==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Combined Estimation and Optimization
for Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
Master Thesis
Esben Jørgensen Bager (s134814)
Skipper af Rosenborg (s134774)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Management Science
Technical University of Denmark
Supervisor
Thomas Stidsen
Building 424
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4449
thst@dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The purpose of this dissertation is to firstly see whether the widespread sparse lin-
ear regression method, LASSO, is beaten in a dynamic setting by a newly proposed
approach by Dimitris Bertsimas and Angela King and secondly determining whether
the combination of predictive and prescriptive analytics in a financial setting can lead
to additional returns compared to current practices.
The results show that our implementation of the proposed algorithmic approach to
linear regression performs worse than LASSO on static data sets, as opposed to what
was shown in the article wherein it was proposed, and it performs significantly worse
in a dynamic setting. This is partly due to worse results, but more importantly the
algorithmic approach is too time consuming invalidating its usage in a back-testing
heavy area such as finance.
Furthermore it has been shown that incorporation of macroeconomic predictors,
time dependencies and technical analysis predictors in a LASSO model allow us to
provide better forecasts resulting in significant additional returns compared to a sim-
ple 1 over N strategy or using Sample Average Approximation as forecasting method
instead. Lastly, our Combined Estimation and Optimization method did not show
promising results on the selected comparison metrics. However it did manage to de-
liver the highest average positive return, but suffered from its disability to properly
handle risk. Possible reasons for this effect were investigated, and future areas of re-
search to fully judge the potential of integrating the two analytical areas are discussed.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Management Engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring
a masters degree in engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, June 15th, 2018
Esben Jørgensen Bager (s134814)
Skipper af Rosenborg (s134774)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
As it is with major projects, it is rarely done without any outside help and our
dissertation is no different. First and foremost, we would like to thank our supervisor
Thomas Stidsen and our sparring partners Thomas Trier Bjerring and Peter Nystrup
from Annox A/S. Their help in keeping us on track, discussing our problems and
being supportive along the way is greatly appreciated.
We want to thank Murat Kulachi and Lasse Engbo Christiansen for taking the time
to discuss bootstrapping and statistical validation methods with us as well as the
HPC IT group at DTU for teaching us how to properly utilize the computational
power at our disposal.
Lastly, we want to thank our family and friends for supporting us throughout the
process.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Study
3
2.1
Linear Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Distribution of financial index returns
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Risk Premium Predicting Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Portfolio Allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Connecting predictive and prescriptive analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Modern Linear Regression
13
3.1
Methods under consideration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Implementation of AALR & LASSO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Verification of prior results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Efforts to improve the efficiency of AALR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Concluding remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Predicting Financial Returns
29
4.1
Log-Normal Returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Efficient market theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Financial Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Financial Predictors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.5
Financial predictive power of AALR and LASSO . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.6
Deep exploration of LASSO in a financial setting . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
49
5.1
Mean Variance Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.2
Combined Estimation and Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.3
Alternative investment strategies for comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.4
Implementation of CEO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.5
Parameter Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.6
Comparison methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.7
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6
Future Research
77
6.1
Further CEO Investigation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.2
Other predictive methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.3
Other prescriptive methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7
Conclusion
81
8
Appendix
83
8.1
Link to data and code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
8.2
Connecting Julia & Gurobi
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
8.3
HPC Parallelization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
8.4
Parameter Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
8.5
Financial Data Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
8.6
Convergence of regularization parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
8.7
Additional Portfolio Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
Bibliography
101
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Knowing that finding a silver lining in the financial markets can lead to great pros-
perity, multiple brilliant minds have generated a lot of academic research on finding
exactly that. A lot of research tries to predict the market and results range from
proving their capability of finding an edge on the market, while others claim that
complex methods are beaten by simple investment strategies. Furthermore, a lot of
research has been done on how to utilize those predictions for portfolio allocation.
The scope of this thesis is to investigate two things. The first being whether an
algorithmic approach to linear regression methods works better than a traditional
LASSO approach in general and especially within a financial, and hence dynamic,
setting.
Secondly, the thesis aims to research whether combining the chosen lin-
ear regression method with prescriptive analysis into a single problem can provide
improved financial returns in a dynamic portfolio allocation process contrary to uti-
lizing a classic separate approach. The comparison will be done on financial indexes,
more specifically the 10 industry indexes made by Eugene Fama and Kenneth French1.
Our contribution is two-fold. First we test the proposed framework by Angela
King & Dimitris Bertsimas[BK16] in a more dynamic setting, where a static linear
regression model is not sought, but where the model will change continuously to
adapt to new information. Secondly we build upon recent academic research in three
specific articles when combining predictive and prescriptive analytics. First an article
by Rudin & Vahn in which it has been shown how one can minimize expected costs
when simultaneously predicting demand and prescribing order quantity in a newsven-
dor problem [RV14], secondly an article by Suvrajeet Sen & Yunxiao Deng providing
an algorithmic framework for automatically detecting the best available model for
a recurring stochastic problem[SD17] and lastly a paper by Dimitris Bertsimas &
Nathan Kallus where they create a weighting of prior observations relative to the
new observation in order to obtain better predictability which translates to better
prescriptions [BK14].
Our proposal is then to show the potential of integrating predictive and prescriptive
analysis, more specifically multi-linear regression for predicting financial markets and
then Mean-Variance optimization for acting upon our predictions.
For the multi-
linear regression, we will investigate whether applying an algorithm for linear regres-
1Available at http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
sion proposed by Dimitris Bertsimas & Angela King [BK16] can help us to obtain
better results in contrast to using a LASSO approach. This newly proposed algorithm
aims at finding the optimal linear regression model that includes sparsity constraints,
non-linear transformations and pair-wise correlation limits [BK16]. The best method
for predicting financial returns out-of-sample will be used when we combine it with a
Mean-Variance optimization program to create our combined framework for dynamic
portfolio allocation, which is compared to three other strategies: 1 over N, Sample
Average Approximation and Point Prediction-Driven optimization.
While some may claim that the approaches chosen for our combined framework
are too simple to capture the complexity of the financial markets, we would argue
that the simplicity is intended. In order for us to show the potential of an integration
between predictive and prescriptive analytics, it is important that the integration is
the main element and not the models. Hence by combining two common methods, we
should be able to investigate the possibilities fully and then create a basis for more
complex interactions afterwards. Furthermore, we are firm believers that ”markets are
beatable through behavioral biases, security market anomalies and other research using
computerized superior betting techniques” as presented in [Zie16], where the focus of
such a belief is on using ”very focused, disciplined, well-researched strategies with
superior execution and risk control” [Zie16]. Hence we believe that by applying multi-
linear regression models to the financial markets, we are still capable of generating
excess returns and obtain predictive power of indexes. By obtaining predictive power
on its own, we aim to show whether the integration can further improve the ability
to generate excess returns and in return validate our proposed method.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Study
In order to show how our thesis can be seen as a contribution to academia, it is
necessary to understand the research made before ours. Therefore an understanding
of the financial markets is needed as well as the research made on both predictive
analysis in the form of linear regression and prescriptive analytics within portfolio
allocation. For the latter, the optimization problem under investigation, Portfolio
Allocation, was originally introduced by Harry Markowitz in 1952 [Mar52] when he
mentioned that an investor should look at both the possible return but also keep an
eye on risk, thereby creating the famous Mean-Variance optimization problem[Mar52]
which requires an input of expected returns and covariance between assets under
investigation.
The predictive analysis will provide us with a way to create the expected returns and
we will investigate a new algorithmic approach to linear regression against the most
widespread implementation of linear regression, LASSO, which is an abbreviation
of ”Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator”[Tib96]. There are both pros
and cons for such a predictive model choice. On a positive note, this allows us to
potentially provide insights on market behavior and interactions between indicators
and indexes providing value for investors when explaining their clients how they trade
and what they see in the market. On the opposite side, such a simple model might
not be able to truly capture the underlying mechanics of the markets. Despite this
worry, we still believe that if we are able to produce excess returns by combining
simple and widespread models utilized or known by all practitioners in the field, we
will manage to convince more people about the possibilities of the field instead of
building complex models understood by few.
2.1
Linear Regression
As mentioned, we will utilize linear regression when having multiple predictors as we
do. It is one of the most widespread predictive methods across the world. In all its
simplicity, the linear regression model is written as:
y = Xβ + ϵ
(2.1)
Where y ∈Rnx1 is a vector of the response variable, X ∈Rnxp is a matrix of predictor
terms and β ∈Rpx1 is the coefficients of the predictor terms. Lastly, the errors are
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Literature Study
defined as ϵ ∈Rnx1.
In the Ordinary Least Squares (OLS), there is a normality
assumption on the errors, so ϵ ∈N(0, σ2). For a linear regression model to uphold,
it is important for the predictors to be exogenous, meaning they do not correlate
with the error term. Otherwise the model assumptions do not hold. Another thing
to ensure is that highly correlated predictors are not present in the model, since
the predictors would not be linearly independent thus hindering X from having full
rank. In this case, we cannot determine the best fit, since two predictors can explain
the same part of the variance of y. If the predictors have finite moments up to at
least the second moment, meaning mean and variance are finite, then the matrix
Qxx = E[ XT X
n
] is finite and positive semi-definite.
Dealing with a positive semi-
definite matrix mean that we can a find a minimum in which no other value will
provide improvements, thus ensuring optimality of our model.
It is also important to ensure homoscedasticity, meaning approximately equal variance
regardless of what subset of errors is sampled, and no autocorrelation between errors,
meaning the expected value of the product between two errors should be 0.
The problem of finding the best β can be written as a quadratic problem of minimizing
the squared errors, hence the name for ˆβ of least squares estimator:
min
β ∥Y −Xβ∥2
2
(2.2)
The optimal solution of β to the OLS is well-known and given as:
ˆβ = (XT X)−1XT Y
(2.3)
If we do not have full rank of X, then (XT X)−1 is not possible due to the calculation
of the inverse matrix diverging. When we have a lot of predictors, we do not know
which predictors to eliminate in order to ensure full rank thus making the problem
difficult. A common solution to this is to stabilize the diagonal of the matrix by
including a regularization term. One of the first attempts to do this is called Ridge
Regression, which modifies the problem to [HK70]:
min
β ∥Y −Xβ∥2
2 + ∥Γβ∥2
2
(2.4)
Where Γ is called the Tikhonov Matrix, due to the Russian professor Andrey Tikhonov
who created the method in 1978[TA78], and it is most commonly a scalar multiplied
on the identity matrix. The optimal solution of β for Ridge Regression becomes:
ˆβ = (XT X + ΓT Γ)−1XT Y
(2.5)
This regularization helps to lower the coefficients of the predictors, but it does not
ensure any sparsity of the model to obtain a parsimonious model.
This specific
regularization was solved by Robert Tibsherani in 1996 with the introduction of
LASSO[Tib96]. Tibsherani proposed using the L1 norm instead of the L2 norm used
in ridge regression thus still penalizing large values of predictor coefficients but also
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Linear Regression
5
aiding in eliminating certain predictors from the model if it did not aid in minimizing
the squared error sufficiently [Tib96]. The problem for LASSO is written as:
min
β ∥Y −Xβ∥2
2 + λ∥β∥1
(2.6)
It can be seen here that the Tikhonov Matrix is simply replaced by a scalar λ and
that the L2 norm is replaced by a L1 norm. Later on, the Elastic Net was proposed
as a combination of both ridge regression and LASSO regularization hence dealing
with the optimization problem [ZH05]:
min
β ∥Y −Xβ∥2
2 + λ1∥β∥1 + λ2∥β∥2
2
(2.7)
When doing linear regression, not only should the errors be minimized, but the opti-
mal model should also be as sparse as possible meaning it only contains significant
predictors.
This idea is equivalent to the well-known mathematical optimization
problem of ”Best Subset Selection”.
The problem of finding the best subset is widely known and was originally formu-
lated in [Mil84] as:
min
β
1
2∥y −Xβ∥2
2 s.t. ∥β∥0 ≤k
(2.8)
where ”the l0 (pseudo)norm of a vector β counts the number of nonzeros in β”
[BKM16], and the article [BKM16] also points out that due to its NP-hard nature
and thus non-polynomial scaling computational solving properties, it has been tough
to solve the problem when more than 30 coefficients are present. This problem of
finding the best subset selection was addressed in [BKM16], where an extensive liter-
ature study of the subset selection problem is also found. Here it is mentioned that
the need for a sparse model by selecting coefficients in β to be exactly 0 is commonly
solved through the LASSO method.
The reason for the preference towards LASSO is that it manages to set a lot of the
variables to 0 by using the 1-norm instead of the 2-norm previously used in Ridge
Regression, because it generates a hypercube instead of sphere in the solution space,
where the convex objective function is certain to find coefficients of value 0. It is par-
ticularly interesting to read the findings of the LASSO paper, since it highlights the
difficulties within linear regression; when the amount and effect of predictors change,
the best performing model type changes[Tib96], thus Lasso does not always succeed
in finding the best model. This also brings attention to the shortcomings of LASSO;
its bias towards heftier penalization of larger coefficients than smaller due to its use
of the 1-norm as well as its regularization that can set more coefficients to zero but
at the cost of excluding true predictors from the model[BKM16].
A model such as LASSO still requires a lot of validating afterwards if one is to
conclude on the validity of the found estimation. Furthermore various constraints
could also be added in order to ensure exact sparsity, restrictions on certain groups,
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Literature Study
etc. The idea of including it all into one large MIP was proposed recently by Dim-
itris Bertsimas & Angela King in their paper ”An Algorithmic Approach to Linear
Regression”[BK16] (denoted AALR from now on). The paper describes the current
linear regression modelling approach as an iterative process, where the modeller often
have to make trade-offs between interpretability of the model and predictive abil-
ity, as well as keeping several other objectives in mind. This often means that the
entire solution space is not investigated and most often not all desirable properties
can be incorporated in the same model. The article attempts to solve that prob-
lem by utilizing academic research within best subset selection, bootstrapping and
mixed integer quadratic optimization[BK16]. Bertsimas & King propose a method for
avoiding multicollinearity, including non-linear transformations, statistically validat-
ing models and obtaining sparse models all through the usage of existing optimization
methods. In the paper, they compare their results to LASSO and see that it is able to
obtain equal or better results in almost all cases, while actually creating more sparse
models simultaneously[BK16]. We will first try to replicate their results, to ensure
correct implementation of both LASSO and AALR, and then apply these methods to
the dynamic settings of financial return data in order to see which method of linear
regression should be utilized in the dynamic portfolio allocation problem.
As mentioned, ”An Algorithmic Approach to Linear Regression”[BK16] includes
bootstrapping which is used for the statistical validation of proposed models. Since
this is a crucial step of the algorithm, a brief introduction to bootstrapping is neces-
sary. Bootstrapping is the statistic procedure of random sampling with replacement
and it was pioneered by Bradley Efron in 1979 [Efr79], where he showed how boot-
strapping was superior to ”leave-one-out” or cross-validation approaches and better
then theoretical justifications of the error rate of a linear model. His approach to
bootstrapping was to use Monte Carlo simulation meaning in order to get a good
estimator, one has to make a large amount of simulations and calculate the variable
of interest from each simulation[Efr79].
The average of the simulated estimators
then provides a good estimator. This has also made it clear for us that the goal of
bootstrapping is to generate an asymptotically consistent estimator of the true distri-
bution, meaning one that will converge towards the true estimator when amount of
simulations go towards infinity.
When bootstrapping to find our distribution, the main focus should be on avoiding a
poor mean estimate, since errors here will translate to significantly higher losses than
errors in variance and co-variance estimations [Zie16].
2.2
Distribution of financial index returns
The linear regression method will be applied in a financial setting and the nature of fi-
nancial index returns require further introduction since this type of data is well studied
and a lot of knowledge is available here. As originally pointed out by Benoit Mandel-
brot [Man62], then later described in greater detail by Eugene Fama in ”Foundations
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Distribution of financial index returns
7
of Finance” [Fam76] and also exemplified through historical analysis and Jarque-Bera
tests in [Hen02], the normality assumptions of the market returns does not hold up
due to the monthly returns having a leptokurtic distribution with a negative skew-
ness.
As summarized in [SQ09], there are three reasons why the normality assumption of
market returns cannot be justified:
1. Serial Correlation
2. Negative Skewness and Leptokurtosis
3. Correlation Breakdown
Those three reasons will be explained in greater detail now, since they influence our
modelling of the problem and create a need for bootstrapping in order to truly see
the distribution and validate significance of the prediction terms.
1. Serial correlation
If returns were truly independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) then the return
of the previous time period should not impact the other, but various studies have
shown slight autocorrelation. As concluded by Eugene Fama and Kenneth French in
1988, there do seem to be some slight autocorrelation when the time horizon becomes
longer, whereas in shorter periods of time the autocorrelation is weak [FF88].
2. Negative skewness and leptokurtosis
If a distribution is skewed, it indicates a lack of symmetry and a larger tail to one
side than another. A negative skewness occurs when the left tail is longer or fatter
than the right tail, thus in financial returns, we will have more occurrences of returns
lower than the mean or have observations further from the mean negatively than
positive. A positive skewness is than the opposite. In a study of 33 security market
returns, 26 had a negative skewness and 7 were positively skewed. An important note
here is that the markets with positive skewness were emerging markets, whereas the
ones with negative skewness were mature[WY09]. Another interesting finding in that
paper was that the risk premium is negatively correlated with the skewness, so in a
market with a negative skewness, the risk premium would be higher in order to make
up for the higher probability of losses[WY09].
Now, leptokurtosis was coined by Karl Pearson as something ”less flat-topped” than a
normal, or mesokurtic, distribution [Pea05]. The financial markets being leptokurtic
was shown in [CT96], where all observations were leptokurtic.
3. Correlation breakdown
Often the correlation between two assets does not always stay linear at its extremes,
thus there is a need for multivariate distributions, denoted copulas, to correctly quan-
tify these relationships leading to a better estimation of tail risks and hence condi-
tional value at risk. This need for multivariate distributions was also identified for
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Literature Study
the positive tails in [LS01], where they also found that the correlation breakdown
happens in markets in a downtrend, while not happening in uptrend.
Although this correlation breakdown has shown the need for multivariate distribu-
tions for even more precise estimations, we will still model the indexes independently
using the other indexes as exogenous factors instead of creating a multi-variate dis-
tribution, which will complicate modelling immensely and invalidate our approach to
incorporate both predictive and prescriptive analytics into one problem that can be
solved within a fair amount of time.
2.3
Risk Premium Predicting Factors
Another thing to consider when building linear regression models is possible exoge-
nous factors which could help to obtain an improved model. Multiple articles have
discussed the significance of Risk Premium Predicting Factors (RPPF), such as in-
flation rate, book-to-market ratio, dividend price yield, net equity issuing activity,
consumption-wealth ratio, etc., and the overall consensus seems to be that they can
be significant in generating additional out-of-sample returns[BRW16]. This is not to
say that all people believe that RPPF are capable of attributing to a better output;
in a paper by Ivo Welch and Amit Goyal, they highlight the weak performance by
the most commonly used RPPFs in terms of being capable of predicting market de-
velopments [WG08] and question the validity of using them in models by concluding
”that most models [with models being RPPFs incorporated into a time series model
to predict returns] seem unstable or even spurious” [WG08]. This result is partly
validated by a subsequent paper by Campbell & Thompson in which they agree that
these RPPF do not have a significant R2 influence on the models, but they do how-
ever improve the Out-of-Sample performance, hence proving their worth since slight
return improvements can yield great monetary value for investors [CT08]. Following
that paper David Rapach, Jack Strauss and Goufo Zhou recommends an alterna-
tive approach, where the RPPFs are not used individually but combined and proves
that this strategy provides significant Out-Of-Sample returns[RSZ10]. Another paper
tries to redo the findings by [WG08], and concludes that for dividend yield, earnings
growth, and price-earnings ratio growth, they do seem significantly capable as predic-
tors[FS11], contrary to the belief held by [WG08].
With all this information in mind, we therefore see the need to investigate the addi-
tion of exogenous factors to our linear regression models in order to obtain a better
prediction of the model and in particular the combination of them all into one model.
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Portfolio Allocation
9
2.4
Portfolio Allocation
Once having obtained a prediction of the return, the other part of our procedure
involves prescriptive analysis through solving the Portfolio Allocation problem. A
brief review of academic research will therefore also be provided on this topic.
2.4.1
Mean Variance Optimization
The method we will use in the prescriptive analysis part is Mean Variance Optimiza-
tion. It was introduced by Harry Markowitz in 1952 [Mar52] and despite academic
criticism due to its simple nature and reliance on normality assumptions of the mar-
kets, it remains a popular strategy. The optimization problem to solve is:
min
wt γwT
t Σtwt −µT
t wt
(2.9)
s.t 1T wt = 1
(2.10a)
0 ≤wt
(2.10b)
(2.10c)
where wt is a vector of weights for all assets under considerations at time t, Σt is the
covariance matrix between assets at time t and µt is the expected returns at time t.
Lastly γ is the risk aversion, so γ = 0 means all risk is allowed and maximum expected
return portfolio, while γ = ∞would indicate the minimum variance portfolio. If we
were to plot the rate of return against the risk aversion, the efficient frontier, as it is
denoted, would be visible. This line shows investors what rate of return they are to
expect given their risk aversion [Mar52].
In the paper by Harry Markowitz, he assumes that the future return and covariance
is known [Mar52], but in reality it needs to be estimated from sample data. This
is one of the points of criticism towards the method; relying on past information to
correctly identify future observations. If we had perfect future information about
covariance and return, the method would work seamlessly, but those parameters are
immensely difficult to predict. Furthermore, minor changes in predictions can lead
to significant weight changes as shown by W.J. Hurley and Jack Brimberg [HB15].
Here a 3-asset portfolio was investigated and it was shown that changing the expected
return from 12.13% to 13.34% led to a weight increase of 160% for the asset which
forecast changed[HB15]. This goes to show that the model is highly sensitive to the
return forecast, hence highlighting the importance of correctly estimating expected
returns. Lastly the further the returns stray from normality, the worse results the
method can obtain since the efficient frontier would no longer be obtained.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Literature Study
2.4.2
Other methods
The flaws of Mean Variance Optimization gave way for many other suggestions as to
how to solve the portfolio allocation problem. We could spend many pages listing
all of them, but instead a brief overview will be given. A popular risk management
method is Value-at-Risk (VaR) or its extension Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR),
also called expected shortfall[RU99]. The difference between the two methods can be
summarized as ”with respect to a specified probability level β, the β-VaR of a portfolio is
the lowest amount α such that, with probability β, the loss will not exceed α, whereas
the β-CVaR is the conditional expectation of losses above that amount α”[RU99].
What this means is best shown through an example, where we set β = 0.95. Then
VaR will find the smallest α-quantile, determining a level of losses, which will not be
exceeded with 95% significance. CVaR, on the other hand, will work to minimize the
expected amount of losses, when this α-quantile is exceeded. Hence using CVaR a
more realistic image is obtained of the worst-case scenarios and how to mitigate these
through risk management.
One method, which also falls under the category of Tactical Asset Allocation,
where one dynamically rebalances a portfolio, is to involve the third and fourth mo-
ment into the optimization problem, so it becomes Mean-Variance-Kurtosis-Skewness
optimization [JR06]. This method allows for better results during more severe cases
of non-normality, but the paper also concludes that the closer the returns are to
satisfying the normality returns, the closer the mean-variance procedure is in approx-
imating the best possible allocation at the efficient frontier [JR06].
Another approach is Regime-Based Asset Allocation (RBAA), which seeks to ”take ad-
vantage of favorable economic regimes as well as withstand adverse economic regimes
and reduce potential drawdowns”[Nys+15].
This process is a bit more long-term,
where the portfolio is not rebalanced often, but instead it aims to build a portfolio for
a year at a time. RBAA is again in contrast to other methods such as Strategic Asset
Allocation, which is typically a really static and robust portfolio built to withstand
economic turmoil in long periods of time.
2.5
Connecting predictive and prescriptive analysis
Having introduced both parts of the framework, namely linear regression as predictive
analysis and mean-variance optimization as prescriptive analytics, the combination
of the two requires us to briefly recap the work which has given us the inspiration
for our own framework. As stated earlier, our inspiration draws from three papers;
”Learning Enabled Optimization”[SD17], ”Big Data Newsvendor: Practical Insights
from Machine Learning Analysis”[RV14] and ”From Predictive to Prescriptive Ana-
lytics”[BK14].
==PAGE:21==
2.5 Connecting predictive and prescriptive analysis
11
2.5.1
Learning Enabled Optimization
The author presents ”Learning Enabled Optimization”[SD17] (abbreviated LEO on-
wards) as a combination of linear regression and stochastic optimization models in
order to determine the optimal solution with an α-significance through distribution-
free estimates of the errors. The paper does introduce its own way of generating and
validating linear regression models, but it is not as detailed and flexible as the ap-
proach suggested by [BK16], hence why we have selected to use that approach to test
a way of predictive analysis. Furthermore, portfolio selection lies within the disjoint
space part of the article, due to the assumption that our portfolio selection strategy
alone will not change market dynamics, hence making it a disjoint space between un-
certainty and selection. In the appendix of the paper an example of LEO applied to a
Two-Stage Multi-Period Stochastic Program is shown, and it is also stated that such
a problem can be decomposed and solved through parallelization to achieve a statis-
tical optimal solution faster. The paper offers a framework for dynamically choosing
between proposed models in a optimization setting, but it does not offer a way to
continuously change the proposed models based on their impact on the prescriptive
analysis, hence it does not manage to fully integrate the two analytical parts.
2.5.2
Big Data Newsvendor
The article ”Big Data Newsvendor: Practical Insights from Machine Learning Anal-
ysis”[RV14] was created by Cynthia Rudin and Gah-Yi Vahn and it resembles our
situation a lot in the sense that they solve the classic newsvendor problem through
analyzing historical data of the demand of newspapers alongside a couple of exoge-
nous factors to help build a predictive model [RV14]. What they continue to do in
the article is then to incorporate both the predictive and the prescriptive analysis in a
single model and show possible variations of solving it. In particular, they show how
a simple mathematical model can allow for the incorporation of both analytic parts
specific to the newsvendor problem, even with possible regularization of the available
predictors. Their contribution is then compared with Separated Estimation and Op-
timization methods, where the two analytics field are kept separate. They find that
their proposed methods are significantly better than the separated approach, hence
validating that combining two simple mathematical models into one single model can
yield beneficial results[RV14]. The difference from us remains the area of utilization;
they focus on the classic newsvendor problem and end up with a specific formulation
for that problem, but their results shows the potential of integrating the analytical
perspectives.
2.5.3
Predictive Prescription
Dimitris Bertsimas and Nathan Kallus have created a paper on the combination of
predictive and prescriptive analytics in the case of utilizing certain machine learning
methods in an optimization framework. In that paper, the two authors do highlight a
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Literature Study
good point: ”it is not clear how to go from a good prediction to a good decision”[BK14],
which is exactly our point as well. Even the best possible predictive model does not
manage to incorporate the possible usage afterwards in an optimization setting. Their
proposed method revolves around introducing similarity scores for each observation
relative to the new observation when doing predictive methods, meaning they dif-
fer from the classic Empirical Risk Minimization, such as least squares for linear
regression, by introducing dynamic weights based on the predictive method. This
modification means that the model refocuses based on the new observation in order
to continuously adapt to new information. Furthermore, they propose a method for
validating the results of their method in term coined predictive prescription, which
”prescribes a decision in anticipation of the future given the observation X = x”[BK14].
Our approach differs in the fact that while they utilize dynamic weighting based on
similarity, we fully integrate the two analytical sides into one single mathematical
model.
Investigation of other academic research showed that a direct implementation of
integrative analytics within financial data seemed to lack, although some articles are
coming close. An article by Adam Elmachtoub and Paul Grigas managed to develop
a framework with similarities to ours, but they decide to solve it through a stochastic
gradient descent method since they were unable to solve the combined model[EG17].
Furthermore they only tested it on artificial data delivering sparse insights of the
obtained results[EG17].
2.6
Summary
In summary, it seems evident from researching current academic literature that com-
bining predictive and prescriptive analytics is a field which has just started to see
attention and the papers within the topic all seem to show promise compared to the
current separated method.
Our suggested approach with a two-fold contribution seems valid because of two rea-
sons. First research has shown the value of utilizing multiple Risk Premium Predicting
Factors into a single model when predicting financial returns, which is what we aim
to do with linear regression. But knowing the complexity in the financial market and
its dynamic behavior, it seems relevant to investigate whether the new algorithmic
approach on linear regression by Dimitris Bertsimas and Angela King can generate
additional predictive power compared to LASSO due to the incorporation of multiple
constraints in the optimization model.
Secondly no literature have been found on similar approaches for financial returns
whereas plenty of research of papers have shown positive results on various parts
of the combined approach or similar implementations in other problems. This indi-
cates the all of the parts individually seem well-suited, but no one has tested the full
combination of simultaneously solving Mean-Variance and linear regression, hence
strengthening the need for doing just that.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Modern Linear
Regression
The reason for applying a linear regression model as well as utilizing the ”Algorithmic
Approach to Linear Regression”[BK16] (abbreviated AALR from now on) is that with
an steadily increasing amount of data available, more black-box models becoming
available through advanced machine learning and artificial intelligence as well as
strong correlation across financial indexes, there is a need to cut through it all and be
capable of describing the markets as sparsely as possible. This is exactly the power
of AALR; creating a sparse model which can be explained to a potential investor
without having to introduce multiple complex mathematical methods, since linear
regression is one of the most widespread analytical methods out there and one of the
most intuitive as well.
3.1
Methods under consideration
We will compare the results of two different linear regression models; LASSO and
AALR. It is expected that LASSO is faster than AALR due to it being a continous
model where AALR is discrete, but AALR should be able to obtain better perfor-
mance with the same sparsity according to Bertsimas & King[BK16]. The goal here
is to identify which algorithm manages to obtain good results on a wide variety of
static datasets in order to validate the approach by Bertsimas & King.
3.1.1
An Algorithmic Approach to Linear Regression
This approach was made by Dimitris Bertsimas and Angela King in 2016 and in their
paper they present a 3-stage method for generating linear regression models [BK16].
The first stage consists of 6 steps. First the data is pre-processed by standardizing
it, and then secondly the initial parameters of the algorithm is set, i.e. regularization
strength and amount of pairwise correlations between included variables. This leads
to creating a set of highly correlated variables, denoted HC, by identifying pairs with
correlation higher than the default of 0.8. Thirdly a set of group-sparse variables, GS,
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Modern Linear Regression
can be determined, if it is deemed necessary. These two sets can help in achieving a
sparse and parsimonious model, but group sparsity is only applicable when a group
structure is known in advance. Step number 4 is to create a set, T of any non-linear
transformation, which should be tested, i.e. log(x), x2, √x, etc. The next step is to
allow the modelers to require a set, J, of variables to be included permanently in the
final model, due to existing knowledge. Lastly in Step 6, the algorithm proceeds to
solve the following Mixed-Integer Optimization problem of determining the maximum
subset size, kmax:
kmax = max
z
p
∑
i=1
zi
(3.1)
s.t.zi + zj ≤1, ∀(i, j) ∈HC
(3.2)
zi ∈0, 1, i = 1, ..., p
(3.3)
The maximum value found is then transferred to the second stage of the algorithmic
approach.
In the second stage, the algorithm will solve a MIQO (Mixed-Integer Quadratic Opti-
mization) program, which will attempt all possible values of k between 1 and kmax as
well as the regularization strength parameter λ. For each combination, the model will
deliver the output β∗and z∗and find the R2 value of the solution on the validation
set of the data. The MIQO model that has to be solved is defined as:
min
β,z {1
2∥y −Xβ∥2
2 + λ∥β∥1}
(3.4a)
s.t.
zl ∈{0, 1}, l = 1, ...p
(3.4b)
−Mzl ≤βl ≤Mzl, l = 1, ..., p
(3.4c)
p
∑
l=1
zl ≤k
(3.4d)
z1 = ... = zl(1, ..., l) ∈GSm, ∀m
(3.4e)
zi + zj ≤1, ∀(i, j) ∈HC
(3.4f)
∑
i∈Tm
zi ≤1, ∀m
(3.4g)
zl = 1, ∀l ∈J
(3.4h)
∑
l∈Si
zl ≤|Si| −1, ∀S1, ..., Sj
(3.4i)
The objective function is the residual sum of squares with a regularization term
added meaning the objective function is exactly the LASSO formulation introduced
by Robert Tibsharani [Tib96], which has been introduced earlier. This model helps
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Methods under consideration
15
to create a sparse estimate of β. The first term of the objective function and the first
three constraints stems from the best subset selection problem presented in [BKM16].
The first constraint introduces a binary variable zl, and in the second constraint the
value of zl will determine if the coefficient βl is nonzero with the use of a Big-M
notation. This ability is useful for the third constraint, where a sparsity constraint is
introduced in order to reduce the size of the problem.
Constraint (3.4e) helps to create group sparsity, where particular sets of regression
variables all have either 0 or non-zero coefficients.
Constraint (3.4f) ensures that
variables with a high pairwise correlation are not both included in the model to keep
sparsity and (3.4g) ensures at most one variable transformation is used from the set
Tm of possible non-linear transformations. Constraint (3.4h) allows the modeller to
directly require certain specifications for the model based on expertise, i.e. knowing
a direct link between input variable and response variable, which should always be
included.
The last constraint is a possible addition to the problem in order to create necessary
cuts for certain solutions, if they produce undesirable results or have insignificant
variables, which should be removed. These cuts will be cover inequalities and are
created in Stage 3, where the significance levels of the prediction terms are found
through bootstrapping methods to determine the actual distribution, thereby creating
an approach free of distribution assumptions. When no more cuts are found or Stage
3 has been visited more than n times, the algorithm terminates and the three best
models are presented.
3.1.2
LASSO
The method that AALR is trying to improve upon is the already mentioned LASSO,
which focuses on minimizing the least squares while bounding the absolute value of
the coefficients through a L1 regularization addition in the objective function[Tib96].
The objective of LASSO is:
min
β
1
2∥y −Xβ∥2
2 + λ∥β∥1
(3.5)
LASSO utilizes an almost identical framework as the non-negative garrote, but per-
forms better in highly correlated situations since it does not depend on the sign of
OLS (Ordinary Least Squares) estimate contrary to the non-negative garrote [Tib96].
A further review of LASSO is found in literature study in Section 2.1.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Modern Linear Regression
3.2
Implementation of AALR & LASSO
The algorithms were implemented in the programming language Julia, where the
package JuMP (Julia for Mathematical Optimization) allows the formulation of the
problems at hand. In order to determine which solver would provide us with the
fastest solution times, we used the ”Benchmarks for Optimization Software” by Hans
Mittelmann from Arizona State University1.
From inspection of the tests, it was
evident that Gurobi was the fastest in solving Mixed Integer Quadratic Optimization
Problems, therefore it was chosen.
Due to the programming language Julia and JuMP not yet having launched version
1.0, some features are lacking, such as change of coefficient and removing/adding
constraints without having to rebuild the entire model.
Initially this provided us
with a lot of complications as you could not easily add cover constraints or easily
change the model, which is very used in AALR. Furthermore, when formulating a
quadratic program using JuMP it took an immense amount of time and memory
to build the model. We initially worked around this by going into the sublayers of
JuMP, namely the interface MathProgBase and Gurobi. However, the build time was
still very high and we often ran out of memory. In order to solve these problems
we searched for a reformulation of the model that could provide improvements in
building and run time.
3.2.1
Transforming a quadratic problem into a second order cone
problem
When using the formulation of the objective given in Equation (3.5) it takes a long
time to build the model using Julia’s modelling package JuMP. Furthermore the
problem is a quadratic problem which increases solve time as well. It was therefore
decided to reformulate the problem into a Second-Order Cone (SOC) problem. In
order to do so, we can introduce an auxiliary variable and turn the original objective
function into a constraint. The procedure of reformulating it is shown underneath,
1http://plato.asu.edu/bench.html
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Implementation of AALR & LASSO
17
where T is the auxiliary variable:
T ≥1
2∥y −Xβ∥2
2
0 ≥1
2∥y −Xβ∥2
2 −T
0 ≥2∥y −Xβ∥2
2 −4T
0 ≥2∥y −Xβ∥2
2 + (1 −T)2 −(1 + T)2
(1 + T)2 ≥2∥y −Xβ∥2
2 + (1 −T)2
(1 + T) ≥
√
2∥y −Xβ∥2
2 + (1 −T)2
(1 + T) ≥

[√
2(y −Xβ)
(1 −T)
]
2
Using this formulation we were able to build the problem so much faster that it could
be build for each iteration, circumventing the problem of modifying the problem
directly in Gurobi. Furthermore the model could be solved faster since a Second-
Order Cone problem can efficiently be solved using the Interior Point method, which
is briefly described in the appendix Section 8.2.2, which is not the case for quadratic
programs. This ensures both LASSO and AALR can be solved faster in practice.
3.2.2
Bootstrapping
In order for us to validate our result in AALR, we needed to test the significance of
the proposed β solution. This was done through bootstrapping, a method previously
mentioned. The implemented algorithm for this is shown in Algorithm 1. The initial
amount of samples S was set to 50, dataset sizes were the same size as the original
training dataset, bootstrapping amount K was set to 1000 and lastly the amount of
values needed to create a mean was set to J=100.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Modern Linear Regression
Algorithm 1 Bootstrapping β
1: Given: Solution function for β, Initial β samples S, dataset sizes for β solutions
O, bootstrapping amount K and samples for creating single input to distribution
J.
2: Initialize S=50, S2 = 1000, βsolutions ∈Rp,S, D ∈RK
3: while iteration < S do
4:
Generate x ∈X and y ∈Y through sampling with replacement
5:
Solve linear regression MISOCP
6:
Save obtained solution β in βsolutions
7: end while
8: while iteration < K do
9:
Calculate the mean µ of J samples taken with replacement from βsolutions
10:
Add µ to D
11: end while
12: Generate confidence intervals for β based on the distribution D
13: if β is in α confidence interval & α confidence interval does not contain 0 then
14:
Proposed value of β is significantly different than 0 with α certainty
15: end if
The reason behind a small amount of initial samples was simply due to time
limitations from solving AALR instances. We would definitely be able to generate a
more robust estimation of the significance through a lot initial samples, but compared
with the additional amount of time it would require, the trade-off was not worth it
from our perspective.
3.2.3
Julia, JuMP & Gurobi parameters setup
When implementing LASSO and AALR, Julia version 0.6.2 with JuMP version 0.18
as the modelling package was used together with Gurobi 7.0.1 as the solver.
All
problems was solved using only 1 thread in both Julia and Gurobi. For AALR the
additional parameters seen in Table 3.1 were used2.
Parameter
Value
TimeLimit
90
PreMIQCPForm
0
MIPFocus
1
ImproveStartTime
20
Table 3.1: Parameters used when solving AALR.
2A description of all Gurobi parameters and settings can be found at http://www.gurobi.com/
documentation
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Implementation of AALR & LASSO
19
TimeLimit impose a time limit of 90 seconds, if no optimal solution is found ear-
lier Gurobi returns the best found solution. The time limit comes from the original
paper by AALR [BK16], where they impose a similar time constraint in order to
provide results in a timely manner, but they use 20 seconds for problems with n > p
meaning more observations than predictors and 40 for n < p. We have tried with
a similar strict time limit, but it was not possible to obtain similar results in this
time. It should be noted, however, that Dimitris Bertsimas and Angela King often
manages to find optimal solutions before the time limit[BK16] indicating the need
for additional work on our implementation of their algorithm. The total run-time for
certain artificial datasets are shown and some test-runs there take up to two hours
for a full run to be completed.
PreMIQCPForm with value 0 leaves the model’s quadratic constraints in the form
it is given and starts branch-and-cut algorithm immediately. If PreMIQCPForm is
not set Gurobi will usually try to reformulate the quadratic constraints or SOC into
disaggregated MISOCP form which takes too much time for the problem sizes we are
dealing with.
MIPFocus with value 1 informs Gurobi that a good feasible solution is the main focus.
ImproveStartTime with value 20 tells Gurobi that after 20 seconds it should heavily
focus on finding an good feasible solution increasing the use of heuristics.
A tuning of the Presolve parameter was also attempted, where we varied it to see
the effect of such. However, after adding the PreMIQCPForm parameter the Pre-
solve parameter did not have much effect on the speed nor the solution. Different
settings for the Heuristic parameter, which determines the amount of heuristics used
by Gurobi, were also explored. The Heuristic parameter was replaced by ImproveS-
tartTime, which states that after our chosen value of 20 seconds, the solver will go
from an optimal-seeking solution approach to a heuristic based approach where it
attempts to continuously improve the solution and put less emphasis on improving
the bound.
3.2.4
Other possibilities with AALR
We did not utilize the possibility of ensuring group sparsity nor did we add any
modeler expertise to the amount of constraints on financial returns, despite the model
presented in [BK16] being capable of including this. The addition of group sparsity or
modeler expertise can prove beneficial on other problems, but since we did not have
prior knowledge of the financial market or wanted to impose unnecessary constraints,
we wanted the algorithm to pick the best possible solutions for us.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Modern Linear Regression
3.3
Verification of prior results
In order to validate our implementation of AALR we gathered a sample of the datasets
used in the paper. In Table 3.2 we have highlighted the results presented in the paper
on AALR[BK16] for both LASSO and AALR alongside the results we have generated
through our implementation. Our own results are the average of the 3 best models
found in both LASSO and AALR for 10 different dataset splits. For AALR 5 values
of λ were linearly spaced between maxVal and 0, with maxVal = ∥XT y∥∞where X is
the training data and y is the response to the training data. A derivation of this value
can be found in Appendix 8.4.1. For LASSO, 300 values of λ were linearly spaced
between the same maxVal as for AALR and 0. In these tests AALR was allowed 90
seconds to find an optimal solution before the best feasible solution is returned. The
tests were conducted on DTU’s High-Performance Computing (HPC) cluster with
the use of a single processor with a clock speed range between 2.6GHz and 2.8GHz3.
In Table 3.2, the amount of observations n, the original amount of predictors p
before any transformations as well as the R2 and amount of variables chosen K are
shown. The used datasets have all been found through the information given in the
paper[BK16]4,5,6,7,8.
Dataset
Paper AALR
Our AALR
Paper LASSO
Our LASSO
n
p
R2
K
R2
K
R2
K
R2
K
Concrete
1,030
8
0.823
7
0.774
6.6
0.834
12
0.793
17.8
House
2,271
208
0.920
20
0.759
30.2
NA
NA
0.786
129.0
CPU
209
6
0.869
5
0.859
3.6
0.861
6
0.896
10.5
Diabetes
221
64
0.334
4
0.454
33.4
0.381
14
0.497
67.1
Red Wine Quality
799
11
0.384
6
0.304
8.4
0.386
7
0.314
27.5
Table 3.2: Comparison of AALR and LASSO on various datasets on both our own
implementation of the two methods as well as the results presented in the paper ”An
Algorithmic Approach to Linear Regression” [BK16].
In the dataset ”House”, Bertsimas & King mentions that they are using artificial
predictors created through recoding and interactions of other predictors, something
which we did not do, and that these predictors improved the R2 value up to 0.92
[BK16].
It should furthermore be mentioned that we did not use any non-linear
transformations of prediction terms for the dataset ”House” as this took too long to
solve and did not produce good results due to the time constraint applied.
In Table 3.3 the runtime statistics is given for LASSO and AALR on the CPU and
Concrete dataset. It is seen that AALR takes significantly longer to run compared
3https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/?page_id=342
4Concrete: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Concrete+Compressive+Strength
5House: https://ww2.amstat.org/publications/jse/v19n3/decock/AmesHousing.txt
6CPU: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/cpu-performance/
7Diabetes: https://web.stanford.edu/~hastie/Papers/LARS/
8Red Wine Quality: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/wine+quality
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Verification of prior results
21
to LASSO.
Dataset
LASSO CPU
AALR CPU
LASSO Concrete
AALR Concrete
Average
3.97
237.27
22.65
2262.40
Stdev
1.39
156.53
1.76
1523.10
Max
7.86
529.72
27.49
4661.87
Min
2.91
33.31
21.42
817.55
Table 3.3: Statistics for the runtime of LASSO and AALR over 10 datasplits. All
numbers are in seconds.
The results from Table 3.3 combined with our obtained results on the five different
datasets points towards the fact that AALR might be able to produce more sparse
estimates, but at the cost of predictive power as well as a large time increase.
3.3.1
Discussion
As seen in Table 3.2 our AALR algorithm performed worse compared to the results
obtained by Dimitris Bertsimas & Angela King. This could be due to the datasplit
we make compared to compared to them, where they do not describe exactly how
they split data that does not come with a predetermined split except they say 50%
for training, 25% for validation and 25% for testing. We are furthermore doing an
average over 10 random data splits, where they can be using the best possible result
generated. Once again, the information on their exact procedure is sparse, but there
are certain indicators that point towards the usage of only a single, and possibly
best, split. In the tables presented in the article, all of the K values, the amount
of included prediction terms, are integer. Whether this is due to rounding, a really
robust implementation always identifying the same prediction terms or actually due
to it being a single result, is unclear, but the most likely of those three must be that
it stems from a single result. We have yet to find a single decisive model, which is
not affected by the data split hence our reason to question that it is a true average
over various splits.
This issue with not knowing the correct data split or the exact data used also shows up
as a problem in the Diabetes dataset. Here we have the same amount of predictors as
in [BK16], however the results in the paper are significantly better than ours. Given
the prior results on the four other datasets, it points to an error on our end. But when
we do not know how they split the data, or if they transform the output variable in a
specific way, it becomes difficult for us to troubleshoot this in depth with appropriate
hypotheses.
It might also be interesting to add interaction terms as a possible transformation of
the predictors at hand. It was described that they made their own predictors through
recoding and interactions on the housing dataset, but since we do not know exactly
what they did, we decided to avoid adding additional predictors to our model, since
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Modern Linear Regression
we were already experiencing slow run times and increasing the dimensionality would
only make it worse.
Looking at the performance of our LASSO and AALR algorithm it is seen that our
own AALR performs slightly worse than our LASSO, which again contradicts the
results shown in [BK16] wherein AALR was deemed superior to LASSO. However the
AALR model is more interpretive and on average uses less than half of the prediction
terms compared to LASSO, thereby showing that the implementation is capable of
producing the promised sparse models, but the equal or better performance cannot
be delivered in our implementation. This can also be due to the fact that our LASSO
implementation seems to vary from their LASSO implementation in [BK16] in terms
of performance, which we find particularly odd given the generality of the LASSO
model. In some instances, we generate substantially better results than their LASSO
despite the fact that the model is the same. This again raises the question of how
they selected the LASSO result to compare with their AALR result, since there is no
mentioning of how the data was split and how the shown values were calculated.
The last major point from the verification of the prior result is the computation time.
As LASSO is a SOC problem it can be solved very quickly. However since AALR is
a Mixed Integer SOC problem, the solving time increases immensely and the optimal
solution is not always found due to the time constraint for each iteration. As seen in
Table 3.3 the run time scales poorly with the number of prediction terms and LASSO
is less than 1% of the computing time of AALR. Especially the computational time
seems to hinder us greatly, and the general run time of the algorithm is substantially
more in our implementation than in theirs. A lot of the algorithm’s run time is spent
in Phase 3, where we need to validate the significance of the prediction terms through
bootstrapping. In the paper by Bertsimas & King, it is not covered, at all, how they
managed to make this an efficient process. All that is written in the paper is ”Our
approach is [...] to use bootstrapping techniques to generate confidence intervals and
test for statistical significance”[BK16], which leaves room for interpretation, to say
the least. We discussed our approach with various statistical experts at DTU, who
agreed that we had correctly implemented the general approach, but it is possible that
a further investigation of bootstrapping might lead to a performance improvement.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Efforts to improve the efficiency of AALR
23
3.4
Efforts to improve the efficiency of AALR
As seen in section 3.3.1, AALR is a MISOCP (Mixed Integer Second Order Cone
Problem) meaning it does not scale well with the number of variables added.
In
order to improve the solution time three approaches were taken: warmstarting using
a LASSO solution, using local branching as described in [FL03] and warmstarting
using a modified gradient descent. Each of these approaches are described in detail
in the following subsections. None were, however, found to be successful compared
to simply using the standard QMIP solver Gurobi.
3.4.1
Warmstart with a LASSO solution
Using a feasible starting point from a LASSO solution should give the Gurobi a good
starting point and thereby quicker find a better or optimum solution. This, however,
was not the case seen as the feasible starting point seemed to confuse the Gurobi
more than guide it in the right direction. Furthermore, additional time needs to be
spent on finding a feasible solution before Gurobi can optimize the problem. Thus,
providing Gurobi with a LASSO solution when starting the AALR did not provide
any improvements.
3.4.2
Math Heuristic: Local Branching
A different approach to solving the problem is using local branching created by Mat-
teo Fischetti and Andrea Lodi in 2003[FL03]. The overall idea is to search a small
neighbourhood around a feasible solution to find an optimal solution or better feasi-
ble solution. Once such a solution is found, a new neighbourhood is created around
this solution and the process restarts until a local extrema is reached. If the problem
becomes infeasible, unbounded or a local extrema is found the neighbourhood size is
expanded[FL03].
To implement this, assume that the variables xj ∈{0, 1}∀j ∈J and the set S
is defined as S := {j ∈J : xj = 1}, with a feasible solution is denoted ¯x. With
this notation the neighbourhood area can be implemented by adding the left local
branching constraint
∆(x, ¯x) :=
∑
j∈S
(1 −xj) +
∑
j∈J\S
xj ≤k
Under this constraint a maximum of k/2 binary variables given in the feasible solution
are allowed to swap places.
When moving to a new neighbourhood the solver is
warmstarted with the previous solution and the left local branching constraint, ∆(x, ¯x)
is updated with the new better solution. If an optimal solution is found in the previous
neighbourhood the right local branching constraint ∆(x, ¯x) ≥k+1 is added to ensure
the algorithm does not search the previous neighbourhood. This constraint forces at
least k + 1 of the old variables to swap places which ensures that we do not search
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Modern Linear Regression
the previous neighbourhood. If no better solution is found the right branch is solved
to optimality or until a time constraint is reach. Alternatively, the search area can
be expanded by increasing k which is called weak diversification. The search can
also be restarted but from a completely different starting point which is called hard
diversification. A standard local search is illustrated in Figure 3.1 where a solver
solves the problem at all filled nodes.
Figure 3.1: The basic local search scheme where a standard solver solves the subprob-
lem where the nodes are filled.
In our implementation of local branching only weak diversification is implemented.
Furthermore, we applied a time limit of 5 seconds to solve each subproblem in order
to be somewhat competitive to the standard implementation of AALR which have
a time limit of 30 seconds for each problem. If the time limit is reached within the
subproblem only the left branch constraint is updated and no right branch constraints
are added. The reason for this is that we did not fully explore the neighbourhood
because of the time limit and therefore it can not be guaranteed that the there is not
a better solution in that neighbourhood. An illustration of this is seen in Figure 3.2
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Efforts to improve the efficiency of AALR
25
Figure 3.2: Local search scheme when time constraints are imposed.
A standard
solver solves the subproblem where the nodes are filled.
In our implementation, if the time limit is reached but no better solution is found
the algorithm terminates. This is again to remain somewhat competitive on a time
perspective compared to the standard implementation of AALR.
3.4.3
Modified gradient descent to obtain feasible solution
In order to warmstart the quadratic solver, a heuristic based on Bertsimas, King
& Mazudum was further developed and modified[BKM16]. It is assumed that all
input data X and the output value y is standardized with mean, µ = 0 and standard
deviation, σ = 1.
On a high level, the heuristic is a gradient descent algorithm that only keeps the k
largest absolute values and shrink all other values to 0. First a full description of the
shrinking function is made followed by how it is implemented in the gradient descent.
If ˆβ is an optimal solution to the problem:
ˆβ ∈arg min
∥β||0≤k
∥β −c||2
2
then ˆβ can be computed as keeping the k absolute largest elements of c and set the
rest to zero. If the vector c is ordered such that |c1| ≥|c2| ≥|c3| ≥· · · ≥|cp| then
ˆβi =
{
ci
if i ∈{1, . . . , k}
0
Otherwise
where ˆβi is the ith coordinate to ˆβ.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Modern Linear Regression
This function is extended such that all highly correlated variables are shrunken to
0 and such that only one transformation of a variable (either x, √x, log x or x2) can
be used at a time. These two extra constraints are implemented to ensure a feasible
solution for the mathematical model 3.4. The shrinking algorithm Hk(c) is described
in Algorithm 2 in pseudocode.
Algorithm 2 Shrinking function, Hk(c)
1: Given: β ∈Rp, maximum number k of non-zero values allowed in β, array of
highly correlated variables HCarray
2: Initialize βabs = |β|, 0arr ∈0p
3: for i = 1 to k do
4:
ind = arg max βabs
▷Find index of maximum absolute value
5:
0arr,ind = βind
▷Copy value to the 0-array
6:
βabs,ind = 0
▷Set the absolute number to 0
7:
HCvariable = Find ind in HCarray
▷Finds all the highly correlated
variables related to the ind
8:
if length of HCvariables > 0 then
9:
βabs,HCvariable = 0
▷Shrink all highly correlated variables to 0
10:
end if
11:
Find all transformation of ind and shrink the values to 0 in βabs
12: end for
13: return 0arr
With the shrinking function in place the gradient descent is now described. Gen-
erally gradient descent can be described as
xk+1 = xk −1
L∇xg
where xk+1 is a point closer to the local optimum, ∇xg is the gradient of our loss
function g(x) and 1
L is the learning rate. In the case of linear regression we use the
loss function
g(β) = 1
2∥y −Xβ∥2
2
and the gradient
∇g(β) = −X′(y −Xβ)
The learning rate
1
L is fixed and determined through parameter tuning, we used
L=100000. The algorithm in pseudocode is described in Algorithm 3.
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Efforts to improve the efficiency of AALR
27
Algorithm 3 Modified gradient descent
1: Given: Input matrix X ∈Rn×p, response vector y ∈Rn, learning rate L, error
tolerance ϵ, maximum number k of non-zero values allowed in β, array of highly
correlated variables HCarray
2: Initialize β = random ∈Rp, iteration = 0
3: β = Hk(β)
▷Shrink β
4: βold = β
5: ϵcur = ∥y −Xβold|2
2 −∥y −Xβ∥2
2
6: while iteration < 10000 and ϵcur > ϵ do
7:
βold = β
8:
∇β = X′(y −Xβ)
▷Gradient of β
9:
β = Hk(β −∇β
L , k, HCarray)
10:
ϵcur = ∥y −Xβold∥2
2 −∥y −Xβ∥2
2
11:
Iteration = Iteration + 1
12: end while
13: return β
In order to speed up the process, once a stable set of β is found, the non-zero
values of β are extracted and a closed form least square solution on this subset is
created to polish the values of β.
3.4.4
Time testing results
As our main objective with AALR is to find a forecasting model for financial data one
period ahead, we focused the benchmarking tests for these improvements on a dataset
of financial returns. In this case we created 6 datasets that each had 12 training points
and 456 possible prediction terms available. The 6 datasets were spread across the
financial returns in order to test the method on various time periods. For each of the
6 datasets, 14 different kmax values and 3 different λ values were used as parameters.
The test were performed on a Intel Xeon Processor 2660v3 (2.60 GHz) using only
on thread. As seen in Table 3.4, none of the efforts to improve AALR, were able
to perform better time wise than letting Gurobi utilize its own available tools. The
objective found using Pure Gurobi, LASSO Warmstart and Gradient Descent were
all the same and a study of the log data shows that the warmstarted solution is
immediately beaten by Gurobi’s first heuristic solution. The objective of the Math
Heuristic was higher and the performance slower suggesting it might not be the right
fit for this algorithm.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Modern Linear Regression
Pure Gurobi
LASSO Warmstart
Math Heuristic
Gradient Descent
Average (sec)
503.5
618.2
528.2
506.2
Table 3.4: Benchmark test that averages over the solution time to 6 splits of financial
returns, where each split contains 12 months worth of data on 456 prediction terms.
The objective of each of Pure gurobi, LASSO Warmstart and Gradient Descent were
identical, while the objective of the Math Heuristic was higher.
3.4.5
Future improvement strategies
Other improvement strategies would be to reformulate the problem, making a com-
pletely exhaustive parameter tuning within Gurobi, to decomposition the problem or
to properly parallelize the code. As first mentioned, a reformulation of the problem
to a disaggregated cone problem could prove beneficial. By doing the reformulation
ourselves, Gurobi no longer needs to spend time on reformulating the problem from a
MIQCP or MISOCP to a disaggregated MISCOP. Furthermore such a reformulation
could lead to improvements in solution times. Secondly, a more exhaustive parameter
tuning in Gurobi could also be done ensuring that each parameter is perfectly tuned
to the problem and data. Gurobi has a vast combination of possible settings and
it was seen how some modifications proved helpful for our specific problem, hence
showing the possibility that other settings could improve it even more.
A third option would be to apply decomposition method onto the problem leading to
faster solutions and possibly tighter bounds. However, we do not see an obvious way
to decompose the model as of now, therefore it was not attempted within the scope of
this dissertation. Lastly, the code could be parallelized such that each instance of k
(the maximum number of prediction terms allowed) is solved in parallel and the entire
bootstrapping process is parallelized. Furthermore the branch and bound could also
be parallelized within Gurobi by allowing Gurobi more than 1 thread. This however
requires that the root node is solved before the branch and bound scheme can start
and it was seen that just solving the root node itself took a significant amount of
time.
3.5
Concluding remarks
It was seen that AALR does create more sparse and interpretable models compared
to LASSO. The additional sparsity does however come with both a cost on both
prediction power and speed. In all our test instances AALR performed slightly worse
on the out of sample R2 metric and took much more time than LASSO. Efforts
to improve the speed of AALR using various heuristics and warmstarting methods
proved inefficient. This is probably due to Gurobi having strong heuristics itself that
outperform the ones we implemented.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Predicting Financial
Returns
An interpretable and easily explained model is sought after in finance, since this not
only allows investors to gain a more thorough understanding of market dynamics and
utilizing this to improve returns, it also enables them to lure in more customers due to
a simpler explanation of their investing strategy. Unfortunately the financial markets
are inherently complex and might be influenced by both governmental legislation,
politics, industrial advancements, public belief, etc.
This is the exact reason why we are utilizing multi-linear regression methods on
financial data. The models are easily explained and by creating a sparse model, noise
can be removed and significant insights to the factors driving market changes can be
found. The hypothesis is then that utilizing a method such as AALR will be able to
provide a more sparse model with returns similar to LASSO.
4.1
Log-Normal Returns
The data used for the financial portfolio optimization is the 10-Industry dataset made
by Eugene Fama and Kenneth French1.
The returns will be transformed to log-
returns, rl, through the simple calculation:
rl,t = ln
( pt
pt−1
)
(4.1)
with pt being the price in period t. Log-returns are commonly used in financial studies
instead of arithmetic rate of returns since log-returns are closer to having a normal
distribution than arithmetic returns and they can remove some seasonality patterns
due to the log-transformation.
Log-returns express the continuously compounded
rate of return. Furthermore, the calculation of the total return becomes significantly
easier since one can utilize addition and subtraction rather than multiplication with
arithmetic returns.
rlT otal = ln
( pend
pstart
)
(4.2)
1Available at http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Predicting Financial Returns
Vend = Vstart · erlT otal
(4.3)
Once we obtained the desired weights for our portfolio using the logarithmic returns,
we do need to convert them back to arithmetic returns. The reason for this is that
we cannot do a sumproduct of logarithmic returns and weights, which is necessary to
calculate the portfolio return. The conversion is done through the following equation:
rarr = (erlog −1) · 100
(4.4)
Having returns which more closely resembles a normal distribution, i.e. using log-
normal returns, does come with a price during the more rare observations since there
is a discrepancy between the normal returns and the log-normal returns during rare
occurrences. If we multiply the log-normal returns with 100%, we can illustrate this
discrepancy as done in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: An illustration of the discrepancy between Normal returns and Log-
Normal returns.
As seen, our predictive method will be prone to underestimating extreme upswings,
while overestimating extreme downswings. But due to the rarity of these occurrences,
it will be fair to assume that using log-normal returns will be beneficial for us during
most of the time simply because of the normality assumptions being more accurate,
particularly important for our Mean-Variance optimization later.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Efficient market theory
31
4.2
Efficient market theory
An important aspect when validating predictive power within finance is the discussion
about market efficiency, an idea originally proposed by Eugene Fame in 1970 [Fam70].
In that seminal paper, Fame puts forward the idea of an ”informationally efficient”
market, wherein all prices fully reflect all available information[Fam70]. This means
that it would be difficult, or next to impossible, to beat the market since it auto-
matically reflects all available information and one cannot possess more information
than another with equal skill and determination legally. Under this assumption, even
the slightest edge of predictive power would be indicative of a significant advantage
and would allow one to beat the market. But at the same time, if a person finds
an advantage in the market, the market self-corrects since other people will find a
similar advantage hence eliminating this advantage over time.
The reason behind this belief lies in the fact that when one person learns a way to
predict the market, multiple others will follow this method thus slowly removing the
edge. Furthermore, even the slightest edge or capability of predicting the market bet-
ter than the historical average can be leveraged into massively beating market indexes.
This leveraging possibility means that if a method is capable of truly producing better
estimates of market movements, however minor they might be, the method should be
seen as valuable.
As summarized by William Ziemba, there exists 5 different opinions about the market:
Efficient Markets, Risk Premium, Inexplicable Genius, Value-Based Investments and
Beatable Markets[Zie16]. The paper defines the risk premium group as those investors
who believe a model with few factors can describe asset prices and also mentions that
this group believes in capital asset pricing model (CAPM) by William Sharpe, Three-
Factor model by Eugene Fama & Kenneth French or Carharts Four-Factor Model.
But at the same time, this group does not believe a larger model is justified. The
third group is rather self-explanatory, while the fourth group of Value-Based invest-
ments is where an investor, such as Warren Buffett, invest based on their assumption
of the long-term value the company holds. But in our case, the group of interest and
where we are located is ”Beatable markets”. The belief in this group is that through
”very focused, disciplined, well-researched strategies with superior execution and risk
control”[Zie16] we are able to continuously outperform the market.
It has been argued that searching for meaningful predictive power from macroeco-
nomic variables is not worthwhile, as pointed out in the famous paper by Amit Goyal
and Ivo Welch which concludes that ”the profession has yet to find a variable that has
meaningful and robust empirical equity premium forecasting power”[WG08]. Accord-
ing to that paper, there is no single macroeconomic factor which continuously aid
in predicting the market movements. Some people have been successful in obtaining
predictive power though, but if articles are capable of finding an edge, it will often
be minor: a 1.3% R2 value relative to the historical mean [FS11] when two or more
predictors are combined to produce forecasts in the Sum-of-Parts (SOP) approach or
a R2 of 2.88% on an Extended SOP approach, where they combine predictors more
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Predicting Financial Returns
intelligently through pooling strategies[BM12]. In general, ”since small R2 statistics
can generate large benefits for investors, we should expect predictive regressions to
have only modest explanatory power”[CT08]. An example is further showed, where
a 0.43% prediction rate on an index can improve the portfolio return by a propor-
tional factor of 36% [CT08]. Hence it goes to show that we are searching for the
slightest improvement upon a historical average approach, because even such a slight
improvement will lead to excess returns.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Financial Data
33
4.3
Financial Data
As already mentioned, the financial data used in this thesis is the ”10 Industry In-
dexes” made by Eugene Fama and Kenneth French. The dataset is created by creating
10 different industry categories and then assigning each asset in S&P 500 to one of
these categories. Since the companies in S&P 500 change over time, this exercise has
been done multiple times to creating a dataset with monthly returns for each indus-
try. In our case, we have decided to work with an Average Equal Weighted Returns,
meaning all assets in the industry category contribute equally to the average contrary
to Average Value Weighted Returns. This was deemed a more saying indicator for
how the industry was actually behaving instead of letting a few major firms determine
the state of the industry.
The 10 industries in the dataset are as following:
1. NoDur - NonDurables, i.e. Food, Tobacco, Textiles, Apparel, Leather, Toys
2. Durbl - Consumer Durables, i.e. Cars, TV’s, Furniture, Household Appliances
3. Manuf - Manufacturing, i.e. Machinery, Trucks, Planes, Chemicals, Off Furn,
Paper, Com Printing
4. Enrgy - Energy, i.e. Oil, Gas, and Coal Extraction and Products
5. HiTec - High Technology & Business Equipment, i.e. Computers, Software, and
Electronic Equipment
6. Telcm - Telephone and Television Transmission
7. Shops - Wholesale, Retail, and Some Services (Laundries, Repair Shops)
8. Hlth - Healthcare, Medical Equipment, and Drugs
9. Utils - Utilities
10. Other - Mines, Construction, Building Management, Transport, Hotels, Bus
Service, Entertainment, Finance
These 10 indexes as well as the average across all of them and the cumulative sum of
the average return can be seen in Figure 4.2.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Predicting Financial Returns
(a) Time Series plot of the first 6 indexes out of the 10.
(b) Time Series plot of the last 4 indexes out of the 10 as well as the
average return across industries and the cumulative sum of these average
returns.
Figure 4.2: Time Series plots of all indexes as well as average return and cumulative
sum of the average returns.
From Figure 4.2 it becomes clear that the great economic depression, which started
in 1929, is by far the most volatile period for financial returns for most industries,
except for Telecommunications who faced larger volatility during the DotCom bub-
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Financial Data
35
ble around 2000. The DotCom bubble also affected the HiTec index, which is to be
expected due to the nature of the industry. Some other interesting insights are how
stable Utilities as an industry is, while Healthcare, Telecommunications and High
Technology seem to be the most volatile industries. It is not surprising that Telecom-
munications and High Technology is volatile due to nature of constant disruption
there, whereas the volatility Healthcare is more surprising but it could be expected
that the pharmaceutical business in this index is causing a lot of the volatility.
Another interesting finding from the visualization of the returns is the cumulative
sum of the average returns, where it becomes clear that on average the market re-
turns are linear. It also shows from the average return plot that the great recession
in 1929, the oil crisis in 1970s and the financial recession in 2008 were major causes
of volatility across all indexes for a longer period of time.
Having seen how the financial returns differ across time and having identified the
worst economic recessions for the different industries, it would interesting to see the
distribution of the returns. These distributions are shown in Figure 4.3 and it shows
the expected picture; returns are leptokurtic with negative skewness, although slightly.
The mean is positive for all industries and there is a longer tail of negative returns
than positive returns. There are some differences between the industries however; if
we compare NoDur and HiTec, it can be seen that NoDur has few returns above 10%
whereas HiTec has several occurrences of returns above 10%.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Predicting Financial Returns
(a) Histograms of the return distribution for the first 6 indexes.
(b) Histograms of the return distribution for the last 4 indexes and the
average return across all indexes.
Figure 4.3: Histograms of the last 4 indexes out of the 10 as well as the average return
across industries and the cumulative sum of these average returns.
Another interesting thing to investigate is the amount of correlation between the
indexes across all observations. This correlation matrix is shown in Table 4.1 and
shows that even the industries with the lowest amount of correlation, Hlth and Utils,
still have 0.58, while some industries have a correlation as high as 0.95, for Manuf
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Financial Data
37
and NoDur. In general, multicollinearity between the indexes is something to keep in
mind and it goes to show that financial returns strongly correlate.
NoDur
Durbl
Manuf
Enrgy
HiTec
Telcm
Shops
Hlth
Utils
Other
NoDur
1
0.94
0.95
0.75
0.87
0.78
0.94
0.81
0.72
0.93
Durbl
0.94
1
0.96
0.73
0.88
0.76
0.93
0.79
0.71
0.91
Manuf
0.95
0.96
1
0.80
0.90
0.78
0.93
0.81
0.73
0.94
Enrgy
0.75
0.73
0.80
1
0.69
0.60
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.77
HiTec
0.87
0.88
0.90
0.69
1
0.85
0.88
0.87
0.62
0.84
Telcm
0.78
0.76
0.78
0.60
0.85
1
0.78
0.79
0.57
0.73
Shops
0.94
0.93
0.93
0.70
0.88
0.78
1
0.82
0.70
0.89
Hlth
0.81
0.79
0.81
0.65
0.87
0.79
0.82
1
0.58
0.77
Utils
0.72
0.71
0.73
0.60
0.62
0.57
0.70
0.58
1
0.76
Other
0.93
0.91
0.94
0.77
0.84
0.73
0.89
0.77
0.76
1
Table 4.1: Correlation between the 10 different industry indexes.
We also tested whether the data was stationary, meaning whether or not we
could expect homoscedasticity to hold. If the data is stationary, we can expect that
regardless of the data subset, we should expect the variance of the errors to be equal.
Performing an Augmented Dickey-Fuller test showed that no unit root exists and
we cannot consistently find an AutoRegressive explanation for the changes between
months. Having a stationary time-series does allow us to expect homoscedasticity. It
should be added that the financial recessions definitely do make the timeseries look
non-stationary, but due to their rare occurrences, the result from the test remains a
stationary series.
Seasonality due to months was tested through visualization with boxplots as well as
doing Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests of the identified areas of interest. It became clear
that not many months differed in terms of return distribution, but visually there
seemed to be a difference between January and December. This goes in line with the
January Effect, originally proposed by Sidney Wachtel and discussed multiple times in
academics. The reason for the effect seems to be tax-related selling [CS04]. From our
analysis, it was clear that January had more positive returns and differed with 99.9%
significance from December in all industries except Energy, Telecommunications and
Utilities. The boxplots across all industries and months can be found in Appendix 8.5
Figures 8.2-8.3. In that section, it is also possible to find p-values for the Kolmogorov-
Smirnov tests between December and January in Table 8.2.
With the main financial return data introduced, we will introduce the other predictors
we will include as well to obtain the best possible predictions.
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Predicting Financial Returns
4.4
Financial Predictors
In this section the additional macroeconomic, technical indicators and time depen-
dencies are introduced.
4.4.1
Macroeconomic Predictors
In order to enhance the prediction accuracy the model contains several Equity Risk
Premium Predicting Factors. In total, 17 macroeconomic predictors have been uti-
lized and an explanation of them follows here [WG08]:
• Index - This is simply the S&P 500 index
• D12 - A 12-month moving sum of the dividends paid on the S&P 500 index
• E12 - A 12-month moving sum of the earnings from the S&P 500 index
• b/m - Book-to-Market ratio takes a look at how much a company is worth
in the books divided by its market capitalization.
In this case, the market
investigated is the Dow Jones Industrial Average
• tbl - Treasury-bill rates on U.S. yields
• AAA - Corporate Bond Yields on AAA rated bonds
• BAA - Corporate Bond Yields on BAA rated bonds
• lty - Long-Term Yield given from Long-Term United States bonds
• ntis - Net Equity Expansion can be seen as an indicator of financial health
since it shows whether more or less equity has been placed in the market. It is
calculated as a ratio between a 12-month moving average of net issues by NYSE
listed stocks and the year-ending market capitalization of those same stocks
• Rfree - Risk-free rate is given as the U.S. Treasury Bill rate
• infl - Inflation rate is the Consumer Price Index
• ltr - Long Term Rate of Returns from Ibbotson’s ”Stocks, Bonds, Bills and
Inflation Yearbook”
• corpr - long-term Corporate Bond Returns from Ibbotson’s ”Stocks, Bonds,
Bills and Inflation Yearbook”
• svar - The stock variance computed as the sum of squared daily returns on
S&P 500
• csp - Cross-Sectional beta Premium meaning the difference between high and
low-beta stocks. Beta is a measurement of how much a stock moves in alignment
with the market, where values below 1 means it is less volatile than the market
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Financial Predictors
39
• CRSPSPvw - Center for Research in Security Press has gathered the S&P 500
monthly index returns and this predictor is with dividends
• CRSPSPvwx - similar to previous, except it is without dividends
The macroeconomic predictors are chosen based on being the most used and re-
searched within the academic literature. A point to mention here is that there is not
academic agreement on the predictive power of macroeconomic variables, with the
strongest opposition being from Amit Goyal and Ivo Welch [WG08]. They argue that
the out-of-sample R2 obtainable by such macroeconomic variables are non-significant
in most cases, especially following the oil crisis in 1973. Others, however, argue that a
combination of macroeconomic factors does give you an edge compared to a historical
mean[RSZ10; FS11; HMN11].
4.4.2
Technical Indicators
Not only macroeconomic variables were considered in our model, though. Also tech-
nical indicators were used, and in particularly Moving Averages and Momentum
strategies. Volume-based indicators were not feasible, since monthly volume of the
individual indexes are not given in the data sets by French & Fama. Utilizing techni-
cal indicators in linear regression has shown significant improvements in contrast to
merely using macroeconomic variables as highlighted by Christopher Neely [Nee+14]
and also by Libo Yin [YY16]. The technical indicators were implemented as they
were presented in [Nee+14], meaning a moving-average buy or sell signal (Si,t = 1 or
Si,t = 0 respectively) for industry i is calculated at the end of period t by comparing
two moving averages with different timeframes:
Si,t =
{
1,
if MAs,t ≥MAl,t
0,
otherwise
where
MAj,t = 1
j
j−1
∑
i=0
Pt−i
(4.5)
Hence, if the index at period t manages to have a higher moving average for the last s
periods than in the moving averages of the last l periods (s < l), a buy signal occurs.
This allows for trend capturing and can catch changes in the index, since the short
moving-average will adjust faster than the longer, obviously. We are utilizing the
same time periods as the paper, so s ∈{1, 2, 3} and l ∈{9, 12} [Nee+14].
The momentum is a modified version of the moving average indicator, where instead
of calculating the average over the time span, we simply compare the index at time
t to the index at t −m. If it is higher, the index has momentum and a buy signal
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Predicting Financial Returns
is generated. If it is lower, a sell signal is generated. In mathematical terms, this
means:
Si,t =
{
1,
if Pt ≥Pt−m
0,
otherwise
Again, we are utilizing the same time periods as the article and hence use m ∈
{9, 12}[Nee+14].
4.4.3
Time dependencies
Lastly, in order to correctly describe market developments using a linear regression,
trends should be incorporated given the serial correlation of the data. In order to
do so, we expanded our dataset with columns containing t −1, t −2, . . . , t −12
observations of the industry returns and macro economical predictors.
4.4.4
VIX
In order to better capture market volatility we gathered data on the VIX index from
the Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED). This was motivated by talking to people
with in the quantitative financial industry who said that it was widely used to identify
the current market state. The index forecasts the implied volatility 30 days in advance
of stocks in S&P 500, thus giving not only a description of the current volatility but
also the expected volatility for the next period of time. This predictor has gained
popularity since its introduction in 1993 by Chicago Board Options Exchange, but it
has been calculated back to 1990 by FRED, thus it can be used in models including
data from here on out. If VIX is commonly used as an indicator of market volatility
by investors, market psychology tells us that a fair hypothesis is that VIX will be a
significant indicator.
==PAGE:51==
4.5 Financial predictive power of AALR and LASSO
41
4.5
Financial predictive power of AALR and LASSO
In order to test the performance of AALR and LASSO’s ability to predict index
prices, a dataset was created including all the aforementioned macroeconomic factors,
time expansions, technical indicators and non linear transformations. In total this
results in 1464 prediction terms. From this dataset AALR and LASSO were tested
using a rolling window with 12, 24, 36, 48, 120 and 240 training months, predicting
1 month ahead for the consumer non-durable (NoDur) industry. The first month
predicted is August 1946 and the last month predicted is July 2016 resulting in 70
years of monthly predictions. LASSO is tested across 10 λ values and AALR over 5
λ values, both linearly spaced between 0 and maxVal = ∥XT y∥∞. The reason for
fewer λ values for AALR is due to its time consumption. Each subproblem in AALR
is time constrained to 40 seconds after which the best feasible solution is returned if
no optimal solution is found. All other parameters are as described in Section 3.2.3
for AALR. Furthermore, in order to achieve a significant speed-up we parallelized the
solution process by giving each thread, out of the 84 used by us, a span of 10 months
to solve, where each thread has a computational power between 2.6-2.8GHz. This
parallelization was crucial in our ability to generate results efficiently since a standard
laptop would not be able to make its way through such a hefty task. A more detailed
description of our parallelization can be found in Appendix 8.3.
Our way of measuring the fit of the linear regression is the same way as Campbell
and Thompson in 2008[CT08]:
R2
OS = 1 −
∑T
t=1(rt −ˆrt)
∑T
t=1(rt −¯rt)
(4.6)
where T is the total amount of predictions we have made over the span of our entire
Out-of-Sample testset, rt denotes the actual observation at time t, ˆrt is the forecast
by the linear regression and ¯rt is the forecast made by historical mean created by
taking the average of all prior observations up to and including t −1, meaning:
¯rt =
1
t −1
t−1
∑
i=1
ri
(4.7)
Additionally, the out-of-sample binary classification rate whether the price is going up
or down (CR), the out-of-sample absolute mean error (AME) and the out-of-sample
root mean squared error (RMSE) are all calculated. The results of the test can be
seen in Table 4.2.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Predicting Financial Returns
Algorithm
Training months
CR
R2
AME
RMSE
AALR
12
48.81%
-2329.86%
0.120
0.249
LASSO
12
53.69%
-1.26%
0.037
0.051
AALR
24
52.86%
-228.58%
0.059
0.091
LASSO
24
54.29%
-1.89%
0.037
0.051
AALR
36
52.62%
-79.23%
0.049
0.067
LASSO
36
54.40%
-0.95%
0.037
0.051
AALR
48
56.19%
-43.49%
0.044
0.060
LASSO
48
58.10%
-0.47%
0.036
0.051
AALR
120
57.98%
-11.90%
0.039
0.053
LASSO
120
60.00%
1.68%
0.036
0.050
AALR
240
59.29%
1.20%
0.036
0.050
LASSO
240
61.67%
3.89%
0.035
0.049
Table 4.2: Test results for AALR and LASSO on 70 years of monthly data.
From the results it is seen that AALR does not outperform LASSO at any point
on any metric. It does however take much more time to solve AALR compared to
LASSO and an optimal solution is not guaranteed. For comparison, 7 predictions of
AALR on 1 thread took just shy of 18 hours to solve, which is an average of 2.57
hours per prediction.The entire LASSO problem, all 840 predictions, took about 2.6
hours to solve on 1 thread.
It became quite clear for us that the power of AALR to find the statistically
best and parsimonious model is most valuable on static data sets, where there is
not a need for constant recalculation of the solution given new information. This
constant need for iterations is time-consuming, meaning AALR has to deliver an even
greater additional predictive performance, since it needs more time than LASSO in
general to solve an instance and thus has to enhance its performance:time ratio in the
performance aspect. Especially the need for statistical validation in Phase 3 becomes
a major time consumer, since solving the model is time-consuming enough in itself,
but when it has to be solved an additional 50 times during bootstrapping, LASSO
stands to gain a massive advantage. As previously stated, we therefore believe that
Phase 3 is where Dimitris Bertsimas & Angela King[BK16] managed to save time
compared to us, but due to a limited description of their procedure, we have not been
able to generate similar performance in terms of time.
We also tested whether the prediction terms used by LASSO and AALR were
the same, in the case of the 240 training months dataset. Here we looked at the 20
most used prediction terms, and the analysis showed that the two methods had 0
overlaps between the 20 most used prediction terms. Furthermore it has been found
that AALR is less stable in terms of selecting prediction terms compared to LASSO.
AALR has 707 different active prediction terms over the entire time series with the
most used 28.6%. In comparison, LASSO has 512 different active prediction terms
with the most used 50.3% of the time.
Despite only being tested on the consumer non durable industry dataset, we de-
==PAGE:53==
4.6 Deep exploration of LASSO in a financial setting
43
cided that AALR’s performance:time ratio was too low to continue exploring the
method in a financial setting, hence we will only focus on LASSO going forward.
4.6
Deep exploration of LASSO in a financial setting
In this section LASSO is explored more in depth in a financial setting with a focus
on which prediction terms produce the best results.
4.6.1
Importance of prediction terms
In order to investigate whether including the time series, macroeconomic prediction
terms, technical indicators, the VIX index and non linear transformation of the pre-
diction terms had any importance for LASSO, we computed the R2
OS and RMSE on
24 different dataset configurations across all 10 industries with 10 values of λ. An
overview of the 24 different datasets are seen in Table 4.3.
The dataset that produced the best R2
OS with the best λ regularization is seen in
Table 4.4 and the R2
OS values are seen in Table 4.5. The number of training months
seem to have a significant influence on the performance of LASSO, since 240 training
months has a performance more than twice as good compared to the second best.
Macroeconomic factors seems to have a positive influence on the prediction power as
90% of the best performing datasets include macroeconomic factors as well as the
VIX index. Another interesting point is how great of predictive power we stand to
gain on the various indexes. For Durbl we end up with a R2
OS = 9.76% when using
240 months of training data, and in general the R2
OS = 5.42%, proving the validity
of applying linear regression to financial data.
The dataset that produced the best RMSE is seen in Table 4.6 and the RMSE
values are seen in Table 4.7. Again, the number of training months seem to have a
influence on the performance of LASSO. However, macroeconomic factors does not
seem to have a strong influence for LASSO here and is only included 30% of the time
for the 240 training months.
It is seen that 240 months of training data gives the best statistics across all
industries. To get an even better understanding of which dataset performs the best
an average of the statistics across all industries have been made and are seen in
Table 4.8. From this table it is seen that when using no macroeconomic prediction
terms the Raw dataset performs the best, while non-linear transformations and time
series seem to generate more noise than predictive power.
However, this picture
changes with the introduction of macro economical prediction terms. Now time series,
VIX and technical indicators improve the predictive power. In general, the data set
(VIX)MarcoTimeTA is the best performing across all statistics and this combination
is selected going forward. With the best models found as being MacroTimeTA and
VIXMacroTimeTA, it was deemed relevant to investigate those two models a bit more
thoroughly.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Predicting Financial Returns
Dataset
MEF
VIX
NLT
TI
TS
Raw
0
0
0
0
0
RawTA
0
0
0
1
0
RawExp
0
0
1
0
0
RawExpTA
0
0
1
1
0
RawTime
0
0
0
0
1
RawTimeTA
0
0
0
1
1
RawTimeExp
0
0
1
1
0
RawTimeExpTA
0
0
1
1
1
Macro
1
0
0
0
0
MacroTA
1
0
0
1
0
MacroExp
1
0
1
0
0
MacroExpTA
1
0
1
1
0
MacroTime
1
0
0
0
1
MacroTimeTA
1
0
0
1
1
MacroTimeExp
1
0
1
1
0
MacroTimeExpTA
1
0
1
1
1
VIX_Macro
1
1
0
0
0
VIX_MacroTA
1
1
0
1
0
VIX_MacroExp
1
1
1
0
0
VIX_MacroExpTA
1
1
1
1
0
VIX_MacroTime
1
1
0
0
1
VIX_MacroTimeTA
1
1
0
1
1
VIX_MacroTimeExp
1
1
1
1
0
VIX_MacroTimeExpTA
1
1
1
1
1
Table 4.3: An overview over the different datasets tested. MEF is Macroeconomic
Factors, VIX is the VIX index, NLT is Non Linear Transformations, TI is Technical
Indicators and TS is time series expansions.
4.6.2
Prediction terms in MacroTimeTA
Including macroeconomical prediction terms as well as the time series of the past 12
months and technical indicators resulted in 359 prediction terms that LASSO can
pick from. Despite having such a large amount of possible prediction terms to pick
from for LASSO, only 132 of the prediction terms were actually picked more than
10% of the time. Furthermore, when looking at the amount of prediction terms being
relevant 30% of the time, the amount of terms shrunk to barely 14. The progress of
the amount of terms being used at a specific amount of time can be seen in Figure
4.4. This figure suggests that there are a few strong indicators but also a lot of noise,
since 227 of 359 prediction terms are used rarely.
As the number of variables are so high, only the top 10 most selected variables
averaged across all industries are displayed in Table 4.9. It is very significant how
==PAGE:55==
4.6 Deep exploration of LASSO in a financial setting
45
Training Months
NoDur
Durbl
Manuf
Enrgy
HiTec
12
VIX_MacroTA
Raw
MacroTA
VIX_MacroExpTA
RawTA
24
Raw
Raw
VIX_MacroExp
VIX_MacroExp
Raw
36
Raw
Raw
Raw
VIX_Macro
Raw
48
Raw
Raw
Raw
VIX_Macro
Raw
120
MacroTimeTA
MacroExp
MacroTA
VIX_MacroTA
Raw
240
VIX_MacroTimeTA
VIX_MacroTimeTA
VIX_MacroTimeTA
Raw
VIX_MacroTime
Training Months
Telcm
Shops
Hlth
Utils
Other
12
MacroTA
Raw
RawTA
VIX_Macro
MacroTA
24
VIX_Macro
Raw
VIX_Macro
VIX_Macro
VIX_MacroExp
36
Raw
Raw
Macro
MacroExp
Raw
48
MacroTA
Raw
VIX_MacroTA
VIX_MacroTA
VIX_Macro
120
MacroExpTA
Raw
VIX_Macro
VIX_MacroExp
MacroExp
240
VIX_MacroExp
VIX_MacroTimeTA
VIX_MacroExp
VIX_Macro
VIX_MacroTimeTA
Table 4.4: An overview of the best performing datasets based on the R2
OS metric.
Raw indicates that only the indexes are used as prediction terms.
Training Months
NoDur
Durbl
Manuf
Enrgy
HiTec
Telcm
Shops
Hlth
Utils
Other
Average
12
0.66%
0.97%
-0.38%
0.76%
0.19%
1.06%
0.68%
-1.04%
-1.91%
-0.32%
0.07%
24
1.52%
1.64%
-0.02%
0.08%
0.23%
0.69%
2.12%
-0.35%
-1.18%
1.63%
0.64%
36
2.73%
2.83%
0.86%
-0.14%
0.84%
1.08%
3.18%
0.08%
-0.67%
0.94%
1.17%
48
3.51%
3.68%
1.59%
0.41%
1.31%
1.79%
3.91%
1.73%
0.89%
1.97%
2.08%
120
2.90%
3.61%
2.05%
-0.28%
1.84%
4.04%
3.80%
3.53%
1.05%
2.69%
2.52%
240
6.94%
9.76%
6.32%
-0.02%
6.63%
3.60%
7.35%
3.52%
1.19%
8.91%
5.42%
Table 4.5: An overview of the predictive power, R2
OS obtained from the best perform-
ing datasets based on the R2
OS metric.
Training Months
NoDur
Durbl
Manuf
Enrgy
HiTec
12
RawTime
VIX_MacroTimeTA
MacroTimeExpTA
RawTimeExpTA
RawTime
24
RawTime
MacroTimeExpTA
RawTime
RawTimeExpTA
RawTimeTA
36
RawTimeExpTA
MacroTimeTA
RawTime
MacroTimeTA
RawTime
48
RawTimeExp
MacroTime
MacroTime
RawTimeExpTA
RawTime
120
RawTimeExp
RawTimeExpTA
RawTimeExp
RawTime
MacroTimeExpTA
240
RawTimeExp
RawTimeExp
RawTimeExp
MacroTimeExpTA
MacroTimeExp
Training Months
Telcm
Shops
Hlth
Utils
Other
12
RawTimeExpTA
MacroTime
MacroTimeTA
RawExpTA
RawTime
24
RawTimeExpTA
RawTimeExp
RawTime
RawExpTA
RawTime
36
RawTimeExpTA
RawTimeExpTA
RawTimeExp
RawTime
RawTime
48
RawTimeExpTA
RawTimeExpTA
RawTimeExp
RawTimeTA
RawTimeExp
120
RawTime
RawTimeExp
RawTimeTA
RawTA
RawTimeExpTA
240
RawTimeExpTA
MacroExpTA
RawTimeTA
RawTimeTA
RawTimeExpTA
Table 4.6: An overview of the best performing datasets based on the RMSE metric.
T0 csp (cross-sectional beta premium) is used in more than 70% of all cases and how
corpr (long-term corporate bond returns) seems to be a strong prediction term across
the time series. It is, however, also noticeable how the 2nd most used prediction term
is used less than half of all models. Averaging across all prediction terms, a prediction
term is on average used 0.9% of the time with a standard deviation of 1%.
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Predicting Financial Returns
Training Months
NoDur
Durbl
Manuf
Enrgy
HiTec
Telcm
Shops
Hlth
Utils
Other
Average
12
0.051
0.065
0.058
0.074
0.077
0.069
0.057
0.067
0.036
0.053
0.061
24
0.051
0.065
0.058
0.074
0.077
0.069
0.057
0.067
0.036
0.053
0.061
36
0.051
0.065
0.058
0.074
0.077
0.069
0.057
0.067
0.036
0.053
0.061
48
0.051
0.065
0.058
0.074
0.077
0.069
0.057
0.067
0.036
0.053
0.061
120
0.050
0.064
0.057
0.074
0.077
0.069
0.056
0.066
0.036
0.053
0.060
240
0.050
0.064
0.057
0.074
0.077
0.069
0.056
0.066
0.036
0.052
0.060
Table 4.7: An overview of the obtained RMSE values from the best performing
datasets based on the RMSE metric.
Dataset
CR
R2
OS
AME
RMSE
Raw
58.30%
1.52%
0.0440
0.0595
RawTA
57.40%
1.45%
0.0440
0.0596
RawExp
57.89%
1.15%
0.0440
0.0596
RawExpTA
57.56%
0.91%
0.0441
0.0597
RawTime
57.36%
0.73%
0.0441
0.0598
RawTimeTA
56.65%
0.89%
0.0441
0.0597
RawTimeExp
57.13%
0.29%
0.0441
0.0599
RawTimeExpTA
57.05%
0.27%
0.0442
0.0599
Macro
60.76%
2.23%
0.0435
0.0594
MacroTA
60.11%
2.23%
0.0434
0.0594
MacroExp
59.50%
2.08%
0.0435
0.0594
MacroExpTA
58.94%
1.90%
0.0435
0.0594
MacroTime
60.63%
4.08%
0.0433
0.0588
MacroTimeTA
60.81%
4.22%
0.0432
0.0587
MacroTimeExp
59.74%
1.42%
0.0436
0.0596
MacroTimeExpTA
59.65%
1.43%
0.0436
0.0596
VIX_Macro
60.62%
2.36%
0.0435
0.0593
VIX_MacroTA
60.29%
2.34%
0.0434
0.0594
VIX_MacroExp
59.69%
2.16%
0.0434
0.0594
VIX_MacroExpTA
58.94%
1.94%
0.0435
0.0594
VIX_MacroTime
61.01%
4.64%
0.0431
0.0586
VIX_MacroTimeTA
61.21%
4.88%
0.0431
0.0586
VIX_MacroTimeExp
60.07%
1.74%
0.0434
0.0595
VIX_MacroTimeExpTA
59.96%
1.74%
0.0434
0.0595
Table 4.8: An average across all 10 industries with 240 months of training data.
Prediction term
T0 csp
T0 corpr
T3 corpr
T4 corpr
T1 ltr
T6 Telcom
MA(1,9)
T9 corpr
T7 Shops
T1 Manuf
Average Usage
0.722
0.469
0.447
0.426
0.384
0.370
0.351
0.351
0.337
0.332
Table 4.9: Top 10 most used variables averaged across all industries. Tx indicate the
time series with x being the number of periods behind the current period T = 0.
==PAGE:57==
4.6 Deep exploration of LASSO in a financial setting
47
Figure 4.4: Development of the average usage of prediction terms in LASSO using
the MacroTimeTA dataset. # of active prediction terms included at the percentage
is plotted at the left axis and # of active prediction terms included at or above the
percentage is plotted at the right axis. Note that the horizontal axis breaks between
50% and 70%.
4.6.3
Prediction terms in VIXMacroTimeTA
Including the same prediction terms as in MacroTimeTA as well as the VIX index
we get better statistics. In this dataset we have 372 prediction terms that LASSO
can pick from.
The prediction term average usage distribution is very similar to
MacroTimeTA’s distribution and the top 10 prediction terms are identical. As the
VIX index only becomes active in the last 323 out of 845 observations it makes sense
that it does not reach the top 10 most used prediction terms, especially taking into
consideration that we have 240 periods of training data leaving only 83 periods where
the VIX index is active in all the training data. Averaging over the data from the
first time the VIX index is active, the VIX index is still the 6th most used prediction
term.
4.6.3.1
Prediction quality with most used prediction terms
Having seen that a large amount of predictions terms are rarely used, it was inves-
tigated whether LASSO could benefit from us filtering out some of these potential
noisy prediction terms. Hence a subset of the VIXMacroTimeTA dataset was created
using prediction terms that are active more than 25% of the time. Such a subset con-
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Predicting Financial Returns
tains 26 prediction terms that LASSO can pick from and it turned out to show great
performance as seen in Table 4.10. The subset had improved performance across all
industries and all metrics except for Utilities where it had a lower performance. This
shows that by imposing sparsity manually, LASSO stands to gain an improvement in
its predictive power. Despite the obvious performance improvement it was decided
Dataset
CR
R2
OS
AME
RMSE
VIX_MacroTimeTA
61.2%
4.88%
0.043
0.059
VIX_MacroTimeTA_SubSet
64.8%
13.00%
0.041
0.056
Table 4.10: Benchmark of a subset which only contains prediction terms that are
used more than 25%.
that we would still continue by using VIX_MacroTimeTA, because of the fact that
we did do our prediction term analysis across the entire dataset to gain knowledge
about which prediction terms proved to be the most occurring. If we were to apply
this knowledge regardless of the current time period we were forecasting, we would
mix past and future knowledge. When predicting next months return, we do not have
future knowledge available, because if we did, why even bother to predict the returns
then? Therefore we cannot utilize such knowledge without invalidating our results.
It is however relevant to investigate whether a dynamic sparsity constraint can be
added to LASSO to correctly incorporate such knowledge, but it was deemed out of
scope to do so in this dissertation.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Dynamic Portfolio
Allocation
After having determined that LASSO clearly beats AALR on financial data, we will
now move onto the dynamic portfolio allocation and actually utilize the predictive
method in a prescriptive setting. Our chosen prescriptive model is Mean-Variance
Optimization, as introduced earlier, given its simplicity and the fact that if we are
able to produce meaningful results using a simple portfolio allocation, one should
expect even better results when utilizing more acknowledged methods instead.
5.1
Mean Variance Optimization
It was introduced by Harry Markowitz in 1952 [Mar52] and despite academic criticism
due to its simple nature, it remains popular and heavily used.
The optimization
problem is:
min
wt γwT
t Σtwt −µT wt
(5.1)
s.t1T wt = 1
(5.2)
0 ≤wt
(5.3)
where wt is the fraction of wealth, µ is the mean of the returns, Σ is the covariance
matrix of those returns and γ is the relative risk aversion. So γ = 0 means endless
risk is allowed and the maximum return portfolio, while γ = ∞would indicate the
minimum variance portfolio without taking the return into account, since its term
would be so minor in comparison. The first constraint enforces us to be fully invested
at all times, while the second indicates that we do not allow short positions, which
greatly lowers the complexity of the problem.
As pointed out in the paper, two inputs are necessary: an estimate of the expected
returns for assets, µ under consideration and the covariance of these returns, Σ. Due
to time constraints, we will only investigate various ways of estimating the expected
returns and simply create the covariance matrix from the historical observations avail-
able.
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
5.1.1
Second-Order Cone formulation
The classic Mean-Variance Optimization program is a quadratic problem, which can
hinder performance when solving it. We therefore chose to reformulate it through
Second-Order Cone constraints, thereby removing quadratic terms from the objective
function and hence improve the necessary computational time for solving it. In order
to reformulate it, we can initially insert an auxiliary variable pt in the objective
function instead of the wT
t Σtwt and obtain:
min
pt,wt pt + µT wt
(5.4)
s.t. 1T wt = 1,
∀t ∈T
(5.5a)
wT
t Σtwt ≤pt,
∀t ∈T
(5.5b)
We can transform this hyperbolic constraint into a second-order constraint by follow-
ing the framework provided in ”Convex Optimization” Problem 4.26 by Boyd and
Vandenberghe [BV09]. Here it is shown that:
uT u ≤yz, y ≥0, z ≥0 ⇐⇒

[
2u
(y −z)
]
2
≤y + z, y ≥0, z ≥0
(5.6)
Utilizing this in the Mean-Variance program allows us to set z = 1 and u = U T wt,
where U is the Cholesky factorization of the covariance matrix, Σ, meaning Σt = UU T .
The Mean-Variance program can then be formulated as:
min
pt,wt pt + µT wt
(5.7)
s.t1T wt = 1,
∀t ∈T
(5.8a)

[
2U T wi,t)
(pt −1)
]
2
≤(pt + 1),
∀t ∈T
(5.8b)
With the conic formulation of the Mean Variance optimization problem established,
the problem can be solved more efficiently and combined with other SOC programs,
which is exactly what we propose in our own framework Combined Estimation and
Optimization.
5.2
Combined Estimation and Optimization
Our idea behind combining two separate SOC programs into one single program came
after studying the current literature and learning about the promising field of com-
bining predictive and prescriptive analytics, whether it was called Learning Enabled
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Combined Estimation and Optimization
51
Optimization, Predictive Prescription, Integrative Analytics or any other name. The
basis of it all revolves around allowing the predictive model to see how it affects a
prescriptive model and a prescriptive model to refocus a predictive model to those ar-
eas beneficial for the problem at hand. In the paper ”From Predictive to Prescriptive
Analytics” by Dimitris Bertsimas and Nathan Kallus[BK14] they mention that the
current practice is, as they call it, Point-Prediction Driven or PPD. This approach is
referred to as Separated Estimation and Optimization by Rudin & Vahn [RV14], but
we adopt the PPD name. Currently the PPD approach is widespread, since multiple
different approaches to predictive modelling exists and equally many approaches to
prescriptive modelling exists and PPD allows people to utilize their favorite method
from both boxes somewhat independently of each other. The trade-off committed by
seeing it as two different problems, estimating and acting upon the estimation, comes
from the reduced impact, lost profit or whatever objective the problem concerns.
As mentioned in the literature study, a few articles already concerns closing this gap
and successfully integrating the two analytical fields into one, but from our point of
view those are either a theoretical framework unproven, a more intelligent and rolling
model selection or a complicated method not easily understood by practitioners in
the field. Our approach is then to create the ”Combined Estimation and Optimiza-
tion” method revolving around investigating whether bridging this gap can be done
through two simple and widespread methods; LASSO and Mean-Variance optimiza-
tion. If combining these two into one mathematical program yields stronger financial
returns than a PPD approach of first finding a LASSO model, estimating the future
returns using the model and acting upon the estimation through Mean-Variance op-
timization, then it will be clear for practitioners how useful the integration can be.
Without further ado, the MIP model for our CEO approach is:
min
β,wt,i λ1∥y −Xβ∥2
2 + λ2∥β∥1+
λ3

∑
i,t
γwt,iΣ−1wt,i −µt,iwt,i

−λ4
∑
t,i
wt,iyt,i
(5.9)
s.t.µt,i = E[xtβ | x ∈X], ∀t ∈T, i ∈I
(5.10a)
I
∑
i=1
wt,i = 1, ∀t ∈T
(5.10b)
wt,i ≥0, ∀t ∈T, i ∈I
(5.10c)
There are four objective terms each regulated by their separate λ values. The reason
for regulating all terms is to ensure that all terms can modify the output of the so-
lution. The first two terms are derived from the known LASSO formulation, while
the third one is the Mean-Variance formulation, but the fourth term is not as self-
explanatory. The fourth term looks at what the actual return will be by applying the
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
weights proposed by Mean-Variance optimization. The higher the actual return, the
better our model has become at determining weights for the portfolio optimization.
Furthermore, if this term is dropped the µ estimation is more likely to increase its
positive bias, since this would decrease the size of the third term significantly with-
out incurring any penalty for providing poor weighting suggestions. Obviously, an
incorrect µ estimate would also be penalized through the first term, but the first
term does not aid in avoiding the positive bias due to squared errors penalizing gross
overestimations and underestimations the same. The first constraint binds the mean
of an asset to equal the expected value which is calculated as prediction −¯ϵ, where ¯ϵ
is the average prediction error.
5.3
Alternative investment strategies for comparison
In order to determine whether or not the CEO approach works, we will see its per-
formance relative to three other investing strategies, namely:
• Sample Average Approximation
• Point-Prediction Driven Method
• 1 over N
These three strategies will now be explained in more detail.
5.3.1
Sample Average Approximation
Sample Average Approximation, or SAA as it denoted in literature, is basically an
approximation of the future returns through the average of the sample, meaning it
might as well be called a rolling window average, moving average or the like. Hence
if we have a training set of size T, we take the average of the returns for each asset in
the training set and use this average as the prediction for the next month. Beating
this method is critical, since it indicates that our predictive method adds value to the
dynamic portfolio allocation by delivering better forecasts. If SAA manages to beat
our methods, it renders all of our used predictors obsolete with regards to the return
since it cannot beat this simple forecasting method.
5.3.2
Point-Prediction Driven Method
The Point-Prediction Driven Method focuses on finding the best possible LASSO
model on a given training set for an index and then forecast the next months return, y
given an observation of the input variables X. Combining all indexes into an expected
return for the assets under consideration allows for a Mean-Variance optimization to
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Implementation of CEO
53
give us the portfolio weights, which can then be converted into realized return when
we multiply the assigned weights with the actual returns of the month.
5.3.3
1 over N
The last method for evaluation of CEO is the classic
1
N or 1 over N, which is a port-
folio equally invested in all assets under investigation. The reason why this strategy
remains a benchmark in financial research is that beating it has proven remarkably
difficult. In a famous paper by DeMiguel, Garlappi & Uppal it was shown that none
of the 14 models used was capable of being the
1
N strategy in terms of Sharpe Ratio
[DGU09]. As the authors point out, this means that ”the gain from optimal diversi-
fication is more than offset by estimation error” [DGU09].
The reason why we still believe in our approach is that we incorporate more elements
than they did, such as time dependencies, macroeconomic factors, transformation
of predictors and they do not trade dynamically in this paper either, which should
work to our advantage as well. They did however include transactions costs, which
we do not thereby making the dynamic trading element significantly more favoured.
Furthermore, in the same paper, it was noted that ”more effort needs to be devoted to
improving the estimation of the moments, and especially expected returns”[DGU09],
which is exactly the aim of our thesis and therefore it is relevant for us to see whether
we are able to actually beat the naive approach of
1
N .
Having introduced the three investing strategies, which will help to evaluate the
performance of CEO, a deeper understanding of how to implement CEO will now be
given.
5.4
Implementation of CEO
In order for us to successfully implement the mathematical model of CEO, we needed
to do 3 things for it to run efficiently:
1. Decide on what predictors to include for LASSO
2. Apply Second-Order Cone Programming on LASSO
3. Apply Second-Order Cone Programming on Mean-Variance term and avoid mul-
tiplication of two variables in µt,iwt,i
The first point has been covered in Section 4.6.1, where we saw which prediction terms
were necessary to obtain the possible predictive power for each index. The best model,
VIX_MacroTimeTA, is what we will now carry over to CEO. The second point on
converting LASSO to a SOCP has also been covered previously in Section 3.2.1,
when we introduced how AALR and LASSO were transformed in order for them to
run faster. Hence the only point left to explain is the last. Here we already saw a
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
SOCP version of Mean-Variance in Equation 5.7-5.8, but a new problem arises when
the expected return µt,i is no longer a parameter, since we now have a quadratic
element in the objective function.
5.4.1
Second-Order Cone formulation
The third point is to transform the Mean-Variance optimization term through SOC.
If the expected mean was a parameter for the model obtained from an outside model,
we would have an expression similar to the standard expression xT Ax + bx which is
easily transformed into a SOCP and was shown earlier. But in the case of CEO the
expected return vector is no longer a parameter, but a variable, µ, and this variable
is determined by the model itself due to its connection with the current selection of
β.
Our way of solving this problem is to remove the wt,i from the objective function
and impose its effect on the expected portfolio return through constraints.
This
approach involves adding one additional constraint, modifying an existing constraint
and changing the third term of the objective function:
(ˆµi + M) · wi,t ≥µi,t,
∀t ∈T, i ∈I
(5.11)
µt,i ≤E[xtβ | x ∈X],
∀t ∈T, i ∈I
(5.12)
λ3

∑
i,t
γT −µt,iwt,i

⇒λ3
(∑
i
(
γT −
∑
t
µt,i
))
(5.13)
Here ˆµi is the mean of index i over the current period, and M is the classic Big-M
notation. The first constraint ensures that µi,t, which is now our expected return
addition to the portfolio, can not be higher than its weighting multiplied with the
upper bound. The second constraint ensures that the expected return addition to
the portfolio at no point can be more than the expected value. If this constraint is
binding, it means that wt,i = 1 and we are solely invested in this one index i at time
t.
Lastly, by changing the objective function and making it a SOCP, we can achieve a
significant speed-up and avoid having both SOC and quadratic terms at the same
time in the objective function.
The CEO mathematical model, which is actually implemented in Julia therefore looks
like this:
min
β,wt,i
∑
i
(λ1qi + λ2Iz) +
λ3
(∑
t
(
γpt −
∑
i
µt,i
))
−λ4
∑
t,i
wt,iyt,i
(5.14)
==PAGE:65==
5.4 Implementation of CEO
55
s.t. (ˆµi + M) · wi,t ≥µi,t,
∀t ∈T, i ∈I
(5.15a)
µt,i ≤E[xtβ | x ∈X],
∀t ∈T, i ∈I
(5.15b)
β ≤z
(5.15c)
−z ≤β
(5.15d)

[√
2(qi −Xβ)
(1 −qi)
]
2
≤(1 + qi), ∀i ∈I
(5.15e)

[
2U T wi,t)
(pt −1)
]
2
≤(pt + 1), ∀t ∈T
(5.15f)
I
∑
i=1
wt,i = 1, ∀t ∈T
(5.15g)
wt,i ≥0, ∀t ∈T, i ∈I
(5.15h)
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
5.5
Parameter Selection
Having the mathematical model in place, the question that comes to mind is how
to regulate the four terms in the objective, how to set the Big-M notation and what
risk aversion parameters to investigate in order to obtain a true estimation of the
capabilities of the strategies.
5.5.1
Risk Aversion parameters
Before running the investment strategies, we needed to decide on a range of risk aver-
sion parameters to investigate. We decided to include a risk aversion parameter of 0
in order to see how the methods differed when focusing solely on their forecasts and
select the one index, which was deemed to deliver the biggest return. In order to
decide how high a risk aversion value we would include, we knew that in most cases
the risk aversion parameter would be between 2 and 4[Fab+07]. We decided to look
at what objective we could expect in order to quantify how these different values will
change our optimization problem. This was done by utilizing 1 over N weights, where
we saw that the risk-aversion term was 18 times higher than the expected mean term
when a value of 2.4 was selected. It was decided to do a linearly spaced array of 10
values between 0 and 2.4 to begin with, and if the results showed it necessary, it could
be expanded to go up to a risk aversion of 4, where the difference in terms would be
a factor of 30.
5.5.2
Regularization of CEO
For CEO, it was necessary to develop a wide range of regularization options for it to
choose from in order for us to see how the various terms played a factor in chang-
ing the obtained return. Doing a full Grid Search would be time consuming, so we
decided to implement a heuristic search procedure and an overview of this seen in
Algorithm 4. It works by setting λ1 to 1 and then testing 5 values at a time for
the remaining 3 λ values. To begin with, all 3 λ values are tested on the set {0.1,
0.5, 1, 2, 10} and this is done for 50 months starting from August 1946. Following
that, the average of the obtained P-values are calculated for the 125 different CEO
strategies and the best regularization parameter for each λ is chosen. Another set of
regularization parameters is then generated and the same 50 months are tested with
these new regularization terms. After doing this a total of 5 times, the regularization
terms has converged sufficiently (the range of a set will be <0.01) and we stop the test.
==PAGE:67==
5.5 Parameter Selection
57
Algorithm 4 Regularization of CEO
1: Given: Starting time T, interval size I, initial regularization set R, maximum
runs M
2: Initialize I = 50, M = 5, R = {0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, 10}, L = {1, 2, 3}
3: Set m = 0, Rnew = {R, R, R}, t = T
4: while m < M do
5:
Set i = 0
6:
Generate regularization combinations, RC, from Rnew
7:
Set P = |RC|, t = T
8:
while i < I do
9:
Set p = 0
10:
while p < P do
11:
Select Rc ∈RC
12:
Solve CEO with Rc regularization to forecast period t
13:
Save P(Rc, i) and increment p
14:
end while
15:
Increment t, i
16:
end while
17:
Set Rtemp,l = arg maxRc
1
I
∑
i∈I P(Rc)
18:
Set rnew,l = f(Rtemp,l) for l ∈L
19:
Set Rnew = {rnew,1, rnew,2, rnew,3
20:
Increment m
21: end while
22: Set Rbest,l = Rtemp,l
The function f(Rtemp,l) generates a new set of regularization parameters and it
is crucial since this is what ensures both sufficient exploration of the regularization
space as well as conversion to allow us to end the algorithm. We are generating two
values larger and two values lower than the found λ term, r ∈R as well as including
the value of λ itself. The function for calculating these values are seen underneath:
f(r) =


L + (R −L) · 0.2
L + (R −L) · 0.8
1
R + (U −R) · 0.2
R + (U −R) · 0.8


(5.16)
Where L (U) is the value before (after) r in the regularization set R. If the value
happens to be an extrema of the current region, we set L (U) to 0 (2r). A complete
example of the convergence of this heuristic search procedure can be found in Ap-
pendix 8.6.
After this search, we ended with λ1 = 1, λ2 = 1.99, λ3 = 0.98, λ4 = 11.68. This
regularization goes to show that the best results are obtained, when the prescriptive
usage is included and in particular the relevance of the actual returns seem crucial
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
to provide the best returns out-of-sample. It should also be noted that during the
search procedure, the risk aversion parameter γ was set to 2.4. Obviously it would be
beneficial to include this parameter as well in the regularization tuning, but doing so
increases the required time significantly and would require us to generate 10 different
regularization settings, all tuned individually. This was not done due to time limita-
tions, but it seems worth investigating the impact of such a dynamic regularization
more.
5.5.3
Big-M for CEO
In order for us to implement CEO, it was necessary to set a Big-M value for the
constraint (5.15a). The value of this Big-M showed crucial to our model, since it
would put a boundary on our forecasts thereby helping to avoid an extremely positive
bias. The reason for this is that without the boundary on this constraint, the expected
value of the forecast could increase significantly since that would benefit the objective
function.
Knowing this we decided to create a dynamic Big-M, which was the largest value seen
for each index in the given training data. This would create a sufficient boundary such
that some positive bias could be avoided, while still allowing the model to accurately
try and learn from all the given months of data. Of course, when predicting afterwards,
the Big-M setting does mean that the model will never be able to predict anything
larger than what was in the training set, but we saw this a minor effect since it is
highly unlikely to predict these returns anyways. The impact of this Big-M constraint
is significant and it could be investigated whether another value could provide even
better returns, although other static values were tested and none proved as effective
as the proposed setting.
==PAGE:69==
5.6 Comparison methods
59
5.6
Comparison methods
We will evaluate the various strategies on their performance during economic reces-
sions as well as four comparison metrics. Furthermore, we will investigate how they
differ with various risk aversion parameters.
5.6.1
Performance during economic recessions
In order to determine economic recessions, we utilized the defined recessions by the
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). NBER determines a recession by
a wide variety of factors such as recent developments in the GDP of both product
and income, employment numbers, income changes, industrial production, etc. A
group of experts within the NBER are then to determine whether or not a recession
is truly happening or if it is merely minor drawbacks during an economic expansion1.
The reason behind investigating the effect of economic recessions comes from the fact
that predictive methods manage to obtain higher predictive power during financial
recession, as shown in multiple papers [LT17; RT16; BM12; HMN11]. Within these
papers, it is shown how stronger predictive power of both macroeconomic and tech-
nical indicators are seen during recession periods. Therefore it was deemed relevant
to test whether a similar conclusion could be drawn from our strategies as well as
see whether the economic recession could aid in explaining negative returns in the
portfolio.
5.6.2
Comparison Metrics
Beside economic recession, we will compare the various strategies on 4 different met-
rics:
• Coefficient of Prescriptiveness, P
• Sharpe Ratio, SR
• Maximum DrawDown, MDD
• Months positive, MP
Those four metrics will be explained in greater detail underneath.
5.6.3
Coefficient of Prescriptiveness
The Coefficient of Prescriptiveness, P, was introduced by Dimitris Bertsimas &
Nathan Kallus [BK14].
In this case, we wish to see how much better a strategy
1More information about the process of recession determination can be found on their website:
http://nber.org/
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
is than the simple 1 over N strategy, which has been deemed tough to beat, hence we
will calculate it as:
Pt = 1 −rS,t −rP,t
r1N,t −rP,t
(5.17)
where rS,t is the obtained return for the strategy at time t, r1N,t is the obtained
return for the
1
N at time t and rP,t is the obtained return when perfect information
about the expected return is used in a Mean Variance optimization program. We
have decided to utilize 1 over N as the benchmark instead of SAA, since we want to
compare a dynamic strategy to a static strategy.
This metric tells us how much we stand to gain by switching from a
1
N strategy to
the other strategy relative to providing perfect information. If we achieve a value of
Pt = 1, the proposed strategy is able to produce returns similar to those obtained
through perfect estimations of the next months return whereas Pt = 0 indicates that
the strategy is only capable of producing returns similar to
1
N .
5.6.4
Sharpe Ratio
The Sharpe Ratio, SR, is probably the most notorious financial metric for investing
strategy and is named after its inventor William Sharpe, who created it in 1966[Sha66].
It is a way of showing the average return relative to the standard deviation, thereby
providing a way to compare strategies despite differences in risk aversions.
It is
calculated as:
SR = rp
σp
(5.18)
where rp is the average return of the portfolio p and σp is the standard deviation of
the portfolio p. Sometimes the risk-free rate is subtracted from the portfolio returns,
but given our goal of comparison this would not change the picture and has been left
out. It should be mentioned that our Sharpe Ratio is not annualized, since it would
not change the comparison either.
In lay-man terms the Sharpe Ratio indicates whether the risk an investor takes on
by going after additional return is worth it. If the Sharpe Ratio decreases as a result
of the change, the strategy can be deemed less successful. A rule of thumb says that
a Sharpe Ratio of 1 is good, 2 is very good and 3 is excellent, but 3 is also almost
impossible to obtain due to the natural correlation and volatility in the markets.
The Sharpe Ratio is also criticized for assuming normality of returns, while in reality
the returns are leptokurtic and negatively skewed, thus indicating that the standard
deviation might not be equal on both sides of the mean as a normal distribution
assumes. Despite these criticisms, it is one of the most common metrics to evaluate
portfolios, hence why we have included it.
==PAGE:71==
5.6 Comparison methods
61
5.6.5
Maximum Drawdown
The Maximum Drawdown, MDD, is a way of more accurately depicting the actual
risk involved with the portfolio, since it shows how much the strategy loses during
a bad period from a peak to a trough. A lower value for one strategy relative to
another means that it has a lower risk involved with the strategy and that the bad
periods are less impactful relative to the strategy with a higher MDD. The MDD is
calculated as:
MDD = TRtrough −TRpeak
TRpeak
(5.19)
Where TRpeak indicates the Total Return for the portfolio at the peak and TRtrough
indicates the lowest Total Return value during the trough period defined as the period
between two peaks.
5.6.6
Months positive
This metric is an indicator on how often the strategy manages to produce a positive
return. We know that on average the indexes have a positive return 60.4% of the
time (exact number for each index can be found in Appendix 8.5, Table 8.1), hence
it would be beneficial to not only utilize these upswings to generate excessive returns
but also avoid some of the negative months through better diversification from the
strategy. This metric is calculated as:
MP =
M +
M + + M −· 100%
(5.20)
where M + is the amount of months with positive portfolio returns and M −is amount
of months with negative portfolio returns. This number also works a risk measure-
ment, since we can see how stable returns we can deliver to risk-adverse investors.
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
5.7
Results
All of our results are obtained by having the strategies predict the following month,
where the first month predicted is August 1946 and the last month predicted is July
2016 resulting in 70 years of monthly predictions.
Going into the results, it is important to provide a baseline in order to truly show how
well the various investment strategies perform. This baseline is established through
seeing the obtained returns when providing a Mean-Variance optimization problem
with perfect return estimations for the coming period throughout our entire dataset.
The obtained results can be seen in Table 5.1, and has been obtained through a risk-
aversion parameter of 0. The reason for this parameter choice is that it will also
maximize the return, hence it would never be possible for another strategy to provide
a higher return thereby never invalidating our P-value calculation. It will be possible
for another investment strategy to provide a lower standard deviation, however, but
the point is not to provide the best Sharpe Ratio, but merely a benchmark of the
highest returns possible and what implications this has for the rest of the comparison
metrics.
Mean
Std
SR
MP %
MDD
Max
Min
5.90
6.62
0.891
84.9%
-17.1%
53.13
-10.45
Table 5.1: The possible return and comparison metrics obtainable through perfect
estimations of next months return
In Table 5.2 the results are shown when using Sample Average Approximation as
a forecasting mechanism using the last 12 observations as input. This amount of ob-
servations proved to yield the highest returns, due to obtaining higher mean returns
while not increasing the standard deviation significantly when compared to a more
robust estimation using 240 observations. The results from using 24, 36, 48, 60, 120
and 240 months for SAA can be seen in Appendix 8.7.4.
As it can be seen from Table 5.2, the best SAA results are obtained when we have a
risk aversion of 1.066. In general SAA manages to beat 1 over N in terms of Sharpe
Ratio, where it is 0.282 for the best SAA setting and only 0.221 for 1 over N, thereby
setting the benchmark for what our own methods should be capable of beating. An-
other thing to notice is that SAA also manages to produce more positive portfolio
return months compared to the 61.3% by 1 over N. A critical mind might note that
the average months positive by 1 over N (61.3%) differs from the average across the
months positive by indexes (60.4%). The difference lies in the fact that for the port-
folio, the amount an index is positive can aid in generating higher returns for the
portfolio, while it will just be a binary addition for the index calculation leading to
the seen discrepancy.
==PAGE:73==
5.7 Results
63
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P
0.0
1.92
6.78
0.283
34.45
-25.83
63.9%
-52.7%
10.9%
0.267
1.52
6.60
0.230
26.07
-32.66
62.5%
-68.6%
3.7%
0.533
1.53
6.56
0.234
25.89
-32.66
62.1%
-66.6%
3.9%
0.8
1.54
6.51
0.237
25.75
-32.66
62.3%
-65.9%
4.2%
1.066
1.63
5.78
0.282
24.68
-25.73
63.0%
-42.1%
9.0%
1.333
1.62
5.73
0.282
24.66
-25.66
62.9%
-42.4%
8.8%
1.6
1.61
5.71
0.281
25.35
-25.61
63.0%
-42.6%
8.6%
1.867
1.59
5.69
0.280
27.18
-25.57
63.3%
-42.9%
8.3%
2.133
1.59
5.67
0.280
28.62
-25.54
63.3%
-43.1%
8.2%
2.4
1.58
5.65
0.279
29.72
-25.52
63.1%
-43.1%
8.1%
1 over N
1.17
5.31
0.221
28.82
-26.98
61.3%
-61.0%
NA
Table 5.2: A comparison across the various risk aversion parameters for Sample Av-
erage Approximation when the model forecasts using the last 12 months of data.
With the best SAA results shown, it is time to look at a Point-Prediction Driven
portfolio allocation, where we generate the LASSO estimate of the expected returns
which is then used in the Mean-Variance optimization. The results when using 240
observations, which has previously been shown to be the best amount of observations,
are shown in Table 5.3.
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P
0
1.84
6.42
0.287
38.31
-22.39
63.9%
-71.2%
11.5%
0.267
1.80
5.89
0.305
34.96
-22.19
63.7%
-60.1%
11.3%
0.533
1.72
5.76
0.298
34.92
-21.12
63.9%
-57.4%
10.1%
0.8
1.66
5.66
0.293
34.91
-21.55
64.3%
-57.2%
9.4%
1.066
1.63
5.61
0.290
34.90
-21.75
64.6%
-56.9%
9.1%
1.333
1.60
5.58
0.287
34.90
-21.87
63.9%
-56.6%
8.8%
1.6
1.58
5.55
0.284
34.90
-22.13
64.2%
-56.5%
8.4%
1.867
1.56
5.54
0.282
34.89
-22.73
64.2%
-56.9%
8.2%
2.133
1.55
5.52
0.280
34.89
-23.19
63.8%
-57.3%
8.0%
2.4
1.54
5.51
0.279
34.89
-23.53
63.7%
-57.5%
7.8%
1 over N
1.17
5.31
0.221
28.82
-26.98
61.3%
-61.0%
NA
Table 5.3:
A comparison across the various risk aversion parameters for Point-
Prediction Driven Portfolio Allocation when the model is trained on 240 observations.
From Table 5.3 it becomes clear that:
1. PPD is better than SAA with a best possible Sharpe Ratio of 0.305 vs. 0.282
2. PPD has more positive months than SAA with as much as 64.6% versus 63.9%
as the highest for SAA
==PAGE:74==
64
5 Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
3. The maximum and minimum returns are both in favor of PPD
These three points all point to the same conclusion; PPD is superior to SAA as
a forecasting mechanism, meaning it is possible to generate excess returns through
predictive analysis of the various market indicators.
Furthermore, the results seen in Table 5.3 show that our allocation does manage to
limit standard deviation of the portfolio returns when given a higher risk aversion
parameter, but it does lead to a lower mean yield meaning the Sharpe Ratio is not
always improved from minimizing the portfolio variance.
A point could be made that the predictive power does not necessary translate to
prescriptive power and therefore we investigated whether the usage of the best LASSO
model translated to higher scores on our metrics when compared to the worst model
for each industry from those identified in Chapter 3. In both cases the selection is
based on the obtained R2 value and the training period remains 240 days. On all
comparison metrics, the best model were capable of delivering the best results and
the difference was clear; From a maximum Sharpe ratio of 0.305 for the best model
to a maximum Sharpe ratio of 0.267 for the worst model. The full comparison can
be seen in Appendix 8.7 Table 8.9.
With this in mind, it is now time to investigate whether CEO offers improve-
ment on the results obtained by PPD through its incorporation of the predictive and
prescriptive analysis into a single model.
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P
0
1.48
6.84
0.217
43.00
-24.76
60.1%
-63.8%
2.2%
0.267
1.55
6.07
0.256
41.30
-24.76
61.7%
-63.1%
4.5%
0.533
1.54
5.93
0.260
37.21
-24.76
61.1%
-63.0%
5.1%
0.8
1.54
5.78
0.267
34.84
-24.76
61.9%
-62.6%
5.6%
1.066
1.54
5.69
0.270
34.83
-24.20
62.3%
-61.2%
6.0%
1.333
1.53
5.63
0.271
34.80
-23.61
62.5%
-59.6%
6.2%
1.6
1.50
5.59
0.268
34.78
-23.81
62.4%
-59.6%
6.1%
1.867
1.48
5.56
0.266
34.15
-23.94
62.3%
-60.3%
6.0%
2.133
1.46
5.54
0.264
34.77
-23.94
61.8%
-60.3%
5.7%
2.4
1.47
5.57
0.265
34.77
-23.94
61.8%
-59.5%
5.7%
1 over N
1.17
5.31
0.221
28.82
-26.98
61.3%
-61.0%
NA
Table 5.4: A comparison across the various risk aversion parameters for Combined
Estimation and Optimization Portfolio Allocation when the model is trained on 240
observations.
From Table 5.4 it is seen that CEO does not perform better than PPD. It has a
lower mean, lower SR, lower MP and lower P-Values. An interesting observation is
that CEO has a higher Max, but also a worse Min. With increasing Risk Aversion,
CEO does manage to improve in terms of lowering MDD and the standard deviation,
while keeping the average return similar leading to a better Sharpe Ratio. These
==PAGE:75==
5.7 Results
65
improvements are not enough to beat PPD though, and it even struggles to compete
with a simple strategy such as SAA.
5.7.1
Addition of Risk-Free Rate
Having seen the differences across the different strategies, it would interesting to
investigate whether allowing an investment in the Risk-Free Rate will significantly
improve performance. A hypothesis here would be that it would allow for significantly
smaller MDD values and possibly lower standard deviation values as well, since the
Mean-Variance optimization should steer away from investing in the 10 industry in-
dexes, when their forecasts are negative, and instead invest in the risk-free rate.
Once again, it is necessary to establish a baseline and this is once again done by pro-
viding a Mean-Variance optimization problem with the perfect estimations of next
months returns and setting the risk aversion to 0. The obtained results are seen in
Table 5.5.
Mean
Std
SR
MP %
MDD
Max
Min
6.33
6.07
1.043
100%
0%
53.13
0.002
Table 5.5: The obtained results on the various evaluation criteria when with perfect
return estimations and provided the possibility to invest in the risk-free rate.
With the baseline established, the returns obtained by the investment strategies
can be evaluated properly. First up, we have the SAA method and how it manages
to act when given the chance to invest in the risk-free rate. The result of this is seen
in Table 5.6.
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P
0
1.71
6.50
0.262
34.45
-25.83
66.8%
-49.3%
10.3%
0.267
1.51
5.75
0.262
24.78
-26.86
65.5%
-38.7%
7.8%
0.533
1.46
5.54
0.264
24.77
-26.11
66.1%
-36.2%
7.6%
0.8
1.43
5.43
0.264
24.71
-25.86
65.8%
-36.2%
7.3%
1.066
1.42
5.35
0.266
24.68
-25.73
66.0%
-35.7%
7.2%
1.333
1.41
5.30
0.266
24.66
-25.66
66.2%
-35.7%
7.1%
1.6
1.40
5.27
0.266
25.35
-25.61
66.0%
-35.9%
7.0%
1.867
1.39
5.24
0.266
27.22
-25.57
66.3%
-35.9%
6.8%
2.133
1.38
5.22
0.265
28.62
-25.54
66.5%
-35.9%
6.7%
2.4
1.38
5.19
0.266
29.72
-25.52
66.4%
-35.8%
6.6%
1 over N RFR
1.07
4.83
0.221
26.20
-24.53
61.3%
-57.2%
NA
Table 5.6: The performance of a 12-day SAA investment strategy, which has the
possibility of investing in the risk-free rate, with various degrees of risk aversion. The
bottom row is 1 over N including the risk-free rate.
==PAGE:76==
66
5 Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P
0
1.82
6.08
0.299
38.31
-22.39
69.2%
-71.2%
10.9%
0.267
1.76
5.25
0.335
34.96
-21.23
70.1%
-53.3%
9.1%
0.533
1.65
4.92
0.335
34.92
-18.70
70.1%
-43.3%
6.6%
0.8
1.57
4.72
0.332
34.91
-18.71
70.4%
-39.6%
4.9%
1.066
1.53
4.59
0.334
34.90
-19.00
70.7%
-37.5%
4.1%
1.333
1.50
4.49
0.333
34.90
-19.21
70.7%
-36.2%
3.3%
1.6
1.46
4.38
0.333
34.89
-19.37
71.0%
-35.2%
2.6%
1.867
1.43
4.30
0.332
34.89
-19.45
70.8%
-34.4%
1.9%
2.133
1.40
4.24
0.330
34.89
-19.52
70.7%
-33.8%
1.4%
2.4
1.37
4.18
0.329
34.89
-18.97
71.1%
-33.3%
0.8%
1 over N RFR
1.07
4.83
0.221
26.20
-24.53
61.3%
-57.2%
NA
Table 5.7: The performance of a 240-day PPD investment strategy, which has the
possibility of investing in the risk-free rate, with various degrees of risk aversion. The
bottom row is 1 over N including the risk-free rate.
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P
0
1.60
6.61
0.243
43.00
-31.56
61.3%
-56.6%
7.9%
0.267
1.54
6.14
0.250
43.00
-31.56
62.7%
-58.9%
7.8%
0.533
1.56
6.09
0.255
41.87
-31.56
62.7%
-57.9%
7.4%
0.8
1.50
6.04
0.249
41.50
-31.56
62.7%
-58.9%
6.5%
1.066
1.49
5.92
0.251
41.31
-31.56
62.1%
-61.4%
6.2%
1.333
1.44
5.82
0.247
41.20
-31.56
61.7%
-62.8%
5.0%
1.6
1.44
5.76
0.250
41.13
-31.56
61.7%
-63.7%
5.1%
1.867
1.43
5.68
0.253
41.08
-31.56
62.6%
-63.9%
4.7%
2.133
1.43
5.59
0.255
41.05
-31.56
63.1%
-63.8%
4.4%
2.4
1.41
5.48
0.257
37.51
-31.56
63.2%
-64.4%
4.1%
1 over N RFR
1.07
4.83
0.221
26.20
-24.53
61.3%
-57.2%
NA
Table 5.8: The performance of a 240-day CEO investment strategy, which has the
possibility of investing in the risk-free rate, with various degrees of risk aversion. The
bottom row is 1 over N including the risk-free rate.
While SAA actually does not manage to improve despite given the chance to in-
vest in the risk-free rate instead of the indexes, the PPD strategy does find significant
improvements. This further points to the fact that PPD is capable of forecasting the
market better and thus actually see times, where the risk-free rate seems more prof-
itable than the indexes.
Once again, it was also seen in this instance that using the best possible LASSO model
for PPD provided us with a significant improvement in returns relative to using the
worst. The complete performance by the worst LASSO model, when given risk-free
rates as a possible investment alongside the 10 indexes, can be seen in Appendix 8.7
==PAGE:77==
5.7 Results
67
Table 8.10. One interesting note is that when forecasts become significantly worse by
using the worst model, the average return is less, when generating positive returns
(+1.56 for the worst vs. +2.58 for the best) and worse then generating negative re-
turns (-2.43 for the worst vs. -2.31 for the best), truly indicating that by selecting the
best LASSO model the investment strategy stands to gain a significant improvement
in returns. Using the worst model does lead to a lower standard deviation of the
portfolio returns, hence the Sharpe ratio does not suffer as much from this change,
but this is due to the fact that the risk-free rate becomes a much larger part of the
portfolio leading to smaller returns, but a more stable portfolio.
CEO manages to obtain the exact minimum regardless of the risk aversion. It was
seen that CEO always invested 100% in Durbl in during the month of October 1987.
In this month the famous Black Monday happened on Wall Street, which was the
worst trading day in history and made indexes plummet, thereby being the reason
behind the severity of the loss. It is interesting however that the regardless of the risk
aversion, CEO was not capable of avoiding a full investment in that index indicating
a large expected return in the specific index. This suspicion was confirmed from the
data with the expected return for Durbl being µDurbl = 16.53% and the largest ex-
pected return of all other indexes was 6.55%. This also indicates that our algorithm
was not at all able to foresee such a dramatic event, but given that very few people
were, we deem it acceptable.
This fact and the fact that CEO does not manage to improve its returns when having
the option to invest in the risk-free return indicates that CEO has a positive bias
hindering it from truly seeing the value of the risk-free rate since it overestimates
the expected returns of the various indexes. Furthermore, CEO once again struggles
to compete with the other two investment strategies underlining the problems of the
method in its current state.
5.7.2
Strategy Comparison
The best possible result, when evaluating across the comparison metrics, for each
strategy is compared in Table 5.9.
An example here is that PPD RFR 1.6 was
selected, despite not having as large a Sharpe Ratio as PPD RFR 0.267, but the
improvements in MDD and MP made up for it.
From Table 5.9, it is clear that our added complexity in terms of forecasting
returns through a linear regression model are definitely worth it, since we do manage
to beat the 1 over N strategy as well as the SAA strategy with a Point-Prediction
Driven investment strategy. In the case of CEO however, the additional integration
of predictive and prescriptive analytics into one mathematical seem to struggle to
improve the existing returns from a PPD strategy.
For the sake of completeness, it was also determined to increase our risk aversion
parameter up to 4 for all three strategies to see the effect, but it did not alter any
conclusions being drawn in terms of comparison across the strategies.
The exact
results obtained with such an expansion can be seen in Appendix 8.7.5.
==PAGE:78==
68
5 Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
SAA 12-1.066
PPD RFR 1.6
CEO 1.33
1 over N RFR
Mean
1.63
1.46
1.53
1.07
Std
5.78
4.38
5.63
4.83
SR
0.282
0.333
0.271
0.221
Max
24.68
34.89
34.80
26.20
Min
-25.73
-19.37
-23.61
-24.53
MP
63.0%
71.0%
62.5%
61.3%
MDD
-42.1%
-35.2%
-59.6%
-57.2%
P-value
9.0 %
2.6%
6.2%
0
Table 5.9: A comparison across the best performances for the four investment strate-
gies.
As mentioned, it seems as if CEO suffers from a positive bias. When we looked at
how the strategies perform when they manage to provide positive returns in contrast
to when they deliver negative returns, this positive bias of CEO became evident. A
comparison is shown in Table 5.10 in which it is seen how CEO does manage to deliver
better positive averages than the other 2 strategies, but it is beaten significantly by
PPD in terms of mitigating the negative returns. It seems evident that the integration
allows a predictive model to capitalize in some areas, but it comes at the cost of
underestimating others leading to larger losses.
Strategy
SAA RFR
PPD RFR
CEO RFR
µ+
µ−
µ+
µ−
µ+
µ−
0
4.91
-4.73
4.43
-4.04
5.28
-4.22
0.267
4.42
-4.01
3.73
-2.88
4.82
-4.00
0.533
4.20
-3.88
3.42
-2.51
4.81
-3.93
0.8
4.12
-3.74
3.21
-2.34
4.70
-3.87
1.066
4.05
-3.67
3.07
-2.20
4.63
-3.68
1.333
3.98
-3.63
2.98
-2.08
4.55
-3.57
1.6
3.96
-3.56
2.87
-2.00
4.51
-3.50
1.867
3.91
-3.56
2.80
-1.91
4.37
-3.48
2.133
3.87
-3.56
2.74
-1.83
4.27
-3.43
2.4
3.85
-3.52
2.66
-1.80
4.18
-3.36
2.667
3.84
-3.47
2.61
-1.72
4.14
-3.26
2.930
3.82
-3.44
2.53
-1.69
4.07
-3.20
3.2
3.81
-3.41
2.48
-1.65
3.99
-3.16
3.467
3.75
-3.46
2.43
-1.61
3.92
-3.07
3.730
3.73
-3.45
2.39
-1.57
3.84
-3.07
4
3.72
-3.43
2.35
-1.53
3.79
-3.02
Table 5.10: Comparison across the three strategies in terms of what the average
positive, µ+, and negative return, µ−, is.
==PAGE:79==
5.7 Results
69
During this analysis it was also seen that CEO did manage to capitalize on the
introduction of the risk-free rate by limiting the average negative return slightly, but
this gain did not amount to an improvement in Sharpe Ratio, since it also impacted
the average positive return negatively. The exact numbers on positive and negative
averages for CEO without the risk-free rate can be seen in Appendix 8.7.1.
Having identified a positive bias for CEO and a superb performance by the PPD
strategy, we wanted to investigate whether the strategies differed in terms of their
ability to generate returns equal to the perfect returns in the month under consid-
eration, meaning a P-value of 1. A comparison of the three investment strategies is
given in Table 5.11.
Strategy
SAA
PPD
CEO
SAA RFR
PPD RFR
CEO RFR
0
198
112
112
171
80
117
0.267
161
31
33
78
24
74
0.533
148
19
20
61
20
56
0.8
141
15
11
59
16
45
1.066
68
13
11
51
14
33
1.333
61
10
7
49
10
28
1.6
58
8
6
46
8
27
1.867
55
7
6
45
8
24
2.133
51
6
5
42
7
20
2.4
50
4
3
40
6
20
Table 5.11: A comparison between PPD and CEO in terms of how often the method
manages to obtain a P-value = 1, meaning it generates returns as good as a allocation
based on perfect forecasts.
From Table 5.11 it seems as if, PPD and CEO are similar when risk-free rate is
not an option, whereas CEO RFR does manage to gain an advantage over PPD when
it comes to forecasting with the inclusion of the risk-free rate. Furthermore, SAA
manages to obtain a large amount of perfect returns, which is quite interesting given
its overall performance shown previously.
There is a gap between the performance of SAA and PPD in general, yet SAAs
ability to generate a vast amount of perfect returns lead to an investigation of what
the average return is for a strategy, when it actually manages to produce perfect
returns. When comparing the three strategies on risk-aversion 0 without a risk-free
rate, CEO did produce higher returns than the other 2 when obtaining P = 1 with
99% significance. This showed that when CEO obtains a perfect return, it yields a
higher positive return than the other 2 strategies, while SAA in general manages to
get P = 1 more often but the result of doing so also leads to less value based on
the obtained return. It was deemed pointless to test other risk aversions due to few
observations, thereby hindering statistical significance tests, but a full overview of the
impact of P = 1 for the three strategies is shown in Appendix 8.7.3 Table 8.11.
==PAGE:80==
70
5 Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
5.7.3
Economic Recessions
As mentioned, we would also investigate the effect of economic recessions on the
investment strategies. We want to see if there is a correlation between the economic
recessions and negative portfolio returns and especially between economic recessions
and Maximum Drawdowns, which is to be expected. Figure 5.1 shows how the Point-
Prediction Driven portfolio is impacted by the financial recessions when it has a risk
aversion of either 0 or 4.
The correlation between economic recession and portfolio drawdown is clear when
looking at Figure 5.1, and it goes to show the effect of risk aversion. The higher
risk aversion, the less impact those financial recessions has. In terms of returns, the
effect of risk aversion is also clear since they become significantly smaller. It is also
quite remarkable how much the portfolio suffers during the financial recession in 2008,
which by far causes the largest drawdown.
A similar comparison was also made for CEO RFR and SAA RFR. The results of
CEO RFR are shown in Figure 5.2, whereas the results for SAA RFR can be found
in Figure 5.3.
From Figure 5.2, it can be seen how CEO does not benefit as much as PPD in
terms of minimizing the drawdown with an increased risk aversion. However the in-
crease in risk aversion does help the strategy in getting rid of a severe period around
2001-2005. The correlation between portfolio drawdown and economic recession is
however also evident here.
For SAA, shown in Figure 5.3 it can be seen how the strategy generally struggles with
avoiding drawdown periods and the correlation between economic recession and port-
folio drawdown is less evident here indicating a worse investment strategy. Especially
interesting is Figure 5.3b where drawdowns seem to happen constantly meaning the
actual portfolio return could be poor when applying such a method.
Another interesting thing to investigate regarding economic recessions is our abil-
ity to beat a static portfolio strategy in these times, which is the hypothesis based
on academic literature. Here it is often mentioned that a higher predictive ability
is to be expected during economic recession, not necessarily resulting in positive re-
turns, but at least being better suited to avoid significant losses. In order to validate
this hypothesis, the average P-value was calculated during economic recessions for a
dynamic strategy and a static strategy and compared to the overall P-value. Further-
more a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was run in order to see whether a true statistical
difference was present. Once again, it should be mentioned that a KS-test was chosen
since we also want to investigate changes in distribution and not just mean, as well
as not knowing whether or not it is actually normally distributed as a t-test assumes.
==PAGE:81==
5.7 Results
71
(a) An overview of the portfolio performance of a PPD RFR strategy with
γ = 0.
(b) An overview of the portfolio performance of a PPD RFR strategy with
γ = 4.
Figure 5.1: A comparison between two variations of PPD strategies, where Figure
5.1a has a risk aversion of 0, whereas Figure 5.1b has a risk aversion of 4. The grey
areas indicate financial recessions, the orange areas indicates the drawdown of the
strategies and the blue columns are the obtained returns for the period.
==PAGE:82==
72
5 Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
(a) An overview of the portfolio performance of a CEO RFR strategy with
γ = 0.
(b) An overview of the portfolio performance of a CEO RFR strategy with
γ = 4.
Figure 5.2: A comparison between two variations of CEO strategies, where Figure
5.2a has a risk aversion of 0, whereas Figure 5.2b has a risk aversion of 4. The grey
areas indicate financial recessions, the orange areas indicates the drawdown of the
strategies and the blue columns are the obtained returns for the period.
==PAGE:83==
5.7 Results
73
(a) An overview of the portfolio performance of a SAA RFR strategy with
γ = 0.
(b) An overview of the portfolio performance of a SAA RFR strategy with
γ = 4.
Figure 5.3: A comparison between two variations of SAA strategies, where Figure
5.3a has a risk aversion of 0, whereas Figure 5.3b has a risk aversion of 4. The grey
areas indicate financial recessions, the orange areas indicates the drawdown of the
strategies and the blue columns are the obtained returns for the period.
First of all, for a Point-Prediction Driven method with a Risk-Aversion value of
2.4, the overall P-value was 4.9%, but during economic recession this average rose
to 12.6% indicating a major increase in predictability. The KS-test was run with a
null-hypothesis that the distribution overall was significantly less than the distribution
during economic recessions. The results showed that the difference was not significant
==PAGE:84==
74
5 Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
with a p = 0.868. Hence we are not able to completely verify the results put forward
in other academic research, but we clearly see the indication of increased predictive
power during economic recessions however it is not statistically significant with our
method.
5.7.4
Portfolio Overlap
Despite variations in terms of achieved results from the various strategies, the ques-
tions arises; how much do they actually differ from each other? In order for us to
determine this, we investigated the weightings for each time period for the best result
of each strategy and then determined an overlap to occur. We defined the percentage
of overlap for each time period as
Overlap = 100 ·
∑
i∈Industries
{
1
|Wi,A −Wi,B| < 0.05 & Wi,A, Wi,B > 0.001
0
Otherwise
∑
i∈Industries Wi,A > 0.001
where Wi,A is the weighting for industry i for strategy A and similar for Wi,B. The
average overlap all time periods can then be calculated.
The relative overlap is
calculated as the average of all overlaps that are greater than 0. The weighted overlap
is calculated as:
Weighted overlap =
∑
i∈Industries
Wi,B·
{
1
|Wi,A −Wi,B| < 0.05 & Wi,A, Wi,B > 0.001
0
Otherwise
Such a weighted overlap allows us to get an understanding of how much influence
the overlaps have for the return in the given time period. This means a weighted
overlap equal to the overlap is the exact same investment when overlaps occur, where
a weighted overlap equal to 20% of an overlap means that only 20% of the investment
is the same during overlaps. The last metric is Months Different which is defined
as the percentage of months where there is 0 overlap. The result of doing such an
analysis can be seen in Table 5.12.
Strategies
Overlap
Relative
Weighted
Months Different
SAA vs. PPD
9
56
5
84
SAA vs. CEO
6
41
3
86
SAA vs. PPD (RFR)
7
49
3
85
SAA vs. CEO (RFR)
5
100
5
95
PPD vs. CEO
10
46
8
77
PPD vs. CEO (RFR)
3
100
3
97
Table 5.12: The results of investigating overlaps between strategies, when an overlap
is defined as something where the difference in an index weight is within ±0.05. All
values are in %.
==PAGE:85==
5.7 Results
75
From here it can be seen that the variations in strategy performance stem from
a true variation in terms of which indexes are entered and especially in what degree
these indexes are entered. This points to the fact that the best strategy, which is Point-
Prediction Driven, truly manages to gain an edge on some of the other strategies.
Another interesting fact is the fact that CEO seems to differ greatly from the 2 other
strategies, but whenever they do overlap, they are exactly the same. This once again
points to the fact that CEO indicates its potential, since it can identify different
possibilities in the market in comparison to the other methods, but these do not lead
to excess returns due to its positive bias leading to a disability to mitigate risk.
Seeing how clearly the best result for the three strategies differ from each other, it
would be of equal interest to see whether the same pattern persists, when they are
all using the risk aversion setting. In this case, the risk aversion was set to 0 to see
differences when focusing on single assets or 2.4 in order to obtain a wide spread
without focusing too heavily on the risk-free rate.
Strategies
Overlap
Relative
Weighted
Months Different
SAA vs. PPD
14
100
14
86
SAA vs. CEO
27
100
27
73
SAA vs. PPD (RFR)
10
100
10
90
SAA vs. CEO (RFR)
19
100
19
81
PPD vs. CEO
18
100
18
82
PPD vs. CEO (RFR)
14
100
14
86
Table 5.13: The results of investigating overlaps between strategies when risk aversion
is 0. An overlap is defined as something where the difference in an index weight is
within ±0.05. All values are in %.
Strategies
Overlap
Relative
Weighted
Months Different
SAA vs. PPD
7
38
3
82
SAA vs. CEO
6
40
3
84
SAA vs. PPD (RFR)
7
46
2
85
SAA vs. CEO (RFR)
6
48
3
88
PPD vs. CEO
23
48
14
53
PPD vs. CEO (RFR)
8
47
3
82
Table 5.14: The results of investigating overlaps between strategies when risk aversion
is 2.4. An overlap is defined as something where the difference in an index weight is
within ±0.05. All values are in %.
The difference between the strategies seem to continue even when the risk aver-
sion is 0 or 2.4, except for the comparison between PPD and CEO. Here a slight
resemblance is seen in Table 5.14, when no risk-free rate is added, since they only
completely differ 53% of the time and have an overlap of 23%. We would argue that
==PAGE:86==
76
5 Dynamic Portfolio Allocation
this is still enough of a difference between strategies, though, since we are only focus-
ing on 10 indexes in our dissertation.
With the results showed in Table 5.12 in mind, it seemed relevant to expand the
overlap margin to ±0.10 instead. The result of such an expansion can be seen in Ap-
pendix 8.7.6 Table 8.27. It was seen that the strategies truly differ from each other,
since the increments in overlap are minor when increasing the margin from 0.05 to
0.10.
5.7.5
Implementing a regime based strategy
We have seen how we are able to gain enough of an advantage over static investment
strategies such as 1 over N and beat a dynamic strategy based on a moving average
forecast, identified as SAA, but our investment strategy still suffers from significant
drawdown during times of economic recession. A possible solution to limit the risk
of the strategy would be to start predicting potential shifts in financial regimes.
A simple solution to avoiding these drawdowns is to utilize NBER to tell us when
an economic recession is going on and become more risk adverse once given this
information. We implemented a simple solution, where the best PPD strategy, with
a risk-aversion of 1.6, would simply exit the indexes completely and stick to the risk-
free rates when NBER determined an economic recession was happening. The result
of such an implementation gave us a Sharpe Ratio of 0.330 and a negative P-value of
-0.01 compared to the 0.026 it was before, meaning that now we cannot consistently
beat a 1 over N strategy. But on the other side, as one could expect, the Maximum
Drawdown dropped to -26.5% from -35.2% and amount of months positive is now
76.5% compared to 71%. So there are some potential in a simple dual strategy such
as this one, if one is extremely risk-adverse, but it comes at the price of decreasing
the expected returns from 1.46% per month to 1.22%.
Seeing the potential in the regime-based approach, we investigated whether one should
just utilize the two extreme instead; when there is a financial recession, increase the
risk-aversion to 4 and when there is none, set the risk-aversion to 0.
When this
strategy was implemented, we improved the average monthly return with no risk-
aversion from 1.82% to 1.89% for the dual strategy, which yields a Sharpe Ratio of
0.340 compared to 0.299 before. This does indicate that it is still a relative volatile
method, but it has managed to decrease the spread while actually improving the
average return as well.
Furthermore, the maximum drawdown from using such a
method is -35.0% compared to -71.2% when only having a risk-aversion of 0 even
during financial recessions. Lastly, the P-value becomes 10.8% which is among the
highest we have seen. These results show the potential of utilizing such a dual strategy
as it manages to incorporate the best of both worlds; the high returns from γ = 0,
the dual strategy even improves the average return, and the ability to mitigate bad
periods by setting γ = 4 in economic recessions.
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 6
Future Research
As we see it, there are three ways to conduct future research based on our results:
1. Investigate current CEO more
2. Change predictive method
3. Change prescriptive method
What specific actions we see as possible ways for the three areas are to be elaborated
in the following three sections.
6.1
Further CEO Investigation
The most obvious future research is to investigate the current state of CEO to its
fullest in order to see whether or not it holds up as a framework for integrating
predictive or prescriptive methods. Here we can look at a better regularization of
model or possible ways of expanding the current model.
6.1.1
Hyperparameter Optimization
In terms of a better regulariation, we have discussed the opportunity of implement-
ing a hyperparameter tuning, such as IRACE [Lóp+16], where they aim to find the
most appropriate set of parameters for a optimization problem. In our case, this will
help significantly in obtaining the best possible regularization thereby possibly realiz-
ing the full potential of the crossover between a linear regression and mean-variance
framework, since this regularization was seen to cause difficulties. We saw that it
took 30 min to calculate the results of 5 months for 625 combinations using 125 pro-
cessors, meaning an exhaustive search of the possible regularization was not possible.
In our case we implemented a simple search heuristic, as described earlier, but clearly
a more exhaustive and advanced search methodology should be investigated to fully
understand the potential of our method.
The IRACE method works through three steps: first a sample of possible configura-
tions is created based on a particular distribution, secondly the best configurations
from the sample are selected through racing and lastly, the distribution is updated
to make it more likely that the best configurations will be picked again [Lóp+16]. It
==PAGE:88==
78
6 Future Research
should be mentioned that racing implies that a series of iterations are done, and after
each either the objective or the distance from the perfect objective is measured for
each configuration. If possible, the configurations that perform significantly worse
than the others, measured by Friedman’s non-parametric two-way analysis of vari-
ance, are removed. This continues until one of three thresholds have been met: a
minimum number of surviving configurations, number of instances run or pre-defined
computational budget (such as computational time used) [Lóp+16].
The implementation of such a Hyperparameter Optimization would also make it eas-
ier for us to correctly regulate the methods to account for variations in risk-aversion
settings or a series of different Big-M values we would want to investigate. Hence
implementing an even more thorough regularization method seems sound.
6.1.2
Model expansions
Currently we are not including any costs of rebalancing the portfolio, but in order for
us to validate the proposed strategies in a real-life scenario an expansion of the model
is necessary. In this thesis it was deemed out of scope, since the main purpose was
to show the possible benefits of connecting predictive and prescriptive analytics and
therefore adding more complexity would only make it harder to correctly implement
the fusion. This increased difficulty would also add to the runtime as well as the need
for memory capacity, which was already an issue without transaction costs. But it
might be that handling this additional complexity is exactly where the benefit of inte-
grating predictive and prescriptive analytics lies, hence it seems relevant to research.
Another thing to consider is the ability to go short, meaning we are betting against
the market. This can be included by allowing negative weights in indexes, which could
be particularly beneficial during financial recessions if we are able to forecast nega-
tive returns correctly. Once again, such an addition adds another layer of complexity,
since it can also lead to the need for continuous option pricing and implementation
of a way to pay the option or prematurely exercise it. Once again, this additional
complexity might prove to be better handled by an integrative strategy such as CEO
instead of the classic PPD approach.
Lastly, a potential addition to our method would be to include two economic con-
straints, namely 1) only focusing on forecasting positive returns and never allow the
portfolio to invest in something that is not forecasted to go up and 2) incorporate
logical restrictions on the coefficients sign for certain macroeconomic factors. These
two economic constraints were suggested by John Campbell and Samuel Thompson
in 2008 [CT08]. They prove that those two restrictions combined with the predic-
tors, which was deemed incapable of beating the historical average [WG08], actually
creates a way to continuously outperform the market[CT08]. Therefore it would be
interesting to see how much our model could benefit from including such constraints.
==PAGE:89==
6.2 Other predictive methods
79
6.2
Other predictive methods
As we only explored LASSO and AALR, which are both linear regression models in
varying complexity, other forecast methods could be interesting to explore. This could
include neural networks regression, K-nearest-neighbour regression, support vector
machine regression or random forest regression. We did a brief evaluation of some of
these classic machine learning algorithms in terms of their ability to classify positive
financial returns given the amount of predictors we had available, and by doing so,
we saw that random forest managed to beat LASSO, hence showing a potential in
changing predictive method. For some of the other machine learning algorithms, the
picture varied based on the amount of data available. The results for the various
models, in terms of classification rate success, can be found in Appendix 8.7.7.
6.3
Other prescriptive methods
Our choice of Mean-Variance as a prescriptive method is based on the fact that it
would provide for simple comparison between strategies and allow for a full integra-
tion between predictive and prescriptive methods. A selection of a more complex
method could provide additional information about the potential of integrating the
two analytic fields and this topic is discussed in Section 6.3.1.
Another thing to investigate is the implementation of dual prescriptive methods in
order to capitalize properly on economic growth and be better hedged during financial
recessions, as we briefly demonstrated its ability to do in Section 5.7.5. We will build
on these results to discuss future possibilities in Section 6.3.2.
6.3.1
Portfolio Allocation Method
It can be discussed whether implementing a simple strategy such as Mean-Variance
has hindered us from seeing the full potential of the CEO method. It might be that
the simplicity of Mean-Variance, which is often criticized, is causing the method to
have a tough time truly gaining an edge on the more simple strategies or the classic
Point-Prediction Driven approach. On the other side it can be argued that when
comparing across various methods, the prescriptive method of choice should be less
significant since it will be the same for all strategies. Due to our lack of expertise on
integrated predictive and prescriptive analytics, and a general shortage of academic
research within the field, it is tough to deem where the truth lies. None the less, it is
definitely of interest to see whether a more complex prescriptive method can lead to
1) improved returns for the various strategies and, more importantly, 2) show that
an integration of predictive and prescriptive analytics stands to gain significantly in
such an instance.
Generally, we saw that the maximum drawdown became a problem for most strate-
gies during economic recession and that a better risk controlling method would be
beneficial. This could be a truly dynamic method, such as the methods Value-at-Risk
==PAGE:90==
80
6 Future Research
(VaR) or Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR)[RU99], previously mentioned in the liter-
ature study. Imposing such a prescriptive method would be interesting, since it could
help a CEO framework in obtaining a better way of seeing the possible risks and
then be able to steer away from it through the prescriptive method. Implementing
this would mean a change in our risk proxy from the current variance measure to a
Conditional Value-at-Risk measure, wherein we would need to estimate the portfolio
loss distribution given a specific weighting between assets.
6.3.2
Dual Strategies and Financial Regimes
As seen in Section 5.7.5 a simple dual strategy could increase the average return while
lowering maximum drawdown. This all points to the fact that an implementation of
a more sophisticated investment strategy is an area which should receive further
research. Particularly we find it interesting whether other volatile periods can be
identified, besides the financial recession, where the more risk-adverse strategy can
be utilized instead. Such prediction of volatile periods has been seen in academic
literature already, where it has shown to be a robust investment strategy capable
of beating static portfolio strategies[Nys+15], therefore we believe it could aid in
improving our results even more.
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In our dissertation, we found that our implementation of AALR and LASSO did not
match the results by Bertsimas & King on the datasets presented in [BK16]. We sus-
pect that this is caused by differences in the data splits as our results did not deviate
from theirs in a consistent way. Performance-wise AALR did manage to produce a
more sparse model with slightly worse prediction power compared to LASSO on the
presented datasets. When tested on financial data however, AALR showed worse per-
formance and were less stable in the usage of prediction terms compared to LASSO.
We further found that AALR works best in a static setting as the computational time
often will be too high for dynamic settings or fields that require a lot of backtesting.
With the selection of LASSO as our predictive method, a further investigation of
its capability within a financial setting was made. It was seen that by incorporating
macroeconomic factors, time dependencies, technical indicators and the VIX index,
when possible, LASSO was capable of producing a R2
OOS = 4.88%. The included
prediction terms within such a model proved to be fluctuating substantially and only
14 prediction terms were used more than 30% of the time. This lead to an investigation
of the predictive power for a subset of prediction terms. Such a subset proved to
dramatically increase the performance of LASSO to a R2
OOS = 13.0%.
However,
since this analysis was all done in-sample, the knowledge would not be applicable
in a dynamic portfolio allocation problem, since we would then incorporate future
knowledge at all points in time. It was then deemed out of scope for this dissertation,
due to time limitations, to come up with an approach to consistently generate the
most promising subset of prediction terms for a linear regression, but we strongly
encourage others to research it.
The predictive power of LASSO was then utilized in a portfolio allocation problem
in both a classic and a new strategy.
The classic strategy consists of generating
expected returns separate from their usage in the portfolio allocation problem and is
referred to as a Point-Prediction Driven (PPD) strategy, whereas the new strategy
is our own proposed method called Combined Estimation and Optimization (CEO).
We created CEO as a mathematical model capable of including both the predictive
model of LASSO alongside the prescriptive model of Mean-Variance optimization.
By transforming the formulation into a Second-Order Cone program this model did
not have any quadratic terms in the objective function and could obtain reasonable
computational run times. A specialized heuristic search procedure was implemented
in order to tune the model appropriately and it was seen that the model performed
==PAGE:92==
82
7 Conclusion
the best when both predictive and prescriptive parts were present in the objective
function.
The two strategies utilizing LASSO, PPD and CEO, were then compared to a
Sample Average Approximation method as well as the static 1 over N portfolio. Here
it was seen how PPD managed to generate excess returns showcasing that predictive
power of financial returns does translate to improved portfolio returns. Given the
possibility to invest in the risk-free rate, PPD further improved its results in com-
parison to all other methods, showing that it was capable of using the risk-free rate
possibility to mitigate potential negative returns in the market. In the case of CEO,
it was not capable of beating PPD at any metric, which we believe is due to positive
bias. This positive bias meant that when it generated a positive return, it was higher
than all the other methods, however it suffered from worse average negative returns
as well. Furthermore, it has been shown that across all strategies economic recessions
play a big part in causing portfolio drawdowns, but the strategies varied drastically
on the severity of the drawdowns caused by economic recessions. Here PPD proved to
be the most effective at mitigating the impact, while CEO primarily suffered during
economic recessions and SAA seemed to experience drawdowns almost regardless of
the economic state.
Based on our work we would recommend that further research on CEO is focused
on implementing better risk control. The reason for this being that CEO is excellent
at generating high positive returns but have troubles controlling risk resulting in large
drawdowns and lower Sharpe ratio. The improved risk control could stem from either
a better risk proxy, such as CVaR instead of just variance, a dual strategy that is more
risk averse in certain periods or a combination of the two. Furthermore, we would
recommend an even more thorough method for tuning the regularization parameters
of CEO to fully explore its potential. Lastly, other predictive methods could also be
investigated, but we believe that the other two areas should be researched beforehand.
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 8
Appendix
8.1
Link to data and code
Link to raw results:
https://drive.google.com/open?id=1gfJNvdARGV__iWPJSP35ukI9ycRFQE1b
In this folder the raw results files can be found.
Link to data:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1FXLa3d3yEAJv9HsUqNel8Lg0CvSzWZzd?
usp=sharing
In this folder the data for the monthly financial returns can be found.
Link to code:
https://drive.google.com/open?id=1jHzPtv7-P3TDCmKcDhLtvWWFBjmD-UXQ
In the excel file called ”Code Explanation” an explanation for each script can be
found.
8.2
Connecting Julia & Gurobi
In the implementation of An Algorithmic Approach to Linear Regression (AALR) it
was chosen to use Julia as the main programming language. The choice was made as
Julia has performance approaching C and is very easy to code in. Furthermore, there
is a great solver independent modelling package called JuMP which makes writing
LP, MIP, SOCP and QMIP models relatively easy. Before we rewrote our models to
SOCP we quickly noticed that we needed to add constraints and change coefficients
in order to properly warmstart the solver and leverage previous solutions found. As a
consequence we needed to code directly into Gurobi with only a very simple interface.
The architecture of the modelling, modification and solving code is outlined in this
section.
==PAGE:94==
84
8 Appendix
8.2.1
The architecture
As Julia is only on version 0.6.2, JuMP on 0.18, MathProgBase on 0.7 and Gurobi for
Julia on version 0.3.3 the documentation of the actual architecture have been sparse,
but through reading the source code, reading and writing in forums and through trial
and error the architecture is as follows:
JuMP works as an interface for MathProgBase, which works as an abstract inter-
face for the actual solver. When a model is created in JuMP, an abstract model is
created in MathProgBase which creates the actual model in solver. As JuMP v. 0.18
does not support changing coefficients after model has been constructed, it was nec-
essary for us to get the internal model (the MathProgBase model) from JuMP which
can modify existing models. In theory, the MathProgBase model is an abstract in-
terface where different solvers such as CPLEX, Gurobi or XPRESS can be applied,
but as the implementation of the interface is still in development it was chosen to use
Gurobi as the main solver and code directly using the GurobiMathProgBase interface,
which is a wrapper for the C Gurobi interface.
The process of how to solve the problems is seen in Figure 8.1 and is as follows:
We use Gurobi as our solver and JuMP to create overall MIP/QMIP model. Once
the model has been created in JuMP we extract the GurobiMathProgBase model and
use this model to communicate directly with Gurobi and the model within Gurobi,
giving us full control of the solver and the problem.
Figure 8.1: The implementation and architecture of how we model, modify and solve
advanced optimization problems.
8.2.2
Interior Point Method
The Interior Point method was developed by Narendra Karmarkar in 1984 [Kar84]
and it differed greatly from the classic Simplex algorithm by not searching the poly-
hedron boundary and finding the vertices, but searching through the interior of the
feasible region. It has gained popularity due to its ability to solve large, sparse prob-
lems significantly faster than the classic Simplex method [BT97]. The simplest of
the interior point method is called ”Affine Scaling”, and it revolves around exploring
ellipsoids around feasible solutions. First, a feasible point in the interior is located
and a ellipsoid centered around the feasible solution is made. The exterior of the
==PAGE:95==
8.3 HPC Parallelization
85
ellipsoid is then searched for a new incumbent solution, and a new ellipsoid, centered
around the new point, is created. This continues until a stopping criterion is reached
[BT97]. The method has shown to provide rapid improvements when located deep
within the interior space, while only taking minor improvement steps the closer to
the edge. Therefore convergence issues may arise, which made way for a new way of
approaching interior point method. A method called ”Potential Reduction” penalizes
the algorithm, when it nears the edge in order to avoid slow convergence and quickly
investigate the interior space of the feasible region [BT97].
Lastly, the currently most widespread interior point method can be seen as a ”Path
Following” algorithm, where the potential reduction idea is intact but created through
a logarithmic barrier function in the objective function instead [BT97]. We know that
the boundary of the feasible region will be bound by some constraints, and due to the
logarithmic nature the penalty will increase substantially once the method is nearing
the boundary. This leads to a broader search of the feasible region, since the method
automatically avoids the boundary. This approach, where we now have an objective
function that includes the barrier function through Lagrangian relaxation, is then
coupled with Newton’s Method for approximating solutions, where one calculates the
next solution through subtracting the objective function divided by the derivative
of that same objective function. Lastly, the algorithm decreases the strength of the
barrier function over a run of the algorithm. All of this means that the algorithm
will follow a certain path across the feasible region, hence the name of the algorithm,
and it is guaranteed to end up at an optimal solution [BT97].
8.3
HPC Parallelization
When we are working with financial timeseries, the problem becomes embarassingly
parallel. This means that the result at time t + 1 is not dependent on the result at
time t. In common tongue this means that we can solve each instance separate of each
other, which is exactly how we then parallelized our code to ensure a significant speed-
up. This parallelization was done by splitting the time periods under investigation
into 84 different parts, where each part consists of 10 individual months needing
predictions.
Each part is assigned to a separate thread, meaning we successfully
parallelized our code onto 84 different threads.
We could assign parts to thread
through commandLine inputs in the terminal connected to the HPC. Thus our speed-
up came from our access to DTU HPC, where we utilized 84 threads simultaneously
and each thread had been given 10 months to solve and predict on. After successfully
solving the 10 periods, each thread would then generate an output file and when we
had all 84 files, we would run a script to combine them a single file containing the
obtained results. Furthermore, these 84 individual files were also read directly when
used in a Mean-Variance portfolio optimization instead of having to run the entire
process every time.
==PAGE:96==
86
8 Appendix
8.4
Parameter Selection
8.4.1
Derivation of maximum λ value
The reason for choosing the maximum λ value, which regulates the objective function
of the linear regression in regards to sparsity, stems from the need to investigate
between 0 regularization and a regularization strict enough to set all predictor coeffi-
cients equal to 0, meaning β = 0. In order to see how λmax = ∥XT y∥∞a derivation
is necessary. First, recall that the estimate ˆβλ obtained from LASSO, dependent on
the regularization λ, comes from the objective:
ˆβλ = arg min
β ∥y −Xβ∥2
2 + λ∥β∥1
(8.1)
In order to find an extrema, we know that the first order condition requires the
derivative to be equal to 0 meaning:
XT (y −X ˆβλ) = λˆzλ
(8.2)
where ˆzλ is a conditional variable:
ˆzλ =
{
sgn(βλ,j),
if ˆβλ ̸= 0
[−1, 1],
otherwise
Since we are trying to see what happens when ˆβ = 0, we can plug this into the
equation and obtain:
XT y = λˆzλ
(8.3)
Now knowing that we want to obtain the highest possible value of λ, we are interested
in the maximum absolute value, which is exactly what taking the infinity norm allows
us to find. Furthermore, knowing that ∥λˆzλ∥∞would result in ˆzλ = 1 since λ is a
parameter and can be put outside the norm, then we end up with:
λmax = ∥XT y∥∞
(8.4)
8.5
Financial Data Information
NoDur
Durbl
Manuf
Enrgy
HiTec
MP
60.5%
57.5%
60.8%
59.2%
59.2%
Telcm
Shops
Hlth
Utils
Other
Average
MP
59.4%
61.3%
58.2%
65.1%
63.0%
60.4%
Table 8.1: The percentage of months having a positive return for all 10 indexes as
well as the average across all indexes.
==PAGE:97==
8.5 Financial Data Information
87
Figure 8.2: Boxplots showing the return distributions for the first 6 industries during
various months.
==PAGE:98==
88
8 Appendix
Figure 8.3: Boxplots showing the return distributions for the last 4 industries as well
as the average return distribution during various months.
P-Value
NoDur
0.0001
Durbl
0.0021
Manuf
0.0059
Enrgy
0.0157
HiTec
0.0036
Telcm
0.0379
Shops
0.0001
Hlth
0.0157
Utils
0.311
Other
≪0.001
Average
0.0003
Table 8.2: P-values for Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests between December and January
across all industries.
==PAGE:99==
8.6 Convergence of regularization parameters
89
8.6
Convergence of regularization parameters
A brief example is shown here to demonstrate the convergence of our heuristic search
procedure for determining our regularization parameters. It should be noted that
this is all just for demonstration purposes, and does not necessarily show the actual
results found by method. The bold value is the best parameter based on P-values, the
column underneath is the result of the function f(r) and those values are transferred
to the next matrix, where another iteration takes place. In Table 8.7 it can be seen
how the convergence of parameters allows us to end the search.
λ Value
0.1
0.5
1
2
10
0.02
0.18
0.6
1.2
3.6
0.08
0.42
0.9
1.8
8.4
0.1
0.5
1
2
10
0.18
0.6
1.2
3.6
12
0.42
0.9
1.8
8.4
18
Table 8.3: The first iteration of our f(r) calculation method for exploring the regu-
larization space for λ2, λ3, λ4.
λ Value
0.18
0.42
0.5
0.6
0.9
0.116
0.228
0.436
0.52
0.66
0.164
0.372
0.484
0.58
0.84
0.18
0.42
0.5
0.6
0.9
0.228
0.436
0.52
0.66
0.92
0.372
0.484
0.58
0.84
0.98
Table 8.4: The second iteration of our f(r) calculation method for exploring the
regularization space for λ2, λ3, λ4.
λ Value
0.52
0.58
0.6
0.66
0.84
0.504
0.532
0.584
0.612
0.696
0.516
0.568
0.596
0.648
0.804
0.52
0.58
0.6
0.66
0.84
0.532
0.584
0.612
0.696
0.852
0.568
0.596
0.648
0.804
0.888
Table 8.5: The third iteration of our f(r) calculation method for exploring the regu-
larization space for λ2, λ3, λ4.
==PAGE:100==
90
8 Appendix
λ Value
0.532
0.568
0.580
0.584
0.596
0.522
0.539
0.570
0.581
0.586
0.530
0.561
0.578
0.583
0.594
0.532
0.568
0.580
0.584
0.596
0.539
0.570
0.581
0.586
0.597
0.561
0.578
0.583
0.594
0.599
Table 8.6: The fourth iteration of our f(r) calculation method for exploring the
regularization space for λ2, λ3, λ4
λ Value
0.581
0.583
0.584
0.586
0.594
Table 8.7: The fifth and final iteration of heuristic search procedure, where the best
value found is 0.586 in this example.
8.7
Additional Portfolio Results
8.7.1
Average Positive/Negative Returns
Strategy
CEO RFR
CEO
CEO RFR
CEO
µ+
µ+
µ−
µ−
0
5.28
5.46
-4.22
-4.52
0.2666
4.82
4.97
-4.00
-3.94
0.5333
4.81
4.93
-3.93
-3.78
0.8
4.70
4.80
-3.87
-3.76
1.066
4.63
4.72
-3.68
-3.72
1.333
4.55
4.67
-3.57
-3.72
1.6667
4.51
4.64
-3.50
-3.71
1.86667
4.37
4.62
-3.48
-3.71
2.1333
4.27
4.63
-3.43
-3.67
2.4
4.18
4.64
-3.36
-3.65
2.6666
4.14
4.60
-3.26
-3.70
2.93
4.07
4.57
-3.20
-3.74
3.2
3.99
4.56
-3.16
-3.74
3.4667
3.92
4.56
-3.07
-3.73
3.73
3.84
4.53
-3.07
-3.75
4
3.79
4.52
-3.02
-3.77
Table 8.8: Comparison of the average positive and negative returns obtained by the
CEO with and without the possibility to invest in the risk-free rate.
==PAGE:101==
8.7 Additional Portfolio Results
91
8.7.2
Worst LASSO model
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P-Value
0
1.51
5.98
0.253
43.00
-25.29
60.6%
-50.5%
5.9%
0.2666
1.43
5.36
0.267
24.95
-30.15
62.1%
-51.5%
6.2%
0.5333
1.39
5.34
0.260
24.55
-29.16
62.0%
-53.5%
5.7%
0.8
1.37
5.36
0.256
24.43
-28.29
62.0%
-54.2%
5.3%
1.066
1.35
5.37
0.252
25.06
-27.78
61.9%
-54.5%
4.9%
1.333
1.34
5.37
0.249
25.78
-27.36
61.9%
-54.7%
4.6%
1.6667
1.33
5.36
0.247
26.26
-27.08
62.1%
-54.9%
4.4%
1.86667
1.32
5.35
0.246
26.61
-26.90
62.1%
-54.9%
4.3%
2.1333
1.31
5.34
0.245
26.90
-26.75
62.0%
-54.9%
4.2%
2.4
1.30
5.34
0.244
27.13
-26.65
62.4%
-55.5%
4.1%
1 over N
1.17
5.31
0.221
28.82
-26.98
61.3%
-61.0%
Table 8.9: The obtained results when utilizing the worst possible model configuration
of LASSO for each industry based on R2 values.
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P-Value
0
1.36
4.54
0.301
43.00
-19.20
75.0%
-34.7%
3.3%
0.267
1.19
3.77
0.316
24.95
-19.20
79.3%
-29.9%
-0.5%
0.533
1.10
3.52
0.313
24.61
-19.20
81.7%
-30.0%
-2.7%
0.8
1.07
3.42
0.313
24.45
-19.20
82.5%
-30.0%
-3.6%
1.066
1.06
3.34
0.316
24.37
-19.20
83.6%
-30.1%
-4.1%
1.333
1.04
3.27
0.320
24.34
-19.20
84.0%
-30.1%
-4.5%
1.667
1.03
3.22
0.320
24.32
-19.20
84.9%
-30.1%
-4.9%
1.867
1.01
3.17
0.320
24.30
-19.20
85.4%
-29.7%
-5.4%
2.133
1.00
3.11
0.320
24.28
-19.20
85.2%
-27.9%
-5.8%
2.4
0.99
3.07
0.322
24.27
-19.20
85.7%
-26.0%
-6.1%
1 over N RFR
1.17
5.31
0.221
28.82
-26.98
61.3%
-61.0%
Table 8.10: The obtained results when utilizing the worst possible model configuration
of LASSO for each industry based on R2 values, while also allowing the investment
strategy to go into the risk-free rate.
==PAGE:102==
92
8 Appendix
8.7.3
Averages with P=1
Strategy
SAA
PPD
CEO
SAA RFR
PPD RFR
CEO RFR
0
6.55
6.33
8.32
7.35
8.88
8.52
0.267
6.27
8.23
9.75
6.21
9.92
8.81
0.533
6.10
10.97
8.86
5.96
10.42
8.79
0.8
5.90
11.30
8.64
5.95
10.59
9.13
1.066
4.10
10.02
8.64
5.48
9.30
9.37
1.333
3.64
9.56
9.41
5.35
8.79
9.51
1.6
3.90
8.38
9.19
5.08
7.42
8.62
1.867
3.86
8.48
6.20
5.11
7.42
7.82
2.133
3.62
8.35
7.32
4.97
7.16
7.55
2.4
3.48
10.04
8.93
4.69
7.46
7.23
Table 8.11: The average returns for a strategy with a given risk aversion when it
achieves a P-value of 1 indicating it matches perfect returns.
8.7.4
SAA strategies
With Sample Average Approximation, SAA, we tested a wide range of time spans to
include in the average for forecasting values; 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, 120 and 240. The
results for 12 days have been shown in the main report, but the other results are all
gathered underneath.
8.7.4.1
SAA strategies excluding risk-free rates
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P-Value
0
1.34
6.65
0.202
26.07
-28.01
60.8%
-64.2%
1.6%
0.267
1.46
6.16
0.237
28.42
-27.43
61.7%
-57.3%
4.1%
0.533
1.46
6.02
0.242
34.92
-27.03
62.4%
-58.3%
4.3%
0.8
1.46
5.94
0.246
37.09
-26.73
62.1%
-58.7%
4.6%
1.066
1.45
5.82
0.249
32.52
-27.26
62.9%
-59.3%
4.6%
1.333
1.43
5.70
0.251
27.31
-27.55
62.6%
-59.8%
4.3%
1.6
1.41
5.62
0.251
23.05
-27.78
62.7%
-60.1%
4.0%
1.867
1.39
5.56
0.250
22.75
-27.93
62.9%
-60.3%
3.7%
2.133
1.37
5.51
0.249
22.54
-28.04
63.2%
-60.5%
3.3%
2.4
1.36
5.48
0.248
22.39
-28.14
63.3%
-60.7%
3.1%
1 over N
1.17
5.31
0.221
28.82
-26.98
61.3%
-61.0%
Table 8.12: The obtained results with various risk aversions on a 24 months SAA
strategy.
==PAGE:103==
8.7 Additional Portfolio Results
93
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P-Value
0
1.34
6.77
0.198
26.07
-26.63
60.7%
-71.3%
-0.4%
0.267
1.41
5.96
0.237
24.78
-24.93
61.5%
-50.6%
3.0%
0.533
1.42
5.81
0.244
24.78
-24.93
62.5%
-53.0%
3.3%
0.8
1.39
5.71
0.244
24.53
-24.93
62.4%
-53.6%
3.0%
1.066
1.36
5.62
0.243
24.01
-24.93
62.1%
-55.0%
2.7%
1.333
1.35
5.55
0.244
23.70
-24.92
62.1%
-55.8%
2.6%
1.6
1.35
5.50
0.245
23.50
-24.72
62.3%
-56.3%
2.5%
1.867
1.34
5.46
0.246
23.34
-24.50
62.0%
-56.9%
2.5%
2.133
1.34
5.42
0.246
23.24
-24.34
62.3%
-57.5%
2.4%
2.4
1.33
5.40
0.246
23.16
-24.20
61.9%
-58.3%
2.4%
1 over N
1.17
5.31
0.221
28.82
-26.98
61.3%
-61.0%
Table 8.13: The obtained results with various risk aversions on a 36 months SAA
strategy.
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P-Value
0
1.25
6.77
0.184
26.07
-32.66
58.9%
-82.5%
-2.1%
0.267
1.19
5.77
0.207
24.62
-31.16
60.4%
-65.7%
-0.8%
0.533
1.24
5.61
0.221
24.34
-30.15
61.4%
-66.6%
0.3%
0.8
1.26
5.55
0.226
24.18
-28.67
61.7%
-66.8%
0.7%
1.066
1.26
5.51
0.230
24.10
-27.96
62.3%
-66.6%
1.0%
1.333
1.27
5.47
0.233
23.65
-27.52
62.4%
-66.1%
1.3%
1.6
1.28
5.44
0.235
22.59
-27.22
62.6%
-65.6%
1.6%
1.867
1.28
5.42
0.237
21.79
-27.00
62.7%
-65.1%
1.7%
2.133
1.28
5.40
0.238
21.20
-26.85
62.4%
-64.8%
1.8%
2.4
1.28
5.38
0.239
20.75
-26.72
62.7%
-64.7%
2.0%
1 over N
1.17
5.31
0.221
28.82
-26.98
61.3%
-61.0%
Table 8.14: The obtained results with various risk aversions on a 48 months SAA
strategy.
==PAGE:104==
94
8 Appendix
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P-Value
0
1.17
6.83
0.171
34.44
-32.66
59.6%
-79.4%
-3.1%
0.267
1.24
5.82
0.213
24.59
-31.20
61.9%
-68.9%
-0.8%
0.533
1.26
5.66
0.223
21.86
-31.04
62.6%
-67.5%
0.3%
0.8
1.28
5.59
0.228
21.58
-30.99
63.0%
-65.8%
0.9%
1.066
1.28
5.56
0.231
21.60
-30.12
63.0%
-64.8%
1.2%
1.333
1.28
5.54
0.232
21.73
-29.12
63.1%
-63.5%
1.2%
1.6
1.28
5.52
0.232
21.76
-28.49
62.9%
-63.0%
1.2%
1.867
1.28
5.50
0.232
22.19
-28.00
62.1%
-63.4%
1.1%
2.133
1.27
5.50
0.231
22.50
-27.64
62.1%
-63.7%
1.0%
2.4
1.27
5.50
0.231
22.74
-27.37
61.9%
-63.9%
1.0%
1 over N
1.17
5.31
0.221
28.82
-26.98
61.3%
-61.0%
Table 8.15: The obtained results with various risk aversions on a 60 months SAA
strategy.
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P-Value
0
1.38
7.53
0.183
46.59
-32.66
59.6%
-75.6%
-4.0%
0.267
1.24
5.70
0.217
25.29
-26.02
62.0%
-61.6%
-2.1%
0.533
1.18
5.53
0.214
26.89
-25.52
63.5%
-61.6%
-2.2%
0.8
1.16
5.48
0.211
27.72
-25.44
63.0%
-61.5%
-2.1%
1.066
1.15
5.48
0.210
28.34
-25.33
62.7%
-62.2%
-1.9%
1.333
1.14
5.48
0.209
28.88
-25.32
62.4%
-63.7%
-1.7%
1.6
1.14
5.48
0.208
29.54
-25.29
62.4%
-64.5%
-1.5%
1.867
1.14
5.48
0.208
30.01
-25.27
62.3%
-64.9%
-1.2%
2.133
1.14
5.49
0.208
30.36
-25.25
62.5%
-65.2%
-1.1%
2.4
1.14
5.49
0.208
30.64
-25.25
62.5%
-65.4%
-0.9%
1 over N
1.17
5.31
0.221
28.82
-26.98
61.3%
-61.0%
Table 8.16: The obtained results with various risk aversions on a 120 months SAA
strategy.
==PAGE:105==
8.7 Additional Portfolio Results
95
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P-Value
0
1.12
6.99
0.161
26.07
-32.66
59.6%
-88.7%
-5.5%
0.267
1.18
5.36
0.220
23.06
-25.13
61.3%
-59.3%
-0.9%
0.533
1.15
5.33
0.215
26.61
-25.22
62.1%
-59.6%
-1.0%
0.8
1.13
5.34
0.212
27.80
-25.23
62.1%
-59.8%
-1.3%
1.066
1.12
5.35
0.210
28.39
-25.26
61.8%
-61.0%
-1.4%
1.333
1.12
5.36
0.209
28.71
-25.26
61.8%
-62.2%
-1.4%
1.6
1.12
5.36
0.209
28.92
-25.31
61.9%
-63.0%
-1.4%
1.867
1.12
5.37
0.208
29.10
-25.43
61.8%
-63.5%
-1.4%
2.133
1.12
5.37
0.208
29.22
-25.52
62.0%
-63.8%
-1.4%
2.4
1.12
5.38
0.207
29.30
-25.60
62.0%
-64.0%
-1.4%
1 over N
1.17
5.31
0.221
28.82
-26.98
61.3%
-61.0%
Table 8.17: The obtained results with various risk aversions on a 240 months SAA
strategy.
8.7.4.2
SAA strategies including risk-free rates
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P-Value
0
1.27
6.47
0.197
26.07
-28.01
63.1%
-64.2%
4.6%
0.267
1.36
5.92
0.230
28.43
-27.44
64.0%
-54.1%
6.2%
0.533
1.34
5.68
0.236
34.92
-27.03
64.3%
-49.5%
5.8%
0.8
1.32
5.52
0.239
37.10
-25.11
64.0%
-50.5%
5.6%
1.066
1.29
5.35
0.241
32.57
-24.88
64.9%
-51.6%
5.1%
1.333
1.26
5.20
0.242
27.28
-24.87
64.5%
-52.7%
4.6%
1.6
1.24
5.10
0.242
23.02
-24.86
64.6%
-53.2%
4.2%
1.867
1.22
5.03
0.242
22.74
-24.86
64.8%
-53.2%
3.8%
2.133
1.20
4.97
0.241
22.54
-24.85
65.1%
-53.3%
3.5%
2.4
1.18
4.92
0.240
22.39
-24.85
65.2%
-53.4%
3.1%
1 over N
1.07
4.83
0.221
26.20
-24.53
61.3%
-57.2%
Table 8.18: The obtained results with various risk aversions on a 24 months SAA
strategy including the option to invest in the risk-free rate.
==PAGE:106==
96
8 Appendix
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P-Value
0
1.26
6.62
0.190
26.07
-26.63
61.5%
-71.3%
2.5%
0.267
1.35
5.67
0.238
24.78
-24.93
62.4%
-47.4%
4.9%
0.533
1.34
5.42
0.247
24.78
-24.93
63.0%
-46.1%
4.4%
0.8
1.30
5.25
0.248
24.53
-24.93
63.1%
-46.3%
3.8%
1.066
1.26
5.11
0.247
24.01
-24.93
63.1%
-46.4%
3.4%
1.333
1.24
4.99
0.248
23.70
-24.91
63.5%
-46.4%
3.2%
1.6
1.22
4.91
0.249
23.50
-24.72
63.5%
-46.4%
3.0%
1.867
1.21
4.84
0.250
23.35
-24.50
63.3%
-46.5%
2.8%
2.133
1.20
4.78
0.250
23.24
-24.34
63.6%
-46.6%
2.6%
2.4
1.19
4.73
0.250
23.15
-24.20
63.2%
-46.7%
2.5%
1 over N
1.07
4.83
0.221
26.20
-24.53
61.3%
-57.2%
Table 8.19: The obtained results with various risk aversions on a 36 months SAA
strategy including the option to invest in the risk-free rate.
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P-Value
0
1.21
6.67
0.181
26.07
-32.66
60.2%
-82.5%
1.4%
0.267
1.16
5.55
0.210
24.62
-31.15
61.2%
-62.4%
2.1%
0.533
1.19
5.33
0.224
24.35
-30.14
62.1%
-60.8%
3.1%
0.8
1.20
5.23
0.230
24.18
-28.71
62.6%
-59.7%
3.6%
1.066
1.20
5.16
0.233
24.10
-27.95
63.2%
-59.1%
3.8%
1.333
1.20
5.09
0.236
23.68
-27.51
63.3%
-57.5%
3.9%
1.6
1.20
5.03
0.239
22.58
-27.25
63.6%
-56.4%
3.9%
1.867
1.19
4.98
0.240
21.79
-27.00
63.6%
-55.8%
3.8%
2.133
1.19
4.93
0.241
21.21
-26.84
63.2%
-55.9%
3.7%
2.4
1.18
4.88
0.242
20.79
-26.72
63.7%
-55.0%
3.6%
1 over N
1.07
4.83
0.221
26.20
-24.53
61.3%
-57.2%
Table 8.20: The obtained results with various risk aversions on a 48 months SAA
strategy including the option to invest in the risk-free rate.
==PAGE:107==
8.7 Additional Portfolio Results
97
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P-Value
0
1.17
6.70
0.174
34.45
-32.66
61.4%
-79.3%
1.8%
0.267
1.23
5.65
0.218
24.59
-31.20
63.3%
-68.3%
2.9%
0.533
1.24
5.42
0.228
21.88
-31.04
64.0%
-64.6%
3.6%
0.8
1.23
5.30
0.232
21.59
-30.98
64.4%
-62.4%
3.8%
1.066
1.23
5.23
0.235
21.71
-30.10
64.4%
-60.8%
3.9%
1.333
1.22
5.19
0.235
21.71
-29.13
64.4%
-59.3%
3.8%
1.6
1.21
5.15
0.235
21.72
-28.46
64.0%
-58.2%
3.6%
1.867
1.19
5.11
0.234
21.75
-27.98
63.5%
-57.4%
3.4%
2.133
1.18
5.08
0.232
21.72
-27.64
63.6%
-56.7%
3.1%
2.4
1.17
5.05
0.232
21.75
-27.37
63.6%
-55.8%
3.0%
1 over N
1.07
4.83
0.221
26.20
-24.53
61.3%
-57.2%
Table 8.21: The obtained results with various risk aversions on a 60 months SAA
strategy including the option to invest in the risk-free rate.
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P-Value
0
1.38
7.53
0.183
46.59
-32.66
59.6%
-75.6%
0.2%
0.267
1.21
5.56
0.218
25.30
-26.07
62.1%
-61.6%
1.6%
0.533
1.14
5.32
0.213
22.22
-25.61
63.8%
-61.5%
1.1%
0.8
1.09
5.25
0.208
22.04
-25.45
63.2%
-61.6%
0.7%
1.066
1.07
5.22
0.206
21.94
-25.37
63.0%
-61.6%
0.7%
1.333
1.07
5.19
0.205
21.90
-25.32
62.6%
-61.6%
0.6%
1.6
1.06
5.17
0.205
21.86
-25.29
62.6%
-61.6%
0.7%
1.867
1.06
5.15
0.206
21.84
-25.27
62.5%
-61.5%
0.9%
2.133
1.05
5.11
0.205
21.82
-25.25
62.7%
-61.5%
0.6%
2.4
1.03
5.06
0.203
21.80
-25.28
62.7%
-61.2%
0.2%
1 over N
1.07
4.83
0.221
26.20
-24.53
61.3%
-57.2%
Table 8.22: The obtained results with various risk aversions on a 120 months SAA
strategy including the option to invest in the risk-free rate.
==PAGE:108==
98
8 Appendix
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P-Value
0
1.12
6.99
0.161
26.07
-32.66
59.8%
-88.9%
-0.7%
0.267
1.17
5.31
0.220
20.73
-25.11
61.3%
-59.3%
2.3%
0.533
1.10
5.13
0.215
19.86
-25.21
62.1%
-59.6%
1.5%
0.8
1.07
5.08
0.210
19.57
-25.25
62.1%
-59.7%
0.8%
1.066
1.05
5.06
0.207
19.43
-25.26
61.7%
-60.0%
0.4%
1.333
1.04
5.04
0.205
19.70
-25.25
61.7%
-60.1%
0.1%
1.6
1.02
5.02
0.203
20.34
-25.32
61.8%
-60.1%
-0.4%
1.867
1.00
4.99
0.201
20.81
-25.43
61.7%
-60.1%
-1.0%
2.133
0.99
4.95
0.199
21.13
-25.52
61.8%
-60.1%
-1.5%
2.4
0.97
4.92
0.197
21.39
-25.60
62.0%
-60.1%
-2.1%
1 over N
1.07
4.83
0.221
26.20
-24.53
61.3%
-57.2%
Table 8.23: The obtained results with various risk aversions on a 240 months SAA
strategy including the option to invest in the risk-free rate.
8.7.5
Increased Risk Aversion
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
Max
Min
MP
MDD
P-Value
2.4
1.38
5.19
0.266
29.72
-25.52
66.4%
-35.8%
6.6%
2.666
1.38
5.17
0.266
30.59
-25.51
66.3%
-35.4%
6.6%
2.933
1.38
5.15
0.268
31.31
-25.49
66.3%
-34.4%
6.6%
3.2
1.38
5.13
0.269
31.88
-25.48
66.3%
-33.6%
6.7%
3.466
1.37
5.11
0.269
32.40
-25.47
67.0%
-34.0%
6.6%
3.733
1.37
5.10
0.269
32.83
-25.46
67.1%
-34.5%
6.6%
4
1.37
5.08
0.269
33.22
-25.46
67.1%
-35.4%
6.6%
1 over N RFR
1.07
4.83
0.221
26.20
-24.53
61.3%
-57.2%
Table 8.24: The obtained results when expanding the risk aversion up to 4 for the 12
months SAA strategy that can also invest in the risk-free rate.
==PAGE:109==
8.7 Additional Portfolio Results
99
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
max
min
MP
MDD
P-Value
2.4
1.37
4.18
0.329
34.89
-18.97
71.1%
-33.3%
0.8%
2.667
1.35
4.10
0.329
34.89
-16.98
70.8%
-33.0%
0.2%
2.930
1.32
4.03
0.328
34.89
-15.37
71.3%
-32.7%
-0.5%
3.2
1.30
3.97
0.327
34.89
-14.05
71.3%
-32.5%
-1.1%
3.467
1.28
3.92
0.326
34.89
-12.94
71.4%
-32.2%
-1.6%
3.730
1.26
3.87
0.325
34.89
-12.04
71.5%
-32.1%
-2.0%
4
1.24
3.83
0.325
34.86
-11.26
71.5%
-31.9%
-2.4%
1 over N RFR
1.07
4.83
0.221
26.20
-24.53
61.3%
-57.2%
NA
Table 8.25: The obtained results when expanding the risk aversion up to 4 for the
240 months PPD strategy that can also invest in the risk-free rate.
Risk Aversion
Mean
Std
SR
max
min
MP
MDD
P-Value
2.4
1.41
5.48
0.257
37.51
-31.56
63.2%
-64.4%
4.1%
2.667
1.39
5.41
0.257
33.99
-31.56
62.9%
-64.6%
3.8%
2.930
1.36
5.33
0.255
31.88
-31.56
62.7%
-64.1%
3.4%
3.2
1.34
5.27
0.255
29.39
-31.56
63.0%
-64.4%
3.0%
3.467
1.33
5.20
0.256
27.78
-31.56
63.0%
-64.6%
2.7%
3.730
1.31
5.14
0.255
27.78
-31.56
63.5%
-64.8%
2.3%
4.000
1.29
5.10
0.254
27.78
-31.56
63.3%
-65.1%
2.0%
1 over N RFR
1.07
4.83
0.221
26.20
-24.53
61.3%
-57.2%
NA
Table 8.26: The obtained results when expanding the risk aversion up to 4 for the
240 months CEO strategy that can also invest in the risk-free rate.
8.7.6
Increased Overlap Margin
Strategies
Overlap
Relative
Weighted
Months Different
SAA vs. PPD
11
54
7
79
SAA vs. CEO
8
41
6
80
SAA vs. PPD (RFR)
10
49
4
80
SAA vs. CEO (RFR)
7
100
7
93
PPD vs. CEO
16
46
12
65
PPD vs. CEO (RFR)
3
100
3
97
Table 8.27: The results of investigating overlaps between strategies, when an overlap
is defined as something where the difference in an index weight is within ±0.10. All
values are in %.
==PAGE:110==
100
8 Appendix
8.7.7
Classification rate
A table of different classification rates obtained using Scikit-Learn’s standard Naïve
Bayes (NB), Random Forest (RF) and Linear Support Vector Machine (LSVM) im-
plementation with minimal parameter tuning. The data is contains the full 12 months
time series, all non-linear transformation and technical indicators totaling in 1464
LASSO
Time Period / Industry
Durbl
Enrgy
HiTec
Hlth
Manuf
NoDur
Other
Shops
Telcm
Utils
Average
12
52.5%
56.0%
56.0%
53.9%
52.7%
53.7%
55.7%
53.9%
53.8%
58.0%
54.6%
24
53.6%
56.4%
53.1%
54.6%
55.6%
54.3%
57.6%
53.8%
54.6%
56.2%
55.0%
36
55.0%
58.2%
54.8%
55.4%
56.8%
54.4%
59.2%
56.0%
54.5%
59.3%
56.3%
48
56.2%
59.8%
55.5%
57.7%
58.8%
58.1%
61.2%
58.0%
56.2%
60.6%
58.2%
120
58.0%
55.6%
56.7%
58.8%
59.0%
60.0%
61.7%
58.7%
60.6%
63.1%
59.2%
240
59.0%
58.5%
57.6%
57.9%
60.8%
61.7%
60.0%
60.7%
61.3%
62.1%
60.0%
Average
55.7%
57.4%
55.6%
56.4%
57.3%
57.0%
59.2%
56.8%
56.8%
59.9%
57.2%
NB
Time Period / Industry
Durbl
Enrgy
HiTec
Hlth
Manuf
NoDur
Other
Shops
Telcm
Utils
Average
12
55.8%
60.5%
57.5%
54.6%
58.1%
58.1%
57.6%
60.6%
58.8%
61.9%
58.4%
24
58.5%
57.6%
57.1%
56.4%
59.1%
57.4%
59.8%
60.1%
60.6%
59.5%
58.6%
36
58.4%
58.3%
57.0%
56.9%
59.8%
56.0%
60.6%
59.9%
61.0%
58.6%
58.6%
48
57.1%
59.8%
56.6%
57.0%
58.5%
56.0%
58.4%
58.8%
61.5%
59.5%
58.3%
120
55.8%
59.0%
56.6%
55.1%
56.4%
54.9%
55.3%
56.5%
55.4%
58.9%
56.4%
240
54.5%
58.0%
57.9%
56.1%
58.0%
55.3%
58.3%
57.3%
55.5%
59.8%
57.1%
Average
56.7%
58.9%
57.1%
56.0%
58.3%
56.3%
58.3%
58.9%
58.8%
59.7%
57.9%
RF
Time Period / Industry
Durbl
Enrgy
HiTec
Hlth
Manuf
NoDur
Other
Shops
Telcm
Utils
Average
12
60.8%
60.6%
60.4%
58.6%
59.5%
57.5%
60.0%
62.0%
61.3%
62.9%
60.4%
24
59.3%
60.3%
58.1%
57.5%
59.0%
58.6%
59.0%
60.8%
62.5%
62.4%
59.7%
36
58.3%
59.8%
57.4%
56.8%
58.5%
57.6%
60.0%
60.8%
61.5%
62.5%
59.3%
48
59.8%
58.9%
57.8%
57.6%
57.8%
58.1%
59.4%
60.5%
62.0%
62.8%
59.5%
120
59.3%
60.1%
59.5%
58.0%
59.8%
58.3%
61.1%
60.8%
60.3%
61.0%
59.8%
240
58.6%
59.5%
57.3%
59.5%
60.5%
58.1%
60.6%
61.1%
61.0%
62.6%
59.9%
Average
59.3%
59.9%
58.4%
58.0%
59.2%
58.0%
60.0%
61.0%
61.4%
62.4%
59.8%
LSVM
Time Period / Industry
Durbl
Enrgy
HiTec
Hlth
Manuf
NoDur
Other
Shops
Telcm
Utils
Average
12
55.8%
57.4%
56.9%
56.8%
55.5%
57.6%
55.9%
58.0%
59.0%
58.3%
57.1%
24
55.0%
56.9%
54.8%
53.9%
54.9%
54.8%
56.3%
56.8%
57.6%
59.3%
56.0%
36
54.8%
56.9%
55.9%
55.6%
55.5%
54.1%
57.8%
56.8%
55.4%
58.8%
56.1%
48
56.0%
56.3%
56.5%
54.4%
57.0%
56.6%
58.9%
57.9%
54.3%
60.3%
56.8%
120
57.6%
55.6%
57.5%
54.9%
57.9%
55.6%
58.6%
57.0%
55.3%
58.0%
56.8%
240
54.8%
55.5%
54.0%
55.6%
56.9%
53.0%
56.5%
57.9%
53.3%
56.5%
55.4%
Average
55.6%
56.4%
55.9%
55.2%
56.3%
55.3%
57.3%
57.4%
55.8%
58.5%
56.4%
Table 8.28: Classification rates (of predicting positive returns of the indexes) of 3
different machine learning algorithms in comparison to LASSO.
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[BK14]
Dimitris Bertsimas and Nathan Kallus. “From Predictive to Prescriptive
Analytics”. In: ArXiv (2014), pages 1–52.
[BK16]
Dimitris Bertsimas and Angela King. “An Algorithmic Approach to Linear
Regression”. In: INFORMS 64.September (2016), pages 2–16.
[BKM16]
Dimitris Bertsimas, Angela King, and Rahul Mazumder. “Best subset
selection via a modern optimization lens”. In: Annals of Statistics 44.2
(2016), pages 813–852.
[BM12]
Fabian Baetje and Lukas Menkhoff. “Predicting the equity premium via
its components”. In: Empirical Finance II 2 (2012).
[BRW16]
Thomas Trier Bjerring, Kourosh Marjani Rasmussen, and Alex Weissensteiner.
“Portfolio Selection under Supply Chain Predictability”. In: Computational
Management Science (2016).
[BT97]
Dimitris Bertsimas and John N. Tsitsiklis. Introduction to Linear Opti-
mization. 6th. Athena Scientific, 1997.
[BV09]
Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. 7th. Cam-
bridge University Press, 2009, page 716.
[CS04]
Honghui Chen and Vijay Singal. “All Things Considered, Taxes Drive the
January Effect”. In: Journal of Financial Research 27.3 (2004), pages 351–
372.
[CT08]
John Y. Campbell and Samuel B. Thompson. “Predicting excess stock re-
turns out of sample: Can anything beat the historical average?” In: Review
of Financial Studies 21.4 (2008), pages 1509–1531.
[CT96]
Charles J. Corrado and Su Tie. “Skewness and Kurtosis in S&P 500 Index
Returns Implied by Option Prices”. In: Journal of Financial Research 19.2
(1996), pages 175–192.
[DGU09]
Victor DeMiguel, Lorenzo Garlappi, and Raman Uppal. “Optimal versus
naive diversification: How inefficient is the 1/N portfolio strategy?” In:
Review of Financial Studies 22.5 (2009), pages 1915–1953.
[Efr79]
B. Efron. “Bootstrap Methods: Another Look at the Jackknife”. In: Annals
of Statistics 7.1 (1979), pages 1–26.
==PAGE:112==
102
Bibliography
[EG17]
Adam N. Elmachtoub and Paul Grigas. “Smart ”Predict, then Optimize””.
In: ArXiv (2017), pages 1–38.
[Fab+07]
Frank J. Fabozzi et al. Robust portfolio optimization and management.
John Wiley & Sons, 2007, page 495.
[Fam70]
Eugene F. Fama. “Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and
Empirical Work”. In: Journal of Finance 25.2 (1970).
[Fam76]
Eugene F. Fama. Foundations of Finance. 1976.
[FF88]
Eugene F Fama and Kenneth R French. “Permanent and Temporary Com-
ponents of Stock Prices”. In: Journal of Political Economy 96.2 (1988),
pages 246–273.
[FL03]
Matteo Fischetti and Andrea Lodi. “Local Branching”. In: Mathematical
Programming 98.1-3 (2003), pages 23–47.
[FS11]
Miguel A Ferreira and Pedro Santa-Clara. “Forecasting stock market re-
turns: The sum of the parts is more than the whole”. In: Journal of Fi-
nancial Economics 100 (2011), pages 514–537.
[HB15]
W. J. Hurley and Jack Brimberg. “A note on the sensitivity of the strategic
asset allocation problem”. In: Operations Research Perspectives 2 (2015),
pages 133–136.
[Hen02]
Olan T. Henry. “Long memory in stock returns: some international evi-
dence”. In: Applied Financial Economics 12.10 (2002), pages 725–729.
[HK70]
Arthur E Hoerl and Robert W Kennard. “Ridge Regression: Biased Es-
timation for Nonorthogonal Problems”. In: Technometrics 12.1 (1970),
pages 55–67.
[HMN11]
Sam James Henkel, J. Spencer Martin, and Federico Nardari. “Time-
varying short-horizon predictability”. In: Journal of Financial Economics
99.3 (2011), pages 560–580.
[JR06]
Eric Jondeau and Michael Rockinger. “Optimal portfolio allocation un-
der higher moments”. In: European Financial Management 12.1 (2006),
pages 29–55.
[Kar84]
N. Karmarkar. “A New Polynomial-Time Algorithm for Linear Program-
ming”. In: Combinatorica 4.4 (1984), pages 302–311.
[Lóp+16]
Manuel López-Ibáñez et al. “The irace package: Iterated racing for au-
tomatic algorithm configuration”. In: Operations Research Perspectives 3
(2016), pages 43–58.
[LS01]
François Longin and Bruno Solnik. “Extreme Correlation of International
Equity Markets”. In: The Journal of Finance 56.2 (2001), pages 649–676.
[LT17]
Jiahan Li and Ilias Tsiakas. “Equity Premium Prediction: The Role of
Economic and Statistical Constraints”. In: Journal of Financial Markets
36 (2017), pages 56–75.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
103
[Man62]
Benoit Mandelbrot. “Paretian Distributions and Income Maximization”.
In: The Quarterly Journal of Economics 76.1 (1962), pages 57–85.
[Mar52]
Harry Markowitz. “Portfolio Selection”. In: Journal of Finance 7.1 (1952),
pages 77–91.
[Mil84]
Alan Miller. “Selection of Subsets of Regression”. In: Journal of Royal
Statistical Society 147.3 (1984), pages 389–425.
[Nee+14]
Christopher J. Neely et al. “Forecasting the Equity Risk Premium: The
Role of Technical Indicators”. In: Management Science 60.7 (2014), pages 1772–
1791.
[Nys+15]
Peter Nystrup et al. “Regime-Based Versus Static Asset Allocation: Let-
ting the Data Speak”. In: The Journal of Portfolio Management 42.1
(2015), pages 103–109.
[Pea05]
Karl Pearson. “”Das Fehlergesetz und Seine Verallgemeinerungen Durch
Fechner und Pearson .” A Rejoinder”. In: Oxford Journals 4.1 (1905),
pages 169–212.
[RSZ10]
David E. Rapach, Jack K. Strauss, and Guofu Zhou. “Out-of-sample eq-
uity premium prediction: Combination forecasts and links to the real econ-
omy”. In: Review of Financial Studies 23.2 (2010), pages 821–862.
[RT16]
François Éric Racicot and Raymond Théoret. “Macroeconomic shocks,
forward-looking dynamics, and the behavior of hedge funds”. In: Journal
of Banking and Finance 62 (2016), pages 41–61.
[RU99]
R. Tyrrell Rockafellar and Stanislav Uryasev. “Optimization of condi-
tional value-at-risk”. In: Journal of Risk 2 (1999), pages 21–41.
[RV14]
Cynthia Rudin and Gah-yi Vahn. “Big Data Newsvendor: Practical In-
sights from Machine Learning Analysis”. 2014.
[SD17]
Suvrajeet Sen and Yunxiao Deng. “Learning Enabled Optimization : To-
wards a Fusion of Statistical Learning and Stochastic Optimization”. In:
Optimization Online (2017), pages 1–44.
[Sha66]
William F. Sharpe. “Mutual Fund Performance”. In: Journal of Business
39.1 (1966), pages 119–138.
[SQ09]
Abdullah Z. Sheikh and Hongtao Qiao. “Non-normality of Market Re-
turns”. In: J.P.Morgan Asset Management (2009).
[TA78]
A. N. Tikhonov and V. Y. Arsenin. “Solutions of Ill-Posed Problems”. In:
Mathematics of Computation 32.144 (1978), pages 1320–1322.
[Tib96]
Robert Tibshirani. “Regression Selection and Shrinkage via the Lasso”. In:
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B 58.1 (1996), pages 267–288.
[WG08]
Ivo Welch and Amit Goyal. “A comprehensive look at the empirical per-
formance of equity premium prediction”. In: Review of Financial Studies
21.4 (2008), pages 1455–1508.
==PAGE:114==
104
Bibliography
[WY09]
Fenghua Wen and Xiaoguang Yang. “Skewness of return distribution and
coefficient of risk premium”. In: Journal of Systems Science and Complex-
ity 22.3 (2009), pages 360–371.
[YY16]
Libo Yin and Qingyuan Yang. “Predicting the oil prices: Do technical
indicators help?” In: Energy Economics 56 (2016), pages 338–350.
[ZH05]
Hui Zou and Trevor Hastie. “Regularization and Variable Selection via
the Elastic Net”. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 67.2
(2005), pages 301–320.
[Zie16]
William T Ziemba. “Understanding the U.S. Index Futures Stock Market
Using Research”. In: INFORMS 04 (2016), pages 250–268.
