==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Thomas Charles Vestergaard, s120478
Development and verification of
an acoustic analysis algorithm
for implementation in BIM
software
Master Thesis, June 2018
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
This report was prepared by:
Thomas Charles Vestergaard, s120478
Supervisors:
Cheol-Ho Jeong
Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark
Finnur Pind
Industrial Ph.D. Candidate, Technichal University of
Denmark & Henning Larsen
Gerd Marbjerg
Postdoc, Technical University of Denmark
Kristoffer Negendahl
Assistant Professor, Technical University of Denmark
Jakob Strømann-Andersen
Partner and Head of Sustainability Engineering,
Henning Larsen
Department of Electrical Engineering
Acoustic Technology (ACT)
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
Technical University of Denmark
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.act.elektro.dtu.dk
Tel: (+45) 45 25 39 49
E-mail: elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Release Date
22nd June 2018
Category
1 (public)
Edition
First
Comments
This report is part of the requirements to achieve the
Master of Science in Engineering (M.Sc. Eng) at the
Technical University of Denmark.
This report repre-
sents 30 ECTS points.
Rights:
©Thomas Charles Vestergaard, 2018
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
The current report has been written as the final requirement and as part of the overall re-
quirements for a master’s degree in Architectural Engineering at the Technical University of
Denmark. The project documented in the current report has been conducted at the Depart-
ment of Acoustic Technology in the period from the 22nd of January to the 22nd of June, in
collaboration with Henning Larsen Architects.
The project was inspired by and is in some aspects, a continuation of related research projects
carried out at the Department of Acoustic Technology. The thesis ”Broadband Hybrid Room
Acoustic Simulations” by Finnur Pind has served as the main inspiration concerning the devel-
opment of the algorithm, where the thesis ”Embedded Room Acoustic Modelling in Parametric
Design” by Martin Schmidt Lauridsen has been the main inspiration concerning the implemen-
tation of the algorithm in Revit.
I
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my sincere thanks and gratitude to my main supervisor, assoc. prof.
Cheol-Ho Jeong, for his continued support and guidance, spanning from my bachelor project to
the finalisation of the present thesis. Additionally I would like to thank my supervisor Finnur
Pind for his encouragement during the special course leading up my thesis, and his continued
encouragement and help during the project. I would also like to thank supervisor Gerd Mar-
bjerg for her tremendous support during the project and supervisor Kristoffer Negendahl for
undertaking the teaching of the special course leading up to the present thesis and his continued
help during the thesis.
Furthermore I would like to thank Jacob Strømann-Andersen and Mathias Sønderskov Nielsen
at Henning Larsen Architects for their valuable guidance and input. A special thank you is
extended to Claus Lynge Christensen from Odeon, for taking the time to assist me with prob-
lems both in person and over e-mail.
Finally, a heartfelt thank you to my friends, both from and outside of DTU, my family and my
dear partner Niclas, for their continued love and support during my studies.
II
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
A geometrical room acoustics simulation algorithm using the ray-tracing method is developed,
analysed and verified against measurements and the commercial simulation software Odeon.
Furthermore the feasibility of implementing the algorithm in the 3D modelling software Revit is
investigated. In the process of development of said simulation algorithm, the effects of using the
secondary source method and different scattering models are investigated. The development of
a ray-tracing/image source method hybrid model is furthermore attempted. It is however found
that additional work is required in order to achieve an energy balance between the two models
and thereby reach an acceptable level of accuracy. A verification study of the ray-tracing al-
gorithm revealed acceptable levels of agreement for mid and higher frequency bands for rooms
with reasonable amounts of absorption. For rooms with low amounts of absorption the current
version of the developed algorithm is found to underestimate the reverberation times for all
frequency bands. A set of tools are developed for use in the Revit add-on Dynamo. The tools
allow for the selection of a room in an existing Revit model, export of the geometry of the
selected room and direct analysis of the reverberation time of the selected room, thereby com-
pletely circumventing the need for remodelling the space. The process of running an acoustic
analysis directly on an existing Revit model through Dynamo, by selection of a defined room,
is found to be a viable and practical method of working with a Revit model.
III
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Preface
I
Acknowledgements
II
Abstract
III
Contents
V
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Geometrical Acoustics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Ray Tracing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Emission of Rays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.2
Determination of the Reflection Plane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.3
Ray Reflection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3.1
Tradition Reflection Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3.2
Vector Based Scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.3.3
Single Pass Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.4
Updating the Ray Tracing Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.5
Receiver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.6
Secondary Source Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.7
Reverberation Time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Image Source Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.1
Creating the Image source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.2
Image Source Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.2.1
Image Source Test Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.3
Image Source Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4
Ray Tracing and Image Source Method Hybrid Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Revit
23
3.1
Dynamo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Revit Integrated Acoustic Simulations - RIAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1
Geometry Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.2
Geometry Export . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.3
Running the Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
IV
==PAGE:12==
3.2.4
Dependencies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.5
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Implementation
31
4.1
Traditional Ray-Tracing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Ray-Tracing - Secondary Source Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Hybrid Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Verification
44
5.1
Frequency Independent Scattering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.1.1
Configuration 1 - Empty Room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.1.2
Configuration 2 - Absorbing Ceiling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.1.3
Configuration 3 - Absorbing Ceiling & Wall Panels . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2
Frequency Dependent Scattering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2.1
Configuration 1 - Empty Room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2.2
Configuration 2 - Absorbing Ceiling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2.3
Configuration 3 - Absorbing Ceiling & Wall Panels . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Discussion
53
7
Conclusion
57
8
Future Work
58
8.1
Acoustic Analysis Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
8.2
RIAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
Appendix A Revit related figures
63
Appendix B Measurements performed at the Ecophon laboratories, Hyllinge,
Sweden
64
V
==PAGE:13==
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The current project was in great part motivated by the observation, that in a traditional acous-
tic analysis work-flow, the practitioner is required to ”go where the tools are”. Meaning that,
in order to perform acoustic analysis of a design by use of an acoustic simulation tool, a certain
amount of the work already done, may need to be repeated. This is due to the necessity of
remodelling the space in order to obtain an acoustic model applicable to acoustic analysis. Such
a process may, in some cases, be too time consuming or otherwise costly, with respect to the
given budget. Unless special emphasis is put on the acoustic requirements of a project, as for
concert halls, studios etc. the acoustics may first be considered in the later phase, when the
design is more or less finalised. This may lead to solutions or fixes which are both aesthetically
unpleasing as well as cost ineffective. As a result, the aim of ”creating tools where the practi-
tioners are” was formed. It is the ambition that such tools will eventually lead to a faster and
easier work-flow between the architectural and acoustical disciplines. Allowing for easy ongoing
analysis of the acoustic qualities of a design throughout the design process.
It was concluded by Videbæk [1] that especially the architects are in need of tools which can
give indications of the acoustic conditions of a given design.
Lauridsen [2] developed a set of tools for implementation in the visual programming tool
Grasshopper, which in itself is a plug-in for the 3D modelling software Rhinoceros (Rhino),
allowing for the direct acoustic analysis of a model produced in Rhino. However the underlying
algorithm needed further work in order to yield results with an acceptable level of accuracy.
The work done by Lauridsen was thoroughly studies and replicated by the author during a
special course, undertaken as part of the requirements for a Master’s degree in engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark. The special course was undertaken in order to establish
familiarity with both coding using the coding language python as well as the theory governing
the underlying algorithm. It was the initial aim of the project to improve upon the work carried
out by Lauridsen, with the ambition of arriving at a functioning algorithm, which would yield
results of acceptable accuracy, within a tolerable computation time.
Upon starting the current project, a meeting at Henning Larsen Architects led to a slight
alteration of the original objective. It was the belief at Henning Larsen Architects, that a
tool implemented in the 3D modelling software Revit might be more beneficial with respect to
analysing the acoustic qualities of a design during the design phase. The reasoning for changing
1/70
==PAGE:16==
1.2. RESEARCH OBJECTIVES
the implementation platform was based on the level of information available in the respective
programs, as well as an observed gradual shift in work-flow. It had been observed that the
early design phase would only be carried out in Rhino/Grasshopper for a short period, after
which the remaining work would be carried out in Revit. Additionally, a model constructed in
Rhino is, so to say, a ”dead” model. Meaning that a surface has no other native information,
other than it’s geometry. Finally, it was concluded that more often than not, materials are
not assigned or have even been decided upon, at the time of the work being performed using
Rhino/Grasshopper.
Taking the above mentioned factors into consideration it was decided to change the implemen-
tation platform from Rhino/Grasshopper to Revit/Dynamo. Dynamo is the Revit equivalent
of Rhino’s Grasshopper, with many of the same functions, but allows for the acquisition of the
considerable level of information typically embedded in a Revit model.
1.2
Research Objectives
The overall project objective of the current master thesis entails the development of an acoustic
analysis algorithm and the implementation of said algorithm in Revit/Dynamo. It is the aim
that the algorithm should achieve a level of accuracy justifying its use in analysis of architectural
3D models. As part of the main objective, the following research questions and objectives were
identified.
• Which methods related to the ray-tracing, with respect to improvement of accuracy and
computation time, exist and what are the effects of such methods?
• Investigation of Ray-Tracing/Image Source Method hybrid models.
• Development of an analysis algorithm with an acceptable accuracy/computation time
ratio.
• How can Dynamo embedded tools, for use in conjunction with the developed analysis
algorithm, be created ensuring ease of use for the user.
• What are the potentials for integration of an acoustic analysis algorithm in Revit/Dynamo.
• Verification of the developed analysis algorithm.
As mentioned above, the main focus of the present project, is the development and validation
of the analysis algorithm. As such, the tools developed for and in Revit/Dynamo represent a
”proof of concept”, rather than being a finalised set of tools.
2/70
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
2.1
Geometrical Acoustics
In order to accurately depict a sound field in an enclosure and the wave phenomena occurring
within it, one would need to solve the governing physics equations that describe the sound field
completely, e.g. by use the wave based approach. A number of methods exist in the category of
wave based models, such as the ”finite element method” and ”boundary element method”. The
wave based methods all share the quality of being able to depict the sound field of an enclosure
with great accuracy, by solving the wave equation. This accuracy does however come at a cost,
as the computation time can be found to be extensive in cases with large geometries and when
broadband results are desired [3]. Additionally the computation time will be increased by having
complex geometries and non-rigid boundaries. As an alternative, a geometrical room acoustics
approach, such as the ray-tracing or image source method, may be applied. When applying
a geometrical approach, simplifying approximations are made with respect to the propagation
and reflection of the sound. The sound wave is approximated differently depending on the
respective method, but is often approximated as rays or particles, the former being the case in
the ray-tracing method. How such a ray propagates around the room is then determined by
the same geometrical laws of propagation as is found in optics [3], apart from the difference
in velocity. The use of geometrical acoustics is justified if the dimensions of the room and the
surfaces of which it is composed, are large compared to the wavelength at the frequency of
interest [3]. This essentially imposes a minimum frequency for which geometrical acoustics is
valid. A general rule of thumb used by many practitioners is that this frequency is determined
by the Schroeder frequency, which can be found as [3],
fs = 2000
√
T
V ,
(2.1)
where T is the is the reverberation time, taken either as the average reverberation time or the
reverberation time of the octave band in which the Schroeder frequency is assumed to be found,
and V is the volume. The Schroeder frequency is the frequency above which the modal overlap
approximately exceeds three, meaning that no individual resonances dominate the sound field.
It is important to note that there is no direct link between the Schroeder frequency and the
validity of the results obtained from using geometrical acoustics. In cases where strong flutter
echoes or the so called seat dip effect occur, the Schroeder frequency may be found below the
frequencies at which these effects occur [4]. As a result the minimum frequency may at times
3/70
==PAGE:18==
2.2. RAY TRACING
be taken as a factor 2 or 4 of the Schroeder frequency. Two methods within the geometrical
room acoustics approach, the ray-tracing and image source methods, have been investigated in
depth in the following.
2.2
Ray Tracing
The ray tracing algorithm in its basic form consists of emitting a number of rays, represented
by three-dimensional vectors, from a source point. The path of the rays and their reflections on
the predefined geometry, either as specular or diffuse, are then traced until one of two scenarios
occurs. The ray is either traced until the energy of the ray is attenuated below a predefined
threshold value or until the ray hits the volume receiver. The initial energy of each ray is set as
1 and the threshold is set to 10−6, corresponding to a 60 dB decrease. The ray tracing method
is described in depth in the following.
2.2.1
Emission of Rays
The rays emitted from the source point can be defined by use of either a deterministic or
statistical method [5]. The vectors resulting from the two methods can be seen in figure 2.1
Figure 2.1: Visualisation of the vectors generated by use of the deterministic (left) and statistical
(right) methods. Taken from [5].
The deterministic method involves sectioning a sphere surface centred at the source point into
n regular sections. The vertices of the sections then determine the end points of the ray vectors
with the source point acting as the base point. The statistical method utilises a random number
generator in order to produce two sets of random numbers. The first set representing the polar
angle with values in the range of [0,π] and the second set representing the azimuth angle with
values in the range [0,2π], [5].
The three-dimensional vectors resulting from the randomly
generated values are then calculated as [4][5],
v =
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
sin(θ)cos(φ)
sin(θ)sin(φ)
cos(θ)
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
.
(2.2)
Where θ is the randomly generated polar angle and φ is the randomly generated azimuth
angle. When using the deterministic method, the desired number of rays must be determined
4/70
==PAGE:19==
2.2. RAY TRACING
beforehand, as opposed to the statistical method where the number of rays may be changed
dynamically. Thus, the statistical method was chosen to be implemented in the current project.
2.2.2
Determination of the Reflection Plane
Once an initial ray direction has been determined, the reflection point on the geometry surface
needs to be calculated. The geometry obtained from a 3D model, is defined as sets of vertices,
each set defining a surface of the geometry. For the purpose of the calculations carried out
in the algorithm, the surfaces of the geometry are however defined as infinite planes, each
constructed by a point contained in the plane and a normal vector to the plane directed inward
with respect to the volume of the geometry. Since the ray vectors constitute the direction
of an infinite line, intersections between the ray vectors and all of the geometry surfaces will
eventually occur, resulting in either a negative or positive distance from the source point to the
plane. An exception to this statement will occur if the ray vector is parallel to any surfaces.
Such a scenario is of course highly unlikely, but still accounted for in the algorithm.
The
negative distances are found for the planes located in the opposite direction of the vector and
are as such not valid planes for intersection. Determining the valid planes of intersection and
the actual reflecting plane, is done by examining the dot product of the ray vectors and the
inward facing normal vectors of each individual plane and disregarding the planes where the
resulting angle is acute [5],
Ni ⋅v > 0.
(2.3)
In equation (2.3), Ni is the inward facing normal vector of the i’th plane and v is the three
dimensional ray vector. The distance from the source point, along the ray vector to each plane
with an obtuse angle between ray and normal vector [5],
Ni ⋅v < 0,
(2.4)
is then calculated as [5],
li = Ni ⋅ÐÐ→
PiPs
v ⋅Ni
.
(2.5)
Where li is the distance from the source point to the plane along the ray vector, and ÐÐ→
PiPs is the
vector constructed from the source point to any point contained within the respective plane.
For convex geometries, as the example seen in figure 2.2, the reflecting plane will correspond
to the minimum distance calculated. However, in cases with concave geometries, as in the
example seen in figure 2.4, where planes may extend into/through the volume of the geometry,
further testing is needed in order to determine the correct reflecting surface. Such testing can
be performed in at least one of three ways [5].
The first, seen in figure 2.3(a) entails calculating the apical angles of the four triangles ABQ,
ADQ, DCQ and BCQ, where A, B, C and D are the vertices of the surface and Q is the
intersection point on the plane in which the surface is contained. If the sum of these angles is
less than 4π radians, the point Q is located outside the surface ABCD. Alternatively the areas
of the four triangles can be calculated. If the sum of the areas exceeds the area of the surface
5/70
==PAGE:20==
2.2. RAY TRACING
Figure 2.2: Cross section of convex geometry. The ray vector will intersect planes 2,3,4 and 5. As
the shortest distance is found for plane 4, this will be the plane of intersection. Taken from [5].
Figure 2.3: Testing of intersection point on surface. Taken from [5].
ABCD the point Q is also located outside the surface. The last method involves creating two
sets of vectors. The first set is the three-dimensional normal vectors of the edge lines of of the
surface, S1, S2, S3 and S4 in 2.3(c). These normal vectors point inwards with respect to the area
of the surface. The second set is the vectors from the intersection point and perpendicular to
the edge lines of the surface, R1, R2, R3 and R4 in 2.3(c). Once these two sets are created, the
dot product between the normal vector and the respective perpendicular vector is examined
for each edge of the surface. If the dot product is found to be equal to 1, the vectors are
6/70
==PAGE:21==
2.2. RAY TRACING
compatibly parallel, if the resulting dot product equals -1, the vectors are oppositely parallel.
If the dot product equals 1 just once, the reflection point is situated outside the surface 2.3(c).
Ergo the reflection point is invalid and the next possible reflection point is tested. According
to [5], the third method utilising the normal vectors of the surface edges, was found to be twice
as fast when compared to the first and second testing methods. Thus, the third method was
implemented in the algorithm.
Figure 2.4: Cross section of concave geometry. The ray will intersect planes 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 9. As
the ray will only intersect surface 4 within it’s boundaries, this will be the surface of intersection.
Taken from [5].
Once the reflecting plane and the matching distance has been determined, the reflection point
on the plane can be calculated as [5],
P = Ps + v ⋅l.
(2.6)
2.2.3
Ray Reflection
How the ray is reflected upon collision with the geometry, can be determined in different ways.
In the following sections, three different methods are described.
2.2.3.1
Tradition Reflection Model
Using the traditional reflection model, rays can be reflected either as a specular reflection or
a diffuse reflection. In the case of specular reflection, the reflection is governed by Snell’s law,
meaning that the reflected angle is equal to the angle of incidence and the reflected three-
dimensional vector is thus calculated as [4],
7/70
==PAGE:22==
2.2. RAY TRACING
vreflected = v −2 ⋅(Ni ⋅v) ⋅Ni.
(2.7)
In the case of diffuse reflection, the reflection is calculated in accordance with the Lambert
distribution [3].
Practically, the Lambert distribution is implemented in the algorithm by
substituting the polar and azimuth angle in equation (2.2) with the expressions [4]
θ = θNi + arccos(2r1 −1) −π
2
(2.8)
and
φ = φNi + arccos(2r2 −1) −π
2
(2.9)
respectively. Where θNi and φNi represent the polar and azimuth angle of the normal vector of
the reflecting surface and r1 and r2 are both randomly generated numbers in the range [0,1].
Whether the ray is reflected in a specular or diffuse manner is determined by generating a
random number in the range [0,1] and comparing against the scattering coefficient of the surface
for the specific frequency. If rrandom < si[f], the reflection will be diffuse and if rrandom > si[f]
the reflection will be specular.
2.2.3.2
Vector Based Scattering
The vector based scattering method is a method used in the simulation tool Odeon [6]. The
method uses a combination of specular and diffuse reflection vectors, see figure 2.5. Instead
of the reflection being determined by comparison with a randomly generated number, the
reflection is made slightly scattered every time the ray is reflected on a surface.
Figure 2.5: Vector based scattering. A ray reflected on a surface with s=0.5 and α=0.5, depicted in
2D. Taken from [7].
The resulting vector seen in figure 2.5 is calculated as [7],
vresulting = vspecular ⋅(1 −si[f]) + vscattered ⋅si[f],
(2.10)
where the specular and scattered rays are calculated as described in section 2.2.3.1, with the
diffusely reflected vector from section 2.2.3.1 being equal to the scattered ray in equation (2.10).
8/70
==PAGE:23==
2.2. RAY TRACING
2.2.3.3
Single Pass Calculation
Due to the fact that the scattering coefficient is frequency dependent, the propagation path
will be different for the individual frequency bands. Consequently it is necessary to repeat the
calculations for each initial ray, N times, N being the number of frequency bands of interest.
Both the traditional reflection model and the vector based scattering model require that each
frequency is run separately per initial ray.
This obviously increases the computation time
considerably, depending on the number of frequency bands. In order to reduce the computation
time while maintaining accuracy, a method utilising a ”splitting coefficient” was proposed by
Embrechts [8]. Instead of using the more general splitting coefficient, which is calculated as
the mean value of the scattering coefficients of the surface in question, Embrecht proposed a
method of updating the splitting coefficient with each reflection. This was shown to eliminate
the errors otherwise caused by the use of the splitting coefficient.
As Embrechts’ method
calculates the splitting coefficient of the (i + 1)th reflection using the splitting coefficient of the
ith reflection, the splitting coefficient of the first order reflection (i=1) should be calculated as
the before mentioned mean value of the scattering coefficients [9]. For the first order reflection
a randomly generated number rd,i=1, in the range [0,1], is generated. The mean value of the
scattering coefficients of the surface of reflection is then compared against rd,i=1. If rd,i=1 > ξi=1
the reflection is treated as specular, if rd,i=1 < ξi=1 the reflection is treated as diffuse. After
the first order reflection the subsequent splitting coefficients of the (i + 1)th reflections can be
calculated as [8][9]
ξi+1 =
max{Ai[f] ⋅si[f]}
max{Ai[f] ⋅si[f]} + max{Ai[f] ⋅(1 −si[f])},
(2.11)
where
Ai[f] =
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎩
Ai−1[f]1−si[f]
1−ξi ,
rd > ξi,
Ai−1[f]si[f]
ξi ,
rd ≤ξi.
(2.12)
is an amplification factor taking into consideration the nature of the previous reflection. For
the first calculation of the amplification factor, Ai−1[f] is set to 1. In the equations in (2.12),
s[f] are the frequency dependent scattering coefficients of the reflecting surface and rd is the
randomly generated number.
For the subsequent reflection orders, the splitting coefficient
for the ith order, calculated during the (i −1)th order, is compared against a new randomly
generated number in the range [0,1]. If rd > ξi the reflection is treated as specular and if rd < ξi it
is treated as diffuse. In both cases the reflected vector is calculated using the method described
in section. 2.2.3.1.
2.2.4
Updating the Ray Tracing Parameters
Upon reflection on a surface, the parameters utilised in the algorithm are updated before the
algorithm is continued. Firstly, the energy carried by the ray is updated in accordance with
the attenuation of the medium and the factor of energy absorbed by the reflecting surface, i.e.
the absorption coefficient. The updated energy is calculated as [5]
Eupdated = E ⋅e−m⋅l ⋅(1 −αi).
(2.13)
9/70
==PAGE:24==
2.2. RAY TRACING
Where m is the frequency dependent air absorption coefficient per meter, the values of which
may be obtained from experimental data [10] or estimated by use of [11]
m = 5.5 ⋅10−450
h ( f
1000)
1.7
,
(2.14)
where h is the relative humidity in percentage and f is the frequency. In equation (2.13), l is the
distance from the source point to the reflecting surface, calculated from equation (2.5), and αi
is the absorption coefficient of the reflecting surface at the respective frequency. The traditional
geometrical spreading of the sound energy is fundamentally included in the ray tracing method
due to the ray density decreasing with increasing propagation distance and as such the usual
1
r2 reduction factor is omitted from the energy calculations in the ray-tracing method [5]. The
distance travelled by the ray is updated and the travel time of the ray is calculated by division
of the distance [m] by the speed of sound [m/s]. The source point is then updated to take the
value of the reflection point and the initial ray vector is replaced with the reflected ray vector
calculated for either specular or diffuse reflection and the next iteration is run using these new
values.
2.2.5
Receiver
In order to create a reflectogram and a histogram style energy decay curve from the results
obtained from the algorithm, it is necessary to introduce a receiver with a physical volume.
This is due to the fact that the probability of any given ray passing through the receiver point
is infinitesimal when using a receiver defined as a point. The size and shape of the receiver
can however have significant effects on the results of the algorithm [12]. The receiver volume
is modelled as a sphere centred at the receiver point. The radius of the receiver sphere is
determined by use of a model proposed by Zeng [13]. This model takes into consideration the
size of the room, the number of rays used and the distance between source and receiver. Using
said model, the receiver sphere radius is calculated as [13]
r = k ⋅dSR
√
4
N ,
(2.15)
r being the sphere radius, dSR being the distance from the source to the receiver point, N is
the total number of rays run in the algorithm and k is defined as
k = log10(V ),
(2.16)
where V is the volume of the geometry.
In order to test whether a receiver hit occurs, a set of inequalities must be examined [5].
v . w > 0,
(2.17)
A2 −B + r2 ≥0,
(2.18)
and
lmin ≥−A.
(2.19)
10/70
==PAGE:25==
2.2. RAY TRACING
Where v is the vector representing the ray direction, w is the vector from the reflection point
to the receiver centre, A = v.w and B = ∣w∣2.
If the inequalities presented in equations (2.17), (2.18), (2.19) are all found to hold for a given
reflection point and ray vector combination, the ray will intersect the receiver. The distance
from the reflection point to the intersection point with the receiver sphere can then be calculated
as [5],
lreceiver = min
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎩
−A +
√
A2 −B + r2,
−A −
√
A2 −B + r2.
(2.20)
It is noted that the distance calculated in (2.20) should be taken as the numerical value, as
the resulting distance may be negative. Once the distance to the receiver intersection points
has been determined, the ray tracing parameters are updated and logged. Provided that all
frequencies have been calculated, the ray is terminated and a new initial ray is emitted from the
source point. The travel time of the ray is then simply the travel distance to the receiver added
to the sum of travel distance logged at the reflection point, divided by the speed of sound. The
energy is updated as [5],
Eupdated = E ⋅e−m⋅lreceiver,
(2.21)
2.2.6
Secondary Source Method
The basic ray tracing method, although simple in execution, has certain important limitations
as a result of the need for the receiver volume. Zeng [13] discussed the importance of a correct
receiver size and how an incorrect receiver size can lead to multiple, diminished or wrong de-
tections. In addition, a considerable number of rays are needed in order to ensure that enough
receiver hits occur, for the results to maintain the desired level of accuracy. Using the model
proposed by Zeng described in section 2.2.5, the effects of the receiver can be reduced to a
certain degree. With an increasing number of rays the computation time increases linearly,
and with a number of rays needed of the order of 104 [4], if not far greater, the computation
time becomes substantial. In order to compensate for these limitations a method was proposed
by Rindel [14] named the secondary source method.
The method works by creating a secondary surface source at each reflection point of the tra-
ditional rays. These secondary sources then emit energy in a hemisphere into the room. The
contribution arriving at the receiver from a secondary source is then the energy level at the
secondary source multiplied by a factor of
1
d2
SR, where dSR is the distance from the secondary
source to the receiver. The energy should also be attenuated with respect to air absorption.
A visibility check is needed for more complex geometries in order to ensure that the line from
the secondary source to the receiver point is not obstructed, see figure 2.6. Should the distance
from the secondary source to the receiver, be found to be greater than the distance to any sur-
face of the geometry following the same vector, the contribution from the particular secondary
source is omitted.
The secondary source method renders the need for a receiver volume obsolete as the contri-
butions are traced directly to the receiver point. Additionally, it speeds up the computation
11/70
==PAGE:26==
2.2. RAY TRACING
Figure 2.6: Illustration of the secondary source method. From all the reflection points (left) with an
unobstructed line of sight to the receiver, contributions are added directly to the receiver (right).
Taken from [4]
time drastically, as each ray will now yield a number of contributions at the receiver equal to
the number of reflections necessary for the energy of the ray to cross below the threshold value
previously described. However, with the loss of the receiver sphere, the direct energy is also
lost. The direct energy will therefore need to be synthesised.
Figure 2.7: Bar plots of the reflectograms with the direct sound being synthesised excluding (left)
and including (right) the geometrical spreading factor.
Figure 2.7 shows the reflectograms of two simulations. In figure 2.7 (left), the direct energy has
been added maintaining the absence of the geometrical spreading factor as,
Edirect = 1 ⋅e−m⋅ldirect,
(2.22)
where ldirect is the distance from the source to receiver. Figure 2.7(right) shows a reflectogram
12/70
==PAGE:27==
2.2. RAY TRACING
where the direct energy has been attenuated by the geometrical spreading factor as,
Edirect = 1 ⋅
1
l2
direct
⋅e−m⋅ldirect.
(2.23)
From figure 2.7 it can be seen that when the geometrical spreading is not included in the direct
energy, the level of becomes disproportional to the energy contributed by the secondary sources.
This is due to the secondary source factor
1
d2
SR, which is equal to the geometrical spreading factor.
Consequently, the geometrical spreading factor is included in the direct energy calculation.
Figure 2.8: Example of scatter plots from traditional ray-tracing (left) and ray-tracing using the
secondary source method (right), at 1 kHz, presented in dB
Figure 2.8 shows examples of scatter plots of the reflectograms for the traditional ray-tracing
method (left) and ray-tracing using the secondary source (right), for a simple rectangular
geometry composed of 6 surfaces. It is seen that for the traditional ray-tracing method, the
results are gathered in horizontal bands. The number of apparently horizontal bands found in a
scatter plot for the traditional ray-tracing is found to be equal to the maximum reflection order
required for the energy to be attenuated below the threshold value, plus one. The plus one
being the direct sound found in the top left corner of the figure. The bands in figure 2.8(left)
appear to be horizontal due to the fact that the results shown are generated for the 1 kHz
frequency band. At this frequency the attenuation due to air absorption used is 0.00097 [10]. If
the frequency was to be increased so would the attenuation factor, and the ”horizontal” bands
would become diagonally slanted, decreasing with time. It is however not determined if the
band accumulation of the results will occur for more complex geometries. In figure 2.8(right)
we see that the arrival time and energy levels of the results become stochastically distributed
as a result of the secondary source method. It can also be seen that the amount of results
obtained is drastically increased due to the secondary source method.
13/70
==PAGE:28==
2.2. RAY TRACING
2.2.7
Reverberation Time
It is recommended that the results in the reflectogram, as the ones seen in figure 2.8 are collected
and averaged into 3 ms time steps [6], thereby creating a so called histogram. This is done in
order to reduce the effect of any unwanted anomalies in the reflectogram.
From the histogram the reverberation time, as well as other parameters can be determined. In
order to obtain the reverberation time from the histogram, the backward Schroeder integration
[15] is applied to the results. For a continuous domain the backward Schroeder integration is
written as [4],
edc(t) = 10log10
⎛
⎝
∫
∞
t
p(τ)2dτ
∫
∞
0 p(τ)2dτ
⎞
⎠,
(2.24)
where edc(t) is the time dependent energy decay curve resulting from the backward integration
and p(τ) is the pressure. When one is working with a discrete domain, the integrations in equa-
tion (2.24) become the summations of the respective time intervals. Once the time dependent
energy decay curve has been calculated, the reverberation time is determined in accordance
with the ISO 3382 standard [16]. A least-squares fit line is calculated for a range from -5 dB
to -35 dB for T30 and from -5 dB to -25 dB if T20 is to be calculated. From the least-squares fit
line, the slope [−dB/s] is obtained and used to calculate the reverberation time.
14/70
==PAGE:29==
2.3. IMAGE SOURCE METHOD
2.3
Image Source Method
As the ray tracing method, the image source method (ISM), is a geometrical room acoustic
analysis method. The image source method is generally considered quite accurate. This accu-
racy allows for detailed analysis of the early reflections as well as the creation of auralisations,
due to the fact that the early reflections are a deciding factor in localisation. The traditional
image source method can however not include scattering and, as will be seen later, it presents
extensive computation times. In short the image source method involves creating image sources
(IS) by mirroring the source point in each of the surfaces of the geometry, thereby creating first
order image sources, and collecting the contributions from each created image source at the
receiver. Each first order image source is then mirrored in the surfaces of the geometry in order
to created second order image sources. This process is repeated until a predefined criterion,
such as a reflection order or energy level, is met [17]. The Image Source Method treated in the
algorithm of the current project is described in depth in the following.
2.3.1
Creating the Image source
The source point represents an image source at a reflection order of 0, see figure 2.10. At
this order, all surfaces of the geometry are valid as mirroring surfaces for geometries which
are entirely convex. For concave rooms, an image source could potentially exist within the
volume of the room, and is as such not a valid image source. The image source method utilises
meticulous testing in order to avoid such image sources. This is further discussed in section
2.3.2. The image source created by mirroring a source Pi in a surface S is calculated as [5][18],
Pimage = Pi −NS ⋅2 ⋅d,
(2.25)
where NS is the normal vector of the surface S and d is the distance from the point Pi,
perpendicular to the surface S, see figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: Creation of an image source point. Adapted from [5]
15/70
==PAGE:30==
2.3. IMAGE SOURCE METHOD
The calculation in 2.25 is, for each image source at the respective reflection order, repeated for
all surfaces in the geometry with the exception of the surface used to create the image source
in question. This process results in an exponential increase of the number of image sources as
a function of the reflection order and as such, also an exponential increase of the computation
time.
A flowchart showing the exponential growth of the number of image sources can be seen in
figure 2.10. In the figure it is seen how the source point is used to create the the first 6 image
sources for a rectangular geometry composed of 6 surfaces. The image source ISPS1 created
by use of the first surface (S1), is then mirrored in all of the surfaces with the exception of
S1, thereby generating 5 additional image sources. The process is then repeated for the image
source ISPS1-S6 to obtain the 3rd order reflections.
Figure 2.10: Flowchart illustrating the exponential growth of the number of image sources for a
rectangular geometry composed of 6 surfaces. The chart displays the image sources created for a
single branch, up to the 3rd order reflections.
For a room with N surfaces the number of potential image sources (IS) can be expressed as a
function of the reflection order [17],
IScount = N ⋅(N −1)(o−1),
(2.26)
where IScount is the total number of possible mirror sources at reflection order o for a geometry
composed of N surfaces. For a simple test geometry composed of 6 surfaces the number of
possible mirror sources by reflection order can be seen in table 2.1. It is seen that even for
relatively low reflection orders i.e.
an order of 10, the number of potential image sources
becomes immense.
16/70
==PAGE:31==
2.3. IMAGE SOURCE METHOD
Reflection Order
IScount
1
6
2
30
3
150
4
750
5
3750
6
18750
7
93750
8
468750
9
2343750
10
11718750
Table 2.1: Exponentially increasing number of image sources for a rectangular geometry with 6
surfaces, up to the 10th order
2.3.2
Image Source Testing
In order to ensure that no surfaces are used which would result in an image source, with an order
above 0, positioned within the volume of the room, two methods of testing are implemented
[19]. Firstly, for the image source Pi, the dot product of the vector from Pi, perpendicular to
each surface and the normal vector of the respective surface is checked. All normal vectors are
created so that they point inwards with respect to the volume of the room. A surface is then
only considered valid as a mirror surface if
NS .Ð→
PiS = −1,
(2.27)
where Ð→
PiS is the vector from Pi and perpendicular to the surface S and NS is the normal
vector of the surface S, see figure 2.9, meaning that the two vectors are oppositely parallel.
This ensures that an image source is never mirrored back into the volume and automatically
ensures that the surface which was used to create the image source in question is not used.
If the equality in (2.27) is found to hold for a specific point/surface combination, an image
source is created by use of equation 2.25. The created image source is then added to an image
source branch along with the index of the surface used. The index of the surface is used in order
to identify the surface in the geometry list containing all the surfaces. In order to test whether
the created image source branch is valid, the inverse reflection path is tested against the surface
indexes logged for the specific branch [20]. An example of such a process is presented in section
2.3.2.1. In short, the process of testing the validity of an image source branch, is performed
by creating a vector from the receiver point to the last image source of the branch. See figure
2.11. The surface of intersection for the created vector, and the corresponding intersection
point is calculated. The surface index of the surface of intersection is then compared with the
last surface index logged in the image source branch. If the two indexes are found to be equal,
the process is continued using the calculated intersection point and the next image source of
the branch. If all the reflection surfaces are found to match the surface indexes logged in the
branch, the image source is valid.
17/70
==PAGE:32==
2.3. IMAGE SOURCE METHOD
2.3.2.1
Image Source Test Example
If we consider the image source tree presented in figure 2.10 up to the nth reflection order and
apply this tree to an arbitrary geometry as the one seen in figure 2.11, then the test described
above is conducted as follows. We will start by considering the image source tree in figure 2.10
up the the 2nd reflection order.
Figure 2.11: Illustration of the testing of the inverse reflection path of an image source branch up
to the 2ndreflectionorder.
A vector, v1, is created from the receiver to the last image source in the branch, in this case the
point ISPS1-S6. The vector is divided by its own magnitude in order to obtain a unit vector.
Using the unit vector v1, the intersection point, Q1, is calculated. The corresponding surface
index is noted and compared against the index of the surface used to create the image source
ISPS1-S6. In the example in figure 2.11 we see the the intersection point Q1 is in fact located
on the the surface S6, which was used to create the image source. Thus the test process is
continued. A new unit vector, v2 is then created from the intersection point Q1 towards the
next image source ISPS1. The surface on which the intersection point Q2 lies, is again found
to coincide with the index of the surface used to generate the respective image source. The
image source branch does not contain any more image source points of a reflection order above
0. Ergo the branch is valid. A final visibility check is conducted to ensure that no obstacle
18/70
==PAGE:33==
2.3. IMAGE SOURCE METHOD
obstructs the path from the source to the first reflection point Q2. Provided that the final
visibility check holds, the image source contribution may finally be added to the results.
It is crucial to the image source method that every image source fulfilling the equality in
equation (2.27) is added to the image source tree, even if the subsequent test does not result in
a valid reflection path. This is due to the fact that the reflection path will shift as more image
source are added to the branch. An example of this can be seen in figures 2.12 and 2.13.
Figure 2.12: Illustration of an invalid reflection path for a third order image source branch.
In figure 2.12 the image source branch has been continued to the 3rd reflection order. It can be
seen that the resulting image source does not produce a valid reflection path, as the reflecting
surface is the same for the 2nd and 3rd order image source. However, if the image source branch
is continued to the 4th order, as can be seen in figure 2.13, the reflection path becomes valid
once again, and the resulting contribution of the 4th order image source ISPS1-S6-S5-S4 can be
added to the results.
19/70
==PAGE:34==
2.3. IMAGE SOURCE METHOD
Figure 2.13: Illustration showing the reflection path of a fourth order image source branch.
2.3.3
Image Source Contribution
Once an image source branch has been shown to have a valid reflection path and free path
from the source to the first reflection point, the contribution from the given image source can
be added to the results. The results are collected in histogram bins [21], equivalent to the time
steps used in the ray-tracing method. The travel time is given as the length of the vector from
the last image source of the branch, to the receiver divided by the speed of sound,
Ttravel = r
c,
(2.28)
where r is the distance from the last image source of the branch, to the receiver, r = ∣ÐÐÐÐÐÐÐÐÐ→
ISPNReceiver∣,
ISPN being the last image source of a branch of length N. The calculated travel time then
determines in which histogram bin the results are collected.
As opposed to the ray tracing method, the geometrical spreading is not inherently included in
the image source method, and as such must be included in the energy calculation. The energy
contribution of an image source is then calculated as,
20/70
==PAGE:35==
2.4. RAY TRACING AND IMAGE SOURCE METHOD HYBRID MODEL
E = 1 ⋅1
r2 ⋅e−m⋅r ⋅
N
∏
i
(1 −αi).
(2.29)
where N is the total number of surfaces involved in creating the image source branch.
2.4
Ray Tracing and Image Source Method Hybrid Model
The exponential growth of the number of sources resulting from the image source method and
the accompanied exponentially increasing computation time is a substantial hindrance to the
use of the image source method. Depending on the complexity of the geometry, a number of
the potential image sources will also not be valid, and as such, do not contribute to the results,
whilst still contributing to the computation time. Due to the exponential law of the production
of image sources, the computation time for even relatively simple geometries may extend to
years if not more [22]. However the higher level of accuracy is a quality somewhat lacking
from the ray-tracing method. As previously mentioned, accurate early reflections are crucial if
auralisations are to be mode and allows for detailed analysis of the early reflections, which is
an important tool for acousticians. Additionally, the correct levels of the early reflections are
of great importance for parameters such as clarity, which compares the early and late parts of
the impulse response. As a result, hybrid models have been developed which combine the two
methods. The Simulation software Odeon uses a hybrid model where the ray-tracing method
is used to identify potential image source reflection paths[6][20]. The model works by emitting
a predefined number of rays which function as ”geometry explorer rays”. When a ray hits a
surface, an image source is created behind that surface. The image source then undergoes the
same testing as was described in section 2.3.2 to ensure that it is in fact valid. If the image
source is found to be valid, the contribution is added to the results. The parameters of the ray
are updated in accordance with the procedure described in section 2.2.4 and the ray-tracing is
continued in order to identify the second order reflection and the corresponding second order
image source. This method is continued up to a predefined transition order, at which the rays
transition from being ”geometry explorers” to being carriers of energy. Past the transition
order, the secondary source method is used, as defined in section 2.2.6.
Figure 2.14: Overview of the calculation methods implemented in the Odeon hybrid model. Taken
from [20].
Figure 2.14 illustrates the hybrid model used in Odeon. For the early part, up to the transition
21/70
==PAGE:36==
2.4. RAY TRACING AND IMAGE SOURCE METHOD HYBRID MODEL
order, the model uses the image sources obtained from the ray-tracing reflection sequences
in combination with a number of early scatter rays (ESR)[6]. After the transition order, the
model uses the ray-tracing method, using the secondary source method. As the traditional
image source method is not able to include scattering, the early scatter rays is a method used
to include this in the hybrid model. When an image source is identified by a ray, the energy
of the image source is divided into a specular part used for the image source and a scattered
part used for the early scatter rays. A surface source is created on the image source surface,
emitting a number of early scatter rays into the room. These rays carry the scattered part
of the energy and are traced from the reflection order at which they were created, up to the
transition order. At each reflection of the early scatter rays, including their point of origin, a
”secondary scattering source” is created.
Some ambiguity was found with respect to how the energy of the image sources is attenuated.
From [14] it is gathered that the level of the image sources is calculated as the product of
the absorption coefficient of the surfaces involved in the generation of the image source and a
directivity factor for any non-omnidirectional sources. However in [6] it is stated that the level
of a image source contribution is calculated taking into account:
• A directivity factor of the primary source in the relevant direction of radiation.
• The absorption coefficients of the surfaces involved in generating the image source.
• Air absorption corresponding to the distance from the image source to the receiver.
• Distance damping corresponding to the distance from the image source to the receiver
(geometrical spreading).
• The scatterings coefficients of the surfaces involved in generating the image source. This
is obviously only relevant if the ESR method is included in the model.
The effect of omitting/including the geometrical spreading in a ray-tracing/image source hybrid
model will be investigated in depth in chapter 4.
22/70
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
Revit
Revit is a widely used 3D modelling software developed and maintained by Autodesk. The
strengths of Revit are numerous and not entirely limited to architectural aspects. Revit includes
the possibility of modelling ventilation systems, plumbing, electrical systems and, through add-
ins, also the possibility of performing energy, structural and daylight analyses among other
things. These analyses are made possible through the vast amount of information which can
be embedded in and extracted from a Revit model. It is this high level of possible information
which makes an embedded acoustic analysis tool both possible and interesting. The consid-
erations made and work done in regards to creating an embedded analysis tool in Revit is
discussed in depth in the following.
3.1
Dynamo
Dynamo is a visual programming plug-in which can be used in combination with Revit. Dynamo
may be considered the Revit equivalent of Rhino’s Grasshopper plug-in, for which acoustic
analysis tools such as Pachyderm [23] and the tools developed by Martin Lauridsen [2] and
Ólafur Pjetursson [24] already exist. Dynamo works by connecting components termed ”nodes”
[25]. Each node runs a specific function requiring certain inputs and yielding one or more
outputs. Figure 3.1 shows an overview of the Dynamo script developed in connection to the
present project. It was decided to implement the tools developed in relation to the present
project in Dynamo for a number of reasons. Firstly Dynamo is an open source platform. This
allows for the use of other developers work, such as the Clockwork package, which is discussed
in the following. Secondly Dynamo includes the possibility of custom coded python nodes,
making it easy to achieve the link from the Revit to the algorithm code. Lastly, the visual
programming nature of Dynamo allows for a parametric programming of a geometry which can
then be directly connected to the analysis tools. The geometry can thus be easily changed in
order to optimise with respect to the generated results. Alternatively the tools can be directly
connected to an existing Revit model.
23/70
==PAGE:38==
3.2. REVIT INTEGRATED ACOUSTIC SIMULATIONS - RIAS
Figure 3.1: Overview of the Dynamo script created in connection to the present project
3.2
Revit Integrated Acoustic Simulations - RIAS
The tools developed for use in Dynamo function in 5 steps. Firstly, the room in the Revit model,
for which an acoustic analysis is desired, is selected. Secondly the source and receiver points are
defined, and it is checked whether these points are contained within the geometry of the room.
The third and most cumbersome step, is assigning absorption and scattering coefficients to all
surfaces, for all the frequency bands simulated. The fourth step entails exporting the geometry
along with the before mentioned assigned acoustic parameters as well as the source and receiver
points. Once the geometry has been exported the external algorithm is run using said geometry
and the results of the analysis are imported back into Dynamo. The above mentioned steps are
described in depth in the following.
3.2.1
Geometry Handling
The first step of the Dynamo script involves selecting the enclosure/room to be analysed. In
the Revit API (application programming interface) a room is defined as an element. As such
the native Dynamo node ”Select Model Element” can be used for this purpose. See figure 3.2.
The positions of the source and receiver need to be defined manually. It is proposed that this
is done by using the ”Point.By.Coordinates” node, see figure 3.2, and controlling the x, y and z
values with integer or float sliders. As the room is not necessarily located with a corner placed
in Origo, some caution should be taken when placing the source and receiver. In order to ensure
24/70
==PAGE:39==
3.2. REVIT INTEGRATED ACOUSTIC SIMULATIONS - RIAS
that the two points are in fact placed within the volume of the room, the ”Room.IsInsideRoom”
node can be utilised. By inserting the selected room and the two points in a joined list, the
node will return Boolean True/False values, notifying the user with a ”False” return value,
should a point be located outside the volume.
Figure 3.2: Figure showing the selection of a room, the determination of the source and receiver
coordinates, as well as checking whether these points are contained within the geometry
The room obtained from the ”Select Model Element” node is however not enough input for the
algorithm to run. The room element simply represent the volume of the room as a polyhedral,
telling nothing about the number of surfaces (walls, doors, windows etc.) present in the room.
What is in fact needed, are the elements which compose the boundaries of the selected room.
The room is therefore connected to the custom ”RIAS_Geometry” node developed by the au-
thor in conjunction with the present project. The ”RIAS_Geometry” node utilises the Dynamo
package named ”Clockwork” in order to extract the elements which compose the boundaries
of the selected room. The Clockwork package node ”Room.Finishes” yields the boundary ele-
ments of the room, excluding any inserting elements, such as windows and doors. In addition
it returns the finish materials, meaning the surface materials of the elements, see figure 3.3.
Inserting elements, or inserts, are elements which may be inserted into other elements, such as
a door or window into a wall. These inserts first create a void in the element in which it is to
be inserted, and then fills that void with it’s own geometry.
Potentially the automatic acquisition of the finish materials, could allow for the direct import
of the materials and their values for absorption and scattering from the Revit model. However,
this requires that absorption and scattering parameters have been created for the material used
in the bounding elements, and that values have been provided for these parameters. The pa-
rameters can be added to Revit materials by creating a custom version of the material type
in question. For the present project however, absorption and scattering are entered manually.
The bounding elements obtained from the ”Room.Finishes” node are Revit elements. This
25/70
==PAGE:40==
3.2. REVIT INTEGRATED ACOUSTIC SIMULATIONS - RIAS
means that they are three-dimensional elements with a volume. Unlike a geometry created
using SketchUp or Rhino, where walls are primarily modelled as 2D surfaces, a Revit wall will
have a minimum of 6 surfaces, i.e. a top, a bottom, 2 sides and 2 ends. For the purpose of
running an acoustic analysis we are currently only interested in using the surface of the element
which is facing towards the volume of the room. The surfaces of each element are therefore
extracted and run through a custom python script which filters the lists returning only the
desired surface for each element.
Figure 3.3: Figure showing the ”Clockwork” package nodes utilised in the acquisition of the room
bounding geometry in the ”RIAS_Geometry” node.
For boundary elements (walls, ceilings, floors etc.) with inserts, such as windows or doors, the
voids created by these inserts must be filled by a substitute representing the inserted element.
For this purpose the Clockword node ”Element.Inserts” is used, see figure 3.3. By inputting
the elements obtained from the ”Room.Finishes” node, the ”Element.Inserts” node returns a
list of all the elements which have been inserted into the elements in the input list. Window
and door elements in Revit, are usually far too detailed compared to the level of detail desired
for acoustic analysis, including frames, handles etc. The simulation tool Odeon, recommends
the use of a rule of thumb, saying that surface dimensions should generally be kept above the
26/70
==PAGE:41==
3.2. REVIT INTEGRATED ACOUSTIC SIMULATIONS - RIAS
wavelength at mid frequencies [6]. The wavelength at 1000 Hz being approximately 0.34 me-
tres. In order to handle the Revit geometry in the algorithm, simplifications should be made.
This is done by creating a bounding box around each of the elements obtained from the ”Ele-
ments.Inserts” node. A bounding box is a rectangular box encompassing the extremities of a
given element. The bounding box is then converted to a 2D surface by projecting it onto the
plane in which the related bounding surface is contained. These steps are automatically done
by the RIAS_Geometry node, thus the void created by the inserted element is filled and the
inserted element is simplified at the same time. Such an automatic simplification process could
in theory be translated to all types of Revit elements, possibly maintaining larger details.
Figure 3.4: Figure showing the determination of the absorption/scattering coefficient for the types
of materials present in the model. The surfaces have been assigned absorption/scattering for the 63
Hz, 125 Hz, 250 Hz, 500 Hz, 1 kHz, 2 kHz and 4 kHz octave bands
It is ensured that, for all surfaces, the vertices are listed in clockwise order when seen from
inside the room. This is to ensure that the normal vectors created in the algorithm are always
facing into the volume of the room.
As it was mentioned earlier, the finish materials are also obtained through the ”Room.Finishes”
node. These are outputted in the ”RIAS.Geometry” node and are also appended to the list of
vertices for their respective surfaces. This results in the two output lists, ”Surface types List”
and ”Geometry List”.
As it was previously stated, the absorption and scattering values for the different types of
materials in the model, will at the current stage need to be entered manually. This can be done
by writing the values in sets by frequency in a ”Code Block” node, as can be seen to the left in
figure 3.4. In the example seen in figure 3.4, a room has been constructed of a ceiling, a floor
and two types of walls. All the materials in the model have been assigned uniform absorption
and scattering for all frequencies. The material type name and absorption/scattering values are
27/70
==PAGE:42==
3.2. REVIT INTEGRATED ACOUSTIC SIMULATIONS - RIAS
then merged in 4 lists, equal to the number of different material types, and collected in a final list
named ”Surface Data”. Having the material type name collected with the absorption/scattering
values, makes it possible to match the values with the surfaces in the ”Geometry List” from
the ”RIAS_Geometry” node automatically. Meaning that if one were to have a model with a
100 surfaces, but say only 10 different materials, one would only need to assign the material
properties once per material type.
3.2.2
Geometry Export
The ”RIAS_Export” node developed by the author in conjunction with the present project can
be seen in figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Figure showing the inputs necessary to run the ”RIAS_Export” node
This node takes the previously discussed ”Surface Data list”, the ”Geometry list” as well as the
source and receiver points. In addition to these, the node requires a directory path to where the
user wants the text file, containing the geometry, to be written to, as well as the desired name
of the text file. A Boolean True/False node is inserted in the last input to control whether or
not to run the node. Once the node is set to True, the text file with the stated name, containing
the geometry is written to the desired path. The output of the ”RIAS_export” node is the
directory path to the geometry file. An example of an exported geometry can be seen in figure
A.1 in the appendix.
28/70
==PAGE:43==
3.2. REVIT INTEGRATED ACOUSTIC SIMULATIONS - RIAS
3.2.3
Running the Algorithm
Once the ”RIAS_Export” node has been run and the geometry input file has been generated
the algorithm can be executed. This is done by using the ”RIAS_Run” node, see figure 3.6.
The node requires the directory path for the python execution file inputted in the ”Engine”
input. The ”Template” input requires the directory path for the algorithm code. The ”Input”
input requires the input file directory path generated by the ”RIAS_Export” node and lastly
a Boolean True/False node is inserted in the last input.
Once the Boolean node is set to True, the ”RIAS_Run” node opens the python code connected
to the ”Template” input. The geometry defined in the input file is then written into the code
in a pythonic list format along with the source and receiver points. Once the input has been
implemented in the code, the algorithm is run and the results are written to a text file located
in the same directory path as the input file. The result file takes the name of the input file and
extends it with a ”_Results”. As an example, the file name seen in figure 3.5, ”Link_Test.txt”
would result in a result file named ”Link_Test_Results.txt”. Finally the results are read back
into Dynamo and displayed in the output of the ”RIAS.Run” node.
Figure 3.6: Figure showing the inputs necessary to run the ”RIAS_Run” node
Due to the fact that the algorithm code is not directly embedded into Revit or Dynamo, but
exists as an external template which is run through Dynamo, the use of said algorithm is not
limited to Dynamo alone. The link described in the previous section could be replicated in
Grasshopper for example. This allows potential users to use the tool in combination with their
preferred software.
29/70
==PAGE:44==
3.2. REVIT INTEGRATED ACOUSTIC SIMULATIONS - RIAS
3.2.4
Dependencies
In order to run the Revit integrated simulation tools, some preliminary steps must be taken.
Firstly, the Dynamo package ”Clockwork” must be installed.
This is easily done through
Dynamo. Secondly, Python must be installed on the computer used for the simulations. Ad-
ditionally the following python modules must be installed through python in order for the
algorithm to run,
• numpy,
• random,
• multiprocessing,
• tqdm.
The numpy module allows for the creation and manipulation of so called arrays. Arrays are
vector like formats, which help speed up the calculation time considerably. The random module
is used to generate the random numbers used for creating the initial vectors and determining
the nature of a reflection. The multiprocessing module is used to speed up the computation
time by delegating so called ”pools” of work to more than one processor. Finally, the tqdm
module allows for the creation of a process bar, displaying the current computation time, as
well as the total estimated computation time of a simulation.
3.2.5
Limitations
At the current stage, the Dynamo embedded tools can handle geometries composed of walls,
ceilings, floors, doors and windows. However Revit models will often make use of many other
types of elements. Custom elements, termed ”Families” are used to model a variety of ge-
ometries, which do not fall within the categories currently handled. Acoustic panels, could for
instance be modelled as a wall based family type, and would be crucial to implement in the tool
moving forward. 3D furniture families are often times implemented in a Revit model. As was
previously discussed concerning windows and doors, such furniture families will also be mod-
elled at a detail level, which far exceeds the level appropriate for acoustic simulations. Ergo,
such elements will need to be simplified when incorporated in the geometry for simulation.
30/70
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4
Implementation
This chapter will investigate the use of the different methods discussed in chapter 2 and the
results these methods produce in, order to determine the final model to be implemented in
the RIAS tools. Firstly the traditional ray-tracing method is investigated using the traditional
scattering model, the vector based scatter model as well as Embrecht’s method. For each of
the three scattering models, the ray-tracing method using the secondary source method is then
investigated. Lastly, the hybrid model using a single scattering model is investigated.
In order to investigate the effects of different scattering models, a room with assigned scat-
tering coefficients is needed. The investigations made in the current chapter have thus been
made for a rectangular geometry of size 20m x 10m x 5m, with uniformly distributed absorp-
tion and scattering coefficients as seen in table 4.1. The source is positioned at (1,1,1) and the
receiver is positioned at (7,2,2).
Room 1
fc
63 Hz
125 Hz
250 Hz
500 Hz
1 kHz
2 kHz
4 kHz
α[f]
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
s[f]
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
m[f]
0.000035
0.00007
0.00016
0.0004
0.00097
0.0024
0.00611
Table 4.1: Absorption, scattering coefficients and air attenuation factors for room 1. Air
attenuation factors are presented for 21 degrees Celsius, 50% relative humidity [10]
The results generated in the current chapter are compared with results obtained from Odeon
using the same geometry. As Odeon uses diffraction models such as approximated edge diffrac-
tion, which are not included in the algorithm of the present project, these were switched off for
the simulations.
31/70
==PAGE:46==
4.1. TRADITIONAL RAY-TRACING
4.1
Traditional Ray-Tracing
Firstly the traditional ray-tracing method was investigated using the three different scattering
methods described in section 2.2.3. In order to justify any type of validity of the results gen-
erated by the algorithm, the results must be shown to converge towards a stable value with
an increasing number of rays used [26]. Results from the the traditional ray-tracing using the
traditional reflection model, vector based scattering and Embrecht’s method (2.2.3.1) for 1 kHz,
as functions of the number of rays used, can be seen listed in table 4.2 and plotted in figure
4.1 against results from Odeon using 16000 rays. It is noted that the single result from Odeon
is due to the results obtained being stable regardless of number of rays used.
Number of Rays * 103
0.1
1
5
10
15
20
35
50
100
150
200
Traditional T30 [s]
0.279
0.373
0.431
0.399
0.377
0.381
0.354
0.372
0.399
0.371
0.384
Vector Based T30 [s]
0.305
0.339
0.503
0.553
0.37
0.525
0.398
0.538
0.479
0.395
0.438
Embrechts T30 [s]
0.361
0.576
0.487
0.489
0.462
0.425
0.699
0.54
0.432
0.546
0.635
Odeon T30 [s]
0.41
Table 4.2: Table showing the reverberation times obtained from the traditional ray-tracing method
using either the traditional scattering model, vector based scatter or Embrecht’s method. Included is
also the results obtained from Odeon for 16000 rays. It is noted that the results presented are for
single calculations. The results may deviate with repetition, particularly for lower numbers of rays.
Figure 4.1: Plot showing the reverberation time at 1 kHz, as a function of number of rays for the
traditional ray-tracing method using different scattering methods.
32/70
==PAGE:47==
4.2. RAY-TRACING - SECONDARY SOURCE METHOD
In figure 4.1 it can be seen that the results of the traditional ray-tracing using the traditional
scattering model, become relatively stable around 50000 rays. The results for the vector based
scattering model, show a vague indication of beginning convergence at approximately 150000
rays. However the results are are not converging to a degree which can be considered stable.
The results seen for the Embrecht’s method show no signs of convergence within the number
of rays examined. For both the vector based scattering model and Embrecht’s method, more
rays may be needed in order to fully determine whether convergence occurs. However, as the
computation times for all three methods are of considerable magnitudes, approximately 120
minutes for 200000 rays, it was decided to move forward with the investigations.
4.2
Ray-Tracing - Secondary Source Method
The ray-tracing algorithm using the secondary source method was investigated for the three
possible scattering models. The results obtained from the traditional reflection model, vector
based scattering and Embrecht’s method for 1 kHz can be seen listed in table 4.3 and plotted
in figure 4.2 against the results from Odeon using 16000 rays.
Number of Rays * 103
0.1
1
5
10
15
20
35
50
Traditional T30 [s]
0.616
0.622
0.509
0.734
0.473
0.583
0.614
0.576
Vector Based T30 [s]
0.47
0.397
0.595
0.401
0.56
0.498
0.503
0.5
Embrechts T30 [s]
0.349
0.397
0.703
0.642
0.568
0.582
0.528
0.554
Odeon T30 [s]
0.41
Table 4.3: Table showing the reverberation times obtained from the ray-tracing model using the
secondary source method for three different scattering models. Included is also the results obtained
from Odeon for 16000 rays. It is noted that the results presented are for single calculations. The
results may deviate with repetition, particularly for lower numbers of rays.
In figure 4.2 it can be seen that convergence is achieved much earlier, after about 20000 rays, by
use of the secondary source method. However what is also seen is that the reverberation times
are considerably higher than the results obtained from Odeon, by factors of approximately
1.25-1.5.
Looking at the secondary source method ray-tracing using Embrecht’s scattering method for
15000 rays, the results seen in figures 4.3 and 4.4 are obtained.
In the reflectogram in figure 4.3 (left) it can be seen that, besides the main cluster of secondary
source contributions, a number of contributions are present with higher energy to time ratio
than the general trend. When the time step averaging is performed, this results in the peaks
occurring after approximately 0.2 seconds seen in figure 4.3 (right). This finally leads to the
decay curve obtained from the backwards integration seen in figure 4.4. The decay curve is not
of a consistently linear nature, which would normally be expected for a room with uniformly
distributed absorption. Instead it is seen that after a given time, the decay curve bends, with
the time of the bend corresponding to the time of the peaks observed in the histogram.
The contributions in the reflectogram which do not abide by the general trend are so called
artefacts due to simple geometrical reflection patterns [7][27]. By this is meant, rays which have
33/70
==PAGE:48==
4.2. RAY-TRACING - SECONDARY SOURCE METHOD
Figure 4.2: Plot showing the reverberation time, at 1 kHz as function of number of rays for the
secondary source ray-tracing method using the three different scattering methods.
Figure 4.3: Reflectogram (left) showing the results obtained from the secondary source method using
Embrecht’s scattering method at 1 kHz, for 15000 rays and the resulting histogram (right)
been ”caught” between two surfaces, with no scattering event altering the reflection paths. For
the rectangular geometry in question, such artefacts are for rays caught between the two ends
34/70
==PAGE:49==
4.2. RAY-TRACING - SECONDARY SOURCE METHOD
of the room, giving the longest reflection paths in relation to energy attenuation. In figure 4.4
we see that the beginning of the decay curve, until about -25/-30 dB is of a very linear nature.
The least-squares fit line is however calculated between -5 and -35 dB and as such does not
follow the same linear decay line as the start of the backward integration curve. Instead it has
become more horizontal, thereby resulting in a higher reverberation time.
Figure 4.4: Plot of the decay curve at 1 kHz, obtained from the backward Schroeder integration and
the related least-squares fit line resulting from the secondary source ray-tracing using Embrecht’s
scattering method for 15000 rays.
From the above it can be gathered that by increasing the scattering, the effects of the simple
geometrical reflection patterns should be reduced. This expectation was found to be true during
informal tests, where the scattering coefficients were gradually increased.
Averaging the reflectogram results in order to obtain the histogram, is recommended in order
to reduce the effect of any anomalies in the reflectogram [6]. However it is not a step which is
strictly necessary. On the contrary, it may cause serious issues when performing the backward
integration, if insufficient scattering is included in the model. Figure 4.5 shows the decay curve
obtained directly from the reflectogram without averaging the results. It is seen that the decay
curve becomes much more linear, approaching the type of linear decay curve expected for the
type of room investigated.
Corresponding changes in the decay curves were found for the
traditional scattering model as well as for the vector based scattering model.
The mathematical explanation for the differences seen between the results with and without
averaging is found in the backward Schroeder integration. In equation (2.24) it is seen that
the cumulative integration is normalised by the integration of the entire impulse response. By
averaging, the higher density of contributions in the earlier part is eliminated thereby giving as
much ”weight” to the late contributions as to the earlier ones. If the contributions in the later
part are then relatively high due to the simple reflection patterns, the ratio between the energy
35/70
==PAGE:50==
4.2. RAY-TRACING - SECONDARY SOURCE METHOD
of the entire impulse and the energy found in the later part of the impulse will be skewed,
resulting in the bend seen in figure 4.4. From the above, that if the time step averaging is to
be used, steps must be taken to ensure that the simple reflection patterns will not influence the
results.
Figure 4.5: Plot of the decay curve at 1 kHz, obtained from the backward Schroeder integration and
the related least-squares fit line for the results obtained from the secondary source ray-tracing using
Embrech’s scattering method omitting the 3 ms averaging.
Omitting the time step averaging, the reverberation times obtained for each scattering model
as functions of increasing numbers of rays, can be seen in table 4.4 and plotted against the
results from Odeon in figure 4.6. From the results it is seen that convergence is achieved at a
much lower number of rays and that the agreement with the results from Odeon is improved
significantly.
Number of Rays * 103
0.1
1
5
10
15
Traditional T30 [s]
0.361
0.415
0.411
0.401
0.416
Vector Based T30 [s]
0.442
0.379
0.385
0.384
0.377
Embrechts T30 [s]
0.422
0.402
0.392
0.406
0.402
Odeon T30 [s]
0.41
Table 4.4: Table showing the reverberation times obtained from the secondary source ray-tracing
model using the three scattering models omitting the time step averaging. Included is also the results
obtained from Odeon for 16000 rays. It is noted that the results presented are for single calculations.
The results may deviate slightly with repetition.
36/70
==PAGE:51==
4.2. RAY-TRACING - SECONDARY SOURCE METHOD
Figure 4.6: Plot showing the reverberation time at 1 kHz, from the secondary source ray-tracing
method using different scattering models and omitting the time step averaging, as functions of
numbers of rays
In order to fully determine which scattering model to implement in the algorithm, the three
models were investigated for the frequency bands from 63 Hz to 4 kHz using 10000 rays. The
results seen in figure 4.7 show that all three models produce results correlating to the ones from
Odeon, with average deviations of 1.7% for the traditional scatter model, 8.5% for the vector
based scatter model and 1.6% for Embrecht’s method.
The vector based scattering model
consistently yields slightly lower reverberation times compared to the other methods. This is
to be expected, as the ray is slightly diffused on every reflection as opposed to the traditional
scatter mode and Embrecht’s method, where the nature of the reflection is random. Using
the traditional scatter and vector based scatter models, the computation times for the seven
frequency bands were found to be around 50 minutes. Whereas the computation time for all
seven frequency bands using Embrecht’s method, was found to be around 8 minutes. As a
result of the considerable differences in computation time and based on the agreement of the
results, it was chosen to implement Embrecht’s method in the algorithm.
37/70
==PAGE:52==
4.2. RAY-TRACING - SECONDARY SOURCE METHOD
Figure 4.7: Plot of the reverberation times obtained from the secondary source ray-tracing method
using different scattering models for 10000 rays omitting the time step averaging.
38/70
==PAGE:53==
4.3. HYBRID MODEL
4.3
Hybrid Model
The hybrid model combining the ray-tracing and image source method as described in section
2.4 was investigated. As was previously discussed, some ambiguity was found concerning the
attenuation of the image source contributions in the hybrid model. The two procedures, one
including the geometrical spreading and the other excluding it, were investigated. By using
10000 rays and a transition order of 5, the results from the two procedures, seen in figure 4.8
were attained. In figure 4.8 (left) the results including the geometrical spreading are seen.
A string of contributions extending from the main cluster is observed. These contributions
represent the early reflections from the image source part of the hybrid model. The rest of the
image source contributions are located within the cluster of contributions from the secondary
sources. This is considered acceptable, as some overlap between the two methods is to be
expected. In figure 4.8 (right), where the geometrical spreading has been omitted, it is seen
that the levels of the image source contributions are too high in relation to the secondary source
contributions, analogous to the conclusions made with respect to the direct sound in section
2.2.6.
Figure 4.8: Reflectograms showing the results at 1 kHz, obtained from the hybrid model including
(left) and excluding (right) the geometrical spreading factor, using 10000 rays with a transition order
of 5 for room 1, at 1 kHz.
The results in the two reflectograms are collected in histogram bins, summed and used in the
backwards integration to obtain the decay curves in figure 4.9. In figure 4.9 (left) it can be seen
that the image source contributions result in an apparent horizontal part in the beginning of the
decay curve. In figure 4.9 (right) the image source contributions do not result in a horizontal,
but rather a less steep segment of the decay curve, due to the higher levels of the contributions
from the image source method. In both cases, the decay curves appear to have been shifted
39/70
==PAGE:54==
4.3. HYBRID MODEL
vertically, flattening out at 0 dB in the case including the geometrical spreading.
Figure 4.9: Decay curves at 1 kHz, obtained for room 1 using the hybrid model including the
geometrical spreading factor (left) and excluding the geometrical spreading factor (right), using 10000
rays and a transition order of 5. Both decay curves are obtained directly from the reflectogram,
omitting the time step averaging.
The two decay curves allude to an energy imbalance between the image source and the ray-
tracing methods or in other terms, conservation of energy is not maintained with increasing
transition order. The problem arises from the manner in which the energy emitted by the
source is represented in the two methods. In the ray-tracing method, each ray represents E0
N ,
E0 being the total energy emitted by the source and N being the total number of rays used. In
the image source method, the fraction of energy represented by each image source, depends on
the number of surfaces in the geometry as well as the complexity, as these affect the number
of valid image sources. As such, the unit of energy represented by each ray and image source,
cannot be directly equated, as is the case in the current model.
As a result of the energy contributions from the image sources being underestimated, the
histogram bins in the early part of the impulse will contain far less energy than the later
ones. When the backward integration is then performed, the contribution of the energy in the
early histogram bins will be insignificant compared to the total energy, thereby resulting in the
apparent horizontal segment in figure 4.9 (left) as well as a vertical shift of the entire decay
curve, as the normalisation will not have the appropriate magnitude.
40/70
==PAGE:55==
4.3. HYBRID MODEL
If the hybrid model is considered for 1000 rays, the total sum of energy, normalised by the total
sum of energy for 1000 rays and transition order 0, as a function of transition order excluding
air attenuation, can be seen in figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: The total sum of energy from the hybrid model using 1000 with increasing transition
order normalised by the total sum of energy for 1000 and transition order 0. Air attenuation has
been neglected
From figure 4.10 it can be observed that , as expected, the total sum of energy in the model
is not conserved with increasing transition order. But rather, decreases with the nature of an
exponential decay.
A comparative investigation between the hybrid model algorithm with and without the geo-
metrical spreading was performed against Odeon. The reverberation times of the three models,
as functions of transition order, for room 1 using 10000 rays, can be seen in figure 4.11. It is
observed that up to the 4th transition order, the hybrid model algorithm including geometrical
spreading is in close agreement with Odeon. However after the 4th transition order the results
from Odeon stabilise, whereas the results from the algorithm continue to increase. The dis-
crepancy between Odeon and the algorithm omitting the geometrical spreading factor in the
image source contributions, further substantiate the inclusion of said factor.
41/70
==PAGE:56==
4.3. HYBRID MODEL
Figure 4.11: Plot of the reverberation times obtained from the hybrid model with and without the
geometrical spreading factor against results from Odeon, as functions of transition order. The results
obtained are for room 1 using 10000 rays.
The energy imbalance identified in the above, should be corrected by use of the time step
averaging, as it should then become possible to equate the energy represented by a ray and
an image source. If we however consider figure 4.12, we see the histogram style decay curve
and resulting decay curve, obtained from the reflectogram seen in figure 4.8 (left). It is seen
that the artefacts of the simple geometrical reflection patterns still cause tremendous errors in
the results. Furthermore the ”dip” in the beginning of the histogram suggests that the relative
levels of the ray-tracing and image source method may in fact not be correct. The exact cause
of the dip observed in the histogram is not currently identified. It is however observed that the
time step averaging results in a smoother transition between the two methods, in spite of the
dip in the histogram.
42/70
==PAGE:57==
4.3. HYBRID MODEL
Figure 4.12: Histogram style decay curve (left) and resulting decay curve (right) at 1 kHz, obtained
for room 1 using the hybrid model including the geometrical spreading factor, using 10000 rays and a
transition order of 5
43/70
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 5
Verification
Based on the observations made in chapter 4, more specifically the observations made in sec-
tion 4.3 regarding the current version of the hybrid mode, it was decided to implement the
ray-tracing algorithm using the secondary source method and Embrecht’s scattering method.
In order to verify the validity of the algorithm, comparisons were performed against results from
measurements performed at the laboratories at Ecophon in Hyllinge, Sweden, for class-room
like conditions, supplied by supervisor Gerd Marbjerg. The measurements in question were
performed in a 7.32m x 7.57m x 3.5m room. The geometry of the room can be seen in figure
B.1 in the appendix. The measurements were performed using a combination of 2 source posi-
tions with 6 receiver positions each, resulting in 12 measurement positions. The measurement
positions can be seen in table B.1 in the appendix. The measurements were then repeated for a
number of room configurations. Three of the configurations were used in the comparison study.
One with the test room being completely empty, one with a suspended absorbing ceiling and
one with a suspended absorbing ceiling and 4 additional absorbing panels mounted on a single
wall. The results from the configurations used for comparison can be seen in tables B.2, B.3
and B.4 in the appendix.
Simulations for the three room configurations were then carried out for two sets of scattering
values. One set with frequency independent scattering and one set where the scattering co-
efficients were estimated from the frequency functions provided in the Odeon manual [6], see
figure B.2 in the appendix.
Due to the uncertainties regarding the absorption coefficients of the different materials of the
room, a mean absorption coefficient, taking air attenuation into consideration, was calculated
per octave band of interest for the empty room condition by [28],
αmean =
55.3⋅V
T⋅c −4mV
S
,
(5.1)
where V is the volume of the room, T is the mean reverberation time at the specific frequency
band (see table B.2), c is the speed of sound, m is the air attenuation factor, obtained from
experimental data [10] and S is the total surface area of the room. The temperature and relative
humidity at the time of the measurements were measured at 18.4○C and 39.3% respectively.
44/70
==PAGE:59==
5.1. FREQUENCY INDEPENDENT SCATTERING
5.1
Frequency Independent Scattering
In the current section, the three room configurations were investigated with the RIAS algorithm
using frequency independent scattering coefficients.
It is noted that Odeon only accepts a
scattering coefficient at a frequency of 707 Hz. The scattering coefficient is then expanded to
the remaining frequency bands by interpolation or extrapolation [6], see figure B.2.
5.1.1
Configuration 1 - Empty Room
The first room configuration to be investigated is the empty room configuration. The mean
absorption coefficients obtained from equation (5.1) for the empty room condition can be seen
in table 5.1. The scattering coefficient was set to 0.05 for all frequencies and surfaces and the air
attenuation factors were obtained from experimental data [10] for 20○C and a relative humidity
of 40%.
Room Configuration 1
fc
63 Hz
125 Hz
250 Hz
500 Hz
1 kHz
2 kHz
4 kHz
8 kHz
αMean[f]
0.075
0.057
0.046
0.035
0.036
0.046
0.059
0.038
sMean[f]
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
m[f]
0.00004
0.00008
0.00018
0.00043
0.00106
0.00259
0.00717
0.02374
Table 5.1: Table showing the calculated mean absorption coefficients, the assigned scattering
coefficients and the air attenuation factors for use in comparison with measurements.
By running the algorithm for the 12 source/receiver combinations defined in table B.1 in ap-
pendix B, the results seen in figure 5.1 were obtained. The results are compared with the
measurement results, as well as results from Odeon, using the same source/receiver combina-
tions and absorption/scattering coefficients. From figure 5.1 it can be seen that the results
obtained from the RIAS algorithm have a high level of agreement with the measured values.
It should however be noted that the very high level of agreement with the measurements is in
part due to the fact that the absorption coefficients have been calculated from the reverberation
times. This will naturally result in a better agreement between simulations and measurements,
than if the absorption coefficients had been estimated from the types of materials present in
the room. It is seen that the results obtained from Odeon are consistently lower than those
from the measurements and RIAS. The disagreement could be a result of the additional scat-
tering models included in Odeon, as well as the differences between the scattering coefficients
as described above. Additionally, the uniformly distributed absorption coefficients does most
likely not reflect the real distribution of absorption in the measurement room.
45/70
==PAGE:60==
5.1. FREQUENCY INDEPENDENT SCATTERING
Figure 5.1: Means and spatial standard deviations of the reverberation times from room
configuration 1. ∎: RIAS results using frequency independent scattering, ●: Odeon results using a
scattering coefficient of 0.05 at 707 Hz, ◆: Measurement results
5.1.2
Configuration 2 - Absorbing Ceiling
Figure 5.2 shows the results from investigation of the room configuration using a suspended
absorbing ceiling. The ceiling panels have a thickness of 20 mm with an air gap of 780 mm.
This results in an interior height of the room of 2.7 metres. With a flow resistivity of 32kPas
m2
the ceiling panels were found to have the absorption coefficients seen in table 5.2, provided by
supervisor Gerd Marbjerg. The absorption coefficients of the walls and floor were kept as the
before calculated mean absorption coefficients. The scattering coefficients were likewise kept as
the previously used values.
In figure 5.2 the results from the RIAS algorithm are seen compared to the measurement results
and results obtained from Odeon. The differences between the RIAS algorithm results and the
results from Odeon are seen to be more pronounced with the addition of the absorbing ceiling.
A high level of agreement is still found between the RIAS algorithm and the measurements, for
the lower frequency bands i.e. 63 Hz, 125 Hz and 250 Hz as well as for the higher frequencies,
i.e. 4 kHz and 8 kHz. However at the mid frequencies, particularly at 500 Hz, the measurements
show a drastic drop in the reverberation time, which is not the case for the RIAS algorithm.
The relatively high reverberation times seen at the lower frequencies of the measurements, could
be the results of standing waves occurring around these frequencies. As such, the correlation
46/70
==PAGE:61==
5.1. FREQUENCY INDEPENDENT SCATTERING
Room Configuration 2
fc
63 Hz
125 Hz
250 Hz
500 Hz
1 kHz
2 kHz
4 kHz
8 kHz
αCeiling[f]
0.570
0.812
0.635
0.672
0.769
0.840
0.910
0.946
αWall[f]
0.075
0.057
0.046
0.035
0.036
0.046
0.059
0.038
αFloor[f]
0.075
0.057
0.046
0.035
0.036
0.046
0.059
0.038
sMean[f]
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
m[f]
0.00004
0.00008
0.00018
0.00043
0.00106
0.00259
0.00717
0.02374
Table 5.2: Table showing the calculated mean absorption coefficients and the assigned scattering
coefficients for use in comparison with measurements.
between the RIAS algorithm and measurement results, should not be considered a result of
the algorithm accurately depicting such phenomena, but rather a general overestimation of the
reverberation time due to a lack of scattering, coincidentally coinciding with the measurement
results.
The lower reverberation times obtained from the Odeon simulations at the higher
frequencies i.e. 2 kHz, 4 kHz and 8kHz, are most likely due to the input scattering coefficient
of 0.05 at 707 resulting in too much scattering at higher frequencies.
Figure 5.2: Means and spatial standard deviations of the reverberation times from room
configuration 2. ∎: RIAS results using frequency independent scattering, ●: Odeon results using a
scattering coefficient of 0.05 at 707 Hz, ◆: Measurement results
47/70
==PAGE:62==
5.1. FREQUENCY INDEPENDENT SCATTERING
5.1.3
Configuration 3 - Absorbing Ceiling & Wall Panels
The third configuration investigated includes the suspended ceiling with an additional 4 wall
panels mounted on a single wall. The 4 panels are of equal dimensions, 2.7m x 0.6m, and are
placed with 0.64m spacing, starting 0.86m from the corner, on one of the 7.57m long walls. A
plan drawing of the measurement room can be seen in figure B.3 in appendix B. The absorption
coefficients of the wall panels, provided by supervisor Gerd Marbjerg, can be seen in table 5.3.
The absorption coefficients for the ceiling, walls and floor as well as the scattering coefficients
were kept at the same values.
Room Configuration 3
fc
63 Hz
125 Hz
250 Hz
500 Hz
1 kHz
2 kHz
4 kHz
8 kHz
αCeiling[f]
0.570
0.812
0.635
0.672
0.769
0.840
0.910
0.946
αWallPanel[f]
0.083
0.214
0.435
0.656
0.789
0.858
0.909
0.934
αWall[f]
0.075
0.057
0.046
0.035
0.036
0.046
0.059
0.038
αFloor[f]
0.075
0.057
0.046
0.035
0.036
0.046
0.059
0.038
sMean[f]
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
m[f]
0.00004
0.00008
0.00018
0.00043
0.00106
0.00259
0.00717
0.02374
Table 5.3: Table showing the calculated mean absorption coefficients and the assigned scattering
coefficients for use in comparison with measurements.
The means and spatial standard deviations of the reverberation times obtained from the room
configuration described above, can be seen in figure 5.3.
The same tendencies as the ones
observed for the configuration using only the suspended ceiling can be seen. Though the rever-
beration times from the RIAS algorithm are lowered by the addition of wall panels, the results
are still found to be considerably higher than those obtained from Odeon, with the differences
decreasing with increasing frequency. The significant differences between the RIAS algorithm
and Odeon at the lower frequencies are most likely resulting from the lack of diffraction in
the RIAS algorithm. Only for the higher frequency bands i.e. 4 kHz and 8 kHz can a justi-
fied correlation be seen between the measurements and the RIAS results. As for the previous
room configurations, the low reverberation times obtained from Odeon, could indicate that the
scattering coefficients used are too high.
48/70
==PAGE:63==
5.2. FREQUENCY DEPENDENT SCATTERING
Figure 5.3: Means and spatial standard deviations of the reverberation times from room
configuration 3. ∎: RIAS results using frequency independent scattering, ●: Odeon results using a
scattering coefficient of 0.05 at 707 Hz, ◆: Measurement results
5.2
Frequency Dependent Scattering
The investigations of the three room configurations were repeated, using a set of frequency
dependent scattering coefficients in the RIAS algorithm. It is noted that the scattering model
implemented is Embrecht’s method. As the scattering coefficients from the frequency functions
in the Odeon manual [6], are seen to increase substantially with frequency, it was estimated
that using a scattering coefficient curve with a scattering coefficient of 0.015 at 707 Hz, might
be suitable. The scattering coefficients estimated from the 0.015 scattering coefficient curve in
figure B.2 in appendix B can be seen in table 5.4. The absorption coefficients and air attenu-
ation factors used for the different room configurations in the previous section are maintained
for the repetition of the investigations.
49/70
==PAGE:64==
5.2. FREQUENCY DEPENDENT SCATTERING
fc
63 Hz
125 Hz
250 Hz
500 Hz
1 kHz
2 kHz
4 kHz
8 kHz
s[f]
0.001
0.005
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.07
0.09
Table 5.4: Table showing the frequency dependent scattering coefficients estimated from the 0.015
scattering coefficient curve [6].
5.2.1
Configuration 1 - Empty Room
For the empty room configuration, the simulation results from the RIAS algorithm and Odeon
using the scattering coefficients in table 5.4 are compared to the measurement results in figure
5.4.
Figure 5.4: Means and spatial standard deviations of the reverberation times from room
configuration 1. ∎: RIAS results using the frequency dependent scattering coefficients seen in table
5.4, ●: Odeon results using a scattering coefficient of 0.015 at 707 Hz, ◆: Measurement results
A slightly better agreement between the measurement and Odeon results are found. The results
from the RIAS algorithm are however seen to have decreased considerably for all frequencies.
Only for the 8 kHz frequency band is the difference found to be slightly less noticeable.
50/70
==PAGE:65==
5.2. FREQUENCY DEPENDENT SCATTERING
The distinct decrease of the reverberation times obtained by the RIAS algorithm suggest that
the implemented scattering model may be overestimating the scattering.
5.2.2
Configuration 2 - Absorbing Ceiling
For the room configuration with a suspended absorbing ceiling, the simulation results from the
RIAS algorithm and Odeon using the scattering coefficients in table 5.4 are compared to the
measurement results in figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Means and spatial standard deviations of the reverberation times from room
configuration 2. ∎: RIAS results using the frequency dependent scattering coefficients seen in table
5.4, ●: Odeon results using a scattering coefficient of 0.015 at 707 Hz, ◆: Measurement results
In figure 5.5 it can be seen that the use of the scattering coefficients in table 5.4 has lead
to a decrease of the reverberation times obtained from the RIAS algorithm and an increase
in the reverberation times obtained from Odeon. A much higher agreement has thus been
achieved between the results of the two. It is however again noted, that the change in scattering
coefficients has led to such a decrease in the reverberation time that the Odeon results now
exceed the RIAS results.
5.2.3
Configuration 3 - Absorbing Ceiling & Wall Panels
For the room configuration with a suspended absorbing ceiling and 4 absorbing wall panels,
the simulation results from the RIAS algorithm and Odeon using the scattering coefficients in
51/70
==PAGE:66==
5.2. FREQUENCY DEPENDENT SCATTERING
table 5.4 are compared to the measurement results in figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: Means and spatial standard deviations of the reverberation times from room
configuration 3. ∎: RIAS results using the frequency dependent scattering coefficients seen in table
5.4, ●: Odeon results using a scattering coefficient of 0.015 at 707 Hz, ◆: Measurement results
A considerably higher level of agreement is seen between the measurements and the results
obtained from the RIAS algorithm and Odeon for the 500 Hz frequency band and above, by use
of the frequency dependent set of scattering coefficients. For the lower frequency bands, some
considerable differences are still seen between the Odeon and RIAS results. These differences
affirm the effects of including diffraction, as the effects of diffraction are more substantial at
lower frequencies, where the wavelength may be comparable to the dimensions of a surface
[3]. As diffraction is not included in the RIAS algorithm, it is to be expected, that higher
reverberation times are obtained at the lower frequencies.
52/70
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
The advantages of the secondary source method investigated in chapter 4 were found to be
considerable. The substantial reduction of the computation time and the earlier achievement
of convergence are great assets with respect to practicality. However it was found that the use
of the secondary source in some sense amplified the effects of the simple geometrical reflection
patterns. This may stem from the fact that a ray ”caught” in a simple reflection pattern in
the traditional ray-tracing, may be less likely to hit the receiver, compared to a ray which
experiences more scattering events. Using the secondary source method, all rays, even the ones
”caught” in simple reflection patterns will contribute to the results. Consequently, it becomes
even more important to ensure that sufficient scattering models are included in the model.
It was however found, that the effects of the simple geometrical reflection patterns could be
almost completely mitigated by omitting the otherwise recommended time step averaging. The
mitigation of the simple reflection patterns is achieved by maintaining the higher density of
results in the earlier part of the impulse response, which the time step averaging would other-
wise have eliminated. When the normalisation in the backward integration is then performed,
the density difference reduces the influence of the simple reflection pattern contributions. The
only artefacts of the simple reflection patterns which are then left, were found to not influence
the results. The precise purpose of the time step averaging recommended in the Odeon manual
[6], remains unclear to the author. It is suggested that the averaging is performed in order to
reduce the effect of any unwanted anomalies in the reflectogram. Such anomalies, aside from
the simple reflection patterns, have not been identified by the author at this time. This may
however, simply be due to the types of spaces analysed, which have all been of rectangular
shapes. More complex shapes may prove to create the anomalies in question. In any case, the
time step averaging is needed if a histogram style decay curve is desired.
A great deal of time went into identifying the simple geometrical reflection patterns as the
cause of error in the ray-tracing model. As a result the, ray-tracing/image source hybrid model
did not reach a level of accuracy considered by the author to be sufficient for a verification
study. The efforts made in development of a hybrid model revealed principal hindrances in
regard to conservation of energy between the two models. One potential method of amending
the imbalance of the energy contributions from the ray-tracing and image source methods,
could entail scaling the contributions from the image sources. By ensuring that the sum of
the energy contributions from the image sources for a given reflection order, corresponds to
the sum of energy which would otherwise have been contributed by the ray-tracing method, an
53/70
==PAGE:68==
energy balance should be achieved, regardless of transition order. However, the correct levels
of the early reflections are of great importance if auralisations are to be created, and are in
any case a useful tool for acousticians when analysing a sound space. One of the particular
strengths of the image source method lies in the ability to accurately predict the levels of the
early reflections. As such, this method may not be entirely appropriate. Another way of en-
suring energy balance in the hybrid model, is to include the averaging of the histogram bins as
suggested in the Odeon manual. By doing so, the disproportions between the sums of the early
and later histogram bins are eliminated. This does however, as has been previously discussed,
require that sufficient scattering is included in the model, to ensure that the effects of simple
geometrical reflection patterns are reduced. However, discrepancy between the energy levels
of the two methods was still observed when using the time step averaging. The cause of this
discrepancy has not been determined at this time. Further work is as such needed in order to
bring the hybrid model to an acceptable level of accuracy.
The investigations made in chapter 4 using Embrecht’s scattering method, yielded results in
very high agreement with the results obtained from Odeon while speeding up the computation
time substantially. It should however be noted, that the results obtained from Odeon, are
for simulations omitting any diffraction models, as such models are not included in the RIAS
algorithm. Hence, the high level of agreement is solely between the fundamental ray scattering
methods and not between the full individual models, i.e. Odeon and RIAS.
In the verification studies larger discrepancies were found. Using the frequency independent
scattering coefficients, a considerable level of agreement was achieved with the measurement
results for the empty room condition. However, corresponding agreement was not achieved with
the addition of the absorbing ceiling and wall panels. The sizeable reduction of the reverbera-
tion times for the empty room configuration using frequency dependent scattering coefficients,
could indicate that the implementation of Embrecht’s method may be too sensitive to changes
in the scattering coefficients. Even for the frequency bands where the scattering coefficient was
not drastically altered by using frequency dependent scattering coefficients, i.e. the 2 kHz and
4 kHz frequency bands, the reverberation time was found to be greatly affected. Additionally,
the decrease of the reverberation time at the mid and lower frequency bands, where the scat-
tering coefficients were lowered, is not in accordance with what is normally expected. As the
hindrance regarding the use of the time step averaging was based in a lack of scattering, infor-
mal tests were carried out using said averaging in the hybrid model, with the aim of obtaining
an energy balance. The tests however revealed that, in spite of the apparent overestimation of
scattering, the time step averaging still resulted in a large overestimation of the reverberation
times. It may be prudent to investigate other methods of mitigating the simple reflection pat-
terns besides increasing the scattering.
A considerable increase in the agreement for the configurations using the absorbing ceiling and
wall panels was found at mid and higher frequency bands, by use of the frequency dependent
scattering coefficients. This is considered to be quite acceptable, as these are typically the
frequencies considered when using a ray-tracing model. Moreover, it was seen that the rever-
beration times predicted by the RIAS algorithm were decreased by the addition of absorbing
wall panels, in very good agreement with the effect seen in the results from Odeon and the mea-
surements. This could indicate that the use of the current model may be limited to rooms with
a certain amount of absorption. In order to extend the use of the algorithm to rooms with very
54/70
==PAGE:69==
low amounts of absorption, further work appears to be needed with respect to the implemented
scattering model. In order to implement diffraction models, which are frequency dependent, in
the algorithm it may be necessary to use an entirely frequency dependent model and as such
also a frequency dependent scattering model. However, in order for the entire model to be
run frequency dependently, additional efforts should be made with respect to decreasing the
computation time, as the computation times are otherwise far too great for the tools to be of
practical use.
As discussed, the relatively high reverberation times seen in the lower frequency bands for
the measurements with the absorbing ceiling and wall panels, are conceivably due to standing
waves occurring around these frequencies. Normally, poor low frequency absorption is typical
for absorbing ceiling. However the absorption coefficients provided by supervisor Gerd Marb-
jerg, show that the ceiling actually has quite high absorption coefficients at these frequencies,
particularly at 125 Hz.
standing waves could therefore well explain the high reverberation
times. This clearly underlines the limitations associated with the use of energy based analysis
models, such as ray-tracing and the image source method, as such wave phenomena cannot
typically be depicted by these methods.
The tools developed for use in Dynamo have currently only been tested at a very funda-
mental level and for very simple rectangular geometries. It was however determined, that a
Revit geometry can be relatively easily simplified and transformed in order to be suitable for
acoustic analysis. For surfaces with no inserts, such as windows and doors, the tools have been
found to function, without any errors. This was also found to be true for walls which had been
subsectioned into segments.
The ability to define a room within an enclosure and use the room element to determine the
bounding surfaces was found to be a viable and practical method of working with the Revit ge-
ometry. The potential of embedding absorption and scattering coefficients directly in the Revit
model would increase the user friendliness of the tool considerably, as the main requirement for
use, at the current stage, is in the assigning of said coefficients. However, this potential does
also present at considerable amount of work, as acoustic properties would need to be applied
for every material used.
The developed tools can be applied in two scenarios, currently identified by the author. The
first, is the scenario where the tools are used by expert acousticians in order to analyse a Revit
model provided by the architects. In this scenario the tools allow for the complete circum-
vention of the need to remodel the space which is to be analysed. This presents considerable
potentials with respect to time and cost savings. However extensive studies would be needed
in order to determine the full effects of such a change in work-flow. The second scenario of use
currently identified by the author, is the scenario where the RIAS tools are used by the archi-
tects during the design phase, in order to gain ongoing knowledge of the acoustic qualities of
the design. This scenario does however present some considerable pitfalls. Estimating the ab-
sorption coefficients for materials, where such values are not always known, requires knowledge
and experience. Additionally, as it has been shown, scattering can have tremendous effects on
the results. As such, the use of the RIAS tools, without having the appropriate expertise, may
be ill advised. Further studies should be undertaken in order to fully determine the correct use
of the developed tools.
55/70
==PAGE:70==
As the algorithm depends heavily on the specific format of the inputs, the tools could poten-
tially have numerous flaws which have not yet been identified. Most of the potential errors
currently identified are related to the geometry. The sequence in which the vertices of a sur-
face are listed is very important, as it will determine the direction of the normal vector of the
surface. Additionally, as the normal vectors of each surface edge are computed, the sequence
of the vertices is of equal importance. When inserts are included, the effect of the void created
in the surface has not been fully determined. A proper way of including walls extending into
the room has not been developed yet. Such a wall would be simplified to a 2D surface, through
the same process as other walls, possibly leaving a gap in the geometry. Extensive case studies
should be performed using the developed tools in order to determine potential errors, as well
as what additions to the tools would be beneficial for the practitioner.
56/70
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The objective of the current project was twofold. Firstly, it was the aim to develop an acoustic
analysis model which had an acceptable accuracy with respect to the computation time. Sec-
ondly it was the aim to investigate the possibility of implementing such a model in Revit, with
the purpose of running an acoustic analysis on an existing 3D model created in said software.
It was found that, by implementation of the secondary source method in the ray-tracing algo-
rithm, the computation time was drastically decreased and reliable results were obtained much
faster. Furthermore, by use of Embrecht’s scattering method the computation time was further
decreased. It was however found, that the current implementation of Embrecht’s method re-
sults in too low reverberation times for rooms with very low amounts of absorption, due to an
overestimation of the scattering. However, for rooms with a fair amount of absorption, such as
an absorbing ceiling, the results were found to be in acceptable agreement with measurements
and results from Odeon, for mid and higher frequencies. Further work should be conducted in
order to ensure that the implemented scattering model results in accurate results for all types
of rooms. A key finding was the effect of the simple geometrical reflection patterns when the
reflectogram was collected and averaged in time steps. It is concluded that in order to perform
said time step averaging considerable amounts of scattering is needed in the model. Otherwise
the reverberation times obtained may be greatly overestimated. As a result, the time step
averaging has currently been omitted in the model.
The efforts made with respect to the development of a ray-tracing/image source method hybrid
model revealed that the two methods are not directly compatible, due to fundamental differ-
ences in the way the methods represent the energy of the source. Further work is thus needed
in order to determine the appropriate method of ensuring that an energy balance is achieved
between the two models. Two potential methods are identified. The first entails scaling the
contributions of the image source method. The other method entails ensuring that the time
step averaging can be performed without overestimation of the reverberation time due to simple
reflection patterns.
The tools developed for use in Revit/Dynamo were found to verify the possibility of imple-
menting the algorithm in Dynamo. It was found that an otherwise overly detailed Revit model,
could be rather easily simplified, thereby making it applicable for acoustic analysis. Further-
more, additional potential was identified in the possibility of embedding the acoustic properties
of a material directly in Revit, thereby eliminating the necessity for manual input of these pa-
rameters.
57/70
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 8
Future Work
8.1
Acoustic Analysis Model
The results obtained from the verification study show promising results, particularly for rooms
with fair amounts of absorption. Further work should however be conducted in order to improve
the algorithm. The areas of focus for improvement currently identified are seen listed below.
• The precise cause of underestimation of the reverberation times for rooms with low
amounts of absorption should be identified.
• Ways to improve the computation time further, should be identified and implemented.
This could possibly entail the use of a different coding language such as C++, which
could potentially speed up the computation time. Due to the nature of the link created
in Dynamo, any coding language would be compatible with the RIAS tools.
• Further investigations should be made on the effects of using a frequency in- or dependent
scattering model.
• Provided that the computation time is optimised, it may be advantageous to implement
a frequency dependent scattering model, such as the vector based scattering model. This
could potentially increase the accuracy, particularly for rooms with low amounts of ab-
sorption.
• Further work is needed in mitigating the energy imbalance between the ray-tracing and
image source method in order to develop a fully functioning hybrid model.
• Provided that the computation time is optimised, the model should be extended to enable
the computation of grid responses.
• The algorithm should be extended to include other parameters than the reverberation
time. Parameters such as clarity, definition, STI etc. are all important aspects to consider
when evaluating the acoustic qualities of a space.
• Provided that a functioning hybrid model is developed, the possibility of creating aurali-
sations should be implemented. This could be greatly beneficial in a design process.
58/70
==PAGE:73==
8.2. RIAS
8.2
RIAS
The further work needed in order to develop a fully functioning set of tools for acoustic analysis
of a Revit model currently identified entails;
• Testing of more complicated geometries is needed in order to determine any potential
errors in the geometry simplification process.
• The handling of curved geometries should be investigated and developed. It is currently
not determined in which way Revit creates curved geometries. Whether Revit creates
truly curved geometries or approximates the curvatures with planar surfaces should be
determined.
• The tools should be further developed in order to enable the inclusion of elements such
as furniture, custom made ”families” etc. Applying the rule of thumb recommended in
the Odeon manual, stating that the smallest dimensions of a surface should correspond
to the wavelength at the mid frequencies, a method of simplifying such elements should
be developed.
• Visualisations of the ray propagation paths could be included in the Dynamo embedded
tools in order to enable the evaluation the effects of reflectors.
• Visualisation of the acoustic parameter results by graphs, or similar, could be imple-
mented in the tools. This could allow for a visual comparison of the simulation results
against predefined legislative requirement values for the type of room in question.
59/70
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
[1]
E. E. Videbæk, “Implementation of acoustics in the design phase of a building”, Depart-
ment of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 2015.
[2]
M. S. Lauridsen, “Embedded room acoustic modelling in parametric design”, Department
of Electrical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
[3]
H. Kuttruff, “Room acoustics”, Taylor & Francis, 2009.
[4]
F. Pind, “Broadband hybrid room acoustic simulations using fdtd and ray tracing”, De-
partment of Electrical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
[5]
A. Kulowski, “Algorithmic representation of the ray tracing technique”, Institute of
Telecommunications, Technical University of Gdánsk, 1984.
[6]
C. Lynge, G. Koutsouris, and J. Gil, “Odeon user’s manual - room acoustics software”,
Odeon A/S, 2016.
[7]
C. L. Christensen and J. H. Rindel, “A new scattering method that combines roughness
and diffraction effects”, Proceedings of the Forum Acousticum (Budapest, Hungary), 2005.
[8]
J. J. Embrechts, “Broad spectrum diffusion model for room acoustics ray-tracing algo-
rithms”, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 107, no. 4, pp. 2068–2081,
2000.
[9]
X. Y. Zeng, “An improved broad-spectrum room acoustics model including diffuse reflec-
tions”, Applied Acoustics, vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 1309–1319, 2005.
[10]
C. M. Harris, “Absorption of sound in air versus humidity and temperature”, The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 153–164, 1966.
[11]
T. T. Cox and P. D’Antonio, “Acoustic absorbers and diffusers”, Taylor & Francis, 2009.
[12]
H. Lehnert, “Systematic errors of the ray-tracing algorithm”, Applied Acoustics, vol. 38,
no. 2-4, pp. 207–221, 1993.
60
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[13]
Z. Xiangyang, C. Ke’an, and S. Jincai, “On the accuracy of the ray-tracing algorithms
based on various sound receiver models”, Applied Acoustics, vol. 64, no. no. 4, pp. 433–
441, 2003.
[14]
J. H. Rindel, C. Lynge, G. Naylor, and K. Rishøj, “The use of a digital audio mainframe
for room acoustical auralization”, 96th Convention of Audio Engineering Society, 1994.
[15]
M. R. Schroeder, “New method of measuring reverberation time”, The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 409–412, 2017.
[16]
I. 3382, “Acoustics - measurement of the reverberation time of rooms with reference to
other acoustical parameters”, International Organization for Standardization, no. 2, 1997.
[17]
F.P.Mechel, “Improved mirror source method in room acoustics”, Journal of Sound and
Vibration, vol. 256, no. 5, pp. 873–940, 2002.
[18]
J. Borish, “Extension of the image model to arbitrary polyhedra”, The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, vol. 75, no. 6, pp. 1827–1836, 1984.
[19]
H. Lee and B. H. Lee, “An efficient algorithm for the image model technique”, Applied
Acoustics, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 87–115, 1988.
[20]
G. M. Taylor, “Odeon - another hybrid room acoustical model”, Applied Acoustics, vol. 38,
no. 2-4, pp. 131–143, 1993.
[21]
J. B. Allen and D. A. Berkley, “Image method for efficiently simulating small-room acous-
tics”, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 943–950, 1979.
[22]
M. Vorländer, “Simulation of the transient and steady-state sound propagation in rooms
using a new combined ray-tracing/image-source algorithm”, The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, vol. 86, no. 1, pp. 172–178, 1989.
[23]
Pachyderm acoustics, //www.grasshopper3d.com/group/pachyderm, Accessed: 2018-05-
30.
[24]
Ó. H. Pjetursson, “The integration of acoustic simulations into the parametric design
process”, Department of Electrical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 2016.
[25]
Dynamo, http://primer.dynamobim.org/en/01_Introduction/1-2_what_is_dynamo.html,
Accessed: 2018-05-30.
61/70
==PAGE:76==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[26]
L. Savioja and U. P. Svensson, “Overview of geometrical room acoustic modeling tech-
niques”, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 138, no. 2, pp. 708–730,
2015.
[27]
Personal communication with Claus Lynge Christensen, Managing Director of Odeon
A/S. on May 30th 2018.
[28]
Z. Maekawa, J. Rindel, and P. Lord, “Environmental and architectural acoustics”, CRC
Press, Taylor & Francis Group, no. 2, 2011.
62/70
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A
Revit related figures
Figure A.1: Example of text file containing the geometry exported from Revit
63
==PAGE:78==
APPENDIX B
Measurements performed at the
Ecophon laboratories, Hyllinge,
Sweden
Figure B.1: Geometry of the room used in the measurements performed at the laboratories at
Ecophon in Hyllinge, Sweden. In the RIAS and Odeon simulations, the room has been simplified to
only compose of 6 surfaces.
64
==PAGE:79==
Q1
[3.69, 6.45, 1.50] m
Q2
[1.30, 3.75, 1.50] m
P1
[1.51, 3.88, 1.20] m
P7
[3.43, 4.19, 1.20] m
P2
[4.03, 4.10, 1.20] m
P8
[3.43, 4.19, 1.20] m
P3
[3.37, 2.50, 1.20] m
P9
[3.90, 6.37, 1.20] m
P4
[5.74, 2.90, 1.20] m
P10
[5.25, 2.74, 1.20] m
P5
[2.10, 1.18, 1.20] m
P11
[1.50, 1.50, 1.20] m
P6
[5.74, 6.27, 1.20] m
P12
[4.15, 1.50, 1.20] m
Table B.1: Table showing the measurement positions used in performing the measurements of a
classroom-like room at the Ecophon laboratories in Hyllinge, Sweden.
65/70
==PAGE:80==
Measurement Positions
63 Hz
125 Hz
250 Hz
500 Hz
1 kHz
2 kHz
4 kHz
8 kHz
Q1-P1
2.062
2.698
3.167
3.947
3.668
2.607
1.709
1.174
Q1-P2
1.710
2.743
3.205
4.005
3.697
2.639
1.713
1.154
Q1-P3
1.907
2.514
3.085
3.873
3.697
2.599
1.732
1.170
Q1-P4
2.222
2.575
3.190
3.927
3.627
2.664
1.728
1.171
Q1-P5
1.829
2.436
3.055
3.934
3.690
2.592
1.734
1.174
Q1-P6
1.939
2.382
3.056
3.946
3.616
2.617
1.729
1.178
Q2-P7
1.891
2.540
3.155
3.977
3.790
2,591
1.718
1.162
Q2-P8
1.692
2.334
3.280
3.817
3.630
2.646
1.718
1.180
Q2-P9
1.891
2.698
3.254
4.045
3.688
2.617
1.708
1.151
Q2-P10
2.413
2.608
2.936
3.849
3.719
2.623
1.730
1.200
Q2-P11
1.786
2.385
2.908
3.976
3.688
2.615
1.713
1.148
Q2-P12
1.844
2.459
3.126
3.836
3.642
2.596
1.171
1.197
Mean T30
1.932
2.531
3.118
3.928
3.679
2.617
1.721
1.172
Table B.2: Table showing the T30 [s] results from measurements of a classroom-like room at the
Ecophon laboratories in Hyllinge, Sweden, in empty condition. The measurements were performed at
18.4○C and 39.3% relative humidity
66/70
==PAGE:81==
Measurement Positions
63 Hz
125 Hz
250 Hz
500 Hz
1 kHz
2 kHz
4 kHz
8 kHz
Q1-P1
1.51
1.58
1.65
1.13
1.33
1.29
1.13
0.81
Q1-P2
1.30
1.48
1.60
1.14
1.26
1.30
1.15
0.80
Q1-P3
1.11
1.36
1.52
1.12
1.29
1.30
1.14
0.83
Q1-P4
1.22
1.33
1.49
1.17
1.25
1.29
1.14
0.82
Q1-P5
1.42
1.59
1.51
1.12
1.30
1.30
1.15
0.82
Q1-P6
1.28
1.39
1.51
1.14
1.30
1.32
1.15
0.84
Q2-P7
1.65
1.50
1.52
1.14
1.31
1.32
1.13
0.81
Q2-P8
1.55
1.45
1.63
1.18
1.24
1.30
1.12
0.82
Q2-P9
1.47
1.44
1.55
1.17
1.26
1.31
1.12
0.80
Q2-P10
1.14
1.67
1.75
1.12
1.26
1.31
1.14
0.82
Q2-P11
1.60
1.46
1.71
1.12
1.26
1.28
1.11
0.79
Q2-P12
1.67
1.53
1.51
1.11
1.27
1.35
1.14
0.81
Table B.3: Table showing the T30 [s] results from measurements of a classroom-like room at the
Ecophon laboratories in Hyllinge, Sweden, with an absorbing ceiling of 20 mm thickness, suspended
780 mm. The measurements were performed at 18.4○C and 39.3% relative humidity
67/70
==PAGE:82==
Measurement Positions
63 Hz
125 Hz
250 Hz
500 Hz
1 kHz
2 kHz
4 kHz
8 kHz
Q1-P1
1.39
1.57
1.47
0.90
0.87
0.83
0.80
0.63
Q1-P2
1.2
1.36
1.46
0.86
0.83
0.80
0.78
0.64
Q1-P3
1.07
1.26
1.30
0.85
0.83
0.82
0.79
0.65
Q1-P4
1.14
1.36
1.43
0.86
0.80
0.81
0.75
0.58
Q1-P5
1.27
1.44
1.32
0.84
0.82
0.83
0.78
0.65
Q1-P6
1.24
1.37
1.38
0.81
0.81
0.84
0.76
0.63
Q2-P7
1.42
1.42
1.35
0.81
0.86
0.82
0.78
0.63
Q2-P8
1.48
1,37
1.42
0.88
0.84
0.82
0.79
0.64
Q2-P9
1.49
1.37
1.41
0.93
0.83
0.80
0.77
0.65
Q2-P10
1.30
1.49
1.58
0.84
0.91
0.82
0.80
0.63
Q2-P11
1.56
1.29
1.46
0.83
0.90
0.84
0.79
0.63
Q2-P12
1.55
1.41
1.38
0.90
0.86
0.84
0.79
0.63
Table B.4: Table showing the T30 [s] results from measurements of a classroom-like room at the
Ecophon laboratories in Hyllinge, Sweden, with an absorbing ceiling of 20 mm thickness, suspended
780 mm and 4 absorbing wall panels of size 2.7m x 0.6m placed evenly on a single wall. The
measurements were performed at 18.4○C and 39.3% relative humidity
68/70
==PAGE:83==
Figure B.2: Frequency functions for materials with different surface roughness. The legend of each
scattering coefficient curve denotes the scattering coefficient at 707 Hz. Figure and description taken
from [6]
69/70
==PAGE:84==
Figure B.3: Plan drawing of measurement room. It is noted that the furniture seen in the figure
was not included in any of the investigated configurations. Furthermore, doors and windows were not
modelled, but were simplified to be part of the wall surface.
70/70
