==PAGE:1==
Peer to Peer Self-Regulation
Within Blockchains
Daniel Brand
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Blockchains rely on the fact that a majority of nodes in the network are honest.
This honesty is incentivised through rewards for mining blocks for the blockchain
and through transaction fees.
Most blockchains, such as Bitcoin, rely on a
consensus model that says that the longest blockchain must be authoritative.
This is based on the assumption that the majority of the processing power in
the network comes from honest nodes and that the longest blockchain therefore
must have been produced by such nodes. This assumption is based on the hope
that the computational power of honest nodes is naturally greater than that
malicious nodes, due to the sheer amount of nodes connected to the network
and the amount of eﬀort and investment required for a malicious entity to gain
enough computational power.
No further action is taken to enforce honesty
within the network. There are many known attacks on the blockchain which
may result in activity including, but not limited to, disruption of service for
speciﬁc nodes or larger parts of the network, double spending, scamming and
refund attacks. Many of these attacks are detectable from within the network
and, if given the right incentive, honest nodes could be made to detect and
report such illicit activity to the rest of the network.
The goal of this thesis is to identify known illicit blockchain activity performed
by malicious nodes and how to detect it. Propose/implement a solution that
incentivises honest nodes to detect and report on malicious nodes, in order for
action to be taken in a manner that actively reduces the number of malicious
entities within the network as well as reducing incentive for further malicious
activity.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with various known attacks on blockchain network and proposes
a new model that will allow developers to address known vulnerability and
attacks without having to make major changes to the underlying systems.
The thesis consists of 60 pages, split into an introduction to the topic of the
report, the background required for understanding the topic, a survey of known
vulnerabilities and attacks, a proposal of a new model to handle the discussed
attacks, an implementation of detection capability within Bitcoin to assess the
impact of the model and a ﬁnal conclusion, plus appendix and references.
Lyngby, 15-June-2018
Daniel Brand
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Christian D. Jensen, for putting up with
my asking to be given exact exam dates in good time, knowing that such a thing
is diﬃcult to give and, of course, for supervising my project.
I would also like to thank my colleagues for always asking if I’m done yet, giving
me the motivation to ﬁnally be able to say "Yes, I’m done! Now stop asking!"
Finally, a thank you to my husband for convincing me to ﬁnish my degree despite
having found a job, and for giving me the motivation to carry it through.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Blockchains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Types of blockchains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Bitcoin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
Transactions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.3
Incentives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Mining Pools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Forking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Altcoins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Alternatives to Proof-of-Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Survey
13
3.1
The 51% Attack
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Double-spending
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.1
Finney Attack
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.2
Vector76 attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Malicious Mining Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.1
Selﬁsh Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.2
Block Withholding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Transaction Malleability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3.5
Time Jacking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6
DDoS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.7
Eclipse Attack
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.8
Tampering With Delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
A self-regulation Incentive Model
27
4.1
Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1.1
Double-spending Attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1.2
Other Attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Notiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.1
Message Notiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.2
New Block Veriﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Remediation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Incentive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4.1
Summary of incentive methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4.2
Incentivising miners
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5
Example Signature Deﬁnitions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.6
Detection Compared to Implementing Fix . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.7
Final Model Workﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Live Detection of Attacks
47
5.1
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6
Conclusion
51
6.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
A Appendix
53
A.1 Detection Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Blockchains rely on the fact that a majority of nodes in the network are honest.
This honesty is incentivised through rewards for mining blocks for the blockchain
and through transaction fees.
Most blockchains, such as Bitcoin, rely on a
consensus model that says that the longest blockchain must be authoritative.
This is based on the assumption that the majority of the processing power in
the network comes from honest nodes and that the longest blockchain therefore
must have been produced by such nodes. This assumption is based on the hope
that the computational power of honest nodes is naturally greater than that of
malicious nodes, due to the sheer amount of nodes connected to the network
and the amount of eﬀort and investment required for a malicious entity to gain
enough computational power.
No further action is taken to enforce honesty
within the network.
There are many known attacks on the blockchain which may result in activity
including, but not limited to, disruption of service for speciﬁc nodes or larger
parts of the network, double spending, scamming and refund attacks. Since the
inception of the ﬁrst blockchain, in the form of Bitcoin, much research has been
performed on the topic of blockchain security. Many papers identify speciﬁc
vulnerabilities and attacks and look for methods of preventing or remedying
them. Many of these solutions require fundamental changes to the blockchain
protocol. Due to the nature of blockchain currencies, making such changes to
existing implementations is either very risky or completely impossible.
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
Many of the researched attacks are detectable by peers within the network,
either individually or when working together to identify malicious behaviour.
Currently, no blockchain implementation makes use of the detection capabilities
of nodes within their networks and instead rely solely on the protocol to deﬁne
how interactions are performed. However, if a vulnerability is detected in the
protocol, making major changes in order to ﬁx the vulnerability would require
every node to upgrade their software. If nodes for any reason refuse to perform
the update, there is a risk that the network will split into two separate networks,
each working with their own implementation on their own chain.
In this thesis, we propose a model for making use of network nodes to detect
malicious activity. The model can be implemented into any blockchain protocol
and, once implemented, can be updated to detect the latest threats and perform
a number of proposed remediation actions, all without requiring a dangerous
protocol update. In order to incentivise the nodes of the network to contribute
their processing power to look out for malicious behaviour, we propose multiple
methods of rewarding successful detections of such activity. In our proposal, we
take into account the intricacies of dealing with a system that relies entirely on
its implementation to give a sense of value to its backing currency.
In order to identify the requirements of this model, we perform a survey on
the current research into vulnerabilities and attacks on blockchain systems, the
methods of detecting these attacks and known methods of preventing them.
Additionally, we go in depth with diﬀerent blockchain implementations and
consider their impact on our proposal.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Background
In this section we describe the background of blockchains from a general per-
spective, moving into more detail with the Bitcoin blockchain speciﬁcally. Ad-
ditionally, we describe relevant topics, such as diﬀerent blockchain consensus
models, alternatives to Bitcoin and the diﬀerences between implementations in
regards to implementing a self-regulation system.
2.1
Blockchains
The blockchain technology was ﬁrst conceptualised by an unknown author going
by the name of Satoshi Nakamoto in their paper on the Bitcoin peer-to-peer
transaction system.[32]
On a high level, a blockchain can be described as an electronic ledger containing
all transactions ever made in the system. The ledger itself is distributed among
all the users, known as nodes or peers, of the system. This ledger is represented
as a linked list of blocks, which each consist of a number of transactions, which
themselves consist of inputs and outputs. The chained structure ensures that
it is possible to trace the data contained in each transaction back to its source.
While blockchains are frequently associated with electronic currencies such as
==PAGE:14==
4
Background
Bitcoin, the items contained in a transaction could be any kind of data describing
something owned by someone, such as a speciﬁc asset, a contract or units of some
currency.
Certain nodes within the network are considered miners. These nodes collect
transactions and pack them into blocks to be added to the blockchain. These
nodes are the backbone of the system and performed the work required for
carrying out transactions.
Other nodes can be considered the ’users’ of the
system. They keep track of the transactions that are of interest to themselves
and can create new transactions to be added to the chain.
Blockchains are trustless networks (see section on blockchain types for excep-
tions) that work on a principle of majority honesty; that is, the majority of
nodes in the network are honest and perform their expected tasks according to
the protocol. As long as the majority of the network remains honest, singular
instances of dishonest nodes will not threaten the security of the system. As a
result of this principle, the larger a blockchain network becomes the more secure
it is, due to the fact that more eﬀort is required to achieve a majority in a larger
system.
This principle is realised partly through a consensus model which is central to
the system. The consensus model ensures that all nodes agree on the state of
the system at any time by imposing the same block validation rules on all nodes.
Assuming that the majority of nodes are honest, the majority of the network
will agree on the same state of the system. Additionally, consensus is achieved
through the simple rule that ’the longest chain is current’, meaning that if any
node ever hears of a chain that is longer than the one they currently know of,
the old chain will be discarded and the new one adopted. Due to this simple
rule, miners will always work on extending the longest chain, which is the second
realising factor of the majority honesty principle. With the majority of miners
being honest, the longest chain will always have been created by honest nodes.
2.1.1
Types of blockchains
Diﬀerent types of blockchains exist and each have fundamentally diﬀerent back-
ing philosophies and purposes. The most well-known type is the public blockchain.
Public blockchains are systems as described above, where any person is able to
enter nodes into the system. Consensus is a distributed eﬀort and no single
node is trusted. On the opposite end of the scale is the private blockchain.[26]
The private blockchain is run by a single authority who can choose exactly who
is allowed access. This is commonly seen when blockchain technology is used to
run internal company system that no public entity has access to. Consensus and
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Bitcoin
5
block veriﬁcation is dictated solely by the authority and share few similarities
with public blockchains other than being a distributed ledger backed by the same
data structure. As an in-between type exists the semi-private blockchain.[31]
The semi-private blockchain shares similarities with the private blockchain in
that it is ultimately run by a single authority, but like a public blockchain al-
lows people to enter nodes into the network with little or no authentication
performed by the authority.
2.2
Bitcoin
The Bitcoin transaction network is the original and most well-known blockchain
system at the time of writing. The system operates the currency of the same
name. Each Bitcoin (shortened BTC), is split into 100 million units known as
Satoshis and it is these units that the underlying system functions on.
2.2.1
Blocks
Bitcoin blocks are deﬁned by their block headers, containing information such
as version number, the hash of the previous block in the chain, the root of a
Merkle tree of transaction IDs, the block diﬃculty (described later) and a nonce
found to satisfy the diﬃculty requirement by the miner. The serialised format
of each block contains the block header and full information of all transactions
stored in the block.
Block
Version
Hash of previous block
Merkle root hash
Hashing start time
Diﬃculty
Nonce
Table 2.1: Outline of a block
2.2.2
Transactions
A Bitcoin transaction has the format shown in ﬁgure X. Each transaction con-
sists of a version number, a number of inputs and outputs and a locktime. The
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
locktime is normally set to be zero, but can be used to set a time until the
transaction can be added to a block, eﬀectively locking the transaction until
then.
Transaction
Version
Number of inputs
List of inputs
Number of outputs
List of outputs
Lock time
Table 2.2: Outline of a transaction
Outputs are deﬁned by the amount of Satoshis to be transferred and a public
key (PubKey) script which deﬁnes who is allowed to spend the output. Inputs
consist of a reference to an output being spent and a signature script, which
can be considered as the counterpart to the script deﬁned in the output and
is used to prove the right to make use of the output. This is similar to public
key cryptography, where the holder of the private key (the signature script) can
decrypt the content that was encrypted by the corresponding public key (the
PubKey script). Additionally, inputs consist of a legacy sequence number which
is no longer used.
A special type of transaction is the coinbase transaction. Each block has exactly
one coinbase transaction, which is deﬁned by having a single input, known as the
coinbase, and is the ﬁrst transaction in the block. This transaction allows the
miner of the block to create and transfer to themselves an amount of coins equal
to the reward given for mining the block. The coinbase transaction serves as the
only means of introducing new coins to the system. The coinbase transaction
also contains a small amount of space which can be used by a miner to write
a message. This is known as the coinbase signature, and is commonly used by
mining pools to identify to the network that a block was mined by a speciﬁc
pool.
2.2.3
Incentives
Bitcoin makes use of a system called Proof-of-Work to validate new block. In
this system, miners spend their own computational power in order to ’mine’
blocks so that they can be added to the chain. Mining involves computing a
hash of the block that fulﬁls certain criteria. A typical criteria is that the hash
must be below a certain value, known as the diﬃculty. The miner continually
adjusts a nonce value until the required hash value has been found. The criteria
can be adjusted, such that the time it takes to mine a block can be controlled.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Mining Pools
7
The Bitcoin protocol automatically adjusts the diﬃculty so that it takes an
average of 10 minutes for the entire system to mine a single block.
Miners don’t spend their own resources out of the goodness of their hearts,
however. They are incentivised through two main functions: block rewards and
transaction fees.[23] When a block is added to the chain, a reward is given to
the miner who successfully managed to compute a hash fulﬁlling the diﬃculty
requirement. The block reward is a set amount coins that are entered into the
system under the ownership of the miner.
This also serves as the only way
that additional coins are added to the system. On top of the block reward,
the miner is also granted transaction fees.
Transaction fees are a voluntary
payment that transaction senders can pay in order to increase the chances that
the transaction is added to a block as quickly as possible. A transaction fee
is added by neglecting to assign all of the Satoshis deﬁned in the transaction
inputs to outputs. Any unspent inputs are considered free to be taken by the
miner.
2.3
Mining Pools
Due to the high reward variance associated with solo mining1, miners frequently
band together into mining pools.[35] Mining pools combine the computational
powers of all of its members, thus increasing the chance of successfully mining
a block. The block reward is then shared among the pool members according
to some payout scheme. Joining a mining pool allows a miner to get frequent
payouts of a small fraction of the full block reward, thus reducing the reward
variance.
2.4
Forking
At times, two block are created by two separate nodes at approximately the
same time. If both blocks are valid, they will both be accepted by the rest of
the network, but only one of them will survive. This is known as a fork in the
chain and for a while there are two competing chains that are both equally valid,
Two diﬀerent blocks added in the same position of the same chain are known
as having the same height in the chain. When miners receive multiple blocks of
the same height, they will continue mining on the ﬁrst block they received and
discard any others. As a result of the consensus model, the ﬁrst chain to have
1It would take the average solo miner several years to successfully mine a single block
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
a new block added to it will become the main chain while the other chain is
forfeit and the miner of the block that created the losing fork loses their block
reward. This activity is a common occurrence in every blockchain protocol and
is handled automatically by the rules in place.
Two other types of forks known as soft and hard forks come about as a result
of updates to the protocol and each have diﬀerent levels of associated risks.
Soft Forks
A soft fork occurs when a protocol update is backwards compatible
in the sense that un-upgraded nodes will accept blocks created by upgraded
nodes. The opposite is not necessarily true, however. Upgraded nodes may
reject blocks created by un-upgraded nodes and continue working on their own
chain. This results in one or more forks in the chain. The old branches of these
forks will usually die out within a short time as blocks from updated nodes are
created and accepted by the old nodes. Soft forks are considered much safer than
hard forks due to the fact that un-updated nodes are not segregated completely
from the new chain. Assuming that the updated nodes hold the majority of the
computational power, the new chain will win and be adopted by all nodes in the
network. Un-updated nodes will be incentivised to update their client or face
being unable to generate any new blocks that will be accepted by the majority of
the network. On the downside, if the updated protocol does not manage to get
adopted by a majority of the computational power in the network, the updated
nodes will be left to work on their own, segregated fork of the chain which will
not be resolved until they either gain a majority of the computational power or
give up and decide to downgrade to the old version and continue on the longer,
old chain.
Figure 2.1: Soft fork: Old nodes accept new blocks, but new nodes don’t
accept old blocks.
Hard Forks
A hard fork, unlike the soft fork, does not have any kind of
backward compatibility with old nodes. As a result, un-updated nodes will reject
the new blocks while the updated nodes will reject the old blocks. Hard forks
are risky, because they risk splitting the network into two completely segregated
==PAGE:19==
2.5 Altcoins
9
network. Protocol developers therefore have to be completely certain that a vast
majority of the nodes are going to update their clients. This can be diﬃcult to
achieve, as some people may refuse to update to the newer version for various
reasons, from technical to political, and others may change their mind at the
last second.
Figure 2.2: Hard fork: Old and new nodes do not accept each others’ blocks
2.5
Altcoins
Bitcoin is the largest, but by far not the only blockchain implementation around.
Other implementations have arisen to solve shortcomings in the Bitcoin protocol
or to ﬁll diﬀerent niches. These alternative implementations are colloquially
called Altcoins, short for Alternative Coins. Many Altcoins are based on the
Bitcoin source code, but with changes that make them incompatible with the
existing Bitcoin blockchain. Due to the shared source code, many of Bicoin’s
quirks and vulnerabilities are shared with these Altcoins. Other Altcoins are
built from the ground up with their own source code. These may have diﬀerent
vulnerabilities to Bitcoin-based systems.
Three well-known Altcoins are listed below:
Etherium
Etherium[21], developed by the nonproﬁt Etherium Foundation,
advertises itself as a decentralised platform that runs smart contracts. Smart
contracts are blockchain-based programs that are executed by the nodes of the
network on demand. The system works on two currencies, known as Ether and
Gas. Ether is the main currency of the system and is what miners are rewarded
for mining blocks. Gas is the currency that is used to pay for having programs
that are stored on the chain executed.
Execution comes at a cost of 1 Gas
per line of code with an additional cost for certain operations such as reading
from or writing data to a block. Gas is bought with Ether at a rate which is
automatically adjusted in order to keep the price of executing software the same
no matter the ﬂuctuations in the value of the currency. Due to the nature of
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
the smart contracts, Etherium has the potential to not only face security risks
in the blockchain program itself, but also in the programs that are stored and
executed on the chain.
Litecoin
Litecoin[30] is one of the more well-known Bitcoin alternatives. The
implementation is based oﬀof the Bitcoin implementation with just two signiﬁ-
cant diﬀerences. Where the Bitcoin protocol aims to produce a new block every
10 minutes, Litcoin aims for a new block every 2.5 minutes. The intention is to
increase the speed at which transactions are processed. The Proof-of-Work algo-
rithm is also replaced with a memory-intensive algorithm in order to invalidate
the use of cheap Application-Speciﬁc Integrated Circuits(ASIC) to improve min-
ing eﬃciency compared to general purpose processing units. Due to the shared
software background, any security measures implemented for Bitcoin will likely
be eﬀective for Litecoin as well.
Bitcoin Cash
Bitcoin Cash[7] came controversially into existence due to in-
creased frustration by certain Bitcoin users in the inability of the community to
agree on how to solve Bitcoin’s capacity issues. Due to the Bitcoin protocol’s
block size limit of 1MB transaction fees and conﬁrmation times have increased
drastically throughout 2017. Bitcoin Cash eliminates the capacity issues by in-
creasing the block size to 8MB. The codebase between the two systems are oth-
erwise mostly identical. Bitcoin Cash’s existence highlights the current volatility
of cryptocurrencies and the need to think many years, even decades ahead in
terms of scalability, maintenance and general philosophy if these currencies are
to be widely adopted.
2.6
Alternatives to Proof-of-Work
The Proof-of-Work algorithm used to generate blocks by continually calculating
hashes is widely used in many blockchain systems and has proven to be an
eﬀective algorithm in adding security to the system. However, the algorithm
has some signiﬁcant downsides both within and outside the blockchain system.
Within the blockchain, the ever-increasing processing power requirement of the
algorithm means that people need to get ever more expensive and specialised
equipment in order to turn a proﬁt. Over time, this trend risks excluding people
with less ﬁnancial resources and leaving mining in the hands of fewer and fewer
large organisations, thus decreasing the level of decentralisation and putting
the system at risk. Outside of the blockchain, the increasing amounts of power
required to run mining nodes has a signiﬁcant negative environmental impact.
==PAGE:21==
2.6 Alternatives to Proof-of-Work
11
At the time of writing, the estimated annual power consumption of the Bitcoin
network lies at approximately 33TWh, about the same annual level of power
consumption as Denmark or 0.14% of the world.[15] Alternative algorithms have
been proposed, and to a certain extent implemented in Altcoins, which attempt
to provide security for the network at a signiﬁcantly smaller real-world cost.
Proof-of-Stake
In the Proof-of-Stake model[2], peers create blocks using spe-
cial transactions with an amount of coins to a certain address. The coins sent
in the transaction are not lost to the sender, but are instead counted, according
to some formula, as the peer’s stake in creating the next block. In general, the
more coins a peer sends in the transaction, the higher the chance of them being
given the privilege of creating the next block and earning the reward. Proof-of-
Stake comes in many diﬀerent variations, but few have been implemented in a
publicly available blockchain. A signiﬁcant problem that many Proof-of-Stake
algorithms face is the Nothing-at-stake problem, which is the problem that if a
fork occurs in the chain, nothing prevents a peer from trying to build on both
forks at the same time. Since each fork has its own view of available coins and
transactions, it is possible to send the special transaction in the context of both
forks at the same time. In the Proof-of-Work algorithm this would require the
peer to split its computational power, eﬀectively halving its contribution to each
fork.
Proof-of-Capacity
In Proof-of-Capacity, also known as Proof-of-Space, a
memory intensive process is used rather than a CPU intensive one. In essence,
Proof-of-Capacity algorithms involve miners committing a part of their storage
space to store certain data based on an underlying algorithm. Miners provide
proof that they’ve committed their memory by responding to challenges to send
randomly chosen parts of the stored data to a veriﬁer node.[33] Depending on
the amount of memory reserved, miners have a certain chance to be allowed to
create the next block.
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Survey
In this section we perform a survey of known vulnerabilities and attack vectors
on blockchain-based technologies.
We consider a collection of known attacks against the Bitcoin network and their
solutions, as presented in [10] and discuss methods of letting every node in the
entire network protect each other against these attacks.
3.1
The 51% Attack
One of the most discussed attacks when it comes to blockchain-based technolo-
gies is the 51% attack, where an attacker controls a majority (that is, 51% or
more) of the processing power. Due to the nature of the consensus model (the
longest chain is right), controlling the majority of the processing power means
controlling which blocks are added to the chain and thus also which transactions
are added.While other miners might get a foothold in holding the longest chain
in the short term, the attacker’s chain will eventually overtake any alternative
chains.
Having such control allows the attacker to eﬀortlessly double-spend coins and
in general control what is and what is not added to the chain. However, such
==PAGE:24==
14
Survey
activity is likely to make people lose conﬁdence in Bitcoin system, decreasing
the value of the currency and therefore impacting the value of the attack for the
attacker. There is little point in controlling a currency that holds no value.
An attacker would therefore have to be careful not to disturb the ecosystem of
the currency and while it may be possible for an attacker to hide the fact that
they control a majority of the mining capability, the restraint required is likely
to make the attack unproﬁtable.[29] Instead, the attacker may be attempting
a Goldﬁnger attack in which the goal is entirely destructive.
Many entities
are opposed to Bitcoin, especially governments who wish to maintain control
over the currencies used to trade goods within their borders.
A suﬃciently
motivated state-sponsored attack could perform a 51% attack with the intention
of destroying the value of the currency and the trust that people have in it.
Due to the signiﬁcant attention that this attack has received, many solution have
been proposed. However, none of these solutions have been implemented due
to a combination of complexity in implementing such a change and discussion
about whether such an attack is a realistic threat.[8]
Some of the proposed solutions include the Two Phase Proof of Work, TwinsCoin
and PieceWork.
The Two Phase Proof of Work[18] solution involves adding another layer of
computations on top of the existing one which has to be signed using a private
key. This solution will present pool owners with the dilemma of either having to
trust their members with the private key or to perform the computation them-
selves with their own hardware. The diﬃculty of this second computation can
potentially be adjusted by the protocol in order to disincentivise the formation
of large mining pools that hold a majority of the mining power[4].
TwinsCoin[9] is an implementation which combines the Proof of Work and Proof
of Stake algorithms into a system in which two connected blockchains, one
holding Proof of Work blocks and one holding Proof of Stake blocks are extended
alongside each other. Miner’s can extend the Proof of Work chain using their
computational power, but cannot extend it further before a stakeholder node
is selected to extend the Proof of Work chain. Since mining pools share their
proﬁts among all their members, they’re likely to have a much smaller share of
currency than they have computational power and thus preventing them from
holding a controlling share in the consensus model.
PieceWork[13] splits the hashing process into multiple steps and only allows for
a conﬁgurable part of the steps to be outsourced to other miners. This forces
mining pools to have to own a signiﬁcant portion of the computational power
themselves in order to discover new blocks.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Double-spending
15
Just like any other democratic process requiring a majority consensus, blockchain
technologies are at risk of losing their decentralisation when a majority of its
voting shares are controlled by a single entity. Likely, the problem cannot be
completely eradicated and the risk can only be reduced through implementation
details.
3.2
Double-spending
One of the biggest issues facing blockchain-based digital currencies is how to
prevent users from spending their coins multiple times. A common advice when
dealing with Bitcoins is that one should wait for 6 conﬁrmations before releasing
any goods to a purchaser. However, since waiting for 6 conﬁrmations takes ap-
proximately 1 hour, this does not work under circumstances in which a customer
would expect a faster service, such as when purchasing items at a physical store
using a Bitcoin-accepting paypoint. In these cases vendors forced to take the
risk of accepting fast transactions, also known as 0-conﬁrmation transactions,
in which the vendor merely conﬁrms that a transaction has been broadcast, but
does not wait for it to be included in a block. This is risky for the vendor, since
coins are essentially not spent by the customer before they have been included
in a block and nothing prevents them from spending the same coins again some-
where else. This is known as double-spending and is the ﬁnal goal of many
blockchain-based attacks.
One solution to prevent successful double spending attacks against vendors using
fast transactions is proposed in [27] and [28]. Here, peers in the network continue
to forward and propagate transactions using inputs that have already been spent
to the rest of the network. Normally, such transactions would simply be dropped
by the receiving node without performing any further action. By spreading the
transaction to the rest of the network, the probability that the vendor receives
both of the conﬂicting transactions within a few seconds is very high and can
therefore be made aware of the illicit activity.
3.2.1
Finney Attack
A Finney attack is an attack ﬁrst considered by Bitcoin contributor Hal Finney[20]
which involves a malicious miner withholding a pre-mined block containing a
transaction from themselves to themselves and then broadcasting a new transac-
tion, going to a vendor that accepts 0-conﬁrmation transactions, using the same
inputs as the ones in the pre-mined block. When the attacker has conﬁrmed the
==PAGE:26==
16
Survey
release of goods by the vendor, they immediately release the pre-mined block to
the network, which will be added to the blockchain before the second transaction
of processed. The attack is carried out as follows:
1. Attacker A creates a transaction TxA going to an address controlled by A
itself, but does not broadcast this transaction to the network.
2. A mines a block containing TxA, but does not broadcast it.
3. A contacts vendor V who accepts 0-conﬁrmation transactions and sets up
a transaction TxV for purchasing some goods and broadcasts it to the
network.
4. V receives the transaction from one or more nodes in the network and
releases the goods to A.
5. A, having received the goods, now broadcasts the pre-mined block con-
taining TxA to the network and it is immediately added to the blockchain
by the rest of the nodes.
6. TxV will now be rejected by the network, as its inputs have already been
spent and V will not receive any payment.
The only known solution to this attack is for the vendor to wait for at least 1
conﬁrmation. This, however is not feasible for vendors who accept fast payments
who will have to take the risk.
This attack is potentially expensive for the
attacker, as they risk losing the block reward by withholding a mined block.
Therefore, this attack is, in general, infeasible to use for micro-transactions,
which is the majority of 0-conﬁrmation transactions.
3.2.2
Vector76 attack
A double-spend attack against bitcoin exchanges accepting transactions with
1 conﬁrmation was theorised by forum user vector76[39] after the Bitcoin ex-
change Mybitcoin.com released a statement claiming to have been the victim of
a 1-conﬁrmation attack.[5] Similar to the Finney attack, this attack requires the
attacker to pre-mine a block containing a transaction which has not been broad-
cast to the network. This valid transaction contains instructions to deposit a
large amount of bitcoin from the attacker into the target exchange. At the same
time, the attacker works on establishing direct connections to the target node as
well as most of the bitcoin pools. This can be done by observing how broadcasts
propagate through the network and homing in on the nodes that broadcast the
most new blocks. This achieves two things:
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Malicious Mining Strategies
17
1. The attacker can broadcast the pre-mined block directly to the target.
2. The attacker is one of the ﬁrst nodes to know when a new block has been
added to the chain.
The attack plays out as follows:
1. Attacker A pre-mines block BA containing transaction TD depositing a
large amount of bitcoins to exchange E.
2. A waits until another block BP is broadcast and then immediately broad-
casts BA to E, thereby creating a fork in the chain.
3. E receives BA before BP and believes that it has receives a transaction
which already has 1 conﬁrmation and therefore processes it.
4. A requests a withdrawal of the large sum of bitcoins that it just deposited
with E, who therefore creates transaction TW going to A.
5. When the newly created fork is resolved, one of two things happen:
BA wins -
Both TD and TW are valid and the attacker ends up with the
exact same amount of coins as it started with.
BP wins -
TD is invalidated, but TW remains valid as long as none of the
inputs from TD were used, thus resulting in E sending free bitcoins
to A.
The simplest counter to this attack is to simply wait for additional conﬁrmations,
as the attacker is only able to spoof one conﬁrmation to the victim.
3.3
Malicious Mining Strategies
While miners are encouraged to remain honest through the incentives that they
gain by following the protocol, greedy miners will inevitably attempt to gain
an unfair share of the reward compared to the amount of CPU time that they
have contributed. A number of strategies can be used by miners forming part
of mining pools to increase their share of the income being distributed by the
pool owners or to reduce the reward share gained by the entire pool. While
such subversive strategies may seem tempting to individual miners to maximise
their earnings, widespread use of such strategies will most likely hurt the entire
network.
==PAGE:28==
18
Survey
3.3.1
Selﬁsh Mining
Selﬁsh mining, as described in [19], is a strategy in which a selﬁsh mining pool
refrains from publishing newly discovered blocks in order to waste the compu-
tational power of the rest of the network while the pool continues mining on
its own private fork in the hopes of gaining a further lead. If the pool is lucky
enough to get a lead of two blocks or more, it will be able to invalidate the work
that other miners have performed on what they believe to be the main chain.
If the pool is unlucky, it will lose its lead, in which case it may lose the reward
for the block that it kept private.
The strategy is outlined below:
1. Selﬁsh mining pool P starts out mining the main chain along with the rest
of the honest miners which we will call H.
2. When P discovers a block BP , it will not publish it, but will instead
continue to mine on its own private chain.
3. One of two things will happen:
(a) H also discovers a new block from the main chain and publishes it to
the network. P sees this and immediately publishes BP as well, in
the hopes the H will adopt it so that P will get its reward. P then
restarts from step 1.
(b) P discovers another block BP2 and adds it to its own chain without
publishing it and continues to mine on the same chain.
4. P and H continue to mine on their separate chains.
(a) If P discovers a new block BPx, it will publish block BPx−2 in order
to gain the reward on the main chain. Both continue mining on their
separate chains.
(b) If H discovers a new block, thereby bringing Ps lead down to 1, P
will publish its entire chain for a guaranteed reward of two blocks.
The strategy now restarts from step 1.
The main goal of selﬁsh mining is therefore to waste as much of the honest
nodes’ time mining blocks that the miner has already discovered.
The paper theorises that if half of the honest miners work on BP in step 3a.
the attack will be proﬁtable if the subversive mining pool controls 25% of the
hashing power of the network. This strategy therefore requires a substantial
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Malicious Mining Strategies
19
part of the total hashing power of the network to be proﬁtable, unless the pool
is able to propagate its own blocks to more than half of the honest nodes.
The paper suggests, as a solution to the attack, that mining nodes should pick a
random block to continue mining on when faced with multiple choices. This will
statistically bound the required hashing power of the subversive pool to 25%.
The ZeroBlock implementation proposed in [37] seeks to prevent selﬁsh mining
attacks by enabling the honest miners to reject blocks that have been withheld.
They do this by generating and appending empty dummy blocks to the chain
at a speciﬁed maximum interval in which no new block has been discovered.
Subsequent blocks that are added to the chain must include the dummy blocks
in their hash or face rejection. This will prevent a subversive mining pool from
broadcasting a previously mined block after the dummy block has been added.
3.3.2
Block Withholding
Block withholding/discarding describes a set of attacks that involve withholding
or discarding blocks that were mined in a pool in order to reduce the pool’s
income.
It is generally considered a purely destructive attack in which the
attacker has no ﬁnancial incentive.
In the block withholding attack proposed by [12], a subversive group of miners
abuse other mining pool reward schemes in order to reduce other pools’ total
income while increasing the income of a pool controlled by the attacking miners.
In this attack, it is assumed that mining pools pay their participants propor-
tionally to how much computational power they have contributed.
The attack has the following characteristics:
1. A group of subversive miners controlling V % of the total hashing power
splits into two groups of size n
2 %, MA and MB.
2. MA continue mining in their own private pool as normal while MB spread
out among all other mining pools.
3. Members of MB mine within their assigned pools and supply proof of the
work they have performed to their respective pool managers in order to
gain rewards according to the pool’s reward scheme. However, MB will
discard any blocks that they successfully discover.
==PAGE:30==
20
Survey
By discarding discovered blocks, the subversive miners do nothing to increase
the total income of the other mining pools while gaining the same reward for
contributing as the rest of the honest miners. This is due to the proof of work
that they have submitted while ﬁnding hashes that did not satisfy the require-
ments.
The combined reduction of block output by other mining pools result in a per-
ceived increase in income for the group of miners, MA that have continued
mining in their own pool.
The paper shows that if the attack is performed
by a group of miners controlling 20% of the total hashing power, they will be
able to gain a 6% increase in income due to receiving undue pool rewards while
privately mining at full capacity.
The authors of the paper see no defence against this attack other than only
including trusted miners into mining pools and closing down pools the moment
proﬁts reduce below the expectational threshold.
A solution to the attack is presented by [3] which uses ’cryptographic com-
mitments’ that make it impossible for individual miners to determine if they
have found a block that fully or only partially fulﬁl the requirements to be a
valid block. In this solution, pool managers are able decide what the leading
bits of the proof-of-work should be in a manner that is veriﬁable by the rest
of the network and which does not reduce the diﬃculty of the computation.
Miners in the pool who discover a block with a hash of z′ leading zeroes where
z′ < z|z = number of leading bits required by the Bitcoin protocol have to send
their solution to the pool manager in order to get the reward, but only the
pool manager will be able to tell if this is a partial or full proof-of-work. It is
therefore impossible for subversive miners to send in partial proofs in order to
get rewards without also sending in full proofs.
3.4
Transaction Malleability
A ﬂaw in the current Bitcoin protocol means that transactions are susceptible to
malleability attacks.[1] In short, cryptographic malleability occurs when, based
on a given ciphertext, it is possible to calculate another ciphertext that is in
some way related to the ﬁrst. Transaction malleability is possible within Bitcoin
due to the fact that transaction identiﬁers are hashes calculated from the whole
transaction, including the attached signature scripts.
Since it is possible to
create semantically identical, yet syntactically diﬀerent signatures, it is possible
to generate multiple transactions that are semantically identical (i.e. both create
a transaction from Bitcoin address A to B using the same inputs), but have
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Transaction Malleability
21
diﬀerent transaction identiﬁers. This enables attackers to perform a form of
double-spending attack, in which an attacker requests an entity, such as a Bitcoin
exchange, to create a transaction sending the attacker a number of coins. The
attacker can exploit transaction malleability to get a diﬀerent, but semantically
identical transaction conﬁrmed within the blockchain while claiming that the
original transaction failed. The exchange will be inclined to credit the attacker
the sent amount of coin or to retry the transaction, thereby doubling the amount
received by the attacker.
A transaction malleability attack is carried out in the following steps:
1. Attacker A requests to withdraw an amount of coins that they have stored
at Bitcoin exchange E.
2. E creates a transaction Tx with transaction ID Txid sending the requested
amount to A.
3. A sees the transaction and creates a new transaction TxA which is a
modiﬁed version of Tx.
TxA is semantically identical to Tx, but has
transaction ID TxidA. A broadcasts TxA to the network.
4. One of two things happen:
Tx is accepted:
A receives the requested amount of coins through the
original transaction. The attack failed, but A has lost nothing and is
free to try again.
TxA is accepted:
A receives the requested amount of coins through the
modiﬁed transaction. A complains to E that Tx failed. E veriﬁes the
claim by looking for Tx within the block chain, but does not ﬁnd it
and therefore credits A the amount of coins that are ’owed’ or retries
the transaction.
The transaction malleability attack gained a lot of attention within the Bitcoin
community as well as the general media when it was allegedly used to steal
850.000 bitcoins from the MtGox bitcoin exchange.[14]
The attack can be detected by verifying transactions through more means than
just the transaction ID, such as by monitoring all inputs and outputs relating to
a speciﬁc wallet. Most well-known wallet clients are able to detect and handle
the attack correctly and detects the correct amount of coins that have left the
wallet, but the attack is still possible within the Bitcoin protocol due to requiring
a major code change.
==PAGE:32==
22
Survey
The Segregated Witness (SegWit) soft-fork protocol upgrade proposed in Bit-
coin Improvement Proposal (BIP) 141 solves transaction malleability by sepa-
rating the malleable signature from the rest of the transaction for supporting
clients.[17] By removing the signature from the transaction ID hash calculation,
transactions that are semantically identical will have the same transaction ID.
Clients that do not upgrade to the BIP141 implementation will still be vulner-
able, however.
3.5
Time Jacking
The Bitcoin protocol makes use of a time synchronisation protocol in which a
node’s network time is determined from the median time reported by the nodes
it is connected to. A node will reject any block that it receives with a timestamp
outside of a speciﬁed acceptable threshold (currently set to a deviation of two
hours from the node’s time). A timejacking attack[11] exploits the synchroni-
sation protocol through a sybil attack in order to skew a certain node’s time to
make it reject blocks which are otherwise accepted by the rest of the network.
This enables an attacker to waste the attacked node’s computational power as
well as enabling double spending attacks.
1. Attacker A connects directly to the victim node V using a number of peers
with diﬀerent IP addresses.
2. A’s nodes report inaccurate timestamps to V , forcing a large time devi-
ation between V and the rest of the network. The maximum deviation
allowed before a node resets to using local time is currently set to 70
minutes, so that attacker can, for example, lower V ’s time to 70 minutes
before the rest of the network.
3. A also establishes connections to a majority of the rest of the network and
speeds up their network time by 70 minutes, making for a diﬀerence of
140 minutes between V and the network.
4. A works on creating a new block with a timestamp set 190 minutes ahead
of the real current time. Due to the fact that nodes drop blocks that carry
a timestamp that deviates by more than 2 hours from the node’s own time
V would drop the block as its timestamp would be 260 minutes past V ’s
network time. The rest of the network accepts the block as its timestamp
is still within acceptable deviation of their sped-up time. V has now been
isolated from the rest of the network for as long as the time skewing is
kept up by A. New blocks created by the network will also be rejected by
V , as their network times are more than 120 minutes ahead of V .
==PAGE:33==
3.6 DDoS
23
5. During the time that V is isolated from the network, A can feed V false
blocks containing transaction conﬁrmations that A knows will be reverted
by the main chain later on. If V is a vendor, it would likely send its goods
to A, as it will believe that the received transactions are valid and have
been conﬁrmed multiple times.
More elaborate version of the attack exist, such as taking down the victim node
through a DoS attack while the attacker prepares an alternate chain with fake
transaction conﬁrmations and skewing the rest of the network and main block
chain timestamps ahead in time. When the victim node comes back online it will
receive the main chain, which it will consider invalid due to being too far in the
future compared to the timestamps received by its connected peers which are
controlled by the attacker. It will also receive the alternative chain constructed
by the attacker which, to the victim, has an acceptable timestamp.
Multiple solutions to the problem have been proposed, including using NTP
timestamps1, basing network time on block timestamps rather than peer-reported
times and tightening the acceptable time deviation. Each solution has issues re-
garding handling normal deviation that occurs in a decentralised network or
would require larger changes. As such, no solution has been implemented to
date.
3.6
DDoS
As with any networked system, blockchain protocols are vulnerable to Denial-of-
Service attacks from threat actors intent on slowing or completely taking down
the entire network or individual peers within the network. Many known DoS
attacks performed against the Bitcoin network are focused on the exchanges
and the larger mining pools.[38] Most of these attacks are performed outside of
the blockchain protocol, for example against the web services of coin exchanges
in order to deny the service from the customers. Some DoS attacks are per-
formed using vulnerabilities within the protocol, such as exploiting transaction
malleability in order to ﬂood the system with seemingly diﬀerent transaction,
forcing miners to verify each transaction individually before being able to deter-
mine that they are invalid. These attacks take many forms and are performed
with diﬀerent intentions, but are all characterised by ﬂooding a number of target
nodes with unnecessary work to the beneﬁt of an attacker.
General protections against DoS attacks against single peers include blocking
1Network Time Protocol
==PAGE:34==
24
Survey
IPs, however this is easily circumvented by attackers by distributing the attack
source between multiple IPs. DoS attacks that focus on ﬂooding the network
with transaction are made expensive by the use of transaction fees. An attacker
would also have to control many diﬀerent transaction outputs, as spending the
same output multiple times before the ﬁrst transaction has been conﬁrmed will
render subsequent transactions invalid and therefore limit their spread through-
out the network. Some DoS attacks can be mitigated by ﬁxing exploits that
require nodes to perform extra work based on received data by the attackers.
3.7
Eclipse Attack
Eclipse attacks focus on monopolising a certain node’s connections with IPs
controlled by an attacker and thereby ’eclipsing’ the victim from the rest of the
network.[25] A successful eclipse attack opens up several opportunities for an
attacker to exploit a victim node, including wasting the victim’s computational
power on a blockchain that is separate from the main network, double spending
with multiple conﬁrmations and, with a fraction of all network nodes eclipsed,
splitting the network in order to make it simpler to perform 51% attacks.
In order to successfully eclipse a node, an attacker has to control all the peers
that the victim is connected to. The default conﬁguration for the Bitcoin Core
client allow 117 incoming 8 outgoing connections. An attacker therefore has to
connect to the victim with 125 diﬀerent IPs in order to eclipse them.
The incoming connections of the victim can be taken by the attacker simply
by continuously attempting to connect until all the connections are used up.
The outgoing connections present more of a problem for an attacker, since the
victim gets to choose who to connect to. Since the victim won’t know which
IPs are controlled by an attacker they won’t actively try to avoid connecting to
them. However, the victim has a potentially very large pool of IPs to choose
from, so the probability that the attacker’s IPs are picked is small. The attacker
therefore has to make sure that most, if not all, potential IPs are controlled by
them.
Bitcoin nodes keep lists of tried and new addresses in order to establish and
keep a stable connection to the network. Addresses in the tried list have had a
successful connection to the node before while addresses in the new list have not
yet been connected to, but are available in case they’re needed. The tried list can
contain 3968 addresses while the new list can contain 16384. It would therefore
appear that the attacker needs to control over 20.000 addresses in order to
ensure a successful eclipse of the victim. This is made even more diﬃcult by the
==PAGE:35==
3.8 Tampering With Delivery
25
fact that addresses are added based on their hash values and diﬀerent addresses
might map into the same spot in the list. Luckily for the attacker, addresses in
the new list are not actually checked by the victim upon receiving them while
addresses can be added to the tried list simply by establishing a connection
to the victim. It is therefore possible for the attacker to ﬁll the victim’s new
list with garbage addresses through several Bitcoin ADDR2 messages without
having to worry too much about the victim attempting to establish a connection
to them.
Several countermeasures suggested in [25] have already been implemented into
the Bitcoin protocol. These countermeasures are designed to decrease the like-
lihood of an attacker monopolising all potential connections by increasing the
degree of randomness in the way outgoing connection are selected to, increasing
the determinism in how addresses are stored in the tried and new lists and by
increasing the size of the list, thus requiring more addresses to ﬁll them up.
Despite the improvements made to the implementation, it will always be possible
for a determined attacker to monopolise the connections of a victim in order to
exploit them.
3.8
Tampering With Delivery
The Bitcoin protocol allows some tolerance when it comes to peers with bad
connections, but also implements timeouts for the transfer of transactions and
blocks in order to avoid stuck connections. In the current Bitcoin Core imple-
mentation these timeouts are set to 20 minutes for block transfers and 2 minutes
for transactions. A delivery tampering attack utilises the implemented timeout
values in order to delay the receipt of new blocks by a victim node.[22] This
is done simply by having an attacker establish a connection with the intention
of transferring a given block, but refraining from doing. The victim node will
wait until the connection times out before attempting to retrieve the block from
a diﬀerent peer. For this attack to be successful, it is a requirement that the
attacker is the ﬁrst to advertise a new block to the victim. Once advertised,
the victim will not attempt to retrieve the same block from a diﬀerent peer
in order to reduce network congestion. The attacker has a good probability of
being the ﬁrst to advertise the block to the victim by having a direct connection
to the victim and by skipping the veriﬁcation of a newly received block before
advertising it. This will give the attacker a time advantage compared to honest
2ADDR messages holding up to 1000 addresses each are sent between peers in order to
increase the interconnectedness of the network
==PAGE:36==
26
Survey
nodes that will verify all transactions in the block before advertising it to its
peers.
A more advanced version of the attack allows the attacker to deny the receipt
of subsequent blocks by the victim, thereby extending the amount of time that
the victim spends waiting for receipt of new blocks. The attacker achieves this
by monopolising all the victim’s remaining incoming connections and therefore
preventing the initial exchange of blockchain state that is performed between
peers upon establishing a new connection. The attack can then be prolonged
for as long as the attacker is the ﬁrst the advertise new blocks to the victim.
The attack can be used to waste miner resources as well as double-spending by
sending out two transaction spending the same input, one transferring the coins
to the victim and the other transferring them to an attacker-owned address. By
denying the delivery of the transaction going to the attacker itself, the victim will
believe that only one transaction took place. For a fast transaction, the victim
will be inclined to release its goods before learning of the double-spending.
Suggested countermeasures to this attack includes making use of alternative re-
lay networks, so that blockhain information is obtained outside of the Bitcoin
protocol. Alternatively, the victim can operate several nodes, increasing the
likelihood that an honest peer will establish a connection ﬁrst. It is also pro-
posed that the protocol is changed so that instead of the initial exchange of an
inv message containing an inventory of blocks, the block headers of new blocks
should be sent directly, allowing the victim to be informed of new blocks im-
mediately upon receipt. This comes at the cost of increased protocol overhead,
since the block header is larger than the inv message.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
A self-regulation Incentive
Model
In this section we will propose a model for implementing self-regulation in
blockchains, from detection, notiﬁcation and remediation of threats, to the
subsequent reward given out to the peer responsible for the initial detection as
part of the incentive for all peers in the network to work on reducing malicious
activity.
This model therefore has four stages, as pointed out in bold above. The self-
regulation system is to run on each peer in the network as part of the reference
implementation of the blockchain system. Diﬀerent peers are responsible for
diﬀerent stages.
Detection of threats can be carried out in the background
by any nodes connected to the network which receives transaction and block
updates.
Methods of detecting diﬀerent threats are deﬁned in the reference
implementation in the form of signatures, potentially as a separately updated
module that alternative implementations can make use of. Once a threat has
been detected, a node will send out a notiﬁcation to the rest of the network
with details about the threat. Miners, as the creators of new blocks to be added
to the chain, receive notiﬁcations and verify them based on the signature and
the information received. Diﬀerent steps may be required to verify each type
of signature, which will be deﬁned by the mutual implementation of all nodes.
Upon successful veriﬁcation by the miner, appropriate remediation steps (if any)
are carried out as deﬁned by the signature. Lastly, the peer that ﬁrst detected
==PAGE:38==
28
A self-regulation Incentive Model
the threat will be rewarded through some incentive process which we will propose
and discuss multiple alternatives of.
In private or semi-private blockchains,
detection messages may be received and handled by authority-controlled peers,
rather than miners.
Figure 4.1: Workﬂow of general incentive system
4.1
Detection
The complexity of detecting malicious behaviour varies depending on the speciﬁc
type behaviour that is being looked for. Based on the survey we have performed,
we will discuss methods of detecting malicious behaviours and determine which
are suitable for being reliably detected by an automated system. Not all attacks
are detectable as they occur, but retroactive detections may be used to detect
previous occurrences of those attacks. Not all attacks can be detected easily,
especially long-term distributed attacks which have negligible or no direct eﬀect
on individual peers or attacks that mainly take place outside of the blockchain.
Such attacks may only be detectable by multiple peers working together and
correlating their data to ﬁnd such suspicious activity.
4.1.1
Double-spending Attacks
This section details methods of detection for attacks involving double-spend
transactions. These types of attacks primarily aﬀect just a single peer within the
network. Double-spend attacks are the main target for incentivised detections
due to being possible to reliably detect and remediate.
4.1.1.1
Basic Double-spending
The basic double-spending attack is quite basic and easy to detect for a single
peer. However, an attacker might make eﬀorts to conceal the double-spend by
attempting to isolate the victim or releasing the double-spending transaction
after the victim has released their goods. Having a signiﬁcant amount of the
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Detection
29
peers of the network search for and report on double-spend attempts can help
in reducing the chance of a successful attack.
Detecting a double-spend attack simply involves keeping an eye on which trans-
action inputs are used across all known transaction that are current in-memory.
If duplicate input transaction are seen this indicates an attempted double-spend.
While a double-spend is always invalid activity, it does not necessarily mean that
it is done with malicious intent as bugs and misconﬁgurations in the client may
result in reusing the same inputs.
Pseudo-code for detecting basic double-spends can be seen below.
1 I = l i s t
of
t r a n s a ct i o n
inputs
2
i f
new
t r a n sa c t i o n Tx
i s
received
from
network
3
f o r
each
input
i
in Tx
4
i f
I . contains ( i )
5
double−spend
detected
6
e l s e
7
I . put ( i )
8
i f
new block
i s
receiv ed
from
network
9
I . c l e a r ()
Listing 4.1: Pseudocode for detection of basic double-spend attack.
4.1.1.2
Finney Attack
While the Finney attack is as simple to detect as a regular double-spending
attack, the problem faced by the victim is that the second part of the attack
only takes places after goods have been released. The victim therefore still risks
losing their goods. The attack can be detected immediately after the attacker
releases the pre-mined block, however. This is done by checking whether any
inputs spent in the broadcast block match any inputs of currently unconﬁrmed
transactions. If such a correlation is found, it indicates that a Finney attack
has occurred.
1 T = l i s t
of
t r a n s a c t i o n s
2 I = l i s t
of
t r a n s a ct i o n
inputs
3
i f
new
t r a n sa c t i o n Tx
i s
received
from
network
4
T. put (Tx)
5
f o r
each
input
i
in
t r a n s a c t i on Tx
6
I . put ( i )
7
i f
new block B i s
received
from
network
8
f o r
each
t r a n s a c t i on Tx in B
9
i f T. contains (Tx)
10
T. remove (Tx)
// Remove
l e g i t i m a t e
t r a n s a c t i o n s
that
have
been
included
in
a new block
11
e l s e
==PAGE:40==
30
A self-regulation Incentive Model
12
f o r
each
input
i
in Tx
13
i f
I . contains ( i )
14
double−spend
detected
Listing 4.2: Pseudocode for detection of Finney double-spend attack.
4.1.1.3
Vector76 Attack
The best way to detect the Vector76 attack is for a peer to compare all the
transactions of two blocks of the same height (i.e. have the same parent block)
that have been received within a short amount of time. Every transaction that
is unique to its own block is at risk of being a part of a Vector76 attack. It
is only possible to detect potential Vector76 attacks. In the cases where two
blocks have been mined within close proximity to each other, thus creating a
fork, a number of transactions are bound to not be included in both blocks.
It is unlikely that all or even any at all of the transactions are being used in a
double-spend attack, since such forks naturally happen from time to time due to
random chance. However, detecting the occurrence of such a fork and warning
peers of the event will make them aware of the existence of a potential risk and
allow them to act upon it. An actual Vector76 attack could be prevented if an
attacked Bitcoin exchange decided to cancel all outgoing transactions until the
fork has been resolved.
1 Bc = current
l a t e s t
block
of
chain
2
i f
new block B i s
received
from
network
3
i f B has same
block
height
as Bc
4
f o r
each
t r a n s a c t i on Tx in B
5
i f
not Bc . contains (Tx)
6
p o s s i b l e
double−spend
detected
Listing 4.3: Pseudocode for detection of potential Vector76 double-spend
attack.
4.1.1.4
Transaction Malleability
Detecting the transaction malleability attack for peers who are still susceptible
to it can be done simply by comparing the transaction inputs and outputs
of all transactions received. If the inputs and outputs are identical, but the
transaction IDs diﬀer, the malleability of the transaction has been abused.
1 T = l i s t
of
t r a n s a c t i o n s
2
i f
new
t r a n s a c t i o n Tx
i s
received
from
network
3
i f
not T. contains (Tx)
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Detection
31
4
f o r
each
t r a n s a c t i on
Tx1 in T
5
i f
Tx . inputs = Tx1 . inputs
and Tx . outputs = Tx1 . outputs
6
t r a n s ac t i o n
m a l l e a b i l i t y
e x p l o i t a t i o n
detected
7
e l s e
8
T. put (Tx)
9
i f
new block
i s
receiv ed
from
network
10
T. c l e a r ()
Listing 4.4: Pseudocode for detection of potential Vector76 double-spend
attack.
4.1.2
Other Attacks
This section details methods of detecting attacks that do not involve double-
spending, but otherwise negatively aﬀects a peer or the entirety of the network.
Detection and remediation of these types of attacks are generally more of a
collaborative eﬀort than the double-spend attacks and will require multiple ag-
gregated detections and collaborative remediation eﬀorts. Some attacks which
purposefully violate the limits of the blockchain protocol in order to gain an
unfair advantage or exclude target peers from the rest of the network, can be
detected by a single peer.
4.1.2.1
The 51% Attack
The 51% attack cannot easily be detected, both by individual peers or by other
means which take a more holistic view of the blockchain system. The main
diﬃculty lies in the fact that it is very diﬃcult to determine which peers are
controlled by the same entity. The size of individual mining pools are measured
by the percentage of blocks conﬁrmed to be mined by each pool. This can be
identiﬁed by keeping track of known addresses operated by each pool and by the
coinbase signature added to each block. It is possible for an actor to mask their
hashing power by using multiple diﬀerent IP and blockchain addresses as well as
diﬀerent coinbase signatures. However, suspicion may be raised if a signiﬁcant
number of unknown blocks start appearing even if no speciﬁc actor can be
identiﬁed. Even if an attempt was made to spoof the coinbase signature of the
other known mining pools, there would be a discrepancy between the signature
and the known blockchain addresses associated with the spoofed mining pools.
This analysis can be performed by any peer of the network, but little action
can be taken against such an attack and the data would be of more interest to
observers of the system to identify actors within the system.
==PAGE:42==
32
A self-regulation Incentive Model
4.1.2.2
DoS
Blockchain clients generally already implement basic DoS protections to pre-
vent attacks against single nodes. Likewise, for attacks against the entirety of
the network, transaction fees help in making the cost of the attack signiﬁcant.
A threat may still be presented by a government-backed actor with the only
intention of disrupting the network, however. Detecting such an attack would
require associating IP and blockchain addresses with the threat actor in ques-
tion. No individual peer of the network would be able to detect such an attack.
Instead, a collaboration between nodes exchanging status messages about the
IP and blockchain addresses of transactions identiﬁed as spam may help indi-
vidual nodes determine what traﬃc to block and thereby halt the ﬂood of traﬃc
throughout the network. Such a collaborative approach to DDOS prevention
may be a project unto itself, but could have a beneﬁcial eﬀect upon the network
if implemented in a reliable manner.
4.1.2.3
Malicious Mining Strategies
Selﬁsh mining strategies can be detected by looking for nodes which appear to
broadcast blocks in response to block broadcasts from other peers, especially if
those blocks appear to be higher than those known to the rest of the network.
Detection of selﬁsh mining can be made further diﬃcult by a threat actor con-
cealing their activity behind multiple IP and blockchain addresses.
4.1.2.4
Tampering With Delivery, Time Jacking and the Eclipse At-
tack
Tampering, time jacking and eclipsing peers would be diﬃcult to detect both
for a single peer alone, as well as with the help of the remaining network. This
is due to the generally targeted nature of these attacks, which are meant to be
diﬃcult to detect by the target peer. An indication of a targeted attack may
be obtained with the help of the rest of the network. For example, by sharing
connection statistics, a victim node may learn that a peer is tampering with
the delivery of blocks if other nodes report normal activity from the attacking
node. However, this is, at best, a weak indication for the target node and such
a detection would not ﬁt into the Detect -> Notify -> Remediate -> Reward
model, as no other peer would be able to verify that such an attack is taking
place. For the time jacking and eclipse attacks, the peer may be completely
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Notiﬁcation
33
disconnected from the rest of the network and therefore unable to contact an
honest node.
4.1.2.5
Summary
Based on our analysis of attack detection it is clear that transactions attacks
have the greatest potential for being automatically detected, remediated and
the detector rewarded for the detection.
As further transaction attacks are
identiﬁed, implementing them within the incentive system provides a quick way
of increasing network security against those attacks. With more research into
network and protocol attacks, the detection and notiﬁcation system can be used
to allow peers to collaborate with each other on less direct or wide-ranging
attacks, such as DoS. It is also clear that certain attacks cannot be detected,
and therefore not protected against, with this model. These kinds of attacks
will have to be handled through the usual protocol updates.
4.2
Notiﬁcation
Once a peer has determined that a speciﬁc transaction or other peer is acting
maliciously, the network has to be notiﬁed of this detection for the next steps
to take eﬀect. The forms that this notiﬁcation can take depends on the type of
detection and the structure of the network.
In the following, we will discuss diﬀerent methods of notiﬁcation, when they are
applicable and how they would be implemented.
4.2.1
Message Notiﬁcation
Blockchain systems already rely on some form of messaging system for peers to
communicate transactions, blocks, addresses of other peers and other relevant
information. It is therefore likely to be simple to utilise an existing messaging
system to implement a new class of method for propagating detections through
the network.
Once malicious activity has been detected by a peer, it will construct a message
to be sent to the network. Questions that must be answered include:
==PAGE:44==
34
A self-regulation Incentive Model
1. What information should the detection message contain?
2. How is the detection veriﬁed by peers and miners?
What information should the detection message contain?
A detection
message must ﬁrst of all detail which signature has been used for the detection.
Secondly, the transactions the detection pertains to must be identiﬁed with their
relevant transaction IDs, as well as the peers and addresses that are involved.
Lastly, information about the detection message sender should be included for
veriﬁcation and reward purposes.
A proposed message structure can be seen in table 4.1.
Detection Message
Name
Datatype
Description
Signature Name
String
Name of signature used for detection
Blocks
Block[]
Array of involved blocks
Txids
Txid[]
Array of IDs of involved transactions
Peers
IP[]
Array of IPs of involved peers
Sender IP
IP
IP of sender of this message
Reward Address
Address
Address that reward should be transferred to
Table 4.1: Format of detection message
The used signature is identiﬁed by a string which can be found as an identiﬁer
in the signature deﬁnition. The two lists of involved transactions and peers are
used to verify the detection, as well as for carrying out appropriate remediation
action against. The Sender IP and reward address are used to identify which
address to transfer the reward to, as well as to conﬁrm the legitimacy of the
detection. If a sender IP is found to send many false positives, a peer may decide
to use this information to ignore further detections from this IP.
The sender should use its private key for authentication, to avoid any tampering
with the the original message. Further information may be included in the mes-
sage, as is required by the underlying blockchain system’s messaging framework.
This information likely includes such things as a timestamp, version number and
a checksum.
How is the detection veriﬁed by peers and miners?
When a peer re-
ceives a message, it will forward it to its neighbours in order to propagate the
message across the system.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Notiﬁcation
35
When a miner receives the message, it will go through the process of verifying
the detection before continuing to the remediation and reward steps. Verify-
ing the detection ﬁrstly involves identifying which detection signature has been
used. This information is contained in the detection message in the form of a
signature ID. Detection signatures are ideally deﬁned at a central source and it
will therefore be simple to correlate the signature in the message with one re-
trieved from the central signature database. In order to increase decentralisation
of a public blockchain, it is possible to implement a system where signatures
are developed by multiple diﬀerent people, and peers can subscribe to multi-
ple diﬀerent signature databases.
In this case, it is important for signature
databases to have some form of standardisation, possibly deﬁned within the ref-
erence blockchain implementation, in the signature naming convention in order
to correlate signatures from diﬀerent databases.
After the appropriate signature has been determined by the miner, they ver-
ify the detection by running the signature deﬁnition against the transactions
identiﬁed in the notiﬁcation message. This check exists to ensure that peers are
correctly reporting malicious behaviour according to the same set of rules as the
miner who has to act on the information. If the veriﬁcation succeeds, the miner
proceeds to the next stage. If not, the detection is dropped. If the miner does
not have knowledge of all the involved transactions, the miner will request the
relevant transaction data from its neighbours. The detection is dropped if all
relevant transactions have not been found within a reasonable amount of time.
If a miner receives several of the same detection from diﬀerent peers, only the
ﬁrst one to be received will be processed and the rest discarded, as there is no
reason to perform the same checks against the same transactions multiple times.
4.2.2
New Block Veriﬁcation
Further from the initial veriﬁcation of a detection, peers who receive new blocks
should also verify the detections within the new block. When a miner receives
such a block from the network, it will perform a number of veriﬁcation to ensure
that the block and the transactions within are correct. The incentive model adds
another step to this veriﬁcation, as detections and rewards have to be veriﬁed as
well. For this, the detections need to be added to the block upon block creation.
The coinbase transaction should therefore contain an extra data ﬁeld containing
all detections that have been veriﬁed for this block. When a miner receives the
new block, it accesses the stored detections and veriﬁes them as deﬁned by the
signature. The total reward and the intended recipients are veriﬁed at the same
time by comparing the expected rewards to the reward transactions contained
within the block.
==PAGE:46==
36
A self-regulation Incentive Model
4.3
Remediation
The remediation phase sees the miner take some action against the oﬀending
transactions or peers. The appropriate action is deﬁned by the signature. The
actions taken range from warning the victim, to punishing the perpetrator and
multiple diﬀerent actions can be taken at once. The purpose is to mitigate the
risk posed by a discovered attack in order to increase the safety of the network.
We propose the following actions that may be performed as remediation and we
consider each in turn:
1. Warning
2. Prevention
3. Blocking
4. Reversing
Warning
The most basic remediation step when a victim is involved is to
warn them of the malicious behaviour. This could, for example, be a double-
spend attack in which the victim must be warned not to release their goods to
the attacker. The warning message may contain information about what kind
of warning it is and which transactions and addresses are involved. The warning
will be sent as a message throughout the network so that it reaches the aﬀected
parties. It is then up to the victim to take appropriate action. If a double-spend
has been performed, by a peer, by mistake, the warning will help them identify
and rectify any potential problems with their client. A warning should in most
cases always be sent, on top of any other remediation action that may have been
taken.
A proposed warning message structure can be seen in table 4.2. The warning
message contains the aﬀected addresses or transaction IDs for receiving peers
to make a quick check against, as well as the full original detection message for
veriﬁcation purposes.
Prevention
Based on a veriﬁed detection, a miner may reject one or more
transactions and thus prevent malicious activity from taking place.
Further
propagation of a malicious transaction can also be prevented by neglecting to
send it further on in the network.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Remediation
37
Warning Message
Name
Datatype
Description
Aﬀected Txids
Txid[]
Array of transaction IDs aﬀected in detection
Aﬀected Addresses
Address[]
Array of addresses aﬀected in detection
Detection Message
DetectionMessage
Original detection message
Table 4.2: Format of warning message
Blocking
Messages or transactions from a speciﬁc address or IP can be tem-
porarily blocked if signiﬁcant amounts of detections are ﬁled against them or if
they are involved in a DoS attack. The length of the block would depend on
the severity of the detections and if any previous infractions are known. Block-
ing can be performed either by the miner alone, to prevent further transactions
from a peer from being included in new blocks. Alternatively, a message re-
questing peers to block connections from the oﬀending peer can be broadcast to
the network. This message should contain all the relevant data, including signa-
ture information and peer/transaction data, for peers to individually assess the
blocking request. The full detection information is required due to the trustless
nature of the distributed system, meaning that each peer should have the ca-
pability to verify the correctness of the received request according to the rules
deﬁned by their implementation. Peers in private and semi-private blockchains
may rely solely on the trust that is put into the central authority that sends out
the request.
The proposed message format follows a similar structure as the warning message
and can be seen in table 4.3. Either the Aﬀected IP or Aﬀected Address, or
both, may contain data, depending on what needs to be blocked.
Blocking Message
Name
Datatype
Description
Aﬀected IP
IP
IP that is being requested blocked
Aﬀected Address
Address
Address that is being requested blocked
Detection Message
DetectionMessage
Original detection message
Table 4.3: Format of blocking message
Reversing
For activity that has already happened and has been recorded in
the blockchain, a possible remediation strategy is to reverse the transaction to
recover losses by a victim. This is a violation of most blockchain protocols,
as transactions recorded in the chain are meant to be permanent. Therefore,
a signiﬁcant rework of most protocols would be required for this action to be
undertaken. In private and semi-private blockchains taking this action may be
==PAGE:48==
38
A self-regulation Incentive Model
allowed by the owner along with a potentially permanent ban of the attacker
from the network.
4.3.0.1
Summary
The remediation step is the the most important stage in the self-regulation
system as it is the stage in which steps are taken to mitigate threats.
The
action to be taken is deﬁned alongside the detection signature so as to always
be appropriate for the activity in question.
4.4
Incentive
Peers do not do anything for free. Eﬀort put towards running the blockchain is
rewarded using incentives such as block rewards and transaction fees. Likewise,
it cannot be expected for peers to go out of the way to detect malicious behaviour
without providing some sort of monetary incentive. The current implementation
of Bitcoin utilises a simple incentive system in which the miner who successfully
mines a block wins the entire reward. A self-regulation system in which any peer
can report malicious behaviour will require a more complex rewards system in
which individual peers may be rewarded as appropriate.
Since public blockchain systems are intrinsically linked to the currency of the
implementation in question, any form of reward will naturally come in the form
of the currency that peers have joined up to trade in. We consider diﬀerent
methods of rewarding peers. These considerations can be seen in the list be-
low. We will deliberate each reward method and assess them according to their
feasibility, implementation complexity and their impact on the system at large.
1. Generation of new coins.
2. Granting the transaction fee of a detected malicious transaction (for transaction-
based detections)
3. Adding an additional small transaction fee to each transaction to be dis-
tributed among deserving peers.
4. Reward from a central authority with an interest in keeping the system
healthy.
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Incentive
39
1. Generation of new coins
Being a ﬁnancial system, care has to be taken
about how additional currency is generated. Just as governments and national
banks are generally reluctant to print new bank notes or mint new coins due
to the risk of inﬂation, systems like Bitcoin have implemented their currency
generation systems in such a way that only a ﬁnite amount of coins will ever be
generated. Bearing this in mind, the ﬁrst and most obvious method is to simply
generate new coins as a reward. The implementation of this method would be
simple, similar to how new coins are currently generated as block rewards, but
would require a hard fork in most blockchains since, currently, miners are the
only nodes to receive a reward. As mentioned above, generating new coins might
have an adverse eﬀect on the currency itself, which is diﬃcult to predict. Gener-
ating new coins risks inﬂation and such an implementation therefore shouldn’t
be performed lightly. However, it is possible that the eﬀect will be negligible,
partly due to the fact that in 2014 it was estimated[34] that approximately 30%
of all bitcoins are considered ’zombies’1 and therefore potentially permanently
lost2. This amount is likely to have increased over time, since lost coins are
permanently stuck in the network.
The amount of newly generated coins is
likely to be negligible compared to the amount of coins that are going to be lost
over time. However, it remains diﬃcult to predict the long-term eﬀects of this
method.
2. Granting transaction fees
For transaction-based attacks, such as double-
spending, a potential source of reward could come from the fee that is normally
given to miners for bundling the transaction into a new block. Since a double-
spend transaction should be deemed invalid as a result of being identiﬁed as
malicious, a miner would not have been awarded the fee anyway. Instead, the
fee could go towards the node which broadcast the double-spend detection while
also ﬁnancially punishing the sender of the malicious transaction. Implementing
this reward method without turning it into a case of coin generation is poten-
tially complex from the perspective of the current Bitcoin implementation. In
order to claim the transaction fee while also deducting it from the sender’s
spendable coins, a miner will have to incorporate the double-spend transaction
into a new block.
This would in turn conﬁrm the double-spend transaction
or cause a conﬂict with the corresponding double-spent transaction, however.
Any implementation would therefore need a method for miners to redirect a
transaction fee while still invalidating the transaction itself. A potential im-
plementation could involve attaching a ﬂag, containing the veriﬁed detection,
to the transaction, which signiﬁes that the transaction is invalid. The protocol
would then have to be modiﬁed so that the transaction fee is deducted from one
1Coins were considered ’zombies’ if their containing wallets had seen no activity in the past
1.5 years.
2Coins are lost when the private key controlling those coins is lost.
==PAGE:50==
40
A self-regulation Incentive Model
or more of the inputs while also returning remaining inputs to their originating
addresses. A correct implementation would insure that the amount of coins in
circulation would remain constant. The size of the reward would depend on
the transaction fee involved, which could potentially incite nodes to only report
on transactions with a high transaction fees. Some factors may mitigate that
risk; ﬁrstly, double-spend transactions normally need to be inserted into a block
quickly, in order to be conﬁrmed before the double-spent transaction is. The
transaction fee therefore has to be suﬃcient enough to be conﬁrmed in the next
couple of blocks i.e. it must be higher than the average. Secondly, since rela-
tively little work is required to detect malicious behaviour, there is little reason
not to report on even low-fee transactions. As such, implementing transaction
fees as a reward would involve a more complex change to the protocol while
having less of an eﬀect on the economy of the currency.
3.
Distributed rewards from minimum transaction fee
By adding a
base transaction fee that must be included in any valid transaction, a pot of
reward coins can be built up to be distributed among all contributing peers.
As transactions are collected for each new block, the total amount of coins in
the pot for this block increases. The busier the network is, the larger the pot
will be, giving this method scalability depending on the number of transactions
performed.
Implementing this incentive method would not require a fork in
the blockchain on its own, but it would require a change in the protocol as a
minimum transaction fee must be implemented and enforced by miners while
reward distribution must be performed for each new block as well. The addition
of a minimum transaction fee, even if set to be small, may have a negative impact
upon the adoption of the system due to users losing the ability to perform
free transactions. This may be mitigated by ﬁnding the right balance for the
minimum fee, such that it is low enough to be negligible for most transactions
and high enough for peers to be incentivised to improve the security of the
network and thus improving the appeal of the system. This method is expected
to have a minimal negative impact on busier systems such as Bitcoin where the
average transaction fee is already very high.3
4. Central authority
A central authority with an invested interest in main-
taining the security and performance of the system could serve as the reward-
giver within a semi-private blockchain.
Peers submit their detections to the
central authority who then proceeds to remediate and reward as it deems ap-
propriate.
Given that such blockchains are generally controlled by a single
3The
average
transaction
fee
as
of
November
2017
lies
between
0.00115
BTC
and
0.00164
BTC
corresponding
to
approximately
$7
and
$10.
(https://bitinfocharts.com/comparison/bitcoin-transactionfees.html)
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Incentive
41
owner, they have the freedom to perform many actions that are usually not
possible on public chains. Users may be required to identify themselves and
are therefore susceptible to being banned from the network if they’re detected
performing any malicious activity. This is in contrast to the anonymous and
trustless public chains where such actions are close to impossible. This method
assumes that the owner of the chain is either unable or unwilling to monitor
the chain themselves and instead wishes to pay their participants to perform
the work for them. This method is not one that can be implemented in existing
public blockchains without fundamentally changing them, but can be used by
companies that are building or running their own semi-private blockchains.
4.4.1
Summary of incentive methods
Determining which reward scheme to use depends on multiple factors, such as
the philosophy, implementation details and structure of the blockchain system
in question. Multiple diﬀerent reward methods can also be used within the same
system for rewarding diﬀerent kinds of detections.
4.4.2
Incentivising miners
Miner nodes remain an integral element of any blockchain system. As they are
the entities that decide which transactions should be added to new blocks, they
too will be responsible for making sure that all relevant peers are appropriately
rewarded. However, as previously mentioned; peers do not do anything for free.
An issue that has to be solved is how to incentivise miners into handing out
rewards in a correct and fair manner.
Once again, multiple solutions exist and the correct solution will depend on
the involved blockchain system. In the following, we will present each proposed
solution and discuss how they can be implemented. We will look at the following
options:
1. Invalidating blocks that don’t hand out appropriate rewards.
2. Further monetary compensation for handing out rewards.
Block invalidation
The ﬁrst option; block invalidation, involves forcing min-
ers into acknowledging received detections and distribute rewards as appropriate
==PAGE:52==
42
A self-regulation Incentive Model
lest they risk invalidating their own block. Miners will be expected to verify de-
tections which have been broadcast throughout the network, while allowing for
some acceptable time threshold between initial detection broadcast and block
discovery for detections that are broadcast close to the time that a new block is
discovered. Any miners with slow or high-latency internet connections would be
at risk of having their blocks invalidated because they did not receive detections
within the set time threshold.
Monetary compensation
The second option involves giving miners further
monetary incentive to act on detections. In the case of the incentive method
in which a minimum transaction fee is instated, the miner could be granted a
portion of the minimum fee when acting on detections and handing out rewards
appropriately. This method is simply a small extension of the current method
of granting miners the transaction fees and sees that miners are ﬁnancially
incentivised to do the right thing, rather than being forced through risking
having their block invalidated.
4.4.2.1
Comparison to block rewards
Compared to the work performed by miners calculating block hashes4, the com-
puting power required to detect malicious behaviour would be minimal, as no
repeated calculations would be required. Therefore, the total sum of reward
given for malicious behaviour detection would be relatively small as well, mak-
ing it a low eﬀort, low reward scheme.
More energy-eﬃcient alternatives to
Proof-of-Work would increase the relative reward given compared to mining ac-
tivity. As such, determining the correct reward size depends on the underlying
system, particularly the consensus algorithms used, and should be implemented
in a dynamic manner in order to adjust for changes within the system as peers
join and leave.
4.5
Example Signature Deﬁnitions
In this section we list some example signature deﬁnitions to show the expected
structure and how each section will be used by the diﬀerent peers in the network.
Table 4.4 shows a potential signature deﬁnition for detecting double-spends.
The signature contains the name of the signature, a description of how initial
4Estimated to require an average of 2717EH (exa-hashes) per block in May 2017.[16]
==PAGE:53==
4.5 Example Signature Deﬁnitions
43
Signature: Double-spend
Name: Doublespend
Description
I = l i s t
of
t r a n s a ct i o n
inputs
i f
new
t r a n s ac t i o n Tx
i s
received
from
network
f o r
each
input
i
in Tx
i f
I . contains ( i )
double−spend
detected
e l s e
I . put ( i )
i f
new block
i s
receiv ed
from
network
I . c l e a r ()
Veriﬁcation
Txids = l i s t
of
involved
t r a n s a c ti o n
IDs from
r e c e i v e d
detection
message
I = empty
l i s t
of
t r a n s a ct i o n
inputs
f o r
each
Txid
in
Txids
f e t c h Tx of
Txid from memory or
request
from
network
f o r
each
input
i
in Tx
i f
I . contains ( i )
detection
v e r i f i e d
e l s e
I . put ( i )
// No matching
inputs
detected
i n v a l i d
detection
Remediation: Warning, Prevention
Reward: Transaction Fee
Table 4.4: Example signature deﬁnition for detecting double-spends
detections is performed, how the detection is veriﬁed, followed by the remedi-
ation and reward actions. In this example, if a detection has been successfully
veriﬁed, the verifying peer/miner should broadcast a warning message with the
aﬀected transactions and (if possible) reject the double-spend transactions. The
reward to be given to the detecting peer is, in this example, the transaction fees
of the oﬀending transactions.
Table 4.5 shows an example signature deﬁnition for detecting and verifying
Finney attacks. In this example, a veriﬁed detection results in a warning to be
broadcast and the oﬀending involved address(es) blocked for a period of time.
The detecting peer is rewarded using the incentive system in which a pot is built
from a minimum transaction fee and subsequently divided. The total reward
therefore depends on the number of transaction made in the next block and the
number of other veriﬁed detections.
==PAGE:54==
44
A self-regulation Incentive Model
Signature: Finney
Name: Finney
Description
T = l i s t
of
t r a n s a c t i o n s
I = l i s t
of
t r a n s a ct i o n
inputs
i f
new
t r a n s a c t i o n Tx
i s
received
from
network
T. put (Tx)
f o r
each
input
i
in
t r a n s a c t i o n Tx
I . put ( i )
i f
new block B i s
received
from
network
f o r
each
t r a n s a c t i on Tx in B
i f T. contains (Tx)
T. remove (Tx)
e l s e
f o r
each
input
i
in Tx
i f
I . contains ( i )
double−spend
detected
Veriﬁcation
Txids = l i s t
of
involved
t r a n s a c ti o n
IDs from
r e c e i v e d
detection
message
B = l i s t
of
involved
blocks
from
receiv e d
detection
message
I = empty
l i s t
of
t r a n s a ct i o n
inputs
T = offending
t r a n s a c t i on
from B
f o r
each
Txid
in
Txids
f e t c h Tx of
Txid from memory or
request
from
network
i f B. contains (Tx)
T = Tx
e l s e
f o r
each
input
i
in Tx
I . put ( i )
f o r
each
input
i
in T
i f
I . contains ( i )
detection
v e r i f i e d
// No matching
inputs
detected
i n v a l i d
detection
Remediation: Warning, Blocking
Reward: Reward pot
Table 4.5: Example signature deﬁnition for detecting Finney attacks
==PAGE:55==
4.6 Detection Compared to Implementing Fix
45
4.6
Detection Compared to Implementing Fix
An inevitable question that must be answered is: Why implement a system for
detecting malicious and exploitative behaviour instead of implementing ﬁxes for
said behaviour?
The answer lies within the inherent diﬃculty in making signiﬁcant changes
within a democracy, especially when money is involved. Investors in the blockchain
are afraid of disruptions which may cause unnecessary economic instability. Ma-
jor changes to a blockchain protocol triggers a risky hard fork in which, for a
period, the system is split into two separate systems running their own sepa-
rate blockchain; one running the old protocol version and one running the new
protocol version.
If a signiﬁcant enough amount of peers refuse to upgrade
to the new protocol version (also known as a failure to reach consensus), the
temporary split becomes permanent, causing instability and value-degradation
for the currency. These diﬃculties have been witnessed several times since the
inception of Bitcoin, with recent examples such as the Bitcoin Cash split from
the Bitcoin blockchain[36] and the subsequent failure to fully implement the
SegWit2x proposal to the main Bitcoin chain[6].
Therefore, while plenty of proposals to ﬁx vulnerabilities and exploits are made
on a regular basis, few of them are implemented. If instead there was a system in
place which could detect exploitation of these vulnerabilities without requiring
changes to the protocol itself, it would be simpler to protect against emerg-
ing threats as they are discovered.
Implementing new methods of detecting
malicious behaviour, much like updating the signatures database of anti-virus
software, should meet with little resistance due to the main protocol remaining
untouched.
4.7
Final Model Workﬂow
We can now visualise the workﬂow of the diﬀerent stages of the model with
the proposed methods of implementing each step. The steps are shaded based
on who bears the responsibility of each step. Either the detecting peer or the
miner/verifying peer.
==PAGE:56==
46
A self-regulation Incentive Model
Figure 4.2: Expanded workﬂow with potential implementation options
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5
Live Detection of Attacks
In order to determine the prevalence of various attacks, we implement the de-
tection part of our model into version 0.15.1 of the Bitcoin Core software1.
Speciﬁcally, we will implement basic double-spend detection as well as detec-
tion capability for Finney, Vector76 and malleability attacks.
The detection code is implemented in a single class, SelfPolicing, and function
calls are inserted into the transaction and block message receipt and processing
functions in netprocessing.cpp and validation.cpp of the Bitcoin Core code-
base. As such, each new transaction and block received from the network is run
through the detection algorithms.
Detection algorithms are implemented as described in section 4.1 while taking
into account the implementation details of the Bitcoin Core implementation.
Instead of keeping track of transactions and blocks within the detection class,
we make use of the Bitcoin Core transaction memory pool and active chain
in order to query for unconﬁrmed transaction in memory as well as previously
mined blocks and conﬁrmed transactions located within the blockchain.
For the basic double-spend detection, we take into account the transaction re-
placement policy described in [24]. The replacement policy states that a transac-
tion may indicate that it may be replaced by another transaction which spends
1https://bitcoin.org/en/bitcoin-core/
==PAGE:58==
48
Live Detection of Attacks
the same inputs.
All reported double-spend detections are therefore not ac-
cepted by the protocol and is considered abnormal behaviour.
5.1
Results
We ran the modiﬁed Bitcoin Core node on the main Bitcoin network for a period
of 85 hours. In that time period there was a total of 5015 detections spread out
as shown in table 5.1.
Detection
Amount
Double-spend
2455
Finney
13
Vector76
2547
Malleability
0
Table 5.1: Number of detections by attack type
Firstly, we note that no malleability attacks were detected. This makes sense,
since the introduction of the Segregated Witness protocol upgrade in BIP 141
solves the malleability issue and the vast majority of Bitcoin nodes make use
of the upgraded protocol. Secondly, by observing the distribution of detections
in ﬁgure 5.1, we see that all Vector76 detections were made at approximately
21/12/2017 05:00. Due to the implementation alerting for each transaction that
is diﬀerent between two competing blocks, 2547 alerts triggered simultaneously.
This indicates, that all the transactions were diﬀerent in two blocks that were
broadcast very close to each other.
This is not surprising, since there were
approximately 100,000 unconﬁrmed transactions at the time.
It is therefore
likely that two diﬀerent, valid blocks would contain diﬀerent transactions. While
it is unlikely that this event is an indication of an attack, it is still useful for
nodes, whose transactions are aﬀected, to know, in case they temporarily believe
that their transaction has been conﬁrmed.
Approximately 705000 transactions were made in the monitored time period,
making for a double-spend detection rate of 0.0035%. 407 blocks were mined in
the time period, of which one was detected as a potential Finney attack and one
as a combined Finney and Vector76 attack. This makes for a block detection
ratio of 0.005%.
The expected traﬃc overhead created by broadcasting these detections is there-
fore very low and unlikely to negatively aﬀect the network, while allowing thou-
sands of instances of suspicious behaviour to be handled and potentialy negated.
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Results
49
Figure 5.1: Detections between 18/12/2017 - 21/12/2017
==PAGE:60==
50
Live Detection of Attacks
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
In this project we have examined various methods of exploiting blockchain sys-
tems in order to defraud other peers or to gain an unfair advantage. For each of
these exploits and behaviours, we have looked into the diﬀerent methods that
have been proposed to ﬁx each issue. Our research shows that while solutions
to known problems often exist, it is diﬃcult for blockchain developers to im-
plement these changes due to distributed nature of the technology. For every
major change to the blockchain system, there is a very real chance of destabilis-
ing and dividing the system as peers are slow to adapt changes or for any reason
refuse to update. This fact means that publicly known vulnerabilities remain
unﬁxed for extended periods of time as disagreements within each blockchain
community prevents timely implementation of ﬁxes.
In order to solve the timeliness issue, and to improve the general security pos-
ture of blockchain system, we have proposed a blockchain self-regulation model
in which individual peers look out for and report malicious activity within the
network. Many of the researched exploits are detectable, either before they have
been completed, or in immediate retrospect. Implementing methods of detecting
exploitative behaviour on all peers will enable the network to respond to exploit
attempts through prevention or by warning the victims of attacks before they
take further losses. The goal of the model is to enable blockchain developers to
make a one-time major change to their system and thereafter be able to imple-
ment minor deﬁnition updates to detect newly found malicious activity, without
==PAGE:62==
52
Conclusion
requiring a hard fork. However, in order to ensure that a such distributed de-
tection model becomes successful, we have to ensure that peers will contribute
to it. For this reason, we have researched various methods of rewarding peers
who look out for malicious behaviour and reports it to the rest of the network.
The rewards constitute an alternative method of earning blockchain currency
compared to mining for blocks. This alternative source of income allows peers
with minimal computational resources to take part in the system without be-
ing forced to continually invest in better hardware. Since making a successful
detection of malicious activity depends more on being connected to the right
peer at the right time and less on raw computational power, peers with weaker
systems are level with peers that have high-powered systems.
We have implemented some detection behaviour into the Bitcoin Core software
in order to determine the extent to which these exploits are used in the wild.
We determined that for some of the most basic and straightforward attacks we
see multiple exploit attempts on a regular basis. Preventing or minimising the
losses that come as a result of these attacks would greatly improve the security
of the system. This comes with a very minimal overhead as all peers, including
non-miner peers, are able to contribute to the security of the system.
6.1
Future Work
There are several avenues of further research and improvement of the proposed
model.
New detection capabilities, including more collaborative detections, in which
multiple peers work together to detect malicious activity, will be required as
new threats are discovered.
New methods of rewarding and remediating detections can be implemented as
new blockchain systems are developed, making diﬀerent reward and remediation
options possible.
For as long as new systems using blockchain technology are being developed,
there will be potential for further development of the self-regulation model in
order to integrate the model with their speciﬁc use-cases.
==PAGE:63==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Detection Code
1 /∗
2
∗
s e l f p o l i c i n g . cpp
3
∗
4
∗
Author :
Daniel
Brand
5
∗/
6
7 #include
" s e l f p o l i c i n g . h"
8 #include
" u t i l . h"
9 #include
" v a l i d a t i o n . h"
10 #include
"txmempool . h"
11 #include
" p o l i c y / rbf . h"
12
13 void
s e l f p o l i c i n g : : NewBlock ( const
CChainParams& chainparams ,
const
CBlock& block , CTxMemPool& pool )
{
14
LogPrintf ( "Test :
Start
NewBlock\n" ) ;
15
s e l f p o l i c i n g : : FinneyDetection ( block ,
pool ) ;
16
LogPrintf ( "Test :
After
Finney NewBlock\n" ) ;
17
s e l f p o l i c i n g : : Vector76Detection ( chainparams ,
block ) ;
18
LogPrintf ( "Test :
End NewBlock\n" ) ;
19 }
20
21 void
s e l f p o l i c i n g : : NewTransaction ( const
CChainParams& chainparams ,
CTxMemPool& pool ,
const
CValidationState& state ,
const
CTransactionRef &ptx )
{
==PAGE:64==
54
Appendix
22
// SELF−POLICING:
check
i f
c o n f l i c t
/ double
spend was
detected
23
s e l f p o l i c i n g : : DoubleSpendDetection ( pool ,
state ,
ptx ) ;
24
25 }
26
27 void
s e l f p o l i c i n g : : DoubleSpendDetection (CTxMemPool& pool ,
const
CValidationState& state ,
const
CTransactionRef &ptx )
{
28
const
CTransaction& tx = ∗ptx ;
29
// Check
f o r
c o n f l i c t s
with
in−memory
t r a n s a c t i o n s
30
std : : set<uint256> s e t C o n f l i c t s ;
31
{
32
LOCK( pool . cs ) ;
//
protect
pool . mapNextTx
33
f o r
( const CTxIn &txin
:
tx . vin )
34
{
35
auto
i t C o n f l i c t i n g = pool . mapNextTx . f i n d ( txin . prevout ) ;
//
Find
input ’ s
outputs
36
i f
( i t C o n f l i c t i n g
!=
pool . mapNextTx . end ( ) )
37
{
38
const
CTransaction ∗pt xCon fli cti n g = i t C o n f l i c t i n g −>second ;
39
i f
( tx . GetHash ()
!=
ptxConflicting −>GetHash ( ) )
{
40
i f
( ! s e t C o n f l i c t s . count ( ptxConflicting −>GetHash ( ) ) )
{
41
bool
fReplacementOptOut = true ;
42
i f
( fEnableReplacement )
{
43
f o r
( const CTxIn &_txin
:
ptxConflicting −>vin )
{
44
i f
( _txin . nSequence <= MAX_BIP125_RBF_SEQUENCE)
{
45
fReplacementOptOut = f a l s e ;
46
break ;
47
}
48
}
49
}
50
i f
( fReplacementOptOut )
{
51
LogPrintf ( " Potential
double−spend
detected : %s \n has
same
input
as
in−memory %s " ,
tx . ToString () ,
ptxConflicting −>
ToString ( ) ) ;
52
return ;
53
}
54
s e t C o n f l i c t s . i n s e r t ( ptxConflicting −>GetHash ( ) ) ;
55
}
56
}
57
}
58
}
59
}
60 }
61
62 void
s e l f p o l i c i n g : : FinneyDetection ( const
CBlock& block , CTxMemPool&
pool )
{
63
64
{
65
LOCK( pool . cs ) ;
//
protect
pool . mapNextTx
66
f o r
( const
CTransactionRef& ptx
:
block . vtx )
{
67
const
CTransaction& tx = ∗ptx ;
68
CTxMemPool : : t x i t e r
mi = pool .mapTx. f i n d ( tx . GetHash () ) ;
69
i f
(mi == pool .mapTx. end () )
{
70
f o r
( const CTxIn &txin
:
tx . vin )
{
==PAGE:65==
A.1 Detection Code
55
71
auto
i t C o n f l i c t i n g = pool . mapNextTx . f i n d ( txin . prevout ) ;
// Find
input ’ s
outputs
72
i f
( i t C o n f l i c t i n g
!=
pool . mapNextTx . end ( ) )
{
73
const
CTransaction ∗pt xC o n f l i c t i n g = i t C o n f l i c t i n g −>
second ;
74
LogPrintf ( " Potential
Finney
attack : New t r a n s a c t i o n %s
has
input
of
in−memory t r a n s a c t io n %s \n" ,
tx . ToString ( ) ,
ptxConflicting −>ToString () ) ;
75
}
76
}
77
}
78
}
79
}
80 }
81
82 void
s e l f p o l i c i n g : : Vector76Detection ( const
CChainParams&
chainparams ,
const
CBlock& block )
{
83
const
CBlockIndex∗
tipIndex = chainActive . Tip ( ) ;
84
i f
( tipIndex
!=
n u l l p t r )
{
85
const
CBlockIndex∗prevTip = tipIndex−>pprev ;
86
i f
( prevTip !=
n u l l p t r )
{
87
i f
( block . hashPrevBlock == ∗( prevTip−>phashBlock )
88
&& block . GetHash ()
!=
tipIndex−>GetBlockHash ( ) )
{
89
CBlock
t i p ;
90
i f
( ReadBlockFromDisk ( tip ,
tipIndex ,
chainparams .
GetConsensus () ) )
{
91
f o r
( CTransactionRef
ptx
:
block . vtx )
{
92
i f
( std : : find ( t i p . vtx . begin ( ) ,
t i p . vtx . end () ,
ptx ) ==
t i p . vtx . end () )
{
93
LogPrintf ( " Potential
Vector76
attack :
Transaction %s
in
block %s
not
found
in
simultaneous
block %s \n" ,
ptx−>
ToString () ,
t i p . GetHash () . ToString () ,
block . GetHash ( ) . ToString
() ) ;
94
}
95
}
96
}
97
}
98
}
99
}
100 }
101
102 void
M a l l e a b i l i t y D e t e c t i o n (CTxMemPool& pool ,
const
CValidationState
& state ,
const
CTransactionRef &ptx )
{
103
const
CTransaction& tx = ∗ptx ;
104
{
105
LOCK( pool . cs ) ;
//
protect
pool . mapNextTx
106
f o r
(CTxMemPool : : indexed_transaction_set : : const_iterator
i t =
pool .mapTx. begin () ;
i t
!=
pool .mapTx. end () ;
i t ++) {
107
const
CTransaction& poolTx = it −>GetTx () ;
108
i f
( tx . GetHash () == poolTx . GetHash () )
{
109
bool
hasDifferentInOut = f a l s e ;
110
//Check
i f
t r a n s ac t i o n
has same
input
111
f o r
( const CTxIn &txin
:
tx . vin )
{
112
auto
poolTxIn = poolTx . vin ;
==PAGE:66==
56
Appendix
113
i f
( std : : find ( poolTxIn . begin () ,
poolTxIn . end ( ) ,
txin ) ==
poolTxIn . end () )
{
114
hasDifferentInOut = true ;
115
break ;
116
}
117
}
118
i f
( hasDifferentInOut )
{
119
continue ;
120
}
121
//Check
i f
t r a n s ac t i o n
has same
outputs
122
f o r
( const CTxOut &txout
:
tx . vout )
{
123
auto poolTxOut = poolTx . vout ;
124
i f
( std : : find ( poolTxOut . begin () ,
poolTxOut . end () ,
txout )
== poolTxOut . end () )
{
125
return ;
126
}
127
}
128
LogPrintf ( " Potential
m a l l e a b i l i t y
attack :
Transaction %s
has
d i f f e r e n t
hash
from
t r a n s a c ti o n %s
but have same
inputs
and
outputs \n" ,
tx . ToString () ,
poolTx . ToString () ) ;
129
}
130
}
131
}
132 }
Listing A.1: Main implementation of detection code in Bitcoin Core
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1] M. Andrychowicz, S. Dziembowski, D. Malinowski, and Ł. Mazurek. On
the Malleability of Bitcoin Transactions, pages 1–18. Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2015.
[2] V. Authors. Proof of stake faq, https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/proof-
of-stake-faq, 2017.
[3] S. Bag, S. Ruj, and K. Sakurai. Bitcoin block withholding attack: Analysis
and mitigation. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
12(8):1967–1978, Aug 2017.
[4] M. Bastiaan. Preventing the 51%-attack: a stochastic analysis of two phase
proof of work in bitcoin, 2015.
[5] bbit.
Mybitcoin.com
press
release
#2,
https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=34770.0, 2011.
[6] M.
Belsh.
[bitcoin-segwit2x]
segwit2x
ﬁnal
steps,
https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-segwit2x/2017-
november/000685.html, 2017.
[7] B. Cash. https://www.bitcoincash.org/, 2017.
[8] D.
Cawrey.
Are
51%
attacks
a
real
threat
to
bitcoin?,
https://www.coindesk.com/51-attacks-real-threat-bitcoin/, 2015.
[9] A. Chepurnoy, T. Duong, L. Fan, and H.-S. Zhou. Twinscoin: A cryptocur-
rency via proof-of-work and proof-of-stake. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Re-
port 2017/232, 2017. http://eprint.iacr.org/2017/232.
==PAGE:68==
58
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10] M. Conti, S. K. E, C. Lal, and S. Ruj. A survey on security and privacy
issues of bitcoin. CoRR, abs/1706.00916, 2017.
[11] corbixgwelt. Timejacking & bitcoin, http://culubas.blogspot.co.uk/2011/05/timejacking-
bitcoin_802.html, 2011.
[12] N. T. Courtois and L. Bahack. On subversive miner strategies and block
withholding attack in bitcoin digital currency. CoRR, abs/1402.1718, 2014.
[13] P. Daian, I. Eyal, A. Juels, and E. G. Sirer. Piecework: Generalized out-
sourcing control for proofs of work. 2017.
[14] C. Decker and R. Wattenhofer. Bitcoin transaction malleability and mtgox.
CoRR, abs/1403.6676, 2014.
[15] Digiconomist.
Bitcoin
energy
consumption
index,
https://digiconomist.net/bitcoin-energy-consumption, 2017.
[16] Digiconomist.
Bitcoin
energy
consumption
index,
https://digiconomist.net/bitcoin-energy-consumption, 2017.
[17] J.
L.
Eric
Lombrozo
and
P.
Wuille.
Bip14,
https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0141.mediawiki, 2015.
[18] I. Eyal and E. G. Sirer. How to disincentivize large bitcoin mining pools,
2014.
[19] I. Eyal and E. G. Sirer. Majority Is Not Enough: Bitcoin Mining Is Vul-
nerable, pages 436–454.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2014.
[20] H.
Finney.
Best
practice
for
fast
trans-
action
acceptance
-
how
high
is
the
risk?,
https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=3441.msg48384#msg48384,
2011.
[21] E. Foundation. Etherium, https://www.ethereum.org/, 2017.
[22] A. Gervais, H. Ritzdorf, G. O. Karame, and S. Capkun. Tampering with the
delivery of blocks and transactions in bitcoin. In Proceedings of the 22Nd
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
CCS ’15, pages 692–705, New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.
[23] B.
Group.
Incentive
mechanisms
for
securing
the
bit-
coin,
http://bitfury.com/content/5-white-papers-research/bitfury-
incentive_mechanisms_for_securing_the_bitcoin_blockchain-1.pdf,
2015.
==PAGE:69==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
59
[24] D.
A.
Harding
and
P.
Todd.
Bip:
125,
https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0125.mediawiki, 2015.
[25] E. Heilman, A. Kendler, A. Zohar, and S. Goldberg. Eclipse attacks on
bitcoin’s peer-to-peer network, 2015.
[26] P. Jayachandran. The diﬀerence between public and private blockchain,
https://www.ibm.com/blogs/blockchain/2017/05/the-diﬀerence-between-
public-and-private-blockchain/, 2017.
[27] G. O. Karame, E. Androulaki, and S. Capkun. Double-spending fast pay-
ments in bitcoin. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, CCS ’12, pages 906–917, New York, NY,
USA, 2012. ACM.
[28] G. O. Karame, E. Androulaki, M. Roeschlin, A. Gervais, and S. Čapkun.
Misbehavior in bitcoin: A study of double-spending and accountability.
ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur., 18(1):2:1–2:32, May 2015.
[29] J. A. Kroll, I. C. Davey, and E. W. Felten. The economics of bitcoin mining,
or bitcoin in the presence of adversaries.
[30] Litecoin. https://litecoin.com/, 2017.
[31] W.
Mougayar.
Understanding
semi-private
blockchain
applica-
tions,
https://medium.com/@wmougayar/understanding-semi-private-
blockchain-applications-6bbe91fc3596, 2016.
[32] S.
Nakamoto.
Bitcoin:
A
peer-to-peer
electronic
cash
system,
http://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf, 2008.
[33] S. Park, K. Pietrzak, A. Kwon, J. Alwen, G. Fuchsbauer, and P. Gaži.
Spacemint: A cryptocurrency based on proofs of space. Cryptology ePrint
Archive, Report 2015/528, 2015. https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/528.
[34] J.
W.
Ratcliﬀ.
Rise
of
the
zombie
bitcoins,
https://letstalkbitcoin.com/blog/post/rise-of-the-zombie-bitcoins, 2014.
[35] M. Rosenfeld. Analysis of bitcoin pooled mining reward systems. CoRR,
abs/1112.4980, 2011.
[36] L.
Shin.
Will
this
battle
for
the
soul
of
bitcoin
destroy
it?, https://www.forbes.com/sites/laurashin/2017/10/23/will-this-battle-
for-the-soul-of-bitcoin-destroy-it/#4e5788563d3c, 2017.
[37] S. Solat and M. Potop-Butucaru. Zeroblock: Preventing selﬁsh mining in
bitcoin. CoRR, abs/1605.02435, 2016.
==PAGE:70==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[38] M. Vasek, M. Thornton, and T. Moore. Empirical Analysis of Denial-of-
Service Attacks in the Bitcoin Ecosystem, pages 57–71.
Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014.
[39] vector76. Fake bitcoins?,
https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=36788.msg463391#msg463391,
2011.
