==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Industry 4.0 technologies impact on supply 
chain performance with a direct insight into 
Danish enterprises 
Supervisor 
Peter Jacobsen  
Associate Professor 
22 – June – 2018 
Author 
Morten Bay Nielsen 
S120076 
 
==PAGE:2==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
1 
 
Abstract 
This study aims to explore the impact on the supply chain performance by technologies from 
industry 4.0. The key term in technologies from industry 4.0 is digitalization, and this study explores 
the different technological possibilities, which can affect the overall performance of the supply 
chain. These technologies include, but are not limiting to, sensor technologies on products and 
logistics, and internet-based platforms for sharing information across the supply chain. The sensors 
can be in the form of WSN, RFID, GPS, and be connected directly or indirectly to the internet. The 
platforms for sharing information can be cloud based and build on top of existing ERP systems, but 
can also be in the form of a blockchain. To explore the use of these technologies, 13 enterprises 
located in Denmark was interviewed. The companies found digitalization important, but most of 
the companies did not have a clear strategy for digitalizing the supply chain. The companies have 
started a large amount and range of different initiatives, which large variation of impact on the 
performance. The companies further identify their main challengers and proposed solutions to 
these challengers. The company was in general more mature in the area of connectivity than in the 
area of traceability, which rely on the platforms shared across the supply chain. 
Title page 
English title: 
 
Industry 4.0 technologies impact on supply chain performance 
 
with a direct insight into Danish enterprises 
Danish title:  
 
Industry 4.0 teknologiers påvirkning på forsyningskædens 
 
præstation, med et direkte indblik i danske virksomheder 
Author: 
 
Morten Bay Nielsen, Stud. M.Sc., Industrial Engineering and 
 
Management, Technical University of Denmark 
Project Type: 
 
 
Master thesis 
ECTS points: 
 
 
30 
Start and submission data: 
January 22nd 2018 - June 22nd 2018 
Supervision by: 
 
Peter Jacobsen, Associate Professor, Industrial Engineering and 
 
Management, Technical University of Denmark 
 
_________________________________ 
Morten Bay Nielsen, S120076 
==PAGE:3==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
2 
 
Acknowledgements 
I will start to express my greatest gratitude towards the people from the 13 companies, who 
volunteered their precious time for an interview with me. Their knowledge, opinions and 
experiences have enlightened the entire subject of technologies influence on supply chain, and 
created numerous highly valuable insights. The conversations and discussions with these persons 
gave me new perspectives and allowed me to explore the subject in depth. Big thank you  
Søren Raun,  
 
 
Man Diesel & Turbo 
Christian Hertz Eichner-Larsen,  Haldor Topsøe 
Henrik Mathiesen, 
 
LM Wind Power 
Jørgen Skaarup,  
 
Tulip 
Friedel Meyer,   
 
Siemens Wind Power 
Mikael Riberholdt,  
 
GN Store Nord 
Søren Pap Tolstrup,  
 
Nilfisk 
Steen Hoff,  
 
 
Hempel 
Martin Busch,  
 
LEGO 
Inge Christiansen,  
 
Radiometer 
Karen-Marie Katholm,   
Dupont 
Peter Rødbro,   
 
Danfoss 
Leif Nielsen,  
 
 
Grundfos 
Further, I wish to thank my supervisor, Peter Jacobsen, for great guidance, help, clarifying questions 
and moral support during the long process of writing this thesis.  
 
Abbreviations 
3PL 
 
 
Third-party logistics 
4PL 
 
 
Fourth-party logistics 
B2B 
 
 
Business to business 
B2C 
 
 
Business to consumer 
EDI 
 
 
Electronic data interchange 
ERP 
 
 
Enterprise resource planning 
GPS 
 
 
Global positioning system 
IoT 
 
 
Internet of things 
KPI 
 
 
Key performance indicator 
RFID 
 
 
Radio frequency identification 
PdM 
 
 
Predictive Maintenance 
VIM 
 
 
Vendor Inventory Management 
WNS 
 
 
Wireless network system 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
3 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Abstract .............................................................................................................................................. 1 
Title page ............................................................................................................................................ 1 
Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................................ 2 
Table of Contents ............................................................................................................................... 3 
1. 
Introduction ............................................................................................................................... 4 
2. 
Problem statement .................................................................................................................... 6 
3. 
Supply chain 4.0 ......................................................................................................................... 8 
3.1. 
Technologies enabling connectivity ................................................................................. 13 
3.2. 
Technologies enabling traceability .................................................................................. 20 
4. 
Methodology ............................................................................................................................ 30 
4.1. 
Theoretical foundation .................................................................................................... 30 
4.2. 
Research design ............................................................................................................... 31 
4.3. 
Data collection ................................................................................................................. 32 
4.4. 
Data analysis .................................................................................................................... 33 
4.5. 
Interview guide ................................................................................................................ 36 
5. 
Analysis and discussion of interview outcomes ....................................................................... 38 
5.1. 
Industry and customer groupings .................................................................................... 38 
5.2. 
Background of participants in interviews ........................................................................ 40 
5.3. 
Importance of supply chain 4.0 in companies ................................................................. 41 
5.4. 
Strategic goals .................................................................................................................. 44 
5.5. 
Focus areas ....................................................................................................................... 48 
5.6. 
Initiatives for supply chain ............................................................................................... 51 
5.7. 
Traceability ....................................................................................................................... 56 
5.8. 
Connectivity ..................................................................................................................... 62 
5.9. 
Main challengers on the road to supply chain 4.0 ........................................................... 70 
6. 
Conclusion ................................................................................................................................ 76 
Bibliography ..................................................................................................................................... 78 
List of figures .................................................................................................................................... 81 
Appendix .......................................................................................................................................... 83 
Literature searches ...................................................................................................................... 83 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
4 
 
1. Introduction 
Over the last three decades, a dramatically improvement in information technology (IT) has lead to 
almost every person having a computer laptop or mobile device,  capable of reaching endless 
amount of information and the ability to connect effortlessly, as well establish an interconnection 
between humans and machines. This interconnection of machines and humans can also be 
implemented in a production and operation environment, and give businesses an opportunity to 
improve their performance. The term Industry 4.0 has been coined for this  new network of 
information (Tjahjono, Esplugues, Ares, & Pelaez, 2017). The term industry 4.0 is not a precisely 
defined term, but is considered as the fourth industrial revolution. A central concept in Industry 4.0 
is digitalization, which has been discussed excessively in the last few years. Many different ideas 
have been created to increase the utilization of digitalization to improve customer experience, 
automating processes in businesses or connecting peoples, machines, and businesses. Many of 
these new ideas are affecting not only singular companies, but the entire supply chain, and works 
beyond the normal organization boundary.  
 
In a more traditional supply chain, several companies adds value by processing, assembling, 
distributing or selling the product. The companies seek to optimize their operations, to be able to 
profit as much as possible from the value added to the product. With the new era of Industry 4.0, 
companies are required to rethink their systems and the design of their supply chain, to remain at 
their level of competitiveness. Companies will have to look further than their own operations for 
optimizing, and seek to improve the overall operation of the entire supply chain, and thereby 
increase the overall value of the products. This new digital supply chain has been named Supply 
Chain 4.0, using the same methodology as Industry 4.0. It has a future vision of real-time, end-to-
end transparency throughout the supply chain, where all stakeholders in the chain make decisions 
based on the same facts, via data that is accessible for every participant in the supply chain. The 
real-time data allows companies to react to unexpected changes immediately, and the continuous 
planning process thereby becomes dynamic to changing requirements (Alicke, Seyfert, & 
Rexhausen, 2017). New software, as well as hardware, have to be developed to facilitate this real-
time transparency, and an implementation of sensors on material, products, machines, logistics, 
etc., is necessary to reach a new level of connectivity making this possible. These new technologies 
will help companies to a faster and more flexible delivery of products to customers, through a more 
accurate forecasting utilizing predictive analytics. By the use of integrated planning, execution 
systems, logistic visibility, autonomous logistics, smart procurement and warehousing, spare part 
management, and advanced analytics, companies can increase their responsiveness and resiliency, 
==PAGE:6==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
5 
 
and many companies are rushing to start digitalizing their supply chain with good reason. The 
company PWC surveyed more than 2000 companies, and their analysis shows an average increase 
in revenue of 2.9% and an average decrease in cost by 3.6% from digitalization. The largest portion 
of the cost reduction comes from more precise integrated planning and scheduling, e.g. by gaining 
more and better information from other actors in the supply chain. Another large cost saving comes 
from predictive maintenance, which will be achieved via analysis of big data gained by sensors  
(Griessbauer, Vedso, & Schrauf, 2016). The success, however, depends on the efficiency of sharing 
data across the supply chain. An enterprise might therefore look for suppliers, which are capable 
of this, and the entire performance management of the supply chain might therefore have to be 
revised. 
 
This master thesis will investigate how the supply chain of enterprises in Denmark are affected by 
industry 4.0, and how this might affect the performance of their supply chain. An illustration of the 
area of interest can be seen at Figure 1-1. 
 
 
Figure 1-1: Area of interest in this research is the overlap between supply chain, industry 4.0 and performance 
management. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
6 
 
2. Problem statement 
Despite the tremendous upsides shown by PWC, not all companies are experiencing equal success 
in realizing this opportunity yet. To explore the development from supply chain 3.0 to 4.0, and how 
far companies located in Danish are in their development, it is important to understand the 
difficulties in the transformation. It is expected, that most companies are in an infant stage of their 
development to supply chain 4.0, which can be caused by several factors. One reasons for the 
immature development could be that not all companies have started implementing these new 
technologies and ways of working, and are therefore not able to benefit. Another reason could be 
that the implementation of new initiatives takes time and requires large amount of resources, 
which hinters the process of development, and thereby reduces the positive effects on 
performance. If companies does not develop, they risk losing their competitiveness, which will have 
a negative impact on their finances. To improve the performance of the supply chain, the 
companies within the supply chain must work together, and increase their efficiency in central 
technological areas. The companies therefore have to develop, which will require them to start and 
complete technology projects. The new initiatives will probably create new challengers, which the 
companies have to combat to complete the projects, but the improvement in performance will, 
hopefully, but worth the struggles. This thesis seeks to explore how companies can improve their 
supply chains performance through technological initiatives. The main research question 
investigated in this thesis is: 
 
 
How can industry 4.0 technologies improve performance of the supply chain? 
 
This question is investigated by looking into initiatives and projects started by 13 of the largest 
enterprises located in Denmark and their journey to transform from supply chain 3.0 to supply 
chain 4.0, as well as their key challengers and how these challengers have been overcome. This 
investigation will be carried out through a series of interviews, and with and extra focus on how 
companies are performing in the central areas of traceability and connectivity in the supply chain. 
To explore the main research question, some key questions will have to be answered: 
 
 
What initiatives have enterprises in Denmark started to improve performance of their 
supply chain? 
 
What are the key challengers of implementing new technology initiatives, and how can 
they be overcome? 
==PAGE:8==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
7 
 
 
How well do the Danish enterprises utilize technologies to improve performance in key 
areas as traceability and connectivity across the supply chain? 
 
To answer these questions a broad range of literature have been reviewed and the 13 companies 
have been interviewed. The literature is primarily academic literature such as academic articles and 
conference papers, but company and organization reports have also proven useful for case studies 
and understanding the business logic of this area. The thesis will start with a detailed description 
of what supply chain 4.0 is and some of the most important technologies in it. A description of the 
methodology to investigate the performance of Danish enterprises follows, where after an analysis 
and discussion of the answers from the interviews follows. Lastly, is a conclusion of the analysis, 
with some practical recommendations, which might be of value to other companies undergoing a 
similar journey of developing their supply chain. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
8 
 
3. Supply chain 4.0 
The history of supply chain goes back to the first industrial companies in the beginning of the 19th 
century. This era can be called the supply chain 1.0, where businesspersons bought materials 
manually, produced their product by hand or steam engine, and sold their products manually. In 
the beginning of the 20th century, with The principles of scientific management by Fredrick Taylor, 
the supply chain 2.0 era begun. With an increased focus on improving manual processes, the use 
of operational researched was developed, but only used slightly in World War I. Few developments 
was done until World War II, where the military truly started implementing the techniques. It is 
estimated that more than 1000 British men and women have contributed with the working of 
operational research to optimize logistics in the army. After World War II, many former military 
leaders was getting leadership positions in the industry, and the research in logistics increased, 
where the goal was to improve the labor intensive work. With the introduction of pallets and pallet 
lifts, much of the product handling could be efficiently improved, and in the mid 50's the 
introduction of containers for shipping and train transport started to be widely used, which opened 
up for the globalization of the supply chain. In the 1960's and 1970's the digital computers was 
being introduced at larger corporations, which gave the opportunity to keep records digital, and 
create archives with all transactions. The digital computers also allowed for computerized logistics 
planning, such as optimized routing for trucks and inventory management. This was the beginning 
of supply chain 3.0. The complexity of the supply chain increased rapidly, which fueled the demand 
for a more general system which could simplify this complexity, and in the 1990's the Enterprise 
Resource Planning (ERP) systems was first introduced. In the last decade, the supply chain have 
become more complex, digital, and automated. This have become possible due to faster 
computers, more intuitive software and with the increased comprehensiveness of ERP, which have 
given the companies an overview of sales, inventory, procurement and production in one system. 
These systems have allowed companies to increase the efficiency, since data within the company 
flows more easily across different departments. This increased efficiency can for example help 
reduce overproduction or underproduction, since the manufacturing facilities can have a better 
overview of the demand from customers, as well as inventory levels, and thereby reduce or 
increase the production capacity. By comparing companies using ERP systems with companies 
without ERP systems, it have been shown that these companies perform significantly better, in 
terms of return on assets, return on investments and asset turnover (Hunton, Lippincott, & Reck, 
2003). Whit these remarkable improvements in performance, almost every larger company have 
adopted into the ERP systems to stay competitive. The limitations of today's ERP systems, however, 
lies within the scope of the system. The system gather and analyze data within the company's 
==PAGE:10==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
9 
 
different departments and connect them across the organization, but does not collect data from 
other companies within the supply chain. When each company only manage its own data, the 
supply chain becomes a large amount of siloed steps, from raw materials to components, to parts, 
to distribution and sales. To break down the walls between the silos, new systems have to evolve, 
and be shared among the participants in the supply chain. This change from being able to 
communicate internally in the company in supply chain 3.0, to communicate almost effortless 
between companies lies as the hearth of the supply chain 4.0, and is illustrated in Figure 3-1, where 
the companies plan, order and confirm their purchases through a supply chain control center, 
where shared information is available. 
 
Figure 3-1: Every participant in Supply Chain 4.0 have access to all information at the same time 
The vision is for all the companies in the supply chain to increase efficiency, similar to the increase 
in efficiency in supply chain 3.0 with the digitalization and ERP systems. To do this Schrauf and 
Berttram have identified four main areas, which companies have to fulfill. Firstly the organizations 
capabilities to generate end-to-end understanding of the mechanics in their value chain. A clear 
view of the bureaucracy involved in buying and selling the goods, from order request to toll 
documentation and delivery documentation is needed. Secondly, the company have to develop 
new key performance indicators (KPI's) to manage the supply chain. Thirdly, companies have to 
boosting their ability to partner up with other companies. The fully integrated supply chain cannot 
be built without collaboration between companies in the supply chain. Fourth and lastly, they have 
to devise a roadmap for new and existing technologies, including integration layers with cloud 
==PAGE:11==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
10 
 
databases and analytic capabilities. All these challengers have to be overcome to establish an end-
to-end process connecting the suppliers to the customers (Schrauf & Berttram, 2016) 
To enable the communication between companies, two main subjects of interest have been 
identified: traceability and connectivity. The two subjects have some common basis, since an 
increase in connectivity will also increase the ability to trace parts and products in the supply chain, 
but a part does not necessarily have to be connected to be trace, see Figure 3-2. In the following 
section, these two subjects of interest will be reviewed with a mix of academic literature, 
conference papers and media case studies, which highlights the significance and potential of 
implementing initiatives in these two areas.  
 
Figure 3-2 Subjects of special interest in this thesis on supply chain 4.0 
These two areas of interest have gained tremendous media coverage in the recent years, through 
some of the most promising technologies: Internet of Things (IoT) and Blockchain. In the next 
paragraph, these technologies will be described under each of the two areas of interest, but it is 
important first to recognize the hype these technologies experience in the media and academic 
literature. The hype may create an over expectation, which the technologies cannot live up to. This 
can create a skewed view on these technologies, and this report have therefore also focused on 
some of the downsides of these technologies. The Gartner Hype Cycle was first introduced in 1995, 
and characterize the typical hype-process an emerging technology experience. The process start 
with a positive hype period, where an overenthusiasm of the technology can be experienced. When 
the technology fail to live up to the high expectations, it goes into a period of disillusion, and the 
hype falls down again. After this, a more realistic view on the technology allows it to develop, and 
more and more people gain an understanding of its relevance, the technology moves toward a level 
of productivity, where it becomes more and more used (Fenn & Linden, 2003). Each summer, 
Gartner publish a graph showing the location of technologies on the Gartner Hype Cycle1. In the 
                                                          
1All technologies assets by Gartner can be found here: https://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/top-trends-in-
the-gartner-hype-cycle-for-emerging-technologies-2017/  
==PAGE:12==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
11 
 
published graph, technologies within different areas is presented. These technologies are areas 
within automotive, manufacturing, IT, pharmaceuticals, etc. Some of the key technologies within 
supply chain 4.0 have been chosen and are displayed in Figure 3-3. The chosen technologies are 
within the area of cloud-based management of supply chain, blockchain and Internet of Things 
(IoT), since these are some of the technologies being investigated in this thesis. 
The speed of these technologies through the cycle does not necessarily have to be the same. 
Gartner estimate that IoT Platforms will reach the Plateau of Productivity in 2 – 5 years, whereas 
Blockchain Technologies will reach it in 5 – 10 years, despite being ahead of IoT on the cycle. 
Technologies as IoT Platforms, and Public Cloud SaaS Operational ERP systems are on the top of 
the hype cycle right now, and it would therefore be expected that the hype will decrease within 
the next years, as these technologies will probably not live up to the expectations. Blockchain 
technology have already experience the peak of expectation, which can also be seen on the Bitcoin 
price, a crypto currency build upon the blockchain technology. The Bitcoin did reach a price of 
20.000 USD in the end of 2017, but have fallen back to around 8000 USD in the early summer of 
2018. 
 
Figure 3-3: Technologies relevant for connectivity and traceability on the Gartner Hype Cycle from June 2017. 
The performance S-curve is also displayed in Figure 3-3, indicating how the performance level of 
technology develops over time. Richard Foster originally created the Performance S-curve 
framework, while he worked as a director for McKinsey and co. Inc. The Performance S-curve is 
==PAGE:13==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
12 
 
normally split up into four phases; Embryonic, Growth, Mature and Aging, where each phase 
indicate the maturity of the technology (Foster, 1986). The two framework can often be connected 
to each other, since technologies on the Slope of Enlightenment will typically be in the growth 
phase, and technologies in the Plateau of Productivity will be in the Mature phase. It can be seen 
from Figure 3-3 that technologies as Cloud Platforms and IoT devices have reached the Plateau of 
Productivity, and can be considered mature technologies, whereas the IoT Platforms are still far 
behind the IoT devices, as well as the an Public Cloud SaaS Operational ERP system is behind the 
cloud platform.  
As this thesis focus on performance of the supply chain in regards to technologies within 
connectivity and traceability, some areas have be deselected. One of these is the subject of 
automaticity in logistics and production, which was considered as a third subject of interest. Within 
this subject lies the technologies of self-driving freight vehicles and vessels, as well as automation 
of production systems within companies. The self-driving freight will in the coming years 
revolutionize the freight industry, and will decrease the cost of transportation dramatically, since a 
chauffeur, and thereby the chauffeur salary, will not anymore be required. The logistic part of the 
supply chain thereby stand before a revolution. However, after the initial interviews and a 
conference held by the Danish Ministry of Transportation, Building and Housing on Mobility for the 
Future, in became clear that most companies would not develop this themselves. It is expected, 
that it will be companies in the freight industry, which will adapt the new technology, and that the 
manufacturing companies thereby will continue business as usual in the area of the supply chain. 
The manufactures will experience the lower prices, but should not experience other larger changes. 
Since no freight companies have been interviewed, it have not been possible to investigate this 
subject. The area of automation in the production systems will also have a great effect on the 
supply chain, but it is more an optimization of the individual companies, than an optimization of 
the entire supply chain. The area of automation of the production system is where the industry 4.0 
have already had a great impact and a large amount of both academic literature and company 
reports have already covered this subject, which is vast in itself. This area have therefore been 
deselected from this thesis. The master thesis thereby seeks to investigate technological initiatives 
that can improve performance of the corporation between the parties in the supply chain, and not 
focus on the technological initiatives involving optimization of the production of the products. In 
Figure 3-4 the scope of the thesis is shown in dark blue, where all part of the supply chain is 
investigated, expected for the production of the product, shown in red.  
==PAGE:14==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
13 
 
 
Figure 3-4: This thesis investigate the effects on performance by industry 4.0 on the supply chain expect in the area of 
production of products 
 
3.1. Technologies enabling connectivity  
With the possibility of connecting devices comes many opportunities for businesses. One of these 
will be increased control of their products, by being able to monitor materials and parts in the 
suppliers production and during the transportation between companies. Global Position System 
(GPS), Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) and Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) sensors can be 
used for the monitoring with different benefits. The GPS sensors are widely known from cars and 
cellphones, with the obvious benefits of tracking the physical location of products. This is particular 
useful when products goes missing during transport, or even on production sites in larger 
manufacturing companies. The WSN group of sensors are used for monitoring physical conditions 
in the environment around the sensors. This can include temperature, humidity, wind speed, dust 
levels, water quality, etc. These sensors are particular useful for products with physical 
requirements, such as freeze-dried medicine or fresh food, which require specific temperature and 
humidity range when stored or transported (Budu, 2012). RFID sensors have two parts, a small tag 
attached to the specific product, and a receiver to read the tag. This receiver can identify the tag 
on distances between a few centimeters and 100 meters, qualifying it for conveniently identify all 
parts in a warehouse, a container or a retail shop instantaneously. Another opportunity for 
connecting products is to connect them with the internet. This will allow the company not only to 
gain information about the use of the product, but also to send information to the product in terms 
of software updates or even remote control the product. When products becomes connected, they 
can even access each other, and communicate with each other. This allows different products or 
machines to make decision based on their sensors input, and potentially automating manual 
==PAGE:15==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
14 
 
processes. By the use of machine learning the products can even learn from each other's 
experience, and thereby improve the performance of the product or suggest changes to the. This 
is especially seen in the automotive industry, where self-driving car gain experience whenever a 
car in the fleet is driving. The data measured by the sensors can therefore be valuable for both 
customers as well as the company selling the products.  
The next section will describe each of these technologies in debts, and give practical examples of 
use cases for the technology.  
 
3.1.1. Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) 
RFID is an emerging technology, which is widely considered a technology capable of affecting entire 
supply chains due to its major benefits and advantages over traditional mean of identification, such 
as optical bar codes. The RFID was invented on MIT in 1998 as part of an identification project. The 
project quickly gained attention, and in 2003 around hundred engineers and university students 
was working on getting it to market. In 2005 a common standard was agreed upon, but with the 
crisis in 2008, the RFID did not see commercial success until around 2012, where a few larger retail 
chains started using it (Sarma, 2012).  
The RFID allows for easy automatic identification of already existing applications, which will 
increase security levels, increase access and exit control, and tracking, all of which could reduce 
labor. The RFID technology is especially useful in warehouse management systems, retail inventory 
management, toll roads, and high value asset tracking and management (Yang, Rida, Traille, & 
Tentzeris, 2008). As mentioned earlier, then consist the technology of a RFID tag and a RFID reader. 
The tag can hold information about the products, such as technical specifications, prize, or origin 
of the product. This information can be accessed by the reader, which uses radiofrequencies to 
power the tag and read from it. The most significant improvement of RFID tags compared to 
barcodes and QR-codes, which can hold similar information about a product, is the distance the tag 
can be read from, and that several tags can be read simultaneous. This allows for automatically 
reading a truck full of small products within seconds, instead of someone having to walk around 
and scan all the product with a portable reader.  
This also allows for reading all tags in a warehouse or in a retail store within seconds, and thereby 
identifying if the desired product is available. This create an opportunity to save cost, due to the 
automatic inventory holding overview, but also to allow for more sales,  seen in the Adidas case.  
==PAGE:16==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
15 
 
 
22 
By having a real-time overview of stock levels, the company can also protect itself against theft, 
loss and counterfeiting. The overview can also decrease picking errors, since every pallet or truck 
leaving a warehouse can be scanned and double checked before leaving3. The RFID tags and readers 
comes in many different variations, depending on the amount of information they should be able 
to hold, and the maximum readable distance between tag and reader. The prices will therefore 
vary depending on the type, but the prices have decreased dramatically in general, coming down 
from around 3 - 5 $ for a passive tag, to 0.10 – 0.40 $. The readers can now also be purchased for 
1,250 $ - 3000$4, which decreases the initial investment for RFID, which had been considered to be 
high in the past.  The major advantages of RFID is thereby a reduction in labor cost, due to less work 
of counting times and scanning barcodes, increased inventory accuracy, increased security due to 
higher level of surveillance of products in stock.  
                                                          
2 The Adidas case can be found here: https://www.supplychaindigital.com/scm/supply-chain-40-adidas-
and-amazon-re-write-rules-supply-chain-management  
3 A longer list of RFID initiatives can be found here  http://www.advancedmobilegroup.com/blog/how-does-modern-
rfid-technology-improve-warehouse-performance  
4A more detailed explanation of the RFID price development: http://www.advancedmobilegroup.com/blog/the-true-
price-of-rfid-tags  
Adidas Case  
 
 
 
 
 
Adidas is one of the largest sports brand in the world, and the largest shoe brand in Russia, 
with more than 1,200 stores. Adidas have implemented an omni channel strategy to allow 
their customers to purchase any product anywhere in Russia, and get it delivered any way, 
meaning at home or pick up at local store. The "click-and-collect" option quickly became 
popular, and Adidas had to improve their delivery time to the stores. By the use if RFID tags 
in every shoebox, it was possible to identify the right shoes at the nearest location, and get 
in send from another store, instead of from a large distribution center. Shipping from one 
end of Russia to the other end could take up to 15 days, but with shipping from store to 
store, the delivery time was minimized. When buying shoes online, around 70 % is expected 
to be returned, if not delivered within 3 days, but with the new high-speed delivery, the 
return rate dramatically improved. Adidas experienced 40% higher sales, due to the lower 
number of returns, which also meant fewer logistic costs. Hereafter Adidas started looking 
at the supply chain as a sales driver just as much as a cost driver2. 
==PAGE:17==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
16 
 
3.1.2. Global positioning System (GPS) 
Being able to identify products with technologies as RFID yields many benefits when dealing with 
warehousing and inventory management, but what happens when the product leave the 
warehouse? Often it will be transported to another company or directly to the end customer, but 
without any tracking between the warehouses and the receiving point, which increases the risk of 
missing products, off-loading wrong products or delay. This can create a scenario where the 
receiver will try to trace the cargo, by calling the sender or the directly to the logistic company 
asking, e.g. "Has my cargo arrived?" or "When will my cargo arrive" (He, Tan, & Lee, 2009). By the 
use of GPS, the sender and receiver can access the position of their cargo. The GPS system works 
by triangulation the distances from a receiver to three satellites, enabling a two-dimension (latitude 
and longitude) position, and a forth satellite is used to compute the altitude position. Once the 
location is calculated the data is saved, and the speed and direction can be calculated from a time 
series of data sets. By the use of General Packet Radio System (GPRS) the datasets can be 
transferred from the receiver to a web server or personal computer. This information can then be 
used for fleet management and tracking of cargo by the use of dedicated software systems (Chadil, 
Russameesawang, & Keeratiwintakorn, 2008). 
Many advantages can be realized by the use of GPS tracking: first of all a more transparent transport 
chain, and thereby an increased delivery performance and a faster problem identification, such as 
bottlenecks in the logistics. Secondly the GPS tracking can help with a more accurate planning of 
production, and a faster reaction time when delays raises (Kandel, Klumpp, & Keusgen, 2011). Both 
of these have been used by Coca Cola in their fleet management system using GPS, see Coca Cola 
Case. Thirdly, the GPS tracking can be used to identify products and how they are used. This 
information can be used to optimize the use the product, e.g. by suggest a more efficient route for 
a lawnmower to drive, suggest when service is needed based on how much the product have 
moved or to find the product if a recall or repair is needed.  
The criticism towards GPS is concerning the inaccuracy of the data. Some of the data can be 
unreliable, if the signal are interrupted, e.g. by valleys or high rising mountains. The signal can also 
be reflected by high building facades, if consisting of glass, making the distance to the satellite 
longer, and an incorrect position will thereby be calculated. It is a common misconception that GPS 
only works when having a clear line of sight to the satellites, but with a higher and higher sensitivity 
on GPS receivers, it have for a long time been possible to get positioning inside buildings (Hein, 
Paonni, Kropp, & Teuber, 2008).  
==PAGE:18==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
17 
 
 
5 
3.1.3. Wireless sensor network (WSN) and the Internet of Things (IoT) 
Aside from RFID and GPS sensors comes a large range of other sensors which can be attached to 
products. These sensors will often be connected to a network, called a wireless sensor network 
(WSN). A typical WSN is composed of small devices, called nodes. The nodes include an embedded 
CPU and some smart sensors. With these sensors, the nodes can monitor surrounding 
environmental factors such as temperature, vibration levels, humidity, pressure or accelerations. 
The devices are linked, often by a wireless media, and can thereby communicate their 
measurements to a centralized electronic interface, where the measurements can be read. The 
system was originally invented by the US military in the cold war, to detect submarines by a network 
of sonar sensors, but is now used in all industries  (Kocakulak & Butun, 2017). A common use is for 
quality control, where sensors monitor the physical conditions in which the products are produced 
or stored. In the food and medicine industry, temperature monitoring have been used for many 
                                                          
5The case of Coca Cola's fleet management can be found here: 
https://www.fieldtechnologiesonline.com/doc/coca-cola-s-winning-fleet-management-formula-0001 
Coca Cola Case 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coca-Cola Bottling Company Consolidated produces approx. 160 million cases of soft drinks 
annually, which are transported between 5 production facilities and 46 distribution centers 
in the USA. This requires many trucks, and create a highly complex logistics network. Coca 
Cola experienced an overabundance of idle trailers at some locations, while other locations 
had to scramble to the needed meet capacity. One location had an automatic pallet builder, 
but trailers could not meet the demand from this, and utilization decreased at the location. 
On top of that, at any given time, up to 10% of the trailer fleet was unaccounted for. To 
combat these challengers, Coca Cola installed a GPS unit on each truck. After this, all location 
managers was able to get an overview of all the trucks and where they were going. The rental 
and lease cost of trailers was reduced by 20% and the 10% unaccounted for trailers was 
reduced to less than 1%. The idle time at customers have been decreased by sending a 
message before a truck would arrive, and the maintenance of trucks have been systemized 
after driven distance instead of time, which have proved more effective, and thereby given 
fewer breakdowns. The GPS system have thereby create high value in short time for Coca 
Cola.5 
==PAGE:19==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
18 
 
years, both during production, storage and transportation, but other industries are also starting to 
realize the potential of this technology. This could be by implementing sensors for the use of 
Predictive Maintenance (PdM), for monitoring and assessing the health status of a piece of 
equipment. PdM allow the company to detect some failures before they happens, and thereby 
allowing enough time to send a service technician. PdM is an important and relevant example of 
the class of industrial sensor networking applications that can add measureable value to a 
company, or to its customers, and thereby improving the overall performance of the supply chain. 
(Krishnamurthy et al., 2005).  An example could be a company who sells pumps with some sensors 
included, which will connect to the internet. By measuring, the pressure on a pump at the same 
time as the power consumption, and thereby calculate the efficiency of the pump. If the efficiency 
drops, it could mean that the pump is being used in a wrong way, e.g. by a wrong type of liquid 
being pumped, or that some failure have happened. This could be a bearing or pump blade have 
come loose, but the pump is still able to run. The company can improve its customers operation by 
giving these insights from the sensors, so it becomes possible to replace the broken part before the 
whole system breaks down. Providing services like PdM for customers opens up for whole new 
business models, where it could make more sense, not to sell the product, but to sell the service of 
the product. A pump manufacture could sell flow of water, instead of selling the pump, since they 
already have the insights into the use of the product. By developing new business models, 
companies are more likely to get closer to each other's operations, and thereby intertwine the 
supply chain. 
The WSN technology plays a fundamental part in the IoT, where sensors are used to control devices, 
and will be connected to the internet. This brings the WSN technology not only to businesses, but 
also directly to the consumers. The IoT will tie together the different kinds of devices, and not only 
make the gathered information available, but also act automatically on the information (Kocakulak 
& Butun, 2017). The IoT works as a bridge between all of these mentioned technologies, and give 
the possibility to connect all the different kinds of devices and sensors. The area of IoT does 
therefore not only include the WSN technology, but also identification technologies as RFID and 
positioning technologies as GPS (Zhou & Piramuthu, 2015). The ability to merge the different kinds 
of data to create and overview, and act on the gathered information, could yield even more savings 
across the supply chain, see Figure 3-5 which shows an illustration of how different sensors can 
upload their data to a cloud based service.  
==PAGE:20==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
19 
 
 
Figure 3-5: Example of how data from different technologies can be merged into an IoT Cloud platform 
An IoT Cloud Platform can be shared across companies in the supply chain, allowing for sharing 
information about devices. Ganguly describes how around 64 larger IoT Cloud Platforms have been 
developed or are under development, and evaluate them on many different parameters. Most 
notably is how well some of the open source platforms are performing in the competition against 
the paid platforms (Ganguly, 2016). To use an open source platform, as Kaa by CyperVision is free 
and can support a large range of different devices, and provide an overview, which is accessible on 
iOS and Android devices as well as computers. This can make the initial investment much smaller 
for companies, which is of key importance, since it is crucial for the success of the platform, to get 
as many of the suppliers onboard. If an investment becomes too big, the smaller suppliers might 
be reluctant to join.  
These great possibilities within connectivity will thereby allow companies to work closer together, 
and share information across organizations and to the end-customers. With the connectivity of 
products to the end customer, it will be also possible to utilize business opportunities in Reverse 
Supply Chain. Reverse Supply Chain is the term coined for getting products back from customers at 
the end of the life of the products. This can be to reuse, rebuild or recycle the components. This 
gives opportunities in both in terms of branding and savings in reusing old components to make 
new products (Guide Jr & Van Wassenhove, 2002). Opportunities to work closer together also 
allows companies for a more efficient traceability in their supply chain, which is described in depth 
in the next section. 
 
==PAGE:21==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
20 
 
3.2. Technologies enabling traceability 
Traceability is the ability to trace material, parts, components and product throughout the supply 
chain, and thereby not only from suppliers, but to the customers as well (Pouliot & Sumner, 2008). 
Most companies have the capability to trace their products in some degree, but it is often based 
on a manual process, requiring administration workers to perform detective work, to find the right 
batch of parts and where they might be located in the world. Increased effectiveness in traceability 
yields a large number of benefits for companies. The main benefit with forward traceability, the 
ability to trace products in the outbound logistics and out to the end-customer, is to be able to see 
how the product is used in real life, and thereby being able to modify the product to the specific 
use, as seen in the Bosch Case.  
 
Another benefit of forward traceability is in the case of a quality issue on a product. For many 
manufactures it is difficult to recall their parts, since they might been sold through a retail or 
distribution center, and the end customer of the product is therefore unknown. The company might 
have to recall all products by advertising their mistake, even though the issue only affects a small 
fraction of the products. This can come with great cost to the company, both in inspection and 
repair, but also in reputation and thereby loss in brand value. With an effective traceability system 
it becomes much easier for the company to find all the product affected by the quality issue, and 
only recall the relevant products, see Trek case (TREK, 2016). 
Bosch Case 
Bosch is the supplier of brake pads for Tesla Motors. Tesla have set up a data sharing 
systems, which allows suppliers to access vehicle data and repair data relevant to the 
individual supplier. After several years of use, Bosch discovered that their brake pads hardly 
had any wear, and the design was therefore much larger than necessary. The electrical cars 
simply use the electrical motors to brake, since this can recharge the battery, and the 
brakes are therefore much more seldom used compared to normal cars. Bosch used this 
information redesign their brake pads to a more suitable smaller size, helping Bosch to 
combat the prize pressure from Tesla, and Tesla to become more profitable. 
==PAGE:22==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
21 
 
 
In cases like these, it would be ideal to trace the customer by linking the buyer information, e.g. 
credit card name and bank, to the purchase of the product, and thereby find a direct way to contact 
the end customer about a recall. 
Backwards traceability, the ability to trace products back in the supply chain, to find the source of 
each product, is important for food and pharma industry companies, to insuring safety in their 
products. In a case of an outbreak, e.g. E. coli bacteria in some food, it is important to find the 
source of the food, to be able to recall the right products. The EU adopted a legislation requiring all 
food and pharma to be traceable to its origins of production, and a similar legislation was adopted 
in the US in 2012 (European Parliament and Council, 2002, Article 18). These companies have 
therefore been forces to have the ability to trace, but often in a ineffective manner. An E. coli 
outbreak in Spinach in the US coursed 3 death, 31 severe kidney failures and around 4000 cases of 
sickness in 2006. The US Food and Drug Administraion (FDA) spend 14 days to find the source of 
the outbreak, which turned out to be one batch of spinach, from one single farm (Yiannas, 2017). 
New technologies would enable effectiveness to increase in case like this, making it take minutes 
to trace instead of weeks, as seen in the Walmart Case. 
Trek Case 
Trek design and manufacture road and mountain bikes. In 2016 Trek discovered that they 
have made a design flaw on some of their mountain bikes, making the front fork come 
lose, which could result in unexpected turns on the front wheel or simply collapse of the 
front fork. This minor design flaw could lead to serious accidents, and Trek put out a recall 
notice to bike shops selling the Trek brand. Trek thereby made it the shops responsibility 
to contact the customers on their behalf, which prove to become very difficult. Many bike 
shops did not keep records on the persons who bought the affected bikes, and did 
therefore not succeed in contacting the Trek customers. This later lead to serious accidents 
for some of the owners of the affected bikes, which did not know about the recall. These 
customers might not buy a Trek bike next time. 
==PAGE:23==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
22 
 
 
The benefit of backward traceability is, furthermore a more precise forecasting and thereby better 
and more robust planning. If a company is able to foresee lateness from suppliers, or from sub 
suppliers, it is possible to tune its production, so the lateness will have a minimal impact. This could 
be by producing other products, and thereby keep utilization up. 
To share data and increase traceability within the supply chain, several technical approached have 
been developed, but in this thesis, we will focus on two broad categories. The first is a common 
cloud platform, which companies in a supply chain can use. This platform can facilitate access for 
companies to read other companies in the supply chains data. Companies like Oracle and SAP have 
developed cloud platform, which makes it convenient for companies already using their ERP 
system, to start to use this new functionality. The different cloud platforms does in many ways bare 
a similarity to the ERP systems already in use, and the implementation of this new system, might 
therefore become easier than with the other technology. Another promising technology to share 
information in the supply chain is blockchain technology. Several larger enterprises, such as IBM, 
MAERSK, Walmart, P&G, Fujitsu, Daimler, and Airbus, have already declared that they will utilize 
blockchain technology in the future. The blockchain technology offers several benefits over the 
cloud computing including higher security and trust among transactions. The blockchain technology 
is, however, at an infant stage in the maturity, and can therefore become harder to adopt. The 
technicalities and benefits of these two different technologies is described in depth in the next 
sections. 
 
Walmart Case 
Walmart is one of the largest retail chains in the world. Their products comes from all 
around the world, and is often bought through distribution centers. Safety is at the core 
in the food industry, but sometimes some product might get though the quality 
inspections. E. coli or Listeria could be found in a product, after a customer have been 
hospitalized, and to avoid more people from being sick, Walmart have to recall their 
products. The efficiency of tracing the source of the outbreak will be the most significant 
factor in determining the time the product will be band in the stores. To increase the 
efficiency of the traceability, Walmart have been working with IBM to implement 
blockchain technology. Walmart believes that this will enable them to trace a product in 
seconds instead of days, and thereby limit the damage of their customer. 
==PAGE:24==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
23 
 
3.2.1. Blockchain 
Blockchain have, as mentioned earlier, gained large amount of attention and hype lately. This 
attention comes primarily from the rising prices of bitcoins, which builds on this technology. 
Blockchain is, like the name suggest, a chain of blocks, where each block contain an amount of data. 
This data could be a single transaction between persons or companies, or a number of transactions 
in a specified time frame. Each block is linked to the previous block with a hash key, and the data 
therefore flows in a linear chronological order. The participants in the blockchain collectively 
maintain this chain of blocks with data, which means that every participants can access the data 
(Chen et al., 2017). Every time a new block have to be linked into the blockchain, a number of 
participants have to collectively reach a consensus of the data. This mean, if a company sells a car 
to another company, the participants might be an actioner, a bank and the tax authorities, which 
have to reach a consensus, before the car have changed ownership, and the money will exchange 
between the companies. If the consensus is reached, the block will be processes into to blockchain, 
and everyone having access to the blockchain will be able to see the change in ownership. This is a 
key feature in the technology, since this automatic creates a traceability of all transactions. With 
the chain of data blocks, everyone who participate in the blockchain can look back, and see who 
owned a certain asset at any given time, since transactions of the asset would have to be in the 
blockchain. The blockchain can be either public or closed for public. In a public blockchain, the 
participants would often hide their identity, and make transaction under a code name, which is 
very difficult to connect to their real identity (Cole & Gorman, 2018). The bitcoin blockchain is public 
and builds on anonymity for its participants, which have obvious benefits for trading illegal 
products. A blockchain created for the purpose of companies trading with each other would most 
probably be closed, meaning that only invited companies can participate in it. The companies in a 
closed blockchain lets their identity be known, so other companies know to whom they are selling 
or buying products. A blockchain can also be semi-closed, where a larger number of participants 
shares a blockchain, but not all companies might have full visibility of all transactions. This can be 
a benefit where competing companies are in the same blockchain, and does not wish for 
competitors to know about their transactions with suppliers or their potential recalls.  
The blockchain technologies often builds on an open governance structure, where none of the 
participants in the blockchain owns and control the blockchain, but rather have a decentralized 
governance, shared among all the participants. The decentralized governance enables the 
individual participants to contribute with updates to the system, e.g. a new way of reaching 
consensus of a certain type of transaction, or build on new systems and types of transactions. The 
other participants, or a selected group, will then evaluate the updates or suggestions and the 
==PAGE:25==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
24 
 
changes well then be approved or declined. The changes cannot be made before a consensus is 
reached, and it thereby becomes very difficult to tamper with the structure of the blockchain, which 
increases the trustworthiness of the chain. The decentralization of the system is of key importance, 
since this ensures a higher reliability. Even if the system at one organization crash, other 
organizations in the network would keep maintaining the blockchain. 
There are several advantages with using a blockchain. The most obvious is the increased efficiency 
by having a shared ledger with suppliers and customers, instead of each company register incoming 
and outgoing transactions. A shared ledger will have all the information. This also makes it possible 
for a company to see all the incoming and outgoing transactions for its suppliers and customers, 
thereby allowing the company to follow its products all the way to the end-customers. The shared 
ledger should furthermore decrease administration cost of sales and procurement, since fewer 
registrations have to be made. This decrease in cost would be significant in industries where the 
primary service is transactions, such as the backing industry, insurance industry or pension industry. 
Accenture and PWC reach a similar conclusion in their whitepapers (Treat, Brodersen, Blain, & 
Kurbanov, 2017) (Gregorio, 2017), of cost savings up to 50% on the financial functions within these 
industries, which not only comes from transaction cost savings, but also from saving on their IT 
legacy systems.  
Several industrial companies have already started using blockchain, where many have chosen to 
use the Hyperledger created by IBM and Intel, see Hyperledger case. As mentioned earlier, then 
companies such as Walmart, P&G, Fujitsu, Daimler, Airbus and Maersk have all declared to start 
using blockchain technology, which will affect most of companies in their supply chain. The spread 
of blockchain technology might therefore be faster than most people anticipate. The affected 
partners of the Maersk blockchain are displayed in Figure 3-66. These companies, associations and 
authorities will all have to actively use the technology, and thereby be required to gain the needed 
IT capabilities.  
Maersk will start by running a series of pilot projects, involving Maersk customers, ports, customs 
authorities and a number of other companies, and will use these pilot projects to evaluate 
increased efficiency and accuracy of the shared information. Maersk expect a 15% increase in 
global trade by reducing barriers within the supply chain, due to the increased efficiencies and 
accuracy provided by the shared platform.  
                                                          
6More about Maersk's blockchain initiatives and the involved partners can be found in their press release: 
https://www.maersk.com/stories/maersk-and-ibm-launch-digital-joint-venture  
==PAGE:26==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
25 
 
 
Figure 3-6: Illustration from the Maersk homepage about their new platform. The new platform, build on blockchain 
technology, will affect many different partners and companies. 
 
Not all these tremendous upsides comes without criticism however. The business cases from 
Accenture and PWC, mentioned earlier, is described to account for the implementation, hosting 
and licensing cost, but does not seem to take energy cost and storage cost to run the blockchain 
into consideration (Bloomberg, 2018). Especially the energy cost of running a blockchain have 
gained attention from several authors and news media. Digiconomist estimates that the energy 
consumption from the Bitcoin blockchain is 170 GWh per day7. The energy consumption varies on 
a daily basis, depending on the number of transactions, but have in general increased by 600% since 
last year. In comparison to this is the overall energy consumption in Denmark only 86 GWh per day. 
The Bitcoin blockchain thereby uses around twice the amount of energy than Denmark, but other 
cryptocurrencies are also using tremendous energy, such as the Ethereum blockchain, consuming 
approximately 49 GWh per day. Since all blockchain project by companies are still in the pilot phase, 
the power consumption is still low, but new developments in making the blockchain scalable and 
keep transactions cost low will be of high importance.  
                                                          
7The daily usage of energy from bitcoin and other larger crypto-currencies can be seen at Digiconomist 
webpage:  https://digiconomist.net/bitcoin-energy-consumption  
==PAGE:27==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
26 
 
 
 
3.2.2. Cloud based supply chain management system 
Another way of sharing information across the supply chain is by the use of a shared cloud based 
supply chain management system. A cooperative supply chain benefits all the parties in the supply 
chain, where the adoption of the cloud system is of key importance, since an increase in 
participants will also create an increase in the knowledge base. A larger knowledge base will lead 
to a competitive advantages, which will improve the overall performance in the supply chain (Liu, 
Li, & Lai, 2013). A study by De Mattos and Laurindo promise the overall operational efficiency of 
the entire supply chain will improve with an information exchange structure based on a business-
to-business (B2B) platform, with all enterprises at the nodes of the supply chain tightly connected 
to each other. A collaborative enterprise system will therefore optimize the entire system, and 
gains are divided among the partners companies (De Mattos & Laurindo, 2015). 
A system like this lets participants in the shared system access information about sales, inventory 
levels, production and demand from other companies. This will allow for an automation of central 
functions in the supply chain management, such as procurement. In the last 15 years, the shift 
towards E-Procurement have increased efficiency, by automating some of the procedures in 
Hyperledger by IBM and Intel 
The Hyperledger project was established in 2015 in a corporation between IBM and 
Intel, and now have over 140 company members. The project has an open source, open 
standards and open governance structure, but with IBM as the premier member, which 
also offers 24/7 technical support for the other members. The Hyperledger have two 
different layers: A "fabric" layer, which is the core code of the blockchain and a 
"composer" layer, which lays on top of the fabric layer, making it easier for companies 
to create their own applications in a more high level coding language. In this way, the 
companies can create their own applications with a lower level of IT capabilities. The 
Hyperledger is not an actual blockchain, but a software making it easier for any company 
to start their own blockchain. The different blockchains created on the Hyperledger will 
be compatible, and can in theory be connected to each other, allowing one supply 
chains blockchain to merge with another supply chain. The blockchain will then run on 
the Hyperledger, and be powered by IBM mainframes.  
==PAGE:28==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
27 
 
procurement. E-Procurement is the technological term for companies buying using the internet, 
including sending orders and bills automatic. The electronic data interchange (EDI) system have 
further facilitated the transfer of transactions between two business partners by integrating 
databases using a standardized format for purchase orders.  These systems have already showed 
to improve the performance of the supply chain, where GE reported cost drop of 30% in labor-
intensive paper-based purchasing process and a material cost reduction of 5% to 20%. Other firms 
have experience even greater reductions above 50% (Presutti, 2003). 
Another step on the road of digitalizing in the supply chain function is vendor inventory 
management (VIM) systems. Despite this system being invented more than 15 years ago, it is still 
considered modern, due to the slow development and the little use of it in the industry (Brandes, 
2007). VIM systems lets the supplier control the inventory of a company. By doing this, the 
company safes money on inventory, since it does not own the products before it removes them 
from inventory, and reduces complexity, since it does not have to monitor their inventory levels 
and order new products when levels are low. The supplier benefits by allowing for a more steady 
flow of production, and can improve flexibility in their production. The supplier can also freely move 
products between customers, since the customers does not own the product in their inventory, 
and thereby have an increased flexibility. One study showed an 28% increase in profit, mainly 
driven by a 16% reduction in costs, by implementing a fully implemented vendor-managed 
inventory system compared to a company not using vendor-managed inventory systems (Chungsuk 
Ryu, 2017).  
Several different companies have created such a cloud platform, but Oracle, SAP and Microsoft 
have made some of the most comprehensives. Oracle has developed a cloud based inventory 
management system, which allows several organizations to access the inventory management 
information along with other information build into the same platform8. Microsoft has been 
developing their Dynamics 365 platform in a similar way, where they combine the customer 
relationship management (CRM) module with their ERP module, and thereby lets companies share 
some of their ERP data with customers and suppliers9. Microsoft has made a collaboration with the 
company Adents, which specialize in tracing products through the supply chain, and offers a near 
real-time traceability of products. Microsoft is even taken the system a step further, and offers 
customers access to their IoT platform, Azure, which can be used to control IoT devices as well as 
                                                          
8Link to the Oracle inventory management cloud platform: https://cloud.oracle.com/en_US/inventory-
management-cloud  
9Link to Microsoft Dynamics 365 platform, combining CRM an ERP: https://dynamics.microsoft.com/en-us/  
==PAGE:29==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
28 
 
manage and analyze data10. This give companies the opportunity to access all their information 
regarding their supply chain in one system, and can thereby provide a more holistic overview, than 
a blockchain platform such as the Hyperledger. 
Despite these promising benefits, several studies also points to some key challengers in using a 
collaborative cloud platform. A company has to invest time and money in the new system, but the 
success of the integration depends highly on the implementation of their suppliers and customers. 
The technological capabilities, user acceptance, the learning curve and need for trust between 
planner and buyer are key challengers every company joining a collaboration have to face (De 
Mattos & Laurindo, 2015). There have been data breaches in the recent past, e.g. from Equifax, 
where 143 million customer records were compromised11, and Deloitte had a breach in September 
2017, where they admitted that hackers have gained access to emails and confidential information 
of their blue-chip clients12. Both Equifax and Deloitte blamed the breach on a vendor's IT security13, 
but it does reflect badly back on their own reputation. Data breaches like these might stem from a 
lack of visibility into the security practices of third parties. Communication between companies are 
key to combat these treats. Communication on an inter-organizational level contributes not only 
to knowledge sharing across the different companies, but have also been proven to increase trust 
in the system. To keep an open communication about security, it is necessary to ensure all parties 
are on par on their IT security level. The level of trust in the system will also directly influence the 
level of adoption, which will increase the competitiveness (Liu et al., 2013). 
Many different technologies have been described in the past section, along with their potentials of 
improving the overall performance of the supply chain. By connecting resources, parts, products 
and transportation with sensors as RFID, GPS, WSN and connecting them with the internet, it would 
be possible to increase efficiency in inventory management, logistics and ensure quality, at the 
same time as decreasing manual labor, to mention a few of the before mentioned benefits. Several 
technologies within the traceability area would allow for a more holistic overview of products, and 
higher efficiency when tracing products. This will further more enable the company to get a more 
accurate forecasting, and thereby improve the planning. Improvement of the performance of the 
supply chain by technologies from Industry 4.0 is therefore highly possible. The performance will, 
                                                          
10 Link to Microsoft Axure, which combines their IoT platform with analysis of a large range of business 
parameters: https://azure.microsoft.com/da-dk/  
11 US Federal trade commission on the Equifax data breach: https://www.ftc.gov/equifax-data-breach  
12 The Guardian reveals the Deloitte breach:https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/sep/25/deloitte-
hit-by-cyber-attack-revealing-clients-secret-emails  
13 New York Post article about the blaming of vendor security: https://nypost.com/2017/09/08/equifax-
blames-giant-breach-on-vendor-software-flaw/  
==PAGE:30==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
29 
 
however, undoubtedly also be affected by more traditional parameters seen from industry 3.0. To 
capitalize on the new possibilities industry 4.0 brings to performance management and reporting 
systems, it is important to maintain the right focus on what and where to measure (Flegel & 
Wutzler, 2017). To manage suppliers in the supply chain is of key importance to keep a high 
performance in the supply chain. To increase the overall performance, it is important to manage 
the majority of a company's suppliers and customers, otherwise can opportunities for cost 
reductions or revenue increased be missed (Langfield-smith & Smith, 2005).   
To understand how these technologies are affecting the performance of the supply chain, the 
methodology of multi-case studies where used. An in debt explanation of the methodology will 
follow in the next section, including a go-through of the interview guide.  
 
 
==PAGE:31==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
30 
 
4. Methodology 
The following section will review the methodological considerations in which this report is based 
upon. Firstly, the theoretical foundation will be presented, where after the theory behind the 
design of the study and lastly will the interview guide will be explained. This include considerations 
on data collection, data processing and mythological considerations.  
 
4.1. Theoretical foundation 
The working process of this master thesis have been characterized by the critical rationalism, with 
the falsification principle as its core (Holm, 2011). Although this have been the central theoretical 
viewpoint, the analysis have also been subject to a more pragmatic touch, where softer theoretical 
perspectives also find their use. The theoretical foundation of the assignment is not a hypothesis 
building and testing approach, but has rather been an exploratory work. The main research 
question seeks to explore the interference of supply chain, industry 4.0 and performance 
management, but without a clear hypothesis to test, and both interview as well as discussing will 
be highly affected by this chose. The first explorative interviews in this thesis has an inductive 
character, in which qualitative methods are central, which has reflected both the theoretical and 
empirical work (Ghauri & Grønhaug, 2010). While searching for general explanations, the 
embedded multi-case study is argued by Ghauri and Grønhaug to be best suite, when using one of 
the four types of case study (Yin, 1994). 
 
Figure 4-1 Basic design for case studies (Yin, 1994). This thesis builds around Type 4. 
Overall, the interviews have primarily been prepared from an academic standpoint, but at the same 
time, it has sometimes been necessary to consider how the business world function and use this 
perspective.  
 
==PAGE:32==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
31 
 
4.2. Research design 
The study in this thesis is based upon interviews with several larger companies located in Denmark. 
This is defined as an empirical study (Andersen, 2008), where a phenomenon in the real world is 
studied by the use of real world cases. This form of investigation utilize a broad band of opinions 
and perceptions to cast light over the specific subject of supply chain 4.0, and how well companies 
in Denmark are performing in their supply chain. The use of a series of companies, compare to the 
use of a single case study, have several advantages to maximize the validity of the study. This 
repeatability of a statement from different companies increases the validity, due to an increase in 
knowledge of the causality. The goal is to gain a full understanding of the phenomenon by 
accumulating multiple entries as supporting sources of evidence (Meredith, 1998). Depending of 
the size of the population of interviews, this kind of study creates a good foundation for 
generalization across companies, which can be useful for comparing Denmark to other countries, 
or gain insights, which could be applicable to companies not interviewed in this study. 
This kind of study design, however, does also have several drawbacks. First, as much as the 
possibility of generalization increases by the width of this study, the depth of the study tend to 
decreases. Where a single case study could provide a deeper causality in challengers experienced 
by a company, by finding the root course of the problem, then this study only analyze the 
challengers on the surface. Secondly, this kind of study is very resource heavy. Many interviews 
have to be arranged with different companies at different locations. Just finding the right person 
to interview in the company can be a difficult task, since companies can be organized in many 
different ways. This increase in difficulty also create an uncertainty, since it cannot always be 
guaranteed, that the interviewee is the best person to answer the questions. The answers might 
therefore have been different, if a more knowledgeable person at the company was interviewed 
instead. This uncertainty is minimized by asking several persons in the company to whom is the 
most knowledgeable person on the subject, but can never be eliminated. The person interviewed 
for this thesis was often a supply chain director or a head of a digitalization/industry 4.0 
department, but in one case, it was not possible to get access to the most knowledgeable person 
on the subject, but the interviewee was in this case knowledgeable enough to describe key 
initiatives, challengers, etc. Despite these drawbacks, this kind of case research can have a high 
impact. By conducting the research in the field, the researcher also becomes enriched, by being 
exposed to real life problems and creative insights from people of different parts of an organization. 
By letting the interview be explorative, it can lead to new and creative insights, and have a high 
validity among practitioners – the ultimate user of research (Voss, Tsikriktsis, & Frohlich, 2002). 
==PAGE:33==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
32 
 
4.3. Data collection 
The chosen study design was in a high degree based upon the chosen data collection technique. 
The literature distinguishes between primary and secondary data (Andersen, 2008). Primary data 
can be subdivided into stimuli data and non-stimuli data, where stimuli data is data generated on 
the initiatives of the investigator in the study. This can either be surveys or interviews, where a 
questions made by the investigator will give a certain set of answers. This thesis build on stimuli 
data, where the interviews primarily have followed a structured form.  This is with the exception of 
the first few interviews, which followed a more unstructured form, to explore the subject of supply 
chain 4.0, and gain a deeper understanding on how companies are thinking about this subject. The 
advantage of the unstructured interview is the possibility of having a conversation with the 
interviewee, where the direction of the conversation, in a high degree, is controlled by the 
interviewee, and not the only the interviewer. After these unstructured interviews, main themes 
and technologies became clearer, and a prioritization of questions for the structured interview was 
made. Some of the key discoveries was a high interest in the connectivity subject, which was not 
expected to be such a central subject of interest. The digitalization of product was very high on the 
agenda, and new questions in this subject was therefore created. The subject of automation in 
logistics was discovered not to be interesting. The author expected this to be a central topic in 
industry 4.0, but it turned out not to have much relevance for the interviewed companies. The 
companies did simply not transport their own products to their customers or distribution centers. 
They would expect that their logistic partners would look into self-driving trucks, cars, etc., but they 
did take any actions in this area. If prices would go down on logistics due to self-driving freight 
vehicles, it would be great, but they did not do anything to influence this industry. The first few 
companies mentioned the traceability subject, as a central topic, and the subject was therefore 
chosen to be explored more in debt.   
After the unstructured interviews, a structured interview guide was constructed. The guide include 
both quantitative questions as well as qualitative questions. Most research in operation 
management is based on statistical survey analysis and mathematical modelling, however, "the 
explanation of quantitative findings and the construction of theory based on those findings will 
ultimately have to be based on qualitative understanding" (Meredith, 1998) and qualitative 
questions have therefore been a central source of information in this thesis. The quantitative 
questions gives the company the ability to score themselves in terms of how well they perform in 
different areas and score the importance of supply chain 4.0 technologies, where the qualitative 
questions lets the company explain the reason behind their initiatives, and what they expect 
because of the initiatives. Answers to the qualitative questions have advantages and disadvantages. 
==PAGE:34==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
33 
 
One advantage is clearly the larger sum of information, where arguments can be presented and 
shine light on issues or challengers other companies might have encountered. The main 
disadvantage is the difficulty in administration and analyzing of these answers, which have a large 
variety. Any stimuli data will furthermore be subject to the interviewer-effect, where the 
interviewer might interpret the answers based on some unconscious expected answers or 
predetermined opinions on the subject. However, the advantages is considered to be larger than 
the disadvantages. 
The study also include some secondary data, consisting of company specific material, sent after an 
interview. Together with public information, such as annual reports from the companies and media 
articles about technological initiatives, this have given the opportunity to use a methodical 
triangulation on some of the company, where different data and analysis is used to cast light on 
different subject from different angles. This type of triangulation is described as data triangulation 
(Carter, Bryant-Lukosius, DiCenso, Blythe, & Neville, 2014). 
 
4.4. Data analysis 
The purpose of analyzing the data is to disassemble the different parts and investigate them 
individually and their interactions between each other (Andersen, 2008). The analyze therefore 
take it offset in disassembling the different companies by industry and their customer base. During 
the interviews, a hypothesis about the level of traceability and connectivity would in a high degree 
depend on the industry was created by the interviewees. When analyzing the companies, it later 
became clear, that the customer type was also an influencing factor, where B2B customers would 
value other aspects and Business-to-Customer (B2C). It was furthermore exploited, if the price of 
the company's products would have any influence of the importance or maturity of technologies, 
but analysis showed no significant pattern, and this categorization of companies was therefore 
rejected.  
To analyze the responses from interviews, all answers to the questions in the interview guide was 
carefully noted, and the answers were grouped into categories. The categories was construction to 
be mutually exclusive and collectively exhausting (MECE), meaning that all answers would fall into 
a category, but never fall into two different categories. Most companies would have several 
answers to a single question, and the number of answers to each question therefore exceed the 
number of companies interviewed. A company would often come up with two different 
challengers, when ask about their main challenge in implementing new initiatives, as an example. 
==PAGE:35==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
34 
 
This was deemed to increase the insight this investigation could bring, and no restrictions was 
therefore put on the interviewee to only choose one answer.  
The interviewed companies was mainly in the  B2B category, but with three of them deemed to be 
in the B2C category. Most of the interviewed company was in manufacturing industry, also often 
referred to just as "industry" in literature. In this thesis the manufacturing industry is used to reduce 
the confusion. Five of the companies was in either was either in the medtech, pharma and food 
industry, or in the leisure products industry. The companies are listed below, with a small amount 
of information attached to understand the size of the company, their products and how they have 
been divided in this study. 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
36 
 
 
Figure 4-2: Company overview, key figures, segmentation and interviewee 
The 13 interviews had a combined length of 10 hours and 52 minutes, with an average of 47 
minutes per interview. All companies are located in Denmark, and all was originally from Denmark, 
but international companies have bought three of them. These are Danisco, which was bought by 
DuPont, Bonus Energy, which was bought by Siemens Wind Power and LM Wind Power, which was 
recently bought by General Electrics. 
 
4.5. Interview guide 
The interview guide was originally construction only based on the main research question, but after 
the two unstructured interviews, the interview guide was updated to also include key areas of 
connectivity and traceability. The interview guide was written in Danish, since 12 of the 13 was 
Danish speaking, and it was therefore more convenient to interview in Danish. The questions have, 
however, been translated in the following. The interview guide have 20 questions, and starts by 
understanding the position of the interviewee: 
1. Name and position in company 
2. What are your area(s) of responsibility? 
After this, a small introduction to the subject of supply chain 4.0, and the background of the 
research was explained. The following questions strived to explore the importance of industry 
4.0 in the supply chain: 
3. How important is digitalization of the supply chain for your company (scale from 1 to 5) 
4. At what level is the digitalization of the supply chain anchored in your organization? (CEO, 
top Management, business unit level, other) 
5. Do you have any strategical goals for the digitalization, which affect the supply chain? 
6. Do you have specific areas, which you are going to focus on first? 
After gaining some initial understanding of the importance and focus areas, the concrete 
initiatives in the company was further explored: 
7. Do you already have some ongoing initiatives for digitalizing your supply chain? 
==PAGE:38==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
37 
 
8. What have been the biggest challengers for implementing these initiatives? 
9. What have you done to solve these challengers? 
10. If you could give yourself (or the company) an advise, which could have helped with the 
implementation, what would that be? 
11. Have you reached any of the goals your company set fully or partly? How much have been 
reached? 
After understanding the initiatives started by the company, the two subjects of connectivity 
and traceability was explored. This was done by a small introduction to the terms connectivity 
and traceability, to make sure there was a common understanding of these subjects. The 
questions for connectivity and traceability are the same: 
12. How important is efficient traceability to stay competitive in the future? (scale from 1 to 5) 
13. In what degree do you use technologies to increase efficiency in traceability today, e.g. 
blockchain or share information with other companies with cloud platforms? (scale from 1 
to 5) 
14. In what degree do you use technologies to increase efficiency in traceability in 1 to 2 years? 
(scale from 1 to 5) 
15. What initiatives have you started or planned in the area of traceability technologies? 
16. How important is connectivity to stay competitive in the future? (scale from 1 to 5) 
17. In what degree do you use technologies to increase connectivity today, e.g. RFID, WSN, GPS 
or internet connected products? (scale from 1 to 5) 
18. In what degree do you use technologies to increase connectivity in 1 to 2 years? (scale from 
1 to 5) 
19. What initiatives have you started or planned in the area of connectivity technologies? 
Lastly, the subject of how to measure performance was explored. This was done by a small talk 
about how companies did measure the performance of their suppliers, and there by one 
question and a follow up question.  
20. Do you think suppliers have to perform on some new parameters in the future, or is it still 
mostly important to perform on the usual parameter as price, quality and delivery?  
There was no clear findings in this question, and the theory section and analysis around this 
subject was therefore excluded from the study. 
Lastly, the interviewee was asked if he or she had any extra comments. 
21. Do you have any extra comments, or some consideration, which I have not covered in this 
interview, but could be relevant for me? 
==PAGE:39==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
38 
 
5. Analysis and discussion of interview outcomes 
In the following section, the answers from the interviews will be presented, analyzed, and 
discussed. The analysis will be a mix between quantitative value and qualitative answers. The result 
will be discussed in the same section as the result is presented. Firstly, the groupings for the analysis 
will be described, where after the importance of digitalization of the supply chain, as well as the 
level of which the digitalization is anchored will be analyzed. The strategic goals and focus areas 
will be analyzed and discussed, where after the started initiatives and their goals will be analyzed. 
Thereafter the subject of connectivity and traceability will analyzed, and lastly a description of the 
challengers and proposed solutions will be made, and hereafter analyzed and discussed.   
 
5.1. Industry and customer groupings 
To analyze the responses, certain groupings of the companies are made to distinguish between the 
differences of customers, legislation and products. Eight of the companies are categorized as 
belonging in the manufacturing industry, where their main activity is to produce components for 
other manufacturing companies. Three are categorized in the medtech, pharma and food industry, 
two in the leisure product industry. The groupings are made with the digitalization of supply chain 
in mind, which is the reason for the three companies in the medtech, pharma and food category. 
These companies experience regulations in regards to traceability, which have forced them to 
develop in this area, where other companies have not. GN Store Nord and Lego are categorized in 
the leisure product industry, and have in common that they have established premium brands in 
each of their subcategories of "Toy and games" and "Communication equipment". From a 
statistically standpoint it is clear, that the two smaller groups with only two and three companies, 
are not large enough for a generalization across these two industries. The leisure product industry 
is, however, a small industry in Denmark, with only a few other large companies such as B&O and 
Top Toy, since design and jewelry companies are normally not included in this category, and the 
two companies could therefore give a realistic insight to this group. The medtech, pharma and food 
industry is, on the other hand, a very large group in Denmark, with at seven medical companies 
with more than 1000 employees, a few large food ingredients companies as Chr. Hansen, and 
several large food producing companies as Arla, Danpo, Carlsberg and Royal Unibrew. The three 
companies can therefore not represent the whole group, but can only give an indication.  Even the 
larger group with eight companies could be argued to be too small for a generalization, despite 
representing a large potion of the total number of manufacture companies, if measured on revenue 
or number of employees. If more time and resources had been available, more companies in each 
==PAGE:40==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
39 
 
group could have been interviewed, which also could have made it possible to split up the group of 
medtech, pharma and food. The groupings can be seen in Figure 5-1. 
 
Figure 5-1: Categorization of participating companies into industries 
This study have not been not been focusing on the IT, banking and service industries, since the 
products from suppliers of these companies are often intangible and consists of software systems 
and knowledge. This makes the subject of traceability and connectivity very different compared to 
the other companies, since no physical products will be affected by the technological changes.  
Another categorization, which was made during the analysis, was by the different customer 
segments. The two categorize are B2B and B2C. It is common that business customers would value 
other parameters than consumer, where businesses often seek to streamline the buying process 
to save time, normal people often enjoys the buying experience, and are more willing to shop 
around for the right product. In general, business' purchases in a higher degree based on logic, 
where regular people's purchases often are partly based on emotions. Despite of this, it is widely 
considered that B2B sales are expensive for companies, mainly due to number of people involved 
in making a purchase.  On Figure 5-2, the categorization of companies can be seen. It can be seen 
that 10 companies belongs to the B2B section, and only three companies belongs to the B2C. All 
==PAGE:41==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
40 
 
three companies in the B2C category sells their products via wholesalers, but all their products are 
then bought by consumers. GN audio and Lego also sells direct via their own channels.  
 
Figure 5-2: Categorization of participating companies into customer segments 
In the B2B category is also companies like Hempel, Nilfisk and Danfoss, which sells products to 
consumers via wholesalers, but this is deemed to be a too small part of the overall business.  
 
5.2. Background of participants in interviews 
The participants in this study was chosen mainly by their function in the company. The target 
function was the leader of the supply chain management team or department, but in a few case, 
the company pointed out, that it would be more relevant to talk to their industry 4.0 lead instead, 
since they had a better understanding of the strategic goals as well as an updated view on the 
implementation process. The positions of the interviewees can be seen on Figure 5-3. 
==PAGE:42==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
41 
 
 
Figure 5-3: Number of interviewees on different levels 
The exact positions of each of the interviewed can be seen on Figure 4-2. In general, then the 
interviewees with a position in top management was responsible for end-to-end of the supply 
chain. This include sourcing and suppliers, production, logistics, and sales and operation planning 
(S&OP). Several of the interviewees had furthermore the responsibility of quality departments, 
engineering and capital investments. All the companies operate with a global production setup, 
and are therefore responsible not only for the production, but also the production and asset 
planning. GN Audio was the only company, which did not own their own production facilities, but 
are sourcing their entire production. 
 
5.3. Importance of supply chain 4.0 in companies 
To investigate the importance of the supply chain 4.0, the companies where asked to rank the 
importance on a scale from 1 to 5, and indicate where the initiatives was anchored. The importance 
of digitalization in the supply chain can be seen in Figure 5-4, where the frequency of the companies 
answers are shown. 
 
Figure 5-4. Question: How important is digitalization of the supply chain for your company? 
==PAGE:43==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
42 
 
As the hype of the digitalization have been going on for several years now, it is no surprise that 
business leaders and executives are aware of the potential benefits. The overall average of 
importance was 4.2, which indicates that this is among the most important projects in the 
company. Some of the interviewed also stated that many resources have been allocated to this 
area, both in terms of people working on it and in terms of money to new initiatives. The overall 
importance of digitalization strategy was mentioned by several companies:  
 
Some companies have even acquired other companies, to be able to gain the capabilities faster, in 
an attempt to get ahead of competitors. Acquiring other companies is generally considered to be a 
more expensive method for gaining capabilities, but clearly shows the importance of this project in 
the top management.  
When separating the results into the different industries, no significant difference was found. 
However, when separating the results into the two difference customers groups, it can be seen, 
that the companies selling to customers finds the digitalization of their supply chain even more 
important, see Figure 5-5, where the frequency of answers are split in B2B and B2C. 
 
 
Figure 5-5. Customer segmentation of importance in digitalization of supply chain 
Question: How Important is digitalization of the supply chain for your company? 
With an average of 4.7 for the B2C companies, the importance is significant, despite the low 
number of B2C companies. One of the B2C companies said the following about the importance of 
digitalizing the supply chain: 
==PAGE:44==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
43 
 
For the B2C companies, it might be more important to engage with customers and wholesalers 
through a digital space. When wholesalers have many different suppliers, it becomes very 
important to handle suppliers efficient. This can make the digitalization capabilities of a company 
a qualifier for becoming a supplier. The supplier simply have to be able to handle orders online.  A 
quote from a B2B company demonstrations, that it also depends on what you are focusing on, 
when talking about digitalizing in the supply chain: 
The company argued that neither they nor their business customer was on a digital level, where 
they requested their suppliers to share data or even place order through a digital common 
interface. This shows how some B2B companies have a low digital maturity, and that it might not 
be very effective to invest too much in digitalization, if suppliers and customers are not at the same 
digital level.  
Comparing the results of importance to the another study investigating the importance of 
digitalizing companies located in Denmark (Møller, Hjortegaard, & Bule, 2016), the importance of 
digitalizing the supply chain is only rated 0.05 lower in this study than the importance of 
digitalization of the entire company. In the report by Møller, Hjortegaard and Bule, the importance 
was rated to be 4.25 among 20 of the largest companies in Denmark. This very similar result is as 
expected, since the question is identical in the two studies, and the population of the study is very 
similar. In another study, the impact of industry 4.0 on procurement was investigated. Here it was 
found, that the importance of industry 4.0 on the procurement function was 3.0 on a scale from 1 
to 5 (Glas & Kleemann, 2016). This is less than expected, despite procurement being a part of the 
supply chain, and the overall digitalization of the supply chain is more important than one of its 
parts. The importance of procurement might have been less in 2016 than it does during this 
investigation in 2018, but it might also be affected by the difference in the Danish and German 
industry, which was used in the study by Glas and Kleemann.  
==PAGE:45==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
44 
 
The companies where thereafter asked, at what level the digitalization of the supply chain was 
anchored, and the results can be seen in Figure 5-6, where the frequency of answers are shown: 
 
Figure 5-6. Question: At what level of the organization is the digitalization of the supply chain anchored in your 
organization? 
The digitalization of the supply chain was anchored several difference places in the organization. 
For the companies, who have written the digitalization into their company strategy, it was anchored 
at the CEO level. Many companies did not have the digitalization as part of their overall strategy, 
and at these companies, the digitalization was anchored at the head of the business units, or by 
the director or VP in the organization. If the CEO does not align the digital strategy, it can increase 
the difficulty of implementing new initiatives, since different departments might have different 
goals to achieve, and is therefore not incentivized to corporate with each other.  
 
5.4. Strategic goals 
To set a strategic direction and focusing on digitalizing the supply chain is a key factor in 
determining the success of the transformation to supply chain 4.0. 
Nine of the 13 companies interviewed pointed out, that they did not have a clear define strategy 
for the digitalization of the supply chain, but several companies did have digitalization as part of 
their overall strategy for the company. When analyzing the answers, it becomes clear that the B2C 
companies selling to customers more often have a defined strategy that the companies selling to 
businesses, which can be seen Figure 5-7, where the frequency is displayed for each of the three 
categories. 
==PAGE:46==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
45 
 
 
Figure 5-7 - B2C and B2B companies' status on having digitalization as part of their strategy 
Question: Do you have any strategical goals for the digitalization, which affect the supply chain?  
The B2C companies thereby both set a higher importance of digitalization than the B2B and have a 
more clear defined strategy. When looking at the B2B companies, only two of the 10 have clearly 
specified a strategy for the digitalization of the supply chain, three had a digital strategy but not 
specified on supply chain and five of the B2B companies simply did not have any strategy for 
digitalization. Some of the interviewed companies pointed out, that a more tangible digitalization 
strategy would be created later in 2018, since the digitalization is a top priority. Two of the B2B 
companies described it this way: 
 
Statement like these indicates the subject of supply chain 4.0 is currently something that companies 
are considering more and more, and that it will be implemented in the company strategy for many 
companies within the next few years, for those company who did not already have it.  In the 
following list, one key sentence have been taken from the answer of each company to the question: 
Do you have any strategical goals for the digitalization, which affect the supply chain? 
==PAGE:47==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
46 
 
 
 
Several of these responses brings valuable insights. The quotes have been grouped depending on 
their level of strategy, where "Full" means they have a digital strategy for the supply chain, and 
"Partly" corresponds to have a digital strategy, but not for the area of supply chain. When analyzing 
the companies not having a digital strategy in place, some of the quotes have some interesting 
==PAGE:48==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
47 
 
insights. Responds #9 poses a very interesting case. Here the company do not have a specific goal 
it want to achieve, but it knows that digitalization is important to be competitive, and therefore 
invest in the area. Responds #10 and #12 both use the same expression: We do not digitalize for 
the sake of digitalization. These two companies might look at digitalization in another light than 
some of the other companies. The digitalization is here seen as a method to achieve other goals, 
rather than having a goal of digitalizing some process or their product. This could be goals, which 
to decrease administration costs by X% or increase customer satisfaction by Y%. Both of these goals 
can be achieve via digitalization, but can also be accomplished in several other ways. A benefit of 
this view is that the company mitigate the risk of "over engineer" their digital solutions, but focus 
on value adds to the company and their customers. However, a downside of this view on 
digitalization can be a too intangible path to success. When digitalization is not mentioned in the 
goals, it can become harder to understand how to achieve these goals. Another disadvantage could 
be the lack of common understanding within the company. If there is no overall digital strategy, it 
might be difficult for workers to understand why they have to register data into their IT system. 
The communication about digitalization can be important to get employees in the organization to 
support other business units in their digitalization project. 
A few companies did have a clear strategy in place for the area. Respond #1 had implemented 
SMART-goals (Specific, Measureable, Achievable, Relevant, Time limited) for all their initiatives, 
which also have to go through their state-gate model to make sure, that the goals was reached. 
Their overall goals was firstly to improve customer satisfaction, secondly to improve the quality of 
their product, and thirdly to improve their competitiveness. For the supply chain, they have set up 
goals for improving the "digital value chain". Respond #3 had set an overall strategy, and specified 
each area with milestones they have to reach. This company stressed out, that since they were 
optimizing the supply chain, they relied on data inputs from many different departments within the 
company, and it was there for very important that everyone in the company knew the reason 
behind their initiatives. Respond #2, however, shows that this is still new for some of the 
companies. The difference from the companies who did not have a digital strategy might therefore 
not be far behind the companies who have a digital strategy in their maturity. This is also shown in 
the quotes from the companies with a digital strategy, but not in supply chain, which have been 
categorized as "partly". From responds #5, #7, and #8 it can be seen, that these three companies 
are trying to define some more concrete goals for the supply chain department. From the analysis 
we can conclude, that despite a minority of the companies actually have a digital strategy in place 
for transforming their supply chain 3.0 to a supply chain 4.0, most of the company will have a 
strategy within a few years.  
==PAGE:49==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
48 
 
5.5. Focus areas 
When transforming into supply chain 4.0, several different areas can be interesting to focus on. 
These focus areas can be on different parts of the supply chain, or focusing on specific technologies. 
The companies interviewed was therefore asked, which areas they have chosen to focus on first. 
On average, the companies claimed to be focusing on 2.8 different areas. The answers have been 
grouped in Figure 5-8, where the frequency of answers are displayed. 
 
Figure 5-8. Focus areas in digitalization projects 
Question: Do you already have some ongoing initiatives for digitalizing your supply chain? 
The most frequent answer were digitalization of products and services. This was often by equipping 
products with sensors or connecting them to the internet to be able to read data in real-time. By 
getting information about the use of their products, they gain the opportunity to consult the 
customers on how to optimize their performance. This can have tremendous value for the 
customers, and the companies can thereby sell their products at a premium. With almost half of 
the interviewed companies focusing on this, it can be seen as one of the most important areas to 
optimize performance. The added value into the products can allow for increasing prices, and 
thereby increasing revenue. Some of the companies describe their focus on products: 
 
==PAGE:50==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
49 
 
The companies within the leisure product industry both had the digitalization of products as a focus 
area, suggesting that this is not only business customers who have an increasing demand for digital 
products, but also in a high degree the consumers. The area of digital products will be analyzed 
further in depth in the connectivity section of this thesis. 
The second most frequent answer were to share data across the supply chain. To share data across 
the supply chain can be carried out in many different ways, and it therefore not a very specific focus 
area. This area is however the heart of supply chain 4.0, and with many companies focusing on this, 
there is reason to believe that an increased performance of the overall supply chain can be achieved 
for these companies. Some of the companies said to be focusing on transparency in logistics or 
Vendor inventory management systems, which could also be considered to fall into the group of 
sharing data across the supply chain, making this a group of 10 answers, and by far the largest. One 
of the manufacturing companies described their focus: 
A potential improvement in efficiency gained in the ordering of products for the customers might 
also improve revenue. Both the digitalization of products and sharing data across the supply chain 
can thereby be used as revenue drivers, and not only be considered as an opportunity to decrease 
costs. Some of the most answered focus areas are, however, with a focus on decreasing costs. The 
digitalization of production facilities is not discussed in this thesis, but this does of course not mean 
that this is not an important part of the digitalization for many companies. Several of the companies 
described this area as the most important, since most of their cost was within this area: 
 
As mention, then the subject of automation will not be discussed further in this thesis, partly due 
to the large quantity of already published academic literature on the subject, as well as the only 
indirect influence on the overall performance of the supply chain. However, several companies did 
focus on the automation of manual processes within the supply chain, which could be through 
==PAGE:51==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
50 
 
digital platforms. This will have a more direct influence on the overall performance of the supply 
chain. One of the manufacturing companies described it this way: 
 
The automation of procedures within the supply chain department can speed up orders and 
decrease human errors contributing to a more reliable service for the customers. This will decrease 
costs, give an easier access for customers, and thereby yield an overall improvement in 
performance. The quoted company and two other companies did however also point out, that they 
still where trying to implement ERP systems, and described how this was taking up many of their 
resources. The struggles with ERP systems was actually mentioned several times: 
 
All of these quotes regarding problems with ERP system was from the manufacturing industry, 
suggesting that the digital maturity might be lower for this group of companies, compared to the 
two other groups investigated in this thesis.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
51 
 
5.6. Initiatives for supply chain 
After investigating the importance of digitalizing the supply chain, strategy and which areas the 
companies chose to focus on, the concrete initiatives stated by the companies was investigated 
and explained more in depth. The initiatives they have started was quite diversified, despite many 
of the companies did have similar focus areas, see Figure 5-9. 
 
 
Figure 5-9. Initiatives in companies grouped into four categories. 
Question: Do you already have some ongoing initiatives for digitalizing your supply chain? 
The initiatives in Figure 5-9 have been grouped into four different categories: Digital products, 
Shared platforms, Production productivity, and Planning. It can be seen, that the group with most 
initiatives is the "Shared Platforms", with 36% of the total initiatives. The most common answers 
in this group was to share platform with distributors, so the demand for trucks was ordered 
automatically, and the route for the products was more accessible. The distributors was considered 
to be some of the most digital partners, and as one of the companies in the medtech, pharma and 
food industry said: 
==PAGE:53==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
52 
 
In third part logistics (3PL) and fourth party logistics (4PL) the logistic provides are taking a larger 
responsibility, this could be by performing some of the packaging, handle some inventory or 
warehousing in general being more integrated with the operation of the company. To have a digital 
platform to share information regarding demand for transportation from the production facilities 
to customer or warehouses and other relevant information could decrease cost both in 
administration and in the transportation itself. The second most frequent initiative in the category 
of "Shared platforms" are the EDI system, which can be considered very close of having a shared 
digital platform. As discussed in the theory section 3.2.2 , is the use of EDI system a relatively easy 
way of improving the efficiency of the supply chain by reducing the labor heavy paper work. Since 
many companies have already implemented EDI systems, it would be expected, that the 
implementation costs and risks are relatively low. Another interesting initiative in the "Shared 
platform" initiative group is the Vendor inventory management system. Two of the companies 
interviewed was already implementing this, and other companies was mentioning it as an initiative 
they probably would do in the future. The VIM system considered a modern system even though it 
have been many years since it was developed, as described in the theory section 3.2.2.  
Other companies have initiatives to improve forecasting and collaboration with suppliers through 
digital platforms. One of the companies explains it like this: 
All companies in the supply chain can minimize overproduction or underproduction, and thereby 
lowering the total cost, by getting more precise forecasts.  All of these initiatives in the "Shared 
platform" category can increase the overall performance of the supply chain, and not only improve 
one company in the supply chain. An expected initiative, which was not mentioned, is of course the 
blockchain. Not a single of the interviewed companies had yet started any initiatives on the 
blockchain technology. Three of the companies did however mention the use of blockchain, and 
not without interest in it: 
==PAGE:54==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
53 
 
 
From the quotes, it is clear that the manufacturing companies are not yet ready for starting a 
blockchain project in the company. They both commit to their ERP systems, and does not have any 
short-term plans on trying blockchain technology out. The medtech, pharma and food industry 
company did, however, seem more eager to start a project soon. Being in an investigation phase, 
where the scoping of a project is initiated, and the company could potentially soon launch a 
blockchain initiative. The overall conclusion on the use of blockchain technology is, however, that 
it will not find a broader use in any near future. The maturity is simply too low, and the knowledge 
and capability in the companies are too limited for them to switch to blockchain from their 
traditional system. 
The most frequent answered initiative is putting sensors into products. The category of digital 
products was expected to be the largest, given that the largest focus area was the digitalization of 
products and services. It could be argued, that the category was expected to be larger, given than 
only 18% of all the initiatives stated was within this field. This could suggest, that even though the 
companies have this as one of their focus areas, several of the companies have not initiated any 
project to implement it. This could be a consequence of the missing digital strategies, or that the 
digital strategies have not yet been formulated down to concrete initiatives. 
The second largest group of initiatives is "Production productivity". Several interviewees describes 
the production to be the most obvious place to start with implementing new initiatives, since it is 
not necessary to corporate with other companies, which can become troublesome and requires 
more coordination across organizations. Many different initiatives are in this group, but the largest 
group is the pilot factory, with two initiatives. One company have already made one of their 
factories a pilot factory for testing new digital initiatives, and the second company will very soon. 
By dedicating a single factory to testing, it is possible to use a more lean startup methodology, 
where the mantra is "fail fast". By this is meant to test projects as fast as possible, and if they fail, 
they can either be modified, tested again or scraped without much money wasted. If a project 
shows create potential and a good business case for implementing at other factories, it can easily 
==PAGE:55==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
54 
 
be copied onto the other factories. Some of the other projects in the category of "Production 
productivity" include the use of Yammer, which is a social network much like Facebook, just only 
for the individual company. In this way, the employees get a very informal way of communicating, 
and in the same time quite efficient. For blue color workers, which might not be used to writing e-
mails, but use Facebook on a regular basis, this becomes a more comfortable method for 
communicating. This can lead to valuable communication between the factory workers, but also to 
the management, such as tips for operating machines, suggestions for optimizing procedures or 
highlighting problems or unpleasant work situations. Even if the production is not becoming more 
productive by this initiative, it can lead to other desirable outcomes, such as increased job 
satisfaction. One company also experimented with smart watches for their workers in the factory. 
By having a smart watch, the machines can send messengers directly to the right worker, when it 
needs to be filled with new material or send the error code to the mechanic, so that person know 
which parts to bring to maintain the machine. All these initiatives seeks to improve the production, 
but does not consider the overall supply chain. An increase the production would of course increase 
the overall performance a little, but might just create a bottleneck in the system, if becoming too 
efficient. This could be by producing faster than the supplier is able to supply material or 
components, or by producing faster than the demand for the product.  
The last category of initiatives is "Planning", which manly consist of ERP projects. One company did 
also have a material resource planning (MRP) project ongoing as part of their digitalization. It could 
be argued that these initiatives are more industry 3.0 initiatives, than industry 4.0 initiatives, and 
that the company simply are still working on getting into the Industry 3.0.  
All the answers, shows that the cloud based information sharing systems are widely preferred over 
the blockchain technology. Many companies are currently running projects targeting to share more 
data in the supply chain, either with distributors, suppliers or customers. This information sharing 
could increase the overall performance of the supply chain. The large amount of different initiatives 
could indicate that companies do not have a clear image of what to do, and therefore starts projects 
in many different areas. This indication should be met with skepticism, since the large amount of 
initiatives also could indicate the large spread in digital maturity and simply that different 
companies might benefit from different initiatives. The large spread does, however, make it 
challenging to make recommendations to which projects is best for a certain company, and the 
information from this question might therefore not possess much value for companies considering 
which initiative would be best for them to start with.  
==PAGE:56==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
55 
 
When asked about the goals of the initiatives and the process of reaching these goals, the 
interviewed companies where more reluctant to share this information. Some of the key quotes 
are shown below: 
 
The companies are still in an infant state in transforming their supply chain 3.0 into a supply chain 
4.0, as these quotes suggest. A few of the companies are claiming to have completed some of their 
projects, which suggest that progress is being made. In the last quote where 40% of the manual 
work processes in supply chain have been automated, the company explained how this project 
have required a lot of resources, also more than expected in the beginning, but as more and more 
processes got automated, the savings was starting to pay back the investment. It would be very 
valuable to know the expected pay-back time for the investment, but without the knowledge of 
the size of the investment and the savings, it cannot be calculated. 
After analyzing and discussing many of the started initiatives, as well as some of the process that 
was made, the next section will investigate the traceability more in depth, and assess the 
maturity of the companies in this central area. 
  
 
==PAGE:57==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
56 
 
5.7. Traceability 
Efficient traceability is a central subject in the supply chain 4.0, where corporation between 
companies is crucial for the success. Efficient traceability allow the companies to recall by forward 
traceability, finding root causes of technical problems by backwards traceability and locate 
products in general. The investigation of traceability was, however, more difficult than anticipated, 
which rises from different legislation in the different industries. Companies within medtech, 
pharma and food industry have been forced to have 100% traceability, as described in the theory 
section. This have allowed the industry to form standards across the supply chain, and thereby 
increase the efficiency to trace products. This made it increasingly difficult for the companies to 
rate the importance of it, where one company in the medtech, pharma and food industry would 
claim it to be very important due to legislation, and another claiming it to be unimportant. The first 
company would argue how the company could differentiate themselves by having a more efficient 
traceability system in place. The other company claim it to be unimportant due to already done so 
much, and as long the legislation was followed, the company would not gain any competitive edge 
by increasing their efficiency. These two examples display that there was not always a common 
understanding among the interviewed.  
5.7.1. Importance of traceability in the supply chain to stay competitive 
To investigate the importance of traceability, the companies was asked to rate it on a scale from 1 
to 5, in regards to their competitiveness. The importance was scored as shown in Figure 5-10, 
where the frequency of answers are shown depending on the industry of the company. 
 
Figure 5-10: Importance of traceability by industry segment  
Question: How important is efficient traceability to stay competitive in the future? 
From this figure, it can be seen that the importance is not clear in either the medtech, pharma & 
food industry or the leisure products industry. If more observations in these two categories where 
==PAGE:58==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
57 
 
available, there might have been a more clear trend. In the manufacturing industry, which have 
eight observations and are thereby more reliable to analyze, the average importance score is four, 
indicating that this area should be getting some focus from the companies. When looking at the 
companies' customers, the trend is clearer, see Figure 5-11, where the frequency of answers for 
B2B and B2C are displayed: 
 
Figure 5-11: Importance of traceability by customer segment 
Question: How important is efficient traceability to stay competitive in the future? 
This figure shows how traceability is more important for B2B companies, with an average score of 
4,1 than for B2C companies, with an average of only 1,3. The subject of traceability might not be as 
important for the average person buying a product, than for a company buying a product. One of 
the B2C companies said the following when ask to rank the importance for staying competitive on 
a scale from 1 to 5: 
 
As the quotes explains, the average person buying a product do not care about the efficiency of 
traceability. If their products breaks, they want to get it fixed or get a new one, but they are 
probably not concerned with the underlying bureaucracy. As described in the theory section 3.2 in 
the trek case, the break can become so dangerous for the customer that the brand name will suffer 
from the lack of ability to recall. If a brand gets a reputation of not being able to recall bad products, 
and thereby putting customers in danger, it can have high impact on the revenue and thereby profit 
of the company. The B2B companies are setting the importance of traceability higher, and this is 
transparent when looking at their quotes: 
==PAGE:59==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
58 
 
 
From these quotes, where the person safety hazard are highlighted along with the issues regarding 
copied products, it becomes clear that the companies selling products to other business  are much 
more concerned with traceability.  
 
5.7.2. Development in utilization of Industry 4.0 technology for traceability 
The next two questions in the interview guide was regarding the use of industry 4.0 technology to 
improve traceability. The company was asked to rate their use of the technology today, and was 
afterwards asked to rate their use of it in 1 to 2 years on a scale from 1 to 5. This question was 
designed to gain a larger understanding on how fast the development will occur. Most of the 
companies was rating themselves to only use the technology in a low degree. Two of the companies 
actually wanted to score zero, but this was not possible. As they put it: 
 
Both of these quotes comes from B2B companies, who have not been required to have an efficient 
traceability system. In fact, then non of the B2B companies scored themselves higher than 2 on a 
scale form 1 to 5, where the average was 1.7 today, and increased to 2.7 in one to two years. In 
Figure 5-12 the development in utilization can be seen for B2B and B2C. 
==PAGE:60==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
59 
 
 
Figure 5-12: Development in utilization of industry 4.0 technologies for traceability split on B2B and B2C 
Question 1: In what degree do you use technologies to increase efficiency in traceability today? 
Question 2: In what degree do you use technologies to increase efficiency in traceability in one to two years? 
It can be seen from the figure that the B2C scores a higher both today and in one to two years, 
where the size of the balls represent the number of companies in the category. This is partly due 
to the one high rating, where one of the three B2C companies already was using cloud technology 
for a few years. The two other B2C companies scores just a low as most of the B2B companies, and 
the low number of B2C companies are therefore partly reason for this difference. If a larger number 
of B2C companies was interviewed, the numbers might become more similar. A surprising discovery 
is that even though the B2B companies are rating the importance much higher than the B2C 
companies, then they are not utilizing the technology. Even in one or two years, most of these 
companies score themselves quite low, suggesting that they do not expect to develop much in the 
coming years. The reason for the slow development might be because of immaturity of the 
technologies, or due to low priority. Having in mind that 36% of the initiatives stated was within 
sharing information across the supply chain, and that this subject was the second most common 
focus area, it do not seems to be the last of the two options, and it might therefore be because of 
immaturity in the technology.  It is however still surprising to see this slow development, where the 
difference from now till at 1 to 2 years in the future have been illustrated with a delta (Δ) on the 
figure, to show how the development is at 1 and 0.7 for B2B and B2C respectively. At Figure 5-13 
the split between industries can be seen: 
==PAGE:61==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
60 
 
 
Figure 5-13: Development in utilization of industry 4.0 technologies for traceability split on industry 
Question 1: In what degree do you use technologies to increase efficiency in traceability today? 
Question 2: In what degree do you use technologies to increase efficiency in traceability in one to two years? 
Here it is shown, how the lowest scores come from the leisure products industry and how medtech, 
pharma and food industry is furthest ahead. As discussed earlier, the medtech, pharma and food 
industry have been forced to have traceability, but it have not been demanded to use a shared 
platform between the companies in the supply chain. As one of the companies who score 
themselves relatively high explains: 
 
This company was, however, the only one being able to have this high efficiency in traceability, and 
is therefore also skewing the data a bit. If a larger group of medtech, pharma and food companies 
had been interviewed, the data might not have been as skewed. When asking into the reason 
behind the slightly higher score in one to two years, some interesting projects are highlighted by 
the manufacturing industry companies:  
 
==PAGE:62==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
61 
 
 
The first quote is concern with sharing data with customers, which might use it against them. Other 
companies have raised concerns regarding data security, but is rather afraid of their information 
being shared with a competitor via a supplier or customer, than sharing it to the customer, as in 
this case. This quote suggest that the customer would stand strong in a negotiation in the future, if 
too much knowledge is shared. This view on the situation is, however, in contradiction to the 
literature reviewed for this thesis. According to the theory described in section 3.2, then would the 
consequences of sharing data with customers be increased customer loyalty, and provide higher 
margins due to less manual work in order handling. The reason for the concern in this case could 
be due to extraordinary high margins for the company in an otherwise low margin supply chain. 
The reluctance will, however, slow down the development of an efficient traceability system. The 
next quote describes how the company will incorporate traceability by implementing a new quality 
program, which could be a powerful way of implementing traceability, due to the clear purpose of 
the new system. The program does, however, sound comprehensive and would probably take 
several years for any of these larger companies. In the last two quotes, the interviewees are 
estimating 10 and 5 years respectively, before the use of industry 4.0 technologies for traceability 
will be at a high degree. These estimations furthermore shows how this progress will be slow, but 
with incremental improvements.   
The overall conclusion is therefore, that the current state in utilizing industry 4.0 technologies in 
traceability is very limited to almost none. Most of the companies is however looking into the 
subject, with some projects initiated already, but the development will be slow in this area. When 
self-assessing the maturity, the overall average was 1.8 on a scale from 1 to 5, and before the 
companies will reach a high degree of traceability, between 4 and 5 relative to now, will probably 
take between 5 to 10 years. For allowing for the real-time traceability, some sensors on products, 
logistics and in warehouses will be necessary, and in the next section, the subject of connectivity 
will be investigated. 
==PAGE:63==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
62 
 
5.8. Connectivity 
By equipping products, pallets or trucks with sensors, the companies gain access to much more 
data, which can provide them with valuable insights. As mentioned in the theory section 3.1, then 
sensors can keep track of inventory levels, routing of products between sites, how the products is 
used or when the next maintenance is needed. There are a wide variety of sensors, where the GPS, 
WSN, RFID are described in the theory along with obtaining internet access directly to the products. 
For investigating the subject, the initiatives the companies had started within the area was further 
explored along with the importance of it and their current state of development.  
 
5.8.1. Importance of connectivity in the supply chain to stay competitive 
The companies was asked to rate the importance of connectivity to stay competitive in the future 
on a scale from 1 to 5. The majority of the companies rated the importance as high with 4 or 5, and 
with the B2B companies finding it even more important than the B2C companies, as seen in Figure 
5-14, where the frequency of answers for B2B and B2C is displayed: 
 
 
Figure 5-14: Importance of connectivity at customer segment 
Question: How important is connectivity to stay competitive in the future? 
With and overall average on 4.1 and an average on 4.2 for the B2B companies, this must be 
considered as one of the most important for the companies, and both for B2B and B2C alike. Even 
if the answers are segmented into industries, the importance is 4 or above in all categories, see 
Figure 5-15: 
==PAGE:64==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
63 
 
 
Figure 5-15: Importance of connectivity by industry segment. 
Question: How important is connectivity to stay competitive in the future? 
The reason behind these high rating was described by several of the companies, with some of the 
manufacturing companies putting it like this: 
 
In these two quotes, it becomes clear, that to gather the data is important, but it might be even 
more important to gain the right insights, which can add value to the company itself or directly to 
the customer. This would be anticipated, when looking back at Gartner's hype cycle from Figure 
3-3, where IoT devices have already reach the plateau of productivity, while IoT platforms are at 
the peak of the hype. This means, that the devices have already been developed and can measure 
almost anything, whereas the subtracting of the meaningful information is still difficult, since the 
platforms are not well developed yet. 
Some companies did not find connectivity as important as traceability, despite that connectivity 
had a higher average rating. These companies especially highlights how extra data on the 
distribution will not create much value, because of the high reliability in the distribution industry. 
The next quotes show two companies arguing why connectivity is more important than traceability, 
and two companies arguing why traceability is the most important. 
==PAGE:65==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
64 
 
 
The first quote describes how they can add value to their products, by being able to suggest when 
to maintain the product, and thereby avoid breakdowns. To equip the products with these sensors 
can furthermore be a simpler task than cooperating with other companies in the supply chain, as 
the second quote suggest. A noteworthy difference between the first two quotes and the two last 
quotes is, that the two first quotes describes how sensors can be used to upsell, whereas the last 
two quotes are concerned with the logistical part of the supply chain, which they agree upon is 
working quite well even without sensors as RFID and GPS.  
5.8.2. Initiatives within connectivity 
As described in the focus area section earlier in this report, then is the digitalization of products the 
most frequent focus area. When asking into the use of sensors in their products and logistics, it can 
be seen that many projects have already been started. The answers from the question "What 
initiatives have you started or planned in the area of connectivity technologies?" was grouped into 
the four different categories described in the theory section, with WSN being the most frequent 
answer, see Figure 5-16. 
 
Figure 5-16: Frequency of different connectivity technology initiatives 
Question: What initiatives have you started or planned in the area of connectivity technologies? 
The WSN category covers all kind of sensors measuring the psychical environment around the 
sensor, and thereby a large range of sensors including temperature, pressure, humidity, flow, etc. 
==PAGE:66==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
65 
 
A larger number of different sensors are therefore available on the market today, and it is therefore 
not surprising why this is the largest category. Some of the companies describes how measuring 
the physical environment can give indications of breakdowns, e.g. by a lower flow or by a higher 
temperature near an electronic circuits. One of the companies described their use of WSN sensors: 
 
By having these indication of breakdowns, the companies can react in time, and repair the 
component before it breaks, which correlate with the theory from (Krishnamurthy et al., 2005). As 
more and more companies are equipping their products with these sensors, and start to provide 
PdM for its customers, the operations efficiency should increase all around the supply chain. By 
avoiding breakdowns at the customer, the company can improve the economy of their customer 
and thereby making them a more reliable customer. The different companies in the supply chain 
thereby gets knitted closer together. This closer relationship, where parts of a company's 
production might be monetarized and maintained by its suppliers, can improving the overall 
performance of the supply chain. Companies in the medtech, pharma and food industry also 
explained how they use temperature sensors to be able to document the quality to the authorities. 
One of these describes it like this: 
 
This also correspond to the theory described in section 3.1.3, and could help secure the quality 
level of the product.  
The last three categories of GPS, internet access and RFID had 4, 4 and 3 initiatives respectively. 
Two of the companies had already started using RFID, and one company was in the planning phase, 
and looking at different products which it would be most relevant for. The use of RFID can improve 
the efficiency of finding the right products in a warehouse, creating a real-time overview of 
inventory levels, and can increase efficiency in registering products in and out of production, 
warehouses or stores. Both of the companies using the RFID technologies were still in the process 
of implementing it more broadly in the company. In one of their factories, one of the companies 
used RFID tags in two of the diagonal corners of each pallet. By placing two sensors on each pallet 
would decrease the number of errors in reading the pallet, when passing by a RFID reader. When 
==PAGE:67==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
66 
 
being placed on pallets with products instead of in the products, the company have the opportunity 
to reuse the RFID sensors on the pallets. The other company using RFID had significantly larger 
products, which cannot be transported on pallet. They therefore construct specialized steel 
constructions for transporting their products. These steel structures are then equipped with a RFID 
sensor, making it possible both to keep track of the steel structures, which are expensive by 
themselves, but also register when products are leaving the production site, and how many are in 
storage. The companies did however not have sufficient data to estimate the potential savings 
achieved in their operations.  
In the category of GPS, four companies had started, or planned to start, projects with the use of 
this technology. As discussed in 5.7.1, some companies did not want to put GPS's into their 
products, since logistical partners very rarely displaced orders, and the extra information therefore 
would not create value to the company or the customers. Other companies, however, did see a 
value add in attaching GPS's to their products.  
 
This indicate that not all companies experience the same level of competence by their logistical 
partners, since the first of these two quotes describe how extra cost can arise from not knowing 
the location of their products. This indicate, that GPS's can still be useful for tracking the logistics 
and for trouble shooting when mistake arise, despite some companies experience a high degree of 
competence from their logistic partners. The quote from the manufacturing company describes 
how it also can be valuable to know the location of the products, even after the product have reach 
the end customer. In this case, the manufacturing company was interested in the use of the 
product, to be able to give a better after service of the product.  
The last category is internet access, which could be by the use of an IoT cloud platform. This 
category is, as described in section 3.1.3, a category that often is used in combination with the 
sensors. Most commonly, it would be in connection with WSN sensors, where the information 
measured by the sensors is transferred and analyzed. Four of the interviewed companies would 
initiate, or already had initiated, a project with direct access to the internet. It could be suspected, 
==PAGE:68==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
67 
 
that even more companies actually are planning on this, but did not mentioned it, since it could be 
implicit when initiating WSN sensor projects. Some of the companies described why the connection 
to the internet was important for them: 
 
The first of the three quotes seeks to be more independent from other devices, and thereby 
increase the user friendliness, by being able to connect directly to the internet. It is, however, not 
only in regards to the products, where it can be convenient to connect to the internet. The second 
quote describes how operations in production can be improved by letting production machines be 
connected, and thereby being able to communicate directly with technicians. The last quote have 
been edited to anonymize the company, but displays an example of how to improve performance 
by connecting systems with the internet.  
After analyzing the initiatives, it becomes clear that the WSN and internet access will be the most 
used. In the area of PdM, where many companies see an opportunity to add an extra value to their 
products, by sharing information on the state of products and when to change parts as an extra 
service. Some companies are also experimenting with technologies as RFID and GPS, but the value 
added by implementing these technologies are less clear, which could be the reason companies 
hesitate to invest too heavily in these technologies.  
 
5.8.3. Development in utilization of connectivity 
To investigate the speed of the development in utilizing technology to increase connectivity, the 
same questions as in the traceability section was used. The difference from now to 1 to 2 years in 
the future was used again, to be able to assess the speed without a too large uncertainty.  
==PAGE:69==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
68 
 
 
Figure 5-17: Overall development in connectivity 
The answers, seen in Figure 5-17, shows an increase from 2 to 3.2 on a scale from 1 to 5. This 
increase of 1.2 is a faster development than the traceability, which had an increase of 1.0. When 
splitting the answers up into B2B and B2C companies, a large gab appears, where B2C companies 
are much further ahead than B2B companies, see Figure 5-18. The B2B companies assess 
themselves to be 1.8 in maturity, which is a relative low score, whereas the B2C companies score 
themselves at 2.7, which is a medium score. The size of the balls in the diagram is again a 
representation of the size of the population of interviewed companies.  
 
Figure 5-18: Development in connectivity technologies split on customer segment. 
Question 1: In what degree do you use technologies to increase connectivity today? 
Question 2: In what degree do you use technologies to increase connectivity in one to two years? 
The reason for this cap cannot directly be found in the interview answers. A hypothesis could be, 
that consumers value connectivity higher than businesses, and are more tech savvy, whereas 
business are more logical thinking and less tech savvy, however, the B2B average scored the 
importance of connectivity to 4.2, and B2C scored it to 3.7, so this argument does not seem to hold 
true. Even though B2B companies think that connectivity is more important than B2C companies, 
then B2B companies are lower in their maturity. Another surprising insight from the answers is that 
despite the B2C companies being the most mature, they are apparently also the ones who thinks 
they will develop fastest, with an increase of 1.3. Developing from a medium maturity of 2.7 to a 
high maturity of 4.0 shows a strong dedication to connecting products, logistics or machines in the 
coming years. When comparing to the traceability, where the increase was 0.7 for B2C, it is clear 
==PAGE:70==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
69 
 
that the higher importance score is not only talk, but that the companies also intent to invest in 
this.  When splitting the companies into industries, we see that it is especially the manufacturing 
industry, which is lacking behind, see Figure 5-19.  
 
Figure 5-19: Development in connectivity technologies split on industry. 
Question 1: In what degree do you use technologies to increase connectivity today? 
Question 2: In what degree do you use technologies to increase connectivity in one to two years? 
The manufacturing industry is not only the industry lacking most behind, it is also moving slowest. 
The leisure products companies are, on the other hand, the ones developing most in the next 1 to 
2 years, by going from a 2.5 score to 4 in score, but at the same time with the smallest population, 
and thereby with the largest uncertainty. The fast development in leisure products, however, does 
indicate that the hypothesis regarding customers being tech savvy and want their products to be 
connected might hold true.  
The current state of using connectivity is thereby highly depended on the industry and customer 
segment, where B2B and the manufacturing industry companies are still on a low maturity, 
whereas B2C companies are in general at a medium maturity. The development will furthermore 
be fastest for B2C companies, and especially for companies within the leisure product industry. 
Despite lacking behind in maturity, the B2B companies are looking into implementing WSN sensors 
in both products, as well as using RFID and GPS, especially for the use of predictive maintenance. 
The connectivity will not only affect the products, but also be implemented in the machines to 
optimize the companies own operation. All of these changes will improve the overall performance 
of the supply chain by knitting the companies closer together, and with a faster pace than in the 
area of traceability. It is therefore very likely that improvement will be measureable within the next 
2 years, but with a large certainty within 2 – 5 years.  
To go through this development, however, will not be without challengers, and in the next section, 
the companies will describe some of their main challengers, and how these can be overcome. 
==PAGE:71==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
70 
 
5.9. Main challengers on the road to supply chain 4.0 
Many different challengers can arise when starting out new initiative. This is especially true, if the 
subject of the initiative is not well known. These challengers will vary depending on the type of 
project, where the problems from a connectivity project will probably be different from a 
traceability project or ERP system project. To identifying these challengers, and furthermore 
explain how some of the challengers can be overcome, can create value for other companies 
planning on starting a similar project. The interviewed companies were therefore asked to identify 
the main challengers of their initiatives. A few of the companies identified more than one main 
challenge, but all of the answers were grouped into seven categories, and can be seen in Figure 
5-20. 
 
Figure 5-20: frequency of main challengers identified by interviewees 
Question: What have been the biggest challengers for implementing the initiatives? 
In this section, four of the most frequent categories will be shortly described where after the 
proposed solutions to these challengers will be described. The solutions came from two questions, 
which was asked, but not always answered by the participants. The first question was: "What have 
you done to solve these challengers", and companies would either be able to answer this question 
quite easily, if they did manage to solve the problem or was not able to answer this question, partly 
due to not having solve the main challengers yet. For these companies, the other question was 
asked instead: "If you could give yourself an advice, before you started on this initiative, which could 
have helped with the implementation, what would that be?". By answering this question, the 
company did not have to come up with the solution to the challenge they were facing, but rather 
just give an advice, which could have helped them. These advices might become valuable for other 
companies in the same situation, or planning to start a project.  
With four companies identifying the partnerships in the supply chain being their main challenge, 
this is one of the most frequent answers. Working closer with other companies to optimize the 
performance of the supply chain is at the heart of supply chain 4.0, and it is therefore not surprising 
that exactly this comes as one of the most frequent challengers companies face. The challenge can 
==PAGE:72==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
71 
 
come from cultural differences across regions, or different standards in sharing information. Three 
of the companies describe their challenge in these quotes: 
 
These challengers might seem trivial, something that every head of the supply chain in a larger 
corporation have to deal with on a day to day basis, but they are still very important to deal with 
when making a new initiative, which will influence other companies in the supply chain. As the 
second quote describes, then can a seemingly small problem as different standards in different 
countries become a huge challenge. This especially holds true in IT, where different formats of data 
can make it almost impossible to get different systems to work together. The proposed solution to 
this challenge is mainly to have a close communication, being physical at the meetings to avoid 
misunderstandings, and make sure to align with the partners: 
 
This solution might seem trivial, but it is nonetheless something that many companies struggle 
with, and it can therefore not be empathized enough. To have local employees to handle the 
relationship can further improve the communication, and decrease misunderstandings.  
The next problem, which the same number of companies mentioned, is getting resources for the 
initiatives. Despite knowing the importance of digitalization, it can be difficult to estimate the 
amount of hours needed to complete a project. The companies still have to perform on their day-
==PAGE:73==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
72 
 
to-day operations, and it is therefore not possible to close down an area of the business to run a 
digitalization projects. The pressure to perform the normal day-to-day tasks along with running 
digitalization projects can be difficult, and it will often be necessary to allocate employees fully on 
projects to make sure the projects progress at the desired speed. The companies described the 
problem by the following quotes: 
 
These quotes show how getting the resources is not only a matter of investment by the company, 
but also to get employees to understand the need for spending time on the project. This is 
something that will be discussed later in the employee's readiness and behavior problem. Most of 
these companies had not overcome the problem, but learned to live with it. The advice they would 
give themselves was described with the following quotes: 
 
The first two quotes primarily describes how communication from manager are an important 
factor, in getting the right reasons. To get the employees to understand why the digitalization 
projects are important, and not just for the sake of digitalization, as other companies have been 
quoted saying earlier in this analysis. The last quote regarding building up projects from scratch 
instead of on top of new system is expected to be highly depended on the project, and is probably 
not a general recommendation. However, companies should consider if it could save time to start 
from scratch, when starting a new project. 
The next most frequent answers is regarding the employee's readiness and behavior when 
implementing new initiatives. If a new project in the supply chain department concerns automating 
==PAGE:74==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
73 
 
all manual processes, some of the employees might be scared to lose their job. If this is the case, 
the individual employee might not work very hard to achieve this goal, and might even work against 
it to keep the job. Many employees might also have to learn new IT systems, and new ways of 
working, which people often are reluctant to do. The conservatism in a companies organization is 
described in both quotes below: 
 
This problem might not be expected to be one of the main challengers, when discussing how to get 
new technologies into companies. Employees being reluctant to change their behavior might 
hinder the progress of initiatives, and is therefore a challenge that have to be taken seriously. All 
the companies was emphasizing the importance of internal communication. Getting the employees 
to understand why they need to change is necessary to overcome this challenge. The following 
quotes came from the three companies identifying this as their main challenge: 
 
With these quotes, the importance of clear and throughout communication to employees is 
highlighted. To get the CEO or others from the top management can strengthen the communication 
throughout the organization, and make people stand together on making the necessary changes. 
The power of bringing up a case from another company also get mentioned in the last quote, which 
could be an interesting tool to explain the reason behind the ideas, and decrease fear and confusion 
at the same time. This could potentially make the employees commit more to the initiatives, and 
prove that it is possible to achieve their goals.  
The last of the categories described in this analysis is regarding getting started and creating a 
strategy. As described in section 5.4 regarding strategies, then it is important for the success of new 
==PAGE:75==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
74 
 
initiatives to have a clear strategy for digitalizing the supply. The answers in this section also reveal 
that only 4 of the 13 companies did have a clear strategy for digitalizing the supply chain, and 5 of 
the companies did not even have an overall strategy which included digitalization. Because of this, 
it might seem strange that only two companies identified getting started and creating a strategy as 
their main challenge. The two companies describe their challengers in the following quotes: 
 
Both of these quotes displays a bewilderment of where to start and what to do, which is very 
understandable, since it is difficult to find the exactly best roadmap for the company. By looking at 
the large number of initiatives all the companies have started, it does not seem that there is one 
right answer to where to start. For some of the companies, the right place to start have been to get 
the fundamentals in place. This is especially the companies working on getting the ERP systems up 
to date. For other companies, it seems like they have started by going in different directions, or 
rather going in as many direction as they could at the same time. For these companies, they might 
have started implementing industry 4.0 technologies in their production, setting up a shared 
platform with suppliers and automatizing their order handling system at the same time. This 
strategy can be expensive, and create a lot of pressure on employees during the implementation, 
but can also speed up the process of becoming digital. The first company had come up with an 
interesting approach for solving not having a digitalization strategy in place: 
 
By using a bottom up approach, the first company gets some interesting new ideas from its 
employees. The ideas come from many different areas of the business, and the company can 
therefore not ensure to get a project within a certain area. The employees are, however, more 
likely to see the bottlenecks in their operations and where there truly is a need for optimization, 
==PAGE:76==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
75 
 
and this approach could therefore be very efficient. By using this approach, the company encourage 
their employees to think about ways to optimize the business, and makes them think creatively 
about improving operations. If a project is one of the winner of the competition, the people who 
suggested the idea will be in charge and are more likely to feel ownership of the projects. This will 
automatic encourage these people to work harder to get the project to succeed.  The second 
company did not have an answer to how they solved the challenge, but did have some practical 
advice, which could have helped them earlier. The company could have used a person or company 
to consult them on how to approach the digitalization agenda. When there is so many different 
places to start, it can be overwhelming to make a decision, making it harder to get started.  Other 
companies, which did not mention this challenge as their main challenge, have started smaller 
projects, without a large coordination effort from the top management. The companies 
emphasized that it was important to try new things, even though many things might fail. It is 
important to test new initiatives as soon as possible to identify profitable projects or be able to 
close projects before they become too expensive. 
To help other companies struggling with similar problems, or maybe just getting started on new 
projects within the area of digitalization in the supply chain, three advice can be given after 
analyzing all of these answers regarding main challengers and proposed solutions to overcome the 
challenger. The first is to be close to business partners, and preferably have reoccurring face-to-
face meetings to ensure a common understanding. Secondly is to ensure throughout 
communication and to explain why employees have to work on digitalization, and even get top 
management to emphasize the prioritization of projects. This will both help on the motivation to 
work on the projects and get the resources. Thirdly is to experiment with new initiative, and maybe 
use a bottom up approach to point out ineffective parts of the companies operation. The important 
thing is here to try out new initiatives and not get stuck in bureaucracy and fear of uncertainty.    
 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
76 
 
6. Conclusion 
After analyzing and discussing the importance, focus areas, initiatives, traceability technologies and 
connectivity technologies within digitalization of the supply chain, it is evident that the overall 
performance of the supply chain have not yet seen a remarkable increase, due to the use of 
industry 4.0 technology. The companies does in general think that digitalization of the supply chain 
is important, especially the B2C companies, but most of the companies did not have a strategy for 
digitalizing the supply chain. Most of the companies, which did not have a strategy in place, was 
currently working on it, and most companies will therefore probably have a digital strategy in place 
within a few years. Despite the general low impact of industry 4.0 technologies on the supply chain 
performance, there is a few areas where new technologies have already made an impact. 
Numerous companies have described their implementation of automatic order system is already 
well underway, where the companies are partly using new technologies as cloud platforms for the 
orderings process, and partly relying on the older EDI system.  
Several other technologies are also on a fast track, and an increased supply chain performance is 
expected to be measureable within a couple of years. Companies are seeing the possibilities of 
measuring data from their products, to offer predictive maintenance, which will connect the 
suppliers and customers more closely. By connecting the sensors with the internet, the measured 
data could be shared across the supply chain, for the benefit of several companies. This is in line 
with the before mentioned theory, where the short term cost reduction was expected to come 
from predictive maintenance (Griessbauer et al., 2016). The use of GPS and RFID sensors was less 
widely used, and only few companies where indicating their interest in these. The largest 
improvement on performance in the supply chain is therefore most likely to come from these two 
areas, automatic order handling and predictive maintenance.  
The companies interviewed in this thesis was, in general, more focused on the connectivity of 
products and logistics, than on the subject of traceability. This analysis therefore expect that the 
near future will bring many more sensors connected either directly to the internet, or connected 
to a local network. With several companies indicating that they will have implemented most of 
their initiatives within this area in 2 years, the author of this report believes that the effects of these 
initiatives will be measureable across the supply chain within 2 – 5 years. Many of the companies 
interviewed where at a very low maturity in using cloud platforms to share information across the 
supply chain, and the future perspective is therefore rather 5 – 10 years. The time estimations of 
traceability is similar to another study, where 7 companies estimated 6,9 years on average  from 
June 2016, before having realized the benefits of industry 4.0 in the procurement function (Glas & 
==PAGE:78==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
77 
 
Kleemann, 2016). The B2B companies did indicate that traceability would be important for their 
overall competitiveness, but most of these companies did not have concrete initiatives to increase 
the efficiency of their traceability.  
Lastly, the companies identified their main challengers, where the four main challengers was 
discussed. The main challengers was partnership with other companies in the supply chain, getting 
the necessary resources for the initiatives, getting the employees to embrace the changes, and get 
started with new initiatives and the creation of a digital strategy. To overcome these challengers, 
the companies empathized to have clear and regular communication, bot with suppliers as well as 
employees. When the communication is clear inside the organization, it should also become easier 
to get the necessary resources and help from other departments. To get started and create a 
strategy, it is important to experiment with new initiative and find out what works for the specific 
company. The best initiative to start with will be different from company to company.  
The performance of the supply chain can thereby be improved by several technologies from 
industry 4.0, but will especially see an improvement due to the use of automatic order handling, 
and an increase in connectivity, which will enable predictive maintenance and thereby connect the 
companies in the supply chain more closely. Many companies are working on implementing a 
shared digital platform to share information across the supply chain, but these initiatives will 
probably not improve the performance of the supply chain significant within the next 5 years.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
78 
 
Bibliography 
Alicke, K., Seyfert, A., & Rexhausen, D. (2017). Supply Chain 4.0 in consumer goods.pdf. McKinsey. 
Retrieved from https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/consumer-packaged-goods/our-
insights/supply-chain-4-0-in-consumer-goods 
Andersen, I. (2008). Den skinbarlige virkelighed. Samfundslitteratur (4. udgave). 
Bloomberg, J. (2018). Don ’ t Let Blockchain Cost Savings Hype Fool You. Forbes Magazin, (February), 1–6. 
Brandes, T. (2007). Dynamic Vendor Managed Inventory. International Symposium on Logistics and 
Industrial Informatics, 17–18. 
Budu, L. A. S. (2012). Transportation of fresh produce. LSUAgCenter, 1–35. Retrieved from 
https://www.lsu.edu/.../2_Pub.3442-TransportationofFreshProduce-BestPracticestoEns 
Carter, N., Bryant-Lukosius, D., DiCenso, A., Blythe, J., & Neville, A. J. (2014). The Use of Triangulation in 
Qualitative Research. Oncology Nursing Forum, 41(5), 545–547. https://doi.org/10.1188/14.ONF.545-
547 
Chadil, N., Russameesawang, A., & Keeratiwintakorn, P. (2008). Real-time tracking management system 
using GPS, GPRS and Google earth. International Conference on Electrical Engineering/Electronics, 
Computer, Telecommunications and Information Technology, 5th, 393–396. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ECTICON.2008.4600454 
Chen, S., Shi, R., Ren, Z., Yan, J., Shi, Y., & Zhang, J. (2017). A Blockchain-Based Supply Chain Quality 
Management Framework. 2017 IEEE 14th International Conference on E-Business Engineering (ICEBE), 
172–176. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICEBE.2017.34 
Chungsuk Ryu. (2017). Vendor-Managed Inventory in Three Stage Supply Chain. Journal of Distribution 
Science, 15(8), 15–28. https://doi.org/10.15722/jds.15.8.201708.15 
Cole, A., & Gorman, D. (2018). IBM Blockchain Foundation for Developers. Retrieved from 
https://www.coursera.org/learn/ibm-blockchain-essentials-for-developers/home/welcome 
De Mattos, C. A., & Laurindo, F. J. B. (2015). Collaborative platforms for supply chain integration: Trajectory, 
assimilation of platforms and results. Journal of Technology Management and Innovation, 10(2), 79–
92. https://doi.org/10.4067/S0718-27242015000200006 
European Parliament and Council. (2002). Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of 28 January 2002 laying down the 
general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety Authority and 
laying down procedures in matters of food safety. Official Journal of the European Communities, L31, 
1–24. https://doi.org/2004R0726 - v.7 of 05.06.2013 
Fenn, J., & Linden, A. (2003). Understanding Gartner ’s Hype Cycles. Strategic Analysis Report, Gartner, Inc, 
(May), 1–12. 
Flegel, A., & Wutzler, C. (2017). Performance Management in Supply Chain and Operations – Steering value 
chain activities towards exceptional performance. Deloitte Whitepaper. Retrieved from 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/de/Documents/operations/DELO-2577_Supply-
Chain-Performance-Management-POV_A4_ks3_Safe.pdf 
==PAGE:80==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
79 
 
Foster, R. N. (1986). Innovation: The Attacker’s Advantage. Academy of Management Review (Vol. 12). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0016-3287(87)90027-9 
Ganguly, P. (2016). Selecting the right IoT cloud platform. In 2016 International Conference on Internet of 
Things and Applications (IOTA) (pp. 316–320). https://doi.org/10.1109/IOTA.2016.7562744 
Ghauri, P. N., & Grønhaug, K. (2010). Research Methods in business studies. Research Methods in Business 
Studies: A Practical Guide. 
Glas, A. H., & Kleemann, F. C. (2016). The Impact of Industry 4.0 on Procurement and Supply Management: 
A Conceptual and Qualitative Analysis. International Journal of Business and Management Invention, 
5(6), 55–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.03.162 
Gregorio, M. Di. (2017). Blockchain: A new tool to cut costs. Middle East Insurance Review, (February). 
Retrieved from https://www.pwc.com/m1/en/media-centre/articles/blockchain-new-tool-to-cut-
costs.html 
Griessbauer, R., Vedso, J., & Schrauf, S. (2016). Industry 4.0: Building the digital enterprise. 2016 Global 
Industry 4.0 Survey, 1–39. https://doi.org/10.1080/01969722.2015.1007734 
Guide Jr, V. D. R., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2002). The reverse supply chain. Harvard Business Review, 
80(2), 25–26. 
He, W., Tan, E. L., & Lee, E. W. (2009). A solution for integrated track and trace in supply chain based on 
RFID & GPS. 
Hein, G., Paonni, M., Kropp, V., & Teuber, A. (2008). GNSS Indoors - fighting the fading. 
Holm, A. B. (2011). Videnskab i Virkeligheden: En Grundbog i Videnskabsteori. Samfundslitteratur, (June), 
257. 
Hunton, J. E., Lippincott, B., & Reck, J. L. (2003). Enterprise resource planning systems: Comparing firm 
performance of adopters and nonadopters. International Journal of Accounting Information Systems, 
4(3), 165–184. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1467-0895(03)00008-3 
Kandel, C., Klumpp, M., & Keusgen, T. (2011). GPS based Track and Trace for Transparent and Sustainable 
Global Supply Chain. International Conference on Concurrent Enterprising, 17th. 
Kocakulak, M., & Butun, I. (2017). An overview of Wireless Sensor Networks towards internet of things. 
2017 IEEE 7th Annual Computing and Communication Workshop and Conference (CCWC), 1–6. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/CCWC.2017.7868374 
Krishnamurthy, L., Adler, R., Buonadonna, P., Chhabra, J., Flanigan, M., Kushalnagar, N., … Yarvis, M. (2005). 
Design and deployment of industrial sensor networks. Proceedings of the 3rd International 
Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems  - SenSys ’05, 64. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1098918.1098926 
Langfield-smith, K. I. M., & Smith, D. (2005). Performance measures. Australian Accounting Review, 15(1). 
Liu, X., Li, Q., & Lai, I. K.-W. (2013). A trust model for the adoption of cloud-based supply chain management 
systems: A conceptual framework. 2013 International Conference on Engineering, Management 
Science and Innovation (ICEMSI), 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICEMSI.2013.6913980 
Meredith, J. (1998). Building operations management theory through case and field research. Journal of 
==PAGE:81==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
80 
 
Operations Management, 16(4), 441–454. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0272-6963(98)00023-0 
Møller, T. H., Hjortegaard, J. F., & Bule, N. (2016). The 2017 Digital Transformation Report Denmark. Digital 
Transformation Report. Retrieved from https://qvartz.com/wp-
content/uploads/DigitalTransformationReport.pdf?x78044%0Ahttps://trends.skift.com/trend/2017-
digital-transformation-report/ 
Pouliot, S., & Sumner, D. A. (2008). Traceability, liability, and incentives for food safety and quality. 
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 90(1), 15–27. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
8276.2007.01061.x 
Presutti, W. D. (2003). Supply management and e-procurement: Creating value added in the supply chain. 
Industrial Marketing Management, 32(3), 219–226. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0019-8501(02)00265-1 
Sarma, S. (2012). How Inexpensive RFID Is Revolutionizing the Supply Chain: ( Innovations Case Narrative : 
The Electronic Product Code). Innovations: Technology, Governance, Globalization, 7(3), 35–52. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/INOV_a_00138 
Schrauf, S., & Berttram, P. (2016). Industry 4.0: How digitization makes the supply chain more efficient, 
agile, and customer-focused. Strategy&, 1–32. Retrieved from 
https://www.strategyand.pwc.com/media/file/Industry4.0.pdf%0Ahttp://www.strategyand.pwc.com
/reports/industry4.0 
Tjahjono, B., Esplugues, C., Ares, E., & Pelaez, G. (2017). What does Industry 4.0 mean to Supply Chain? 
Procedia Manufacturing, 13, 1175–1182. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2017.09.191 
Treat, D., Brodersen, C., Blain, C., & Kurbanov, R. (2017). Banking on Blockchain - A Value Analysis for 
Investment Banks. Accenture Consultung, 10. 
TREK. Safety recall notice (2016). Retrieved from 
http://trek.scene7.com/is/content/TrekBicycleProducts/Asset Library/editorial-assets/safet-and-
recalls/TK16_MY14MY15_Farley_Recall_Consumer_Notice_USEN.pdf 
Voss, C., Tsikriktsis, N., & Frohlich, M. (2002). Case research in operations management. International 
Journal of Operations & Production Management, 22(2), 195–219. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/01443570210414329 
Yang, L., Rida, A., Traille, A., & Tentzeris, M. (2008). Time Domain Methods In Electrodynamics. Springer. 
Yiannas, F. (2017). Blockchain and Food Safety with IBM and Walmart. Retrieved from 
https://curiosity.com/videos/genius-of-things-blockchain-and-food-safety-with-ibm-and-walmart-
ibm-internet-of-things/ 
Yin, R. K. (1994). Case Study Research: Design and Methods. Applied Social Research Methods Series, 5, 219. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/FCH.0b013e31822dda9e 
Zhou, W., & Piramuthu, S. (2015). IoT and Supply Chain Traceability. In R. Doss, S. Piramuthu, & W. ZHOU 
(Eds.), Future Network Systems and Security (pp. 156–165). Cham: Springer International Publishing. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
81 
 
List of figures 
Figure 1-1: Area of interest in this research is the overlap between supply chain, industry 4.0 and 
performance management. ............................................................................................................... 5 
Figure 3-1: Every participant in Supply Chain 4.0 have access to all information at the same time . 9 
Figure 3-2 Subjects of special interest in this thesis on supply chain 4.0 ........................................ 10 
Figure 3-3: Technologies relevant for connectivity and traceability on the Gartner Hype Cycle from 
June 2017. ........................................................................................................................................ 11 
Figure 3-4: This thesis investigate the effects on performance by industry 4.0 on the supply chain 
expect in the area of production of products .................................................................................. 13 
Figure 3-5: Example of how data from different technologies can be merged into an IoT Cloud 
platform ........................................................................................................................................... 19 
Figure 3-6: Illustration from the Maersk homepage about their new platform. The new platform, 
build on blockchain technology, will affect many different partners and companies. ................... 25 
Figure 4-1 Basic design for case studies (Yin, 1994). This thesis builds around Type 4. .................. 30 
Figure 4-2: Company overview, key figures, segmentation and interviewee ................................. 36 
Figure 5-1: Categorization of participating companies into industries ........................................... 39 
Figure 5-2: Categorization of participating companies into customer segments ............................ 40 
Figure 5-3: Number of interviewees on different levels .................................................................. 41 
Figure 5-4. Question: How important is digitalization of the supply chain for your company? ...... 41 
Figure 5-5. Customer segmentation of importance in digitalization of supply chain Question: How 
Important is digitalization of the supply chain for your company? ................................................. 42 
Figure 5-6. Question: At what level of the organization is the digitalization of the supply chain 
anchored in your organization? ....................................................................................................... 44 
Figure 5-7 - B2C and B2B companies' status on having digitalization as part of their strategy 
Question: Do you have any strategical goals for the digitalization, which affect the supply chain?
 ......................................................................................................................................................... 45 
Figure 5-8. Focus areas in digitalization projects Question: Do you already have some ongoing 
initiatives for digitalizing your supply chain? ................................................................................... 48 
Figure 5-9. Initiatives in companies grouped into four categories. Question: Do you already have 
some ongoing initiatives for digitalizing your supply chain? ........................................................... 51 
Figure 5-10: Importance of traceability by industry segment  Question: How important is efficient 
traceability to stay competitive in the future? ................................................................................ 56 
Figure 5-11: Importance of traceability by customer segment Question: How important is efficient 
traceability to stay competitive in the future? ................................................................................ 57 
Figure 5-12: Development in utilization of industry 4.0 technologies for traceability split on B2B 
and B2C Question 1: In what degree do you use technologies to increase efficiency in traceability 
today? Question 2: In what degree do you use technologies to increase efficiency in traceability in 
one to two years? ............................................................................................................................ 59 
Figure 5-13: Development in utilization of industry 4.0 technologies for traceability split on 
industry Question 1: In what degree do you use technologies to increase efficiency in traceability 
today? Question 2: In what degree do you use technologies to increase efficiency in traceability in 
one to two years? ............................................................................................................................ 60 
Figure 5-14: Importance of connectivity at customer segment Question: How important is 
connectivity to stay competitive in the future?............................................................................... 62 
Figure 5-15: Importance of connectivity by industry segment. Question: How important is 
connectivity to stay competitive in the future?............................................................................... 63 
==PAGE:83==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
82 
 
Figure 5-16: Frequency of different connectivity technology initiatives Question: What initiatives 
have you started or planned in the area of connectivity technologies? ......................................... 64 
Figure 5-17: Overall development in connectivity ........................................................................... 68 
Figure 5-18: Development in connectivity technologies split on customer segment. Question 1: In 
what degree do you use technologies to increase connectivity today? Question 2: In what degree 
do you use technologies to increase connectivity in one to two years? ......................................... 68 
Figure 5-19: Development in connectivity technologies split on industry. Question 1: In what 
degree do you use technologies to increase connectivity today? Question 2: In what degree do 
you use technologies to increase connectivity in one to two years? .............................................. 69 
Figure 5-20: frequency of main challengers identified by interviewees Question: What have been 
the biggest challengers for implementing the initiatives? ............................................................... 70 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
Morten Bay Nielsen 
 
22 – June – 2018 
 
83 
 
Appendix 
Literature searches 
The table below shows how the amount of articles about blockchain and internet of things have 
increased dramatically within the last 5 years. The subject of industry 4.0 have already been around 
for about a decade, where 50% of the articles are written within the last 5 years, but it is first now 
we see the effects on the entire supply chain. Like the blockchain and internet of things, then have 
most of the articles about supply chain 4.0 been written within the last 5 years.  
Search String 
Google 
Google 
Scholar 
DTU Findit 
DTU Findit  
last 5 
years 
DTU Findit 
Last 5 
years % 
Industry 4.0 
       3,620,000          1,140,000         24,690        12,349     
50% 
Supply Chain 4.0 
       1,590,000             328,000                557   
         390     
70% 
Blockchain 
    27,900,000               24,400            2,161          2,127     
98% 
Internet of Things 
    36,300,000          3,160,000         37,300        34,318     
92% 
Cloud platform 
       5,940,000          1,490,000         33,835        24,605     
73% 
Supply Chain 
Management 
       8,650,000          2,750,000       125,121   
    51,994     
42% 
Multiple case 
research 
33,900,000 
      3,370,000       128,249   
    52,470     
41% 
 
