==PAGE:1==
The cost of customer flexibility in
attended home pickup and delivery
problems
By:
María Isabel Rodríguez Mancebo
s172255
Technical University of Denmark
Lyngby
June 23, 2018
DTU Management
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This MSc thesis entitled "The cost of customer ﬂexibility in attended home
pickup and delivery problems" was prepared at the department of DTU
Management Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark, in collab-
oration with AMCS Group.
The main advisor has been Associate Professor Martin Philip Kidd from
DTU Management Engineering. The thesis has a scope of 30 ECTS points
and is written as part of an exchange programme with Universidad Politéc-
nica de Valencia (UPV).
María Isabel Rodríguez Mancebo
1
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
First, I would really like to thank my supervisor Martin Philip Kidd for his
time and endless patience during the course of this thesis.
I am very grateful for being given the opportunity to join DTU throw
an exchange program.
It was absolutely amazing to be part of such an
institution and having the opportunity of being taught as much as I did
about my ﬁeld of study and about life.
Finally, I want to thank my family and friends for their constant support
and positivism.
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
5
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Purpose and contributions of thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Outline of thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Literature Review
7
2.1
Attended Home Delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
E-commerce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.3
Deﬁnitions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.4
Types of Last-Mile Delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.5
Main concerns of the attended home delivery problem
12
2.1.6
Characterizing the attended home delivery . . . . . . .
14
2.1.7
Last research surveys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Customer Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.1
Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.2
Managing customer retention and customer service pri-
orities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.3
Meeting and surpassing customer aspirations
. . . . .
23
2.2.4
Service recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.2.5
Flexibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Methodology
28
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Customer ﬂexibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Calculating the routing cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.5
Tool for oﬀering Time Slots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3
==PAGE:5==
4
Results
38
4.1
Eﬀect of the number of days on the cost . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Eﬀect of the number of time slots per day on the cost
. . . .
40
4.3
Eﬀect of the time slot length on the cost . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Eﬀect of the density on the cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5
Conclusion and possible future research
. . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This introductory chapter provides the motivation of the thesis created by
the fast-moving world where we life. The purpose and contribution of this
work are given afterwards, ending with the outline of this thesis.
1.1
Motivation
Last mile delivery relevance in our daily life is just growing as fast as new
technologies presence. The ability of use an smart-phone or equivalent to
manage almost any activity of every day life from anywhere is reforming
customer’s behaviour and making them each time more demanding.
This keeps up with e-commerce growth, the kind of products that a
person can purchase online today is countless: from e-grossery to furniture
and having it delivered at your house door without the minimum eﬀort.
This is absolutely appropriate from customer’s point of view, specially if
a person has any kind of diﬃculty to travel to the physical shop or just for
main convenience and comfort. However, transport became a key point of
delivery companies and not only because of the resulting high costs but also
for the high level of pollution caused.
It is in this environment that an analysis which of the trade-oﬀbetween
customer service oﬀered and transport costs become highly important.
1.2
Purpose and contributions of thesis
The purpose of this thesis is, ﬁrst, to deﬁne the concept of customer ﬂexibility
and reﬂect the importance of further research on this area which importance
is just growing due to the tendency of customers to be each time more
5
==PAGE:7==
exigent. This need is justiﬁed by a deep research into customer service and
its relation with attended home delivery. Secondly, a simulation problem
based in real-life data will be exposed and the trade-oﬀbetween delivery
costs and the level of customer ﬂexibility will be highly discussed.
Thought this analysis the main following questions pretend to be an-
swered: (1) What is the eﬀect on the number of days on the cost? (2) What
is the eﬀect on the number of time slots per day on the cost? (3) What is
the eﬀect on the time slot length on the cost? (4) What is the eﬀect of the
density on the cost?
Diﬀerent scenarios will be modelled programming the CVRP with time
windows and analyzing the inﬂuence of customer ﬂexibility on the delivery
costs.
1.3
Outline of thesis
The following chapters of this thesis are organized as follows. Chapter 2
presents the literature review realized where the main focus was made on
the two key aspects of the paper. Firstly the attended home delivery prob-
lem is explained and contextualized into the actual industry. Next, a re-
view of the concept of customer service is exposed.
Chapter 3 addresses
the methodology followed to address the real-life problem confronted in the
present analysis. For that end the concept of customer ﬂexibility will be
deﬁned and a brief summary of the vehicle routing problem is exposed and
the algorithm developed are clearly explained.
In Chapter 4, the results obtained by the implemented tool are exposed
and a brief conclusion and future space for research are exhibited.
6
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 2
Literature Review
2.1
Attended Home Delivery
2.1.1
Introduction
In the massively interconnected world we live in, the transport and logistics
sector performs an important role. Transport and logistics companies ac-
complish several functions throughout the supply chain of several industry
sectors. The main logistics features can be as varied as: provide the sourcing
of raw materials and supplies, warehousing products or deliver the ﬁnished
products or services to the ﬁnal clients, however, the focus of the present
document will me made at the end of the distribution chain addressing the
last mile delivery and concretely attended home delivery services.
Due to the growing popularity of online shopping, many traditional re-
tailers oﬀer an Internet sales channel nowadays. Last mile delivery is truly
convenient for clients for reasons such as: incapacity to move to the shops,
busy lifestyle or straightforward convenience. Nevertheless, it leads to mean-
ingful organizational and logistical deﬁance for the companies due to the fact
that last mile delivery is one of the most expensive, ineﬃcient and contam-
inant phase of the whole distribution chain; largely due to the requirement
of the consumer presence which involve a elevated rate of failure deliveries.
In order to ensure high customer service level and to prevent unsuccess-
ful deliveries, client and company must agree in a concrete time slot for the
product or service deliverance. All those aspects highlight the need of de-
veloping a sophisticated planning of delivery routes to satisfy consumer time
windows withing the lower possible value of the costs.
In the present chapter will be presented an overview of e-commerce and
the motives for it success. Then, the diﬀerent types of Last-Mile delivery
7
==PAGE:9==
which are research subjects of high relevance, focusing specially into attended
home delivery as it is the one evaluated in the present thesis. Followed by
the description of how to design the time slot schedule and its real-time
management. Finally, they will be exposed diﬀerent tactics for Time Slot
prizing.
2.1.2
E-commerce
Technology development and the actual social interest for electronic devices
allow e-commerce to keep growing enormously. Meanwhile, this way of busi-
ness increases customer power allowing them to easily compare prizes and
force companies to compete no only in price but also within product quality
and customer service.
A wide variety of industries are highly involved throw e-commerce, it can
be purchased online almost everything nowadays: furniture, books, concert
tickets and so on. It acquires special relevance the grocery market as it is
a highly growing sector and there is no alternative to the attended home
delivery as distributes perishable items.
To give a better idea of the e-
commerce growth, it is exposed below a graph with the real e-commerce
sales worldwide growth between years 2014 - 2017 and the expected growth
for years 2018 - 2021 obtained from [1].
;
Figure 2.1: Adding value through customer service
[1]
As exposed in [2], the main aspects of e-commerce progress are:
• To provide a quick, reliable and versatile service without carry a high
cost increment. Time Windows will perform a core paper to this end
as it will be extensively exposed later.
8
==PAGE:10==
• Attended home delivery although its high cost will remain being the
main last mile delivery type until alternative delivery systems evolve
more(locker bank, collection points...).
• City logistics providers must ﬁnd their way to minimize cost by means
of customer service deﬁnition, novel time slot pricing, communal oper-
ations, developing suitable unattended delivery systems (if the product
delivered allows it).
2.1.3
Deﬁnitions
In the present section will be deﬁned the main logistic applications of at-
tended home delivery upon which the conclusions of the present thesis could
be useful.
Last Mile Delivery
The last mile delivery is deﬁned by Gevaers et al [3] as "the ﬁnal leg in a
business to consumer delivery service whereby the consignment is delivered
to the recipient, either at the recipient’s home or at a collection point".
Thus, business to consumer (B2C) allude to the transactions carried
straight between an enterprise and the end-users of its products or services.
Even thought any company which sell directly to consumers can be designate
as a B2C company, the term is commonly used to mention online retailers,
just like any company that sells products and services online.
The B2C model diﬀers substantially from the business-to-business (B2B)
model, which refers to commerce between two or more businesses and are
often subject to other parameters such as larger order quantities, wider time
slots and having the guaranty that the client will be expecting the order with
the consequent absence of risk of delivery failure.
Reverse Logistics
Rogers & TibbenLembke [4] did an overview of the most relevant researches
on reserve logistic completed so far, determining the most known deﬁnition
as following one: "Reverse logistics is the process of planning, implement-
ing, and controlling the eﬃcient and cost eﬀective ﬂow of raw materials,
in-process inventory, ﬁnished goods, and related information from the point
of consumption to the point of origin for the purpose of recapturing value or
proper disposal".
9
==PAGE:11==
But what motivates the need of moving back a product to the original
point? The main reason for this fact and the ﬁrst that crosses our mind is be
the return of a product either because it was defective or because returns are
allowed and the product didn’t fulﬁll customer expectations. Brito & Dekker
[5] made a extend analysis regarding the motifs why products needed to move
backwards throw the supply chain and organized them according to three
supply chain stages:
1. Manufacturing returns, which embrace raw material surplus, quality-
control returns, and production leftovers.
2. Distribution returns, which include product recalls, returns coming
back due to commercial agreements (B2B commercial returns), internal
stock adjustments and functional returns.
3. Customer returns, which comprise reimbursement guarantees, war-
ranty returns, service returns, end-of-use and end-of-life returns.
However, there are much more activities that fall into reverse logistics:
• Reusable packaging collection. Packaging is one of the main logistics
pollution source that must be avoid when possible, for this reason
packaging such as pallets or plastic totes usually ﬂow back as they are
reusable.
• Speciﬁc waste collection. Collecting back some products when its life
cycle comes to an end may create proﬁt for the company through the
sale of materials, contributes to the environmental awareness of cus-
tomers involved in the process, and most importantly minimizes the
environmental impact. Those tactics are starting to be implemented
specially in groceries but they often depend on each country regula-
tions.
Special or Hazardous Waste Logistics
The nature of waste which is considered hazardous and require special treat-
ment can vary from one to another country but most of the European coun-
tries agree to the following ones: heavy metal containing batteries, PVC
containing waste, PCB containing waste, asbestos containing waste, electric
and electronic equipment, used tyres, discarded cars, impregnated timber
and ﬂuorescent tubes, used oils and so on.
10
==PAGE:12==
The highly contaminant nature of those residues entails the need of com-
panies in charge of their picking and responsible management. The need of
the customer to be present in most of these cases when the waste is collected
makes this sector a good match to apply the attended "delivery" problem
(pick up in this case).
This way have been exposed the main sectors where attended home de-
livery is a factor. Here-under, they will be highlighted the main issues that
require especial concern when solving the attended home delivery problem.
2.1.4
Types of Last-Mile Delivery
Storage or pick
up location
Pick up at distribu-
tion center or shop
Clustering
Home delivery
Locker bank
Collection points
Post Oﬃces
Attended
Unattended
Figure 2.2: Flow chart representing last mile delivery alternatives. Based into
Fabian Ehmke (2012) [2]
In addition, other alternatives such as drone delivery model and Self-
Driving/Autonomous Vehicles are being tested. The online retailer Amazon
oﬀers Amazon Prime Air in the United States, the United Kingdom, Austria,
France and Israel; this service grants the delivery of packages up to ﬁve
11
==PAGE:13==
pounds in 30 minutes using small drones. On the other hand, McKinsey
bets that the future of last mile delivery will be parcel delivery and within
20 years the following predictions will become reality:
• AGVs with parcel lockers will dominate regular parcel delivery as well
as time-window and same-day delivery in urban areas.
• Drones will deliver all time-window and same-day items in rural areas.
• If droids do not become signiﬁcantly cheaper, bike couriers are likely
to be the best delivery form for instant delivery.
2.1.5
Main concerns of the attended home delivery problem
The present section objective is to highlight the main concerns of the at-
tended home delivery and justify the need of study made in the present
document. The principal problems that can be observed within attended
home deliveries are:
• There is a high degree of failed deliveries. The main reasons for this
is people not being at home or address mistaken. This is the principal
source of extra costs and emissions.
• Another characteristic that increments the costs is distribution by par-
tially loaded trucks or even having to start a new route for an only order
which may be in an isolated area.
• The critical mass for generating an eﬃcient route can be sometimes
too limited for high density population regions.
• Most last mile deliveries are done by reduced size vans, which leads to
a higher carbon footprint per kg than distribution by a larger truck.
Jennifer Gibbs [6] and Jay R. Brown [7] explore the environmental im-
pact of the B2C delivery. Numerous studies have been published regarding
this important topic but there is not a clear consensus whether home de-
liveries are more or less polluting than customer picking up.
There are
several parameters implied. Nevertheless, there is agreement that narrower
time windows and reduced lead times conduct home delivery to contaminate
more. Perhaps, make customers aware of it could contribute to conduct their
selection towards wider time slots length.
Mangiaracina et al [8] makes a deep analysis focused on a set of 56 papers
from international journals published between 2001 and 2014. Concerning
12
==PAGE:14==
the content, four main areas in last mile logistics have been diagnosed of
having environmental impact: transport planning and management, ware-
housing, packaging and distribution network design. Furthermore, the main
indicators used to measure environmental impact were identiﬁed as energy
consume, gas emissions, waste generated and traﬃc mileage. However, the
authors consider that there is a lack of quantitative models for measuring the
environmental eﬀect of last mile delivery. Indeed, a signiﬁcant proportion of
the papers analyzed provide a qualitative assessment of the impact based on
a comparison between online and oﬄine purchase.
On the other hand, the issue of delivery failure is one of the most chal-
lenging problems of attended home delivery, fact that is reﬂected at the
following table made from data provided by J.H.R. van Duin [9]. Only a
75% of deliveries are made successfully, here lies the importance of provid-
ing customers with concrete and narrow time slots that ensure their stay at
home during the time slot length and avoid as much as possible a delivery
failure, which would increase the costs notably as it increments the number
of deliveries which need to be made (rework).
Table 2.1: Success percentages of delivery . Source: [9]
Delivery Options
Web shop with an
option for delivery at
an alternative location
First Time Right
(address)
Receiver is at home for
1st delivery
75%
First Time Not at
Right (address)
Package is given to
neighbours
15%
First Time Not
Delivered
Receiver is at home and
service is delivered
10%
On the other hand, Table 2 sums up the key aspects of Gevaers, Van de
Voorde & Vanelslander [3] research. It is stated that the last mile delivery can
be deﬁned by ﬁve crucial aspects: the level of consumer service, security and
type of delivery, geographical area, level of market penetration and density,
the vehicle ﬂeet and technology available and the environmental footprint.
Those elements are scrutinized in detail and related sub-characteristics are
assigned to them as exposed in the table.
So, throw the present thesis some of the presented problems are ad-
dressed. It will be made an analysis of the number of time slots oﬀered to
the clients in order to achieve a successful delivery and reduce distribution
13
==PAGE:15==
Table 2.2: Eﬃciency characteristics throughout last mile delivery. Source:[3] [3]
Level of
Customer
Service
Security and
Type of
delivery
Geographical
area and
Market density
or penetration
Fleet and
Technology
Environment
Time windows
Attended vs
Unattended
delivery
Density
Type of delivery
vehicles
Packaging
Lead time
Collection points
Pooling of goods
ICT (Information
and
Comunication
Technology)
Trade-oﬀbetween
time factors and
environmental
impact
Frequency
Return of goods
cost and pollution by the design of the most eﬃcient routes as possible. It
will also be analyzed the eﬀect of delivering in areas with higher or lower
population density. But this will be deeply explained in the Methodology
section.
2.1.6
Characterizing the attended home delivery
Time Slot Schedule Design
At the present section, it will be described the tactical planning for designing
a time slot schedule.
According to Agatz et al. [10], Time Slot Schedule Design involves two
correlated but separated clusters of determinations:
• Deﬁne the service speciﬁcations and distribution expenses for each zip
code (according with the authors personal criteria).
• Allocate each of the time slots to each of the zip codes (fulﬁlling the
service speciﬁcations determined).
The decision making process for each of the schedule decisions deﬁned
implies its challenges to overcome. Deﬁning the service speciﬁcations and dis-
tribution expenses relies on marketing concerns, meanwhile allocating time
slots to zip codes is a decision linked to delivery routing concerns.
The determination of the service speciﬁcations imply trading between
marketing and operational considerations. The mean decisions that must be
taken are summarized below:
14
==PAGE:16==
• Length of Time Slots. The length of a time slot has a remarkable
eﬀect in both customer service and delivery costs.
The shorter the
time slot is, the higher the customer service but that minimizes the
ﬂexibility and it may incur in higher delivery costs as it is going to be
more complicated to adjust a reduced time slot into an existing route.
Selecting time slots of diﬀerent lengths may be helpful when designing
time slot schedules.
• Overlapping of Time Slots. Allowing time slots oﬀered to overlap
can be a good idea in order to concentrate resources in those hours
preferred by clients and guarantee an elevated customer service level.
However, it must be considered that it implies the need of a large
vehicle ﬂeet and probably higher number of drivers which may incur
in higher costs.
• Number of Time Slots oﬀered. The number of time slots oﬀered
is directly proportional to both customer service and delivery costs. A
high number of time slots oﬀered increases the customer service, how-
ever it also increases the probabilities of having to do far away deliver-
ies more frequently with the subsequent cost elevation. An interesting
way to prevent this to happen could be oﬀering diﬀerent number of
time slots to customers regarding their distance to the depot and the
population density in their area.
• Delivery charges. There are several contradictory theories regard-
ing the willingness to pay of customers. As a general rule, it could
be said that customers are willing to pay for an elevated service level
(reducing the elapsed time since the request has been made until the
product/service is delivered in destiny for example) but frequently cus-
tomers are expecting to get a minimum service level without paying
or at least not paying too much. A variety of delivery charges may be
considered depending on the emplacement of the customer, the size of
the order and the time slot chosen for delivery.
After having decided about the service requirements just exposed, con-
crete time slots are allocated to each of the zip codes in the coverage area.
To that end, several considerations must be taken into account. Customers
are willing to be oﬀered a number of time slots distributed equitably over a
day (morning, afternoon, evening) and over the week (allowing weekdays and
weekend).On the other hand, smoothly distributed demand over the day and
the week is also interesting from the companies point of view as it provides
15
==PAGE:17==
cost-eﬀective picking and delivery. Nevertheless, smooth demand patrons
have been relegated to the past and right now it is likewise relevant to have
demand "geographically smooth".
So, it is undeniable the importance of routing considerations when allo-
cating time slots to zip codes. But, which other factor play an important
role? It is important to consider what will happen when the delivery time
preferred by the customer is not available. Will demand disappear if the
customer decides not to place the order or will demand be increased if the
customer decides to place an order in another time slot?
Dynamic Time Slotting
Once the time slot design has been implemented, the real-time management
will be addressed in this section.
Following the example described by Agatz et al. [10]. After the place-
ment of an order, the feasibility and costs incurred by its delivery must be
evaluated by the home delivery enterprise and if it is encountered beneﬁcial,
a reduced set of options will be provided to customer who can choose the
deﬁnitive time slot or withdraw the order.
The main aspects that drive dynamic slotting management are exposed
below:
• Time slot preferred by customer.
• Customer’s reaction when receives a set of time slots that does not
contain the desired one.
The most challenging part of dynamic time slot management is without
doubt customer service modeling. However, as customers order online, it
is possible to monitor and analyze individual customer preferences and use
that information for future purchases.
Several fair strategies can be applied to select the range of time slots
that will be oﬀered to a customer. One strategy could be focusing only on
feasibility and close a time slot only when it has been received enough number
of orders for that period of time. Another strategy could be combine real-
time information together with information on the already accepted orders
and planned future ones. Overall, it is important to remember that the time
reachable for time slotting decisions is reduced, seconds rather than minutes.
16
==PAGE:18==
Dynamic Prizing
Finally, let’s consider dynamically modiﬁcation of the corresponding delivery
fee. Using price incentives may be an interesting and customer-friendly strat-
egy to persuade customers to order in a time slot favorable for the logistic
company.
Agatz et al. [10] present some important resolutions that can help to
determine time slot incentives:
• Deﬁning the kind of incentives that can be used: maybe free products
or coupons instead of reduced delivery charges.
• Penalizing the choice of unfeasible or extremely expensive time slots.
• Deﬁning diﬀerent levels of discounts regarding the company’s prefer-
ence for various time slots.
• Determine in advance the amount of money available for discounts.
How many orders will be likely to receive the oﬀer?
2.1.7
Last research surveys
Time slot management has traditionally received little attention, as it was an
aspect expected to be deﬁned by the sales and marketing department. How-
ever, the tremendous growth of e-commerce associated with the described
problems of failed deliveries and traﬃc pollution have made evident the need
to investigate and improve the management of time slot as well as build the
most eﬃcient routes as possible.
The ﬁrst cost comparison between attended, unattended delivery and the
cost of customers visiting the store is made by Punakivi and Saranen [11].
They determine that e-grocery home delivery service can be until a 43%
cheaper than customers cost of displacement.
Additionally, it is claimed
that the cost per attended delivery (with 2 hour time slots) stop is over
2,5 times the cost per unattended delivery stop due to the time restrictions
added.
A more recent ﬁeld of research is real-time management of time slots
(research area in which the present project will make its focus).
In this
area, Bent and Van Hentenryck [12] and Campbell and Savelsbergh [13]
both use stochastic information about possible forward requests to select
which delivery orders will be accepted or rejected depending on their ﬁt in
the model. The main diﬀerence is that [12] pretends to maximize the number
17
==PAGE:19==
of accepted requests while [13] contemplates rejecting an expensive delivery
to save resources for other future orders.
One sub-ﬁeld of real-time management is the study of incentive schemes
to inﬂuence customer behavior regarding time slots preferences. Campbell
and Savelsbergh [14] and [15] study the use of such incentives in order to
reduce delivery costs by encouraging the choice of time slots that involve
lower costs of delivery routes, even getting customer to accept wider delivery
windows instead of speciﬁc time slots.
Another research area is the time slot management problem (TSMP),
introduced by Agatz et al. [16] as an innovative planning problem relevant
to any business involved with attended home delivery. Their approach is
based on data from a concrete e-grocery shop, taking as known the speciﬁc
requirements of the number of time slots, duration and number of days that
the company wants to oﬀer for each zip code and each shift. On this basis,
the paper presents the problem of deciding which time slot to assign to each
zip code in order to minimize the delivery costs. It is interesting to highlight
that the TSMP is introduced as a tactical problem which assigns time slots
geographically and does not manage real-time arrival of new orders.
Finally, another recent ﬁeld of study is the use of historical delivery data
to predict future delivery results by applying address intelligence, introduced
by J.H.R. van Duin et al. [9]. Multiple linear regression techniques are ap-
plied towards the pursuit of address intelligence, recognizing and forecasting
the improvement potential for other zip code areas.
2.2
Customer Service
Globalization and the dynamism of a constant evolving society lead enter-
prises to ﬁnd increasingly hard to distinguish themselves positively from
other competitors. The rules of the game have changed long ago and enter-
prises need to stand out not only from local peers but also from international
entrants and within a context in which technological diﬀerences are no longer
prominent. Meanwhile, this global stage enable customers to choose from a
extensive range of possibilities whenever they are seeking any products or
services.
It is undeniable that daily routines have changed over the last years
and one of the factors more valuable for most of the human beings is time.
People is not willing to waste time waiting for a product delivery or for the
availability of a product or service, clients became extremely demanding and
await high service level from vendors.
18
==PAGE:20==
Prosperous companies are making signiﬁcant eﬀorts to examine what are
the real expectations of their customers and if they are satisﬁed by their
internal service standards, sometimes going so far as linking their employees
bonuses to an index of customer satisfaction.
It is in this context, in which the power of the brand is signiﬁcantly
limited, that customer service acquires highly relevance as a factor of market
diﬀerentiation.
In this way, managing the customer service through the
supply chain becomes a core concern in logistics management.
2.2.1
Deﬁnition
Numerous deﬁnitions of customer service have been made over the years,
Frank W. et al [17] collected some of the most popular:
1. The elapsed time between the receipt of an order at the supplier’s
warehouse and the shipment of the order from the warehouse.
2. The percentage of items in a supplier’s warehouse which might be found
to be out-of-stock at any given point of time.
3. The percentage of customers, or volume of customer orders, which
describes those who are served within a certain time period from the
receipt of the order at the supplier’s warehouse.
4. The percentage of customer orders which can be ﬁlled completely upon
receipt at a supplier’s warehouse.
5. The proportion of goods which arrive at a customer’s place of business
in saleable condition.
6. The elapsed time between the placement of an order by a customer
and the delivery of goods ordered to the customer’s place.
7. The ease and ﬂexibility with which a customer can place his order.
However, those deﬁnitions are signiﬁcantly "supplier-oriented" except for
the last two which are more "customer-oriented". As the focus of the present
paper is going to be made on the last mile delivery, the deﬁnition made by
Martin Christopher [18] seems more appropriate: the role of customer service
would be to grant ‘time and place utility’ when goods and/or services are
transferred.
After all, making the product or service ‘available’ is what the distribu-
tion function of the business is in essence, but to make a product/service
19
==PAGE:21==
available there are many processes implied.
Consequently, ﬁnding a way
to deﬁne customer service through factors which represent the many activi-
ties involved might vary regarding the enterprise’s activity (if it is oﬀered a
product or service, if the enterprise produces their own merchandise or de-
pends on third parties, the enterprise’s vision, the consciousness about their
customers needs and so on).
According to the abovementioned book, those factors could be examined
under three headings: Pre-transaction elements, Transaction elements and
Post-transaction elements. Examples of diﬀerent elements that can be ana-
lyzed under those headings are listed below but it is crucial to understand
that customer service must be settled in terms of the variable requirements
of divers market segments and there is not an universal list of elements ap-
plicable.
1. Pre-transaction elements.
• Stock availability
• Target delivery dates
• Response time to queries
2. Transaction elements.
• Order ﬁll rate
• Back orders by age
• shipment details
• Product substitutions
3. Post-transaction elements.
• First call ﬁx rate
• Customer complaints
• Returns/Claims
• Service parts availability
Indeed ultimately customer service could be determined by the inter-
action of all those factors that contribute to make products and services
available to the acquirer.
20
==PAGE:22==
2.2.2
Managing customer retention and customer service pri-
orities
It has been already stated the relevance of customer service as a diﬀeren-
tiation weapon, if an enterprise does not make use of it, it will be placing
itself in real disadvantage. But, should the main focus of this diﬀerentiation
weapon being made on getting new customers or on keeping the existing
ones? According to the concept of lifetime value of a customer, an enter-
prise’s beneﬁts will be increased by the longer a customer remains loyal to
them.
Lifetime value = Average transaction value x Yearly
frequency of purchase x Customer life expectancy
From the equation, it is proved the extreme relevance of developing sat-
isfactory, long-term relationships with clients. According to Colin Scott et
al [19], the main reasons to invest in customer loyalty are:
• The main cost of gaining fresh customers takes place in the ﬁrst year.
• The longer B2B customers remain, it is increased their tendency to
purchase a larger variety of products or services.
• Long-term clients service is often cheaper as their relation with the
company matures.
• Long-term customers are frequently willing to pay premium prices in
exchange for better services.
• Satisﬁed clients will share their personal experiences which increases
the opportunities of adcquiring new potential customers.
In the ﬁgure ??, it is schematized and highlighted some of the most
relevant aspect that improve the service oﬀered and can make a diﬀerence
when a client chooses to remain loyal to a brand or switch to another with
better customer service.
Once it has been stated the importance of customer retention, a new
dilemma arises. Should all clients be provided with the same service level?
To answer this question, Pareto Law or 80/20 rule proper guidance for
developing a cost-eﬀective strategy. It is logical that companies’ proﬁts might
21
==PAGE:23==
;
Figure 2.3: Adding value through customer service
[18]
vary by customer and by product, but in the graph exposed below is pre-
sented how the curve is split into three classes: the ’A’ class groups the 20%
of products and customers with higher proﬁtability, the ’B’ class is formed
by the following 50% and, ﬁnally, the 30% remaining are class ’C’. The exact
division between classes will be diﬀerent depending on the kind of business
or the kind or market.
This law has been highly used to determine the safety stock of diﬀerent
product regarding on their expected demand and the proﬁt their provide.
However, this vision of service prioritization can be applied to customers
as showed in [ﬁgure2] . It is proved that if the 80/20 rule operate both to
products and customers then all businesses are in fact highly dependent upon
a reduced number of customers purchasing a reduced number of elevated
proﬁt lines. The arithmetic justiﬁes it as follows:
22
==PAGE:24==
;
Figure 2.4: The Pareto or 80/20 rule
[18]
20% of customers buying a 20% of the products = 4% of all
customer/product transactions
Providing:
80% of 80% of total proﬁt = 64%
Consequently, 4% of transactions provide the 64 % of all proﬁt. Ones
being aware of this fact, it is justiﬁed to oﬀer the highest possible standards
of service and availability to key customers who request key products and it
is highlighted the need to pay attention to the less proﬁtable customers and
less proﬁtable items.
For all reasons given, managing key customers and earning their loyalty
are key focus to accomplish business success.
2.2.3
Meeting and surpassing customer aspirations
The ﬁnal mission of supply chain management and logistics is to deliver
clients with the level of service that they seek and to achieve so at less possible
cost. However, become aware of customers’ service needs is probably the
23
==PAGE:25==
;
Figure 2.5: The Pareto or 80/20 rule
[18]
most complicated task. It must be remembered that each customer seeks
diﬀerent service speciﬁcations.
To mitigate those diﬀerences, clients will
be assigned into segments that share similar service requirements. Market
research can be a crucial instrument to determine what are the service issues
that divide clients.
An approach to service segmentation may pursue those three-step pro-
cess:
1. Identiﬁcation of key aspects that must be guaranteed by the customer
service.
2. Deﬁning the importance that each of the previous factors has for cus-
tomers.
3. Classify customers into clusters regarding their similar service prefer-
ences.
But deﬁning customer service for the diﬀerent segments identiﬁed is not
enough. Customer expectations evolve constantly due to technology evolu-
tion, competitors’ advances and so on. Accordingly, delivery companies must
adjust their customer service as fast as their clients require it or risk being
left behind.
24
==PAGE:26==
2.2.4
Service recovery
The ICS National Complaints Culture Survey 2006 detects the following key
statistics with regard to complaints and service recovery [20]:
• 68% of clients say they are prepared to pay up to 20% more to deal
with an organization which oﬀer extremely high service level.
• 60% of consumers are disposed to complain about products while only
46% are disposed to make a complaint about services.
• The reason why 33% of clients decide not to make a complaint is be-
cause they think that the organization will not take the complaints
into consideration.
• 94% of clients complaining by email believe their complaint should be
solved within 1 week, but this barely happens in 49% of cases.
• 89% of customers are more likely to share with others bad service
experiences while only 60% of them are likely to mention about good
experiences.
The way an organization deals with problems and complaints provide a
great insight about the customer service oﬀered by branch. Complaints can
be really positive if they are solved fast and eﬀectively, leaving the customer
with a good impression getting their problems solved but also, allowing the
company to collect information about matters that can be improved.
To sum up, service recovery, instead of being used as a tool for embar-
rassment, can be used to enhance business processes and encourage customer
loyalty.
2.2.5
Flexibility
After having exposed the importance of customer service, it is essential for
the present document to explain the concept of ﬂexibility along the supply
chain.
An extensive research has been carried out on this topic from the nineties
through to today as authors realized of the importance of ﬂexibility to
adapt to changing markets, customers requirements and so on. At present,
globalization and constant technology improvements which lead to a even
more highly competitive market where implementing the last technologies
throughout the manufacturing process and providing customers with the last
25
==PAGE:27==
technologies just emphasize the importance of ﬂexibility to adjust to such a
evolving environment. Not to mention the increment in customers’ expec-
tations and requirements, today they are expected short lead times, high
variety of high quality products or services, concrete time slots for deliveries,
even often free deliveries and so on.
After a proper research, it becomes clear that the main focus of ﬂexibil-
ity along the previous years has been manufacturing ﬂexibility. According
to Stevenson and Spring [21], initial deﬁnitions focus on the ability to ad-
just to volatile circumstances but ﬁnding this a too general deﬁnition, they
reﬂect that several principles are shared by most of the existent literature
on ﬂexibility. When deﬁning manufacturing ﬂexibility, they are used therms
of range, mobility and uniformity. Some examples are the diﬀerent states
that a system can undertake or the capacity of switch from manufacture
one product to another. The conclusions that the authors bring from their
research are:
• Flexibility is multi-dimensional.
• The importance given to each element of ﬂexibility will vary regarding
factors such as the industry sector being studied.
Kumar et al [22] agree on this multi-dimensional nature and highlights
that this shows that supply chain of diﬀerent organizations may need alter-
native types and levels of ﬂexibility according to their strategic objectives.
So, ﬂexibility is not generic and it needs to be attentively analyzed, planned
and managed in order to fulﬁll its objectives.
Kumar et al [22] also highlight the importance of a taxonomy of ﬂexibility
in order to better identify and make use of the diﬀerent ﬂexibility terms to
improve the customer service. The taxonomy proposed is exposed in the
following table.
Moreover, Zhang et al [23] develops a set of instruments to measure the
sub-dimensions of logistics ﬂexibility, sub-dimensions that deﬁnes as follows:
This way, it is reﬂected how the supply chain ﬂexibility encompass several
forms, many of them with still considerable progress to be made as it is the
case of logistics or delivery ﬂexibility, which will have critical implication on
the present document as it will be exposed in the following section.
26
==PAGE:28==
Table 2.3: Taxonomy of ﬂexibility. Source: [22]
Product
Flexibility
"The ability of the supply chain partners to produce cus-
tomized product or upgrade existing ones economically and
with no additional time to meet customers’ speciﬁcations".
Sourcing
Flexibility
"The ability of the supply chain partners to control the sup-
ply levels (increasing or decreasing) economically and with
no additional time to meet customer demand".
Delivery
Flexibility
"The ability of the integrated logistic system to distribute
and deliver the product economically and with no additional
time from the raw material source to the ﬁnal customer".
New
Product
Flexibility
"The ability of supply chain partners to collaborate and co-
ordinate to produce completely new products economically
and with no additional time to meet the market demand".
Responsive
Flexibility
"The capability of supply chain partners to respond econom-
ically and with no additional time to the market changes to
satisfy customer demand".
Table 2.4: Sub-dimensions of logistics ﬂexibility. Source: [23]
Logistics
Flexibility
"The ability of a ﬁrm to respond quickly and eﬃciently to
changing customer needs in inbound and outbound delivery,
support, and service".
Physical
Supply
Flexibility
"The ability of a ﬁrm to provide a variety of inbound mate-
rials and supplies for production, quickly and eﬀectively".
Purchasing
Flexibility
"The ability of a ﬁrm to make agreements to buy a variety
of materials and supplies, quickly and eﬀectively".
Physical
Distri-
bution
Flexibility
"The ability of a ﬁrm to adjust the inventory, packaging,
warehousing, and transportation of physical products to
meet customer needs, quickly and eﬀective".
Demand
Man-
agement
Flexibility
"The ability of a ﬁrm to respond to the variety of customer
needs for service, deliver time, and price, quickly and eﬀec-
tively".
27
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Methodology
In the present chapter, it will be presented the real-life problem which will
be the main focus of the present project. First of all, it will be introduced
the case proposed, followed by the deﬁnition of the customer ﬂexibility used
to weigh customer service and the data-set given.
3.1
Introduction
AMCS Group is an enterprise grade cloud and software platform designed
based on the best practice processes of thousands of waste & recycling com-
panies around the world. Distinguish by high experience in routing problems,
AMCS provides real life data from one of its clients, a especial waste collec-
tor enterprise, in order to analyze the relation between customer service and
distribution costs.
Distributing goods to all parts of the country every single day is good
service but may be very costly. A seller can promise delivery any day at the
risk of assuming high delivery costs. How often should a distributor deliver
goods in a given part of the country in order to grant acceptable/good service
in that area?
How much diﬀerence does it make if a seller can promise
delivery on any day compared to only having two or three days to choose
from? Or even compared to not being able to choose a day at all? How
much diﬀerence does it make the number of time slots oﬀered to the client
each day? And the length of them? Those are some of the question that will
be answered throughout the present thesis.
As it is not known exactly how the company operates, some suppositions
must be established. The enterprise receives requests to pick up an approxi-
mate volume and weight of special waste (attended delivery). The company
28
==PAGE:30==
own three depots from where truck must perform the most cost-eﬀective as
possible route and return to their departure depot, but this can become re-
ally diﬃcult when managing a large number of geographically disperse orders
and high demands for precise time windows.
It is unknown the software used by the company to design the most cost-
eﬀective routes as possible. However, for the present analysis a multi-depot
vehicle routing problem with time windows (MDVRPTW) will be designed
using java. An heuristic solution method will be implemented so that, when
a new order arrives, the real-time decision support system oﬀers the client
a determined number of time slot whereby they can receive the service.
The methodology followed to design the possible time slots available will be
properly explained later.
Even though the data provided is from a pick up service, the analysis
will be implemented to be applicable to both pick up and delivery problems
as well as product or service focused. The only restriction is that it will be
business to customer (B2C) oriented, where customer service plays a truly
important role as it was explained in the previous chapter.
3.2
Data
This case study relies on a data-set consisted of 2297 customer’s orders lo-
cated in Denmark, corresponding to the business activity carried out between
28/10/2015 and 18/12/2015. The order made by each customer is deﬁned
by ID, service time, date and time when the orders arrive, city, postcode,
capacity measures(weight and volume) and time window start and end. The
ﬁrst four orders will be exposed below as an example.
Table 3.1: Customer’s orders provided
City
Postcode
Order Created
Planned Weight(kg)
Planned Volume (m2)
Planned Time Window Start
Planned Time Window End
ID
Gadbjerg
7321
24-08-2015 15:12:00
0,42
0,00
01-11-2015 17:00:00
01-11-2015 20:59:00
4
Svendborg
5700
31-08-2015 12:22:00
260,00
1,70
12-11-2015 17:00:00
12-11-2015 20:59:00
5
Børkop
7080
20-09-2015 10:25:00
87,75
0,33
02-11-2015 11:00:00
02-11-2015 13:59:00
6
Hellerup
2900
21-09-2015 13:51:00
78,00
0,59
29-10-2015 11:00:00
29-10-2015 13:59:00
7
Even though there is not a maximum known number of ﬂeet vehicle and it
will be allowed to vary the ﬂeet in order to fulﬁll a concrete level of customer
ﬂexibility, it is deﬁned the maximum weight and volume capacity by truck
and represented below:
Other data provided are the length of service time (15 min), the actual
overlapping shifts of the company and two matrices containing time (seconds)
and distance (metros) between all locations of orders and depots.
29
==PAGE:31==
Table 3.2: Vehicles capacity
Capacity Volume
100 m2
Capacity weight
740 kg
Table 3.3: Company’s working hours
Morning shift
8:00 - 17:00
Afternoon shift
12:30 - 21:30
3.3
Customer ﬂexibility
In the ﬁrst chapter, it was exposed some research related to ﬂexibility along
the supply chain and the need of further research in some ﬁelds such as
logistics ﬂexibility.
As the present thesis focuses in attended home delivery and it was already
explained that one of the main causes of high cost of this activity is delivery
failure due to the absence of the customer, it is highlighted the need of
delivery times agreement beforehand between customer and company. In
this context, it is reﬂected the need to deﬁne a parameter which allows the
company to decide the level of customer service that must oﬀer and use it
to design the oﬀer of time slots.
In the present section, it will be deﬁned customer ﬂexibility as the willing
of a company to oﬀer a higher customer service regarding product or service
delivery. Customer ﬂexibility will symbolize the power that is given to a
customer when selecting a time slot to receive a product.
The customer ﬂexibility will be deﬁned by the following three compo-
nents:
• Number of days oﬀered (nd).
The higher it is the number of days
from which a customer is allowed to choose for receiving a product
or service, the higher will be the customer ﬂexibility as it allows the
client to choose from a wider variety of option the day that ﬁts better
customer’s needs.
• Number of time slots per day oﬀered (ns). The higher it is the number
of time slots per day oﬀered to a client, the best will be the customer
ﬂexibility as the client will have a higher variety of options to choose
from, making it easier to adjust customer’s personal duties to the order
reception at home.
30
==PAGE:32==
• Length of the time slots oﬀered (l). In this case, the lower it is the
length of time slots oﬀered to customers, the higher will be the cus-
tomer ﬂexibility.
This is because the customers wants to know as
accurate as possible the period of time that his presence is required at
home in order to adapt the order reception with his daily routine.
For this ﬁrst analysis of customer ﬂexibility those three factors will be
the only three taken into consideration as it is considered that they already
embrace the main customer’s interests regarding deliveries.
However, there are other other aspect that could be analyzed. Firstly, it
could be analyzed if there is a variation of costs regarding the time of day in
which a time slot is located, the delivery will be more costly at certain time of
day due to the higher or lower concentration of request for this time or maybe
there are time of high traﬃc density when the costs are increased and the
route time is incremented(speciﬁc data of a concrete area will be needed for
such analysis). Secondly, it could be analyzed the level of customer service
oﬀered to a client oﬀering weekend deliveries and testing how it aﬀects the
costs.
Another possible analysis would be study the possibility of oﬀering diﬀer-
ent levels of customer ﬂexibility for each customer on the basis of rewarding
customer loyalty, applying diﬀerent customer ﬂexibility in relation with the
distance to the depot or the population density of an area, applying dynamic
prizing oﬀering diﬀerent customer ﬂexibility depending on the delivery ser-
vice cost chosen by the client and so on.
Nevertheless, to apply all those analysis speciﬁc data would be needed,
parameters such as: customer’s willingness to pay more for speciﬁc time
slots or for diﬀerent levels of ﬂexibility, speciﬁc data of a concrete company
environment and the areas where they serve to sparsely populated areas
where the trucks may operate with half-load and so on.
Carefully deﬁning and managing the three parameters exposed (number
of days, number of time slots and length of time slots) will be deﬁned the
customer ﬂexibility and together with it customer service. A high customer
ﬂexibility should imply a high grade of customer satisfaction, which may
lead to customer retention, acquiring new customers who have been advised
by satisﬁed clients and so on.
However, delivery costs will be probably
incremented directly proportional to ﬂexibility, so it is up to each speciﬁc
enterprise to determine how important it is for them the level of ﬂexibility
oﬀered to each client.
31
==PAGE:33==
3.4
Calculating the routing cost
The Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP) is one of the most known
combinatorial optimization tasks within operations research.
It was ﬁrst
proposed by Dantzig and Ramser more than 60 years ago and hundreds
of papers have been developed since then to the exact and approximate
solution of many variants of the problem. Dantzig and Ramser [24] deﬁned
the problem as follows:
"A number of identical vehicles with a given capacity are located at a
central depot. They are available for servicing a set of customer
orders, (all deliveries, or, alternatively, all pickups). Each customer
order has a speciﬁc location and size. Travel costs between all
locations are given. The goal is to design a least cost set of routes for
the vehicles in such a way that all customers are visited once and
vehicle capacities are adhered to."
As said, many modiﬁcations of the problem have been exposed since
then. The VRP with Time Windows (VRPTW), where customers need to
be served within concrete time interval and the schedule of the vehicle trips
needs to be deﬁned.
The known as "rich" VRP take into account other
operational factors, adding variants such as multiple depots,multiple vehicle
types, multiple trips to be performed by the vehicles or pick up and delivery
done simultaneously at the same route.
Here will be applied the CVRP with Multiple Depots, Time Windows
and Shifts Overlapping, which is a NP-hard problem. The computational
eﬀort required to solve the problem hence increases exponentially as the
problem size increases, the number of customers to serve.
It is common that a real-life case can not be solved to optimality because
of the high number of customers and the complexity added by operational
constraints.
This explains why the ﬁeld of non-exact algorithms for the
diverse varieties of VRP problem has been really active. A wide variety of
research regarding the implementation of algorithms able to aﬀord a good
solution (not necessarily optimal) in short computing times.
Heuristic methods can be diﬀerentiated into two main classes: classical
heuristics evolved mostly between 1960 and 1990, and metaheuristics, whose
growth had place in the last two decades and shows an increasing trend. Ac-
cording to Golden [25], classical heuristics can be divided into construction
32
==PAGE:34==
heuristics (that build a set of routes from scratch) and improvement heuris-
tics that try to produce an improved solution on the basis of an previous
available solution.
Metaheuristics provide best quality solutions (of course, with diﬀerent
quality solutions between the diverse metaheuristics methodologies) but for
that end the prize to pay is a higher computation time. For this reason, as in
this document will be applied a multiobjective optimization, it is decided to
use a classical approach when calculating the routing cost so that the total
computation time is not excessive but an acceptable quality of solution is
obtained.
It will be implemented the cheapest insertion heuristics, a simple con-
struction heuristics.The strategy used is pure greediness which objective is
to minimize the total costs of the routes created. It performs adding one
request at each iteration, when inserting a new request it will be checked if
it is feasible adding it to any of the existent routes; if feasible it will be mea-
sured the total cost of adding it to each route and in all possible positions,
selection the one that increments the least the cost.
To evaluate the total cost of the plan, two cost indicators are used. It is
calculated as the sum of total mileage and total hourly costs calculated for
each scenario as stated above:
Totaldistance ∗Costperkm + Totaltime ∗Costperhour
The cost indicators are obtained from ”Key Figure Catalogue - Usage
within socio-economic analysis in the transport sector. Danish Ministry of
Transport (2006)” [26], where it is indicated that the hourly cost includes
depreciation, wage, maintenance and overhead costs; while the mileage cost
includes depreciation, fuel, lubricant, tires and maintenance. This way, all
costs are considered including the ones associated with vehicles.
The algorithm was implemented as exposed below:
In order to check if a route is feasible the following constraints must be
fulﬁlled:
• Each truck must start and ﬁnish at the same depot.
• The request will be assigned to each closest depot.
• The start and end of a route must meet the time restrictions of a
concrete shift. It can not start in the morning shift and end in the
afternoon shift.
• Time window selected by the client must be provided.
33
==PAGE:35==
input
: Rq set of customer requests
output
: T Total delivery costs
parameter: R set of routes
for Rq0 to Rqn do
New routes created for the request’s day Rqday and for each shift;
for R0 to Rn do
for pos0 to posn do
if route is feasible then
Costs calculation ci;
if ci < cmin then
cmin = ci;
The actual position in the actual route becomes the
cheapest;
else
Try next position;
end
else
Try next route;
end
end
Remove empty routes;
end
T = cmin;
Request Rqi assigned to the cheapest position pos of the cheapest
route R;
end
Algorithm 1: Cheapest Insertion
34
==PAGE:36==
• A request must be assigned to a route which day ﬁts with customer
requirements.
• The maximum volume and weight capacity of each vehicle can not be
surpassed.
• Not to deliver an order or deliver it in diﬀerent conditions as the ones
selected by customers is not contemplated.
As exposed, each time a new order arrives, it will be checked the feasibil-
ity of placing a request into each speciﬁc position of each available route. If
it is feasible, the costs will be calculated and compared and the route charac-
teristics which lead to cheapest cost will be selected. This process continues
until all requests have been inserted or no more requests can be inserted.
3.5
Tool for oﬀering Time Slots
The main objective of the present research is to realize an analysis of the
trade-oﬀbetween delivery costs and customer service in which concerns the
delivery characteristics. For that end, it will be used the already deﬁned
customer ﬂexibility to measure diﬀerent level of customers service oﬀered to
the client.
In view hereof, each time a new order arrives, a concrete oﬀer (Of) of
time windows will be presented to the customer. This oﬀer will contain nd
sets of ns time slots of length l according to the level of customer ﬂexibility
deﬁned. Then, the customer will choose which time slots prefers from the
options available.
The set of options provided will be the ones with the lower costs so that
the routes can remain as eﬃcient as possible.
In order follow a robust approach, it will be presented the worst scenario
and it will be considered that the customer always selects the most expensive
time slots in the most expensive day from the set oﬀered and the cost c(0) for
delivering with a determined level of customer ﬂexibility (f) will be analyzed.
This way, it has been exposed a multi-objective optimization problem
with four objectives: minimize cost, maximize number of days, maximize
number of slots per day and minimize time slot length.
The heuristic approach followed to solve the problem is presented here-
after:
Multiobjective optimization is a really important research topic, not only
because of the multiobjective nature of most real-world problems, but also
35
==PAGE:37==
input
: t set of days, f= (nd, ns, l) set of customer ﬂexibility
parameters
output
: Dominating solutions of c(0), nd, ns, l
Ti is the time horizon, which will be ﬁve days
for each ﬂexibility level f do
for t = 1 to Ti do
for each time slot ns of duration l do
Calculate c(0). Cheapest insertion heuristics;
if Cost if customer chooses this time slot is located under
the ns cheapest then
Save set of ns best time slots for day t ;
else
end
Calculate the cost for day t: the sum of the costs of the ns
best time slots;
end
Save set of nd best days T;
The oﬀer Of is deﬁned
end
for each ﬂexibility level f do
Compare all solutions (c(0), nd, ns, l) and remove dominated ones.
end
Now for each level of ﬂexibility f, an oﬀer Of is made to the client.
Algorithm 2: Multi-objective Optimization
36
==PAGE:38==
because there are still many open questions in this area. In fact, there is not
even a universally accepted deﬁnition of "optimum" because normally the
decision about what the "best" answer is depends on the so-called (human)
decision maker.
As exposed in the algorithm, it gives diﬀerent levels of ﬂexibility and
for each one an oﬀer. The company now has to compare the costs c(O) of
diﬀerent levels of ﬂexibility f and choose one to oﬀer the customer regarding
on how important it is for them the customer service. Dominated solutions
are extracted from the set of possible solutions following Pareto law.
A
solution will be a Pareto optimal if it exists no feasible vector x which would
decrease some criteria without an increment of at least one other criterion.
Which means that when any of the solutions given by the algorithm excess
all the parameters of other solution is a dominating solution (lower costs,
higher number of days oﬀered, higher number of time slots oﬀered and lower
length of time slots).
So, when a new order arrives, the algorithm will calculate the cheapest
options of days, time slots and length of each time slot given as many op-
tions as determined by the customer ﬂexibility parameters. For each level
of customer ﬂexibility will calculate the total costs of the route considering
the client selects the most expensive option, so that the company has a clear
idea of the higher costs that would have to face depending on the level of
ﬂexibility oﬀered to the customer. An example of the solution given by the
algorithm will be exposed next.
Table 3.4:
Example of calculation of costs suitable for the speciﬁc new order
regarding the diﬀerent levels of ﬂexibility
Total Costs
Number of days
Number of Time Slots
Duration of Time Slots
14026,15
1
6
15
14171,5
4
1
60
14171,5
4
5
120
14177,33
4
6
15
14175,6
5
1
60
14177,33
5
1
30
14171,5
5
3
120
14177,33
5
3
60
14171,5
5
4
180
14175,6
5
5
120
14177,33
5
6
120
14180,99
5
6
15
37
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Results
It has been already clearly explained in the previous chapter the simulation
that was implemented in order to compare transport costs and level of cus-
tomer ﬂexibility made available. In the present chapter, there will be ﬁrstly
exposed the diﬀerent scenarios that were compiled in order to eﬀectively per-
form the present study. Then, all numerical data obtained will be plotted in
order to compare and discuss the results achieved.
In the previous chapter was exposed a table with costs resulting from
adding one order (with diﬀerent levels of ﬂexibility) to a previously designed
route of 100 delivery points. Now, there will be simulated twelve scenarios
with the characteristics that will be progressively explained.
First of all, the customer ﬂexibility factors are deﬁned as exposed below.
There are checked scenarios where customers are allowed to choose between
1 to 5 days a week, from 1 to 6 time slots a day and there are selected
lengths of time slots that seem attractive from the customer point of view.
All possibilities will be checked, all possible duration for all available number
of time slots and for each possible number of days to choose from.
• Number of days oﬀered = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
• Number of time slots oﬀered = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
• Length of time slots oﬀered = 180, 120, 60, 30, 15
With the explained levels of ﬂexibility 12 scenarios are compiled. There
will be compared the cases where the initial routes are designed for 100, 200
and 300 delivery points having each order its speciﬁc restrictions of time
slots, volume and weight and so on. And, for each of those initial scenarios,
there are simulated the addiction of 20 new customer’s requests applying all
38
==PAGE:40==
levels of ﬂexibility previously exposed. And also, the addiction of those extra
20 orders will be made 4 diﬀerent range of data to grant that results obtained
are reliable and it wasn’t the fact that the 20 concrete orders selected had
favourable conditions.
With the scenarios explained, all the data obtained was plotted and used
to answer the following questions:
4.1
Eﬀect of the number of days on the cost
The number of possible days of each simulation was grouped for the diverse
sets of twenty orders and according to the level of customer ﬂexibility, ending
up with three charts due to the diﬀerence in the number of initial number of
orders in the route.
;
Figure 4.1: Delivery costs vs number of days oﬀered to the client for 100 initial
orders
;
Figure 4.2: Delivery costs vs number of days oﬀered to the client for 200 initial
orders
39
==PAGE:41==
;
Figure 4.3: Delivery costs vs number of days oﬀered to the client for 300 initial
orders
Paying attention to the three graphs it is reﬂected that they share an
homologous behaviour.
The tendency of the costs is to growth with the
number of days available to choose. However, it is interesting to see how
the main growth takes place from one to two days oﬀered and the posterior
growth is much more reduced.
The costs evolution regarding the initial number of orders considered will
be analyzed at the last section of this chapter.
4.2
Eﬀect of the number of time slots per day on
the cost
The same procedure is followed with time slots and it is showed how once
again the cost will be incremented with the number of time slots oﬀered.
4.3
Eﬀect of the time slot length on the cost
Once again, it is applied the same procedure and it is highly interesting how
the huge change in costs is made due to the duration of the time slots, the
costs are highly incremented as lower as it is the duration of the time slot.
4.4
Eﬀect of the density on the cost
Finally, to check the eﬀect of density on the cost. The costs obtained from
the previous charts are calculated by order, so that the comparison is reliable
and it is proved how with high density the cost may be higly reduces. So,
40
==PAGE:42==
;
Figure 4.4: Delivery costs vs number of time slots oﬀered to the client for 100
initial orders
;
Figure 4.5: Delivery costs vs number of time slots oﬀered to the client for 200
initial orders
trying to group as much orders as possible in the same route is for sure a
reason for reducing costs.
4.5
Conclusion and possible future research
It was showed how the costs increment with a high number of day availability
and number of time slots but not in such signiﬁcant way as it does with the
duration of time slots. Consequently, oﬀering high variability in the number
of days and time slots to choose but a higher duration of time slots may
be a good agreement between customer service level and costs.
Finally,
another path for further research would be combining the multi-objective
optimization proposed with dynamic prizing.
In the present study, it is
41
==PAGE:43==
;
Figure 4.6: Delivery costs vs number of time slots oﬀered to the client for 300
initial orders
;
Figure 4.7: Delivery costs vs length of time slots oﬀered to the client for 100
initial orders
analyzed the cost that each order with its concrete characteristics (capacity,
location, customer preference) added to the company’s expenses. It would
be highly fascinating to use this expense to oﬀer a ﬁnal cost to the client for
choosing a speciﬁc time slot depending on how the customer preferences ﬁt in
the already existent route. For that end, it would be interesting to conduct
a survey regarding customer preferences (speciﬁc daily hours preferred by
customers, preferred weekdays, which number of time slots or duration of
time slots would be considered a high level of customer service, how much
is willing to pay a client for a higher level of ﬂexibility and on) as there is
not much public information about those aspects. This approach could be
really helpful for companies in order to enhance delivery eﬃciency.
42
==PAGE:44==
;
Figure 4.8: Delivery costs vs length of time slots oﬀered to the client for 200
initial orders
;
Figure 4.9: Delivery costs vs length of time slots oﬀered to the client for 300
initial orders
43
==PAGE:45==
costs2.jpg
;
Figure 4.10: Costs per order
44
==PAGE:46==
Bibliography
[1]
The Statistics Portal. Retail e-commerce sales worldwide from 2014 to
2021. 2018. url: https://www.statista.com/statistics/379046/
worldwide-retail-e-commerce-sales/ (visited on 06/07/2018).
[2]
Jan Fabian Ehmke. Integration of Information and Optimization Mod-
els for Routing in City Logistics. Springer, 2012, pp. 23–33.
[3]
Thierry Vanelslander Roel Gevaers Eddy Van de Voorde. “Cost Mod-
elling and Simulation of Last-mile Characteristics in an Innovative
B2C Supply Chain Environment with Implications on Urban Areas
and Cities”. In: Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 125 (2014),
pp. 398–411. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.01.
1483.
[4]
Ronald Tibben-Lembke Dale S. Rogers. “An examination of reverse
logistics practices”. In: Journal of Business Logistics 22.2 (2001).
[5]
Rommert Dekker Marisa P. de Brito. “A Framework for Reverse Lo-
gistics”. In: ERIM Repot Series Research in Management (2003).
[6]
Jason Dedrick Jennifer Gibbs Kenneth L. Kraemer. “Environment and
Policy Factors Shaping Global ECommerce Diﬀusion: A Cross-Country
Comparison”. In: The Information Society 19.1 (2006), pp. 5–18. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1080/01972240309472.
[7]
Alfred L. Guiﬀrida Jay R. Brown. “Carbon emissions comparison of
last mile delivery versus customer pickup”. In: International Journal
of Logistics Research and Applications 17.6 (2014), pp. 503–521. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1080/13675567.2014.907397.
[8]
Sara Perotti et al. Riccardo Mangiaracina Gino Marchet. “A review
of the environmental implications of B2C e-commerce: a logistics per-
spective”. In: International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics
Management 45.6 (2015), pp. 565–591. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1108/IJPDLM-06-2014-0133.
45
==PAGE:47==
[9]
B. Wiegmans et al J.H.R. van Duin W. de Goﬀau. “Improving home
delivery eﬃciency by using principles of address intelligence for B2C
deliveries”. In: Transportation Research Procedia 12 (2015), pp. 14–25.
[10]
Moritz Fleischmann et al. Niels Agatz Ann Melissa Campbell. Chal-
lenges and Opportunities in Attended Home Delivery. Springer, 2008,
pp. 379–396.
[11]
Juha Saranen Mikko Punakivi. “Identifying the success factors in e-
grocery home delivery”. In: International Journal of Retail & Distribu-
tion Management 29.4 (2001), pp. 156–163. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1108/09590550110387953.
[12]
Pascal Van Hentenryck Russell W. Bent. “Scenario-Based Planning
for Partially Dynamic Vehicle Routing with Stochastic Customers”.
In: Transportation Science 52.6 (2004), pp. 977–987. doi: https://
doi.org/10.1287/opre.1040.0124.
[13]
Martin W. P. Savelsbergh Ann Melissa Campbell. “Decision Support
for Consumer Direct Grocery Initiatives”. In: Transportation Science
39.3 (2005), pp. 313–327. doi: https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.
1040.0105.
[14]
Martin Savelsbergh Ann Melissa Campbell. “Incentive Schemes for
Attended Home Delivery Services”. In: Transportation Science 40.3
(2006), pp. 327–341. doi: https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.1050.
0136.
[15]
Dimitri Ratkovitch et al. Robert Klein Michael Neugebauer. “Diﬀer-
entiated Time Slot Pricing Under Routing Considerations in Attended
Home Delivery”. In: Transportation Science (2017). doi: https://
doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2017.0738.
[16]
Moritz Fleischmann et al. Niels Agatz Ann Campbell. “Time Slot Man-
agement in Attended Home Delivery”. In: Transportation Science 45.3
(2011), pp. 435–449. doi: https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.1100.
0346.
[17]
Frank W. Davis Karl B. Manrodt. “The Evolution to Service Response
Logistics”. In: International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logis-
tics Management 2.9 (1992), pp. 3–10. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1108/EUM0000000000422.
[18]
Martin Christopher. Logistics & Supply Chain Management. Prentice
Hall, 2011, pp. 27–55.
46
==PAGE:48==
[19]
Paul Thompson Colin Scott Henriette Lundgren. Guide to Supply Chain
Management. Springer, 2011, pp. 155–168.
[20]
C Hicks. National complaints culture survey. Redditch: TMI, 2006.
[21]
Martin Spring Mark Stevenson. “Flexibility from a supply chain per-
spective: deﬁnition and review”. In: International Journal of Opera-
tions & Production Management 27.7 (2007), pp. 685–713. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1108/01443570710756956.
[22]
Kamel A. Fantazy et al Vinod Kumar. “Implementation and man-
agement framework for supply chain ﬂexibility”. In: Journal of Enter-
prise Information Management 19.3 (2006), pp. 303–319. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1108/17410390610658487.
[23]
Mark A. Vonderembse et al Qingyu Zhang. “Logistics ﬂexibility and
its impact on customer satisfaction”. In: The International Journal of
Logistics Management 16.1 (2005), pp. 71–95. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1108/09574090510617367.
[24]
G. B. Dantzig and J. H. Ramser. “The Truck Dispatching Problem”. In:
Management Sciece 6.1 (1959), pp. 80–91. doi: http://www.jstor.
org/stable/2627477.
[25]
S. Raghavam et al Bruce Golden. The Vehicle Routing Problem: Latest
Advances and New Challenges. Springer, 2008, pp. 3–28.
[26]
Key gure catalogue - usage within socioeconomic analysis in the trans-
port sector. Danish Ministry of Transport, 2004.Revised 2006.
47
