==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Master Thesis
Personal Health Technology for Behaviour Change
in Alcohol Misuse
Andrea Quemada (s161632)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Alcohol abuse is a huge burden worldwide and its consequence is a percentage of
the global deaths. Symptoms such as, slow speech and reactions, loss of attention,
impaired verbal learning and memory, are some of the effects that alcohol causes on
someone’s body and brain.
In particular young people are one of the groups that are most affected by alcohol
abuse through Heavy Episodic Drinking (HED) and the biggest reason is due to a
social behaviour.
A mobile application has been designed and developed with the aim of reducing ex-
cessive alcohol consumption among young adults using Behavioural Change (BC).
The design process included a User Centred Design (UCD) methodology in order to
address the users’ needs and build an easy-to-use mobile app.
Therefore, a qualitative study with 15 subjects was carried out to evaluate the us-
ability and perceived usefulness of this system. In addition, usage data was analysed
in order to investigate drinking patterns and symptoms. The mobile application ob-
tained a score of 76.67, which corresponds to a B in the System Usability Scale (SUS).
Moreover, 53% subjects agreed and 26% strongly agreed on the perceived usefulness
of the app. Qualities such as, ’learnability’, ’feeling of skillfulness’, and ’ease of use’
were highly rated by subjects. Unlike the features ’improve quality of life’ or ’include
features expected by user’, which most users reported not to be clearly present.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master Science degree in Digital Media Engineering. The
thesis began February 22, 2018.
The content of this thesis is written to be understood by a broad audience, contain-
ing knowledge in Behavioural Change (BC), and User Centered Design (UCD). The
thesis emerged as a combination in between (1) the knowledge in Behavioural Activa-
tion (BA) gathered by the author as part of the student assistant job in Copenhagen
Center for Health Technology (CACHET), which is closely related to BC and (2)
a talk on “The potential in research across institutions and recommendations from
‘Vækstteam’ for Life Science” by Liselotte Højgaard [28] held in 2017 CACHET sem-
inar. The talk strongly stressed the potential of research to solve problems in the
healthcare sector. Alcohol is very accepted in the day-to day life, nevertheless young
adults do not realise the gravity of its abuse. Therefore, as the author has the skills
to develop a technological system to rise awareness of this topic, it derive into the
present Master Thesis.
Kongens Lyngby, June 22, 2018
Andrea Quemada (s161632)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
The author desires to express her gratitude firstly, to her supervisor Jakob Eyvind
Bardram who provided great support during feedback sessions; in addition to financial
support to purchase required hardware for the project.
Darius A. Rohani, Steven Jeuris, again Jakob E. Bardram, and Unai Villanueva
who provided the author with great knowledge in literature, as well as feedback during
writing the manuscript.
Antonio Plaza, Marina Puentes, Diana Abad, Darius A. Rohani, and more who
collaborated in this project as participants, subjects and testers of the system through-
out its development and suffer extremely annoying bugs, see Figure 1 .
(a) App crashing
(b) Activity creation in loop
Figure 1: Bugs of DropIt through its development
My family and Joseba Ruiz-Olalla who supported my decision to move to Denmark
and get the education that I aspired to.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Goal and research question
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Overview of thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Clinical background and Related Work
5
2.1
Alcohol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Behavioural Change
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Related work: Mobile Apps for Behavioural Change in Alcohol Con-
sumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Design Process
18
3.1
Design Method: User Centered Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Personas and scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
User Centered Design - Workshop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Implementation
32
4.1
Breathalyser - BACTrack VIO
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Data Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Study
48
5.1
Recruitment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.3
Questionnaires
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
6
Results
52
6.1
Subject’s drinking profile
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.2
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3
Usability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.4
Perceived Usefulness and Ease of Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.5
Interviews ’in-the-wild’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7
Discussion
62
7.1
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.2
Usability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.3
Perceived Usefulness and Ease of Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.4
Relation between Feedback - Qualitative Questionnaires . . . . . . . .
64
7.5
Other systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.6
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
8
Conclusion
70
A Acronyms
71
B Documents
72
B.1
User Centered Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
B.2
Feedback from Prototype in Marvel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
B.3
Recruitment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
B.4
DropIt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
C Data
108
C.1 Standard Alcohol Units, Calories and Approximate Krones
. . . . . . 110
D Results
111
D.1 ’DropIt’ - The App . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
D.2 Data Analysis - Jupyter Notebook
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
D.3 System Usability Scale Scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
D.4 UMACF questionnaire’s scores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
Bibliography
117
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In a recent large systematic review, it has been concluded that alcohol abuse is still
one of the greatest burdens of disease and mortality [52]. In fact, 5.9% of the global
deaths in 2012 were caused by alcohol consumption, which is found to have a causal
link to many major diseases [51] with strong association to HIV infection [24, 59].
Alcohol is basically a depressant drug that affects the entire body [29, 71, 50, 11].
It has life-threatening symptomatic consequences including the deprivation of vital
functions (speech, movement, perceptions and reactions), and brain functions that
are responsible for attention, verbal learning, visuospatial processing and memory
[60]. In particular among young people this results in imprudent behaviour, such as
car crashes and unforeseen injuries [27]. Despite of this, in 2010 the consumption
worldwide was, surprisingly, 6.2 litres of pure alcohol per person, among people aged
15 and older. 16% of these people were engaged in heavy episodic drinking [69].
Children, adolescents and elderly people are usually the most vulnerable groups
to alcohol-related harm as drawn from interviews done by Mäkelä et al. [36]. Heavy
drinking is particularly likely among people (1) who experience stress, (2) who drink
as a coping mechanism, (3) whose friends experience heavy drinking episodes, and
(4) who drink for social reasons themselves, which is a very popular drinking motiva-
tion amid young people [32]. Additionally, an early initiation of alcohol consumption
indicates that there is a high probability of impaired health status, along with an
increased risk for alcohol dependence in an advanced age [21].
The immense health burden that alcohol causes for the individual and the society
[12], yells for preventive efforts. As young people are more likely to commit heavy
episodic drinking, it is important that the preventive efforts are easy-reachable and
able to engage them. An understanding surrounding the cause of such destructive
behaviour is needed to intervene and promote a behavioural change among young
people towards reducing excessive alcohol consumption.
1.1
Background
Throughout the time, stakeholders including the healthcare ministry, the alcohol
producers themselves, and the research community, have attempted to change peo-
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Goal and research question
2
ple’s behaviour approaching a healthier and moderate alcohol consumption.
The
performed endeavours arose from completely different backgrounds, for example:
Mass media campaigns - A well-known method to influence the population to-
wards healthy habits are the mass media campaigns. Unfortunately, with the
exception of mass media campaigns to reduce drink driving, campaigns to lessen
alcohol intake have had very little success [67]. And moreover, a systematic re-
view from the University of Nottingham, UK, claims that there is little evidence
of reductions in alcohol consumption [70].
Pharmacy-delivered interventions - A systematic review was done on interven-
tions for public health priorities, and one of them was alcohol reduction includ-
ing 2 studies. The conclusions don’t show that these kinds of interventions have
an effect on alcohol reduction [10].
Nowadays, the rapid development of technology brings to light new methods of
tackling health issues. Indeed, it was found that the widespread adoption of mobile
phones highlights a significant opportunity to impact healthy behaviours globally [72].
Mobile applications - There are great amounts of mobile applications related
to behavioural change in alcohol reduction and these were selected for having
(1) a high number of Behavioural Change Techniques (BCTs), (2) a high User
Experience (UX) rating, and (3) evidence on reduction of alcohol intake [15]:
DrinkLess [20], Alcodroid and The Alcohol Predictor [15].
A recent analysis on the usage data of the Drinkaware app on approx. 120,000
users and the qualitative feedback from 21 of them, proved this app to be
motivational to reduce users’ alcohol consumption for those who already were
committed to do it [3].
These mobile applications still lack features (e.g. provide accurate feedback on
Blood Alcohol Content (BAC) level) that could improve the effectiveness of reducing
excessive alcohol consumption in young people [19].
1.2
Goal and research question
The purpose of this thesis is to design and build a mobile application that aims to
change the behaviour of young people towards high alcohol consumption in social
environments.
The research question that this master thesis will resolve is:
”What is the design and usefulness of a mobile application system
for the everyday monitoring and reduction of alcohol abuse?”
==PAGE:10==
1.3 Overview of thesis
3
In pursuance of that answer, this master thesis will accomplish the sub-goals:
1. Survey existing research and technologies related to behavioural change in re-
duction of alcohol abuse.
2. Design a mobile application with the purpose of reducing alcohol consumption
3. Build the designed mobile application applying UX knowledge
4. Run a study and evaluate the design and usefulness of the implemented system
1.3
Overview of thesis
The process of designing, building, and evaluating a mobile application with the aim
of reducing alcohol abuse is documented in the following chapters.
Chapter 2: Clinical background and related work - This chapter will describe the
consequences of drinking alcohol, the reasons for young people to binge drink, and
raise awareness about the problem that excessive alcohol consumption is in Denmark.
The concepts of Behavioural Change (BC) and Behaviour Change Intervention (BCI)
will be explained. Then the active factor of BCIs will be described, which are the
different Behavioural Change Techniques (BCTs).
As one of the main goals of this thesis is to build a mobile application with the aim
of reducing alcohol consumption, a research on existing technologies regarding this
topic will be performed and presented.
The device for measurement of BAC level also needs to be investigated and reported
in this project, due to the integration of this feature in the system.
Chapter 3: Design Process - The design process will use a User Centred Design
(UCD) method, due to the significance of the user’s preferences in this project. There-
fore, the theory behind this method and its performance will be explained.
The UCD process will include a workshop with participants, and an early prototype
built with the feedback gained from the workshop.
UCD involves iterative processes, so the description of this chapter will contain the
sections:
• Description of the workshop and corresponding feedback
• Description of the prototype and corresponding feedback
Chapter 4: Implementation - This chapter provides the technical understanding of
how the composed system of a mobile application and a breathalyser will be imple-
mented.
Firstly the reader will find the description and instructions on how to use the
breathalyser.
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Overview of thesis
4
The process of building the User Interface (UI) will be explained in 5 parts. At
the end of this section, in the 5th part, a storyboard of the final version of the app
will be included.
Lastly, the description of the data management section will be done by explaining
4 types of interaction with the database. Those interactions are; either sending data
to or fetching data from the built database.
Chapter 5: Study - This chapter will contain a description of the study that will
be performed when the mobile application is finalised. The description will involve
details such as recruitment, experimental setup, and questionnaires to evaluate the
developed system.
Chapter 6: Results - The results from the study will be presented and contain 3
focus areas; (1) Interviews ’in-the-wild’, (2) Data analysis, and (3) Qualitative ques-
tionnaires
Chapter 7: Discussion - This chapter will discuss the results beginning with (ac-
cording to the order above) (2) Data analysis, continuing with (1) Interviews ’in-the-
wild’, and finalising with (3) Qualitative questionnaires.
From this review, the BCTs and elements chosen for the mobile app, and the UCD
design method will be discussed. Aiming to discover the reasons for the results that
will be obtained.
Chapter 8: Conclusion - A conclusion will be built based on the findings of this
project. Furthermore, improvements and new suggestions to the current solution will
be proposed as feasible future work.
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2
Clinical background
and Related Work
2.1
Alcohol
Alcohol is a psychoactive substance with dependence-producing properties.
There are three main direct mechanisms of harm caused by alcohol consumption
in an individual as defined by Babor et al. [5]:
• Toxic effects on organs and tissues
• Intoxication, leading to impairment of physical coordination, consciousness, cog-
nition, perception, affect or behaviour
• Dependence, through which the drinker’s self-control over his or her drinking
behaviour is impaired.
The World Health Organisation (WHO) affirms there is a wide range of problems
related to alcohol and its consumption, although the burden of disease and death
endures significantly in most of the countries. Alcohol’s harmful use ranks among the
top five risk factors for disease, disability and death all over the world.
Drinking alcohol is associated with a risk of developing health problems such as:
alcohol dependence, liver cirrhosis, cancers and injuries.
From the Global status
report on alcohol it is know that the latest causal relationships suggested by research
findings are those between alcohol consumption and incidence of infectious diseases
such as tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS. Moreover, it is known that the net effect of
harmful use of alcohol is approximately 3.3 million deaths each year, meaning that it
accounts for 5.9% of all deaths worldwide [69].
2.1.1
Heavy Episodic Drinking
Heavy Episodic Drinking (HED) or Binge Drinking is a term used to describe a
single drinking event with an excessive amount of alcohol consumption [48].
An
excessive amount is defined differently from country to country. In Denmark, where
this thesis is being conducted, the amount is set at 5 or more alcoholic beverages.
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Alcohol
6
More accurately 60 or more grams of pure alcohol on one occasion at least monthly
[16].
A review from the Norwegian Institute of Public Health found solid evidence of
less alcohol use by wealthy countries’ youth since the millenium shift. However, there
is also indications of heavy drinkers not having reduced their alcohol intake [49].
As it was known by a last year’s article from WHO, the Danish youth are the
heavy drinkers who drink the most in Europe. Actually, among 15-16 year-old-danes,
32% addressed having been drunk in the past 30 days, compared to the European
average of 13%. Every year 1400 Danes around 17 years old, who are the greatest
heavy drinkers compared to different age groups, attend the hospital due to HED (see
Figure 2.1). Moreover, in 2016 1 out of 10 15-16-year-old danish youth reported having
had unprotected sexual relations under the influence of alcohol, likewise experienced
undesired sexual insinuations [61].
Figure 2.1: Percentage of population that exceeds the recommended limit for alcohol
intake during a typical week, among men and women of different age groups in 2010,
2013 and 2017 [61].
All these facts tell that HED is a big common problem for the world’s society
and specially for Danish citizens. However, to tackle HED there is firstly a need to
understand what triggers this behaviour in young people.
2.1.2
Why do we drink?
Humans make a huge amount of decisions a day, including the decision to drink.
According to the article ”Why do young people drink? A review of drinking motives”
from the Swiss Institute for the Prevention of Alcohol and Drug Problems [32] there
are four main drinking motives as antecedents to a drinking behaviour; drinking to
(1) enhance positive mood, (2) obtain social rewards, (3) mitigate negative emotions,
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Alcohol
7
and (4) avoid social rejection. As it was stated, two of these methods account for
social behaviours. Consequently, those will be the reasons to be analysed throughout
this manuscript.
2.1.3
Measurement
In order to work with the problem of excessive alcohol consumption in young people,
there are two main things to be measured: alcohol content in a drink and alcohol
content in a person.
• Drinks’ alcohol content: The alcoholic content of a drink is always shown in the
container of the commercialised drinks. It is called Alcohol by Volume (ABV)
and is measured in percentage (%), see Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Alcohol By Volume (4.5%) in a standard beer
• Blood Alcohol Content (BAC): BAC refers to the amount of alcohol circulating
in the bloodstream, and is the best estimate of the effects of alcohol on the
brain. BAC varies as a function of dose of alcohol, time, gender, body weight,
age, beverage type, and individual differences in absorption and metabolism of
alcohol [4].
In brief, BAC level is based on how much alcohol went into a person’s body
over a period of time. It depends on three parameters: the initial concentration
of alcohol in the stomach after ingestion, the rate of alcohol absorption into
the blood stream, and the rate at which the alcohol is metabolised by the liver
[63]. The maximum driving BAC level in Denmark and in most of the countries
is 0.05% according to International Alliance for Responsible Drinking [18]. At
this level, a person is already showing symptoms related to alcohol consumption.
Table 2.1 shows the typical symptoms at different BAC levels, as defined by the
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Behavioural Change
8
U.S. National Library of Medicine [45] and the approx. corresponding number
of drinks (i.e. 1 drink = 330 ml beer) for a person who weights around 70 kg 1:
BAC level
Approx. no drinks
Symptom
0.05
2
Reduced inhibitions
0.10
5
Slurred speech
0.20
10
Euphoria and motor impairment
0.30
>10
Confusion
0.40
NA
Stupor
0.50
NA
Coma
0.60
NA
Breathing stops and death
Table 2.1: Approx. no. of beers and symptoms Corresponding to a certain BAC level
The Danish Healthcare Institution, Sundhedsstyrelsen, recommends a maximum of
14 and 7 standard alcohol units per week for men and women, respectively 2. One
standard alcohol unit is equivalent to 12 grams (1.5 cl) of pure alcohol 100% . The
standard units for the most typical alcoholic beverages (based on footnote2) are listed
below:
Beer (33 cl and 4.6 %) - 1 standard unit
Glass of wine (17.5 cl and 12%) - 1.4 standard units
Drink or spirit (2.5 cl and 40%) - 0.6 standard units
Shot (2 cl and 40%) - 0.4 standard units
2.2
Behavioural Change
For the majority, our re-programmable brains have the ability over time to rewrite
the processes that direct what humans think, feel, and do. By trying new things and
forming new relationships, humans automatically reprogram perceptions, feelings,
thoughts and skills. This happens when new behavioural routines or Behavioural
Change (BC) is practised [41].
Digital Behaviour Change (DBC) in particular is defined as a behaviour change
that makes use of technology to either: promote the delivery of the intervention, en-
hance the environment through which the intervention occurs, or encourage patterns
of interaction that fortify the intervention [23].
1https://dui.drivinglaws.org/drink-table.php
2https://www.sst.dk/da/sundhed-og-livsstil/alkohol/anbefalinger#
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Behavioural Change
9
2.2.1
How does it work?
A behavioural change requires a Behaviour Change Intervention (BCI). This inter-
vention is usually designed through a 3 stage model known as the Behaviour Change
Wheel (BCW) [47]:
Stage 1: Understand the behaviour - In this stage intervention designers need
to define the problem in behavioural terms, then select and specify the target
behaviour to be able to identify what needs to be changed.
Stage 2: Identify intervention options - There is a need to identify the interven-
tion functions and policy categories in this stage.
Stage 3: Identify content and implementation options - Lastly, the Behavioural
Change Techniques (BCT) and mode of delivery is identified.
The designed BCI is then evaluated by answering the following questions:
1. Did the intervention change the behaviour it targeted?
2. How did the intervention work? Did it change the regulatory mechanisms tar-
geted?
3. How much does the intervention cost for a given degree of effectiveness?
2.2.2
Behavioural Change Techniques
Behavioural Change Techniques, referred in this document as BCTs, are defined as
the active components of an intervention designed to change behaviour, a BCI. BCTs
are required to be: observable, replicable, irreducible components of a BCI, and ac-
tive ingredients within the intervention [43]. A BCT can be used alone or combined
with other BCTs.
BCIs to reduce excessive alcohol consumption have a small but important effect.
There are several types: (1) Theory-based interventions that include BCTs from guid-
ance documents, treatment manuals or Cochrane review [31], (2) Pharmacy-delivered
interventions, and (3) Digital interventions such as, mobile apps.
According to the research report from S.Michie et al. [42] the taxonomy of BCTs
contains the groups:
• Address motivation
• Address self-regulation
• Promote assisting activities
• Address general aspects of the interaction
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Related work: Mobile Apps for Behavioural Change in Alcohol Consumption
10
When focusing on the mobile based intervention, which is the area of interest of this
master thesis, the reported 5 most used BCTs are [15]:
• facilitate self-recording
• provide information on consequences of excessive alcohol use and drinking ces-
sation
• provide feedback on performance
• give options for additional and later support
• offer/direct towards appropriate written materials
2.3
Related work: Mobile Apps for Behavioural
Change in Alcohol Consumption
A study by Norman et al. [48] suggests that heavy episodic drinking is a social be-
haviour which is eased by their social environment. In order to attempt to reduce that
incidence, the most effective interventions may be those that influence the context
of consumption either directly or through social guidance. Also, the Youth Alcohol
Action Plan from the UK [64] states that young people need to receive accurate in-
formation about alcohol, its effects and potential harms.
Besides those facts, it is known from the evidence review written by J.Zhao et
al. [72] that health-related mobile apps provide a significant opportunity to impact
health behaviours globally.
Consequently, if the previous mentioned knowledge is
combined with the mobile technology, a new arousal of digital BCIs come to take
part in the area of reduction of HED.
This section will provide an overview of 4 mobile applications. 3 of them were
selected for having (1) evidence on reduction of alcohol intake, (2) a high User Expe-
rience (UX) rating, and (3) a high number of BCTs [15]; and the 4th app was selected
for (4) having proved, by the qualitative feedback of 21 users, to be motivational to
reduce users’ alcohol consumption for those who already were committed to do it [3].
These mobile applications are: (1) DrinkLess, (2) Alcodroid the Alcohol Tracker, (3)
the Alcohol Predictor, and (4) Drinkaware.
2.3.1
Drink Less
The mobile app Drink Less was proved to help reduce hazardous and harmful drinking
using five intervention modules or BCTs. It allows the user to keep track on his/her
alcohol intake, set goals to drink less, get feedback on his/her progress, play games
==PAGE:18==
2.3 Related work: Mobile Apps for Behavioural Change in Alcohol Consumption
11
designed to strengthen the willing to drink less, as well as, create plans for likely
alcohol intake situations and take part in exercises designed for BC [20].
The 5 BCTs that this app provides are:
1. Self-monitoring and feedback
2. Action planning
3. Normative feedback
4. Cognitive bias re-training (i.e. Change the tendency to approach alcohol to an
‘avoid’ bias)
5. Identity change (i.e. Smokers focused: strengthening an ex-smoker identity)
However, the Drink Less app is only developed for iOS (Apple’s Operative Sys-
tem) according to their statements, to avoid issues of fragmentation associated with
Android. And the same reference stated that, that fragmentation is precisely what
provides the basis for Android’s global reach.
Drink Less app was also only developed for iOS because there tends to be a greater
retention rate for apps amongst iPhone users compared with Android [20].
There is no method to calculate the BAC level with this app. Moreover, Drink
Less does not allow the user record his/her hangover, instead it gives the possibility
to record the mood.
(a)
Self-reporting
drinks
(b) Progress
(c) Setting personal goals
(d) Mood
Figure 2.3: Drink Less app: (a) Illustrates how to report different kind of drinks
consumed; (b) Shows feedback on progress regarding units, calories, and spent money;
(c) View to set personal goals; (d) Shows progress on how user feels
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Related work: Mobile Apps for Behavioural Change in Alcohol Consumption
12
2.3.2
AlcoDroid Alcohol Tracker
The AlcoDroid app is one of the most popular and highest rated alcohol consumption
trackers. It is a drinks diary and optionally it tracks costs of drinks. AlcoDroid also
provides an estimate of the BAC level based on the logged drinks, plots its progress
in a chart, and indicates when the user gets above the legal limit or back to sobriety,
as stated in Google Play Store 3.
This app allows the user to show, edit and export the drink logbook. The user’s
drinking habits are displayed daily, weekly or monthly, and can be exported as well.
Furthermore, the user can share this information and the BAC level on Facebook, by
e-mail, and other platforms.
According to D.Crane et al. [15, 22] AlcoDroid includes 7 BCTs:
1. Provide information on consequences of excessive alcohol use and drinking ces-
sation
2. Boost motivation and self‐efficacy
3. Provide feedback on performance
4. Facilitate goal setting
5. Prompt review of goals
6. Facilitate self-recording
7. Provide information on withdrawal symptoms
On the other hand, as stated previously in this document BAC varies as a function
of dose of alcohol, time, gender, body weight, age, beverage type, and individual
differences in absorption and metabolism of alcohol [4]. Therefore, the accuracy of
the BAC level in this mobile app it is inaccurate due to its base in logged drinks.
In addition, pop-up ads are one of the biggest drawback that this app contains.
Alternatively, the user can pay a fee to upgrade the system and remove the ads.
3https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.M.alcodroid
==PAGE:20==
2.3 Related work: Mobile Apps for Behavioural Change in Alcohol Consumption
13
(a) Overview:
Esti-
mated BAC
(b)
Personalization
of drinks
(c)
BAC
progress
over the days
(d)
Progress
over
time
Figure 2.4: AlcoDroid Alcohol Tracker app: (a) Illustrates the estimated BAC level
and how to report drinks; (b) Shows the detailed drink reporting; (c) View of log and
goal performance; (d) Provides feedback on progress and set goal
2.3.3
Alcohol Abuse Predictor
The purpose of the app is to rise awareness about signs and symptoms of alcohol
abuse in people that has an interest in it. This app provides options to explore if the
user thinks himself/herself or someone else is at risk of alcohol related harm. The
Alcohol Abuse Predictor provides the user with the AUDIT screening tool - which as-
sess alcohol consumption, drinking behaviours, and alcohol-related problems [55]. It
also claims to give the user’s perspective on his/her drinking patterns by calculating
how much the user drank over time and how that compares to others.
The Alcohol Abuse Predictor is one of the systems with the highest number of
BCTs (13) [15, 22] :
1. Provide information on consequences of excessive alcohol use and drinking ces-
sation
2. Provide feedback on performance
3. Provide normative information about others’ behaviour and experiences
4. Facilitate action planning/know how to help identify relapse triggers
5. Facilitate goal setting
6. Facilitate self-recording
7. Advise on environmental restructuring
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Related work: Mobile Apps for Behavioural Change in Alcohol Consumption
14
8. Advise on avoidance of social cues for drinking
9. Give options for additional and later support
10. Assess current and past drinking behaviour
11. Offer/direct towards appropriate written materials
12. Provide information on withdrawal symptoms
13. Behaviour substitution
The Alcohol Abuse Predictor does not provide the possibility to input the user’s
hangover or to measure the user’s BAC, as occurs with previous mobile apps.
(a) AUDIT screening
tool
(b) Categories to pre-
dict
(c)
Comparing
your
drinking to others
(d) Related articles
Figure 2.5: The Alcohol Abuse Predictor app: (a) Illustrates the AUDIT test [55]; (b)
Shows information to fill for BAC prediction; (c) Provides a comparison with people
from other countries; (d) Provides credible sources on healthy alcohol intake
2.3.4
Drinkaware
The Drinkaware app is a helpful tool to reduce excessive alcohol consumption. It
supports behaviour change in individuals who are already motivated and committed
to reduce their alcohol consumption by tracking units and calories in their drinks
[3]. This app also allows the user to set goals and provide support with personalised
feedback. The users are intended to attach to those goals and change their habits
favourably as a result of the encouragement provided by the app. Drinkaware makes
the users be aware of the benefits of reducing their alcohol intake and understand the
impact of drinking in their bodies and brains. In fact, 2 experts on BC confirmed the
==PAGE:22==
2.3 Related work: Mobile Apps for Behavioural Change in Alcohol Consumption
15
evidence on reducing alcohol consumption of this app [15].
Drinkaware is the app that has the highest amount of BCTs, and those are:
1. Provide information on consequences of excessive alcohol use and drinking ces-
sation
2. Boost motivation and self‐efficacy
3. Provide feedback on performance
4. Provide rewards contingent on successfully reducing excessive alcohol use/ab-
staining
5. Prompt commitment from the user there and then
6. Provide rewards contingent on effort or progress
7. Facilitate barrier identification and problem solving
8. Facilitate goal setting
9. Prompt review of goals
10. Facilitate self-recording
11. Set graded tasks
12. Give options for additional and later support
13. Tailor interactions appropriately
14. Emphasize choice
15. Assess current and past drinking behaviour
16. Assess current readiness and ability to reduce excessive alcohol use
17. Offer/direct towards appropriate written materials
Drinkaware is an app only available in United Kingdom which does not contribute
to its research and evaluation. Moreover, the app is lacking in personalising and would
benefit of tailoring to promote long term use.
This mobile app does not give the user the possibility of reporting his hangover,
neither of self-recording the BAC level.
However, as affirmed by B.Jones et al.[30], negative expectancy items (e.g. ‘I expect
to have a hangover if I drink’) represent an important component of motivation to
restrain towards excessive alcohol consumption. Hence, providing feedback on the
user’s hangover might motivate to reduce his alcohol consumption.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Related work: Mobile Apps for Behavioural Change in Alcohol Consumption
16
(a) Progress over time
(b)
Summary
of
drinks
(c)
Self-recording
of
drinks
(d) Encouragement of
reducing
alcohol
in-
take
Figure 2.6: Drinkaware app: (a) Provides weekly progress on amount of drinks and
spent money; (b) Shows the user’s risk level and a monthly summary on drinks and
calories ; (c) Provides a simple way of reporting drinks; (d) Illustrates the accom-
plished and locked achievements
==PAGE:24==
2.3 Related work: Mobile Apps for Behavioural Change in Alcohol Consumption
17
2.3.5
Summary
The following table contains a comparison of the most important features of the mo-
bile applications analysed for this project.
System
Drink Less
[20]
Alcodroid
Alcohol
Tracker [15]
Alcohol
Abuse
Predictor [15]
Drinkaware
[3]
Number
of BCTs
5
7
13
17
Available
plat-
forms
iOS
Android
Android
Android / iOS
Score:
Google
Play
Store
/
iTunes
- / 3.9
4.3 / -
3.7 / -
4 /2.5
No.
of
ratings
- / 36
5,169 / -
3 / -
1,870 / 59
BAC
Calcula-
tion
No
Yes,
not
accu-
rate
No
No
Hangover
report
No - instead
Mood,
Pro-
ductivity,
Clarity
and
Sleep
No
No
No
Result
Help
reduce
hazardous
and harmful
drinking
Popular apps in
the market for
reducing alcohol
consumption us-
ing BCTs
Evidence on reduc-
ing excessive alco-
hol consumption
Useful
be-
haviour
change
tool
in
indi-
viduals
who
are
already
motivated
Table 2.2: Comparison of analysed mobile applications that aim to reduce alcohol
abuse using BC
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Design Process
Every single product or system needs to go through a Design Process. A successful
design is usually characterized by an easy-to-use user interface. This means that the
system needs to provide good quality in 5 components: learnability, efficiency, mem-
orability, errors and satisfaction [46].
Usability is the root for Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), which focuses on how
humans relate to computing products. Simultaneously, HCI was the origin for User-
centered design (UCD), which is the design method that will be used in this master
thesis project [65].
3.1
Design Method: User Centered Design
User-centered design (UCD) emerged from HCI and is a software design methodology
for developers and designers.
Essentially, it helps developers and designers make
applications that meet the needs of their users.
To understand what UCD is, the reader should also understand what it is not.
UCD is not subjective and often relies on data to support design decisions. It involves
much more than making applications aesthetically pleasing, meaning design plays an
important role; however, it’s not the only focus. An advantage that is frequently
underestimated by developers is that UCD can actually save time by helping avoid
costly mistakes. Going through a UCD session ensures that the focus is on the right
things: meeting users’ needs with the proper technological solution [65].
The important concept about UCD is that users are involved in the design process.
There is a spectrum of ways in which users are involved. For example, some types
of UCD will exclusively question users about their needs at specific times during the
design process; typically during requirements gathering and usability testing. At the
opposite end of the spectrum there are UCD methods in which users have a deep
impact on the design by being involved as partners with designers throughout the
design process [40].
Within UCD there are some phases that require special focus: (1) information
gathering, (2) users’ needs identification, and (3) envisioning and evaluation.
One of the goals of this thesis, is to design an easy-to-use user interface. Therefore,
a UCD method will be used involving the above mentioned phases.
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Personas and scenarios
19
Each phase can be explored using different techniques, such as stakeholder and context
of use analysis for phase (1); user interviews, focus groups, or workshops for phase
(2); and prototyping for phase (3) [35]. Hence, this design process will include: (1)
creation of personas and scenarios, and (2) workshop, and (3) prototyping involving
users.
3.2
Personas and scenarios
A persona is a character-driven element that helps the designer remember who he/she
is building the application for. It is a fictional character that is a personification of
the real users of the solution.
The following characters are a few examples of personas that were created with
the purpose of targeting the correct users with the right needs:
Figure 3.1: Example of 2 personas: reasons to drink through frustrations and goals.
(See rest of analysis in Appendix B.2.1)
These personas’ frustrations were based in the most popular motives for young
people to drink, which are: drinking to enhance positive mood or well-being , to obtain
social rewards, to attenuate negative emotions, and to avoid social rejection [32]. And
their goals or rather, needs are features that the system that will be developed could
potentially solve.
Once the personas were created to reflect the users of the application, the scenarios
need to be created. Scenarios are mini stories that reflect situations the personas may
find themselves in. In each scenario, particular attention is payed to how the system
will enhance the experience of the user.
==PAGE:27==
3.3 User Centered Design - Workshop
20
The scenario that is presented next, is an example corresponding to the persona
Marie Larsen:
”Marie loves music festivals. They usually last for days, long days. She is very
active, doesn’t like to miss a concert and she loves to give good vibes to the group.
Unfortunately, in order to keep this enthusiastic mood she usually goes through binge
episodes. However, this year for the Roskilde festival, she is using an alcohol tracker
which sends the data to an app. In this app she can see her BAC along the day and
she can set up goals (e.g. Daily max no. of beers = 3). This goals keep her
motivated and engaged to reduce her alcohol intake and still have a nice time.”
3.3
User Centered Design - Workshop
Once the previous analysis of the user-personas and scenarios was done, it was time
to involve the real users in the design process of this project. In order to promote the
co-creation and a creativity way of thinking in the users a workshop was held.
Figure 3.2: Participants doing an energising exercise during the workshop
A workshop is a way for participants to cooperate to create something new and
creative.
==PAGE:28==
3.3 User Centered Design - Workshop
21
The main purpose of this workshop was to decide upon which BCTs to use in the
final solution and which UX features should the mobile app have to be easy to use.
The workshop was planned (see the plan in Appendix B.2.2) following the guide-
lines provided by The Cookbook1, a collection of valuable instructions from the course
”Staging co-creation and Creativity - 42081”.
The workshop was performed with 6 potential users, 4 males and 2 females. The
session lasted 3 hours and it targeted the User Centered Design methodology.
In short, the plan of the workshop consisted of 3 tasks; debating about alcohol con-
sumption, reviewing existing mobile applications, and prototype new solutions, which
are elaborated in subsection 3.3.1, subsection 3.3.2, and subsection 3.3.3.
3.3.1
Debate: The WHY for alcohol
To understand why young people drink, and especially HED, a debate session was
built among the workshop participants. Each participant was provided with a paper
that had 3 questions written in it. The participants were expected to answer each
question individually and then talk aloud about them. An example of the material
provided for this task can be found in Appendix B.2.3
3.3.1.1
Outcome
The answers to the 3 raised questions were the following:
• Do you like drinking alcohol? Why?
5 out of 6 participants said they like the fact of drinking and one said sometimes
he/she did. The main reasons for drinking in order of importance were: social
implications (as stated in the literature review), taste, enjoyment and enhance
positive mood, effect of lack of inhibition produced by alcohol, and alcohol as
a self prize.
• What makes you buy the next drink?
What prevents you from
doing it?
– Next drink: The main reasons for the participants in this workshop to buy
another drink was the atmosphere(if the general mood of people is high),
the participant’s own mood is high, pursued effect with alcohol (meaning
lack of inhibition), social pressure, the fact of feeling an awkward if not
holding any drink, planned time to go home being far from actual time,
owing someone a drink or cheap drinks.
– No more: The most mentioned motive to stop drinking was: ”I already
drank too much and feel that I will have a hangover tomorrow”. Then, the
1https://vinismidthc.wixsite.com/playbook-javikan/dictionary
==PAGE:29==
3.3 User Centered Design - Workshop
22
progressively less important reasons were: the planned time to go home is
close to the current time, not willing to be drunk, bothersome to hold a
drink while dancing, and saving money.
• In which occasion do you decide to drink more than X (4 for women
and 5 for men) 2 units of alcohol?
The main reasons for participants to have a heavy drinking episode are: special
occasions - birthdays, weddings, etc.-, if the atmosphere is good and people is in
a positive mood, social pressure, day-time parties, if having a tasty drink and if
there is a combination between, not having anything planned for the rest of the
evening and inexpensive drinks. Indeed, P4 affirmed: ”I go crazy with alcohol
in weddings. The atmosphere is so cheerful and it makes me forget about the
consequences of excessive drinking.”
3.3.2
Mobile App rating and analysis
In this part of the workshop, 3 mobile applications were rated and analysed. The
apps were selected based on an initial literature review on existing solutions. More
specifically, the top app within evidence of alcohol reduction (Drink Less), user
rating (AlcoDroid Alcohol Tracker), and number of BCT (Alcohol Abuse
Predictor) were selected. The app Drinkaware, mentioned in chapter 2: Clinical
Background was excluded from the workshop due to its unavailability in the Google
Play Store or AppStore.
Figure 3.3: Participants working on Task 2: Mobile App rating and analysis
2Being those amounts close to consider an event as a heavy drinking episode [69]
==PAGE:30==
3.3 User Centered Design - Workshop
23
In this task the participants were divided in 3 groups of 2 persons each. Each
group was provided with a template; so 3 different templates, one per app to be rated
(templates can be found in Appendix B.2.4. The groups were asked to evaluate
the exposed apps based on the design and functionality. The rating was done by
providing each participant with 6 post-its, divided in 2 groups of 3 post-its each (3
for design and 3 for functionality) of different colours, meaning 3 points (pink), 2
points (orange) and 1 point (yellow) per post-it.
Subsequently, participants were
asked to give detailed comments about each of the apps, to understand what they
liked and dislike from the user interface or their functionality.
3.3.2.1
Outcome
Participants gave the same rating, regarding design and functionality, to each mobile
application. The ratings from high to low correspond to AlcoDroid Alcohol Tracker,
Drink Less,and The Alcohol Abuse Predictor, respectively.
A more in depth analysis of the apps was given by participants and it’s described
below.
• Drink Less
The Drink Less app was proved to help reduce hazardous and harmful drinking,
and it contains the least number of BCTs (n = 5). One of those BCTs was
action planning, and participants thought that this app has a good design to
set personal goals taking into account calories, units or money. Nonetheless,
the participants also stated that there was a lack of information to reach their
goals.
Some participants claimed that they liked the look of the icons for the beverages,
but they presumed it would be easily forgettable to self-report the drinks. And
they consider the self-reporting should not require that many taps. To finalise,
they conclude that they would like to self-record their feelings or mood. The
believe the purpose of this feature is to discover if it exists any correlation in
between drinking event, amount of drinks and mood. These were the comments
from the participants that rated this app with a medium score in design and
functionality.
• AlcoDroid Alcohol Tracker
Besides containing 7 BCTs, the AlcoDroid Alcohol Tracker is one of the most
popular in the market and the one that has the highest rating of the selected
systems (rating = 4.3).
The participants of this workshops rated the design and functionality of this
app as the best of the three systems. The clear visualisations for alcohol con-
sumption and the simplicity to self-report the drinks were the main reasons for
==PAGE:31==
3.3 User Centered Design - Workshop
24
those ratings. The participants found useful to have graphs with their progress,
but in this case they stated - ”This progress graphs are confusing, because they
are showing data from a window of 7 and 30 days in the same screen”. As a
big drawback they said the app was overwhelming for the quantity of data that
shows. Over and above, the participants stated that BAC visualisations are in-
teresting to see, however the number is taking too much space of the screen and
it gives too much relevance. Lastly, one of the participants claimed - ”Knowing
the estimated time of being sober is a good point”.
• The Alcohol Abuse Predictor
The Alcohol Abuse Predictor app was evaluated as a system with evidence
on reducing excessive alcohol intake and has the highest number of BCTs (n =
13). However it has one of the lowest ratings of the selected mobile applications
(rating = 3.7) and the participants of this workshops had the same opinion.
They rated this app with the lowest score in both design and functionality and
the reasons were:
– No challenge against myself
– No goal setting
– The comparison with what others drink is not relevant
– Tracking of user’s progress is missing
Nevertheless, participants found very valuable to read about BCT theory and
that the app provides the user with health advices.
The next table shows a summary of the rating of the mobile applications from the
participants.
Systems
Drink Less
AlcoDroid
Alco-
hol Tracker
The
Alcohol
Abuse Predictor
Design
12
Medium
14
High
10
Low
Functionality
11
Medium
17
High
8
Low
Table 3.1: Mobile apps rating comparison. Number of earned points out of the total,
36 points.
3.3.3
Prototypes
The purpose of this task is to give the participants the opportunity to freely express
their thoughts and ideas on how an app for alcohol reduction should be designed.
The 6 participants were divided equally into two groups. Each group was asked to
==PAGE:32==
3.3 User Centered Design - Workshop
25
sketch a prototype of an app with the aim of alcohol consumption reduction. The
participants were reminded of the possibility of including features from the 3 analysed
apps in the previous task, as well as provided visualisations in paper.
3.3.3.1
Outcome
• 1st Group
The first group prototyped an app focused in the self-reporting of drinks. This
is the full list of features that the prototype would ideally include, in order of
importance:
– Self-report of drinks
– Setting a weekly personal goal
– Feedback of the drinks you should not take, considering the set goal
– Weekly BAC progress
– Self- report of meals previous to drink
– Special alerts for special occasions (i.e. Set football match the morning
after)
– Feedback of last night out
– Accurately report your feelings/mood previous to drink
– Fast-to-play games to test how drunk you are. Show feedback according
to performance.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 User Centered Design - Workshop
26
(a) Self-recording drinks
(b) Rating hangover
Figure 3.4: Example of 1st group’s prototype.
A full prototype can be found in
Appendix B.2.5.1
• 2nd Group
An app prototype with focus on visualisations for weekly limits was done by
the second group. The following key points were noted down from these partic-
ipants’ sketches, in order of importance:
– Visualisations of weekly limits (i.e. ”How far are you from reaching your
limit of 10 units/week”)
– Accurate information of what you drank last night (i.e. Number of units,
type of alcohol, percentage, calories, and money). Calculate totals.
– Database of drinks that the user could drink without over-passing the
weekly limit - use colour coding
– Progress graph of drinks - weekly, monthly and yearly - and show your
goal/limit within the graph
==PAGE:34==
3.4 Prototype
27
(a) Weekly limit visualisation
(b) Drinking progress
Figure 3.5: Example of 2nd group’s prototype. A full prototype can be found in
Appendix B.2.5.2
Participants lastly collaborated by giving some extra suggestions/ideas, such as:
reporting how was the hangover if the user drank the previous night or linking the
app with the user’s credit card to automatically record the number of drinks.
Moreover, some participants suggested to provide a database with the number of
standard units corresponding to each alcoholic beverage, in order to know the contri-
bution of their drinks to the weekly limit.
3.4
Prototype
Once the workshop was finalised, the author of this thesis analysed the participants’
comments/suggestions/critics and used them in order to make the first prototype.
Marvel 3 was the online tool used to make the first prototype. Marvel helps creating
a digital prototype from pen & paper or from a design application. In this project the
prototype was firstly sketched and then uploaded to Marvel. This web application
helped to create connections in between the different screens, and then make the
prototype publicly accessible in this link.
https://marvelapp.com/3a6088j
3https://marvelapp.com
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Prototype
28
The findings from the workshop contributed to the included components in the
prototype with the purpose of meeting the needs of the user.
The main screen shows an overview of what the user drank during the week and
how far it is from the weekly limit. In that way, the user knows if he is exceeding the
recommended maximum standard alcohol units for the week.
There is also a summary of the drinks taken in the last drinking episode, because
providing this information has an effect in the user. Going through a learning pro-
cess of what users drink, helps them become more self-aware of the amount of alcohol
consumed. This self-awareness process might contribute to a behavioural change to-
wards the quantity of alcoholic beverages consumed or the way the consumption is
spread over the week.
Figure 3.6: Sketched
floating button
An essential component of this prototype was the self-
recording of drinks.
This feature was a basic need for the
app and the requirements were to be: simple, fast, clear and
easy to input.
This need brought the design to include a floating but-
ton, see Figure 3.6.
A floating button is typically used
for positive actions;
such as, create, add, take picture,
write ...
(not delete).
Therefore,
this kind of but-
ton was used to let the user self-record the drinks eas-
ily.
Moreover both components, the ’previous-to-drink’ food
intake report and next day’s hangover report, were added in
the prototype. These components are particularly important
since they contribute to one of the 5 most used BCTs - ’provide
information on consequences of excessive alcohol consumption
and reducing excessive alcohol consumption’.
The second screen was sketched with the purpose of giv-
ing feedback to the user about how his drinking habits evolved
over the time, as well as his/her BAC level. Providing feed-
back on the user’s progress is a well known BCTs which ad-
dresses motivation.
3.4.1
Prototype’s feedback
The first prototype was completed and user feedback was needed to iterate over the
design and functionality with the purpose of improvement. A questionnaire was cre-
ated in Google Forms 4, in order to get feedback in a fast and accessible manner. The
questionnaire was filled in by 12 people, being most of them students in between the
4https://www.google.com/intl/es/forms/about/
==PAGE:36==
3.4 Prototype
29
age of 22 to 29. The questionnaire can be found in Appendix B.2.
Figure 3.7 shows a collection of screenshots from the prototype. The figure con-
tains numbers from 1 to 6, which correspond with the feedback that interviewees gave
and that can be found below the figure.
(a) Overview
(b) Personal goal setting
(c) My progress
(d)
Hangover
assess-
ment
Figure 3.7: Screenshots of first prototype
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Prototype
30
1. Overview: Interviewees liked to have a simple visualisation, such as the circular
gauge showing the weekly progress. Nonetheless, some feedback was focused on
the dislike of the prototype being designed in a weekly basis, while they would
rather focus on the single current drinking event. In general they liked that
there is only 2 tabs on the top for navigation - from Overview to My Progress,
and vice versa.
2. Floating button: According with some interviewed people the floating button’s
action was not clear, in regards to the specific drinks. Interviewees requested
some labels for it to be fully understandable. While others stated - P5: ”Nice
way to input my drinking so fast.” - or - P11: ”The icons are really intuitive.”
3. List of drinks: There was a general comment about the first screen being over-
whelming, because too much text was included regarding the list of drinks from
the last event. In addition, there was a complaint about the understanding
of the first value of the list. This value wasn’t labelled, therefore interviewees
could not know that this value was referring to the BAC level.
4. Goals: Setting personal goal is a real need that interviewees liked from the
prototype. However, an interviewee stated - P7: ”I don’t understand the screen
that appears when the circle is tapped. Which number am I supposed to choose?”.
From this feedback it is assumed that a redesign of the goal screen needs to be
carried out.
5. Hangover and meals report: Interviewees liked to report what they ate and how
they felt after a night with drinks, to be able to look at it and consequently,
take decisions.
6. Progress: The scatter plot was confusing for some people and don’t see the
relevance for a monthly visualisation. However, they agree about showing the
progress as a visualisation, and not as text.
7. Missing features:
• Information about the recommended limit by the Danish law and the driv-
ing limit.
• Possibility of sending drinking data
• Hangover prediction
• Adding a summary of the last event or last week (i.e. How fast did you
reach 70% of the goal last week?, max BAC reached, hangover symptoms,
etc. , every day or every Monday you open the app, respectively.
• Historical data about the top worst hangover days, with the purpose of
not repeating the same drinking episode
==PAGE:38==
3.4 Prototype
31
The feedback showed that most of the interviewees thought the prototype to seem
’Easy’ or ’Very easy’ to use. Additionally, the graph shows that the score of the
perceived usefulness of the prototype was high; due to the fact that 7 out of 12
people thought that this potential app could be useful in a future.
Figure 3.8: Feedback on usability and perceived usefulness of the prototype
The full feedback document can be found in Appendix B.2
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Implementation
This chapter contains the methodology for building the solution of the mobile applica-
tion that intends to change the behaviour of young people towards excessive alcohol
consumption, by making a usability friendly and useful system using BCTs.
Firstly, the merge of the software with the acquired breathalyser will be explained in
the section 4.1.
Subsequently, the User Interface section will tell in the form of a story, the process
of coding the designed human-computer interaction.
And lastly, the section Data Management will describe in detail what occurs in the
back-end of the implemented software piece - this is, what happens ’behind the scenes’.
4.1
Breathalyser - BACTrack VIO
After the research in devices to measure Blood Alcohol Content was accomplished
(see Table 4.1), the breathalyser BACTrack VIO1 was chosen to be used in the project.
Figure 4.1:
BACTrack VIO
and BACTrack App
The reasons to select this breathalyser, in order
of priority, were:
• Compatible with smart-phones:
BACTrack
VIO is both compatible with iOS and Android
devices
• Open source API - SDK available in BAC-
Track’s website
• Compact design, in order to be portable: De-
sign to be used as a keychain
• Accurate BAC level results: Using semiconduc-
tor sensor technology
• Affordable: BACTrack VIO’s prices is 50 $
1https://www.bactrack.com/products/bactrack-vio-smartphone-keychain-breathalyzer
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Breathalyser - BACTrack VIO
33
Device
BACTrack
VIO
WrisTAS
2
SCRAM
3 [38]
FLOOME
4
Compatible with An-
droid and iOS
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
SDK / Data Available
Yes / Yes
No / Yes
No / Yes
Yes / Yes
Portable
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Accurate BAC
Yes, not the
best
Yes
No
Yes
Affordable
Yes (320 kr.)
No
(15000 kr.
+ 7500 kr.
/year)
No
(25000
kr.)
No
(800
kr.
+
7500 kr.)
Table 4.1: Hardware comparison
One BACTrack VIO unit was bought for the implementation process. The BAC-
Track App (for iOS5 and Android6) was downloaded to test how the system worked
- how was the interaction with the breathalyser to measure the BAC level.
The project’s mobile application was chosen to be developed for Android devices
in the platform Android Studio7, but not for iOS devices. This decision was made
because of several reasons:
• The fact that there are 2 different SDKs, one per operative system. Which
implies a need for coding in the native language of each operative system, iOS
and Android.
• In the mobile world there is a higher amount of Android users than iOS. Specif-
ically in the beginning of 2017, 70% more according to International Data Cor-
poration (IDC)8.
• The knowledge about Android programming language of the developer of this
system is much stronger than what it is about Swift programming language
For those reasons, the BACTrack SDK for Android was downloaded. The SDK
contains a demo version which was run and understood.
The demo included the functionalities that can be seen in Figure 4.2 and for this
project two of them were essential: ’Connect to Nearest BACtrack’ and ’Start Blow
Process’. Therefore, the project’s mobile application was developed with this demo
as a base code.
5https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/bactrack/id553347498?mt=8
6https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.bactrack.bactrack_mobile
7https://developer.android.com/studio/
8https://www.idc.com/promo/smartphone-market-share
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Breathalyser - BACTrack VIO
34
Figure 4.2: BACTrack SDK Demo
==PAGE:42==
4.2 User Interface
35
4.2
User Interface
This master thesis is focused in building a mobile application with a good usability
and evaluate its perceived usefulness. This section describes the chronological process
of applying the knowledge gained from the UCD to the development of the app.
4.2.1
PART I - Take a BAC test
The name of the app was decided to be ’DropIt’ in regards to the slogan ”Dropping
that extra drink you don’t need”, which promotes a healthy drinking. As a start the
Software Development Kit (SDK) was modified to be able to connect to the BACTrack
VIO and take a test simplified in one button.
The ’TAKE THE TEST’ button needed to be tapped twice: first time to connect to
the breathalyser and second to start the blowing process, as seen in Figure 4.3b.
The Figure 4.3c presents the screen that shows when ’TO THE APP’ button is tapped.
A 3 tab screen was created to offer an easy navigation for the user. In the first tab
the user can report his/her drinks using a floating button, included due to its great
acceptance. However in order to make the type of drink input completely clear, labels
were added. A small but important usability detail is the icon in the floating button.
A ’plus’ icon is shown to add drinks, and a ’cross’ icon to close the type of drinks
option.
(a) Splash screen
(b) First screen
(c) Tapped floating button
Figure 4.3: Part I: Take a BAC test
==PAGE:43==
4.2 User Interface
36
4.2.2
PART II - Visualisations and Recommended Limits
In this second part visualisations were included to give feedback to the user about
what he/she drank.
Figure 4.4b presents a gauge indicating the percentage of the weekly alcohol intake
out of the maximum std. alcohol units recommended by the Danish Health Board
[61], being 7 and 14 respectively for women and men.
From this information arose a need of obtaining the gender of the user. This feature
is included in a procedure of 3 steps: 1) Choosing gender with normal buttons, 2)
Take a BAC test by tapping twice, and 3) Go to the tabbed view of the app (see
Figure 4.4a).
From the workshop it was observed that there was a big interest in number of con-
sumed calories and spent money. Hence, corresponding icons and texts were included
to easily identify each item and provide the relevant information (see Figure 4.4b).
(a) Test screen
(b) Overview
Figure 4.4: Part II: Visualisations and Recommended Limits
==PAGE:44==
4.2 User Interface
37
4.2.3
PART III - Navigation issues and Personal Data
At this point there was inconsistency in the navigation and accessibility issues with
the BAC testing screen. Therefore, the BAC testing was merged within the tabbed
view.
Moreover, the normal buttons for the selection of Man or Woman weren’t suitable
for their functionality. Consequently they were substituted by radio buttons, which
allow the user to choose just one of the options, as can be seen in Figure 4.5a.
In addition, the drop icon of the app was enabled as navigation component to go to
the first tab. The below listed components were also included (see Figure 4.5b):
• Text fields to indicate time the visualisations correspond to (e.g. Weekly Goal)
• In previous versions the BAC level was only visualised below the ’TAKE A
TEST’ button and it disappeared with every new measurement or every discon-
nection of the breathalyser. In this way the users weren’t able to check on the
last BAC level. Therefore, this feature was included in the information about
the Last drinking event.
• Text input field for meals before a drinking event. This field was a user need
identified in the UCD workshop, due to participants’ conviction in food’s influ-
ence on alcohol symptoms. Indeed food has an impact on the metabolic process
of the alcohol; thus, also in the BAC [25].
• Selection of hangover symptoms. This feature, provides the user with feedback
on alcohol intake consequences, which is part of a BCT discussed in the UCD
workshop.
(a) Test screen
(b) Overview
Figure 4.5: Part III: Navigation issues and Personal Data
==PAGE:45==
4.2 User Interface
38
4.2.4
PART IV - Usability, User Control and Feedback on
performance
Once the navigation issues were solved, the next step was to have a greater focus on
the user. In this part of the UI development the good usability was a priority.
• Breath & Learn Tab: The radio button which allowed the user to choose gender
was removed from the first tab and moved to a screen that can only be seen
when installing the app. This modification was done for the simple reason that
users do not need to specify gender more than once. Note: The start screen
will be shown in the final solution in subsection 4.2.5.
• Overview Tab: The inner circle of the gauge incorporates setting personal weekly
drinking goals, which in fact are maximum drinking limits. It works by tapping
the inner circle that is shown in Figure 4.5b. Then an alert dialog pops-up
where the user can specify weekly maximum number of: beers, glasses of wine,
drinks, and shots (see Figure 4.6b ; Appendix C.1 for information about
calculations9) [66, 25, 16, 61]. The selected number of drinks will translate into
standard units, calories and approx. money predicted to spend. Those values
will be presented, hence the user has the opportunity to choose an economic,
caloric or official recommendation type of reason to reduce alcohol consumption.
• My Progress Tab: A graph with the user’s consumed drinks over time and a
calendar were introduced in the middle tab, as part of the BCT mentioned in
Part IV. Firstly, the graph users will rise awareness on users’ drinking habits
and evolution over time. Secondly, the calendar is a useful component for the
user to see what he/she: ate, drank and felt on a specific date. The expected
usefulness of this feature is high, since the user can learn the effect of alcohol
on his/her body depending in type and amount of food and alcohol beverages.
9https://ndb.nal.usda.gov/ndb/search/list?qlookup=14050
==PAGE:46==
4.2 User Interface
39
(a) Breath & Learn Tab
(b) Weekly Goal Setting
(c) My Progress tab
Figure 4.6: Part IV: Usability, User Control and Feedback on performance
4.2.5
PART V - Final solution
The final elements were included and last modifications were done, so that the system
was as pleasant to use as possible. (See Figure 4.7 to follow the changes of this part).
• About Yourself Screen: As explained in subsection 4.2.4, gender selection was
moved to a screen that appears only when the app is installed. Besides, this
screen requires: name/alias, age, gender, purpose of using the app (track or
reduce alcohol consumption), valuable information when analysing data.
• Overview Tab: Includes possibility to delete the last reported drink and send
data by: email, Facebook, and other social media platforms, in the upper right
corner of the screen.
The floating button was presented in every tab because it was thought to provide
accessibility.However, it was later discovered to be a confusion utility, as quoted
from one user: ”The button press did not provide any feedback if I wasnt in the
right tab”.
Additionally, the number of maximum weekly standard units are displayed on
the top left corner of the gauge, due to the need of a reference of standard
alcohol units
• Breath & Learn Tab: It was observed that users looked at the text inside the
yellow button (Figure 4.6a), but never the text above. As a result of this bad
interaction, the guiding text on top of the button was removed and changed to
be displayed in the yellow button, which changes with the tapping.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 User Interface
40
• Notification: Lastly, as the self-reporting of drinks was not a daily habit, it
was noticed by testers that it was difficult to remember. For this reason, a
notification was sent everyday at 21:00 which acted as a reminder to report the
drinks of that day
==PAGE:48==
Trigger: Press
to the app 
Rule: Save
name, age,
gender and
purpose 
Feedback:
Change to
tabbed view 
Trigger: Tap
ﬂoatting button 
Rule: Load
images of drinks 
Feedback:
Show drink
types and labels 
Trigger: Tap a
beer and ﬂoatting
button (cross) 
Rule: Save drink
in DB, calculate
parameters 
Feedback: Show
weekly
percentage out
of max. and
information on
that event 
Trigger: Tap
trush icon (top
right corner) 
Rule: Delete
last drink from
DB 
Feedback:
Show a toast
message and
decrease the
percentage of
the gauge
visual. 
Trigger: Tap 
arrow icon
(top right
corner) 
Rule: Trigger
email intent 
Feedback:
Show alert
dialog with
sharing
options 
Trigger: Tap 
Gmail option 
Rule: Load DB as
an attached ﬁle 
Feedback: Open
email in Gmail with
subject and
recipient 
Trigger: Tap 
food text
input 
Rule: Trigger
keyboard 
Feedback:
Show
keyboard,
cursor and
written text 
Trigger: Tap 
anywhere in
the screen 
Rule: Trigger
date picker 
Feedback:
Show
calendar to
save current
or previous
date 
Trigger: Tap 
center of gauge
('Change your
goal here') 
Rule: Load alert
dialog 
Feedback:
Show weekly
goal selection
and translation
to: units,
calories and
money 
Trigger: Tap 
feelings spinner 
Rule: Load
Multi Spinner 
Feedback:
Show possible
hangover
symptoms 
Trigger: Tap
checkboxes 
Rule: Save
checked options 
Feedback:
Show selected
options checked
and focused 
Trigger: Tap
Submit button 
Rule: Save
symptoms in DB 
Feedback:
Show calendar
to save current
or previous date 
Trigger: Tap My
Progress tab 
Rule: None 
Feedback: Show
graph of drinking
history 
Show calendar with
color coding on
binge episodes 
==PAGE:49==
Trigger: Tap
Overview tab 
Rule: None 
Feedback:
Show overview
screen 
Trigger: Tap date in
calendar 
Rule: Load alert
dialog with info.
from DB 
Feedback: Show
meals and drinks
from that date and
hangover of the
next day. BCT 
Trigger: Time is
21:00 
Rule: Send intent of
Alarm alert 
Feedback: Show
notiﬁcation reminding
the user if he/she
drank during that day 
Trigger: Tap
Breath & Learn
tab 
Rule: None 
Feedback: Show
button to take a
BAC test 
Trigger: Tap My
Progress tab 
Rule: None 
Feedback: Show
graph of drinking
history 
Show calendar with
color coding on binge
episodes 
Trigger: Turn Bluetooth
on in smartphone and
tap button 'TAP TO
CONNECT' 
Rule: Bluetooth
technology turned on.
App searching for
nearest BT devies 
Feedback: Show
 bluetooth connected  
Trigger: Turn on
BACTrack VIO 
Rule: Device and
phone pairing 
Feedback: Show
 Status: connected  
Trigger: Tap
button 'TAP
TO BLOW' 
Rule:
Calibrating
device and
starting
countdown 
Feedback:
Show
countdown 
Trigger:
Countdown
ﬁnished 
Rule: Count
reached cero 
Feedback:
Show 'Blow
now!' message 
Trigger: Blow
through
BACTrack VIO 
Rule: Steel
board detects
resistence from
alcohol in air 
Feedback:
Show 'Keep
blowing...'
message 
Trigger: Status
message:
'Done!...' 
Rule: User stops
blowing 
Feedback: Show
BAC level and a
description of your
current state 
Figure 4.7: Part V: Storyboard with Microinteractions DropIt App
==PAGE:50==
4.3 Data Management
43
4.3
Data Management
This section contains the background interaction between the mobile application and
a local SQLite database. The database called DropIt contains two tables, named
Drinks and Body. The table Drinks contains the drinks that a user had, including
type of drink and timestamp; and the table Body contained data about meals and
hangover symptoms.
The source code of the mobile application DropIt can be found in Appendix D,
section D.1.
4.3.1
Breath & Learn
The following flowchart, Figure 4.8 explains the data collection that occurs in the
tab Breath & Learn. Basically when the user takes a test, the app finds the closest
BACTrack breathalyser and automatically connects to it. After the user has blown in
the breathalyser, the result value is stored in the database as an entry in the Drinks
table.
Figure 4.8: Tracking BAC level process
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Data Management
44
4.3.2
Overview
4.3.2.1
Self-reporting
Figure 4.9 illustrates how the data the user inputs is stored in the database. Specif-
ically, data type A is stored in table Drinks and data types B and C are stored in
table Body.
Figure 4.9: Data reporting process
==PAGE:52==
4.3 Data Management
45
4.3.2.2
Visualisation
Figure 4.10 describes how the data stored is fetched to be presented on the mobile
application. This data is filtered depending on the visualisation. For the gauge (visu-
alisation A) the data is fetched weekly, meaning from Monday to Monday. Differently,
the data displayed just under each icon (visualisation B) are fetched daily, meaning
from 8:00 a.m of the current day until 7:59 a.m of the next day. Finally, the visu-
alisation C, the BAC level is fetched by taking the last entry in table Drinks that
doesn’t have a BAC_percentage of -1.0.
Figure 4.10: Overview presenting data
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Data Management
46
4.3.2.3
Sharing data
The arrow that is placed in the upper right corner of the screen (see Figure 4.11)
gives the user the opportunity to send the data to the author. The control of this
action was given to the users because it was desired to make them feel that they had
control over their data.
Figure 4.11: Option: Send data
The data from will be collected and converted from SQLite database format to
csv format. Indeed, the data will consist of 2 csv files; one corresponding to the table
Drinks and one to the table Body. The data from those csv files will be analysed
using Jupyter Notebook version 5.5.010 and Python version 2.711.
The result of this analysis can be found in chapter 6.
4.3.3
My Progress
In the tab My Progress there is 3 places where the data needs to be fetched from the
DB. To create the graph the amount of daily drinks are fetched from the Drinks table.
If that value is equal or greater than 5 standard alcohol units, the calendar shows
that day in red, because it’s labelled as a heavy drinking episode. The data presented
in the alert dialog saying ”What happened?” (interaction C in Figure 4.12) is fetched
from both tables in the DB, Drinks and Body. The symptoms presented correspond
to the data from the next day to the drinking event, since the user is expected to
input the hangover in the next morning.
10http://jupyter.org/
11https://www.python.org/
==PAGE:54==
4.3 Data Management
47
Figure 4.12: Data visualisation
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Study
An ’in-the-wild’ study was carried out in order to test and evaluate if DropIt is
an easy-to-use mobile application and whether there is a future behavioural change
possibility, as assessed by the perceived usefulness.
5.1
Recruitment
A snowball recruitment process was used within three areas.
(1) Flyers were dis-
tributed with the potential of reaching over 1,800 from the Technical University of
Denmark’s (DTU) Annual Party (DTU Årsfest1) in Lyngby (see Appendix B.3),
(2) social-media recruitment of 510 from the author’s network on Facebook (see Fig-
ure 5.1), (3) by word of mouth in the near network of the author.
In the first day of the study 23 people downloaded the app, the second day 36, and
the maximum amount of users was reached in half-way of the study with 53 downloads.
For this study, only people that had completed the pertinent questionnaires and
decided to share the data with the project, were considered subjects. Therefore, the
dropouts were consequence of not filling out the required questionnaires, uninstalling
the app due to small bugs, and installing the app but never sending data to be
analysed during the project.
1Number of attendants in the Facebook event ’DTU Årsfest 2018’
==PAGE:56==
5.1 Recruitment
49
(a) Social-media posts
(b) Distributing flyers during the DTU Årsfest
Figure 5.1: Different recruitment forms
There were some requirements and some discriminatory features for users to be
part of the study.
• Inclusion criteria:
1. To be an Android smartphone user
2. To have English language skills
3. To drink alcohol beverages
• Exclusion criteria:
1. To be below the age of 18 years old, since it is an app related to alcohol
2. Not participating in one or both of the tasks: filling out questionnaires
and sharing data collected by the app with the study
A total of 15 subjects (40% females) were eligible in the age range of 23 to 31 years
old. The study started from the beginning of May, and subjects were first asked to
fill out the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) [55, 2, 6]. The AUDIT
test is a 10 item questionnaire that provides a simple method of early detection of
hazardous and harmful alcohol use in primary health care settings. The questionnaire
is useful to identify drinking profiles of the subjects involved in a study, and can be
categorised in 3 groups: low, medium and high risk.
The AUDIT questionnaire was delivered online by a Google Forms survey2.
2https://goo.gl/forms/9qtMIkd1MENnyfLB2
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Experimental Setup
50
5.2
Experimental Setup
The study was performed ’in-the-wild’, which is believed to provide more revealing re-
sults than other experimental lab-based approaches, due to the high external-validity,
as stated in [14].
The BAC measuring device called BACTrack VIO Breathalyser was required to
utilise all of the apps features. However, only 4 units were purchased and handed out
with the support of Copenhagen Center for Health Technology (CACHET3). There
was a limited amount of units due to economical reasons. The mobile application,
DropIt was sent to the participants of the study through an online link to the app on
Google Play Store. The link can be found in Appendix B.4
The participants were instructed to use DropIt for 1 month, and the 4 subjects with
breathalysers were told to bring the breathalysers with them whenever they went out.
5.3
Questionnaires
Once the study ended, subjects were sent two questionnaires to assess the usability
and perceived usefulness of the built system. These questionnaires are the System Us-
ability Scale (SUS) and the Unified Methodology for Assessment of Clinical Feasibility
(UMACF), respectively.
5.3.1
System Usability Scale
The SUS is a 10-item reliable, low-cost usability scale that can be used for global
assessments of systems usability[9]. It is made as a 5-point Likert scale; ‘strongly
disagree’, ‘disagree’, ‘neutral’, ‘agree’, and ‘strongly agree’ [34, 1, 39], which was
validated by the article [33]. As in previous cases, the questionnaire was delivered to
subjects through a online Google Forms survey4.
SUS questionnaire’s answers were submitted to the AUDIT website5 in order to get
the results that will be presented in chapter 6.
5.3.2
Unified Methodology for Assessment of Clinical Feasibility
Perceived Usefulness is defined in this project as ”the degree to which a person be-
lieves that using DropIt would help drink alcohol in a healthier manner”. This follows
from the word useful: ”capable of being used advantageously”. Perceived Ease of Use,
in contrast, refers to ”the degree to which a person believes that using DropIt would
3http://www.cachet.dk/
4https://goo.gl/forms/iqpLsvkbPTvyRVWJ2
5http://auditscreen.org/page.php?Using-Audit-1
==PAGE:58==
5.3 Questionnaires
51
be free of effort”.
The Unified Methodology for Assessment of Clinical Feasibility (UMACF) ques-
tionnaire likewise the SUS, applies a 5-point Likert scale which evaluates; perceived
usefulness, perceived ease of use, perceived importance, perceived robustness, and
perceived behaviour intention.
It is based on the article ”Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and User
Acceptance of Information Technology” from Fred D. Davis [17].
The mentioned
document proved that perceived usefulness is significantly correlated with both, self-
reported current usage and self-predicted future usage. In the same way perceived
ease of use was proved to be significantly correlated with both, current and future use .
There are different ways to present and visualise Likert scales results as discussed
by Robbins et al.[53]. However, it is recommended to present data in (i) a table
and (ii) as a so-called ‘diverging stacked bar chart’. This method will be used to
present the results of this questionnaire in chapter 6. Additionally, subjects received
the UMACF questionnaire through a online Google Forms survey6.
6https://goo.gl/forms/MEywf4XELfx2Ao1L2
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Results
To evaluate the developed mobile application a pre and post qualitative study, quan-
titative analysis and ’in-the-wild’ interviews were conducted. The qualitative evalu-
ation consisted of two independent questionnaires; the System Usability Scale (SUS)
and the Unified Methodology for Assessment of Clinical Feasibility (UMACF).
These questionnaire’s results will be presented in this chapter. However, preceding
those questionnaires the subject’s ’on-the-go’ feedback will be introduced; feedback
which was collected while the subjects were using DropIt.
Additionally, the data collected from the subjects when using DropIt was analysed
and the corresponding results are presented in the present chapter too.
6.1
Subject’s drinking profile
As explained in the chapter 5, an AUDIT test was filled by the subjects of the con-
ducted study which helped identifying the drinking profiles.
Those profiles were
categorised in 3 groups: low, medium and high risk.
There were 5 subjects corresponding to the healthy low risk category. However
8 out of 15 were classified into the medium risk category. These 8 subjects have a
drinking pattern that is putting themselves at a risk of harm in the short term (such
as injuries) and in the long term (such as diseases of the liver, heart, brain, muscle,
nerves and other key organs and systems of the body). The splinter group, with
a minority of 2 subjects, belong to the high risk category which indicates alcohol
dependency.
People in high risk category are recommended to seek medical help
because if alcohol dependence is untreated, it has a seriously progressive course [6].
6.2
Data analysis
This chapter will reveal the results found from the data analysis of the mobile applica-
tion. Each of the following subsections will contain one-single graph about; drinking
patterns of subjects, BAC level measurements, gender differences when drinking, most
consumed drink types, most common hangovers, and hangovers depending on amount
of drinks.
The source code for the data analysis can be found in Appendix D, section D.2.
==PAGE:60==
6.2 Data analysis
53
6.2.1
Drinking patterns over time
Firstly, an analysis of general drinking patterns over time was conducted. Figure 6.1
1 shows the amount of drinks consumed over the period of one month (duration of the
study) per subjects. In the scatter plot, each colour identify a subject, and the size
of each bubble represents the amount of drinks in one day. The bigger the bubble,
the higher amount of drinks. There are subjects with more entries than others, which
suggest they drink in more occasions. However, the fact that subjects could have
forgotten to input their drinks needs to be taken into account.
From the graph it is observed weekend drinking patterns for subjects; 1, 2, 3, 5, 6,
11, and 14 (being the weekends during the study; 5-6, 12-13, 19-20, 26-27 of May and
2-3 of June), except for the first and last weekends. It perfectly coincides with the
event of the DTU Årsfest (4th of May, date of app publishment) and the Distortion
Festival(30th and 31st of May) in Copenhagen. Meaning that subjects decided not
to drink or drink less those weekends when they drank during weekdays. Subject 11
and 5 are the ones that had the highest amount of drinks in a single occasion.
Figure 6.1: Drinks over time per subject
1Note: An interactive version of Figure 6.1 can be found in: https://plot.ly/~andreaque/43.
embed
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Data analysis
54
6.2.2
BAC level measurements over time
Figure 6.2 2 presents the BAC measurements per day over the duration of the study,
per subjects. Likewise in the previous Figure 6.1, each colour represent a subject,
but in this case the Y axis indicates the level of BAC in g/dl 3. As a reference to
understand the BAC measurements, a BAC of 0.05 is the common driving-limit in
European Countries, including Denmark [69, 18]. Subjects 2, 3, 8, and 14 were the
ones that owned breathalysers, however the breathalysers were occasionally shared
among the participants and therefore data from 8 subjects was collected. The highest
levels on BAC were reached by subjects 15, 2 and 14, but never overpassed 0.2, which
correspond to the symptoms euphoria and motor impairment as described in Table 2.1.
Weekend drinking patterns can be seen again for the weekends; 12-13, 19-20, 26-27
of May and then, the Distortion festival.
Figure 6.2: BAC level over time per subject
2Note: An interactive version of Figure 6.2 can be found here
3https://www.bactrack.com/blogs/expert-center/35044037-what-is-bac
==PAGE:62==
6.2 Data analysis
55
6.2.3
Drink Type disparity per gender
Figure 6.3 4 presents the percentage of subjects within 2 different groups - females
(in blue) and males (in orange) - divided in the possible beverages; beer, wine, drinks,
and shots. The graph illustrates that males have a more skewed distribution with a
majority drinking beer. The distribution for female is more uniform between beer,
wine and drinks. However shots were never reported by this group.
Figure 6.3: Drinking disparity per gender
4Note: An interactive version of Figure 6.3 can be found in: https://plot.ly/~andreaque/57.
embed
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Data analysis
56
6.2.4
Drink Type disparity per subject
Figure 6.4 5 shows the total amount of drinks (categorised in four types; beer, wine,
drink/spirit and shot) each subject drunk during the study. In the same manner as
in Figure 6.3, different colours represent different subjects and the size of the bubbles
quantity of drinks.
Repeatedly, it is noticed that beer is the most liked alcoholic drink and what people
drinks most.
It is also interesting to see that both subjects who had the highest
amount of drinks in a single-occasion, drank beer and shots.
Figure 6.4: Amount of type of drink per subject
5Note: An interactive version of Figure 6.4 can be found in: https://plot.ly/~andreaque/45.
embed
==PAGE:64==
6.2 Data analysis
57
6.2.5
Hangover symptoms per subject
This subsection presents a graph which shows how many occasions a subject had a
certain symptom of hangover, see Figure 6.5 6. The X axis contains symptoms of
hangovers, based on The Acute Hangover Scale [54]. The Y axis instead, shows the
number of subject identified per colour. And the size of the bubbles indicate the
amount of occasions in which a subject had a certain symptom of hangover during
the study.
The graph shows that subjects reported not having hangover in more
occasions than having it. Within hangover symptoms, being ’tired’ and having a
’headache’ were most common. A difference in hangover symptoms can be noticed
between subject 8 (in gray) and the rest.
Subject 8 reports to have more severe
symptoms than the rest of subjects, which in most of the occasions are ’thirsty’,
’tired’, or have a ’headache’.
Figure 6.5: Hangover symptoms per subject
6Note: An interactive version of Figure 6.5 can be found in: https://plot.ly/~andreaque/51.
embed
==PAGE:65==
6.2 Data analysis
58
6.2.6
Hangover Occurrence and Binge Drinking
Figure 6.6 7 shows the hangover symptom occurrence (%) depending in 2 types of
drinking events; heavy episodic drinking (HED) [16] and moderate drinking.
The orange trace shows the occasions in which subjects drank below 5 std. units
and the blue one, the binge drinking or heavy drinking episodes. The X axis shows
the types of hangover symptoms and the Y axis, the amount of drinking episodes in
percentage.
From this graph we can see that heavy drinking episodes yield larger percentage
occurrence of hangover symptoms such as, ’thirsty’, ’tired’, ’dizziness/faintness’, ’loss
of appetite’, and ’nausea’; while almost 45% of the moderate drinking episodes report
no hangover.
Figure 6.6: Hangover occurrence if binge drinking or not
7Note: An interactive version of Figure 6.6 can be found here
==PAGE:66==
6.3 Usability
59
6.3
Usability
One of the purposes of this master thesis is to evaluate the usability of the imple-
mented system, DropIt. The usability was evaluated by the SUS questionnaire [9].
SUS provides a single number representing a composite measure of the overall usabil-
ity of DropIt. Equation 6.1 is used to calculate the total SUS.
SUSTotal = 2.5

∑
i∈L1
SUS(i) −1 +
∑
j∈L2
5 −SUS(j)


(6.1)
where L1 = (1, 3, 5, 7, 9) and L2 = (2, 4, 6, 8, 10) represents a list of the specific items
from the questionnaire, and i, j are extracting the results from the particular items
SUS score which ranges between 0 −4 [33, 56, 57].
The SUS score will vary from 0 to 100. The grade corresponding to the obtained
score can be found in the Table 6.1.
Grade
SUS
Percentile range
A
84.1 −100
96 −100
A
80.8 −84
90 −95
A-
78.9 −80.7
85 −89
B
77.2 −78.8
80 −84
B
74.1 −77.1
70 −79
B-
72.6 −74
65 −69
C
71.1 −72.5
60 −64
C
65.0 −71.0
41 −59
C-
62.7 −64.9
35 −40
D
51.7 −62.6
15 −34
F
0 −51.6
0 −14
Table 6.1: Curved Grading Scale for SUS. The middle column represents a total
SUS score range, and shows the corresponding grade level on the left column. The
resulting range for DropIt is illustrated with a bold outline
The SUS score of the mobile application DropIt is 76.67 and the pertinent calcu-
lations can be found in Appendix D.3.
According to 6.1 the achieved score corresponds to a B grade in usability, equiva-
lent to the percentile range 70-79.
6.4
Perceived Usefulness and Ease of Use
In order to assess the perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use of the mobile
application, the Unified Methodology for Assessment of Clinical Feasibility (UMACF)
questionnaire was delivered to the subjects of the study.
==PAGE:67==
6.4 Perceived Usefulness and Ease of Use
60
Inspired on the proposal from Heiberger Robbins [26], the results for the ques-
tionnaire are presented in a table (see Appendix D.4 for questionnaire data) and
a stacked bar chart, see Figure 6.7. The Y axis indicates the features that are being
evaluated; where HE stands for Health Expectancy, which corresponds to the features
belonging to perceived usefulness and where EE stands for Effort Expectancy, which
corresponds to the features belonging to perceived ease of use.
The X axis, on the other hand, represents the 5-point Likert scale; ’Strongly disagree’
(in darkest purple), ’Disagree’, ’Neutral’, ’Agree’, and ’Strongly agree’ (in lightest pur-
ple). The ’Strongly Disagree’ and ’Disagree’ labels overlap, due to the low percentage
they cover.
From the results in Figure 6.7 it is observed that, in general, a high percentage
of the subjects agreed or strongly agreed with the features presented, both about
perceived usefulness and ease of use.
Figure 6.7: UMACF score
==PAGE:68==
6.5 Interviews ’in-the-wild’
61
6.5
Interviews ’in-the-wild’
During the study, the subjects were called or had short feedback sessions with the
author. From this feedback several usability issues were registered:
• Subjects would like to have the option to input the drinks from a previous night
to avoid phone usage during social activity.
• The app lacks a BAC level progress chart that correlates with the consumed
drinks, in addition to spent money and consumed calories chart. Moreover, the
calendar is missing a summary of BAC measurements when tapped on a certain
day.
• DropIt shows information in the ’Overview’ tab that is not relevant for the user,
depending in the time of the day (i.e. What did you eat before drinking?, asses
your hangover, etc.). Subjects demand an event-based user interface.
• The pairing of the BACTrack VIO with the smartphone is surprisingly easy,
intuitive and fast. However, in order to take a BAC test there is a 20 second
waiting time until blowing is possible. Users reported that it was very bother-
some, as well as carrying it in the pocket as a key-chain.
• There was unanimity regarding that the floating button is clear and useful.
Nevertheless, it wasn’t clear how to remove drinks if subjects were mistaken
when reporting.
Moreover, the navigation was clear and showed the purpose of the app.
• Subjects demanded a monthly summary of their drinking events, including spent
money, consumed calories, standard alcohol units, number of drinks per type,
BAC measurements and hangover symptoms.
• A minority complained about not including an icon for introducing a consumed
cider or champagne.
• Some subjects believe that prompting the number of standard alcohol units was
not very relevant. This feature and other additional information could be added
as pop-up info when pressed a ’What is this?’ button or interrogation mark
icon, as suggested by subject 11.
• Subject 3 affirmed: ”I really feel that the app has given me a need that I did
not have before! I would really much like to continue to use the app and learn
where my limit is regarding hangover, and what type of alcohol I should drink
less of etc.”
• Random notifications containing alcohol related facts and healthy lifestyle ad-
vices which rise awareness in alcohol consumption, was definitely a feature that
subjects desired for a future version of DropIt.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
The results obtained in this master thesis will be interpreted and discussed in this
chapter. A more in-depth explanation of the methodology will be provided, due to a
comparison with other systems.
7.1
Data Analysis
The analysis carried out about the data collected from the app conveyed interesting
results, such as drinking patterns of subjects, like/dislike of types of drink, and con-
sequences of HED were easily detected.
Firstly, the number of drinks consumed per subject per day was analysed, see
Figure 6.1. It was noticed that most of the subjects had a weekend drinking pattern,
except a few that drank regularly during weekdays.
It is known that weekends are when people have more spare time and gathers to-
gether in social events. This fact supports the literature research on motives for the
young people to drink [32]; meaning that the recorded drinking patterns by the app
prove social motives to be the main reason for drinking. At a glance, it is possible to
notice that during the first half of the study there is fewer data points, than in the
second half. Moreover, notifications were implemented on May, 14th which perfectly
concurs with the increase on self-reporting drinks. Thus, it is reasonable to say that
notifications promote self-reporting.
The graph presenting BAC level measurements shows a large amount of 0.0 and
high BAC levels in the same day, see Figure 6.2. From this data 2 things can be
inferred; (1) the breathalyser is not extremely accurate, which causes false negatives,
and (2) once the user remembers to use the breathalyser, he/she enjoys to use it. (1)
could occur because of the use of Semiconductor Oxide sensors, instead of Fuel Cell
Sensor Technology which has a higher accuracy [62].
Regarding the type of drinking between men and women, differences can be de-
tected through the self-reporting of the app, see Figure 6.3. DropIt was capable of
exposing that men tend to drink much more beer than other drinks, while women
drink beer, wine and drinks in a more homogeneous manner.
==PAGE:70==
7.2 Usability
63
Figure 6.4 showed type of drinks users consumed most. Besides the knowledge
stated in chapter 6, the system provides the possibility to build profiles of specific
drink taste. For example, from the graph different types of drinkers were found: the
type who only drinks wine, the type who drinks every type of drink except shots, the
type that just drinks beer and shots, etc. Building profiles could help giving sugges-
tions in a future version of DropIt.
Figure 6.5 and Figure 6.6 analyse the symptoms of the subjects after drinking.
From this information conclusions could be drawn in regards of connection between
detailed consequence of drinking and type and amount of drinks. This is, subject
11 was the one who drinks the most within the heavy drinking episodes and it is
also one of the subjects, together with subject 8 who had the most severe symptom,
heart racing. Subject 13 felt ’thirsty’, ’tired’ and had a ’headache’ the same amount
of times, whether subject 12 and 4 felt ’tired’ and had a ’headache’, but was never
feeling ’thirsty’. This indicates that an identification of hangover type may be pos-
sible through DropIt. Nevertheless, in general the data tells that out of 9 hangover
symptoms, if the user goes through a HDE is more likely to experience 6 of them,
rather than just 3.
DropIt is capable of replicating real drinking behavioural patterns and registering
on people’s drinking in an unbiased way, proving the app to be a great tool for self-
reporting.
7.2
Usability
In accordance with James R. Lewis & Jeff Sauro [33], it was perceived that it is
becoming a common industrial goal to achieve a SUS of 80 as evidence of an above
average user experience. Thus, they stated that it seems like a reasonable benchmark
given that an 80 is a B in the Bangor et al. absolute grading scale [8] and an A- in
the Sauro-Lewis curved grading scale [33].
The usability score of ’DropIt’ was 76.67 which almost reached the benchmark
proposed. And looking into the specific items of the SUS questionnaire, it was no-
ticed a clear majority reported the app had the qualities: ’learnability’ and being
’effortless’.
Drink Less, AlcoDroid Alcohol Tracker, and the Alcohol Abuse Predictor are the
mobile applications reviewed in this thesis, however none of them had an evaluation
on usability or perceived usefulness. Hence it is difficult to compare and judge how
easy it was to use or how useful users thought the app was. Nevertheless DropIt
conducted a usability study and it exists knowledge on which features should be
improved and which satisfied the users’ needs.
Related to usability, it is also interesting to contemplate some objective data (see
Figure 7.1), which shows a wider overview of what occurred during the study aside
from what was described in this manuscript.
==PAGE:71==
7.3 Perceived Usefulness and Ease of Use
64
Figure 7.1: Installs during the study (4th May - 4th June)
The statistic board in Google Play Console 1 shows the number of installations of
the app over the period of the study.
In addition to the 15 subjects involved in the study, the application reached 38 addi-
tional users at halfway of the study and decreased to a total of 43 users by the end
of it.
7.3
Perceived Usefulness and Ease of Use
A more in-depth view tells that the app didn’t succeed at ’improving quality of life’
or ’including the features that the user expected’ according to the responses of the
UMACF questionnaire. Nevertheless, the 4 features that highest percentage of re-
spondents strongly agreed in were (from highest to lowest); ’learnability’, ’feeling of
skillfulness’, ’ease of use’, and ’usefulness’.
Regarding behavioural change towards excessive alcohol consumption, 53% agreed
and 26% strongly agreed that the app could help reduce hazardous and harmful
drinking.
7.4
Relation between Feedback - Qualitative
Questionnaires
The interpreted results from the questionnaires are analog to the obtained feedback
from calls and short ’think-aloud’ sessions with subjects.
1Google Play Console: Software through which the mobile app was published and distributed
==PAGE:72==
7.4 Relation between Feedback - Qualitative Questionnaires
65
7.4.1
Unfavorable analysis
Subjects stated missing features in the app; such as the possibility of including drinks
the next day to the drinking event, a chart of BAC measurements, or monthly sum-
mary of drinking patterns; which perfectly correlates with the low score on adequate
feature expectancy from the UMACF questionnaire.
• The first mentioned missing feature, ’Self-reporting drinks from previous days’,
raises a discussion with various pros and cons, that needs to be considered.
There are 3 types of self-reporting; ’Interval-contingent recording’, ’Signal-contingent’
and ’Event-contingent’. The developed system promotes signal-contingent self-
reporting. Meaning that the user is sent a notification as a reminder to report
the drinks of that day. According to L.Wheeler & H.Reis the signal-contingent
and event-contingent methods (user is instructed at the beginning of the study
to report whenever a certain event occurs) require recording that is very close in
time to the event, reducing the subjects’ likelihood of forgetting or reappraisal
[68].
This theory is contradictory to what the user demands, and it derives in a us-
ability issue which relies on how pleasant is the app to use. Nonetheless, as
stated in the Developer’s Guide to Building User-Friendly Applications from
Travis Lowdermilk, users are not designers, neither always right [65]. Therefore,
it exists a need to continue asking users the reasons for this demand and the
conclusion was that they do not want to stop their social activity to report their
drinking. Hence, this issue could be the cause for including a social focus in the
system or to find less intrusive ways of self-reporting.
• Subjects believed that the app is lacking a BAC level chart showing progress,
as well as BAC measurements in the summary of an event in the calendar. The
essence of this complaint relies on 2 BCTs; the demand for ’feedback on perfor-
mance’ and ’self-monitoring’.
Control Theory [13] posits that the BCTs; ’goal-setting’, ’feedback/self-monitoring’,
’action planning’, and ’goal review’ have synergistic effects. Interventions using
a group of these techniques have been found to be more effective than interven-
tions that used only one, which is what the system ’DropIt’ intends to include
[15]. Blowing into the breathalyser, which corresponds to the ’self-monitoring’
BCT, was observed to be really engaging for the user and probably the trigger
for the demand on a more thorough ’feedback on performance’. Indeed, Su-
san Michie concludes in one of her articles that promoting self-monitoring is
associated with improved out- comes in brief interventions [42].
• The BCTs ’Behaviour substitution’ 2, ’Problem solving’ 3, and ’Credible source’
2Behaviour substitution:
Prompt substitution of the unwanted behaviour with a wanted or
neutral behaviour.
3Problem solving: Analyze, or prompt the person to analyze, factors influencing the behavior
==PAGE:73==
7.4 Relation between Feedback - Qualitative Questionnaires
66
4 were associated with great alcohol reduction [19, 44].
Fortuitously some subjects of the study claimed that there was a lack of med-
ical advice on healthy drinking (’Credible source’) and in fact, albeit it was
mentioned in the UCD workshop too, the BCT wasn’t included in the system.
The system was implemented without this BCT due to the priority given to
the included BCTs; ’self-monitoring’, ’self-reporting’, ’goal-setting’, and ’feed-
back on performance’, including ’biofeedback’. Furthermore, as C.Garnett et al.
affirmed the total number of BCTs present in an intervention was not signifi-
cantly associated with reduced consumption [19], meaning that a big amount of
BCTs does not imply a success in alcohol consumption reduction. However, the
’Credible source’ BCT was proved to be associated with a reduction of alcohol
intake, hence it might need to be included in the mobile app.
• The BCT ’goal-setting’ was barely used by the users. As they stated, this was
because they wanted to have as a limit the recommended standard alcohol units
by the Danish Health Board (7 for men and 14 for women) [61] or they did not
want to reduce their alcohol consumption, just track it. Baring in mind the UX
part, the functionality of changing the max. standard units weren’t sufficiently
visible and was inconsistent. The inconsistency arises from presenting this BCT
inside of the gauge, while the gauge it’s showing self-performance. Moreover,
on the left upper corner the weekly goal in a number of std. units it’s presented.
Doubtless, the option to edit that goal should appear next to it, see Figure 7.2.
Figure 7.2: ’Goal-setting’ BCT
and generate or select strategies that include overcoming barriers and/or increasing facilitators.
4Credible source: Present verbal or visual communication from a credible source in favour of or
against the behaviour.
==PAGE:74==
7.5 Other systems
67
7.4.2
Favorable analysis
On the other hand, from the subjects’ feedback, it is noticed that there are elements
corresponding to the features that scored high on the UMACF questionnaire. The
features that had the highest percentage of agreement in the ’Perceived Ease of Use’
(EE) were; ’learnability’, ’feeling of skillfulness’, and ’ease of use’ and the correspond-
ing elements are:
• The gauge visualisation was clear and expressed where was the limit that
shouldn’t be exceeded. Although, usability wise is not the most appropriate be-
cause of the little information given compared to the pixels used in the screen.
However, the goal in the ’Overview’ tab is to enhance the relevance of this
visualisation, and not to collapse the view with excessive information.
• The use of tabs made the navigation fast and simple. Subjects affirmed that
the app looked organised, hence it was easy to understand what the user is
expected to do.
• The floating button got really good feedback from the user, being the simplest
and easiest feature to use from the app.
• Subjects strongly believed that the BACTrack VIO was easy to connect with
the app and easy to use and understand the results in the app. A subject said:
”The feature of giving extra information on the BAC level (i.e. 0.05 - Reduced
inhibitions. You cannot drive) it’s really useful!”
Regarding ’Perceived Usefulness’ (HE), the feature the highest percentage of sub-
jects agreed on was ’usefulness’, in general. The corresponding elements that were
thought to trigger this result were firstly, while it may appear redundant, the floating
button and secondly the calendar.
Some users stated that, in a long-term usage, would be interesting and useful to
learn how to drink in a healthier manner from previous days knowledge. Gazing at
the summary of drinking events, the user can learn what to eat before drinking, and
consequently what to drink, in order not to have a horrible hangover.
7.5
Other systems
In Table 2.2 in Chapter 2 it is shown a comparison of some features from the selected
DBCIs; Drink Less app, Alcodroid Alcohol Tracker, The Alcohol Abuse Predictor,
and Drinkaware. In Table 7.1 DropIt is added and compared to the related work.
DropIt included less BCT than the other systems. We chose to focus on (1) an in-
frequent used BCTs with evidence on effectiveness (’Self-monitoring and biofeedback’
= ’BAC Calculation’) and on (2) a very frequently used one (’Self-reporting and
feedback on performance’ = ’Hangover report’) that satisfied users from the UCD,
==PAGE:75==
7.6 Limitations
68
as stated by C.Garnett et al. [19], and keep the number of other BCT low. It is
found that a large amount of BCTs increases the complexity and reduced the overall
usability, and therefore favourable to keep at a low level [19].
DropIt included the support of an external BAC measurement device, which none
of the others did. The overall feedback from the device was good. Several users stated
that - ”The breathalyser is so easy to use. Plus, I like the feedback on the BAC level”.
Furthermore, DropIt manage to achieve a usability of B, which is above average [33].
Unfortunately, the other systems did not report on the usability using SUS.
System
DropIt
Drink Less [20]
AlcoDroid
Al-
cohol
Tracker
[15]
The
Alcohol
Abuse Predic-
tor [15]
Drinkaware [3]
Number
of
BCTs
4
5
7
13
17
Available
platforms
Android
iOS
Android
Android
Android / iOS
Score:
Google
Play
Store
/ iTunes
4.3 / -
- / 3.9
4.3 / -
3.7 / -
4 /2.5
No.
of rat-
ings
7 / -
- / 36
5,169 / -
3 / -
1,870 / 59
BAC Calcu-
lation
Yes, accurate
No
Yes, not accurate
No
No
Hangover
report
Yes
No
-
instead
Mood, Productiv-
ity,
Clarity
and
Sleep
No
No
No
Result
B
in
usabil-
ity.
High
level of agree-
ment
in
’learnability’,
’skillfulness’,
’ease of use’,
and
’useful-
ness’
Help reduce haz-
ardous and harm-
ful drinking
Popular
apps
in
the
market
for
reducing
alcohol
consumption
us-
ing BCTs
Evidence
on
reducing
ex-
cessive
alco-
hol consump-
tion
Useful
behaviour
change
tool
in
individuals
who
are already moti-
vated
Table 7.1: DropIt comparison to other systems
7.6
Limitations
There are several points in the development and evaluation of DropIt and the project,
that raises some concerns and needs to be addressed:
• As described in the Recruitment section 5.1, the subjects which collaborated
in the study belong to a close network of the study coordinator and therefore,
awareness should be raised on the positive bias of results.
• During the study, the app gave users the control of sending their data. This
factor limits the recruited amount of subjects, as well as the gathered amount
of data per subject. Although improved interpretations could have been drawn
from a greater amount of data, this limitation is not thought to have caused a
high impact on the quality of the data.
==PAGE:76==
7.6 Limitations
69
• Hardware resources were limited, meaning that only 4 breathalysers were pur-
chased. This fact derives from the lack of knowledge regarding the number of
subjects that would collaborate in the study, in combination with economic limi-
tations. Its consequence was that only 4 out of 15 subjects could fully experience
the usage of DropIt, and couldn’t report on it.
• Data could have been biased by only receiving data from people that actually
wanted to share their data. Possibly people that did not drink that much during
weekends, was unwilling to share the data due to the fear of being judged as
’Boring/anti-social’. The culture in the western world, especially Denmark, is
centred around alcohol.
If people do not drink at social events, they could
receive comments on the reason for it: ’Are you pregnant, ’What’s the matter,
are you okay?’. In the same way, sharing data showing low alcohol activity
could bring up the same fear [7].
• Not developing the app for the operative system iOS, made the study be more
reduced in the number of subjects and miss some feedback from users that are
accustomed to other usability features.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
The data analysis showed that it is possible to understand and learn an individual’s
drinking pattern. These findings could be used in future BCTs; i.e., using machine
learning methods to predict future drinking patterns, thus use the BCT ’Action plan-
ning’ with a personalised knowledge of the user. In this way, the user would be guided
towards a non-harmful alcohol consumption.
Additionally, the results from the questionnaires together with the feedback tell
that, in general terms, the mobile application had an above average usability and
subjects agreed in the existence of perceived ease of use and usefulness.
With the aim to improve and finalise an effective technological system, that at the
same time satisfies the users’ needs, the UC design process could be more focused on
design details and the user.
For instance, instead of analysing the general design and functionality of 3 apps
related to BC in alcohol consumption, the performed workshop could have guide par-
ticipants into analysing BCTs. Each of the apps that were presented in the workshop
had a certain number of BCTs and those could have been introduced to the partici-
pants in order to get more BC oriented opinions.
Furthermore, when targeting the usability focus area, participants could have been
asked to open/install popular apps (i.e. Facebook) and analyse features such as; nav-
igation, selection, reporting, adding, deleting, etc.
Moreover, self-monitoring could also be modified to be done in an automatised
way. The use of wearables, such as BACTrack Skyn 1 and drunk user interfaces [37]
to measure BAC level are emerging, which brings to light new ways of interaction
with technology for BC. These methods will facilitate the self-recording, however
simultaneously - Will they make the user less aware of their drinking, and reduce the
effectiveness of BCIs compared to manually self-recording?
To sum up, automatic sensing might facilitate BCIs, however gathering a greater
knowledge in behavioural change and good usability (i.e. The SUPR-Qm to measure
usability[58]), in combination with UCD iterative processes would derive in imple-
menting an effective DBCI for excessive alcohol intake.
1https://www.bactrack.com/pages/bactrack-skyn-wearable-alcohol-monitor
==PAGE:78==
APPENDIX A
Acronyms
BC Behavioural Change
BCI Behavioural Change Intervention
BCT Behavioural Change Technique
UCD User Centered Ddesign
BAC Blood Alcohol Content
AUDIT Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test
SUS System Usability Scale
UMACF Unified Methodology for Assessment of Clinical Feasibility
HE Health Expectancy
EE Effort Expectancy
SDK Software Development Kit
TAS Transdermal Alcohol Sensor
CACHET Copenhagen Center for Health Technology
CAM Continuous Alcohol Monitoring
WHO World Health Organization
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX B
Documents
In the Appendix B documents regarding the design process and implementation of
the system will be found.
B.1
User Centered Design
B.1.1
Personas and Scenarios
DESIGN BASICS
7 FEBRUARY 2018
==PAGE:80==
USER PERSONAS
LAURA JENSEN
17, Jutland
Bachelor in Environmental 
Management
Frustrations
•
Family problems
•
Drink to mitigate negative 
emotions
Goals
•
Be aware of the amount 
of alcohol drunk over a 
period of time (progress)
JACOB DAHL
19, Fyn
Bachelor in Chemical 
Engineering
Frustrations
•
Lack of close relationships
•
Drink to obtain social 
rewards
Goals
•
Get reasons to stop 
drinking more than a 
certain amount (know the 
consequences)
Normally lonely drinkers
==PAGE:81==
USER PERSONAS
ANDERS BERG
21, Copenhagen
Master in Aquatic Science 
and Technology
Frustrations
• Introvert
• Drink to avoid social 
rejection
Goals
• Set up discrete alarms to 
know when you are over 
a certain limit
MARIE LARSEN
23, Copenhagen
Master in Business Management
Frustrations
• Not achieving to be the 
most popular friend
• Drink to enhance positive 
mood
Goals
• Stay motivated to 
reduce my alcohol intake
==PAGE:82==
USER STORIES
•
As a person that tries to solve her personal problems with alcohol, Laura needs to realise the amount of 
alcohol she is drinking over time
•
As a person who drinks to get social rewards (e.g. hug from friends, smiles, etc.), Jacob needs a tool that 
while it keeps him in a social environment, also reduces his binge episodes by giving him some knowledge 
about the consequences
•
As a person who drinks to avoid social rejection, Anders needs a tool that discretely let him know when 
he is over his limitations.
•
As a person who drinks to enhance positive mood, Marie needs a technologic tool that keeps her 
motivated to reduce her binge episodes
==PAGE:83==
SCENARIOS
1st SCENARIO
Is Friday, Jacob is meeting with his friends after class for some beers. 
He wants to be social/polite and he wants to easy communicate, so he 
drinks to comply with others and to get peer acceptance. He is going to 
end up drinking too much, way above the recommended by the Danish 
system. 
Because he is wearing a BAC tracker connected to a mobile app, he can 
be informed objectively about his BAC along the evening, maybe he 
now he decides to stop drinking earlier or take his drinks more 
separately over the time.
==PAGE:84==
SCENARIOS
2nd SCENARIO
Anders has been invited to a birthday party this weekend. He just 
knows 2 people out of 30. He wants the rest to accept him, meaning 
avoiding social rejection. In order to achieve this, he drinks without any 
limits, with the risk of going through an excessive alcohol intake.
But because he has a wearable tracking his alcohol content in blood 
and he previously set up some limitations, now he knows when is too 
much.
==PAGE:85==
SCENARIOS
3rd
SCENARIO
Marie loves music festivals. They usually last for days, long days. She is 
very active, doesn’t like to miss a concert and she loves to give good 
vibes to the group. Unfortunately, in order to keep this enthusiastic 
mood she usually goes through binge episodes.
However, this year she is using an alcohol tracker which sends the data 
to an app. In this app she can see her BAC along the day and she can 
set up goals (e.g. Daily max nr. of beers = 3). This goals keep her 
motivated and engaged to reduce her alcohol intake and still have a 
nice time during Roskilde Festival.
==PAGE:86==
RECOMMENDED ALCOHOL INTAKE (DENMARK)
Do not exceed 5 drinks (60g) on one occasion.
Low risk consumption: below 14 units/week for men and 7 units /week for women
High risk consumption: above 14 units/week for men and 7 units /week for women
No alcohol is safe for your health. Do not drink alcohol for the sake of your health.
If you are elderly, be especially careful with alcohol.
Children and young people under 16 should not drink alcohol. Young people between 16 and 18 
years should drink as little as possible and stop before 5 drinks on the same occasion.
Reference: http://www.iard.org/policy-tables/drinking-guidelines-general-population/ [8]
==PAGE:87==
B.1 User Centered Design
80
==PAGE:88==
B.1 User Centered Design
81
B.1.2
Workshop Plan
User Centered Design
Workshop
25 February 2018
1
Workshop Plan
1.1
Introduction
1. Participants’ Main Goal of Workshop: Prototype 3/4 screens of an app
with the aim of reduce alcohol consumption in young people
2. My Main Goal of Workshop
(a) Decide on the BCTs to use in the app (the ones that users ﬁnd more
eﬀective)
(b) Decide on the best features UX wise of an app
3. Agenda
(a) Meet your partner
(b) Debate
(c) App Rating
(d) Break
(e) App analysis
(f) Break
(g) Prototyping
1.2
Deﬁnition of Activities
Meet your partner
1. Material: 10 sheets
2. How to: Fold a paper on half. Write on the upper part Name, Age, Gender
and an embarrassing fact that could had happened to the person to your
right. On the lower part write the same information about yourself. One
by one, say out loud what you wrote about the one to your right. Then
that person responds with the real information.
1
==PAGE:89==
Debate
1. Material: 10 templates with 3 questions
2. Grab a piece of paper and write your answer to: Do you like drinking?
Why? (Give 3 reasons)
3. Open question: What makes you buy the next drink? (Write your main
reason)
4. Open question: In which situation usually happens for you? (Write down
most typical
App rating
1. Material: 3 squared tiny pieces of paper per person, 2 x printed screenshots
of 4 apps (The Alcodroid, The Alcohol Predictor, Drink Less, Leaf)
2. Grab a piece of paper and write your answer to: Do you like drinking?
Why? (Give 3 reasons)
3. Open question: What makes you buy the next drink? (Write your main
reason)
4. Open question: In which situation usually happens for you? (Write down
the most typical)
Break
App analysis
1. Material: 2 x printed screenshots of 4 apps (The Alcodroid, The Alcohol
Predictor, Drink Less, Leaf)
2. 2 groups
3. Write underneath each screenshot which features you like and you don’t
Break
Prototyping
1. Material: 2 x 5 printed templates of mobile phone frames)
2. 2 groups
3. Taking into account what you have written in the previous ”App analysis”
section and with the help of your imagination, design the main screenshots
of an app that motivates users to reduce alcohol consumption.
2
==PAGE:90==
B.1 User Centered Design
83
==PAGE:91==
B.1 User Centered Design
84
B.1.3
Workshop: Task 1 - Debate
==PAGE:92==
B.1 User Centered Design
85
B.1.4
Workshop: Task 2 - App rating and analysis
==PAGE:93==
==PAGE:94==
==PAGE:95==
B.1 User Centered Design
88
==PAGE:96==
B.1 User Centered Design
89
B.1.5
Workshop: Task 3 - Prototyping
B.1.5.1
Prototype Group 1
==PAGE:97==
==PAGE:98==
==PAGE:99==
==PAGE:100==
B.1 User Centered Design
93
==PAGE:101==
B.1 User Centered Design
94
B.1.5.2
Prototype Group 2
==PAGE:102==
==PAGE:103==
==PAGE:104==
==PAGE:105==
B.2 Feedback from Prototype in Marvel
98
B.2
Feedback from Prototype in Marvel
In order to get feedback from the prototype done in Marvel, a questionnaire was
built and published in the following link: https://goo.gl/forms/zvCQxOy1lcCF9Iko2
==PAGE:106==
B.2 Feedback from Prototype in Marvel
99
FEEDBACK ON PROTOTYPE: POP by Marvel 
 
14 people giving feedback 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:107==
B.2 Feedback from Prototype in Marvel
100
==PAGE:108==
Design 
1. I don’t like that… 
 
A more in-depth answer to "does it seem simple to use" I think it is fairly simple when you are sober 
while I think that there is both too much information and that the buttons are too small for when your 
motorical skills are effected. (but that might be due to it being first prototype) 
I am a bit insecure what the "add drink" buttons represents (the shot class, is it champage or wine 
class...). Could be nice with a small text underneath maybe or maybe somehow indicated in the main 
plot... 
 
I dont like that the app is focused on a weekly basis. I am more focused on my drinking events 
(second part of main screen), I want to reduce drinking on daily basis when I am out etc. so I want 
that main plot to show the drinking event.  
 
I cant add a picture of my ugly face the next day together with the symptom list.  
 
I cant see what the 0.01/123 kcal/25 kr means.. put a label so I know that 0.01 is my BAC.  
 
Cant really see the difference between being at 100% and being 125% (25% above).  
Sometimes it was a bit hard to read for me, maybe it would be better if you could scan it instead of 
photos. On the first screen I'd only show the circle and add an option to see more info on the other 
screen, I think it's a bit too much for one screen. When I click on a circle in scatter plot I understand 
that the chart is showing weekly consumption, but I don't get the monthly view - why is it there?  
 
Sea tan suave los trazos y poco vistosa y colorida 
 
Demasiados datos quizás en el círculo y al lado de las bebidas, aunque sí lo ponéis en tabla bien 
 
 
El diseño de la gráfica de puntos, me parece confusa 
No hay nada que me disguste especialmente 
 
 
2. I like that… 
 
I like the usage of graphical material to illustrate progress 
There is the simple circular bar with 70% filled red, and when it reaches 100% everything is filled.  
The nice way to input my drinking so fast.  
There is only to/few tap buttons. 
The next-day symptom icons 
Nice idea with scatterplot! In general I think the app is really cool and I'd definitely like to use it :)  
interfaz novedosa y amigable  
Original 
el diseño, los iconos son suficiente intuitivos para que no haga falta utilizar texto. 
==PAGE:109==
Puedas establecer objetivos, estaría bien si se pone (que no lo vi) automáticamente maximo legal 
para conducir una vez introduces el pais por ejemplo. En cuánto tiempo se te pasa, trucos o 
remedios para disminuir ... 
es muy intuitivo todo 
Amigable  
Se tenga que apuntar lo que se ha comido, pero me faltaría el cuándo. 
La pantalla principal tenga a la vista los datos mas importantes sin tener que ir a otra pantalla 
El boton del medio apetece apretarlo, la barra roja tambien esta chula 
 
FUNCTIONALITY 
1. I don’t like that… 
 
 
I cant send my data to my mail as a CSV file 
I cant see a graph for my drinking event, of my inputs. Based on my gender, age, and weight you 
could probably estimate what BAC I am currently on... 
.. and what next-day symptom I am probably going to have the next day if I continue. 
I cant add a name to the drinking event.  
I didn't fully understand the screen shown when I click on circle on the home screen. What are the 
units and what is the number that I have to choose? (Design) > Maybe consider showing icons 
instead of a list it would be nicer.  
 
 
 
 
 
No me queda claro si se puede poner un objetivo de reducción o de cantidad de alcohol por mes o 
algo así.  
También me costó entender exactamente qué significa la frase cuando clickeas en el ícono 
indicando que vas a tomar otro vaso... significa que si tomo otro vaso llegaría al 85% del tope de 
alcohol que yo especifiqué como límite? Por qué dice +1 drink? Abajo?  
No tenga opción de poner una alerta 
No entiendo muy bien el grafico de los circulos cada semana. Qué se supone que significan? 
respecto a qué tengo que comprar el tamaño del circulo? 
No me resulta intuituva la grafica de las estadisticas w1, w2, w3.. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:110==
 
2. I like that… 
 
the fact that you can set a goal for the night. 
I like the functionality of tracking my drinking, and see an overview of it. 
I like to see and re-collect my next-day symptoms 
Same as my answer for the designs.  
 
 
la aplicacion sea rápida y eficiente. 
 
 
 
Puedas ver la cantidad de alcohol de cada bebida ingerida 
Añadir nuevas consumiciones parece muy simple. Eso ayuda a que no te de pereza hacerlo 
Que te vaya indicando en terminos de distintas bebidas la cantidad que puedes ingerir 
 
EXTRA COMMENTS 
 
It would be nice if you could scan your bottle with your camera and it would know how much amount 
there is and percentage. For those who drink bottled beer.  
I would like some comparison to the average person of my age and gender. So start the app by 
asking some details about me. Then in the "my progress" I would have a feeling if im above average 
or below in alcohol consumption (weekly).  
Would be nice to show that main circular plot, as it is now, but with some indication of past 
experience, something like: "70% of max, last time you went to 70% this fast (0-70% within 1 hour) 
you ended with 180% and with following symptoms next day: tired, nausia... (with the cool icons). But 
of course in a simpler way.  
Would be nice with a "call a taxi" feature in my event area in the main screen. If you have the number, 
then just code that the phone calls that number if you press the button. So the app becomes a app-to-
go-to during drinking evenings. Which also means you could in a future scenario add: "need a friend 
to drink with" and it gives a list of your friends that are currently using DropIT and is registering above 
0% BAC.  
Cool app good job ; )  
 
 
Muy buena idea e intención para concienciar a la gente del abuso en el cosumo del alcohol. 
 
solo falta un breathalizer! ;) 
==PAGE:111==
Cuál es el ícono de la aplicación? No lo encuentro... 
Me gusta la dinámica de la app, creo que sería buena idea poner un tab de "tu historia" para recordar 
aquellos días con mayor resaca y ver lo que tomaste. Todo el mundo querrá evitar 100% llegar al 
mismo punto. 
A ver voy a intentar ir por partes y comentar todo lo que pueda. En cuanto a la pantalla principal esta 
bastante bien. La informacion principal esta ahi y es facil de ver. Añadir nuevas consumiciones es 
facil tambien. Lo unico de lo que no estoy seguro es de la parte de añadir comidas, no se como de 
importante es pero si es importante igual lo ponia debajo de la grafica? si es algo extra esta bien ahi.  
En la pantalla que sale al darle a la grafica circular, no pillo lo de BAC con el menu desplegable, que 
se supone que estoy eligiendo ahi? nivel de alcohol maximo para un evento? como se relaciona eso 
con la grafica de la pantalla principal? 
Luego en my progress, como ya te he dicho la grafica de los circulitos no la entiendo muy bien pero 
lo demas esta guay. El calendario no se por que tiene solo un dia verde y uno rojo, supongo que la 
idea es que los dias ok sean todos verdes y los que te pasas rojos no? 
- I'd move drinking history in a third tab together with overview and my progress Frontpage may have a bit too 
much info.  
- I don't know what BAC stands for  
- Íf meal is free text, include weight. If meals are mapped towards a database make them search- and selectable 
similar to your dropdown 
- my first thought on the name is a rapper/r&b person dropping a microphone 
 
==PAGE:112==
B.2 Feedback from Prototype in Marvel
105
==PAGE:113==
B.3 Recruitment
106
B.3
Recruitment
Download “DropIt – DTU”  
to track your alcohol consumption 
 
 
 
Go to PlayStore, type “DropIt – DTU” and download the app (Only available for 
Android users) 
 
Enter some basic personal data and off you go! 
 
Add your drinks with the big plus yellow button 
 
The Breath & Learn tab only works with an specific breathalyser… but you can still use 
the other features of the app 
 
 
 
 
Developed by Andrea Quemada a DTU Master student 
==PAGE:114==
B.4 DropIt
107
B.4
DropIt
This section provides a link to the mobile application in the Google Play Store:
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.
bactrack.backtrack_mobile.bactrackandroidsdkdemo&hl=
en_US
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX C
Data
Appendix C will mainly contain documents relevant to the data used in the Mobile
Application.
==PAGE:116==
C Data
109
==PAGE:117==
C.1 Standard Alcohol Units, Calories and Approximate Krones
110
C.1
Standard Alcohol Units, Calories and Approximate
Krones
  
Type of Drink 
Standard Units 
Calories 
Approximate krone 
Tuborg grön: 33 cl (4.6 
% alc.) 
1.012 
37 
40 
Glass of wine: 17.5 cl 
(12 % alc.) 
1.4 
160 
50 
Spirit dark:  2.5 cl (40 
% alc.) 
0.6 
106 
100 
Shot: 2 cl (40 % alc.) 
0.5 
60 
30 
 
 
==PAGE:118==
APPENDIX D
Results
Appendix D contains documents relevant to the results of this project.
D.1
’DropIt’ - The App
This section contains the source code for the mobile application ’DropIt’, which was
uploaded to Github and can be found in the following link:
https://github.com/andreaquemada/DropIt
D.2
Data Analysis - Jupyter Notebook
The Jupyter Notebook was used as a tool to analyse the data collected from the
mobile application. The source code for the analysis of the data can be found in the
following link to the Github website:
https://github.com/andreaquemada/DropIt/tree/master/Results
==PAGE:119==
D.2 Data Analysis - Jupyter Notebook
112
==PAGE:120==
D.3 System Usability Scale Scores
113
D.3
System Usability Scale Scores
Columna1
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10
Q1
2
3
4
3
4
5
4
3
4
3
Q2
1
2
1
1
1
3
1
2
1
1
Q3
5
4
4
4
5
2
4
4
4
5
Q4
1
1
1
1
1
3
1
1
1
1
Q5
4
3
5
5
4
4
3
5
3
4
Q6
1
1
2
1
1
3
1
2
2
2
Q7
5
5
5
5
5
3
5
4
5
5
Q8
1
4
3
1
2
4
4
3
1
1
Q9
5
3
5
4
5
3
4
4
4
5
Q10
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
Score
90
72,5
85
90
92,5
55
80
77,5
82,5
90
Total Score
==PAGE:121==
S11
S12
S13
S14
S15
4
5
2
2
4
3
2
3
2
2
4
4
1
4
4
1
1
4
1
3
5
4
2
4
4
1
2
4
1
2
4
4
1
3
4
1
2
4
3
2
5
4
2
3
4
1
1
3
3
1
87,5
82,5
25
65
75
76,67
==PAGE:122==
D.3 System Usability Scale Scores
115
==PAGE:123==
D.4 UMACF questionnaire’s scores
116
D.4
UMACF questionnaire’s scores
Type
Question
Strongly Disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Strongly Agree
Total
Avg.
HE1
Usefulness
3
5
7
64
12,8
HE2
Adherence
3
3
3
6
57
11,4
HE3
Behaviour
3
8
4
61
12,2
HE4
Health
1
11
3
62
12,4
HE5
Efficiency
1
3
7
4
59
11,8
HE6
Productivity
3
2
6
4
56
11,2
HE7
Quality
4
5
4
2
49
9,8
HE8
Safety
2
9
4
62
12,4
EE1
Usability
1
4
5
5
59
11,8
EE2
Understandable
1
1
7
5
58
11,6
EE3
Learning
1
5
9
67
13,4
EE4
Easy
1
6
8
65
13
EE5
Skillful
2
2
2
9
63
12,6
EE6
Information
1
1
4
3
6
57
11,4
EE7
Interface
1
3
7
4
59
11,8
EE8
Pleasure
1
3
7
4
59
11,8
EE9
Features
3
7
5
47
9,4
SI1
Medical personal
6
1
4
3
1
37
7,4
SI2
Family
6
1
2
3
3
41
8,2
SI3
Peers
6
1
2
5
1
39
7,8
SI4
Country
5
2
5
3
36
7,2
FC1
Resources
1
14
74
14,8
FC2
Knowledge
4
11
71
14,2
FC3
Assistance
6
5
4
58
11,6
BI1
Intention
1
2
5
4
3
51
10,2
BI2
Prediction
2
2
6
2
3
47
9,4
BI3
Planning
1
3
3
5
3
51
10,2
Scores
==PAGE:124==
Bibliography
[1]
Gerald Albaum. “The Likert scale revisited : An alternate version”. In: Journal
of the Market Research Society 331.2 (1997), pp. 1–12. issn: 00253618. doi:
DOI:. url: http://www.wedb.net/download/quanti/escalas/albaum_
(1997).pdf.
[2]
J P Allen et al. “A review of research on the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification
Test (AUDIT)”. In: Alcohol Clin Exp Res 21.4 (1997), pp. 613–619. issn: 0145-
6008. doi: 00000374-199706000-00008[pii].
[3]
Sophie Attwood et al. “Using a mobile health application to reduce alcohol
consumption: a mixed-methods evaluation of the drinkaware track & calculate
units application”. In: BMC Public Health 17.1 (2017), pp. 1–21. issn: 14712458.
doi: 10.1186/s12889-017-4358-9.
[4]
Kate B Carey and John Hustad. Methods for Determining Blood Alcohol Con-
centration: Current and Retrospective. 2005.
[5]
Thomas F Babor and Frances K Del Boca. Treatment matching in alcoholism.
Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[6]
Thomas F Babor et al. “The alcohol use disorders identification test (AUDIT):
Guidelines for use in primary care”. In: World Health Organization, Department
of Mental Health and Substance Abuse (2001).
[7]
Ana I Balsa et al. “Alcohol use and popularity: Social payoffs from conforming
to peers’ behavior”. In: Journal of Research on Adolescence 21.3 (2011), pp. 559–
568.
[8]
Aaron Bangor, Philip T. Kortum, and James T. Miller. “An empirical evaluation
of the system usability scale”. In: International Journal of Human-Computer In-
teraction 24.6 (2008), pp. 574–594. issn: 10447318. doi: 10.1080/10447310802205776.
[9]
John Brooke. “SUS - A quick and dirty usability scale”. In: Usability evaluation
in industry 189.194 (1996), pp. 4–7. issn: 1097-0193. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20701.
url: http://hell.meiert.org/core/pdf/sus.pdf.
[10]
Tamara J. Brown et al. “Community pharmacy-delivered interventions for pub-
lic health priorities: A systematic review of interventions for alcohol reduction,
smoking cessation and weight management, including meta-analysis for smoking
cessation”. In: BMJ Open 6.2 (2016). issn: 20446055. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-
2015-009828.
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
118
[11]
Brad J Bushman. “Human Aggression While Under the Influence of Alcohol
and Other Drugs: An Integrative Research Review”. In: Current Directions
in Psychological Science 2.5 (1993), pp. 148–151. doi: 10.1111/1467-8721.
ep10768961. url: https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8721.ep10768961.
[12]
Don Cahalan. Problem drinkers. Jossey-Bass San Francisco, 1970.
[13]
Charles S. Carver and Michael F. Scheier. “Control theory: A useful conceptual
framework for personality-social, clinical, and health psychology”. In: Psycho-
logical Bulletin 92.1 (1982), pp. 111–135. issn: 00332909. doi: 10.1037/0033-
2909.92.1.111.
[14]
Alan Chamberlain et al. “Research in the Wild : Understanding ‘ In the Wild
’ Approaches to Design and Development”. In: Proceedings of the Designing
Interactive Systems Conference (2012), pp. 795–796. issn: 1450312101. doi: 10.
1145/2317956.2318078.
[15]
David Crane et al. “Behavior change techniques in popular alcohol reduction
apps: Content analysis”. In: Journal of Medical Internet Research 17.5 (2015).
issn: 14388871. doi: 10.2196/jmir.4060.
[16]
“Dansk Selskab for Almen Medicin i samarbejde med Sundhedsstyrelsen Spørg
til alkoholvaner”. In: (2010).
[17]
Fred Davis. “Perceived Usefulness , Perceived Ease of Use , and User Acceptance
of”. In: Management Information Systems Quarterly 13.3 (1998), pp. 319–340.
[18]
Distrito Federal and Quintana Roo. “Global Blood Alcohol Content ( BAC )
Level Limits for Driving Global Blood Alcohol Content ( BAC ) Level Limits
for Driving”. In: (), pp. 2–3.
[19]
Claire V Garnett et al. “Behavior Change Techniques Used in Digital Behav-
ior Change Interventions to Reduce Excessive Alcohol Consumption: A Meta-
regression”. In: Annals of Behavioral Medicine June (2018), pp. 530–543. issn:
0883-6612. doi: 10.1093/abm/kax029. url: https://academic.oup.com/
abm/advance-article/doi/10.1093/abm/kax029/4827558.
[20]
Claire Garnett et al. “Evaluating the effectiveness of a smartphone app to reduce
excessive alcohol consumption: Protocol for a factorial randomised control trial”.
In: BMC Public Health 16 (2016), pp. 1–10. issn: 14712458. doi: 10.1186/
s12889-016-3140-8. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12889-016-3140-
8.
[21]
Bridget F Grant and Deborah A Dawson. “Age of onset of drug use and its
association with DSM-IV drug abuse and dependence: results from the National
Longitudinal Alcohol Epidemiologic Survey”. In: Journal of substance abuse 10.2
(1998), pp. 163–173.
[22]
John Griffiths, John-paul Thain, and Jonas Kamber. “Mobile App BCT Coding
for the article ’Behavior change techniques in popular alcohol reduction apps:
Content analysis’”. In: ().
==PAGE:126==
Bibliography
119
[23]
Mag Aleksander Groth. Digital behavior. Elsevier Inc., 2015, pp. xi–xiv. doi:
10.1016/B978- 0- 12- 802690- 8/00014- 1. url: https://ac.els- cdn.
com/B9780128026908000141/3- s2.0- B9780128026908000141- main.pdf?
_tid = 8e22e390 - d058 - 11e7 - 8def - 00000aacb35f & acdnat = 1511446622 _
86275f5409c3f5a35fc6cf05e7ea0ddd % 0Ahttp : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 /
B978-0-12-802690-8/00014-1.
[24]
Martin W Hahn et al. “Polynucleobacter acidiphobus sp. nov., a representa-
tive of an abundant group of planktonic freshwater bacteria”. In: International
journal of systematic and evolutionary microbiology 61.4 (2011), pp. 788–794.
[25]
Charles H Halsted et al. “Trans-HHS Workshop : Diet , DNA Methylation
Processes and Health Metabolic Interactions of Alcohol and Folate 1 , 2”. In:
The Journal of Nutrition 132.June (2002), pp. 2367–2372.
[26]
Richard M Heiberger and Naomi B Robbins. “Design of diverging stacked bar
charts for likert scales and other applications”. In: Journal of Statistical Software
57.5 (2014), pp. 1–32. issn: 1548-7660. doi: 10.18637/jss.v057.i05.
[27]
Ralph W Hingson and Wenxing Zha. “Age of drinking onset, alcohol use disor-
ders, frequent heavy drinking, and unintentionally injuring oneself and others
after drinking”. In: Pediatrics 123.6 (2009), pp. 1477–1484.
[28]
Liselotte Højgaard. “The potential in research across institutions and recom-
mendations from Growth Team for Life Science”. In: ().
[29]
Yedy Israel. “Cellular effects of alcohol: A review.” In: Quarterly journal of
studies on alcohol (1970).
[30]
Barry T Jones, Will Corbin, and Kim Fromme. “Conceptualizing Addiction:
A Review of Expectancy Theory and Alcohol Consumption”. In: Addiction
96.February 2000 (2001), pp. 57–72. issn: 0965-2140. doi: 10.1080/09652140020016969.
[31]
F S Eileen Kaner et al. “Effectiveness of brief alcohol interventions in primary
care populations”. In: Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 4 (2009). doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD004148.pub3.www.cochranelibrary.com. url: http:
//ovidsp.ovid.com/ovidweb.cgi?T=JS&CSC=Y&NEWS=N&PAGE=fulltext&
D=coch&AN=00075320-100000000-03130%5Cnhttp://sfx4-cons.obvsg.at:
3210/sfxmuw/?sid=OVID:cochdb&id=pmid:&id=doi:&issn=&isbn=&volume=
&issue=4&spage=&pages=&date=2009&title=Cochrane+Database+of.
[32]
Emmanuel Kuntsche et al. “Why do young people drink? A review of drink-
ing motives”. In: Clinical Psychology Review 25.7 (2005), pp. 841–861. issn:
02727358. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2005.06.002.
[33]
James R Lewis and Jeff Sauro. “Item Benchmarks for the System Usability
Scale”. In: Journal of Usability Studies 13.3 (2018), pp. 158–167. url: http:
/ / uxpajournal . org / wp - content / uploads / sites / 8 / pdf / JUS _ Lewis _
May2018.pdf.
[34]
R Likert. “A technique for the measurement of attitudes.” In: Archives of Psy-
chology 22 140 (1932), p. 55.
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
120
[35]
Martin Maguire and Nigel Bevan. “User Requirements Analysis: A Review of
Supporting Methods”. In: IFIP World Computer Congress (2002), pp. 133–148.
[36]
K Mäkelä and H Mustonen. “Relationships of drinking behaviour, gender and
age with reported negative and positive experiences related to drinking.” In:
Addiction (Abingdon, England) 95.July 1998 (2000), pp. 727–736. issn: 0965-
2140. doi: 10.1046/j.1360-0443.2000.9557278.x.
[37]
Alex Mariakakis et al. “Drunk User Interfaces : Determining Blood Alcohol
Level through Everyday Smartphone Tasks”. In: Proceedings of the 2018 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’18. New York, NY,
USA: ACM, 2018, pp. 1–13. isbn: 978-1-4503-5620-6. doi: 10.1145/3173574.
3173808. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3173574.3173808.
[38]
Paul R. Marques and A. Scott McKnight. Evaluating transdermal alcohol mea-
suring devices. November. 2007. isbn: 3017552799. url: www.nhtsa.gov.
[39]
Michael S. Matell and J. Jacoby. “Is there an optimal number of alternatives
for Likert scale items?” In: Educational and Psychological Measurement 31.3
(1971), pp. 657–674. issn: 0013-1644. doi: 10.1177/001316447103100307. url:
http://epm.sagepub.com/cgi/doi/10.1177/001316447103100307.
[40]
Hugh E. McLoone et al. “User-centered design and evaluation of a next gener-
ation fixed-split ergonomic keyboard”. In: Work 37.4 (2010), pp. 445–456. issn:
10519815. doi: 10.3233/WOR-2010-1109.
[41]
Susan Michie, Lou Atkins, and Robert West. “The behaviour change wheel: a
guide to designing interventions”. In: Needed: physician leaders 26 (2014), p. 146.
[42]
Susan Michie et al. “Identification of behaviour change techniques to reduce
excessive alcohol consumption”. In: Addiction 107.8 (2012), pp. 1431–1440. issn:
09652140. doi: 10.1111/j.1360-0443.2012.03845.x.
[43]
Susan Michie et al. “Strengthening evaluation and implementation by specifying
components of behaviour change interventions: A study protocol”. In: Implemen-
tation Science 6.1 (2011), pp. 1–8. issn: 17485908. doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-
6-10.
[44]
Susan Michie et al. “The behavior change technique taxonomy (v1) of 93 hi-
erarchically clustered techniques: Building an international consensus for the
reporting of behavior change interventions”. In: Annals of Behavioral Medicine
46.1 (2013), pp. 81–95. issn: 08836612. doi: 10.1007/s12160-013-9486-6.
[45]
NIAAA-SAMHSA. “Alcohol Overdose: The Dangers of Drinking Too Much”. In:
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (2015).
[46]
Jakob Nielsen. “Usability engineering at a discount”. In: Proceedings of the
third international conference on human-computer interaction on Designing and
using human-computer interfaces and knowledge based systems (2nd Ed.) New
York, NY, USA: Elsevier Science Inc., 1989, pp. 394–401. isbn: 0-444-88078-X.
url: http://www.nngroup.com/articles/discount-usability-20-years/.
==PAGE:128==
Bibliography
121
[47]
Monica Olsen and Mary Yates. “The facilitative leader: group decision making”.
In: The Official Magazine of the Canadian Society of Physician Leaders 2.1
(2015), pp. 14–17.
[48]
Norman P., Bennett P., and Lewis H. “Understanding binge drinking among
young people: An application of the Theory of Planned Behaviour”. In: Health
Education Research 13.2 (1998), pp. 163–169. url: http : / / www . scopus .
com/inward/record.url?eid=2-s2.0-0031777355&partnerID=40&md5=
0ba0485fa78324bec4b264df44b2c39e.
[49]
Hilde Pape, Ingeborg Rossow, and Geir Scott Brunborg. “Adolescents drink
less: How, who and why? A review of the recent research literature”. In: Drug
and Alcohol Review 37.November 2017 (2018), pp. 98–114. issn: 14653362. doi:
10.1111/dar.12695.
[50]
Albert Rabin, N E D Papania, and Allan M C Micrael. “Some Effects of Alcohol
in Rorscharch Performance”. In: 1 (), pp. 1–4.
[51]
Jürgen Rehm et al. “The relation between different dimensions of alcohol con-
sumption and burden of disease: an overview”. In: addiction 105.5 (2010), pp. 817–
843.
[52]
Jürgen Rehm et al. “The relationship between different dimensions of alcohol
use and the burden of disease—an update”. In: Addiction 112.6 (2017), pp. 968–
1001. issn: 13600443. doi: 10.1111/add.13757.
[53]
Naomi B Robbins and Richard M Heiberger. “Plotting Likert and Other Rating
Scales”. In: Joint Statistical Meetings October 2005 (2011), pp. 1058–1066. url:
http : / / www . amstat . org / sections / srms / proceedings / y2011 / Files /
300784_64164.pdf.
[54]
Damaris J. Rohsenow et al. “The Acute Hangover Scale: A new measure of
immediate hangover symptoms”. In: Addictive Behaviors (2007). issn: 03064603.
doi: 10.1016/j.addbeh.2006.10.001.
[55]
J B Saunders et al. “Development of the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification
Test (AUDIT): WHO Collaborative Project on Early Detection of Persons with
Harmful Alcohol Consumption”. In: Addiction (Abingdon, England) 88.6 (1993),
pp. 791–804. issn: 0965-2140. doi: 10.1111/j.1360-0443.1993.tb02093.x.
url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8329970.
[56]
Jeff Sauro. “Sustisfied? little-known system usability scale facts”. In: UX Mag-
azine 10.3 (2011), pp. 2011–2013.
[57]
Jeff Sauro, Kristin Johnson, and Chelsea Meenan. “From Snake-Oil to Science:
Measuring UX Maturity”. In: Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI EA ’17. New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2017, pp. 1084–1091. isbn: 978-1-4503-4656-6. doi: 10.1145/
3027063.3053350. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3027063.3053350.
==PAGE:129==
Bibliography
122
[58]
Jeff Sauro and Pareezad Zarolia. “SUPR-Qm: A Questionnaire to Measure the
Mobile App User Experience”. In: Journal of Usability Studies 13.1 (2017),
pp. 17–37. issn: 1931-3357. url: http://www.upassoc.org..
[59]
Paschal Sheeran and Sheina Orbell. “Augmenting the theory of planned behav-
ior: Roles for anticipated regret and descriptive norms”. In: Journal of Applied
Social Psychology 29.10 (1999), pp. 2107–2142. issn: 00219029. doi: 10.1111/
j.1559-1816.1999.tb02298.x.
[60]
Linda P Spear. “Effects of adolescent alcohol consumption on the brain and
behaviour”. In: Nature reviews. Neuroscience 19.4 (2018), pp. 197–214. issn:
1471-003X. doi: 10.1038/nrn.2018.10. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/
nrn.2018.10.
[61]
Sundhedsstyrelsen. Danskernes Sundhed. 2014, pp. 3–121. isbn: 9788771040104.
doi: https://www.sst.dk/da/sundhed-og-livsstil/{\~{}}/media/.ashx.
[62]
Robert Swift. “Direct measurement of alcohol and its metabolites”. In: Addiction
98.SUPPL. 2 (2003), pp. 73–80. issn: 09652140. doi: 10.1046/j.1359-6357.
2003.00605.x.
[63]
Article Talk. “Blood alcohol content”. In: 10.2 (2012), pp. 1–8.
[64]
The Department of Health. “Youth Alcohol Action Plan”. In: (2008), p. 32.
[65]
Travis Lowdermilk. A developer’s Guide to Building User-Friendly Applications.
O’ Rielly, 2013, p. 135. isbn: 9781449359805. url: oreilly.com.
[66]
“Tuborg”. In: (), p. 11.
[67]
Melanie A. Wakefield, Barbara Loken, and Robert C. Hornik. “Use of mass
media campaigns to change health behaviour”. In: The Lancet 376.9748 (2010),
pp. 1261–1271. issn: 01406736. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60809-4.
[68]
Ladd Wheeler and Harry T Reis. “Self ‐ Recording of Everyday Life Events :
Origins , Types , and Uses SeU-RecordIng of Everyday Life Events : Origins ,
Types , and Uses”. In: November (2016). doi: 10.1111/j.1467-6494.1991.
tb00252.x.
[69]
Word Health Organization. “Global status report on alcohol and health 2014”.
In: (2014).
[70]
Ben Young et al. “Effectiveness of Mass Media Campaigns to Reduce Alcohol
Consumption and Harm: A Systematic Review”. In: Alcohol and Alcoholism
53.May (2018), pp. 302–316. issn: 0735-0414. doi: 10.1093/alcalc/agx094.
url: http://academic.oup.com/alcalc/advance-article/doi/10.1093/
alcalc/agx094/4796878.
[71]
Samir Zakhari. “Overview: how is alcohol metabolized by the body?” In: Alco-
hol research & health : the journal of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse
and Alcoholism 29.4 (2006), pp. 245–254. issn: 1535-7414. doi: doi:10.1038/
modpathol.3800344.
==PAGE:130==
Bibliography
123
[72]
Jing Zhao, Becky Freeman, and Mu Li. “Can mobile phone apps influence peo-
ple’s health behavior change? An evidence review”. In: Journal of Medical Inter-
net Research 18.11 (2016), pp. 1–12. issn: 14388871. doi: 10.2196/jmir.5692.
