==PAGE:1==
SIMULATING QUANTUM
MECHANICAL SYSTEMS WITH
MEMORY
MATHIAS RØNNOW JØRGENSEN
Masters thesis, June 2018
Supervised by
Prof. Jesper Mørk
Dr. Felix Pollock
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
1
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Quantum processes consisting of a sequence of experimental operations on an open
quantum system, are complicated by the presence of temporal correlations. Recently
the process tensor was proposed as a natural framework in which to model such
processes [16]. The explicit construction of this process tensor for a relevant open
systems model, has been an open problem.
This master’s thesis present two new developments along these lines. The ﬁrst is a
novel new numerical algorithm for eﬃciently simulating the process tensor numerically
exact, for open systems with Gaussian environments. The algorithm makes use of
tensor network methods originally developed for problems within condensed matter
physics. We apply the algorithm to spin-boson type models, and it is found that
the computational resources required are signiﬁcantly smaller than what is the case
for earlier numerically exact methods. The second development is a generalization
of the discretised Nakajima-Zwanzig master equation. Recently it was shown that
the conventional Nakajima-Zwanzig equation describing the reduced density operator
can be seen as the result of a tomographic reconstruction of an arbitrary open system
dynamics [2], [4]. Here we generalize this idea to the case of multi-step processes,
and show that this generalization makes it possible to perform long-time simulations
eﬃciently.
Originally the process tensor framework was developed within the quantum infor-
mation community to provide an operationally meaningful notion of what constitutes
a Markovian quantum process [13]. Given such a notion it becomes possible to in-
troduce meaningful measures of the degree of non-Markovianity. Both the developed
methods are applied to study various controlled processes of the spin-boson model,
and memory e↵ects are investigated using these new non-Markovianity measures.
2
==PAGE:4==
3
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
This has been written to fulﬁll the graduation requirement for the Master degree in
physics and nanotechnology at the Technical University of Denmark.
I would like to thank my supervisor at DTU, Professor Jesper Mørk, for agreeing
to act as a a supervisor on this project in the ﬁrst place, and for always being there to
help when help is needed. The entirety of the project has been carried out at Monash
Unversity in Melbourne Australia. I would like to thank my supervisor at Monash,
Dr. Felix Pollock, for his competent guidance and support during the work on this
thesis. In addition I would like to thank the quantum information science group at
Monash University (MonQIS) for welcoming me into the group, and for providing
both academic and social support throughout my stay in Australia.
Mathias R. Jørgensen
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
June 8, 2018
4
==PAGE:6==
5
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
8
2
The process tensor framework for quantum stochastic processes
12
2.1
Basic structure of quantum mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Transformations of quantum states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
The process tensor framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
Concluding remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3
The quantum Markov condition and e↵ective state simulation
24
3.1
Markovian quantum processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
A master equation for the e↵ective state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Correlation structure and tensor networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Concluding remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Tensor network simulation of the Gaussian inﬂuence functional
34
4.1
E↵ective spin systems and harmonic dissipation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Tensor network representation and contraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Network complexity and scaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4
Concluding remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Tomographic reconstruction of any open quantum dynamics
44
5.1
Non-Markovian dynamical maps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Generalizing the transfer tensor method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Signatures of memory e↵ects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.4
Concluding remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Conclusion and outlook
56
Appendices
58
A Notes on developed code
60
B Project plan
62
Bibliography
65
6
==PAGE:8==
7
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Memory e↵ects in open quantum dynamics have been the focus of active research
for decades, as they play a critical role in a wide span of physical and chemical pro-
cesses, ranging from the chemical activity of complex organic molecules [37] to the
optical emission of semiconductor quantum dots [36], the latter being of consider-
able importance to the development of single photon sources [6]. An illustration of
an open quantum system is shown in ﬁgure 1.1. When the interaction between a
system and its environment is weak and the environment unstructured, it can of-
ten be assumed that the dynamics is memoryless, or Markovian, leading to relatively
simple time-local equations of motion for the system [19]. However, whenever system-
environment interactions become stronger, or if the environment is structured, the
dynamical description of a quantum process could in general be vastly more complex,
with non-Markovian memory of the system’s past inﬂuencing its future evolution.
A host of techniques have been developed to account for non-Markovian e↵ects
in quantum dynamics, with greater or lesser breadth of applicability. Conventional
approaches usually fall into two classes; the ﬁrst is analytic approaches based on
the formally exact Nakajima-Zwanzig formalism [19].
The method works well for
a wide range of problems but is restricted to regimes with weak damping, high-
temperatures, short memory time or short simulation time [4]. The second class of
approaches is to adopt the harmonic bath approximation where the environment is
treated as a collection of harmonic oscillators, in this case it is possible to design
powerful numerical algorithms making use of the Gaussian inﬂuence functional [7],
[20], [21], [22]. However these methods su↵er from poor convergence with system
size, memory length and the strength of the dissipation. This limits the ability to
apply them to important processes involving large complex systems or where long
time dynamics is important.
Most of the methods developed to model non-Markovian quantum systems, have
focused on the reduced density operator encoding the state of the system at a given
time. In instances where one seeks to model multiple measurement procedures, or
any other control operations that an experimenter can perform, on an open quantum
system, the standard reduced quantum state provides an incomplete description [3].
The characterization of temporal correlations and the development of tools provid-
ing complete descriptions of multi-time correlations, has gained renewed interest in
recent years. The process tensor [16], and the idea of a super-density operator encod-
8
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Illustration of an open quantum system. We can think of a situation
where we are interested in the properties of one part of a larger complex molecule, or
where a small known system is used as a probe for a larger unknown system.
ing temporal correlations [5], have all been introduced as frameworks for analyzing
quantum correlations in space and time.
The process tensor is perhaps the most
complete framework in which to discuss memory e↵ects in open quantum processes,
and leads naturally to a notion of quantum Markovianity which uniﬁes the multitude
of previous work on the topic [13].
In this thesis we investigate how simulation methods developed for studying open
system dynamics, can be modiﬁed and generalized to describe multi-time correlations.
Given access to multi-time correlations we can study the nature of memory e↵ects,
and look at the behaviour of the non-Markovianity measures derived from the new
notion of what constitutes a quantum Markov process [13].
Outline of thesis
The thesis consist broadly of two background chapters, and two results chapters. The
main results of this thesis are the development of two new methods for the eﬃcient
simulation of multi-time quantum processes, these are presented in chapters 4 and 5.
All the computer code used throughout has been developed and implemented by the
author.
Chapter 2 : The basic structure of quantum mechanics, which will be used through-
out the thesis, is outlined. The process tensor is then introduced, as a framework in
which multi-time controlled quantum processes can be characterized. The key con-
cept of the chapter is the e↵ective state which encodes the temporal correlations of
9
==PAGE:11==
a quantum process as spatial correlations in a many-body state. The introduction of
such an e↵ective state enables one to specify a joint probability distribution of tempo-
rally separated control operations which is independent of the speciﬁc experimental
controls implemented.
Chapter 3 : Here we discuss the quantiﬁcation of memory e↵ects and the problem
of constructing the e↵ective state. We describe the operational Markov condition
[13], and outline how meaningful measures of non-Markovianity can be deﬁned. An-
alytical approaches to simulation are commonly structured around the use of the
Nakajima-Zwanzig formalism [19]. We also show that such techniques are applicable
to the e↵ective density operator, in the process we point out the connection between
the quantum regression theorem and the operational deﬁnition of Markovianity. The
chapter ends with a discussion of how many-body quantum states can be represented
eﬃciently by using tensor networks, and why it is reasonable to assume that the ef-
fective state should have en eﬃcient matrix product state representation.
Chapter 4 : In this chapter we develop a tensor network algorithm to simulate the
Gaussian inﬂuence functional. Recently, methods have been proposed utilizing ten-
sor network tools, originally developed to study quantum many-body systems [26].
Most prominently, the proposed time-evolving matrix product operator (TEMPO)
algorithm [7], succeeded in eﬃciently simulating the Gaussian inﬂuence functional
with a computational complexity growing as a small polynomial. Here we generalize
the TEMPO algorithm to describe multi-time correlations. It is found that the gen-
eralization leads naturally to a modiﬁed algorithm, which signiﬁcantly outperforms
previous numerical methods.
Chapter 5 : Numerically exact methods often have to balance an error minimization
with a tolerable complexity scaling. One way to approach this diﬃculty is with the
transfer tensor method [4], originally developed to study reduced system dynamics.
In this chapter the transfer tensor method is generalized to describe multi-time corre-
lation functions, making it possible to generate two-point functions, and higher, very
eﬃciently, and with an approximately constant error. The developed method is used
to study memory e↵ects in a simple controlled process.
Unit convention
This thesis makes use of natural units with the Planck constant ~ = 1 and the
Boltzmann constant kB = 1 [38].
Physically this means that we associate rates
directly with an energy scale, for example one can state a time of 1meV−1 which
corresponds to approximately 2/3ps. In the same way setting the Boltzmann constant
equal to one means that temperature is measured in units of energy, in this case 1
Kelvin corresponds approximately to 0.1meV. With these conventions every physical
quantity can be expressed with units of either energy or inverse energy.
10
==PAGE:12==
11
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
The process tensor framework
for quantum stochastic processes
“The simple and obvious truth is that quantum phenomena do not occur in a Hilbert
space. They occur in a laboratory. If you visit a real laboratory, you will never ﬁnd
there Hermitian operators. All you can see are emitters (lasers, ion guns,
synchrotrons and the like) and detectors. The experimenter controls the emission
process and observes detection events.”
- Asher Peres [39]
In this chapter we will introduce the background quantum theory, that will be used
throughout the thesis. Having outlined the basics, we will turn to a discussion of the
recently developed process tensor framework [16]. This framework provides a useful
conceptual and practical tool for discussing the temporally correlated measurement
outcomes of experiments involving multiple temporally separated measurement pro-
cedures on an open quantum system. The Peres quote above is included to motivate
what is called the operational approach to quantum physics. We seek to model the
things that experimenters do, and to this end we look for a description where the
experimental choices can be seen as probing a underlying probability distribution
independent of the speciﬁc operation that the experimenter carries out. When the
processes considered include multiple experimental operations at di↵erent points in
time, it seems to become impossible to identify a probability distribution which can
be studied independently of the speciﬁc experimental operations implemented. The
major utility of the process tensor framework is that it achieves such a separation of
controlled and uncontrolled aspects of the process. We will see that this separation
comes at the price of having to consider an extended state space.
2.1
Basic structure of quantum mechanics
In this ﬁrst section we will discuss the basic structure of quantum mechanics, and
introduce some of the notation and the concepts which will be used throughout.
Quantum mechanics is a probabilistic theory and we will discuss how probability
distributions are represented in quantum mechanics. The material presented here is
completely standard, and can be found in most books on quantum theory such as
[10], [11] and [12].
12
==PAGE:14==
The mechanical postulate
A physical system is characterized by a collection of variables i.e. spins, positions,
momenta etc.
Each of these variables can take a range of values, and the set of
these values form the phase space of the system. Classical physics builds on the as-
sumption that it is, at least in principle, possible to specify the state of the system
arbitrarily precisely. This means that if the state of the system is speciﬁed to occupy
a ﬁnite region R of phase space, containing the physical variable values characterizing
the system, then in principle this region could be made arbitrarily small. Quantum
physics is di↵erent in that the minimal phase space volume that the state of a system
can occupy can be no smaller than 2⇡~ per degree of freedom, where ~ is the Planck
constant. A consequence of this constraint is that the physical variables describing
a system can take on only discrete values [35], this fundamental discreteness in the
description is what gives quantum theory its name. Of course if we are interested in
physics on the scales of electrons, photons and atoms, then many variables can take
on e↵ectively continuous spectra. Technically the physical fact that physical vari-
ables take on discrete values is implemented into a mathematical framework through
the following postulate, that to each physical variable there corresponds a linear op-
erator, and the possible values of the variable are the eigenvalues of the operator.
The justiﬁcation for this postulate is that there are operators which possess both
discrete and continuous eigenvalue spectra, and thus all possibilities are accounted
for. In representing physical variables by operators, we also introduce the possibility
of non-commuting algebras of these, this non-commutativity is responsible for most
intrinsically quantum phenomenon [11].
The statistical postulate
The next question is how to assign probabilities to the various allowed values of phys-
ical variables. Quantum mechanics is at heart a statistical theory, and has no means
by which to predict the speciﬁc outcome of a single experiment [11]. It is useful to
divide a quantum mechanical experiment into two phases, there is a preparation pro-
cedure followed by a measurement. A speciﬁc preparation procedure determines the
probabilities of the various possible outcomes of the measurement. The preparation
procedure is independent of the subsequent measurement, and therefore determines
the probabilities of all conceivable measurements.
This leads us to introduce the
idea of a quantum state, which is the probability distribution associated with a spe-
ciﬁc preparation procedure. A state preparation procedure may be a sequence of
control operations performed by an experimenter, or it might be a natural process.
Importantly any two preparation procedures which give rise to the same probability
distribution, are said to prepare the same state. In quantum mechanics the state is
represented mathematically by a density operator, also called a state operator, ⇢, and
it is postulated that the statistical average of a physical variable represented by the
operator A in the state ⇢is given by
hAi = Tr (A⇢)
Tr ⇢
,
(2.1)
13
==PAGE:15==
where Tr denotes the trace operation [11]. The density operator must satisfy certain
conditions for it to be acceptable. First of all the density operator is conventionally
normalized such that Tr ⇢= 1, and the total probabilities sum to one. The normal-
ization is not an essential condition and in many cases it can be useful to allow the
state to be subnormalized, that is have a trace smaller than one but greater than zero.
Secondly the density operator must be self-adjoint ⇢= ⇢†, this follows by imposing
the condition that the average value of a variable taking on only real values must itself
be real. Thirdly the average value of a variable taking on only positive values must
be non-negative, which implies that the density operator itself must be non-negative
such that hu| ⇢|ui ≥0 for all vectors |ui.
Among the set of all possible quantum states there is a special class of states called
pure states. The density operator representing a pure state has the simple form
⇢= | ih | ,
(2.2)
written in terms of the state vector | i. The state vector itself belongs to an equiva-
lence class of state vectors di↵ering by an overall complex phase, however the density
operator representation has no such freedom. A pure quantum state can be charac-
terized by the necessary and suﬃcient condition [11]
⇢2 = ⇢.
(2.3)
This condition for a state to be pure leads us to deﬁne the purity of a quantum state
by
P⇢= Tr ⇢2 ,
(2.4)
which must equal one if the state is pure, and be less than one for a non-pure state.
An arbitrary density operator can be written down as a convex combination of pure
states [11]
⇢=
X
n
wn |φni hφn| ,
(2.5)
where 0 < wn < 1, P
n wn = 1, and the state vectors |φni are drawn from some
set of state vectors. A pure state cannot be expressed as a nontrivial convex com-
bination of other states, however a non-pure state can always be expressed as such
a combination. Furthermore the representation of a non-pure state has a so-called
ensemble ambiguity as there are many equivalent ways of expressing a non-pure state
as a convex combination of pure states [11].
The question is now how the statistical average connects with the full probability
distribution. Consider a function of a dynamical variable f(R), it must be possible
to express the average value in terms of a probability distribution g(r) as
hf(R)i =
Z 1
−1
dr0 f(r0)g(r0)
= Tr (⇢f(R)) .
(2.6)
Now suppose that the physical variable R has a discrete spectrum of eigenvalues,
and that the associated spectral resolution is R = P
n rn |rni hrn|.
To relate the
14
==PAGE:16==
distribution g(r) to the density operator we consider the statistical average of the
Heaviside step function
h⇥(r −R)i =
Z r
−1
dr0 g(r0)
= Prob (R < r | ⇢) .
(2.7)
From the statistical postulate of quantum mechanics it is known that this average
can also be expressed in terms of the density operator as
h⇥(r −R)i = Tr (⇢⇥(r −R))
=
X
n
hrn| ⇢|rni ⇥(r −rn) .
(2.8)
These two ways of writing the average value must be consistent with one another,
and from this requirement of equivalence we can conclude that
g(r) = @rProb (R < r | ⇢)
=
X
n
hrn| ⇢|rni δ(r −rn) .
(2.9)
It then follows immediately that the probability that the physical variable R takes
the speciﬁc value r given that the state of the system was ⇢is given by
Prob (R = r | ⇢) = Tr (⇢⇧r) ,
(2.10)
where the projection operator ⇧r = P
n |rni hrn| δr,rn has been introduced. In the
case of a physical variable with a continuous spectrum the analysis is slightly more
involved, but conceptually identical.
The general feature is that the expressions
for probability always consists of two factors, a state function ⇢and a ﬁlter function
which in the above expression is the projection operator. This separation between the
underlying probability distribution and the ﬁlter function, means that it is possible
to discuss the dynamical change of a distribution independently of any measurement
procedure. What exactly is meant by a measurement procedure will be described
below, when discussing state transformations.
Representing composite quantum systems
The systems that we study are always composite, meaning that they consists of mul-
tiple component systems.
Examples of composite systems include multiple atoms
at distinct locations or a quantum dot interacting with both phononic and photonic
degrees of freedom [19]. Composite systems which interact with one another exist in
correlated states, and physical variables deﬁned on the separate systems have joint
probability distributions associated with them. In the special case of non-interacting
components the probability distribution must factorize, this condition is true by con-
struction if we build the composite state space as Kronecker product states of the basis
vectors of the individual spaces [12]. Physical variables on the joint space are likewise
composed as Kronecker products, and a general joint operator can be decomposed
into a linear combination of tensor products on the form
(Ai ⌦Bj) |am, bni = Ai |ami ⌦Bj |bni ,
(2.11)
15
==PAGE:17==
|am, bni = |ami ⌦|bni .
(2.12)
Many of the diﬃcult and interesting features of quantum dynamics come in when
considering the joint transformation of multi-component systems. Among the many
possible joint states of a bipartite, that is two-part, quantum system we will often
make use of the maximally entangled state. Consider two identical d-dimensional
systems each spanned by the orthonormal basis {|ii}d
i=1, we then deﬁne the maximally
entangled state, or Bell state, by
 + =
$$ +↵⌦
 +$$
,
$$ +↵
=
1
p
d
d
X
i=1
|ii ⌦|ii .
(2.13)
In a later section we will see that such maximally entangled states will allow us
to introduce an e↵ective density operator describing the joint statistics of multiple
temporally separated measurement procedures. However, in order to discuss multi-
time correlations, we need to ﬁrst consider how quantum states evolve in time; that
is, how they are transformed.
2.2
Transformations of quantum states
In this section we discuss how quantum states transform in time. Speciﬁcally we focus
on the joint transformations of bipartite quantum systems. A discussion of quantum
state transformations can be carried out at many levels of abstraction. Here we will
focus on just the tools we will need later on, and the presentation is largely drawn
from [3], [11] and [12].
Unitary evolution
A state preparation procedure is a dynamical process. In practice this is often mod-
elled as having the system start out in some known initial quantum state, and then
consider a certain transformation of that state over a duration of time. The question
we ask is then how to describe the transformation of a density operator at one point
in time to a density operator at a later point in time. If the system under considera-
tion is closed, that is all relevant degrees of freedom in the system are accounted for,
then the transformation of the system will be reversible. One can show that any con-
tinuous linear transformation which maps a density operator to a density operator,
while preserving the purity, and which has a well-deﬁned inverse operation, making it
reversible, must be a unitary transformation [12]. We can then write a transformation
of the density operator from time t0 to time t1 as a unitary mapping
⇢1 = U(t1; t0) [⇢0] = U(t1; t0) ⇢0 U(t1; t0)† ,
(2.14)
where U(t1; t0)U †(t1; t0) = U †(t1; t0)U(t1; t0) = 1. The dynamical evolution of a sys-
tem is described by the Hamiltonian operator H(t) [11], which generates the unitary
transformation through the equation of motion
i@tU(t; t0) = H(t)U(t; t0) ,
(2.15)
16
==PAGE:18==
where the initial condition on the continuous unitary transformation is that U(t0; t0) =
1. The Hamiltonian operator provides the microscopic physical model of the system
and can in general be time-dependent.
This equation of motion can be formally
integrated to give
U(t1; t0) = T exp
✓
−i
Z t1
t0
ds H(s)
◆
,
(2.16)
where T is the chronological time ordering operator. This operator acts on a se-
quence of operators and rearranges them such that operators at earlier times act
ﬁrst.
Quantum measurements
As a ﬁrst example of a joint transformation of a bipartite quantum system, we consider
a quantum measurement procedure. Suppose we want to measure a physical variable
R of a system S with a discrete set of eigenvectors forming a complete basis set
R |riS = r |riS .
(2.17)
In quantum mechanics we often model a measurement in the following way. Assume
that we have available a measurement apparatus A which posses an indicator variable
A having a complete set of eigenvectors
A |↵iA = ↵|↵iA ,
(2.18)
where ↵is the indicator eigenvalue, and we consider the spectrum to be discrete.
What makes the physical variable A an indicator is the assumption that the possible
values it can take are somehow macroscopically distinct, that is we take for granted
that an experimenter can access the value of the indicator variable. To perform a
measurement we prepare the measurement apparatus in a known initial state, say
|↵= 0iAh↵= 0|. An interaction is then turned on between the system we want to
measure and the apparatus, and they undergo a joint unitary evolution for some
duration of time. Consider the case where the initial state of the system S is given
by ⇢i
S, after the joint evolution the state is
U
⇥
⇢i
S ⌦|0iA h0|
⇤
=
X
↵β
M↵⇢i
SM†
β ⌦|↵iAhβ| ,
(2.19)
where we have deﬁned the measurement operators M↵= h↵| U |0i. From the uni-
tarity of the evolution it follows that P
↵M†
↵M↵= 1. Since it is assumed that the
eigenvectors of the indicator variable A are macroscopically distinct, the measurement
procedure produce a superposition of macroscopically distinct indicator eigenvectors.
We see that the probability of the indicator variable to take the value ↵given the
initial state and the form of measurement procedure is
Prob (↵) = Tr
⇣
M↵⇢i
SM†
↵
⌘
.
(2.20)
If it is possible to design the joint unitary evolution such that a unique correspondence
is introduced between an eigenvalue r of R and an indicator eigenvalue ↵r of the
indicator variable A, then the indicator eigenvalue ↵r would occur with the same
17
==PAGE:19==
probability as the eigenvalue r, such measurements are called orthogonal. Often this
is not possible, and we have what is called a general measurement described by the
collection of measurement operators {M↵}. This collection is often called a positive
operator-valued measure (POVM) [12].
Open quantum evolution
The above discussion of a quantum measurement procedure is only one example of
a joint unitary evolution of a bipartite quantum system. Another example would be
the joint unitary evolution of a bipartite system where the measurement record is
not accessible. Consider a general product state of the form ⇢S ⌦⇢E which becomes
correlated through a joint unitary evolution. This is of course equivalent to the above
measurement procedure and we say that the environment E measures the system
S. However if we have no access to degrees of freedom of the environment then we
are forced to average our predictions for the system over the possible states of the
environment. This is called a quantum channel [?], and can be written as
E (⇢S) = TrE (U [⇢S ⌦⇢E]) .
(2.21)
An important feature of quantum channels is that they are not in general reversible.
Intuitively this is clear as the tracing operation involves discarding information about
the state of system. Once this information is lost, it is not possible to establish a
unique correspondence between the resulting reduced state of the system and its
initial state. Throughout we will refer to the joint unitary evolution of a system and
an environment as an open quantum evolution.
Quantum control operations
Both quantum channels and measurements, are speciﬁc cases of a more general notion
called a quantum control operation [12]. In the case of a measurement we assumed
that the measurement apparatus had an indicator variable with a set of macroscop-
ically accessible eigenvectors. In the case of the quantum channel the environment
consisted only of inaccessible degrees of freedom. Between these two extreme cases
there is a large class of transformations, for which some partial information is acces-
sible to an experimenter. This class of transformations is called quantum operations,
and are represented by completely positive maps. Completely positive maps are maps
which are non-negative, also if they only act on one part of a composite system [12].
These maps will in general not be trace preserving if some knowledge of the accessible
degrees of freedom is obtained, and the state will transform into a normalized state
only if the control operation can be implemented deterministically. One could chose
to include a renormalization with any application of a control operation, however in
practice this often introduce some awkward features into the description, and it is
easier to allow for subnormalized states. We can write a general quantum control
operation as a map from a density operator to a subnormalized density operator
˜⇢0 = A(r) [⇢] ,
(2.22)
where the label (r) is meant to indicate that the control operation is chosen from some
collection of control operations available to an experimenter. These maps are not
18
==PAGE:20==
radically di↵erent from the measurement procedure described above, the di↵erence
is that the measurement apparatus might contain both accessible and inaccessible
degrees of freedom. In particular any control operation can be implemented by a
unitary entanglement operation followed by some projection operator on the accessible
degrees of freedom [12]. The outcome of a control operation is thus some value of an
indicator variable. Just as a measurement, a control operations has a decomposition
into a set of Krauss operators [12], similarly to measurement operators in equation
(2.19)
A(rk) [⇢] =
X
l
A(rk)
l
⇢
⇣
A(r)
l
⌘†
,
X
l
⇣
A(r)
l
⌘†
A(r)
l
1 .
(2.23)
It turns out that any conceivable control operation that an experimenter can perform
on a quantum system is described by completely positive linear maps of this form
[12]. A special control operation is the do nothing operation, here an experimenter
simply leave the system alone. This operation has a deterministic implementation
and is represented by the identity map I [16].
2.3
The process tensor framework
In this section we consider a more general class of processes, where an experimenter
can probe the system of interest, extracting partial information, multiple times. In
the simple process of state preparation and a single measurement, the expressions
obtained for probabilities contained a state function and a ﬁlter function.
These
two factors could be considered independently. We will see that at ﬁrst sight this
separation disappears when considering multi-time processes.
The process tensor
framework [16] reintroduces this separation, and has a representation in terms of a
many-body e↵ective density operator.
Multi-time quantum processes
The quantum process of preparation, evolution and measurement is only the simplest
of a large variety of processes which could be considered. For example one could study
a process where an initial quantum state undergoes open quantum evolution with an
environment, at some time a measurement on the system is performed followed by
further open quantum evolution with the same environment, and ﬁnally a second
measurement procedure on the system. The outcome of such an experiment would
be the joint statistics of the two measurement procedures. To deal with such cases
we consider a more general quantum stochastic process consisting of open quantum
evolution interrupted by instantaneous control operations. The resulting joint system-
environment density operator after a k-step process is given by
⇢SE
k
(Ak;0) = A(rk)
k
◦Uk:k−1 ◦A(rk−1)
k−1
◦... ◦A(r1)
1
◦U1:0 ◦A(r0)
0
⇥
⇢SE
0
⇤
,
(2.24)
which is a quantum state at time tk conditioned on past control operations Ak;0 =
n
A(rl)
l
ok
l=0 applied at times {tl}k
l=0 respectively. Depending on the control operations
the state might be subnormalized. The notation Uk:k−1 denotes a unitary map taking
an input at tk−1 and giving an output at time tk, and the ◦notation denotes the
19
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.1: Quantum circuit illustration of a general quantum process. An initially
correlated system environment state undergoes an open quantum evolution which is
interrupted by instantaneous control operations on the system alone. At the end of
the process both the system and the environment are discarded corresponding to a
tracing operation. The result of this circuit is then a probability distribution over
the temporally correlated outcomes of the various control operations.
The circuit
here can be seen as just a graphical illustration, but it can also be interpreted as an
exact mathematical expression with the various operators expressed in their Liouville
representation [22].
composition of maps such that ﬁrst the right one is implemented and then the left one.
The control operations are drawn from a set of controls available to an experimenter
labelled by (rl).
The unitary maps implement an open quantum evolution with
the same environment throughout. Assuming instantaneous control operations is a
good approximation if the system can be controlled on a timescale much faster than
the characteristic system dynamics. Alternatively a continuously controlled process
could be approximated by taking the limit of inﬁnitely many closely spaced control
operations, as is done when modelling weak measurement procedures [10].
We now deﬁne a generalized correlation function as the set of control operation
outcomes resulting from the quantum process. The probability of realizing a given
process will be written as
Prob (Ak;0) = TrSE
⇣
A(rk)
k
◦Uk:k−1 ◦... ◦U1:0 ◦A(r0)
0
⇥
⇢SE
0
⇤⌘
,
(2.25)
a quantum circuit illustration is shown in ﬁgure 2.1. This is a multi-time correla-
tion function encoding the joint statistics of temporally correlated control operations.
Now this formulation of the process has the feature that in contrast to the simplest
case there is no clear separation between the control operations being implemented,
and the underlying open quantum evolution. This means that it is not possible to
identify a state function independent of the ﬁlter function being applied. From an
experimental point of view this is of course completely reasonable as the contin-
ued process is conditioned on the control operation being applied. However from a
theoretical point of view it is an awkward feature that one cannot identify a joint
probability distribution independently of the speciﬁc sequence of control operations
implemented.
We now outline the idea behind the process tensor framework [16]. First of all it
can be useful to rethink the concept of a quantum state. A quantum state assigns a
probability to a given measurement outcome, slightly more generally we can think of
assigning a probability to realizing a given control operation
Prob(A(r)
t ) = Tr
⇣
A(r)
t
[⇢t]
⌘
,
(2.26)
20
==PAGE:22==
recall that the realization probability is interesting as controls are not determinis-
tic. We can also write this formally as a map T which act on a control operation
implemented at time t, and gives the probability of realizing that control operation
Prob(A(r)
t ) = T
h
A(r)
t
i
.
(2.27)
The process tensor is the generalization of this idea to multiple temporally separated
control operations. That is the process tensor is a map from a sequence of control
operations to the probability of realizing that speciﬁc sequence
Prob(Ak;0) = T [Ak;0] .
(2.28)
Thus the process tensor encodes the information that can extracted from the system
by carrying out control operations at multiple times [5]. As presented here the process
tensor is simply a new notation for equation (2.25). However one can shown that the
process tensor is a more general object [16], with equation (2.25) being one possible
representation.
We will now discuss an alternative representation of the process
tensor, which achieves a separation between control operations and the uncontrolled
aspects of the process.
The e↵ective density operator
As mentioned above the process tensor constitutes a well-deﬁned map [16].
One
representation of this map is equation (2.25), however alternatively we can write the
process tensor in terms of an e↵ective state. Here we will simply state the form of
this state, it is given by
⇤k|0 = TrE
⇣
Uk:k−1 ◦... ◦U1:0
h1
 +2⌦k ⌦⇢SE
0
i⌘
,
(2.29)
where  + is the maximally entangled state of two copies of the system, and the
notation ⇤k|0 indicates a dependence on all times between t0 and tk. The e↵ective
state is a many-body state consisting of (2k +1) copies of the system. A unitary map
Uk:k−1 acts on the environment state, and one part of the k’th maximally entangled
state..
The e↵ective state is illustrated graphically in ﬁgure 2.2, the sequence of
unitary maps act on the same environment throughout, but at each time {tl}k−1
l=0 a
new system is provided. We can think of this as a sequence of input and output
spaces, illustrated with arrows in the ﬁgure. In the absence of any unitary maps,
trivial process, corresponding input-output spaces would be maximally entangled.
The next ingredient in the alternative representation of the process tensor is an
e↵ective ﬁlter function given by
Ok|0 =
⇣
d2k+1⌘
A† (rk)
k
[1/d] ⌦A† (rk−1)
k−1
⇥
 +⇤
⌦... ⌦A† (r0)
0
⇥
 +⇤
,
(2.30)
where the control operations act on the second part of the maximally entangled
bipartite states. It is important to notice that the maximally entangled states here,
are not equivalent to the ones in the expression for the e↵ective state. In the e↵ective
state the maximally entangled state  + is of the input space at timestep tk−1 and
the output space at tk, as illustrated in ﬁgure 2.2. For the e↵ective ﬁlter function
21
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the e↵ective state construction. The state space is enlarged
by including maximally entangled ancillary systems. By having the unitary maps act
on a new system space between control operations, a sequence of input-output spaces
are obtained. A given process can be realized by acting on an e↵ective ﬁlter function.
Figure 2.3: A separation between control operations and uncontrolled open quantum
evolution can be achieved by making use of the maximally entangled state. (a) Quan-
tum circuit illustration of the bipartite maximally entangled state.
(b) Correlated
system environment state acted on by a control operation followed by an open evo-
lution. (c) Making use of the maximally entangled state the circuit in (b) can be
rewritten as an e↵ective many-body state contracted with an e↵ective ﬁlter function.
22
==PAGE:24==
the maximally entangled state is between the output and input spaces at the same
timestep. The di↵erence is illustrated in ﬁgure 2.3.
We now have the tools required to write down the process tensor. One can show
that the process tensor can be expressed as [16]
T [Ak;0] = TrS
1
Ok|0 ⇤k|0
2
,
(2.31)
where the trace is over all (2k + 1) system spaces. That the process tensor can in
fact be expressed in this way, can be derived formally using the Choi-Jamiolkowski
isomorphism [3], [16]. A detailed discussion of this would be too extensive to give
here, a rigorous derivation can be found in [3], [16]. The construction is given a more
heuristic motivation in ﬁgure 2.3, the basic idea is similar to a quantum teleportation
protocol [26].
The e↵ective state representation of the process tensor achieves a description of
the open quantum process which separates the control operations completely from the
underlying uncontrolled quantum process. In addition it illustrates that the temporal
correlations of a multi-step quantum process, has a dual description in terms of the
entangled state of a many-body quantum system. The e↵ective density operator is a
more general object than the density operator, since it describes multi-time controlled
processes. It would reduce to the standard density operator for a one step-process,
or if all intermediate controls are identity operations.
2.4
Concluding remarks
In this chapter we have discussed the basics of quantum mechanics, and how one
describes quantum mechanical processes. It has been shown that the temporal cor-
relations of a multi-step quantum process can be encoded in an e↵ective state. This
makes it possible to study the nature of the temporal correlations, as well as the
construction of the e↵ective state, independently of the speciﬁc control instruments
being implemented.
23
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
The quantum Markov condition
and e↵ective state simulation
”Now in ﬁeld theory, what’s going on over here and what’s going on over there and
all over space is more or less the same. Why do we have to keep track in our
functional of all things going on over there while we are looking at the things that
are going on over here? . . . Its really quite insane actually: we are trying to ﬁnd
the energy by taking the expectation of an operator which is located here and we
present ourselves with a functional which is dependent on everything all over the
map. That’s something wrong . . . I think it should be possible some day to describe
ﬁeld theory in some other way than with wave functions and amplitudes. It might be
something like the density matrices where you concentrate on quantities in a given
locality and in order to start to talk about it you don’t immediately have to talk about
what’s going on everywhere else.”
- Richard Feynman [40]
The problem of actually simulating the e↵ective density operator is complicated by
the fact that the same environment is used throughout the process, giving rise to non-
trivial temporal correlations. For most quantum processes these temporal correlations
are not very strong [28], and it should be possible to ﬁnd approximate descriptions
which are much easier to simulate. In this chapter we do three things. Firstly we
present recent ideas about how to operationally deﬁne a quantum Markov condition
[13], this leads to a well-deﬁned way of quantifying the degree to which a process is
non-Markovian. Secondly we outline how conventional master equation methods are
also applicable to the construction of the e↵ective state, and point out the connection
between the operational Markov condition and the well-known regression theorem [6].
Lastly we will discuss how ideas about Markovianity can inform what approach one
should take to design eﬃcient numerical algorithms. The Feynman quote above can
be taken as a motivation for the use of tensor network methods which allows us to
represent the e↵ective state in a more local way.
3.1
Markovian quantum processes
In this section we introduce the notion of a Markovian quantum process. The dis-
cussion follows the ideas presented in [13]. Deﬁning what is meant by a Markovian
24
==PAGE:26==
quantum process, and constructing various measures of non-Markovianity, has a long
history within open quantum systems theory [19], [32]. The operational deﬁnition
presented here uniﬁes these earlier notions, and makes it possible to construct well-
deﬁned measures of non-Markovianity.
An operational quantum Markov condition
To deﬁne what constitutes a Markovian quantum process we introduce the notion of a
causal break. Consider a reduced density operator at time step l conditioned on past
control operations ⇢l = ⇢l (Al−1;0). Imagine that at timestep k, for k < l, the system
is measured, and outcome r is obtained with a probability p(r)
k . The measurement is
associated with a projection operator ⇧(r)
k , and after the measurement the system is
re-prepared in a state σ(s)
k
drawn from a distribution
n
σ(s)
k
o
. This control operation
implements a causal break in the process as the input state is fully independent of
the measurement outcome. After the causal break the system is allowed to evolve
freely such that at time step l the system is described by the conditional state
˜⇢l = p(r)
k ⇢l
⇣
σ(s)
k
| ⇧(r)
k ; Ak−1;0
⌘
,
(3.1)
where in general the state is subnormalized as a measurement is not a deterministic
operation. Since the system itself carries no information past the causal break, any
dependence on past control operations must arise from correlation with an external
environment.
This condition then makes it possible to deﬁne what constitutes a
Markovian process, that is a quantum process is Markovian if and only if
⇢l
⇣
σ(s)
k
| ⇧(r)
k ; Ak−1;0
⌘
= ⇢l
⇣
σ(s)
k
⌘
,
(3.2)
for all possible control sequences, measurements and re-preparations, and for all pos-
sible choices of times (tk, tl). Processes for which this condition is not true are then
non-Markovian and carry memory. From the deﬁnition it follows directly that any
Markovian process is divisible, that is the process can be written as a sequence of
completely positive trace preserving (CPTP) maps between time steps [13]. An im-
mediate consequence of divisibility is that the Markovian e↵ective state takes on a
product state structure
⇤Markov
k|0
= ⇤k:k−1 ⌦⇤k−1:k−2 ⌦... ⌦⇤1:0 ⌦⇢0 ,
(3.3)
where ⇢0 is the initial system state averaged over the environment state. Thus a
Markovian quantum process is one in which an external environment introduces no
correlation into the process except between corresponding input and output spaces.
As of yet we know nothing about the speciﬁc structure of these individual states, only
that any Markovian process belongs to the class of product states in state space.
Quantifying the degree of non-Markovianity
The sub-manifold of quantum states which can be expressed as product states, forms
an exponentially smaller space than the full available state space. The Markov con-
dition is strict, and a general quantum process need of course not occupy this sub-
manifold of states. In fact no environment is fully memoryless and consequently all
25
==PAGE:27==
processes violate the Markov condition [13]. However having identiﬁed what a Markov
process is we can quantify the degree of non-Markovianity N through any distance
measure D, between the e↵ective state and the Markovian e↵ective state
N :=
min
⇤Markov
k|0
D
h
⇤k|0 || ⇤Markov
k|0
i
,
(3.4)
where the distance measure must be CP-contractive to give rise to consistent mea-
sures of non-Markovianity [13]. The measure could also be a quasi-distance measure,
which is a distance measure that needs not be symmetric in its arguments. The non-
Markovianity is deﬁned with an optimization over the Markovian state, that is one
search for the product state which minimizes the speciﬁc distance measure considered.
Any distance measure could be considered, and di↵erent choices have di↵erent
operational interpretations. Here we will focus on the relative entropy quasi-distance
measure given by
N = S
h
⇤k|0 || ⇤Markov
k|0
i
= Tr
⇣
⇤k|0 log ⇤k|0 −⇤k|0 log ⇤Markov
k|0
⌘
,
(3.5)
where ⇤Markov
k|0
is deﬁned below. Measuring non-Markovianity as a relative entropy
has a clear operational signiﬁcance as a hypothesis testing procedure [27]. That is
how likely are we to confuse the Markovian e↵ective state for the exact state given n
copies of the e↵ective state. The probability of confusion is given by Probconfusion =
exp (−nN). Using the relative entropy has the added beneﬁt that the optimization
over Markov states, can be proven to produce the state obtained by discarding any
correlations in the full state [13]. That is
⇤j:j−1 = Tr¯j
1
⇤k|0
2
(3.6)
where the trace is taken over all subsystems except the systems corresponding to the
input at time tj−1 and output at time tj. Throughout this thesis we will only consider
the relative entropy measure of non-Markovianity, and we will refer to the optimal
Markov state with respect to the relative entropy measure simple as the Markovian
state.
That concludes our discussion of how to deﬁne a quantum Markov process. The
main message is that the e↵ective state describing a Markovian process has the struc-
ture of a product state. Since environment induced temporal correlations are, in most
cases of interest, weak, one would expect the e↵ective state describing a general non-
Markovian process to be close to the class of product states. This vague notion will be
made more precise in the third section, ﬁrst we will discuss how one could approach
the construction of the e↵ective state using standard master equation techniques.
3.2
A master equation for the e↵ective state
Open systems theory often takes the approach of studying equations of motion for
the reduced system, so-called master equations [19]. Here we will discuss how these
26
==PAGE:28==
methods carry over to the e↵ective density operator, and point out how the opera-
tional notion of Markovianity relates to the well-known regression theorem [6]. First
of all we introduce the full system-environment e↵ective state given by
⌥k|0 = Uk:k−1 ◦... ◦U1:0
h
( +)⌦k ⌦⇢SE
0
i
,
(3.7)
where the environment degrees of freedom have not been traced over. Now the full
state can be written as a causal hierarchy of equations on the form
⌥k|0 = Uk:k−1
⇥
 + ⌦⌥k−1|0
⇤
,
(3.8)
such that an extended e↵ective state is obtained by unitarily entangling one part of
a bipartite maximally entangled state with the environment of the original e↵ective
state. The unitary maps are generated by a Hamiltonian operator, and they all satisfy
an equation of motion on the form
@tkUk:k−1 = Lk ◦Uk:k−1 ,
(3.9)
where we have deﬁned the Liouvillian operator [19], such that acting with it on a
state ⌥gives
Lk⌥= −i [Hk, ⌥] .
(3.10)
Here the time-dependent Hamiltonian operator Hk in the above expression is the
generator of the unitary map. Notice that both the Liouvillian and the Hamiltonian
only depends on a single time index. Taking the time derivative of the full e↵ective
state then produce an equation of motion on the form
@tk⌥k|0 = Lk⌥k|0
(3.11)
which is of course nothing but the standard von-Neumann equation [11]. We will now
describe how to derive an equation of motion for the accessible part of the e↵ective
density operator only. A general approach to doing this is the Nakajima-Zwanzig
projection operator method [19]. As presented here the method applied to objects
encoding correlations in multi-time processes, this is slightly more general than the
usual applications of the formalism which describes density operator dynamics.
Nakajima-Zwanzig projection operator master equation
The Nakajima-Zwanzig formalism starts out by noticing that the full e↵ective state
can be separated into an accessible and an inaccessible part. This separation can be
achieved by introducing the Nakajima-Zwanzig projection operators by
P⌥k|0 = ⇤k|0 ⌦⇢R ,
(3.12)
Q⌥k|0 = ⌥k|0 −P⌥k|0 .
(3.13)
Here ⇢R is a reference state of the environment which could in general be chosen to
be time-dependent. In most cases however the environment reference state will be
taken to be time-independent, the reason for this will be explained in chapter 5.
27
==PAGE:29==
The aim is now to derive an equation of motion for the accessible part of the full
e↵ective state. To this end we act with both P and Q on equation (3.11) giving rise
to two equation
@tkP⌥k|0 = PLkP⌥k|0 + PLkQ⌥k|0 ,
(3.14)
@tkQ⌥k|0 = QLkP⌥k|0 + QLkQ⌥k|0 .
(3.15)
The ﬁrst equation describes the accessible part but contains a term dependent on the
inaccessible part, that is the equations are coupled. We can formally integrate the
second equation for the inaccessible part to obtain
Q⌥k|0 = GF
k (tk, tk−1)
⇥
 + ⌦Q⌥k−1|0
⇤
+
Z tk
tk−1
ds GF
k (tk, s)QLk(s)P⌥k|0(s) ,
(3.16)
written in terms of the propagator
GF
k (t, s) = T exp
✓Z t
s
ds0 QLk(s0)
◆
.
(3.17)
Here T is the chronological time ordering operator, as described in the preceding
chapter. The notation here becomes slightly awkward, when writing Lk(s) what is
meant is that the Liouvillian act on the relevant system space speciﬁed by (tk, tk−1)
but that the later time is treated as an integration variable, and can take on a
range of values s. The same convention applies to ⌥k|0(s), such that for example
⌥k|0(0) =  + ⌦⌥k−1|0. The integrated equation for the inaccessible part could now
be substituted back into (3.14). In many cases the analysis is taking a little further to
derive what is called the time-convolutionless form of the equation. This is achieved
by introducing the back in time propagator [6]
GB
k (t, s) = T! exp
✓
−
Z t
s
ds0 Lk(s0)
◆
,
(3.18)
where T! is the anti-chronological time ordering operator. This backwards in time
propagator can be used to remove the dependence on ⌥k|0(s), and we can derive the
relation
(I −⌃k:k−1) Q⌥k|0 = GF
k (tk, tk−1)Q⌥k|0(0) + ⌃k:k−1P⌥k|0 ,
(3.19)
where I is the identity operator and we have deﬁned
⌃k:k−1 =
Z tk
tk−1
ds GF
k (tk, s)QLk(s)PGB
k (tk, s) .
(3.20)
If it can be assumed that the operator (I −⌃k:k−1) has a well-deﬁned inverse operator,
which is often valid in the weak coupling regime [6], then we can solve the equation
for the inaccessible part of the e↵ective state. Taking this and substituting it into
equation (3.14) we ﬁnd that
@tkP⌥k|0 = Kk:k−1P⌥k|0 + Ik:k−1Q⌥k|0(0) ,
(3.21)
where we have deﬁned the homogeneous and the inhomogeneous kernels
Kk:k−1 = PLk (I −⌃k:k−1)−1 P ,
(3.22)
28
==PAGE:30==
Ik:k−1 = PLk (I −⌃k:k−1)−1 GF
k (tk, tk−1)Q .
(3.23)
Because of the hierarchical structure of the e↵ective state, as pointed out in equation
(3.8), the same equation of motion is applicable for any value of k. The di↵erence of
course is that for higher values of k, the inhomogeneous term becomes increasingly
complex. An often applied approach to dealing with this diﬃculty is the so-called
regression theorem [19], [6], and we will now describe some of its features.
The regression theorem and Markovianity
The inhomogeneous term in equation (3.21) describes the fact that the environment
at time tk−1 will in general be correlated with past system states. The often applied
regression theorem, which is really more an approximation, makes the assumption
that this inhomogeneous term is negligible [6], [32]. When this is the case the resulting
equation becomes
@tkP⌥k|0 = Kk:k−1P⌥k|0 ,
(3.24)
such that the accessible part of the e↵ective state at time tk only depends on the
accessible part of the e↵ective state at time tk−1. The resulting di↵erential equation
for the accessible part can be formally solved and the solution takes the form
P⌥k|0 = T exp
 Z tk
tk−1
ds Kk:k−1(s)
!
P⌥k|0(0) .
(3.25)
If we take this equation and trace over the environment degrees of freedom we obtain
the e↵ective state describing only the system degrees of freedom
⇤k|0 = TrE
 
T exp
 Z tk
tk−1
ds Kk:k−1(s)
!
⇥
 + ⌦⇢R
⇤
!
⌦⇤k−1|0 ,
(3.26)
which has the form of a product state ⇤k|0 = ⇤k:k−1 ⌦⇤k−1|0. This result can be
applied iteratively and the full e↵ective state takes on the following product form
⇤Markov
k|0
= ⇤k:k−1 ⌦⇤k−1:k−2 ⌦... ⌦⇤1:0 ⌦⇢0 .
(3.27)
We can thus conclude that applying the regression theorem to a quantum process
gives rise to a Markovian state of the form dictated by the operational quantum
Markov condition. If the reference state of the environment is deﬁned such that
⇢(k)
R = TrS
1
⌥k|0
2
(3.28)
where the trace is over all the 2k +1 system spaces, then the regression theorem state
above becomes exactly equivalent to the Markovian state minimizing the relative
entropy measure of non-Markovianity.
The connection between the regression theorem and the operational notion of
Markovianity is not surprising. It has been pointed out that requiring the validity
of the regression theorem seemed to constitute a stronger requirement than many
conventional notions of Markovianity [31], such as CP-divisibility and the behaviour
in time of the trace distance between two quantum states. The relation pointed out
here support this conclusion since the operational Markov condition itself constitute
a stronger requirement than those older notions [13].
29
==PAGE:31==
This concludes our development of a master equation for the e↵ective state. Fur-
ther work in this direction would attempt to approximate the various kernels, and
solve the resulting equations [6]. We will return to this in chapter 5, although from a
somewhat di↵erent starting point. Now however; we will pick up the theme eluded to
at the end of the previous section, and discuss what we can say about the structure
of the e↵ective state.
3.3
Correlation structure and tensor networks
The e↵ective state will in general inhabit an exponentially large state space. Intu-
itively we would suspect that certain classes of states in this full available space are
more relevant than others. For example, it is in most cases physically sensible to
suspect that memory e↵ects which are more short ranged are more important than
memory e↵ects which are longer ranged. Thus it would be useful to ﬁnd a way of
parameterizing the state space such that these more local states are treated prefer-
entially. We know that a Markovian quantum process is represented by a product
state, which can be seen as the most local class of states. One would expect that
the introduction of memory e↵ects into the process would produce an e↵ective state
which is close to the class of product states. Luckily there is a class of states which
can be seen as expansions around the manifold of product states, these are the matrix
product states [26]. In this section we introduce the matrix product states, and in
the next chapter they are applied extensively.
Tensor diagrams and the singular value decomposition
Before introducing the matrix product states, we will introduce a graphical notation
for tensors which will ease the discussion. By a tensor is simply meant a collection
of numbers, think of a vector or a matrix, which is labelled by a number of indicies
specifying a given element of the tensor. For an arbitrary tensor we can introduce
a diagram as in ﬁgure 3.1 where dangling legs of the diagram represent the indicies.
The contraction of two indicies on two separate tensors, or on the same tensor, is
represented by connected legs, and by convention connected legs are summed over.
Typically the summation signs are not written explicitly, and instead one relies on
Einstein’s summation convention where repeated indicies, one upper and one lower,
are summed [26]. By connecting indicies in various ways one can represent all the
standard tensor operations - i.e. tracing out indicies or matrix multiplications.
A linear algebra operation which will turn out to be extremely useful is the singular
value decomposition (SVD). Any arbitrary rectangular matrix M↵β of dimension
d↵⇥dβ can be decomposed into the product of three matrices
M↵β =
X
γ,δ
U ↵γSγδ
⇣
V †⌘
δβ
(3.29)
where S is a diagonal matrix of dimension min (d↵, dβ)⇥min (d↵, dβ), with the singular
values of the matrix as entries in descending order [25]. The matrix U has orthonormal
column vectors such that U †U = 1, and the matrix V † has orthonormal rows such
that V †V = 1.
The singular value decomposition is interesting for a number of
30
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.1: Tensor network diagrams representing basic tensor operations. (a) A
three index tensor written as a matrix by introducing a partition between upper and
lower indicies. (b) Contraction of two tensors expressed as matrix multiplication.
(c) The trace over a tensor index illustrated by a cap on the open leg. (d) Singular
value decomposition of two index tensor.
reasons. Firstly it provides the optimal lower rank approximation to a matrix, with
respect to the Frobenius norm, where the rank of a matrix is the number of non-zero
singular values [26]. The optimal lower rank approximation is obtained by discarding
singular values starting with the smallest, this truncation reduce the size of the three
matrices making up the singular value decomposition. Secondly the singular value
decomposition of the matrix describing a bipartite quantum state, indicates the degree
of correlation between the two parts [12]. That is a bipartite state which is highly
correlated will have a singular value decomposition with a large rank.
Tensor network representations
Consider a generic state  of a k-body system.
Take each subsystem to be d-
dimensional, and let them be spanned by a complete orthonormal basis {|ii}d
i=1.
The density operator, or any other operator on the system, can then be expanded in
this basis as
 =
X
↵1...↵k
 ↵1...↵k |i1...iki hj1...jk| ,
(3.30)
where we have introduced the compound label ↵l = (il, jl) to ease notation. The
tensor elements are given by  ↵1...↵k = hi1...ik|  |j1...jki. In general it requires on
the order of d2k complex numbers to specify this tensor completely, and the size thus
grows exponentially in the system size.
Our discussion of memory e↵ects have taught us that Markovian quantum pro-
cesses are described by the restricted class of many-body states for which the full state
has a product structure. This means that the generic state above would factorize as
 ↵1↵2...↵k =  ↵1 ↵2 ...  ↵k ,
(3.31)
where the individual tensors on the right hand side need not be identical. A product
state is uncorrelated in the sense that each subsystem can be described independently
of the other subsystems. This restricted class of states require on the order of k ⇥
d2 complex numbers to specify fully, such that the description of product states
grows only linearly in the number of subsystems. Markovian processes thus occupy
a manifold of states in the e↵ective state space which are computationally easy to
handle.
31
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.2: Tensor network diagram illustrating the matrix product state decomposi-
tion of a generic k index tensor, equation (3.35). The horizontal lines represent bond
indicies, and connected lines are summed.
The presence of memory e↵ects in a process would force the state to leave the
Markovian manifold. A description of states which can be seen as expansions around
the set of product states is realized by the class of matrix product states.
Any
generic state can be decomposed into a matrix product state, and we now outline
their construction. Consider again the generic state  introduced above. First the
tensor is reshaped into a matrix with partition between the ﬁrst index and the rest.
Here we illustrate this partition by using raised and lowered indicies
 ↵1...↵k =  ↵1↵2...↵k .
(3.32)
We then ﬁnd the singular value decomposition across this partition
 ↵1↵2...↵k = U ↵1β1Sβ1γ1V γ1↵2...↵k ,
(3.33)
where following the Einstein summation convention, a repeated upper and lower index
is summed. We can carry out the sum over γ1, and include the singular values in the
right hand side tensor. The full state then takes the form
 ↵1↵2...↵k = U ↵1β1 ˜ β1↵2...↵k ,
(3.34)
such that the ﬁrst site is described by a local tensor. Correlations between the ﬁrst
subsystem and the remaining ones are described by the bond index β1. Considering
the right hand side tensor and raising the ↵2 index we can perform a second decom-
position. In this way the procedure can be repeated iteratively and the full state
takes the form
 ↵1...↵k = A↵1A↵2 ... A↵k ,
(3.35)
where the product should be understood as a matrix multiplication over the bond
indicies in the sense of ﬁgure 3.2. Again the local tensors need not be identical, which
tensor is referred to is labelled through the index. This realizes a local description of
the state which resembles the product structure, however the presence of bond indicies
makes it possible for this state to encode generic quantum states. The utility of the
matrix product state decomposition is that we now have a clear way of determining
which states are close to the manifold of product states, it will be the states for
which the bond dimensions are bounded. From our discussion of the singular value
decomposition we know that this corresponds to ﬁnite correlations between di↵erent
subsystems, which is exactly what is needed to describe non-Markovian e↵ects.
32
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.3: Tensor network diagram illustrating the contraction of a matrix product
state with a matrix product operator. Notice that the contraction increases the overall
bond dimension.
In the next chapter we will often refer to the local contraction of a matrix prod-
uct state with a matrix product operator. A matrix product operator is conceptually
identical to the matrix product state, but each local tensor can have multiple uncon-
tracted indicies. A local contraction procedure is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.3, in which
a matrix product state is contracted with a matrix product operator to give a new
matrix product state. The contraction increases the bond dimensions, and often the
contraction would be followed by a matrix product state decomposition where the
singular values are truncated.
3.4
Concluding remarks
In this chapter we have deﬁned what is meant by a Markovian quantum process,
and discussed the relative entropy measure of non-Markovianity. We have outlined
how master equation methods applies to modelling the e↵ective density operator, and
pointed out the connection between the operational notion of Markovianity and the
regression theorem. Master equation methods are often diﬃcult to apply for non-
Markovian processes, and instead one has to turn to numerical simulation methods.
We have introduced some of the basic notions of tensor network theory, and argued
why representing quantum process as matrix product states would be physically sen-
sible.
33
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Tensor network simulation of the
Gaussian inﬂuence functional
In this chapter we show how tensor network methods can be applied to compute
the e↵ective state highly eﬃciently for the class of physical systems which can be
approximated as e↵ective spin systems interacting with Gaussian environments. The
tensor network approach to this class of problems was ﬁrst developed in [7] to simulate
the reduced density operator.
Here we generalize the tensor network method to
compute the full e↵ective state. Interestingly it turns out that the generalization
naturally leads to a re-designed algorithm signiﬁcantly outperforming the original
construction.
4.1
E↵ective spin systems and harmonic dissipation
A large number of physical systems at the quantum scale can be described by gener-
alized coordinates with an associated potential energy surface containing a number
of approximately degenerate energy minima [14], [15]. If the thermal energy of the
system is small compared to the energy spacing of these minima, then the system
can to a good approximation be described by an e↵ective spin system. Throughout
this chapter we consider the simplest case of two potential energy minima, such that
we have an e↵ective two-state system, the method generalized to higher spin system
straightforwardly. If the two-state system is isolated then it can be described by the
Hamiltonian [15]
HS = E ˆSz + V ˆSx
(4.1)
where ˆS(x,z) are spin operators with eigenvalues ±1/2, obeying the anti-commutation
relation
n
ˆSz, ˆSx
o
= 0. Often we will make us of the Pauli operators σ(x,z) given
by ˆS(x,z) = 1/2σ(x,z) [11]. The measurable quantity in most of these systems is the
localization of the system, which is described by the eigenstate of ˆSz. The zero point
of the energy is taken to be the average of the ground state energy of the two potential
minima, this then gives energies of ±E/2. In addition the model has a term inducing
tunneling between the two e↵ective spin states, the tunnelling amplitude is described
by the energy V . We will mostly consider the symmetric, or unbiased, case where
E ⇡0.
34
==PAGE:36==
A quantum system is never truly isolated, and in the case of e↵ective spin systems
we often consider a principle environment coupling of the form ˆSz ˆB where ˆB is an
environment operator. The spin state of the system is thus measured by the envi-
ronment, such interactions tend to degrade the phase coherence of the reduced spin
state. In a wide range of problems involving extended coordinate systems we can fo-
cus exclusively on a ˆSz coupling, however for example in nuclear magnetic resonance
we would have to consider an environment perturbing the spin in all directions [14],
[15]. Provided that the coupling to any one degree of freedom in the environment is
suﬃciently weak, it is generally a good approximation to model the environment as
a collection of harmonic oscillators [15]. The dissipative two-level system can then be
described by the spin-boson model Hamiltonian
H = HS + ˆSz
X
↵
⇣
g↵a↵+ g⇤
↵a†
↵
⌘
+
X
↵
!↵a†
↵a↵
= HS + HB ,
(4.2)
where HS describes the free spin system, and the bath inﬂuence is collected in HB.
A bath mode has energy !↵, and is created (annihilated) by the bosonic operator
a†
↵(a↵). The system operator ˆSz interacts with the oscillator bath with coupling
constants g↵.
The spin-boson model has been widely studied for many decades, and its prop-
erties can be understood analytically in many limiting cases [14], [15], [19]. Here we
will focus on a numerically exact simulation using tensor network methods.
The spin-boson model inﬂuence functional
First we consider the structure of the e↵ective state for the spin-boson model Hamil-
tonian. Recall that an arbitrary e↵ective state takes the form
⇤k|0 = TrE
⇣
Uk:k−1 ◦... ◦U1:0
h1
 +2⌦k ⌦⇢SE
0
i⌘
,
(4.3)
and adopt the convention that all unitary maps evolve the system for an inﬁnitesimal
time δt. To ease the notation we will stop writing the time-interval explicitly, Uk:k−1 =
U, as all the unitaries evolve for the same amount of time. This means we have to
be slightly careful as the unitary maps do not act on the same system space, however
the meaning of a given expression is usually clear from the context. We assume that
the initial system-environment state factorizes ⇢SE
0
= ⇢S
0 ⌦σE
0 , and throughout we
take the initial environment state to be a thermal state given by
σE
0 = exp
"
−β
X
↵
!↵a†
↵a↵
#
/Z ,
(4.4)
at an inverse temperature β = 1/T, where T is the temperature. Here Z denote the
usual partition function, deﬁned through the normalization condition on quantum
states.
Next we consider the problem of simulating this e↵ective state. To this end we
substitute the exact unitary maps, with an approximation in which the environment
35
==PAGE:37==
inﬂuence can be separated from the free spin dynamics. That is we perform a Trotter-
Suzuki splitting [24] of each unitary map into a system and an environment part
U = UBU0 + O(δt2) ,
(4.5)
where UB is a unitary map generated by HB, and U0 is a unitary map generated by
H0. The term O(δt2) describe the introduced error, and indicates that the leading
term in the error scales as δt2. Here we consider a ﬁrst order Trotter-Suzuki splitting,
the generalization to higher order splittings are straightforward but would complicate
the presentation. Notice that the Trotter-Suzuki approximation does not break the
unitarity of the problem. This means that the error should not manifests itself as
any kind of unphysical behaviour, rather it should be understood as a discrepancy
between the exact and the simulated model. For a given timestep δt the discrepancy
between the simulated and the exact model grows linearly in the number of timesteps
simulated.
When written in terms of these approximate unitary maps, the e↵ective state
takes the form of an environment inﬂuence functional acting on a free e↵ective state
⇤k|0 = Fk|1
h
⇤Free
k|0
i
,
(4.6)
where these objects are given by
Fk|1 = TrE
1
UB ◦... ◦UB
⇥
σE
0
⇤2
,
(4.7)
⇤Free
k|0 = U0 ◦... ◦U0
h1
 +2⌦k ⌦⇢S
0
i
.
(4.8)
The free e↵ective state is simple the e↵ective state that one would ﬁnd if there was
no environment inﬂuence, consequently there are no memory e↵ects, and the free
state takes on a product state structure. The inﬂuence functional Fk|1 is a many-
body operator acting on the collection of system output spaces, and encodes all
environment induced memory e↵ects.
Next we make use of the fact that the environment inﬂuence HB is diagonal in the
eigenstates of the spin operator ˆSz. This implies that the inﬂuence functional is also
diagonal in the basis of spin operator eigenstates, and we can study each diagonal
element independently. A speciﬁc diagonal element is expressed as
⇥
Fk|1
⇤sk...s1 ,
(4.9)
where we have introduced the composite index sl = (s+
l , s−
l ) to denote two ˆSz eigen-
values. Recall that the inﬂuence functional operate on the collection of output spaces,
and the subscript on the index labels the temporal ordering of these. Each composite
index takes d2 possible values, for a d-dimensional spin system, and we are thus faced
with the problem of constructing a tensor growing exponentially in the number of
timesteps simulated.
The spin-boson model is one of the known models for which each diagonal ele-
ment has an exact analytical form [20], [21]. The existence of an analytical form is
a consequence of the spin-boson model Hamiltonian being quadratic, or Gaussian,
in bath creation and annihilation operators. More generally an analytic inﬂuence
functional could be derived for any Gaussian environment, not just the spin-boson
36
==PAGE:38==
model. The exact expression for a given diagonal element is given by a product of
two-point functions
⇥
Fk|1
⇤sk...s1 =
k
Y
i=1
iY
j=1
b(i−j) (si, sj) ,
(4.10)
where the individual two point functions depend on a pair of output states and on
their temporal separation as
b(i−j) (si, sj) = exp
⇣
−(s+
i −s−
i )(⌘i−js+
j −⌘⇤
i−js−
j )
⌘
.
(4.11)
Memory e↵ects are described by a memory kernel which is given by
⌘i−j =
Z ti
ti−1
Z tj
tj−1
dt0dt00C(t0 −t00) ,
if i 6= j
=
Z ti
ti−1
Z t0
ti−1
dt0dt00C(t0 −t00) ,
if i = j ,
(4.12)
where the memory kernel is a function of the bath autocorrelation function
C(t) =
Z 1
0
d!J(!)

coth
✓β!
2
◆
cos(!t) −isin(!t)
9
,
(4.13)
which is a function of the environment spectral density J(!). The spectral density
has the general form J(!) = P
↵| g↵|2 δ(! −!↵) [14], [19], [22]. The memory kernel
goes to zero as the temporal separation increases, this means that the b(i−j) goes to
an identity as (i −j) gets large.
The analytical results for the inﬂuence functional allows us study the structure
of memory e↵ects in the spin-boson model. The challenge is now to construct the
exponentially many diagonal elements, we will see that this can be done eﬃciently
using the tensor network representations discussed in the preceding chapter.
4.2
Tensor network representation and contraction
As motivated in the preceding chapter we would expect that the e↵ective density
operator could be represented eﬃciently by the class of matrix product states with
bounded bond dimensions. In this section we will outline how the inﬂuence functional
can be represented as a two-dimensional tensor network. The challenge is then to
contract this network down to its boundary matrix product state.
To make this
contraction eﬃcient it is necessary to continuously compress the project the network
into the manifold of matrix product states with a bounded set of bond dimensions.
Time-evolving matrix product operators
First of all we introduce the tensor network representation of the inﬂuence functional,
in the form it was developed in [7]. First of all we will see that it is useful to express
the two-point inﬂuence functions as four index inﬂuence tensors deﬁned by
Brisj
sirj = δsj
rj δri
sib(i−j)(si, sj) ,
(4.14)
37
==PAGE:39==
where the two auxiliary indicies (ri, rj) are introduced for later convenience. A graph-
ical representation of this tensor is shown in ﬁgure 4.1.(1.a). The inﬂuence functional
can be constructed from this set of tensors by connecting legs corresponding to the
same state. Consider the following matrix product operator
Gi|1 =
X
↵1,...,↵i+1
X
ri
B↵1s1
↵2r2B↵2s2
↵3r2 ... B↵i−1si−1
↵iri−1
B↵isi
↵i+1riδ↵i+1ri ,
(4.15)
where the Greek letter indicies label internal bonds which are summed over, and the
Kronecker delta function in the end implements a boundary condition on the full
tensor. The boundary condition is chosen such that each node in the network have
access to index si. The mathematical expression for this tensor is complicated looking,
however the graphical representation shown in ﬁgure 4.1.(1.b) illustrates that we have
simply contracted tensors together in a one-dimensional chain ordered by the non-
locality of the inﬂuence tensors, that is the di↵erence (i −j). Recall that connected
legs indicate contraction over the corresponding tensor indicies.
We now form a two-dimensional network by contracting matrix product operators
for di↵erent values of i along the vertical bonds in the network. We will write the full
result of this contraction procedure as
Fk|1 =
k
Y
i=1
Gi|1 ,
(4.16)
which should be understood as the two-dimensional tensor networks shown in ﬁgure
4.1.(1.c). In the above we do not write the tensor indicies explicitly, but remember
that the object strictly speaking corresponds to a speciﬁc diagonal inﬂuence func-
tional element. We have used the symbol for the inﬂuence functional to denote this
contraction of matrix product operators because the resulting object is by construc-
tion a tensor network representation of the inﬂuence functional in equation (4.10)
and encodes the same overall tensor. The contraction of the tensor network down
to its boundary matrix product state, can be formulated iteratively as a series of
propagators. The two-dimensional representation takes the form
Fk|1 = Gk|1Gk−1|1 ... G2|1G1|1 ,
(4.17)
The individual elements on the right hand side are called the time-evolving matrix
product operators [7]. Each of these describe how the spin state at one time depends
on past spin states, we will refer to them as the TEMPO propagators.
Boundary freedom of network representation
We could now move on to the problem of contracting the network eﬃciently, however
it turns out to be useful to point out a slightly awkward feature of the TEMPO
representation.
The inﬂuence functional encodes memory e↵ects, and it is to be
contracted with the sequence of maps describing the free unitary dynamics of the
spin system (equation (4.6)). The free unitaries are represented by tensors which are
completely local in the sense that they only depend on spin states separated by a
single inﬁnitesimal timestep. Now in the TEMPO representation, these unitary maps
are to be contracted with the open legs in ﬁgure 4.1.(1.c). This boundary consist of
38
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.1:
(1.a) Graphical representation of the four index inﬂuence tensors, the
dotted line is included as a reference on the orientation as a later ﬁgure has the
tensor rotated. (1.b) Representation of the TEMPO propagator, with a lighter color
indicating a more non-local tensor. (1.c) The full TEMPO network, a single TEMPO
propagator is indicated by the dotted line box.
(2.a) Illustration of the boundary
freedom inherent in the network representation. (3.a) Representation of the CaMPP
propagator. (3.b) The local boundary network.
the most non-local tensors, while the local tensors are situated along the diagonal of
the diagram. When thinking about the construction in this way, it would seem more
natural to have the open indicies along the most local boundary. If this was the case
then the contraction to the boundary matrix product state, could be conceptualized
as adding increasingly long-range memory e↵ects to an initially Markovian process.
It does not take long to convince oneself that the TEMPO construction contains
an inherent redundancy. When constructing the network we imposed a boundary
condition on the local boundary, such that the spin label si was accessible to all
the tensor in a horizontal row. However, this condition can be implemented in a
number ways which are di↵erent from the speciﬁc choice of equation (4.15). The
only requirement is that the two uncontracted indicies on the local boundary tensors
must take on the same value. This only requires the delta function in equation (4.15)
but not the summation over ri. If this summation is not carried out the network
has two open boundaries as shown in ﬁgure 4.1.(2.a). By construction both of these
boundaries encode the same inﬂuence functional, and the network thus has an inherent
redundancy. Removing this redundancy can be done by making a speciﬁc boundary
choice, and tracing out the other boundary.
If the network is fully contracted to a single k-index tensor, then the tensor will
be the same independently of the boundary choice. When not contracting the net-
work fully, but instead ﬁnding the boundary matrix product state, then the di↵erent
boundary choices can lead to di↵erent local tensors.
This property that di↵erent
tensor networks can encode the same global tensor, is a consequence of the Gauge
redundancy inherent in tensor network representations [26]. We will now look at the
algorithm resulting from working with the local boundary.
39
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.2: Tensor network representation of the causal matrix product propagator
contraction procedure (left) and the TEMPO contraction procedure (right).
Time
ﬂows upwards and the e↵ective state is encoded on the open boundary.
Causal matrix product propagators
Structuring the contraction algorithm around the local boundary choice comes with
conceptual changes. We now have to view the construction of the inﬂuence functional
as contracting a series of propagators encoding how the current state inﬂuence future
states
Fk|1 = Ck|kCk|k−1 ... Ck|2Ck|1 .
(4.18)
This set of propagators describes how a spin state inﬂuences future spin states, we
will refer to these propagators as the causal matrix product propagators (CaMPP).
Conceptually this is di↵erent from the TEMPO case and from how we usually think
about master equations with memory kernels, in that the causal propagators does not
work by acting on the system history. Rather all relevant information is propagated
locally in an e↵ective environment memory space as illustrated in ﬁgure 4.2. The
causal propagators are given by
Ck|i =
X
↵k+1,...,↵i
Brk↵k+1
sk↵k
Brk−1↵k
sk−1↵k−1 ... Bri+1↵i+2
si+1↵i+1Bri↵i+1
si↵i
δ↵isi ,
(4.19)
where the diagrammatic form is shown in ﬁgure 4.1.(3.a). The left boundary index
has been traced over, and the right boundary index is constrained to equal the si
index.
The product of two causal propagators is obtained by locally connecting
corresponding legs, and the full inﬂuence functional is constructed iteratively. Given
the tensor network picture it is clear that the causal propagators give the boundary
choice of ﬁgure 4.1.(3.b), and that the distinction between the TEMPO and CaMPP
formulations is a matter of how tensors are grouped. The new insight that is pointed
out here is that di↵erent network boundary choices motivates di↵erent contraction
algorithms, and as we will see di↵erent choices can lead to large di↵erences in the
performance of the resulting algorithm.
Eﬃcient network contraction
Constructing the inﬂuence functional has been formulated as a problem of eﬃciently
contracting a two-dimensional tensor network, down to its boundary matrix product
state. The full inﬂuence functional is a k index tensor, with a size growing exponen-
tially in the number of time steps. This exponential growth manifest itself by the
40
==PAGE:42==
fact that the maximum bond dimension grows by a factor of d2 in each iteration. In
both the TEMPO and the CaMPP cases eﬃciency is achieved by ﬁnding a minimal
representation in each iteration. A minimal representation is obtained by replacing
high rank tensors by lower rank approximations. This is done by performing a matrix
product state decomposition as was outlined in the preceding chapter, and discard
the singular values below a speciﬁed cuto↵value λc. Indicating an index partition by
raised and lowered indicies the singular value decomposed tensor takes the form
Csk...sj+1sj...si = U sk...sj+1↵D↵β
⇣
V †⌘
βsj...si ,
(4.20)
where the diagonal matrix D↵β contains the singular values, and U,V are unitary
matrices. Truncating the singular values reduces the sizes of U and V, with an intro-
duced error determined by the cuto↵. The contraction procedures for the TEMPO
and CaMPP cases are shown in ﬁgure 4.2. Starting out from one boundary, propaga-
tors are contracted together iteratively. In each iteration the boundary state will have
a maximal bond dimension growing by a factor of d2. The bonds can be compressed
by performing a matrix product state decomposition, as outlined in the previous
chapter, and truncating the singular values [25], [26].
A nice feature of the causal matrix product propagators, not shared by the
TEMPO propagators, is that in each iteration the algorithm produce a local ten-
sor which is not updated further. Physically, this makes explicit the causality of the
process, by constraining the future process to not inﬂuence the past. This means that
the causal structure becomes a property of the local tensors, in the sense that if one
is interested in an intermediate state, it can be obtained by simply cutting the bond
representing correlations with future states, and tracing over the resulting free index.
Another di↵erence between the two approaches is that for the TEMPO propa-
gators the boundary state being propagated contains all the information about past
states. Of this information it is only part of it which is relevant for predicting future
states. The causal propagators make it possible to separate out the relevant infor-
mation. This restricted information is well described by a smaller sub-manifold of
the full state space. Because of this, the contraction of the causal matrix product
propagator network should be signiﬁcantly faster than the TEMPO network.
4.3
Network complexity and scaling
In this section we examine the performance of the tensor network algorithms discussed
above, for the speciﬁc case of an unbiased (E = 0) spin-1/2 system interacting with
a bosonic bath. Recall the form of the Hamiltonian operator
H = V ˆSx + ˆSz
X
↵
⇣
g↵a↵+ g⇤
↵a†
↵
⌘
+
X
↵
!↵a†
↵a↵,
(4.21)
where ˆSx, ˆSz are the usual spin operators, and V is the tunnelling element between
localized spin states. The bath autocorrelation function depends on the environment
spectral density. Here we consider an continuum bath model with an Ohmic spec-
tral density J(!) = 2↵!exp (−!/!c), with the coupling strength ↵and the cuto↵
frequency !c [22], [7], [19]. We compare the performances of the two approaches in
41
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.3: (Left) Spin dynamics obtained with the causal propagators, starting in a
spin-up state. The parameters used are β−1 = 0.0meV, V = 1meV, δt = 0.10meV−1
and !c = 5V . The dynamics computed using CaMPP are shown with solid lines for
the couplings ↵= 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5. Results obtained using TEMPO propaga-
tors is shown with dotted lines except for ↵= 0.5. In both cases the same singular
value truncation is applied, in the TEMPO propagator case this gives rise to dynamics
which is not fully converged. (Right) Computational resource comparison between the
two algorithms measured in computation time, the use of causal propagators provide
a signiﬁcant speed-up compared to the TEMPO algorithm.
computing the e↵ective density operator, and check for convergence by observing the
uncontrolled spin dynamics.
Dynamics obtained at weaker coupling is shown on the left in ﬁgure (4.3). The
computational resource scaling di↵erence between the two approaches is compared
on the right in ﬁgure (4.3). The resource is measured in computation time. Using
the causal propagators the resources required becomes constant after an initial period
scaling as a small polynomial. The required resource is seen to decrease over time,
but this is simply because a ﬁnite time duration is considered. Using the TEMPO
propagator algorithm the resources required grows at best linearly with each iteration,
we see that the CaMPP algorithm achieves a performance improvement of 1-2 orders
of magnitude compared to TEMPO. For long-time simulations, stronger couplings,
or high resolutions this results in signiﬁcant speed-up using the causal propagator
approach. In addition the overall error associated with causal propagators is smaller
as fewer lower-rank approximations are computed. This is illustrated on the left in
ﬁgure (4.3) where the same truncation which gives converged dynamics when using
the causal propagators, gives dynamics which is not fully converged when using the
TEMPO propagators. This indicates that the obtained scaling di↵erence is only a
lower bound on the actual di↵erence. Physically the spin is observed to carry out
damped oscillations up to the Toulouse point (↵= 0.5) [19], [15], at which point the
dynamics become critically damped.
At stronger couplings, the TEMPO algorithm generally requires more extensive
computational resources than a standard laptop can provide [7]. Since the causal
propagators only propagate an e↵ective memory space the simulation can be per-
formed at stronger couplings without a super-computing cluster available. The un-
42
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.4: (Left) Spin dynamics obtained with the causal propagators, starting from
a spin-up state. The parameters used are β−1 = 0.0meV, V = 1meV, δt = 0.10meV−1
and !c = 5V .
(Right) Computational resource scaling measured in computation
time.
controlled spin dynamics at stronger couplings is shown on the left in ﬁgure 4.4.
The resource scaling of the causal propagator algorithm is shown on the right. Even
though the resource scaling is small enough that the computations can be performed
with a standard laptop, the resulting matrix product state is equally complex for both
the TEMPO and the CaMPP algorithms. A consequence of this is that even though
the simulation can be done eﬃciently, the eﬃcient manipulation of this state requires
the processing power of a super-computing cluster. In ﬁgure 4.4 the simulation has
been carried out for parameters which does not result in full convergence. Physically
the dynamics is observed to become increasingly localized in one spin eigenstate as
the coupling is increased. This is in agreement with known properties of the spin-
boson model which has a phase transition at a critical coupling ↵c = 1 + O(V/!c)
[7], [15], [23]. An in depth examination of this localization transition would require
computational resources beyond what has been available for this project.
4.4
Concluding remarks
In this chapter we have developed a highly eﬃcient tensor network algorithm which
allows one to simulate the e↵ective state for the class of spin-boson models, much
more eﬃciently than previous algorithms. That is we have designed a method which
makes it possible to simulate ⇤k|0 highly eﬃciently for inﬁnitesimally separated con-
trol operations. A speciﬁc controlled process can then be studied by specifying an
e↵ective ﬁlter function. Any numerical algorithm su↵ers from having to balance an
error minimization and a restriction of the network complexity, in the next chapter
we show how the CaMPP algorithm can be used in hybrid with a tomographic recon-
struction procedure to give a truly eﬃcient simulation method with an approximately
constant error.
43
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Tomographic reconstruction of
any open quantum dynamics
In this chapter we introduce the transfer tensor method [2], [4] as it was developed
for simulating the dynamics of the reduced density operator. The method is then
generalized to describe the e↵ective density operator encoding multi-time statistics.
The generalization in itself is interesting, however the real utility of it is that it
provides a well-deﬁned way of generating eﬃcient propagators of few-point statistics,
such as for example two-point correlation functions, which are highly eﬃcient.
5.1
Non-Markovian dynamical maps
The transfer tensor method is essentially a black-box engineering approach, or to-
mographic reconstruction, in which one assumes no knowledge about the underlying
system-environment Hamiltonian. Consequently the developed methods apply to any
open system regardless the form of the microscopic model. It was originally intro-
duced as an ansatz in [4], but was later derived rigorously in [2]. There it was also
shown that it can be applied to time-dependent problems, cases with initial system-
environment correlations, and instances where the environment is not initially in a
steady state.
Suppose that one has obtained a set of non-Markovian dynamical maps at the
discrete times tk = kδt such that the density operator at any time tk is related to the
density operator at the initial time t0 by
⇢tk = E(tk; t0) [⇢t0] ,
(5.1)
where the initial system-environment state is assumed factorizing. The discrete times
could correspond to the timestep in a numerical simulation or to the time resolution
of an actual experimental reconstruction. The maps are referred to as non-Markovian
dynamical maps as no speciﬁc substructure is assumed a priori, they simply describe
the input-output relations obtained through a tomographic reconstruction of the open
dynamics. One conventional notion of Markovianity is that these maps form a dynam-
ical semi-group [4], [19]. If the non-Markovian maps satisfy the semi-group property
they would decompose as
E(tk; t0) = E(tk; tk−1) ◦... ◦E(t1; t0) .
(5.2)
44
==PAGE:46==
This semi-group structure of the maps is closely related to the operational notion of
Markovianity, however as was shown in [13] the semi-group property is not in itself
suﬃcient for a process to be operationally Markovian.
Now suppose that the dynamics has been fully characterized over a number of
timesteps k 2 [0, K], that is the non-Markovian dynamical maps have been obtained
for these times. Then we can ask the following question; is it possible given the set
of maps for k K to construct the maps describing timesteps with k > K? In other
words, does the constructed maps {E(tk; t0)}K
k=1 encode suﬃcient information on the
structure of temporal correlations in the underlying dynamics, to infer the structure of
maps extending over a longer time-duration than that over which the set of available
maps was initially constructed? In cases where the temporal correlations present in
the physical system of interest only extend over a ﬁnite time, which is indeed most
systems studied within quantum physics, then the answer to this question is yes [4],
[2].
The initial proposal in [4] introduced as an ansatz the following transformation
of the set of dynamical maps onto a set of transfer tensors given by
T(tk; t0) = E(tk; t0) −
k−1
X
s=1
T(tk; ts) ◦E(ts; t0) ,
(5.3)
which can be constructed iteratively for k 2 [0, K] given the non-Markovian dynamical
maps. The transformation onto the set of transfer tensors can conceptually be seen as
an expansion around a dynamics satisfying the semi-group property. In the case where
all transfer tensors except the leading term T(tk : tk−1) vanishes, the resulting process
satisfy the semi-group property. The inclusion of additional terms then corresponds
to introducing memory e↵ects. Given the set of transfer tensors, the density operator
can be expressed as
⇢tk =
k−1
X
j=0
T(tk; tj)
⇥
⇢tj
⇤
(5.4)
such that the non-Markovian dynamical map E(tk; t0) have been decomposed into
a set of transfer tensors describing how the state at tk depend on its past trajec-
tory
:
⇢tj
 k−1
j=0. The transfer tensors in essence sort of the temporal correlations over
di↵erent timescales.
Having obtained a decomposition of the non-Markovian dynamical maps into the
set of transfer tensors, we ask the question of when the reconstructed set of transfer
tensors over a certain set of times would allow us to infer the transfer tensors for
an extended set of times. If the system exhibits a bounded memory time this would
manifest itself as a vanishing of transfer tensor terms above the memory time [2].
That is if one ﬁnds that
|| T(tk; tj) || ⇡0
,
for (tk −tj) > Tmemory ,
(5.5)
where || ... || denotes a suitably chosen norm and Tmemory a proposed memory time
serving as a convergence parameter, then the sum over transfer tensors in equation
(5.4) can be approximated by a truncated sum. In most of the work done to date the
error is quantiﬁed using the operator norm [4], [2].
45
==PAGE:47==
Now if in addition to having a bounded memory length, the dynamical maps
describing the physical system are time homogeneous or periodic such that
E(tk : tj) = E(tk+ap : tj+ap)
for j < k ,
a 2 Z+ ,
(5.6)
where T = pδt is the period of the maps, then we have a corresponding periodicity
of the transfer tensors
T(tk : tj) = T(tk+ap : tj+ap)
,
a 2 Z+ ,
(5.7)
which enables us to map an arbitrary transfer tensors to an equivalent one with
j 2 [0, p].
One then obtains a ﬁnite set of transfer tensors which fully describes
memory e↵ects up to the memory time cuto↵. Since the transfer tensors are peri-
odic they can be used to propagate the density operator to longer times, than the
initially reconstructed set. This propagation is highly eﬃcient as it only involves mul-
tiplying two-index tensors, and consequently long-time propagation can be performed
eﬃciently.
Connection with master equation approaches
The transfer tensors encode memory e↵ects in the dynamics, and it can be useful
to relate them to an underlying microscopic model. Open system dynamics is often
modelled using the Nakajima-Zwanzig density operator master equation [4], [2], [19]
@t⇢S(t, t0) = LS(t)⇢S(t, t0) +
Z t
t0
ds K(t, s)⇢S(s, t0) ,
(5.8)
where K(t, s) is the memory kernel, and LS(t) is the Liouvillian operator on the
system alone. It can be shown [2] that this equation is in fact the continuous limit
of equation (5.4). The transfer tensors are then identiﬁed as a formal solution of the
discrete Nakajima-Zwanzig equation [4], [2] and one can make the correspondence
T(tk : tj) = (1 + LSδt) δk,j+1 + Kk,jδt2 ,
(5.9)
where Kk,j = K(tk, tj). Hence if one is able to construct the set of transfer tensors,
either tomographically or numerically, then a phenomenological memory kernel and
system Hamiltonian could be reconstructed.
5.2
Generalizing the transfer tensor method
In this section we generalize the transfer tensor construction presented above to the
case of the e↵ective density operator. The question which is now asked is whether
one can construct an extended e↵ective state given an e↵ective state over a certain
number of time-steps. The existence of generalization in itself is an interesting result,
however it would often be diﬃcult to apply. The primary reason for this is that an
experimenter would never carry out complete tomography of a k-step process for large
k. Even if the input is generated from a numerical simulation which can provide the
full e↵ective state, it is unlikely that the resulting scaling would be better than that
of the original simulation. Therefore the real utility of the generalization is that it
46
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.1: (a) Matrix product state representation of the e↵ective state, the e↵ective
state can be written as a sum of transfer tensor terms describing temporal correlations
over di↵erent timescales. (b) Illustration of the e↵ective state being contracted with
a speciﬁc instrument. (c) Representation of the identity map which does nothing to
the system.
makes it possible to generate instrument speciﬁc sets of transfer tensors, such that
for example two-point correlations could be propagated eﬃciently given the set of
reconstructed two-point functions over a restricted time interval.
Suppose we are interested in the general k-step e↵ective density operator for an
initially uncorrelated system-environment state. Recall that such a state is given by
⇤k|0 = TrE
⇣
Uk|k−1 ... U1|0
h1
 +2⌦k ⌦⌧R
0
i⌘
⌦⇢0
= ˜⇤k|0 ⌦⇢0 ,
(5.10)
where ⌧R
0
is a reference state of the environment at time t0, and ⇢0 is the initial
state of the system. We impose the condition that the di↵erent times are separated
by a ﬁxed amount such that δt = tk −tk−1 for all k.
The method as presented
here would generalize straightforwardly to the case of an initially correlated system
environment state, however the generalization introduces some complications and as
we will not consider the initially correlated case we will focus exclusively on the an
initially uncorrelated state. In the above expression we introduced the ˜⇤k|0 state, it
will be useful to introduce a slight generalization given by
˜⇤k|s = TrE
⇣
Uk|k−1 ... Us+1|s
h1
 +2⌦(k−s) ⌦⌧R
s
i⌘
,
(5.11)
where the time dependent reference state ⌧R
s
is drawn from a set
:
⌧R
s
 k
s=0.
This
set could be deﬁned in any way that is convenient to the speciﬁc problem. Here we
will exclusively chose this reference state to be the environment state resulting from
tracing out all past system degrees of freedom, that is
˜⇤k|s = Trs|0 ˜⇤k|0 ,
(5.12)
where the notation Trs|0 means that all system Hilbert spaces from the input space at
t0 to the output space at ts are traced over. Carrying out this trace one ﬁnds that the
47
==PAGE:49==
environment state at ts+1 resulting from this procedure is related to the environment
state at ts through the update rule
⌧(R)
s+1 = TrS
1
Us+1|s
⇥
1/d ⌦⌧R
s
⇤2
,
(5.13)
which could in principle be used to obtain the environment state given ⌧R
0 . In many
cases it is possible to arrange the problem such that the environment state is station-
ary with respect to the above update rule. If the initial environment state is a thermal
state, then it is possible to add and subtract terms to the Hamiltonian generating
the unitary evolution which would have the e↵ect that ⌧(R)
s+1 = ⌧(R)
s
for all times [6],
[19]. From here on we will always assume that the thermal state is stationary, and
that the reference state of the environment is in a thermal state.
We are now ready to introduce the generalized transfer tensor method. Adapt-
ing the ideas introduced in [2], we emulate the structure of the Nakajima-Zwanzig
projection operators, and deﬁne a set of time-dependent projectors by
Ps˜⇤k|j = ˜⇤k|s ⌦˜⇤s|j ,
Qs˜⇤k|j = ˜⇤k|j −˜⇤k|s ⌦˜⇤s|j ,
for k ≥s ≥j
(5.14)
where these projection operators satisfy the identity relation (Ps + Qs) ˜⇤k|j = ˜⇤k|j.
The projection operator Ps remove the temporal correlations carried across any con-
trol operation implemented at timestep ts, and the projection operator Qs accounts
for the discrepancy that this introduces.
Having introduced these time-dependent projectors, we can apply the identity
relation iteratively to the e↵ective state. This procedure results in a decomposition
given by
˜⇤k|0 =
1
Pk−1 + Qk−1
1
Pk−2 + Qk−2 ( ... (P2 + Q2 (P1 + Q1)) ... )
22 ˜⇤k|0 .
(5.15)
If the right hand side is expanded out, the decomposition takes a form similar to
the transfer tensor decomposition of the reduced density operator described in the
preceding section
˜⇤k|0 =
k−1
X
s=0
Tk|s ⌦˜⇤s|0
,
˜⇤0|0 = 1 ,
(5.16)
where the generalized set of transfer tensors is given by
Tk|s = Qk−1 ... Qs+1˜⇤k|s .
(5.17)
Using the properties of the projection operators it is then straightforward to show
that this set of operators can be related to one another recursively as
Tk|k−j = ˜⇤k|k−j −
k−1
X
s=j+1
Tk|s ⌦˜⇤s|j .
(5.18)
Notice that only the leading transfer tensor Tk|k−1 has a non-vanishing trace.
Conceptually the set of generalized transfer tensors encode genuine multi-time
correlations. The recursive construction shows that the transfer tensor Tk|0 is obtained
from the e↵ective state ˜⇤k|0 by subtracting all correlations which can be accounted
48
==PAGE:50==
for by its marginals. If all transfer tensors but the one propagating the system over
a single timestep Tk|k−1 vanishes, then the full process takes the form
⇤Markov
k|0
= ˜⇤k|k−1 ⌦... ⌦˜⇤1|0 ⌦⇢0 ,
(5.19)
which is a Markovian e↵ective state according to the operational deﬁnition of Marko-
vianity. The transfer tensor decomposition can thus be thought of as a reorganiza-
tion of the temporal correlations of a process, into an expansion of the e↵ective state
around its optimal Markovian state with respect to the relative entropy measure of
Markovianity. The connection to the relative entropy measure follows from how the
projectors have been deﬁned.
Eﬃcient propagation and error scaling
If the speciﬁc process considered is time homogeneous or driven periodically with
some period T = pδt, then the e↵ective states has a time translation invariance of
the form
˜⇤k|s = ˜⇤k+ap|s+ap
8a 2 Z+ .
(5.20)
Such a time translation invariance means that the family of e↵ective states for di↵erent
values of k and s can be mapped to an equivalent e↵ective state with s 2 [0, p]. This
invariance carries over to the transfer tensors
Tk|s = Tk+ap|s+ap ,
(5.21)
such that the full set of transfer tensors can be mapped to a smaller, but complete,
set with s 2 [0, p]. For each value of s in this interval, one then ﬁnds a collection of
transfer tensors which only depends on the time di↵erence (k −s)δt.
If the contribution to the e↵ective state ˜⇤k|0 from terms Tk|s with (k −s)δt >
Tmemory is negligible, then the state is well approximated by a state with no genuine
(k −s)-point correlations. This kind of behaviour is to be expected in systems ex-
hibiting a ﬁnite memory time. Given the time-translation invariance of the transfer
tensors, it is then possible to generate extended e↵ective states iteratively
˜⇤k+j|0 =
k−1
X
s=1
Tk+j|s+j ⌦˜⇤s+j|0 .
(5.22)
This is so because transfer tensors with (k −s)δt > Tmemory are assumed to vanish,
and the full set of transfer tensors can be mapped to a now ﬁnite set with s 2 [0, p]
and (k −s)δt < Tmemory. Hence under these conditions the e↵ective state describing
arbitrary multi-time correlations can be generated from a ﬁnite set of transfer tensors.
The error associated with discarding transfer tensors encoding temporal correla-
tions longer than the memory length can be quantiﬁed by a suitable norm on the
di↵erence
Error =|| ˜⇤k|0 −˜⇤(approx.)
k|0
|| ,
(5.23)
where ˜⇤(approx.)
k|0
contains no transfer tensor terms above the memory length. If we
chose to quantify the error using the operator norm [27] given by || A ||1= Tr
p
A†A,
49
==PAGE:51==
then the error can be bounded by the sum of the operator norms of the discarded
transfer tensors
Error 
X
⌧>Tmemory
|| Ttk|tk−⌧||1 .
(5.24)
If temporal correlations decay exponentially, then the bound on the error will be
dominated by the transfer tensor in the above sum encoding temporal correlations at
the memory length. A nice feature of the transfer tensor method is that the growth
of the error is multiplicative rather than additive, this makes it possible to propagate
the state with an approximately constant error.
Generating ﬁlter function speciﬁc propagators
The construction of a generalized set of transfer tensors shows that if given the k-
point e↵ective state for suﬃciently large k, then it is in principle possible to construct
extended e↵ective states for larger k. The construction so far is fully general in the
sense that it propagates the full e↵ective state, however this also potentially makes
it ineﬃcient. To represent both the e↵ective state and the transfer tensors above
eﬃciently, they must be expressed as matrix product states.
When propagating
the e↵ective state, we are then forced to add together matrix product states. The
addition of matrix product states requires a subsequent compression procedure of
the state, and compression is potentially computationally expensive.
In fact the
transfer tensor propagation closely resembles the TEMPO algorithm discussed in the
preceding chapter, and the same linear scaling is achieved.
We can specialize the set of transfer tensors to be propagators of the one-point
function only in the following way. The one point function is deﬁned by all control
operations being identity maps except for one which can be an arbitrary control.
That is we deﬁne a one-point ﬁlter function by
A(rl)
l
= I
8l except l = 0, k
(5.25)
such that we have a control operation at timesteps t0 and tk, but leave the system
alone at all other times. The number of di↵erent processes in the set of one-point
ﬁlter functions grows linearly with the number of timesteps. When taking the e↵ective
state and contracting it with one of the one-point ﬁlters, we obtain a restricted set of
transfer tensors where the internal output/input spaces have been contracted
Tk:k−j = ˜⇤k:k−j −
k−1
X
s=j+1
Tk:s ◦˜⇤s:j .
(5.26)
Here the notation Tk:j means that the transfer tensor takes an input at time tj and
produce an output at time tk, but at all intermediate timesteps the input and output
at that time have been contracted. The ◦notation usually refers to a composition of
maps, here we use it to indicate that the output space from the operator on the right
is contracted with the input to the operator on the left. This restricted set of transfer
tensors only propagate one-point functions, and form a closed dynamical relation
in the sense that all one-point transfer tensors can be generated from knowing just
50
==PAGE:52==
the one-point e↵ective state over a certain time interval. Given the set of one-point
transfer tensors we can express the one-point e↵ective state as
˜⇤k:0 =
k−1
X
j=0
Tk:j ◦˜⇤j:0 ,
(5.27)
and by applying the arguments on time-translation invariance and bounded memory
length as discussed above, the one-point e↵ective state can be propagated to long-
times using only a ﬁnite set of one-point transfer tensors. In contrast to the general
formulation of the transfer tensor method the one-point functions can be propagated
highly eﬃciently, since the states to be added together only contains two free spaces.
Also notice that the restriction to one-point ﬁlters reproduces the original transfer
tenser method.
Having shown how to obtain the one-point transfer tensors it is clear how to do
the same for the two-point transfer tensors. We deﬁne the set of two-point ﬁlters by
A(rl)
l
= I
8l except l = {0, n, k} ,
, n < k ,
(5.28)
such that a control operation can is implemented at timesteps t0, tn and tk, while
leaving the system alone at all other times. The number of processes in this set grows
quadratically with the number of timesteps. If we now restrict the set of transfer
tensors to only act on the class of two-point ﬁlters, we ﬁnd that
Tk:n:0 = ˜⇤k:n:0 −
n−1
X
j=0
Tk:n:j ◦˜⇤j:0
−Tk:n ⌦˜⇤n:0 −
k−1
X
j=n+1
Tk:j ◦˜⇤j:n:0 ,
(5.29)
where the notation Tk:n:j means an object which takes an input from timestep tj, gives
an output and takes an input at time tn, and gives an output at time tk. Crucially
the output and input spaces at time tn are not contracted, however all the other
intermediate output-input spaces at a given time are contracted. We refer to this set
of transfer tensors with an intermediate open output-input space as the two-point
transfer tensors, notice that they form a closed dynamical relation in the sense that
the full set of two-point transfer tensors are generated from knowing only the set
of one-point and two-point e↵ective states over a restricted time interval. Having
constructed both the two-point, and the one-point transfer tensors, we can express
the two-point e↵ective states as
˜⇤k:n:0 =
n
X
j=1
Tk:n:n−j ◦˜⇤n−j:0
+ Tk:n ⌦˜⇤n:0 +
k
X
j=1
Tk:k−j ◦˜⇤k−j:n:0 ,
(5.30)
where we discard transfer tensor terms describing temporal correlations extending
over a longer time period than the system memory time. Speciﬁcally any transfer term
with a di↵erence between the two end-point times, which is greater than the memory
51
==PAGE:53==
time, is discarded, Comparing this expression with the corresponding expression for
the one-point functions, we see that there is a term describing how memory e↵ects
are propagated across a control operation.
5.3
Signatures of memory e↵ects
In this section we apply the transfer tensor method to study one- and two-point
e↵ective states for the spin-boson model. The full e↵ective state can be obtained over
a restricted time interval using the causal matrix product propagators introduced in
the preceding chapter. From this constructed state the relevant transfer tensors can
be inferred. We focus on the unbiased spin-boson model (E = 0) with a spectral
density given by
J(!) = 2↵! exp (−!/!c)
(5.31)
as introduce in the preceding chapter. For the computed e↵ective states we look at
the relative entropy measure of non-Markovianity, and attempt to quantify memory
e↵ects in the processes.
Given an initially constructed e↵ective state over a time of 4.0meV−1 with control
operations separated by δt = 0.1meV−1, we can ﬁrst compute the collection of one-
point e↵ective state ⇤k:0, where tk is within the constructed interval. From these the
one-point transfer tensors can be constructed, and the decay of temporal correlations
can be investigated. If the temporal correlations decay suﬃciently fast with increas-
ing memory time, then a memory time cuto↵can be meaningfully introduced and the
one-point e↵ective state propagated eﬃciently. In ﬁgure 5.2.a. the natural logarithm
of the transfer tensor operator norm is plotted, it is observed that correlations decay
exponentially. In addition is is seen that increasing the coupling makes correlations
slightly longer ranged. In ﬁgure 5.2.(b-d). the population di↵erence is plotted at dif-
ferent memory length truncations. For a memory length of 0.1meV−1, corresponding
to a process with no memory e↵ects since δt = 0.1meV−1, the population di↵er-
ence oscillates at weak couplings, and even shows some oscillatory behaviour at the
Toulese point (↵= 0.5). Including one additional transfer term, such that the mem-
ory length is 0.2meV−1, introduces strong damping of the dynamics. If the dynamics
is converged with respect to the memory time, then we observe that the damping is
lessened and that a change in the period of oscillations is introduced compared to the
fully memoryless case. Here we might as well choose the maximum possible memory
time of 4.0meV−1 though the behaviour converges for shorter memory lengths as well.
From the initially constructed e↵ective state, we can also generate the set of
two-point states over the given time interval. Having constructed this set, we can
infer the transfer tensors and propagate the two-point states. The logarithm of the
operator norm of the two-point transfer tensors, is shown in ﬁgure 5.3. An exponential
decay is observed, and one sees that the rate of this decay increases as temperature
is increased. Interestingly it is observed that at higher temperatures, the norm of
short-ranged temporal correlations increase slightly.
We are going to consider the case of implementing the ﬁrst control operation in
the steady state, and look at signatures of memory in the continued dynamics. In
ﬁgure 5.4 the relative entropy measure of non-Markovianity has been computed at
52
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.2: (a) Logarithm of the operator norm of transfer tensors encoding temporal
correlations over di↵erent timescales. We see that the temporal correlations decay
exponentially. The parameters used are δt = 0.1meV−1, V = 1.0meV, !c = 5V and
β−1 = 0meV. (b) Population di↵erence for Tmemory = 0.1meV−1, starting from a
spin-up state. (c) Population di↵erence for Tmemory = 0.2meV−1, introducing short-
ranged memory e↵ects are observed to have a strong dampening e↵ect. (d) Population
di↵erence for Tmemory = 4.0meV−1, introducing long-ranged memory decreases the
damping while the oscillation period increases monotonically.
Figure 5.3: Natural logarithm of the operator norm of the two-point transfer tensors,
averaged over the intermediate timestep, as a function of di↵erence between endpoint
times. The decay of temporal correlations is observed to be exponential for the spin-
boson model when using the parameters V = 1.0meV, !c = 5V and β−1 = 0meV. As
temperature is increased the decay rate of the correlations slightly increases, this is
accompanied by a slight increase in the norm of short range correlations.
53
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.4:
Relative entropy measure of non-Markovianity as a function of the
system-environment coupling strength, at di↵erent temperatures. The relative entropy
is computed between the exact two-point state and the Markovian two-point state. The
ﬁrst control operation is implemented at time t for t ! 1, such that the steady state
have been reached, and the second control operation is implemented at time t + ⌧.
Parameters used are β−1 = 0meV, E = 0meV, V = 1.0meV and !c = 5V .
di↵erent temperatures. Recall that the relative entropy is related to the probability
of confusing the exact two-point state and its corresponding Markovian state. We
observe that increasing the temperature results in a vanishing of the relative entropy
as the temperature becomes the largest energy scale of the system. This means that
increasing the temperature reduces the degree to which the environment becomes
conditioned on the system. The behaviour of the relative entropy as the coupling is
changed, is more complex. Initially, that is for small ⌧, the relative entropy increase
with coupling, intuitively this is sensible as a stronger coupling should result in an
environment state more correlated with the system state. At all couplings the relative
entropy decreases over time and eventually vanishes completely. This is also sensi-
ble as any correlations carried across a control operations have a ﬁnite range, and
should eventually become negligible. The stronger the coupling the longer a non-zero
di↵erence is maintained.
Lastly we study a speciﬁc controlled quantum process. Consider the case where a
system has evolved into its steady state, then a projective measurement of the spin Z
component is made, and the system is re-prepared in a spin up state. The question
we can then ask is whether the continued dynamics depends on the outcome of the
measurement.
In ﬁgure 5.5 we show the probability of measuring a spin-up or a
spin-down state at a time ⌧after the ﬁrst measurement. The solid line shows the
probabilities given that a spin-down state was measured at time t, and the dotted
lines the probabilities given that a spin-up state was measured. We focus on the case
of zero temperature, as this is the regime exhibiting the strongest memory e↵ects,
and propagate the state with a convergent memory time. We see that the continued
54
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.5:
(a) The operator norm of the one-point transfer tensors as a func-
tion of memory time with the parameters β−1 = 0meV, E = 0meV, V = 1.0meV
and !c = 5V . (b) Relative entropy measure of non-Markovianity where Nt+⌧:t:0 =
S
⇥
⇤t+⌧:t:0 || ⇤Markov
t+⌧:t:0
⇤
. (c) Probability of measuring spin-up state at time t + ⌧con-
ditioned on a measurement at time t, the solid line gives probability given that a
spin-down state was measured at t, the dotted line is if a spin-up state was measured.
(d) Probability of measuring spin-down state at a time t + ⌧under same conditions
as in (c).
dynamics, shows quantitative di↵erences between the two cases at stronger couplings,
but that qualitatively no signiﬁcant di↵erences are observed.
5.4
Concluding remarks
In this chapter we have introduced and generalized the transfer tensor method. The
original method provided a powerful tool for propagating the reduced density operator
eﬃciently, and with an approximately constant error. The generalization presented
here makes it possible to do the same for multi-time statistics. We have used this
new method to study memory e↵ects in the steady state of the spin-boson model,
and found quantitative di↵erent behaviours in the case of subsequent measurements
of the spin localization.
55
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 6
Conclusion and outlook
In this thesis we have developed methods to simulate the joint probability distribution
of multiple temporally correlated measurements, or control operations, on an open
quantum system. It was recently shown that these probability distribution can be
conveniently expressed as an e↵ective state ([16]), and the unifying theme has been
the development of simulation tools for this object.
In chapter 2 we argued that the joint probability distributions describing multi-
time controlled quantum processes can be encoded in an e↵ective state operator.
The introduction of such an operator makes it possible to study multi-step processes
independently of the speciﬁc controls implemented. Chapter 3 introduced the oper-
ational deﬁnition of a quantum Markov process, and investigated the structure of a
Markovian e↵ective state. It was illustrated formally that standard master equation
techniques are also applicable to the e↵ective state, and that there is a clear connec-
tion between the operational notion of Markovianity and a process described by the
regression theorem. Lastly we discussed tensor network representations of quantum
states, and argued that one could expect the e↵ective state to have an eﬃcient ma-
trix product state structure. In chapter 4 we introduced and generalized the tensor
network approach to simulating the spin-boson model inﬂuence functional. It was
found that the generalized algorithm could be modiﬁed, and a signiﬁcant improve-
ment in the eﬃciency of the algorithm was achieved. To our knowledge this is the
ﬁrst algorithm achieving a constant scaling for modelling harmonic oscillator envi-
ronments, and the computer code used has been implemented and developed from
scratch. Chapter 5 discussed the use of tomographic reconstruction techniques for
modelling the behaviour of open quantum systems. The successful transfer tensor
approach has been generalized to describe multi-time processes, which makes it pos-
sible to construct few-point statistics highly eﬃciently and with an approximately
constant error. The developed methods have been used to study memory e↵ects in
the steady state of the spin-boson model. To our knowledge this is the ﬁrst results
which successfully establishes a generalization of the transfer tensor method, and the
applications of the method in open system dynamics and condensed matter physics
are potentially vast.
56
==PAGE:58==
Outlook
A natural next step is to gain access to a high-performance computing facility. This
would make it possible to investigate how the CaMPP algorithm performs on com-
putationally diﬃcult problems. These problems could include carrying out a detailed
examination of the Ohmic localization transition for the spin-boson model, and the
sub-Ohmic localization transition. For the sub-Ohmic case in particular, the simu-
lation of the localization transition is an open problem. Another direction of future
work would be to include multiple baths at di↵erent temperatures into the model,
and apply the CaMPP algorithm to study energy transport in such networks. As the
algorithm simulates the e↵ective state, it would also be possible to study a range of
speciﬁc controlled processes.
The generalized transfer tensor method has been developed and implemented,
but due to time constraints it has not been applied widely. Perhaps the major area
of application of the method is in the simulation of Greens functions in condensed
matter physics. Greens functions are essentially two-point correlation functions. In
many cases powerful numerical methods exist for simulating Greens functions over a
restricted time interval, however the error accumulation often becomes problematic.
The transfer tensor method would make it possible to generate an extended set of
Greens functions, from an initially constructed set, with an approximately constant
error.
This would make it possible to study for example steady state behaviour
numerically. On a di↵erent note, the transfer tensor method makes it possible to
study the validity of a regression theorem description for a wide class of interesting
open systems models. In the near future the plan is to apply the method to study
memory e↵ects in pump-probe spectroscopy.
57
==PAGE:59==
Appendices
58
==PAGE:60==
59
==PAGE:61==
Appendix A
Notes on developed code
The tensor network simulation and the transfer tensor simulation has been imple-
mented using the python programming language. The design of both the algorithms
have been explained in the main text. Technically the main diﬃculty is to develop
the set of basic tensor operations which are required. For the code developed in this
work, all tensors have been represented as matrices. In that case the only operations
required are the ability to contract indicies, the ability to raise and lower indicies,
and the ability to shift indicies around.
Having developed the tools necessary to manipulate matrices, the tensor network
simulation can be implemented in a conceptually simple way. The compression of
a matrix product state resulting in a given step is the most challenging part. Here
we use a standard SVD compression algorithm with multiple left and right sweeps
as outlined in [34], [25]. The SVD compression approach is usually fast, however it
is not always the best method to ﬁnd the optimal representation of the full matrix
product state. Alternatives include variational compression schemes [25].
The transfer tensor algorithm is technically much simpler to implement.
One
complication in the case of the general set of tensors, that is the set not restricted to
a speciﬁc class of instruments, is that it is necessary to add together matrix product
states. How this is done is outlined in [25].
60
==PAGE:62==
61
==PAGE:63==
Appendix B
Project plan
Practical details
Credit : 35 ECTS points
Time frame : Begin 2. January 2018 and hand-in the 8. June 2018.
Supervision : The main supervisor throughout the project is professor Jesper Mørk
at DTU Photonics.
The project is carried out at Monash university in Australia
where I am a visiting student. At Monash university I am aﬃliated with the quantum
information theory group, and the project will be carried out with Dr. Felix Pollock
as an aﬃliated supervisor.
Project overview
Advances within low-temperature cooling techniques and the ability to design sys-
tems at the nanoscale, has meant that the study of quantum technologies is becoming
increasingly relevant. Successfully developing such technologies requires a detailed
understanding of the underlying quantum physics. Achieving such understanding is
complicated by the fact that systems at the nanoscale are never isolated, and conse-
quently must be treated as open systems undergoing stochastic processes. The study
of such quantum stochastic processes is an area of research with a long history. Re-
cently [16] the process tensor framework was established, in which memory e↵ects
occurring in arbitrary controlled processes can be characterized in an operationally
well-deﬁned way. An outstanding challenge connected with this development is the
numerical simulation of the central object, the process tensor.
The simulation of
quantum mechanical systems is notoriously diﬃcult, however research in this area
has advanced rapidly over the past decades due to insight originating in quantum
information theory [30]. Recently [7] an approach to simulating the paradigmatic
spin-boson model was proposed based on such insights, which succeeds in reducing
the computational resources required from an exponential scaling to a weak polyno-
mial scaling. The main aim of this project is the modiﬁcation of the proposed method
to compute the process tensor rather than the reduced density operator. Having ac-
cess to the process tensor will make it possible to connect insight into the underlying
structure of temporal correlations with the actual physics observed. The spin-boson
model is often applied as a paradigmatic model of an open quantum system. This in-
cludes models of semiconductor quantum dots embedded in solid state environments,
62
==PAGE:64==
and this project is thus of relevance to ongoing e↵orts to develop single-photon sources
based on semiconductor quantum dots.
Learning goals
1. See connections between the di↵erent aspects of a technological prob-
lem.
The project carried out has a basic scientiﬁc relevance in the sense of understanding
memory e↵ects in quantum processes. In addition to this speciﬁc technologically rel-
evant properties can be studied, and insights into memory e↵ects can teach us about
the prospects and limitations of future technologies based on the systems studied.
2. Comprehend, constrain and place in its broader context a complex,
open ended problem, and based on this to device di↵erent strategies for
its solution.
The general problem of simulating quantum systems with memory is studied in the
context of a spin-boson model. The speciﬁc algorithm and model studied will be placed
in the broader context of classical simulation methods build around a matrix product
state structure of quantum states.
3. Apply current research in developing new ideas and solve new prob-
lems.
The project combines two separate recent advances in the study of quantum stochastic
processes, which has the potential to provide new insight into the physics of the model
under study.
4. Communicate a technical subject matter clearly in written and verbal
English.
5. Apply and assess technical solutions to problems based on principles,
ethics and sustainability, and place technical solutions in a societal per-
spective.
The model under study is of relevance in understanding the physics of semiconductor
quantum dots, a physical system which is a leading candidate for future single photon
sources.
6. Select, analyze and assess relevant information, identify further devel-
opments.
Various research carried related to the speciﬁc problem will be studied, and if possible
connections will be made. For example the developments going on within transfer
tensor methods might be of relevance when performing long-time simulations.
7.
Manage practical aspects of a project and adapt existing plans to
changes.
A project plan is included below, and time is left open to account for delays and
unforeseen problems.
63
==PAGE:65==
Original project plan
January : Understand and implement the developed time-evolving matrix product
operator algorithm, and modify its structure so as to preserve information about tem-
poral correlations.
February : Apply the developed code to study the localization transition occurring
for the spin-boson model at a critical coupling. Speciﬁcally our interest is in how the
localization transition manifests itself on the structure of temporal correlation func-
tions, and the relation between di↵erent parameter regimes and the non-Markovianity
of the process.
March : Include spontaneous emission to an electromagnetic vacuum ﬁeld into the
model, and study optical signatures of non-Markovianity. Our hope is to reproduce
recent results on non-Markovian signatures in emission spectra, and study e↵ects of
higher order temporal correlations.
April : Generalize recent work on the transfer tensor method for long-time propa-
gation of reduced density operators such that the long-time behavior of correlations
functions can be studied. The idea is that any process with a ﬁnite memory length
will have a generalized translation invariance associated with it.
May to June :Bu↵er period which will either be used on aspects of the above work if
this has been delayed, or for further investigations such as studying various controlled
processes. In addition to this there will probably be a great deal of work involved in
writing up the thesis.
Actual project
January : The TEMPO algorithm was implemented and modiﬁed to describe multi-
time correlations.
February : During the development of the TEMPO algorithm it was noticed that
a signiﬁcantly faster algorithm could be designed, the new algorithm (CaMPP) was
implemented, and attempts made to study the localization transition.
March : It was found that the computational resources required to study the spin-
boson model localization transition exceeded what was available. This made us give
up this line of work. In addition it was found that the error scaling associated with
the tensor network simulations did not allow for steady state emission spectra to be
studied.
April : The transfer tensor method was successfully generalized and the code im-
plemented. It was found that in the general case the transfer tensor scaling did not
perform better than the tensor network simulation. This meant that steady state
64
==PAGE:66==
behaviour was not accessible.
May to June : It was found that the transfer tensor method could be made eﬃcient
by restricting the information propagated to few-point statistics. Working on the
writing of the thesis.
65
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1] Tobias J. Osborne, Jens Eisert, and Frank Verstraete, Holographic Quantum
States, Physical Review Letters 105, 260401, 2010.
[2] F. Pollock and K. Modi, Tomographically reconstructed master equations for any
open quantum dynamics, arXiv:1704.06204v1 [quant-ph], 20 Apr 2017.
[3] S. Milz, F. Pollock and K. Modi, Introduction to operational quantum dynamics,
arXiv:1708.00769v1 [quant-ph], 2 Aug 2017.
[4] M. Buser, J. Cerrillo, G. Schaller, and J. Cao, Initial System-Environment Cor-
relations via the Transfer Tensor Method, arXiv:1709.02310v1 [quant-ph], 7 Sep
2017.
[5] Jordan Cotler, Chao-Ming Jian, Xiao-Liang Qi and Frank Wilczek, Superdensity
Operators for Spacetime Quantum Mechanics, arXiv:1711.03119v1 [quant-ph], 8
Nov 2017.
[6] Dara P. S. McCutcheon, Optical Signatures of Non-Markovian Behaviour in Open
Quantum Systems, arXiv:1504.05970v2 [quant-ph], 3 May 2016.
[7] A. Strathearn, P. Kirton, D. Kilda, J. Keeling, and B. W. Lovett, Eﬃcient
non-Markovian quantum dynamics using time-evolving matrix product operators,
arXiv:1711.09641v1 [quant-ph], 27 Nov 2017.
[8] Simon Milz, Felix A. Pollock, and Kavan Modi, Reconstructing open quantum
system dynamics with limited control, arXiv:1610.02152v1 [quant-ph], 7 Oct 2016
[9] F. Verstraete and J. I. Cirac, Continuous Matrix Product States for Quantum
Fields, arXiv:1002.1824v1 [cond-mat.str-el], 9 Feb 2010.
[10] H. M. Wiseman and G. J. Milburn, Quantum Measurement and Control, Cam-
bridge University Press, 2010.
[11] Leslie E. Ballentine, Quantum Mechanics, A Modern Development, Second Edi-
tion, World Scientiﬁc, 2014.
[12] John
Preskill,
Lecture
notes
on
quantum
information,
preskill@theory.caltech.edu.
[13] F. A. Pollock, C´esar Rodrigues-Rosario, Thomas Frauenheim, Mauro Paternos-
tro and Kavan Modi, An operational Markov condition for quantum processes,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 040405, Published 25 January 2018.
66
==PAGE:68==
[14] Dara P. S. McCutcheon, Open quantum systems in spatially correlated regimes,
PhD thesis, University College London, October 2010.
[15] A. J. Leggett, S. Chakravarty, A. T. Dorsey, Matthew P. A. Fisher, Anupam
Garg and W. Zwerger, Dynamics of the dissipative two-level system, Reviews of
modern physics, Vol 59, No. 1, January 1987.
[16] Felix A. Pollock, Cesar Rodriguez-Rosario, Thomas Frauenheim, Mauro Pater-
nostro, and Kavan Modi, Non-Markovian quantum processes: Complete frame-
work and eﬃcient characterization, Phys. Rev. A 97, 012127], Published 25 Jan-
uary 2018.
[17] David Poulin, Angie Qarry, R. D. Somma, Frank Verstraete, Quantum Simu-
lation of Time-Dependent Hamiltonians and the Convenient Illusion of Hilbert
Space, Phys.Rev.Lett. 106 (2011).
[18] Jutho Haegeman, Tobias J. Osborne, Frank Verstraete, Post-Matrix Product
State Methods: To tangent space and beyond, Physical review. B, Condensed mat-
ter 88(7), May 2013.
[19] H.-P. Breuer and F. Petruccione, The theory of open quantum systems, (Oxford
University Press, 2002).
[20] N. Makri and D. E. Makarov, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 4600, (1995).
[21] N. Makri and D. E. Makarov, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 4611, (1995).
[22] A. Strathearn, B. W. Lovett, and P. Kirton, Eﬃcient real-time path-integral
calculations for non-Markovian spin-boson models, New Journal of Physics, Apr
2017.
[23] S. Florens, D. Venturelli, and R. Narayanan, Quantum Quenching, Annealing
and Computation, edited by A. K. Chandra, A. Das, and B. K. Chakrabarti,
(Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010) pp. 145–162.
[24] H. F. Trotter, Proc. Am. Math. Soc. 10, 545 (1959).
[25] U. Schollwock, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 326, 96 (2011).
[26] Jacob C. Bridgeman, and Christopher T. Chubb, arXiv:1603.03039v4 [quant-ph],
16 May 2017.
[27] Mark M. Wilde, Quantum information theory, Cambridge University Press, 2013.
[28] Pedro Figueroa–Romero, Kavan Modi, and Felix A. Pollock, Almost Markovian
processes from closed dynamics, arXiv:1802.10344v2 [quant-ph], 1 Mar 2018.
[29] Maximilian Buser, Javier Cerrillo, Gernot Schaller, and Jianshu Cao, Initial
system-environment correlations via the transfer-tensor method, Physical review
A 96, 062122, (2017).
[30] I. M. Georgescu, S. Ashhab, and Franco Nori, Quantum simulation, Reviews of
modern physics, volume 86, January-March 2014.
67
==PAGE:69==
[31] Giacomo Guarnieri, Andrea Smirne, and Bassano Vacchini, Quantum regres-
sion theorem and non-Markovianity of quantum dynamics, Physical review A 90,
022110, (2014).
[32] Li Li, Michael J. W. Hall, Howard M. Wiseman, Concepts of quantum non-
Markovianity: a hierarchy, arXiv:1712.08879v2 [quant-ph], 28 Jan 2018.
[33] Giulio Amato, Heinz-Peter Breuer, and Bassano Vacchini, Generalized trace dis-
tance approach to quantum non-Markovianity and detection of initial correlations,
arXiv:1804.06445v1 [quant-ph], 17 Apr 2018.
[34] E.M. Stoudenmire and Steven R. White, Minimally Entangled Typical Thermal
State Algorithms, New Journal of Physics, Volume 12, May 2010.
[35] Carlo Rovelli, “Space is blue and birds ﬂy through it”, arXiv:1712.02894v5
[physics.hist-ph], 29 Jan 2018.
[36] Jake Illes-Smith, Dara P. S. McCutcheon, Ahsan Nazir and Jesper Mørk, Phonon
scattering inhibits simultaneous near-unity eﬃciency and indistinguishability in
semiconductor single-photon sources, Nature Photonics volume 11, pages 521–526,
(2017)
[37] W. Barford, Electronic and optical properties of conjugated polymers, Vol. 159,
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2013.
[38] Michael E. Peskin and Dan V. Schroeder, Introduction to quantum ﬁeld theory,
Westview Press; 1 edition, October 2, 1995
[39] A. Peres, arXiv:quant-ph/0207020, 2002.
[40] Jutho Haegeman, and Frank Verstraete, arXiv:1611.08519v1 [cond-mat.str-el],
25 Nov 2016.
68
