==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Machine learning and feature extraction
for user engagement
Using machine learning to extract the relevant features that drive user
conversion with push notifications
Julien Hoareau (s161088)
Copenhagen, 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In the construction industry, getting data from the workers on the construction site
to the main offices is crucial for efficient project management, but workers currently
do not get enough reminders to report progress or problems on tasks, which leads to
communication problems on site. By sending reminder notifications and building a
dataset of responses to those notifications or lack thereof, a dataset representing the
patterns of user behaviour was gathered, representing the response time to the noti-
fication with respect to notification parameters, the environment of the worker and
informations about the task. Using Bayesian machine learning techniques (Gaussian
Processes), a model of this response time based on those parameters was built. This
model can be used to optimise the performance of those notifications, by minimising
the response time. The tone of the notification, the time of day the notification is
sent and the hierarchy of users in the project have been found to have a direct effect
on the response time. However, several obstacles make this model less robust than
what can be expected in a production environment.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a master’s degree in Digital Media Engineering.
It has also been developed in collaboration with GenieBelt ApS, Vesterbrogade
2B, 1620 København V.
This thesis has been supervised by Morten Mørup, Section for Cognitive Systems
at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark (DTU Compute).
Copenhagen, June 22, 2018
Julien Hoareau (s161088)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank GenieBelt, and in particular Bob Leung and Martin Koch
for their support during this thesis, Kacper Kawecki for his precious advice on the
technical side for the implementation of the data structures and Gee-Kay Wong for
proofreading.
I would like to thank Morten Mørup for his supervision and pointers to realise a
more complete analysis of the problem at hand.
Finally, I’d like to thank my family for supporting me all along, and my friends
for providing the much-needed breaks during the whole period.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis-specific vocabulary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Project goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Data, definition and collection
7
2.1
The dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
The psychology of notifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Choosing the target user group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Multivariate testing collection process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Forseeable challenges with the dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6
Preliminary data exploration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Methods
21
3.1
Background: Bayesian Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Bayesian probabilities, A/B testing and multivariate testing . . . . . .
22
3.3
Gaussian Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Feature selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Sparse Gaussian Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.6
Latent Variable Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.7
Python implementation: GPflow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.8
Implementing the Gaussian Processes on a synthetic dataset . . . . . .
33
4
Results
39
4.1
Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.2
Choosing the best model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3
Interpretation: User behaviour model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4
Conclusion on the results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.5
Effect on the company operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Conclusion
47
A User Research
49
B Pitching the idea to the client companies
51
C Technical details
55
C.1 Collecting the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
C.2 Building the dataset in a Sci-Py compatible format . . . . . . . . . . .
56
C.3 Analysing the dataset (basic statistics) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
C.4 Synthetic analysis (familiarisation with Gaussian Processes) . . . . . .
56
C.5 Modelling the user behaviour (machine learning) . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Thesis-specific vocabulary
A/B Testing Segmenting participants into two sample groups, each group having
access to a different experience (different parameters), leading to data gener-
ation in coordination with tracking in order to statistically determine which
variant is the most effective.
MSE Mean Squared Error.
Progress Report A progress report is when a worker sends a status update about
a specific construction task on the site, i.e.
a status update can be a real
percentage (e.g. half the wall is built) or a problem report (e.g. the foundation
of the wall is shaky so we have to start over).
Projects and Tasks A project is representative of a construction site, or a part of
this construction site. A project is comprised of several tasks that are necessary
for the completion of the building project. A task can be assigned to a specific
worker, who is then responsible for doing the actual construction task and also is
responsible for updating the progress of that task, through progress reports.
Role of a person in a project A project is comprised of different stakeholders.
The managers and owners have an oversight on the project and can be in con-
tact with the workers, but are not necessarily on site. The workers are present
on site and are the ones responsible for the actual physical construction tasks.
In the context of this thesis, we will focus on the workers that have the mobile
app.
User Conversion A user is said to have ”converted” when he does the action the
platform wants the user to do. The conversion rate is therefore the number of
users who acted, divided by the number of users that received the call-to-action.
User Experience In the context of this thesis, we will only focus on the user expe-
rience towards push notifications and incentives to report on the progress.
UX User Experience.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
1.2
Background and motivation
1.2.1
GenieBelt and progress reports
This thesis focuses on the company GenieBelt and its software product in the specific
market of the construction industry. This product provides a real-time data platform
for tracking progress of construction projects especially for project managers and
stakeholders. It is a multi-platform cloud service. When accessed from a web browser
it gives an overview on the construction project’s progress.
When used from the
mobile-app it allows real-time data to be sent from the construction site, such as
pictures, progress, comments and important tasks for each worker.
The key feature of the platform is the data flow that moves directly from the
construction site to the project managers and different stakeholders. It is this type
of platform and real- time data flow that has been considered crucial to the digitisa-
tion and evolution of this industry [ACS16]. Nevertheless this industry is still very
reluctant to move towards digitisation [ACS16], and it has been the experience of
GenieBelt’s clients that the actual workers on-site won’t voluntarily enter the needed
data in the current digital systems.
Some initial analysis of GenieBelt users’ behaviour confirms that managers and
some workers do use their phone to interact with the GenieBelt platform in the same
way as they may use the web interface on their computer. This allows them to have
more immediate feedback from the rest of the construction team when on site. On
top of simple interactions, workers are also using their mobile app as intended by
GenieBelt, which is reporting construction work progress. These findings may seem
low-key but it is not a given for such a young company like GenieBelt, and it proves
that the platform works and data is correctly flowing from the construction site to
the office. This can be seen on figure 1.1 (subcontractor means worker, usually on
site): the number of mobile progress reports is steadily increasing, but for now is just
a sign of the overall number of progress reports growing.
The ultimate goal is consistent real-time progress reporting by all the workers on-
site and there is still a long way to go to achieve this. New habits need to be formed
and old behaviours have to change. Instead of telling a manager about progress and
obstacles, the worker should report everything via the app first.
It enables more
efficient communication overall throughout the whole value chain and also enables
sharing of information with people that may have a stake in the progress, or are
able to facilitate when there are obstacles, but may not have been aware using the
old means of communication. In figure 1.1, the curve for manager reports and web
reports should ideally decrease in the future, if this goal to shift the habits of the
workers is attained.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Background and motivation
3
Figure 1.1: Cumulative number of progress reports per month per platform at the
top, and per user role at the bottom.
1.2.2
Smartphone notifications
In today’s world, smartphones play a big part in most people’s personal and pro-
fessional lives. In the context of GenieBelt, some of their construction companies
customers actually have workers who are issued company smartphones pre-loaded
with the GenieBelt mobile application that allows them to report progress directly
on the go.
Most of the interactions the smartphone users have with their device are handled
through different apps, which serve different, specific, purposes. Those past years, a
specific feature became very widespread across all apps and devices – push notifica-
tions. These have become so ubiquitous as part of user interaction patterns within
mobile applications that the major mobile platform developers (Apple, Google and
others) acknowledge this by focusing their efforts towards enhancing and augmenting
the user experience around mobile notifications [Boh17]. It seems therefore natural
to imagine notifications as a tool to incite the workers to provide this data, in real
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
time [BT13].
Even though notifications are a central part of the current interaction patterns of
users with their smartphones and may be a good way to create new habits [Eya14],
developers should be wary of their use and abuse. For users, there are also lots of
downsides to notifications that might create ”notification fatigue” in the long term.
Users indeed feel overwhelmed by notifications that are not personally addressed to
them [Sah+14]. This also includes notifications in a professional context. Therefore
finding an optimal notification pattern for users is needed and the literature uses the
term ”interruption” to define the correct timing for a notification [IB08] [PCdO14].
This same literature shows that targeted notifications, with a relevant timing and
respectful interruptions, are more efficient than traditional notifications that react to
an immediate event.
We are therefore interested in finding the best ways to introduce effective notifi-
cations to GenieBelt users (the workers on-site) by identifying relevant parameters
from patterns of users’ behaviour that we may use to help us do this. For example,
another specific parameter that could influence the notification conversion rate, other
than the timing of the notification, is the content of said notification [Meh+15].
Aside those real-time data needs, tracking this conversion rate is also important
in order to measure the user engagement towards the platform. Tracking conversion
in general is important for commercial online software platforms [DV13] [Yan+01].
[Att+11] offers suggestions on what can be tracked and measured. In addition objec-
tive user engagement, subjective user satisfaction, behavioural changes, and finally
the quality of the data obtained are also important in the short term and long term.
For quality data, if the user feels nagged, they might provide the wrong data on
purpose as a counter-reaction.
1.3
Project goals
This project’s research goals can be summarised in 3 questions:
• Is it possible to gather data that can be used to model user behaviour towards
push notifications? If so, what data is relevant for the model?
• Can user behaviour be modelled using machine learning techniques?
• Can the generated model of user behaviour be interpreted in order to act on
user engagement?
This thesis will use machine learning techniques to explore the importance of
different parameters involved in user engagement and conversion. We will build a
model of the response time of users, from sending a notification to them acting on
that notification. In this context, we will extract which parameters the model deems
as ”most important”.
Using techniques usually referred to as A/B testing, in this case segmenting the
users set into several categories, we will first generate a dataset that incorporates
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Related work
5
different notifications parameters as well as the response time of the users to those
notifications.
Considering the dataset will be built during the thesis and the chosen subset of
users may be relatively small, the number of datapoints will be relatively small when
compared to usual datasets. The whole dataset is comprised of around 2000 data
points.
In order to build the user behaviour model from the dataset, different Machine
Learning techniques are used and iterated upon in order to fit the data gained during
the thesis proceedings. The academic goal of the machine learning part of the thesis
is to explore machine learning techniques compatible with few datapoints. We will
then compare the performance of the different techniques and also the result of their
combination with feature selection techniques.
In future work building upon this thesis, using the parameters discovered here,
this built model of user behaviour towards notifications could be generalised to be
the foundation of a deployed model that could automatically optimise user conversion.
1.4
Related work
Similar work towards this high-level goal, i.e.
modelling user behaviour towards
notifications in order to optimise their delivery effect, exists in the industry.
In
particular, Facebook [IK17] is doing lots of research in this area. Some other industry
projects try to predict the conversion of users based on their previous behaviour
towards a platform [Rea15].
The results of those research projects is of course confidential, being a competitive
advantage for those companies. However, from the publicly available information,
it can be understood that the mass of data generated by those companies is very
important for those machine learning applications, especially in the case of Facebook,
that tracks users actions across the whole platform.
In the case of GenieBelt data, considering the dataset population is done during
the thesis, a mass of data cannot be expected and therefore the same techniques
cannot apply. Hence the analysis in this thesis will focus around few datapoints, and
will also dive into the chosen machine learning method in depth.
1.5
Outline
The first part of this dissertation focuses on the techniques used to define the dataset,
gather the data real-time as the users interact with the platform, and then build the
complete, static dataset.
The second part of this dissertation expands on the theoretical foundations of
Gaussian Processes, a machine learning method that measures prediction uncertainty
using Bayesian statistics and is renowned for its regression performance on limited-
size datasets.
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
The third part of this dissertation analyses the actual results of the application of
the machine learning methods to the dataset, interprets the generated model of user
behaviour and how this model expands our understanding of the user interactions.
It also identifies how to generate business-ready interpretations of the data for the
purposes of the company.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Data, definition and
collection
This section will focus on defining the dataset that will be used in the machine
learning algorithms that will follow in the next sections. It will also describe how this
dataset has been collected in practice, in the context of the production environment
at GenieBelt.
2.1
The dataset
2.1.1
What is needed from the dataset
The dataset should contain information that enables the machine learning work to
derive a model of the user behaviour. This dataset should therefore have enough data
about the context of the sent notification to be able to figure out what might influence
the user’s decision to act or not. Going back to the specific problem definition, in
the case of GenieBelt users that have been assigned a task in a construction project,
we can now discuss the different parameters that may play a role in this specific
behaviour.
After meeting with several stakeholders inside GenieBelt, some key elements have
been pinpointed. The role of the person assigning the task to the worker may be
important as it has psychological effects, which are known to influence users’ decisions
[Sah+14]: it makes the notification more personal. The status of the task at the
moment when the notification has been sent is also very important: if the task has
been reported on very recently, the worker will probably not deem necessary to report
on the task again. If a task is very long, the worker may be able to report progress
less often that if the task is short: it is harder to quantify the progress on a complex
task than on a simple task, and the workers take this into account when reporting
already.
In a more general way, not only applicable to GenieBelt, an important factor to
be studied is the time of day of the notification, as stated in the introduction. [IB08]
and [PCdO14] define the key concept of interruptions, which should shine through
the data analysis. A notification sent at 2 A.M. and a notification sent at 4 P.M.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Data, definition and collection
probably won’t have the same impact. Similarly, a notification during work time and
a notification sent when the worker is done with their day also would probably make
the user behave differently.
Building on general considerations about notifications, the formulation of the noti-
fication is definitely something very important [Meh+15]. Considering both the tone
of the notification or the presented information in the text, both are prone to have
an impact that will be measured in the analysis later on.
2.1.2
Preliminary user research
As shown in appendix A, it can be seen that the users globally have a similar be-
haviour in regard to notifications, and that my own assumptions about notifications
were globally shared. In particular, that notifications are not particularly hated or
seemed as intrusive, as it can be cleared. Some people actually don’t even clear the
notification from the notification drawer of their smartphone, as it does not bother
them to have a long list of unread notifications there. This, however, might lead to
”notification fatigue” and the user not noticing a new incoming notification in the
flow of notifications they currently receive. Considering this is out of our control,
especially during the course of this thesis, those effects are be considered as noise in
the signal.
2.1.2.1
Assumptions on user interaction patterns
• Users do not interact with a notification they do not care about.
• Users are not be disturbed by a notification at odd times, thanks to automatic
quiet modes.
• Users might open a notification to have more information, but might not act
afterwards. That means the notification wasn’t as relevant as it seemed at first
glance.
2.1.3
Dataset definition
Following those assumptions, the dataset can be defined.
The list of parameters present in the dataset will be, in the specific context of the
thesis:
• Notification parameters (internal to the notification)
– The content of the notification (as a choice between several content types)
- discrete nominal
– The time of day the notification is sent - continuous interval
– The day of the week the notification is sent - discrete nominal
• Task parameters (external to the notification, but the user knows their status)
– The time delta between current date and last progress report date - con-
tinuous ratio
==PAGE:19==
2.1 The dataset
9
– Length of the task - continuous ratio
– The time delta between current date and end of task date - continuous
ratio
– Role of the person who assigned the person to the task (colleague or man-
ager) - binary ordinal
• User engagement measurements
– The time the user spent before clicking the notification - continuous ratio
• Output
– Inverse of time delta between the progress report and the notification sent
time - continuous ratio
2.1.4
More details on specific data columns
Even though some of those columns might not be relevant to the worker’s decision
process, they may very well be and the analysis will shine light on their relevance
or non-relevance.
Considering that the machine learning methods can do feature
selection in the rest of the thesis, adding more information can reduce the external
noise in the signal and hopefully bring a richer model of user behaviour.
2.1.4.1
The content of the notification
The content of the notification will be discussed in section 2.2.
2.1.4.2
The time of day
As discussed in the assumptions in section 2.1.2.1, we assume that the workers have
their phone on silent mode at night and do not mind the extra notification at night,
because they already receive a lot of notifications at night (e-mail, text messages).
Therefore, in the dataset building part, notifications have been sent at night. It
will be part of the analysis to figure out the behaviour of users towards notifications
sent at night: do they reply to them immediately because they’re free and on their
phone? Do they reply to them in the morning? Do they ignore them completely?
2.1.4.3
The day of the week
In the same vein, those notifications were sent every day, including weekend days.
Considering the minimal involvement needed to do the progress reporting task, maybe
the workers actually consider progress reporting during the weekend, as it would make
their week free of administrative task. Conversely, the workers might be very reluctant
to the idea of replying to a work-related notification during the weekend. We will
test those two hypotheses during the analysis.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Data, definition and collection
2.1.4.4
Task parameters
These are parameters that cannot be shown in the notification itself. However, the
task being a daily task of the worker, they probably know that information already
and it may very well be part of their decision process to act upon the notification or
not.
2.1.4.5
Output: inverse time delta
In order to predict the response time of the users and also the response rate in regard
to notifications in one metric, the inverse time delta is considered as the output
column in the dataset. It has the practical advantage of being 0 when a user does
not reply to the notification, and grows with the speed of the user to reply to the
notification positively. We will discuss the output function in 2.4.3.
2.2
The psychology of notifications
2.2.1
User’s cognitive psychology
Cognitive psychologists have studied the relationship between attention and com-
puting applications. Their conclusions tend to criticise the effect of the prevalence
of technology in our everyday lives on our short-term attention span. Notifications
especially are a subject of numerous studies.
For example, [Hor+03] proposes a model of users’ decision making in regard to
the different possibilities their phones always offer them at any time.
Therefore,
it emphasises the importance of factors internal to the technology and the content
presented to the user, in our case the text of the notification.
[WV09] explains the importance of external factors to the user engagement with
technology in general and notifications in particular. Those factors, while being out
of our control, can be built upon and adapted around: using the plethora of sensors
now available in smartphones, the technology has a better grasp on the surrounding
environment, and can even guess user intent in some cases thanks to the added data
[Ruo+14]. In the end, better adaptation to user intent is always a good way to get
more engagement towards a specific feature.
2.2.2
Content and context
From a psychological point of view, the content of the notification is therefore very
important in order to catch the user’s attention. Providing more or less context to
the worker about the task they have to report on definitely influences their decision
on whether they need to report or not. There are lots of different possibilities for
the formulation and presentation of information in the notification: mentioning a
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Choosing the target user group
11
manager’s name or not, mentioning the worker’s name or not, formulating the notifi-
cation in a robotic way or as a request from a manager, showing a hint on the current
progress of this task or not, and so on.
[May+88] brings up interesting points about user experience with interaction
paradigms. Even though that specific article comes from a time where common peo-
ple were not used to interacting with computer interfaces, it raises some interesting
points about immediate action and the effect of context. Specifically, it suggests that
users do not know all the actions of the interface per se, but can infer their expected
story flow from context. The context helps the user make a decision, not only for the
task at hand (clicking on the notification to report progress), but also in the decision
making process (”Should I click on this notification? Is it relevant to me?”).
After a thorough discussion with experience designers of the company, three dif-
ferent notification wordings have been devised. The focus in the differences between
the wordings is mainly to bring different context elements and information to the
worker receiving the notification, as discussed before.
• Task X on project Y may need an update.
• Manager’s first name needs an update on task X in project Y.
• Task X on project Y is currently Z%. Does it need an update?
Adding more information to the notification is a trade-off on the attention-catching
part of the mechanism, as there is more text for the user to read and process. However,
it may better fit their intent and will generate more engagement if the intent is
correctly guessed, as discussed in the previous paragraph.
Another option was also to vary the tone of the notification: following a ”carrot or
stick” methodology [LXW12] in order to ask the worker to report progress. However,
it was chosen, in collaboration with the experience designers at GenieBelt, to focus
on a more objective criterion. This choice has been motivated by the need to limit the
noise in the signal linked to possible emotional responses to the message, for the sake
of scientific validity and reproducibility of this thesis work. The machine learning
methods in the next chapter aim to model this noise.
2.3
Choosing the target user group
In order to not disturb all the mobile users of GenieBelt during the experiment, it
was decided, in coordination with my company supervisor, to limit the test with a
certain subset of users.
The first step in order to choose the target user group was to determine who needs
to progress report on the platform. They are called ”subcontractors” internally, and
they are the workers on site. They are distinguished from managers in the correctly
configured GenieBelt projects: they cannot change the project plan but can only
report progress, comment and report a problem.
All the subcontractors using one of the two mobile apps (Android or iOS) were
identified, they are Nsubs = 487.
In order to have a homogeneous population, it
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Data, definition and collection
was decided in coordination with my company supervisor to choose users part of a
company and to exclude lone users. Two client companies of GenieBelt stand out as
being the most active companies in terms of subcontractors using the mobile app: a
Danish company and an Australian company.
2.3.1
Actual contact with the companies
GenieBelt having a good commercial relationship with those two companies, I was
allowed to present the experiment to them and also the potential benefits, in order
to have their approval to send potentially annoying notifications to their workers. It
is also an opportunity to dictate some behavioural rules for the workers towards the
notifications in order to have the most useful data, e.g. not clicking on the notification
if the user cannot report, so that the algorithm can take this into account.
I had to prepare a pitch for those two companies (see appendix B), and therefore
presented my thesis experiment in a different light than the actual user behaviour
modelling.
I insisted on the potential commercial benefits of this work, that will
bring more progress reports in the long term.
In the end, the companies seemed enthusiastic about the experiment, and I was
to run my study experiment with those workers and their smartphones.
2.3.2
Content adaptation to the target users
The GenieBelt mobile app is localised, which means it has a different language de-
pending on the language of the user’s phone. It was important to be consistent with
this with the notifications that were sent in the context of this experiment, as a Dan-
ish worker cannot be expected to understand a message sent in English. This is again
another argument for working on the content of the notification and not with the tone
of the notification: translating different tones is harder than objective facts only.
The content of the notifications was originally written in English, manually trans-
lated to Danish, and machine-translated to all the other languages GenieBelt sup-
ports.
2.4
Multivariate testing collection process
2.4.1
Background: A/B testing and multivariate testing
2.4.1.1
A/B testing of calls-to-action
A/B testing is a controlled experiment where a user is presented with two variants of
a page, or more specifically a ”call to action” [SW16]. The goal of this experiment
is to determine which of those two variants performs the best, according to a metric
defined by the experimenters. An example can be the colour of a ”buy” button on a
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Multivariate testing collection process
13
web merchant page, and the developers want to know which colour incites the users
the most to click on it (example in figure 2.1).
[Koh+09] defines a set of experimental guidelines, in order to have statistically
valid data for the following analysis:
• Variables independence: In the variables selection process, all the processes
should be random and independent.
• Consistency: Each user should always be subject to the same set of parameters.
I.e. if the user sees the call-to-action again, he should receive the same variant
as the first time.
• Experiments independence: Separate experiments should be independent.
A/B testing is usually focusing on a specific feature of a web page or mobile
application that needs optimising. It is used in order to bring incremental changes to
a feature, trying to find the best solution one step at a time, where each step is the
consequence of a choice made through A/B testing.
Another specific characteristic of A/B testing is that both variants have to be built
manually by the developers; as opposed to reinforcement learning where an algorithm
tries the changes by itself in order to maximise the revenue.
The UX research applications are clear: A/B testing is the first step towards user
behaviour modelling.
In Human-Computer Interaction research and studies, A/B
testing is used to evaluate the performance of a new technique as opposed to the
one the subjects are used to [Mac13]. This experiment as a whole can be considered
as A/B testing: the users being experimented on being one variant, while the other
variant of the testing is the set of users subject to classical notifications and not shown
the reminder notifications.
Figure 2.1: Optimising actions using A/B testing (source: optimizely.com).
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Data, definition and collection
Considering this experiment as one unique A/B test allows us to benchmark the
actual efficiency of the algorithm and analysis, which is important for the commercial
viability of this technique. If successful, it would be comparable to the techniques
used by Facebook for notification targeting [IK17].
2.4.1.2
Multivariate testing
In a more pragmatic point of view, about the actual experiment details, A/B testing
is limited to very local optimisations, and does not help building a full model of user
behaviour, as it is limited to understanding a binary problem only, and limits itself to
one parameter. Therefore, our specific testing methodology cannot be considered to
be a true A/B test, as it would not yield enough results to understand user behaviour.
As an extension to A/B testing, multivariate testing [HH14] includes several vari-
ants at the same time.
Instead of varying one parameter at a time in successive
experiments, only one experiment is necessary to model the user behaviour.
It is usually considered as harder to implement than standard A/B testing [MulT]
but it is here necessary in order to investigate the whole spectrum of parameters in
the limited amount of time: multivariate testing helps to build a full representation
of the user behaviour and not only their marginalised behaviour respective to each
variable separately.
Classical multivariate testing usually focuses on binary problems on different pa-
rameters at the same time, or non-parametric problems. Here, we use it on different
variations of different parameters at the same time, as there are some parameters we
want to model the user behaviour against.
We will interpret this statistical advantage in the light of Bayesian statistics in
the machine learning section of this thesis.
2.4.2
The final collection process
The full dataset building code can be found in appendix C.1.3.
2.4.2.1
Sending the notifications
Every half hour, a script is be launched on GenieBelt’s servers. This script will choose
a random, small subset of the target user group and a random task they are assigned
to and will send out a notification to those users if they have not received any that day
about that specific task. Each notification has its parameters randomised in order to
fit the requirements of the multivariate testing framework.
The consistency rule of [Koh+09] has been voluntarily ignored here, in order to
build the biggest dataset possible for the rest of the work in this thesis. The user set
being effectively relatively small, having only one fixed set of parameters per user is
very limiting for the purposes of building a complete model of user behaviour. We
will evaluate the impact of this decision once the final model of user behaviour is
built.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Multivariate testing collection process
15
2.4.2.2
Tracking the user engagement
In order to track the user engagement with the notifications, an integration of a track-
ing platform has been built on the mobile applications of GenieBelt. This platform
detects if, when and which notifications are acted upon by the users.
A tracking code has been added to the Android and iOS platform applications in
order to track the opening of said notifications. Using this information, it is possible
to then track whether the users have reported progress after opening the notification.
All this information is then enough to build the engagement part of the dataset.
2.4.2.3
Building the final dataset
The code that sends the notifications also saves the parameters used for the notifica-
tion in a database. By matching the tracked notifications with the sent notifications
with the saved parameters, a full dataset can be built row by row. Data flows contin-
uously every day during the data collection period, but I have chosen to work with
static snapshots of this dataset in the machine learning part of this thesis for the sake
of simplicity of implementation of the algorithms.
2.4.3
Transforming the output
The goal of the output transformation is to penalise long response times and reward
short response times in the algorithm. After discussing with the company stakehold-
ers, the defined metrics are:
• The user clicks on the notification and reports in less than 30 minutes: high
reward
• The user clicks on the notification and reports in less than 2 hours: medium
reward
• The user clicks on the notification and reports in more than 2 hours: low reward
• The user clicks on the notification and does not report, or does not click on the
notification: no reward
This ”reward” can be seen in terms of transforming the response time:
A mathematical formulation is needed for g for the implementation. According
to the previous requirements defined by the business:
• g(∆t) ≤0.5 if ∆t ≤1800
• 0.5 ≤g(∆t) ≤1 if 1800 ≤∆t ≤7200
• g(∆t) ≥1 if ∆t ≥7200
With ∆t in seconds.
Considering the inversion step already introduces a non-linearity, g should be
piecewise linear as to not skew the data too much. For ∆t in s, the expression of g
becomes:
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Data, definition and collection
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0
900
1800
2700
3600
4500
5400
6300
7200
8100
9000
9900
10800
11700
x
y
y = log
(
1 +
1
g(x)
)
Figure 2.2: Piecewise log-inverse function.
g(∆t) =



∆t/3600 if ∆t ≤1800
(∆t + 3600)/10800 if 1800 ≤∆t ≤7200
∆t/7200 if ∆t ≥7200
And the output column of the dataset is the result of function (f ◦g)(y), as shown
in figure 2.2.
2.5
Forseeable challenges with the dataset
Once the final dataset has been built, several challenges can be foreseen for the
machine learning part.
The first challenge is the definition of time. All notifications are sent and calcu-
lated in UTC time, however the users are in a specific timezone that differs from
UTC, and also different users are in different timezones, especially the Australian
users. Therefore, the measurements need to adapt to these timezone problems, by
knowing at which local time did the user receive the notifications. However, on a
technical side, considering the location of the user before he opens the notification is
unknown, the real time data is lacking in the case of the users not interacting with
the notifications, and in those cases the dataset only provides information in UTC
time, which might be very different from the local user time.
A second challenge is tracking whether the progress report is a direct conse-
quence of the notification (upon receiving the notification, the worker directly re-
ported progress on the application) or an indirect consequence of the notification (it
==PAGE:27==
2.6 Preliminary data exploration
17
reminded the worker that he had to report progress, but he did it an hour later, either
on his computer or his phone). The compromise I settled with, with the company,
was that if the worker reported progress in the hours after the progress report, it
still counted as a valid progress report. However, the higher the progress report time
delta is, the bigger the bias and noise introduced by external factors is.
Finally, the period I ran the experiment in contained several holidays, both in
Denmark and Australia: because this parameter is not taken into account in the
dataset, it can be expected to have some effects in the result of the model fitting,
similar to the effects of weekend days, but unaccounted for.
2.5.1
Size of the dataset and per-user behaviour modelling
A conscious choice in this thesis is to aggregate the data for all the users in one
consolidated dataset, because not enough data is gathered per individual user. This
allows us to build a dataset big enough to evaluate the global trends in user behaviour,
under the assumption that most workers behave in the similar way.
Because the data is aggregated throughout all the users in the pool, it is not
possible to model the behaviour of individual users, as Google or Facebook might do
in order to predict engagement and conversion. The assumption that most workers
behave similarly is flawed at best, as the user pool is comprised of two very distinct
sets of users (the Australian workers and the Danish workers), but also each worker
has a different relationship to technology because of their background and possible
working environment.
However, having a global behavioural trend emerge from the analysis of this data
would be an achievement by itself. Individual behaviour modelling requires scales not
attainable in the scope of this thesis.
2.6
Preliminary data exploration
The full code can be found in appendix C.3. This notebook also offers more statistics
on the data, plots and insights.
The data has been collected from the 15th of April to the 18th of March.
2.6.1
Data columns
The dataset is first normalised for most columns, with zero mean and unit variance.
The attributes’ distributions can be seen in figure 2.3.
The features’ distribution are summarised in table 2.1.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Data, definition and collection
Figure 2.3: Boxplots of the standardised attributes, input on the left and output
on the right.
Figure 2.4: Percentage of variance explained by the PCA number of columns.
==PAGE:29==
2.6 Preliminary data exploration
19
Table 2.1: Data attributes base statistics.
Column name
Mean
Variance
Range
end_to_sent_delta
0 (standardised)
1 (standardised)
6.3
last_progress_report_value
0.2
0.03
0.99
last_report_delta
0 (standardised)
1 (standardised)
6.3
package_duration
0 (standardised)
1 (standardised)
11
sent_to_open_delta
0 (standardised)
1 (standardised)
10.4
time_of_day
0 (standardised)
1 (standardised)
3.42
day_of_week_0
0.14
0.35
1 (binary)
day_of_week_1
0.14
0.35
1 (binary)
day_of_week_2
0.14
0.35
1 (binary)
day_of_week_3
0.13
0.34
1 (binary)
day_of_week_4
0.13
0.33
1 (binary)
day_of_week_5
0.18
0.39
1 (binary)
day_of_week_6
0.14
0.35
1 (binary)
tone_1 (binary)
0.33
0.47
1 (binary)
tone_2
0.35
0.47
1 (binary)
tone_3
0.33
0.47
1 (binary)
who_assigned_role_owner
0.59
0.49
1 (binary)
who_assigned_role_manager
0.41
0.49
1 (binary)
sent_to_reported_delta
0 (standardised)
1 (standardised)
20.4
2.6.2
Principal Component Analysis
PCA transforms the dataset in order to maximise the variance explained by each
component of the transformed dataset. It helps finding a latent structure in the case
where the first few PCA-transformed components explain most of the data variance
[HSM16].
However, for this dataset, once scaled as it is used by the machine learning algo-
rithm, the variance explained by each PCA component is non-negligible, as shown in
figure 2.4. That means that there is no evident orthogonal data structure, and that
the columns number cannot be reduced.
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Data, definition and collection
2.6.3
User fatigue
By exploring the data manually, it is striking that users opened notifications less and
less often towards the end of the data collection period, and also reported progress
less often following notifications.
This phenomenon is the result of what is called in User Experience ”user fatigue”.
Discussing with the User Experience specialist at GenieBelt, I realised the users
usually do not feel comfortable following automated suggestions: it was their past
experience that when users do not see the incentive and consequence to following
or not the recommendations in the notifications, as they’re not really generated by
humans, they would lose interest in collaborating. Therefore, the workers got back
to their previous habit of reporting. Such a phenomenon has been observed before in
applications where user input is an important factor in the data [Llo+05].
A common solution to this problem is gamification, but as [HKS14] explains, its
implementation has to be tailored to the problem and the effect may not apply to
this specific category of users because of the professional context of GenieBelt.
A more appropriate solution to this problem would be a bigger user pool, leading
to each individual user being less subject to experimental notifications in a short time
span (days).
In the end, the data has this fatigue aspect, aspect which cannot be modelled
properly: there is no easy way to model an increasing noise with respect to time as
the next chapter explains. Therefore, this effect should be incorporated as part of
the global noise and external factors.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
This section will expand on the theoretical background of the machine learning al-
gorithms used in this thesis, and also link this background to the problem at hand:
multivariate testing results analysis.
We also have to remember that the goal of this thesis is to explore the role of the
different parameters. The analysis should highlight those points, while being based
in the strong mathematical background of Bayesian statistics.
[Reu+17] recommends a Bayesian treatment of the data in order to model user
behaviour: we will here explore the field of Gaussian Processes, a powerful Bayesian
inference framework.
3.1
Background: Bayesian Inference
In statistics in general and in Bayesian machine learning in particular, the goal is
to determine the probability of new data based on previous data. [Bis06] describes
Bayesian inference as observing a ”posterior” function as proportional to the result
of the multiplication of a ”prior” and a ”likelihood” function.
In cognitive modelling and signal detection theory, the prior is described as the
prior beliefs about the observations, the likelihood the actual data observations, and
the posterior is the actual probability of the underlying structure, with respect to the
data observations [Lee12]. Using machine learning notations instead of the mathe-
matical ones, the base equation of Bayesian inference can be written:
p(w | X) ∝p(X | w) · p(w)
Where w is the underlying ”truth” (prior) and X | w the observed data (likelihood).
The prior is never known, as the underlying model of the truth is not known.
Therefore, assumptions have to be made about this prior distribution: different in-
ference methods have different assumptions. In machine learning, the truth w cor-
responds to the weights of the model. Using different prior distributions, we have
different posterior distributions for the weights of the model with respect to the train-
ing data.
Bayesian Inference can be directly used to predict a new data point using previous
data: it is a machine learning technique by itself. From a set of ”training points” X
(likelihood) and a prior distribution w that we define ourselves, that represents our
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Methods
choice of model, the posterior predictive distribution can determine the probability
distribution of a new point:
p(y | X) =
∫
w
p(y | w) · p(w | X) dw
(3.1)
Equation 3.1 is a rewritten form of 1.60 in [Bis06], for regression applications.
This equation is the base of the results found further.
3.2
Bayesian probabilities, A/B testing and multivariate
testing
3.2.1
A/B testing and probability distribution
A naive technique for analysing data from a standard A/B testing session would be
the following:
• Separate the users in four buckets: the ones who clicked the call-to-action in
version A (A1 users), the ones who did not click the call-to-action in version A
(A0 users), the ones who clicked the call-to-action in version B (B1 users), and
the ones who did not click the call-to-action in version B (B0 users).
• Calculate the success ratio for each version:
A =
A1
A0 + A1
for version A and, for version B,
B =
B1
B0 + B1
• If A > B then version A is more successful and, inversely, if B > A then version
B is more successful.
This can give a first overview into the effectiveness of the two variants if the
amount of data is big enough.
However, because each user behaves differently, using general results over the
whole users pool in order to validate the tested hypothesis is usually not a valid
technique [RB12]. [RB12] offers a thorough statistical analysis of the binary A/B
testing problem in an extended capability, being calculating the count of uses of a
specific feature in an interface, therefore the analysis requires proper model of user
behaviour.
3.2.2
Bayesian statistics and A/B testing
The goal of traditional Bayesian statistics, in cognitive modelling, is to calculate a
sensitivity threshold [WP83].
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Gaussian Processes
23
While this approach is valid, it does not give us any insight into machine learning
methods. In this thesis, we want to model the probability of the user replying to
the notification, or, more precisely, the probability distribution of the response times
distribution to each notification. We can therefore apply the principles of Bayesian
inference to A/B testing results in order to predict a response time from a new data
point.
Equation 3.1 allows predicting new points: using the same notations as before,
• p(y | w) is calculated using the model: in the case of a linear regression for ex-
ample, this probability would be higher if the output y is close to the regression
line, or lower if y is far away from that regression line.
• p(w | X) is calculated using the previous training data, that led to a model for
w. This probability is updated with respect to all the training points.
We can here see that the predictive distribution for a new point seems to be a
combination of the probability distribution for the training points. This is linked
to the Gaussian Processes theory, expanded upon in the next section. Also, each
point gets associated with a Gaussian distribution, with a mean and variance. The
mean would correspond to the inference result while the variance corresponds to the
uncertainty in the prediction.
Using those distributions, it is now possible to predict whether a user will prefer
variant A to variant B by interpreting the data in this way, and therefore the generated
user behaviour model contains the information intrinsically on whether variant A is
better than variant B or the opposite. The model can also contain information about
any metric that has been measured and is present in the data.
3.3
Gaussian Processes
This section will go over the overall concept of the Gaussian Processes and how it can
apply to the specific case at hand. All the details covered in this section come from
[RW06], and I won’t reference it explicitly any further.
3.3.1
Modelling the noise
In the dataset gathered in the previous chapter, the noise in the signal is linked to
factors external to the actual notifications parameters: the delay in sending notifi-
cations, the worker’s propensity to opening notifications or not, the worker’s private
and professional life are examples of such factors.
In the following subsections, the following notations will be used: the output
function that is the prediction goal will be y, which has the form y = f(x) + ε where
ε is the noise.
The noise in the signal needs to be modelled, as decided in the previous chapter,
and the Gaussian Processes literature offers a Gaussian model for the noise: ε ∼
N(0, σn).
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Methods
The variance of the noise inside the signal is unknown to the algorithm in the first
place, and so it becomes a hyper-parameter of the model that needs to be taken into
account later during model fitting.
3.3.2
Bayesian linear regression
As explained in the previous section, Bayesian inference can be used to predict the
probability of a new point from a distribution based on other observations of that
distribution. Equation 3.1 can be related to linear regression: if the prior is assumed
to be Gaussian, of mean 0 and covariance matrix Σ, the exact integral is tractable as
seen on pages 9 to 11 of [RW06].
However, that inference can be seen in a different light, which is the core of the
Gaussian Processes theory.
Instead of using column-based weights, the regression problem can be seen as
trying to find the correct distribution of functions f that can have the values found
in the dataset. This distribution, Gaussian in the case of Gaussian Processes, has
a mean m : x 7→m(x) and a covariance k : (x, x′) 7→k(x, x′), k being a positive
semi-definite function, and the ”real” function representing the data should have a
high probability according to that distribution.
In the framework of machine learning, the final goal is to make specific predictions
and therefore the exact expression of the latent function does not need to be derived.
Fitting a mean function and covariance function over the training data is enough to
reach that goal, which is get estimations for the test data. The advantage of Gaussian
Processes is that the algorithm also estimates of the uncertainty at each predicted
point, using the covariance function estimated at this point.
Using the weight-space formulation that uses equation 3.1, we can derive the
expressions seen in 3.2.
The final matrix formulation of the prediction of the GP can be written, in the
case of noisy observations as discussed before, for a test data point x∗, for the mean
value and variance at this point:
{
f(x∗) = k∗(σnI + k(x∗, x∗))−1y
V(x∗) = k(x∗, x∗) −tr(k∗k∗
⊤(σnI + k(x∗, x∗))−1)
(3.2)
Where k∗= [k(x∗, x1), ..., k(x∗, xN)].
This expression (reformulated from 2.25 and 2.26 from [RW06]) takes into account
the choice of covariance function k and the modelled noise variance σn.
3.3.3
Kernels
This formulation gives us total liberty for the expression of the covariance function,
also called kernel, Σ(x), as long as that matrix is positive definite. Several kernels
exist, with different parameters. Those parameters can usually be aggregated into
one metric, called ”lengthscale”, that estimates the spacial breadth of the kernel
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Gaussian Processes
25
variations. The bigger the lengthscale, the more points it will take into account at
once inside a single operation. Therefore, the ”smoothness” will be augmented, but
underfitting becomes a risk. Inversely, a too short lengthscale can lead to overfitting
and modelling the noise inside the signal as well. Therefore, it is a parameter that
needs optimisation.
A non-exhaustive list of kernels is:
• The RBF kernel: a Gaussian kernel. The only parameter is the variance of the
kernel, which directly determines the lengthscale.
• The Matern kernel, which mainly exists in 3 forms:
– Matern 1/2 which models Brownian noise. The lengthscale here is less
important because of how jagged the distribution is.
– Matern 3/2 and 5/2 which are more regular, but are still more jagged than
the smooth and infinitely differentiable RBF kernel. Its only parameter is
also the variance, which determines the lengthscale.
• Polynomial kernels: very flexible as they have as much parameters as the degree
of the polynomial, however they are only positive definite in a certain domain.
• Other interesting kernels, like dot product or neural network-like kernel.
The sum of two kernels is still a valid kernel, as the sum of two positive definite
matrices is still positive definite, per linearity of the operations. Therefore, we can
imagine a kernel with a linear part and a non-linear part, as based on the ideas
developed in some deep neural networks the recent years, called ResNet [He+15a].
We will explore this possibility during the machine learning experiments.
3.3.4
Model selection
The Gaussian Process literature offers an alternative to cross-validation to optimise
the internal parameters of the algorithm: the maximum likelihood optimisation.
In the case of Gaussian Processes with a standard kernel, it is actually possible
to mathematically compute the likelihood : another term for this calculation is the
maximum a posteriori calculation of the weights vector w. A generalisation of this
likelihood calculation can be used to calculate the best value of the hyperparameters,
through an approximation called type II maximum likelihood [RW06]. Considering
the hyperparameters of the models are the lengthscales of the kernel, it is directly
possible to optimise those lengthscales in the likelihood calculation.
This likelihood can be marginalised, and the marginal likelihood can also be used
to optimise the hyperparameters like the kernel lengthscales. For the classic Gaussian
Process with a zero mean function, its expression is
log p(y|X, θ) = −1
2yT (K(X, θ) + σ2
nI)−1y −1
2 log ∥K(X, θ) + σ2
nI∥−n
2 log 2π
Where θ represents the hyperparameters vector, which is implicitly present on
the right side of the equation as part of the covariance matrix K. This marginal
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Methods
likelihood can be optimised using the partial derivatives wrt. the hyperparameters
θi.
As usual in optimisation, the maximum is found using numerical methods, which
are prone to be ”stuck” in local minima. It is therefore important to use a correct
optimisation technique. A subset of possible techniques can be found at [SciPy]. With
most of those techniques, initialisation is important: re-running the optimisation
with several initial values may be beneficial in order to find a more global function
maximum.
However, the computational complexity of derivating the log-likelihood is signifi-
cant, unless K−1 is computed beforehand: this leads to efficient numerical optimisa-
tion methods using gradients.
Cross-validation is the standard model selection technique and it cannot be avoided:
the chapter 4 of [Wah90] offers a comparison between cross-validation and maximum
likelihood optimisation.
It concludes on the fact that cross-validation gives more
stable results but requires a linear search in an interval, which is extremely slow
especially in the case of Gaussian processes (we will discuss the performance issues
later). The maximum likelihood is an iterative method that converges, and is usually
much faster than the linear interval search. A sensible default seems to be using the
maximum likelihood to optimise the model, but use cross-validation for generalisation
error estimation for each kernel.
3.4
Feature selection
3.4.1
Classical feature selection
3.4.1.1
Dataset techniques
A very common technique to select features is to either remove columns from the
data and see the evolution of the generalisation error, or to start from no columns
and adding columns as long as the generalisation error does not increase.
Those
methods are called respectively backwards-selection and forwards-selection. In order
to evaluate the generalisation error at each step, cross-validation is used.
These techniques are useful when it is theorised that some columns in the data
are useless/redundant/do not have any correlation with the output whatsoever, but
those columns are hard to pinpoint directly from the formulation of the model. An-
other advantage of these techniques is that it’s completely independent on the model
formulation, and therefore they are compatible with all kinds of models.
However, in cases where all the columns are actually useful for the model, they
do not help in understanding the latent variables ”hidden” in the dataset.
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Feature selection
27
3.4.1.2
Parameter regularisation
Many machine learning methods, regression or classification, offer sparse variants that
penalise the weight and/or number of parameters.
The most common technique is called norm regularisation, and uses one (or sev-
eral) norms of the weights vector in order to penalise a too big amount of weights,
to limit the weights amplitude, or both in the same operation [ZH05]. Usually, this
penalisation is part of the objective function the method is minimising: for example,
for a simple least-squares regression, the regularisation function will be added to the
squared distance penalty.
When used for linear regression, the Gaussian Process does incorporate a form
of ”ridge regression” in the calculation.
Indeed, p(w | X) ∝p(X | w) ∗p(w) as
seen before, and in the case of the linear regression kernel, w follows the probability
distribution N(0, Σp) whose distribution can be written as:
f(x) = exp
(
−1
2x⊤Σp
−1x
)
Considering this probability distribution is evaluated in w, the probability is di-
rectly dependent on w⊤Σp
−1w, which is the expression of the squared L2 norm of w
in the case of a diagonal covariance matrix. The principles of ridge regression emerge
implicitly in this formulation, as the L2 norm of the parameter vector w is indirectly
penalised when optimising the likelihood, through the kernel.
However practical ridge regression is in the context of linear regression, this anal-
ysis in this context is very limited for several reasons:
• this is a characteristic of the linear regression kernel and cannot be easily gen-
eralised for the infinite-expansion kernels like RBF or Matern, even if we can
imagine the same concepts transposed using infinite expansions, which are not
the focus of this thesis.
• it only concerns the L2 norm and not the L1 or a linear combination of the two
penalisations (also called ElasticNet) [ZH05].
• the L2 norm is isotropic and does not take into account the effect of each
parameter independently, and does not promote sparsity like L1.
3.4.2
Gaussian Processes specific techniques
As we just saw, Gaussian Processes, being a smoothing process, do not directly take
the columns into account and therefore do not inherently weigh the importance of
each column and cannot take into account the number of parameters. We have to
use other techniques in order to understand the importance of the variables.
Standard covariance kernels usually are isotropic: they take all the columns into
account with no weighing. It is possible and often desirable to have non-isotropic
kernels: there are several methods to artificially weigh the columns in the algorithm,
as explained in [RW06].
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Methods
The first possibility is to add a transform step to the input, like PCA. This is
meaningful only if the PCA yields interesting results on the dataset.
Another possibility is to integrate weighing the different columns in the data
points directly in the covariance kernel.
Considering weighing is done using the
lengthscale parameter, it is possible to extend the lengthscale concept to a lengthscale
per dimension. This is called ARD (automatic relevance determination), which is a
technique that generalises to every Bayesian machine learning technique. An example
formulation for the RBF kernel for example is:
Before ARD:
k(x1, x2) = exp
(
−1
2l2 (x1 −x2)⊤(x1 −x2)
)
After ARD:
k(x1, x2) = exp
(
−1
2(x1 −x2)⊤diag
( 1
l2
1
, 1
l2
2
, ..., 1
l2n
)
(x1 −x2)
)
Using the previously discussed model selection techniques, we can directly inte-
grate the ARD lengthscale parameters in the maximum-likelihood estimation and
have this optimisation technique figure out the correct lengthscale parameters, au-
tomatically. It is therefore simpler to implement than standard L1 regularisation,
which requires specific computation techniques (LARS, Cyclical coordinate descent).
[WN07] relates ARD to direct L0 quasi-norm optimisation which directly favours
sparsity.
Another extension to ARD is factor analysis distance, which adds a positive semi-
definite matrix to the diag(l−2) term in order to explain the data in a low-rank
representation on top of the per-column weighing: that’s very reminiscent of principal
component analysis and latent variables discovery.
3.5
Sparse Gaussian Processes
3.5.1
The concept
[Tit09] explains the concept behind sparse GP regression, whose goal is to simplify
the calculations, either during training or for the predictions.
The first method is to approximate the covariance calculations: the covariance
matrix is approximated from a subset of points, called support points. Using the
Nyström method [WS01], which is a numerical method that lowers the dimensionality
of the integral calculation, the likelihood and then the prediction can be calculated.
This method is known to give good results if the support points, hereby called inducing
points, are carefully chosen.
An alternative method, which the paper aims to prove is better, is to train the
sparse GP at the same time as finding the correct inducing points, using a variational
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Sparse Gaussian Processes
29
method based on KL-divergence, in order to get a result as close as possible to the
full Gaussian Process. This method is reminiscent of the calculations made in deep
variational auto-encoders. The concept of KL-divergence will be explained in section
3.6. The performance is then supposed to approach the one from the full Gaussian
Process, but with higher training and prediction speed.
Using a sparse Gaussian Process, the complexity is reduced from O(n3) to O(mn2)
where m is the number of inducing points and n the number of points in the dataset
[Tit09].
On top of reducing the complexity, it can also improve the prediction perfor-
mance. Because it is using only a representative subset of the input points for actual
predictions, it is less prone to interferences due to outliers and is more robust against
overfitting, like parameters sparsity does.
3.5.2
Inducing points choices
Every sparse GP regression calculation takes as input a list of inducing points used
for the algorithm as a starting point.
The choice of inducing points is very important in the Nyström approximation,
as a different choice leads to better or worse precision. The inducing points need to
be representative of the dataset. Therefore, two kinds of inducing points sets seem
to be interesting to look at, which we will examine in this section.
3.5.2.1
K-medoids
K-medoids is a clustering method resembling K-means, but chooses existing data
points as cluster centres. A common algorithm for its implementation is PAM, which
is fast on a small dataset like this one (2000 points).
Because of the definition of the medoids, they are good candidates for efficient
data representation, as they represent the different regions in the data.
3.5.2.2
Archetypal analysis
Archetypal analysis, instead of looking cluster centres, tries to evaluate a reasonable
convex hull of the data and extracts points defining this convex hull, but stays robust
against outliers [CB94]. Convex combinations of the computed archetypes represent
the whole dataset. The archetypes can be computed using alternated projected gra-
dients.
Archetypes allow a different representation of the data, by bounding it: by com-
bining the information from the medoids and the archetypes, it can be assumed that
the dataset is correctly represented.
In the case of this thesis, as the goal is to use points that belong to the dataset, the
chosen archetypes are the points from the dataset closest to each computed convex
hull point.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Methods
Figure 3.1: A dataset with three distinct clusters. In red, the medoids. In black,
the archetypes.
3.5.2.3
Early stopping
For either method, because the goal is not to extract the precise cluster centres or
convex hull, the precision of the inducing points does not matter that much, and
sampling ”around” the true values of those centres/archetypes will not affect the
result of the predictions using the sparse Gaussian Process. Hence, early stopping
can be used for both methods, for computational efficiency. Moreover, the inducing
point choices can be optimised as the next paragraph explains it.
3.5.3
Bayesian optimisation
The inducing points choice can be integrated inside the maximum likelihood, and
therefore can be optimised like the kernel hyperparameters. The variational method
from [Tit09] explicits the formula for this likelihood [Hen16].
If we define Kxx as being the covariance matrix between the data and itself, Kzz
the covariance between the inducing points and themselves and Kxz the covariance
==PAGE:41==
3.6 Latent Variable Models
31
between the data and the inducing points,
L = log N(y | 0, Q + σ2I) −1
2σ−2tr(Kxx −Q)
(3.3)
where:
Q = KxzK−1
zz Kzx
This calculation has the benefit of only needing to invert the Q matrix which is
of a smaller dimension than the full data covariance matrix Kxx, because the size
of the set of inducing points is significantly smaller than the one of training points.
Inverting that matrix is being done using the Cholesky decomposition of its different
components, as section 3.7 explains.
The covariance between inducing points being calculated, those inducing points
can automatically be chosen as well when optimising that likelihood: the inducing
points are considered like the rest of the hyperparameters.
The prediction calculations also benefit from the reduction in dimensionality: its
expression is too complex to be written here but it only depends on Kxz and Kzz,
of way lower dimensions than Kxx, which is used in the main GP prediction (the
k(x∗, x∗) term).
This is just one possible implementation of the sparse Gaussian Process, and this
is the one that will be used in this thesis.
3.6
Latent Variable Models
[RW06] evocates the existence of a latent variable model for Gaussian Processes,
and [LC16] describes the most common type of ”LVM”: on top of determining the
hyperparameters through optimising the maximum likelihood, the model also assumes
the actual data derives from X’ of lower dimensionality than X. This consideration
can be directly expressed in the likelihood expression, therefore can be found by
optimising that likelihood, like the hyperparameters. [McM14] explains the caveats
of such a technique: considering optimising just one hyperparameter of the kernel can
already lead to local optima, adding this amount of parameters makes the algorithm
very prone to bad results and sensitive to the initialisation of the parameters.
The Bayesian GP-LVM tries to overcome those points, by marginalising over a
set of support points, similarly to the sparse GP calculations: however those support
points are defined in the latent space so they can’t be set to sensible defaults as
with the sparse GP (medoids, archetypes). Therefore, those latent points and their
dimensionality are automatically optimised by the maximum likelihood.
Similarly to the sparse GP, the prediction performance can be better than the
standard GP, as the support points are also a subset of the input points projected in
the latent space, therefore being more robust against overfitting and outlier data.
The maximum likelihood is prone to local minima already with one parameter only,
and the amount of parameters to optimise in the LVM makes this method especially
fragile to this issue.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Methods
The implementation is directly inspired by the loss function in variational auto-
encoders, where the KL-divergence between the latent variable distribution and a
normal distribution is minimised [KW13]. Here, the likelihood uses a KL-divergence
term between the latent variable distribution and the projected prior variable distri-
bution:
KL(P∥Q) =
∫∞
−∞
p(x) log p(x)
q(x)dx
This divergence estimates how different the two distributions are, and therefore
when the optimisation aims to reduce this divergence, it tends to optimise the latent
variable distribution to be as close to the projected prior variable distribution as
possible.
This model is the most flexible Gaussian Process technique that is available, and
with its flexibility comes a high risk of local minima during the optimisation.
3.7
Python implementation: GPflow
The GPflow toolbox uses the principles explained in this section, and tries to infer
exactly when equation 3.1 is tractable and uses numerical matrix methods in other
cases [dG M+17].
A notable specific numerical optimisation used by the toolbox is the Cholesky
decomposition in order to compute the predictions and uncertainties. As seen before
in equation 3.2, a requirement for computing the predictions at a given point requires
calculating the kernel at each training point (this is the k(x∗, x∗) of the expression),
adding the diagonal noise matrix then inverting the total sum. Matrix inversion is
a very costly and slow process (lower bound of Ω(n2 log n), but most solvers have a
complexity of O(n3)), so optimising this step probably is the best optimisation doable
in the algorithm.
Instead of inverting the matrix, the operation can be reformulated as a linear
equations system: solving {(K(x1, ..., xm)i+σ2
n)vi = xi} for i = 1..m and m being the
number of points in the system. Solving a general linear system is as computationally
costly as inversing a matrix, except in the case of a triangular system/matrix where
then it is in O(m).
Because the kernel matrix is positive definite (by definition of the kernel functions)
and we only add positive components to its diagonal, K + σ2I is still positive definite
and we can then apply the Cholesky decomposition: K + σ2I = LL⊤where L is a
lower-triangular matrix. The Cholesky decomposition, even though it has a O(n3)
complexity, can be very easily parallelised. Solving the linear system is then very
easy as the matrix representing it is triangular.
An implementation choice that needs discussion is the optimisation of the marginal
likelihood function.
GPflow uses by default an optimising method called BFGS
[SciPy], that estimates the Hessian matrix from the first-order derivatives of the
==PAGE:43==
3.8 Implementing the Gaussian Processes on a synthetic dataset
33
likelihood. Other methods exist and are more often used in Deep Learning, like the
Adam optimiser [KB14], that use full gradient estimations to be more robust against
local minima, yet faster in the computation than standard derivative methods by
choosing the directions carefully and dynamically. However, while the optimised hy-
perparameters were at least as performant (wrt. the computed mean squared error
over 10 folds), the calculation was several times longer. Because of the limited com-
puting resources I had access to during this thesis, I chose to stay with the standard
BFGS optimiser.
The mean of the Gaussian Process distribution will be set to zero, as to simulate
the intended behaviour for the real dataset.
3.8
Implementing the Gaussian Processes on a
synthetic dataset
In order to test different techniques exposed here and also identify the behaviour of
different kernels, several synthetic regression datasets have been generated, similar to
the data present in the real dataset, but with controlled parameters and behaviour.
This allows understanding the inner mechanisms of the framework, and also to solve
some problems with the actual numerical implementation, that differs from the the-
oretical background we just elaborated on.
A specific point of testing will be a dataset comprised of both a linear part and
a non-linear part. In order to model this kind of dataset, Microsoft has developed a
technique specific to neural networks called ResNet [He+15a], where each neuron’s
activation function has a linear part and a non-linear part. This allows the network
to first train on the linearity, and then to focus on learning the non-linearity. This
idea can be transposed to Gaussian Processes, where a covariance function with a
linear part and a non-linear part is definitely possible to have.
The detailed code can be found in appendix C.4.
Three synthetic datasets are being subject to regression modelling:
• Noisy latent-variable linear dataset: y1(X) = Xw1 + ε1.
X1 contains 250
samples and 18 parameters. ε1 ∼N(0, σn) and w1 contains some zeroes. Also,
X is non-inversible, of rank 12: a latent variable structure exists. σn is in the
order of magnitude of one-tenth of max(Xw1): the noise is significant amongst
the signal.
• Noisy latent-variable squared dataset: y2(X) = (Xw1)2 + ε2 with the same
parameters. The noise variance is in the order of magnitude of one-tenth of
max((Xw1)2) this time.
• A combination of the linear and non-linear datasets: y3(X) = y1 + y2
2 + ε3.
Now, the noise variance is in the order of magnitude of one-tenth of max(Xw1 +
(Xw1)2).
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Methods
The performance of different kernels has been evaluated on those three datasets.
Each model is trained several times with different random parameter initialisations,
and the best model is picked for visualisation, as to limit the effect of parameter
initialisation when comparing the different models.
3.8.1
Numerical instability
The implementation of the non-linear kernels show numerical instability even on the
simplest datasets: σ2
nI + K(x∗, x∗) once calculated is not invertible and/or not posi-
tive semi-definite. In this case, either the Gaussian process regression is simply not
defined, or the numerical optimisations provided by the Cholesky decomposition are
not applicable.
Those instability problems would not surface in a ”perfect” computation setting
as discussed previously, as K is positive semi-definite and σ2
n is positive. However, the
real computations are composed of heavily-truncated floating point numbers because
of the optimisations made to be able to run on GPUs, which provide the fastest
calculation available but trade-off on the precision of the floating point numbers,
especially when a long string of operations is made. Toolboxes that do not run on
GPUs, like GPy, have those instability problems happen less often.
In this specific case, the instability is linked to data points being too close to each
other, leading to truncating numbers to the same value and then to non-invertible
matrices. A way to override that is to either add (more) noise to the data, or add
noise to the kernel function itself.
As the sum of kernels is still a kernel, and a
pure white noise diagonal matrix is a valid positive semi-definite matrix (σI). For
this implementation, a noise kernel has been chosen as it can be tweaked directly in
the algorithm: if a CV split cannot be trained upon, the noise in the kernel can be
increased and training on the split is tried again [Hen14].
However, adding noise to the kernel comes at the expense of degrees of freedom
of the model: the more jitter is added to the diagonal, the less each point will have
an effect on the final result as the added bias takes over, which leads to a risk of
”underfitting” the data.
Therefore, sparse models seem to be a good alternative to those instability solu-
tions, but only if the support points can be guaranteed to be far enough from each
other to guarantee invertible kernel matrices even with truncated calculations. In
practice, however, because the full covariance matrix also has to be computed (see
equation 3.3), those problems can appear as well in the sparse GP computation.
3.8.2
Comparing the performance of different kernels
Without ARD, the three kernels have the same prediction performance.
This is
explained in subsection 3.8.2.1 for the RBF kernel, and the same reasoning may be
appliable to the smooth Matern kernels.
==PAGE:45==
3.8 Implementing the Gaussian Processes on a synthetic dataset
35
The linear Gaussian Process is therefore true to its promise to correctly model a
noisy linear dataset.
However, as the linear kernel is the computationally cheapest, this kernel would
be the preferred one. In this case, the Gaussian Process is strictly equivalent to a
simple minimisation of the square penalty with an added L2 regularisation term, as
explained before.
Figure 3.2: Predictions on one test fold of the linear synthetic dataset, using a linear
kernel with ARD.
3.8.2.1
Seeing that the RBF kernel asymptotically tends towards the linear kernel
On a specific synthetic dataset run, the optimised parameters are as follows:
• For the linear kernel: variance vLin ≈7.62 · 10−2
• For the RBF kernel: variance vRBF ≈1.06 · 10+2 and lengthscale l ≈3.94 · 10+1
But the norm of the input vector is ∥X∥≈2.8 · 100.
The expression of the kernel for the linear regression is k(x, x′) = vLinx · x′ and,
for the RBF kernel: k(x, x′) = vRBF exp
(
−∥x−x′∥2
2l2
)
.
The fact that the variance vRBF is orders of magnitude higher than the variance
for the linear kernel, and also that the lengthscale l is around ten times bigger than
||X|| seems to indicate an asymptotic behaviour, that would explain that the RBF
kernel behaves like a linear kernel if its lengthscale is big and also its variance.
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Methods
kRBF(x, x′) = vRBF exp
(−∥x −x′∥2
2l2
)
=
l→+∞vRBF
(
1 −∥x −x′∥2
2l2
+ o
( 1
l2
))
= vRBF −vRBF
2l2
(∑
x2
i +
∑
x′
i
2 −2x · x′)
+ o
(vRBF
l2
)
= vRBF
(
1 + 1
l2 kLin(x, x′) −1
2l2
(
∥x∥2 + ∥x′∥2)
+ o
( 1
l2
))
This asymptotic expression for the RBF kernel explains in part the behaviour that
is similar to the linear kernel. An extra constant term is added, which adds itself to
the modellisation of the noise σnI in equation 3.2. Then, a term depending on the
norm of x and x′ also exists, but its interpretation does not seem straightforward.
3.8.2.2
On the non-linear dataset
The RBF kernel seems more apt to predict outliers, as it is more flexible than the
linear predictor. A linear regression would indeed struggle to model such a dataset
because the relationship is not linear at all, and the linear GP, being equivalent to
linear ridge regression, follows the same rule.
The purely non-linear kernels give the best results, especially with ARD, but
because of the scale of the added noise (1/10 of the signal), the results start getting
fuzzy when plotted, though the outliers are better predicted and the mean squared
error is half the one for the linear kernels.
3.8.2.3
On the mixed dataset
Because of the observed relationship before, a good performance of the linear kernel
on the linear part and a good performance of the non-linear kernels on the non-linear
part, it seems like combining both kernels on the mixed dataset can be a good idea,
as the addition of kernels is still a valid kernel function.
However, in practice, the performance of the mixed kernels is similar and/or in-
ferior to the pure non-linear kernels. They have a theoretical higher representation
power with their duality: for a purely linear dataset, the optimisation should tend
to nullify the non-linear part of the kernel, and the opposite for a non-linear dataset.
Unfortunately, optimising them is more difficult because of the doubled amount of
parameters, which gives more flexibility but also more chances to converge towards
local minima. Combined with the longer training time (twice as slow as a pure non-
linear kernel), this solution does not seem to be worth it in the end, on the synthetic
dataset. The linear representative capabilities of the smooth non-linear kernels, as
shown before, seems to be enough to model the linear part of the data.
==PAGE:47==
3.8 Implementing the Gaussian Processes on a synthetic dataset
37
Figure 3.3: Fitting on the best test fold of the non-linear synthetic dataset. First:
linear kernel with ARD, second: Matern52 kernel with ARD.
3.8.2.4
Concluding on the kernel performances
Non-linear kernels are not more efficient at modelling linear relationships than linear
kernels. Therefore, if a linear expression can be proven between a set of data columns
and the output, setting the right kernel will help the maximum likelihood optimisation
find a better global solution. However, it seems like adding parameters to the kernels
in the context of ARD is generally a good idea to model complex relationships in
datasets. The relevance of the mixed kernels architecture has not been proven but
has not been disproven either: calculations inspired on the ResNet calculations would
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Methods
clear that up, in particular understanding the asymptotical effect of the separation
of kernels in the final prediction result, like exposed previously in 3.8.2.1. In the
end, the simplest solution seems to be to stick to the common kernels (linear, RBF,
Matern 5/2), with Automatic Relevance Determination turned on.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Results
This section will expand on the results of the implementation of the Gaussian Process
techniques on the dataset collected during this thesis. The computed models will be
interpreted in light of user behaviour patterns. This will allow us to conclude on the
relevance of the concept of notifications for the case in hand.
The full code can be found in appendix C.5.
4.1
Regression
4.1.1
Implementation
Because the default state of the user is to not reply to a notification, the mean of
the Gaussian Process has been set to the zero function.
In practice, this means
that if a point is far away from the training points’ support, the prediction will be
zero which means that the user will be considered as not having reported progress
after receiving a notification. This is a reasonable assumption in this context, as
the built dataset covers most of the support of the possible parameters. However, a
small obstacle appears due to the normalisation of the output column: ”no response”
does not correspond to yi = 0 but to yi = min(y). That leads to the necessity of
adding a constant mean function to the Gaussian process. Because the testing fold
is standardised using the same parameters as the training fold, a non-response will
scale to the same value in the training and in the test fold, limiting the risk of error
in this regard.
For the numerically unstable kernels, a white noise kernel is added (small constant
added to the diagonal of the kernel matrix). If this noise kernel is not enough to
bypass the numerical instability, the calculation is retried using a higher-variance
noise kernel.
For the sparse Gaussian Process, the chosen inducing points are a combination of
both medoids and archetypes: 15 of each (1% of the dataset).
The models’ generalisation errors are evaluated using 10-fold cross-validation,
where the calculated error is the mean of the mean squared errors on the test splits.
Determining the kernel lengthscales, kernel variances and modelled noise variance
is done using maximum-likelihood optimisation. Because of the risks linked to this
optimisation that were discussed previously, each optimisation is ran 5 times with
different random initialisations of the parameters, and only the best result per fold is
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Results
kept. The random initialisation is based on the He parameters initialiser [He+15b],
which takes into account the number of parameters to randomly initialise as well as
the expect range for those parameters.
4.1.2
Evaluating the performance of the different models
While the mean squared error of each model (defined by its kernel) is a good indicator
for ranking its performance amongst the others, a comparison to a baseline model
is necessary in order to distinguish the representative power of the modelling: the
ability of the model to successfully separate the signal from the noise in the dataset,
or its lack thereof. This baseline model represents a ”worst-case” model, where it
would predict only the average of the output data.
The baseline model is a Gaussian Process trained upon the mean of the input
features across the parameters:
Xmean =


x1,∗
...
xn,∗


Comparing the models on real data to the models on this baseline data gives
indication on the representative power of the models: if the mean squared error of
the trained model is lower than the one for the baseline model, it means that the
model managed to extract signal from the data. If the mean squared error is in the
same order of magnitude as the baseline model error, then the model only manages
to model the noise in the data.
4.1.3
Implementing the Latent Variable Model
Implementing the latent variable model is challenging as the LVM itself outputs the
latent variable representation of the original data. That representation then needs
to be fed into another GP model, effectively creating a two-layered process, which
increases the number of parameters and therefore the error.
This double-layered model is hard to cross-validate in one go, as it is not possible
to optimise the two layers at once in GPflow, and mean squared errors are not com-
parable to the ones from the other models, as the test datasets are not the same size
as the 1/10 of dataset used for the other models in the 10-fold CV.
Unfortunately, because of technical issues at the last minute when running the
final computations, the latent variable model could not be trained. While the code is
correct and runs on a minimal amount of data, the execution of the training on the
full dataset ends up realistically intractable and leads to a memory overflow, probably
because of the way how TensorFlow handles the calculations. The rest of this report
will assume that the LVM model remains a good hypothesis to try, but no results can
be shown as of now.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Choosing the best model
41
4.2
Choosing the best model
Following the theory from the previous chapter, different models can be applied: stan-
dard Gaussian Process, sparse Gaussian Process, and the Gaussian Process Latent
Variable Model. Each of those models can have several kernel choices: linear, radial
basis function, Matérn 3/2 or 5/2.
We study the effect of those two choices independently, as a joint analysis would
be too computationally intensive. However, from the previous study, it seems like the
representative power of the kernels and the model flexibility are not necessarily linked,
and so analysing the effect of different kernels on a simple GP model may be enough
to use those learnings on the other models, especially as they tend to be optimised to
give results as close as possible to the standard Gaussian Process regression, as seen
previously: optimising the inducing points while staying in the dataset in the case
of the sparse GP, and optimising the latent variable using KL-divergence against the
standard GP parameter prior in the case of the LVM.
4.2.1
Dataset transformation
After a first try at experimenting with modelling the raw dataset, a very obvi-
ous first discovery is the predominance of the sent_to_open_delta column in the
ARD results, by looking at the lengthscales and per-column variances. That means
that all the columns had a variance with the order of magnitude 10−6, except the
sent_to_open_delta column, who had a variance with the order of magnitude 10−1.
As a reminder, that column corresponds to the time delta between sending the
notification and the worker opening that notification on their phone. This represents
a measurement and not an actionable parameter, and while it brings value to the
model in order to bring its prediction performance up as well as representing a possible
measurement in real-life situations, this renders the interpretation of the model useless
for parameter optimisation purposes. It is therefore necessary for the intent of this
thesis to artificially reduce the influence of this parameter in the modelisation while
keeping its usefulness in the prediction.
Removing the column entirely is a possibility, but then the prediction perfor-
mance will probably take a hit. Another solution is to mask the rows based on the
”opened/not opened” value: if the user has opened the notification then we take into
account the data point, otherwise we set the input to zero (and the output will be
zero because it means no action has been taken by the user, including no progress
report). That’s how the input dataset X2 is defined in the code: setting the input row
to zero if the user has not opened the notification, and keep providing all the data
in the case where the user has opened the notification. This allows the algorithm to
train over the subset of opened notifications, while still learning the behaviour that,
if the user does not open the notification, the user cannot respond to it.
For comparison, the input dataset X3 is defined as the dataset deprived of this
column. We will compare the networks on the three versions of the dataset in order
to interpret the generated model.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Results
However, it seems clear from all the training experiments that using X3 for mod-
elling never gives good results: that means that the noise in this dataset is too
important and knowing whether the users have opened the notification or not stays a
crucial piece of information. We will therefore omit the results on X3 in the coming
subsections.
4.2.2
Choosing the best kernel
In order to select the best kernel, the model used here is the standard Gaussian
Process regression.
For dataset X1, the results can be found in table 4.1. From those results, it seems
like the linear kernel is the best kernel for achieving this prediction task. The RBF
kernel performance is very close to the baseline performance, which means that this
kernel cannot capture any useable information in the dataset. As for the Matérn 5/2
kernel, its performance is in between.
As for dataset X2 (results in table 4.2), the prediction performance is poorer than
with dataset X1, as expected, as less information is present. However, the prediction
in case of the linear kernel is encouraging, as it is lower than the baseline performance.
Table 4.1: Kernel performance comparison on dataset X1.
Kernel type
Mean squared error
Linear with ARD
0.852
RBF with ARD
1.028
RBF without ARD
1.072
Matérn 5/2 with ARD
0.937
Baseline (linear & RBF)
1.076
Table 4.2: Kernel performance comparison on dataset X2.
Kernel type
Mean squared error
Linear with ARD
0.972
RBF with ARD
1.028
Matérn 5/2 with ARD
1.032
Baseline (linear & RBF)
1.076
4.2.3
Choosing the best approximation
Using the linear kernel, as it is the best performing kernel in the previous section, it is
possible to now compare the different models’ performance. As explained previously,
the latent variable model did not perform at all, so the results are unknown.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Interpretation: User behaviour model
43
The standard GP and the sparse GP give the exact same prediction performance
on both datasets. While the standard GP is faster to train (because the likelihood is
not computed on both the full dataset and the set of support points), the predictions
are faster using the sparse GP: a production model would tend to use the sparse
model, but for our modelling purposes neither stands out.
Table 4.3: Model performance comparison on dataset X1.
Model type
Mean squared error
Standard GP
0.852
Sparse GP
0.853
GP-LVM
?
Baseline (no signal)
1.076
Table 4.4: Model performance comparison on dataset X2.
Kernel type
Mean squared error
Standard GP
0.972
Sparse GP
0.972
GP-LVM
?
Baseline (no signal)
1.076
4.3
Interpretation: User behaviour model
4.3.1
Interpretation of model parameters
Different kernels lead to different user behaviour models and also interpretations.
While interpreting the variance of each column in the linear kernel give us a direct
way to interpret the relationship between that column and the output, that reasoning
does not translate to the non-linear kernels, where spatial considerations also exist.
In the light of the results of the last section, the best model appears to be a GPR
model with a linear kernel. The dataset that gives the lowest error is the full dataset,
however it is very hard to interpret because the sent_to_open_delta column squashes
the rest of the lengthscales. In order to have an idea of the interesting parameters,
we can combine this information with the informations gotten when fitting dataset
X2.
When training and testing upon the full X2 dataset (no Cross-Validation, 80%
used for training and 20% for testing), the obtained parameters during one specific
run of the training are detailed in table 4.5. Because of the random initialisation,
several runs of the training may be needed to arrive to similar optimisation results,
which seem to be the real optimal parameters.
This gives us precious information for the interpretation of the user behaviour:
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Results
Table 4.5: Column weights upon training on X2.
Column
ARD variance
end_to_sent_delta
10−6
last_progress_report_value
10−6
last_report_delta
10−6
package_duration
10−6
sent_to_open_delta
9 · 10−2
time_of_day
3 · 10−3
day_of_week_0
10−6
day_of_week_1
10−6
day_of_week_2
10−6
day_of_week_3
10−6
day_of_week_4
10−6
day_of_week_5
10−5
day_of_week_6
10−6
tone_1
10−6
tone_2
8 · 10−2
tone_3
10−6
who_assigned_role_owner
10−6
who_assigned_role_manager
4 · 10−3
• time_of_day corresponds to the scaled time of day: 0 corresponds to noon. This
specific variance shows a direct relationship between the time and the response
score but no specific indication of better timing appears when using the linear
kernel.
• day_of_week_5 corresponds to Friday.
This falls in line with the previous
statistics, which showed a higher response rate on Fridays.
• tone_2 corresponds to a direct request update from their manager’s name (see
section 2.2.2 for the full formulation). Using this tone leads to a higher response
score.
• who_assigned_role_manager corresponds to the tasks where the worker has
been assigned by his direct manager. The fact that this has an impact whereas
the tasks assigned by the project owner (often a higher-up in the company)
shows that a more direct hierarchic link between the worker and the ”task
assigner” is beneficial for the response score.
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Conclusion on the results
45
4.3.2
Effects of assumptions
Let’s go over the assumptions made in subsection 2.1.2.1 and see if they hold them-
selves in regards to the results of the modelling. The quantitative data comes from
the notebook in appendix C.3.
The original weight of the sent_to_open_delta column in the modelling shows
that there is indeed a big correlation between opening the notification and reporting
progress. However, only 33% of users that opened a notification actually reported
progress: the causation is not direct.
Most of the notifications sent at night (see section 2.1.4.2) did get replied to in
the morning, which validates the assumption that the notifications at night are not
a nuisance for the users. Similarly, notifications did not go unanswered when sent
during the weekends: while Friday was the day with the most replies, Saturday had
more replies than Thursday for example. Workers did not ignore notifications on
Sundays either.
4.4
Conclusion on the results
The other assumptions made are about the kernels to model the data: while limiting
our experiments to one kind of kernel only to cover all the columns, we limited the
representative power of the model. For example, a periodic kernel on the time_of_day
column would have been more relevant and might have shown different interesting
information on the effect of this column, in particular the lengthscale on the column
would have allowed an interpretation on the best times to send a notification.
In the end, the original hypothesis about the effect of timing is validated. How-
ever, the timing column data was not robust (as discussed previously, because of
timezone problems, some times were not using the right timezone because of techni-
cal limitations) and a more accurate dataset on the timing would have allowed us to
use a more specific kernel for this kind of data and therefore allowed a closer analysis
of the behaviour.
The lack of correlation with some intrinsic parameters of the task (length of the
task package_duration, last progress report value) is surprising, but that can be
explained by the fact that the user might not have those parameters in mind while
deciding to report progress or not.
The lack of correlation with the last time the report has been made is also surpris-
ing, and can only be explained by the way the dataset has been built: for the sake of
not creating too much fatigue on the users, at most one notification was sent per day
per task to each worker. This compromise probably has lead to the loss of interesting
information for the modellisation in this column.
The impact of the tone on the user is interesting. An assumption from the UX
Designer of the company was that too much of a ”robotic” impression in the wording
might put off the workers from replying to the notifications altogether.
The pre-
dominant tone that leads to the highest score is very similar to an order from their
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Results
direct supervisor, and therefore this exploits the hierarchical relationships between
the workers and their supervisor. However, it is to be noted that the platform should
not impersonate said supervisor and speak in their name.
Finally, the impact of direct hierarchy is clear: an order from a closer manager
seems more effective than an order in the name of someone that might be high-ranked,
but not directly known from the worker. However, to moderate this point, this thesis
has only been tested on users from Denmark and Australia where hierarchy tends to
be more horizontal than in some other countries, where hierarchical rapports might
tend towards the other direction and an order from a higher-up be taken more into
account. However, on this specific subset of users, this trend is explainable.
4.5
Effect on the company operations
Thanks to the metrics inside the company, it has been possible for me to build metrics
on the subset of users that received the notifications, and compare to the rest of the
users on the platform. Those statistics are a bit skewed because the period included
a lot of holidays in Denmark, some of whose are also shared with the Australian
company. The graph in figure 4.1 is adjusted for the number of working days in the
week.
Figure 4.1: Progress reports metric (weekly average) adjusted for the working days
count in each week (in green, the period of the thesis) on the users
subset.
This is to compare to the progress reports metric on the rest of the users, which
stayed stable.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
From the original problem definition from GenieBelt, which is to increase the worker’s
engagement towards the platform and in particular change their behaviour with re-
spect to reporting progress in real time on site, it has been shown in this thesis that a
dynamic reminder mechanism is needed in order to get the workers to actually report
progress. However, determining the right time depending on the workers themselves,
the tasks’ type, the schedule and the external factors is definitely a big challenge. The
process started with introducing this new notification mechanism. This mechanism is
coupled with tracking of the workers’ interactions, which is a common way to identify
patterns in order to build a model of user behaviour. This model can then be used
to determine the correct notification sending parameters in more general conditions.
Creating a multivariate testing framework around the sending of the notifications
that tries to strike a balance between nagging and data collection is crucial in the
case of human behaviour tracking.
Indeed, if the user feels nagged, he will stop
interacting with the notifications altogether thanks to the mechanisms provided by
the different mobile platforms (”muting” the notifications for a certain period of time
or blocking all notifications from GenieBelt altogether).
Also, forcing the system
upon the workers through contractual obligations is also too reliant on the worker’s
good-will. Using this ”extended A/B testing” framework, a dataset has been defined
from the parameters that may be relevant, and the data has been collected over a
little more than a month. This allowed to see the cycles during the days, also during
the weeks, and finally during different weeks.
While A/B testing is very common, using Bayesian modelling for user behaviour
interpretation is not very common in the literature. Through this thesis, I had the
opportunity to learn the concepts behind Bayesian inference and its extension to
machine learning through the Gaussian Processes. I’ve learnt that kernel methods are
very powerful but are also very computationally intensive and numerically unstable,
but there are ways to overcome those issues and I had the opportunity to use some
of them on a real case.
The main explanation for the poor prediction performance of the models is the
difficulty to integrate external factors in the fixed dataset: the weather and workers’
weekly and daily schedules are just a examples of the large set of factors that can
influence the workers’ propension to report progress on a given task at a given time.
Right now, those factors are incorporated in the ”noise” element of the algorithm and,
as seen during the synthetic analysis, the Gaussian Processes’ predictive power goes
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Conclusion
down with the level of external noise going up.
Nevertheless, the generated interpretation of the user behaviour has a real business
potential: I will present those results to the company in hope to build a system that
will take those findings into account, and increase the amount of progress reports for
all customers, which will eventually hopefully lead to better real-time communication
between workers and project managers once the habits are formed by the workers.
It will be a matter of judgement in the future to decide whether such a notification
system is temporary, in order to form habits only, or permanent in order to maintain
those habits and guide the workers.
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX A
User Research
Figure A.1: Survey for user research.
This small survey helps understanding how some GenieBelt users behave in regards
to notifications, both from GenieBelt and every other app. The results are a good
starting point to form some hypotheses.
15 GenieBelt employees replied to the questionnaire. The results can be seen on
figure A.2.
==PAGE:60==
50
A User Research
Figure A.2: Results for the survey.
==PAGE:61==
Participation in research
More progress reports for you
APPENDIX B
Pitching the idea to
the client companies
==PAGE:62==
You want data
• GenieBelt is all about bringing data from site to oﬃce 
• We want to give you more progress reports than what 
you’re getting right now. That usually is because the 
workers don’t remember to report when they made 
progress within their task.
More progress reports
• Our goal is to bring at least one progress report a week 
per task, even maybe one a day!
==PAGE:63==
Our solution
• Sending mobile notiﬁcations at the right time is crucial to 
get an answer. 
• The right time is very hard to deﬁne (diﬀerent for diﬀerent 
people and location) and we will use machine learning for 
this. It is able to determine when the workers need to 
receive a notiﬁcation for a task, depending on the task 
type, duration, etc.
Why we need you
• For the machine learning, we need a group of users to 
test on, so the machine can establish the right behaviour. 
• We will send push notiﬁcations to your workers assigned 
to tasks, but it can be at any time (even at night) and any 
day (even during the weekends). 
• Request: No need to ask your workers to behave 
diﬀerently. If the notiﬁcation is not relevant for the worker, 
the worker should ignore the notiﬁcation. It will train the 
algorithm to not send notiﬁcations at that time.
==PAGE:64==
54
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX C
Technical details
C.1
Collecting the data
C.1.1
Sending the notifications from the GenieBelt back-end
Plugging in to the existing code in the GenieBelt back-end, its technical framework
limited me to send notifications at specific intervals of time. I decided to send a batch
of notifications every 30 minutes, as this gives us 48 ∗X data points per day, where
X is the number of customers in each batch of notifications we send.
Each time a notification is sent out, its different parameters are saved in an ex-
ternal MongoDB database.
This database only receives data from my thesis and
therefore is considered as my temporary data storage for the whole duration of the
data collection period.
The timezone of the user is estimated using his last connection IP, geolocalised.
C.1.2
Receiving the notifications on mobiles and tracking the
engagement
Each time a notification is clicked, a tracking signal is sent to the Mixpanel platform.
When progress is effectively reported, a tracking signal is also sent to the Mixpanel
platform.
C.1.3
Gathering all the data together
The previous parts were blended in the proprietary code of GenieBelt and therefore
cannot be too explicit. However, all data from now on is fully generated from the
thesis and can be more detailed.
Considering a part of the data is in the MongoDB database and a part of the data
in the Mixpanel interface, I had to devise a strategy to combine all the data together
to form coherent datapoints for the rest of the thesis.
==PAGE:66==
56
C Technical details
C.2
Building the dataset in a Sci-Py compatible format
The code is available at : https://github.com/jhoareau/masters-thesis-public/
DatasetBuilding.ipynb or the IPython notebook attached to this thesis called
DatasetBuilding.ipynb.
The code can be explained as follows:
• The data is gathered from the three data sources: internal MongoDB database,
internal SQL database and Mixpanel
• The data is matched from the three sources into single objects
• Progress reports information come at the same time from the internal database
and Mixpanel for redundancy
• Progress reports are only kept if they are done after the notification has been
opened in a timespan of 12 hours (half a day)
• A one-hot encoder is used in order to make the data directly useable in a Sci-Py
format, standard format for the machine learning algorithms.
C.3
Analysing the dataset (basic statistics)
The code is available at : https://github.com/jhoareau/masters-thesis-public/
StatsOnData.ipynb or the IPython notebook attached to this thesis called StatsOnData.ipynb.
The columns that require scaling are scaled by centering the data around the
mean, setting that mean to zero and the variance to one. The same operation is done
on the output data.
In order, the different calculations represent: data statistics, variance per PCA
component, column boxplots and per column histograms. Each calculation is made
for, in order: the full dataset, the dataset without one-hot encoding, the subset of
rows where users opened the notifications, the subset of rows where users replied with
a progress report, the subset of rows where the notifications have been sent by day,
the subset of rows where the notifications have been sent by night. Finally, the last
cell corresponds to the statistics on the output column.
C.4
Synthetic analysis (familiarisation with Gaussian
Processes)
The code is available at : https://github.com/jhoareau/masters-thesis-public/
SyntheticDataset.ipynb or the IPython notebook attached to this thesis called
SyntheticDataset.ipynb.
==PAGE:67==
C.5 Modelling the user behaviour (machine learning)
57
C.5
Modelling the user behaviour (machine learning)
The code is available at : https://github.com/jhoareau/masters-thesis-public/
GaussianProcesses.ipynb or the IPython notebook attached to this thesis called
GaussianProcesses.ipynb.
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[ACS16]
Rajat Agarwal, Shankar Chandrasekaran, and Mukund Sridhar. Imag-
ining Construction’s Digital Future | McKinsey & Company. June 2016.
url: https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/capital-projects-
and- infrastructure/our- insights/imagining- constructions-
digital-future (visited on January 29, 2018).
[Att+11]
Simon Attfield et al. “Towards a Science of User Engagement (Position
Paper)”. In: WSDM Workshop on User Modelling for Web Applications.
2011, pages 9–12.
[Bis06]
Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. In-
formation science and statistics. New York: Springer, 2006. 738 pages.
isbn: 978-0-387-31073-2.
[Boh17]
Dieter Bohn. Android Oreo Review: It’s What’s inside That Counts.
September 11, 2017. url: https://www.theverge.com/2017/9/11/
16286012/android-8-review-o-oreo-update-treble-notifications
(visited on January 24, 2018).
[BT13]
Frank Bentley and Konrad Tollmar. “The Power of Mobile Notifications
to Increase Wellbeing Logging Behavior”. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’13. New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2013, pages 1095–1098. isbn: 978-1-4503-1899-0.
doi: 10.1145/2470654.2466140.
[CB94]
Adele Cutler and Leo Breiman. “Archetypal Analysis”. In: Technomet-
rics 36.4 (1994), pages 338–347. issn: 0040-1706. doi: 10.2307/1269949.
JSTOR: 1269949.
[dG M+17]
Alexander G. de G. Matthews et al. “GPflow: A Gaussian Process Li-
brary Using TensorFlow”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research
18.40 (2017), pages 1–6. url: http://jmlr.org/papers/v18/16-
537.html.
[DV13]
Jeroen D’Haen and Dirk Van den Poel. “Model-Supported Business-
to-Business Prospect Prediction Based on an Iterative Customer Ac-
quisition Framework”. In: Industrial Marketing Management. Special
Issue on Applied Intelligent Systems in Business-to-Business Marketing
==PAGE:70==
60
Bibliography
42.4 (May 1, 2013), pages 544–551. issn: 0019-8501. doi: 10.1016/j.
indmarman.2013.03.006.
[Eya14]
Nir Eyal. Hooked: How to Build Habit-Forming Products. Penguin, Novem-
ber 4, 2014. 151 pages. isbn: 978-0-698-19066-5.
[He+15a]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. In:
(December 10, 2015). arXiv: 1512.03385 [cs]. url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1512.03385 (visited on March 27, 2018).
[He+15b]
Kaiming He et al. “Delving Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassing Human-
Level Performance on ImageNet Classification”. In: IEEE, December
2015, pages 1026–1034. isbn: 978-1-4673-8391-2. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.
2015.123.
[Hen14]
James Hensman. GPy.Util.Linalg - Definition of Cholesky Decomposi-
tion with Jitter. 2014. url: https://github.com/SheffieldML/GPy/
blob/devel/GPy/util/linalg.py#L53.
[Hen16]
James Hensman. SGPR Notes — GPflow 1.0.0 Documentation. 2016.
url: https : / / gpflow . readthedocs . io / en / master / notebooks /
SGPR_notes.html (visited on April 15, 2018).
[HH14]
Clemens Holzmann and Patrick Hutflesz. “Multivariate Testing of Na-
tive Mobile Applications”. In: Proceedings of the 12th International Con-
ference on Advances in Mobile Computing and Multimedia. MoMM ’14.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2014, pages 85–94. isbn: 978-1-4503-3008-4.
doi: 10.1145/2684103.2684119.
[HKS14]
J. Hamari, J. Koivisto, and H. Sarsa. “Does Gamification Work? – A
Literature Review of Empirical Studies on Gamification”. In: 2014 47th
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. 2014 47th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences. January 2014, pages 3025–
3034. doi: 10.1109/HICSS.2014.377.
[Hor+03]
Eric Horvitz et al. “Models of Attention in Computing and Communica-
tion: From Principles to Applications”. In: Communications of the ACM
46.3 (2003), pages 52–59.
[HSM16]
Tue Herlau, Mikkel Schmidt, and Morten Mørup. Introduction to Ma-
chine Learning and Data Mining. December 2, 2016.
[IB08]
Shamsi T. Iqbal and Brian P. Bailey. “Effects of Intelligent Notifica-
tion Management on Users and Their Tasks”. In: Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM,
2008, pages 93–102.
[IK17]
Aleksandar Ilic and Oleksandr Kuvshynov. Evaluating Boosted Deci-
sion Trees for Billions of Users. March 27, 2017. url: https://code.
facebook.com/posts/975025089299409/evaluating-boosted-decision-
trees-for-billions-of-users/ (visited on January 24, 2018).
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
61
[KB14]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic
Optimization”. In: CoRR abs/1412.6980 (2014). arXiv: 1412.6980. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
[Koh+09]
Ron Kohavi et al. “Controlled Experiments on the Web: Survey and
Practical Guide”. In: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 18.1 (Febru-
ary 1, 2009), pages 140–181. issn: 1384-5810, 1573-756X. doi: 10.1007/
s10618-008-0114-1.
[KW13]
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. “Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes”.
In: (December 20, 2013). arXiv: 1312.6114 [cs, stat]. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114 (visited on May 19, 2018).
[LC16]
Ping Li and Songcan Chen. “A Review on Gaussian Process Latent
Variable Models”. In: CAAI Transactions on Intelligence Technology
1.4 (October 1, 2016), pages 366–376. issn: 2468-2322. doi: 10.1016/j.
trit.2016.11.004.
[Lee12]
Peter M. Lee. Bayesian Statistics: An Introduction. 4th ed. Chichester,
West Sussex ; Hoboken, N.J: Wiley, 2012. 462 pages. isbn: 978-1-118-
33257-3.
[Llo+05]
Xavier Llorà et al. “Combating User Fatigue in iGAs: Partial Ordering,
Support Vector Machines, and Synthetic Fitness”. In: Proceedings of
the 7th Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation.
GECCO ’05. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2005, pages 1363–1370. isbn:
978-1-59593-010-1. doi: 10.1145/1068009.1068228.
[LXW12]
Huigang Liang, Yajiong Xue, and Liansheng Wu. “Ensuring Employees’
IT Compliance: Carrot or Stick?” In: Information Systems Research
24.2 (July 27, 2012), pages 279–294. issn: 1047-7047. doi: 10.1287/
isre.1120.0427.
[Mac13]
I. Scott MacKenzie. Human-Computer Interaction: An Empirical Re-
search Perspective. First edition. Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann is an
imprint of Elsevier, 2013. 351 pages. isbn: 978-0-12-405865-1.
[May+88]
J. Terry Mayes et al. “Information Flow in a User Interface: The Ef-
fect of Experience and Context on the Recall of MacWrite Screens”.
In: Proceedings of the Fourth Conference of the British Computer So-
ciety on People and Computers IV. New York, NY, USA: Cambridge
University Press, 1988, pages 275–289. isbn: 978-0-521-36553-6. url:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=54675.54691 (visited on
February 11, 2018).
[McM14]
James McMurray. The Gaussian Process Latent Variable Model (GPLVM).
April 2014. url: https://www.slideshare.net/jamesmcm03/the-
gaussian-process-latent-variable-model-gplvm (visited on May 10,
2018).
==PAGE:72==
62
Bibliography
[Meh+15]
Abhinav Mehrotra et al. “Designing Content-Driven Intelligent Notifi-
cation Mechanisms for Mobile Applications”. In: Proceedings of the 2015
ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Com-
puting. UbiComp ’15. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2015, pages 813–824.
isbn: 978-1-4503-3574-4. doi: 10.1145/2750858.2807544.
[MulT]
Multivariate Testing. url: https://www.optimizely.com/optimization-
glossary/multivariate-testing/ (visited on February 12, 2018).
[PCdO14]
Martin Pielot, Karen Church, and Rodrigo de Oliveira. “An In-Situ
Study of Mobile Phone Notifications”. In: ACM Press, 2014, pages 233–
242. isbn: 978-1-4503-3004-6. doi: 10.1145/2628363.2628364.
[RB12]
Saharon Rosset and Slava Borodovsky. A/B Testing Using the Negative
Binomial Distribution in an Internet Search Application. 2012.
[Rea15]
Marshall Reaves. Predict Tells You Who Will Convert before They
Do. - The Signal. November 17, 2015. url: https://mixpanel.com/
blog/2015/11/17/introducing-predict-see-who-will-convert-
before-they-do/ (visited on January 24, 2018).
[Reu+17]
Jan Reubold et al. “Bayesian User Behavior Models”. In: (2017), page 12.
[Ruo+14]
Tuukka Ruotsalo et al. “Interactive Intent Modeling: Information Dis-
covery Beyond Search”. In: Commun. ACM 58.1 (December 2014), pages 86–
92. issn: 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/2656334.
[RW06]
Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian
Processes for Machine Learning. Adaptive computation and machine
learning. OCLC: ocm61285753. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 2006.
248 pages. isbn: 978-0-262-18253-9.
[Sah+14]
Alireza Sahami Shirazi et al. “Large-Scale Assessment of Mobile Notifi-
cations”. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. CHI ’14. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2014,
pages 3055–3064. isbn: 978-1-4503-2473-1. doi: 10 . 1145 / 2556288 .
2557189.
[SciPy]
Scipy.Optimize.Minimize — SciPy v1.0.0 Reference Guide. url: https:
/ / docs . scipy . org / doc / scipy / reference / generated / scipy .
optimize.minimize.html (visited on April 3, 2018).
[SW16]
Claude Sammut and Geoffrey I. Webb, editors. Encyclopedia of Machine
Learning and Data Mining. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2016. isbn: 978-
1-4899-7502-7. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4899-7502-7. url: http://link.
springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4899-7502-7 (visited on February 5,
2018).
[Tit09]
Michalis K Titsias. “Variational Learning of Inducing Variables in Sparse
Gaussian Processes”. In: (2009), page 8.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
63
[Wah90]
Grace Wahba. Spline Models for Observational Data. Society for In-
dustrial and Applied Mathematics, January 1990. isbn: 978-0-89871-
244-5 978-1-61197-012-8. doi: 10.1137/1.9781611970128. url: http:
//epubs.siam.org/doi/book/10.1137/1.9781611970128 (visited on
March 22, 2018).
[WN07]
David P Wipf and Srikantan S Nagarajan. “A New View of Automatic
Relevance Determination”. In: (2007), page 8.
[WP83]
Andrew B. Watson and Denis G. Pelli. “Quest: A Bayesian Adaptive
Psychometric Method”. In: Perception & Psychophysics 33.2 (March 1,
1983), pages 113–120. issn: 0031-5117, 1532-5962. doi: 10.3758/BF03202828.
[WS01]
Christopher K. I. Williams and Matthias Seeger. “Using the Nyström
Method to Speed Up Kernel Machines”. In: Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 13. Edited by T. K. Leen, T. G. Dietterich,
and V. Tresp. MIT Press, 2001, pages 682–688. url: http://papers.
nips.cc/paper/1866-using-the-nystrom-method-to-speed-up-
kernel-machines.pdf.
[WV09]
Heli Wigelius and Heli Väätäjä. “Dimensions of Context Affecting User
Experience in Mobile Work”. In: Human-Computer Interaction – IN-
TERACT 2009. IFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, August 24,
2009, pages 604–617. isbn: 978-3-642-03657-6 978-3-642-03658-3. doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-03658-3_65.
[Yan+01]
Lian Yan et al. “Improving Prediction of Customer Behavior in Nonsta-
tionary Environments”. In: International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks, 2001. Proceedings. IJCNN ’01. International Joint Confer-
ence on Neural Networks, 2001. Proceedings. IJCNN ’01. Volume 3.
2001, 2258–2263 vol.3. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.2001.938518.
[ZH05]
Zou Hui and Hastie Trevor. “Regularization and Variable Selection via
the Elastic Net”. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series
B (Statistical Methodology) 67.2 (March 9, 2005), pages 301–320. issn:
1369-7412. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9868.2005.00503.x.
==PAGE:74==
