==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cellulose conversion with heterogeneous phosphate 
catalysts in biphasic ionic liquid systems 
 
 
 
Mads Holm Jensen 
s134472 
 
30 ECTS Master Thesis, June 2018 
 
 
     Thesis Supervisor: 
Professor Anders Riisager 
 
 
  
 
  
 
                                                                                  _______________________________________ 
                                                                                                         Mads Holm Jensen 
                                                                                                                  s134472 
==PAGE:2==
DTU Chemistry
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Kemitorvet
Building 207
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 2419
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The catalytic conversion of carbohydrates, cellulose, lignin and other types of abundant biomass
into useful chemicals, which in the future could serve as platform chemicals for the production
of many other chemicals widely used today have been extensively studied. In this work the
catalytic efficiency of porous tin and gallium phosphate catalysts in the conversion of cellulose,
glucose and fructose to the chemical HMF have been tested. The reactions were run in biphasic
solvent systems, and the two organic solvents MTHF and MIBK, was used. For the other
phase water, as well as the ionic liquid C4mim[Cl] were tested. The effect of the calcination
temperature of the synthesized catalysts, which previously have been found to influence the
porosity have also been tested. Nitrogen adsorption tests were also done. The most efficient
of these catalysts were modified using a known silylation procedure, which have been reported
to enhance the catalyst selectivity of metal phosphates, by silica binding to the coordinatively
unsaturated metal ions which are unselective Lewis-acid sites. The sugar and HMF quantities
in the aqueous/IL and organic phases respectively, were measured using HPLC.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This work is a 30 ETCS Master thesis made at the Catalysis and Sustainable Chemistry (CSC)
Group at the Department of Chemistry at the Technical University of Denmark, during the
period of February to June 2018.
Acknowledgements
I would like to give my thanks to Ph. d. student Irene Tosi for general help with questions
regarding the laboratory equipment as well as the use of the HPLC instrument. I would also
like to thank Post-Doc Nanette Zahrtmann for help with the use of the inert atmosphere
glovebox, and Bodil Fliis Holten for taking her time to do the nitrogen adsorption/desorption
tests on the produced catalysts.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
List of abbreviations
5-HMF
5-Hydroxymethylfurfural
MTHF
2-Methyltetrahydrofuran
MIBK
4-methyl-2-pentanone
TEOS
Tetraethyl ortosilicate
DMSO
Dimethylsulfoxide
TMS
Tetramethylsilane
DFF
2,5-diformylfuran
FDCA
Furan-2,5-dicarboxylic acid
BHMF
2,5-bis(hydroxymethyl)furan
GDE
Glycol dimethyl ether
NMP
N-methyl-pyrrolidone
IL
Ionic liquid
AFIL
Acid Functional Ionic Liquid
C4mim[Cl]
1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride
C4mim[Br]
1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide
C2mim[Br]
1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide
TEAOH
Tetraethylammonium hydroxide
NMR
Nuclear magnetic resonance
HPLC
High-Pressure-Liquid-Chromatography
DST
Density function theory
ppm
Parts per million
BET
Brunaur-Emmett-Teller
TON
Turn-over number
SEM
Scanning electron microscopy
SDA
structure-directing agent
CTAB
cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
List of figures
Description
Page number
Figure 1.1 Scheme of HMF derivatives with future potential in chemical industry
2
Figure 1.2 Reaction scheme from glucose to HMF
4
Figure 1.3 Mechanism for acid-catalyzed glycosidic bond breaking
5
Figure 1.4 Mechanism for fructose dehydration
5
Figure 3.1 Pore width distribution for SnP-700 catalyst
24
Figure 3.2 Pore width distribution for SnP-600 catalyst
25
Figure 3.3 Tin catalyst calcination temperature effect sugar conversion
27
Figure 3.4 Tin catalyst calcination temperature effect cellulose conversion
28
Figure 3.5 Gallium catalyst calcination temperature effect sugar conversion
29
Figure 3.6 Gallium catalyst calcination temperature effect in cellulose conversion
30
Figure 3.7 Sugar conversions of silylated and non-silylated tin catalyst
31
Figure 3.8 Cellulose conversions of silylated and non-silylated tin catalyst
32
Figure 3.9 Sugar conversions of biphasic solvent systems with MIBK/MTHF
33
Figure 3.10 Cellulose conversions of biphasic solvent systems with MIBK/MTHF
34
Figure 3.11 Sugar conversions in IL biphasic system at different temperatures
35
Figure 3.12 Cellulose conversions in IL biphasic system at different temperatures
35
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
List of tables
Description
Page number
Table 2.1 List of conversion reactions
20
Table 2.2 HPLC Standard concentrations
21
Table 3.1 Surface area, pore width and volume of tested tin catalysts
24
Table 3.1 Averages and standard deviations for reactions with glucose
26
Table 3.2 Averages and standard deviations for reactions with fructose
26
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
List of abbreviations
v
List of figures
vii
List of tables
ix
Contents
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Biomass-based platform chemicals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Sustainability and availability of biomass
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Platform chemicals as fossil fuel alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.3
Current production and use of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural
. . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Principles of catalysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Mechanisms and role of acid sites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Solvent systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4.1
Organic solvents and multiphase solvent systems . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4.2
Ionic liquids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
Characterization and analysis methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5.1
Nitrogen Adsorption Isotherms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5.2
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5.3
High-Pressure-Liquid-Chromatography (HPLC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.6
Literature study of heterogeneous catalysts in HMF synthesis . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.6.1
Porous Al, Ti, Zr and Nb phosphates by Ordomsky et al. . . . . . . . .
11
1.6.2
Supported and doped vanadyl phosphates by Carlini et al. . . . . . . . .
12
1.6.3
Porous tin phosphate from polymer template by Dutta et al.
. . . . . .
12
1.6.4
Copper phosphate nanostructures by Khemthong et al.
. . . . . . . . .
13
1.6.5
Alkaline earth phosphates by Daorattanachai et al. . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.6.6
Phosphated titanium oxides in biphasic systems by Atanda et al. . . . .
14
1.6.7
Ceria-niobia mixed oxides by Stošić et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.6.8
Tin- and titanium-beta zeolites in biphasic systems by Nikolla et al. . .
15
1.6.9
Acid modified zeolites in biphasic system by Pande et al.
. . . . . . . .
16
1.6.10 Phosphated zirconium MOFs by Yabushita et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.6.11 Nanotube-supported acidic MOFs by Liu et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.7
Aim of project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
==PAGE:14==
xii
Contents
2
Experimental
19
2.1
Catalyst preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.1.1
Synthesis of metal phosphate particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.1.2
Silylation procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
Cellulose and carbohydrate conversion reactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
Yield determination and product characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3.1
HPLC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3.2
Product characterization with 1H-NMR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3.3
Nitrogen adsorption/desorption test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4
Reagent list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Results and discussion
23
3.1
Catalyst yields
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Product characterization with 1H-NMR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Catalyst characterization with nitrogen adsorption/desorption . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Catalytic cellulose and carbohydrate conversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4.1
Estimation of experimental error in catalytic reactions . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4.2
Effect of calcination temperature on Tin phosphate catalysts
. . . . . .
27
3.4.3
Effect of the choice of metal and calcination temperature of Gallium
phosphate catalysts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4.4
Effect of silylation surface modification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4.5
Effect of solvent system and temperature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4.6
Future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Conclusion
37
Bibliography
39
Appendix
43
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Biomass-based platform chemicals
1.1.1
Sustainability and availability of biomass
The shrinking fossil fuel reserves and continued increase in the demand of energy and chemical
present an increasing problem for society. Despite efforts to decrease energy usage, including
by industrial sectors, the global energy demand is still expected to increase by at much as 37%
by 2040. Petroleum is also the feedstock for the production of more than 95% of chemicals
containing carbon that is used today. Renewable sources for the production of energy and
chemicals have therefore gained a lot of interest in academia and the industry. Considerable
research is dedicated to advancing and developing new catalysts and technologies in order to
be able to have a sustainable production of chemicals and fuels. 170 billion metric tons of
biomass are produced by the nature each per, the vast majority by photosynthesis. Roughly
75% of this are classified as carbohydrates. Glucose, the most common type of hexose can
be made from starch, cellulose, lactose and sucrose.
Enzymatic hydrolysis of corn is used
on an industrial scale to produce glucose, and the United States produces 200 to 250 billion
tons of corn each year, with two third being used to produce chemicals. Cellulose formed by
polymerized glucose, is a component of lignocellulosic biomass which constitutes up to 50%
of biomass composition, and is a renewable source of carbon that is also inedible for humans.
This have caused cellulose along with the other components of lignocellulose, hemicellulose
and lignin, to attract attention as a source for the production of chemicals and fuels. If the
processes for producing glucose from wood cellulose could be improved, this glucose source
could be less expensive than using corn. Research and development plans to use cellulose have
also been initiated in several countries. The supply of lignocellulose compounds is abundant,
and can come from the agricultural industry as well as paper producing plants [1, 2, 3, 4, ?].
1.1.2
Platform chemicals as fossil fuel alternatives
In 2002, the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy in the US Department of Energy
combined different programs into a single biomass program. Two years later, the Department
of Energy released at report identifying the twelve building block chemicals from sugars which
can be converted into high-value bio-based chemicals, and which according to the screening
procedure had the biggest potential. One of the researchers and author of the original report,
re-visited this screening again in 2010, looking at the new research on the topic. This time, the
chemical 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) was among the thirteen platform chemicals which
was seen as having good potential. Another platform chemical, Furan-2,5-dicarboxylic acid
(FDCA) was mentioned in the 2004 report, and all synthesis routes proceed via oxidation of
HMF using different catalysts [5, 6].
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
1.1.3
Current production and use of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural
The acid-catalyzed dehydration of fructose is the most convenient way to produce HMF , but
due to the lower cost of glucose, glucose is the only carbohydrate used industrially is the
production of HMF. However, due to the requirements of strong acids and organic solvents,
along with the high price of fructose and low reactivity of glucose, the sugar route is not used in
bulk-scale production. Bulk-scale production of HMF is currently done by hydroxymethylation
of furfural with formaldehyde, and the global consumption have been estimated to be around
100 metric tons annually, according to a recent survey.
However, HMF is seen as a new
petrochemical accessible from sustainable regrowing sources, and also have a high potential for
an increasing demand in the chemical industry in the production of various chemicals. Many
of these chemicals are currently being derived from petroleum, and are currently used in the
manufacturing of products such as fuels, polymers and pharmaceutical products [2, 4, 7, 8].
Figure 1.1: A scheme showing HMF derivatives with a high potential for the chemical industry.
From Corma et al. [4]
Using classical oxidants in stoichiometric quantities, HMF can be oxidized to 2,5-diformylfuran
(DFF). DFF is a versatile compound with numerous reported uses, including as a monomer
in polymer production, and as a starting material for the synthesis of antifungal agents and
pharmaceuticals. FDCA, another derivative of HMF produced by oxidation of HMF, have a
high potential for applications in the manufacture of current products. FDCA can be used in
the manufacture of polyamides, polyurethanes and polyesters, where it can replace isophtalic,
adipic and terephthalic acids which are all currently being used. 2,5-bis(hydroxymethyl)furan
(BHMF) can be synthesized by either reduction of HMF or through hydroxymethylation of
furfuryl alcohol using formaldehyde. BHMF is a chemical useful as an intermediate in the
production of polymers and synthesis of drugs. Research into the development of different
types of catalysts used in the synthesis of these HMF derivatives are ongoing, and Corma et
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Principles of catalysis
3
al. [4] provides a short overview of some of these in their review [4].
1.2
Principles of catalysis
The chemical industry contribute to roughly 20% of the world’s total gross domestic product,
and here the catalytic technologies have a big role.
The turnover in the world market of
catalysts was estimated to be 13 billion US $ in 2008 [9, 10].
Catalysts are compounds which increase the reaction rate of a thermodynamically feasible
reaction in a cyclic process. The catalyst forms a complex with the reactants which allow them
to be transformed into products, and the catalyst is returned to its original form before the
next cycle takes place. This doesn’t mean that catalysts can take part in an infinite number
of catalytic cycles, as structural changes can deactivate the catalyst, making replacement or
reactivation necessary [9, 10].
Catalysis can be divided into five different groups: Heterogeneous, homogeneous, electro-,
photo- and bio-catalysis. The latter four will not be described in further detail. Heterogeneous
catalysis is a catalytic system where catalyst and reactions are in different physical phases. In
this case, the catalyst will typically be a solid, while the reactant is in gas or liquid phase.
Homogeneous catalysis on the other hand, is systems where catalyst and reactants have the
same physical phase [10].
For solid catalysts, the Sabatier principles proposes that an unstable intermediate is formed
between the surface of the catalyst and a reactant. The intermediate should however, still be
stable enough to be formed and be able to easily transform into the product.
Langmuir
formulated a model of chemisorption on the surface of metals, where active sites, which can
be atoms or functional groups on the surface, can bind to a reactant to facilitate the its
transformation into the intermediate. Langmuir made the assumption that all the sites were
identical, but Taylor emphasized the heterogeneity of the active sites. The surface of solid
catalysts can contain terraces, ledges, kinks and vacancies, where sites with exposed atoms
will have different coordination numbers, and therefore also different activities and reactivities.
The active sites of solid catalysts, can be metal cations, anions, Lewis and Brønsted acids,
bases or acid-base pairs, and more [10].
Heterogeneous catalysis can be divided different elementary steps.
The first is the dif-
fusion of reactant to the interphase between surface of the catalyst and the bulk liquid or
gas. If the solid catalyst is porous, diffusion into its pores can also take place. The second
step is chemisorption or physisorption, the binding of reactant to the surface of the catalyst.
Chemisorption is the formation of an actual bond between the surface and the reactant, while
physisorption is the interaction between the surface and reactant by van der Waals forces,
which is much weaker than the formation of an actual chemical bond. Next, the reaction of
the reactant(s) to the product(s) through an intermediate. For bimolecular reactions, the two
possible mechanisms are the Eley-Rideal and Langmuir-Hinselwood mechanisms. The former
is the reactions between one adsorbed reagent and one approaching from the bulk phase, while
the latter is the reaction between two adsorbed species on the surface. The next step is the
desorption of the formed product(s), and lastly the formed product(s) diffuse into the bulk
phase again [10, 11].
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
1.3
Mechanisms and role of acid sites
The conversion of cellulose to HMF is a three-step reaction, where cellulose goes through
hydrolysis to glucose, and isomerization converts glucose to fructose, which is finally dehydrated
to HMF. The complex and bulky structure of cellulose lowers its solubility in many solvents, and
also makes it difficult for the molecule to interact with the active sites of catalysts. Studies
with the use of homogeneous catalysts for cellulose conversion have given good results, but
the corrosive nature of these catalysts, as well as the poor separation and recycling of the
catalysts, have made heterogeneous catalysts more attractive. Heterogeneous acidic catalysts,
which can catalyze the dehydration of glucose and cellulose, can also cause side reactions such
as formation of humin, rehydration of HMF or degradation of cellulose and glucose. Increasing
the selectivity of the heterogeneous catalysts is therefore important, to make this reaction
efficient [1].
Figure 1.2: Reaction scheme for conversion of carbohydrates to HMF as proposed by Villanueva
et al. Side reactions from HMF not included [12].
Villanueva et al. have looked at the kinetics of the reactions using glucose as substrate, and
found that glucose and fructose had one byproduct each. Furthermore, they found that fructose
formed an intermediate before being converted to HMF. The second step, the conversion of
intermediate to HMF was slower than the first step, the conversion of fructose to intermediate.
See Figure 1.1 for the reaction scheme proposed by Villanueva et al. [12].
Brønsted acids and bases are defined as species or sites which can respectively release and
accept protons, while Lewis acids and bases are defined as species or sites which can respectively
accept or donate an electron pair to form a coordination bond. Brønsted acid and bases are
thus also Lewis acids and bases, as any acid which can release a proton also is able to accept
an electron pair, and any base which can accept a proton likewise also can donate an electron
pair [13]. In metal phosphates, two types of Lewis acids exist: sites formed by the attachment
of the metal to the phosphate, and sites formed by the coordinatively unsaturated metal ions
[14].
It have been proposed that the Brønsted acidity is mainly responsible for the hydrolysis
of polysaccharide (e.g. cellulose) as well as well as the dehydration of fructose to HMF. The
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Mechanisms and role of acid sites
5
oxygen in the C-O-C glycosidic bond in polysaccharides can be attacked by protons from
acids, which will break the linkage forming shorter chains, as seen in Figure 1.2. Ultimately
monosaccharides such as glucose will be formed [15].
Figure 1.3: Mechanism for acid catalyzed breaking of the glycosidic bond in the polysaccharide
cellulose [15, 16, 17].
For fructose dehydration, as can be seen in Figure 1.3, the proton eliminates water from
the second carbon, forming a carbonium ion intermediate, which is transformed into an enol
and finally condensed to HMF as two more water molecules are released [15].
Figure 1.4: The proposed mechanism for the dehydration of fructose with the most support
from experimental data according to Antal et al. [15, 16].
Lewis acidity facilitates the isomerization of glucose to fructose, but different mecha-
==PAGE:20==
6
1 Introduction
nisms have been proposed for different solvent systems.
For trivalent metal chlorides and
Sn-containing zeolite and a few other catalysts in an aqueous system, it have been proposed
that the Lewis acid facilitates the opening of the glucose ring, as it forms a complex with the
hydroxyl oxygen at C1 and C2 of the now acyclic glucose. The Lewis acid then polarizes the
C1 carbonyl group which promotes the transfer of hydride from C2 to C1, whereby fructose is
formed [15].
Some have argued that glucose can be dehydrated directly to HMF, and that the isomer-
ization of glucose to fructose isn’t a required pathway. Computational studies have found a
cyclic mechanism for the direct dehydration of glucose to HMF using ab initio molecular dy-
namics and metadynamics simulation, and microkinetic modelling based on density function
theory (DFT). However, the activation energy of direct glucose dehydration is higher than
than of fructose dehydration (152.30 kJ/mol versus 123.01 kJ/mol, respectively), indicating
that a strong Brønsted acidity is necessary for the direct dehydration. A very recent study by
Villanueva et al. found that Lewis acid sites, responsible for the isomerization of glucose to
fructose, is necessary to get anything more than a negligible amount of fructose or HMF from
glucose conversion with a solid acid catalyst [15, 12].
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Solvent systems
7
1.4
Solvent systems
1.4.1
Organic solvents and multiphase solvent systems
Many different solvent systems have been used for the conversion of cellulose and/or carbohy-
drates to HMF. The use of water as sole solvent typically leads to low yields due to both low
catalytic activity, as well as the instability of HMF in acidic aqueous conditions which results
in rehydration of HMF to levulinic acid and formic acid. The complex formation between the
low-coordinate metal species in a catalyst and the substrate in an aqueous solution, is hindered
by progressive deactivation of the Lewis acid site. However, the use of continuous extraction,
biphasic solvents, heterogeneous acid catalysts and ionic liquids have been shown to achieve
higher yields and selectivities, increasing the sustainability of the reaction. Aprotic solvents
have been postulated to inhibit the formation of levulinic acid and humins. Several organic
solvents have subsequently been found to result in higher yields in HMF synthesis, and include
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), dimethyl acetamide (DMA), N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP) and
dimethyl formamide (DMF). The high boiling points of these solvents make it costly to distill
and separate them from the reaction mixture for recovery, and have resulted in a large interest
in the use of more readily separable solvents such as tetrahydrofuran (THF), methyl isobutyl-
ketone (MIBK) and some secondary alcohols. The use of biphasic solvent systems, typically
consisting of a more polar solvent such as water and methanol, and an organic solvent such
as THF or MIBK have been found to improve product yields by several studies, as HMF is
continuously extracted to the less polar phase whereby degradation reactions are prohibited.
Many of these organic solvents however, have a poor partitioning of HMF into the organic
phase. The addition of salts have been shown by both Román-Leshkov et al. [18] and Dutta
et al. [19] shown to increase the partitioning of HMF into the organic phase, further improv-
ing the HMF yields by limiting degradation. In the study by Román-Leshkov et al. wherein
seventeen organic solvents and nine different salts were compared, it was found that the best
overall combination of good selectivity and partition coefficient was achieved by a system of
water and THF saturated with sodium chloride [18, 8].
1.4.2
Ionic liquids
Ionic liquids (ILs) are molten salts with melting temperatures below 100 oC, caused by their
bulky, unsymmetrical structure with a delocalized charge. A large amount of different ILs can
be made, by changing the cations and anions, whereby their properties such as melting point,
viscosity, acid-base character and water-miscibility can be changed. Although some ILs can be
distilled, their negligible vapor pressure means they can easily be recovered, which have caused
them to be called ”green solvents”. Some ILs have been found to be able to dissolve cellulose,
which have been a goal in some research. It have been found that the best IL cations for
the dissolution of cellulose was based on methylimidazolium and methylpyridinium cores, and
having butyl side chains, while the best anions were chloride, acetate and formate. Introducing
hydroxyl groups or an allyl group on the imidazole cation on methylimidazolium chloride ILs
have been found to increase their cellulose dissolution rate and maximum capacity [20]. It
have also been found that microwave heating increases the cellulose dissolution rate. Swatloski
et al. used microwave instead of conventional heating, to get a 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium
chloride (C4mim[Cl]) solution up to 25 wt% cellulose compared to 10 wt% for conventional
==PAGE:22==
8
1 Introduction
heating [21].
Acid functional ionic liquids (AFIL) are ILs which are acidic and therefore can act as
catalysts in acid-catalyzed reactions, either as-is or by being immobilized on solid carriers [22].
Li et al. found that the protic imidazolium-based ILs can convert fructose to HMF with good
yields, without the addition of other catalysts, solvents or additives, while Brønsted acidic ILs
give very low yields. They found 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide (C4mim[Br]) to give the
highest yield of 75% after 30 minutes and 92% after one hour. C4mim[Cl] one the other hand,
gave a yield of <1% at 23% conversion and 5% at 42% conversion for 30 minutes and one hour
respectively [23]. The ILs C4mim[Br] and 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide (C2mim[Br])
have also been used as solvent as well as catalyst together with solid metal phosphates to
convert glucose into HMF. The ILs were mainly responsible for the conversion of fructose to
HMF, while the solid catalysts converted glucose into fructose. A biphasic solvent system, with
C2mim[Br] and glycol dimethyl ether (GDE) as organic solvent was also tested, and found to
still give a considerable yield, despite large amounts of ionic liquids being displaced by the
organic solvent [24].
==PAGE:23==
1.5 Characterization and analysis methods
9
1.5
Characterization and analysis methods
1.5.1
Nitrogen Adsorption Isotherms
Langmuir’s work on the phenomenon of adsorption, in which he presented evidence for a uni-
fied concept of the monomolecular layer, radically changed the interpretation of adsorption. If
the plateau of an adsorption isotherm indicated the completion of a monolayer, it would also
be a measurement of the capacity of the monolayer. The surface area of an adsorbent could
then be estimated, based on the adsorption isotherm plateau and the known area occupied
by the adsorbed molecule. Many researchers tried to determine the surface area of various
adsorbents, and Brunauer an Emmett published their Brunaur-Emmett-Teller (BET) theory.
This method is still used as the standard procedure for the determination of the surface ar-
eas of adsorbents, despite the known over-simplification of the multilayer adsorption model in
BET theory. Evaluation of the size distribution of mesopores by gas adsorption was pioneered
by Foster. Later Barrett et al. developed the computational procedure known as the BJH
method for pore size analysis. Dubinin identified three types of pores based on their physisorp-
tion mechanism. Later IUPAC based their pore width classifications of micropores < 2 nm,
mesopores 2-50 nm and macropores > 50 nm on the work of Dubinin [25].
[26]
1.5.2
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) is an important spectroscopic method in organic chem-
istry, and many nuclei can be studied, wit hydrogen and carbon being the most common. NMR
spectroscopy allows one to determine the number of each of each of the nuclei with distinct
positions and environment in a chemical compound. Atomic nucleus which have either an odd
mass, odd atomic number, or both behave as if they are spinning. This causes them to have a
quantized spin angular momentum and a magnetic moment. Some of the more common nuclei
with a spin which are used in NMR spectroscopy are 1
1H, 13
6 C and 19
9 F. Spectroscopy using 1
1H
and 13
6 C are called 1H-NMR and 13C-NMR respectively [27].
Each nuclei with spin have a number of quantized spin states which are determined by its
nuclear spin quantum number I, which is a physical constant for each nucleus. The number
of allowed spin states is 2I+1 with the integral differences ranging from +I to -I. For a proton
with spin quantum number I = 1
2 the allowed spin for its nucleus are +1
2 and −1
2. In the
presence of a magnetic field, the different spin states will not be of equivalent energy (called
degeneracy), but generate a magnetic field of its own. Each nucleus have a magnetic moment
µ caused by it’s own spin and charge, which for a proton with its two spin states of equal size,
but opposite direction, will lead to nuclear magnetic moments pointing in opposite directions.
The spin aligned with the applied magnetic field will be of lower energy, while that opposed
to it will be of higher energy. The phenomenon nuclear magnetic resonance is when a nuclei
aligned with an applied magnetic field, absorbs energy and change its spin orientation so it goes
against the direction of the magnetic field. The absorbed energy required for this is quantized,
and is equal to the amount of energy between the two states. The energy of the absorbed
electromagnetic radiation is proportional to the frequency, called the resonance frequency. In
an applied magnetic field, the valence electrons surrounding the nuclei will circulate to create
an opposing magnetic field. This opposing field caused by electrons, will shield protons in a
==PAGE:24==
10
1 Introduction
molecule to different extents, depending on the electron density. The net magnetic radiation
felt by a nucleus will thus decrease, as will the resonance frequency of the electromagnetic
resonance which changes its spin. In NMR spectroscopy, the frequencies relative to that of the
universal standard compound tetramethylsilane (TMS), is measured for all nuclei in a sample.
The most common unit for this relative frequency is called the chemical shift δ, is in parts per
million (ppm), and is independent of the frequency of the applied field [27].
A NMR spectrometer will scan through a frequency range, and nuclei with different
amounts of shielding can be seen in a NMR spectrum as different peaks, with the relative
integral of the different peaks being equal to the relative amount of the corresponding nuclei
in the sample. Protons bonded to carbons adjacent to one another will influence each other.
This phenomenon is called spin-spin splitting, and can be seen in a NMR spectrum as a multi-
plet peak. The number of multiplet peaks will be equal to (n+1), with n being the number of
equivalent protons bonded to the adjacent carbon. If the adjacent carbon to a single proton
is bonded to another single proton, a doublet will appear, but if it is bonded to two protons,
a triplet peak will be seen in the spectrum. The relative intensity ie. heights of the multiplet
peaks caused by spin-spin splitting, will follow Pascal’s triangle. While a doublet will have
peaks of equal intensity, the middle peak of a triplet will have twice the intensity of the other
peaks [27].
1.5.3
High-Pressure-Liquid-Chromatography (HPLC)
High-Pressure-Liquid-Chromatography separates and detects solvents and fine particles in a
sample, by passing it through a high-pressure chromatography column and quantifying the
amounts of the different compounds using detector. HPLC uses columns packed with support
particles, most commonly spherical microporous silica particles of 1.7 to 5 µm in diameter with
a surface area of hundreds of square meters per gram. Non-polar stationary phases are more
common, and consists of carbon chains, while more polar stationary phases typically have
nitrogen and oxygen in their chains. These stationary phases are covalently bonded to the
silica particles. The compounds in a sample will diffuse between the stationary phase and the
mobile phase, meaning the solvent. As the compounds move through the column, the less polar
compounds will interact more with the non-polar stationary phase, and not flow through the
column as a lesser speed. This way, compounds in the sample will be separated by polarity as
they pass through the column. Polar compounds will have a shorter retention time, and leave
the column first. As the compounds leave the column it will pass by a detector such as a mass
spectrometer, ultraviolet detector or light-scattering detector. To quantify the compounds in
a sample, it is necessary to make standards with known concentrations of the compounds, in
order to find the correlation between the signal from the detector and the concentration in the
sample [28].
==PAGE:25==
1.6 Literature study of heterogeneous catalysts in HMF synthesis
11
1.6
Literature study of heterogeneous catalysts in HMF
synthesis
Several kinds of homogeneous catalysts have been used to convert cellulose and/or carbohy-
drates to HMF, some being inorganic or organic Brønsted acids, others being Lewis acids
containing transition or post-transition metals. The recent studies using metal phosphate cat-
alysts and a few examples of other types of solid acid catalysts for cellulose and carbohydrate
conversion to HMF will be described. For an overview of the use of homogeneous catalysts,
see the review by Yu et al. [15].
1.6.1
Porous Al, Ti, Zr and Nb phosphates by Ordomsky et al.
Ordomsky et al. have synthesized and tested various metal phosphates with varying Brønsted
acidity as catalysts in the dehydration of glucose to HMF, and increased the selectivity by
deactivation of unselective Lewis acid sites, using a silylation procedure and phosphoric acid
treatment. Aluminum phosphate was prepared by adjusting the pH value of an aqueous so-
lution of equimolar quantities of 1M orthophosphoric acid and aluminum chloride, using 25
wt.% aqueous ammonia. Titanium phosphate was synthesized by quickly adding an aqueous
solution of 7.5 g TiCl4 in 20 ml of 1 M HCl to a solution of 5.92 g orthophosphoric acid in 20
mL water, while under intense stirring. The zirconium phosphate was made by quick addition
of 23.3 g of phosphoric acid in 470 mL water to a solution of 22.5 g zirconyl chloride in 140 mL
water, while under intense stirring. Niobium phosphate were prepared by treating hydrated
niobium oxide with 9 g orthophosphoric acid for 7 hours at 70 oC. Niobium phosphate using
’fresh’ niobium oxide was made using the same method. The ’fresh’ niobium oxide was made
gradually heating fused niobium oxide and KOH to 450 oC, dissolving in product in water, and
addition of nitric acid to make the niobium oxide precipitate. Ordomsky et al. modified the
surface of the zirconium and niobium phosphate by adding 4 g of dried catalyst to a solution
of 1 g of TEOS in 100 mL n-hexane, and letting it stir for 25 hours at 50 oC, before washing
the catalyst with water and drying them [14].
Using nitrogen adsorption, they found that the titanium phosphate had a narrow pore size
distribution of 50-120 Å, while the rest had pores with diameters greater than 100 Å. The
prepared phosphates were also found to have different metal to phosphate ratios, with the
Zirconium phosphate having the lowest of 0.6 M/P, and niobium phosphate the highest of
4.1 M/P. The high ratio of the niobium phosphate was though to be caused by incomplete
transformation of the niobium oxide to phosphate.
The silylation procedure was found to
lower the total amount of Lewis acid sites, but result in a increased selectivity. Threefold ion-
exchange at 50 oC with a 1 M solution of sodium carbonate was found to decrease the amount
of Brønsted acid sites on the phosphate catalysts. They found that the zirconium and niobium
phosphate catalysts had the highest activity in glucose transformation, and also that the total
acidity of the catalysts didn’t correlate with the activity. As the glucose conversion increased
over time, they found that the selectivity towards HMF was bell-shaped when plotted against
glucose conversion. This was attributed to rehydration of HMF to levulinic and formic acid,
and condensation to humins [14].
==PAGE:26==
12
1 Introduction
1.6.2
Supported and doped vanadyl phosphates by Carlini et al.
Vanadyl phosphate (VOPO4·H2O) is a known bifunctional acid catalyst used in various reac-
tions, including dehydration and isomerization. It have also previously been reported to have
an acidity which can be modified by partial substitution of VO3+ groups with trivalent met-
als, resulting in stronger Lewis acidity and improved catalytic activity. Carlini et al. doped
vanadyl phosphates with the trivalent metals Fe3+, Cr3+, Ga3+, Mn3+ and Al3+, and tested
them in the dehydration of fructose. The doped vanadyl phosphate was made by heating vana-
dium(V)oxide in an excess of phosphoric acid with the proper amount of Fe3+, Cr3+, Ga3+
or Al3+ nitrate added, refluxing for 16 hours, washing with water and acetone after cooling
and finally air-drying the reaction product.
For the vanadyl phosphate doped with Mn3+,
potassium permanganate was added to the phosphoric acid instead of a nitrate. Along with
the doped vanadyl phosphate, Carlini et al. also prepared vanadyl phosphate supported on
the oxides γ-Al2O3, SiO2 and TiO2, by adsorbing vanadyl phosphate in an aqueous solution
[29, 30, 31].
Carlini et al. performed their catalytic reactions using an aqueous solutions of either 3-
40 wt.% fructose or 3-46 mmol inulin, along with 0.05 to 1 g of catalyst under a nitrogen
atmosphere at 80 oC while stirring. The best selectivity and activity were achieved by the
catalyst doped with iron, which converted concentrated aqueous fructose (40 wt.%) at 80 oC
at a rate of 376 mmol g -1
cat h-1, which achieved a yield of 50.4% at 57.7% conversion with a
87.3% selectivity after 30 minutes. Oxide-supported vanadyl phosphates were also tested, and
the acidity of the support was found to be important in the promotion of fructose dehydration
[29].
1.6.3
Porous tin phosphate from polymer template by Dutta et al.
A large-pore tin phosphate catalyst was synthesized by Dutta et al. using the polymer Pluronic
P123. They dissolved 1 g of Pluronic P123 in 1.15 g of H3PO4 in 15 ml of H2O and stirred
the mixture for 2 hours, before adding 3.5 g. of tin(IV) chloride pentahydrate in 5 ml of H2O,
and stirred for another 3 hours at room temperature. The mixture was then transferred to a
polypropylene bottle, kept at 100 oC for 72 hours, and finally filtered and dried, before being
calcined at 700 oC for 5 hours. Using nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherms they found
the synthesized catalyst to have a very narrow pore size distribution with a diameter of 10.4,
along with a BET surface area of 2.16 m2g-1 and pore volume of 0.59 cm3g-1. The catalyst was
found to have an acid site concentration of 2.2 mmol g-1, and scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) showed that the material consists of aggregated spherical nanoparticles of 10 to 15 nm
in diameter, which causes the large pores in the material. Using the synthesized catalyst, they
managed to convert fructose, glucose, cellebiose, sucrose and cellulose to HMF, and yields of
77, 50, 39, 51 and 32 %, and conversions of respectively. These yields were achieved using 0.25
mmol substrate, 10 mg catalyst in a biphasic solvent system of 1 ml water and 2 ml MIBK,
and heating the reaction mixture to 150 oC for 20 minutes using microwave radiation, while
stirring. The addition of 10 mg NaCl increased the partition coefficient of the solvent system,
increasing the yield of glucose from 50 to 61 % under identical reaction conditions. The loss
in catalyst activity of the tin phosphate after five cycles of reactions and catalyst recovery was
only around 4%. Dutta et al. also prepared a smaller pore tin phosphate catalyst, using the
same procedure but using cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) as a structura-directing
==PAGE:27==
1.6 Literature study of heterogeneous catalysts in HMF synthesis
13
agent (SDA) instead, resulting in a catalyst with a pore diameter of 3 nm, but a substantially
lower HMF yield [19].
1.6.4
Copper phosphate nanostructures by Khemthong et al.
Khemthong et al. have synthesized copper phosphate nanostructures and tested their catalytic
activity in the dehydration of fructose. They dissolved 1.2 g of CuCO3 powder in 5 ml of 70%
H3PO4 and added 30 ml of acetone while stirring. The precipitate was filtered and washed
with acetone, and dried in an oven, and calcined at 600 and 900 oC. Using XRD they found
the non-calcined and calcined catalysts to have two crystalline phases of copper hydrogen
phosphate monohydrate (CuHPO4·H2O) and copper pyrophosphate (Cu2P2O7) respectively,
with the latter having two polymorphic phased, α-Cu2P2O7 formed at lower temperatures and
β-Cu2P2O7 at higher temperatures. Using 0.01 g of their produced catalysts in the conversion
of 0.1 g fructose in 1 ml of DI water at 200 oC for 5 minutes in an nitrogen atmosphere, they
managed to achieve yields of 14.3% for the non-calcined catalyst, and 29.8 and 35.8 % for those
calcined at 600 and 900 oC, respectively. This was done at conversion rates of 92.3, 94. and
82.2 % respectively. The catalyst calcined achieve the highest turn-over number (TON) of 34
mmol HMF/h·g of catalyst [32].
1.6.5
Alkaline earth phosphates by Daorattanachai et al.
Daorattanachai et al.
produced strontium and calcium phosphate catalysts for use in the
dehydration of fructose to HMF. They dissolved 0.1 g of either calcium carbonate (CaCO3)
or strontium carbonate (SrCO3) in 5 ml of a 70 % orthophosphoric acid solution, added
30 ml of acetone and let the mixture stir vigorously for 1 hour. The precipitated catalyst
were then filtered and washed repeatedly with acetone, before being dried in an oven, and
calcined at 600 and 900 oC for 3 hours in atmospheric air. All of the catalysts were found
to have a BET surface area of roughly 0.5 m2·g-1, and XRD revealed the calcined and non-
calcined catalysts to have crystalline phases similar to those found in copper phosphate by
Daorattanachai and team.
The non-calcined calcium phosphate was found to be calcium
hydrogen phosphate hydrate (Ca(H2PO4)2·H2O) and the calcined one calcium phosphate (β-
CaP2O6). The non-calcined strontium catalyst was identified as strontium hydrogen phosphate
(Sr(H2PO4)2), which after calcination at 600 oC became Sr2(PO3)4, and after calcination at 900
oC became α-Sr(PO3)2). SEM showed that the calcination of the calcium phosphate changed
the morphology from parallelogram-like crystals of 3 to 10 µm in diameter, to aggregates
of irregularly shaped crystals. Likewise, calcination of the strontium phosphate was shown
to change the morphology from small and large rod-like crystals of 0.3-2 µm and 3-10 µm
in length, respectively, to agglomerated particles. Acid property measurements showed that
the calcium and strontium phosphate had similar acid strengths, but that the non-calcined
catalysts had a greater acid strength, when considered weak acids [33]. The catalytic activity
of the produced catalysts were tested in a batch reactor containing 0.1 g of either glucose or
cellulose, 1 ml of distilled water and 0.1 g of one of the solid catalysts. Nitrogen was added to
the reactor until the pressure was 2.5 MPa, and the reactor was heated to 220 oC for glucose
as substrate and 230 oC for cellulose, and in either case the reaction was running for 5 minutes
[33].
==PAGE:28==
14
1 Introduction
Daorattanachai et al.
found that the non-calcined calcium phosphate and the calcium
phosphate calcined at 600 oC gave comparable combined yields of HMF and glucose of 24-
25%, while the one calcined at 900 oC gave a lower yield of 17.4%.
The one calcined at
600 oC accelerated the the hydrolysis of cellulose more, resulting in the highest glucose yield
of the calcium catalysts. The non-calcined calcium catalyst accelerated both the hydrolysis
of cellulose to glucose, and the dehydration of sugar to HMF, resulting in the highest yield
of HMF when cellulose was used. However, when glucose was used as a substrate, the non-
calcined calcium catalyst achieved the lowest HMF yield of the calcium catalysts, even lower
than the use of homogeneous phosphoric acid, despite a higher conversion. This was due to the
formation of degradation products of HMF such as levulinic acid, formic acids and insoluble
degradation products. For the strontium phosphate catalysts, the one calcined at 900 oC gave
the highest combined yield of glucose and HMF of 34.8 % from cellulose as substrate. However,
all of the strontium catalysts achieved higher yields of HMF from glucose than the calcium
catalyst with the same calcination temperature, despite lower conversion rates. This was also
the same for all but the non-calcined catalyst when cellulose was used. It was found that
the non-calcined catalysts were partially soluble in water, and therefore would act partly as
homogeneous catalysts [33].
1.6.6
Phosphated titanium oxides in biphasic systems by Atanda et
al.
Atanda et al. prepared phosphated titanium oxide catalysts, by impregnating hydrated TiO2
with ammonium phosphate monobasic, and calcining the catalyst at 600 oC for 4 hours. By
varying the amount of the ammonium phosphate monobasic precursor, they produced titanium
oxide catalysts with theoretical phosphate contents of 0, 5, 10, 15, 20 and 25 %. Using XRD
and the Debye-Scherrer equation, Atanda et al.
found the catalysts to be crystals with a
mean diameter ranging from 5.3 to 27.3 nm, with a higher phosphate content resulting in
smaller diameter. The catalyst with a theoretical 15 wt% phosphate content was found to
have the highest BET surface area of 151 m2·g-1, highest pore volume of 0.43 cm3·g-1 and
highest acidity of 2.36 mmol ·g-1 found using NH3-TPD analysis. The reduced BET surface
area and pore volume for the catalysts with a phosphate content above 15 wt% was attributed
to partial pore blockage by an excess of phosphate. All of the phosphated titanium oxide had
higher surface areas compared to pure TiO2 due to the phosphate anions stabilizing against
sintering effects during calcination. The phosphate was thought to replace hydroxyl bridges in
uncalcined TiO2, creating Ti-O-P linkages, which results in an acid bifunctional nanoparticle,
with balanced Brønsted/Lewis acidity. The produced catalysts were tested in the dehydration
of glucose to HMF, with varying reaction temperatures and times. In a biphasic system of 30
ml water and 70 ml n-butanol, and using 0.6 g catalyst, HMF yields of 81, 60, and 45 % were
achieved using 2, 5 and 10 wt% glucose respectively. This was done at a reaction temperature
of 160 oC and a reaction time of 5 hours [2, 34, 35].
Atanda and team later prepared phosphated titanium oxide by dropwise addition of tita-
nium(IV)butoxide to an aqueous solution of ammonium phosphate monobasic with n-butanol,
while stirring. Then the pH was maintained at 7 by addition of a ammonium hydroxide so-
lution, and the solution was refluxed for 24 ours at 80 oC. Afterwards, excess solvent was
evaporated and the product dried at 80 oC K overnight, before being calcined for 4 hours
at 600 oC. The reported mole ratio of butanol/alkoxide/ammonium phosphate/water initially
==PAGE:29==
1.6 Literature study of heterogeneous catalysts in HMF synthesis
15
used was 1/0.125/0.124/2. The specific surface area and estimated pore diameter of the result-
ing catalyst were 125 m2·g-1 and 6.04 nm. This time using a solvent system of 30 ml water,
60 ml MeTHF and 10 ml N-methyl-pyrrolidonium (NMP), Atanda and team achieved a HMF
yield of 90.7 % at 97.9 % conversion using 10 g glucose, 1.25 g of catalyst and a reaction
temperature of 448 K and reaction time of 80 minutes. For comparison, five different catalytic
systems with homogeneous metal salts, one with a 0.1 M HCl co-catalysts were tested using
the same solvent system. The best of the tested homogeneous catalytic systems, AlCl3·6H2O
with the HCl co-catalyst, achieved a slightly smaller HMF yield of 86.9 % at 99.9 % conversion,
than the produced catalyst. Using microcrystalline cellulose, the phosphated titanium oxide
catalyst achieved a HMF yield of 3.92 % at 6.08 % conversion. After Decrystallization of the
cellulose by ball milling, the HMF yield was increased to 20.8% at 28.8% conversion, while
acidulating microcrystalline cellulose with sulphuric acid prior to milling achieved a HMF yield
of 74.7% at 99.8% conversion [2].
1.6.7
Ceria-niobia mixed oxides by Stošić et al.
Ceria-niobia mixed oxides with niobium oxide contents of 25, 50 and 75% were prepared by
Stošić et al. by coprecipitation from ammonium-niobium oxalate complex and cerium nitrate
solutions. The two solutions were mixed while a 16 wt% ammonia solution was added dropwise
under stirring, and the pH was continuously monitored until the pH was 9, and precipitation
was complete. A pure cerium oxide catalyst was prepared likewise, and all the precipitates
were filtered, washed with 0.5 L of hot distilled water, and dried overnight at 110-120 oC
before being calcined for 10 hours at 400 oC. For comparison, they bought a niobium oxide
and calcined it at the same temperature. Using nitrogen adsorption, they found the BET
surface area of the ceria-niobia mixed oxides with 25, 50 and 75% niobium oxide to be 99,
79 and 41 m2g-1 respectively. In comparison the surface area of the pure cerium oxide was
88 m2g-1, while that of the pure niobium oxide was 93 2g-1. Stošić et al. tested activity of
the five catalysts in the dehydration of fructose. This was done using a 100 ml steel autoclave
containing 600 mg fructose, 60 ml water, and 80 mg catalyst. The reaction mixture was heated
to 130 oC over 30 minutes, and samples were withdrawn each hour for analysis. They found
that the pure niobium oxide catalyst achieved the the highest fructose conversion along with
the highest selectivity towards HMF, with both conversion and selectivity decreasing with the
decrease in niobium oxide content of the produced catalysts.
1.6.8
Tin- and titanium-beta zeolites in biphasic systems by Nikolla
et al.
Nikolla et al. mixed a tetraethylammonium hydroxide (TEAOH) solution, tetraethylorthosil-
icate (TEOS) and either tin (IV) chloride pentahydrate or titanium (IV) isopropoxide in 15
mL of water, and stirred the mixture at room temperature until the hydrolysis of the TEOS
was fully done. Water, ethanol and isopropanol was evaporated from the solutions until they
achieved the desired ratios, and an aqueous solution of 52 wt% HF was added resulting in the
formation of a gel in both solutions. They then heated the gels to 140 oC for 40 days in an
autoclave, before filtering, washing, drying and finally calcinating both of the produced zeolite
catalysts at 580 oC for 6 hours. The compositions of the produced gels for the tin and titanium
==PAGE:30==
16
1 Introduction
zeolites were SiO2 / 0.01 SnCl4 / 0.55 TEAOH / 0.54 HF / 7.52 H2O an SiO2 / 0.021 TiO2 /
0.54 TEAOH / 0.53 HF / 6.6 H2O respectively.
Nikolla et al. performed the catalytic reactions of glucose using 1 g of an aqueous 10 wt%
glucose solution, and a catalyst amount corresponding to a 1:200 metal:glucose molar ratio,
and the correct amount of organic solvent to achieve a 1:3 volume ratio of aqueous to organic
phase. They adjusted the pH of the solution to 1 using HCl. For the conversion of starch
and cellobiose, a 10 wt% aqueous mixture of the substrate was adjusted to pH 1 using HCl,
and heated to 180 oC for 40 minutes prior to catalytic reaction, where amounts of catalyst
and organic solvent equal to those used in the glucose conversion reactions were added. The
reaction mixtures with glucose were heated to either 160 or 180 oC for varying reaction times,
while the starch and cellobiose reaction mixtures were heated to 180 oC for 60 minutes [36, 37].
Testing the effect of the addition of the salts NaCl, KCl, MgCl2 and KBr to the aforemen-
tioned glucose reaction mixture, they found NaCl to give the highest HMF selectivity. They
also compared the solvents 1-butanol, 2-butanol and THF and found that the use of THF gave
the highest HMF selectivity along with one of the highest glucose conversions. The produced
tin-beta zeolite and titanium-beta zeolite produced comparable glucose conversions and HMF
selectivity at 180 oC, with the tin-beta zeolite achieving 79% conversion with a 72% HMF
selectivity, compared with a 76% conversion with 70% HMF selectivity for the titanium-beta
zeolite. However, the tin-beta zeolite achieved its highest yield after a reaction time of 70
minutes, 35 minutes shorter than the optimal reaction time for the titanium catalyst. When
cellobiose and starch were used, the tin-beta zeolite achieved conversions of 36 and 75% with
a 36 and 69% HMF selectivity, respectively [36, 37].
1.6.9
Acid modified zeolites in biphasic system by Pande et al.
Pande et al. modified the commercially available H-USY zeolite using sulfuric and phosphoric
acid. They mixed 1 g of the zeolite with 50 mL of a 10 wt% aqueous phosphoric acid solution,
and letting it stir for 2 hours at 100 oC. The solid product was isolated using vacuum filtration,
washed with 1 L of distilled water and dried at 120 oC for 6 hours, before being calcined at
500 oC for 5 hours. They similarly made catalysts using 20 and 30 wt% phosphoric acid, and
10, 20 and 30 wt% sulfuric acid. Using EAX and NH3-TPD, they determined the content of
phosphor and sulfur in the catalysts, along with their total acidity. The zeolite treated with
30 wt% phosphoric acid was found to have the highest wt% of phosphorous of 1.8 wt%, more
than 20 times the amount of those treated with 10 and 20 wt% phosphoric acid. This catalyst
also had the highest total acidity of 0.98 mmol/g. The phosphor content of the zeolites treated
with 10 and 20 wt% phosphoric acid were 0.075 and 0.085 wt%, and their total acidity were
0.27 and 0.58 mmol/g respectively. None of the zeolites treated with sulphuric acid exceeded
a sulfur content of 0.12 wt%, and the zeolite treated with 10 wt% sulfuric acid had the highest
total acidity of 0.31 mmol/g [38].
For testing the catalytic activity of the produced catalysts, Pande et al. mixed 1 g fructose,
1 g catalyst, 4.5 mL water and 45.5 mL MIBK in a 150 mL pressure autoclave. They heated
the reaction mixture to 120 oC for 5 hours under stirring. Of the produced catalysts, the zeolite
treated with 10% phosphoric acid achieved the highest HMF yield of 65% at a selectivity of
89% [38].
==PAGE:31==
1.6 Literature study of heterogeneous catalysts in HMF synthesis
17
1.6.10
Phosphated zirconium MOFs by Yabushita et al.
Yabushita et al. synthensized and used phosphate modified NU-1000 zeolites in the conver-
sion of glucose to HMF. NU-1000 was formed as crystals by reaction of ZrCl4, benzoic acid
and 1,3,6,8-tetrakis(p-benzoic-acid)pyrene (H4TBAPy) in diethylformamide as previously de-
scribed by Mondloch et al.. Phosphate species were then impregnated on the zeolite by dis-
persing 50 mg of the NU-1000 zeolite in 5 mL of a aqueous phosphoric acid solution, either
equimolar or half-equimolar to the amount of OH groups in the zeolite. They used ultrasonica-
tion on this mixture for 1 minute to disperse the zeolite in the solution, and then removed the
water using rotary evaporation at room temperature, followed by vacuum drying. Yabushita et
al. tested the two catalysts produced using equimolar or half-equimolar, along with a commer-
cial ZRO-5 bulk zirconia material as a reference, in the conversion of glucose. The catalytic
reactions were done in 1.5 mL sealed vials, to which had been added 10 mg of catalyst, 1 mL
of a 100 mM aqueous glucose solution and a magnet. They also tested a bihpasic system of
0.1 mL aqueous glucose solution and 0.9 mL of either 1-propanol, 2-propanol, THF, DMSO
or DMF. The reaction mixture was ultrasonicated for 1 minute to disperse the catalyst, and
before being set to react at 140 oC for five hours while under stirring. When water was used
as solvent, the NU-1000 zirconium zeolite without any phosphate impregnated had the highest
glucose conversion of 60% and a HMF yield of 2.3%. The NU-1000 impregnated with a half-
equimolar amount of phosphate achieved the highest HMF yield of 15%, with a 50% conversion.
The highest yield were achieved using the water/THF solvent system where the half-equimolar
impregnated NU-1000 achieved a HMF yield of 25% at 97% conversion [39, 40].
1.6.11
Nanotube-supported acidic MOFs by Liu et al.
Liu et al.
impregnated first the amphiphilic non-ionic polymer PVP and then the Metal-
Organic-Framework (MOF) UiO-66-SO3H onto commercially available halloysite nanotubes
(HNTs) [Al2Si2O5(OH)4·H2O]. They first added 1 g of HNTs to a 2.5 wt% solution of PVP
and stirred the mixture for 24 hours at room temperature, before collecting, washing and
drying the PVP-modified HNTs. 25 mg of the PVP-HNTs were dissolved in 20 mL of DMF,
and mixed with 0.0 g of ZrCl4 in 0.046 g of monosodium 2-sulfoterephthalate. Afterwards
1.5 mL acetic acid was added, and the mixture was put in a sealed polytetrafluroethylene
reactor and placed at 180 oC for 24 hours. The produced catalyst was filtered, washed with
DMF and dried at a temperature of 60 oC. Liu et al. changed the molar ratio of MOFs to
HNTs by increasing the molar amounts of ZrCl4 and monosodium 2-sulfoterephthalate, in total
producing four catalysts with UiO-66-SO3H to HNTs ratios of 0.5, 1, 2 and 4. The BET surface
area of the catalysts increased from 873 to 1108 m2g-1 as the UiO-66-SO3H to HNTs ratios
increased from 0.5 to 4, while the total acidity increased from 1.9 to 4.6. The pore diameter
of the catalysts were however very similar in the range 7.1 to 7.6 nm [41, 42].
They performed the catalytic tests of their catalysts using 100 mg fructose, 50 mg of the
produced catalyst, and 5 mL of DMSO, and dispersed the mixture using sonication before
heating the reaction mixture to 120 oC for 2 hours. The catalyst with a ratio of 2 had the
highest catalytic activity achieving a HMF yield of 92.4%, and showed no significant loss in
activity after isolation and recycling five times [41, 42].
==PAGE:32==
18
1 Introduction
1.7
Aim of project
The aim of this project is to make porous tin and gallium phosphate catalysts using a well
documented procedure, and test the effect of calcination temperature, silylation modification
of the surface, and different biphasic solvent systems, with and without ionic liquids, on the
selectivity and yield of cellulose and carbohydrate conversion to HMF.
A procedure for making porous metal phosphate catalysts developed by Dutta et al. [19]
and which was found to result in higher fructose to HMF conversion yields compared to tin
phosphate catalysts produced using other methods will be used. Along with tin, gallium was
chosen as metal for the catalyst.
Gallium is less Lewis acidic than aluminum which have
previously been used in phosphate catalysts, but more electronegative [43], which according
to Ordomsky et al.
[14] leads to a decrease in the amount of strong Brønsted acid sites.
This mean that gallium phosphates could have a different Brønsted/Lewis acid site ratio and
strength than previously tested aluminum phosphate catalysts. Calcination temperatures of
700 oC which was used by Dutta et al.
have previously been found to plug the pores of
metal phosphates, resulting in a decreased porosity and surface area [12]. Therefore, different
calcination temperatures for the metal phosphates will be tested. Nitrogen adsorption tests
to find the surface area, porosity and pore width distribution will be done. Furthermore, a
silylation modification of the catalyst surfaces, which previously have been found to increase
selectivity by removing unselective Lewis acid sites, will also be used and compared [14].
Biphasic systems consisting of MIBK/MTHF with NaCl-saturated water will be compared
to biphasic systems with the IL C4mim[Cl], and the effect of the IL biphasic system on cellulose
and carbohydrate conversion and selectivity will be investigated. C4mim[Cl] have been found
to be able to dissolve cellulose [20], as well as being a very effective Brønsted-acid catalyst in the
conversion of fructose to HMF [23]. C4mim[Cl] have been reported to degrade at temperatures
of 140 oC and above, although at a small rate of roughly 50 µmol/g over 10 days at 140 oC.
Therefore, the catalytic performance in a biphasic IL system above and below this temperature
will also be tested [44].
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2
Experimental
2.1
Catalyst preparation
2.1.1
Synthesis of metal phosphate particles
For the preparation of metal phosphate catalysts, the method developed by Dutta et al. [19]
which have been previously described in chapter 1.6.1.3 was used, although for the gallium
phosphate catalysts the method were slightly modified.
Upon contact of the Tin chloride
solution and the polymer and phosphoric acid solution, a white precipitate was immediately
formed. The precipitate quickly disappeared again, but a white opaque gel was formed after a
few minutes of stirring. After the addition of the Ga(II) chloride solution to the polymer and
phosphoric acid solution, concentrated aqueous ammonia was added until the pH was 7 or 9.
This was done due to very low precipitation and subsequently a low catalyst yield when there
was no adjustment of the pH. For all subsequent experimental work and reactions, only the
gallium phosphate from the batch with pH adjustment to 7 was used. Due to Ga(III) chloride
reacting with water in the air, the needed amount was weighed in a nitrogen atmosphere.
The tin and gallium phosphate catalysts were each divided into two roughly equal portions,
with the two portions of each catalyst being calcined at 600 oC and 700 oC for 5 hours, with a
50 minutes temperature ramp. The produced catalyst was homogenized using a mortar. The
catalysts were then designated according to their composition and temperature, eg. the tin
phosphate catalyst calcined at 600 oC was labeled SnP-600.
2.1.2
Silylation procedure
The procedure for the silylation of the catalysts were done as described by Ordomsky et al.
The TEOS and n-hexane amounts were scaled to fit the smaller amount of catalyst. 0.2 g of
each of the calcined tin catalysts were added to solutions of 54 µL TEOS in 5 ml of n-hexane.
The calcined gallium catalyst was synthesized in a smaller amount, so 0.06 g of each were
added to solutions of 16 µL TEOS in 1.5 ml of n-hexane. The mixtures were stirred for a
minimum of 24 hours at 50 oC using a heat bath. The silylated catalysts were separated using
centrifugation, washed with water three times and dried in an oven at 120 oC overnight. Si
was added to the catalyst designation, eg. the silylated tin phosphate catalyst calcined at 600
oC was designated SnP-600-Si.
==PAGE:34==
20
2 Experimental
2.2
Cellulose and carbohydrate conversion reactions
The conversion reactions of cellulose and carbohydrates were performed similar to those by
Dutta et al. [19], with 0.25 mmol (45 µg) of the substrate (fructose, glucose and α-cellulose)
being added to a 10 mL microwave tube with 1 mL of a 0.17 mM NaCl in water solution (100
mg NaCl in 1 mL water) or C4mim[Cl] IL, 2 mL of MIBK, 10 mg catalyst, a magnet, and the
mixture being heated to 120 or 150 oC in a microwave for 20 minutes while being stirred. The
IL had been dried in an oven at 100 oC over the night prior to the reactions, in order to remove
any water. After each of the reactions, the aqueous phases were separated, and the aqueous
phase was washed three times with 2 mL of diethyl ether. The solvent of the combined organic
phase was removed using a rotary evaporator to get the product.
Of the possible combinations of catalysts and solvent systems, reactions were designed with
only one variable at a time, in order to reduce the total number of reactions. Due to the lower
catalytic activity of the gallium compared to tin catalysts, and the silylation modifications
decrease of the tin catalysts catalytic activity, it was decided to not use the silylated gallium
catalysts due to time constrains, and likely low catalytic performance. The total list of reactions
with catalyst, solvent system and reaction temperature can be seen in Table 2.1 below.
Reaction no.
Catalyst
Org. phase
Aq./IL phase
Reaction temp. (oC)
1
SnP-700
MTHF
0.17 mM NaCl-Water
150
2
SnP-700
MIBK
0.17 mM NaCl-Water
150
3
SnP-600
MIBK
0.17 mM NaCl-Water
150
4
GaP-700
MIBK
0.17 mM NaCl-Water
150
5
GaP-600
MIBK
0.17 mM NaCl-Water
150
6
SnP-600-Si
MIBK
0.17 mM NaCl-Water
150
7
SnP-600
MIBK
C4mim[Cl]
150
8
SnP-600
MIBK
C4mim[Cl]
120
Table 2.1: List of reactions with catalyst, solvent system and reaction temperature. All of
these reactions were done using fructose, glucose and cellulose as substrate
Each of these reactions were made using cellulose, glucose and fructose as starting substrate.
Reaction 3 was done three times with glucose and fructose, while the rest were only done once
using each of the substrates.
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Yield determination and product characterization
21
2.3
Yield determination and product characterization
2.3.1
HPLC
Determination of the amount of HMF in the organic phase was at first attempted using quan-
titative 1H-NMR, following the method described by Dutta et al. where mesitylene is used as
an internal standard. However, due to low reproducibility, it was decided to use HPLC for
determination of the HMF yield in the organic phase.
High-Performance-Liquid-Chromatography (HPLC) was used to determine the amounts of
fructose and glucose in the aqueous/IL phase, and HMF in the organic phase.
The aqueous phase was filtered using a disposable filter on an injector to remove cellulose,
catalyst and any undissolved salt before HPLC analysis. For the reactions with IL, the IL
was diluted with 19 ml of DI-water before being similarly filtered for HPLC analysis. The
product from the organic phase was dissolved in 3 ml of methanol before being filtered for
HPLC analysis.
Six standards of varying concentrations were made for glucose and fructose in water, and
HMF in methanol were made. The concentrations of the six standard samples for glucose,
fructose and HMF can be seen in Table 2.2 below.
Sample no.
Glucose
Fructose
HMF
1
22.2 mg/ml
20.2 mg/ml
28.5 mg/ml
2
18.5 mg/ml
16.8 mg/ml
23.5 mg/ml
3
14.8 mg/ml
13.6 mg/ml
19.2 mg/ml
4
11.1 mg/ml
10.1 mg/m
15.3 mg/ml
5
7.4 mg/ml
6.8 mg/ml
10.7 mg/ml
6
3.7 mg/ml
3.3 mg/ml
5.3 mg/ml
Table 2.2: Concentrations of the six HPLC standards for glucose, fructose and HMF
The retention times of glucose, fructose and HMF throughout the standards and samples varied
in the ranges 9.0-9.5 seconds, 9.8-10.2 seconds, and 31.0-32.2 seconds respectively.
Each of the standard samples were run in HPLC three times, and the average areas after
integration of the peaks were used. The highest standard deviation for any of the samples were
2.6% of the average value. All of the standard were fitted to a straight line with intercept at
0.0, and coefficients of determination being at least 0.99. The equations from the linear fits
used to calculate the glucose, fructose and HMF concentrations based on area are as follows:
Glucose concentration (mg/ml) = 2.2464 × 10 -5 X
,
R2 = 0.9902
Fructose concentration (mg/ml) = 2.1858 × 10 -5 X
,
R2 = 0.9954
HMF concentration (mg/ml) = 1.7782 × 10 -5 X
,
R2 = 0.9948
==PAGE:36==
22
2 Experimental
The conversion of substrate, yield and selectivity of the run reactions were calculated using
the following equations:
Substrate conversion (mol%) = moles of initial substrate - moles of remaining substrate
moles of initial substrate
×100%
Product yield (mol%) =
moles of product
moles of initial substrate × 100%
HMF selectivity (%) =
moles of HMF
moles of initial substrate - moles of remaining substrate × 100%
For reactions with cellulose as substrate conversion and selectivity could not be calculated, as
cellulose is not completely soluble in the aqueous or organic phase, and therefore were removed
during the filtration prior to HPLC analysis. For the reactions with glucose, both HMF and
fructose yields were calculated, and for reactions with cellulose, both glucose, fructose and
HMF yields. The HPLC apparatus used was a Agilent 1200 Series with a HPX-87H column.
0.005 M H2SO4 was used as eluent at a flow of 0.6 ml/min for all the samples, and the column
temperature was 60 oC.
2.3.2
Product characterization with 1H-NMR
1H-NMR was used to characterize the product.
The isolated product was dissolved in d-
chloroform, and the spectra were analyzed using the software MestReNova.
2.3.3
Nitrogen adsorption/desorption test
To find the porosity, pore diameter and surface area of the prepared SnP-700 and SnP-600
catalyst, nitrogen adsorption tests were done on 100 mg of each of the two catalysts.
2.4
Reagent list
85% Ortho-Phosphoric acid and microcrystalline cellulose (for column chromatography) from
Merck. Tin(IV) chloride pentahydrate (98+%, extra pure) from Acros Organics. Gallium(III)
chloride (anhydrous, beads, −10 mesh, 99.99% trace metals basis), Gallium(III) nitrate hy-
drate (crystalline, 99.9% trace metals basis), TEOS (￿99% (GC)), 2-Methyltetrahydrofuran
(anhydrous, ￿99%, Inhibitor-free), 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene (98%), chloroform-d (99.8 atom%
D), Pluronic® P-123 and 4-methyl-2-pentanone (Fluka Analytical), >=95% 1-butyl-3-methyl-
imidazolium chloride (Fluka Analytical), 99% 5-Hydroxymethylfurfural an D-(-)-Fructose ≥99%
from Sigma-Aldrich. D(+)-Glucose monohydrate (extra pure) from Ridel-de Haën. Extra Pure
n-Hexane from Farak. Methanol ≥99.9%, HiPerSolv CHROMANORM, for HPLC super gra-
dient and Diethylether ≥99.7% stabilised, AnalaR NORMAPUR® ACS, Reag. Ph. Eur. from
VWR Chemicals. All chemicals were used as-is unless otherwise stated.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
Results and discussion
3.1
Catalyst yields
Assuming that all the Pluronic P123 polymer have been removed during the calcination at 600
oC and 700 oC, the catalyst yield can be calculated based on the amount of added metal and
phosphate. The yield of the tin phosphate were 91.82%. When the pH of the gallium chloride
solution wasn’t adjusted, almost no product was formed, while adjusting to a pH values of
7 and 9 gave yields of 52.97% and 65.17 % respectively. The yields after the silylation were
lower, especially for the gallium phosphates. For SnPO-600-Si and SnPO-700-Si the yields
after silylation were 80.47% and 79.98% respectively, while for GaPO-600-Si and GaPO-700-Si
they were 18.33% and 21.33% respectively.
Daorattanachai et al. [33] have previously mentioned that their non-calcined calcium phos-
phate catalyst were partially water soluble. Therefore the chosen metal for the phosphate
catalyst seem to have a large influence on the water solubility, as well as the yield from the
catalyst preparation and silylation procedure, where the catalyst is washed with water. Dutta
et al. [19] have also reported that the pH value during the metal phosphate synthesis is im-
portant, as a low pH value prevents uncontrolled precipitation, polymerization of inorganic
species as well as the formation of large particle aggregate, the latter of which lowers access to
the internal pore volume, important to achieve the highest catalytic activity. The lowered pH
of the gallium chloride, polymer and phosphoric acid solution necessary to get any yield from
the synthesis, is therefore also likely to negatively affect the catalytic activity of the produced
catalyst.
3.2
Product characterization with 1H-NMR
1H-NMR (200Mhz, CDCl3) δ 9.64 (1H, s), 7.28 (1H, d), 6.88 (1H, d), 4.77 (2H, s)
The 1H-NMR results are similar to the signals found by Dutta et al. [45], although all of
the signals are slightly more downfield. The full spectra of the peaks and the corresponding
protons can be found in Appendix 1.
==PAGE:38==
24
3 Results and discussion
3.3
Catalyst characterization with nitrogen
adsorption/desorption
Figure 3.1: Pore volume as a function of pore width for adsorption and desorption on SnP-700
calculated using BJH
Catalyst
BET
surface
area (m2g-1)
Average
BET
Ads. Pore width
(nm)
BJH Ads.
Pore
volume (cm3g-1)
SnP-700
169.20
11.06
0.53
SnP-600
167.22
10.92
0.52
Table 3.1: Estimated BET surface area, average BET pore width and pore volume of the
SnP-700 and SnP-600 catalysts
As can be seen from Table 3.1, the BET estimated surface areas of SnP-700 and SnP-600 of
169.20 and 167.22 m2g-1 respectively, are almost identical. As are the the estimated average
pore widths of 11.06 and 10.92 nm calculated from BET adsorption, and the BJH adsorption
pore volumes of 0.53 and 0.52 cm3g-1 respectively. The distribution of BET pore widths of
SnP-700 and SnP-600 seen in Figure 3.1 and 3.2 respectively, are similarly almost identical.
Lowering the calcination temperature from 700 to 600 oC had no noticeably effect, despite
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Catalyst characterization with nitrogen adsorption/desorption
25
previous studies [12] stating the issue of pore clogging of metal phosphates at calcination
temperatures of 700 oC. This could be due to several reasons. Pore clogging might happen
to the same degree at 600 oC as at 700 oC, and the calcination temperature would thus have
to be lowered further to achieve any measurable difference. The use of Pluronic P123 as a
SDA might negate the problem of pore clogging, if the cause of the pore clogging take place
before the polymer have been fully decomposed. Finally, as it was not possible to find any
information on the decomposition temperature of Pluronic P123, the slightly lower surface
area and pore width of SnP-600 might be due to a slightly less complete decomposition of the
template polymer.
Figure 3.2: Pore volume as a function of pore width for adsorption and desorption on SnP-600
calculated using BJH
The estimated average pore widths of SnP-700 and SnP-600 of 11.06 and 10.92 nm respectively,
are comparable to that of the tin phosphate catalyst synthesized by Dutta et al. [19] which
had an average pore diameter of 10.40 nm. The same is true for the pore volumes of 0.52 and
0.53 (cm3g-1 for SnP-700 and SnP-600 respectively, which are close to that of the catalyst by
Dutta et al. with 0.59 (cm3g-1. However, the pore size distribution is not narrow like that
of the tin phosphate by Dutta et al. or their earlier synthesized titanium phosphate, where
Pluronic P123 was also used as a SDA [46].
==PAGE:40==
26
3 Results and discussion
3.4
Catalytic cellulose and carbohydrate conversion
3.4.1
Estimation of experimental error in catalytic reactions
The average and standard deviations of substrate conversion, HMF yield and selectivity can be
seen below in Tables 3.2 and 3.3, where glucose and fructose respectively, are used as starting
substrate. Both glucose and fructose contents in the aqueous phase are given as relative to the
total amount of added substrate.
Reaction no.
Conversion (mol%)
HMF yield (mol %)
HMF selectivity (%)
1
67.79
33.07
48.78
2
64.73
32.04
49.51
3
89.30
28.10
31.46
Average±SD
73.94±10.93
31.07±2.14
43.25±8.34
Table 3.2: Average and standard deviation for three identical reactions of SnP-600 in MIBK,
0.17 mM NaCl-Water with fructose as substrate
Reaction no.
Conversion
(mol%)
Fructose yield
(mol%)
HMF yield
(mol%)
HMF selectivity
(%)
1
15.75
6.40
4.23
26.87
2
15.47
6.33
3.22
20.85
3
10.03
7.50
3.93
39.14
Average±SD
13.75±2.63
6.74±0.53
3.79±0.42
28.95±7.61
Table 3.3: Average and standard deviation for three identical reactions of SnP-600 in MIBK,
0.17 mM NaCl-Water with glucose as substrate
As can be seen from the tables, the last reactions using both glucose and fructose as substrate
have a high deviation from the sugar composition, conversion, yield and selectivity compared
to the first two runs of each reaction. As a result, the experimental error in the conversion,
fructose yield, HMF yield and HMF selectivity of the glucose reactions were 27.05%, 11.28%,
15.11% and 35.18% respectively, while for the fructose the conversion, HMF yield and HMF
selectivity were 20.77%, 9.56% and 27.26% respectively. These experimental errors are very
high, and can make it difficult to make any concise conclusions from the experimental results.
HMF is a highly unstable compound, and the time that passes from the end of the reaction
to the separation of the phases, and to isolation of the product could have an influence on the
results. Further interpretation of the results, as well as comparison with results from known
literature are done in the following subsections.
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Catalytic cellulose and carbohydrate conversion
27
3.4.2
Effect of calcination temperature on Tin phosphate catalysts
The sample composition, conversion, yield and selectivity of reactions with SnP-700 and SnP-
600 using glucose, fructose and cellulose as starting substrate, can be seen in Figure 3.3 and
3.4.
Figure 3.3: Comparison of conversion, yields and selectivity towards HMF in reactions with
SnP catalysts, Water-MIBK and fructose or glucose as substrate at 150oC
As can be seen from Figure 3.3 and 3.4, the tin catalysts achieved almost identical fructose
and HMF yields when fructose and glucose was used as substrate, and the difference is within
the standard deviation for the reaction. Both catalysts converted slightly below a third of the
fructose to HMF, and the overall conversion of fructose is considerable higher for SnP-600 than
SnP-700, but lower for glucose. This could be due to a higher but also less selective Brønsted
acid activity, but is most likely a deviation. As the surface area, pore widths, porosity and pore
size distribution of the catalysts were comparable, very similar catalytic activity is expected.
==PAGE:42==
28
3 Results and discussion
Figure 3.4: Comparison of conversion, yields and selectivity towards HMF in reactions with
SnP catalysts, Water-MIBK and cellulose as substrate at 150oC
In Figure 3.4 it can be seen that little cellulose were converted by either of the catalysts, and
in the reaction sample with SnP-600, no HMF was detected at all. For none of the reactions
with either catalyst or starting substrate were it possible to get HMF yields comparable to
those measured by Dutta et al. As HPLC analysis of the aqueous phase of the reactions shows
that much of the carbohydrates remain unconverted, poor catalytic performance is more likely
to have caused the low yields, than HMF degradation during isolation or analysis.
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Catalytic cellulose and carbohydrate conversion
29
3.4.3
Effect of the choice of metal and calcination temperature
of Gallium phosphate catalysts
The conversion, yields and selectivity of the two gallium phosphate catalysts are overall very
comparable. The effect of the calcination temperature on the surface areas and pores of gallium
phosphates are very likely to be similar to identical to that of tin phosphates. The GaP-600
achieved slightly higher fructose and HMF yields when both glucose and fructose were used as
a substrate.
Figure 3.5: Comparison of conversion, yields and selectivity towards HMF in reactions with
GaP catalysts, Water-MIBK and cellulose as substrate at 150oC
The two catalysts resulted in almost identical amounts of glucose and fructose from cellulose
conversion, however, no HMF was detected in the reaction sample where GaP-700 was used.
The higher HMF yields of GaP-600 from both fructose, glucose and cellulose could indicate a
slightly better catalyst activity, although still a minuscule difference.
==PAGE:44==
30
3 Results and discussion
Figure 3.6: Comparison of conversion, yields and selectivity towards HMF in reactions with
GaP catalysts, Water-MIBK and cellulose as substrate at 150oC
The gallium phosphate catalysts had overall lower conversions and yields compared to the tin
phosphate catalysts for all substrate. However, both of the gallium catalysts had significantly
higher selectivities with fructose as substrate, but this was not the case with glucose as sub-
strate. This could indicate that the gallium phosphate catalysts had more selective, or a higher
amount of Brønsted acid sites, which are responsible for the dehydration of fructose to HMF,
but a lower Lewis responsibility, limiting the isomerization of glucose to fructose. The glucose
yield from cellulose was also higher for both of the gallium catalysts compared to tin catalysts.
As the conversion of cellulose to glucose is catalyzed by Brønsted acidic sites, this could also
indicate a higher Brønsted acidity of the gallium phosphates. However, the experimental errors
of the reactions are too high to accurately give any conclusions on the catalytic activity.
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Catalytic cellulose and carbohydrate conversion
31
3.4.4
Effect of silylation surface modification
Compared to the non-silylated SnP-600 catalyst, SnP-600-Si achieved a lower conversion of
glucose to both fructose and HMF. The total conversion, yield as well as selectivity were also
lower, despite Ordomsky et al. finding that a deposition of liquid silica increased the selectivity
of zirconium and niobium phosphates. This could indicate that many of the Lewis acid sites
present on the tin phosphate catalyst were coordinatively unsaturated metal ions, which are
deactivated by the silylation procedure. When fructose was used as substrate, SnP-600-Si also
achieved a very low yield and selectivity, even though the Brønsted acid sites responsible for the
dehydration of fructose shouldn’t be greatly affected by the silylation modification according
to previous tests [14].
Figure 3.7: Comparison of conversion, yields and selectivity towards HMF in reactions with
GaP catalysts, Water-MIBK and cellulose as substrate at 150oC
==PAGE:46==
32
3 Results and discussion
Figure 3.8: Comparison of conversion, yields and selectivity towards HMF in reactions with
GaP catalysts, Water-MIBK and cellulose as substrate at 150oC
==PAGE:47==
3.4 Catalytic cellulose and carbohydrate conversion
33
3.4.5
Effect of solvent system and temperature
First the two organic solvents MTHF and MIBK in a biphasic system with NaCl-saturated
water was compared, using SnP-600 as a catalyst. As can be seen in Figure 3.19, using MIBK
as a solvent resulted in a slightly higher conversion of fructose, and much higher HMF yield
and selectivity. When glucose was used as substrate, MIBK also showed to be a better solvent,
resulting in a 50% increase in conversion, almost eighth times the HMF yield and five times
the HMF selectivity. However, the fructose yields were very comparable. The sugar and HMF
yields from cellulose were very small. Although the Water-MIBK system resulted in a much
higher HMF yield, the identical reaction using the very similar performing SnP-600 catalyst
resulted in no detectable HMF yield at all, indicating a likely very high experimental error for
cellulose at these low yields.
Figure 3.9: Conversion, yields and selectivity towards HMF in reactions with SnP-600 catalyst,
Water-MTHF and Water-MIBK and fructose or glucose at 150oC
==PAGE:48==
34
3 Results and discussion
Figure 3.10: Conversion, yields and selectivity towards HMF in reactions with SnP-600 catalyst,
Water-MTHF and Water-MIBK and cellulose at 150oC
Figures 3.11 and 3.12 show the conversion, yields and selectivity of the reaction samples using
SnP-600 with the C4mim[Cl] IL at 120 and 150 oC.
The HMF yields from the reactions using the IL/MIBK solvent system were all very low
compared to the systems with NaCl-saturated water and either MTHF or MIBK, and only the
reaction at 150 oC using fructose resulted in a HMF yield above 1%. This make experimental
errors and any uncertainties far too great to estimate the effect of reaction temperature on
this solvent system with any accuracy. When fructose was used as a substrate, no fructose was
detected after the reaction at 150 oC, resulting in a calculated conversion of 100 %, in compari-
son to the 32 % conversion of the reaction at 120 oC. This is certainly due to the bad detection
of the sugars from the IL/MIBK system, as neither glucose nor fructose could be detected in
any of the reactions with cellulose as substrate. In the reactions using glucose, 11.83% fructose
yield was calculated from the reaction at 120 oC despite an only 10.8% conversion, indicating
a high relative deviation.
==PAGE:49==
3.4 Catalytic cellulose and carbohydrate conversion
35
Figure 3.11: Conversion, yields and selectivity towards HMF in reactions with SnP-600 catalyst,
IL-MIBK system with fructose or glucose as substrate at 120 or 150oC
Figure 3.12: Conversion, yields and selectivity towards HMF in reactions with SnP-600 catalyst,
IL-MIBK system with fructose or glucose as substrate at 120 or 150oC
==PAGE:50==
36
3 Results and discussion
3.4.6
Future perspectives
Due to time constrains all of the reactions except SnP-600 in Water/MIBK using fructose and
glucose were done only once. This leads to uncertainties in the measurements of conversions
and yields, and makes it difficult to give a precise comparison of catalyst performance and
effect of changing catalyst an reaction parameters. More reactions would need to be done to
limit uncertainties in the experimental results.
It was not possible to detect HMF and sugar yields in reactions with the IL/MIBK system
with any uncertainty with the used method, and a better procedure for detecting the reaction
products would be needed to find the effect performance of the solvent system.
Due to the failure to replicate the yields achieved by Dutta et al. and the decrease in
catalytic activity after the silylation procedure, indicating many unsaturated metal ions in the
catalysts, it is believed that too little phosphoric acid was used during the catalyst synthesis.
To test whether the SDA used in the catalyst synthesis eliminated the problem of pore
clogging previously reported, or if the decrease in calcination temperature from 700 to 600 oC
was insufficient, more catalysts, ideally both with and without the use of a SDA, would be
needed to be made and tested in catalytic reactions.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4
Conclusion
The catalytic conversion of carbohydrates and biomass to platform chemicals such as HMF have
been extensively studied. The conversion of the most abundant biomass, cellulose to HMF is
composed of reactions; breaking of cellulose to glucose, isomerization of glucose to fructose
and rehydration of fructose to HMF. The first and last of these reactions are catalyzed by
Brønsted acids, while the isomerization is catalyzed by Lewis acids. This makes bifunctional
heterogeneous acids interesting, due to the easy reuse of catalyst and the need for only a single
type of catalyst.
Porous tin and gallium phosphate catalysts were synthesized and used in different biphasic
systems. The effect of calcination temperature and the modification of catalyst surface with
silica on conversion were investigated. The performance of the two solvent MTHF and MIBK
in the reaction were compared, and so were the use of IL C4mim[Cl] instead of water.
It was not possible to achieve comparable conversion rates or yields to the literature despite
using the same method of catalyst preparation, likely due to the use of too little phosphoric
acid during catalyst synthesis. The decreased catalytic performance after silylation indicates
the presence of many unselective Lewis acid sites on the prepared catalyst. No significant
difference which couldn’t be attributed to uncertainty were found for the catalysts calcined
at different temperatures. Nitrogen adsorption tests showed that decreasing the calcination
temperature from 700 to 600 oC had negligible effect on surface area, porosity and pore width
distribution. The gallium phosphate catalysts calcined at both 600 and 700 oC showed higher
HMF selectivity from fructose as substrate compared to the tin phosphate catalysts, indicating
a more selective Brønsted acidity. The use of a NaCl-saturated Water/MIBK solvent system
gave higher yield and selectivity than a NaCl-saturated Water/MTHF for all tested substrates.
HPLC analysis of reaction samples with IL were inconsistent and in several of the reactions no
carbohydrates were detected at all, indicating that another procedure for analyzing the HMF
and sugar content is needed.
==PAGE:52==
38
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
Xue, Z., Ma, M.-G., Li, Z., and Mu, T. (2016) Advances in the conversion of glucose and
cellulose to 5-hydroxymethylfurfural over heterogenous catalysts. RSC Adv., 6, 98874–
98892.
[2]
Atanda, L., Konarova, M., Ma, Q., Mukundan, S., Shrotri, A., and Beltramini, J. (2016)
High yield conversion of cellulosic biomass into 5-hydroxymethylfurfural and a study of the
reaction kinetics of cellulose to HMF conversion in a biphasic system. Catal. Sci. Technol.,
6, 6257–6266.
[3]
Bhanja, P. and Bhaumik, A. (2016) Porous nanomaterials as green catalyst for the con-
version of biomass to bioenergy. Fuel, 185, 432–441.
[4]
Corma Canos, A., Iborra, S., and Velty, A. (2007) Chemical routes for the transformation
of biomass into chemicals. Chemical Reviews, 107, 2411–2502.
[5]
Werpy, T. and Petersen, G. Top Value Added Chemicals from Biomass Volume I — Results
of Screening for Potential Candidates from Sugars and Synthesis Gas Top Value Added
Chemicals From Biomass Volume I : Results of Screening for Potential Candidates. 7/2-
2018.
[6]
Bozell, J. J. and Petersen, G. R. (2010) Technology development for the production of
biobased products from biorefinery carbohydrates—the US Department of Energy’s “Top
10” revisited. Green Chemistry, 12, 539–554.
[7]
Rout, P. K., Nannaware, A. D., Prakash, O., Kalra, A., and Rajasekharan, R. (2016)
Synthesis of hydroxymethylfurfural from cellulose using green processes: A promising
biochemical and biofuel feedstock. Chemical Engineering Science, 142, 318–346.
[8]
Agarwal, B., Kailasam, K., Sangwan, R. S., and Elumalai, S. (2018) Traversing the his-
tory of solid catalysts for heterogeneous synthesis of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural from carbo-
hydrate sugars: A review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 82, 2408–2425.
[9]
Wilson, K. and Clark, J. H. (2000) Solid acids and their use as environmentally friendly
catalysts in organic synthesis. Pure Appl. Chem, 72, 1313–1319.
[10] Deutschmann, O., Knözinger, H., Kochloefl, K., and Turek, T. Ullmann’s encyclopedia
of industrial chemistry Vol.6 chapter Heterogeneous Catalysis and Solid Catalysts Wiley
(2012).
[11] Murzin, D. (2013) Engineering Catalysis, Walter de Gruyter, 1th edition.
==PAGE:54==
40
Bibliography
[12] Villanueva, N. I. and Marzialetti, T. G. (2018) Mechanism and kinetic parameters of glu-
cose and fructose dehydration to 5-hydroxymethylfurfural over solid phosphate catalysts
in water. Catalysis Today, 302, 100–107.
[13] Wang, Z. and Huang, J. (2017) Brønsted-Lewis Acids for Efficient Conversion of Renew-
ables. Production of Biofuels and Chemicals With Bifunctional Catalysts, 8, 99–135.
[14] Ordomsky, V. V., Sushkevich, V. L., Schouten, J. C., Van Der Schaaf, J., and Nijhuis,
T. A. (2013) Glucose dehydration to 5-hydroxymethylfurfural over phosphate catalysts.
Journal of Catalysis, 300, 37–46.
[15] Yu, I. K. and Tsang, D. C. (2017) Conversion of biomass to hydroxymethylfurfural: A
review of catalytic systems and underlying mechanisms. Bioresource Technology, 238, 716–
732.
[16] Antal, M. J., Mok, W. S., and Richards, G. N. (1990) Mechanism of formation of 5-
(hydroxymethyl)-2-furaldehyde from d-fructose and sucrose. Carbohydrate Research, 199,
91–109.
[17] Krässig, H., Schurz, J., Steadman, R. G., Schliefer, K., Albrecht, W., Mohring, M., and
Schlosser, H. Ullmann’s encyclopedia of industrial chemistry Vol.6 chapter Cellulose Wiley
(2012).
[18] Román-Leshkov, Y. and Dumesic, J. A. (2009) Solvent effects on fructose dehydration
to 5-hydroxymethylfurfural in biphasic systems saturated with inorganic salts. Topics in
Catalysis, 52, 297–303.
[19] Dutta, A., Gupta, D., Patra, A. K., Saha, B., and Bhaumik, A. (2014) Synthesis of
5-hydroxymethylfurural from carbohydrates using large-pore mesoporous tin phosphate.
ChemSusChem, 7, 925–933.
[20] Pinkert, André an dMarsh, K. N., Pang, S., and Staiger, M. P. (2009) Ionic lquids and
their interaction with cellulose. Chemical Reviews, 109, 6712–6728.
[21] Swatloski, R. P., Spear, S. K., Holbrey, J. D., and Rogers, R. D. (2002) Dissolution of
cellose with ionic liquids. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 124, 4974–4975.
[22] Zhou, L., Liang, R., Ma, Z., Wu, T., and Wu, Y. (2013) Conversion of cellulose to HMF in
ionic liquid catalyzed by bifunctional ionic liquids. Bioresource Technology, 129, 450–455.
[23] Li, Y.-N., Wang, J.-Q., He, L.-N., Yang, Z.-Z., Liu, A.-H., Yu, B., and Luan, C.-R. (2012)
Experimental and theoretical studies on imidazolium ionic liquid-promoted conversion of
fructose to 5-hydroxymethylfurfural. Green Chemistry, 14, 2752–2758.
[24] Hou, Q., Zhen, M., Liu, L., Chen, Y., Huang, F., Zhang, S., Li, W., and Ju, M. (2018)
Tin phosphate as a heterogeneous catalyst for efficient dehydration of glucose into 5-
hydroxymethylfurfural in ionic liquid. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, 224, 183–193.
[25] Sing, K. S. W. (1998) Adsorption methods for the characterization of porous materials.
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science, 76–77, 3–11.
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
41
[26] Reichenauer, G. and Scherer, G. W. (2000) Nitrogen sorption in compliant materials.
Journal of Non-Crystalline Solids, 277, 162–172.
[27] Pavia, L. D., Lampman, M. G., Kriz, S. G., and Vyvyan, R. J. Introduction to Spec-
troscopy chapter Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy Part One: Basic Concepts
Cengage Learning, Inc 200 First Stamfor Place, 4th Floor, Stamford, CT 06902, USA 5th
edition (2015).
[28] Daniel, H. C. Quantitative Chemical Analysis chapter High-Performance Liquid Chro-
matography W. H. Freeman and Company 9th edition (2016).
[29] Carlini, C., Patrono, P., Galletti, A. M. R., and Sbrana Glauco, G. (2004) Heteroge-
neous catalysts based on vanadyl phosphate for fructose dehydration to 5-hydroxymethyl-
2-furaldehyde. Applied Catalysis A: General, 275, 111–118.
[30] Ladwig, G. (1965) Über die Konstitution des VPO5(·nH2O). Zeitschrift für anorganische
und allgemeine Chemie, 338, 266–278.
[31] Bagnasco, G., Galli, P., Larrubia, M. A., Massucci, M. A., Benes, L., Ramis, R., and
Turco, M. (2000) Studies on water and ammonia programmed thermodesorption of mixed
M (III)-vanadyl phosphates. Journal of thermal analysis and calorimetry, 61, 625–636.
[32] Khemthong, P., Daorattanachai, P., Laosiripojana, N., and Faungnawakij, K. (2012) Cop-
per phosphate nanostructures catalyze dehydration of fructose to 5-hydroxymethylfufural.
Catalysis Communications, 29, 96–100.
[33] Daorattanachai, P., Khemthong, P., Viriya-empikul, N., Laosiripojana, N., and Faung-
nawakij, K. (2015) Effect of calcination temperature on catalytic performance of alkaline
earth phosphates in hydrolysis/dehydration of glucose and cellulose. Chemical Engineering
Journal, 278, 92–98.
[34] Atanda, L., Mukundan, S., Shrotri, A., Ma, Q., and Beltramini, J. (2015) Catalytic con-
version of glucose to 5-hydroxymethyl-furfural with a phosphated TiO2 catalyst. Chem-
CatChem, 7, 781–790.
[35] Atanda, L., Mukundan, S., Shrotri, A., Ma, Q., and Beltramini, J. (2015) Catalytic conver-
sion of glucose to 5-hydroxymethyl-furfural with a phosphated TiO2 catalyst: Supporting
Information. ChemCatChem, 7, 781–790.
[36] Nikolla, E., Román-Leshkov, Y., Moliner, M., and Davis, M. E. (2011) One-pot synthesis
of 5-(hydroxymethyl)furfural from carbohydrates using tin-beta zeolite. ACS Catalysis, 1,
408–410.
[37] Nikolla, E., Román-Leshkov, Y., Moliner, M., and Davis, M. E. (2011) One-pot synthe-
sis of 5-(hydroxymethyl)furfural from carbohydrates using tin-beta zeolite: Supporting
Information. ACS Catalysis, 1, 408–410.
[38] Pande, A., Niphadkar, P., Pandare, K., and Bokade, V. (2018) Acid Modified H-USY
Zeolite for Efficient Catalytic Transformation of Fructose to 5-Hydroxymethyl Furfural
(Biofuel Precursor) in Methyl Isobutyl Ketone-Water Biphasic System. Energy and Fuels,
32, 3783–3791.
==PAGE:56==
42
Bibliography
[39] Yabushita, M., Li, P., Islamoglu, T., Kobayashi, H., Fukuoka, A., Farha, O. K.,
and Katz, A. (2017) Selective Metal-Organic Framework Catalysis of Glucose to 5-
Hydroxymethylfurfural Using Phosphate-Modified NU-1000. Industrial and Engineering
Chemistry Research, 56, 7141–7148.
[40] Yabushita, M., Li, P., Islamoglu, T., Kobayashi, H., Fukuoka, A., Farha, O. K., and Katz,
A. (2013) Vapor-Phase Metalation by Atomic Layer Deposition in a Metal −Organic
Framework. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 135, 10294–10297.
[41] Liu, M., Zhang, Y., Zhu, E., Jin, P., Wang, K., Zhao, J., Li, C., and Yan, Y. (2017) Facile
Synthesis of Halloysite Nanotubes-Supported Acidic Metal-Organic Frameworks with Tun-
able Acidity for Efficient Fructose Dehydration to 5-Hydroxymethylfurfural. Chemistry
Select, 2, 10413–10419.
[42] Liu, M., Zhang, Y., Zhu, E., Jin, P., Wang, K., Zhao, J., Li, C., and Yan, Y. (2017) Facile
Synthesis of Halloysite Nanotubes-Supported Acidic Metal-Organic Frameworks with Tun-
able Acidity for Efficient Fructose Dehydration to 5-Hydroxymethylfurfural: Supporting
Information. Chemistry Select, 2, 10413–10419.
[43] Brothers, P. J. and Ruggiero, C. E. (2011) The Group 13 Metals Aluminium, Gallium,
Indium and Thallium: Chemical Patterns and Peculiarities, if part of oneJohn Wiley
Sons, from where numberth edition.
[44] Meine, N., Benedito, F., and Rinaldi, R. (2010) Thermal stability of ionic liquids assessed
by potentiometric titration. Green Chemistry, 12, 1711–1714.
[45] Dutta, A., Gupta, D., Patra, A. K., Saha, B., and Bhaumik, A. (2014) Synthesis of
5-hydroxymethylfurural from carbohydrates using large-pore mesoporous tin phosphate:
Supporting Information. ChemSusChem, 7, 925–933.
[46] Dutta, A., Patra, A. K., Dutta, S., Saha, B., and Bhaumik, A. (2012) Hierarchically
porous titanium phosphate nanoparticles: an efficient solid acid catalyst for microwave
assisted conversion of biomass and carbohydrates into 5-hydroxymethylfurfural. Journal
of Materials Chemistry, 22, 14094–14100.
==PAGE:57==
Appendix
Figure 1: 1H-NMR of the product of the organic phase of reaction with SnP-600 and Water-
MIBK at 150 oC with glucose as substrate
==PAGE:58==
