==PAGE:1==
CONFIDENTIAL
Nicolai Sahl-Tjørnholm (s123860)
Adaptable Computer Vision
System for Automated Fault
Detection in Industrial Production
Lines
Master’s Thesis, June 2018
CONFIDENTIAL
==PAGE:2==
CONFIDENTIAL
b
==PAGE:3==
CONFIDENTIAL
Adaptable Computer Vision System for Automated Fault Detection in Industrial Pro-
duction Lines
Fleksibelt Computer-vision-system til Automatisk Fejldetektion for Industrielle Produk-
tionslinjer
This thesis is written by:
Nicolai Sahl-Tjørnholm (s123860)
Supervisor:
Anders Bjorholm Dahl
Published:
June 24. 2018
Period:
January 2018 to June 2018
ECTS points:
35 ECTS
Education:
MSc
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Confidential
Revision:
First
Rights:
© Nicolai Sahl-Tjørnholm
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
CONFIDENTIAL
d
==PAGE:5==
CONFIDENTIAL
Abstract
In a time where automation and technological change is a rapidly advancing field, every-
where from the private consumers to the large-scale industries, the need for sufficient,
effective and easy data collection, is getting evermore important.
Improvement of production flow in the modern factory, is a crucial part in the quest
of keeping the production lines at their state of the art efficiency, ensuring a strong,
competitive position for the company.
To enable continuous improvements, detailed
knowledge of the production faults, is one of the major parts the collected data needs to
provide.
Nowadays the registration of faults in a production line, is done manually by the oper-
ators at the industrial site. This can require the operator to spend a lot of the working
hours to do a standardised procedure of registering the fault, specify where and when
the fault happened etc. There are several ways to get an indication of faults in a produc-
tion line, but an easy and adaptable system to make fault detection of any production
possible, is not a tool available today.
In this thesis I will investigate a method where a camera, used as the data collection sen-
sor, can be placed at different types of production lines and find visually detectable faults.
The idea is that the autonomous fault detection is based on differences in video frames.
First it will calculate the differences between two sets of frames, both being videos show-
ing normal operation of the production line. Then it will calculate differences between
one normal video and a given video from the same process. If the differences between the
latter has a statistical deviation, significantly larger than the normal-to-normal video
differences, it could be caused by a fault in the production.
Focus will be to achieve a highly adaptable system, while maintaining a robust ability
to detect faults happening in the videos.
Three different production scenarios are tested, with four types of faults in each. The
system made, has achieved a fault detection of 82.6% of the faults occurring in the tests.
To have a fully functional system, ready for direct implementation in the industry, the
software could be adapted to utilise cloud computing, making the processing power read-
ily available to the companies, who want to use the system. This would increase the
speed, at which the fault detection could be run, to a pace that would make it a useful
tool for the operators.
==PAGE:6==
CONFIDENTIAL
ii
==PAGE:7==
CONFIDENTIAL
Resume
I en tid hvor automation og teknologisk udvikling er et felt i hurtig udvikling, overalt
fra private forbrugere til industrier i stor skala, bliver behovet for brugbar, effektiv og
let datahøst, hele tiden endnu vigtigere.
Forbedringer i produktionsflow på den moderne fabrik er en kritisk del i missionen om
at holde produktionslinjerne på deres ”state of the art” effektivitetsniveau, for at sikre
en stærk, kompetetiv position for firmaet. For at muliggøre fortsatte forbedringer, er
detaljeret viden om produktionsfejl, en af de væsentlige ting som datahøsten skal bidrage
med.
Nu til dags foregår registrering af fejl på produktionslinjer, ved at operatøren manuelt
foretager fejlmeldingen på produktionssitet. Det kan kræve at operatøren bruger mange
arbejdstimer på, at udføre den standardiserede procedure for registrering af fejl, speci-
ficere hvor og hvornår fejlen skete etc. Der er flere måder at skaffe indikationer på fejl
på en produktionslinje, men et let og adaptivt system til at foretage fejlfinding i enhver
produktion, er ikke et værktøj der er til rådighed i dag.
I denne afhandling vil jeg undersøge en metode, hvor et kamera, brugt som den dataop-
samlende sensor, kan placers ved forskellige typer af produktionslinjer og finde visuelt
detekterbare fejl. Idéen er at den autonome fejldetektering, baseres på forskelle i vide-
oframes. Først vil der beregnes forskelle mellem to sæt af frames, begge værende video
der viser normal operation af produktionslinjen. Efterfølgende vil forskellene udregnes
mellem en normal video og en ukendt video. Hvis forskellene mellem de sidstnævnte har
en statistisk afvigelse, som er væsentligt større end normal til normal videoforskellene,
kunne det være forårsaget af en fejl i produktionen.
Fokus er på at opnå et system med høj grad af adaptivitet, samtidig med at beholde en
robust evne til at detektere fejl der opstår i videoerne.
Tre forskellige produktionsscenarier er testet, med fire typer fejl i hver. Systemet som
er udviklet, har formået en fejldetektion på 82.6% af de fejl der forekommer i testene.
For at have et fuldt funktionelt system, til direkte implementation i industrien, skal
softwaren tilpasses således at det kan udnytte cloud computing, hvilket vil gøre den
nødvendige processorkraft umiddelbart tilgængelig for firmaer, der ønsker at benytte
systemet. Dette vil højne hastigheden, som fejldetekteringen vil kunne køre med, til et
niveau der vil gøre det til et brugbart værktøj for operatørerne.
==PAGE:8==
CONFIDENTIAL
iv
==PAGE:9==
CONFIDENTIAL
Preface
This thesis is submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the Masters degree
(MSc Eng) in Electrical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark.
The work was performed at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science.
The thesis contents represents 35 ECTS points.
The work in relation to the thesis has been conducted in the period January 2018 to
June 2018, totalling 6 months.
I would like to thank my supervisor, Anders Bjorholm Dahl, for his collaboration and
ideas during this project.
Furthermore I would like to thank the colleagues at Blackbird ApS for their help during
the thesis work, both in terms of feedback and great companionship.
A special thanks to Mathias Koch and Michael Morsing for their help with proofreading,
and to my parents and sisters for their support during the writing of this thesis.
Kongens Lyngby, June 24, 2018
Nicolai Sahl-Tjørnholm (s123860)
==PAGE:10==
CONFIDENTIAL
vi
==PAGE:11==
CONFIDENTIAL
Contents
Abstract
i
Resume
iii
Preface
v
Contents
vii
List of Figures
ix
List of Tables
xiii
List of Nomenclature
xv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Unsolved Aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Overview
5
2.1
Camera Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Anomaly Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Previous Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Approach & Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Description of the Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Computer Vision Algorithms
11
3.1
Video Stream Characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Motion Vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Cyclic Process Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Frame Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Phase Correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Fault Detection System
23
4.1
Enveloping the Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Statistical Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:12==
CONFIDENTIAL
viii
Contents
4.3
Program Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
Test Cases and Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Results
35
5.1
Visualisation of the Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Fault Detection Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Discussion
43
6.1
Computation Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Delimitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.4
Best Performing Test Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.5
Possible Issues in the System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.6
Further Improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7
Conclusion
49
A Mathematical Operators
51
A.1 Hadamard product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
B Test Results
53
C Python Code
67
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:13==
CONFIDENTIAL
List of Figures
2.1
Illustration of a line scan camera and an area scan camera. The left camera
is the line scan camera, which only scans a single line of pixels at a time.
To scan an object, it must be adjusted very precisely to the speed of the
conveyor belt, moving underneath it. A new scan should be performed every
time the belt has moved one pixel width in the cameras field of view. To the
right is the more commonly known area scan camera, capturing a surface at
a time, in a grid of pixels instead of a line
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1
Illustration of the three colour channels (red, green and blue), as separate
dimensions in a u×v×3 matrix. Each channel contains a value for the given
colour, for every pixel in the image. Combined, the three channels form an
RGB colour image. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Motion vectors displayed in two different frames. To the left (3.2a) a robotic
arm is moving down to grab a block. On the right (3.2b) the block has been
grabbed and it is moving out of the field of view towards the right. Small
arrows indicate the motion vectors of each macroblock. . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Sliding window correlation of a sequence of frames and a video representing
two full cycles of a process. It is clear to see where the frame sequence matches
the cycle the best, by finding the position where the difference between the
two, reaches its minimum value (at approximately 250 and 700). The sliding
window is performed both with a colour channel video and a greyscale video.
No noticeable difference in performance between colour and greyscale is seen,
when trying to detect the position of the minimum difference.
. . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Visualisation of the frame subtraction, when the frame is displaying normal
behaviour of the production line. Figure 3.4a shows the actual frame and
figure 3.4b shows the subtraction of that frame from the best matching frame. 17
3.5
Visualisation of the frame subtraction, when an error has occurred at the
production line. Figure 3.5a shows the actual frame with the error and figure
3.5b shows the subtraction of that frame from the best matching frame. . . .
17
3.6
Shown here is the error for every frame in a test video of half a minute. The
error is the difference between the test frame and its best match and it can
be seen how the error sometimes make significant spikes, when just a single
bad frame match occur.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.7
Difference between frame subtraction before and after phase correlation and
geometric translation has been performed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
==PAGE:14==
CONFIDENTIAL
x
List of Figures
4.1
Displayed is the frame matching error from figure 3.6, together with the
calculated lower envelope. The envelope is smoother than the original signal,
but still makes a good representation of the actual frame match, just without
the sudden spikes from a very few bad frame matches.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
The error and its lower envelope from figure 4.1 are shown together with the
calculated median of the envelope and the MAD from that median. . . . . .
25
4.3
The error, lower envelope, median and MAD from figure 4.2 are shown to-
gether with the calculated threshold. The threshold is based on the envelope,
which is the reason why the original error data sometimes passes the threshold. 27
4.4
The error and lower envelope is showed together with the calculated topo-
graphic peak prominences. The peak prominences are based on the envelope.
27
4.5
Normal frame from the packaging line video. The image shows the ROI used
to perform the fault detection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Normal frame from the conveyor belt video. The image shows the ROI used
to perform the fault detection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.7
Normal frame from the robot pick& place video. The image shows the ROI
used to perform the fault detection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1
Example from a conveyor belt test. The horizontal red lines along the x-axis
indicate, when a figurine appears in the video, where there should have been
a brick. All variations in training length, resolution and frame rate results in
correct detection of the faults. Note, however, that the peak prominences and
the one minute training video, both have a false positive detection between
frame number 200 and 300 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
B.1 Packaging Line: Small box gets displaced. When the next layer of small
boxes are pushed in the larger box, they are laying stacked on top of the
displaced box, such that they do not get packed correctly.
. . . . . . . . . .
54
B.2 Packaging Line: After standing still, a layer of only two small boxes arrive.
After they have been pushed into the larger box, it is still possible to see
that some boxes are missing, but it is only in a very small part of the image,
where it can be seen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
B.3 Packaging Line: A layer in the larger box is already slightly misplaced when
the video starts. Then a new layer is pushed on top of it, and the larger box
moves out of the FOV. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
B.4 Packaging Line: A layer of small boxes arrive, but are all displaced. They are
discarded and a four new small boxes arrive and attempted packed. There
are still small boxes at the conveyor belt from the previous four, and all
are forced into the larger box, resulting in a small box getting stuck on the
conveyor belt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
B.5 Conveyor belt: A brick is turned 45 degrees compared to the normal direction
of the bricks. Another brick is just turned slightly, 20 degrees. . . . . . . . .
58
B.6 Conveyor belt: A single green brick has been replaced with a blue brick.
. .
59
B.7 Conveyor belt: A green and orange brick has swapped places.
. . . . . . . .
60
==PAGE:15==
CONFIDENTIAL
List of Figures
xi
B.8 Conveyor belt: A small figurine has replaced one of the bricks. . . . . . . . .
61
B.9 Robot pick & place: One of the three blocks has a small blue brick attached
to its top. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B.10 Robot pick & place: One of the three blocks is displaced to one side, when
placed in the camera FOV. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B.11 Robot pick & place: One of the three blocks is missing in the cycle. . . . . .
64
B.12 Robot pick & place: Two blocks have miscoloured ends. One has a fully
miscoloured and the other just half of the end is a different colour. Only
when the blocks are moved into the FOV, the end being miscoloured is visible. 65
==PAGE:16==
CONFIDENTIAL
xii
==PAGE:17==
CONFIDENTIAL
List of Tables
1
Definition of commonly used symbols in the thesis.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xv
5.1
Fault detection performance for each test type in the three use cases. . . . .
39
5.2
Total fault detection performance for each test type.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
Average time spent for matching one second of video. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4
Average time spent for matching one second of video. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.5
Average time spent for matching one second of video. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:18==
CONFIDENTIAL
xiv
==PAGE:19==
CONFIDENTIAL
List of Nomenclature
r, g, b ∈R
Pixel value in red, green and blue colour channel
R, G, B ∈R Pixel absolute difference in red, green and blue colour channel
u, v ∈R
Frame width and frame height in pixels
∆u, ∆v ∈R Geometric translation between two frames in u and v direction
E ∈R
Average pixel error
TH ∈R
Threshold of the acceptable frame error
MAD ∈R
Median Absolute Deviation
k ∈R
Constant scale factor
σ ∈R
Standard deviation
F
Forward Discrete Fourier Transform
P
Cross-correlation in frequency domain
p
Cross-correlation in time domain
C
A 5x5 weighted centroid
M
Transformation matrix
Table 1: Definition of commonly used symbols in the thesis.
==PAGE:20==
CONFIDENTIAL
xvi
==PAGE:21==
CONFIDENTIAL
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In our modern society, a constantly increasing need for data gathering and processing, is
part of the core for many businesses today. Especially in the production industry, data
collection is about to become more relevant than ever, with various companies preparing
for the so called industry 4.0, where: ”We’re seeing a transition from having machines
with computers in isolation to machines with on-board computers that are communicating
or being controlled from other computers.”[8]. The ability to quickly detect a fault or
an anomaly in the production, can lead to a significant reduction in production loss
and downtime. Some flaws or possible ways to optimise the processes, simply cannot be
found without the collection of data within the processes. If one just looks at the input
to a factory and compare with the output, a lot of relevant variables are not included
and the information about e.g.
downtime is limited.
Furthermore, finding ways to
optimise the process can be almost impossible, if the correct variables are not measured
and visualised.
To collect data from the processes of an industry, a broad arsenal of sensors with different
properties can be used. Devices for counting, measuring dimensions, weight, vibration
etc. can be added to existing production lines, and hereby assist in the collection of
data from the processes, hence enabling the manufacturers to track down errors and
start optimising their production. Amongst these sensors is the camera - a relatively
cheap sensor with the potential for extracting an immense amount of data. This is one
reason that a lot of research is diving into the use of cameras as sensors, and the fields
within computer and machine vision systems are getting more and more popular.
1.1
Unsolved Aspects
A camera can easily be mounted to monitor a process, but it would require a human to
look through the recorded video, to decide if the process has been running optimally or if
there has been any crashes, lack of products or other kinds of issues that could occur in a
given production scenario. In this way the camera would only be collecting data and the
interpretation of the data is done by a human. This interpretation or processing of the
data, would preferably be done by a computer programme, such that the human does
not have to spend hours looking through videos, finding errors in the production line
from the video surveillance system, but focus on improving the factory, by optimising
the production lines. The idea of replacing the human by an autonomous detection of
the faults happening during a video clip, is what brings us to the topic of this thesis;
==PAGE:22==
CONFIDENTIAL
2
1 Introduction
investigating and developing a method to automatically detect faulty behaviour of an
industrial production line, only based on the data collected by a camera. The camera
should be able to be placed in different production environments and at different stages
in a given production, hence the system should be adaptable to different scenes and
types of production lines. Existing camera inspection systems are widely available, but
their use is often quite limited to surveillance of certain parts of a production line. An
example is a labelling machine, where the human eye simply cannot see what is causing a
faulty labelling due to the high speed. Any other process involving high speed machinery
that create faults, could benefit from a surveillance like that, but it is still just an aid
for the human to later search and find out, what and when things went wrong. Other
camera inspection systems are used to detect faults in production. Such a system could
consist of several cameras capturing photos of e.g. the chassis of a car, and use them
to automatically verify, whether or not the chassis has been assembled correctly. This
type of assessment is however very case specific, and cannot directly be implemented in
other production scenarios.
1.2
Objective
The thesis is a project developed at, and in collaboration with, Blackbird ApS. The
research objective of this thesis is to investigate methods for fault detection of industrial
production lines.
The approach is to use a camera as input sensor, and comparing
footage of correct behaviour of the production, with footage to be investigated. The
goal is to achieve detection of faulty behaviour, by only having knowledge of how the
correct behaviour appears in the camera. In this way it is expected, that the system is
capable of detecting errors that occur in a video clip, when having been presented to
another video previously, showing correct production.
1.3
Thesis Structure
The thesis is divided into the following chapters:
Overview chapter which gives an introduction to the technology as it is today. The
chapter also introduces the approach used to investigate and build the fault detection
system.
Computer Vision Algorithms discusses the different ways to use a video sequence
to ”learn” the correct behaviour of an industrial production line, such that if presented
with faulty behaviour in a video, this would be recognised.
Fault Detection System explains how the final system setup is made and how the
system works.
==PAGE:23==
CONFIDENTIAL
1.3 Thesis Structure
3
Results present the performance of the system in regards to the test setups as well
as when used in real-world applications, where different industries have actual produc-
tion lines tested, to see how well faulty behaviour is detected.
Discussion of current limitations and ideas for further improvements of the system
in various ways.
Conclusion summarises the results to make an easy comparison with the initial goals
of the project.
==PAGE:24==
CONFIDENTIAL
4
==PAGE:25==
CONFIDENTIAL
CHAPTER 2
Overview
Cameras are very versatile sensors and can be used for solving a wide variety of tasks.
Everything from scanning and recognising text and labels, to inspection of assemblies
and with multiple views creating 3D models of an object. Therefore the task of designing
and developing a computer vision fault detection system, can be approached in different
ways. In a lot of situations, one would probably have a specified task, that the vision
system should solve.
In this case however, I will investigate possible solutions to a
more general approach. The system should be able to adapt to different production
lines, different types of production tasks etc. Therefore the system must be based on
some kind of recognition, finding differences between what it has been taught is correct
behaviour and what it ”sees” during video recording, at a running production line.
2.1
Camera Technologies
2.1.1
Camera Types
Different types of cameras are used in the industry for machine vision tasks. Take for
instance the well known point-and-shoot type of digital camera. This type of camera is
called an area scan camera, since it scans or captures an area at a time. Another type of
camera is the line scan camera, which differs from a normal area scan camera, by only
capturing a single line of pixels at a time (see figure 2.1). This kind of camera can be
used to capture an image of a very large object, such as a long sheet of fabric. The line
of pixels covers the width of the fabric and due to very fast and consecutive captures,
the fabric can be scanned line-by-line while it passes through the camera view.
The line scan cameras are great for certain types of tasks, but the area scan cameras
have a much wider range of application areas. Furthermore the line scan camera needs to
be setup and have a precise timing with the movement of the object. The narrow range
of applications for the line scan, together with the requirements to setup and tuning,
makes it unfavourable to our application, compared to the area scan cameras.
2.1.2
Physical Variables to Consider
Illumination is another variable that depends on the specific task at hand. Different types
of lighting is used in computer vision systems, such as brightfield frontlight, darkfield
frontlight, brightfield backlight etc. The type of illumination chosen depends on the task
==PAGE:26==
CONFIDENTIAL
6
2 Overview
Figure 2.1: Illustration of a line scan camera and an area scan camera. The left camera
is the line scan camera, which only scans a single line of pixels at a time. To scan an
object, it must be adjusted very precisely to the speed of the conveyor belt, moving
underneath it. A new scan should be performed every time the belt has moved one pixel
width in the cameras field of view. To the right is the more commonly known area scan
camera, capturing a surface at a time, in a grid of pixels instead of a line
to be solved. When inspecting a woven fabric for production flaws, the use of brightfield
backlight would be a good choice, since this will illuminate the fabric from the back side,
enabling the camera to clearly distinguish the woven fibres from one another.
The lens is yet another variable that can play a role in vision systems. The purpose
of a lens is to redirect the rays of light coming towards the camera, to hit the image
sensor instead of passing by. This enables the camera to capture more light, resulting
in a brighter image without adding new light sources. Furthermore lenses can enable
zooming, provide wider or narrower fields of view and in other ways manipulate the light,
resulting in a change of the image.
Since the goal of this thesis is to make a versatile fault detection system, that can apply
to as many situations as possible, the camera used is a full HD web camera from Logitech.
This camera is small and portable enough to be installed at existing production lines,
and several of them are already installed at Blackbird customers. Considering the fact
that there is no prior knowledge of the setups, at which the cameras may be mounted,
the decision has been made to not setup and utilise other light sources, than those
existing at the given production line.
2.2
Anomaly Detection
In the article Anomaly Detection: A Survey, the authors describe an anomaly as follows:
”At an abstract level, an anomaly is defined as a pattern that does not conform to expected
normal behaviour.”[1]. Based on this definition, the approach to building an anomaly
detection system is quite apparent. It would be to first define the regions in the data,
that belong to normal behaviour, and then declare anything appearing outside of these
==PAGE:27==
CONFIDENTIAL
2.3 Previous Work
7
regions as anomalies. There are, however, a couple of factors making this straightforward
approach more challenging than it seems:
• It can be difficult to define the normal behaviour, since you rarely have every
single possible situation, that will be regarded as normal, in your data set, making
the boundary between normal and anomalous less precise. Hence there may be
normal behaviour present, just outside the region defined as normal, making it
falsely being defined as abnormal.
• In many situations normal behaviour can change over time. This can result in
data regarded as normal, will appear as anomalous in the future, and vice versa.
• Depending on the specific domain, the allowed deviation from normal can vary
a lot. A given variation can be acceptable in some cases, but certainly not in
others. An example could be fluctuations in electricity prices being regarded as
normal, versus fluctuations in temperature of the human body, which would clearly
be anomalous. Thus applying the same technique developed for one domain to
another, may require significant changes.
• To be able to define normal or abnormal behaviour in the first place, one must
have access to labelled data, which can be a major issue in many cases.
• In some cases the data can contain noise that tends to be similar to the actual
anomalies, making it difficult to distinguish the two apart.
Due to these challenges, the anomaly detection problem, in its most general form, is not
an easy task to solve.
2.3
Previous Work
Prior to this thesis, work with general setups of industrial machine vision systems and
basic image analysis has been part of the research done in previous work at DTU. The
work includes, but is not limited to; fundamental properties of digital images, image
filtering and transformations, pattern and texture analysis, designing a stand alone image
analysis system, exhaustive scene analysis etc. Introductory courses in programming and
group projects involving programming in different languages, has been completed prior
to this thesis, giving a foundation of basic programming skills.
It is expected, that the general knowledge about digital image acquisition will be helpful
in the work during this thesis, but more specialised principles within the field e.g. texture
and scene analysis, will not bring much to the progress of developing the system, due to
the wide area of applications, the system should fit into.
==PAGE:28==
CONFIDENTIAL
8
2 Overview
2.4
Approach & Assumptions
Since the vision system should be as broadly applicable as possible, and ultimately be
able to recognise faulty behaviour, no matter what process it is tested on, the approach
was to start ”simple” and see how much information could be obtained from a process,
without using specialised algorithms that may not apply to all processes. To be able to
differ between correct and faulty behaviour, the system must be taught, what correct
behaviours look like. In the cases where the system will be used, there may not be
any video displaying errors, therefore the approach is to design the system, to use video
showing normal operation, and using this to find errors in other video sequences, based
on the inequalities occurring between the two.
2.4.1
Computer Vision Algorithms
Time and Cyclic Processes
Since most of the industrial processes, that could benefit from this system, are cyclic,
making some sort of model representing a normal cycle, was the first approach. This,
however, requires knowledge about the cycle’s start and end. This issue could not simply
be overcome by setting a cycle duration. Many processes investigated in this thesis stops
momentarily and irregularly, making the time for a full cycle to complete, vary a lot.
Furthermore, the duration set, or the marking of start and end of a cycle, would have to
be set by an operator, hence resulting in the system being more dependent on the skill
and precision of the operator.
When it is realised that the idea of creating a representation of a normal cycle requires
more work from the operator, and possibly will not fit all processes e.g. those with no
or very long cycles, a new approach has to be considered. Another way to design the
system is by ignoring the time line in a given process and put aside the idea of keeping
track of the cycle all together. This overcomes the issues regarding both marking of the
cycle start/end as well as the processes that have irregular stops.
Background Interference and Region of Interest
It is more likely than not, that the camera is capturing more than just the interesting
parts of the process, within its field of view (FOV). Therefore some way of ignoring
the background and other parts of the image, that are not of interest, should be used
to increase accuracy and robustness of the system. A simple yet very effective way of
doing this, is by selecting a region of interest (ROI). Since it would be fairly quick for
an operator to mark the area of interest in the FOV, it is assumed that a reasonable
ROI is marked in the camera view, before any further processing takes place. Not only
does this increase accuracy of the system, but it increases the processing speed, since a
smaller ROI contains less information (fewer pixels) to be processed.
==PAGE:29==
CONFIDENTIAL
2.5 Description of the Data
9
2.4.2
Fault Detection System
Defining an Error
To be able to recognise and mark when an error occurs in a video sequence, first of all
the system must have a definition of what is regarded an error. The definition cannot be
made beforehand, since the system has no chance of knowing what it will be monitoring.
Instead the definition of an error will be based on a threshold, calculated from videos
displaying correct operation of the process of interest. In this way the system gets an
estimate of the values and variations, that typically occur in the data at hand, and can
base the threshold on this information. The trigger of an alarm indicating that an error
has occurred, should happen when the difference between what the camera sees, and
what it expects to see, rises above the calculated threshold.
The system will be tested on a local PC, hence there is a limitation in the processing
power available. In reality the system would be using cloud computing, which is available
to, and currently being used by, Blackbird ApS. Optimising the processing time of the
system will therefore not be a major focus in this thesis, since the resulting times will
be far slower than the performance of the cloud computing. The difference in speed of
the tests, however, will be examined to see what parameters are influencing the time it
takes to process a given length of video.
Use Cases in the Industry
Several use cases were proposed at the beginning of the project. An example is packaging
of small boxes pushed into larger boxes for later transportation. Here the small boxes
may be placed sideways, resulting in faulty packaging, some may even be missing or
fall off the conveyor belt during packaging. Another example is a pick and place task
performed by a robotic arm. Again the objects being moved in the process may be
misplaced, be missing, be a wrong colour etc. These cases should be tested along with
other examples, when the vision system has reached a maturity that allows it to run the
fault detection.
2.5
Description of the Data
In collaboration with Blackbird ApS, three use cases were chosen and the data for them
was collected. The choices were based on the amount of available data for each case,
and the variation in the type of faults found in the data. The use cases are:
• Packaging of small boxes from a conveyor belt.
• Surveillance of another conveyor belt, transporting coloured bricks.
• A robotic arm with a gripper, performing a pick & place task with small blocks.
==PAGE:30==
CONFIDENTIAL
10
2 Overview
The data contains both very low resolution video and some higher resolution videos.
Both the packaging case and the robotic pick & place, has a higher resolution, than
the video of the conveyor belt.
In the packaging videos, there are footage showing
displacement of the boxes - both very large displacements and rather small.
Other
videos show missing boxes, or boxes being squeezed, when attempted to be packed.
In the conveyor belt videos small errors occur, like lack of alignment of the bricks or
bricks that have switched places. The errors are visible in approximately 1.5 seconds,
before they move out of the cameras field of view.
In the pick & place videos there also exists misalignment, missing objects and small,
miscoloured pads on the objects, that only appear briefly in the camera FOV.
==PAGE:31==
CONFIDENTIAL
CHAPTER 3
Computer Vision Algorithms
There are three main categories of anomaly detection; supervised anomaly detection,
semi-supervised anomaly detection and unsupervised anomaly detection.
Supervised anomaly detection techniques are the ones that has the most require-
ments in regards to the data used. It assumes that the available data contains all the
classes i.e. normal data and all the types of anomalous behaviour to expect in the given
case. To make use of the data, it needs to be labelled with the correct classes. Then
new and previously unseen data can be estimated to belong to one of the defined classes,
and hereby be classified as either normal or one of the anomalous behaviours.
Semi-supervised anomaly detection is similar to the supervised category in terms
of need for labelled data. As the name suggests there is not labelled data available for
all the classes, but rather for the normal behaviour only. The ability to predict the class
of a given behaviour, with only a single class of labelled data as reference, makes this
technique more widely applicable.[1]
The unsupervised anomaly detection does not require any training data, making
it the most widely applicable of the three. It only works under the assumption that
instances of normal behaviour are far more frequent than anomalies.
In this thesis the focus will be on developing a system within the category of semi-
supervised anomaly detection algorithms. This is due to Blackbird ApS’s description
of the project, which allows the customer to indicate parts of the video data as being
normal, and feed this video into the program for it to base its future decisions on. The
system will therefore not be based on supervised anomaly detection, and the reason is
that it would require the customer to manually detect, mark and categorise each error
that could occur at the given production line. Not only will this demand more work done
by the customer, but in some cases it is not even a possibility. Since the production line
may already be highly optimised and has its downtime reduced to a minimum, faults
on a given line may only occur in very rare cases, making it a difficult or sometimes
impossible task to find video footage, showing the faulty behaviour. Therefore a semi-
supervised approach is taken, utilising the knowledge of what normal behaviour looks
like, which can be easily obtained by the customer, by choosing a video sequence where
the production is running as planned. As with many other semi-supervised techniques,
this could be later adapted to become an unsupervised system, with the assumption
==PAGE:32==
CONFIDENTIAL
12
3 Computer Vision Algorithms
that most data will be within the boundaries of the normal classification. It will then
simply use some random data to classify what normal behaviour is, expecting there to
be none, or very little, abnormal behaviour present.
The program will be written in Python and utilise OpenCV libraries (Open Source Com-
puter Vision Library) for reading the video files as well as a few of the functions related
to image processing.
3.1
Video Stream Characteristics
A video clip consists of several frames being displayed at a certain rate, known as the
frame rate. In this case the videos will be recorded at 30 frames per second (FPS),
hence normal playback would require displaying 30 frames every second. Every frame is
a single still image, consisting of three u by v grids of pixels, representing the red, green
and blue (RGB) colour channels respectively of the image (figure 3.1). Each pixel has
a minimum value of 0 and a maximum value of 255, describing how bright the pixel is,
with 255 being the brightest possible value. The 256 possible values for each pixel, is a
result of the colour depth. The colour depth is the number of bits used to represent a
single pixel in each of the three colour channels. In this case the videos have the default
8 bits colour depth (28 = 256) i.e. one byte.
The u by v pixel grid determines the resolution of the video. Since the ROI that the
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the three colour channels (red, green and blue), as separate
dimensions in a u × v × 3 matrix. Each channel contains a value for the given colour,
for every pixel in the image. Combined, the three channels form an RGB colour image.
==PAGE:33==
CONFIDENTIAL
3.2 Motion Vectors
13
customer chooses, directly indicates what the u and v values will be, the program must
be able to handle different video resolutions and aspect ratios (being the ratio between
u and v).
To detect an unusual event happening in a video frame, the pixel values of the frame
are considered. These values are the data describing what the camera sees, and by com-
paring them to pixel values in frames that are labelled as normal, the differences can
be identified. If the differences are of considerable size, the frame will be defined as an
outlier, and the video therefore contains an anomaly at the point where the specified
frame appears. The procedure used in this thesis will be described in section 3.4.
3.2
Motion Vectors
A method for detecting movement in a video was one of the first approaches considered
for doing fault detection. Making some sort of motion estimation would normally be
required, but the idea was that this information was available already in the situations,
where the system would be used. This is because the video files that should be used for
both defining normal behaviour and those being tested afterwards, are stored as com-
pressed video files with the H264 CODEC (enCOder/DECoder). With this CODEC
the videos are stored with motion vectors, indicating how blocks of pixels (called mac-
roblocks) moves between each frame[4] (see figure 3.2). In this way the blocks of pixels
that stay the same between two frames (i.e. have a motion vector of zero), do not need
to be updated, and other blocks have a predicted position in the next frame, given by
the motion vector. This would make it a redundant task to calculate motion estimations
in the videos, since they are already available. The problem that was soon realised, is
that the motion vectors only give information about motion of the pixel blocks in the
video. Therefore the system needed some other detection algorithm on top of the motion
vectors, to detect for instance miscoloured objects, since these could be moving correctly
through the scene and therefore go undetected if only motion was considered.
3.3
Cyclic Process Representation
When investigating the typical processes the vision system should be used at, the idea
of developing a system fitted to cyclic processes appeared. Many of the use cases in the
industry is repetitive tasks, performed by some sort of automated process e.g. assemblies,
packaging of products etc. The idea was to produce a representation or a model of the
average normal cycle, and then compare future video with this model.
If the video
suddenly deviates more from the model, than a given threshold, it is labelled as an
outlier.
To be able to compare the video to the model, it is needed to identify what part of
the process cycle, the video is displaying. An attempt of this was to perform a sliding
==PAGE:34==
CONFIDENTIAL
14
3 Computer Vision Algorithms
(a) Robot grabbing a block.
(b) Robot and block moving to the right.
Figure 3.2: Motion vectors displayed in two different frames. To the left (3.2a) a robotic
arm is moving down to grab a block. On the right (3.2b) the block has been grabbed
and it is moving out of the field of view towards the right. Small arrows indicate the
motion vectors of each macroblock.
window correlation of a sequence of frames, over the frames of a normal cycle, and find
out where in the process cycle the best match occurred. This was done both with RGB
colour video and with greyscale video, to see if using the colour information of the video
was necessary to include in the process tracking (see figure 3.3).
There are, however, some issues related to this approach. First of all, many processes like
packaging or similar automated tasks in a production line, are dependent on other parts
in the process. This could be the flow of products to be packed, which are transported
on a conveyor belt, from another part of the production line. Sometimes delays occur in
these places, directly impacting the packaging process, by not providing the products to
be packed. This results in the packaging process coming to a halt. It would seem like an
error, while it is not, but in fact a quite common event at many production lines. These
stops in the process, which can be both frequent and very irregular, brings disadvantages
to the approach of following a cyclic model of normal behaviour. Even when the start
of a cyclic process has been found, the entire process length, and when it repeats itself,
cannot be anticipated to be calculated accurately, due to the issues mentioned above.
In other processes there may not even be a cycle, or more correctly; the cycle may be
very long or very short. An example could be bottles passing by on a conveyor belt at
high speed. The cycle here could be a bottle entering the camera FOV in one side of
the frame and leaving it at the other side. A bottle may be closely followed by one or
several other bottles, or maybe none, making the definition of a cycle a bit vague. Since
==PAGE:35==
CONFIDENTIAL
3.4 Frame Matching
15
the system should be adaptable to as wide a range of use cases as possible, the cyclic
process representation approach was dismissed and a new was considered.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Frame number in Video Input
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Difference between Training and Test set
Sliding Window Correlation with RGB channels and Greyscale
Red channel
Green channel
Blue channel
Greyscale
Figure 3.3: Sliding window correlation of a sequence of frames and a video representing
two full cycles of a process. It is clear to see where the frame sequence matches the
cycle the best, by finding the position where the difference between the two, reaches
its minimum value (at approximately 250 and 700). The sliding window is performed
both with a colour channel video and a greyscale video. No noticeable difference in
performance between colour and greyscale is seen, when trying to detect the position of
the minimum difference.
3.4
Frame Matching
To find out if a sequence of frames belong to the category of correct behaviour or if it
should be highlighted as an anomaly, we must compare them to a representation of cor-
rect behaviour. Since the system must detect anomalies both in colour, object placement
etc. the comparison must use the pixel values in the video frames to decide the category
of the current frame or sequence of frames. Calculating differences between frames by
subtracting their pixel values, will give a representation that can be plotted and visually
show the deviation between the frames of interest. In this fashion it is possible to make
a graph displaying how well a sequence of frames (a video clip) matches another set of
frames.
To calculate how much a video sequence deviates from normal behaviour, a sequence (or
multiple) must be given to represent the normal behaviour, then the new video sequence
will be matched against this representation, and the differences calculated, should be
==PAGE:36==
CONFIDENTIAL
16
3 Computer Vision Algorithms
within an acceptable threshold, in order to be categorised as error free.
Let us look at an example; a three minute video clip, captured by a camera at the end
of a conveyor belt, is showing correct packaging of boxes. The boxes are transported
on a conveyor belt four at a time. They enter the camera’s FOV from the right hand
side and stop when they are positioned directly in front of a larger sized box next to
the conveyor belt. A mechanical arm pushes the four boxes into the larger box, then
repositions itself, ready for the next four boxes to arrive on the conveyor belt. The
process continues until the larger box is full and replaced by a new, empty large box,
and the process repeats itself. Now the system has three minutes worth of frames, that
all fall into the category of normal behaviour. The next step is to test some new and
unknown footage from the same camera, and compare it to the three minutes obtained
earlier. Starting with the first frame in the new video footage, the mean difference be-
tween that frame and all frames in the three minute video is calculated, and the frame
with the least mean difference is marked as the best match for the first frame. This
procedure is then repeated for the remaining frames of the new video, until all of its
frames have a best matching frame in the three minute video. In this way, all the frames
in a video we want to check for faulty behaviour, gets a score representing the mini-
mum error found, when comparing them with the normal behaviour video. The error is
calculated, by first finding the pixel differences for all three colour channels separately as
Ru,v = |r1u,v −r2u,v|
Gu,v = |g1u,v −g2u,v|
Bu,v = |b1u,v −b2u,v|
(3.1)
Where r1, g1 and b1 are the red, green and blue pixels in the normal video, r2, g2 and
b2 are the red, green and blue pixels in the test video and R, G and B are the resulting
absolute differences for each pixel in the three colour channels. The result of subtracting
two very similar frames in this way, is illustrated in figure 3.4b, where a frame displaying
normal production is subtracted from another frame displaying the same place in the
process, but at another time.
Just by doing this subtraction of frames, errors that are large enough, will immediately
appear as coloured regions in the image created from the subtracted frames. An example
of this is the same process as figure 3.4, but where a larger brick is underneath one of
the normal bricks. The frame and the resulting image after the subtraction, can be seen
in figure 3.5.
This difference in pixel values, between the subtracted frame images (figure 3.4b and
3.5b), is the key feature that the system is supposed to base its decisions on. To get a
representation of the size of the error in a given frame, a score for the frame as a whole
is made as follows: Let u be the image width in pixels, v the image height in pixels and
==PAGE:37==
CONFIDENTIAL
3.4 Frame Matching
17
(a) Frame displaying normal behaviour in the production.
Small bricks are being moved
through the field of view.
(b) Subtracting the best matching frame from the frame in figure 3.4a results in thin lines
surrounding the bricks. These lines are the result of the differences between the subtracted
frames.
Figure 3.4: Visualisation of the frame subtraction, when the frame is displaying normal
behaviour of the production line. Figure 3.4a shows the actual frame and figure 3.4b
shows the subtraction of that frame from the best matching frame.
(a) Frame displaying a fault in the production. A blue brick is placed underneath a yellow
brick.
(b) Subtracting the best matching frame from the frame in figure 3.5a gives a clear visual
indication of the error in the form of the large red areas surrounding the third brick.
Figure 3.5: Visualisation of the frame subtraction, when an error has occurred at the
production line. Figure 3.5a shows the actual frame with the error and figure 3.5b shows
the subtraction of that frame from the best matching frame.
==PAGE:38==
CONFIDENTIAL
18
3 Computer Vision Algorithms
n be the total number of pixels in the frame: n = u · v. Then we calculate the frame
difference as the mean of the absolute values, of all pixels in the frame’s three colour
channels
E = 1
3n
(
n
∑
i=1
(Ri + Gi + Bi)
)
(3.2)
Where E is the error, calculated as the average pixel absolute difference.
Thus the best frame match to a given frame, is the normal frame that results in the
lowest frame difference, when all three colour channels are accounted for. After finding
the best frame match to all frames in the test video, the error throughout the video can
be visualised as seen in figure 3.6
0
200
400
600
800
Frame Number in Test Video
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
Difference from Training Video
Error from best Frame Match
Error
Figure 3.6: Shown here is the error for every frame in a test video of half a minute. The
error is the difference between the test frame and its best match and it can be seen how
the error sometimes make significant spikes, when just a single bad frame match occur.
3.5
Phase Correlation
In many cases the direct frame to frame matching will be sufficient. There are, however,
situations where the alignment of the objects, in the FOV, is slightly off between two
frames. This could be due to the camera being moved or other events resulting in a
small change of the FOV. The resulting difference between the tested frames and the
normal frames will therefore be greater, than it should actually be. There will occur a
significant difference between pixels along all edges of objects, that have an angle differ-
ent from the direction that the two frames are displaced (see figure 3.4).
==PAGE:39==
CONFIDENTIAL
3.5 Phase Correlation
19
It is possible to correct the displacement between the frames and hereby avoid the incor-
rect errors produced along the object edges. To do so, one frame will be geometrically
translated to fit the other frame. To estimate the relative translative offset between the
two frames, the phase correlation method will be used. It is calculated by fast Fourier
transforms for detecting the translational shift in the frequency domain. It computes
a phase difference map that ideally contains a single peak. The location of the peak is
proportional to the relative translation between the two images.[3]
Considering two identical images im1 and im2, with im2 being shifted by [∆u, ∆v] rela-
tive to im1
im2(u, v) = im1(u −∆u, v −∆v)
(3.3)
To calculate the phase correlation, the OpenCV function phaseCorrelate is used. It
calculates the cross-power spectrum of two supplied source arrays (the two frames to
phase correlate). The function performs the following calculations:
• Applies the Hanning function[7] to each image, to remove possible edge effects.
• It then computes the forward Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) of each of the
source arrays.
IM1 = F{im1}
(3.4)
IM2 = F{im2}
(3.5)
Where F is the forward DFT.
• Next it computes the cross-power spectrum of each frequency domain array.
P = IM1 ◦IM∗
2
|IM1 ◦IM∗
2|
(3.6)
Where ◦is the Hadamard product (entry-wise product, see appendix A.1).
• The cross-correlation is then converted back into the time domain via the inverse
DFT.
p = F−1{P}
(3.7)
==PAGE:40==
CONFIDENTIAL
20
3 Computer Vision Algorithms
• Finally it computes the peak location in p, which is done with a weighted centroid
around the peak.
(∆u, ∆v) = C{arg max{p}}
(3.8)
Where C is a 5x5 weighted centroid around the peak, to enable sub-pixel accuracy.
The function returns the detected phase shift between the two frames, as a translation
∆u in the u direction and a translation ∆v in the v direction.
With this information the two frames can be aligned with a simple translation. Here
the OpenCV function warpAffine, is used. It takes the frame as input along with the
transformation matrix M. Let imin be the input image and imout be the output image,
then we have
imout(u, v) = imin(M11u + M12v + M13, M21u + M22v + M23)
(3.9)
where the transformation matrix M is
M =

1
0
tu
0
1
tv


(3.10)
with tu = ∆u and tv = ∆v being the translation in u and v direction respectively,
as obtained from the phase correlation. When the phase correlation has predicted the
geometric translation, and the frames are adjusted accordingly, the alignment of the two
frames should result in a better matching of the frames. The subtraction of two frames
before and after the translation, can be seen in figure 3.7, where a clear improvement is
seen, producing a much smaller error.
3.6
Summary
In this chapter different approaches to anomaly detection has been presented. An intro-
duction to properties of digital video and encoding is given, and the method that will
be used to determine, if parts of a video is normal or abnormal, has been introduced.
The use of phase correlation to improve the results, has been explained, and the results
have been visualised.
==PAGE:41==
CONFIDENTIAL
3.6 Summary
21
(a) A matching frame pair is subtracted from each other. A clear outline of the bricks and the
conveyor belt is visible, due to a geometric translation between the two frames, making the
subtraction result in higher values, where there is change in colour in the frames.
(b) The same frame match as in figure 3.7a, but now subtracted after a phase correlation
has predicted the geometric translation and the frames are adjusted accordingly. Hardly any
differences between the two frames are now visible.
Figure 3.7: Difference between frame subtraction before and after phase correlation and
geometric translation has been performed.
==PAGE:42==
CONFIDENTIAL
22
==PAGE:43==
CONFIDENTIAL
CHAPTER 4
Fault Detection System
The system should be able to detect anomalies in a video stream, when comparing it
to a video sequence that displays correct behaviour. As described in section 3.4 the
comparison is performed on pixel level, where individual pixel values are compared with
other pixels in the same position, but from different frames. The reason for this pixel to
pixel comparison is, that if the position of the pixels was neglected and only the values
was taken into consideration, some types of faults would be undetectable. An example
could be packaging of jars with coloured lids. Imagine a situation where the camera is
positioned directly above the conveyor belt, facing down such that belt is perpendicular
to the cameras principal axis. Now several jars are transported into the field of view at
the same time, and one half of the jars has red lids while the other half has blue lids. If a
row suddenly has a red and blue lid that have changed places, it would pass undetected
if pixel position is not considered. Since there would be the same total amount of red
and blue pixels in the described case, and the frame therefore has the same total pixel
value, the fault would only be detected if pixels are compared with pixels of the same
position, in other frames.
4.1
Enveloping the Data
The raw absolute differences between best matching frames as seen in figure 3.6, is the
data used to detect errors in a video. To avoid triggering a false fault detection based
on a single frame match, the first thing done with the raw values, is computing a lower
envelope to represent the minimum absolute error. This will help prevent short spikes
in the error value, from affecting the error detection and falsely result in detection of an
error, that actually does not occur.
4.1.1
Lower Envelope Function
To calculate the lower envelope, the local minima are first detected and their locations
are saved. Then a suitable model is fitted to the minima found with the interp1d class
from SciPy. The class is used to do a cubic spline interpolation of the data points, to
produce the curve that result in the lower envelope.
After performing the interpolation, the data has become a much smoother curve in the
==PAGE:44==
CONFIDENTIAL
24
4 Fault Detection System
form of the lower envelope of the calculated absolute values, as seen in figure 4.1.
0
200
400
600
800
Frame Number in Test Video
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
Difference from Training Video
Error from best Frame Match
Error
Lower Envelope
Figure 4.1: Displayed is the frame matching error from figure 3.6, together with the
calculated lower envelope. The envelope is smoother than the original signal, but still
makes a good representation of the actual frame match, just without the sudden spikes
from a very few bad frame matches.
The reason for the enveloping of the data is to increase the robustness of the system.
Sudden spikes in the error calculated, can occur for several reasons. It could be due to a
phase correlation, introduced in section 3.5, that did not result in as good a prediction,
as the frames preceding and following it. Different ways to prevent spikes to be de-
tected as errors have been considered, for instance checking how long the interval where
consecutive values have been above a given threshold is, but this had to be based on
yet another threshold of the minimum interval length. The enveloping gave consistent
results and was therefore chosen for the further development.
4.2
Statistical Approach
The procedure to do the actual fault detection in this system, is a statistical approach,
where a constant k will be calculated from a threshold, which is based on the normal
data. This constant will then be used with new data, calculating a new threshold based
on the data combined with the constant found earlier. In this way the threshold will
become more dynamic, than just setting one fixed value, that a given frame match error
cannot exceed, before being categorised as a fault.
==PAGE:45==
CONFIDENTIAL
4.2 Statistical Approach
25
4.2.1
Median Absolute Deviation
The method used to calculate a threshold is the Median Absolute Deviation (MAD). It is
a robust statistic, meaning that it is very resistant to outliers in the data.[6] Opposing to
a robust statistic are the non-robust statistics, such as sample standard deviation, which
can be greatly influenced by outliers. The result is that an arbitrarily large standard
deviation can occur, simply by increasing a single observation. In a robust statistic, such
as the MAD, the same behaviour will not be possible.
The MAD is used to quantify the statistical dispersion in a set of numerical data. This
will give a better understanding of the data at hand and the threshold will therefore be
based on this. MAD is defined as the median of the absolute deviations from the median
of the data.[6]
Let X1, X2, ..., Xn be a univariate data set, then the MAD is calculated as
MAD = median
i
{|Xi −median
j
(Xj)|}
(4.1)
Using the enveloped data from before, we can calculate the median and the MAD, which
can be seen in figure 4.2.
0
200
400
600
800
Frame Number in Test Video
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
Difference from Training Video
MAD of the Frame Match Error
Error
Lower Envelope
Median of Envelope
Median Absolute Deviation
Figure 4.2: The error and its lower envelope from figure 4.1 are shown together with the
calculated median of the envelope and the MAD from that median.
Since the median is used, and not say the mean, the statistic becomes very resistant
to the outliers, that may be present in the data. As seen in equation 4.1, the MAD is
calculated by finding the absolute difference between all data points and the median.
Then the median of these absolute differences is calculated. It is now a measure of the
dispersion of the data. To use the MAD as a consistent estimator of the parameter of
interest, a constant scale factor k is needed. If the data has a Gaussian distribution and
the parameter of interest is the standard deviation σ, it is needed to set k = 1.4826.[5]
==PAGE:46==
CONFIDENTIAL
26
4 Fault Detection System
MAD · k = σ
when
k = 1.4826
(4.2)
In the case of the fault detection system, we want to find a measure of the largest ac-
ceptable value among the frame matching errors, hence the constant k should be fitted
to match the highest expected value. We want to find it based on the difference between
the highest value and the median. Therefore we find a k that, when multiplied with
MAD, gives the difference between the maximum accepted error and the data’s median.
MAD · k = Xmax −median
↔
k = (Xmax −median)
MAD
(4.3)
Where Xmax is the maximum value reached by the frame matching. Now that k has
been calculated, the threshold for a new sequence of frame matches can be calculated
from this value to see, if the dispersion is greater than the one for the data labelled as
normal. This new sequence must of course be of the same type of data, as the data used
to calculate the first MAD and k, i.e. the video sequences for normal behaviour and the
sequence to be tested must be from the same camera (same FOV) and show the same
process.
To test the new video sequence, the frame matching algorithm will be run on the data
and a new MAD will be calculated. Now the scale factor k from the normal data, will
be used to set the threshold TH with the new MAD
TH = k · MADnew
(4.4)
Now that the threshold has been calculated, values from the new sequence being larger
than this, are labelled as outliers and therefore considered as faults. The threshold is
added to the previous plot, and the result can be seen in figure 4.3.
4.2.2
Peak Analysis
An attempt to assist the detection of faults is performed by calculating the peak promi-
nences of the lower envelope of the frame matching error, and combine it with the MAD
analysis. The peak prominence, or topographic prominence, is the height difference be-
tween the top of a peak and the lowest contour line not shared with a higher peak as
illustrated in figure 4.4.
==PAGE:47==
CONFIDENTIAL
4.2 Statistical Approach
27
0
200
400
600
800
Frame Number in Test Video
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
Difference from Training Video
MAD of the Frame Match Error
Error
Lower Envelope
Median of Envelope
Median Absolute Deviation
Threshold
Figure 4.3: The error, lower envelope, median and MAD from figure 4.2 are shown
together with the calculated threshold. The threshold is based on the envelope, which
is the reason why the original error data sometimes passes the threshold.
0
200
400
600
800
Frame Number in Test Video
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Difference from Training Video
MAD of the Frame Match Error
Error
Lower Envelope
Prominences
Figure 4.4: The error and lower envelope is showed together with the calculated topo-
graphic peak prominences. The peak prominences are based on the envelope.
It is calculated using the function peak_prominences from the SciPy library.
The
procedure is as follows
• Extend a horizontal line from the current peak to the left and right until the line
either reaches the window border or intersects the signal again at the slope of a
higher peak. An intersection with a peak of the same height is ignored.
• On each side find the minimal signal value within the interval defined above. These
points are the peak’s bases.
• The higher one of the two bases marks the peak’s lowest contour line. The promi-
nence can then be calculated as the vertical difference between the peaks height
itself and its lowest contour line. [2]
==PAGE:48==
CONFIDENTIAL
28
4 Fault Detection System
The prominences can be used to compare the peaks with each other. The peak promi-
nences found in the new data being tested, are compared with the maximum prominence
of the normal data. The prominence analysis should support the MAD threshold in error
detection, by detecting faults that increase over time. The thresholding should be able
to detect sudden changes in the error value, but if the error gradually increase over time,
the MAD detection method may not be able to identify the error. This could occur if
the data set tested is small enough, that the gradually increasing error is largely covering
the new data set. The result is that the MAD will be based on data primarily displaying
faulty behaviour and the threshold might be placed above the errors, making them pass
undetected. Here the peak prominences could detect the error, since the highest peak of
the increasing error, would have a prominence larger than the ones found in the normal
data.
4.3
Program Overview
To give an understanding of the process of detecting faults from start to end, a walk-
through of the program written, will be given. The program is written in Python and
as mentioned, uses functions from both OpenCV libraries and SciPy libraries, which are
optimised for the purposes of working with image data and arrays. The program runs
locally on a single computer, resulting in strict limitations to the available computation
power, and is not comparable to the performance of cloud computing, as the program
is intended to run on, hence the actual processing speed is not of great interest in the
tests.
The program starts by taking the name of the ”training” data, being a video showing
normal behaviour, as well as the name of a normal video sequence. These two videos
are used as the base for the thresholding and prominence calculations, making them
important for the resulting fault detection. Furthermore, it is specified what number
of pixel rows/columns, the phase correlation is allowed to move a frame, during frame
matching. To ensure that the size of the frame matches does not change throughout a
test, all frame matches will have the specified amount of pixels removed from the outer
edges, regardless of the result of the phase correlation.
The functions written in the program are the following:
4.3.1
frameMatchError
• With the name of the training data, normal data and specified edge cut-off, the
frameMatchError function start off by using the OpenCV’s VideoCapture class
to capture the two video files with the names specified earlier. The frame height
and width of the two videos are checked, to ensure that they are of identical shape.
If they are not, an error message will be displayed and the program will exit.
• Next a video stream thread will be started, to enable buffering of the frames. This
is done to save time when each frame is to be used later, since they will be loaded
==PAGE:49==
CONFIDENTIAL
4.3 Program Overview
29
and ready for processing, instead of only being read from the video file, when they
are needed for calculations. The function then starts to loop through all frames in
the normal video, computing the absolute difference between that frame and all
frames in the training data set.
• The training frame with the lowest absolute difference is then used to do a phase
correlation with. This is done with the OpenCV phaseCorrelate function as de-
scribed in equations 3.4-3.8. Due to restrictions regarding the function parameters,
the frames are converted to greyscale before performing the phase correlation.
• The phase correlation is checked to see, if the correlation is within the limitations
of the edge cut-off, or if the frames would have to be translated more than allowed
by the defined cut-off. If the phase correlation is within the limits, the transfor-
mation matrix M is defined as in equation 3.10, and one frame (again in colour)
is translated with the OpenCV function warpAffine, before the final absolute dif-
ference between the two aligned frames, is calculated and saved as the minimum
error for the given normal frame.
This procedure is looped until all frames in the normal video has been assigned a
minimum error from their best frame match.
• When all frames in the normal video has been tested against the training data
set, the video captures are released and the video stream thread stopped. An
array of minimum errors (one error for each normal frame) is returned from the
frameMatchError function.
4.3.2
lowerEnvelope
• With the minimum errors found and returned from the frameMatchError function,
the lower envelope can be calculated. The function lowerEnvelope detects all local
minima and mark their location.
• Then interp1d from SciPy is used, to perform a cubic spline interpolation of the
minima found.
• The data is returned as a new array containing the envelope data.
4.3.3
calcKeyValues
• Now that the frame matching has been performed and the lower envelope has been
saved as a new array, the key values are calculated in the calcKeyValues function.
calcKeyValues only takes one argument; the data array containing the minimum
errors.
The first thing done in the function, is to call the already mentioned
lowerEnvelope function, that returns the array containing the envelope data.
==PAGE:50==
CONFIDENTIAL
30
4 Fault Detection System
• With this array calcKeyValues computes the median, finds all peaks, peak indices,
peak prominences and the maximum value of the envelope. The peak calculations
are done with the find_peaks function from SciPy. It returns the positions of the
peaks and a dictionary containing properties of the peaks, where the peak_heights
and peak_prominences are used.
• The calcKeyValues function returns the envelope, its median and max value, peak
indices and peak prominences.
4.3.4
calcK
• The function calcK is calculating the constant scale factor k, as described in equa-
tion 4.3, by using the envelope data, hence Xmax is the maximum value of the
envelope, not the raw frame differences.
• The function returns k, to be used for later checking new data for correct or faulty
behaviour.
When the above steps have been done for a set of normal data, the key values used for
fault detection has been calculated for that specific process. Now a set of unknown video
data, from the same process, can be checked for faults. The procedure is the same as
the steps above, apart from the calculation of the scale factor k, which is omitted, since
it should be based on the data set of normal behaviour.
Lastly the data and values calculated are plotted using matplotlib.pyplot. This is
where the new data set is displayed, together with its calculated threshold, showing
if there is any time in the video sequence, where the error rises to a level above the
threshold. In case that does happen, it is concluded that an anomaly of some sort has
happened at that instance in time.
4.4
Test Cases and Experiments
Since the camera is provided by Blackbird ApS, and already installed at customers, the
choice was to use that camera model. It is an HD web camera, and it has been evaluated
that any normal area scan camera could be used in the situation, since no knowledge
of potential work environments are available. That being said, it would be preferable if
the camera has a high sensitivity to light, since illumination can vary a lot and external
light sources most likely cannot be controlled.
Three different test cases have been chosen as the base of the experiments, when the
system should be tested.
The first case is monitoring the packaging of small boxes in a larger box, at the end of
a conveyor belt (figure 4.5). Four small boxes are transported side by side on a conveyor
belt, stops in front of the larger box and are pushed into this. The larger box is lowered
==PAGE:51==
CONFIDENTIAL
4.4 Test Cases and Experiments
31
and another layer of four small boxes are pushed on top of the first. This cycle is done
three times, and when the third layer of small boxes are in the larger box, they are
moved to a second conveyor belt and a new large box takes its place. This case is at an
existing customer. Errors that occur in this case are:
1. A small box getting displaced in front of the larger box and not pushed into it
with the first layer. The following two layers of small boxes are getting misplaced,
since the extra small box takes up space in layer two.
2. A single layer of boxes is pushed into the larger box, but there are only two small
boxes instead of four.
3. A layer already in the larger box is missing one small box, therefore the next and
final layer will be ”falling” wrongly into the larger box.
4. Four small boxes are all displaced on the conveyor belt. Packaging fails and they
are discarded, but end up being in the way for the next layer anyways, and the
process stops.
Figure 4.5: Normal frame from the packaging line video. The image shows the ROI used
to perform the fault detection.
The second case is surveillance of a small conveyor belt, where small LEGO bricks
are being transported through the field of view (figure 4.6). They appear in a certain
order of colours, such that first a sequence of bricks is one colour, then a sequence of a
different colour appears and so forth, until the cycle repeats itself. This case is a setup at
Blackbird ApS, and used for demonstration purposes to illustrate a typical production
line. Errors occurring in this case is:
1. Two different bricks are rotated in place. One with a 45◦angle and another with
just a 20◦angle.
==PAGE:52==
CONFIDENTIAL
32
4 Fault Detection System
2. In the sequence of dark green coloured bricks, one brick is replaced with a dark
blue brick of same size and shape.
3. The last brick in a sequence of green is swapped with the first brick in the orange
sequence, that follows directly after.
4. One brick is replaced by a LEGO figurine.
Figure 4.6: Normal frame from the conveyor belt video. The image shows the ROI used
to perform the fault detection.
The third case is surveillance of a robotic arm doing a pick and place task (figure 4.7).
Three blocks are picked one at a time (outside the FOV) and placed within the FOV.
Every time a new block is picked, the robotic arm briefly reveals the end of the block to
the camera, and then places the block with its side facing the camera. After all three
blocks have been presented and placed, they are picked one at a time and placed outside
the FOV. This cycle continues with three new blocks. Under normal circumstances, all
blocks are of more or less same size, shape and colour, but not necessary truly identical.
The case is a setup at Blackbird ApS, to demonstrate automated pick and place processes
with a robotic arm. Errors that occur in this case is:
1. A small blue brick is attached to one of the three blocks (the brick is
1
18 the size
of the block).
2. One of three blocks is grabbed wrongly by the robotic arm and the block ends up
misplaced a bit to one side of the intended position.
3. One block is missing in the cycle.
4. Two blocks have a miscoloured end (the end briefly revealed to the camera). One
has its entire end coloured differently. The other has approximately half of the
end miscoloured.
4.4.1
Procedure for Testing
A test procedure has been made, such that all three cases are tested in the same fash-
ion, making the comparison between the results easier. Each case has a training video
sequence, showing three minutes of normal behaviour. A 30 second video of normal be-
haviour is then matched against the training video, and used to get the lower envelope
and key values, representing normal behaviour of the given production line. When this
==PAGE:53==
CONFIDENTIAL
4.4 Test Cases and Experiments
33
Figure 4.7: Normal frame from the robot pick& place video. The image shows the ROI
used to perform the fault detection.
representation is established, different videos containing faulty behaviour are tested to
see, if the system can detect the errors.
Each of the three test cases has four different videos of faulty behaviour. Each of these
show a different type of error. All error videos are 30 seconds long, the same length as
the normal video tested.
For each type of error in a case, a matching of the error video and the full three minutes
of training video is performed. This result is the baseline for the given case and used as a
reference when comparing variations of the tests. The videos have three parameters that
are changed throughout the testing; length of training video, resolution of the videos
and the frame rate used in the test video. All cases are tested as follows:
• Tested with three, two and one minute of training video, where three minutes is
the baseline.
• Tested with a resolution of 1,
1
4 and 1
8 of the original resolution, all with three
minutes of training video.
• Tested with a test video frame rate of 30 FPS, 15 FPS and 7 FPS. Again with
three minutes of training video.
==PAGE:54==
CONFIDENTIAL
34
4 Fault Detection System
In this way the first test, in each of these scenarios, is the same: A full resolution video,
at the native frame rate of 30 FPS and with the maximum length of training video made
available in this test, being three minutes.
With the described testing procedure, it should be possible to get an estimate of the
necessary frame rate, resolution and amount of training video, for the system to detect
different types and ”sizes” of errors. Furthermore each test has its run-time recorded,
revealing the differences in computation time, for the different cases and parameter
variations.
4.5
Summary
In this chapter the necessary processing of the data, to perform the fault detection,
is described. The method for enveloping the data, to avoid incorrect spikes, and the
statistical calculations, for determining the limit of acceptable deviation, is presented.
Furthermore an overview of the written program is given, along with a thorough expla-
nation of the different test cases, as well as the test procedures.
==PAGE:55==
CONFIDENTIAL
CHAPTER 5
Results
To present the results in a meaningful way, both figures and tables with relevant data
will be presented. Each test result has been plotted to reveal details about the behaviour
of the system and the predictions made in the specific case. This will give insight in
the performance of the different tests, and how close or how far the system was from
detecting the errors occurring in the video clips.
After running all test cases with every variation applied, following the procedure de-
scribed in section 4.4.1, the data has been plotted to visualise the results. All data plots
can be found in appendix B, but when important elements are discussed, a reference to
the relevant plot will be made. Furthermore, the performance of the different test cases
is calculated and presented as percentages of successful fault detections in the three
cases, along with a total success rate of the systems overall best performing setup, when
the results of all three test cases are combined. Finally the computation time will be
discussed and compared between the different cases and variations of the tests.
5.1
Visualisation of the Results
The structure and composition of the plots used to visualise the results, are identical
for all tests, making comparison between them easier. It should be noted that the axis
scaling is not fixed, such that peaks from one test can be far greater than peaks in
another test, even though they may look similar in height.
An example of one of the plots will be explained here, showing a test from the conveyor
belt. The video tested is showing the running conveyor belt, where bricks are transported
through the FOV, and one brick has been replaced with a figurine of approximately the
same size as the brick. The colour and shape of the figurine is the main difference to
the brick that was expected to appear. After letting the program test the video, with a
duration of 30 seconds and the figurine on the conveyor belt, and calculating the results,
it is plotted as seen in figure 5.1. It is displaying the 30 seconds of tested video, with the
frame number specified along the x-axis. Along the y-axis is the error value, being the
total absolute difference between the tested frame and its best match from the training
video. The value can be between 0 and 255, where 0 is two identical frames and 255 is
two completely opposite frames e.g. a fully white and a fully black frame.
The figure is divided into three subplots, each representing one parameter being varied.
In the top is the variations of training video length, displaying tests with three, two and
==PAGE:56==
CONFIDENTIAL
36
5 Results
one minute of training video. In the middle is the subplot showing varying resolutions
of the videos. The resolution is always identical between the test and training videos,
so the test video of 1
8 resolution is matched against the three minute long training video
with its resolution reduced to 1
8 as well. In the bottom of the figure is the third subplot.
It displays variations in the test video frame rate. The frame rate of the training video
is 30 FPS, regardless of the frame rate of the video being tested.
Along the x-axis is a mark when the faults appear in the video. It is indicated by the
slightly transparent red line, following horizontally along the axis. These marks are all
made manually by noting when a fault appears and disappears in the given video, when
doing a playback of the video.
In all three subplots the peak prominences are displayed as thin vertical bars, indicating
the size and location of the prominences found in the three minute video. Some peak
prominences are red, indicating that they are taller than the maximum expected peak
prominence, indicating that there may be an error. The largest peak prominence in
the normal video tested, is used as a threshold, therefore the red peak prominences are
simply greater than the largest peak prominence in the training data. Finally the test
results, from the three variations of a given parameter, are plotted and their individual
thresholds are marked with a horizontal line in a matching colour. In the case of the
figurine video (figure 5.1) the three minute training threshold (green) and two minute
training threshold (magenta) shown in the first subplot, are close to being identical,
making them look like a single line just below an error value of six.
The figure (5.1) is a good example of how the system is intended to work. Errors occur
a few places in the tested video, but the majority of the video shows normal behaviour.
This results in great thresholds that all detect the errors. When looking at the first
subplot, it is clear to see how a single minute of training video was too little information,
to estimate the correctness of the tested video frames.
The error values calculated
(dotted blue line) is clearly fluctuating more than those of two and three minutes of
training video (dashed red line and solid cyan line), that seem to have close to identical
error values throughout the 30 seconds.
As a result of the fluctuating behaviour of
the dotted blue line, the threshold calculated is higher than the other two, trying to
compensate for the fluctuations by allowing a larger deviation in the calculated error.
There are, however, occurring too large spikes in the errors calculated with one minute
of training video, resulting in the false positive detection of an error at approximately
frame number 280 in the first subplot.
The peak prominences has the same false positive detection as the one minute training
error. The reason for these two false positives is that there actually is an unusual or rare
event happening in the video at that exact time. An unclear print on the surface of the
conveyor belt, gets visible in the video at that point in time. It is not considered a fault,
since the print appears once every time the belt has been driven a full cycle. Therefore
it is a rare event, but it still exists in the training video. The reason why it only affects
the error noticeably, when calculated with the one minute training video, is because the
other two video training sets contain far more occurrences of this rare event (twice and
three times as many), making better frame matches more likely to exist.
==PAGE:57==
CONFIDENTIAL
5.1 Visualisation of the Results
37
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
2
4
6
8
10
Variation in Training Video Length
Error (3 min. training)
Error (2 min. training)
Error (1 min. training)
Threshold (3 min.)
Threshold (2 min.)
Threshold (1 min.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
2
4
6
8
10
Difference from Training Video
Variation in Resolution
Error (full resolution)
Error ( 1
4  resolution)
Error ( 1
8  resolution)
Threshold (full res.)
Threshold ( 1
4  res.)
Threshold ( 1
8  res.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Frame Number in Test Video
0
2
4
6
8
10
Variation in Test Video Frame Rate
Error (30 FPS)
Error (15 FPS)
Error (7 FPS)
Threshold (30 FPS)
Threshold (15 FPS)
Threshold (7 FPS)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
Figure 5.1: Example from a conveyor belt test. The horizontal red lines along the x-axis
indicate, when a figurine appears in the video, where there should have been a brick.
All variations in training length, resolution and frame rate results in correct detection of
the faults. Note, however, that the peak prominences and the one minute training video,
both have a false positive detection between frame number 200 and 300
==PAGE:58==
CONFIDENTIAL
38
5 Results
5.2
Fault Detection Performance
A summary of the detection performance from the tests can be seen in table 5.1. A
percentage of the faults found, is calculated for each variation of each of the three test
cases. It can be seen how both two and one minutes of training resulted in 100% detected
faults in the videos of the packaging line. The values for the tests should, however, only
be used as an indicator of how the performance may be, since only a few faults are
part of the tests. The packaging line case only has four faults in total, meaning that a
single fault missed decreases its fault detection performance with 25%. Another thing
to notice is the peak prominences, that also has a 100% fault detection rate, but in the
robot pick & place case. It does however seem that the peak prominences have too low
a threshold, since it triggers four times where no error occurs, giving it a false positive
score of 80% in this specific case.
In general there is a low tendency to detect false positives. Apart from the 80% in the
peak prominences for the robot pick & place case, there are just a few in the conveyor
belt case. The explanation for the false positives in the conveyor belt case, is the event
mentioned in section 5.1, where a print on the surface of the conveyor belt is visible.
This is the reason for the false positive registered in the one minute training, figure B.8,
for 1
8 resolution in the first 50 frames of figure B.6, and for the peak prominences outside
the marked error in both figure B.7 and B.8.
5.2.1
Percentage of Faults Detected
In table 5.2 the total fault detection performance for each test type is shown. This is
the total percentage of faults detected, across all three test cases, separated into the
different test variations. This comparison gives a representation of the method that,
with the given test and training videos, leads to the best results. Here it surprisingly
is the 1
8 resolution tests that gets the highest score, meaning that most detections of
faults when all cases are combined, is through video with drastically reduced resolution.
The false positives for 1
8 resolution is in the low end with 4.3%, all of which is a result
of the rare event in the conveyor belt videos. These should be avoidable by supplying
more training data, making the rare events occur additional times, resulting in a higher
probability of good matches.
5.2.2
Computation Time
In table 5.3, 5.4 and 5.5 the computation times for the cases can be seen, in relation to
varying length of training, resolution and frame rate, respectively. First thing to notice
is that the robot pick & place always is the slowest, then the packaging line and by far
the fastest is the conveyor belt case. The reason for this is simply the resolution, which
depends on the ROI selected prior to testing the videos. The robot pick & place has a
==PAGE:59==
CONFIDENTIAL
5.2 Fault Detection Performance
39
Percentage of faults detected
Test Variation
Packaging line
Conveyor belt
Robot pick & place
3 min. training
75 %
57.1 %
40 %
2 min. training
100 %
57.1 %
60 %
1 min. training
100 %
42.9 %
80 %
1
4 resolution
50 %
64.3 %
80 %
1
8 resolution
75 %
85.7 %
80 %
15 FPS
50 %
57.1 %
60 %
7 FPS
50 %
64.3 %
60 %
Prominences
75 %
78.6 %
100 %
Percentage of false positives
3 min. training
0 %
0 %
0 %
2 min. training
0 %
0 %
0 %
1 min. training
0 %
7.1 %
0 %
1
4 resolution
0 %
0 %
0 %
1
8 resolution
0 %
7.1 %
0 %
15 FPS
0 %
0 %
0 %
7 FPS
0 %
0 %
0 %
Prominences
0 %
14.3 %
80 %
Table 5.1: Fault detection performance for each test type in the three use cases.
resolution of 320x360 (115,200 pixels), the packaging line a resolution of 320x240 (76,800
pixels) and the conveyor belt has a resolution of only 424x48 (20,352 pixels). Therefore
a time comparison between the testing methods should only be considered, when the
methods are used on the same case i.e. the same base line resolution.
As seen in table 5.3, reducing the length of the training video, also reduces the compu-
tation time. This is true for all cases, and makes sense, since a shorter video has fewer
frames to match against. Not surprisingly the computation time increases linearly with
the amount of training video available.
In table 5.4 the resolution is the varying parameter. Here there is no linear correlation
between time and the variable. Reducing the resolution to a fourth, reduces the time
spent on calculations to far less than a fourth of the base line computation time, except
for the case with the conveyor belt. It seems that when the base line resolution is low,
the reduction of resolution does not nearly impact the computation time as much, as it
does with the two other examples.
==PAGE:60==
CONFIDENTIAL
40
5 Results
Percentage of Detected Faults
Test Variation
Detection (Percent)
3 min. training
56.5 %
2 min. training
65.2 %
1 min. training
60.9 %
1
4 resolution
65.2 %
1
8 resolution
82.6 %
15 FPS
56.5 %
7 FPS
60.9 %
Prominences
82.6 %
False positive 1 min. training
4.3 %
False positive 1
8 resolution
4.3 %
False positive Prominences
26.1 %
Table 5.2: Total fault detection performance for each test type.
Finally table 5.5 shows the time differences when varying the frame rate of the test
video. Just like when varying the length of the training video, this parameter simply
reduces the number of frames being matched. And again the result is a linear correlation
between the number of frames and the time spent. Using half the frame rate result in
half the processing time.
==PAGE:61==
CONFIDENTIAL
5.2 Fault Detection Performance
41
Varying Length of Training Data
Test Case
3 min. training
2 min. training
1 min. training
Packaging line
236.5 sec.
154.5 sec.
79.2 sec.
Conveyor belt
39.0 sec.
24.5 sec.
12.6 sec.
Robot pick & place
348.4 sec.
250.1 sec.
125.2 sec.
Table 5.3: Average time spent for matching one second of video.
Varying Resolution
Test Case
Full Resolution
1
4 Resolution
1
8 Resolution
Packaging line
236.5 sec.
34.2 sec.
16.0 sec.
Conveyor belt
39.0 sec.
18.6 sec.
13.1 sec.
Robot pick & place
348.4 sec.
47.7 sec.
18.6 sec.
Table 5.4: Average time spent for matching one second of video.
Varying Frame Rate
Test Case
30 FPS
15 FPS
7 FPS
Packaging line
236.5 sec.
117.1 sec.
56.8 sec.
Conveyor belt
39.0 sec.
19.2 sec.
8.7 sec.
Robot pick & place
348.4 sec.
175.8 sec.
95.7 sec.
Table 5.5: Average time spent for matching one second of video.
==PAGE:62==
CONFIDENTIAL
42
==PAGE:63==
CONFIDENTIAL
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
From the results presented in the previous chapter (chapter 5) it is clear that the task
of constructing an adaptable vision system, to detect any type of fault in every given
process, is not an easy task. It will not be solving the fault detection task at a satisfying
level, before several iterations of the system has been developed and tested. Yet a system
has been developed throughout this thesis, to do automatic fault detection based on a
video input of normal process behaviour.
By comparing the input to another video
showing the same process, the system can detect parts that deviate from the known
data set, and can categorise these as outliers, if the deviation is significant. As the
system is now and with the tests carried out, the best performance is estimated to
be approximately 80% as seen in figure 5.2. This is definitely a usable performance,
considering that further improvements can be made, creating a faster and even more
robust system.
6.1
Computation Time
A drawback of the current system is the computation time when checking a video for
faults. Even the fastest test had a computation time that was more than eight times as
long, as the video that was tested (Conveyor belt at 7 FPS in table 5.5), where an opti-
mal system would be able to process video in the same rate as the video was recorded,
making real-time detection possible. The system would, however, be implemented as a
cloud computing solution when used for real applications, making the processing power
many times greater than what was used for testing during this thesis. An implementa-
tion of the current fault detection methods, would actually be able to run in real time, if
the calculations were split up into a high enough number of separate processes. Taking
the overall best performing test variation (the 1
8 resolution test according to table 5.2),
the process takes a little more than 12 seconds to process one second of video. To make
it able to run in real time, the system could be split into a number of processes (more
than 12) to spread out the work load and compute the frame matches in the same rate
as the video is produced by the camera. Every process would then have a separate part
of the training data, computing the match that fits their part of the data set the best.
Then a comparison of the best matches across the different processes could be made,
and the best overall match would be found. This approach is possible if the system was
implemented in a cloud computing environment. Furthermore the number of separate
processes can be scaled to fit the amount of training data in such a way, that it would
==PAGE:64==
CONFIDENTIAL
44
6 Discussion
always be able to run at real time speed, even when much more training data is used.
This could provide better results, but would increase the system cost, since more com-
putation power would be needed from the cloud computing service.
Looking at the time consumption of the different tests, two different factors (that were
varied throughout the tests) were influencing the processing time. The first was the num-
ber of frames to perform the calculations on. As explained in section 5.2.2 a reduction in
the number of frames, either by lowering the frame rate of the test video or by reducing
the length of the training set, had a linear correlation with the time spent processing.
The other was the resolution reduction, that did not result in linear time reduction. The
low resolution video from the conveyor belt case, could approximate linear behaviour,
but as soon as the frame resolution grew, in case of the robot pick & place and the pack-
aging line, the resolution and processing time did not show a linear correlation. Instead
when the higher resolution videos were used, it increased the processing time more than
the increase in resolution. As an example the packaging line went from 34.2 seconds on
average for 1
4 resolution, to 236.5 seconds on average at full resolution (table 5.4). That
was an increase of almost seven times in time used on processing, but only an increase
of four times the resolution. The reason for this behaviour may be limitations of the
hardware used, which may get an issue with lack of memory, when larger arrays are
being used for the higher resolution frames, resulting in increased processing time.
6.2
Delimitations
To keep focus on the task of detecting faults, some boundaries has been made to the
project. There are delimitations in the form of the number of use cases, the number
of tests and their variations performed, as well as the amount of training data and test
data used. No more than three different use cases have been tested, to ensure that
well defined tests for all cases could be made within the time limitations of the project.
The same reason is behind the choice of having four different types of faults for each
case. This was enough to test some of the most common issues found at the production
lines; missing products, displaced products, wrongly fabricated/shaped products and
miscoloured products.
A factor that can have a great impact on the fault detection, is the amount of data used.
Every test video was only 30 seconds in length, due to the time that every second of
video took to process. Together with the high number of varying testing methods of
interest, the length of the test videos had to be quite limited to complete all cases with
the same variants of testing procedures, within the time limitations of the project.
==PAGE:65==
CONFIDENTIAL
6.3 Limitations
45
6.3
Limitations
Apart from the chosen delimitations, some limitations have influenced the project as
well. Among these are the duration of the project, the available data and the available
hardware. The duration of the project set a natural limit to the extend of the work that
could be done. As mentioned in the previous section 6.2, the amount of data and the
tests performed has been limited, which is a direct consequence of the time limitation.
To ensure the project contains all relevant parts from start to end, every part has been
prioritised and given a time period, to which the work with that specific part could
extend, without influencing the rest of the work in a negative fashion.
Another limitation is the available data. Even though the company has many cameras
at customers, streaming video to the company’s cloud services, it is challenging to find
videos suitable for testing.
The available examples of different types of faulty behaviour was a limitation as well.
It resulted in some noticeable differences in performance between the tests, since only
a few number of faults occurred in some of the cases. This resulted in large percentage
wise performance differences, even when the number of detected faults was only differing
by a single fault. Therefore the performance score quickly degraded, as mentioned in
section 5.2.
Regarding the performance of the system, not only the fault detection rate was mea-
sured. The run time for the video processing, was also investigated. Apart from factors
like data size, that influenced the resulting processing time, the hardware used had a
great influence on the processing time as well. All tests have been run locally on a PC
used during the research. This is a natural limitation to the performance of the system,
with regards to the processing time and since the system is planned to run using cloud
computing, the time consumption was not a factor of high importance, when the system
was designed.
6.4
Best Performing Test Setup
The best performing test was the videos with a reduced resolution. The highest detection
score was the 1
8 resolution videos, with a fault detection of 82.6%. The second best was
the 1
4 resolution videos with 65.2% detection, the same percentage as the third best,
being the full resolution video with two minutes of training video (table 5.2). The peak
prominences was also reaching 82.6% fault detection, but had a very large false positive
rate of 26.1%, compared to only 4.3% of the 1
8 resolution tests.
==PAGE:66==
CONFIDENTIAL
46
6 Discussion
6.5
Possible Issues in the System
A surprising result is, that the two minute training tests, performed better than the
three minute tests. Looking at table 5.1, the differences between the two test variations
are found in the performance from the packaging line (75% for three minutes against
100% for two minutes) and the robot pick & place (40% for three minutes against 60%
for two minutes). This difference is caused by the two minutes training, successfully
detected one more fault in the robot pick & place case and also one more in the packag-
ing line case, compared to the three minute training. This result is surprising, because
the expected behaviour of the system is better performance, when more training data
is used. More training data would provide the system with a better and more precise
representation of what correct behaviour is. But in this specific case, more data had
the opposite effect, making the system perform a worse prediction of the errors. To
explain this unusual behaviour, we will look at the top of figure B.1, where the three
minute video perform worse than the others. The first thing noticeable is the threshold,
calculated from the three minute training, which is far above the one and two minute
thresholds. Knowing that the threshold is calculated based on a constant scale factor
and the MAD, we should find the answer by looking at the calculated errors, since they
are the base of the whole calculation. And while one and two minute training errors are
closely following each other, for the vast majority of the time, the three minute training
error start the first 150 frames ( 1
6th of the test video), by having approximately half the
error value, as the other two. This is due to the extra minute of training, containing
frames that match the start of the test video much better, as to be expected, but this
makes the MAD calculated with the three minute training have a larger value. As men-
tioned in section 4.2.1, the MAD is used to indicate the statistical dispersion of the data.
Having much lower values in the first 150 frames, makes the MAD for three minute
training have a larger dispersion than the other two, hence the resulting threshold after
multiplying with the scale factor, is higher.
The other test where the three minute training missed a fault, which was detected by the
one and two minute training, is seen in the top of figure B.10. Here the errors in all three
cases seem very similar, but the threshold for three minute training still gets the highest
value, resulting in a threshold that does not detect the fault. The reason for this may be
the same as mentioned in the previous case, but the higher dispersion occurring in the
training data itself, not the test data. The training data is used to calculate the scale
factor, which directly influences the threshold. With more training data, the normal
video used to determine the scale factor (before testing), will likely result in a smaller
error, compared to training data sets that are shorter and have less information. The
result is that normal behaviour is defined with a more consistent, lower error, making
the MAD smaller. If there is a single time where the normal video has a ”large” error
value, this may be many times higher than the calculated MAD, hence the scale factor
will be increased accordingly (see calculation of the scale factor in equation 4.3) to still
allow that behaviour to be categorised as normal.
==PAGE:67==
CONFIDENTIAL
6.6 Further Improvements
47
6.6
Further Improvements
The solution to the problem stated in 6.5 could simply be to supply more testing data.
The video we want to check for errors, must contain a certain amount of normal be-
haviour, for errors to be detected. If the whole video sequence tested is one long session
of faulty behaviour only, the system may not recognise this as a fault, since the calculated
MAD will be very large, allowing the whole data set to fit underneath the calculated
threshold. If test videos always were long enough, to mainly contain correct behaviour,
the MAD would be correctly calculated and the threshold would then catch any anoma-
lies with significant size in the video. Another idea is to use the peak prominences to
detect these types of errors, since they should be larger than those of the normal behav-
ing video. Therefore a combination of peak prominences and the detected faults from
thresholding, could be used for increased probability of detecting the faults correctly,
even when a small amount of test video is supplied. Other than that, using the peak
prominences as well can increase the certainty of a detected error to actually be an error
and not just a false positive.
Improvement of the computation time could be done in several ways. Apart from opti-
mising the code, running it through cloud services etc. an idea could be to check frames
in the training set, that are close to the best frame match of the previous frame. The
thought is that the previous test frame and the current test frame, are very similar,
hence a good match to the current test frame, could be found at approximately the
same position in the training data, as the match of the previous test frame. This could
make the system avoid the redundant process, of checking the whole training data set
every time, and just check a subset of the data instead.
Another approach is to use machine learning like neural networks, to perform the fault
detection of the videos. The clear advantage of this approach, is that a model to represent
correct behaviour is created, and all new videos will be tested against this model. This
would increase the processing speed, since there is no individual frame matching involved
in the system. The downsides could be that there is a lack of control of the behaviour,
since the process of the fault detection could be difficult or sometimes impossible to
understand. The creation of a machine learning system would be an interesting approach
to take, but would require a whole project in itself. Therefore no further details of this
subject, are discussed throughout this thesis.
==PAGE:68==
CONFIDENTIAL
48
==PAGE:69==
CONFIDENTIAL
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
Optimisation and improvement of industrial production lines, are very important sub-
jects in the modern industry. To enable continuous improvements and hereby secure a
state of the art production flow, fault detection is a crucial part of the everyday at the
factories. Autonomous fault detection is therefore a very relevant topic for the industry
these days.
This thesis has described, and successfully tested, a highly adaptable, vision fault de-
tection system, that autonomously detects faulty behaviour at a production line. An
operator provides a video sequence to the system, showing the production line during
normal operation. The operator should indicate the region of interest in the video im-
age, to provide the most accurate results. Then any video from the same camera can
be presented to the system, and a graphical representation of the estimated production
behaviour, is given back to the operator.
The fault detection is based on statistical dispersion of data. The data is produced
by subtracting video frames in the video to be tested, from video frames in the video
showing normal operation. A lower envelope of the data is then calculated, to filter
out small spikes. By calculating the median absolute deviation (MAD), from the data’s
median, an estimate of the dispersion is established. This is first done on video showing
normal behaviour, and a constant scale factor k is multiplied with the MAD, such that
all data points from the subtraction of the normal operation video, are found below this
multiple of the MAD. Then a video to be tested for faults are presented to the system.
A new MAD is calculated based on this video, and the ”old” scale factor k is multiplied
with this MAD, effectively producing a threshold that indicates the boundary, of what
is considered normal behaviour.
The best performing procedure found, after thorough testing of variations with re-
gards to video resolution and number of frames used, was to reduce the resolution of
the videos before performing the calculations. Videos with full, 1
4th and 1
8th resolution,
had a total fault detection percentage of 56.5%, 65.2% and 82.6% respectively. Clearly
the lower resolution led to a higher success rate. The 1
8th resolution did, however, result
in false positive detections, equal to 4.3% of the number of actual faults, where no false
positives were detected using full or 1
4th resolution. 4.3% is regarded as an acceptable
percentage of false positives, especially when compared to the major increase in correct
detections, that the 1
8th resolution tests provided.
Basing the system on video with decreased resolution, and providing it with video, which
is considered a good representation of normal behaviour, result in an automatic fault de-
==PAGE:70==
CONFIDENTIAL
50
7 Conclusion
tection system, able to reach a detection capability of more than 80%. This is definitely
enough to aid the industrial production, in the tracking and elimination of production
faults.
==PAGE:71==
CONFIDENTIAL
APPENDIX A
Mathematical Operators
A.1
Hadamard product
The Hadamard product ◦is the element wise product of two matrices A and B of the
same dimensions. It produces a new matrix of same dimensions, with elements given by
(A ◦B)i,j = (A)i,j(B)i,j
(A.1)
Example of the Hadamard product for a 3x3 matrix A with a 3x3 matrix B:


a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33

◦


b11
b12
b13
b21
b22
b23
b31
b32
b33

=


a11b11
a12b12
a13b13
a21b21
a22b22
a23b23
a31b31
a32b32
a33b33


(A.2)
==PAGE:72==
CONFIDENTIAL
52
==PAGE:73==
CONFIDENTIAL
APPENDIX B
Test Results
==PAGE:74==
CONFIDENTIAL
54
B Test Results
0
200
400
600
800
0
5
10
15
20
25
Variation in Training Video Length
Error (3 min. training)
Error (2 min. training)
Error (1 min. training)
Threshold (3 min.)
Threshold (2 min.)
Threshold (1 min.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
0
5
10
15
20
25
Difference from Training Video
Variation in Resolution
Error (full resolution)
Error ( 1
4  resolution)
Error ( 1
8  resolution)
Threshold (full res.)
Threshold ( 1
4  res.)
Threshold ( 1
8  res.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
Frame Number in Test Video
0
5
10
15
20
25
Variation in Test Video Frame Rate
Error (30 FPS)
Error (15 FPS)
Error (7 FPS)
Threshold (30 FPS)
Threshold (15 FPS)
Threshold (7 FPS)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
Figure B.1: Packaging Line: Small box gets displaced. When the next layer of small
boxes are pushed in the larger box, they are laying stacked on top of the displaced box,
such that they do not get packed correctly.
==PAGE:75==
CONFIDENTIAL
B Test Results
55
0
200
400
600
800
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Variation in Training Video Length
Error (3 min. training)
Error (2 min. training)
Error (1 min. training)
Threshold (3 min.)
Threshold (2 min.)
Threshold (1 min.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Difference from Training Video
Variation in Resolution
Error (full resolution)
Error ( 1
4  resolution)
Error ( 1
8  resolution)
Threshold (full res.)
Threshold ( 1
4  res.)
Threshold ( 1
8  res.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
Frame Number in Test Video
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Variation in Test Video Frame Rate
Error (30 FPS)
Error (15 FPS)
Error (7 FPS)
Threshold (30 FPS)
Threshold (15 FPS)
Threshold (7 FPS)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
Figure B.2: Packaging Line: After standing still, a layer of only two small boxes arrive.
After they have been pushed into the larger box, it is still possible to see that some
boxes are missing, but it is only in a very small part of the image, where it can be seen.
==PAGE:76==
CONFIDENTIAL
56
B Test Results
0
200
400
600
800
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Variation in Training Video Length
Error (3 min. training)
Error (2 min. training)
Error (1 min. training)
Threshold (3 min.)
Threshold (2 min.)
Threshold (1 min.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Difference from Training Video
Variation in Resolution
Error (full resolution)
Error ( 1
4  resolution)
Error ( 1
8  resolution)
Threshold (full res.)
Threshold ( 1
4  res.)
Threshold ( 1
8  res.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
Frame Number in Test Video
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Variation in Test Video Frame Rate
Error (30 FPS)
Error (15 FPS)
Error (7 FPS)
Threshold (30 FPS)
Threshold (15 FPS)
Threshold (7 FPS)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
Figure B.3: Packaging Line: A layer in the larger box is already slightly misplaced when
the video starts. Then a new layer is pushed on top of it, and the larger box moves out
of the FOV.
==PAGE:77==
CONFIDENTIAL
B Test Results
57
0
200
400
600
800
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Variation in Training Video Length
Error (3 min. training)
Error (2 min. training)
Error (1 min. training)
Threshold (3 min.)
Threshold (2 min.)
Threshold (1 min.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Difference from Training Video
Variation in Resolution
Error (full resolution)
Error ( 1
4  resolution)
Error ( 1
8  resolution)
Threshold (full res.)
Threshold ( 1
4  res.)
Threshold ( 1
8  res.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
Frame Number in Test Video
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Variation in Test Video Frame Rate
Error (30 FPS)
Error (15 FPS)
Error (7 FPS)
Threshold (30 FPS)
Threshold (15 FPS)
Threshold (7 FPS)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
Figure B.4: Packaging Line: A layer of small boxes arrive, but are all displaced. They
are discarded and a four new small boxes arrive and attempted packed. There are still
small boxes at the conveyor belt from the previous four, and all are forced into the larger
box, resulting in a small box getting stuck on the conveyor belt.
==PAGE:78==
CONFIDENTIAL
58
B Test Results
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
2
4
6
8
10
Variation in Training Video Length
Error (3 min. training)
Error (2 min. training)
Error (1 min. training)
Threshold (3 min.)
Threshold (2 min.)
Threshold (1 min.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
2
4
6
8
10
Difference from Training Video
Variation in Resolution
Error (full resolution)
Error ( 1
4  resolution)
Error ( 1
8  resolution)
Threshold (full res.)
Threshold ( 1
4  res.)
Threshold ( 1
8  res.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Frame Number in Test Video
0
2
4
6
8
10
Variation in Test Video Frame Rate
Error (30 FPS)
Error (15 FPS)
Error (7 FPS)
Threshold (30 FPS)
Threshold (15 FPS)
Threshold (7 FPS)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
Figure B.5: Conveyor belt: A brick is turned 45 degrees compared to the normal direction
of the bricks. Another brick is just turned slightly, 20 degrees.
==PAGE:79==
CONFIDENTIAL
B Test Results
59
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Variation in Training Video Length
Error (3 min. training)
Error (2 min. training)
Error (1 min. training)
Threshold (3 min.)
Threshold (2 min.)
Threshold (1 min.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Difference from Training Video
Variation in Resolution
Error (full resolution)
Error ( 1
4  resolution)
Error ( 1
8  resolution)
Threshold (full res.)
Threshold ( 1
4  res.)
Threshold ( 1
8  res.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Frame Number in Test Video
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Variation in Test Video Frame Rate
Error (30 FPS)
Error (15 FPS)
Error (7 FPS)
Threshold (30 FPS)
Threshold (15 FPS)
Threshold (7 FPS)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
Figure B.6: Conveyor belt: A single green brick has been replaced with a blue brick.
==PAGE:80==
CONFIDENTIAL
60
B Test Results
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
2
4
6
8
10
Variation in Training Video Length
Error (3 min. training)
Error (2 min. training)
Error (1 min. training)
Threshold (3 min.)
Threshold (2 min.)
Threshold (1 min.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
2
4
6
8
10
Difference from Training Video
Variation in Resolution
Error (full resolution)
Error ( 1
4  resolution)
Error ( 1
8  resolution)
Threshold (full res.)
Threshold ( 1
4  res.)
Threshold ( 1
8  res.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Frame Number in Test Video
0
2
4
6
8
10
Variation in Test Video Frame Rate
Error (30 FPS)
Error (15 FPS)
Error (7 FPS)
Threshold (30 FPS)
Threshold (15 FPS)
Threshold (7 FPS)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
Figure B.7: Conveyor belt: A green and orange brick has swapped places.
==PAGE:81==
CONFIDENTIAL
B Test Results
61
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
2
4
6
8
10
Variation in Training Video Length
Error (3 min. training)
Error (2 min. training)
Error (1 min. training)
Threshold (3 min.)
Threshold (2 min.)
Threshold (1 min.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
2
4
6
8
10
Difference from Training Video
Variation in Resolution
Error (full resolution)
Error ( 1
4  resolution)
Error ( 1
8  resolution)
Threshold (full res.)
Threshold ( 1
4  res.)
Threshold ( 1
8  res.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Frame Number in Test Video
0
2
4
6
8
10
Variation in Test Video Frame Rate
Error (30 FPS)
Error (15 FPS)
Error (7 FPS)
Threshold (30 FPS)
Threshold (15 FPS)
Threshold (7 FPS)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
Figure B.8: Conveyor belt: A small figurine has replaced one of the bricks.
==PAGE:82==
CONFIDENTIAL
62
B Test Results
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Variation in Training Video Length
Error (3 min. training)
Error (2 min. training)
Error (1 min. training)
Threshold (3 min.)
Threshold (2 min.)
Threshold (1 min.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Difference from Training Video
Variation in Resolution
Error (full resolution)
Error ( 1
4  resolution)
Error ( 1
8  resolution)
Threshold (full res.)
Threshold ( 1
4  res.)
Threshold ( 1
8  res.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Frame Number in Test Video
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Variation in Test Video Frame Rate
Error (30 FPS)
Error (15 FPS)
Error (7 FPS)
Threshold (30 FPS)
Threshold (15 FPS)
Threshold (7 FPS)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
Figure B.9: Robot pick & place: One of the three blocks has a small blue brick attached
to its top.
==PAGE:83==
CONFIDENTIAL
B Test Results
63
0
200
400
600
800
0
5
10
15
20
25
Variation in Training Video Length
Error (3 min. training)
Error (2 min. training)
Error (1 min. training)
Threshold (3 min.)
Threshold (2 min.)
Threshold (1 min.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
0
5
10
15
20
25
Difference from Training Video
Variation in Resolution
Error (full resolution)
Error ( 1
4  resolution)
Error ( 1
8  resolution)
Threshold (full res.)
Threshold ( 1
4  res.)
Threshold ( 1
8  res.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
Frame Number in Test Video
0
5
10
15
20
25
Variation in Test Video Frame Rate
Error (30 FPS)
Error (15 FPS)
Error (7 FPS)
Threshold (30 FPS)
Threshold (15 FPS)
Threshold (7 FPS)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
Figure B.10: Robot pick & place: One of the three blocks is displaced to one side, when
placed in the camera FOV.
==PAGE:84==
CONFIDENTIAL
64
B Test Results
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Variation in Training Video Length
Error (3 min. training)
Error (2 min. training)
Error (1 min. training)
Threshold (3 min.)
Threshold (2 min.)
Threshold (1 min.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Difference from Training Video
Variation in Resolution
Error (full resolution)
Error ( 1
4  resolution)
Error ( 1
8  resolution)
Threshold (full res.)
Threshold ( 1
4  res.)
Threshold ( 1
8  res.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Frame Number in Test Video
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Variation in Test Video Frame Rate
Error (30 FPS)
Error (15 FPS)
Error (7 FPS)
Threshold (30 FPS)
Threshold (15 FPS)
Threshold (7 FPS)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
Figure B.11: Robot pick & place: One of the three blocks is missing in the cycle.
==PAGE:85==
CONFIDENTIAL
B Test Results
65
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
2
4
6
8
10
Variation in Training Video Length
Error (3 min. training)
Error (2 min. training)
Error (1 min. training)
Threshold (3 min.)
Threshold (2 min.)
Threshold (1 min.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
2
4
6
8
10
Difference from Training Video
Variation in Resolution
Error (full resolution)
Error ( 1
4  resolution)
Error ( 1
8  resolution)
Threshold (full res.)
Threshold ( 1
4  res.)
Threshold ( 1
8  res.)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Frame Number in Test Video
0
2
4
6
8
10
Variation in Test Video Frame Rate
Error (30 FPS)
Error (15 FPS)
Error (7 FPS)
Threshold (30 FPS)
Threshold (15 FPS)
Threshold (7 FPS)
Prominences
Abnormal Prominences
Error (manually marked)
Figure B.12: Robot pick & place: Two blocks have miscoloured ends. One has a fully
miscoloured and the other just half of the end is a different colour. Only when the blocks
are moved into the FOV, the end being miscoloured is visible.
==PAGE:86==
CONFIDENTIAL
66
==PAGE:87==
CONFIDENTIAL
APPENDIX C
Python Code
1 import cv2
2 from imutils.video import FileVideoStream
3 import time
4 from matplotlib.pyplot import plot,show,grid,hlines,vlines,legend,title,
subplot ,tight_layout , figure
5 import numpy as np
6 import os.path
7 import pickle
8 from scipy.interpolate import interp1d
9 from scipy.signal import find_peaks
10 import sys
11
12 def lowerEnvelope(minimum_errors):
13
env = np.zeros(minimum_errors.shape)
14
#Prepend the first value of (minimum_errors) to the interpolating
values.
15
env_x = [0,]
16
env_y = [minimum_errors[0],]
17
#Detect local minima and mark their location in env_x, env_y
respectively.
18
for i in range(1,len(minimum_errors)-1):
19
if (np.sign(minimum_errors[i]-minimum_errors[i-1])==-1) and ((np.
sign(minimum_errors[i]-minimum_errors[i+1]))==-1):
20
env_x.append(i)
21
env_y.append(minimum_errors[i])
22
#Append the last value of (minimum_errors) to the interpolating values
.
23
env_x.append(len(minimum_errors)-1)
24
env_y.append(minimum_errors[-1])
25
#Fit suitable models to the data.
26
l_p = interp1d(env_x,env_y,kind = 'cubic',bounds_error = False,
fill_value=0.0)
27
#Evaluate each model over the domain of (minimum_errors)
28
for j in range(0,len(minimum_errors)):
29
env[j] = l_p(j)
30
return (env)
31
32 def calcKeyValues(data):
33
env = lowerEnvelope(data)
34
envMedian = np.median(env)
35
peaksAll = find_peaks(env,height=0.1,prominence=0.1)
36
peaksIndex = peaksAll[0]
==PAGE:88==
CONFIDENTIAL
68
C Python Code
37
prominences = peaksAll[1].get('prominences')
38
maxValue = np.amax(peaksAll[1].get('peak_heights'))
39
return (env, envMedian , peaksIndex , prominences , maxValue)
40
41 def calcK(maxValue , envMedian , env):
42
k = (maxValue - envMedian) / np.median(np.absolute(np.subtract(env,
envMedian)))
43
print('k: {}'.format(k))
44
return (k)
45
46 def plotting(data, env, envMedian , cutoff, peaksIndex , prominences ,
plotName):
47
plot(data, label='Minimum Errors')
48
plot(env,'g', label='Lower Envelope')
49
hlines(envMedian ,0,len(data),'y', label='Median of Envelope');hlines(
cutoff ,0,len(data),'r', label='Cut-off');hlines(envMedian + np.
median(np.absolute(np.subtract(env, envMedian))),0,len(data),'y',':
', label='Median Absolute Deviation')
50
vlines(peaksIndex ,0,prominences , label='Prominences')
51
title('{}'.format(plotName));legend();grid(False);show()
52
53
54
55 def frameMatchError(test, training , edgeCut):
56
57
print('[INFO]: Edge cut in correlation process is: {} pixels.'.format(
edgeCut))
# Number of pixels removed from the edge in the
correlation process.
58
59
# Read video files and get video dimensions etc.
60
capTest = cv2.VideoCapture('{}.mp4'.format(test))
61
capTraining = cv2.VideoCapture('{}.mp4'.format(training))
62
test_channels = 3
63
test_w = int(capTest.get(3))
64
test_h = int(capTest.get(4))
65
test_nFrames = int(capTest.get(7))
# Number of frames in test set.
66
training_nFrames = int(capTraining.get(7))
# Number of frames in
training set.
67
if test_w != int(capTraining.get(3)) or test_h != int(capTraining.get
(4)):
68
print('[ERROR]: You must provide a test and training set, both
with same resolution.')
69
sys.exit()
70
# Start the file video stream thread and allow the buffer to start
filling.
71
print("[INFO]: Starting video file thread...")
72
videoStream = FileVideoStream('{}.mp4'.format(test),128).start()
73
time.sleep(1.0)
74
75
# Preallocate arrays for minimum error and frame differences.
76
error_array = np.full((test_nFrames), 255.)
# Filled with maximum
value.
==PAGE:89==
CONFIDENTIAL
C Python Code
69
77
error_array_old = np.full((test_nFrames), 255.)
# Filled with
maximum value.
78
# im_diff = np.zeros((test_nFrames ,test_h -int(edgeCut*2),test_w -int(
edgeCut*2),test_channels))
79
# im_diff_old = np.zeros((test_nFrames ,test_h -int(edgeCut*2),test_w -
int(edgeCut*2),test_channels))
80
totalTime = 0
81
totalSingleMatchTime = 0
82
for i in range(test_nFrames):
83
startTime = time.time()
84
sFrame = videoStream.read()
# Stream frame.
85
videoTrain = FileVideoStream('{}.mp4'.format(training),128).start
()
86
min_error = 255
# Reset error to max value.
87
print('\nFrame {} of {} getting checked.'.format(i+1,test_nFrames)
)
88
for j in range(training_nFrames):
89
tFrame = videoTrain.read()
90
abs_diff = np.absolute( np.subtract( tFrame.astype(float),
sFrame.astype(float) ))
# Element -wise absolute
difference.
91
current_error = np.mean( abs_diff )
92
93
if current_error < min_error:
94
min_error = current_error
95
match = j
96
singleMatchTime = time.time()
97
capTraining.set(1, match)
# Capture the best match from the
training video.
98
ret, trainFrame = capTraining.read() # Read training frame.
99
# Convert to grayscale for cv2.phaseCorrelate.
100
tFrameGray = np.float32(cv2.cvtColor(trainFrame , cv2.
COLOR_BGR2GRAY))
101
sFrameGray = np.float32(cv2.cvtColor(sFrame, cv2.COLOR_BGR2GRAY))
102
correlation = cv2.phaseCorrelate(sFrameGray ,tFrameGray)[0]
103
t_x = correlation[0]
# Translation in x direction.
104
t_y = correlation[1]
# Translation in y direction.
105
# Perform translation.
106
if t_x > edgeCut or t_y > edgeCut:
107
print('Translation would be more than {2} pixels in one
direction. Skipping transformation.\nt_x = {0}, t_y = {1}.'
.format(t_x,t_y,edgeCut))
108
else:
109
M = np.float32([[1,0,t_x],[0,1,t_y]])
# Transformation
matrix.
110
translated = cv2.warpAffine(sFrame,M,(test_w,test_h))
111
abs_diff = np.absolute( np.subtract( trainFrame.astype(float)[
edgeCut:-edgeCut , edgeCut:-edgeCut , :], translated[edgeCut:-
edgeCut , edgeCut:-edgeCut , :] ))
# Element -wise absolute
difference.
112
abs_diff_old = np.absolute( np.subtract( trainFrame.astype(float)[
edgeCut:-edgeCut , edgeCut:-edgeCut , :], sFrame.astype(float)[
==PAGE:90==
CONFIDENTIAL
70
C Python Code
edgeCut:-edgeCut , edgeCut:-edgeCut , :] ))
# Element -wise
absolute difference.
113
# im_diff[i,:,:,:] = abs_diff
114
# im_diff_old[i,:,:,:] = abs_diff_old
115
error_array[i] = np.mean( abs_diff )
116
error_array_old[i] = np.mean( abs_diff_old )
117
endTime = time.time()
118
totalSingleMatchTime += singleMatchTime -startTime
119
totalTime += endTime -startTime
120
print('Single Match Time: {}'.format(singleMatchTime -startTime))
121
print('Time: {}'.format(endTime -startTime))
122
print('Time total: {}'.format(totalTime))
123
124
avgSingleMatchTime = totalSingleMatchTime/test_nFrames
125
avgMatchTime = totalTime/test_nFrames
126
print('Time average for single frame match: {}'.format(
avgSingleMatchTime))
127
print('Time average for correlated frame match: {}'.format(
avgMatchTime))
128
capTraining.release()
129
capTest.release()
130
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
131
videoStream.stop()
132
# return (im_diff , error_array , im_diff_old , error_array_old)
133
return (error_array , error_array_old)
134
135
136 edgeCut = 10
137
138 '''
139 Training data.
140
141 '''
142 name_train_set = 'robot3min'
143 name_test_set = 'normalRobot'
144 trainingFile = '/app/{0}_{1}.pkl'.format(name_train_set ,name_test_set)
145
146 # Check if file exist.
147 # If so, load it. If not, start frameMatchTraining and save file when done
.
148 if os.path.isfile(trainingFile):
149
with open(trainingFile , 'rb') as fid:
150
frameMatchTraining = pickle.load(fid)
151 else:
152
frameMatchTraining = frameMatchError(name_test_set , name_train_set ,
edgeCut)
153
with open(trainingFile , 'wb') as fid:
154
pickle.dump(frameMatchTraining , fid)
155
156 dataTrainingCor = frameMatchTraining[0]
157 keyValuesTrainingCor = calcKeyValues(dataTrainingCor)
158 envTrainingCor = keyValuesTrainingCor[0]
==PAGE:91==
CONFIDENTIAL
C Python Code
71
159 envMedianTrainingCor = keyValuesTrainingCor[1]
160 maxNormalProminences = np.amax(keyValuesTrainingCor[3])
161 maxValueCor = keyValuesTrainingCor[4]
162 kCor = calcK(maxValueCor , envMedianTrainingCor , envTrainingCor)
163
164 '''
165 Error data.
166
167 '''
168 name_train_set = 'robot3min'
169 name_test_set = 'displaced'
170 testFile = '/app/{0}_{1}.pkl'.format(name_train_set ,name_test_set)
171 if os.path.isfile(testFile):
172
with open(testFile , 'rb') as fid:
173
frameMatchTest = pickle.load(fid)
174 else:
175
frameMatchTest = frameMatchError(name_test_set , name_train_set ,
edgeCut)
176
with open(testFile , 'wb') as fid:
177
pickle.dump(frameMatchTest , fid)
178
179 keyValuesTestCor = calcKeyValues(frameMatchTest[0])
180 envTest = keyValuesTestCor[0]
181 envMedianTestCor = keyValuesTestCor[1]
182 peaksIndex = keyValuesTestCor[2]
183 prominences = keyValuesTestCor[3]
184 errorProminences = np.zeros(len(prominences))
185 errorProminences = map(lambda n: 0 if n < maxNormalProminences else float(
n), prominences)
186 # Calculate MAD and cut-off.
187 MADCor = kCor * np.median(np.absolute(np.subtract(envTest ,
envMedianTestCor)))
188 cutoff = np.array([(envMedianTestCor + MADCor) for i in range(len(envTest)
)])
frameMatching2.py
==PAGE:92==
CONFIDENTIAL
72
==PAGE:93==
CONFIDENTIAL
Bibliography
[1]
V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V Kumar. “Anomaly detection: A survey. ACM
Comput. Surv. 41, 3, Article 15”. In: (2009). url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/
1541880.1541882.
[2]
The SciPy community. scipy.signal.peak_prominences. url: http://mathworld.
wolfram.com/HanningFunction.html.
[3]
R. A. Reed. “Comparison of Subpixel Phase Correlation Methods for Image Regis-
tration”. In: (2010). url: http://www.dtic.mil/get-tr-doc/pdf?AD=ADA519383.
[4]
Iain E. Richardson. The H.264 Advanced Video Compression Standard. Second Edi-
tion. 2010. url: https : / / files . cnblogs . com / files / irish / The _ H . 264 _
advanced_video_compression_standard.pdf.
[5]
P. J Rousseeuw and C. Croux. “Alternatives to the Median Absolute Deviation”.
In: (1993).
[6]
W. N. Venables and B. D. Ripley. Modern Applied Statistics with S. Fourth Edition.
Springer, 2002.
[7]
Eric W. Weisstein. ’Hanning Function.’ From MathWorld–A Wolfram Web Resource.
url: http://mathworld.wolfram.com/HanningFunction.html.
[8]
Ian Wright. “What Is Industry 4.0, Anyway?” In: (2018). url: https : / / www .
engineering.com/AdvancedManufacturing/ArticleID/16521/What-Is-Industry-
40-Anyway.aspx.
==PAGE:94==
CONFIDENTIAL
