==PAGE:1==
Artiﬁcial Bandwidth Extension of Bone Con-
ducted Speech using Deep Neural Networks
Master Thesis
Mikkel Heber Hahn Petersen - s123028
Tobias Toft Christensen - s123023
Supervisor: Tobias May
Date: June 22, 2018
Hearing Systems
Department of Electrical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Bone conduction microphones (BCMs) are being used in communication systems due
to the low interference from outside noise sources. However BCMs imposes several chal-
lenges such as degraded and band-limited speech which reduces the perceived speech
quality and intelligibility.
This Master thesis investigated the possibilities and limitations of using a deep neural
network for bandwidth extension of bone conducted speech. The INVISIO X5 headset
was used as a physical framework and the speech signal recorded from it’s BCM was
the degraded speech in focus.
The proposed solution utilizes a deep neural network to establish a mapping function
from narrow band speech to wide band speech. The proposed system consists of three
central building blocks; (1) feature extraction, (2) a deep neural network (DNN) map-
ping function, and (3) a posterior feature reconstruction.
In order to generalize better to unseen acoustic environments a multi-stage training
process was utilized. The ﬁrst training stage used synthetic generated data as training
data. The synthetic data was constructed to reﬂect real world data. In the second stage
transfer learning was applied to use knowledge gained from the ﬁrst training stage to
train and ﬁne-tune the model using a smaller real world data set.
The network performance was evaluated by a series of experiments. The experiments
were divided into measuring quality preference and intelligibility. The speech quality
results showed an increase of 53.1% in preference for the processed speech, while no
signiﬁcant decrease in speech intelligibility. The speech intelligibility was measured by
consonant recognition and confusions in normal-hearing listeners using consonant-vowel
nonsense syllables presented in background noise.
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master thesis is produced and written togehter with the Hearing Systems Group
under the department of Electrical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark.
It is written by Tobias Toft Christensen and Mikkel Heber Hahn Petersen in the period
from January 2018 to June 2018.
This work was supervised by Tobias May from the Hearing Systems Group.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the people from INVISIO Communication for providing equip-
ment, and measuring facilities for this project. Furthermore we would like to thank
Johannes Zaar for providing the MATLAB GUI which made the subjective speech ex-
periments possible.
Finally will we like to acknowledge Tobias May, Jonas Dahl, and Christoﬀer Ceutz for
valuable feedback during the project.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
5
2.1
Communication Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Speech Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Speech Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.3
Speech Perception
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Artiﬁcial Bandwidth Extension
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Statistical Artiﬁcial Bandwidth Extension Methods . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Cost Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.2
Backpropagation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Neural Network Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4.1
Supervised Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4.2
Feed-Forward Neural Network Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4.3
Convolutional Neural Network Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.5
Objective Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.5.1
Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality (PESQ)
. . . . . . . .
22
2.5.2
Magnitude Correlation Coeﬃcient (MCC)
. . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.5.3
Short-Term Objective Intelligibility (STOI) . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.6
Subjective Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.6.1
Speech Quality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.6.2
Speech Intelligibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3
Artiﬁcial Bandwidth Extension
29
3.1
Pre-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
3.1.1
Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3
Post-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.1
Feature Reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4
Training Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.4.1
Step One - Initial Training Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.4.2
Step Two - Training with Synthetic Data . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4.3
Step Three - Training with Real Recordings
. . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.4.4
Generalization Ability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4
Experimental Evaluation
50
4.1
Preliminary Exp. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.1.1
Experiment 1 - Hyper-parameter Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2
Objective Exp.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2.1
Experiment 2 - Objective Evaluation - PESQ and STOI . . . . .
52
4.2.2
Experiment 3 - Bandwidth Extension - MCC . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.3
Subjective Exp. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.3.1
Experiment 4 - Speech Quality - MUSHRA . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.3.2
Experiment 5 - Speech Intelligibility - DANOK
. . . . . . . . .
56
5
Results
59
5.1
Preliminary Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.1.1
Experiment 1 - Hyper-parameter Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
Objective Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2.1
Experiment 2 - Objective Evaluation - PESQ and STOI
. . . .
61
5.2.2
Experiment 3 - Bandwidth Extension - MCC . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3
Subjective Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.3.1
Experiment 4 - Speech Quality - MUSHRA . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.3.2
Experiment 5 - Speech Intelligibility - DANOK
. . . . . . . . .
67
6
Discussion
73
6.1
Objective Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.1.1
Experiment 2 - PESQ and STOI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.1.2
Experiment 3 - Bandwidth Extension - MCC . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.2
Subjective Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
6.2.1
Experiment 4 - Speech Quality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.2.2
Experiment 5 - Speech Intelligibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.3
Summary of Main Findings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.3.1
Data and Feature Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.3.2
Variance Scaling - Expansion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.3.3
Quality vs. Intelligibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.3.4
Objective vs. Subjective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
7
Conclusion
83
7.1
Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
Appendices
89
A INVISIO - Background
89
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
ABE
artiﬁcial bandwidth extension
ACM
air conduction microphone
AVIL
audio visual immersion lab
BCM
bone conduction microphone
BP
band-pass
CNN
convolutional neural network
CV
consonant-vowel
DANOK
DAnsk Nonsens Ords Korpus
DNN
deep neural network
FFN
feed-forward network
GMM
Gaussian mixture model
HMM
Hidden Markov model
MCC
magnitude correlation coeﬃcient
MOS
mean opinion score
MSE
mean square error
MUSHRA
MUltiple Stimuli with Hidden Reference and Anchor
NB
narrow band
PESQ
perceptual evaluation of speech quality
ReLU
rectiﬁed linear unit
SNR
signal-to-noise ratio
SPL
sound pressure level
STOI
short-term objective intelligibility
T-F
time-frequency
WB
wide band
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
A robust communication system is crucial when working in stressful environments with
critical noise levels. INVISIO Communication provide advanced communication and
hearing protection systems, for professionals in noisy and mission critical environments.
The INVISIO X5 headset uses a BCM which detects speech in the form of vibrations
transmitted through the jaw bone. This improves the users communication abilities
in noisy environments. The main advantage of the BCM over the traditional air con-
duction microphone (ACM) is the minimal signal interference caused by environmental
noise sources.
A major disadvantage of the BCM is it’s limited bandwidth of the
speech signal captured by the microphone. This leads to distorted speech quality, loss
of speaker characteristics and in worst case lower speech intelligibility [Shin et al., 2012].
Artiﬁcial bandwidth extension (ABE) has been studied in the audio processing com-
munity mainly as a solution to the limited bandwidth accompanied by the telephone
transmission channel [Erik Larsen, 2005]. The majority of the ABE approaches make
use of the source-ﬁlter model for speech production [Rabiner and Schafer, 1978; Flana-
gan, 1978]. These approaches often consists of a two step procedure. The ﬁrst step
involves estimating the excitation signal of the source signal by ﬁndings the properties
of the vocal tract. The second step involves modeling the spectral envelope for the
ﬁlter. The central task for extending the bandwidth towards the high frequencies is to
estimate the wide band spectral envelope. For the low frequency case the primary task
is to reconstruct the missing pitch information.
1
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Simple codebook methods [Carl and Heute, 1994; Sadasivan et al., 2016] and more so-
phisticated statistical models such as Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) [Nour-Eldin
and Kabal, 2011] and Hidden Markov models (HMMs) [I. Katsir and Cohen, 2012;
C. Yagli and Erzin, 2013; Jax and Vary, 2000] have also been thoroughly investigated.
With these statistical models bandwidth extension algorithms have reached a stable
baseline quality where the processed speech signals are preferred over non-processed
speech signals [Erik Larsen, 2005]. Motivated by the promising performance in other
signal processing areas, deep neural networks (DNNs) have been investigated as an
addition to or a substitution for the statistical models like HMM and GMM in ABE
applications.
DNNs have in the study area of ABE been used to approximate a non-linear regres-
sion function between narrow band (NB) speech and the missing upper band (UB)
speech which has shown promising results when compared to the classiﬁcation based
GMM/HMM baseline. The results are among other things based on the subjective
mean opinion score (MOS) test and the objective wide band (WB) perceptual evalu-
ation of speech quality (PESQ) [Abel and Fingscheidt, 2017]. The estimation of the
UB log-power spectrum using ABE algorithms have also been investigated [Li and Lee,
2015; Bukhari, 2015] together with the use of the recurrent neural network structures
[Y. Gu and Dai, 2016].
The vast majority of studies applied ABE on clean speech limited to a bandwidth of
0.3-3.5 kHz, and does not consider noisy conditions such as additive background noise.
Little focus have been on improving the speech quality of bone conducted speech signals
with ABE methods.
Scope of Project
Based on the challenges related to the BCM the main goal is to extent the bandwidth of
the band-limited speech signal in order to increase the perceived speech quality, while
maintaining the speech intelligibility. This project proposes two neural network frame-
works that aims to solve the problems of band-limited speech by modeling a non-linear
mapping function from NB speech to WB speech. The project further investigates the
beneﬁts of ABE by the use of diﬀerent objective and subjective measures. As a conse-
2
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
quence of how neural networks learn an indirect noise reduction will also take place.
Enhancing speech signals from BCMs have had a growing interest [Fingscheidi, 2012],
but to our knowledge there has been very little focus on the use of DNNs. The two DNN
structures which this project aims to implement are the feed-forward network (FFN)
and the convolutional neural network (CNN). The FFN is the typical neural network
consisting of a multi-layer perceptron like structure and the CNN is a variation of the
multi-layer perceptron structure build on a shared-weights architecture.
It has been shown that CNNs obtain a high phoneme recognition performance [G. E. Hin-
ton, 2012] and that particular CNNs have shown high accuracy in image classiﬁca-
tion[Nielsen, 2017]. Since a spectrogram can be viewed as an image, there is a high
probability that especially this technique can successfully be transferred to the task of
ABE, which motives the use of DNNs in the ﬁeld of ABEs.
Training neural networks for regression using supervised learning techniques, requires
large amount of labeled training data. To obtain a large data set this project aims to
generate a synthetic speech corpus that approximates the characteristics of actual bone
conducted speech. The synthetic speech corpus will be based on the TIMIT speech
data set ﬁltered with a bone conduction transfer function estimated from a corpus of
real BCM speech recordings. The diﬀerent DNN conﬁgurations will be trained on the
synthetic data in order to capture the dynamics of a broad range of speakers. After-
wards the model will be ﬁne tuned with the speech corpus constructed from the real
recordings, by the use of transfer learning [Torrey and Shavlik, 2009]. Transfer learning
is a method where knowledge gained from solving one problem can be utilized and
applied to a related problem. In other words transfer learning exploits what has been
learned in one setting to improve generalization in another setting.
To evaluate the ABE methods both objective and subjective metrics will be used.
Speech quality has in previous studies been evaluated by the WB-PESQ measure [Fin-
gscheidt, 2018]. It’s an algorithm that analyses speech sample-by-sample of correspond-
ing degraded and reference signals. The WB-PESQ score models the MOS which is a
subjective preference scale used to assess the quality of a stimuli or system. MOS is
rated on a scale from 1 (bad) to 5 (excellent).
3
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
It has been shown that a direct comparison of diﬀerent ABE approaches using objective
metrics is not enough, when compared to subjective listening tests [Fingscheidt, 2018;
Bauer et al., 2014]. However objective measures have the advantage of saving time, and
are practical when trying to get a quick performance estimate in an iterative process.
The objective measure’s inadequate ability to show the full picture, is the motivation
to use subjective listening experiments to make a more in depth analysis of the perfor-
mance of the ABE methods.
The subjective metrics will consist of speech quality and intelligibility experiments. It
is important to emphasize that the need of subjective evaluation is the essential as an
ﬁnal evaluation.
Study show that speech intelligibility for clean narrow band speech is high.
For a
telephone speech signal the speech intelligibility is around 99% [Erik Larsen, 2005], in-
dicating that the beneﬁt from ABE is small. The speech intelligibility is on the other
hand signiﬁcantly reduced under noisy conditions, which makes ABE meaningful. Par-
ticularly consonants which contains energy at high frequencies suﬀer in the narrow
band speech. This calls for a evaluation of speech intelligibility for the artiﬁcial band-
width extended speech, in noisy conditions. This project aims to simulate real life noise
environments and evaluate the speech intelligibility for NB speech and compare it to
artiﬁcially bandwidth extended speech.
Structure of Report
The report is structured as follows. Chapter two provides a short review of the theoreti-
cal concepts needed to understand the considerations and reﬂections made in connection
with the proposed method. Chapter three contains a comprehensive review and anal-
ysis of the speciﬁc steps made to implement the ABE solution. The review describes
parameters such as the use of databases, synthetic data, and other resources. Chapter
four provides an extensive evaluation of the performance ABE algorithm, using both
objective and subjective evaluation metrics. Chapter ﬁve presents the results obtained
from the evaluation metrics. The objective and the subjective evaluation results are
then discussed in chapter six. Chapter seven presents the conclusion and a review of
possible future directions of research.
4
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Theory
In this chapter the theoretical concepts needed to understand the principles behind the
proposed algorithms will be reviewed. First the model of communication along with the
diﬀerent parts including speech production and transmission will be explained. Secondly
diﬀerent general machine learning approaches to solve the band limitation problems
will be reviewed along with the essential concepts behind neural networks. Finally the
diﬀerent objective and subjective measures will be examined and their strengths and
weaknesses analyzed.
2.1
Communication Model
Shannon’s model of communication is a basic model to describe and explain speech
communication [Shannon, 1948]. The model was invented to help improve telephonic
communication. The model is now widely used and is considered the foundation for
describing speech communication systems.
The model is reasonably simple and consist of ﬁve blocks (ﬁg. 2.1). First block contains
the sender or information source. The sender is the object which chooses the transmis-
sion channel and constructs/sends the message. Second block contains the transmitter
which encodes the message, and prepare the message for the transmission channel. The
third block is the transmission channel which deliver the message to the receiver. The
receiver decodes the message and prepare the information for the destination. The
model is shown in ﬁgure 2.1.
5
==PAGE:13==
2.1. COMMUNICATION MODEL
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Speech Production
Speech Perception
Transmission 
Channel
Information 
Source
Information 
Receiver
Transmitter
(encoder)
Receiver
(decoder)
Channel
Speech Communication Model
Noise
Figure 2.1: Shannon’s model of speech communication [Shannon, 1948]. The information
source produces a message. The transmitter prepares signal on the basis of the message
which is passed through transmission channel. Transmission channel is the medium over
which the signal is sent.
The receiver decodes the signal back into a message.
The
information receiver is the destination of the message.
The noise term is included in the transmission channel block and characterize the
factor which counteracts and interfere with the predictability of the communication
outcome. Noise can also be added in form of articulation diﬃculties of the speaker.
The model is important to keep in mind when considering the principles of transmission
and perception of human communication.
The speech production block and the transmission channel of the communication model
are the foundation of a wide range of bandwidth extension systems and are crucial to
understand as they are often what is being approximated in statistical ABE methods.
2.1.1
Speech Production
Human speech is highly non-stationary and is extremely hard to model due to the con-
stant ﬂuctuation across time. When studying a speech signal in a shorter time frame
it can on the other hand be considered partly stationary. But only when analyzing it
in a 10-30 ms time frame [Loizou, 2013].
The speech signal is produced when air is pressed from the lungs through the vocal
tract and on through the mouth and nose cavities [Poulsen, 2008]. The intensity of the
sound is deﬁned by the intensity of the air ﬂow from the lungs. The tension and length
of the vocal folds determines the pitch of the signal.
The timbre of an individual is unique and is determined from a wide range of diﬀerent
6
==PAGE:14==
2.1. COMMUNICATION MODEL
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
parameters. The shape and size of the vocal tract has a large inﬂuence, but also the
shape of the chest, neck and the position of the tongue can be altered to aﬀect the
timbre of an individual’s speech.
The knowledge of speech production and the communication model is important if one
wants to understand the properties and characteristics of a speech signal, and the el-
ements which speech is composed of. This knowledge and understanding is favorable
when investigating and evaluating speech enhancement algorithms. It can help to un-
derstand which speech elements are important if one wants to improve speech quality
and/or intelligibility.
Technical Model of Speech Production
The source-ﬁlter model is a very recognized method to model speech production (ﬁg.
2.2) and is motivated by the actual human speech production system. The model is,
as the name suggests, a decomposition of the speech signal into two parts. The source
(excitation) part and the ﬁlter part.
The source part of the model can be related to the human vocal folds from where an
excitation signal is produced. The excitation signal can be periodic or non-periodic.
The ﬁlter part of the model can be viewed as the vocal tract and cavities in the mouth
and the nose. The vocal tract acts as a ﬁlter which shapes the spectra of the excitation
signal coming from the source (vocal folds).
7
==PAGE:15==
2.1. COMMUNICATION MODEL
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.2: The Source Filter model of speech production. The power spectra of the
excitation and output signal are shown for an idealized voiced speech sound.
The
speech signal is shaped by the auto-regressive (AR) vocal tract ﬁlter H(z). (Figure from
[Erik Larsen, 2005])
The technical model have achieved a wide acceptance in application such as speech
codex, and vocoders [Rabiner and Schafer, 1978; Flanagan, 1978]. This is properly
due to it’s simplicity. It is a simplistic linear model of speech production in which
the source (vocal folds) is uncorrelated with the ﬁlter (vocal tract). Further more is it
assumed that the relationship between the pressure and the velocity is linear. None of
these factors is in reality so simple, and the complete model is much more complex and
non-linear.
2.1.2
Speech Material
The spoken language is constructed from a relatively low number of building blocks.
These building blocks are known as phonemes. A phoneme is deﬁned as the small-
est meaning-distinctive part of the speech signal. Phonemes can be decomposed into
diﬀerent categories. The categories are illustrated in ﬁgure 2.3.
8
==PAGE:16==
2.1. COMMUNICATION MODEL
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Diftongue
Vowels
Fricatives
Stops
Nasals
Labials
Phonemes
Consonants
Figure 2.3: Overview of the diﬀerent phoneme categories. Phonemes can be split into
three main categories. The consonant category can further be divided into four subcate-
gories
The fricatives and the stop can further be divided into voiced and unvoiced speech
sounds.
Voiced and unvoiced speech are standardized way to classify speech sounds. It is a way
of grouping and labeling speech sounds in phonetics and phonology. Voiced sounds are
produced by vibration of the vocal tract, and includes consonants such as /b/ and /g/.
The spectrum for voiced sounds follows the formant structure [Poulsen, 2008]. The
formant peaks varies according to the speciﬁc sound.
Unvoiced sounds are on the other hand produced without any vibration of the vocal
tract, and includes consonants like /k/, /p/, and /f/. Unvoiced sounds are instead
produced by diﬀerent variations of air ﬂow modulation. For example /f/ is produced
by pressing air out between teeth and the lips. /p/ is produced from a sudden opening of
the air ﬂow. The spectrum for unvoiced sounds does not follow the formant structure.
Figure 2.4a shows the spectrogram of 15 consonant-vowel (CV) combinations.
All
consonants are followed by the vowel i.
9
==PAGE:17==
2.1. COMMUNICATION MODEL
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
(a) Spectrogram of the 15 CV combinations used in [Dau, 2017]. Every consonant is followed by the
vowel i. The CV tokens are recorded with the reference microphone.
(b) Same CV combinations as above, but recorded with the BCM. The BCM recorded CV combinations
all show large attenuation of the frequencies above 4 kHz. The frequency range below 4 kHz show
signs of degradation.
Figure 2.4: Comparison between the spectrogram representations of 15 CV combinations
recorded with an ACM and a BCM.
From ﬁgure (2.4a) a connection between the categorization of the phonemes and the
spectrogram representations can be observed. For the consonants /s/ and /sj/ a large
10
==PAGE:18==
2.1. COMMUNICATION MODEL
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
amount of broadband energy is present before the vowel. These are both categorized as
fricatives since the sound comes from turbulent noise produced with the lips or teeth.
Turbulent noise is often broadband.
Bone Conduction
ACMs are the most commonly used microphones to capture speech signals. From a
practical point of view ACMs have to be mounted close to the mouth which makes
them unpractical in a dynamic environment. The so-called boom microphone which
is mounted on the head is one solution to this problem. One essential problem still
remains, a ACM is not very eﬀective in noisy environments. The ACM is not shielded
from unwanted sounds from the surroundings, resulting in a signiﬁcantly loss of speech
intelligibility at low signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs).
A BCM is a potential replacement. The BCM is attached to the users head and cap-
tures the vibrations of the skull which occurs when a speech signal is being produced.
Besides the attachment which makes the BCM more optimal in dynamic environments,
the most important advantage of the BCM is the minimal signal interference of un-
wanted noise from the surroundings.
An issue accompanied with the BCM is it’s limited bandwidth of the speech signals
captured by the microphone. The limited bandwidth of the speech signals often leads
to a reduced speech quality, loss of speaker characteristics and in worst case a reduced
speech intelligibility [Shin et al., 2012].
Compared to natural speech, band-limited speech signals have signiﬁcantly degraded
speech quality. Eliminating the high-frequency components above 3-4 kHz leads to a
reduction of phoneme recognition. The band-limited speech is also described as ’muf-
ﬂed’, indicating the lack of high frequency speech components. The absence of these
can result in a reduced ability for the listener to identify the speaker.
2.1.3
Speech Perception
Depending on the quality of the transmission channel the desired signal can be de-
graded on a more or less severe grade. The degradation of the signal can impact the
11
==PAGE:19==
2.2. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
intelligibility of the speech material in a way that the word are unrecognizable and the
meaning and context of the speech is lost. Another aspect is the amount of cognitive
eﬀort the listener has to put into the task of understanding the speech. When noise
is added to the speech signal the cognitive eﬀort is increased and the amount of brain
power that can be utilized on other tasks is decreased.
2.2
Artiﬁcial Bandwidth Extension
Speech enhancement aims at improving the intelligibility and perceptual quality of
speech signals, by the use of signal processing algorithms. Artiﬁcial bandwidth exten-
sion (ABE) is a major ﬁeld under speech enhancement and is largely motivated by the
tele-community. A vast variety of ABE methods for telephone speech has through out
the years been proposed. Methods ranging from simple signal processing techniques to
more complex methods which takes the source-ﬁlter model of speech production into
consideration. More modern non-linear and statistically signal processing techniques
has also been widely investigated and has shown promising results [Fingscheidt, 2018;
Loizou, 2013].
2.2.1
Statistical Artiﬁcial Bandwidth Extension Methods
Several statistical learning approaches have been thoroughly investigated through out
the last decays. Statistical learning approaches such as Gaussian mixture model and
Hidden Markov model.
Gaussian mixture models are a probabilistic model which characterizes the problem by
assembling weighted multivariate Gaussian distributions and through the use of the an
Expectation-Maximization iterative learning process try to classify the input data.
Speech is temporal dependent, meaning that each time frame in speech processing
is dependent on the previous time frame. The Hidden Markov model exploits these
temporal dependencies and incorporate these dependencies to estimate a bandwidth
extension.
The Hidden Markov Model is often considered as a more sophisticated
method than the Gaussian mixture model, since it utilizes temporal information hidden
in a speech sequence which evolves over time.
12
==PAGE:20==
2.3. NEURAL NETWORKS
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.3
Neural Networks
Artiﬁcial neural networks have in many years been studied for the purpose of archiv-
ing human like performance in all sorts of aspects. Neural networks are as the name
implies a computational model inspired by the biological neural system observed in
brains. The networks are made up of simple computational elements (nodes) called
neurons (ﬁg: 2.5).
The neurons are connected by links with variable weights in a
densely connected network structure. The computational nodes perform simple calcu-
lations like additions and multiplications and the output is passed through a non-linear
term called an activation function [Lippmann, 1987]. A neural network is often used to
perform a non-linear mapping between some input data and some output data. It has
through studies been shown that a neural network can successfully realize and model a
wide range of complex non-linear functions [Nielsen, 2017].
The neural network is presented with input data. At each neuron the the data is sys-
tematically added up and the output is calculated on the basis of a given non-linear
activation function. The output from the activation function is added together with
a bias, which acts as an oﬀset. The output of a neuron is then fed to the next layer
also consisting of neurons. The strength of the data fed from neuron to neuron is de-
terment by the connection links between them, called weights. The weights and biases
are changeable and are adapted during a training phase to optimize the output of the
neural network.
13
==PAGE:21==
2.3. NEURAL NETWORKS
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
x1
x2
xN
w1
w2
wN
y
INPUT
OUTPUT
Figure 2.5: A visual illustration of the mathematical process inside a neuron. Each input
(x1, x2, xN) to the neuron is multiplied with a corresponding weight (w1, w2, wN) and
summed. A bias term (w0) is added, before processed by an activation function f.
Figure 2.5 illustrates the mathematical process which occur in each neuron. The process
is given by following equation:
y = f


N
X
i=1
wixi + w0


(2.1)
Where x = [x1, x2, ..., xN] deﬁnes the inputs and w = [w1, w2, ...wN] deﬁnes the weight
parameters. f(·) is the activation function.
The activation function deﬁnes how the neuron responds to a given input. A wide
range of diﬀerent activation functions has been the focus of research over the years
[Lippmann, 1987]. An example is the simple threshold based activation function, telling
the neuron to be active if the output is greater than a threshold, and not active if
the output is smaller than the threshold. This is a binary approach and is not very
ﬂexible. Another very popular activation function, especially in classiﬁcation tasks, is
the Sigmoid function. The Sigmoid function is a smoothed step function. Opposite
to the step function it produces non-binary outputs and have a smooth gradient. The
output of the Sigmoid activation function is limited in the range between zero and one
which means that the outputs can’t explode. The Sigmoid activation function is given
14
==PAGE:22==
2.3. NEURAL NETWORKS
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
in equation 2.2
f(x) =
1
1 + e−x
(2.2)
The most recent and very popular activation function is the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU)
which equation is shown in 2.3. The paper [X. Glorot and Bengio, 2011] explores the use
of ReLUs as an alternative to the Sigmoid activation function. They suggest that the
ReLU activation function is of special interest because it is a more realistic model of a
biological neuron. An important point to make is the increased sparsity in the network
structure introduced by the ReLU activation function. For large network structures
with a large amount of neurons, the Sigmoid function will cause nearly all neurons to
activate, which means that all neuron outputs will be processed to describe the output
of the network. The ReLU function outputs 0 for negative values of x, meaning that
for a random weight initialization half of the neuron outputs will become zero. This
reduces the computational cost of the network signiﬁcantly, and allow for more sparse
and eﬃcient model.
f(x) = max(0, x)
(2.3)
The ReLU activation function introduces a new issue known as ”the dying ReLU prob-
lem”. A ReLU neuron can ”die” under the backpropagation phase (Backprop. sec:
2.3.2), meaning that the weights and the bias’s gets updated in such a way that the
ReLU neuron ends up in a state which its unlikely to recover from. An example could
be that the neuron learns a large negative bias term. The problem originates in the
region for negative x values, where the activation will result in zero. This means that
the weights will not get adjusted during the gradient descent phase. This problem can
cause that a large amount of the neurons stops responding and that way making a con-
siderable part of the network passive. Even though that a Sigmoid neuron can suﬀer
from a similar problem, there will at least always be a small gradient allowing them to
recover eventually.
A solution to the dying ReLU problem is to allow for a small, non-zero gradient for
negative x values. Meaning that for negative values of x, the activation function will
15
==PAGE:23==
2.3. NEURAL NETWORKS
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
not output zero. This solution is called a Leaky ReLU activation function. The idea
is simply to allow the neuron to recover during training, by letting the gradient diﬀer
from zero. The diﬀerence between the ReLU and the Leaky ReLU activation function
is illustrated in ﬁgure 2.6.
yi = 0
yi = xi 
y
x
yi = aixi 
yi = xi 
y
x
ReLU
Leaky ReLU
Figure 2.6: The left ﬁgure presents the ReLU function and the right ﬁgure presents the
leaky ReLU function. The ai value in the leaky ReLU function determines the size of
the ’leak’.
2.3.1
Cost Function
A cost function is a function which outputs a scalar that quantiﬁes the error of the
performance of the neural network.
Choosing the right cost function is crucial to achieve the desired result of a network. The
optimal cost function depends on the speciﬁc task. Choosing the right cost function
aﬀects how quickly and accurately the network learns the correct weight values. A
general rule is to use a cross entropy cost function for classiﬁcation and a mean squared
error for regression problems. But if one has a large prior knowledge about the data,
and know exactly what the neural network should achieve, a more specialized cost
functions can be considered.
As this project focuses on a regression problem the mean squared error cost function is
chosen:
C(w, b) = 1
2n
X
x
||y(x) −a||2
(2.4)
Where w is the collection of weights, b is the collection of biases, n is the total number
16
==PAGE:24==
2.3. NEURAL NETWORKS
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
of inputs to the network, y(x) is the target output and a is the a vector containing the
predictions of the network for input vector x.
In classiﬁcation tasks the link between the cost function and the performance of the
network is straight forward. If the task is to classify handwritten digits the cost function
usually returns the number of misclassiﬁed digits in percentage.
The task of bandwidth extension of speech is much more complex. A minimal error
between the output and the target doesn’t necessarily result in a perceptually better
result, since low and high frequencies have a diﬀerent impact on speech quality and
intelligibility [Erik Larsen, 2005]. This could lead one to use a perpetually inspired
function as PESQ or short-term objective intelligibility (STOI). But two assumptions
needs to hold for a cost function. The ﬁrst assumption that needs to hold is that the
cost function should possible to write as an average over cost functions for individual
training examples. The second assumption is that the cost function can be written as
a function of the outputs from the neural network. Both of these assumptions holds for
the mean square error (MSE) [Nielsen, 2017]. But since PESQ and STOI require time
signals as inputs and the output of the network is frequency bins (see chapter 3), both
assumptions would violated with those cost functions.
2.3.2
Backpropagation
The backpropagation scheme is responsible for updating the weights and biases in the
neural network and that way optimizing the performance of the network. This means
that the main goal of the backpropagation scheme is to update every weight and bias
so that the output of the network results in the lowest possible error.
To understand the backpropagation scheme it is important to understand how changing
the weights and biases in a network changes the cost function [Nielsen, 2017]. Meaning
determining the partial derivative of the cost function:
δC
δwl
j
δC
δbl
j
(2.5)
Equation 2.5 illustrate the partial derivatives of the cost function in relation to the
weights (w) and in relation to the bias (b). l indicates the layer and j specify the
17
==PAGE:25==
2.4. NEURAL NETWORK STRUCTURES
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
neuron.
The derivative of the cost function in a speciﬁc point gives the rate at which the function
is changing with respect to the weight and biases. The backpropagation scheme analyses
and exploits the rate at which the cost changes relatively to the changes on the weights
and biases.
The backpropagation scheme is based on a set of fundamental equation, which together
determine how the weights and biases of the network should be changed in order to
minimize the performance error [Nielsen, 2017].
2.4
Neural Network Structures
2.4.1
Supervised Learning
Machine learning algorithms are often classiﬁed into two groups, supervised learning
and unsupervised learning.
Supervised learning is the most common and straightforward machine learning tech-
nique, and is as the name suggest a technique where the learning process is supervised.
In a supervised learning process prior knowledge regarding the ground truth is used
to train the model. In a supervised regression problem the goal is to learn a function
which given an input performs a mapping to a desired output.
Unsupervised learning is more towards what is known as artiﬁcial intelligence. As the
name suggest unsupervised learning is a technique where the algorithm is unsupervised
and learns patterns without human guidance.
Supervised learning is commonly used in regression problems. If a system is given by
f(X), with input X and a known output Y , supervised learning can be used to learn
or approximate the system which maps the input variable to the output variable. The
approximated mapping function can than after the training phase be used to predict
the output for new unseen input data.
2.4.2
Feed-Forward Neural Network Structure
The Feed-Forward neural network structure is also known as a multi-layer perceptron
structure [Nielsen, 2017]. Perceptrons were ﬁrst described by the scientist Frank Rosen-
18
==PAGE:26==
2.4. NEURAL NETWORK STRUCTURES
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
blatt back in 1950s. Perceptrons are strongly related to neurons which were described in
the a previous section. The feed-forward structure follows a few simple characteristics.
First of all the neurons are arranged in layers. The ﬁrst layer, called the input layer,
processes the inputs, and the last layer, called the output layer, produces the outputs.
In between the input and the output layers are a series of so called hidden layers.
Second of all the information is always fed forward in the network, hence the name.
Furthermore there is no connection among the neurons in the same layer. If the network
is dense every neuron in one layer is connected to every neuron in the next layer.
Hidden Layers
Output
Layer
Input
Layer
Figure 2.7: The structure of a fully connected neural network. The diagram illustrates
how the inputs are connected to the neurons in the hidden layers. Two hidden layers are
shown, but more could be utilized. The outputs of the last hidden layer are connected
to an output layer.
The simplicity of feed-forward networks also has a down side. In machine learning a
phenomenon called the Curse of Dimensionality is used to describe various challenges
and can also be used to describe one of the limitations of the FFN structure [Bishop,
2006]. Because the ﬁrst hidden layer of the FFN is fully connected to all the input
features the number of parameters can explode if the dimensionality of the input features
increase [Nielsen, 2017].
19
==PAGE:27==
2.4. NEURAL NETWORK STRUCTURES
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.4.3
Convolutional Neural Network Structure
The convolutional neural network architecture takes advantage of structural relations in
the data. This could be the spatial relationship of pixels in an images or the temporal
relations of data points in a time-series. The technique have had a large impact on
reigniting the interest of neural networks.
The convolution neural network structure is in many ways very similar to the feed-
forward neural network structure. It is also made up of neurons arranged in layers
and each neuron have both trainable weights and biases. Each neuron receives input
data which has been processed by the weights. A cost function is used to calculate the
ﬁnal loss which is used to update the weights and biases of the network. The major
diﬀerence is that the convolution network assumes that the input data contains useful
structural information, which allow for certain beneﬁcial properties when designing the
network architecture.
The convolutional neural network architecture is build on three basic ideas, local re-
ceptive ﬁelds, shared weights, and pooling ﬁg: 2.8 [Nielsen, 2017].
Local receptive fields
Weight sharing
Pooling
Input data
Convolution layer
Subsampling layer
Figure 2.8: Convolution Structure. The blue and red squares visualize the local receptive
ﬁelds of the convolution layer. The values of the convolutional layer are pooled together
in smaller ﬁelds to condense information [Nielsen, 2017].
In the feed-forward network structure each input is connected to every neuron in the
20
==PAGE:28==
2.5. OBJECTIVE METRICS
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
ﬁrst hidden layer, making it dense.
As the dimensionality of the input features to
a convolutional network often is high, it makes it impractical to use the feed-forward
structure as the number of parameters will explode. In CNN every input is therefore not
connected to every neuron in the hidden layer, instead the inputs are grouped together
in small, localized regions which is connected then to a neuron in the hidden layer.
Such a region is called a local receptive ﬁeld. The size of the region can be changed, as
well as the overlap between regions. The overlap is determined from the stride length.
The stride length is deﬁned as how far the local receptive ﬁeld is being moved. If the
overlap is large, meaning the stride length is small, a larger amount of weights has to
be utilized.
Each neuron in the hidden layer is connected to it’s corresponding local receptive ﬁeld
and in that ﬁeld all weights and bias are shared. This means that even though the local
receptive ﬁeld changes position the weights and biases are the same. The hidden layer
detect exactly the same ’feature’, just in diﬀerent places. The shared weights and bias
are often called a kernel or a ﬁlter. By increasing the amount of ﬁlters the network can
capture more features, which can be valuable when dealing with complex inputs.
The third part of the convolutional structure is the sub-sampling layer often known as a
pooling layer. Pooling layers are placed after a convolutional layer and can be viewed as
down-sampling layers or a way to condense the spacial information extracted from the
convolutional layers. That way reducing the amount of parameters and computations
in the network.
After the three described building blocks one or more fully connected layers are often
used to make the network learn on a more abstract level and to integrate the global
information from the convolutional layers.
2.5
Objective Metrics
To evaluate the performance of speech enhancement algorithms objective metrics are
often used as a way of quantifying speech quality or speech intelligibility diﬀerences
by a mathematical comparison between a reference and a degraded signal. Objective
metrics, as the name implies, are impartial and are not aﬀected by subjective opinions
or interpretations.
21
==PAGE:29==
2.5. OBJECTIVE METRICS
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Three diﬀerent objective metrics are used in this project; Perceptual Evaluation of
Speech Quality (PESQ), Magnitude Correlation Coeﬃcient (MCC) and Short-Term
Objective Intelligibility (STOI). PESQ is, as the name implies, a measure of the speech
quality and has in previous studies has been used to evaluate performance of ABE
algorithms. The wide band (WB-PESQ) measure was used to evaluate speech quality
in [Fingscheidt, 2018]. It is an algorithm that analyses speech sample-by-sample for
corresponding degraded and reference signals. The WB-PESQ framework models the
mean opinion score (MOS) which is a subjective measure used to assess the quality of
a stimuli or system. MOS is rated on a scale from 1 (bad) to 5 (excellent).
The MCC metric is an objective measure of the magnitude spectrum correlation be-
tween a degraded signal and a reference signal. This is an interesting metric because
it allow for an correlation analysis of energy in speciﬁc frequency bins. In relation to
ABE algorithms it allow us to quantify the improvement of the high frequency content
of a signal.
STOI models the subjective speech intelligibility of signals and is based on the MCC
method. But where MCC only calculates the correlation in TF-units, STOI is used
to predict how human listeners would perceive the output of an speech enhancement
algorithm.
2.5.1
Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality (PESQ)
The evaluation of a speech processing system is often divided into two categories. The
speech quality which is categorized as the naturalness or pleasantness of speech, and
the speech intelligibility which is categorized as how understandable speech is under
certain conditions. PESQ is an objective perceptual method for predicting the subjec-
tive speech quality. PESQ was developed to perform automated objective assessment
of speech quality through telephone transmission systems. Today it is a metric which is
applied world wide in the tele-communities and in hearing research. PESQ is standard-
ized by the Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) as recommendation
P.862 (02/01) [ITU-T, 2011a]. The mapping function (P.862.1) which maps the wide
band PESQ to the MOS scale can be seen in ﬁgure 2.9 [ITU-T, 2011b].
22
==PAGE:30==
2.5. OBJECTIVE METRICS
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.9: The ﬁgure shows the non-linear mapping function from the PESQ metric to
the predicted mean opinion score. The PESQ metric outputs a score in the interval from
-0.5 to 4.5 and the MOS metric in a range from 1 to 4.5. The correlation between PESQ
and MOS was found to be (ρ = 0.92) [Loizou, 2013].
Even though PESQ is found to correlate very well in the case of quantifying degradation
due to transmission codex, it is not found to correlate with the subjective MOS test in
relation to other tasks. Tasks such as noise reduction and dereverberation. In several
publications the PESQ metric is also found to be insuﬃcient when comparing diﬀerent
ABE approaches to subjective listening tests [M¨oller et al., 2013; Pulakka et al., 2015].
[Abel et al., 2016] purpose a novel instrumental quality measure that is speciﬁcally
suited to test ABE approaches. This metric is quite new and could be a important tool
for evaluating not only ABE algorithms but also other speech enhancement algorithms.
But at the moment it is still new, and is yet to be fully tested. We will therefore in this
project not use it.
It should be stated clearly that the PESQ results should not be blindly trusted, and
it is essential to compare them to subjective measurements. This makes one wonder
why the PESQ metric is so frequently used by scientists to evaluating tasks where the
eﬀectiveness is questionable. The answer is often that the subjective metrics are more
time consuming, and that the scientists simply does not have a better alternative.
23
==PAGE:31==
2.5. OBJECTIVE METRICS
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.5.2
Magnitude Correlation Coeﬃcient (MCC)
Even though it appears that there is a correlation between the speech quality and the
speech intelligibility, PESQ was found to correlate really poorly with speech intelligi-
bility Loizou [2013]. This motivates the use of other objective metrics to evaluate the
speciﬁc aspects of the ABE algorithm.
The Spectral magnitude correlation coeﬃcient (MCC) is a measure based on how similar
the spectrum’s of the reference and the degraded signal is. The equation for the MCC
is presented in equation 2.6.
dMCC(x, y) =
J−1
P
j=0(Γx(j) −µΓx)(Γy(j) −µΓy)
s
J−1
P
j=0(Γx(j) −µΓx)2
J−1
P
j=0(Γy(j) −µΓy)2
(2.6)
Where Γx(j) and Γy(j) denotes the energy within the jth critical band of the spectrum
xm and µΓx and µΓy denote the sample mean of the clean and processed (degraded)
critical band values
The MCC metirc uses a perceptually motivated frequency analysis by the means of a
DFT based critical-band decomposition. A critical-band decomposition describes the
decomposition into frequency bands with a bandwidth estimated from the auditory
ﬁlters inspired by the human cochlea. It is implemented by applying an l2-norm on the
critical-band ﬁltered DFT spectrum (eq. 2.7).
Γxm(j) =
K/2
X
k=0
| Hj(k)Xm(k) |2
(2.7)
In a paper by [C. H. Taal and Jensen, 2011] 17 diﬀerent objective measures were evalu-
ated. Out of all 17 measures the highest correlation with respect to speech intelligibility
was obtained for the frame based MCC measure, despite it’s simplicity. The correlation
were between the objective metrics and subjective listening experiments. The subjec-
tive listening experiments consisted of word recognition rate.
The paper also conclude that the advanced objective speech quality metric PESQ has
a low correlation with speech intelligibility, which emphasizes the need for multiple
metrics.
24
==PAGE:32==
2.5. OBJECTIVE METRICS
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
The MCC metric will in this project primarily be used as a simple spectral correlation
measure, which allow us to measure how much the processed speech signal correlates
with the clean reference speech signal. The MCC metric is an interesting analyzing tool
in relation to ABE methods, as it can analyze the correlation in speciﬁc frequency bands.
This is valuable when one wants to isolate and analyze the correlation improvement
speciﬁcally for the high frequency bands.
2.5.3
Short-Term Objective Intelligibility (STOI)
The STOI algorithm was developed as an improved objective metric that correlated
well with the subjective intelligibility score [Cees H. Taal and Jensen, 2010]. The algo-
rithm is a further development of the MCC metric and is aimed at evaluating speech
signals enhanced by noise reductions algorithms. The method consists of calculating
the TF-representation of a processed speech signal and the corresponding clean ref-
erence signal. The TF-representations are calculated from 400ms, 50% overlapping,
Hanning-windowed DFT frames, which are grouped into 15 1/3-octave bands with the
lowest center frequency set to 150 Hz.
Xj(m) =
v
u
u
u
t
k2(j)−1
X
k=k1(j)
|ˆx(k, m)|2,
(2.8)
Equation 2.8 present the equation for the TF-representation of the clean reference signal
Xj(m), where k1 and k2 denote one-third octave band edges which are rounded to the
nearest DFT-bin. The TF-representation of the processed speech is obtained similarly
and is denoted Yj(m).
The TF-representation is used to calculate a intermediate speech intelligibility (eq: 2.9),
which is a linear correlation coeﬃcient between the clean and processed TF-units.
dj(m) =
X
n
 
Xj(n) −1
N
X
l
Xj(l)
! 
Y ′
j (n) −1
N
X
l
Y ′
j (l)
!
v
u
u
tX
n
 
Xj(n) −1
N
X
l
Xj(l)
!2 X
n
 
Y ′
j (n) −1
N
X
l
Y ′
j (l)
!2
(2.9)
25
==PAGE:33==
2.6. SUBJECTIVE METRICS
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
where l ∈M and Y ′ = max(min(αY, X + 10−β/20X), X −10−β/20X), where Y ′ is the
normalized and clipped TF-unit, β is the lower signal-to-distortion ratio and α is a
factor such that the energy equals the clean speech energy, within that TF-region.
The ﬁnal objective intelligibility measure is the mean of the intermediate measure (eq:
2.10).
d =
1
JM
X
j,m
dj(m)
(2.10)
where M is the total number of time frames and J is the number of frequency bins.
STOI has been found to correlate very well with subjective measurements (ρ = 0.95)
[Cees H. Taal and Jensen, 2010].
2.6
Subjective Metrics
Objective measures have the advantage of saving time, and is practically feasible when
trying to get a quick performance estimate of speech enhancement algorithms. The
objective measures are also favorable when comparing diﬀerent variants of the same
ABE method to each other. However it has been shown that a direct comparison of
diﬀerent ABE approaches using objective assessments is not optimal when compared
to subjective listening tests [Fingscheidt, 2018; Bauer et al., 2014].
This makes subjective evaluation essential and necessary to obtain a complete picture
of the actual performance. Subjective evaluations are normally performed by listening
tests and/or conversational tests.
2.6.1
Speech Quality
To this day subjective listening tests are the most recognized way of categorize the eﬀect
of diﬀerent algorithms on the sound quality [BS.1534-2, 2014]. Listening tests needs
to be carefully designed to limit the eﬀects of uncontrolled factors. The tests must be
designed so that the degradation of the audio are easy to assess on a quality scale. This
means that the scale of preference needs to reﬂect and reveal the degradation of the
audio signal. There should be a audible diﬀerence between test signals. Listening tests
must also be designed so that the subjects don’t get exhausted by the duration of the
26
==PAGE:34==
2.6. SUBJECTIVE METRICS
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
complete test, which could lead to noisy results.
Another crucial factor for obtaining reliable and repeatable test results is a subject
screening process. A screening process can include an audiogram which determines
subjects hearing ability or an expertise gauge, that is intended to measure subjects
experience and the subjects ability to listen critically.
To fulﬁll these requirements the MUSHRA: ITU-R Recommendation BS.1534-2 has
been chosen for this project. In the Recommendation, guidelines for all of these con-
sideration has been provided. A more thoroughly review of the MUSHRA procedure is
written in the evaluation section.
2.6.2
Speech Intelligibility
Speech intelligibility has been the focus of investigation for a long time and is deﬁned
as how understandable a speech signal, from a speaker, is for a listener. The speech
intelligibility is dependent on a variety of parameters. Background noise, reverberation
and the quality of the given transmission system all have a large impact on the speech
intelligibility and the listeners ability to correctly perceive the content of the speech
signal.
The inﬂuences of intonation, pauses etc. in speech also determines how a listener un-
derstands and interprets what he/she understands from a speaker.
It is important to evaluate speech intelligibility as it’s an important factor in the basic
model of communication (Shannon’s model - 1948). It involves the receivers ability to
decode the message. The ability to understand and interpret speech signals are essential
to human communication.
Studies show that speech intelligibility for narrow band speech signals is high [Erik Larsen,
2005]. In clean telephone speech it is around 99%, indicating that the beneﬁt from ABE
is small. The speech intelligibility is on the other hand signiﬁcantly reduced for narrow
band speech under noisy condition, which makes ABE meaningful. Particularly frica-
tives which contains most of energy at high frequencies suﬀer from the band limitation.
Thus, testing speech intelligibility in background noise is interesting as an extended
evaluation of the ABE algorithm.
27
==PAGE:35==
2.6. SUBJECTIVE METRICS
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
One of the most simple and recognized evaluation techniques for speech intelligibility
is the percentage of correct identiﬁed words or complete sentences in the presence of
interference. The listener is presented with a list of words or sentences that have a
known signal to noise ratio (SNR). For each of theses SNRs, a number of correctly rec-
ognized words or sentences are counted and divided by the number of presented words
or sentences to ﬁnd the probability of correct answers. These values for each SNR are
referred to as intelligibility scores and are plotted as a function of SNR which normally
results in a S-shaped psychometric function.
Usually, it’s easier and more practical to present the speech intelligibility with a single
value. To do that, the concept Speech Reception Threshold (SRT) is used [Hagerman,
1982]. This threshold is deﬁned as the SNR level for which 50% of the spoken corpus
can be correctly recognized and understood by the listener.
This type of speech intelligibility test provide an informative macroscopic evaluation.
However the results of such a method may be inﬂuenced by the listener’s cognitive abil-
ities, such as the ability to identify certain inaudible words in the context of a complete
sentence.
A way to avoid this could be to study the speech intelligibility on a more microscopic
phoneme level. More speciﬁcally a consonant recognition measurement could be very
useful in evaluating and analyzing the speech intelligibility of the artiﬁcial bandwidth
extended speech. The consonant perception measurement allows for a more detailed
investigation and provides information on which phonemes gets confused and which
phonemes that doesn’t. Another important advantage of this approach is that many
consonant speech cues contain most energy at high frequency. Studies show that con-
ﬂicting cue regions in natural speech are often correlated with consonant confusion,
which particularly arises under noisy conditions or for bandwidth-limited speech [Dau,
2017; Allen, 2012]. This is a motivating reason to use this method for ABE evaluation,
where the purpose is to reconstruct the high frequency content.
28
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3
Artiﬁcial Bandwidth Extension
In this chapter the diﬀerent building blocks of the algorithm is presented. First the
complete structure of the algorithm is brieﬂy explained followed by a detailed rundown
of each building block. Second the procedure of training a complex neural network is
explained along with the reasoning behind the iterative process.
The proposed artiﬁcial bandwidth extension algorithm is shown in ﬁgure 3.1 as a block
diagram depicting the high level building blocks which makes up the complete system.
The algorithm consists of three primary parts. (1) The feature extraction module which
as the name suggest extracts the relevant information by converting the raw input
speech signal to useful features. (2) The deep neural network (DNN) module which is
the core of the algorithm and computes the mapping between the input features |X|
and the output features | ˙X|. (3) The last part is the feature reconstruction module,
which reconstructs the enhanced speech signal by combining the output features with
the unprocessed noisy phase obtained directly from the input features.
3.1
Pre-processing
In the pre-processing step the goal is to compute an informative feature representation
of the input data.
29
==PAGE:37==
3.1. PRE-PROCESSING
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
Feature 
Extraction
Feature 
Reconstruction
DNN
∠X
|X|
|Ẋ|
Narrow Band 
speech
Wide Band 
speech
Xt
Ẋt
Figure 3.1: Block diagram depicting the high level framework for the complete artiﬁcial
bandwidth extension system. The algorithm consists of three essential building blocks.
A feature extraction and feature reconstruction block to extract and reconstruct the
features and a deep neural network block as the core engine of the algorithm
3.1.1
Feature Extraction
Feature extraction is the process of analyzing and extracting relevant information from
the input speech signal. It’s a method of guiding the network towards solving a speciﬁc
problem by choosing relevant information which the network should evaluate. Choos-
ing the features that contain relevant information always depend on the task at hand.
Feature selection for audio processing tasks often results in the utilization of a spectral
representation of the audio signal.
A digitized audio signal is a series of discrete values that represents the sound pressure
level at the location of the microphone. It would be challenging for a neural network to
learn the relationship between sound pressure level and missing frequency components,
which would be necessary for the task of artiﬁcial bandwidth extension. But if the
network is fed a spectral representation of the audio signal, the task of reconstructing
the high frequency components becomes more intuitive.
Figure 3.2 presents a closer look of the feature extraction building block. The building
block receives an input which is a raw audio signal sampled at 16 kHz. The audio is ana-
lyzed by short-time Fourier transform with 512 FFT points, 75% overlap and a Hanning
window to extract the spectral representation. Speech is highly non-stationary, but can
be considered as fairly stationary, when looking at a suﬃciently short time period (10-35
ms). The FFT size of the spectral transformation is selected to be 512 FFT points on
30
==PAGE:38==
3.1. PRE-PROCESSING
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
this bases. With a FFT size of 512 and sampling rate of 16k Hz the time period of a sin-
gle STFT frame is 512/16e3 = 32ms. It was veriﬁed that the STFT parameters met the
constant overlap add constrains, that ensures that a perfect reconstruction can be done.
Feature Extraction
STFT
log(|.|)
Mean/variance 
standardization
∠
Xt
|X|
∠
X
Figure 3.2: Diagram of the feature extraction module. The time signal is processed by a
STFT procedure and split into magnitude and phase components. Before the magnitude
features enters the neural network, the features are standardized to zero mean and unit
variance. The phase component are untouched and passed to the reconstruction stage.
The output of the spectral transformation is split into magnitude and phase compo-
nents.
The logarithm (base-10) operation is performed on the magnitudes and the
magnitudes are afterwards standardized.
The phase from the spectral representation output is unprocessed and passed directly
to the reconstruction stage.
Feature Standardization
An important feature preparation that needs to be completed before training a neural
network is to normalize or standardize the input features. Normalization is often linked
to the operation of shifting the data distribution of the features into a range of either
[0,1] or [-1,1]. Standardization on the other hand is often linked to the operation of
making a distribution more Gaussian. This is done by subtracting the mean and divid-
ing by the standard deviation. In order for the neural network to converge faster the
numeric range of the features needs to be in a suitable range for the network. A suitable
range is determined by the feature selection and type of activation function used in the
network. The most common feature standardization is the zero mean and unit variance
31
==PAGE:39==
3.1. PRE-PROCESSING
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
standardization which is found to work great for a wide range of diﬀerent network archi-
tectures and especially architectures based on the gradient decent optimization scheme
[Nielsen, 2017]. When deciding on the kind of normalization/standardization to use,
it’s crucial to inspect the activation function used in the layers. In this project the leaky
ReLU activation function was utilized. Because The leaky ReLU doesn’t saturate as
opposed to the Sigmoid function, it isn’t necessary to limit the numeric range of the
features. On this basis the standardization procedure was chosen.
The distribution of magnitude features is visualized in each feature extraction step in
ﬁgure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Histogram representation of the magnitude values across all frequency bins
in each step of the feature standardization.
Before the standardization by zero mean, unit variance a log10 operation was performed.
It was inspired by the human auditory system, which weights the frequencies similar
to a log-scale.The distribution of the magnitude features before the log operation is
presented in the top panel of ﬁgure 3.3. The log10 operation increases the dynamic
32
==PAGE:40==
3.2. NEURAL NETWORK
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
range of magnitude values, illustrated in the second panel. By then performing the
standardization as seen in the bottom panel of the ﬁgure, the dynamic range was
further increased.
3.2
Deep Neural Network
The deep neural network (DNN) is the central engine of the algorithm. The DNN
performs the actual non-linear mapping between the input and the output features.
Two diﬀerent network structures were used; the feed-forward and the convolutional.
The diﬀerent network structures and the training process is further explained in section
3.4.
3.3
Post-processing
In the post-processing step the goal is to transform the output of the neural network
back into the same domain as the input of the system, in this case the time domain.
Other processing techniques that enhances the outcome will additionally be utilized
here.
3.3.1
Feature Reconstruction
In ﬁgure 3.4 a block diagram describing the feature reconstruction procedure is pre-
sented. The output of the network is a 257 FFT-point STFT representation of the
processed speech signal.
The ﬁrst step of the reconstruction process is to shift the magnitude values of the
distribution back in the original range. This is done by scaling the variance and then
inverting the feature standardization operation.
33
==PAGE:41==
3.3. POST-PROCESSING
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
Feature Reconstruction
ISTFT
10(.)
Mean/variance 
standardization
|Ẋ|
Ẋt
∠
X
∠
Expansion
Figure 3.4: Diagram of the feature reconstruction module. To transform the output of
the network to a time signal, the procedures of the feature extraction as to be inverted.
First the output needs to be transformed into the original distribution of magnitude
values. This is accomplished by applying variance scaling (expansion) and inverting the
feature standardization. Next the inverse operation of log10 is applied and ﬁnally the
inverse-STFT is performed. The resulting outcome is then a time signal.
Second step is to inverse the log10 operation. Final step is to calculate the real and
imaginary parts to the inverse Fourier transform from the phases of the original input
and the corresponding processed magnitudes.
What is left is an enhanced reconstructed version of the input signal.
Variance Scaling - Expansion
Variance scaling is applied to shift the numeric values of the neural network output to
the same natural variance as the target speech signal.
After the inverse standardization it was observed that the variance in the distribution of
output magnitude values were lower than the variance in the distribution of the target
speech. This discrepancy motivated a scaling of the variance, which was applied on the
magnitude distribution before performing the inverse standardization. The variance
scaling can be seen as a data distribution expansion, and is simply computed by mul-
tiplying the magnitude values with a scaling factor of 1.3. Meaning that a magnitude
level of 1 dB was ampliﬁed to having a magnitude level of 1.3 dB and a magnitude level
of -1 dB was attenuated to having a magnitude level of -1.3 dB. The multiplication
factor can also be operated as a exponential factor in the linear spectrum domain.
A study from [Xu et al., 2014] observed that the global variances of the estimated fea-
tures were smaller than those of the target features. They stated that this indicates
34
==PAGE:42==
3.3. POST-PROCESSING
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
a over-smoothing problem during the DNN training process. They proposed a global
equalization factor which was multiplied by the network output log spectrum. The
global equalization factor was calculated by the diﬀerence between the variance of the
estimated features and the variance of the target features.
We found that applying the same global equalization method resulted in a too severe
equalization, which decreased the objective speech quality results. We instead found
the speciﬁc scaling factor empirically using objective experiments in which the speech
quality (PESQ) was measured. The scaling factor was chosen on the basis of obtaining
the highest PESQ score.
The scaling method was globally applied and resulted in a general attenuation of a large
portion of the noise components, due to their low magnitude level. Speech components
which have a high magnitude level was on the other hand ampliﬁed.
The method blindly enhances the modulations in the entire speech mixture, and does
not distinguish between time frames dominated by noise or speech. This can possibly
lead to an attenuation of speech components or a possible ampliﬁcation of noise com-
ponents with a high magnitude level. Both of which isn’t favorable.
35
==PAGE:43==
3.3. POST-PROCESSING
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
Figure 3.5: Time-frequency representation of a speech excerpt. The speech excerpt is
acquired from a real BCM recording. The ﬁgure present four diﬀerent versions of the same
excerpt; clean reference, unprocessed BCM, processed (predictions) and processed with
expansion. The energy of the background noise was lower for the expansion compared to
the predicted, while keeping the same energy level for the speech components.
The process of variance scaling is visualized in ﬁgure 3.5. The spectrograms present
the variations between the network outputs before and after the variance scaling. The
spectrograms show that the processed speech (predicted) without expansion have en-
hanced a large amount of unwanted noise components. Noise components with a low
amplitude, but still audible. By applying the variance scaling and expanding the out-
put magnitude distribution a large portion of the introduced noise components are
attenuated. This is illustrated in the expansion spectrogram by the reduced energy of
the background noise, while maintaining the same energy level for most of the speech
components. Especially the speech harmonics obtain a higher contrast and the distinc-
tion between speech and noise components increases. Similar eﬀects were found in [Xu
et al., 2014], which reported an eﬀectively sharped of formant peaks of the recovered
speech and suppression of residual noise.
36
==PAGE:44==
3.4. TRAINING PROCESS
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
These diﬀerent eﬀects increase the similarity between the clean reference speech signal
and the processed speech signal with expansion which results in an increased PESQ
score.
Variance scaling is through out the report sometimes denoted as Expansion.
3.4
Training Process
The training process for the neural network models is divided into three main steps.
Step one is based on a simpliﬁcation of the project task. It functions as a proof of
concept and has the purpose of determining viable methods for future steps. In the
second training step the task is more complex. The task here is to explore and solve
a more complex problem based on the viable methods determined and evaluated in
the ﬁrst step. In step three the generalization of the model developed in the second
step is explored, and the use of transfer learning is implemented to further improve the
performance of the model. The third training step steers the ﬁnal model towards real
data inputs.
An overview of the training steps is shown in ﬁgure 3.6, and each step is further de-
scribed below.
37
==PAGE:45==
3.4. TRAINING PROCESS
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
Dataset:
BP-filter 300-2500 Hz
(TIMIT corpus)
Evaluation
(Proof of concept)
Step #1
Step #2
Step #3
Training process
Training
Validation
Dataset:
Estimated BCM TF
(TIMIT corpus)
Hyper-parameter 
evaluation
Training
Validation
Dataset:
Real BCM 
Rec’s.
Final evaluation
(Test on real data)
Training
(Transfer Learning)
Validation/Test
Pre-
trained 
model
Figure 3.6: The three iterative steps of the training process in the implementation. The
ﬁrst step was a simpliﬁed problem and was used as a proof of concept. The second step
was more realistic and involved training on a synthetic data set, based on the TIMIT
corpus, which approximated the characteristics of bone conducted speech. In the third
step transfer learning was applied to use knowledge gained from the ﬁrst training stage
to train and ﬁne-tune the model using a smaller real world data set.
3.4.1
Step One - Initial Training Phase
In the initial step a simpliﬁed task was deﬁned from the overall project goal. The task
was to train and evaluate simple feed-forward and convolutional networks on a degraded
speech corpus.
The speech corpus used was the TIMIT data set. The TIMIT data set has multiple
advantages. First of all it has a very usable size it consist of 630 speakers of eight
major dialects of American English, each reading ten phonetically rich sentences [?].
It is large enough to get reliable results, while small enough to make it convenient to
try many variations of methods. Second of all the TIMIT data set is widely known
and acknowledged and has been used to benchmark many existing speech enhancement
techniques.
38
==PAGE:46==
3.4. TRAINING PROCESS
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
The degradation of the speech corpus was done by applying a simple Butterworth band-
pass (BP) ﬁlter. The BP ﬁlter transforms the speech corpus into a narrow band speech
corpus, similar to simulating a telephone transmission line. The BP ﬁlters cut-oﬀfre-
quencies were deﬁned as 300 Hz and 2.5 kHz and the ﬁlter order was 8. The idea of
starting with this simple task was to make a proof of concept and verify that it was
possible to artiﬁcially expand the bandwidth of the degraded speech signal, and recon-
struct the missing frequency components.
Starting with a simpliﬁed problem allows for a initial study of the capabilities of a neu-
ral network and the inﬂuence of basic parameters like size of the training set, feature
selection and general network structures. These are all basic parameters which have a
crucial inﬂuence on the performance of a neural network. The study of parameters in
this simpliﬁed task, can help determine the correct parameters for the more complex
task.
Even though the TIMIT data set is a simple and convenient way to evaluate speech
enhancement methods, it should be stated that performance on the TIMIT set does
not always reﬂect a high performance on other data sets. However TIMIT is a good
starting point for developing new speech enhancement algorithms.
With the simpliﬁed task deﬁned the main goal of the training process was to ﬁnd the
weights and biases that minimized the error between the output of the network and
the target speech. The regression problem was solved by processing the input features
through the neural network, and afterwards evaluating the output using a cost function.
The weights and biases were updated according to the impact they have on the cost
function. The mean squared error cost function was used.
The validation was performed after each epoch on a validation data set extracted from
the TIMIT data set. An epoch is when the complete training set has been processed.
Before selecting a validation data set it is crucial to recall the diﬀerence between a
training data set and a validation data set. Opposite the training data set which is
used adjust the weights and biases of the neural network, the validation data set is not
39
==PAGE:47==
3.4. TRAINING PROCESS
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
used to adjust anything. The validation data set is used to verify that the network’s
performance on training data correlates with the performance on unseen data. Select-
ing a validation data set which consist of features that the network has not seen before
is essential, and is the best way to predict overﬁtting.
Figure 3.7: Visual inspection of a single validation ﬁle. The left spectrogram illustrates
the wide-band clean speech signal, the middle spectrogram illustrates the band-limited
speech signal and the right spectrogram illustrates the predicted wide-band speech signal.
It was observed that the network did perform bandwidth extension.
The evaluation of the initial exploratory network analysis was based on the objective
PESQ metric, a visual inspection of the spectrograms and informal subjective listening
tests. The PESQ score was calculated from an average of 50 speech ﬁles in the validation
set and resulted in a relative improvement of 0.17 PESQ points. A visual inspection
of the spectrograms showed a signiﬁcant extension of the bandwidth of the speech. An
example is shown in ﬁgure 3.7. The visual inspection further showed that the networks
did successfully reconstruct harmonic parts of the speech.
This argues that the trained neural network was able to create and furthermore shape
the high frequency content which was removed from the input features by the BP-ﬁlter.
The informal subjective listening inspection further indicated an increase in perceived
speech quality.
40
==PAGE:48==
3.4. TRAINING PROCESS
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
The exploratory network analysis was only performed as a proof of concept, and no
extensive evaluation was therefore performed.
3.4.2
Step Two - Training with Synthetic Data
Based on the positive results from the simpliﬁed task in step one a more complex task
was deﬁned.
A diverse and representative training data set is an essential part of successfully training
deep neural networks and achieving a high performance in real world applications. In
many cases it’s not easy to obtain such a data set, and it often involves a large amount
of time spent on collecting and labeling data. Time which often is costly. To solve the
task of this project it would mean recording hours and hours of bone conducted speech,
and use this as a viable data set. This was simply not possible in the given time-frame.
A way to overcome this issue was to generate a synthetic data set. A synthetic data set
that approximates the properties of real data with respect to the degradations imposed
by the BCM. The synthetic data set can then be used to train the neural network.
Even though this reduces both cost and time, it also introduces several obstacles which
needs to be taken into consideration. First of all does the synthetic data need to reﬂect
the real data. This means that the synthetic input speech signal needs to look and
sound as close to the real bone conduction speech signal as possible. Second of all it is
crucial to consider the variety of the constructed training set. If the training set is too
uniform in form of diﬀerent types of degradations, it will negatively eﬀect the networks
ability to generalize to unseen data.
Extraction of Transfer Function
The generation of the synthetic data set was done by ﬁrst estimating a set of transfer
functions. Transfer functions which relates a recording of speech from a reference ACM
to the BCM. Diﬀerent variations of the transfer function was estimated from a set of
real recordings. They were then applied to the speech corpus by the convolution oper-
ation. The speech corpus used were once again the TIMIT data set.
The real recordings were obtained in a controlled lab environment, with 22 diﬀerent
41
==PAGE:49==
3.4. TRAINING PROCESS
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
speakers (4 womens/18 male). Each speaker recorded for a total duration of 15 min-
utes with 3 reﬁtting. Meaning that each recording had a duration of 5 minutes. The
speciﬁc ﬁtting of the microphone have a signiﬁcant impact on how the transfer function
is composed. By reﬁtting the microphone multiple times a more comprehensive and
general representation of the BCM was obtained. In addition to the BCM a reference
ACM was placed near the speakers mouth to record the clean reference signals. The
total data set of real BCM recordings consists of 66 recordings each lasting 5 minutes.
The MATLAB function tfestimate was used to estimate the transfer function between
the ACM and the BCM. The MATLAB function is based on Welch’s method to estimate
transfer functions [Welch, 1967]. The Welch’s method estimates the power spectral
density at diﬀerent frequencies and computes a modiﬁed periodogram which reduces
the noise in the estimated power spectrum, by reducing the frequency resolution. With
the ACM signal as input x and the BCM signal as output y the transfer function was
estimated as:
H1(f) = Pyx(f)
Pxx(f)
where Pyx is the cross power spectral density of x and y, and Pxx is the power spectral
density of x.
42
==PAGE:50==
3.4. TRAINING PROCESS
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
Figure 3.8: Variation in the transfer functions estimated on the basis of the speech corpus
recorded through the bone conduction microphone. The transfer function estimate was
very speaker depended and changed a lot according to the speciﬁc ﬁtting. These large
variations are shown by the plotted standard deviations.
Figure 3.8 illustrates the variation in the estimated transfer functions. The variation in
the estimated transfer functions are largest for frequencies below 100 Hz. The variation
is smaller and more constant for the frequency range above 100 Hz.
From the variation in ﬁgure 3.8 it’s clear that the transfer function depends strongly
on the speaker, and the speciﬁc ﬁtting. However the tendencies are pretty consistent.
Tendencies as the peak at 300 Hz and around 2 kHz. Furthermore a dip around 1 kHz
is pretty consistent.
The synthetic data set should be a more general training set which is a better repre-
sentation of the real problem.
Noise Estimation
To achieve the best possible performance it is crucial to approximate the real record-
ings as closely as possible. To be able to do this the bone conduction microphone was
inspected. By inspection it was clear that the transfer function extracted above was
not the only thing which distinguish and signiﬁes the BCM. From audible inspection a
43
==PAGE:51==
3.4. TRAINING PROCESS
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
signiﬁcant stationary noise component was found. The noise component was similar to
white noise and by inspecting the spectrogram the noise was found to be wide-band.
To approximate the real data this noise component was also approximated and added
to the synthetic training set. To get the best and the most accurate approximation,
the noise component was extracted from real recordings. This means that several silent
recordings was recorded. This way the recordings only contained the noise components
which were mixed in on top of the synthetic data, at diﬀerent SNRs. The SNRs was
chosen on the basis of audible and visual inspection.
This more complex data set was used in a second training process which also result in
a more demanding prediction task. However it’s a much better approximation of the
real problem and is an essential step towards a high task performance using real bone
conduction speech data.
Bias-Variance Trade-oﬀ
An important dilemma when considering training data in general is the bias-variance
trade-oﬀ[Bishop, 2006].
The bias-variance trade-oﬀis of interest when comparing
model complexity and amount of training data.
High variance in the model parameters leads to overﬁtting. In that case the network
is too complex to the amount of data present in the training set, which means that
the network can’t learn the patterns of the data. This issue is often indicated by the
training error not correlating with the validation error. The issue of overﬁtting is further
explained in section 3.4.4. To solve the high variance problem it can be necessary to
increase the amount of data, not only the size but more importantly the diversity.
A high bias in a model leads to underﬁtting, and is caused by a model which is too
simple or general for a large amount of data, meaning that there isn’t enough ﬂexibility
in the model to adapt to all the training data. In this case adding more data will not
help, and it is necessary to limit the data set. The network can simply miss relevant
relations between input and output features.
44
==PAGE:52==
3.4. TRAINING PROCESS
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
Hyper-parameter Tuning
Hyper-parameters optimization is an important part of deep neural networks and the
large amount of parameters are one of the central reasons why DNNs are diﬃcult to
conﬁgure. Furthermore individual models are normally slow to train. This means that
it is often not time-wise feasible to test all the diﬀerent parameter combinations. It
is therefore essential to choose the most signiﬁcant hyper-parameters which have the
largest impact on the network performance.
Hyper-parameters can be divided into two groups; optimization and model speciﬁc
parameters. Optimization parameters includes, but are not limited to, learning rate,
mini-batch size and total number of training steps. Model speciﬁc parameters includes
the number of layers, number of units, type of activation function, type of regularization
and weights initialization.
To limit the amount of time spent investigating the diﬀerent hyper-parameters only a
few were chosen to be further investigated with a grid-search.
According to [Bengio, 2012] learning rate is the single most important parameter to
tune, as it controls how the optimization algorithms moves around the weight-variable
space. A too large learning rate can result in overshooting and makes ﬁnding the global
minimum of the cost function diﬃcult, which makes convergence hard. A too small
learning rate can on the other hand result in slow convergence, and the chance of end-
ing up in a local minimum increases.
Based on informal pilot tests the second hyper-parameter chosen to tune was the num-
ber of layers. The number of layers are a complicated thing and there aren’t any speciﬁc
rules on the subject. However there is a few guidelines on the subject. One hidden layer
is often suﬃce for simple data sets, and with more complex data sets additional layers
may be valuable. The network is able to learn and adapt to more complex data structure
when containing multiple layers, which allow the network more ﬂexibility. However a
large number of hidden layer also leads to challenges. By increasing the number of layers
the neural network gets much more complicated to train [Nielsen, 2017]. This is primar-
ily due to the vanishing gradient problem. The vanishing gradient problem occur from
using the gradient descent optimization scheme. The weights are updated backwards in
45
==PAGE:53==
3.4. TRAINING PROCESS
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
the back-propagation scheme, by calculating the gradients of the errors with respect to
the weights. The speciﬁc problem occurs because the calculated gradients get smaller as
the scheme moves backward in the network. This result in a slower learning process for
the neurons in the ﬁrst hidden layer compared to the learning process in the later layers.
It’s important to notice that a full multi-dimensional grid search of all the hyper-
parameters are the most thorough way of optimizing a neural network, but the amount
of time and computation power needed to do such an experiment was not doable in
this project. The grid-search experiment description and results are found in section
4.1 and in section 5.1.
3.4.3
Step Three - Training with Real Recordings
The third and ﬁnal step aims to solve the overall goal of extending the bandwidth of real
recordings of the BCM. Even though the performance of a neural network trained on
synthetic band-limited speech data can be interesting from an academic point of view,
it is rather uninteresting if the performance is not reﬂected in a real world setting.
Meaning that if the performance decrease signiﬁcantly when the network is exposed to
unseen real world bone conducted speech signals. Since it is close to impossible to con-
struct a synthetic data set which is indistinguishable from real world data, it is expected
that the performance of the pre-traind neural network won’t be able to generalize to
real world inputs. And informal listing test conﬁrmed that theory.
To solve this issue the obvious choice would be to use real world recordings as train-
ing data instead of the synthetic data. But he idea behind generating synthetic data
was because there wasn’t enough real world data. A solution to the restriction in the
amount of training data could be to utilize the means of transfer learning. The best
feed-forward and convolutional network conﬁguration from the two grid searches were
picked and laid the basis for models covered in this section. And thus, the third and
last training step revolved around utilizing transfer learning to improve the network’s
generalization ability towards real world data.
46
==PAGE:54==
3.4. TRAINING PROCESS
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
Transfer Learning
Transfer learning is a method where knowledge gained from solving one problem can be
utilized and applied to a related problem [Torrey and Shavlik, 2009]. This means that
the neural network which is trained on the synthetic data set can be adapted through
a new training process and applied to a real world task. This method allows the net-
work to ﬁrst learn the coarse-grained features using the large synthetic data set, and
afterwards using the small real world data set to learn the ﬁne-grained features which
ﬁne-tunes the performance of the network. This type of knowledge transferring can be
considered as a form of network weight initialization.
Transfer learning were applied for both the network conﬁgurations. The process con-
sists of two steps. First the models are trained on the synthetic data set. The idea
behind this step is that the models will learn to extend the bandwidth bandwidth of
many diﬀerent speakers, but the band-limitaion is less varied than in with the real
world data. The amount of training is controlled by an early stopping criteria. The
stopping criteria was tracking the epoch with the lowest validation error. If the valida-
tion error didn’t drop below the previous lowest within ten epochs, the training would
stop and the weight conﬁguration corresponding to the epoch with lowest validation
error was saved. In the second step the models were trained on the data set of real
world recordings from the BCM. This data set consists of signiﬁcantly fewer speakers
than the synthetic set, but the variation in degradation and SNRs are larger. The idea
is that the models have learned the basic overall patterns to extend the bandwidth of
signals, but the variations in the degradations were limited. In order to ﬁt the models
to the actual use case the real world data was used to ﬁne-tune the models.
Both models were validated by a subset of the real recordings and the training were
also controlled by the same early stopping criteria. To further increase the performance
diﬀerent generalization techniques were used. These are describe in the next section.
47
==PAGE:55==
3.4. TRAINING PROCESS
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
3.4.4
Generalization Ability
A term that has been the focus of the whole project was generalization, which is the abil-
ity to perform well on unseen data. This ability can be reduced by a number of things
the most important being overﬁtting. Overﬁtting occurs when the model is matched
too perfectly to the training data and that way learns speciﬁc correlations which only
occur in the training data. When applying the model to a test set, the model don’t
perform as expected. Overﬁtting is an important challenge in deep learning, and has
been the focus of countless research papers and is crucial avoid.
The most obvious solution to this problem was to add more data, which were why trans-
fer learning has been utilized. But other methods are also needed to further increase
the performance. Some of these methods are known as regularization [Goodfellow et al.,
2016].
Dropout
Dropout is another powerful way to avoid overﬁtting. Dropout has received a lot of
attention over the last years and is popular due to its simplicity and eﬃciency. The key
idea is to randomly discard neurons and their corresponding connections temporarily
in each training step during the training phase [Srivastava et al., 2014]. Discarding
neurons and their corresponding connections prevents the network from forming com-
plicated co-adaptions during training. This restrains the network from only using a
subset of the neurons and forces the network to use all the weights. By using all the
weights the network is more likely to generalize to new unseen data in the testing phase.
48
==PAGE:56==
3.4. TRAINING PROCESS
CHAPTER 3. ARTIFICIAL BANDWIDTH EXTENSION
Figure 3.9: The process of dropout [Srivastava et al., 2014]. During the training process
neurons and their corresponding connection are temporarily removed from the network
architecture to prevent overﬁtting and improve generalization.
Figure 3.9 illustrates the process of dropout.
Figure (a) illustrate a standard feed-
forward neural network with an input layer, two hidden layers and an output layer.
Figure (b) illustrates an possible example of a thinned version of the same neural net-
work during a training step. The thinned version is produced by applying dropout to
the network. Such a thinned version of the network is randomly produced for every
weight update. Many of the thinned versions produced during the training process
will contain the same neurons along with the same incoming and outgoing connections,
meaning that every weight will with high probability be updated multiple times during
the training process. It is hypothesized that by presenting a changing network structure
for every weight update, the individual neurons will be forced to learn internal features
independent of the rest of the network.
Another way of understanding the idea behind the dropout technique, is to think of
dropout as an averaging procedure. Randomly discarding diﬀerent sets of neurons cor-
respond to training a large amount of diﬀerent neural networks. The dropout procedure
correspond to averaging the eﬀect of a large amount of diﬀerent neural networks.
Dropout is often not the only regularization technique used to improve generalization
and is usually combined with other regularization techniques.
49
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4
Experimental Evaluation
In this chapter a series of experiments for evaluating the ABE algorithm is presented.
The experiments are split into three main categorizes, the pre-experiment, the objec-
tive experiments and the subjective experiments. The objective evaluation includes two
experiments and is performed for both the CNN and the FFN network structures and
includes the use of PESQ, MCC and STOI. The subjective experiments consists of two
listening experiments. One experiment for evaluating the perceptual quality of the output
and one for evaluating the speech intelligibility.
To conduct a thorough evaluation of the ABE methods both objective and subjective
metrics were used. Objective evaluation is a metric of mathematical comparison of the
original and processed signals. It’s a way of quantifying speech quality or speech intelli-
gibility improvements via numerical distance between the original and processed speech.
Subjective evaluation quantiﬁes the same things but by the means of human listeners
[Loizou, 2013]. For a objective evaluation metric to be valid it needs to correlate well
with the subjective evaluation results. A way of accomplishing this is by constructing
the objective metric to reﬂect certain aspects of the human auditory system.
4.1
Preliminary Experiment - Network Complexity
When the overall structure of the network has been chosen and the data set has been
collected and prepared, the ﬁnal network conﬁguration needs to be determined. This
50
==PAGE:58==
4.2. OBJECTIVE EXP.
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
process determines the complexity of the network and involves tests and evaluations
of several diﬀerent combinations of network conﬁgurations. This is an comprehensive
process and the most time-eﬃcient way to do that was to perform a grid search.
4.1.1
Experiment 1 - Hyper-parameter Tuning
The purpose of the grid search was to identify the optimal hyper-parameters com-
binations for the diﬀerent neural network conﬁgurations.
A grid search was per-
formed both for the feed forward and the convolution model structure. The PESQ
metric was used as the primary evaluation metric in the grid search. The synthetic
TIMIT data set with added noise was used as the training data (section: 3.4.2). The
grid search looped through number of layers ranging from 1 to 5 and learning rates
1e−3, 1e−4, 1e−5 and 1e−6. The diﬀerent conﬁgurations was controlled by an early stop-
ping criteria evaluated on the validation error. The evaluation was performed on the
unseen validation data set.
Table 4.1: Overview of the most important hyper-parameters for the models in the grid search.
Grid Search
FFN
CNN
Learning Rate
Variable
Variable
Fully Connected Layers
Variable
2
Neurons in FC Layers
2048
2048
Convolutional Layers
N/A
Variable
Filters in Conv. Layers
N/A
32
Dropout
25%
25%
Activation Function
Leaky ReLU
Leaky ReLU
Batch Size
32
32
4.2
Objective Experiments
The objective evaluation consisted of three diﬀerent metrics. PESQ was used as in the
pre-experiment. Furthermore the magnitude correlation coeﬃcient (MCC) and STOI
were utilized to get an objective measure of speech intelligibility.
51
==PAGE:59==
4.2. OBJECTIVE EXP.
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
A combination of these three objective metrics evaluates the diﬀerent aspects of speech
enhancement algorithms, and are a comprehensive way to objectively quantifying the
performance of the artiﬁcial bandwidth extension algorithm.
4.2.1
Experiment 2 - Objective Evaluation - PESQ and STOI
To evaluate the optimal network type and the diﬀerent aiding methods, the objective
evaluation metrics were used on a test set.
The test data set was a subset of the
real BCM recordings. It contained 20 percent of the total data set and included 12
recordings, spoken by 4 speakers. Each speaker recorded 3 sentences, where the bone
conduction microphone was reﬁtted to obtain a new variation of the transfer function.
The test data set was never seen by the trained model. This is one of the fundamental
rules for a test data set in order to be credible.
The objective experiments tested a series of diﬀerent network conﬁgurations. First of
all the two main network types (FFN and CNN) were tested and compared against the
unprocessed BCM recordings. And for each of the two main network types four diﬀerent
algorithm conﬁgurations of aiding techniques, with and without transfer learning and
variance scaling (expansion). The diﬀerent network conﬁguration are illustrated in table
5.1 along with the results of the objective metrics.
4.2.2
Experiment 3 - Bandwidth Extension - MCC
To evaluate and examine the actual bandwidth extension more comprehensively the
MCC metric was used.
The MCC metric is a simple spectral correlation measure
and is valuable in the process of examining the similarity between the spectrum of
two signals.
The metric gives the correlation coeﬃcient at the diﬀerent frequency
bands which means that the improvement for isolated frequency components can also
be assessed. A modiﬁcation to the algorithm was implemented in order to get a make
a more detailed analysis. In the original implementation the time-frequency (T-F)-
representation is decompositioned into critical bands. This decomposition was omitted
in order to get a higher frequency resolution and enable a closer inspection of the
bandwidth extension.
The experiment investigated the correlation between the test data set under diﬀerent
52
==PAGE:60==
4.3. SUBJECTIVE EXP.
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
network conﬁgurations and the corresponding reference speech signal. The test data
set was the same as experiment 2.
The network conﬁgurations under test consisted of two main network types, the FFN
and the CNN along with the expansion technique. The diﬀerent network conﬁgurations
were compared to the unprocessed BCM speech signal. The correlation coeﬃcients of
theses diﬀerent conﬁgurations were based on the mean values across the complete test
set.
4.3
Subjective Experiments
It is important to emphasize that the need of subjective evaluation is essential as a
ﬁnal evaluation. If the quality/intelligibility improvements are not seen with listening
subjects the actual eﬀect of the ABE algorithm would have to be re-evaluated. The
subjective evaluation was performed on the basis of two diﬀerent metrics.
The ﬁrst subjective evaluation experiment was a preference test and evaluated the
speech quality of the processed and unprocessed speech signals. The second subjective
experiment was a speech intelligibility listening test and evaluated the speech intelligi-
bility of the processed and unprocessed speech signals.
4.3.1
Experiment 4 - Speech Quality - MUSHRA
To evaluate the perceptual sound quality of the ABE algorithms the subjective MUl-
tiple Stimuli with Hidden Reference and Anchor (MUSHRA) method was used. The
MUSHRA is a method for subjective assessment of intermediate audio quality and
is described in the ITU-R BS.1534-1 Recommendation. The MUSHRA test uses an
unprocessed recording as the global reference, hidden reference, an anchor which is a
low-passed version (cutoﬀat 3.5kHz) of the reference and degraded signals that are
under test. The advantage of MUSHRA over the commonly used MOS test is that the
subjects are presented with all of the conditions at a time. This allows the user to make
direct comparisons of the conditions and it’s lowers the demand of remembering the
full range of degradatios from excerpt to excerpt.
In the MUSHRA test the subjects are asked to rate all the speech excerpts on a contin-
uous scale from 0 to 100 where 0 is bad and 100 is excellent. The subjects are listening
53
==PAGE:61==
4.3. SUBJECTIVE EXP.
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
for the Basic audio quality, which includes all degradation’s and artifacts present in the
signal. This gives a single value that describes the diﬀerence between the conditions
under test and the reference.
Experiment
This experiment was constructed in order to assess the diﬀerence in perceptual sound
quality of the processed speech signals. The null hypothesis (H0) was that there were
no diﬀerence, on average, between the perceptual quality of the BCM signals and the
processed signals. The alternative hypothesis (Ha) was that there were a diﬀerence, on
average positive or negative, between the perceptual quality of the BCM signals and
the processed signals. In order to reject H0 in favor of Ha the signiﬁcance level α was
set to 0.05.
The experiment was two-fold. One experiment was conducted under controlled con-
ditions using DTU’s facilities.
The other experiment was an online version of the
MUSHRA test. Identical in every way, but it wasn’t controlled. A website-link was
sent to every subject providing an online MUSHRA test along with guidelines for the
participation in the experiment.
Listeners
The subjects were split into two groups. The ﬁrst group included 8 listeners, screened
by a professional audiologist and found to be normal hearing.
Every subject were
native danish speakers and every subject signed an informed consent document, and
were reimbursed for their eﬀorts.
The second group were a select group of experienced listeners from the Hearing Systems
group at DTU and employees from Invisio Communication A/s.
Stimuli
The stimuli consisted of 11 selected sentences from the BCM recorded validation set
and one training sentence from the TIMIT database. Each sentence were truncated to
a maximum duration of 10 seconds and adjusted to 60 dB SPL. The unprocessed BCM
54
==PAGE:62==
4.3. SUBJECTIVE EXP.
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
signal was processed by the respective ABE algorithms. No noise was added, so only
the self-noise of the BCM was present. The ABE algorithms under test were the CNN
with and without expansion, and the FFN with and without expansion.
Based on an initial pilot experiment of 4 persons, the traditional low-pass anchor, was
omitted. The anchor normally has the role of being the lowest quality signal presented.
This gives the subject a range between the best and the worst quality. But in this case
the unprocessed BCM signal was signiﬁcantly worse in quality than the anchor, which
resulted in a lower dynamic range of eﬀects. The unprocessed BCM was therefore in
this experiment used as the lower bound of the quality range.
Experimental Design
In the MUSHRA test the subjects were asked to ﬁrst listen to the reference signal, then
listen to each of the presented conditions and rate each of the condition according to
the perceived quality.
Figure 4.1: Graphical user interface of the online MUSHRA test. The interface allowed
the subject to freely switch between the diﬀerent conditions, listen and rate the quality
of the sentences under each condition.
The sound excerpt was looping and the subject could freely switch between the diﬀerent
conditions. When all conditions were rated the subject moved on to the next sentence.
At any time the subject could go back to previous sentences and alter their response
and if necessary take a break. At the end of the experiment the subjects were asked to
55
==PAGE:63==
4.3. SUBJECTIVE EXP.
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
state their nationality and gender.
Procedure and Apparatus
All signals were processed in Python 3.6 with a sampling rate of 16 kHz. For group
one the playback was over a Sennheiser HD 650 headset on a HP Notebook PC with
integrated sound card. For group two the equipment couldn’t be reported as this was
part of the strategy to get as many listeners to participate as possible. The participants
were asked to use good quality headphones but since it was not possible to oversee this
we can’t be sure.
4.3.2
Experiment 5 - Speech Intelligibility - DANOK
The DAnsk Nonsens Ords Korpus (DANOK) is a type of corpus used to evaluate the
subjective speech intelligibility by consonant recognition. We refer to this experiment
as DANOK.
Experiment
The experiment was constructed in order to test if the speech intelligibility was better
or worse after the speech was processed by the diﬀerent networks. The null hypothesis
(H0) was that there were no diﬀerence.
The alternative hypothesis (Ha) was that
there were a diﬀerence, positive or negative. In order to reject H0 in favor of Ha the
signiﬁcance level α was set to 0.05. The DAnsk Nonsens Ords Korpus (DANOK) speech
corpus were re-record with the BCM. The consonant recognition test was performed
on the re-recorded speech corpus and the speech intelligibility was evaluated on the
unprocessed BCM speech and on the processed ABE conﬁgurations.
Listeners
The same eight native, normal hearing, danish listeners from experiment 4 also par-
ticipated in this experiment. They signed an informed consent document, and were
reimbursed for their eﬀorts.
56
==PAGE:64==
4.3. SUBJECTIVE EXP.
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
Stimuli
The corpus consisted of 15 consonants followed by the vowel /i/ spoken by a female
non-professional speaker. The sound levels of the 15 CV combinations were equalized
using the VUSOFT method developed by Lobdell and Allen (2007), which was also used
in [Dau, 2017]. This technique ensures that the sound level of the vowels stay close to
constant, over diﬀerent CVs, but the sound levels of the consonant parts change, this
is close to the dynamics of natural speech.
Recordings of a helicopter recorded through the BCM were used as masking noise. Dif-
ferent SNR scenarios (25 dB, 20 dB and 15 dB) were created by ﬁxing the level of the
speech to 60 dB sound pressure level (SPL) and adjusting the noise to the desired level.
The re-recording of the corpus was conducted according to the method described in
[Christiansen, 2011] with a few modiﬁcations. The corpus consisted of 6 lists with 11
CV combinations. All CV combinations were followed by the nonsense word tu, in order
to make the pronunciation more natural.
Each list was initiated by a prompting sentence ”Nu bliver der sagt” followed by three
repetitions of the ﬁrst CV:tu, then four seconds of silence and then the next three
CV:tu’s and so on. After a list was recorded a small break was taken where the speaker
was able to drink some water. After recording the hole corpus each recording of the
triplets (three repetitions of CV:tu combination) were screened for inappropriate noises
such as mouth sounds, scratches, sound from moving etc., and re-recorded if the noises
were too inappropriate.
Experimental Design
The experiment consisted of four trials; One training and three tests. Each test at a
diﬀerent SNR (25 dB, 20 dB and 15 dB). In a single trial the 15 CV combinations
were repeated six times for the three diﬀerent conditions (BCM, CNN and CNN with
expansion) resulting in a total of 270 CV combinations. 1080 CV presentations in total
during the entire experiment. After each trial a break was taken.
57
==PAGE:65==
4.3. SUBJECTIVE EXP.
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
Procedure and Apparatus
The experiments was conducted in an audio visual immersion lab (AVIL) Psy booth
at DTU. In the booth a Sennheiser HD 650 headset and a computer terminal showing
the graphical user interface was present. The presentation sound levels were adjusted
to a comfortable level for each subject. The subjects would listen to the stimuli and
immediately after chose the consonant corresponding the the perceived stimuli. After
each trial the break was taken in order for the subject to recover and clear their mind.
Figure 4.2: Graphical user interface of the DANOK experiment.
The interface was
provided by Johannes Zaar and were similar to the setup used in [Dau, 2017].
58
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 5
Results
In this chapter the results from the evaluation experiments is presented. Like the pre-
vious chapter, the experiments are split into three main categorizes, the preliminary
experiment, the objective experiments and the subjective experiments.
5.1
Preliminary Experiment - Network Complexity
5.1.1
Experiment 1 - Hyper-parameter Tuning
The hyper-parameters are determined and evaluated on the basis of the performance
of the models trained on synthetic data set, developed in the second training step. The
diﬀerent model conﬁgurations were analyzed and evaluated in a grid search. There
are inﬁnitely many diﬀerent model conﬁguration combinations to choose from. This
project focused on learning rate and number of layers. The results from the grid search
(preliminary-experiment) are presented in ﬁgure 5.1 for the FFN model and in ﬁgure
5.2 for the CNN model.
It is clearly illustrated in the ﬁgures that the learning rate have a large impact on the
performance of the network. The learning rate is the factor which determines how much
the weights of the network are adjusted with respect to the gradient of the cost function
in each training step.
59
==PAGE:67==
5.1. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENT
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
Figure 5.1: FFN grid search results from the preliminary experiment. The focus was on
learning rate and the number of layers. Every model was trained with 2048 neurons in
each layer.
Figure 5.2: CNN grid search results from the preliminary experiment. The focus was on
learning rate and the number of convolutional layers. Every model was trained with a
kernel size on 10x10, 32 ﬁlters in each convolutional layer and with 2048 neurons in each
fully connected feed-forward layer.
60
==PAGE:68==
5.2. OBJECTIVE RESULTS
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
The grid search showed that for the FFN model, the best conﬁguration was with a
learning rate of 1e−5 and two layers and for the CNN model the best performing model
had a learning rate of 1e−6 and one convolutional layer.
For the FFN model the general trend was that the performance was lower for conﬁg-
urations with many layers and low learning rate. The trends were harder to point out
for the CNN and the grid search showed larger variations between the conﬁgurations.
5.2
Objective Results
5.2.1
Experiment 2 - Objective Evaluation - PESQ and STOI
The results of the objective experiments are presented in table 5.1. The mean value
across the test set of each metric is presented and the best performing conﬁguration is
highlighted in bold. The ﬁrst row in table 5.1 correspond to the performance of the
unprocessed BCM recordings, the baseline.
Table 5.1: Results for the objective experiment performed on the the diﬀerent neural network
conﬁgurations. Variance scaling is noted as Expansion. Note: Results are presented as the
mean value across speakers and sentences of each metric.
Model
Transfer Learning
Expansion
PESQ
MCC
STOI
BCM (baseline)
N/A
N/A
1.49
0.40
0.78
FFN
yes
yes
1.92
0.68
0.83
no
1.71
0.67
0.83
no
yes
1.93
0.66
0.82
no
1.72
0.67
0.83
CNN
yes
yes
2.30
0.70
0.83
no
2.17
0.72
0.85
no
yes
2.01
0.70
0.83
no
1.85
0.70
0.84
Studying the PESQ results of the objective experiments all FFN model conﬁgurations
and all CNN model conﬁgurations signiﬁcantly improved the PESQ score. The FFN
conﬁguration without any expansion scored 1.71 −1.72 which is an improvement of
61
==PAGE:69==
5.2. OBJECTIVE RESULTS
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
0.22 −0.23, and when applying the expansion method the improvement increased to
0.44 −0.45. An interesting thing regarding the PESQ improvement for the FFN con-
ﬁguration is the little eﬀect which inﬂuence of prior knowledge have. There was no
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the model with pre-trained weights and biases and the
model without.
The CNN model conﬁgurations out-performed the FFN conﬁgurations signiﬁcantly, and
pre-training the weights and biases by the use of transfer learning had opposite to the
FNN an signiﬁcantly positive eﬀect. For the model without any pre-trained weights
and biases the improvement from the baseline was 0.36 without expansion and 0.52
with expansion. When pre-training the model on synthetic data the PESQ improve-
ment rose to 0.68 without expansion and 0.81 with expansion. These are signiﬁcant
improvements which were audible.
The results from the MCC measure presented a some what similar story. There were a
signiﬁcant improvements from the unprocessed baseline to the processed model conﬁg-
urations, for both FFN and CNN. The MCC improvements varied between 0.26 −0.32
and the diﬀerent model conﬁgurations did not eﬀect the MCC performance signiﬁcantly.
As the MCC metric was primarily used to measure how well the frequency content of
the processed/unprocessed speech signals correlates with the clean reference speech sig-
nal, the mean value improvement was not that interesting. Instead the MCC results for
the diﬀerent model conﬁgurations will be presented on a more frequency speciﬁc level
in section 5.2.2.
The results from the STOI metric did not show any signiﬁcant improvement.
The
largest improvement over the BCM was 0.07 which was well within the variations of
the observations. Among the diﬀerent network conﬁgurations the largest diﬀerence was
only 0.02.
5.2.2
Experiment 3 - Bandwidth Extension - MCC
The correlation between the spectrum of the diﬀerent processed speech signals and the
reference speech signal has been evaluated in experiment three by the MCC metric.
62
==PAGE:70==
5.2. OBJECTIVE RESULTS
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
Figure 5.3 presents a comparison of the correlation results obtained for the unprocessed
BCM baseline and for four diﬀerent model conﬁgurations for frequencies ranging from
50 Hz to 8 kHz. There was a high correlation between the unprocessed baseline and
the reference speech signal for frequencies between 300 Hz and 550 Hz. The correlation
drops between 600 Hz and 1.5 kHz. Around 5 kHz the correlation drops close to zero.
Figure 5.3: Comparison between the diﬀerent magnitude correlations versus frequency
for the diﬀerent network conﬁgurations and the unprocessed BCM baseline. All network
conﬁgurations showed higher correlation with the reference signal than the unprocessed
BCM baseline.
The correlation between the processed speech signals (FFN, FFN Exp., CNN and CNN
Exp.) and the reference speech signals showed very similar behavior as the unprocessed
baseline for the frequency range between 300 Hz and 4 kHz. However, the results from
the processed speech showed a small improvement, particularly in the dips.
The correlation for the processed speech signals compared to the unprocessed baseline
presented a signiﬁcant improvement for frequencies below 300 Hz. The correlation was
63
==PAGE:71==
5.3. SUBJECTIVE RESULTS
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
likewise signiﬁcantly improved for frequencies above 4 kHz.
The correlation for the CNN and CNN Exp conﬁgurations were nearly identical to
the correlation for the FFN and FFN Exp. with a small positive oﬀset. Meaning the
correlation value for the CNN and CNN Exp. was a bit higher
The signiﬁcant improvements presented for frequencies above 4 kHz, could indicate a
partial reconstruction of high frequency content.
5.3
Subjective Results
5.3.1
Experiment 4 - Speech Quality - MUSHRA
The results from group one of the MUSHRA test are presented in ﬁgure 5.4. The mean
results across all sentences are reported along with the 95% conﬁdence interval.
The reference condition was as expected clearly the most preferred and scored close to
100 with very little variance. The results from the speech processed by the diﬀerent
models were more varied. Three out of four networks scored a higher preference rating
than the unprocessed BCM speech condition. The three networks were the FFN with
expansion (Exp.), the CNN, and the CNN with expansion.
The FFN model without expansion was the only conﬁguration which scored lower pref-
erence rating than the unprocessed speech condition and was also the model with the
lowest score.
64
==PAGE:72==
5.3. SUBJECTIVE RESULTS
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
Figure 5.4: The average results from the controlled MUSHRA preference test across all
test sentences. The error bars mark the 95% conﬁdence interval. The reference was clearly
preferred. The three network types FFN Exp., CNN Exp. and CNN were signiﬁcantly
preferred over the unprocessed BCM signal.
In order to draw a conclusion to either accept or reject the null hypothesis a statistical
analysis was performed. The test was based on a two-sample t-test. The largest im-
provement over the BCM was observed for the CNN network with expansion at around
20 percentage points. From the statistical analysis seen in table 5.2 it’s observed that
the three network conditions that scores higher than the BCM were all statistic signif-
icantly higher. And the FFN conﬁguration was signiﬁcantly worse.
Between the three networks that scored higher than the unprocessed speech signals,
none of them were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the others.
The results from the online MUSHRA test showed a slightly diﬀerent picture than the
controlled test (ﬁg: 5.5). The results indicated that the quality of the speech processed
65
==PAGE:73==
5.3. SUBJECTIVE RESULTS
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
Table 5.2:
Statistical analysis of the controlled (Booth) and the uncontrolled (Online)
MUSHRA experiments.
Booth
Online
H0 rejected
p-value
H0 rejected
p-value
FFN Exp.
true
1.5 · 10−06
true
0.014
FFN
true
0.018
false
0.451
CCN Exp
true
2.4 · 10−06
true
0.036
CNN
true
0.009
true
1.5 · 10−05
by the same three network conﬁgurations (CNN Exp., FFN Exp. and FFN) scores
signiﬁcantly higher than the unprocessed BCM speech. However the signiﬁcance level
was lower compared to the controlled experiment.
A surprising result was that the FFN without expansion received a higher speech qual-
ity rating than the unprocessed BCM speech. Even though it ain’t signiﬁcant it was
noticeably diﬀerent from the controlled experiment result, which scored lower than the
BCM.
66
==PAGE:74==
5.3. SUBJECTIVE RESULTS
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
Figure 5.5: Mean results from the uncontrolled MUSHRA preference test. The error bars
mark the 95% conﬁdence interval. The reference was clearly preferred. The three network
types FFN Exp., CNN Exp. and CNN are signiﬁcantly preferred over the unprocessed
BCM signal.
The dynamic range of responses was lower than for the controlled booth measurement
and the largest improvement was also lower for the online test.
5.3.2
Experiment 5 - Speech Intelligibility - DANOK
The results of experiment 5 are presented in ﬁgure 5.6. The results are presented as
the mean across all CV combinations for a given network conﬁguration and a given
SNR. The results are illustrated as the accuracy in percentage of consonant recognition
for the diﬀerent SNR levels in dB, and were presented along with the 95% conﬁdence
interval.
67
==PAGE:75==
5.3. SUBJECTIVE RESULTS
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
Figure 5.6: The average results from the DANOK experiment with 95% conﬁdence in-
terval across all CV combinations for the diﬀerent SNR conditions. The results showed
very little variation across the diﬀerent SNR’s. A summary of the test of signiﬁcance can
be seen in table 5.3.
Studying the speech intelligibility results, a minor decrease in intelligibility was observed
for all network conﬁgurations, at all SNR conditions. A statistical analysis was done
with a two-sample t-test in order to test the signiﬁcance of the results. The two-sample
t-test analyses the diﬀerence of the mean values in the results and evaluates if these
diﬀerences can be characterized as signiﬁcant. The result from the statistical test is
presented in table 5.3.
68
==PAGE:76==
5.3. SUBJECTIVE RESULTS
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
Table 5.3: Statistical analysis of the DANOK speech intelligibility results for the BCM, CNN
and CNN with expansion in ﬁgure 5.6. The analysis showed if there was a statistical signiﬁcant
diﬀerence in speech intelligibility between conditions. The conﬁdence value was set to α =
0.05.
SNR
Expansion
H0 rejected
p-value
25
yes
false
0.35
no
false
0.15
20
yes
false
0.18
no
true
0.025
15
yes
true
0.018
no
true
0.005
From the statistical analysis in table 5.3 it was observed that there wasn’t any evidence
of an increase or decrease in speech intelligibility for the 25 dB SNR conditions. For
the 20 dB SNR condition only the CNN with expansion showed a signiﬁcant decrease.
Both the network types shows a signiﬁcant decrease in performance for the 15 dB SNR
condition.
Although a slight indication of an increasing intelligibility for the unprocessed BCM
with decreasing SNR was observed, the variation in the observations was too large to
denote the increase as statistical signiﬁcant. There wasn’t either any signiﬁcant diﬀer-
ence between the diﬀerent networks when compared across SNR levels.
In order to obtain a more in-depth view of the the results were analyzed by studying
the speciﬁc consonant confusions. Figure 5.7 presents a confusion matrix of the actual
pronounced consonant versus the subject reported consonant. The results are pooled
across SNRs to give a clearer view of the diﬀerent consonant confusions. The confusion
matrix is a good way of investigating any patterns in consonant confusions and that
way identify if certain groups of phonemes are harder to understand than others.
The size of the marks indicates the consonant recognition rate. A larger size meaning a
higher percentage. Marks in the diagonal indicates correct answers and marks outside
of the diagonal indicates incorrect answers.
69
==PAGE:77==
5.3. SUBJECTIVE RESULTS
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
Figure 5.7: Across listener confusion matrix for the unprocessed BCM (gray) and the
CNN without expansion (red). The responses were averaged across SNR levels. The size
of the circles indicates the proportions of responses for the individual response alternative.
Circles in the diagonal indicates correct consonant recognition’s.
From ﬁgure 5.7 it’s observed that some consonants are clearly harder to understand
than others.
Some consonant almost never get classiﬁed correctly while some gets
misclassiﬁed almost every time. An example is the /g/ and /d/ consonants. /g/ was
often classiﬁed as a /d/ than as /g/. Where as /d/ was very seldomly classiﬁed as a
g. The two consonants are in the same phoneme category of stops without aspiration,
which could indicate that they are similar in the time-frequency domain. An inspection
of this hypothesis is shown in ﬁgure 5.8.
70
==PAGE:78==
5.3. SUBJECTIVE RESULTS
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
Figure 5.8: Spectrogram representation of the consonants /d/ and /g/ under three given
conditions. The two spectrograms to the left presents the clean reference version, the
middle spectrograms presents the unprocessed BCM and the spectrograms to the right
present the CNN processed.
The spectrograms in ﬁgure 5.8 of /d/ and /g/ are presented for three conditions, the
clean reference, bone conducted and enhanced versions. Even in the reference condition
the consonants looks very similar. Both consonants are initialized by a short burst of
broadband energy followed by a harmonic part. The /d/ has a bit more high frequency
energy around 6-7.5 kHz and the /g/ has a slight positive slope towards higher fre-
quencies in the harmonic part.
When looking at the BCM condition the high frequency part, is as expected, totally
attenuated. The initial burst is almost gone as well. The only part to diﬀerentiate
them is the harmonic part. When looking at the enhanced spectrograms it’s clear to
see that some of the high frequency components (3.5-4.5 kHz) of the harmonic part has
been enhanced, but the initial burst has not. As this is the part which distinguish the
two consonants, one could argue that this is the reason for the confusion.
Another interesting observation from ﬁgure 5.7 is that out of the six consonants that
almost never gets predicted correct, three of them are fricatives. The sound of the
fricative consonants gets produced by air being pressed through the lips or the teeth,
71
==PAGE:79==
5.3. SUBJECTIVE RESULTS
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
and can be characterized as turbulent noise, and noise don’t gets easily picked up by
the BCM.
Both observations support the claim that phonemes from the same category gets more
easily confused under hard listening conditions, which is in accordance to [Poulsen,
2008].
72
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 6
Discussion
This chapter contains a discussion of the results from the experiments described in the
preceding chapter. The main discoveries are highlighted and evaluated for each experi-
ment. The last section contains additional ﬁndings which are considered of substantial
value.
6.1
Objective Findings
6.1.1
Experiment 2 - PESQ and STOI
The PESQ results observed in the experiment showed a signiﬁcant increase of speech
quality. An increase achieved by all of the DNN conﬁgurations, with the best having
a relative improvement of 53%. This was a noticeable improvement, however before
concluding anything on the basis of this result, it is crucial to return to the theory
behind the PESQ metric. The PESQ metric was developed and standardized by the
telecommunication industry, and is used to evaluate the eﬀect which a telephone trans-
mission systems has on speech quality. It can’t be stressed enough that the PESQ
metric does not evaluate the speciﬁc ABE of a given speech signal and multiple studies
show that the PESQ metric in many cases is insuﬃcient when comparing diﬀerent ABE
approaches to subjective listening tests [Bauer et al., 2014; Abel et al., 2016].
The PESQ results from the objective analysis showed that the eﬀect of pre-training
the network with a synthetic data only increased the performance of the convolutional
networks. The performance for the feed forward networks didn’t increase. This could
73
==PAGE:81==
6.1. OBJECTIVE FINDINGS
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
indicate that the convolutional network beneﬁts from pre-training due to it’s more com-
plex network structure, with more weights which can needs more information to learn.
The FFN on the other hand has fewer weights and may not be able to capture as much
information from the pre-training data set, information which can be transferred to the
ﬁnal training phase. An interesting experiment could be to further do a grid-search
on the pre-trained networks with the ﬁnal training set, to see if a more complex FFN
network would beneﬁt more from the pre-training.
The BCM training set contains a noticeable amount of constant wide-band background
noise originating from the transducer design of the BCM. Given the inherent limita-
tions of the BCM training set it’s diﬃcult to pre-deﬁne what the network should learn.
This means that the network automatically also learns to remove the background noise,
because that factor also contributes to reducing the MSE cost function. This is a fac-
tor that needs to be accounted for when evaluating the explicit bandwidth extension
ability of the algorithm. The large improvements in PESQ may partial reﬂect precisely
this noise reduction. Even though the noise reduction was a positive side eﬀect of the
network, it makes it harder to evaluate and analyze the speciﬁc bandwidth extension
of the speech signal.
This issue indicates that PESQ may not be the optimal choice, and does deﬁnitely not
present the complete picture of the performance. However the PESQ metric is proba-
bly the best standardized objective metric to predict speech quality, which is also the
reason why it’s so widely used. To account for the limitations of PESQ, both STOI
and MCC were used to consolidate and produce a more comprehensive analysis.
The STOI results didn’t present any noticeable improvement. Which will be tried to
explained with the results obtained from the MCC metric, which will be discussed in
the section below.
The test set used to assess the performance of the ﬁnal neural networks consisted of
the same 12 sentences which were used for the MUSHRA experiment. The test set
should not only assess the performance, but also the generalization ability. In order
to analyze the generalization ability a more varied test set could be of interest. Even
though the test set contained real recordings from diﬀerent speakers, they have all been
74
==PAGE:82==
6.1. OBJECTIVE FINDINGS
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
recorded in a controlled lab environment. A test set containing recordings from real
world situations would provide a more realistic test.
6.1.2
Experiment 3 - Bandwidth Extension - MCC
The limitations imposed by the PESQ metric regarding the explicit evaluation of band-
width extension motivated the second experiment. The MCC metric is better designed
for the purpose of actually examining bandwidth extension. It is a simple but very
eﬀective metric which evaluates the correlation in each frequency bin. This means that
it’s possible to observe the correlation variation speciﬁcally for the reconstructed fre-
quencies. The MCC results shown in ﬁgure 5.3 presents a comparison between the
MCCs obtained for the unprocessed BCM baseline and for the diﬀerent model conﬁg-
urations across frequencies ranging from 50 to 8 kHz. The results showed a correlation
improvement of around 0.5 for the high frequencies above 5 kHz. As the correlation was
calculated between the clean reference speech signal and the processed speech signal one
could argue that a large part of the high frequency components has been reconstructed.
It’s paramount to keep the underlying theory behind the MCC calculation in mind. The
MCC calculation is a simple energy correlation measure, meaning it does not care where
the energy comes from. The improved correlation can therefore be due to introduced
noise components, which would result in wrong interpretations of the performance.
The eﬀect of bandwidth degradation on speech has been studied in several publications.
In the book [Erik Larsen, 2005] the impact of limited bandwidth on speech quality has
been compared to the impact on speech intelligibility. The study showed that high
frequency components (> 3 kHz) of speech only has little eﬀect on speech intelligibility.
Removing the high frequency components have a much more critical impact on the
speech quality. This eﬀect was also reﬂected in our objective experiments, where it was
found that an extension of the high frequencies signiﬁcantly improved PESQ scores,
whereas the speech intelligibility (STOI) already scored high for the unprocessed speech
and did not improve signiﬁcantly.
This indicates the signiﬁcant PESQ improvement can be linked to the extension of
the high frequencies. Indicating that the method actually extends the bandwidth and
reconstruct the high frequency content, which causes the quality of the perceived speech
75
==PAGE:83==
6.2. SUBJECTIVE FINDINGS
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
to increase.
6.2
Subjective Findings
6.2.1
Experiment 4 - Speech Quality
Two MUSHRA experiments were conducted.
An experiment conducted at DTU in
controlled settings with selected test subjects, and an uncontrolled online experiment.
Both MUSHRA experiments were conducted to evaluate the diﬀerence in perceptual
sound quality between the unprocessed BCM speech signal and the processed speech
signals. The experiments evaluated four diﬀerent network conﬁgurations.
The controlled experiment showed an improvement of 20 percentage points for the
speech signal processed by both the FFN and CNN network conﬁguration with expan-
sion. The diﬀerence between the FFN and CNN network conﬁgurations with expansion
was not signiﬁcant. This is interesting since the two network types vary considerably
in complexity and since the PESQ results from the objective experiment showed a sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerence in favor of the CNN conﬁguration. This diﬀerence indicates that the
PESQ metric does not correlate perfectly with a subjective speech quality evaluation.
The memory usage of the FFN and CNN model conﬁgurations diﬀers with a factor 20,
meaning that the CNN model conﬁguration is 20 times more memory demanding. As
eﬃciency, power consumption and such aspects of implementation considerations isn’t
part of the scope for this project, it hasn’t been investigated further. But it is deﬁnitely
worth noticing and it illustrates that network complexity does not always correlate with
the ﬁnal network performance.
In the ITU recommendations [BS.1534-2, 2014] it is stated that the test subjects par-
ticipating should be experienced and critical listeners. In this controlled MUSHRA
experiment the subjects nationality and their hearing ability was taken into considera-
tion. The subject were furthermore partly characterized as experienced listeners, since
everybody previously had participated in listening experiments.
However the subjects ability to judge a sound signal critically was not part of the
selection criteria and because of this all the results were screened for outliers. The ac-
ceptance requirements of the screening was that the reference should, on a mean basis,
76
==PAGE:84==
6.2. SUBJECTIVE FINDINGS
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
not be rated lower than 95. All subjects met the criteria and was included in the results.
The online MUSHRA experiments showed a slightly diﬀerent result than the controlled
experiments. The resultin ratings appear more compressed, meaning the dynamic range
between the quality ratings are lower. This could be due to inadequate listening equip-
ment or that the experiments were conducted in noisy acoustic environments.
It’s hard to conclude why exactly the results are more compressed and it would require a
more comprehensive experimental setup to determine what factors aﬀects the outcome
of the experiment. The comprehensive experiment setup would have to contain a more
detailed description of the equipment used, and the surrounding acoustic environment
which the experiment is conducted in. Such detailed information could help investigate
how diﬀerent parameters aﬀect the experiment outcome.
Online audio experiments have in a long time been impossible due to inadequate web
standards for audio processing. But with recent advancements in the Web Audio API
such online experiments have become available. The online MUSHRA experiment is
very interesting because of it’s eﬃciency and it’s abilities to reach a wide ranging pool
of listeners. However given these results it could indicate that it’s necessary to ﬁnd a
way for subject to carry out the experiment while at the same time being compliant to
the ITU recommendations [BS.1534-2, 2014].
6.2.2
Experiment 5 - Speech Intelligibility
The results from experiment 5 presented the speech intelligibility scores for all CV com-
binations given diﬀerent CNN model conﬁgurations at diﬀerent SNR levels. The results
indicates that there is a small decrease in speech intelligibility for the CNN network
conﬁgurations compared to the unprocessed BCM baseline. It should be stated that
not all the results are statistical signiﬁcant.
The initial goal of extending the bandwidth of the degraded speech signal was to im-
prove the speech quality while maintaining or improving the speech intelligibility in
noisy conditions. However the results from the DANOK experiment indicates that this
goal has not been accomplished.
There are multiple reasons why this is. First of all predicting and improving the band-
77
==PAGE:85==
6.3. SUMMARY OF MAIN FINDINGS
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
width for the diﬀerent CV combinations under the chosen SNR conditions is an in-
credible diﬃcult task for the network. The combination of unseen noise and low SNR
levels challenges the network in terms of it’s robustness and it’s ability to generalize
to unseen acoustic environments. Taking this into consideration along with the results
which showed that the speech intelligibility doesn’t drop signiﬁcantly at 25 dB SNR,
one could argue that the robustness of the network is good. As the SNR drops to 20
dB and 15 dB the diﬀerence between the unprocessed BCM baseline and the processed
CV tokens increases, which makes sense since the prediction task gets even harder.
The DANOK results also indicated a small increase in speech intelligibility for the
unprocessed BCM baseline with a decreasing SNR. Again the result didn’t present a
statistical signiﬁcant increase. However it is an interesting result and it could indicate
that the eﬀect of pre-training aﬀect the results. A factor which is important to consider
when evaluating the implications of the DANOK experiment. For future experiments it
could be considered to expand the preliminary training phase of the experiment. This
would allow the subject to gain experience with the experiment method which hope-
fully would lower the potential eﬀect of training. This training issue could also be a
substantial cause for the increasing diﬀerence between the processed and unprocessed
results going from high to low SNR level.
It is suspected that the training eﬀect isn’t seen to the same extent for the processed
CV tokens since the noise is more unpredictable and non-stationary.
Finally it could be argued that the DANOK experiment does not represent a realistic
listing setting, and that complete sentences would be more realistic than diﬀerent CV
combinations. The DANOK experiment does provide us with a informative macroscopic
evaluation and it provides a way to evaluate and study speciﬁc consonant confusions.
6.3
Summary of Main Findings
6.3.1
Data and Feature Selection
One of the fundamental requirements for successfully utilizing the deep learning method-
ology is to have a data set that reﬂects the problem at hand. One of the major challenges
78
==PAGE:86==
6.3. SUMMARY OF MAIN FINDINGS
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
in deep learning and especially in this project was the data collection process. As getting
the right data set for solving the problem is paramount for obtaining good performance,
it has been a fundamental part of this project. The process of collecting and labeling
large amount of real world data was not an option in the time scope of this project.
This inspired the investigation of possible solutions to this issue. The solution became
to analyze a small subset of real world data and from that data create a synthetic data
set. A data set which approximated the characteristics of the real world.
The small subset of real world data was afterwards used to train and ﬁne-tune the
model. A process which increased the generalization ability of the model.
Another way to include the synthetic data could be to complement it with the real world
data, and thus creating a combined larger data set, and only training the network once.
The reason this wasn’t tried was due to memory limitations of the computer used for
training the network. But it could be a way to force the network to generalize better
to unseen data.
The correct feature selection is a vital part of designing a deep neural network and is
crucial for achieving a high performance. Even though a diverse data set is crucial, the
process of interpreting and preparing the feature representation is just as important.
Selecting and extracting the right features helps build a solid foundation for the actual
learning process. In this project the main focus has been on using frequency magnitude
features. Given the right resolution this provide a neural network with a lot of useful
information.
A frequency representation consist of two things, the magnitude part and the phase
part. This means that by only feeding the magnitude features compressed on a loga-
rithmic scale to the neural network does not provide the full picture. Studies show that
to obtain a natural sounding speech signal and thereby improve the speech quality it is
crucial to both enhance the magnitude and the phase response of the degraded signal
[Williamson and Wang, 2017; Moon et al., 2010]. So an improved result could possibly
be obtained by jointly enhancing both the magnitude and phase parts.
Enhancing the phase is tricky thing and after a couple of preliminary experiments we
chose not pursue this issue any further, primarily because it’s clear that a successful
result can be obtained by only enhancing the magnitude features. The phase issue is
79
==PAGE:87==
6.3. SUMMARY OF MAIN FINDINGS
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
worth keeping in mind for future research, since it deﬁnitely have an impact on the
speech quality.
6.3.2
Variance Scaling - Expansion
Variance scaling (Expansion) was utilized as a post-processing step and is a method of
expanding the variance of the magnitude distribution of the output. The purpose of
this step was to further improve the speech quality and the generalization ability of the
networks.
The results from the objective speech quality experiment showed a signiﬁcant positive
eﬀect from applying this post-processing step. To ﬁnd the reason for the increased
PESQ value inspected the calculations for which the PESQ metric is determined on.
The PESQ metric is calculated on the basis of the absolute diﬀerence between the clean
reference and degraded speech signals. The ﬁnal PESQ score is a non-linear computa-
tion over time and frequency and is calculated by two averages, one symmetric and one
asymmetric. The asymmetric weighted factor is only measuring additive distortions,
meaning that if the degraded signal has energy present in the frequency bins, where the
reference doesn’t, it will have a larger negative impact on the ﬁnal PESQ result, than
if the degraded signal is missing energy in the frequency bins where the reference have
energy.
The non-linear process of variance scaling attenuates a portion of the unwanted noise
components which are introduced by the neural network, this increases the similarity
between the processed and clean reference signals. This increase in similarity improves
the ﬁnal PESQ result. However the method also attenuates some of the speech com-
ponents. This were clearly visualized in the MCC evaluation which presented a lower
correlation for signals with expansion.
From an informal listening test it was concluded that the listening experience was more
pleasant, and that less artiﬁcial noise artifacts are audible.
Because the expansion
scheme attenuated a portion of the unpleasant noise artifacts introduced by the net-
work, the listening experience was more smooth. However it was also noticed that some
of the wanted speech components were attenuated. This were also illustrated in the
80
==PAGE:88==
6.3. SUMMARY OF MAIN FINDINGS
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
subjective evaluation which presented an improvement of speech quality, most signiﬁ-
cantly for the FFN.
To limit the attenuation of reconstructed speech components, it would be interesting
to look into other ways of applying the variance scaling.
Based on the ﬁndings in
[Wiinberg et al., 2018] it could be interesting to look into a T-F-frame wise SNR-
dependant enhancement scheme. By only expanding the frequency frames that met
a certain SNR-criteria the scheme could distinguish between frames containing speech
and frames containing noise and that way limit the attenuation of speech components.
Another interesting thing could be to investigate which components of the signal are
attenuated and which components are ampliﬁed. The variance scaling blindly ampliﬁed
all the T-F-bins that, in the normalized log-domain, had positive values, and attenuated
all the bins that had negative values. If it were possible to identify the T-F-bins below
zero which contained speech information, and shift them to the positive region, the
problem of suppressing reconstructed speech components could be minimized.
6.3.3
Quality vs. Intelligibility
An interesting observation which was drawn from the results of the subjective ex-
periments were that speech quality and intelligibility didn’t necessarily correlate. An
improvement in quality was found for three of the network conﬁgurations, while no sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerence in intelligibility was found for high SNR levels. The same observation
could be made for the objective measures from experiment 2. Here the PESQ results
showed signiﬁcant improvements, while the STOI didn’t.
The task of increasing speech intelligibility is hard and have been the focus of countless
studies. So when both the objective and subjective results show an increase in quality
while maintaining the intelligibility the algorithm can still be regarded as successful.
It could be interesting to evaluate the speech intelligibility further by lowing the SNR
level in the subjective DANOK experiment. By lowering the SNR, the consonant rec-
ognizing rate should theoretically drop. This would hopefully produce a more righteous
evaluation.
It should be noted that results actually already showed a slight drop in speech intelligi-
bility for lower SNR levels, which were properly due to the networks inadequate ability
81
==PAGE:89==
6.3. SUMMARY OF MAIN FINDINGS
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION
to generalize to unseen acoustic environments
A higher speech quality often lead to a lower listening eﬀort and when considering the
stress-full and critical environment where the ABE algorithm is meant to be used, this
could prove very valuable.
6.3.4
Objective vs. Subjective
When comparing the results obtained from the objective and subjective speech quality
experiments, two clear discrepancies were observed. First the CNN conﬁguration with
expansion scored almost 0.4 PESQ points higher than the FFN conﬁguration with ex-
pansion, but when looking at the subjective results the diﬀerence was negligible. Second
the FFN conﬁguration without expansion scored higher in PESQ but lower on subjec-
tive speech quality measure than the unprocessed BCM.
These discrepancies reveals one of the limitations with PESQ. The method does not
distinguish between the diﬀerent subcategories of speech quality. Meaning PESQ pre-
dicts an overall value for speech quality and does not evaluate the speciﬁc aspects of
speech quality like speech bandwidth, noise, artiﬁcial sounding noise components.
The objective measure of speech intelligibility appears to correlate well with the sub-
jective measurement. Here both metrics show no signiﬁcant improvement or decline in
intelligibility. But it should be noted that a direct comparison can’t happen since the
two experiments are conducted using two diﬀerent speech data sets.
82
==PAGE:90==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The main objective of this thesis was to implement and evaluate an artiﬁcial bandwidth
extension framework to increase speech quality while not degrading speech intelligibil-
ity for bone conducted, band-limited speech. The main focus was to investigate the
capabilities of using deep neural networks to solve the challenges imposed by bone con-
duction of speech.
In chapter 3 a framework for training and utilizing neural networks were developed.
Two neural network structures were implemented; a feed-forward and a convolutional.
To increase the amount of training data and to enhance the generalization abilities of
the networks, a synthetic data set was developed. The synthetic data set was based on
the TIMIT corpus and approximated the characteristics of bone conducted speech. The
data set was created by applying a set of estimated transfer functions based on a small
set of matched BCM and ACM recordings to the TIMIT corpus. To further increase
the similarity to real world data, recordings of bone conducted noise were added to the
corpus at varying SNR levels.
In chapter 4 ﬁve experiments were constructed in order to analyze the eﬀects of the
bandwidth extension performed by the neural networks. The experiments consisted of
both objective and subjective experiments, as this were a crucial factor for obtaining a
comprehensive evaluation.
83
==PAGE:91==
7.1. FUTURE WORKS
CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSION
Chapter 5 showed the results of the objective and subjective experiments. Both showed
that the speech quality was signiﬁcantly improved while maintaining the speech intelli-
gibility for high SNR levels. The results showed a slight drop in speech intelligibility for
the lowest SNR levels, which were due to the networks inadequate ability to generalize
to unseen acoustic environments. A technique called variance scaling was applied to
expand the output magnitude distribution of the network. The technique presented a
signiﬁcant positive impact on both the objective and subjective speech quality experi-
ments.
On the basis of this project, the use of deep neural networks proves as an attractive
solution for extending band-limited speech, and reconstruction lost speech components.
The capabilities reach beyond bone conducted speech and could be implemented to
enhance other kinds of degraded signals.
7.1
Future Works
The algorithm described and evaluated in this project is not ready to be implemented
and utilized in a real-time audio application. The size and the complexity of the neural
networks are too large and complex to meet the requirements of a real-time system and
further research should be carried out to mature the system and meet the requirements.
A future step for INVISIO Communication would be to further investigate a feasibility
of a implementation of a bandwidth extension algorithm on embedded systems.
The experimental results presented a robustness issue at low SNR levels.
A issue
which relates to the networks ability to adapt to unseen noise environments. A fur-
ther investigation into optimizing the robustness of the algorithm towards unseen noise
environment could be interesting. Such an investigation should be connected with a
further analysis of the speech intelligibility linked with bone conducted speech.
84
==PAGE:92==
Bibliography
J. Abel and T. Fingscheidt. A dnn regression approach to speech enhancement by
artiﬁcial bandwidth extension. IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing
to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA), pages 219–223, 2017.
J. Abel, M. Kaniewska, C. Guillaum´e, W. Tirry, and T. Fingscheidt. An instrumen-
tal quality measure for artiﬁcially bandwidth-extended speech signals. IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, PP, 12 2016.
F. L. A. T. A. M. J. B. Allen. A psychoacoustic method for studying the necessary
and suﬃcient perceptual cues of american english fricative consonants in noise. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 132, 2012.
P. Bauer, C. Guillaum´e, W. Tirry, and T. Fingscheidt. On speech quality assessment
of artiﬁcial bandwidth extension. 2014 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 6082–6086, 2014. ISSN 1520-6149.
Y. Bengio. Practical recommendations for gradient-based training of deep architectures.
2012.
C. M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and
Statistics). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006. ISBN 0387310738.
I.-R. BS.1534-2. Method for the subjective assessment of intermediate quality level of
audio systems. Electronic Publication, 2014.
B. L. J. T. Z. W. Y. L. D. Bukhari. A novel method of artiﬁcial bandwidth extension
using deep architecture. Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the International
Speech Communication Association, Interspeech, pages 2598–2602, 2015.
R. H. C. H. Taal, R. C. Hendriks and J. Jensen. An evaluation of objective measures for
intelligibility prediction of time-frequency weighted noisy speech. Acoustical Society
of America, 130(5):3013–3027, 2011.
M. A. T. T. C. Yagli and E. Erzin. Artiﬁcial bandwidth extension of spectral envelope
along a viterbi path. Speech Communication, 55(1):111–118, 2013.
H. Carl and U. Heute. Bandwidth enhancement of narrow-band speech signals. Signal
Processing Vii, Theories and Applications, 2:1178–81, 1994.
85
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
R. H. Cees H. Taal, Richard C. Hendriks and J. Jensen. A short-time objective intelli-
gibility measure for time-frequency weighted noisy speech. ICASSP, 2010.
P. J. H. T. U. Christiansen. Objective evaluation of consonant-vowel pairs produced by
native speakers of danish. ResearchGate, 2011.
J. Z. T. Dau. Predicting consonant recognition and confusions in normal-hearing lis-
teners. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 141:1051—-1064, 2017.
R. M. A. Erik Larsen. Audio Bandwidth Extension: Application of Psychoacoustics,
Signal Processing and Loudspeaker Design. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2005.
H. S. S. H. G. R. T. Fingscheidi. Survey of speech enhancement supported by a bone
conduction microphone. Proceedings of 10th Itg Symposium on Speech Communica-
tion, 2012.
J. A. M. S. T. Fingscheidt.
Artiﬁcial bandwidth extension using deep neural net-
works for wideband spectral envelope estimation. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing, 26(1):71–83, 2018.
J. Flanagan. Speech Analysis, Synthesis and Perception. Springer-Verlag, 2nd edition,
1978.
e. G. E. Hinton. Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech recognition: The
shared views of four research groups. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):82–97,
2012.
I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville.
Deep Learning.
MIT Press, 2016.
http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
B. Hagerman. Measurement of speech reception threshold. Scandinavian Audiology,
11:191–3, 1982.
D. M. I. Katsir and I. Cohen. Evaluation of a speech bandwidth extension algorithm
based on vocal tract shape estimation. IWAENC 2012; International Workshop on
Acoustic Signal Enhancement, pages 1–4, 2012.
ITU-T.
Pesq:
An objective method for end-to-end speech quality assessment of
narrow-band telephone networks and speech codecs. recommendation p.862 (02/01).
https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-P.862-200102-I/en, 2011a. Accessed: 2018-05-
11.
ITU-T.
Mapping
function
for
transforming
p.862
raw
re-
sult
scores
to
mos-lqo
recommendation
p.862.1
(11/03).
https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-P.862.1-200311-I/en,
2011b.
Accessed:
2018-05-11.
P. Jax and P. Vary. Wideband extension of telephone speech using a hidden markov
model. 2000 IEEE Workshop on Speech Coding. Proceedings. Meeting the Challenges
of the New Millennium, pages 133–135, 2000.
86
==PAGE:94==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
K. Li and C. H. Lee. A deep neural network approach to speech bandwidth expan-
sion.
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pages 4395–4399, 2015.
R. P. Lippmann. An introduction to computing with neural nets. Ieee Assp Magazine,
4:4–22, 1987.
P. C. Loizou. Speech Enhancement: Theory and Practice. CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton,
FL, USA, 2nd edition, 2013. ISBN 1466504218, 9781466504219.
S. M¨oller, E. Kelaidi, F. Koster, N. Cote, P. Bauer, T. Fingscheidt, T. Schlien, H. Pu-
lakka, and P. Alku.
Speech quality prediction for artiﬁcial bandwidth extension
algorithms. pages 3439–3443, 01 2013.
S. H. Moon, B. Kim, and I. S. Lee. Importance of phase information in speech en-
hancement. International Conference on Complex, Intelligent and Software Intensive
Systems, pages 770–773, 2010.
M.
Nielsen.
Neural
networks
and
deep
learning,
2017.
URL
http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/.
A. H. Nour-Eldin and P. Kabal. Memory-based approximation of the gaussian mixture
model framework for bandwidth extension of narrowband speech. 2011.
T. Poulsen. Acoustic communication, hearing and speech. Lecture notes, ver. 2.1.1,
2008.
H. Pulakka, V. Myllyl¨a, A. R¨am¨o, and P. Alku. Speech quality evaluation of artiﬁcial
bandwidth extension: Comparing subjective judgments and instrumental predictions.
09 2015.
L. Rabiner and R. Schafer. Digital Processing of Speech Signals. Prentice Hall, 1978.
J. Sadasivan, S. Mukherjee, and C. S. Seelamantula. Joint dictionary training for band-
width extension of speech signals. 2016 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 5925–5929, 2016.
C. E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell System Tech-
nical Journal, 27(3):379–423, July 1948.
ISSN 0005-8580.
doi:
10.1002/j.1538-
7305.1948.tb01338.x.
H. S. Shin, H. G. Kang, and T. Fingscheidt. Survey of speech enhancement supported
by a bone conduction microphone.
Speech Communication; 10. ITG Symposium,
2012.
N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhutdinov. Dropout:
A simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting. Journal of Machine Learn-
ing Research, 15:1929–1958, 06 2014.
87
==PAGE:95==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
L. Torrey and J. Shavlik. Transfer learning, appears in the handbook of research on
machine learning applications.
Pre-print; University of Wisconsin, Madison WI,
USA, 2009.
P. Welch. The use of fast fourier transform for the estimation of power spectra: A
method based on time averaging over short, modiﬁed periodograms. IEEE Transac-
tions on Audio and Electroacoustics, 15(2):70–73, Jun 1967.
A. Wiinberg, J. Zaar, and T. Dau. Eﬀects of expanding envelope ﬂuctuations on conso-
nant perception in hearing-impaired listeners. Trends in Hearing (online), 22, 2018.
D. S. Williamson and D. Wang. Time-frequency masking in the complex domain for
speech dereverberation and denoising. Ieee-acm Transactions on Audio Speech and
Language Processing, 25(7):1492–1501, 2017.
A. B. X. Glorot and Y. Bengio. Deep sparse rectiﬁer neural networks. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research - Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 15:315–323, 2011.
Y. Xu, J. Du, L. R. Dai, and C. H. Lee. Global variance equalization for improv-
ing deep neural network based speech enhancement. pages 71–75, July 2014. doi:
10.1109/ChinaSIP.2014.6889204.
Z.-H. L. Y. Gu and L.-R. Dai. Speech bandwidth extension using bottleneck features
and deep recurrent neural networks. Interspeech, 2016.
88
==PAGE:96==
Appendix A
INVISIO - Background
INVISIO is a global market leader within advanced communication and hearing pro-
tection systems. The company develops and sells advanced systems that enable profes-
sionals in noisy and mission critical environments to communicate and work eﬀectively,
while protecting their hearing.
INVISIO’s systems give operational advantages and increased security for military and
security personnel.
Figure A.1 illustrate the INVISIO X5 headset, which were used to record the bone
conducted speech corpus.
Figure A.1: The INVISIO X5 headset, used for recording the bone conducted speech
corpus. Picture obtained from INVISIO’s website
89
