==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pablo Benavides López 
 
 
 
Functional and Markovian Switching Regression Approach 
for Modelling Intraday Imbalance Price using Sales and 
Purchase Curves  
 
 
 
Master Thesis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
 Technical University of Denmark 
Supervisor: Dr. Jethro Browell, Prof. Pierre Pinson 
 
Kongens Lyngby, 2018
==PAGE:2==
i 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
 
The transition towards a low-carbon economy means a growing role for 
renewable energy sources (RES). It also involves giving consumers a more 
meaningful role, allowing them to manage their demand actively, produce 
electricity for self-consumption and feed the excess into the grid. Managing the 
variability of RES and demand is challenging for both power system operators and 
electricity market participants, particularly in regions with a high RES penetration 
where power fluctuations can have a significant influence on intraday and real-time 
markets.  
The cost of balancing is expected to increase in the future, as the system 
operator will need to take more actions to balance increasing levels of RES on the 
system. Accurate price forecasts for the balancing market (BM) could bring useful 
information before the closure of intraday markets to help participants to reduce 
uncertainty and manage their position and exposure to increasingly volatile 
imbalance prices.   
Previous approaches for modelling imbalance prices are focused mainly on the 
price time series. However, the aim of this paper is to model and forecast in the 
short-term the single balancing market price in GB by taking a new angle on the 
data, applying functional regression based on the day-ahead sales and purchase 
curves. The resulting day-ahead curves of the electricity price can lead to capture 
valuable information about residual supply and demand, and consequently the cost 
of flexibility that will ultimately set the imbalance price.  
When modelling imbalance prices, two different dynamic behaviours can be 
expected depending on whether there is surplus or deficit of energy in the 
transmission system.  For that reason, a Markov Regime Switching model (MRS) is 
implemented to represent the observed stochastic behaviour of the imbalance 
time series by two separate regimes with different underlying stochastic processes.  
Therefore, we show an approach to deal in the short-term with a considerable 
amount of auction data which demonstrates the ability to improve the price 
forecasts accuracy by applying functional regression on the day-ahead curves, and 
another methodology based on MRS which represents the two dynamic models 
that characterized the imbalance prices. Even though the MRS model aims to 
capture the two dynamic patterns the imbalance price follows, the functional 
regression approach led to more accurate price forecasts. The proposed models 
provide 5 settlement periods ahead forecasts, using data from the GB market in the 
UK.  
==PAGE:3==
ii 
 
 
 
 
Preface 
 
 
This master’s thesis was written at the Department of Electronic and Electrical 
Engineering at University of Strathclyde, under supervision of Dr. Jethro Browell 
and Prof. Pierre Pinson. It was written from January 2017 to June 2018 and accounts 
for 30 ECTS. 
The thesis deals with the benefits of modelling intraday imbalance price from 
GB by applying functional data analysis on the day-ahead sales and purchase 
curves, and the advantages of using Markov Models to represent the two dynamic 
models followed by the imbalance prices. 
The thesis is written in British English. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
iii 
 
Contents 
 
 
1    Introduction                                                                                                                                1 
1.1 
Literature Review ................................................................................................. 2 
1.2 
Structure of the Paper ......................................................................................... 3 
 
2    The Whosale Market                                                                                                                 4 
2.1 
Market Players ..................................................................................................... 5 
2.2 
Spot Markets ........................................................................................................ 5 
2.2.1 
Day Ahead Spot Market .......................................................................... 5 
2.2.2      Intraday Spot Market ............................................................................. 5 
2.3 
Imbalance Settlement Process ............................................................................ 6 
2.3.1      Settlement Periods and Gate Closure………………………………………………….6 
2.3.2 
 Transmission System Net Imbalance ..................................................... 6 
2.3.3      Balancing Mechanism ............................................................................ 7 
2.4 
Imbalance Pricing ................................................................................................. 7 
 
3    Exploratory Analysis                                                                                                                  9 
3.1 
Data Sources ........................................................................................................ 9 
3.1.1 
 Nordpool ................................................................................................ 9 
3.1.2      Elexon ..................................................................................................... 9 
3.2 
Data Analysis ........................................................................................................ 9 
3.2.1 
 Imbalance Price Behaviour .................................................................. 10 
3.2.2      Seasonality ........................................................................................... 12 
3.2.3 
 Exogenous Variables ............................................................................ 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
iv 
 
4    Problem Formulation                                                                                                              15 
4.1 
Multiple Linear Regression ................................................................................ 15 
4.1.1 
Ordinary Least Squares ......................................................................... 16 
4.1.2 
Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator ............................... 16 
4.2 
Functional Regression ........................................................................................ 17 
4.2.1     Day-Ahead Curves ................................................................................. 17 
4.2.2     Functional Regression on Day-Ahead Curves ........................................ 18 
4.2.3     Additional Predictors from Day-Ahead Curves ..................................... 20 
4.3 
Markov Regime Switching ................................................................................. 21 
 
5    Results                                                                                                                                        23 
5.1 
Handling Data .................................................................................................... 23 
5.2 
Forecasting Models ............................................................................................ 25 
5.3 
Model Performance Measurements ................................................................. 28 
5.4 
Forecast Time Horizon Evaluation ..................................................................... 31 
 
6   Conclusions                                                                                                                                32 
 
Bibliography                                                                                                                                    34 
 
Appendix A                                                                                                                                      37 
A.1 
Predictor Variable Names .................................................................................. 37 
A.2 
Predictor Variables for Forecasting Models ...................................................... 31 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
1 
 
 
Chapter 1 
Introduction  
 
The prospect of irreversible environmental alterations and an increasingly 
volatile climate pressurises societies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Power 
generation from renewable energy sources (RES) is steadily increasing around the 
globe as many countries adopt policies that promote their use, thereby mitigating 
climate change impacts. In UK for example, a target has been set that 15% of total 
energy consumption should be generated by RES till the year 2020 [1]. The 
challenge of such high RES penetration is how the fluctuations in power production 
are going to be balanced.  
Energy balancing and related pricing are likely to become increasingly 
important. The sharper imbalance prices will mean parties will go to great lengths 
to avoid exposure to high imbalance prices that could in some periods be up to 
£3,000/MWh, and even higher in the future, £6,000/MWh following the 
modification P305 to the Balancing and Settlement Code (BSC) in November 2018 
[2]. Additionally, the volume weighting average to determine imbalance prices, at 
present 50MWh of the most expensive actions remaining in the BM, will be reduced 
in November 2018 to the most expensive 1MWh actions, consequently leading to 
greater imbalance prices [2].  
A challenge in this respect is to model price forecasts for the balancing market 
in the short term as accurate as possible in order to bring useful information for 
market players, allowing them to adjust their position by trading energy during the 
intraday market and the balancing mechanism. The prediction models to be 
develop should offer higher visibility on the single imbalance price and allows 
industrial players to reduce their risks and capture additional market opportunities. 
Different forecasting techniques have been analysed and presented in this work to 
model the imbalance prices in GB, paying special attention to functional regression 
and Markov Models. 
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1.    INTRODUCTION 
 
2 
 
 
 
1.1 
Literature Review 
 
Since the process of deregulation and the introduction of competitive markets, 
the research community has widely approached electricity price forecasting (EPF). 
Weron and Misiorek [3] offer a good analysis of spot electricity price forecast 
methods and benchmark a range of the time series methods against each other. 
 
Other publications that benchmarks day-ahead forecasting models include the 
work of Conejo et al. [4], who compare three different time series models, neural 
network and wavelet models for the PJM Interconnection day-ahead price, and that 
of Nogales et al. [5], who compare two different time series models for the Spanish 
and the Californian day-ahead market prices.  
 
Whereas the papers on modelling day-ahead electricity markets are numerous, 
literature on modelling balancing market prices is relatively scarce, despite an 
increasing concern on how to balance the system. Predicting imbalance prices in 
the short term are considered in [6] and balancing volumes in [7] which use 
approaches based on ARIMA and exponential smoothing respectively. Additionally, 
simple time series imbalance price forecasts have been used to find optimal trading 
wind strategies in both dual-price system [8] and single price-system [9].  
 
All these papers have in common that they are focused mainly on the price time 
series and do not incorporate auction data, missing valuable information contained 
on the curves. We will therefore aim to capture this information by using the 
approach based on functional regression. Day-ahead supply and demand curves are 
considered as single functional objects, allowing for the use of additional 
information (e.g. smoothness, slopes) contained in the functional structure of the 
data. 
 
Additionally to the proposed functional regression approach, a Hidden Markov 
Model (HMM) for BM electricity price forecasting is presented at the end of this 
paper. The HMM are used to model multiple structures that can characterize the 
time series behaviours in different unobserved regimes or states. Historically, the 
HMM has been used with success as predictor or classifier in many fields, like in 
speech recognition [10] or stock markets [11]. HMM for spot electricity price 
forecasting has been successfully applied to day-ahead prices in [12] and [13], and 
for imbalance electricity prices in [14], however this work is only focused on the 
Nordic BM, where dual imbalance prices set the cost of balancing the system. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1.    INTRODUCTION 
 
3 
 
 
 
1.2 
Structure of the Paper 
The thesis will present the following structure:  
In case of need, Chapter 2 quickly reviews the UK electricity market framework 
and its reading is suggested to who does not have enough experience with the UK 
electricity market.  
Chapter 3 presents and explores the data that has been used to train and test 
the forecasting models. The main features of spot and imbalance electricity price 
and volume are summarized and visually represented. Potential predictor variables 
and dynamic behaviours are identified by and the most appropriate forecasting 
techniques are chosen regarding the analysis on the data. 
 
The purpose of Chapter 4 is to formulate different forecasting techniques for 
the prediction of the imbalance price. First, linear regression based on Ordinary 
Least Squares (OLS) and least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (lasso) are 
presented. Then we apply functional linear regression on the sales and purchase 
day ahead curves by using smoothing splines. Finally, we explain the theory behind 
Markov Regime Switching models and how is applied for BM forecasting in order 
capture the underlying dynamics behind the imbalance prices. 
Chapter 5 describes how the data was processed to facilitate the forecasting 
process, and lists the empirical results from all the proposed prediction models. Our 
final section, Chapter 6, draws some conclusions about the main outputs obtained 
from the models. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
The Wholesale Market  
 
This chapter provides a description of the UK short-term wholesale electricity 
market. As such, no long-term contracts such as futures or forward agreements are 
inquired in this chapter. The “over-the-counter" agreements are not analysed as 
well. Thus, we will focus on the day-ahead, intra-day and imbalance settlement 
process, with a special focus on the balance mechanism. A deeper review can be 
found in [1], [2], [15], [16] and [17] which are the main sources of information of 
this chapter. 
 
The British wholesale electricity market currently operates under the British 
Electricity Trading and Transmission Arrangements (BETTA). BETTA came into effect 
in 2005, when the New Electricity Trading Arrangements (NETA) that were 
operating in England and Wales extended into Scotland. under BETTA. Wholesale 
trading in GB is made up of four main components:  
 
• 
Bi-lateral contracting between individual parties from days to years ahead of 
delivery such as futures, forward contracts or “over-the-counter" 
agreements. 
 
• 
Day-ahead spot market that determines the schedule for the activation of 
generators and large industrial consumers for the following day. 
 
• 
Intraday spot market which allows participants to modify their position 
closer to delivery. 
 
• 
Imbalance settlement process that pays for the balancing actions taken by 
the GB system operator. Balancing mechanism is the main tool utilised by the 
transmission system operator to balance supply and demand in real time. 
 
Additional markets may also exist for ancillary services such as frequency 
response, reserve power and provision of reactive power.
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2.    THE WHOSALE MARKET 
5 
 
 
 
2.1 Market Players 
To trade electricity, you must to be a BSC Party, which means signing-up to the 
Balancing and Settlement Code (BSC). It is administered by the Balancing and 
Settlement Code Company (BSCCo), a role performed by ELEXON.  
More than 250 BSC Parties exists, of which over 75% are trading parties. Trading 
parties come in different flavours: suppliers, generators, interconnector users and 
non-physical traders. Some of these parties are vertically integrated companies, 
which typically have a single trading operation that satisfies the needs of its 
generation and retail arms. Non-physical traders are financial organisations that 
have no physical assets (no generation plant or customers) but speculate on 
changes over time in the wholesale market price through trading future positions 
that are closed out prior to delivery. 
 
2.2 Spot Markets 
2.2.1 Day Ahead Spot Market 
The day-ahead market is the spot market for physical trading of production and 
consumption. As the name suggests, bidding takes place a day ahead of operation, 
when the market participants submit a set of price-volume bids for every hour of 
the following operation day. For every such hour, the market interprets the set of 
bids as points on a bidding curve. At noon, the market is cleared, i.e. the demand 
and supply curves from all market participants are aggregated and the equilibrium 
is determined. Usually, bids are dispatched in merit order until aggregated demand 
and supply matches (however, taking into account transmission constraints). Bids 
can either be fully or partially (the marginal bid) accepted, and the marginal bid 
determines the market price. This market price is applied to all accepted bids and 
offers and is an important reference for intraday and balancing markets since it 
gives an indication of the marginal price of energy for a given period. Upon market 
clearing, the market prices for the following operation day are announced and the 
market participants are notified of their dispatch. The market participants are 
committed to comply with their dispatched volume, and hence must produce or 
consume accordingly. 
2.2.2 Intraday Spot Market 
The intraday spot market allows a continuous trading mechanism of energy. It 
opens from 48 hours before the physical energy delivery to the delivery time. This 
market is mainly used to adjust the position from the day ahead market due to 
outages or forecasts errors, but often suffer from low liquidity meaning that is 
difficult for participants to find counter-parties to trade with. 
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2.    THE WHOSALE MARKET 
6 
 
 
 
2.3 Imbalance Settlement Process 
Nevertheless, due to it is inevitable that RES and demand forecasts will be wrong 
or unforeseen events such as deliberate noncompliance with the market 
commitments, expected and realized production and consumption may not fully 
match. When the transmission system is not balanced it is called imbalance. The 
System Operator (SO), National Grid in GB, ensures the transmission system is 
always balanced. The balancing mechanism, ancillary services and contract 
notifications ahead of the submission deadline can be applied by the SO to balance 
the electricity system. 
 
2.3.1 Settlement Periods and Gate Closure 
In order to balance the transmission system, the SO needs to know what 
generators intend to generate and what suppliers intend to consume for each 
settlement period. Electricity is finally traded in half hour ‘chunks’. These half hour 
chunks are referred to as settlement periods. Each day is split into 48 settlement 
periods, with settlement period 1 equivalent to 00:00 to 00:30, settlement period 
2 to 00:30 to 01:00 and so on, through to settlement period 48 (23 :30 to 00:00). 
The SO needs this information before the start of the settlement period so that 
it can understand the transmission system imbalance, plan how to balance it and 
take corresponding balancing actions. Therefore, generators and suppliers submit 
Physical Notifications (PNs) to the SO for each settlement period. One hour before 
each settlement period the PNs are frozen. This is called Gate Closure. At this point 
the PNs become Final Physical Notifications (FPNs). After Gate Closure, parties must 
try to adhere to the FPNs submitted to the SO. They should only deviate from their 
FPN at the instruction of the SO. 
2.3.2 Transmission System Net Imbalance 
Following delivery, the SO is able to evaluate the net imbalance of the 
transmission system. The SO does this by assessing the difference between 
contracted and actual volumes of generators and suppliers for the settlement 
period. The transmission system net imbalance can be also called the transmission 
system length. 
• 
Transmission system length is long when there is more generation than 
demand. 
 
• 
Transmission system length is short when there is more demand than 
generation. 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2.    THE WHOSALE MARKET 
7 
 
 
 
2.3.3 Balancing Mechanism 
The Balancing Mechanism operates from Gate Closure to real time and is 
managed by the SO. Parties submit bids and offers telling the SO how much it would 
cost for them to deviate from their FPN.  An offer price indicates the price you want 
to be paid per MWh for an increase in generation or a decrease in demand, and a 
bid price indicates the price you are willing to pay per MWh for a decrease in 
generation or an increase in demand.  
 
Bids and offers are submitted in pairs because this provides an undo mechanism 
for acceptances. For an accepted offer, the paired bid price is the ‘undo’ option 
(and for bid the associated offer price is the ‘undo’ option). If the SO has already 
accepted the offer, this is the price SO will be paid per MWh to undo the 
acceptance. There is usually a difference between the two, which ensures that if a 
party’s bid or offer is accepted and then undone, they will still receive a payment.  
 
Figure 1. Example of bid - offer acceptance [2] 
The SO assesses all the bids and offers for each settlement period and chooses 
the ones that, best satisfy the balancing requirements of the transmission system. 
Participation in the BM is optional, and parties that choose to do so must submit 
bids and offers before Gate Closure for each settlement period. 
 
2.4 Imbalance Pricing  
The cost of balancing incurred by the system operator is recovered through 
payments by those who are out of balance. Prices are calculated based on either a 
single or dual pricing system. In GB, all participants in a single price system resolve 
their imbalance at the same imbalance price, at present the most expensive 
50MWh of bid offer acceptances (BOAs) set the price. On the other side, in a dual 
price system, participants receive different prices depending on the sign of their 
imbalance. 
 
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2.    THE WHOSALE MARKET 
8 
 
 
 
For single price system, a party whose imbalance is in the opposite direction to 
the overall direction of the system (e.g. a party that is long when the system is short, 
and therefore contributes to the reduction of the system imbalance) faces the same 
imbalance price as a party whose imbalance is in the same direction as the overall 
direction of the market (e.g. a party that is long when the system is long, and that 
therefore aggravates the system imbalance). If the system is short of energy, the 
balancing price will be greater than the day-ahead price to reflect the utilisation of 
more expensive or flexible generators (or demand reduction), and the converse if 
the system is long.  
 
The effect of this is to penalise market participants who are out-of-balance in 
the same direction as the system, and to reward those who are helping the system 
by being out of balance in the opposite direction: 
 
• 
If a participant has a long position, that is to say the difference between 
contractual and metered volumes has contributed to a surplus of energy 
flowing on to the system, they are paid for that spill at the System Sell Price 
(SSP). 
 
• 
If a participant has a short position, that is to say the difference between 
contractual and metered volumes has contributed to a deficit of energy 
flowing on to the system, they are charged for that short-fall at the System 
Buy Price (SBP). 
 
In contrast, a dual price system is where a party with an imbalance contributing 
to the system imbalance faces a price that reflects the cost of balancing, while a 
party with an imbalance reducing the system imbalance faces a different price, 
frequently a market price. The rationale of the dual price is that imbalances 
contributing to the system imbalance are penalised, and those helping receive a 
neutral reference price, which is usually similar to the day-ahead price. 
 
The importance of forecasting the imbalance price before the gate closure is 
clear. Comparing the day-ahead price with the predicted imbalance price allows 
market players to know the sign of the transmission system length beforehand, and 
consequently to improve their making decision process for the trade-off between 
trading on a multilateral intraday market or taking part in the balancing market. If 
a producer is to make coordinated bids between the intraday market and balancing 
mechanism, an imbalance price forecast is needed around 2-3 hours before the 
operating hour. In this way, market players are provided with enough time to 
decide whether enter into the balancing mechanism and avoid loss market 
opportunities or instead participating in the intraday market where its low liquidity 
invites to be less profitable. Therefore, we will set our forecast horizon to 5 
settlement periods in advance from real time. In further chapters we will analyse 
how the forecast horizon affect the forecasting accuracy of the models. 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 
Exploratory Analysis 
 
In this chapter the datasets used for this study case are presented, and the most 
important features and dynamic behaviours from the data which could lead to 
more accurate predictions of the imbalance price are analysed and summarized. 
3.1 Data Sources 
For this investigation, the proposed forecasting models are evaluated using 
historic data from the GB power system in the UK from 00:00h on 01/01/2016 to 
23:00h on 31/12/2017. Two data sources have been used to generate the final 
dataset used on the models.  
 
3.1.1 Nordpool 
There are two coupled auctions operated by APX and N2EX (Nordpool) which 
clear at the same price for each hour of the next day in GB. The day-ahead data 
utilized in this study is provided by Nordpool [15] and it comprehends auction prices 
and volumes as well the day-ahead sales and purchase curves. Data for each day is 
issued after noon on the day before delivery. 
 
3.1.2 Elexon 
The balancing market comprises half-hour settlement periods and is operated 
by the System Operator and Elexon. The imbalance price and volume data are 
available from Elexon [2]. 
 
3.2 Data Analysis 
The purpose of the data analysis that follows is to establish the desirable 
features of the models for imbalance prices and to identify relevant exogenous 
variables. Only results that appeared to deserve further inspection are presented. 
R has been the programming language used to develop this analysis.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 3.    EXPLORATORY ANALYSIS 
10 
 
 
 
3.2.1 Imbalance Price Behaviour 
 
As it was explained in Chapter 2, imbalance prices are intended to be reflective 
of the cost incurred by the SO in its role of managing system imbalance. The 
methodology by which the imbalance price is calculated in each settlement period 
depends on the direction of market imbalance in each particular settlement period. 
For imbalance purposes, the direction on the market is determined by the value of 
Net Imbalance Volume (NIV). This is the net MWh value of all actions taken by the 
SO in any settlement period and is the maximum volume of actions that can be 
utilised to derive the main imbalance price in each period.  
 
If NIV is negative means that the Transmission System length is long, and 
therefore there is more generation than demand. In this case, the imbalance price 
is typically smaller than the day-ahead price. On the opposite case, if NIV is positive 
means that the Transmission System length is short, and therefore there is more 
demand than generation. In this situation, the imbalance price is bigger than the 
day-ahead price. Fig.2 clearly reflects the variations of the imbalance price 
respected to day-ahead prices depending of the system length.  
 
Looking into detail to Fig.2, the imbalance price seems to follow different 
patterns depending if the system is long or short, since more spike prices appears 
when the imbalance price is higher than the day-ahead price (system is short), 
whereas if the system is long the imbalance prices present a quite flat pattern. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Day-ahead and imbalance prices (right column), and net imbalance 
volume (left column) on 01/01/2016. 
 
This will lead us to partition of the forecasting problem into the estimation of 
two possible imbalance prices for each settlement period conditional upon the NIV 
sign. A Markov Regime Switching model (MRS) will be employed in further chapters 
in order to distinguish between long and short phases when modelling the 
imbalance prices. 
 
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 3.    EXPLORATORY ANALYSIS 
11 
 
 
 
The time series for imbalance prices when the system is long or short are 
represented on Fig.3. Both cases show constantly fluctuation along time, with 
frequent price spikes, but they exhibit different time series patterns. Price spikes 
when the system is short are more acute and separated along time than when the 
system is long. In addition, whereas the prices fluctuate between -100 and 100 
£/MWh when the system is long, imbalance prices can reach tremendous values up 
to 1500 £/MWh, but not negative values, as it happens when the system is long. 
Therefore, when there is a deficit of electricity on the system, market players could 
be exposed to either higher penalties (if they are short) or benefits (if they are long) 
than when there is a surplus of electricity.  
 
 
Figure 3. Time series plot of imbalance prices when the system is long (right column) 
and short (left column) from 01/01/2016 to 31/12/2017. 
 
In Table 1. is summarized the empirical probabilities for the two possible states 
of the transmission system for 2016 and 2017. It reveals the dominance of long 
state, meaning that most of the time the generation is greater than the demand. 
This is not a coincidence since market players could be exposed to higher penalties 
when the system length is shorth, where differences between day-ahead and 
imbalance prices can be much higher than when the system length is long.  
 
Table 1. The empirical probabilities of transmission system length. 
 
Long 
Short 
67.44% 
32.56% 
 
It is interesting to see in Fig.4 how the transmission system length follows an 
intra-day and an intra-week pattern. For example, in settlement periods 31 and 46, 
corresponding to a decrease in electricity demand, the system is long most of the 
time. That can be due to all the generators are still running by that time, and 
consequently the amount of generation exceeds clearly the demand. However, in 
settlement periods 13, 37 and 39 is equally probable for the system to be either 
long or short. In this case, during these settlement periods there is a big increase of 
the demand while at the same time some generators are not still running meaning 
that is likely that the amount of demand exceeds the electricity generation. 
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3.    EXPLORATORY ANALYSIS 
12 
 
 
 
When it comes to possible patterns during the week days, it seems that is slightly 
more probably for the system to be short during the weekends than during the 
working days. 
 
 
Figure 4. Intra-day and intra-week variations (left and right columns, respectively) 
of the transmission system length with respect to their empirical average.  
 
3.2.2 Seasonality 
Mainly driven by the daily and weekly cycles of consumption, electricity prices 
are generally known to have the same seasonal cycles. It therefore seems natural 
to examine the seasonality of the imbalance price. The autocorrelation (ACF) 
function of the imbalance price presented in Fig. 5 shows some strong correlation 
for lags 1-6. There are also some small correlations each 48 settlement periods, 
which implies an intra-day seasonality. 
 
Figure 5. ACF function of imbalance price 
 
In order to see how seasonality affects the imbalance prices, considering both 
states of the transmission system length, Fig. 6 depicts averages of the different 
imbalance prices for each settlement period of the day and each day of the week 
relative to the corresponding empirical means.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 3.    EXPLORATORY ANALYSIS 
13 
 
 
 
The first main difference found between the imbalance prices depending on the 
system length is that the imbalance price averages are clearly higher when the 
system is short tan when is long. There is also an obvious half hourly diurnal 
variation when the system is short, which is much less distinctive when the system 
is long. Furthermore, the variation of the imbalance price seems to be quite 
consistent throughout the week in both cases, with slightly lower values during the 
weekends than during working days.  
 
 
Figure 6. Intra-day and intra-week variations (left and right columns, respectively) 
of the imbalance price with respect to their empirical average. 
 
3.2.3 Exogenous Variables 
Fig. 7 illustrates the impact of exogenous variables deemed relevant for the 
imbalance prices. These plots are constructed by segmenting the data into 10 
equally populated bins according to x-axis variable. The average price for each bin 
is plotted against the bin median.  
 
The top-left plot illustrates the dependencies of the average imbalance price 
upon day-ahead price. The graph shows a strong upward relationship for imbalance 
prices respect to the day-ahead prices for both states of the system length.  Similar 
conclusions can be drawn from the top-right plot where the impact of the day-
ahead electricity traded load over the imbalance prices is clear. As in the previous 
case, there is a growing relationship until values close to 16000 MWh, when the 
imbalance price starts to decrease slightly for both states. Since important 
dependencies between these variables are seen, lag values corresponding to day-
ahead price and load will be tested as well in the proposed forecasting models. 
  
Finally, the plots placed at the bottom indicates how the imbalance prices are 
influenced by the fifth lag value of NIV. When the system is long there is an upward 
dependency (bottom-left), but when the system is short (bottom-right) there is not 
apparently relationship between the variables until the fifth lag value of NIV 
reaches 0 MWh, when it stars a growing relationship.  
 
 
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3.    EXPLORATORY ANALYSIS 
14 
 
 
 
Our motivation to use such lag variable, instead of lag values closer or further to 
real time, is because we will predict the imbalance prices setting the forecast 
horizon to not less than 2 hours in advanced, which is equivalent to 5 settlement 
periods. This time horizon will provide enough time to market players to make their 
trading decisions without missing excessive information in the data. Lag values 
further on time will be also included and tested in the proposed models. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Average imbalance prices as a function of day-ahead price (top left), day-ahead 
load (bottom right) and the fifth lag net imbalance volume value when the system is long 
(bottom right) and short (bottom left). 
 
The choice of the correct lag sets is crucial for the full model, as they specify the 
possible model structure. In general, it holds true that larger sets increase the 
likelihood of overfitting, even though this likelihood is limited due to our used 
regularized estimation technique. However, if the lag sets were chosen too small, 
we might miss important features in the data. Thus, we should always choose of 
reasonable size. This size will be carefully determined when modelling the 
imbalance price. 
 
The question of whether the imbalance price is affected by all the proposed 
variables will be answered in following chapters by examining whether a model 
including these variables contributes to superior forecasting skills. 
==PAGE:20==
 
15 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 
Problem Formulation 
 
The purpose of Chapter 4 is to formulate four forecasting techniques for the 
prediction of the imbalance price: linear regression based on Ordinary Least 
Squares (OLS), and Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO); 
functional linear regression; and Hidden Markov Model (HMM). Distinction 
between short and long when forecasting the imbalance price is only explicitly 
considered on Markov Models, but some covariates encode this information in the 
other models.  
4.1 Multiple Linear Regression  
Linear regression models [18] are statistical models in which a univariate 
response or dependant variable is modelled as the sum of a ‘linear predictor’ and a 
zero mean random error term. The linear predictor depends on some predictor 
variables or covariates, measured with the response variable, and some unknown 
parameters, which must be estimated. The multiple linear regression model 
proposed to forecast imbalance price is 
 
                         𝑦𝑡= ∑𝑥𝑡𝑗𝛽𝑗+ 𝜀𝑡       
𝑚
𝑗=0
 
(4.1) 
 
Where yt is the imbalance price (dependant variable) for t=1,…,35086 settlement 
periods (number of settlement periods corresponding to 2016 and 2017); xtj are the 
possible m covariates such as past imbalance price observations, seasonal dummy 
variables and exogenous features already analysed in the previous chapter; βj are 
the unknown parameters; and the term εt is the error term or noise. This variable 
captures all other factors which influence the dependent variable yt other than the 
linear predictor composed by the covariates xtj and coefficients βj. The covariate 
with j = 0, which has the value one for all t is usually included because origin of the 
imbalance price and/or one or more of the predictor variables can be arbitrary. β0 
codes the constant needed to allow for this.  
 
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 4.    PROBLEM FORMULATION 
16 
 
 
Two different methods have been applied to solve the linear regression model. 
4.1.1 Ordinary Least Squares 
The first algorithm used to solve the linear regression problem is the Ordinary 
Least Squares (OLS) [19], a mathematical procedure for finding the best-fitting 
curve by estimating the unknown parameters βj. OLS estimates the parameters of 
a linear function of a set of predictor variables by minimizing the sum of the squares 
of the differences between the observed dependent variable in the 
given dataset and those predicted by the linear function as expressed in Eq. (4.2). 
The smaller the differences, the better the model fits the data. The function “lm” 
in R was implemented to solve the problem by OLS.  
 
                               𝑎𝑟𝑔 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝛽∑(𝑦𝑡− 𝑥𝑡𝑗𝛽𝑗
𝑝
𝑗=0
)2              
(4.2) 
 
The use of OLS for our forecasting problem brings a lot of advantages. It is easy 
to implement on a computer, it works very quickly even with large amount of data 
points, and it is easier to analyse mathematically than many other regression 
techniques. 
 
However, OLS can sometimes lead to poor predictions when there is 
multicollinearity, which means a subset of the independent variables are 
significantly correlated to each other. Furthermore, having too many covariates can 
cause serious difficulties to avoid redundant information and select the proper 
variables which lead to fit better the model. Therefore, a second algorithm has been 
implemented to deal with these problems. 
4.1.2 Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator 
Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) [20], is a regression 
analysis method that performs both variable selection and regularization in order 
to enhance the prediction accuracy and interpretability of the model. To get more 
direct control over what we mean by “smooth”, lasso introduces a roughness 
penalty λ. When minimizing the penalized sum of squares in Eq. (4.3), parameter 
estimations can be exactly zero. The larger the penalty applied, the further 
estimates are shrunk towards zero.  
 
                  𝑎𝑟𝑔 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝛽∑(𝑦𝑡− 𝑥𝑡𝑗𝛽𝑗
𝑝
𝑗=0
)2 +  λ ∑|𝛽𝑗|
𝑝
𝑗=0
 
(4.3) 
This algorithm is convenient to get an automatic variable selection, as well as 
dealing with highly correlated predictors. The package “glmnet” [21] in R was used 
to implement a specific optimisation algorithm to solve LASSO. 
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 4.    PROBLEM FORMULATION 
17 
 
 
4.2 Functional Regression  
Linear models can be functional in one or both of two ways: the response 
variable is functional, and one or more of the predictor variables are functional [22]. 
This case is confined to consider the prediction of the imbalance price (scalar 
variable) including potential covariates extracted from the day-ahead sales and 
purchase curves (functional variables) by applying functional regression. Including 
features from the resulting sale and purchase curves, which are also referred to as 
ask and bid curves or market supply and market demand curves, can lead us to 
capture important information which is needed to determine the imbalance price.  
 
4.2.1 Day-Ahead Curves 
As it is explained in Chapter 2, the day-ahead electricity price is set as the 
intersection between sales and purchase curves, which are composed by a set of 
price-volume bids and offers respectively, submitted by the market players every 
hour of the following operation day. Fig. 8 shows an example on how the day-ahead 
price is cleared by the intersection of the supply and demand curves at 32.1 £/MWh 
and 21.11 MWh of total exchanged load for 14:00 h on 22/02/2016. 
 
 
Figure 8. Supply and demand curves for 14:00 h on 22/02/2016 auction. 
 
Diversified information is summarized in the electricity price curves. Sales curves 
contain the marginal cost of every power source and the amount of energy 
generated by each type of technology every hour. Taking this into account, we can 
for example expect that an unexpected shift in wind production levels for can lead 
to a little or vast change in prices, dependent on if the equilibrium price of the 
market was already mainly driven by wind producers. On the other side, purchase 
curves can reflect continuously load changes such as people turning heating system 
or lights on and off, as temperature changes or the natural light comes and goes.  
 
All this information can be very important to know by the SO to see if it is 
possible to adjust for external shocks easily or if a tremendous price spike will occur. 
This sensitivity reflected on the imbalance prices can therefore be obtained by 
analysing the original day-ahead price curves instead of only their outcome as price 
time series. 
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 4.    PROBLEM FORMULATION 
18 
 
 
4.2.2 Functional Regression on Day-Ahead Curves 
First, we want to fit both the sales and purchase curves by applying functional 
regression. The auction prices yi for both curves (response variable) is to be 
predicted or approximated based on the volume loads vi(s), where s index 
represents continuous volume (MWh). Therefore, in this case, the vector of 
covariate observation is replaced by a non-parametric function. A first idea might 
be to weight the information within the functional covariate vi(s) across values of s 
by doing linear regression 
                              𝑦𝑖= 𝛼+ ∫𝑣𝑖(𝑠)𝛽(𝑠)𝑑𝑠+ 𝜀𝑖  
(4.4) 
Here the constant 𝛼 is the intercept term that adjusts for the origin of the price 
variable. The functional parameter of interest is again the regression coefficient 
function β(s). 
 
This situation formally resembles conventional multiple linear regression if we 
think of each volume s as indexing a separate scalar predictor variable. But now we 
have a finite number of observations with which to determine the infinite 
dimensional β(s). Over-fitting the data seems inevitable. The way out of the 
problem is to force the weighting of information across s to be sufficiently smooth 
that we can know that a bad fit is in principle possible. This smoothing over s will 
involve the regularization process by using a smoothing function f 
                         𝑦𝑖= 𝑓(𝑣) + 𝜀𝑖 
(4.5) 
To estimate f we need to represent Eq. (4.5) as a linear model. This can be done 
by choosing some basis functions, which will be treated as completely know: if bj(v) 
is the jth such basis function, then f is assumed to have a representation 
                          𝑓(𝑣) = ∑𝑏𝑗(𝑣)𝛽𝑗
𝑞
𝑗=1
 
(4.6) 
 
Substituting Eq. (4.6) into Eq. (4.5) clearly yields a linear model. 
                         𝑦𝑖= ∑𝑏𝑗(𝑣)𝛽𝑗
𝑞
𝑗=1
+ 𝜀𝑖 
(4.7) 
In this work, the smoothing function f(v) is described by a cubic smoothing spline 
[23]. A cubic spline is a curve, made up of sections of cubic polynomial (basis 
functions), joined together so that they are continuous in value as well as first and 
second derivatives. The points at which the sections join are known as the knots of 
the spline. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 4.    PROBLEM FORMULATION 
19 
 
 
Fig. 9 illustrates how the previous supply curve showed in Fig. 8, constrained to 
values close to the spot price (where most if the information is contained), is fitted 
by using cubic spline with the function “bs” in R. The various curves of medium 
thickness plotted in the left column show the basis functions, bj(v), of a cubic 
regression spline. When each of them is multiplied by its associated coefficient βj 
and summed altogether, we obtain the smooth curve who fits the actual supply 
curve, both illustrated on the right column. The vertical dotted lines in the left 
column show the knot locations, where the cubic polynomial sections are joined to 
form the fitted curve.  
 
 
Figure 9. Representation of a smooth function using cubic regression spline basis. 
The right column illustrates the 7 basis functions, bj(v), where the vertical dotted 
lines show the knot locations. The final fitted curve f(v) composed by the plotted 
basis functions, and the actual supply curve on 14:00 h on 22/02/2016 auction are 
shown in the right panel. 
 
For regression spline models, the fit of the model tends to depend quite strongly 
on the degree of smoothness and the localization of the knots.  
 
• 
The choice of smoothness degree is controlled here by the basis dimension 
(the number of knots + 2). If the number of knots is too high then the data 
will be over smoothed, and if it is too low then the data will be under 
smoothed. In both cases this will mean that the smoothing function f will not 
be close to the true curve. Ideally, it would be good to choose the number of 
knots so that f is as close as possible to the actual curve. 
 
• 
For a conventional spline, the knots occur wherever there is a datum, but for 
the regression splines of interest here, the locations of the knots must be 
selected.  Bad location choice can lead to bad results which means be missing 
important information contained in the curves. 
 
We know that by varying the unknown parameters βj, the form of f(v) can 
change. Our goal here is to fix the number and location of knots for fitting the 
curves for every hour so that we use the same basis functions bj(v) for all the curves, 
with different values of βj. These value differences can contain behavioural patterns 
with important information for forecasting the imbalance prices. Therefore, all the 
βj parameters we estimated by using functional smoothing on both supply and 
demand curves will be included as potential predictor variables in Eq. (4.1).   
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4.    PROBLEM FORMULATION 
20 
 
 
Different numbers and locations of knots have been tested, using from 5 to 50 
knots, as well as applying sequentially and uneven knot spacing along the curves. 
The optimal selection of number and location of the knots for all the curves has 
been doing by performing cross-validation technique (explained in further 
chapters) over the dataset used for this work. It is important to clarify that not the 
entire length of the curves have been fitted by functional regression, but only close 
points to the day-ahead price, where the most valuable information is contained. 
More specifically ±2500 MWh from the day-ahead cross point is the chosen 
interval, corresponding to approximate the minimum and maximum net imbalance 
volumes happened during 2016 and 2017. 
 
Both OLS and LASSO algorithms were implemented to solve the linear regression 
model with the new predictor variables, but neither of them was leading to the best 
prediction of the imbalance prices. Instead, by entering different predictor variable 
combinations and assessing them through the use of cross-validation technique 
(explained in further chapters), the best combination of predictor variables which 
led better imbalance prices forecasting was found. 
 
4.2.3 Additional Predictors from Day-Ahead Curves 
As mentioned above, the unknown parameters βj extracted from applying 
functional regression to fit the day-ahead curves play an important role. But we 
also consider the impact of other possible predictor variables contained on the 
curves that might influence the imbalance price behaviour. In particular, we 
attempt to use the volume load values at extreme points placed on both curves (x4, 
x5, x6, x7), as it is showed on Fig. 10. 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Supply and demand curves for 14:00 h on 22/02/2016 auction with 
labelled extreme curve points.  
 
In addition, we splitted the central interval of both curves on 8 equal segments 
of 300 MWh, four to the right and four to the left from the cross point (day-ahead 
Price and volume). Slopes of each segment have been calculated in order to capture 
how sensible the electricity prices on the day-ahead exchange market are when 
varying the volume load. The slope values will be included in the forecasting models 
to verify if these variations contribute to improve the imbalance price forecasts. 
 
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 4.    PROBLEM FORMULATION 
21 
 
 
4.3 Markov Regime Switching  
When predicting imbalance prices, two different behaviours for prices can be 
expected depending on the transmission system length. For instance, the analysis 
developed on Chapter 3 reveals that imbalance prices tend to be higher when the 
system is short than when is long.  
 
The Markov Switching model [24], also known as the Regime Switching model 
(MRS), is one of the most popular nonlinear time series models in the literature. 
This model involves multiple structures that can characterize the time series 
behaviours in different regimes or states. By permitting switching between these 
structures, this model is able to capture more complex dynamic patterns, while 
simultaneously estimating when there is transition from one state to another. The 
Markov Switching Model is therefore suitable for describing imbalance prices which 
exhibit two distinct dynamic patterns during different time periods. Let st denote 
an unobservable state variable assuming the value zero or one (system length is 
short or long respectively). The switching model for the imbalance price yt involves 
two different models: 
 
               𝑦𝑡= 
{
 
 
 
 𝛼(0) + ∑𝑥𝑡𝑗𝛽𝑗
(0) + 𝜀𝑡(0) 
𝑚
𝑗=0
        𝑠𝑡= 0
𝛼(1) + ∑𝑥𝑡𝑗𝛽𝑗
(1) + 𝜀𝑡(1) 
𝑚
𝑗=0
        𝑠𝑡= 1
 
(4.8) 
 
Knowing that 𝛽𝑗
(0)  ≠ 𝛽𝑗
(1), this model admits two dynamic structures at 
different levels, depending on the value of the state variable st, which determines 
the switching between these two regimes. 
 
In a Markov-switching model, the switching mechanism between the states (or 
regimes) is assumed to be an unobserved Markov chain Rt. It is described by the 
transition matrix P containing the probabilities 𝑝𝑖𝑗= 𝑃(𝑅𝑡+1 = 𝑗| 𝑅𝑡= 𝑖) of 
switching from regime i at time t to regime j at time t + 1. In our particular model, 
the two possible regimes are referred to the length of the system i, j = {0, 1}, 
corresponding to long and short system length respectively. Additionally, the 
transition matrix P of the model contains the probabilities  𝑝01 = 𝑃(𝑅𝑡+5 =
1| 𝑅𝑡= 0) of switching from regime 0 at time t to regime 1 at time t + 5, being 5 
the number of settlement periods after time t. It is not a coincidence to use t+5 
instead of t+1, since we set the forecasting time horizon of our prediction problem 
five settlement periods ahead of real time. The transition probabilities 𝑝𝑖𝑗 at each 
time t are calculated as linear function of n predictor variables: 
 
                         𝑝𝑖𝑗𝑡= ∑𝑥𝑡𝑘𝛽𝑘+ 𝜀𝑡       
𝑛
𝑘=0
 
(4.9) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4.    PROBLEM FORMULATION 
22 
 
 
Because the system has to be in one of the two states we have that pi0 + pi1 = 1 
at each time t. Therefore, the full matrix of transition probabilities P which governs 
the random behaviour of the state variable st contains only two parameters (p01 
and p10): 
              𝑃= (𝑝𝑖𝑗) = (𝑝00   𝑝01
𝑝10   𝑝11
) = ( 1 −𝑝01        𝑝01
 𝑝10          1 −𝑝10
) 
(4.10) 
 
The next step is to estimate the unknown parameters 𝛽𝑗
(0),  𝛽𝑗
(1) and 𝛽𝑘. In this 
paper, we employ the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm [25] as a way to 
find maximum a posteriori (MAP) parameter estimates of the MRS model. Typically, 
EM involves models which depends on unknown variables, as happens with MRS 
models. It works by choosing random values for the unknown data points and using 
those guesses to estimate a second set of data. The new values are used to create 
a better guess for the first set, and the process continues until the algorithm 
converges. When using MAP each of observation of our data is assigned to one 
state, which is determined by the Viterbi algorithm [26]. We implemented this 
method in R by using the package “depmixS4" [27], with the argument classification 
chosen to “hard” when fitting the data. 
 
Once these parameters have been estimated, we can calculate the imbalance 
price forecast yt for each time t for each state st by multiplying the regression 
parameters by their correspondent predictor variables as in Eq. (4.8). The 
probability of the system being long p(l)t or short p(s)t at each time t can be also 
calculated as indicated in Eq. (4.10), knowing the transition probabilities p01 and p10 
and the system length five settlement periods ahead of real time (St-5 = 1 when the 
system length is long and St-5 = 0 is short). 
 
         𝑝(𝑙)𝑡= 𝑝00 ∗𝑆𝑡−5 + 𝑝10 ∗(1 − 𝑆𝑡−5) 
  
         𝑝(𝑠)𝑡= 1 −𝑝(𝑙)𝑡 
 
(4.11a) 
(4.11b) 
In order to compare the accuracy performance of the MRS model against the 
other models, we calculated a unique weighted imbalance price yt, by using the 
imbalance prices yl and ys, when the system is long and short respectively, and the 
probability of the system to be long p(l)t and short p(s)t at each time. 
 
                 𝑦𝑡= 𝑦𝑙∗𝑝(𝑙)𝑡+ 𝑦𝑠∗𝑝(𝑠)𝑡 
(4.12) 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
23 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 
Results 
 
This section presents the results from the proposed models using data from the 
GB market in the UK for 2016 and 2017, with a time forecasting horizon of 5 
settlement periods ahead predictions. All forecasting models are trained and tested 
following the cross-validation technique, and their performance analysed and 
compared based on performance measures. 
5.1 Handling Data 
To facilitate the prediction process of the forecasting models, it was first 
gathered all the information from the different data sources in only one data frame 
in R (modelling table). Some challenges were presented along the process: 
• 
First step was aimed to download and read all datasets. The balancing 
mechanism data was downloaded, and then simply read by using the 
function “fread” from the package “data.table” [28] in R. The same was 
applied when extracting the day-ahead price and traded volume data. 
However, a major challenge rose when dealing with the huge amount of data 
contained in the day-ahead curves from Nordpool. Even though the data was 
classified by days in csv files, its extraction was not straight forward, and it 
was not possible to apply the user-friendly functions “fread” or “read.csv”. 
Instead, “getURL” function from the package “RCurl” [29] was used to open 
and read the files, as well as some additional programming lines to handling 
and processing data strings.  
 
• 
When all datasets were stored in R, we proceed to apply functional 
regression on the day-ahead curves to include the extracted covariates in the 
modelling table. The purpose was only to fit the data points from the curves 
close to the day-ahead cross point, more specifically ±2500 MWh from the 
day-ahead cross point, corresponding to approximate the minimum and 
maximum net imbalance volumes happened during 2016 and 2017. 
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 5.    RESULTS 
24 
24 
 
Nevertheless, we found hours were the day-ahead price cleared at volumes 
quite close to the maximum offered and demanded load volume, meaning 
there were not existing points in the curve to cover the segment we wanted 
to fit for all the curves. The solution to the problem was to add one single 
data point placed at +2500 MWh from the day-ahead cross point for both 
curves as Fig.11 shows. 
 
Figure 11. Supply and demand curves for 14:00 h on 22/02/2016 auction to 
be fitted by functional smoothing. The origin has been changed to the cross 
point, and the supply and demand curves completed to +2500 MWh showed 
by the discontinuous lines.  
 
• 
Completing the curves to reach +2500 MWh value from the day-ahead cross 
point was not the only issue to handle with the data from the curves. High 
distances between data points placed on the curves led to obtain basis 
functions highly correlated. This multicollinearity at the same time was 
generating a remarkable number of undesired NAs when extracting the 
parameters βi by functional smoothing, losing important information. 
Therefore, it was decided to complete all the supply and demand curves with 
data points each 20 MWh as Fig.12 illustrates. By implementing this method, 
an insignificant number of NAs was obtained after applying functional 
regression.  
 
Figure 12. Supply and demand curves for 14:00 h on 22/02/2016 auction to 
be fitted by functional smoothing. The left column presents the original data 
points on the curves while the right column illustrates the curves including 
data points each 20 MWh. 
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 5.    RESULTS 
25 
25 
 
• 
Additionally, it was found that the day-ahead price and volume values were 
in some hours totally different from the day-ahead cross point obtained from 
the curves. These misalignments were identified, and the corresponding 
rows removed from the modelling table.  
Table 2. Misalignments between day-ahead cross point and curve data points. 
Misalignments 
Total Hours 
% 
612 
17543 
3.49 
 
• 
Finally, in order to align hourly day-ahead data with half-hourly balancing 
mechanism data, we proceeded to duplicate the day-ahead data to finally 
conform a modelling table containing imbalance prices and potential 
predictor variables. 
 
5.2 Forecasting Models 
This paper has presented four different approaches to predict the balancing 
mechanism price five settlement periods before real time: OLS, LASSO, functional 
regression and MRS. Five forecasting models from these techniques have been 
developed and performed. 
 
1. In the first step, imbalance price predictions were calculated by applying 
multiple linear regression over all potential covariates extracted during the 
exploratory analysis (predictors from the day-ahead curves are excluded), 
using Ordinary Least Squares algorithm (OLS) as method to solve the 
forecasting problem (OLS1 Model).  
 
2. Then, predictor variables that showed to be statistically insignificant were 
removed (using Student’s T-Test). OLS algorithm was again applied as the 
previous case to make predictions (OLS2 Model).  
 
3. The third model used linear regression as well, but in this case the covariates 
selection was performed by LASSO algorithm (LASSO Model).  
 
4. Following the methodology of this work, we included the βj parameters we 
estimated by using functional smoothing on the day-ahead curves to the 
model (FR Model). The optimal βj parameter values were found only to be on 
the supply curves, fitted by cubic splines with 10 knots sequentially placed 
between 1700MWh and 900MWh before the day-ahead cross point, as 
Fig.13 shows. Most of these parameters were included as part of the 
covariates to predict the imbalance price.  
 
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 5.    RESULTS 
26 
26 
 
 
 
Figure 13. Representation of the smooth function f(v) using cubic regression 
spline, with the final optimal location of the knots showed by the dotted 
vertical lines, and the actual supply curve on 14:00 h on 22/02/2016 auction. 
 
5. The development of a MRS model for forecasting the single imbalance price 
was motivated by the exploratory analysis developed at the beginning of the 
work, and finally by looking at the residuals of the FR model. Plotting the 
residuals allows to assess whether the observed errors are consistent with 
stochastic error. The residuals should be centred on zero throughout the 
range of fitted values, but as it can be appreciated in Fig.14, there is clearly a 
bimodal distribution, suggesting that the imbalance price is governed by two 
different behaviour patterns. MRS model was developed to capture these 
behaviours.  
 
Figure 14. Histogram presenting the residuals of FR model. 
 
When estimating the unknown parameters of the MRS model, we clearly 
found differences between 𝛽𝑗
(0) and 𝛽𝑗
(1). As consequence, we could assure 
that the applied MRS model for predicting imbalance prices admits two 
dynamic price behaviours at two different regimes (st = 0 when the system 
length is long and st = 1 when is short). In Fig.15 is showed as an example the 
estimation of the two imbalance price models from 11/07/2017 to 
14/07/2017 forecasted by our MRS model.   
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 5.    RESULTS 
27 
27 
 
 
 
Figure 15. Estimation of the two dynamic models of the MRS model from 
11/07/2016 to 14/07/2017. 
 
As we were expecting from the exploratory analysis of the data, both models 
exhibit different time series behaviours. While the system length is short, the 
imbalance price pattern shows constantly fluctuation along time with 
frequent high price spikes. Whereas if the system length is long, the 
imbalance price behaviour seems to be quite flat, with lower values than 
imbalance prices when the system is short.  
 
Table 3. Description of the models for forecasting the imbalance prices. 
 
Name 
Price forecast method 
OLS 
Linear Regression based on Ordinary Least Squares 
OLS2 
Linear Regression using Student’s T-Test based on 
Ordinary Least Squares 
LASSO 
Linear Regression based on Least Absolute 
Shrinkage and Selection Operator 
FR 
Linear Regression including functional covariates 
from the supply day-ahead curve 
MRS 
Markov Regime Switching  
 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 5.    RESULTS 
28 
28 
 
5.3 Model Performance Measurements 
In order to evaluate and compare the forecasting accuracy of the models, a 
cross-validation procedure (CV) based on a rolling forecasting origin [30] was 
applied on the modelling table as Fig. 16 shows. The CV method used on the models 
starts with one-year subset of data for training purpose. The model is fitted using 
this training data set, and predictions are made for the next three months. Then, 
the accuracy for the forecasted data is evaluated using some performance 
indicators. The next training dataset to fit the models includes the three moths used 
previously as test data set. The subsequent three months are forecasted, and their 
accuracy evaluated again. At the end, the average for each performance indicator 
is calculated, and these values are compared between the different models to 
compare their performance. 
 
 
Figure 16. Cross-validation procedure (CV) based on a rolling forecasting origin for 
training and testing imbalance price models. 
 
The performance indicators used to compare forecasting performance between 
models are based on two of the most common metrics used to measure forecasting 
accuracy, mean absolute error (MAE) and Root mean squared error (RMSE) [31].  
 
• 
MAE measures the average magnitude of the errors in a set of predictions, 
without considering their direction. It is the average over the test sample of 
the absolute differences between predictions and actual observations, 
where all individual differences have equal weight. Let et = yt – y’t be as the 
imbalance price prediction error for the series yt, with y’t the forecast value. 
 
                             𝑀𝐴𝐸= 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 (|𝑒𝑡|) 
(5.1) 
• 
RMSE is a quadratic scoring rule that also measures the average magnitude 
of the error. It is the square root of the average of squared differences 
between prediction and actual observation. 
                            𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸= √𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 (𝑒𝑡
2) 
(5.2) 
 
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 5.    RESULTS 
29 
29 
 
Since the errors are squared before they are averaged, the RMSE gives a 
relatively high weight to large errors. This means the RMSE will be particularly 
useful since large errors are undesirable when forecasting the imbalance prices. On 
the other hand, MAE describe average error alone, making easier its understanding. 
Fig. 17 illustrates the different MAE and RMSE values for the five proposed models. 
 
Figure 17. MAE and RMSE for OLS, OLS2, LASSO, FR and MRS models. 
 
Between all linear regression models, the OLS model seems to be the least 
accurate. This is to be expected, since at the beginning it is difficult to know which 
set of predictor variables will create the best prediction equation.  The OLS model 
probably contains covariates which show a strong correlation with the imbalance 
price, but they are not necessarily functionally related, reducing the forecasting 
performance. 
 
Certainly, regression selection approaches applied on OLS2 and LASSO models 
are helpful in increasing the efficiency of the prediction. The aim of covariates 
selection is to reduce the set of predictor variables to those that are necessary and 
account for nearly as much of the variance as is accounted for by the total set.  
 
OLS2 and LASSO models perform well, but the performance indicators indicate 
that functional approach model FR creates the lowest prediction errors in 
forecasting imbalance prices than any of the other linear regression models. That 
indicates the potential benefits of including the predictor variables extracted by 
applying functional regression on the supply curve. 
 
Results from the forecasting accuracy evaluation imply that linear regression 
models perform better than weighted predictions made by the Markov model, even 
though the MRS model aims to capture the two dynamic patterns the imbalance 
price follows. Some reasons may explain the bad performance of MRS model: first, 
there are probably better methods to calculate more accurately the weighted price 
predictions for comparing the results with the other models. Second, the optimal 
selection of the predictor variables for estimating the imbalances prices and 
transition probabilities could be a different set the covariates than the used in our 
model. Finally, there could be more suitable MRS techniques to estimate the two 
underlying stochastic processes of the imbalance price. 
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 5.    RESULTS 
30 
30 
 
Descriptive forecasting performance results more in detail are shown in Fig.18, 
where the half hourly-daily MAE is graphically summarized, for all the models. 
 
Figure 18. Half hourly-daily MAE profile for OLS, OLS2, LASSO, FR and MRS models. 
 
Here again, the graph indicates the best forecasting performance along the day 
is estimated by FR model, closely followed by LASSO and OLS2, whereas MRS model 
creates the worst predictions for most of the settlement periods. However, from 
the settlement period 34 to 36, the MRS model surprisingly seems to the best 
forecasting model. For the rest of the settlement periods, all the models apparently 
follow the same half-hourly behaviour.  
 
In general, the average MAE profiles closely match a typical daily electricity 
demand curve as shown in Fig. 19. When the demand is high the SO could have to 
use more expensive plant to balance the system, meaning that price spikes are 
likely to occur multiple times, and consequently most difficult is to predict the 
imbalance prices during these periods of times. 
 
 
 
Figure 19. Average half-hourly variation of the electricity demand in England and 
Wales. 
 
As an example to see visually our estimations against the real imbalance prices, 
we represent graphically in Fig.20 the predicted imbalance prices with the FR model 
against the actual prices from 11/07/2016 to 14/07/2017, using as training data set 
all the previous values since 2016.  
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 5.    RESULTS 
31 
31 
 
The graph shows that the FR model can estimate the general behaviour of the 
imbalance price, but price spikes could be predicted more effectively. 
 
Figure 20.  Actual and estimated imbalance price values using FR model from 
11/07/2016 to 14/07/2017. 
 
5.4 Forecast Time Horizon Evaluation 
Estimating imbalance prices in advance allows market players making strategic 
decisions between trading on a multilateral intraday market or taking part in the 
balancing market. The best decisions are directed related by our anticipation to the 
results, the forecasting time horizon. Therefore, we evaluated the forecast made 
by FR models across different time horizons as represented in Fig.21. 
 
 
Figure 21. MAE and RMSE for FR model across different time horizons. 
 
The comparison clearly shows that the model performs better on short horizon 
forecasts than predictions estimated well in advanced. Time horizon with 4 
settlement periods ahead has also been evaluated to evaluate how much the 
accuracy of the FR model is improved by forecasting 30 min before than our 
proposed forecast horizon. It will depend on each market player the decision of 
forecasting before than 5 settlements periods ahead, having less time to make their 
decisions before the PNs are frozen one hour before real time. However, it is 
important to remark that the data is not published instantly by Elexon, and 
therefore predicting 4 settlement periods ahead could mean forecasting with less 
than 2 hours before real time, having very little time to make decisions.  
==PAGE:37==
 
32 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6 
Conclusions 
 
In this paper we have presented five models for predicting the balancing 
mechanism price. First, we implemented linear regression over all potential 
covariates extracted during the exploratory analysis using OLS, Student’s T-Test and 
LASSO techniques to solve the linear problem. Following the study, we included the 
parameters associated to the basis functions we estimated by using functional 
regression on the supply day-ahead curve to the model. Finally, considering that 
the imbalance price is governed by two different behaviour patterns, a MRS model 
aimed to capture these behaviours was presented. 
All models have been benchmarked, with special emphasis of the ability of the 
model to create imbalance price forecasts that can assist market players to improve 
their making decision process for the trade-off between trading on a multilateral 
intraday market or taking part in the balancing market. For this reason, we set the 
forecasting time horizon to 5 settlement periods ahead real time, providing market 
players enough time to make their trading decisions without missing excessive 
information in the data.  
Our analysis confirms that it is hard to predict the imbalance prices even few 
hours before real time. In fact, it could be interpreted as a sign of an efficient 
electricity market that it is not possible to predict the balancing market price. 
However, stating that it is difficult to capture the expected imbalance price 
behaviour precisely, does not mean that balancing market forecasting is futile or 
that it does not matter which forecasting model that is used.  
Even though the conducted Markov Regime Switching aimed to capture the two 
different dynamic patterns seems to lead to bad performance in terms of error 
measures such as MAE and RMSE, modelling the imbalance prices using a functional 
approach is a very promising way. Including valuable information about residual 
supply contained on the day-ahead supply curves allowed us to capture the general 
behaviour of the imbalance price and reduce prediction errors respect to the other 
proposed linear regression models. However, since the balancing mechanism is 
designed to handle unforeseen events and fluctuation, predicting extreme 
imbalance prices can very challenging, and still there is room for improvement in 
this aspect. Only the supply curves were useful for improving the forecasts accuracy 
of the functional model, but we consider that this could change in the future as 
demand becomes more flexible.
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 6.    CONCLUSIONS 
33 
33 
 
We think the provided functional model approach opens the door for a different 
way to improve imbalance price predictions. Thus, for that purpose we strongly 
recommend apply functional regression to the day-ahead sales and purchase 
curves to extract very valuable information which could lead to improve the 
imbalance price forecasting accuracy, and we highly encourage to continue 
exploring the MRS model to capture the bimodal behaviour of the imbalance prices 
more accurately.  
 
 
 
   .
==PAGE:39==
 
34 
 
 
 
Bibliography 
 
[1]  “Ofgem,” [Online]. Available: https://www.ofgem.gov.uk. 
[2]  “Elexon,” [Online]. Available: https://www.elexon.co.uk. 
[3]  R. Weron and A. Misiorek, “Forecasting spot electricity prices: a comparison 
of parametric and semiparametric time series models,” International Journal 
Forecast, pp. 744-763, 2008.  
[4]  A. J. Conejo, J. Contreras, R. Espinola and M. A. Plazas, “Forecasting electricity 
prices for a day-ahead pool-based electric energy market,” International 
Journal of Forecasting 21, pp. 435-462, 2005.  
[5]  F. J. Nogales, J. Contreras, A. J. Conejo and R. Espinola, “Forecasting nextday 
electricity prices by time series model,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 
17(2), pp. 342-348, 2002.  
[6]  M. Olsson and L. Soder, “Modelling in real-time balancing power market 
prices using combined SARIMA and Markov processes,” IEEE Transaction on 
Power Systems, vol. 23, pp. 443-450, 2008.  
[7]  T. Jónsson, P. Pinson, H.A. Nielsen and H. Madsen, “Exponential smoothing 
approaches for prediction in real-time electricity markets,” Energies, vol. 7, 
pp. 3710-3732, 2014.  
[8]  P. Pinson, C. Chevallier and G. N. Kariniotakis, “Trading wind generation from 
short-term probabilistic forecasts of wind power,” IEEE Transaction on Power 
Systems, vol. 22, pp. 1148-1156, 2007.  
[9]  J. Browell, “Risk Constrained Trading Strategies for Stochastic Generation 
with a Single-Price Balancing Market,” Energies 2018, 11, 1345.  
[10] L. Rabiner, “A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in 
speech recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 257-286, 1989. 
[11] M. R. Hassan, B. Nath, “Stock market forecasting using hidden Markov model: 
a new approach,” in Intelligent Systems Design and Applications, 2005. ISDA 
'05. Proceedings. 5th International Conference, 2005.  
[12] J. Zhang, J. Wang, R. Wang and G. Hou, “Forecasting next-day electricity prices 
with Hidden Markov Models,” in Industrial Electronics and Applications 
(ICIEA), 2010 the 5th IEEE Conference, 2010.  
==PAGE:40==
 
35 
 
[13] A. M. Gonzalez, A. M. S. Roque and J. Garcia-Gonzalez, “Modelling and 
forecasting electricity prices with input/output hidden Markov models,” IEEE 
Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 13-24, 2005.  
[14] I. Dimoulkas, M. Amelin and M. R. Hesamzadeh, “Forecasting Balancing 
Market Prices Using Hidden Markov Models,” in European Energy Market 
(EMM), 2016 13th International Conference, 2016.  
[15] “Nord Pool,” [Online]. Available: https://www.nordpoolgroup.com. 
[16] “National Grid,” [Online]. Available: https://www.nationalgrid.com. 
[17] “epexspot,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.apxgroup.com/trading-
clearing/apx-power-uk. 
[18] S. N. Wood, “Generalized Additive Models: An Introduction with R,” Chapman 
& Hall/CRC, 2006, pp. 1-10. 
[19] S. N. Wood, “Generalized Additive Models: An Introduction with R,” Chapman 
& Hall/CRC Texts in Statistical Science, 2006, pp. 10-22. 
[20] R. Tibshirani, “Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso,” J. R. Stat. Soc. 
Ser. B Stat Methodol, vol. 58, no. 1, p. 267–288., 1996.  
[21] J. Friedman, T. Hastie and R. Tibshirani, “Regularization Paths for Generalized 
Linear Models via Coordinate Descent,” Journal of Statistical Software, vol. 
33, no. 1, pp. 1-22, 2010.  
[22] J. O. Ramsay and B. W. Silverman, Functional Data Analysis, Springer Link, 
2005.  
[23] S. N. Wood, “Generalized Additive Models: An Introduction with R,” Chapman 
and Hall/CRC, 2006, pp. 120-128. 
[24] C. M. Kuan, “Lecture on the markov switching model,” 2002.  
[25] M. R. Gupta and Y. Chen, Theory and Use of the EM Algorithm, Foundations 
and Trends in Signal Processing, 2011.  
[26] G. Forney, “The Viterbi Algorithm,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 61, no. 3, 
1973.  
[27] I. Visser and M. Speekenbrink, “depmixS4: An R Package for Hidden Markov 
Models,” Journal of Statistical Software, vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 1-21, 2010.  
[28] M. Dowle and A. Srinivasan, “data.table: Extension of `data.frame`,” 2017. 
[Online]. Available: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=data.table. 
[29] D. T. Lang and CRAN team, “RCurl: General Network (HTTP/FTP/...) Client 
Interface 
for 
R,” 
2016. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://CRAN.R-
project.org/package=RCurl. 
==PAGE:41==
 
36 
 
[30] R. J. Hyndman, “Cross-validation for time series,” 5 December 2016. [Online]. 
Available: https://robjhyndman.com/hyndsight/tscv/. 
[31] T. Chai and R. R. Draxler, “Root mean square error (RMSE) or mean absolute 
error (MAE)? – Arguments against avoiding RMSE in the literature,” 
Geoscientific Model Development, 2014.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
 
37 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix A  
 
A.1 Predictor Variable Names 
 
Price_N2EX 
Lag_N2EXpr 
Volume_N2EX 
Lag_N2EXvl_i 
Lag_ip_i 
Lag_iv_i 
Settl_fac 
Wday_fac 
Month_fac 
x4 
x5 
x6 
x7 
Slopes_i 
Slopep_i 
Coef_sp_i 
Coef_dm_i 
Intercept_s 
Intercept_p 
Day-ahead price 
Lag value i of day-ahead price 
Day-ahead traded volume 
Lag value i of day-ahead traded volume 
Lag value i of imbalance price 
Lag value i of net imbalance volume  
Settlement period dummy variable 
Weekday dummy variable 
Month dummy variable 
Starting point of demand curve 
Starting point of supply curve 
Finishing point of supply curve 
Finishing point of demand curve 
Segment slopes of supply curve 
Segment slopes of demand curve 
Functional regression coefficients from the supply curve 
Functional regression coefficients from the demand curve 
Intercept of the smoothing supply curve 
Intercept of the smoothing demand curve
 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
38 
 
 
 
A.2 Predictor Variables for Forecasting Models  
 
In the following table, predictor variables used for each proposed forecasting 
model are presented 
 
Table 1.A Predictor variables of the models for forecasting the imbalance prices. 
Forecasting Model 
Predictor Variables 
OLS 
All predictor variables, excluding the covariates from 
the day-ahead curves 
OLS2 
Price_N2EX + Volume_N2EX + Lag_N2EXpr_3 + 
Lag_N2EXpr_4 + Lag_N2EXpr_5 + Lag_N2EXvl_5 + 
Lag_ip_5 + Lag_ip_9 + Lag_ip_48 + Wday_fac + 
Month_fac 
LASSO 
Price_N2EX + Volume_N2EX + Lag_ip_5 + 
Lag_ip_48 + Lag_iv_5 + Lag_iv_9 + Lag_iv_48 
+ Month_fac 
FR 
Intercept_s + Coef_sp_1 + Coef_sp_2 + 
Coef_sp_3 + Coef_sp_4 + Coef_sp_5 + 
Coef_sp_6 + Coef_sp_7 + Coef_sp_8 + 
Coef_sp_9 + Price_N2EX + Lag_N2EXpr_1 + 
lag_N2EXpr_2 + lag_N2EXpr_3 + lag_ip_5 + x5 
MRS 
Variables to fit the model:  
The same predictor variables as FR model 
 
Variables which contribute to switching effect: 
Price_N2EX + lag_iv_5 + lag_ip_5 + coef_spl7 
+ x6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
