==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Inferring User Location Based on Language
in Online Social Networks
Leopold Gattinger (s162900)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, June 21, 2018
Leopold Gattinger (s162900)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
People have migrated a significant portion of their social interactions to the online
environment of social networks where millions of messages are created each day and
where people publish various aspects of their life. Many times, however, people do not
specify their location. In this thesis we examine whether the messages posted online
can be indicative of users’ location. We approach this task by considering traditional
dialect regions in the United States of America and we examine whether it is possible
to identify users’ location based on the dialect they are using. Using natural language
processing and state-of-the-art machine learning techniques our findings suggest that
it indeed is possible to classify users with regard to these dialect regions and that
many times it is not only the dialect that helps classify the samples but also the
topics discussed within the messages.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
3
2.1
Review papers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Network-based approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Content-based approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Social and linguistic studies regarding Twitter . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Data
19
3.1
Linguistic map data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Dialect corpora . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Methods
27
4.1
Determining home location
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Transforming dialect regions into machine-readable format . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Data visualization application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Mapping dialect regions to location strings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.6
Processing raw tweet data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.7
Classification tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.8
Feature selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Experiments and Results
43
5.1
Tweet-centric experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
User-centric experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.3
Salient and location specific words
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Conclusion and discussion
57
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
A Appendix
61
Bibliography
65
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
English is unarguably one of the most widely spoken languages worldwide with
speakers coming from many different countries and communities having various back-
grounds. It is also well known that different people use different dialects and accents
when speaking the same language – an average person coming from the US will most
likely speak differently than an average British person. However, one can observe
such differences even within one single country which is typically regarded as a de
facto monolingual country. For example, the dialect spoken in the southern part of
the US is quite distinct and different from the one used in the area colloquially known
as New England.
With these assumptions in mind, an intriguing thought may come to one’s mind –
would it be possible to guess which part of a country a person comes from considering
the way this person speaks?
Researching this topic in a traditional setup (i.e. conducting research with the
subjects over phone, doing field-work, etc.) may be quite exhausting and costly if
large enough pool of samples should be considered. Another obstacle that may be an
issue is that just as fashion and culture gradually evolves, so do languages – listening
to a speech from early 20th century will certainly sound different than one made this
year, both vocabulary- and accent-wise.
With the advent of internet and more recently social media, people write thou-
sands of messages online each day discussing various topics and ideas, or simply
describing their ordinary days or thoughts.
Since large part of the population uses these social media to express themselves
and most of the discussion there are traditionally quite informal, it just may be the
way of looking at these different dialects and tackling the initial question of estimating
user’s location based on the dialect a person uses.
The structure of the thesis will be as follows. First an overview of related lit-
erature will be provided where we look at what has been done in this field so far,
what results were achieved and how it relates to this work. We then continue onto
selecting an appropriate data for this task such as dialect regions and text corpus.
Afterwards, various methods that have been tried in regard to dataset processing and
experiment setups will be discussed. Results and findings of the experiments will then
be described in a separate chapter where we look at whether the results look similar
to what one would intuitively expect. Lastly, we discuss the whole work where we
reflect at the outcomes and finally we conclude this thesis with ideas for future work.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
The source code for this thesis can be found online on GitHub1 and whenever a
reference to code is made in this work, it can be found in this online repository.
1https://github.com/lgatting/ledial
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Literature review
Before exploring the task and different approaches right away, we have first examined
and considered previous work and literature that deals with location inference tasks.
In this chapter, we go over such sources where we will summarize the important points
that are relevant to this thesis, however, other interesting or impressive ideas will be
highlighted as well. Since by reviewing literature we are exploring what has been
done in this field in general, some papers may be more specific to the dialect-part
of the location inference problem while others might take on the task from a more
general perspective.
2.1
Review papers
There has been done quite a lot of research in the field of geolocation inference as we
have found out. Therefore to get a general overview of the problems and solutions
that have been considered, we first start by review papers which summarize previous
findings. In the first paper we look at various approaches for how we can process and
identify locations while the second work goes through other research done in this field
and compares their results. These papers therefore do not propose new techniques of
solving the issues in this field per se.
A survey of location inference techniques on Twitter
[AHL15] Although
the paper is most likely not describing state-of-the-art techniques anymore since it
was published in 2015, we have decided that it may still provide us with valuable
insight into the field. The paper mentions problem with extracting reliable location
information since only 0.5% of users geotag their tweets and only 14% provide name of
a real place in the location field. Their review is structured such that they look closely
at location detection types, spatial indicators and methods of inferring locations.
For the first category, they identified various location detection types. The first
method simply looks at location from which a tweet was posted. This obviously raises
a question whether such location can be trusted as home location since a user may
have posted a tweet from a place far away from his home. Another method surveyed
used content of a tweet as a source for location.
The second category considers spatial indicators and the authors of the paper
identified numerous different approaches. They consider content of the location field
==PAGE:12==
4
2 Literature review
and how malformed it may be (e.g. United Kingdom may be written in many different
ways, such as UK, GB, Gr8 Britain etc.) together with solutions to resolving these
unusual or mistyped place names. Some other approaches also considered examining
the links contained in a tweet. Another useful feature found in their survey is the
use of social networks where they claim that reciprocal following increases the chance
of that connection’s usefulness for the current user location inference, following with
geotags where the main drawback is mentioned, namely that only few users have the
geotaggin feature enabled. Lastly, third party sources such as Foursquare where users
can connect their Twitter account to such location-based services can also be useful
for the task.
The survey then continues onto exploring different methods of inferring locations
on Twitter. Here they mention natural language processing (NLP) techniques, by
which they mainly mean Named Entity Recognition (NER) systems and their varia-
tions built specifically for dealing with raw data such as tweets. Besides that, gaze-
teers are also mentioned where locations can be matched against predefined strings
and GeoNames or GeoNet are mentioned as specific examples of these. Finally, prob-
abilistic and machine learning techniques are also mentioned.
The core of the paper is concluded by describing various sources of Twitter data
and analysis techniques where they look at criteria based on which models can be
compared. In vast majority of times, the models are compared based on the coverage
radius with different sizes, however, state, city or zip code level measures are used as
well.
Geolocation Prediction in Twitter Using Social Networks: A Critical Anal-
ysis and Review of Current Practice
[Jur+15] The authors note that although
many studies have been done in regard to various geolocation methods and approaches,
there does not seem to be unified evaluation technique where one can easily compare
them relatively to each other. They therefore take on the task of comparing 9 network-
based state-of-the-art methods and compare their performance using a standardized
evaluation procedure. The prediction task is formulated as follows: given a tweet,
predict its geolocation as latitude and longitude.
The authors propose 3 evaluation criteria.
• Accuracy at tweet-level geoinference
• Accuracy at user-level geoinference
• Maximizing number of posts whose geolocation can be infered
These evaluation criteria are afterwards measured using methods called AUC
(Area Under Curve), Median-Max and Post Coverage metrics for each of the eval-
uation criteria, respectively. The first metric measures how the error from true lo-
cation for a single tweet geolocation changes with regard to the tolerated distance
radius, second method quantifies user-based accuracy by firstly identifying highest
error across all user’s posts and then median error across all users’ errors is selected
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Network-based approaches
5
and lastly, post coverage metric simply measures percentage of posts for which the
method can predict location.
The results of the study show couple of interesting findings.
Firstly, the self-
defined location strings are not as accurate as they are claimed to be in the studies
surveyed. Authors note that this may be suggesting an existence of a trend where less
users provide correct location when compared to previous years. The next interesting
finding is that the accuracy claimed by the authors of the studies is not being observed
under real-world conditions and the algorithms do not scale well to more data. Lastly,
such models are quite significantly affected by their age – number of tweets that can
be tagged decreases every four months by half.
2.2
Network-based approaches
One of the popular approaches in the domain of geolocation inference is to use in-
formation contained within social network of a user. In this section we review two
papers where the first one is trying to infer future users’ location based on their social
network that joined Twitter before the user in question did while the second paper
tries to identify users’ location by propagating known locations through the graph of
social connections between users.
Collective aspects of privacy in the Twitter social network
[Gar+18] This
relatively new paper is claimed to be one of the first to conduct experiments where
personal data of people, such as geolocation, that are not yet members of the social
network are being inferred from data of their friends who are users. The authors
therefore try and test the shadow profile hypothesis that says that data of users
can be indicative of personal information of non-users. Although the shadow profile
hypothesis concerns about constructing general description of a person, this work
mainly focuses on identifying location of such non-users.
The approach to the problem is formulated via ego and alter users where ego user
is the person in question (i.e. non-user) and alter users are users of Twitter that
have connection to the ego user. Therefore, they start off by identifying 1 017 ego
users and 68 447 alter users. It is important to note that there may be alter users
that joined the network after the ego user and therefore these will not be considered.
Therefore, for the geolocation prediction task, only information and posts that were
available before the ego user joined the network are used.
As for the geolocation, the location of a user is determined to be the most frequent
city that is associated with given geotag. For users that do not have geotags associated
with any of their tweets, the location is determined by analyzing location string and
biographical text of the user with the help of Google’s Text Analysis API1. For the
text analysis part, they employ NLTK’s stopword list2 and stemming. Besides these
1https://cloud.google.com/natural-language/
2https://www.nltk.org
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Literature review
methods, they have also used document to vector technique – a technique similar to
word2vec where words are represented as n-dimensional vectors.
The final location of an ego user is determined to be the most frequent city of ego
user’s alters and the median error from true location is estimated by the authors to be
69km. As the final result, the authors claim that it is indeed possible to approximate
non-user’s location and biography text to certain degree.
That’s What Friends Are For: Inferring Location in Online Social Media
Platforms Based on Social Relationships
[Jur13] A paper that builds on some
of the other papers reviewed in this chapter, the authors try to solve the geolocation
task by using only a handful of initial locations and they are inferring the location
for other users by propagating information via links established in the social network.
Although Twitter is central to this work, the authors claim that the approach used
in this study should be network-independent.
The dataset contains 47 million unique users and around 5% of those users are
assigned a location which is defined to be a mean location of users who had at least
5 geotagged tweets and at least 5 geotagged tweets were within 15km radius.
Besides inferring user location by propagating known locations throughout the net-
work, the proposed method is enhanced by combining data from other social networks
using self-reported locations, linguistic similarity for predicting more local neighbors
and pruning geographically distant relationships since those may introduce noise.
As a result, the authors claim that after multiple iterations of the algorithm,
almost all users in the network have been assigned a location which is typically within
10km from the true location. They also show that although self-reported locations are
noisy, they may be used without much loss in the performance, information from other
social networks can improve performance and that users’ relative spatial closeness
does not correlate much with the lexical content of the respective users’ posts.
2.3
Content-based approaches
A reasonable assumption is that users reveal their location through information that
they publish such as profile or messages they post and the following papers are mostly
examining the textual content of these. The task is approached from various angles –
some papers try to identify location entities within the text, while others try to iden-
tify words that are indicative of certain locations. Analyzing these papers therefore
allows us to understand what techniques are relevant and with what degree of success
they were used.
Inferring Twitter User Locations With 10km Accuracy
[RM14] The paper
focuses on predicting location of South Korean users’ location by identifying local
words. They mention problem regarding sparsity of location data in general (i.e. few
users geotag their tweets (less than 1%)). The locations are defined as bins of size
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Content-based approaches
7
500x500m2. Since their focus was on one specific country and language, they used
snowball sampling where the initial samples were Korean celebrities.
As a result,
they have gathered 615 million tweets created by 3.3 million users that were written
between June 2010 and April 2011.
After processing the dataset, they ended up with 801 505 words from 22 525 users.
They continue on calculating center mass of each word together with foci and dis-
persions of the words. The resulting metric used to denote how “local” a word is
is denoted as α and the higher the value of this metric, the more local the word is.
Altogether they identified 450 very local words (α > 0.4) and they conclude that
top 1 000 words as ordered by their α value are the most informative. Examining
the selection of words from this list, it is clear that most of them are in fact named
entities and locations (such as airports, universities, terminals etc.)
They use two baseline methods for inferring users’ location. The first one uses
all words present in users’ tweets while the second baseline method only uses local
words for location inference, where “local words” are the top 1000 words as ordered
by their α value. Using local words and implementing map projection, they manage
to place 82% of users correctly within 30km from their true home location.
Finally, they note that the method can only be employed with users who actually
use local words since their fallback approach (i.e. using local words of user’s friends
for location estimation) is not as precise.
End-to-end Network for Twitter Geolocation Prediction and Hashing
[Lau+17]
The proposed value of this paper is that the model outputted by the neural network
is language independent, interpretable and with only minimal feature engineering
while outperforming state-of-the-art systems.
Additionally, the authors propose a
system for efficient binary compression of the learned representation. Their dataset
consists of around 9 million samples that are split into training, development and test
partitions of size 8.9 millions, 7 200 and 10 000, respectively.
As for the output, the goal is to predict correct location. In this case, they have
identified 3 362 possible locations and the network will therefore aim to associate any
given tweet with one of those.
The goal of geolocation prediction is in general twofold, namely, predicting ge-
olocation on tweet-level and on user-level, however, the authors in this work focus
on the tweet-level prediction with tweet in this context representing both the actual
text message as well as various other metadata associated with it (i.e. creation time,
timezone, location string and account creation time). The high-level architecture of
the proposed neural network is that for each of the input metadata, a feature vector
is created, which get afterwards concatenated and go through additional layers (i.e.
tanh and softmax layers).
As already mentioned, one of the advantages of using this architecture is that
only basic feature engineering is required and preprocessing done on the dataset is
minimal since only tweets that have less than 5 characters are removed. Additionally,
characters that appear less than 5 times are also discarded.
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Literature review
Location detection and disambiguation from Twitter messages
[Ink+17]
The goal of this work as setup by the authors is to detect locations from within
Twitter messages. It is therefore not a paper concerning locating users that did not
provide their location on Twitter, but rather they approach the task in a manner
similar to Named Entity Recognition (NER), but instead of focusing on identifying
all kinds of named entities, they focus on location entities and they go as far as
classifying each identified location as city, state or province or country.
The dataset consisted of tweets collected between June 2013 and November 2013
and the total number of tweets gathered was 20 million. Since the authors were not
aware of any annotated dataset, they performed this manual task themselves and
processed 6 000 tweets, marking each location entity as either country, SP (short for
state/province) or other.
The authors also mention an important problem associated with this kind of task,
namely the disambiguation and identify two such types: geo/geo which refers to
disambiguation of two locations with the same name and geo/non-geo which refers to
deciding whether the named entity is a location or something else (e.g. given name).
The main contribution of the paper is location recognizer that is able to identify
places whose names can consist of multiple words and the disambiguation method
that is capable of determining which exact location is being referred to with the
latter method being based on set of heuristic rules defined by the authors.
Evaluating the “geographical awareness” of individuals: an exploratory
analysis of twitter data
[XWY13] The core of this work relies on somewhat
philosophical assumption that a person has higher awareness of local geography and
places nearby than those that are farther away. The study itself is exploratory in its
nature and examines how the level of awareness correlates with person’s e.g. home
location, however, that is not the sole purpose and the goal is rather more general.
Problem with recognizing named entities in such an informal setting as is Twitter
is also mentioned in this paper and authors simply tried multiple tools and chose
those that performed best on a set of 3 200 tweets used for calibration.
The dataset consisted of approximately 3 000 users and their tweets, however,
throughout the analysis phase, the authors decided to focus only on handful of these
to highlight different features.
The results of this work were somewhat surprising since it was expected that
users will show most interest in their local area. However, according to this paper, it
seems that users may have interests in various different places, be it on national or
international level. Therefore, although such approach does indeed provide us with a
closer look into one’s mental map of different locations, the geographical awareness
does not seem to be indicative of users’ home location.
Tracking geographical locations using a geo-aware topic model for ana-
lyzing social media data
[LSB17] Unlike other similar papers that identify user
location based on keywords or dialects, the authors of this one decided to examine how
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Content-based approaches
9
and whether topics can be assigned location which then directly leads to connecting
it with user geolocation.
The auhtors decided to use two distinct datasets; the first one consisted of 3 200
tweets for each major news or television company (they have identified 31 such com-
panies on Twitter) while the other source uses tweets that have news-related hashtags
and are written by general Twitter population. However, the latter source has proven
to be too noisy to work with since the tweets were selected using keywords and many
tweets, albeit containing the relevant keywords, were not discussing news. Moreover,
since they were not written by the respectable news companies, the text was written
in quite an informal way which is difficult to process.
An interesting highlight that relates to this thesis is regarding the preprocessing
techniques. According to the authors, removing hashtags removes too many interest-
ing and vital information and according to their findings, it is better to preserve these
text features. Another interesting preprocessing technique employed in this work was
removing uninteresting symbols such as currency signs or unicode emoticons.
Twitter location (sometimes) matter: Exploring the relationship between
georeferenced tweet content and nearby feature classes
[HPB14] The overall
goal of this article is to explore to what extent does the content of a tweet correlate
with the location from which it has been sent. This general question is then separated
into more fine-grained research topics that are covered in the paper, where quite
interesting concern is raised – namely, whether the location of texts related to a
location follow a random distribution in space.
The data are again retrieved from Twitter, however, certain post-processing tasks
are performed on them. Since the authors focus on Germany, only geotagged tweets
coming from this region are kept. Afterwards, language-based filtering is applied and
lastly only tweets coming from iPhone/iPad, Android and BlackBerry devices are
kept. The reason for the last post-processing step is to avoid content from other,
potentially automated services posting on behalf of a user such as Instagram.
The conclusion of their work is that there seems to exist low correlation between
the content of a tweet and location from where it was posted. The authors therefore
continue to suggest that using user’s social network might increase the accuracy of
such systems with conjunction of tweet content analysis.
Location Inference using Microblog Messages
[IET12] The main motivation
of this paper is to analyze textual content of tweets so as to allow for predicting
location of sudden disasters and the authors see the potential of this work to be used
by municipal emergency response centers. The prediction is carried out by identifying
keywords that are informative of location.
The authors take somewhat unusual approach to identifying location of messages.
They first classify messages into two categories, namely location messages where
tweets contain a location information e.g. from location service and expression mes-
sages for all the other tweets. Afterwards, each expression message is associated with
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Literature review
the chronologically closest location message, given that the location message was cre-
ated within some reasonable time interval. The list of keywords from the expression
message are then created and those are then associated with the given location. The
location of new messages are then estimated by comparing the keywords of the new
message with the keywords associated with different locations and location whose
keywords overlap the most with the keywords of the new message is then selected.
The preprocessing done on the dataset was rather basic since only retweets and
replies were removed and the evaluation of this technique is done by using geotagged
tweets as the ground truth and the training of the keywords is done both on single-user
level (i.e. only given user’s past messages are used) as well as multi-user level.
The results of the study are somewhat surprising since the baseline – which simply
determines location to be the most common one for the current user – performs quite
well.
The results also show that training done on single-users results in highest
accuracy while multi-user training is somewhat disappointing since it performs worse
than the baseline.
Where Is This Tweet From? Inferring Home Location of Twitter Users
[MND12] The authors of the paper propose a method for locating Twitter users at
different granularity levels, such as state, city or time zone levels. The geolocation
task in this paper is carried out by examining content of the tweets as it is done in
other papers, but the authors also consider user’s tweeting behavior. Besides having
the goal of geolocating users, they also want to show strategies for avoiding location
discriminative features that could be useful for people who want to publish their
content publicly yet do not want to reveal their location.
The dataset consists of tweets form July to August 2011 and are the tweets coming
from top 100 US cities population-wise. For each of the cities, 100 users together with
200 tweets for each users were retrieved.
The classification is threefold since it is based on either words, hashtags or place
names, the last one being entities identified by a geographical gazetteer. For the first
category, only words that are tagged as nouns are used, the second category consists
of words that were prefixed by the “#” symbol and lastly, for the last category,
the terms are matched against USGS gazetteer. They have tried various machine
learning approaches, with Multinomial Naïve Bayes being chosen amongst others since
it provided with reasonably good results. An interesting approach to the classification
task used by the authors is to use time zones which splits day into fixed-size chunks of
time of equal size and number of tweets posted in each chunk is recorded as a feature.
These multiple classifiers are then also merged to produce ensemble classifiers in order
to improve the results.
As a result, the authors claim that their approach produces better results than
state-of-the-art methods, partly because of the ensemble classifiers and hierarchical
approach where e.g. first the time-zone is estimated and afterwards this information
is used to estimate the city location.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Content-based approaches
11
Location Extraction From Disaster-Related Microblogs
[LKY13] The moti-
vation behind the paper is to be able to identify locations of disasters by identifying
named entities within text and locate the places on the geolocation and point-of-
interest (POI) level.
The dataset used contained 3 203 selected disaster-related tweets, out of which
2 878 were selected after being annotated with location names by authors and MTurks3.
They consider 4 NLP tools for identifying named entities, namely Stanford NER,
OpenNLP, TwitterNLP and Yahoo! PlaceMaker and they compare them both out-
of-the-box as well as their retrained versions, where the retraining is done on the
manually annotated dataset.
As for the results, the authors claim that they were able to retrain Stanford NER
to increase its performance on informal texts such as tweet messages and conclude
that identifying POIs is difficult task even for such retrained system, since the best
result at identifying POIs was accuracy of 69%.
Estimating Twitter User Location Using Social Interactions – A Content
Based Approach
[CKM11] The user geolocation task in this paper is approached
via examining content of the tweets and looking at topics that are being discussed by
users in their conversations. They begin the work by mentioning standard problems
typically seen in this research area, namely problems with self-provided locations,
lack of geotagged tweets, multiple locations for users that move a lot or locations
that are too vague and the goal set up by the authors is to be able to locate users
with city-level granularity. The intuition driving the motivation behind this study is
that tweets and the associated reply-tweets stick to one topic and the content of this
conversation may contain location-specific data.
The first model used in this work considers each user’s tweets to be belonging to
one city and thereby words of that tweet should be indicative of that place whereas
the second model also considers a link between tweets and their replies and thereby
all words within the conversation can be tied to that user and that user’s city.
The authors conclude the study by pointing out that associating content of reply
tweets with initial tweet’s user location improves performance and they improve their
baseline method results that are claimed to be typically used by other works by
around 12% and the results they were able to obtain suggest accuracy of 22%.
You Are Where You Tweet: A Content-Based Approach to Geo-locating
Twitter Users
[CCL10] Another work that focuses purely on the content of the
tweets and which does not consider any other hints such external knowledge bases.
The proposed solution relies on textual content of the tweet, classifier that identifies
location-specific words and lattice-based neighborhood smoothing model for refining
the results. The model’s outcome is then an ordered list of possible cities in decreasing
order with regard to the probability of that place being the home location.
3https://www.mturk.com
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Literature review
Their approach to data collection is twofold since they gather data from both
the publicly available API that provides a random sample of tweets as well as go-
ing through users’ timelines and following follower-relationship edges of the network
graph. The study only focuses on continental US and uses self-provided location that
is in form “cityName”, “cityName, stateName” or “cityName, stateAbbreviation” as
the ground truth.
The results of the work seem to hint at the fact that it is indeed possible to estimate
user location with the proposed approach since they were able to locate 51% of users
with 100 miles radius margin while the baseline that considers all words (i.e. not only
location-specific words) was correct only about 10% of the time. Important to note is
that although various smoothing methods with various accuracy improvements have
been applied, the single most important contribution to performance improvement
is removing non-local words. Another observation is that even though obviously the
more tweets there are per user the easier it is to estimate user’s location, their method
seems to be performing quite well even with 100 tweets per user since in this case
they were able to correctly locate more than 40% of users (the 51% accuracy was
measured with 1 000+ tweets per user).
Geolocation prediction in social media data by finding location indicative
words
[HCB12] The core assumption of this work is that messages on social media
contain many location-wise uninformative words. They therefore try to find location-
specific words that help pinpoint users’ location and find users’ home location at city
level granularity.
The task is represented as a text classification task with cities being the classes
and tweets from users from these cities are the representation of those.
For this
purpose, the authors identified 3 709 cities world wide. It is also important to note
that although the authors consider the whole world, only tweets in English are used
since otherwise language would be much too strong of an indication of a place.
The feature selection is only done on single words (i.e. only unigrams are used
as features) and the location indicative words (LIWs) are classified in 3 categories:
words specific to one city, words specific to a handful of cities and common words. For
this purpose, the authors use a modification of TF-IDF method which they call TF-
ICF, ICF standing for “inverse city frequency” and the best LIWs should have high
TF-ICF value. However, words with high TF value may introduce undesired effects
and therefore they first sort features by ICF and then by TF component. Besides
that, they also employ information gain ratio and maximum entropy-based feature
weights as feature selection method. Out of these three methods, information gain
ratio and TF-ICF perform the best, in that order.
The outcome of this paper is that the authors were able to improve the accuracy
of state-of-the-art methods by 10.6% and reduce mean and median error. They also
define notions of prediction confidence and show that the performance of their system
is even better when the model is more confident.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Social and linguistic studies regarding Twitter
13
From Where do Tweets Originate? - A GIS Approach for User Location
Inference
[HCW14] Many approaches try to pinpoint one specific location, gener-
ally referred to as the home location, for a given user. In this paper, however, the
authors try to build a model that captures user’s primary activity zones (PAZ) that
are in general places, where the user tends to spend their time (e.g. office, home,
park, etc.).
The task is approached by first clustering geo-tagged tweets so as to identify user’s
PAZ. The problem is also approached from the temporal aspect since, intuitively,
people tend to spend their time at different PAZ in regular time intervals. Lastly,
they also identify different activity zone types and they decided to classify each cluster
into one of 8 zones.
A detailed analysis is afterwards carried out on an active Twitter user with more
than 1 200 geotagged tweets.
As a result, they were able to identify user’s home
(residential type area), office, entertainment area and eating area. The drawback of
the method is that it requires a considerable amount of geotagged tweets (around 50).
2.4
Social and linguistic studies regarding Twitter
Since we are considering dialects in our work, we have also reviewed papers that look
at the social or linguistic aspect of the task.
In these papers, we learn what are
the demographics of social media and whether such differences are being reflected in
text, who are the people that publish their location and whether these users are a
representative sample.
Continuous Representation of Location for Geolocation and Lexical Di-
alectology using Mixture Density Networks
[RBC17] The authors start off
by mentioning limitations of traditional regression-based (e.g. if user tweets from
New York and Los Angeles, his home location may be estimated to be in the mid-
dle of the US) vs. classification-based (e.g. no fine-grained location such as exact
place within large metropolitan areas) approaches. The proposed idea of this paper
is therefore to create a mixture model with probability distribution over locations.
The goal of the paper is twofold: using the Mixture Density Networks, the authors
try to predict location given text (i.e. text-based geolocation) and predict text given
location (i.e. lexical dialectology).
As for the data corpus, they use existing datasets GeoText [Eis+10] and Twitter-
US [Rol+12], with each dataset being already partitioned into testing, training and
development sets. The users in these datasets are represented as concatenation of
their tweets and their location is determined by the coordinate associated with their
first tweet.
Altogether, they have access to data from about 458 000 users.
The
dialect dataset is manually extracted from DARE dataset and contains around 4 300
geographically-specific terms, however, the authors mention that many of these words
are not found within tweets, mainly because of the informal nature of this social
network.
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Literature review
The model for the location prediction task is trained using a 3-layer neural network
that takes as input a bag-of-words and the evaluation is done on 3 different measures
listed below.
• Classification accuracy with 100 mile/161km radius
• Mean error in kilometers
• Median error in kilometers
Altogether, the authors show that their approach is able to obtain similar results
to classification models with additional uncertainty.
Challenges of styduing and processing dialects in social media
[JHS15b]
The paper focuses on studying dialects, mainly African American Vernacular English
(AAVE), using Twitter data as it is, according to the authors, a place where informal
styles of expression are used. The paper highlights interesting fact that the traditional
source for linguistic studies of English in North America – the Atlas of North American
English – is based only on 762 speakers. Another interesting fact mentioned in their
work that directly relates to this thesis is that there exists direct relation between
spelling and dialect of the person writing. Besides standard approach to this kind of
tasks (e.g. using lexical markers and spelling variations as features), they also try to
employ POS tagging.
The goal of their work is to test 8 hypotheses from sociolinguistic studies regarding
AAVE and what is the correlation between its use and geographic location, urbaniza-
tion, socioeconomic status etc.
As the most significant result of their work which relates to our work is the fact
that in the context of Twitter, POS tagging is quite a challenging task and the perfor-
mance of the tagger is significantly worse compared to performance on more formal
kinds of texts. For evaluation of these accuracies, manual tagging of a professional
was employed and used as ground truth and the result was compared to the results
of the automatic tools.
Cross-lingual syntactic variation over age and gender
[JHS15a] Many papers
reviewed pay attention to lexical, spelling or phonological differences between clusters
of users. Here authors try to focus on syntactic variations and to do that, they utilize
concept of treelets, i.e. sets of POS tags. The paper mentions problems with some
dataset sources such as Twitter – albeit large enough, users have limited number
of characters per post which forces them to express themselves in concise manner.
Additionally, the goal of the paper is to identify demographic differences and such
metadata are quite scarce on Twitter. For these reasons, the authors decided to use
as a datasource review site Trustpilot where users typically submit their personal
information such as age or gender and reviews written there typically use language
that is more formal compared to Twitter.
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Social and linguistic studies regarding Twitter
15
The features used here are in form of treelets, which behave as a “bag-of-relations”
between words. One of the reasons for this approach is that the authors work with
multiple different languages and they want to minimize the footprint of differences in
word ordering across languages. A treelet can consist of one up to 3 POS tags.
Interesting technique mentioned in this paper is the stability selection using lo-
gistic regression. The authors use the publicly available implementation from scikit-
learn4 with default parameters.
In general, according to the results of the paper, the techniques used are able to
identify differences between demographic groups, e.g. they identified that men tend
to use numerals and nouns while pronouns and verbs are used by women. However,
one may question whether these results are truly indicative of the gender differences
since the study also shows that men tend to write more in car lights and computer
& accessories sections while women tend to contribute to pets and clothes & fashion
section and it may be that it is these sections that stimulate the higher use of the
specific POS tags.
Tweets from Justin Bieber’s Heart: The Dynamics of the “Location” Field
in User Profiles
[Hec+11] Many papers use location field’s raw information as
ground truth. The authors of this work therefore explore how reliable this information
is and whether it can be used for geolocation. The major problems identified with
it as noted by the authors is that many times people simply put non-geographic or
sarcastic text in there and the granularity of the information rarely goes beyond city
level. Besides that, they also aim at exploring to what degree can one infer user’s
location from the tweet messages and effectively “fill in” the location field for the
user.
The study considers the location field in general since many services and social
networks allow their users to fill up such information, however, the actual dataset
comes from Twitter and consists of tweets collected from April 18th to May 28th
2010 resulting in dataset size of 62 million tweets, which was then reduced to 51% of
the initial size so that only English tweets are included. This set contained around 5
million users and the authors randomly sampled 10 000 for manual inspection.
The results show that 66% of users input information that can be matched with
a real geographical location while 34% of users provide irrelevant or no information.
An interesting fun fact that was the source of the motivation for this paper’s title is
that almost 1 in 200 users wrote as a location something related to Justin Bieber,
a singer (i.e.
location was specified to be e.g.
“Justin Biebers heart”).
Another
interesting finding is that out of the 16% of the non-geographical information, 82.1%
could actually be geocoded by Yahoo! Geocoder which introduces quite some noise
(e.g. “Wherever yo mama at” was deemed to be a location in southwest Siberia).
For the second part of their goal, they were able to identify user’s country (4
countries were considered and correct country was estimated 72.7% of the time with
uniformly sampled data) and even state, which, albeit not fine-grained, does provide
4http://scikit-learn.org
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Literature review
certain information about user’s approximate location and goes on to show that many
users indeed implicitly provide their location, even though they may be unaware of
it.
Who Tweets with Their Location?
Understanding the Relationship Be-
tween Demographic Characteristics and the Use of Geoservices and Geo-
tagging on Twitter
[SM15] It is well established as proven by many sources, some
of which are reviewed here in this section, that only a handful of people on Twitter
geotag their tweets. Since many analysis base their geolocation prediction tasks on
a few geotagged tweets and then generalize, the purpose of this paper is to explore
whether the sample of users who enable location services or geotag their tweets is
demographically representative of the wider Twitter population.
The study works with 2 datasets, one that contains users that have enabled loca-
tion services and the other contains users that actually geotagged their tweets.
Identifying gender of users by their first names, it seems that males are more likely
to not enable location services, however, the difference between men and women is
rather small (55.0% not enabled for men vs.
54.2% for women).
For geotagging,
males are more likely to geotag their tweets, however, the difference between the two
genders is only 0.1%. Regarding the age, the mean age of non-geotaggers is 20.76
years old while for geotaggers it is 21.58. As for the social class of users, the results
seem to show that people with semi-routine occupations are more likely to have their
location services enabled when compared to e.g. managerial, professional or routine
occupations.
Lastly, the study shows that users who use or have their profile in
Japanese, Arabic, Korean are much less likely to enable location services or geotag
their tweets than, for example, English, Spanish, Turkish or Portuguese speakers since
e.g. only 0.8% of Japanese-speaking users geotag their tweets while the figure is 7.0%
for Portuguese-speaking users.
Overall, the paper finds out that although quite a lot of users enable their location
services, only a few actually geotag their tweets.
In general, there are statistical
differences between the people who enable location services and those who do not
and also between people who geotag their tweets and those who do not. However,
as exhibited in the paragraph above, the differences are often not big, except for the
language category.
Identifying regional dialects in online social media
[Eis14] Unlike other works
reviewed in this chapter, this paper does not intend to infer location of social network
users directly and instead it is a study concerning how dialect is reflected in social
media. The paper mentions problem regarding the demographics of the users visiting
and using Twitter since e.g. Black Americans are more likely to use it than Whites,
or young people are more likely to be the users than older people.
The first question that is being asked by the authors is whether typical regional
words such as yall or yinz are preserved in social media. The results for this question
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Social and linguistic studies regarding Twitter
17
are somewhat mixed since certain dialect words do preserve their natural geographical
occurence while others do not.
Besides considering few handpicked and intuitively geographical terms, the au-
thors also introduce a method called SAGE for identifying salient words that are
specific for certain areas. The method identifies various words, namely words related
to local sport teams or placenames, however, some dialect words such as jawn which
is unique to the Philadelphia and its surroundings also make it into this selection.
Other interesting words that appear in this study are various abbreviations or words
with alternative spellings.
The authors also propose a method for identifying linguistic areas based on the
selected metropolitan statistical areas that is data driven. Besides that, since the
authors have access to data from 2009 - 2012 period, they explore temporal evolution
of terms which shows how certain words spread across the country throughout time.
Confounds and Consequences in Geotagged Twitter Data
[PE15] The paper
starts off by mentioning an intuitive yet not always obvious assumption that a dataset
such as Twitter may contain demographic biases since the social network might be
popular only among certain subgroup of the population and the main goal of this
paper is to examine these biases.
In the paper, authors focus on 10 largest US metropolitan areas as defined by U.S.
Census Bureau while considering 3 different sampling techniques, namely:
1. equal number of samples from each area based on geotags
2. county-balanced samples based on geotags
3. location-annotated messages with pattern city name and city name, two-letter
state name
The dataset used in this work contains tweets from February 2014 to January
2015 and does not contain – among others – retweets, spam, tweets containing URLs,
accounts that have more than 10% of messages not in English based on the lang
metadata field, accounts with more than 1 000 followers or followees and top 10%
accounts based on number of messages in the dataset. Out of all the tweets available
to the authors, only 1.24% of them contained geotags.
Regarding the age and gender data, the data were gathered from the Social Se-
curity Administration and using this information the authors were able to obtain
probability distribution for age and gender given first names.
The general findings of the paper are that tweets with GPS coordinates are more
likely to be written by young people and women, geotagged tweets contain more
geographically-specific words, young people use more geographically-specific and non-
standard words, men mention more geographically-specific entities (significant only
for people older than 30), users with geolocated tweets tend to write more and that
text-based geolocation is more accurate for men and older people. It is also inter-
esting to note that the analysis of the intersection of tweets between tweets that are
==PAGE:26==
18
2 Literature review
geotagged and tweets whose location is based on the location string suggest that self
provided locations are quite accurate.
The paper also uses SAGE that helps identifying salient words for a given corpus.
Phonological Factors in Social Media Writing
[Eis13] Besides lexical varia-
tions between dialects, there are also phonological differences, i.e. speech sounds that
define a dialect. This study examines whether such features get transcribed into text
on Twitter and tries to falsify two hypotheses, first one saying that phonological vari-
ation is not reflected in social media text and that phonological variation does not
affect underlying structures of lexical items.
The authors study certain selected word pairs such as left vs. lef or with vs. wit
since it is expected that the consonant cluster reduction happens when the subsequent
phonological segment begins with a vowel (e.g. t in left is dropped in I left the house,
but not in I left a tip).
The original dataset contains 114 million tweets and it was filtered by removing
retweets, tweets containing a URL, non-geotagged tweets and geotagged tweets that
do not appear within the US.
The results show that certain phonological factors do in fact make it into informal
text on Twitter (e.g. lef/left or wit/with). Since the study also looked at how it
relates to demographic features of the authors, it shows that there are also different
preferences in regard to using the long/short forms of the selected word pairs, with
e.g. the short, more informal forms, being preferred in densely populated areas.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Data
At the core of any work such as this one is a set of data on which the work bases
its experiments and draws conclusions. Therefore, after reviewing relevant literature,
we go over sources of data that have been considered or selected for this thesis. We
will first look at data regarding the dialects and map of the US and afterwards we
will describe the actual Twitter dataset that we have available and how we process it
from its raw state to a form desirable for us.
3.1
Linguistic map data
Our goal is to identify linguistic regions in the US and afterwards associate each
county in the country with one of those regions. For this reason, we will explore what
sources of dialect or country data are available and we will choose the appropriate
ones for this project.
3.1.1
Source of county data
Although the task of finding a reliable source of county data may seem quite challeng-
ing, the United States Census Bureau1 already provides shapefiles of various types
at various scales, which are machine-readable definitions of polygons describing the
counties. Therefore, obtaining the geographical shapes of the counties was not diffi-
cult and perhaps the only challenge was to convert the original shapefiles to a desired
GeoJSON format, which, on its own, can be done automatically either using one of
the free online tools2,3 or a command line utility4.
3.1.2
Source of dialect data
In order to be able to associate counties in the US with dialects, a reliable linguistic
data source had to be found that would cover the area in question.
After some
research there indeed does not seem to be many up-to-date literature on this topic
1https://www.census.gov/geo/maps-data/data/cbf/cbf_counties.html
2http://mapshaper.org
3http://2geojson.com/index.php
4http://www.gdal.org/ogr2ogr.html
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Data
and, albeit just a speculation, the reason for this may be caused by the exact same
assumption as the one made in the introduction, namely that the time and resources
spent on such a task are quite high.
Another major issue tied with this may be that languages may change gradually
with regard to the change of location and therefore identifying an exact border that
partitions a geographical area into discreet chunks may not be an easy task.
Initially, multiple sources were considered so as to pick the one that is most suitable
for the task – too simple sources would provide little value while complex ones would
be too difficult to work with and considering the scope of the project, such extra
hassle would not be beneficial. Following list of these sources briefly describes each
one of them.
Atlas of North American English (ANAE)
A work by [LAB05] which was
released in 2005 and is based on phone survey of speakers from various parts of North
America. The work provides many detailed maps as well as an overall overview of
dialects in the US. Although – and understandably – the boundaries are not defined
with high precision, it splits the continuous US into multiple partitions based on the
major dialect spoken in those areas. Since the complexity of this work matches the
needs of this project, the county-dialect mapping is mainly based on this map.
Figure 3.1: Dialect regions as identified by Atlas of North American English. Impor-
tant to note is that they have also identified sub-dialect regions such as
“Texas South” or “Inland South” which we do not consider as separate
and rather we merge it together with their parent region.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Linguistic map data
21
International Dialects of English Archive (IDEA)
5 The project aims at
collecting recordings of people speaking English all around the world, including people
who have other native language. The recordings are relatively easy to compare since
subjects are to read a standardized piece of text that is made specifically for the
purpose of comparing dialects. However, the project only provides the raw data (i.e.
the recordings) and no actual map is provided where different dialect regions could
be identified.
North American English Dialects (NAED)
6 The project is created and main-
tained by Rick Aschmann and it is mainly based on the previously mentioned project
ANAE. Since this is not a static work that has been published, the author revises
it continuously with his new discoveries, which he mainly finds in various public
recordings (such as YouTube videos or already mentioned IDEA recordings) of local
politicians and celebrities. Moreover, the major dialect boundaries in the map roughly
match the boundaries that can be found in the ANAE.
Dictionary of American Regional English (DARE)
7 Being one of the older
works considered, the DARE project was carried out in between 1965 – 1970 in all
states of the US in face-to-face interviews. The project consists of voice recordings
and provides also DARE maps, which are maps of the US scaled with regard to each
state’s population density in the 1960s. It is therefore important to note that albeit
being updated, the core of the data is around half a century old.
Dialect Map of American English
8 A project hosted and created by Robert
Delaney, it partitions the US into 26 distinct linguistic regions. The author provides
a description of what is understood as dialect. Compared to ANAE and NAED, it
roughly matches the boundaries proposed by those projects, but additionally includes
special regions for some other major US cities.
Having these sources in mind together with their various advantages and disad-
vantages, the Atlas of North American English (and thereby North American English
Dialects) have been chosen as the source for the county-dialect mapping task. The
main reason for this is that the two projects provide with clear maps that show how
the dialects are represented across the country and, moreover, the data are relatively
recent (2005 and 2017, respectively). The reason why NAED is used as well is that it
takes the original ANAE dialect overview map and defines the borders more specifi-
cally with respect to cities. Although these precise borders should probably be taken
with a grain of salt considering the continuous nature of language and dialects, it
does help with making a decision where to place the border. The reasons for this are
described in greater detail in 4.2.
5http://www.dialectsarchive.com
6http://aschmann.net/AmEng/
7http://dare.wisc.edu
8http://robertspage.com/dialects.html
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Data
Figure 3.2: Detailed dialect map by Rick Aschmann. Being based on the previous
work of Atlas of North American English, we can identify the contours
of the regions defined by the Atlas. The improvement over the previous
work is that this map provides more fine-grained borders between the
regions.
Figure 3.3: Robert Delaney’s dialect map further splits the western and southern
dialects into different subregions and identifies city specific dialects of
e.g. Chicago, Boston or New York City.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Dialect corpora
23
After identifying sources, we have decided to use the following 7 regions as the
distinct areas that should, according to the literature, contain different dialects.
• West
• Northcentral
• North
• New England
• Greater New York City
• Midland
• South
The steps taken to extract and use these regions are explained in greater detail in
4.2.
3.2
Dialect corpora
With regard to the dialect corpora, numerous sources come to mind such as Facebook,
Twitter or TrustPilot as it has been done in [JHS15a]. However, since we had access
to a large dataset of tweets and tools associated with it as provided by the supervisor
of this thesis and the access to this data was also motivation for this work in the first
place, we have decided to use this source.
Available corpora
Throughout the project, we have worked with two different
corpora. The first one was a smaller set that we have used to try out working with
the format of this dataset and it contained 70 000 tweets and all the tweets came
from 1st January 2016. Although this dataset was balanced (it contained equally
large chunks of tweets from each class) and was sufficient for trying out various tools,
it was neither large nor representative enough. The main problem was that many
of the tweets in this corpus come from the New Year’s Day and therefore many of
the tweets discuss this topic. We have performed some initial tests on this dataset,
however, after obtaining a more representative dataset which is described next, we
did not continue using this one and since the same or similar experiments were done
on the larger dataset, we will not further discuss these here.
The main corpus that was used for all the tests and experiments was based on 1%
of all tweets from 2017. The original source of data for 2017 consists of 1 299 885 945
tweets, however, this includes tweets from all over the world, not just from the US
and we were not interested in those. Out of these, we have only selected a small
subset because in our experiments, we were only interested in tweets coming from
the US in the geographical areas specified by us. This dataset consisted of 30 760 813
tweets (around 8.7 GB of data) that were identified as coming from the areas that
we are interested in.
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Data
Corpus format
Tweets in our dataset come in a raw TSV (tab separated values)
format where we can see all the information that were stored for each tweet. Such
a tweet is represented as a single line in such file where the position relative to the
number of tab characters preceding it dictates the semantic meaning of that value.
Table 3.1 provides explanation for each of these fields.
Since the tweets are being retrieved in a certain order, it is important to shuffle
the dataset so as to minimize any potential side effects that may be caused by this.
3.3
Datasets
For our experiments, the original corpus of all tweets from the US is not well suited.
Firstly, it contains many additional information that are not relevant for our work such
as information about device from which a given tweet was sent as well as containing
many tweets that are not valid (at least from our perspective). We therefore produce
a more relevant datasets out of the original corpus by applying various processing
techniques. These datasets and techniques will now be discussed here in this section,
however, the tools that were used for producing these datasets and the overall idea
of how they work will be explained in greater detail in the following chapter.
3.3.1
Filtering
Basic filtering
To obtain a relatively clean dataset, we first apply certain filters
to the corpus. A tweet first needs to pass a validation test which consists of certain
checks or rules and if any of them are not satisfied then a tweet will be discarded. In
this stage, each tweet goes through three filters.
Position
Description
0
Unique ID of the tweet
1
User ID of the author of the tweet
2
Timestamp of the tweet
3
ID of the tweet to which this tweet is a reply
4
User ID of the author of the tweet to which this tweet is a reply
5
Source of the tweet (e.g. iPhone, Android device etc.)
6
Boolean value whether the tweet is truncated
7
Geotag of the tweet
8
Location string
9
Actual content of the tweet, i.e. text
10
Twitter name of the user
11
Twitter name handle of the user (i.e. part after the “@” sign in mentions)
Table 3.1: Meaning of values in the source TSV file.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Datasets
25
1. Pre-processing
2. Word extraction
3. Post-processing
In the pre-processing phase, we take as an input a raw line and remove trailing and
leading white-space characters. We then extract the text of the tweet and validate
that, which effectively means discarding it if it is a retweet or contains a URL since
we assume that content of such tweets does not represent a user dialect-wise.
In the word extraction phase, we remove trailing and leading white-space charac-
ters from a tweet. Tweet’s content is then split by white-space characters, effectively
creating a list of words where each word is checked whether it is consisting of only
ASCII characters. If it is, we let it pass, otherwise, we discard the whole tweet since
we believe that it is better to get rid of such noise early on. We then tokenize the
tweet and return the words of the tweet in form of a list.
Lastly, in the post-processing phase, we eliminate tweets that, after passing the
first two phases, resulted in empty strings, or that contain less than 1 meaningful
word (in here, words that are not meaningful are e.g. commas, periods or special
tokens such as mentions).
The result of this process is a list of words that we then concatenate back using a
space character and convert them back into tweet contents.
Since by words we also understand punctuation symbols such as commas or peri-
ods, these got separated by spaces in this process and the text therefore does not look
very “nice” since it does not follow typical typographical rules such as that a comma
should be separated from the next word on the right side by a space but not on the
left side. However, we think that this should not be a problem for the purposes of
this work and we therefore leave this visual handicaps intact.
Filtering non-English tweets
Since this work focuses on the US and specifically
on the English language, and since US can be in general thought of as multicultural
country where people speak many different languages, we also applied language-based
filtering in order to get rid of sentences that are written in other languages than
English.
The filter works based on comparing words of tweets to entires of dictionary of
English words and allows a tweet to enter our dataset if it meets one of the following
criteria.
• If the tweet consists of exactly one word
• If the tweet consists of less than 5 words and 50% or more of tweet’s words can
be found in the dictionary
• If the tweet consists of 5 words or more and 60% or more of the words can be
found in the dictionary.
==PAGE:34==
26
3 Data
Although the first rule may seem somewhat strange since a tweet that gets into
the dataset because of this rule may contain non-English word, we believe that such
tweets may contain dialect-specific words and therefore we let them pass.
3.3.2
Processed datasets
As a result, by applying the filtering techniques mentioned above, we have ended up
with the following datasets.
• English dataset
• User dataset
• Tokenized user dataset
English dataset
The dataset consists of samples where each sample is a single
tweet. Each tweet has passed both basic and non-English tweet filtering.
User dataset
This dataset is based on the previous one by concatenating tweets
coming from the same user by a single space character.
Tokenized user dataset
The dataset is based on the User dataset and all words
which are not important according to our measure are removed.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Methods
Throughout this work, many different utilities and applications were used in order to
ease up the work as well as to avoid “reinventing the wheel”. The following sections
will describe and explain various tools that were used for data processing (i.e. cleaning,
transforming etc.), machine learning libraries as well as libraries used for processing
natural language found in the dataset.
We start by looking into what we understand as user’s home location and how
we transformed the dialect regions into machine readable format that can be easily
used with other tools. We then continue with describing the custom-built data visu-
alization application where we can easily visualize the region data and make manual
corrections. We explain how we use users’ self-provided location strings and what
natural language processing tools we use. We conclude by looking at the techniques
regarding processing of raw tweet data, machine learning library that we use and
various feature selection approaches.
4.1
Determining home location
In order to construct a model capable of categorizing users into different dialect
groups, a large enough set of Twitter data needs to be collected and the data must
be associated with some location. However, there are multiple ways of assigning a
location to a sample in our dataset.
Geotags
The first method which is intuitively very precise is to use user’s geotagged
tweets and pick a home location based on these. Unfortunately, there are couple of
drawbacks associated with this method.
One is that some users may travel and
therefore post tweets from various locations and thereby make it difficult to pinpoint
one specific location as “home” – although, it may be possible to establish this by
simply choosing e.g. median or average location. A major disadvantage, however, is
that only very few people geotag their tweets – only 0.7% of tweets contain geotag
according to [Jur13] from 2013 and about 3.6% of tweets in the dataset used in
[Gar+18] from 2018 – and therefore in order to be able to get significant number of
samples for each region, we would need to consider a much bigger amount of tweets.
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Methods
Self-provided home location
The other method determines user’s location using
the self provided location string. The obvious issue is that the content of this field
is not regulated in any way and therefore a user may put whatever text he or she
wishes in there.
However, we have had access to a probability distribution that maps a normalized
location string to a set of FIPS county codes1 and their likelihood (i.e. it maps a
location string such as “rocky river oh” to a set of FIPS county codes where each
county code has assigned some probability and together they sum up to 1). To the
understanding of the author, this dataset was created using technique described as
the first method, i.e. it is using geotagged tweets to determine user’s location and
it was performed on large enough dataset. The use of this tool will be explained in
greater detail later in this chapter.
Therefore, to not spent time working on something that is already done, we con-
tinue with using this dataset for our purposes.
To efficiently query the data cluster, the dataset had to be merged with the iden-
tified dialect regions. Therefore, a new dataset that groups these location strings
by their dialect region has been created. To do that, it has been decided that only
location strings where a region can be determined with probability greater or equal
to 0.95 will be considered.
It is interesting to note that throughout the merging process, it has been discovered
that some GEOIDs have become obsolete due to county name change – this anomaly
has been detected with Shannon county, SD that has been renamed to Oglala Lakota,
SD in 2015.
4.2
Transforming dialect regions into
machine-readable format
One of the major issues with all of the map data is that they come in form of maps
represented as raster images while the other data come in form of a text description
of the areas with sample recordings. Although this format may be suitable for some
purposes, it certainly is not an easy format to work with in this setup. Since we work
with counties as the discreet units, the main issue that this format is presenting is
that one would have to manually assign each individual county appropriate region
label. Considering the fact that there are more than 3 000 counties in the US, the
manual labeling would be quite tiresome and error-prone.
Another problem with
county-region manual mapping is that if we decide in future to modify the dialect
regions or only focus on a more specific area, e.g. comparing southern dialects with
northern dialects, one would have to redo this tedious task from scratch again.
We have therefore decided to map the regions identified in the literature into
polygons with coordinates matching the actual GPS coordinates so that it would be
1https://www.census.gov/geo/reference/codes/cou.html
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Transforming dialect regions into machine-readable format
29
possible to overlay the polygons onto actual map of the US. Afterwards, a centroid
for each county would be calculated and checked in which of the identified polygons it
lies. If it falls inside one of the regions, then that region label is assigned to it. If the
centroid does not belong to any of the regions, then no label is assigned and the label
will have to be identified manually. As it will later be shown, there were indeed some
counties that did not get assigned to any dialect region, however, the number of these
was relatively small and therefore not considered as a problem since corrections could
be done quite easily manually through the application that was built specifically for
this purpose.
The following paragraphs will walk through the steps necessary for completing
this transformation.
Defining regions
Having some prior experience with working with personal Google
Maps2, this platform seemed like a good choice for generating the polygons represent-
ing each dialect region. As mentioned earlier, both ANAE and NAED are being used
to generate the shapefiles and the result can be seen in Figure 4.1. Note that the
regions are defined quite precisely within the the US, but get quite rough on the
outer borders. The reason for that is simply that we are only considering US counties
and we want to match each county’s centroid into some polygon. Since there are no
counties outside the US borders, the polygons don’t have to be precise in these areas.
Although not too important, it is interesting to note that one should be careful
when creating polygons close to the meridian that is exactly opposite (i.e.
180◦
away) Greenwich, typically referred to as International Date Line, because once one
crosses this line, some applications may have difficulty displaying the shapes correctly
since the value of the longtitude on the other side of this meridian has opposite
polarity. This incident has been encountered when creating polygon for Alaska and
was bypassed by avoiding crossing the International Date Line.
Fileformat conversions
The results of this process can be downloaded as a KML3
file. However, this is not entirely suitable for the task as will be explained later in this
chapter. Therefore, one additional conversion has to be made and that is converting
it into a JSON format. Luckily, there are tools4 available for this and therefore no
additional work needs to be done besides retrieving the results from a service like
this.
In general, there are two JSON formats that are widely supported, namely Geo-
JSON and TopoJSON. The formats are in essence the same, the main difference
between them is that while the former keeps precise coordinates for each polygon, the
latter performs compression and is therefore a more compact version of GeoJSON
with reduced filesize at the expense of a more complex representation that needs to
be resolved back to GeoJSON format later on in the application.
2https://www.google.com/mymaps/
3http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/kml
4http://2geojson.com/
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Methods
Assigning region labels to counties
For this task, the procedure could be
summed up as follows: for each county polygon, calculate the centroid of this county
and then for each one of the identified dialect regions and its respective polygon,
check whether the centroid lies inside its boundaries.
The implementation of the centroid calculation comes originally from the PN-
POLY - Point Inclusion in Polygon Test5 and the idea is based on Jordan curve
theorem. Since the verification of the results of this algorithm can be done easily by
visual inspection of the output and any problems can be fixed manually, no further
proofs of the correctness of the algorithm itself were necessary, however, they would
be advised to do if this had to be used in projects where visual verification cannot be
easily done and high precision is crucial.
Although vast majority of the US counties consist of one continuous body, some
do not and are defined by multiple shapes. It therefore becomes more difficult to
decide what point should represent the county. However, since, as mentioned before,
the dialect borders themselves are not something exact, we have decided that the
counties at these borders could fall into one or the other region arbitrarily.
This
process is formalized in the following way: if a county consists of more than one
shape, then a centroid is calculated for each of them and stored. Afterwards, the list
of these centroids (which are points) is considered to form a new polygon for which
another centroid that will define the county’s center point is calculated. This new
point will then be checked against the polygons of the regions and the county will get
assigned label per this centroid.
Manual corrections for unassigned counties
After performing the steps men-
tioned before, some counties were indeed not assigned any label. However, the number
was quite insignificant because out of the 3 137 counties that were to be labeled, only
44 were not assigned any label which represents about 1.4% of counties. These cor-
rections were afterwards made manually via the custom-built JavaScript application
where one can select a region and click on the unassigned counties, thereby giving
them label of currently selected region. This application will be described in greater
detail in the upcoming section.
4.3
Data visualization application
As mentioned before, in order to make the work with the identified dialect regions
easier, we have created a custom application for displaying and working with these
data. The application was created using D3.js library6 that helped with displaying
the shapefiles and the map of the US. The application provides multiple features,
each of which is described in greater detail in the following paragraphs.
5https://wrf.ecse.rpi.edu//Research/Short_Notes/pnpoly.html
6https://d3js.org
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Data visualization application
31
Figure 4.1: The seven dialect regions as polygon shapes redrawn on top of the actual
map of the US. The borders of the regions are precise within the US
but not outside (e.g. the polygon describing the west extends far into
the ocean) since it does not affect the county to region mapping.
Overlay map
This is the main feature of this application and it consists of two
utilities. One can toggle the overlay dialect region polygons as well as the individual
county mapping. When both are turned on simultaneously, one can visually examine
the quality of the county-to-dialect mapping. For the application to work, one has to
provide it three types of files.
• A county shapefile encoded in TopoJSON format.
• A county-to-dialect mapping which is simply a JSON object where keys are the
FIPS county codes and values are the region names.
• Dialect polygon shapedata encoded in the GeoJSON format.
The application can be seen in Figure 4.2 where only the county mappings are
enabled and in Figure 4.3 we can see the quality of the mapping by observing the
dialect region overlay. The source code for this tool can be found on GitHub and the
live version of it is also available online7.
Correction utility
As mention earlier, the county-to-dialect mapping did not al-
ways correctly resolve all of the counties – especially the ones at the borders of the
regions – and therefore some minor corrections had to be made manually. Although
the work on these corrections was not too difficult, we have decided that it is easier
to have a tool dedicated to this purpose so that in case we want to identify different
regions in future, the correction work will not be too much of a hassle.
7http://projects.leopik.sk/dipdata/
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Methods
Figure 4.2: The dialect map as seen in the application with each county being as-
signed a distinct dialect region.
Figure 4.3: Map showing both dialect region polygons and counties with their as-
signed regions. We can observe the quality of the mapping at the region
borders which is especially visible between Western region (beige) and
North Central region (green).
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Mapping dialect regions to location strings
33
The tool lets us select the counties for which we want to update the region info
as well as selecting the region that we want to assign to these counties. Once done,
we can print the updated information into browser’s console and simply append the
newly generated JSON data into the dialect mapping file. The tool is, however, not
expected to be used for overwriting region labels of counties, only adding labels to
counties that were not matched to dialect region. The reason for this is that the
generated output is a simple JSON object of key-value pairs and if the key for given
county already exists in the mapping file, then it will not be automatically overwritten
and it has to be deleted manually.
4.4
Mapping dialect regions to location strings
To efficiently retrieve data from the cluster, which was the source of the corpus data,
it is useful if we supply a search query such that only the relevant results will be
returned. For the purposes of this thesis, we were mainly interested in the tweets
coming from the identified regions.
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, we had
access to the mappings of various location strings (i.e. place names that the user
specified as their home address) to FIPS county codes and their probabilities given
the location string. In this thesis it will be referred to as string2probdist dataset and
an example of such mapping can be seen in Table 4.1.
As the table shows, some location strings have a very neat format, e.g. “rocky
river oh” where one can clearly identify a city name together with the state code and
therefore only a few counties are associated with this location string. The dataset also
contains mappings for slang names of locations such as “jerzzz” and “pix burgh” which
seem to be used predominantly in – as one would probably expect – the northern part
Location
FIPS county code
Probability
39035
0.85
rocky river oh
47093
0.05
39151
0.10
...
...
jerzzz
34019
0.42
...
...
...
...
pix burgh
42059
0.40
...
...
...
...
wps
5041
0.39
...
...
Table 4.1: Location string and its association with FIPS county codes and proba-
bility of a county given a location string.
==PAGE:42==
34
4 Methods
of New Jersey and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania area, respectively. One can, however,
find also seemingly random location strings in this dataset as well such as “wps” that
is shown in the example and the county with the highest probability for this location
string is Desha County, Arkansas.
Having each county assigned to a certain dialect region, we now want to generate a
list of all known location strings that are typically associated with the given region so
that we will only retrieve tweets that are associated with one of our areas of interest.
The process of doing this involves going through the string2probdist location strings
and checking region label for each of the associated FIPS county codes. If the sum
of probabilities of counties assigned to one region surpasses certain threshold value,
then the location string will be assigned to the specified dialect region. This idea
could be formalized as shown in equation 4.1 where C is a set of counties associated
with given location string, P(c) is a probability of the county being the home location
given the string location and t is the threshold value. The threshold value should be
greater than 0.5 because otherwise this method could identify multiple dialect regions
for one location string. In practice, however, we have used t = 0.95.
∑
c∈C
P(c) > t : t > 0.5
(4.1)
4.5
Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools
Since we are working with text, we have utilized some of the well-known NLP tech-
niques and tools throughout the project. The core library that was used for this
purpose is the Natural Language Processing Toolkit (NLTK)8 that contains many
helpful functions and tools.
In the following few paragraphs we will introduce the features that were used or
considered in this project.
List of stopwords
Very simple feature that provides a list of stopwords (i.e. com-
mon words that typically do not carry any meaning such as the, and, or, etc.), which
can be used to remove tokens that do not contribute much to the overall meaning of
sentences and are usually not informative.
Word tokenizer
Splitting a sentence into words is usually a more challenging task
than it may seem at first since the definition of a word may be quite vague. A naive
approach to this problem is to splitting a sentence by treating white space characters
as separators. However, should words such as don’t be considered as one word or
multiple words? The NLTK word tokenizer takes care of this problem and provides
a convenient way of converting a sentence into list of words.
8https://www.nltk.org
==PAGE:43==
4.6 Processing raw tweet data
35
Stemming
To simplify text and get the root of words that are being used in a text
can be a challenging task. Words such as gone and going have obviously a common
root, namely word go. The stemming algorithms therefore take words and try to
convert them into their root form by applying various heuristic methods, such as
removing common suffixes and prefixes (e.g. -ing). The stemmers are, however, not
perfect since not all words follow the regular grammar rules and therefore it may
happen that sometimes they remove end of the word that looks like a common suffix
but is in fact not. Albeit not ideal, this may sometimes not be too much of a problem
because although the words may be converted into an invalid form language-wise,
they can still be treated as tokens.
Lemmatization
The concept of lemmatization is very similar to that of stemming
since the goal of a lemmatizer is to take a word that may be inflected and convert
them to their root form. However, the difference is that while stemming does this
process with heuristic approach by e.g.
removing know prefixes and suffixed and
disregarding context altogether, lemmatization does, on the other hand, consider the
context in which the word appears since it is taking into account also word’s part
of speech (POS) tag (i.e. whether a word is a noun or a verb etc.). Although this
approach is more elegant way of solving the problem, it is also more costly (one has
to also calculate POS tags for a sentence) and may not work too well in informal
contexts where POS tagging may fail.
Named entity recognition (NER)
Named entities are anything from state and
city names to sport teams and companies and they typically convey important and
very specific information. However, their removal from text can be quite difficult
since identifying them usually requires not only grammatically correct text without
spelling mistakes, but also a text that is well-cased, i.e. words that should be written
with a upper or lower case letter(s) are actually written that way. Considering the
informal nature of tweets, the task will be still a challenging one even with a tool
such as this one.
Besides the well-established NLTK package, there are other libraries available such
as spaCy9 which has been used briefly for NER task as well.
4.6
Processing raw tweet data
Tweets in their raw format do not provide much information that can be directly
taken and used and instead we have to process this input into a more meaningful
output.
There is number of steps that we have usually done in the experiments
such as tweet validation, normalization of location string, text cleaning, tokenizing or
applying NLP tools to text.
9https://spacy.io
==PAGE:44==
36
4 Methods
Before moving on to the more detailed description of each of the data processing
technique, it is worth mentioning that for working with the raw tweet data, DeepMoji
code by [Fel+17] was utilized in many ways, mainly for constructing vocabulary, pre-
processing and cleaning the text. We have extended the original code by implementing
additional features such as word stemming feature or fastText (machine learning li-
brary that is described in the next section) vocabulary builder that is capable of
taking as an input fastText-friendly dataset instead of raw tweets.
Location string normalization
In order to be able to use the information in this
dataset to its full potential, we have to first normalize location strings so that as
many locations can be matched against the known location strings. This involves
performing the following normalization steps.
• Converting the string to lowercase
• Removing non-alphanumeric characters
• Removing “US” and its variants (e.g. USA, United States, etc.) from the right
side of the location string
• Abbreviating state names (e.g. transforming “Pennsylvania” to “pa”)
• Removing white spaces from both ends of the string.
For this purpose, a specific function has been made that takes as an input a line
from the raw Twitter dataset, mapping of state names to state codes (e.g. mapping
Pennsylvania to pa), county to region mappings and the region labels which is a
dictionary of region name and an integer ID value and outputs the appropriate label
for given line. The reason for using a region labels is to abbreviate the actual labels
and thereby save space (e.g. instead of saving midland, a number 5 will be stored)
and also to be able to label samples that are of unknown origin (unknown region
would typically be assigned label 0). It may seem unreasonable to introduce a label
for unknown region since all of the raw tweets should be assignable based on their
location string to one of the dialect regions since this was one of the criteria used
when retrieving data from the cluster, however, in some experiments we may be
closely examining only some of the regions, not all and therefore we will label the
other regions as unknown and dispose the tweets from these regions.
Tweet validation
We have already described what steps we take in the tweet
validation process earlier in subsection 3.3.1 and throughout this process we have
been relying on internal functions of DeepMoji whose source code can be also found
online10.
10https://github.com/bfelbo/DeepMoji
==PAGE:45==
4.7 Classification tools
37
Word generator
This tool is able to consume a stream of raw text data and
provide with sentence word tokens in form of a list. We have used both the default
built-in TweetWordGenerator that can handle data from the TSV dataset as well
as the custom FasttextWordGenerator which takes in as input a file that contains a
sentence with a label on each line. A word generator contains functions that can be
used externally for text processing, but in case its core function of generating a list
of words is being used, then the processing techniques are used internally as well.
We have extended the preprocessing techniques by allowing one to choose whether
and which stemming function should be used by the word generator. If no function
is provided then the default lambda fall-back function that does not do any further
text processing is being used.
Vocabulary builder
This tool was again part of the DeepMoji codebase and allows
one to create a vocabulary out of the raw tweet data.
It is possible to specify a
maximum number N of tokens in the final vocabulary and the tool will generate a
list of top N words, each being assigned a unique integer ID. The vocabulary builder
uses under the hood word generator that does the necessary text processing techniques
before serving the words to the vocabulary builder.
Removing distinct patterns
There are certain patterns that do not contribute
much to dialect nor language characteristics of a tweet. These patterns are platform-
specific and are typically mentions (“@” character followed by a name of another
Twitter user) or URLs.
The DeepMoji code allows for removing other, typically
uninformative pieces of text such as numbers.
It is important to mention that by default, DeepMoji will only replace these pat-
terns with fixed constants following the CUSTOM_SUFFIX format where SUFFIX
can be one of the many values such as URL, AT, NUMBER, etc.
4.7
Classification tools
The problem at hand at its core can be thought of both as regression or classification.
The regression variant of this problem could be approached by trying to estimate a
geotag for given tweet based on its content and afterwards identify in which of the
dialect regions do these GPS coordinates appear. However, considering the other
methods that we have available and that we are using, we decided to approach this
task as a classification problem where we directly estimate dialect region instead of
the most likely coordinates. The task is therefore to assign one of the labels to every
sample.
Having defined the type of problem, we will now review the tools that we are using
to solve it.
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Methods
fastText
FastText11 is a text classification library that is capable of building word
embeddings and classifying text based on those. The major advantage of this library
is that it is fast yet produces state-of-the-art results as shown in [Jou+16]. The library
at its core is build upon research done in [Mik+13] where they came up with a novel
idea of representing words as N-dimensional vectors where N is typically around 100
and where similar words should have vectors that are close together. Word similar
has in this context quite vague meaning since e.g. although king and queen are similar,
they are similar in a different way than, for example, cow and cattle.
However, the library is not only utilizing word vectors, but it is enhanced by a
novel approach by [Boj+16] where each word’s vector does not contain only infor-
mation about that specific word but is additionally enriched by subword information
of character n-grams and thereby it also takes into consideration word morphology.
The overall basic idea of how it constructs word vector for given word is expressed in
equation 4.2. In this example, a word vector for apple is a sum of vector representing
apple and character n-grams contained in this word. For this specific example, only
3-grams were used, but in theory there is no limit for the value of n for these n-grams.
WV (apple) = V (apple) + V (app) + V (ppl) + V (ple)
(4.2)
The major advantage of using also subword information is that the original word2vec
failed when trying to construct vectors for unknown words, because it did not en-
counter them in the training corpus and thereby did not learn a vector representation.
However, having vectors for subwords, one can construct word vectors also for un-
known words, simply because the character n-grams contained within this new word
have most likely been seen during the training time in other words.
Although fastText library is quite compact and straightforward to use, it does
provide number of parameters that can be tweaked in order to perform different kind
of experiments. Table 4.2 briefly explains the different parameters that were used in
this project.
11https://fasttext.cc
Parameter
Description
maxn
Maximum length of character n-grams
minn
Minimum length of character n-grams
minCount
Minimum number of occurrences of a word
wordNgrams
Maximum number of word n-grams
epoch
Number of training iterations
dim
Number of dimensions for the word vectors
lr
Learning rate
pretrainedVectors
Pretrained word vectors
Table 4.2: fastText parameters used throughout experiments.
==PAGE:47==
4.8 Feature selection
39
It is important to note that with some modifications of the maxn, minn and
minCount parameters one can achieve interesting behavior of this library. Setting
maxn to 0 will results in fastText behaving as a standard word2vec algorithm since
no vectors for subwords will be generated. On the other hand, setting minCount to
a very large number will result in fastText using only subword information and no
word vectors will be created.
Besides allowing us to use it as a tool for supervised learning, fastText also provides
way for testing the model that it builds as well as using a set of pretrained word
embeddings.
4.8
Feature selection
A useful technique for identifying features that are important and that help a classifier
to make a decision the most is called feature selection. For the purpose of this thesis,
the features are typically the words and therefore the following techniques that we
will now examine more closely are the ones that have been utilized for this task.
TF-IDF
Also known as term frequency-inverse document frequency identifies words
that are important or unique to given document relatively to the other documents
in the provided corpus.
For example, words such as the, and or is are not very
informative since they appear quite frequently in all documents.
However, words
such as score or puck provide important information about what the document is, in
general, talking about.
As it can be seen already by the name of this technique, it consists of two parts.
The first part – term frequency – considers how frequent a word is. There are multiple
implementation of this part of TF-IDF, however, the most basic one which is also
easy to understand simply estimates the frequency of a word in given corpus, i.e.
counts the documents where given word appears and compares the result to the total
number of documents in the corpus. Typically, this term frequency is referred to as
boolean frequency and can be formalized as shown in equation 4.3.
The IDF part can typically be described as shown in equation 4.4 where N is the
total number of documents in corpus, and n is number of documents where term t
appears (i.e. where term t appears in document d and document d is part of corpus
D). It can happen that a term does not appear in any of the document which would
mean we would risk division by zero and therefore in many practical applications, n
is incremented by 1.
For the purposes of this project, we have used scikit-learn’s12 implementation of
TF-IDF. This implementation provides a parameter setting that allows us to choose
whether the TF component should be binary or not. Considering that our corpus
will contain only few documents, we will not binarize the TF component because it
is quite likely that only a few insignificant terms will only appear in some documents
12http://scikit-learn.org/
==PAGE:48==
40
4 Methods
(and even then, they will most likely appear sparsely) and we rather want to focus
on terms that are abundant and frequent in one document while not so much in the
other.
tf(t, d) =
{
1,
t ∈d
0,
otherwise
(4.3)
idf(t, D) = log
N
|d ∈D : t ∈d| = log N
n ≈log
N
n + 1
(4.4)
Joining the formulas for the two components, we get the final TF-IDF value
for given term in given document from given corpus. The combination of the two
components is shown in equation 4.5.
tfidf(t, d, D) = tf(t, d) · idf(t, D)
(4.5)
Here, only the basic strategies were described so as to explain the general concept.
These and more advanced weighing schemes can be found in [SB88].
Clearly, the TF-IDF idea typically works with many documents, however, we
will utilize this technique to identify words that are important to the dialect regions.
Therefore, in our case, document refers to an aggregated set of tweets from a given
region and the corpus consists of these documents.
TF-IDF calculates a score of a word for a given document. To rank the words,
we will take two approaches – one that ranks the importance of words for a region
directly by their TF-IDF score and the other approach will consider the difference
in magnitude of the scores of words across documents. This means we consider a
word important for distinguishing a document from others if a score of a word in a
document has much higher value than in other documents. This method was used
when comparing two documents and the important words are selected in the following
way. For each word that appears in both documents, we calculate by what magnitude
they differ. Afterwards, we order these words by the calculated magnitude and select
the ones that are at the extremes of this ordered list. The results can be interpreted
as words with highest magnitude are important to the first document while words
with the lowest magnitude are important to the second document.
Randomized logistic regression
The idea for using this technique came from
[JHS15a] where it has been used for a selecting the important features. In our case,
we use randomized logistic regression for identifying important words that make a
class (i.e. one dialect region) distinct from the others. Just like in the cited paper,
we used the implementation provided by scikit-learn and we ran it with the default
parameters. The important parameters to note are number of randomized models
trained (n_resampling) and sample fraction (sample_fraction). The first parameter
indicates how many iterations of training a logistic regression model should be per-
formed while the latter describes how many samples should be used for each iteration.
==PAGE:49==
4.8 Feature selection
41
The default values for these are 200 and 0.75, respectively. More detailed explanation
of these and other parameters can be found online13.
SAGE
Taking inspiration from [PE15], we have also decided to use Sparse Additive
Generative Models (SAGE). As mentioned in the cited paper, they are using SAGE
as a means to find the most salient words for metropolitan area. Considering that
their idea of a metropolitan area is very similar to our dialect region, the ways how
this tool can be used in this project as well becomes apparent.
The original idea comes from [EAX11] and is explained in greater detail in this
paper.
IDF
Considering the equation 4.4 for the IDF part of TF-IDF where the IDF score
of a term given corpus is described by log of ratio of all documents divided by number
of documents in which the given term appears, we decided to use it as an additional
metric for finding important words. The implementation for this is again provided
by scikit-learn, just like in the TF-IDF’s case since it is possible to extract the IDF
scores from the object. The use of this metric for ranking the terms is similar to one
described under TF-IDF.
13http://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegression.html
==PAGE:50==
42
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5
Experiments and
Results
Bearing in mind the papers that were briefly summed up in chapter 2 and knowing the
tools available to us that were described in chapter 4, we will now propose experiment
setups that should lead us closer to the answer to the central question of this thesis.
For the experiments, we will try to combine the knowledge presented in previous
sections in various ways such that we attack the problem at hand from different
angles and thereby increase the chance of finding out patterns in dialect or, perhaps,
something completely different.
The two main types of experiments that will be
carried out are experiments focused on tweets and experiments focused on users.
Regarding the comparison of the results, we will compare them based on the clas-
sification accuracy. The reason for this is that the suggested standardized approach
as formalized in [Jur+15] which is used for tweet-level cases and recommends using
AUC (Area Under Curve) for comparing different methods cannot be applied to this
scenario since in our task we do not consider distance from true location but simply
whether we have identified the correct region. The cited paper also suggests using
Median-Max for user-level experiments, but again, our error is of binary character –
we have either identified the correct region or we have not and therefore identifying
median error across all users does not make sense in this case. As for the reliability
of the results, all accuracies were calculated based on 10-fold cross validation.
However, before we begin with the experiments, we will first go over ideas and
approaches that we will test and outline the core structure of this chapter.
Text translation
By text translation we understand natural language techniques of
removing stopwords and stemming. Typically, stopwords are being removed because
they do not have any default meaning and therefore are usually not considered as
informative words. We have also decided to use stemming because it may be useful
for normalizing words such that words with same root will be translated into the
same token.
It is important to note that it may be disputable whether this technique helps in
identifying dialect differences rather than content differences, however, we think that
performing experiments using these techniques is also important since it allows us to
==PAGE:52==
44
5 Experiments and Results
gain a different perspective at the problem and perhaps lets us discover something
that we do not anticipate.
Word vectors vs. subwordvectors
As mentioned in the previous chapter, fast-
Text library provides parameters for specifying whether vectors for whole words
should be calculated or if (and what size of) subword vectors should be used. We will
therefore look at how the accuracy on the dataset changes with regard to different
values of these parameters.
Size of word n-grams
Another interesting technique is typically to also utilize
the relative position of words in text, not just the plain words, in other words using
word n-grams. Typically, 4 is the upper value for n in n-grams and we will also stick
to this. Once again, fastText allows this parameter to be tweaked and therefore we
will again use this library to create a model and measure the accuracy.
Training on pretrained word embeddings
One way of training a fastText model
is to use the dataset we have access to to build the word embeddings and afterwords
use these word embeddings and build a classifier using them. Another approach is
to use word embeddings that were trained on another dataset and train the classifier
using those.
Since there are pretrained word embeddings publicly available1 that
were trained using e.g. Wikipedia’s articles as a dataset, we will utilize those in our
experiments as well to see how it affects the results.
Multiclass vs.
binary classification
Another important aspect to consider is
what and how many classes should be considered. As mentioned earlier, we have
identified 7 distinct regions. However, in the previous chapters, we have also raised
concern that dialects cannot typically be separated precisely with a line on a map and
that they usually change gradually with respect to a geographical area. Therefore,
besides trying to classify samples into one of these seven classes, we will also look at
a simplified binary classification problems.
Tweet aggregation
Peeking at a small random subset of tweets, we intuitively
noticed that there is substantial number of tweets that simply do not seem to poses
any important characteristics that would make them distinguishable from others. A
tweet such as “I finally arrived home” does most likely not have any dialect specific
word or morpheme in it. It may be the case that people in certain region write this
sentence more often which may help classify the tweet, however, it is not a dialect
difference.
In this type of experiment, we will aggregate tweets to generate something we
call a tweetdoc, i.e. piece of text that consists of multiple tweets being concatenated
together. To make sure that a tweetdoc is still a product of one person – just like a
1https://fasttext.cc/docs/en/english-vectors.html
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Tweet-centric experiments
45
tweet – a tweetdoc only consists of tweets coming from the same user. Since users can
change their locations and thereby create an inconsistent set of tweets in a tweetdoc
(i.e. set of tweets where there are at least two distinct labels associated with at least
two tweets), we will choose a label by picking the most common one.
Salient word identification
Lastly, we will try to peek at the words that are
the most informative ones. This way we will be able to identify what kind of words
distinguish different regions and whether the important words are mainly dialect-
specific words or something else.
5.1
Tweet-centric experiments
Throughout the tweet-centric experiments, we consider each tweet as a separate sam-
ple. We will be experimenting with the dataset containing only the English tweets
and we consider applying various processes and techniques to this dataset such as
re-sampling and natural language processing. Besides that, an important aspect ex-
plored in this section will be identification of optimal hyperparameters and we will
also look at whether we can simplify the multi-class classification task into a binary
one.
5.1.1
Non-uniform English dataset
The first dataset that we examine is the dataset that resulted from the original corpus
after basic filtering as well as filtering non-English tweets. Since this dataset contains
all tweets from all regions as they naturally appear, it means that it may be unbal-
anced. After examining proportions, which can be seen in Table 5.1, we can see that
it indeed is unbalanced and that region 6, which represents South (the other regions
for other labels can be seen in Table 5.2) is assigned to almost 60% of all samples
Region label
Proportion of the dataset (%)
1
8.9
2
9.7
3
18.5
4
0.5
5
2.3
6
59.5
7
0.5
Table 5.1: Region proportions in the non-uniform English dataset. Region 6 (i.e.
South) has the most samples in the dataset.
==PAGE:54==
46
5 Experiments and Results
Label
Region name
1
North
2
Midland
3
West
4
North Central
5
Northern New England
6
South
7
GNYC (Greater New York City)
Table 5.2: Region labels and their corresponding region names.
After running fastText with default settings, we observe, that the accuracy achieved
is around 60.2%. Considering that simply guessing label 6 for all test samples we
would achieve accuracy of 59.5%, it indeed does not seem like a significant improve-
ment.
5.1.2
Re-sampling
Seeing the biased results that we have obtained in the previous section, the need for
balancing the datasets becomes evident. We therefore apply re-sampling to obtain a
balanced dataset and more meaningful results. There are in general two approaches
to re-sampling, namely up-sampling and down-sampling.
In the process of up-sampling, we would split the dataset into training and testing
set and then we would randomly pick samples from underrepresented classes and
duplicate them. This way we can achieve a balance. However, with this method
there is an associated risk of over-fitting since a sample will be represented in the
dataset multiple times. For example, if we want to up-sample region with label 7, it
means that, on average, each sample from this class will be represented 119 times in
order to balance it with the most populous class (i.e. class 6).
We therefore look into its natural counterpart which is down-sampling. In this
technique, we simply remove samples from the dataset so that every class contains
the same number of samples as the least populous class. With this approach, there
will be no duplicates and we are not risking overfitting. However, the disadvantage
of this approach is that we cut a valuable signal and discard information.
There indeed does not seem to be a decisive agreement on which method is the
best as discussed e.g. in [MZW05] or [DH+03] and the general notion seems to be
that with small (i.e. few hundred of samples in a class) datasets, up-sampling tends
to do better while with larger datasets the differences disappear.
To avoid risk of overfitting, we first examined how big our dataset is after down-
sampling. The results show that we have around 25 000 samples per each class (around
175 000 samples total) which would generally be considered as a large dataset, at least
according to [MZW05] and we therefore stick to this re-sampling method.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Tweet-centric experiments
47
Running fastText with the default parameters, we were able to correctly classify
19.5% of samples for this downsampled dataset. Considering that random guessing
would result in 14.5% accuracy in this multi-class classification problem, the results
seem to be promising.
5.1.3
Identifying best fastText hyper parameters
We have now performed some basic experiments, however, they were all done with
default training parameters of fastText. This machine learning library, however, al-
lows us to specify plethora of different parameters. In this subsection we therefore
try and identify the best combination of the hyper parameters for our type of dataset
that result in the best accuracy. In the following paragraphs we will describe the
combinations that we have tried in respect to different parameters.
Dimension size
fastText stores representations of words and character-level n-
grams in n-dimensional vectors. The value of n by default is 100. In general, the
dimension size of the vector should reflect the cardinality of its vocabulary. Table
5.3 suggests that setting the value of this parameter to a small number may affect
the performance. However, once a threshold value has been reached which allows
the n-dimensional vector to hold all the necessary information for given dataset, the
accuracy does not get affected.
It therefore seems that once an approximate threshold has been identified, we do
not have to worry that we will configure this parameter to be too large. However,
it is important to note that vectors with more dimensions take more disk space
and therefore the resulting models are also bigger. Therefore, from the model-size
perspective, it is better to not overshoot.
Epoch
The parameter specifies how many times all samples are passed through the
neural network. The default value of fastText for this parameter is 5. Table 5.4 shows
what values have been tried.
Just as with dimension parameter, values higher than the threshold value do not
seem to significantly worsen the results. However, larger number signifies more passes
through the network which results in longer execution times and no benefits in form
of improved results.
Dimension
1
2
5
10
20
30
50
100
150
Accuracy (%)
16.8
18.2
19.3
19.4
19.5
19.4
19.4
19.4
19.6
Table 5.3: Accuracy with respect to the dimension size. The results are improving
until the size of the vector is 10 and afterwards the results settle on more
or less the same value.
==PAGE:56==
48
5 Experiments and Results
Epoch
1
2
5
10
20
30
50
100
150
Accuracy (%)
17.9
18.4
19.3
19.4
19.5
19.3
19.3
19.1
19.1
Table 5.4: Accuracy with respect to the number of epochs. The peak accuracy is
achieved with 20 epochs and although results do not change significantly
with more epochs, the results seem to be getting slightly worse after that.
Learning rate
The setting of this parameter affects how fast fastText converges
to the optimal solution. Potential danger here is that setting this parameter to a far
too large number may cause the algorithm to never find an optimal solution whereas
setting it to a small number may cause it to get stuck in a local optima.
Unlike in the previous two cases, Table 5.5 shows that there does not seem to be a
threshold value that separates optimal solutions from the suboptimal ones but rather
there seems to be one absolute optimal solution that we would like to achieve. Our
results seem to suggest that the optimal learning rate is located somewhere around
the fastText’s default value of 0.1.
Word n-grams
In this experiment we try to see whether different bi- and tri- word
n-grams help improve the accuracy and the results are shown in Table 5.6
Character n-grams
One of the major advantage of using fastText when compared
to plain word2vec algorithms is that it is able to create character-level n-grams. This
may be very useful tool since dialects may have specific character-level n-grams that
distinguish them from the others. Table 5.7 shows experiments and results that are
concerning this features where minn and maxn represents minimum and maximum
length of a subword n-gram, respectively.
Learning rate
0.0001
0.001
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.5
1
Accuracy (%)
14.7
14.9
17.9
19.5
19.5
19.5
19.4
19.4
19.3
19.1
Table 5.5: Accuracy with respect to the learning rate. Steep improvement happens
initially which then gets settled once learning rate of around 0.1 has been
reached and the results worsen with increasing value of learning rate.
n-gram
1
2
3
4
Accuracy (%)
19.5
19.2
19.2
19.0
Table 5.6: Accuracy with respect to the number of n-grams. The results show that
there does not seem to be much information contained in the way the
words are ordered since unigrams resulted in the best result.
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Tweet-centric experiments
49
(minn, maxn)
(2, 2)
(2, 4)
(4, 4)
Accuracy (%)
18.0
19.2
19.3
Table 5.7: Accuracy with respect to size of subword n-grams. The longer the sub-
word n-grams are the better result which hints that no spelling nuances
were identified as important.
Since throughout this phase, no word vector information are used, we have decided
to also add that information into the equation and the result obtained was 19.6% in
conjunction with best minn and maxn value.
Pretrained vectors
There exists a set of pretrained vectors available for fastText
that were trained on Common Crawl2. Albeit we do not expect this to perform very
well nor be very relevant since these word embeddings most likely do not capture
dialect information, we have decided to explore this nonetheless. The results were
not deviating from what we have obtained so far and therefore we did not continue
experimenting with these.
5.1.4
Stemming and stopword removal
Using the best hyper parameters discovered in the previous section, we have decided to
employ two additional techniques to our data processing techniques, namely stemming
and stopword removal. Although we do realize that by performing these two steps
we may be removing dialect specific features (especially by stemming the words), we
nonetheless tried these techniques since we believe that looking at the data from this
perspective may be interesting as well and may provide additional hints.
We have run this experiment with the best parameters found in the previous
section, however, the accuracy improved only slightly. The results we have observed
are shown in Table 5.8 and as it can be seen, all three stemming algorithms seem to
perform similarly.
5.1.5
Classification with subset of regions
With down-sampling, we are indeed discarding quite a lot of information. However,
getting back to Table 5.1, we can see that the 3 least populous regions contain only
3.3% of all tweets.
In this set of experiments, we will work with two datasets that consist of subset
of regions. The first dataset will compare 2 regions such that the biggest amount
of tweets is preserved. This corresponds to comparing regions 3 and 6 (i.e. West
and South) since this dataset will contain 37% of all the tweets from our English
dataset. In the second experiment, we will explore the somewhat intuitive division of
2https://fasttext.cc/docs/en/english-vectors.html
==PAGE:58==
50
5 Experiments and Results
Stemming algorithm
Accuracy (%)
Porter stemmer
19.5
Snowball stemmer
19.7
Lancaster stemmer
19.4
Table 5.8: Performance on stemmed dataset. The aggressiveness (level of obfusca-
tion/removal of features from words) of the algorithm increases from top
to bottom, i.e. Porter stemmer is the least aggresive and Lancaster stem-
mer is the most aggressive. The best result was obtained with Snowball
stemmer.
dialects between South and “Merged North”. In this case, Merged North will consists
of multiple merged regions, namely North, Midland, North Central, Northern New
England and GNYC.
Table 5.9 shows that although there indeed seem to be some small difference be-
tween tweets used in this binary classification task, most tweets are indistinguishable.
We therefore decided to verify these results by randomly selecting 10 tweets from this
dataset, 5 from each class and examining them. The tweets selected are presented in
Table 5.10 and, intuitively, there indeed does not seem to be much obvious difference
between those sentences.
We have also performed PCA on the vectors that were
created by fastText and projecting them to 2 dimensions as shown in Figure 5.1, we
can confirm that although there is some division, the shape indeed looks like a circle
or a diamond suggesting little difference.
5.2
User-centric experiments
Seeing the results from the previous section, it indeed seems that the task at hand
is quite complex and location inference may be a tough problem to solve on a single-
tweet basis.
However, people may employ their dialect only in certain situations
while avoid it (consciously or unconsciously) in others. We will therefore also examine
whether the task can be approached from user-level rather than tweet-level so that we
can see whether the users uncover their dialect region after tweeting multiple times.
For this purpose, we have grouped tweets by their authors and Figure 5.2 shows
how many users with n tweets there are with n being shown on the horizontal axis.
Test type
Accuracy (%)
Merged North vs. South
56.9
West vs. South
58.1
Table 5.9: Performance in the binary classification task where Merged North is rep-
resented by tweets from multiple northern regions of the US.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 User-centric experiments
51
Figure 5.1: Vectors of testing samples projected to 2 dimensions using PCA. The
points in the figure seem to be clustered around a central point creat-
ing a diamond/circle shape which suggest little difference between the
classes.
Label
Tweet text
6
time of the year where i don’t if it’s gunshots or firecrackers i hear
6
the next person i deal with may not like the no sex for a couple
of months rule
6
lmao @ my mood switching up fast
6
<AT> he is , isn’t he ? hee , thanks !
6
<AT> yeah like you said those are the graduation cords
3
<AT> <AT> take it with a pinch of salt . shittest journalist
about
3
twitter makes me laugh <NUM> . <NUM> % of the time !!
3
tbh only log onto fb to see the memories of today .. so that i can
then delete all the pointless stuff i posted in middle school
3
i wana go home and play <AT>
3
roots <AT>
Table 5.10: Randomly sampled tweets from the West vs. South dataset. <AT>
and <NUM> are placeholders for a mention and a number, respectively.
Intuitively, it is indeed difficult to infer their label just by considering
the text.
==PAGE:60==
52
5 Experiments and Results
We can see that there is many users who created less than 40 tweets (there are more
than 600 000 users who have just one tweet in our dataset) and the curve that could
describe this graph is quite steep. Regarding the regions that we will examine in this
set of experiments, we will stick to our subdivision of regions and stick to the two
subsets that we have defined in the previous section, namely West vs. South and
Merged North vs. South.
An important question to answer is how many tweets there should be per each
sample. Considering the distribution of tweets, we have many users that have only 1
tweet in our dataset, but we also have extremes on the other end of this scale where
we have a user who has 6 519 tweets in our dataset. To avoid spammers, we chose to
not include tweets from users who have too many tweets in our dataset. At the same
time, to not have samples that consists of very few tweets, we also had to choose a
lower threshold.
We have therefore tried to experiment with values 10 and 20 for the lower threshold
and values 50, 100 and 500 for the upper threshold. The results can be seen in Table
5.11. The results show that the best threshold is 10-500 and that the value of upper
threshold does not influence the results as much as the lower threshold value does.
Therefore, to be certain that the lower threshold should indeed be settled at value
10, we have performed additional experiments on the West vs. South dataset and the
results are shown in Table 5.12. Indeed, our observations from previous experiment
are further confirmed that 10 is an optimal threshold value.
And once again – just like in the previous section that focused on tweet-level
classification – we also tried stemming and removing stopwords to see if we can
further improve on the results. In this process, we used knowledge from the previous
Figure 5.2: Histogram of number of users and tweets; number of users is on the
vertical axis and number of tweets on horizontal axis. There are more
than 600 000 users that have only 1 tweet in our dataset and number
of users quickly decreases with increasing number of tweets associated
with them.
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Salient and location specific words
53
Thresholds
Acc. Merged North vs. South (%)
Acc. West vs. South (%)
10-500
63.4
67.5
10-100
63.3
67.1
10-50
63.3
66.9
20-500
61.6
65.0
20-100
61.5
64.9
20-50
60.1
63.8
Table 5.11: Accuracies for different thresholds for number of tweets per sample in
the user-centric dataset. The upper threshold does not affect the re-
sults as much as the lower threshold suggesting that a fine-tuning lower
threshold is more important.
section and only used Snowball stemmer since it was the one that performed the
best. However, the results did not deviate much from the non-stemmed dataset with
stopwords. With only unigrams, the result was almost identical to the original dataset
(we acheived 67.6% accuracy) and the best result obtained was by using bigrams
and the accuracy was 67.9%.
We have also tried modifying amount of subword
information, but that did not lead to any difference either and in fact lead to a
decrease in accuracy (67.0%) if no subword information was included.
5.3
Salient and location specific words
We have now seen how accurate we can be with classifying the tweets or users into
the dialect regions. However, we do not know what are the important features for
each of these regions. In this section we will therefore explore and identify important
words that serve as a good hint for geolocating tweets or users. Once we have selected
those, we will generate a new dataset that contains only salient words and we will try
to classify samples from such dataset.
The classification experiments will be performed on our user-based West vs. South
dataset, however, we will peek at the salient words from all regions.
Lower threshold value
1
5
8
10
12
Accuracy (%)
59.6
66.2
67.0
67.5
67.3
Table 5.12: Accuracies for different lower thresholds for number of tweets per sample
with value of 10 performing the best.
==PAGE:62==
54
5 Experiments and Results
5.3.1
Identifying salient words
In this section we will identify important or characteristic words for each class. To
do that, we will be using the original tweet-based dataset that contains all 7 regions.
The selection of top 20 most salient words for each region are included separately in
the appendix of this thesis (Tables A.1, A.2, A.3, A.4, A.5 and A.6) but we will go
over the findings in this subsection as well.
The first method that we examine is the one that has been used in [Eis14] for
identifying the salient words and is referred to as SAGE. We can indeed find dialect
specific words and this is visible especially for the region 6 (South) where words like
ion (I do not), y’all (you all), bout (about) etc. are selected. Besides that we can
observe certain abbreviations such as lmfaoo, asf and named entities such as state
names (nh representing New Hampshire, maine, texas) or sport teams’ hashtags (sox,
mets, yankees). It seems that weather-related words are also leaking into this set of
salient words since words such as cloudy or snow are present for some of the northern
regions. Lastly, an intuition that hockey is more popular in the north than it is in
the south could be supported by the salient word hockey that appears for region 4.
The TF-IDF and IDF methods based on the magnitude difference (i.e. how many
times a score of the first item is smaller/larger than the score of the same item
from other region) found some interesting words as well, however, they were already
identified by SAGE. Among these words we can again find references to places (utah,
idaho, disneyland) as well as dialect words such as cookout, brudda, preciate or fina.
The TF-IDF and IDF methods inspired from [HCB12] did not find many words
that could be identified as dialect-specific since only a few interesting words such as
names of sport teams (e.g. whalers) were identified. We therefore assume that albeit
these words may be location indicative, they are not necessarily dialect-related.
Lastly, the randomized logistic regression has been used with default parameters
just like in [JHS15a]. With this method, instead of identifying salient words for each
region, we have identified salient words in general. The method outputs all important
features that cross a certain threshold, in our case the threshold was a criterion where
each feature must have been selected at least 25% of the time. This method indeed
identifies words similar to ones selected by SAGE such as abbreviations (lmaoo),
weather-related words (snow) or dialect words (yall/y’all). However, unlike the other
methods, it also selects stopwords such as the, to, and, etc.
5.3.2
Salient-word-based classification
Examining what are the most salient words according to different methods, we will
now proceed by selecting words that are the most indicative of a location according
to SAGE since this method identified largest amount of words that could be classified
as dialect-specific. We then take the West vs. South dataset and remove from it all
words that cannot be found in this set of salient words.
We have experimented by considering 100 000 most common words and selecting
1 000, 2 000 and 4 000 most salient ones. We have also considered only 10 000 most
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Salient and location specific words
55
common words and chose 1 000 and 2 000 most salient ones to create a new datasets.
The results can be seen in Table 5.13. It is important to point out that although
the 100k-1000 seems to be performing best, the number of tweets in that dataset was
reduced by almost a half since many of the samples simply did not contain any salient
words. Therefore, the overall best result is achieved under 100k-2000 dataset since
we have reduced the number of samples only by 0.7% but the accuracy was the best
that we have observed so far. Projecting it to 2 dimensions using PCA, we can see
that the samples are more spread out across the horizontal axis and the distinction
is more clear.
Figure 5.3: Vectors of testing samples projected to 2 dimensions using PCA where
we can see the two classes being separated more clearly.
==PAGE:64==
56
5 Experiments and Results
Dataset
100k-4000
100k-2000
100k-1000
10k-2000
10k-1000
Accuracy (%)
67.3
70.0
76.6
66.9
68.9
Dataset size (%)
100.
99.3
55.6
100.
97.6
Table 5.13: Performance when trained on datasets where samples are constructed
only from the salient words.
The new size of dataset is represented
as percentage of the original dataset. The best result is achieved with
100k-1000 dataset, however, at a price of removing significant amount of
samples. 100k-2000 improved our previous results by around 3% while
removing only 0.7% of samples.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion and
discussion
In this thesis, we have taken a new approach to the geolocation problem. Whereas
most works try to identify a city or a state of an online user and thereby try to
find linguistic characteristic for these geographical units, we have instead focused on
the more traditional dialect regions as identified by [LAB05] and to the best of our
knowledge such approach has not been taken before.
We first identified the 7 distinct dialect regions and converted them into a machine-
friendly format by classifying each county as a member of one dialect region. For this
purpose we have created an interactive map that can be used for correcting mistakes
that may have occurred during the process, which was automated. Afterwards, we
have used around 1% of all tweets from 2017 available to us from which we removed
tweets not coming from the US, and tweets that were not in English. The resulting
dataset had more than 5 million samples and was cleaned of any non-standard char-
acters or undesired patterns. For the classification task we have decided to employ
the state-of-the-art machine learning library called fastText.
Our first area of focus was the single tweet classification. The first accuracy results
that we have obtained regarding the classification across all regions stood somewhere
around 19.6%. Considering that random guessing would give us accuracy of around
14.3%, that was certainly an improvement, however, not by much. We have therefore
experimented with different hyperparameters and optimized them. Afterwards, for
the next set of experiments, we have utilized some natural language processing ap-
proaches such as stemming and stopword removal, and albeit the accuracy rose, the
change was not very significant (improvement of 0.1% compared to the best previous
result). To simplify the classification task, we have also examined binary classification
where we have considered regions for which we had the most tweets.
In the second part of the experiments, we focused on classifying samples on user-
level, where we have grouped and merged tweets coming from one user into a single
sample. There, we could observe a major improvement compared to the tweet-level
binary classification experiments and the accuracy rose from 58.1% to 67.5%.
In the third set of experiments, we identified words that are specific for a certain
region. To do this, we have used 4 different methods. Here, we were indeed able to
observe words that are dialect specific, but we have also seen many words that are
==PAGE:66==
58
6 Conclusion and discussion
simply location and weather dependent such as names of various local sport teams
or words such as cloudy or snow. After identifying these important words, we have
decided to also process the dataset such that we would remove all words that were
not in this set of important words and perform the classification again. With this
approach, we were able to obtain the best accuracy of 70.0% while removing only
0.7% of samples.
These results provide some insights into content of users’ messages on Twitter, how
this content relates to traditional dialect regions and these results can be interpreted in
multiple ways. The very first conclusion that we came to is that identifying dialect on
a tweet-level is a difficult task and it seems that there is not much dialect information.
We have confirmed this also intuitively by randomly sampling 10 examples from 2
different regions and we could not properly classify those samples with high confidence.
The fact that such classification based on dialects is difficult could be caused by the
fact that the population on Twitter is not a uniform sample of the general population
of the US. According to the papers reviewed, the demographics of Twitter users are in
favor of younger people, which could indicate that the younger generation is perhaps
not using the traditional dialects as much, or at least not in the virtual environment.
The analysis of the salient words seems to confirm that many of the words are not
the typical words that were expected to be found in the traditional dialect regions.
It is also interesting to see the salient words identified by SAGE, especially in
South (region 6) where many words are in fact dialect words.
However, besides
the expected words such as y’all, many of the words seem to be rather related to
ethnolects, which is an interesting finding.
Important to note is that throughout this work, we have also employed removal
of stopwords and stemming. Although such approach may bring interesting insights,
we do not believe that it helps in classifying messages based on their dialect since
the dialect may be present precisely in some of those nuances that get removed in
the stemming phase.
Another conclusion that we can draw from these results is
that although there are dialect variations, there is a lot of content differences across
the regions which may be contributing to the classification more than the dialect
differences themselves – people not only talk differently in different areas, but they
also tend to talk about different topics.
There certainly are areas where this work could be extended. To avoid overfitting,
we have mainly considered downsampling in favor of upsampling. However, there
are other methods how to account for imbalanced datasets and one of them is cost-
sensitive learning.
In this work we have compared the results mainly by the classification accuracy.
In future, it could be interesting to also consider other measures such as classification
confidence and thereby further explore what makes samples from certain regions
distinct.
Another fruitful area to look at would be considering part-of-speech (POS) tags
as part of the feature set. Although POS tagging is generally a difficult task to do
on such an informal text, it would be worth exploring.
==PAGE:67==
6 Conclusion and discussion
59
Besides few papers reviewed, none of them seem to use a neural network setup
that is designed specifically for this task. Therefore a next step could be looking at
what architecture of neural network would best suit this sort of problem to further
improve on the results.
Another aspect to consider in the future would be uniform sampling with regard
to the actual spatial distribution of the population.
Currently, we have selected
regions and we have categorized each tweet in one of those areas. However, some
areas consisted of significantly more tweets than others and even within the regions –
although we did not track that precisely – there may have been inconsistencies such
that urban areas may have been represented better than country side, simply because
Twitter may be more popular in cities.
In conclusion, in this work we have scratched the surface of the topic just enough
to get the understanding of the problems in the field and we have tried out various
approaches to tackle the geolocation task.
There is certainly a lot of interesting
research that could be further done in regard to the dialect-based user location as
already outlined and we believe that results of such research could also find its use in
practice in conjunction with the outcomes of this work.
==PAGE:68==
60
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
Region label
Most salient words
1
#nowplayingongnsg, michigan, gospel, southern, trees, ny, falls,
inches, mph, ^, cover, #nowplaying, wind, rain, following,
weather, snow, rock, news, trade
2
#oldies104, township, fm, ding, liberty, temperature, edge, pa,
nature, f, forecast, florida, na, today’s, county, future, pm, bas-
ketball, teams, low
3
buds, oregon, seattle, random, number, hella, vegas, el, la, become,
ticket, haha, de, ;), hahaha, test, here, dm, :/, :(
4
#flyupnow, #gfedchat, #top, wav, minot, mn, unknown, dakota,
minnesota, fargo, played, hockey, balance, #quote, physical,
grand, lake, nd, north, =
5
nh, maine, showcase, stamp, outcome, booth, [, ], sox, boston,
scores, , album, space, ma, hits, rep, speaking, pm, march
6
ion, town, finna, texas, boys, y’all, yall, nigga, niggas, hoes, ima,
somebody, bout, sis, ain’t, everybody, asf, hoe, gone, fr
7
#dbwl, mahoney, marbles, surf, #followfriday, nj, mets, nyc, ny,
yankees, #raw, engaged, recent, cloudy, partly, strange, connect,
york, island, lmfaoo
Table A.1: Top 20 salient words according to SAGE.
==PAGE:70==
62
A Appendix
Region label
Most salient words
1
pickin, sns, romano, basketballs, khaki, crick, asj, pregnancies,
facism, geezus, puzder, plume, aldrich, rena, barclays, wider, liu,
explosives, nominating, wooh
2
zucker, altruism, tobias, yammering, whalers, postcards, medici-
nal, mobil, hippies, divinity, petite, demonstrations, facism, pate,
aldrich, cherie, fandoms, puzder, vaporwave, plume
3
barclays, whalers, aldrich, plume, tmltalk, everybodytalks, 5sos-
fam, perturbed, namath, brunswick, feom, classof2018, trotz,
mandi, voicesaveadam, fitch, napolean, kanta, cambio, loney
4
woody, appropriation, undead, designing, climbed, stern, dnd,
catchy, dns, yahoo, wana, pooped, unjust, welcomed, rewarded,
sixteen, saddened, ingrid, telescope, allah
5
undead, dns, ingrid, hiya, benched, tannehill, recipients, bench-
ing, disrespects, jewels, tiki, straighten, yessir, pelicans, rags, rw,
omnibus, smackdownlive, floated, sike
6
yoli, montague, beaulieu, chvrches, unelectable, ignorants, deviat-
ing, wigwam, montclair, decemberists, admin2b, fermi, kerfuffle,
overleveled, bluth, vespa, pirateslife, mcnulty, buttoning, encar-
nacion
7
hahahah, wooden, undead, designing, brainwashed, climbed, con-
troversy, projection, stern, catchy, dns, circumstances, morally,
wana, pooped, unjust, dinosaurs, sickening, rewarded, zucker
Table A.2: Top 20 salient words according to TF-IDF.
==PAGE:71==
A Appendix
63
Region label
Most salient words
1
nopats, planilla, earsup, picspam, gau, getoffmydick, branca,
innaguration, oknotok, psone, cosito, dontloweryourstandards,
showi, gao, gahanna, overfascination, vanc, exspressing, fundip,
jawbone
2
dogtown, mccoul, dispener, lalabs, sice, njud, wannaa, lanco, con-
tends, cosita, rayvion, contiki, socute, enity, beholdthecoagula,
porracaralhofilhodaputa, wassermann, vane, expands, jawbone
3
lovemyfamily, quadfeed, wannaa, lanco, roohype, ict4sdg, cosita,
fundie, keepreinventing, ipfw, thhank, cronyn, kindofapsa, mod-
erncx, problematica, 35mm, downstem, dontmesswiththebubble,
manfestbro, gollygee
4
throne, mustaine, squealed, dependence, surge, warranty, indict-
ments, uncontrollable, darvish, jaffe, friendos, girrl, singletary, lvl,
buffy, spanks, roleplay, lance, juns, summertrip
5
juno, asknow, heforshe, junc, lanch, digressions, sandwhich, lancs,
sherm, vtccliquidswords, tremulant, gigem, dhop, grandiosity,
rothfus, downstem, fluffycchoi, seabrooknh, expands, untalented
6
hashtagfirstqueefe, questiong, winstein, wannab, asadagoat, tur-
dquarter,
innacuries,
expandn,
minach,
encompassingly,
ga-
hanna, hillgrove, nittle, punyetang, krystyn, woopsies, southkorea,
canigetawitness, gollygee, feelingbetrade
7
unlikable, registration, significantly, darvish, demorcratic, contra-
dictory, hanukkah, recede, geckos, airyourgrievancesin5words, is-
lippride, overspending, pedazo, kerouac, junk, snowdencondemna-
tion, socute, lohandonedirty, hessle, cronys
Table A.3: Top 20 salient words according to IDF.
Region label
Most salient words
3
prelim, humboldt, pips, slc, precipitation, spokane, uw, goducks,
visibility, detects, headlight, rctid, bukowski, manutd, delighted,
bsu, este, utes, pdx, pnw
6
gusting, greensboro, allstartrek, cookout, ecu, crawfish, barome-
ter, cad, otw, tgfad, bbn, fina, neweditionbet, unconfirmed, yeen,
nomo, brudda, keeppounding, choicemalewebstar, asheville
Table A.4: Top 20 salient words according to TF-IDF magnitude difference.
==PAGE:72==
64
A Appendix
Region label
Most salient words
3
slc, spokane, uw, pdx, utah, pnw, goducks, disneyland, stockton,
idaho, boise, provo, pst, byu, bsu, utes, mariners, seager, gobert,
huntley
6
cookout,
crawfish,
otw,
yeen,
greensboro,
neweditionbet,
whataburger, nomo, brudda, preciate, tgfad, heb, allat, shidd,
raleigh, mfn, keeppounding, kroger, ecu, aggravating
Table A.5: Top 20 salient words according to IDF magnitude difference.
Region label
Most salient words
All
i, the, to, a, you, , and, is, !, my, in, of, it, for, that, ?, me,
on, ”, this, so, i’m, just, have, with, are, but, not, your, at, !!,
what, don’t, they, -, no, he, :, ;, how, &, now, as, from, lol, back,
more, really, an, u, there„ by, today, am, she, only, happy, shit,
life, thank, new, thanks, great, being, ), (, game, *, last, god,
hate, fuck, ass, wanna, im, girl, birthday, trump, y’all, miss, he’s,
show, very, lmao, week, also, fucking, sleep, ya, nice, ain’t, baby,
gotta, around, wow, ready, boys, team, playing, :), looks, amazing,
gone, tho, bro, awesome, news, yourself, nigga, yo, town, saw,
president, excited, top, mad, number, –, haha, , pm, hi, bout, :3,
f, ppl, niggas, smh, swear, post, somebody, perfect, line, lil, af,
x, +, body, lord, random, rain, album, tryna, #quote, become,
played, lady, weather, ima, nah, tf, bless, la, self, e, lmaoo, totally,
yall, nd, rock, =, reading, rt, texas, goal, y, buds, lmfao, test,
anyway, vs, match, public, facts, da, experience, de, fr, folks, snow,
#nowplaying
Table A.6: Salient words as selected by randomized logistic regression.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[AHL15]
Oluwaseun Ajao, Jun Hong, and Weiru Liu. “A survey of location in-
ference techniques on Twitter”. In: Journal of Information Science 41.6
(2015), pages 855–864.
[Boj+16]
Piotr Bojanowski et al. “Enriching word vectors with subword informa-
tion”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.04606 (2016).
[CCL10]
Zhiyuan Cheng, James Caverlee, and Kyumin Lee. “You are where you
tweet: a content-based approach to geo-locating twitter users”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 19th ACM international conference on Information and
knowledge management. ACM. 2010, pages 759–768.
[CKM11]
Swarup Chandra, Latifur Khan, and Fahad Bin Muhaya. “Estimating
twitter user location using social interactions–a content based approach”.
In: Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust (PASSAT) and 2011 IEEE Third
Inernational Conference on Social Computing (SocialCom), 2011 IEEE
Third International Conference on. IEEE. 2011, pages 838–843.
[DH+03]
Chris Drummond, Robert C Holte, et al. “C4. 5, class imbalance, and cost
sensitivity: why under-sampling beats over-sampling”. In: Workshop on
learning from imbalanced datasets II. Volume 11. Citeseer. 2003, pages 1–
8.
[EAX11]
Jacob Eisenstein, Amr Ahmed, and Eric P Xing. “Sparse additive gener-
ative models of text”. In: (2011).
[Eis+10]
Jacob Eisenstein et al. “A latent variable model for geographic lexical
variation”. In: Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics.
2010, pages 1277–1287.
[Eis13]
Jacob Eisenstein. “Phonological factors in social media writing”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Language Analysis in Social Media. 2013,
pages 11–19.
[Eis14]
Jacob Eisenstein. “Identifying regional dialects in online social media”. In:
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2014.
==PAGE:74==
66
Bibliography
[Fel+17]
Bjarke Felbo et al. “Using millions of emoji occurrences to learn any-
domain representations for detecting sentiment, emotion and sarcasm”.
In: Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP). 2017.
[Gar+18]
David Garcia et al. “Collective aspects of privacy in the Twitter social
network”. In: EPJ Data Science 7.1 (2018), page 3.
[HCB12]
Bo Han, Paul Cook, and Timothy Baldwin. “Geolocation prediction in
social media data by finding location indicative words”. In: Proceedings of
COLING 2012 (2012), pages 1045–1062.
[HCW14]
Qunying Huang, Guofeng Cao, and Caixia Wang. “From where do tweets
originate?: a GIS approach for user location inference”. In: Proceedings of
the 7th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on Location-Based
Social Networks. ACM. 2014, pages 1–8.
[Hec+11]
Brent Hecht et al. “Tweets from Justin Bieber’s heart: the dynamics of the
location field in user profiles”. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on human factors in computing systems. ACM. 2011, pages 237–246.
[HPB14]
Stefan Hahmann, Ross S Purves, and Dirk Burghardt. “Twitter location
(sometimes) matters: Exploring the relationship between georeferenced
tweet content and nearby feature classes”. In: Journal of Spatial Informa-
tion Science 2014.9 (2014), pages 1–36.
[IET12]
Yohei Ikawa, Miki Enoki, and Michiaki Tatsubori. “Location inference
using microblog messages”. In: Proceedings of the 21st International Con-
ference on World Wide Web. ACM. 2012, pages 687–690.
[Ink+17]
Diana Inkpen et al. “Location detection and disambiguation from Twitter
messages”. In: Journal of Intelligent Information Systems 49.2 (2017),
pages 237–253.
[JHS15a]
Anders Johannsen, Dirk Hovy, and Anders Søgaard. “Cross-lingual syn-
tactic variation over age and gender”. In: Proceedings of the Nineteenth
Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning. 2015, pages 103–
112.
[JHS15b]
Anna Jørgensen, Dirk Hovy, and Anders Søgaard. “Challenges of studying
and processing dialects in social media”. In: Proceedings of the Workshop
on Noisy User-generated Text. 2015, pages 9–18.
[Jou+16]
Armand Joulin et al. “Bag of tricks for efficient text classification”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.01759 (2016).
[Jur+15]
David Jurgens et al. “Geolocation Prediction in Twitter Using Social Net-
works: A Critical Analysis and Review of Current Practice.” In: ICWSM
15 (2015), pages 188–197.
[Jur13]
David Jurgens. “That’s What Friends Are For: Inferring Location in On-
line Social Media Platforms Based on Social Relationships.” In: ICWSM
13.13 (2013), pages 273–282.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
67
[LAB05]
William Labov, Sharon Ash, and Charles Boberg. The atlas of North
American English: Phonetics, phonology and sound change. Walter de
Gruyter, 2005.
[Lau+17]
Jey Han Lau et al. “End-to-end network for twitter geolocation prediction
and hashing”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.04802 (2017).
[LKY13]
John Lingad, Sarvnaz Karimi, and Jie Yin. “Location extraction from
disaster-related microblogs”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd international con-
ference on world wide web. ACM. 2013, pages 1017–1020.
[LSB17]
Marianela Garcı́a Lozano, Jonah Schreiber, and Joel Brynielsson. “Track-
ing geographical locations using a geo-aware topic model for analyzing
social media data”. In: Decision Support Systems 99 (2017), pages 18–29.
[Mik+13]
Tomas Mikolov et al. “Efficient estimation of word representations in vec-
tor space”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013).
[MND12]
Jalal Mahmud, Jeffrey Nichols, and Clemens Drews. “Where Is This Tweet
From? Inferring Home Locations of Twitter Users.” In: ICWSM 12 (2012),
pages 511–514.
[MZW05]
Kate McCarthy, Bibi Zabar, and Gary Weiss. “Does cost-sensitive learn-
ing beat sampling for classifying rare classes?” In: Proceedings of the 1st in-
ternational workshop on Utility-based data mining. ACM. 2005, pages 69–
77.
[PE15]
Umashanthi Pavalanathan and Jacob Eisenstein. “Confounds and conse-
quences in geotagged Twitter data”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02275
(2015).
[RBC17]
Afshin Rahimi, Timothy Baldwin, and Trevor Cohn. “Continuous Rep-
resentation of Location for Geolocation and Lexical Dialectology using
Mixture Density Networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04358 (2017).
[RM14]
KyoungMin Ryoo and Sue Moon. “Inferring twitter user locations with
10 km accuracy”. In: Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
World Wide Web. ACM. 2014, pages 643–648.
[Rol+12]
Stephen Roller et al. “Supervised text-based geolocation using language
models on an adaptive grid”. In: Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning. Association for Computational Linguistics.
2012, pages 1500–1510.
[SB88]
Gerard Salton and Christopher Buckley. “Term-weighting approaches in
automatic text retrieval”. In: Information processing & management 24.5
(1988), pages 513–523.
[SM15]
Luke Sloan and Jeffrey Morgan. “Who tweets with their location? Under-
standing the relationship between demographic characteristics and the
use of geoservices and geotagging on Twitter”. In: PloS one 10.11 (2015),
e0142209.
==PAGE:76==
68
Bibliography
[XWY13]
Chen Xu, David W Wong, and Chaowei Yang. “Evaluating the “geographi-
cal awareness” of individuals: An exploratory analysis of Twitter data”. In:
Cartography and Geographic Information Science 40.2 (2013), pages 103–
115.
