==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Flexibility Eff ects on the Dynamics of Gimbal 
Mounted Flywheels – Theory & Experiment
Frederik Troels Hansen
June 2018
==PAGE:2==
Flexibility Effects on the Dynamics of Gimbal Mounted Flywheels – The-
ory & Experiment
Author:
Frederik Troels Hansen
Supervisors:
Ilmar Ferreira Santos
Nikolaj Aleksander Dagnæs-Hansen
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé
Building 404
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Phone (+45) 45 25 19 60
www.mek.dtu.dk
Release date:
22.06.2018
Edition
1. edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve Master of Science
in Engineering at Technical University of Denmark.
The report represents 30 ECTS points.
Rights:
© Frederik Troels Hansen, 2018
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis documents an investigation of the flexibility effects on the dynamics of
a flywheel energy storage system (FESS) and the coupled vibrations.
The FESS
consists of a gimbal and housing connected by steel rods and ball bearings and a
rotor attached inside the housing by magnetic bearings. The investigation is carried
out through theoretical and experimental examination of the structure by utilising
the finite element (FE) method and concepts of the experimental modal analysis
(EMA). A FE model of the gimbal has been designed and adjusted according to
experimental natural frequencies yielding a maximum error of 1.14%. The housing
has been modelled and theoretical results show that the structure is rather stiff with
the first natural frequency occurring at 2882 Hz. Moreover, a FE model of the rotor
has been obtained, yielding a discrepancy on the first natural frequency of 8.81%
compared to experimental results. A global model of the FESS has been developed
by assembling the individual FE models of the gimbal, housing, and rotor. These are
connected by simulating the ball bearings and magnetic bearings as linear springs.
The FE model of the FESS indicates 23 natural frequencies in the range of 0-2000 Hz.
Furthermore, the global model indicates that the flexibility effects have an influence
on the dynamics of the FESS. However, the global model could not be validated
through an EMA of the FESS so that the natural frequencies and mode shapes could
be verified.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis is prepared by Frederik Troels Hansen at the Department of Me-
chanical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the
requirements for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering Design and Applied
Mechanics. The project is carried out in collaboration with Maersk Drilling A/S and
WattsUp Power A/S and deals with the flexibility effects on the dynamics of gimbal
mounted flywheels.
The time frame of the project has been five months starting January 22nd 2018. The
investigation of the flexibility effects has been carried out through theoretical calcula-
tions by utilising the finite element method with comparison to experimental results.
The purpose with this thesis is to document the process behind the investigation and
to provide a written evaluation of the results obtained.
Frederik Troels Hansen (s134793)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Professor Ilmar Ferreira Santos is gratefully thanked for handing out the project and
for excellent guidance and counselling during the project. Supervision and introduc-
tion to the the test-rig by Nikolaj Aleksander Dagnæs-Hansen is sincerely acknowl-
edged. Thanks to Jacopo Granata for a introduction to the experimental equipment.
Finally, finite element modelling tips provided by Alexander Sebastian von Osmanski
has been most appreciated.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
Nomenclature
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Flywheel Energy Storage System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory and Methods
5
2.1
Finite Element Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
ANSYS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Experimental Modal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Signal Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Gimbal
11
3.1
Finite Element Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Comparison of Models and Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Adjustment of Gimbal Solid Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Contact Region Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.6
Final Natural Frequencies and Mode Shapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Housing
35
4.1
Expected Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Finite Element Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
AMB Material Sensibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5
Rotor
47
5.1
Expected Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2
Finite Element Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3
Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.4
Comparison of Models and Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.5
Adjustment of the Solid Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6
Global Hybrid Model
63
6.1
Connection of Gimbal to the Surroundings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.2
Connecting of Housing to Gimbal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.3
Rotor Attachment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.4
Boundary Condition Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.5
Natural Frequencies and Mode Shapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.6
Experimental Investigation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.7
Sensitivity Analysis of Magnetic Bearings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7
Conclusion
83
7.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
7.2
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
Bibliography
87
A Element Verifications
89
A.1 Element Verification: BEAM188, SOLID186 & SOLID273 . . . . . . .
89
A.2 Element Verification: MATRIX27 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
B Gimbal
97
B.1
Mode Shapes After Introduction of Gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
C Housing
99
C.1 Housing Discretised Geometry Dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
C.2 Beam Model Convergence Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
C.3 Beam Model Mode Shapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
C.4 Solid Model Convergence Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
C.5 Solid Model Mode Shapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
C.6 AMB Material Properties and Natural Frequencies . . . . . . . . . . . 102
D Rotor
103
D.1 Rotor Discretised Geometry Dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
D.2 Beam Model Convergence Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
D.3 Beam Model Mode Shapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
D.4 Solid Model Convergence Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
D.5 Solid Model Mode Shapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
D.6 Experimental Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
D.7 Adjusted Solid Model Mode Shapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
==PAGE:11==
Contents
ix
E Global Model
111
E.1
Ball Bearing Spring and BC Spring Convergence Study
. . . . . . . . 111
E.2
Steel Rods Convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
E.3
Mode Shapes for Global Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
E.4
Experimental Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
E.5
Experimental Investigation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
E.6
MATLAB Code for Data Processing of Experiments . . . . . . . . . . 120
E.7
PMB Sensitivity Plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Meaning
AMB
Active Magnetic Bearing
BC
Boundary Conditions
CAD
Computer Aided Design
DOF
Degrees of Freedom
EMA
Experimental Modal Analysis
FESS
Flywheel Energy Storage System
FE
Finite Element
FEA
Finite Element Analysis
FEM
Finite Element Method
FFT
Fast Fourier Transform
FT
Fourier Transform
MB
Magnetic Bearing
PMB
Permanent Magnetic Bearing
SS
Sum of Squares
==PAGE:14==
xii
Nomenclature
Symbols
Symbol
Description
Unit
C
Global damping matrix
E
Young’s Modulus
Pa
f
Frequency
Hz
H
Frequency response function
I
Area moment of inertia
m4
K
Global stiffness matrix
k
Spring coefficient
N/m
Kc
Amplifier Gain
V/A
Ki
Integral Gain
1/s
ki
Force/current factor
N/A
Kp
Proportional Gain
A/m
ks
Force/displacement factor
N/m
M
Global mass matrix
R
Electrical resistance
Ω
Rxx
Autocorrelation function
Ryy
Autocorrelation function
Rxy
Crosscorrelation function
Ryx
Crosscorrelation function
Sxx
Autospectral density function
Syy
Autospectral density function
Sxy
Cross-spectral density function
Syx
Cross-spectral density function
s
Slenderness ratio
−
ν
Poisson’s’ ratio
−
ρ
Density
kg/m3
γ
Coherence
−
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Today’s modern society is still highly dependent on fossil fuels in terms of oil and
natural gasses [11]. These are typically extracted from the ground by drilling. Often,
this is carried out offshore where drillships are used in location with very deep water,
and where drilling depths of up to 12.000 meters are needed [17]. During the drilling
process, huge amount of energy is sometimes wasted, which is desired to store instead.
Often lithium batteries are used for energy storage, which can contain up to 180 Wh/kg
[14]. However these have the disadvantages of possible hazardous materials, explosive
gas emissions, fire hazard [8], which make them unfit for drillships. Another way of
storing the excess energy is by storing it as kinetic energy in a flywheel. These type
of batteries are called flywheel energy storage systems (FESSs).
The amount of kinetic energy stored is increasing quadratic with rotational speed of
the flywheel. Furthermore, the life time is expected to be up to 20 years for such
system [8] with possible energy densities up to 5000 Wh/kg [10]. In order for the
FESS to compete with other battery types, the rotational speeds obtained must be
very large and the friction and wear should be very low to achieve a high energy den-
sity. This can be achieved by implementation of magnetic bearings for supporting
the flywheel instead of traditional ball bearings or hydrodynamic based bearings.
Support of the flywheel in the axial direction can be achieved by permanent mag-
netic bearings and active magnetic bearings can be utilised for radial support of the
flywheel. When the FESS is installed in a mobile setting like a ship, it will be im-
posed to large gyroscopic forces, which in most cases are difficult to handle for active
magnetic bearings. In [13] and [15] it is suggested how manoeuvring, vibrations, and
gyrodynamics imposed to the FESS can be removed by implementing a passive gim-
bal mount. In order to investigate how the dynamics of a passive gimbal mounted
rotor supported by active magnetic bearings behave, a test-rig has been designed.
1.1
Flywheel Energy Storage System
The flywheel energy storage system considered consists of a tilting frame, a gimbal,
a housing, and a rotor. The gimbal frame is implemented into the test-rig with the
sole purpose of removing gyroscopic forces, which is desired if the FESS described
are to be implemented in mobile applications. Furthermore, magnetic bearings are
mounted inside the housing to keep the rotor levitated and positioned in the axial
centre. The energy is supplied to the system by blowing air on a compressor wheel
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
mounted in the top end of the rotor and thus the energy is stored in the rotor which
acts as the flywheel. A picture of the test-rig can be observed in figure 1.1, where
only the top of the rotor can be seen and the compressor wheel is not mounted.
Figure 1.1: Flywheel energy storage system
A mathematical model has been developed of the FESS in [8], where the multi-body
dynamics of the gimbal, housing, and rotor is coupled to the forces from the magnetic
bearings.
In this model the parts have been assumed rigid.
However, results [9]
indicates that there might be an influence on the dynamics from the fact that the
parts are flexible and not rigid.
1.2
Thesis Statement
The purpose of this thesis is to investigate the flexibility effects on the dynamics of the
FESS and the coupled vibrations between the flexible bodies through a theoretical
modal analysis and experimental results. The investigation will consist of:
• Modelling of the gimbal, housing, and rotor as flexible bodies and determination
of natural frequencies and mode shapes for each of these parts
• Examination of the effects of different boundary conditions to the surrounding
frame and inter-part connections between housing and gimbal
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Scope
3
• Implementation of the effects from the magnetic bearings between the rotor and
housing
• Modelling of the FESS consisting of the gimbal, housing, and rotor and deter-
mination of natural frequencies and mode shapes
• Experimental investigation of the FESS
1.3
Scope
During the investigation of the flexibility effects the FESS will only be modelled
with the rotor levitated but not rotating. Thus, gyroscopic forces are not considered.
Furthermore, damping is not taking into account.
It is assumed through out the report that all materials are isotropic and homogeneous.
The main materials used in the model are aluminium and steel. In table 1.1 Young’s
modulus, E, Poisson’s ratio, ν, and the density, ρ, for a steel and aluminium type is
listed provided from [1],[5].
Material
E [GPa]
ν
ρ[kg/m3]
Aluminium
71
0.33
2770
Steel
210
0.3
7830
Table 1.1: Material properties for aluminium and steel
The material properties listed in the table above can be assumed for the parts in the
FESS unless anything else is stated.
1.4
Outline
This thesis is divided into seven chapters documenting the process of the project. In
the following, a short description of each chapter is given.
The first and current chapter gives an introduction to the project, the motivation
behind it, and the purpose.
Chapter two covers fundamental theory that the analyses are based on. Furthermore,
key methods used in the project are described.
In the third chapter the gimbal frame of the FESS is considered. Two finite element
models of the gimbal are designed and compared to experimental results. Finally,
one of the FE models is selected for further work and updated according to the ex-
perimental results.
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
The fourth chapter deals with the housing of the FESS. Expected results for the
housing are estimated through an analytic investigation of a beam. A FE model is
developed for comparison to the analytic expected results and the flexibility effects
of the housing geometry and parts are investigated.
In the fifth chapter two different finite element models of the rotor are developed.
These are compared to experimental results. The most promising FE model is se-
lected for further work and updated according to the experimental results.
In chapter six a global model of the FESS is modelled by connecting the designed
FE models of the gimbal, housing, and rotor. Inter-part connection and boundary
conditions are modelled, and the magnetic bearing forces between the housing and
rotor are implemented. Lastly an experimental investigation of the FESS is described
and a sensitivity study of the MB forces are carried out.
Finally, in chapter seven conclusions are made based on the investigations and sug-
gestions for further work are given.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Theory and Methods
Theory and methods that build the foundation for this thesis is in the following
described. Theoretically results are obtained by utilising the finite element method
through the commercial programme ANSYS. Furthermore essential theory in relation
to obtaining the experimental results is stated.
2.1
Finite Element Analysis
The theoretical obtained results in terms of natural frequencies and mode shapes are
determined by setting up a mathematical model for the considered structures. When
dealing with complex geometries it is often difficult to obtain exact analytic solutions.
Therefore, in order to get theoretical results, mathematical models that yields approx-
imations to the actual problem are utilised. The finite element method (FEM) is a
strong numerical approximation method. It can be applied within various fields here
among static, vibration and dynamic analysis of structures.
When doing a structural analysis through the FEM, the structure considered is dis-
cretised into elements each having nodes located a their boundaries. The elements
are then connected by their shared nodes at the boundaries. Each node has a number
of degrees of freedom (DOF) that describe its position an orientation in space. The
relative movement of the nodes to each other, and thus the flexibility of the elements,
is modelled through shape functions. The type of DOF and shape functions used de-
pends on the element type, which is chosen based on the problem considered. Further
details about the concepts of how the finite element method works can be found in [6].
In [6] it is shown how the governing equation for the dynamics of a structure can be
described by summing forces and utilising Newton’s second law as:
M · ¨q(t) + C · ˙q(t) + K · q(t) = F(t)
(2.1)
Here q(t) is a column vector containing the displacements for each DOF, ˙q(t) corre-
sponds to the velocities, and ¨q(t) the accelerations. The column vector F(t) contains
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Theory and Methods
external loading of the structure. Furthermore the matrix M is the global mass ma-
trix, K is the global stiffness matrix, and C is the global damping matrix. The global
damping matrix can be written out in two components consisting of damping effects
D and gyroscopic effects G as:
C = D −ΩG
(2.2)
The above system is a second order differential equation, but can be rewritten into
its ”state space representation” according to [19], such that it becomes a first order
differential equation:
A ˙u(t) + Bu(t) = R
(2.3)
Where the matrices and column vectors are given by:
u(t) =
[q(t)
˙q(t)
]
,
A =
[C
M
M
0
]
,
B =
[K
0
0
−M
]
,
R =
[F(t)
0
]
(2.4)
As mentioned in section 1.3 the gyroscopic forces are not taking into account. Fur-
thermore, in the modal analyses carried out the undamped free response is considered.
Therefore, damping and the forced response is not considered. The matrix A is thus
reduced to:
A =
[ 0
M
M
0
]
,
(2.5)
Which reduces eq. (2.3) to:
A ˙u(t) + Bu(t) = 0
(2.6)
In [19] it is shown that by guessing a solution to eq. (2.6) of the form:
u(t) = weλt
(2.7)
and inserting this into eq. (2.6) yields the first order eigenvalue problem:
(
λA + B
)
w = 0
(2.8)
This is a well known problem, for which the non-trivial solutions is given by the
characteristic polynomial. The solutions can then be expressed in terms of eigenvalues
λj, where j = 1, ..., 2p, and the corresponding eigenvectors, wj. Here p is the total
number of DOF, and the eigenvalues are complex and comes in complex conjugate
pairs. From the obtained eigenvalues the natural frequencies are given as the following
under the assumption of no damping:
fj =

Im (λj)
2π

(2.9)
And the corresponding mode shape is given by vj which can be found in the eigen-
vector corresponding to the eigenvalue:
wj =
[ vj
λjvj
]
(2.10)
The process described above for determining the natural frequencies and mode shapes
is carried out in a commercial finite element analysis software.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 ANSYS
7
2.2
ANSYS
The FE models will be designed in the programme ANSYS Mechanical APDL. This
program offers various element types, having different shape functions and DOF. Us-
ing a commercial programme allows for building complicated geometries easier. The
models are build using APDL scripts, such that easy changes in geometry, mesh, and
parameter studies can be carried out.
The finite element analysis (FEA) is also carried out in ANSYS. Various types of
solver-methods are available. All the theoretical modal analyses are carried out using
the Block Lanczos eigenvalue solver.
It is a sparse matrix solver which is recom-
mended for geometries were poorly shaped solid elements might occur. Furthermore
the program is set-up to mass-normalise the mode shapes.
2.3
Experimental Modal Analysis
An experimental modal analysis is carried out with the purpose of determining the
natural frequencies, mode shapes and damping factors for the test rig. Based on these
results it is possible to determine the precision of the FEM model by comparison of
the theoretical frequencies and mode shapes to the experimental obtained ones.
The vibration characteristics can be determined from the frequency response function
(FRF) based on a input signal x(t) and an output signal y(t). For constant-parameter
linear analysis, the FRF, H
(
f
)
, is given as the ratio between the input, X
(
f
)
, applied
to the structure and the ouput, Y
(
f
)
, of the structure [3], as:
H
(
f
)
= X
(
f
)
Y
(
f
)
(2.11)
Typically, the input is a force and the output is the measured response to the force.
Thus, the experimental modal analysis is carried out as a forced vibration analysis.
As indicated previously the signals are typically time dependent as the measurements
are carried out in time. However it is seen in eq. (2.11) that the FRF is dependent
on the frequency.
This is were signal processing enters the picture, as X(f) and
Y (f) in fact are so-called Fourier transforms (FT) of the input signals x(t) and y(t)
respectively.
2.4
Signal Processing
As mentioned above one way to convert the measurements from time domain into
the frequency domain is by applying the Fourier transform which is carried out by
integration as [3]:
X(f) =
∫∞
−∞
x(t)e−i2πftdt
Y (f) =
∫∞
−∞
y(t)e−i2πftdt
(2.12)
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Theory and Methods
However, when working with impacts and thus transient responses, the signal will
appear as random data. In order to determine the FRF for a random signal it is
necessary to introduce the autocorrelation functions, Rxx, Ryy, and crosscorrelation
functions, Rxy, Ryx, which are given by the expected values of the product of one or
two signals at two instantaneous times t and t + τ, [3], as:
Rxx(τ) = E[x(t)x(t + τ)]
Ryy(τ) = E[y(t)y(t + τ)]
Rxy(τ) = E[x(t)y(t + τ)]
Ryx(τ) = E[y(t)x(t + τ)]
(2.13)
As an example the expected value of the signal x(t) is given by the probability density
function, p(x), by:
E[x(t)] =
∫∞
−∞
x(t)p(x)dx = µx
(2.14)
Thus the expected value of a signal is simply the mean, µx. Based on the correlation
functions the spectral density functions can be determined by FT, from which the
FRF can be determined. In order to make sure that a FT of the correlation functions
exist the following must be true [3]:
∫∞
−∞
|R(τ)|dτ < ∞
(2.15)
The above will always be true for finite record lengths, which will be the case in
practice when doing measurements. Since the FT of the correlation functions exist
the spectral density functions can be obtained by the Wiener-Khinchin relations as
[3]:
Sxx(f) =
∫∞
−∞
Rxx(τ)e−i2πfτdτ
Syy(f) =
∫∞
−∞
Ryy(τ)e−i2πfτdτ
Sxy(f) =
∫∞
−∞
Rxy(τ)e−i2πfτdτ
Syx(f) =
∫∞
−∞
Ryx(τ)e−i2πfτdτ
(2.16)
Where Sxx(f) and Syy(f) denotes the autospectral density functions and Sxy(f) and
Syx(f) denotes the cross-spectral density functions. From these the FRFs can be
obtained by [16], [3]:
H1(f) = Sxy(f)
Sxx(f)
H2(f) = Syy(f)
Syx(f)
(2.17)
The FRF H1(f) is good at estimating anti-resonances opposed to H2(f) which is
good for resonances [3]. Furthermore, the coherence is introduced which is given by:
γ2 = H1(f)
H2(f),
0 ≤γ2 ≤1
(2.18)
The coherence is an expression for the noise present in the signals, where a value of
1 indicates that no noise is present. The amplitude at a given frequency is given by
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Signal Processing
9
|Hj(f)| and the corresponding phase by:
cos (ϕ(f)) = Re (Hj(f))
|Hj(f)|
,
j = 1, 2
(2.19)
Where the phase is inherently important to determine the vibration pattern in terms
of amplitude direction.
As mentioned previously the record length will be finite in practice, and thus the FT
can be represented by a finite FT. Thus for a signal x(t) having t defined in the range
[0; T] the finite Fourier transform is:
X(f) =
∫T
0
x(t)e−i2πftdt
(2.20)
The above equation can be stated as a discrete version as below, since the data
sampled will be discrete [3]:
X(f, T) = ∆t
N−1
∑
n=0
x(n∆t)e−i2πfn∆t
(2.21)
Where the sample consist of N data points with a time distance of ∆t in between,
In practice a fast Fourier transform FFT algorithm will be used [3] opposed to the
simple discrete FT as this reduces the computational time. This method is used to
estimate the spectral density functions. In [19] it is shown how the spectral density
functions, when applying the FFT, is given by:
Sxx(f, T) = 1
T X∗(f, T)X(f, T)
Syy(f, T) = 1
T Y ∗(f, T)Y (f, T)
Sxy(f, T) = 1
T X∗(f, T)Y (f, T)
Syx(f, T) = 1
T Y ∗(f, T)X(f, T)
(2.22)
Where ∗denotes the complex conjugate.
==PAGE:24==
10
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Gimbal
The gimbal consists of four identical side parts and two types of corner parts. The
parts are made of aluminium and are bolted together. The gimbal is shown in figure
3.1, where the types of parts are indicated on the figure. 3.2.
Figure 3.1: Original picture from [1]
In order to describe the gimbal by a mathematical model, a simplification of the
physical structure is carried out, by making the following assumptions:
• Damping is not taking into account
• Contact between the parts are neglected such that the gimbal is modelled as
one solid
• Bolt holes for the gimbal parts and connecting bolts are neglected
Based on the assumptions above the physical structure of the gimbal can be simplified
into a mechanical model. In figure 3.2 a simple mechanical model of the gimbal is
shown with the white circles being nodes and the grey parts being elements. The
gimbal is unsupported so that it is considered in a free condition. Furthermore the
global coordinate system for the model is shown.
==PAGE:26==
12
3 Gimbal
Figure 3.2: Mechanical model of the gimbal
Based on the mechanical model a mathematical model can be set up using the FEM,
such that natural frequencies and mode shapes can be determined. On figure 3.2 the
gimbal is depicted with 8 elements and 8 nodes. However, the appropriate element
type and thus the number of elements, nodes, and DOF must be determined. In
the following, two element types, beam and solid elements, will be considered for
modelling the gimbal. The most suitable element for modelling will be chosen based
on a comparison to experimental results.
3.1
Finite Element Models
The accuracy of the FE model highly depends on the element type used.
Since
it is desired to model the gimbal in 3D and the parts does not have a dimension
that is severely smaller than the others, plane and shell elements are disqualified for
modelling. Thus only beam elements and solid elements are considered. The benefit of
beam elements is that they have few nodes and are thus less computational expensive.
However, they are not capable of capturing complex geometries. The solid elements
have more nodes and DOF per element and are more computational expensive, but
are also capable of capturing more complex geometries. The element types BEAM188
and SOLID186 are considered for modelling the gimbal due to suitable properties.
BEAM188, is a 2-node 3D beam element with 6 DOF.: translation in x, y, and z-
direction, and rotation about each direction. The beam shape functions can be set
to linear, quadratic, and cubic. Furthermore it is based on Timoshenko beam theory
such that it is suitable for analysing stubby beams, which is relevant when modelling
the corner parts as beams.
SOLID186 is a quadrilateral 20 node solid element with 3 DOF: translation in x,
y, and z-direction. This element type is good at capturing irregular geometries like
the holes in the corner parts. In the following, modelling of the gimbal using beam
elements and solid elements are investigated. In appendix A.1 the precision of the
two element types are verified by analysing a simple unsupported beam for which the
exact analytic results are known. The gimbal modelled using BEAM188 elements will
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Finite Element Models
13
be referenced as the gimbal beam model, and the gimbal modelled using SOLID186
elements will be referenced as the gimbal solid model.
3.1.1
Beam Model
In this section the gimbal will be modelled with beam elements. The beam element
has a limitation in terms of geometry discretisation: it is not possible to model the
holes in the corner parts. Thus, it is assumed that the holes in the corner parts can
be neglected and it is discussed in section 3.3 whether this is a fair assumption.
The number of elements used to discretise the structure is crucial for the results ob-
tained. Therefore a convergence study is carried out to assure that sufficient elements
are used to represent the gimbal. In the convergence study the gimbal is given a initial
mesh such that each part is an element, which is shown in figure 3.3. Furthermore,
cubic shape functions are used.
Figure 3.3: Initial mesh of gimbal when using BEAM188
A refinement is carried out, by increasing the number of element divisions in each
part in the gimbal with increasing refinement. The convergence study can be seen in
figure 3.4a and is based on the first six natural frequencies excluding the 0-frequencies
for the rigid body modes.
==PAGE:28==
14
3 Gimbal
(a) Frequency convergence
(b) CPU time
Figure 3.4: Convergence study of gimbal when using BEAM188
It is clearly seen that the frequencies converges fast and is converged after 16 elements.
Furthermore, the CPU time for finding the natural frequencies is shown in figure 3.4b
as a function of the number of elements, where it is observed that the CPU time
is varying with elements. However, one would expect an increasing CPU time with
increasing number of elements. The magnitude of the CPU time is rather small and
one could expect that ANSYS is not able to detect the CPU time accurately when
the CPU time is so low. Furthermore, it was observed that the CPU time for each
mesh type changed if the convergence study was carried out again but stayed in the
same order of magnitude. Finally, it should be mentioned that the CPU time depends
on the PC used. The same PC is used to determine the CPU time in all studies in
this thesis, and is carried out with the purpose of illustrating the CPU time for the
different models relative to each other and not to determine the exact CPU time. In
table 3.1 the converged natural frequencies for the gimbal beam model is shown.
Frequency
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
[Hz]
378.9
537.7
552.1
1141
1219
1219
Table 3.1: Converged frequencies for gimbal beam model
The first natural frequencies occurs at 378.9 Hz and it is observed that f5 and f6 in
fact occurs at the same frequency. In figure 3.5 the corresponding mode shapes for
the beam model are shown where the chosen converged mesh also can be observed. In
the mode shapes 32 elements is used. Even though the frequencies are converged after
using 16 elements, more elements are needed to capture the mode shapes properly.
One sees that it makes sense that f5 and f6 occurs at the same frequency since the
mode shapes are identical and just vibrating in two different directions. The mode
shapes are auto-scaled by ANSYS to achieve the best visualisation. Furthermore,
they are viewed as the displacement vector sum.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Finite Element Models
15
(a) f1 = 378.9 Hz
(b) f2 = 537.7 Hz
(c) f3 = 552.1 Hz
(d) f4 = 1141 Hz
(e) f5 = 1219 Hz
(f) f6 = 1219 Hz
Figure 3.5: Mode shapes for gimbal beam model
==PAGE:30==
16
3 Gimbal
3.1.2
Solid Model
In the following the gimbal modelled with solid elements is considered. The gimbal
is modelled as one solid structure, and thus contact between the surfaces are not
modelled.
SOLID186 only allows mesh of volumes containing up to six surfaces. Thus the parts
must be divided into smaller volumes in order to mesh the parts. Therefore, the
complex geometry of the corner parts sets some limitations of how coarse these can
be modelled. Furthermore, it was decided to have elements with approximately same
side lengths in the initial mesh.
In figure 3.6 the initial mesh of each gimbal part is shown. Symmetry is exploited
such that only a quarter of each part can be observed. Note that the corner parts
connecting the gimbal to the house and the corner parts connecting gimbal to the
frame are not meshed identically since their geometries are not the exact same.
(a) Corner part one
(b) Side part
(c) Corner part two
Figure 3.6: Meshed parts in gimbal
Once again is is emphasised that the gimbal is modelled as one solid structure and
thus the parts will share nodes in the contact surfaces when ”assembled together”.
The total initial mesh of the gimbal is shown in figure 3.7.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Finite Element Models
17
Figure 3.7: Initial mesh of gimbal when using SOLID186
The mesh refinement in the convergence study is carried out by multiplying the initial
element divisions along the length, circumferential and wall thickness with a factor
i = 1, 2, ... with i increasing for increasing refinement. The initial mesh of the gimbal
is rather fine and only one refinement could be carried out before ANSYS had reached
its maximum capacity. In figure 3.8a the convergence study of the gimbal is shown.
(a) Frequency convergence
(b) CPU time
Figure 3.8: Convergence study of gimbal when using SOLID186
Even though only one refinement could be carried out, it can be justified that the
initial mesh, shown in figure 3.7, is converged since it is really fine and the frequencies
between the two discretisations agree. In section 3.4.1 a convergence study of a more
coarse mesh in the side parts is carried out, in order to save computational time. This
study also justifies that the initial mesh is in fact converged.
==PAGE:32==
18
3 Gimbal
As in the case with the beam elements it is observed in figure 3.8b that the CPU time
is increasing with number of elements in the model (44.2 s for the initial mesh and
626.9 s s for the refined mesh). However the CPU time is a lot larger for the SOLID
model which mainly is due to the number of DOF being a lot higher.
In table 3.2 the converged natural frequencies for the gimbal solid model is shown.
Frequency
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
[Hz]
305.9
536.6
571.3
1008
1104
1120
Table 3.2: Converged frequencies for gimbal solid model
The first frequency occurs at 305.9 Hz. However, it is observed that f5 and f6 does
not occur at the same frequency. In figure 3.9 the corresponding mode shapes for the
solid model is shown, where the initial (converged) mesh is used.
It is observed that the mode shapes for f5 and f6 looks similar and are identical. The
minor difference in frequency is due to the corner parts are not identical. However,
they were modelled identical in the beam model, which is way the same natural
frequency is obtained for f5 and f6 in the beam model.
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Finite Element Models
19
(a) f1 = 305.9 Hz
(b) f2 = 536.0 Hz
(c) f3 = 571.3 Hz
(d) f4 = 1008 Hz
(e) f5 = 1104 Hz
(f) f6 = 1120 Hz
Figure 3.9: Mode shapes for gimbal solid model
==PAGE:34==
20
3 Gimbal
3.2
Experimental Results
In the following experimental results for the gimbal in a free condition are presented.
The described procedures and results in this section are given by [1].
The results are obtained by carrying out a experimental investigation following the
procedure of an experimental modal analysis by excitation of the gimbal using a
hammer. The following main points from the experimental set-up should be notified:
• The free condition is simulated by hanging the gimbal in a rubber bands as
depicted in figure 3.1
• A force transducer is equipped on the hammer generating the impact
• The response is measured by an accelerometer
• A total of 11 experiments where carried out with different impact positions and
accelerometer positions
More details about the experimental setup and execution can be found in [1]. In table
3.3 the experimental obtained natural frequencies are listed.
Frequency
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
[Hz]
193.4
384.9
426
767-778
767-778
801
Table 3.3: Experimental natural frequencies for gimbal
As the table indicates the first three modes are well determined however there was a
problem with distinguishing f4 and f5 and capturing f6 accurately.
3.3
Comparison of Models and Results
It is in the following investigated which of the two element types are most suited
for describing the gimbal. This is carried out by comparing the natural frequencies
obtained by the FE models with the experimental obtained natural frequencies for
the gimbal.
In table 3.4, the experimental obtained frequencies and the ones obtained by the
FE models are shown. Furthermore, the discrepancies compared to the experimental
results are stated.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Comparison of Models and Results
21
Result
Freq. no.
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
Experi.
Freq. [Hz]
193.4
384.9
426
767-778
767-778
∼801
BEAM188
Freq. [Hz]
378.9
537.7
552.1
1141
1219
1219
Error [%]
95.9
39.7
29.6
46.7-48.7
56.7-58.9
52.2
SOLID186
Freq. [Hz]
305.9
536.6
571.3
1008
1104
1120
Error [%]
58.2
39.4
34.4
29.6-31.4
41.9-43.9
39.8
Table 3.4: Comparison of gimbal models using BEAM188 and SOLID186 elements to
experimental results
From an overall perspective the solid model yields lower discrepancies than the beam
model. Except for frequency f2, where the beam model yields a slightly lower error
than the solid model.
However, the difference between the discrepancies at this
frequency is so low, that one can argue the models estimates the frequency f2 equally
well.
The fact that the discrepancies for the beam model in general are higher than those
for the solid model indicates that the gimbal is modelled to stiff when using the beam
elements. Furthermore, this is a good indicator that the holes in the corner parts
plays a major role for the stiffness of the gimbal.
Finally, it should be noted that even though the discrepancies for the solid model in
general are lower than those obtained by the beam model, the errors are still high.
Thus, the current solid model is also modelling the gimbal to stiff.
The mode shapes for the beam model and solid model, shown in figure 3.5 and 3.9
respectively overall agree in shape. However, it is also observed that especially the
corner parts in the beam model are behaving more stiff than in the solid model, which
agrees with the natural frequencies being higher for the beam model.
When looking at the number of elements used in the converged models in figure 3.5
and figure 3.9, it is seen that the frequencies are converged after only 16 elements
and a total of 192 DOF for the beam model where as 9760 elements and a total of
153828 DOF are needed in the solid model. This also explains why the CPU time
for the converged beam model is only about 1 second where it is 44.2 seconds for the
converged solid model.
It should be emphasised that a different mesh for the models could yield a faster
convergence element wise and a lower computational time.
However it is highly
unlikely that the solid model will be more efficient than the beam model in terms
computational time. The beam model does not represent the complex geometry of the
gimbal very well, but for simple structures the beam elements are definitely preferred
since they are very computational efficient due to the low number of nodes needed.
Based on the poor representation of the gimbals geometry by the beam elements and
the high discrepancies compared to the experimental results, the beam model is not
suitable for representing the gimbal. Since the solid model yields smaller discrepancies,
==PAGE:36==
22
3 Gimbal
the solid model it is chosen to represent the gimbal. Even though the beam model is
a lot cheaper in computational time than the solid model, the discrepancies are too
high to justify a choice based on this parameter. Furthermore, the gimbal geometry
can not be described more precise by the beam model, whereas the solid model still
allows for further adjustments in terms of geometry. Since the current solid model
of the gimbal does still not yield satisfying results, it is in the following investigated
how the solid model can be updated and modified to yield better results.
3.4
Adjustment of Gimbal Solid Model
In the following some adjustments to the gimbal solid model is carried out. Firstly the
number of elements in the side parts are reduced with the purpose of decreasing the
computational time. Secondly some volumes near the contact areas of the separate
parts will be removed. This will remove some stiffness from the gimbal, since the
parts will only share nodes in one contact area.
3.4.1
Mesh Adjustments in Side Parts
The current number of nodes used are very large and might be reduced without
affecting the results obtained. As it is difficult to make the mesh in the corner parts
more coarse while capturing the geometry, only mesh changes in the side parts will
be carried out. The mesh along the boundaries between the side parts and corner
parts must coincide, thus only element divisions along side part length lside will be
considered as depicted on figure 3.10.
Figure 3.10: Gimbal side part
In figure 3.11a the natural frequencies as a function of number of element divisions
along lside is shown.
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Adjustment of Gimbal Solid Model
23
(a) Convergence study of frequencies
(b) Convergence study on aspect ratio
Figure 3.11: Convergence study of gimbal side parts
It is clearly seen that 3 element divisions along lside is sufficient. Before the model
had 9760 number of elements which is now reduced to 6640 and a CPU time of 25.3 s.
This is a total reduction in elements close to 32% and has resulted in a reduction in
CPU time of 43%.
In figure 3.11b the maximum element aspect ratio in the model is shown as a function
of the element divisions. The aspect ratio is a measure of stretching of a cell [2], and
is an indicator for the quality of the mesh.
It is calculated as the ratio between
the maximum and minimum value of following the two distances in an element: the
distance between the element centroid and a node and the normal distance between
the element centroid and a face centroid [2]. The recommended maximum allowable
aspect ratio is 20 by default in ANSYS. It is clearly seen that the aspect ratio is
above 20 when using only 1 element and rather high when using 2 element divisions
a long lside, which could be the reason why the frequencies has not fully converged
when using less than 3 element divisions.
Even though the natural frequencies has converged after 3 element divisions it is
chosen to go with 6 divisions in order to make sure that the mode shapes are captured
properly. The new mesh in the side parts can be observed in figure 3.12.
==PAGE:38==
24
3 Gimbal
Figure 3.12: New side part mesh
The frequencies when using 6 elements divisions along lside is shown in table 3.5.
Freq. no.
f1,
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
Experimental
[Hz]
193.4
384.9
426
767-778
767-778
∼801
SOLID186
[Hz]
305.9
536.6
571.3
1008
1104
1120
ERROR
[%]
58.2
39.4
34.4
29.6-31.4
41.9-43.9
39.8
Table 3.5: Converged frequencies for gimbal solid elements
From the table it is clearly seen that the natural frequencies practically are the same
as with the initial mesh, which indicates that the mesh is converged for the new mesh.
However, this also means that the gimbal model is still not representing the actual
gimbal well enough. This also makes fairly good sense as the new mesh should not
influence the gimbal model in terms of mass and stiffness and thereby influencing
the natural frequencies. Thus, it is in the following investigated how the part con-
tact regions (the regions where the gimbal parts shares nodes) affects the natural
frequencies.
3.4.2
Introducing Part Contact Regions
In the current FE model the gimbal is modelled as one big solid, which has resulted in
the different parts sharing nodes at interfaces. However, when observing the bolted
connection more closely between the parts, it appears that the current model has
more contact areas, than it physically has. This means that the parts shares nodes
at locations, where they in fact do not touch each other, which stiffens the structure.
Thus, a gap between the side parts and corner parts are introduced, to avoid these
stiffening interfaces. The gap introduced is depicted on the sketch in figure 3.13.
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Adjustment of Gimbal Solid Model
25
Figure 3.13: Sketch of gap between gimbal parts
When the distance dc is increased, the contact region becomes smaller, which makes
the gimbal model less stiff. Furthermore it should be denoted that the contact regions
are plane and can be regarded as a contact areas. In figure 3.14 a study of the gap
size’s influence on the natural frequencies is shown.
(a) Influence on frequency
(b) Influence on aspect ratio
Figure 3.14: Convergence study of the distance dc
From the study it is observed that the frequencies are decreasing with increasing
distance dc as expected. Furthermore, the natural frequencies a now fairly close to
the experimental results, and very low discrepancies are obtained when the gap size
comes close to 3mm. However, it cannot physically be justified to have a gap size of
3 mm.
Based on the technical drawings and examination of the physical gimbal it is esti-
mated that setting the distance dc to 1 millimetre is appropriate. With this distance
implemented the natural frequencies listed in table 3.6 are obtained.
==PAGE:40==
26
3 Gimbal
Freq. no.
f1,
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
Experimental
[Hz]
193.4
384.9
426
767-778
767-778
∼801
SOLID186
[Hz]
225.3
431.9
497.0
870.2
878.2
883.4
ERROR
[%]
16.5
12.2
16.7
11.9-13.5
12.9-14.5
10.3
Table 3.6: Experimental results and natural frequencies for updated model
From the table it is clearly seen that the discrepancies a way lower than those obtained
by the old model, observed in table 3.5. The maximum error is now reduced to 16.7%.
The mode shapes for this new model looks similar to the ones previously obtained by
the solid model and can be observed in appendix B.1.
The discrepancies are fairly low, however, the gimbal is still modelled a bit to stiff.
The parts still shares nodes in the contact regions, and the thus the gimbal is still
modelled as one solid. However, it is not accurate to represent the gimbal as one solid,
as the gimbal consist of separate parts bolted together. Thus, it is in the following
investigated how the contact regions can be modelled differently, so that the gimbal
is modelled as consisting of separate parts that are assembled together.
3.5
Contact Region Modelling
In order to model the gimbal as an assembly consisting of different parts, it is necessary
to go more into detail in the modelling of the contact regions depicted in figure 3.15a.
Instead of the parts having shared nodes in contact areas, the parts will now have
separate nodes that are coincident and connected by springs instead. The coincident
nodes will be connected by three springs as depicted on the sketch in figure 3.15b.
(a) The contact regions are illustrated with
green lines
(b) Sketch of spring directions in contact a
region
Figure 3.15: Contact regions in gimbal
The gimbal model will consist of 8 identical contact regions. Depending on which
contact region that is being modelled, the spring normal to the contact area with
stiffness kn and the spring parallel to the contact area with stiffness kp, will be
connecting the translational DOF in the x and y direction w.r.t. the global coordinate
==PAGE:41==
3.5 Contact Region Modelling
27
system for the coincident nodes. However, the spring with stiffness kz will always
connect the translational DOF in the z direction w.r.t. the global coordinate system
for all the coincident nodes, and it is also parallel to the contact area.
The contact regions is modelled by adjusting the stiffness coefficients for the springs,
such that the results obtained by the FE model agrees with the experimental results
given in section 3.2.
3.5.1
Identical Springs
The element type MATRIX27 is an arbitraty element in ANSYS, which is a 12x12
matrix, that can be used to relate the movement of two nodes to eachother by defining
the element as either a mass, damping or spring matrix. Thus, it can used to represent
a linear spring. The precision of the MATRIX27 element is verified in appendix A.2
through analysing a simple spring-mass system for which the exact analytic natural
frequency is known.
As a starting point the springs are modelled with identical stiffness coefficients, such
that:
ks = kp = kn = kz
(3.1)
It is investigated which spring constant, ks, is needed in order to get a good fit with
the experimental results. In figure 3.16 the six first natural frequencies as a functions
of the stiffness coefficient ks is shown.
Figure 3.16: Contact spring stiffness influence on natural frequencies
From the figures above it is observed that for decreasing stiffness coefficients the fre-
quencies decreases toward 0, which is due to more rigid body modes being introduced
since the gimbal part connection is very week. Moreover, it is seen that for increasing
spring stiffness the frequencies flattens out, and the stiffness has converged. In the
area were the curves are completely flat the obtained natural frequencies are com-
parable to the ones obtained in table 3.6 where the contact region consist of shared
nodes between the parts.
==PAGE:42==
28
3 Gimbal
From the figure it is observed that a spring coefficient of ks = 3 × 106 N m−1 yields
good results. In table 3.7 the frequencies and discrepancies compared to experimental
results are shown when ks = 3 × 106 N m−1.
Freq. no.
f1,
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
Experimental
[Hz]
193.4
384.9
426
767-778
767-778
∼801
SOLID186
[Hz]
196.0
381.5
435
774
777
805
Error
[%]
1.34
0.88
2.11
0.51-0.91
0.13-1.3
0.50
Table 3.7: Converged frequencies for gimbal solid elements
From table 3.3 it is clearly seen that the current model estimates the natural frequen-
cies very well. However, the natural frequencies might be estimated even better if
separate springs coefficients for kn, kp and kz is used. Furthermore, the steps are
increasing by a factor 10 when generating the plots in figure 3.16, and thus better
results might also be obtained by using a smaller step size. Thus, in the following it
is investigated how the spring coefficient can be fine tuned in order to obtain even
better results.
3.5.2
Fine Tuning
The fine tuning of the springs will be based on obtaining a minimum sum of squares
(SS) between the experimental obtained natural frequencies (fi,exp) and the natural
frequencies obtained by the FEM (fi,F EM). Thus the objective is:
min
6
∑
n=1
(
fi,F EM −fi,exp
)2
(3.2)
A programme is developed in the FE model upon this principle and a flow chart of
the program can be seen in figure 3.17. Firstly the initial SS is determined. The
procedure is carried out such that the spring coefficients are considered one at a time.
The considered spring coefficient is evaluated at two scenarios. In the first scenario
the current spring coefficient is increased by the chosen step size, natural frequencies
are determined, and a new SS is determined. In second scenario the spring coefficient
is decreased by the chosen step size, natural frequencies are determined, and a new
SS is determined. The scenario yielding the smallest SS is chosen, and the current
spring coefficient updated accordingly. If neither increasing or decreasing the spring
coefficient minimises the sum of squares, the current spring coefficient is not changed.
This procedure is carried out for all the spring coefficients, for a number of jmax
iterations. After each j iteration it is determined if the SS has changed since last j
iteration. IF the SS has stayed the same, the spring step size is decreased by a factor
10. When jmax is reached the programme is executed.
==PAGE:43==
3.5 Contact Region Modelling
29
Figure 3.17: Flow chart for spring fine tuning programme
When using this method it is assumed that f4 and f5 is equal to the upper and lower
bound in the interval they occur in as depicted in table 3.3. Furthermore the sixth
frequency is set to f6 = 801 Hz. The stiffness coefficients are numerated such that,
k1 = kn,
k2 = kp,
k3 = kz
(3.3)
and an amount of jmax = 100 iterations were carried out, with an initial step size of
ks = 1 × 105 N/m. The initial stiffness is set to 3 × 105 N/m, which is the stiffness
obtained earlier. The value of the sum of squares as a function of iteration number
can be observed in figure 3.18a.
==PAGE:44==
30
3 Gimbal
(a) Sum of squares
(b) Step size
Figure 3.18: Fine tuning of spring stiffness
It is observed that that the sum of squares is never increasing, which should be the
case according to the flowchart shown in figure 3.17. Moreover, it is seen that the sum
of squares is decreasing a lot in the beginning, but after the 25 iterations the curve is
flatting out. Furthermore, it is seen from figure 3.18b that the step size is decreasing
rapidly after 25 iterations which again indicates that convergence has been achieved.
In figure 3.19a the change in the natural frequencies in terms of iteration number
is shown. No severe change can be observed in the frequencies which should be the
case as the fine tuning should not yield one frequency to deviate to much from the
previously found frequencies.
(a) Natural frequencies
(b) Spring stiffness
Figure 3.19: Fine tuning of spring stiffness
Moreover, the change in the springs stiffness coefficients by each iteration is shown in
==PAGE:45==
3.6 Final Natural Frequencies and Mode Shapes
31
figure 3.19b. After the 25 iterations the springs coefficients obtained are:
kn = 2 871 000 N/m
(3.4)
kp = 3 065 000 N/m
(3.5)
kz = 1 748 000 N/m
(3.6)
From which it can be observed that the the spring coefficients for kn and kz are of the
same magnitude where as kp is a bit lower. This makes good sense as the previously
observed mode shapes mainly are influenced by vibration in the z-direction or in the
n-direction.
3.6
Final Natural Frequencies and Mode Shapes
The final gimbal has 7098 elements and 98892 DOF with a CPU time of 26.3 seconds.
In table 3.8 the natural frequencies for the final gimbal FE model are listed as well
as the discrepancies compared to the experimental obtained results.
Freq. no.
f1,
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
Experimental
[Hz]
193.4
384.9
426
767-778
767-778
∼801
SOLID186
[Hz]
195.4
380.5
426
772
775
801
ERROR
[%]
1.03
1.14
0
0.65-0.77
0.39-1.04
0
Table 3.8: Experimental results and final natural frequencies for gimbal FE model
The adjusted model yields fairly good results, with a maximum frequency discrepancy
of 1.14%. The corresponding mode shapes are shown in figure 3.20.
==PAGE:46==
32
3 Gimbal
(a) f1 = 195.4 Hz
(b) f2 = 380.5 Hz
(c) f3 = 426 Hz
(d) f4 = 772 Hz
(e) f5 = 775 Hz
(f) f6 = 801 Hz
Figure 3.20: Final mode shapes for gimbal
==PAGE:47==
3.6 Final Natural Frequencies and Mode Shapes
33
It is observed that the mode shapes agree with he ones obtained by the initial beam
and solid model in figure 3.5 and 3.9 respectively.
It should be mentioned that the fourth mode shape has switched to become the sixth
mode shape compared to earlier. Mode shape four to six are very close in frequency
and it is thus difficult to conclude which of them will appear first. However, since f4
and f5 are hard to distinguish and the mode shapes for f4 and f5 look very similar,
this could indicate that the order in which mode shape four to six is appearing above
is correct. Furthermore, it was observed in the beam model of the gimbal, that when
the corner profiles were modelled identically mode shape 4 and 5 w.r.t. to figure 3.20
were appearing at the exact same frequency. This would also justify that the natural
frequencies for the sixth mode is a bit more isolated because the corresponding mode
shape does no look similar as the fourth and fifth mode shape do. To clarify the order
in which mode shape four to six are appearing, one should carry out an experimental
modal analysis (EMA) of the gimbal, capturing the mode shapes experimentally for
comparison with the FE mode shapes of the gimbal.
==PAGE:48==
34
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Housing
The housing consist of multiple parts assembled together with contact surfaces per-
pendicular to the axial direction. A CAD model of the housing can be observed in
figure 4.1a. In order to simplify the physical structure of the housing the following
assumptions are made:
• The active magnetic bearings (AMB) actuator geometries are approximated as
cylinders
• The ball bearings can be described as steel cylinders
• The permanent magnetic bearings (PMB) are made only of aluminium
• The bearings are perfectly connected to the housing parts
• The housing can be modelled as one solid part
• Damping is neglected
• Mounting holes for the house parts can be neglected
Based on these assumptions the simplified geometry of the housing can be observed
in figure 4.1b as a section view.
(a) CAD model of physical structure
(b) Discretised geometry
Figure 4.1: Housing
==PAGE:50==
36
4 Housing
On the figure the global coordinate system is shown, which is aligned with the global
coordinate system for the gimbal model.
Furthermore, the ball bearing volumes,
AMB volumes, and aluminium volumes are designated. The material properties for
the AMB volumes are estimated in section 4.1.
Moreover, overall dimensions for
the discretised housing can be found in appendix C.1. In the following the natural
frequencies and mode shapes will be estimated for the housing in a free condition, by
comparing analytic results with results obtained by FE models.
4.1
Expected Results
Since no experimental results of the housing is available expected results are obtained
analytically. A rather coarse discretisation of the house is carried out by simplifying
it to a beam. The beam is given the outer radius ro = 74.5 mm and a total length
L = 392.1 mm which corresponds to the dimensions of the housing. Since the inner
radius of the housing is varying a lot, an average inner radius ri is determined from:
Vtot = π
(
ro
2 −ri
2)
L ⇔ri = ro −
√
Vtot
πL
(4.1)
The reason why volumes are used instead of just radius is due to the spacers can not
be characterised by a radius. The volumes are distributed as:
Vsteel = 141 mm3
Valu = 3.763 378 × 106 mm3
VAMB = 409 mm3
(4.2)
Where the steel volumes are the ball bearings volumes. The inner radius is thus given
by:
ri = 45.26 mm
(4.3)
Finally, the area moment of inertia and the slenderness ratio given by:
I = π
2
(
ro
4 −ri
4)
= 20 899 129 mm4
(4.4)
s =
L
√
I
A
= 9.0
(4.5)
In order to take the different materials of the housing into account average value of
the Young’s modulus, Poissons’ ratio and density must be determined.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Expected Results
37
4.1.1
Estimate of Material Properties
The average material properties are determined by:
Eavg = EsteelVsteel + EaluValu + EAMBVAMB
Vtot
(4.6)
ρavg = ρsteelVsteel + ρaluValu + ρAMBVAMB
Vtot
(4.7)
νavg = νsteelVsteel + νaluValu + νAMBVAMB
Vtot
(4.8)
In order to determine the average material properties the material properties for AMB
must be determined first.
The AMB stator consists of steel sheets stacked and glued together, and coils wriggled
around the steel sheets as depicted on the CAD model in figure 4.1a. The AMB
stator is modelled as a cylinder with an inner and outer radius of ri = 26.3 mm and
ro = 50 mm, to keep the 200 µm distance between the rotor and stator. Furthermore
the height of the AMB is set to h = 36 mm which corresponds to the height of the
stacked steel sheets.
It is fairly difficult to determine the volume of the coils and thus the volume will be
based on the volume of how the coils are modelled in the CAD model of the housing
shown in figure 4.1a. The volume of the stacked steel sheets are also obtained from
this CAD model. The volume fractions for the steel stator part (Vs) and one ”coil
volume” part (Vc) is:
Vs = 147 570.75 mm3
Vc = 5893.48 mm3
(4.9)
The coils are made of copper. For copper C12200, the density, Young’s modulus and
Poisson’s ratio is given by the CES database [5] as:
ρc = 8950 kg/m3
Ec = 120 GPa
νc = 0.34
(4.10)
Which yields the final density, Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio using that the
AMB consist of 8 coil volumes:
ρAMB = Vsρs + 8Vcρc
Vs + 8Vc
= 8101 kg/m3
(4.11)
EAMB = VsEs + 8VcEc
Vs + 8Vc
= 188 GPa
(4.12)
νAMB = Vsνs + 8Vcνc
Vs + 8Vc
= 0.31
(4.13)
These material properties for the AMB will be used when modelling the housing with
solid elements as well.
The average material properties for the beam can now be determined from eq. (4.6)-
(4.8):
Eavg = 86.4 GPa
ρavg = 3442 kg/m3
νavg = 0.327
(4.14)
==PAGE:52==
38
4 Housing
4.1.2
Natural Frequencies and Mode Shapes
The natural frequencies of a simple beam can be classified into corresponding to
longitudinal vibration modes, torsional vibration modes and bending vibration modes.
In [16] an expression for the natural frequencies corresponding to the longitudinal and
torsional vibration modes of a beam in free-free condition is given by:
ωn = nπc
l
,
n = 0, 1, 2, ...
(4.15)
For the longitudinal vibration modes the coefficient c is an expression for the velocity
of propagation of the displacement in the beam and is given by:
c =
√
E
ρ
(4.16)
The coefficient c for torsional modes is given by:
c =
√
Gγ
ρJ
(4.17)
Here γ is the torsional constant which is identical to the polar moment of inertia J
for a beam with hollow circular cross section. Thus c can be reduced to:
c =
√
G
ρ
(4.18)
Where it is used that: G =
E
2(1+ν) for an isotropic material.
In [16] an expression for the bending natural frequencies of a beam is developed based
on Euler-Bernoulli beam theory given by:
ωn = βn
2
√
EI
ρA
(4.19)
Here the factor βn depends on how the beam is supported. In appendix A.1.1 the βn
coefficient can be found for a unsupported beam.
It is clearly observed in eq. (4.4) that the slenderness ratio is below 10, and thus
the beam might not be very well represented by the Euler-Bernoulli beam theory,
since it will model the beam to stiff. The natural frequencies corresponding to the
longitudinal, torsional and bending vibration modes are given from eq.(4.15) and eq.
(4.19) and are summarised in table 4.1.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Finite Element Models
39
Mode
n
1
2
3
4
5
Long.
fn [Hz]
6399
12797
19196
25595
31994
Tors.
fn [Hz]
3928
7855
11783
15710
19638
Bend.
fn [Hz]
5065
13963
27373
45249
67594
Table 4.1: Natural frequencies for analytic problem for housing
The mode shapes corresponding to the longitudinal and torsional vibration modes in
a free-free condition is a constant, and is given from [16] by:
cos nπx
l
(4.20)
Furthermore the mode shapes for the bending modes are given by:
cosh βnx+cos βnx−σn
(
sinh βnx+sin βnx
)
,
σn = cosh βnx −cos βnx
sinh βnx −sin βnx (4.21)
The mode shapes corresponding to longitudinal, torsional and bending vibrations are
plotted in figure 4.2.
(a) Longitudinal mode
(b) Torsional mode
(c) Bending modes
Figure 4.2: Mode shapes for unsupported beam
Even though this is a rather coarse discretisation of the housing geometry and the
Euler-Bernoulli theory models the beam too stiff the natural frequencies in table 4.1
gives an idea of the size of the natural frequencies expected. Furthermore, the mode
shapes in figure 4.2 gives a good qualitative idea about how the expected vibration
pattern for the mode shapes in the more complex FEM model of the housing might
look like.
4.2
Finite Element Models
Two finite element models will be carried out of the housing. A model using BEAM188
elements and a model using SOLID186 elements. The beam model will have the same
geometry and material properties as the analytic expected results is based on, whereas
==PAGE:54==
40
4 Housing
the solid model will have the geometry as depicted in figure 4.1b with individual
material properties for the aluminium parts, ball bearings, and the AMBs.
This
is in order to illustrate the agreement between the expected results and the FEM.
Furthermore, the two FE models will illustrate how adding holes, spacers and having
varying inner radius affects the results.
4.2.1
Beam Model
A convergence study for the FE beam model is carried out in the same manner as for
the gimbal, with increasing number of element divisions along axial direction with
increasing refinement. The convergence study can be found in appendix C.2, from
which is observed that the model is converged after 3 beam elements. However, 6
elements are used in order to capture the mode shapes properly, consisting of 42 DOF,
and CPU time of 0.5938 seconds.
As in the case with the gimbal it is observed that only a few elements is needed for
a converged mesh and a very low CPU time is obtained. In table 4.2 the natural
frequencies for the converged beam model is depicted as well as the discrepancies
compared to the analytic expected results.
Frequency
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
Mode type
bend.
bend.
tor.
bend.
bend
long.
BEAM188 [Hz]
3454
3454
3923
6174
6174
6391
Analytic [Hz]
5065
5065
3928
13963
13963
6398
Error [%]
31.81
31.81
0.13
55.78
55.78
0.13
Table 4.2: FEM natural frequencies for housing
From the table above it is clearly seen that the bending modes does not agree very
well. This is most likely is due to the FE beam model takes Timoshenko effects into
account, whereas the analytic bending modes is based on the Euler-Bernoulli theory,
not taking shear deformation and rotary inertia into account. However, there is a
really good agreement between the analytic and FE obtained torsional and longitu-
dinal natural frequencies. This is mainly due to the fact that the analytic torsional
and longitudinal natural frequencies are not based on Euler-Bernoulli beam theory.
The small differences are most likely due to numerical errors.
The beam model of the housing has a symmetric cross section, and thus the bending
modes are appearing two times at the same frequency. Thus mode shape one and two
look similar, which mode shape four and five also do. In figure 4.3 mode shape one,
three, four and six is shown. Mode shape two and five can be observed in appendix
C.3.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Finite Element Models
41
(a) f1 = 3454 Hz
(b) f3 = 3923 Hz
(c) f4 = 6174 Hz
(d) f6 = 6391 Hz
Figure 4.3: Beam model mode shapes for housing
It is clearly seen that the analytic mode shapes in figure 4.2 looks similar to the ones
obtained by the FE beam model as they agree in shape. This is expected as the
Timoshenko beam model should model a more flexible shaft, but shouldn’t change to
vibration pattern severely.
4.2.2
Solid Model
In the following the housing is modelled using SOLID186 elements. This is carried
out with the goal of modelling the housing in a more detailed manner according to
the discretised geometry shown in figure 4.1b. Thus, the housing will be modelled
==PAGE:56==
42
4 Housing
with different inner radius, the spacers and large holes will be introduced, and differ-
ent material properties will be used for the aluminium parts, ball bearings and AMBs.
It can be observed in the element verification appendix A.1 that the SOLID186 ele-
ment and BEAM188 element yields very similar results for a hollow cylinder when a
converged mesh is used. Thus, it can be assured that if a converged mesh is used when
modelling the housing with SOLID186 elements, the changes in natural frequencies
and mode shapes will express the influence of implementing a more detailed geometry
and material properties, such that the majority in change is not due to a change of
element type.
A convergence study for the FE solid model is carried out in the same manner as
for the gimbal, where the initial mesh is refined by multiplying the initial element
divisions by a factor i = 1, 2, .... with i increasing for increasing refinement. The
convergence study can be found in appendix C.4, from which it is observed that the
initial mesh is sufficient. This is due to the initial mesh being rather fine. The inital
mesh consist of 8568 element, that results in 133023 DOF and a CPU time of 52.3
seconds. Thus, the number of elements and DOF are a lot larger for the beam model.
However, it was difficult to mesh the housing differently, in order to capture the holes
properly and not getting warnings for ill shaped elements. The natural frequencies is
shown in table for the converged (initial) mesh as well as the errors compared to the
FE beam model.
Frequency
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
Mode type [Hz]
bend.
bend.
tor.
bend.
bend
long.
SOLID186 [Hz]
2882
2903
3741
4299
4316
4580
BEAM188 [Hz]
3454
3454
3923
6174
6174
6391
Error [%]
16.56
15.95
4.64
30.37
30.09
28.37
Table 4.3: FEM natural frequencies for housing solid model
Based on the natural frequencies, it appears that the change in geometry and material
properties influences the result. Only the torsional mode has discrepancies below 5%.
In general, the changes has the effect of making the housing more flexible as the
natural frequencies obtained for the solid model are lower. However, it is necessary
to look at the mode shapes in order to figure out which of the changes in geometry
and material properties that causes the natural frequencies to decrease. The mode
shapes corresponding to the natural frequency number one, three, four and six given
in the table above can be observed in figure 4.4. From the mode shapes the initial
mesh can also clearly be observed.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Finite Element Models
43
(a) f1 = 2881.9 Hz
(b) f3 = 3740.5 Hz
(c) f4 = 4299.0 Hz
(d) f6 = 4580.0 Hz
Figure 4.4: Solid model mode shapes for housing
Firstly it is observed that the first and second natural frequency as well as the fourth
and fifth natural frequency are no longer exactly identical. This is due to the housing
”cross section” no longer being complete symmetric. However it is observed that the
first and second natural frequency are really close which also accounts the fourth and
fifth natural frequency. Moreover the mode shapes for the first and second natural
frequency look similar in shape, which also accounts for the fourth and fifth mode
shape. The mode shape corresponding to the second and fifth natural frequency can
be found in appendix C.5.
It is clearly observed that in the bending modes, which has large discrepancies com-
pared to the FE beam model, the spacers, and the ”plate” above the spacer has the
==PAGE:58==
44
4 Housing
largest amplitude. Furthermore, it is observed that in the sixth mode, the top ”plate”
is only vibrating in the solid model, whereas the whole housing is vibrating in the
longitudinal mode for the beam model. This explains the high discrepancy in the lon-
gitudinal mode shape between the beam and solid model. In general the amplitude
for the mode shapes are largest near the spacers and the ”plate” above the spacers in
the solid model. This indicates that the spacers plays a major role in the stiffness of
the housing and thus the natural frequencies. This also make quite good sense since
the spacers are a lot less stiff than the solid cylinders the housing is mainly consisting
of.
Due to the high discrepancies between the beam model and solid model it is chosen
to work further with the solid model as it models the housing geometry and material
properties more accurately compared to actual physical housing.
4.3
AMB Material Sensibility
The material properties of the AMB is by the far to most rough estimate in the
model. Thus it is investigated how the change in the material properties of the AMB
affects the results. In figure 4.5a it can be observed how the first natural frequency
is changing depending on the Young’s modulus and density assigned to the AMB. In
the plot the density and Young’s modulus is varied between those of copper and steel.
Similar plots for the 2nd to the 6th natural frequency can be found in appendix C.6.
Overall, the change in the natural frequencies with changing material properties of
the AMB’s are of negligible magnitude compared to the size of the natural frequencies.
This indicates that the material properties of the AMB does not influence the results
that much.
(a) First natural frequency under varying material
properties
(b) Section view of first mode shape for
E = Ec and ρ = ρc
Figure 4.5: AMB material properties influence on first natural frequency
==PAGE:59==
4.3 AMB Material Sensibility
45
It is also observed that the natural frequencies are at their lowest when the AMBs
are modelled as pure copper and at their highest when modelled as pure steel. This
is due to copper having a larger density and lower Youngs’ modulus than steel. Thus
the AMB are more likely to oscillate with the material configuration as copper.
In figure 4.5b the first mode shape when setting EAMB = Ec and ρAMB = ρc is
shown, from which is clearly seen that the AMBs have low amplitude. Furthermore
the other mode shapes was examined and the AMB’s did not appear to be oscillating
in an unexpected manner.
Overall the material properties of the AMB does not seem to affect the results for the
natural frequencies and the mode shapes for the housing by much. However this does
not mean that the chosen material properties of the AMBs does not affect the results
when the housing and rotor is assembled. The material properties are kept at the
initial estimate from section 4.1. Thus, the AMB will be modelled rather stiff so that
the flexibility between the rotor and housing is not affected to much by the properties
of the AMB but depends more on the implementation of the magnetic forces. Finally
it should be mentioned that a different geometry dicretisation of the AMB may affect
the results.
==PAGE:60==
46
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5
Rotor
The rotor consists of a steel shaft where aluminium hubs, and stacked steel sheet hubs
(identical to the AMB stator steel component) are pres-fitted onto. Furthermore the
PMB rotor part is mounted by bolt. A cross sectional view of the CAD model of the
rotor can be observed in figure 5.1a. In order to describe the physical structure of
the rotor more easily the following assumptions are made:
• The rotor can be modelled as one solid part and thus contact analysis between
the components can be avoided
• The stacked steel laminate hubs are regarded as pure steel cylinders
• The compressor wheel can be neglected
• Damping is neglected
Based on the assumptions above the simplified geometry of the rotor is depicted in
figure 5.1b.
(a) CAD model of physical structure
(b) Discretised geometry
Figure 5.1: Rotor
==PAGE:62==
48
5 Rotor
On the figure the different materials are designated. Furthermore, the global coordi-
nate system is shown which is placed at the same location as the housing and gimbal.
It should be denoted that the top part of the rotor is identical to the PMB rotor
part, and thus the rotor is symmetric around the (x,y)-plane w.r.t. the global coordi-
nate system. Moreover, overall dimensions for the discretised housing can be found
in appendix D.1. In the following the natural frequencies and mode shapes will be
estimated for the rotor in a free condition, by comparing analytic and experimental
results with results obtained by the FE models.
5.1
Expected Results
As in the same manner with the housing in section 4.1, an estimate of the rotor natural
frequencies and mode shapes are carried out by simplifying the rotor as a beam with
one cross section. The rotor is given a total length of l = 304 mm and the inner radius
is ri = 0 mm. Following the same procedure as in section 4.1 but determining the
outer radius instead, the geometry parameters listed below are obtained:
ro = 22 m m
I = 219 mm4
A = 1659 mm2
s = 26.5
(5.1)
Furthermore, the steel volume and aluminium volumes are:
Vsteel = 310 783 mm3
Valu = 193 622 mm3
(5.2)
and the material properties are estimated to:
Eavg = 156 GPa
ρavg = 5888 kg/m3
νavg = 0.311
(5.3)
Based on the geometry parameters from eq (5.1) and (5.3) the first five natural
frequencies for longitudinal, torsional and bending modes are obtained. These are
listed in table 5.1.
Mode
n
1
2
3
4
5
Long.
fn [Hz]
8484
16967
25451
33934
42418
Tors.
fn [Hz]
5238
10476
15714
20953
26191
Bend.
fn [Hz]
2284
6295
12341
20400
30474
Table 5.1: Natural frequencies for analytic problem for rotor
5.2
Finite Element Models
Two finite element models will be carried out of the housing. A model using BEAM188
elements and a model using SOLID186 elements. Both models will have the same dis-
cretised geometry and material properties as depicted in figure 5.1b. Both elements
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Finite Element Models
49
types are investigated since severe computational time can be saved using beam el-
ements over solid elements. The overall geometry of the rotor reminds of a beam,
which indicates that it can be well represented by beam elements. However, it might
be challenging to represent the multiple material types using beam elements. This is
investigated in the following.
5.2.1
Beam Model
In order to model the rotor with beam elements having different material properties,
the rotor will be modelled with different cross sections. The beam will be assigned
composite cross sections where both aluminium and steel is present in the cross section.
An example of one of the composite cross section is illustrated in figure 5.2, which
corresponds to to assigned composite cross section where the PMB is assembled onto
the steel shaft. Here Es, ρs, and νs is the material properties for steel, and Ea, ρa,
and νa is the material properties for aluminium.
Figure 5.2: Example of beam composite cross section
A convergence study for the FE beam model is carried out in the same manner as
for the gimbal, where the initial mesh is refined by multiplying the initial element
divisions by a factor i = 1, 2, .... with i increasing for increasing refinement. The
convergence study can be found in appendix D.2, from which it is observed that the
initial mesh is converged. In the initial mesh 22 elements are used, resulting in 138
DOF, and a CPU time of 1.2 seconds.
In table 5.2 the natural frequencies for the converged beam model is depicted as well
as the discrepancies compared to the analytic expected results.
==PAGE:64==
50
5 Rotor
Frequency
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
Mode type [Hz]
bend.
bend.
bend.
bend.
tor.
bend.
BEAM188 [Hz]
2207
2207
5507
5507
5777
8322
Analytic [Hz]
2284
2284
6295
6295
5238
12341
Error [%]
3.37
3.37
12.52
12.52
9.33
32.57
Table 5.2: FEM natural frequencies for housing – beam model
In general, it is observed that the discrepancies are increasing with the increasing
bending mode number. It is typical that the Euler-Bernoulli theory estimate of the
natural frequencies becomes more poor with increasing frequency number as the shear
deformation and rotary inertia becomes more relevant for the higher bending modes
[16]. It is observed that the natural frequencies are of the same magnitude as the
analytic obtained natural frequencies.
The mode shape corresponding to natural
frequency number one, three, five, and six are shown in figure 5.3. Mode number two
and four can be found in appendix D.3 as they are identical in shape to mode number
one and three respectively, due to symmetry.
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Finite Element Models
51
(a) f1 = 2207 Hz
(b) f3 = 5507 Hz
(c) f5 = 5777 Hz
(d) f6 = 8322 Hz
Figure 5.3: Beam model mode shapes for rotor
The mode shapes agree very well with the analytic mode shapes for a beam shown in
figure 4.2, which should be the case as the overall geometry of the rotor reminds of a
slender beam.
==PAGE:66==
52
5 Rotor
5.2.2
Solid Model
A convergence study for the FE solid model is carried out in the same manner as for
the beam model. The convergence study can be found in appendix D.4, from which it
is observed that the initial mesh is converged. However in order to capture the mode
shapes properly, the mesh for the first refinement is used. After the first refinement
the model consist of 5816 elements, resulting in 74283 DOF and a CPU time of 36.6
seconds. Thus a lot more DOF are needed for the solid model and the computational
time is a lot higher. The natural frequencies for the solid model is stated in table 5.3.
Frequency
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
Mode type [Hz]
bend.
bend.
tor.
bend.
bend
bend.
SOLID186 [Hz]
2033
2033
4701
5126
5126
7375
Analytic [Hz]
2284
2284
5238
6295
6295
12341
Error [%]
11.00
11.00
10.25
18.57
18.57
40.24
Table 5.3: FE natural frequencies for housing – solid model
It is observed that the mode shape order is not the same as for the beam, as the
torsional mode is now appearing before the second bending mode. However it should
be denoted that in both the beam model and solid model of the rotor, the second
bending mode and torsional mode is appearing at frequencies close to each other. The
mode shapes corresponding to natural frequency number one, three, four, and six are
shown in figure 5.4. Mode shape number two and five are identical in shape to one
and four respectively and can be found in appendix D.5.
In general, the mode shapes agree in shape with the ones obtained analytically and by
the beam model. Overall it should be denoted that the discrepancies of the natural
frequencies for the solid model compared to the analytic results in general are higher
than those between the beam model and the analytic results. This could indicate
that the beam model is closer to modelling the simple analytic beam instead of the
rotor. However in order to justify this hypothesis the FE models should be compared
to experimental results.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Finite Element Models
53
(a) f1 = 2033 Hz
(b) f3 = 4701 Hz
(c) f4 = 5126 Hz
(d) f6 = 7375 Hz
Figure 5.4: Solid model mode shapes for rotor
==PAGE:68==
54
5 Rotor
5.3
Experimental Results
The experimental investigation of the rotor was not carried out in person, but are
data from an old experiment. The experiment was carried out by the same procedure
described in section 3.2, by measuring the acceleration after excitation by hammer of
the rotor in a free condition. However two accelerometers were mounted at different
different positions when the rotor was exposed to the impact. Data is available for
seven measurements where different number of impacts are carried out on the rotor
and a sampling frequency of 100kHz is used and a gain of 1000 mV is set for the
charge amplifier.
The impact occurrence times ti are determined in each data set and data are extracted
for the following period of ti + 0.3 s. The total data set, which an FRF is based on,
is then generated by assembling each impact data set of length ti + 0.3 s. In some of
the data it has been difficult to determine if a measurement was in fact an impact,
and thus some of the FRF are only based on selected impacts from the full data set.
The number of impact that the FRF is based on can clearly be observed in the time
domain of the extracted data. In figure 5.5 the data set in a time domain is shown.
Figure 5.5: Data in time domain for experimental rotor analysis. Impact at the shaft
centre and accelerometer mounted at the shaft centre (located at origo)
It should be denoted that the following information about test equipment and how
the rotor is hung is missing. In figure 5.6 the frequency response function based on
the data in the time domain shown in figure 5.5 can be observed.
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Experimental Results
55
Figure 5.6: FRF for experimental rotor analysis.
Impact at the shaft centre and
accelerometer mounted at the shaft centre (located at origo)
From the FRF a phase shift is observed around 800 Hz, where two minor amplitudes
can be observed as well. However the coherence is not good in the area of 600-1000
Hz. Based on the bad coherence in this area and the low amplitudes, it is estimated
that a natural frequency is not occurring around 800 Hz.
Around 1237 Hz a clear phase shift and amplitude is observed which is regarded as the
first natural frequency of the rotor. It is seen that the coherence drops severely after
2500 Hz until around 4600 Hz. At 4797 Hz a phase shift and amplitude is observed,
which indicates another natural frequency. After 5100 Hz the coherence drops again
and stays low. Therefore, only up to 6500 Hz i shown in the FRF.
In appendix D.6 the other FRFs and data measurements are shown that the experi-
mental analysis is based on, from which another natural frequency was identified at
3023 Hz. Thus three natural frequency can be determined from the FRFs, which is
located at:
f1 = 1233 Hz
f2 = 3023 Hz
f3 = 4797 Hz
(5.4)
The first natural frequency is also observed when exciting the rotor with the magnetic
bearings. The excitation is carried out by sending a sinusoidal signal with a given
amplitude through the AMB with different frequencies until the mode shape is ob-
served. Moreover, it should be denoted the the rotor should have a high amplitude at
the shaft centre at the first bending mode according to the analytical modes shapes
for a beam in figure 4.2. This is a further indication that the first bending mode
is occurring at 1233 Hz since there is a great response at this frequency when the
impact acecelerometer is located at the shaft centre. Based on the FRFs and the
==PAGE:70==
56
5 Rotor
observations in the test rig, it is justified that the first bending mode should be near
1233 Hz.
5.4
Comparison of Models and Results
In order to determine which of the models are most suitable for representing the rotor
a comparison of the two models to the experimental results are carried out. Since the
second bending mode is occurring before the torsional mode for the beam model and
vice versa for the solid model, the experimental obtained second natural frequency
is compared both to the torsional bending mode and the second bending mode. In
table 5.4 the discrepancies between the first three natural frequencies (corresponding
to the first bending mode) obtained experimentally and by the FE models are listed.
Experi.
Freq. [Hz]
1237
3023
4797
BEAM188
Freq. [Hz]
2207 (b)
5507 (b)
5777 (t)
Error [%]
78.42
82.17
20.43
SOLID186
Freq. [Hz]
2033 (b)
4701 (t)
5126 (b)
Error [%]
64.35
55.51
6.86
Table 5.4: Comparison of rotor using BEAM188 and SOLID186 elements to experi-
mental results
From the table above it is clearly seen that the discrepancies are largest for the beam
model which indicates that the rotor is modelled stiffer with beam elements. This
might be due to the composite cross sections modelling the assembly of the hubs to
the shaft to stiff. This indicates that the solid model is more suitable for representing
the rotor and the solid model of the rotor is thus chosen for further work.
When looking at the first and second natural frequency it is however observed that
the solid model is also modelling the rotor too stiff. Thus, the rotor solid model needs
to be adjusted to be more flexible yielding the natural frequencies to decrease.
5.5
Adjustment of the Solid Model
The adjustment is carried out by challenging the assumption made in the beginning
of this chapter regarding the representation of the laminates in terms of the assigned
Young’s modulus and mass distribution.
Since it cannot be assured which mode the natural frequencies occurring at 3023 Hz
and 4797 Hz is corresponding to, the model will only be adjusted according to the
first natural frequency, which has been verified by two experiments.
==PAGE:71==
5.5 Adjustment of the Solid Model
57
5.5.1
Changing E-modulus of Steel Laminates
The stacked steel sheets or AMB rotors are currently modelled as steel cylinders which
is an idealisation. The steel sheets are glued together which could results in a lower
stiffness compared to a solid steel cylinder. Thus, the assigned Young’s modulus to
the stacked steel sheet volume are investigated. Examination of lowering the density
is not investigated as this will have the effect of increasing the natural frequencies.
In figure 5.7 the first six natural frequencies for the rotor solid model is shown as
a function of the change in Young’s modulus for the stacked steel sheets. Here f1,e
denotes the first experimental natural frequency of 1233 Hz.
Figure 5.7: Natural frequencies for rotor as function of Young’s modulus for steel
sheet volumes
It is clearly seen that all the natural frequencies decrease with decreasing Young’s
modulus. It is observed that a Youngs’modulus of 210 MPa is necessary to get a first
natural frequency that is close to the experimental observed first natural frequency.
It appears that the higher natural frequencies are decreasing faster than the lower
natural frequencies. This is due to ”new” mode shapes are appearing rather than the
natural frequencies decreasing for the previously found mode shapes in figure 5.4. In
figure 5.8 the mode shape for f1, f3 and f4 where E = 210 MPa is shown.
==PAGE:72==
58
5 Rotor
(a) f1 = 1295 Hz
(b) f3 = 1702 Hz
(c) f4 = 1993 Hz
Figure 5.8: Mode shapes for rotor with adjusted Young’s modulus for steel laminate
volumes to E = 210 MPa
Looking at the mode shapes for the first natural frequency, the bending mode is
observed, with a bit larger amplitude for the stacked steel sheets. This bending mode
behaviour could be justified.
However, when looking at the mode shapes for the
third natural frequency (torsional mode) and the fourth natural frequency (second
bending mode), it is clearly seen that these mode shapes are dominated by high
amplitudes for the stacked steel sheet volumes. The mode shape for f4 does not have
the vibration characteristics of a second bending mode. This behaviour of the stacked
steel sheets it not expected physically. Furthermore, the following mode shapes were
mainly consisting of large amplitude for the stacked steel sheet volumes. Therefore,
it cannot be justified to adjust the rotor model by changing the E-modulus.
5.5.2
Removing Steel Laminates
Setting the Young’s modulus for the steel laminate to 210 MPa, almost correspond to
removing the laminates and just adding the mass contribution. Thus this is carried
out in order to avoid the undesired mode shapes observed in figure 5.8. The mass
contribution from the steel laminate is added by changing the density for the part of
the shaft where the steel laminates are mounted.
The laminate is still assumed to be a hollow cylinder with outer radius ro,l = 14.8 mm
and the shaft has circular cross section with outer radius ro,s = 25.9 mm, from which
==PAGE:73==
5.5 Adjustment of the Solid Model
59
the density is estimated as:
ρadjusted = ρsteel
ro,l2
ro,s2 = 23 979.375 kg/m3
(5.5)
Using this density for the parts of the shaft where the steel laminates are located, the
natural frequencies given in table 5.5 are obtained. Furthermore the discrepancies to
the experiemntal results are stated.
Frequency
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
Experi. [Hz]
1237
1237
3023
3023
4797
4797
SOLID186 [Hz]
1346
1346
3224
3224
3644
6504
Error [%]
8.81
8.81
4.19
4.19
32.39
35.58
Table 5.5: Natural frequencies for adjusted solid model
It is observed that the torsional bending moment is now appearing after the second
bending mode as was the case for the beam model. Thus, the change of removing the
laminate makes the rotor more flexible w.r.t. to bending than torsion.
The discrepancy on the first two natural frequencies are now within an acceptable
range. The third experimental mode shape is now appearing between the torsional
mode and the third bending mode of rotor. Therefore, the discrepancy to the second
experimental mode shape is instead compared to the natural frequencies correspond-
ing to these modes. The final mode shapes for the adjusted rotor is shown in figure 5.9.
==PAGE:74==
60
5 Rotor
(a) f1 = 1346 Hz
(b) f3 = 3224 Hz
(c) f5 = 3644 Hz
(d) f6 = 6504 Hz
Figure 5.9: Adjusted solid model mode shapes for rotor
It is seen that the mode shapes show a very good agreement with the ones obtained
by the initial solid model observed in figure 5.4
Looking at the discrepancies for the natural frequencies in table 5.5 it is seen that the
the rotor is still modelled a bit to stiff, since the natural frequencies in general are
==PAGE:75==
5.5 Adjustment of the Solid Model
61
higher (except for the frequency for the torsional mode). Thus, further adjustments
might yield all the frequencies to decrease such the third experimentally observed
natural frequency fit better with the bending mode of the FE model than the torsional
mode.
Furthermore, it should be mentioned that it could be difficult to capture
the torsional mode in the experiments carried out, since the accelerometer has been
mounted such that the acceleration in radial direction is measured. This could further
indicate the the natural frequency at 4797 Hz corresponds to the third bending mode.
Further adjustments could be modelling the contact between the aluminium hubs and
the steel shaft. Looking at the mode shape for the third bending mode in figure 5.9d
one sees that the radial amplitude of the rotor is rather small where the aluminium
hubs are axially located. Thus, a more flexible interaction between the aluminium
hub and shaft would definitely yield are higher amplitude at the aluminium hub
positions, such that the natural frequency for the third bending mode would drop.
These adjustments might also yield the first and second natural frequency to drop a
bit so that a better fit is obtained for these frequencies. However, in order to make
these adjustments, one should carry out an EMA to clearly identify how the mode
shapes look like. Furthermore, the natural frequency of the third bending mode is so
high, that it is not of that big interest. Therefore, further adjustments will not be
carried out as the discrepancies for the first two modes are acceptable.
==PAGE:76==
62
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 6
Global Hybrid Model
In the following the gimbal, housing and rotor is assembled in to the FESS system.
This is carried out by implementing the ball bearings, rods and magnetic bearings
(MB). In order to simplify the inter-part connections and the global hybrid model
the following is assumed:
• The connection of the gimbal corner part to the surrounding can be regarded
as clamped
• The ball bearings can be represented by linear springs
• The steel rods are perfectly connected to the housing
• The magnetic bearings can be represented by linear springs
• Damping is neglected.
Based on the assumptions above the physical FESS is simplified into the mechanical
model illustrated in figure 6.1.
Here the springs in the gimbal corner part holes
represents the ball bearings, and the springs between the housing and rotor represents
the magnetic bearings.
Figure 6.1: Mechanical model of the FESS
==PAGE:78==
64
6 Global Hybrid Model
In order to make sure that the global model is set up properly, the boundary conditions
(BC), modelling of ball bearings and magnetic bearings is investigated.
6.1
Connection of Gimbal to the Surroundings
In the following the connection of the gimbal to the surroundings is modelled. This
is carried out by modelling the ball bearings, and assuming that the centre of the
ball bearings is clamped. This is however not the case as the gimbal is connected to
the tilting frame. An implementation for correcting this not total rigid boundary is
carried out later in section 6.4.
The ball bearings are mounted in the gimbal frame connecting the gimbal to the
tilting frame and to the rods connected to the housing. The ball bearing used are
SKF 7201 BEP single row angular contact ball bearings which are able to take up
forces in axial and radial direction [20].
The Ball bearings are modelled by linear springs in the radial direction and axial
direction. Four connection points in the radial direction are chosen at every 45 degrees
as shown in figure 6.2. This is carried out with the purpose of ”spreading out” the ball
bearing effect into the corner parts. Furthermore, this connection is carried out at
three points in the axial direction. Rotation about a point inside the bearing around
the radial axis direction was observed, if only one point the axial direction was used
for connection. Finally, the springs are mounted to nodes with clamped BC located
at the centre of the gimbal corner part hole. The springs are connected to nodes
inside the corner part as seen in figure 6.2. Connection of the springs to the nodes at
the inner surface of the holes yielded stretching of the surface, which is not physically
expected.
Figure 6.2: Ball bearing spring arrangement
The stiffness of the ball bearings depends on how much elastic deformation is carried
out on the bearing, which often is of such small magnitude (compared to the elastic
deformation in the flexible bodies) that it can be neglected [20]. Thus it is investigated
how high the stiffness of the ball bearing should be set in order to make sure that it
is modelled stiff enough such that it does not influence the obtained results. In figure
6.3 a convergence study of the ball bearing spring stiffness can be observed based on
the first six natural frequencies. The springs in the axial direction and radial direction
are assigned the same stiffness in this study.
==PAGE:79==
6.2 Connecting of Housing to Gimbal
65
Figure 6.3: Convergence study of ball bearing stiffness
From the figure above it is clearly seen that the frequencies are converged when
a spring stiffness of kBB = 1 × 1011 N/m is used. This stiffness coefficient is thus
assigned to the ball bearing springs. The actual stiffness of the ball bearings can then
be adjusted when the FE model is updated according to experimental results.
Is is observed that the first natural frequency is 0, which corresponds to a rigid body
mode of the gimbal frame rotating around the ball bearing axis.
6.2
Connecting of Housing to Gimbal
The housing is connected to the gimbal by steel rods. Between the steel rods and
the gimbal, ball bearings identical to the ones described in section 6.1 are mounted.
Thus, they are modelled in the same manner, with the same amount of connection
points and the springs mounted to the centre nodes of the steel rods. It should be
denoted that since the housing is now connected to the gimbal it might be necessary
to assign a higher stiffness to the ball bearing spring, to make sure that these are
converged. A final convergence study of the ball bearing springs are carried out after
the rotor is also implemented into the model.
The steel rods are modelled by using solid elements and is modelled as a part of the
housing, such that it is perfectly connected to the housing. This is justified since
the rods are screwed into the housing. In figure 6.4 the modelling of the steel rods
connected to the housing can be observed.
==PAGE:80==
66
6 Global Hybrid Model
Figure 6.4: Rods connected to housing
A convergence study of the steel rods have been carried out to assure that sufficient
elements are used. The convergence study can be found in appendix E.2.
It was investigated whether BEAM188 elements could be used instead of solid ele-
ments for modelling the steel rods and then connecting the steel rods to the housing by
using a master/slave node relation between a beam node located inside the mounting
hole in the housing, and the housing nodes in the the circumferential of the mounting
hole. However, the master/slave node algorithm actually increased the computational
time rather than decreasing it.
6.3
Rotor Attachment
As previously mentioned the rotor is connected to the housing by magnetic bearings,
such that it is levitated inside the housing. Two types of magnetic bearings are used
for the connection: a permanent magnetic bearing and active magnetic bearings. The
PMB is mounted in the end of the rotor and housing with the purpose of levitating
the rotor in the axial direction from the housing. Two AMBs are mounted to support
the rotor in radial direction. In figure 6.1 the positions of the PMB and AMBs are
indicated by springs.
6.3.1
Modelling of Permanent Magnetic Bearing
The PMB consist of a rotor part and a stator part, each having magnetic rings
mounted coaxially [8]. A sketch of the PMB can be observed in figure 6.5 along with
the forces resulting from the magnetic field [18].
==PAGE:81==
6.3 Rotor Attachment
67
Figure 6.5: PMB and acting forces
In ideal equilibrium the resulting force from the mass of the rotor, Fw, is balanced
out by the axial force from the magnetic bearing Fz, such that the rotor is levitated
from the housing. Furthermore, the radial force will be zero in equilibrium, when the
rotor is positioned in the centre. However, any small radial displacement such that
the rotor is not positioned in the exact centre will result in the radial force becoming
different from 0 Fr ̸= 0. This is what is observed in practice and thus the radial force
is compensated for by the AMBs. It should be denoted that the radial force is acting
both in the x-direction and y-direction according to the coordinate system shown on
figure 6.5.
It is not possible to model the magnetic field in ANSYS. However, it is possible to lin-
earise the relationship between displacements and forces resulting from the magnetic
fields [8], such that the forces can be represented by linear springs, with the spring
constants given below from [9]:
kz,P MB = 15 kN/m
(6.1)
kr,P MB = −12 kN/m
(6.2)
The magnetic rings in the PMB cannot be altered and thus the stiffness will be
constant. The forces showed in figure 6.5 are resulting force in one point. Therefore,
the PMB connection will be modelled by a single spring in the x, y and z-direction.
The springs are positioned radially at the centre, connected between a node in the
PMB stator and rotor parts. These nodes are located 4 mm inside the PMB ”hats”
from the magnetic field surfaces. The connection of the springs inside the structures
is again carried out with the purpose of avoiding stretching of the surfaces.
6.3.2
Modelling of Active Magnetic Bearings
The AMBs used are identical and are eight-pole heteropolar magnetic bearings con-
sisting of four electromagnetic actuators. The electromagnets consists of feromagnetic
==PAGE:82==
68
6 Global Hybrid Model
cores where a cobber coil with current i is wound around [8]. A sketch of the active
magnetic bearing can be observed in figure 6.6 where the forces resulting from the
magnetic field are shown.
Figure 6.6: AMB forces, sketch inspiration from [8]
In order to describe the interaction between the stator and rotor in the AMBs it
is desired to express the radial forces fx and fy. These forces will depend on the
current in the coils and the displacement of the rotor. In general the total force at
the equilibrium position for the electromagnetic connection, according to [4], is given
by the current i and displacement x as:
f = kii −ksx
(6.3)
Where ki is the force/current factor and ks is the force/displacement factor. However
for the eight-pole heteropolar magnetic bearings used, the legs of the electromagnetic
acutators are angled
π
8 .
Thus, according to [8], the forces w.r.t.
the x-direction
becomes:
fx = cos π
8
(
kii −ksx
)
(6.4)
As the same manner with the PMB it is desired to represent the magnetic field
between the stator and rotor in the AMBs by linear springs. Thus, it is desired to
express the force only in terms of the radial displacement x and a stiffness constant
kx,AMB, that is independent of the current i.
The current i can described through the displacement x by relating the coil dynamics
and PID-controller. The coil winding voltage u can be expressed by the following
equation according to [4]:
u = Ri + L d
dti + Ki
d
dtx
(6.5)
==PAGE:83==
6.3 Rotor Attachment
69
Where R is the resistance an L is the coil inductance. The PID-controller can be
described as:
u = Kc
(
Kp
(
Td
d
dtx + x + Kie
)
+ i
)
(6.6)
Where Kp is the proportional gain, Kc is the amplifier gain, Ki is the integral gain,
Td the derivative time, and e is the error value for a setpoint. Combining eq. (6.5)
and (6.6) one obtains:
Ri + L d
dti + ki
d
dtx = Kc
(
Kp
(
Td
d
dtx + x + Kie
)
+ i
)
(6.7)
Assuming steady state one obtains:
Ri = Kc
(
Kp
(
x
)
+ i
)
(6.8)
From which the current i easily can be found as:
i =
−Kp
1 +
R
Kc
x
(6.9)
Substituting the equation above into eq. (6.4),an expression for the force fx can be
obtained independent of the current i:
fx =
(
−ki
Kp
1 +
R
Kc
)
x = kx,AMB,totx
(6.10)
Where it is clearly seen that a linear relationship between the force and displacement
prevails and the stiffness constant kx,AMB has been determined, such that the forces
in the AMB can be represented as a linear spring. Same principles apply for the
forces in the y-direction, such that:
fy =
(
−ki
Kp
1 +
R
Kc
)
x = ky,AMB,toty
(6.11)
Furthermore from the equations above it is clearly seen that the stiffness depends on
the settings for the AMB controller. However with zero angular velocity for the rotor
and the rotor positioned closely to the centre the AMB springs are given by [7] as:
kr,AMB = kx,AMB = ky,AMB = kx,AMB,tot/2 = −284/2 kN/m
(6.12)
The spring stiffness above is the one that is assigned to the linear springs in the FE
model, since the AMBs are modelled as 4 linear springs each representing a magnetic
actuator. They are located at every 45 degrees w.r.t. the global coordinate system
and axially located at the centre of the magnetic bearings. The connection of the
springs to the housing are inside the structure, located radially in the in the middle of
thickness of the AMB stator part. The springs are attached to the same centre node
in the steel shaft of the rotor. If the springs are not connected to the shaft centre but
to nodes located a radius r ̸= 0 from the shaft centre, the springs prevent rotation
about the shafts own axis.
==PAGE:84==
70
6 Global Hybrid Model
6.3.3
Verification of Bearing Implementation
In order to make sure that the AMB and PMB stiffness contributions are imple-
mented correctly, the natural frequencies of the rotor movement inside the housing
is compared to two rather simple analytic cases. The analytic cases can be observed
in figure 6.7.
(a) Case 1
(b) Case 2
Figure 6.7: Analytic cases
The first case is a simplification of the axial interaction between the rotor and housing,
and the second case is a simplification of the radial interaction between the rotor and
housing.
In both cases the rotor is regarded as a lumped mass, and thus the verification of
the AMB and PMB implementation is only carried out by comparison to the natural
frequencies where the rotor is behaving as a rigid body. The natural frequencies for
both systems is according to [16] given by:
fi = 1
2π
√
ki
m,
i = 1, 2
(6.13)
However the spring coefficient k for the two systems are different. The spring coeffi-
cient for the first case, k1, is simply given by the axial spring stiffness from eq. 6.1
as:
k1 = kz,P MB = 12 kN/m
(6.14)
Using the concept of parallel springs the total spring coefficient, k2, for the second
case is given as
k2 = 4kAMB + kr,P MB = 4 · 142 kN/m −15 kN/m = 553 kN/m
(6.15)
Where it should be denoted that radial spring for the PMB is working in the opposite
direction of the AMB spring, which is the reason for the negative sign on the PMB
==PAGE:85==
6.3 Rotor Attachment
71
stiffness coefficient. The mass of the rotor is easily determined form the volume and
densities for the rotor given in section 5.1 as:
m = ρsteelVsteel + ρaluValu = 2.970 kg
(6.16)
And the natural frequencies f1 and f2 for case 1 and 2 respectively are given by eq.
(6.13) to (6.16) as:
f1 = 10.117 Hz
(6.17)
f2 = 68.679 Hz
(6.18)
In order to make a comparison to the analytical cases only the housing and rotor is
considered. The connection of springs to the rotor will not be completely rigid, as
the housing is flexible. However, the housing ”wall” thickness is very thick at the
AMB location, which will yield a very small amplitude for the housing, if any, at the
rigid body modes for the rotor. Furthermore, the nodes are clamped in the holes
for the connecting rods, to make sure that the house is not moving and make the
boundary conditions look somewhat like the analytical cases. In table 6.1 the natural
frequencies corresponding to the two rigid body modes for the rotor is shown.
Frequency
f1
f2
Analytic [Hz]
10.117
68.679
SOLID186 [Hz]
10.119
68.705
Error [%]
0.069
0.038
Table 6.1: Natural frequencies for rigid body modes of house rotor interaction
The discrepancies are very low, which indicates that the magnetic bearings are imple-
mented as intended. Deviations might be due to numerical errors, the fact that the
shaft is not a lumped mass, and that the housing is not completely rigid. In figure
6.8 the corresponding mode shapes for the frequencies are shown.
==PAGE:86==
72
6 Global Hybrid Model
(a) f1 = 10.119 Hz
(b) f2 = 68.705 Hz
Figure 6.8: Rigid body mode shapes for rotor connected to housing
The mode shapes look as expected. In the first case the rotor is behaving just like a
lumped mass. In the second case the rotor has a bit higher amplitude in the top of
the rotor than the bottom. This is due to the rotor is in fact not a completely lumped
mass, and thus the positions of the springs has an effect. However, the amplitude for
the shaft overall is almost of the same magnitude, the housing has zero amplitude,
and almost identical natural frequencies are observed. Based on this it is justified
that the bearings are implemented correctly.
6.4
Boundary Condition Implementation
So far the boundary conditions has been modelled by clamping the nodes at centre
of the ball bearings in the corner profiles for the gimbal. However, the tilting frame
that the gimbal is mounted to might contribute to the stiffness. Thus the gimbal will
not be exactly clamped at the ball bearings in the corner profiles. In order to give the
opportunity to take this contribution into account, linear boundary condition springs
acting like foundation springs are implemented at the centre nodes where the ball
bearing springs are attached to. This is carried out by locating nodes, with clamped
boundary conditions, coincident with the ball bearing centre nodes. The clamped
boundary conditions on the ball bearing centre nodes are now removed and the nodes
are instead connected to the coincident clamped BC nodes by linear springs in each
translational direction. The BC springs are oriented with the same direction as the
ball bearing springs and not according to the global coordinate system.
==PAGE:87==
6.5 Natural Frequencies and Mode Shapes
73
The idea is that the BC springs can be adjusted based on experimental results. Thus,
for now it is still desired to model the gimbal as clamped. In order to do this it must
be assured that these new BC springs are modelled stiff enough. Thus, a convergence
study is carried out like the one for the ball bearing springs in section 6.1 and can be
found in appendix E.1. A convergence study for the ball bearings after implementing
the housing and rotor has also been carried out prior to this study which can be found
in appendix E.1.
In figure 6.9 the procentual error on the natural frequencies are shown compared to
the case where the ball bearing centre nodes were clamped before.
Figure 6.9: Comparison of natural frequencies after implementing BC springs
All the natural frequencies have discrepancies close to 0 except for the second natural
frequency which has an error close to 3%. This ”large” error is only due to numerical
errors, since the second natural frequency is in the order of 10−3 an practically 0. Thus
minor numerical changes are creating this ”large” error. Since all the discrepancies
are low it is justified, that the clamped boundary conditions and the ball bearings
are still being modelled correctly after the implementation of the BC springs.
6.5
Natural Frequencies and Mode Shapes
After implementation of the bearings and boundary conditions the global model con-
sists of 21679 elements, a total of 310335 DOF and has a CPU time of 152.36 s. Even
though this is a lot of DOF the CPU time still does not appear to be critical. The
natural frequencies and corresponding mode shapes has been obtained for the global
model. A total of 23 natural frequencies were found in the interval of 0–2000 Hz. In
table 6.2 these natural frequencies are listed.
==PAGE:88==
74
6 Global Hybrid Model
Freq.
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
f7
f8
[Hz]
0
0
10.10
26.33
27.79
59.75
64.25
68.51
Freq.
f9
f10
f11
f12
f13
f14
f15
f16
[Hz]
68.87
111.4
270.8
365.1
504.4
641.8
801.0
1086
Freq.
f17
f18
f19
f20
f21
f22
f23
-
[Hz]
1095
1226
1238
1347
1347
1396
1693
-
Table 6.2: Final frequencies for the global model in the range of 0-2000 Hz
From the table it is seen that natural frequencies in the area of those for the rotor
rigid body modes listed in table 6.1 are still observed. Furthermore, the first two nat-
ural frequencies occur at 0 Hz. The first mode is a rigid body mode for the housing
and rotor rotating together about the ball bearing axis. The second mode is the rotor
rotating about the centre axis, which is a movement the magnetic bearings allows.
In figure 6.10 six selected mode shapes can be observed. The rest of the mode shapes
can be found in appendix E.3. In the figures where the modes are not shown as cross
sectional views the rotor is moving with the housing.
The mode shape corresponding to the sixth natural frequency is shown in figure 6.10a,
where the gimbal and housing is vibration together but the rotor is almost standing
still. In the mode shape for the ninth natural frequency shown in figure 6.10b, the
housing is moving up and down with the rotor standing still. However, this mode
clearly illustrates a scenario of coupled vibrations where energy is exchanged between
the housing and gimbal. In general, the steel rods tends to be the most flexible part
in the FESS. A kind of bending mode for the steel rods are observed in the 11th mode
shape in figure 6.10c where the housing is twisted around the global z-axis.
Moreover, in the mode shapes for the 14th and 17th natural frequency only the gimbal
is vibrating. These two modes look similar to the third and fifth mode shape for the
gimbal model shown in figure 3.20. However, the frequencies are a lot higher which
indicates that the vibrations are still affected by the coupling to the other parts and
the implementation of the BC.
Finally, the first bending mode of the rotor is found to occur around 1347 Hz as
observed in figure 6.10f. This bending mode also occur in the other direction per-
pendicular to this at the exact same frequency (mode shape 21). This frequency is
almost identical to the first natural frequency for the first bending mode of the rotor
in free condition, which indicates that the AMB forces have very little influence on
the rotor in this bending mode illustrating a decoupled vibration of the rotor to the
rest of the system.
In general, the housing is not bending a lot during any of the mode shapes, and is
more acting like a rigid body. Thus, one could expect that a more simple model of the
housing with fewer nodes could be sufficient in the global model. Overall the bending
mode shapes looks good and no unexpected behaviour is observed. In order to verify
the mode shapes and natural frequencies obtained by the FE model a experimental
modal analysis should be carried out.
==PAGE:89==
6.5 Natural Frequencies and Mode Shapes
75
(a) f6 = 59.75 Hz
(b) f9 = 68.87 Hz
(c) f11 = 270.8 Hz
(d) f14 = 641.8 Hz
(e) f17 = 1095 Hz
(f) f20 = 1347 Hz
Figure 6.10: Selected mode shapes for global model
==PAGE:90==
76
6 Global Hybrid Model
6.6
Experimental Investigation
As mentioned previously an experimental modal analysis (EMA) should be carried
out of the FESS in order to validate the FEM results. Furthermore the FEM can be
tuned to fit the natural frequencies and mode shapes better in terms of ball bearing
stiffness and BC spring stiffnesses. In the following an experimental investigation of
the FESS is covered.
6.6.1
Test Arrangement
The forced excitation of the system is carried out by a hammer impact, with a
mounted force transducer to measure the impact. This is the same procedure that
has been carried out for identifying the natural frequencies for the gimbal frame in
[1] and the natural frequencies for the rotor.
In the experiments an accelerometer has been used to measure the response from the
impact. A force transducer is mounted on the tip of the hammer to measure the
input to the system. Both the accelerometer and force transducer is coupled to its
own charge amplifier, such that the sensitivity of the response can be adjusted. Both
amplifiers are connected to a NI-9215 DAQ (data acquisition), which has integrated
signal conditioning in form of a analog-to-digital converter. The DAQ is then cou-
pled to a PC, with a designed labview program for measuring the force and hammer
signals. The details of the equipment used is summarised in table 6.3. Pictures of
the equipment can be found in appendix E.4.
Equipment
Description
BK 8230-002
Force transducer mounted to hammer
BK 4339
Accelerometer
BK 2635
Charge amplifier for force transducer and accelerometer
NI-9215
DAQ (Data Aquisition)
Table 6.3: Equipment used in experimental investigation
The accelerometer and force transducer had recently been calibrated, showing a
charge sensitivity of 4.62 pC/ms−2 for the accelerometer and a charge sensitivity of
4.00 pC/ms−2 for the hammer. These sensitivities were adjusted on the charge ampli-
fiers. Furthermore the gain sensitivity of 1V/unit output were used and frequencies
below 1 Hz and larger than 10 kHz were filtered out. A sampling frequency of 6 kHz
has been used, which gives a cutoff frequency of 3 kHz such that aliasing is avoided.
This is more than sufficient to capture the natural frequencies and mode shapes in
the range 0-2000 Hz.
==PAGE:91==
6.6 Experimental Investigation
77
6.6.2
Experimental Procedure
Measurements must be carried out on several positions on the structure in order to
map the mode shapes properly. The impact is carried out at the same position, and
only the accelerometer was moved around. This method is sufficient to capture the
mode shapes since the system will be symmetric when the gyroscopic forces are not
present.
Firstly, a test point was selected for determining the number of impacts needed, such
that the number of impacts used does not influence the results. Point 1 showed on
figure 6.11 was used for this. No difference was observed between the measurement
when using 50, 100 or 150 impact. Thus a total of 50 impacts were used in each
measurement.
6.6.3
Results
The FRF for the first point did not yield the best results and this led to an in-
vestigation of finding a spot on the test-rig that yielded better results. Thus the
following test-scheme in figure 6.11 was used, showing the impact position and the
accelerometer positions. Here the green circles indicate that the acceleration direction
is measured normal to the paper, and the square normal to the surface it is touching.
Furthermore it should be denoted that point five, six, seven, and eight is positioned
at the same angle between the x and y axis.
Figure 6.11: Test scheme
Based on the measurements the frequency response functions were generated for each
point. In figure 6.12 the FRF for point 1 is shown. The FRF for the other points can
be found in appendix E.4.
==PAGE:92==
78
6 Global Hybrid Model
(a) FRF
(b) Time domain
Figure 6.12: Experimental results
When generating the FRFs a Butterworth filter has been applied to exclude the con-
tribution from the 1% highest frequencies. Furthermore a Hanning window has been
applied to suppress spectral leakage [12]. The MATLAB script used to generate the
mode shapes can be seen in appendix E.6.
When observing the FRF for point 1 in figure 6.12a it is seen that a lot of peaks
and phase shifts are observed in the range of 0–500Hz. This would agree very well
with the results from the FE model. However, the coherence is also shifting a lot and
it is difficult to estimate if the coherence is shifting toward 0 due to a resonance or
if the coherence in fact is not really representative in this area. The structure was
also excited with a softer tip with the hope of getting a better response at the lower
frequencies, however this was not achieved.
Looking at the frequency range from 500–2000Hz the coherence is really good, how-
ever, it is difficult to identify any natural frequencies. This might be due to the FESS
being really damped. A sinlge peak around 1125Hz might indicate a natural frequency
at this point. In the interval around 1200–1500Hz the coherence is also dropping and
a lot of peaks are observed, but they do not appear to be natural frequencies, as it is
hard to see any phase shifts. The FRF could also indicate a natural frequency around
2000 Hz, however the phase is ”shifting” over a long interval on the frequency range.
The results from the other FRFs looks like the ones for point 1. Thus it is overall
hard to extract sufficient information to identify the natural frequencies and mode
shapes for the FESS.
Looking at the time domain for point 1 in figure 6.12b it is seen that a rather large
noise is observed in the time domain.
This is observed for all the measurements.
This noise is mainly coming from the AMBs.
This is based on the fact that the
==PAGE:93==
6.7 Sensitivity Analysis of Magnetic Bearings
79
noise disappeared when the equipment was moved to another location far away from
the test-rig. Furthermore, one could feel the vibration from magnetic bearings when
touching the tilting frame the gimbal is mounted to. It was investigated to try to filter
out the noise from the AMBs with a bandwidth filter, however it was not possible
to identify the frequency at which the noise was occurring at. Furthermore, a poor
coherence might also be due to loose parts or the wires and cables mounted to the
test-rig, which gives a response from the impact that can be observed in the FRF.
Since it is difficult to extract sufficient and accurate information from the obtained
FRFs it was discarded to do an EMA of the FESS, and thus the global model of the
FESS is not validated.
6.7
Sensitivity Analysis of Magnetic Bearings
The implementation of magnetic bearings and especially the stiffness assigned plays
a huge role in the first couple of natural frequencies and mode shapes for the global
model. Therefore, a sensitivity study of the MB spring stiffnesses is carried out in
order to see how these affect the natural frequencies.
6.7.1
PMB
Firstly an investigation of the PMB is carried out by varying the radial and axial
stiffness assigned to the linear PMB springs, and see how these affects the natural
frequencies. In figure 6.13 a 3D plot of the third, fourth, and fifth natural frequency
as function of the radial and axial PMB stiffness is shown. Similar plots for the other
frequencies up to frequency number 23 can be found in appendix E.7, however they
did not seem to be affected a lot by changing the PMB stiffnesses.
==PAGE:94==
80
6 Global Hybrid Model
(a) f3
(b) f4
(c) f5
Figure 6.13: Natural frequencies as function of PMB stiffnesses
Looking at the third natural frequency in figure 6.13a is is clearly seen that it is
increasing with increasing axial PMB spring stiffness whereas the radial stiffness does
not have an impact on the frequency. This makes good sense as the mode shape
for this frequency is the rigid body motion of the rotor in the axial direction, which
highly depends on the stiffness assigned to the PMB spring in the axial direction.
In figure 6.13b and 6.13c the change in the fourth and fifth natural frequency is illus-
trated, where the opposite of what is observed for the third natural frequency is seen.
Here the two natural frequencies are increasing with increasing radial stiffness. At
the mode shapes corresponding to these two frequencies, the rotor is vibrating with
the radial springs from the AMB in anti-phase. It makes good sense that the radial
stiffness from the PMB affects these mode shapes, since the stiffness contribution of
the springs in one end of the rotor will be larger than in the other end. See appendix
E.7 for illustration of these two mode shapes.
The dependency of the third, fourth and fifth natural frequency of the assigned PMB
stiffness also illustrates the importance of assuring that a sufficiently high stiffness is
assigned to the ball bearing springs, since a too low stiffness might affect the natural
frequencies and mode shapes.
==PAGE:95==
6.7 Sensitivity Analysis of Magnetic Bearings
81
6.7.2
AMB
In the following the influence of the AMB spring stiffness on the natural frequencies
are investigated. This is carried out to indicate what the influence of adjusting the
AMB actuators might have on the natural frequencies. In figure 6.14 the first 23
natural frequencies as function of the AMB spring stiffness is shown.
(a) f1 to f6
(b) f7 to f12
(c) f13 to f18
(d) f19 to f23
Figure 6.14: Natural frequencies as function of AMB stiffness
It is observed that when that when the AMB is given a stiffness of 50 kN/m and
60 kN/m all the natural frequencies shift down which indicates introduction of new
mode shapes. After this point the stiffness of the AMB’s start to become dominant.
This changes the mode shapes, and thus 23 natural frequencies are present in the
range of 0–2000 Hz, whereas only 21 natural frequencies are present in the 0–2000 Hz
range where the AMB stiffness is low. The mode shapes that a not properly captured
when the AMB stiffness is below 50 kN/m, is mode four and five which are rigid body
modes of the rotor with the AMB springs vibrating in anti-phase.
==PAGE:96==
82
6 Global Hybrid Model
One could argue that the AMB stiffness should be set below 50 kN/m since this will
yield less mode shapes in the 0–2000 Hz range. However, from a practical perspective
it might be challenging to keep the shaft centred with such a low AMB stiffness as
the AMB stiffness is then in same order of magnitude as the radial stiffness of the
PMB which is working in the opposite direction as the AMBs.
After 50 kN/m mode shape four, five, six, seven and ten increases with increasing
AMB stiffness.
This makes good sense as these modes corresponds to rigid body
modes of the rotor in the radial direction. It is also denoted that the ninth natu-
ral freqeuncy is increasing with increasing stiffness, however the ninth mode shape
observed in figure 6.10b should not depend a lot on the AMB stiffness, since the
rotor this mode mainly is in the global z-axis direction. This indicates that around
kAMB = 170 kN/m, where the curve for the ninth and eight frequency is touching, the
mode shape corresponding to mode eight and nine are switching frequency number.
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In the following conclusions based on the investigation and results are carried out.
Moreover, further work for the project is discussed.
7.1
Conclusion
Overall, FE models of the gimbal, housing, and rotor have been developed and a the-
oretical modal analysis has been assessed for each part. Based on these three models,
a global model of the FESS was designed and the theoretical natural frequencies and
mode shapes were determined for the FESS. The theoretical results indicate that the
flexibility effects have an influence on the dynamics of the FESS, since some of the
components are not behaving as rigid bodies in the mode shapes and that coupled
vibrations occur between the flexible bodies.
Regarding the gimbal, two FE models of the gimbal have been designed. A model
based on beam elements and a model based on solid elements. Natural frequencies
and mode shapes have been determined for each model. Furthermore, six natural
frequencies are experimentally identified in the range of 0 to 800 Hz with the first
natural frequency occurring at 193.4 Hz. Based on comparison to the experimental
results, the solid model was chosen for further work and updated accordingly. The
adjustments were carried out by taking contact areas into account and model the
gimbal as separate parts connected by linear springs. After tuning of the spring coef-
ficients, a maximum discrepancy of 1.14% between the theoretical and experimental
natural frequencies were obtained.
A FE model of the housing has been developed showing that the spacers and the top
plate play a significant role in the overall flexibility of the housing. Six theoretical
natural frequencies have been identified in the range of 0-4580 Hz with the first natu-
ral frequency occurring at 2882 Hz. The corresponding mode shapes show a similarity
in the vibration patterns to those of a beam.
The rotor has been investigated through FE models using beam and solid elements and
theoretical natural frequencies have been obtained. Furthermore, the corresponding
theoretical mode shapes were identified as having vibration patterns closely related
to those of a beam. Data from experimental investigations were processed from which
==PAGE:98==
84
7 Conclusion
the the first bending mode and natural frequency were identified to occur at 1233 Hz.
Comparison of the theoretical FE models yielded lowest discrepancies for the solid
model which was further adjusted according to the experimental results. The modi-
fication of the FE model was carried out by removing the stiffness contribution from
the steel laminates, yielding a discrepancy of 8.81% for the first natural frequency.
The final FE models for the gimbal, housing, and rotor have been assembled into
one global model describing the dynamics of the FESS theoretically. Ball bearings
have been implemented as linear springs connecting the housing to the gimbal and
the gimbal to the surroundings. Furthermore, the behaviour of the PMB and AMBs
connecting the rotor and housing have been included in the model by using linear
springs to represent the magnetic forces. Based on the model 23 natural frequencies
and mode shapes have been identified theoretically i the range of 0-2000 Hz. The
mode shapes exert both strong and weak coupled vibration patterns between the
component of the FESS. An experimental validation could not be carried out due to
poor experimental results. The FE model has therefore, not been validated.
7.2
Further Work
A FE model of the FESS has been designed, however, the FE model should be
validated according to experimental results. Therefore EMAs should be carried out
to determine the natural frequencies and mode shapes experimentally. The following
procedure for the experimental investigation is suggested:
1. An EMA of the gimbal, housing, and rotor should be carried out separately, so
the individual components in the FESS can be validated
2. An EMA of the gimbal and housing mounted together without the rotor should
be carried out, so the connection between the gimbal and housing can be vali-
dated without getting the noise from the AMBs
3. An EMA of the gimbal, housing, and rotor assembled together should be carried
out, so the housing-rotor interaction can be validated. It is suggested to use a
shaker instead of a hammer, as this might give a better response in the signal
such that a better FRF can be obtained
Given the results from the above mentioned experiments, the FE model can be com-
pletely validated and updated accordingly. After having validated the FE model it
could be interesting to reduce the model in terms of number of DOF.
Having validated and updated the FE model, one could start introducing the gyro-
scopic forces by simulating the FESS under operational conditions, that is, by giving
==PAGE:99==
7.2 Further Work
85
the flywheel/rotor an angular velocity. As observed in eq. (2.1) this will introduce
the global damping matrix to be come non-zero, which affects the natural frequen-
cies and mode shapes obtained for the system. The FE model of the FESS under
operational conditions should be validated by experimental results. Therefore, a op-
erational modal analysis should be carried out. Based on these results the FE model
can be tuned to fit the experimental observations.
==PAGE:100==
86
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
[1]
Aleksander Andersen. “Design of Gimbal Mounting for Offshore Flywheel Ap-
plications - Theory & Experiment”. In: (2017).
[2]
ANSYS Help Viewer [Computer software].
[3]
S. Julius Bendat and G. Allan Piersol. Random Data. fourth. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., 2010. isbn: 978-0-470-24877-5.
[4]
Hannes Bleauler et al. Magnetic Bearings problem. Springer-Verlag Berlin Hei-
delberg, 2009, pages 1–274. isbn: 978-3-642-00497-1. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-
00497-1.
[5]
CES EduPack [Computer software].
[6]
Robert D. Cook. Finite Element Modelling for Stress Analysis. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., 1995. isbn: 0-471-10774-3.
[7]
N. Dagnaes-Hansen and I.F. Santos. “Magnetic Bearings for Non-static Fly-
wheel Energy Storage Systems (FESS)”. In: Proceedings of IFToMM 2018, ac-
cepted for submission.
[8]
N. Dagnaes-Hansen and I.F. Santos. “Magnetically suspended flywheel in gim-
bal mount - nonlinear modelling and simulation”. In: Journal of Sound of Vi-
bration. In print (2018).
[9]
N. Dagnaes-Hansen and I.F. Santos. “Magnetically suspended flywheel in gim-
bal mount - test bench design and experimental validation”. In: Journal of
Sound of Vibration. Submitted (2018).
[10]
Tim Dever and Nasa Grc. “Development of a High Specific Energy Flywheel
Module, and Studies to Quantify Its Mission Applications and Benefits”. In:
(). url: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/
20150009522.pdf.
[11]
Energistyrelsen. “Energistatistik 2016”. In: (). url: https://ens.dk/sites/
ens.dk/files/Statistik/estat2016.pdf.
[12]
D. J. Ewins. Modal Testing. second. Research Studies Press Ltd., 2000. isbn: 0
86380 218 4.
==PAGE:102==
88
Bibliography
[13]
M M Flynn, J J Zierer, and R C Thompson. “Performance Testing of a Vehic-
ular Flywheel Energy System”. In: Advanced Hybrid Vehicle Powertrains 2005
2005.724 (2005). doi: 10.4271/2005-01-0809. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
4271/2005-01-0809.
[14]
Lew Fulton. “Electric and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles”. In: (2035). url:
http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/EV%
7B%5C_%7DPHEV%7B%5C_%7DRoadmap.pdf.
[15]
Lawrence Hawkins et al. “Shock and Vibration Testing of an AMB Supported
Energy Storage Flywheel”. In: JSME International Journal Series C 46.2 (2003),
pages 429–435. issn: 1344-7653. doi: 10.1299/jsmec.46.429.
[16]
Daniel J. Inman. Engineering Vibration. fourth. Pearson Education Limited,
2014. isbn: 978-0-13-287169-3.
[17]
Maersk Drilling. The drilling industry. url: https://www.maerskdrilling.
com/en/about-us/the-drilling-industry (visited on June 21, 2018).
[18]
Magnus Jørck Ravn. “Karakterisering af passive aksielle magnetiske lejekræfter
og transiente rotorsvingninger”. In: (2017).
[19]
Clarence W. de Silva. “Experimental Modal Analysis”. In: Vibration Fundamen-
tals and Practice (2000).
[20]
SKF. Rolling bearings. SKF Group 2013, 2013.
[21]
Viggo Tvergaard. Styrkelære: Statik og bjælketeori. Technichal University of
Denmark, 2010.
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX A
Element Verifications
A.1
Element Verification: BEAM188, SOLID186 &
SOLID273
In order to examine the precision of the two element types a pilot study is carried
out on a unsupported beam as depicted in figure A.1.
Figure A.1: Beam in free-free condition
The beam considered has the length l and has a hollow circular cross section A, with
inner radius ri and outer radius ro. The dimensions of the beam, cross-sectional area
is given in table A.1.
l [mm]
a [mm]
b [mm]
A [mm2]
I [mm4]
s [−]
1000
8
20
1056
1.22447 · 105
92.8
Table A.1: Beam properties
In the table the area moment of inertia is listed which is calculated by [21]:
I = π
4
(
ro
2 −ri
2)
(A.1)
and the slenderness ratio is found from:
s =
l
√
I
A
(A.2)
==PAGE:104==
90
A Element Verifications
A.1.1
Analytical
The natural frequencies of a simple beam can be classified into corresponding to
longitudinal vibration modes, torsional vibration modes and bending vibration modes.
In [16] an expression for the natural frequencies corresponding to the longitudinal and
torsional vibration modes of a beam in free-free condition is given by:
ωn = nπc
l
,
n = 0, 1, 2, ...
(A.3)
For the longitudinal vibration modes the coefficient c is an expression for the velocity
of propagation of the displacement in the beam and is given by:
c =
√
E
ρ
(A.4)
The coefficient c for torsional modes is given by:
c =
√
Gγ
ρJ
(A.5)
Here γ is the torsional constant which is identical to the polar moment of inertia J
for a beam with hollow circular cross section. Thus c can be reduced to:
c =
√
G
ρ
(A.6)
Where it is used that: G =
E
2(1+ν) for an isotropic material.
The cantilever beam considered can be represented by Euler-Bernoulli beam theory
by the following assumptions:
• Timoshenko effects can be neglected as the slenderness ratio s > 10 according
to [21]
• Plane sections remain plane
• Isotropic elastic material that remains linear and homogeneous not exposed to
axial loading
• Shear and rotary inertia are neglected
• Rotations and translation is decoupled by assuming that vibration direction is
in the symmetry plane
==PAGE:105==
A.1 Element Verification: BEAM188, SOLID186 & SOLID273
91
In [16] an expression for the bending natural frequencies of a beam is developed based
on Euler-Bernoulli beam theory given by:
ωn = βn
2
√
EI
ρA
(A.7)
Here the factor βn depends on how the beam is supported. In table A.2 the first five
coefficients are given from [16] for a beam in free condition.
n
1
2
3
4
5
βnl
4.7300474
7.8532046
10.9956078
14.1371655
17.2787597
βn
26.278041
43.628914
61.0867100
78.5398083
95.9931095
Table A.2: Beta coefficients for beam in free condition
In table A.3 the first five natural frequencies for longitudinal, twisting, and bending
vibration mode is shown. However the first mode for n = 0 is excluded since this will
correspond to a rigid body mode.
Mode
n
1
2
3
4
5
Long.
fn [Hz]
2531
5063
7594
10126
12657
Tors.
fn [Hz]
1552
3104
4656
6208
7760
Bend.
fn [Hz]
194.1
535.2
1049
1734
2591
Table A.3: Natural frequencies for beam for element verification
The analytic solutions are exact solutions to the problem whereas the results obtained
by FEM are only approximations. Therefor the precision of the two element types
can be estimated by comparing the FEM results to the exact analytic results.
A.1.2
FEM Solutions
The discretisation of the structure is crucial for the results obtained, so a convergence
study is carried out to assure that sufficient elements are used to represent the beam.
The initial mesh of the model when using BEAM188 is only one elements, and the
structure is then refined by dividing the beam into more elements along the length.
The initial mesh when using SOLID186 is 4 element visions a long the circumferential
and 2 element divisions along the length l and 1 element divisions trough the cylinder
wall thickness. This initial mesh is also the initial mesh for the SOLID273 model,
however the mesh along the circumferential is constant and set to 12 element divisions.
The refinement of the SOLID models are carried out by multiplying the initial element
division along the length, circumferential and wall thickness with a factor i = 1, 2, ...
with i increasing for increasing refinement. The mesh convergence for when using
BEAM188, SOLID186 and SOLID273 is shown in figure A.2.
==PAGE:106==
92
A Element Verifications
(a) BEAM188
(b) SOLID186
(c) SOLID273
Figure A.2: Convergence study of a beam when using BEAM188, SOLID186 and
SOLID273
From the figures it is observed that all frequencies converges from above, which is due
to a coarse discretisation of a structure tends to increase the stiffness thus yielding
higher natural frequencies.
Moreover it is observed from the figures that f1 and f2 occur at the exact same
frequency. This is due to symmetry in the cross section wrt to the bending modes.
The same bending mode will occur for bending over each symmetry axis in the cross
section. This is also the same case for f4 and f5 for the second bending mode and so
on.
Furthermore it is observed that the natural frequencies obtained by the BEAM188
model has converged after 4 elements wheres the SOLID186 and SOLID273 mod-
els are converged after 432 and 40 elements respectively. Thus fewer elements are
needed when using BEAM188 and the computational time will be less when using
BEAM188 than SOLID186 and SOLID273 since the solid elements has more DOF.
However computational time is not of interest in this simple scenario however it is
==PAGE:107==
A.1 Element Verification: BEAM188, SOLID186 & SOLID273
93
definitely of interest in larger models. It should be denoted that a different initial
mesh for the solid elements might have yielded a different convergence. In section
A.1.3 the converged mesh is shown for the beam when using BEAM188, SOLID186
and SOLID273 elements.
In table A.4 to table A.6 the converged frequencies are shown for the three mode
types as well as the discrepancies compared to the analytic results:
Result
Elements
Freq. no
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
Ana.
-
Freq. [Hz] 2531
5063
7594
10126
12657
BEAM188
4
Freq. [Hz]
2531
5063
7599
10128
12795
Error [%]
0.015
0.005
0.064
0.024
1.090
SOLID186
432
Freq. [Hz]
2531
5060
7586
10106
12620
Error [%]
0.015
0.055
0.108
0.193
0.292
SOLID273
40
Freq. [Hz]
2531
5060
7586
10106
12620
Error [%]
0.015
0.055
0.108
0.193
0.292
Table A.4: Comparison of gimbal using BEAM188 and SOLID186 to analytic longi-
tudinal frequencies
Result
Elements
Freq. no
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
Ana.
-
Freq. [Hz] 1552
3104
4656
6208
7760
BEAM188
4
Freq. [Hz]
1552
3104
4570
6210
7845
Error [%]
0.006
0.006
0.078
0.026
1.09
SOLID186
432
Freq. [Hz]
1552
3104
4656
6209
7763
Error [%]
0.006
0.006
0.006
0.010
0.032
SOLID186
40
Freq. [Hz]
1552
3104
4656
6209
7762
Error [%]
0.006
0.006
0.006
0.010
0.020
Table A.5: Comparison of gimbal using BEAM188 and SOLID186 to analytic tor-
sional frequencies
Result
Elements
Freq. no
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
Ana.
-
Freq. [Hz] 194.1
535.2
1049
1734
2591
BEAM188
4
Freq. [Hz]
193.0
526.2
1019
1680
2524
Error [%]
0.599
1.685
2.883
3.140
2.585
SOLID186
432
Freq. [Hz]
193.0
526.8
1018
1651
2412
Error [%]
0.599
1.573
2.978
4.811
6.907
SOLID273
40
Freq. [Hz]
193.1
526.8
1018
1651
2412
Error [%]
0.548
1.573
2.978
4.811
6.907
Table A.6: Comparison of gimbal using BEAM188 and SOLID186 to analytic bending
frequencies
==PAGE:108==
94
A Element Verifications
From the tables it is clearly seen that all the element types yields good results with
low errors and can be used to model the cantilever beam and the accuracy is justified.
The largest discrepancies are at the high bending modes where shear deformation
and rotary inertia becomes important which the Euler-Bernoulli theory does not take
into account. This is why the FE result in general yields lower frequencies for the
bending modes, as they model the beam mode flexible. Since the BEAM188 model
uses less elements than the SOLID186 model and SOLID273 model, the BEAM188
model are definitely preferred for a simple problem like this as it is easily meshed.
A.1.3
Converged Mesh
(a) BEAM188
(b) SOLID186
(c) SOLID273
Figure A.3: Converged mesh when using BEAM188, SOLID186, SOLID273 for un-
supported beam
A.2
Element Verification: MATRIX27
The element type MATRIX27 is an arbitrary element. Thus it can be used to rep-
resent a spring, by assigning linear spring stiffness coefficients in the matrix. The
precision of the MATRIX27 element is illustrated by analysing the scenario depicted
in figure A.4.
Figure A.4: Spring-mass system
==PAGE:109==
A.2 Element Verification: MATRIX27
95
The natural frequency of the above spring-mass system, with stiffness ks and mass m
is given by [16]:
f = 1
2π
√
k
m = 10 Hz
(A.8)
When setting ks = 1000 N/m and m = 0.1 kg the analytic results and FEM results
depicted in table A.7 are obtained.
k [N/m]
m [kg]
f [Hz]
Analytic
1000
0.1
100
FEM
1000
0.1
100
Error
-
-
0 %
Table A.7: Experimental and analytic results for MATRIX27 spring example
From the table its is clearly seen that no discrepancies occur on thus the general
element MATRIX27 represents a linear spring perfectly.
==PAGE:110==
96
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX B
Gimbal
In this appendix results related to the gimbal model can be found.
See next page.
==PAGE:112==
98
B Gimbal
B.1
Mode Shapes After Introduction of Gap
(a) f1 = 225.3 Hz
(b) f2 = 431.9 Hz
(c) f3 = 497.0 Hz
(d) f4 = 870.2 Hz
(e) f5 = 878.2 Hz
(f) f6 = 883.4 Hz
Figure B.1: Mode shapes for gimbal solid model with gap
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX C
Housing
In this appendix results related to the housing results can be found.
C.1
Housing Discretised Geometry Dimensions
Figure C.1: Discretised geometry of housing with dimensions
==PAGE:114==
100
C Housing
C.2
Beam Model Convergence Study
(a) Convergence study
(b) CPU time
Figure C.2: Convergence study of housing
C.3
Beam Model Mode Shapes
(a) f2 = 3454 Hz
(b) f5 = 6174 Hz
Figure C.3: Beam model mode shapes for housing
==PAGE:115==
C.4 Solid Model Convergence Study
101
C.4
Solid Model Convergence Study
(a) Convergence study
(b) CPU time
Figure C.4: Convergence study of housing
C.5
Solid Model Mode Shapes
(a) f2 = 2902.0 Hz
(b) f5 = 4316.1 Hz
Figure C.5: Solid model mode shapes for housing
==PAGE:116==
102
C Housing
C.6
AMB Material Properties and Natural Frequencies
(a) f2
(b) f3
(c) f4
(d) f5
(e) f6
Figure C.6: Natural frequencies for housing as function of Young’s modulus and
density for AMB
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX D
Rotor
In this appendix results related to the rotor results can be found.
D.1
Rotor Discretised Geometry Dimensions
Figure D.1: Discretised geometry of rotor with dimensions
==PAGE:118==
104
D Rotor
D.2
Beam Model Convergence Study
(a) Convergence study
(b) CPU time
Figure D.2: Convergence study of rotor
D.3
Beam Model Mode Shapes
(a) f2 = 2207 Hz
(b) f4 = 5507 Hz
Figure D.3: Beam model mode shapes for rotor
==PAGE:119==
D.4 Solid Model Convergence Study
105
D.4
Solid Model Convergence Study
(a) Convergence study
(b) CPU time
Figure D.4: Convergence study of rotor
D.5
Solid Model Mode Shapes
(a) f2 = 2033 Hz
(b) f5 = 5126 Hz
Figure D.5: Solid model mode shapes for rotor
==PAGE:120==
106
D Rotor
D.6
Experimental Data
(a) FRF
(b) Time domain
Figure D.6: Rotor experimental analysis, impact: AMB, acc. position: centre
(a) FRF
(b) Time domain
Figure D.7: Rotor experimental analysis, impact: AMB, acc. position: ball bearing
==PAGE:121==
D.6 Experimental Data
107
(a) FRF
(b) Time domain
Figure D.8: Rotor experimental analysis, impact: AMB, acc. position: centre
(a) FRF
(b) Time domain
Figure D.9: Rotor experimental analysis, impact: AMB, acc. position: sensor
==PAGE:122==
108
D Rotor
(a) FRF
(b) Time domain
Figure D.10: Rotor experimental analysis, impact: ball bearing, acc. position: ball
bearing
(a) FRF
(b) Time domain
Figure D.11: Rotor experimental analysis, impact: centre, acc. position: centre
==PAGE:123==
D.6 Experimental Data
109
(a) FRF
(b) Time domain
Figure D.12: Rotor experimental analysis, impact: centre, acc. position: ball bearing
(a) FRF
(b) Time domain
Figure D.13: Rotor experimental analysis, impact: centre, acc. position: sensor
==PAGE:124==
110
D Rotor
D.7
Adjusted Solid Model Mode Shapes
(a) f2 = 1346 Hz
(b) f4 = 3224 Hz
Figure D.14: Adjusted solid model mode shapes for rotor
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX E
Global Model
In this appendix results related to the global model can be found.
E.1
Ball Bearing Spring and BC Spring Convergence
Study
Figure E.1: Convergence study of ball bearing stiffness for final global model
==PAGE:126==
112
E Global Model
Figure E.2: Convergence study of BC spring stiffness for final global model
E.2
Steel Rods Convergence
(a) Frequency convergence
(b) Initial mesh
Figure E.3: Convergence study of steel rod
In the above figure fg denotes the natural frequencies for the rod mesh use din the
global model. Is is clearly seen that the natural frequencies coincide witht he lines
for the convergence study. Thus the mesh is converged.
==PAGE:127==
E.3 Mode Shapes for Global Model
113
E.3
Mode Shapes for Global Model
(a) f1 = 0 Hz
(b) f2 = 0 Hz
(c) f3 = 10.10 Hz
(d) f4 = 26.33 Hz
(e) f5 = 27.79 Hz
(f) f7 = 64.25 Hz
Figure E.4: Mode shape 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 7 for global model
==PAGE:128==
114
E Global Model
(a) f8 = 68.51 Hz
(b) f10 = 111.4 Hz
(c) f12 = 365.1 Hz
(d) f13 = 504.4 Hz
(e) f15 = 801.0 Hz
(f) f16 = 1086 Hz
Figure E.5: Mode shape 8, 10, 12, 13, 15, and 16 for global model
==PAGE:129==
E.3 Mode Shapes for Global Model
115
(a) f18 = 1226 Hz
(b) f19 = 1238 Hz
(c) f21 = 1347 Hz
(d) f22 = 1396 Hz
(e) f23 = 1693 Hz
Figure E.6: Mode shape 18, 19, 21, 22, and 23 for global model
==PAGE:130==
116
E Global Model
E.4
Experimental Equipment
(a) Brüel & Kjær 8230-002 force trans-
ducer mounted on hammer
(b) Brüel & Kjær 4339 accelerometer
(c) Brüel & Kjær Charge amplifier
type 2635 for force transducer and ac-
celerometer
(d) NI-9215 DAQ
Figure E.7: Equipment used in experimental investigation of the FESS
==PAGE:131==
E.5 Experimental Investigation
117
E.5
Experimental Investigation
(a) FRF
(b) Time domain
Figure E.8: Experimental results – point 2
(a) FRF
(b) Time domain
Figure E.9: Experimental results – point 3
==PAGE:132==
118
E Global Model
(a) FRF
(b) Time domain
Figure E.10: Experimental results – point 4
(a) FRF
(b) Time domain
Figure E.11: Experimental results – point 5
==PAGE:133==
E.5 Experimental Investigation
119
(a) FRF
(b) Time domain
Figure E.12: Experimental results – point 6
(a) FRF
(b) Time domain
Figure E.13: Experimental results – point 7
==PAGE:134==
120
E Global Model
(a) FRF
(b) Time domain
Figure E.14: Experimental results – point 8
E.6
MATLAB Code for Data Processing of Experiments
1 % FRF
2 clear all; close all; clc;
3
4 % Filename for output picture
5 filename = 'FESS_P8';
6
7 % impacts in measurment
8 impacts = 50;
9
10 % Loading data;
11 load Point_10.txt;
12 data = Point_10;
13
14
15 % Number of data points in each impact and samplign frequency
16 N
= length(data)/impacts;
17 Fs
= 6000;
18
19 % Hanning windows
20 WIN = hann(N);
21
22 % Overlap and sensitivty
23 overlap = 0;
24 xsens
= 1;
25 ysens
= 1;
26
27 % Loading data
28 x = -data(:,3)*xsens;
29 y = data(:,2)*ysens;
30
==PAGE:135==
E.6 MATLAB Code for Data Processing of Experiments
121
31 % Butterworth filter
32
[Nz,Dz]=butter(5,[0.99],'low');
33
x = filter(Nz,Dz,x);
% input signal after filtering
34
y = filter(Nz,Dz,y);
% output signal after filtering
35
36 % PSD and CSD
37
S_xy = cpsd(x,y,WIN,overlap,N,Fs);
38
S_yx = cpsd(y,x,WIN,overlap,N,Fs);
39
S_xx = pwelch(x,WIN,overlap,N,Fs);
40
S_yy = pwelch(y,WIN,overlap,N,Fs);
41
42 % FRF
43
H1 = S_xy./S_xx;
44
H2 = S_yy./S_yx;
45
46 % Coherence
47 [gamma,F] = mscohere(x,y,WIN,overlap,N,Fs);
48
49 %Index and time vector
50 index = 1:N/2;
51 time=(1:size(x))/Fs;
52
53 % Calculating phase
54 phase2 = -1*ones(1,max(size(index))); % preallocating
55 for it=1:max(size(index))
56 phase2(it)=acos( real(H2(it)) / sqrt( (real(H2(it)))^2+(imag(H2(it)))^2) );
57 end
58
59 % Font size
60 fsize = 24;
61
62 % Time domain
63 figure(1)
64 subplot(2,1,1); plot(time,y,'k-');
65 grid
66 set(gca,'FontSize',fsize)
67 ylabel('Acc. [m/$\mathrm{s^2}$]','Interpreter','latex','FontSize',fsize)
68 xlabel('Time [s]','Interpreter','latex','FontSize',fsize)
69 axis([0 max(time) -10 10])
70 subplot(2,1,2); plot(time,x,'k-');
71 grid
72 set(gca,'FontSize',fsize)
73 ylabel('Force [N]','Interpreter','latex','FontSize',fsize)
74 xlabel('Time [s]','Interpreter','latex','FontSize',fsize)
75 axis([0 max(time) -5 5])
76 saveas(gcf,[filename,'_time','.png']);
77
78 % FRF
79 figure(2)
80 subplot(3,1,1), semilogy(F(index),abs(H1(index)),'b-',F(index),abs(H2(index)
),'r-','LineWidth',1.5);
81 axis([0.7 max(F(index)) 0
1.1*max(abs(H2(index)))])
82 grid
83 set(gca,'FontSize',fsize)
==PAGE:136==
122
E Global Model
84 ylabel('FRF [$\mathrm{\frac{(m/s^2)}{N}}$]','Interpreter','latex','FontSize'
,fsize)
85 legend('H1','H2')
86 subplot(3,1,2), plot(F(index),phase2(index)*180/pi,'r-','LineWidth',1.5);
87 grid
88 set(gca,'FontSize',fsize,'YTick',[-180:90:180],'YTickLabel',[-180:90:180])
89 set(gca,'YTick',[-180:90:180],'YTickLabel',[-180:90:180])
90 axis([0.7 max(F(index)) 0 200])
91 ylabel('Phase [$^\mathrm{o}$]','Interpreter','latex','FontSize',fsize)
92 subplot(3,1,3), plot(F(index),gamma(index),'k-','LineWidth',1.5);
93 axis([0 max(F(index)) 0 1.1])
94 set(gca,'FontSize',fsize)
95 xlabel('Frequency [Hz]','Interpreter','latex','FontSize',fsize)
96 ylabel('Coherence','Interpreter','latex','FontSize',fsize)
97 grid
98 saveas(gcf,[filename,'_FRF','.png']);
figures/global/FRF.m
==PAGE:137==
E.7 PMB Sensitivity Plots
123
E.7
PMB Sensitivity Plots
(a) f1
(b) f2
(c) f6
(d) f7
(e) f8
(f) f9
Figure E.15: Natural frequency 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, and 9 as function of PMB stiffnesses
==PAGE:138==
124
E Global Model
(a) f10
(b) f11
(c) f12
(d) f13
(e) f14
(f) f15
Figure E.16: Natural frequency 10 to 15 as function of PMB stiffnesses
==PAGE:139==
E.7 PMB Sensitivity Plots
125
(a) f16
(b) f17
(c) f18
(d) f19
(e) f20
(f) f21
Figure E.17: Natural frequency 16 to 21 as function of PMB stiffnesses
==PAGE:140==
126
E Global Model
(a) f22
(b) f23
Figure E.18: Natural frequency 23 as function of PMB stiffnesses
==PAGE:141==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Solid Mechanics
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 404
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 4250
Fax  (+45) 4593 1475
www.mek.dtu.dk
