==PAGE:1==
Compressed Representations of
Highly-Repetitive Matrices
Simon Graverholt Søkilde
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The goal of this thesis is to represent highly-repetitive matrices in compressed
space. We implement an approximate version of Re-Pair compression and an
online version of Signature grammar compression. Both implementations are ex-
perimentally tested on sequences and matrices. We ﬁnd that Re-Pair compresses
slightly better than Signature compression, however, Signature grammars can
be constructed faster in theory. Construction time is not tested in practice. We
propose two techniques for achieving matrix-vector multiplication in time pro-
portional to the compressed size of the matrix. The ﬁrst, Reference compression,
achieves speed-up in practice, however slow construction of the compressed ma-
trix and poor compression with respect to space. The second, Grammar-based
compressed computation, achieves speed-up in compressed space in theory and
practice at the cost of a small space overhead proportional to the size of the
compressed matrix.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering. Inge Li Gørtz and Philip Bille were
supervisors of the project. In addition, the project was supervised by Mikko
Berggren Ettienne.
The thesis deals with compressed representations of highly-repetitive matrices.
Lyngby, 15-June-2018
Simon Graverholt Søkilde
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to thank my supervisors Inge Li Gørtz and Philip
Bille. They have brought this subject to my attention and have supported me
throughout the process, helping me keep the weekly momentum going.
Additionally, I would like to thank Mikko Berggren Ettienne for the support and
prolonged meetings along the way. Also, a thanks to Anders Roy Christiansen
for the inspiration, discussions and white-board sessions, which provided me
with a lot of energy for the project.
I express my gratitude to Teresa Steiner, Laura Hjerrild Andersen, Finn Fern-
strøm, Nicolai André Brogaard Riis and Mathias Kaas-Olsen for taking the time
to read parts of the report, providing me with excellent feedback.
Finally, I would like to thank my ﬁancée, Mette Bjørnholt Olsen, for her patience
and support the past ﬁve months.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem Statement
7
3
Preliminaries
9
3.1
Models of Computation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Grammars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Grammar Compression
15
4.1
Grammar Compressed Matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Paired Compression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Approximate Re-Pair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Signature Grammar Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Compressed Computation
39
5.1
Reference Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Grammar-Based Compressed Computation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Results
51
6.1
Grammar Compression of Sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2
Grammar Compression of Matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.3
Computation of Matrix-Vector Product
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
7
Conclusion
73
7.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A Additional Results
77
Bibliography
83
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The demand for processing massive amounts of data is growing, and the size of
the data puts restrictions on the feasibility of computation. Compressed repre-
sentations of huge datasets is an interesting subject, since it opens the possibility
for manipulation in main memory. In this thesis, we address the problem of eﬃ-
ciently representing and processing highly-repetitive high-dimensional matrices
without loss of data.
The matrix-vector product is a fundamental operation. For example, in the
context of graph problems, the PageRank algorithm relies on the matrix-vector
product of binary matrices which represent web graphs. In the ﬁeld of Machine
Learning, observations and attributes are organised into matrices in order to
carry out data analysis and predictions based on regression or classiﬁcation.
Learning a statistical model depends on matrix-vector products as well. Working
with lossless compression (where the data can be completely reconstructed) in
machine learning is interesting, as more data result in higher accuracy when
making predictions using statistical models.
The growing size of data produces a problem of eﬃciently processing it. The
input matrices are too large to ﬁt in memory, making computations ineﬃcient,
and previous approaches has been to cut away less important data using lossy
compression mechanisms, such as dimensionality reduction [TSYP16]. In order
to optimise the accuracy of the statistical models, lossless compressed represen-
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
tation of massive datasets is of high importance.
The compressed matrix must be usable within memory, that is, the desired
computation should be able to be carried out without decompressing the whole
matrix, otherwise defeating the purpose. Algorithms on matrices that are de-
signed for main memory can be run on much larger matrices by maintaining
them in compressed form. The goal is therefore eﬃcient computation in com-
pressed space. Classical compression techniques such as dictionary compression
often requires that the sequence is decompressed up until the desired point.
Grammar compression, on the other hand, imposes a structure on the data
which allows local decompression, limiting the working space.
In this thesis we investigate how grammar compression can be used to eﬃciently
compress matrices while allowing for fast computations, supported by retrieval
of rows in compressed form. First, we address the problem of ﬁtting matrices
into main memory, then we aim at making the computations faster.
Scope
We limit ourselves to consider binary matrices only, which are very sparse,
meaning that the number of 0’s greatly exceeds the number of 1’s. We consider
row access only, and therefore do not consider column access nor access on the
transposed matrix. We do not consider any computations besides the matrix-
vector product. The matrices are considered static, and the scope of this thesis
is matrices too large for main memory.
Previous Work
Claude and Navarro [CN10] propose an approximate version of the classical
Re-Pair (originally by Larsson and Moﬀat [LM00]), among other contributions.
The original Re-Pair uses linear working space in the input size, which does not
allow for eﬃcient compression of input too large for memory. The approximate
version constructs a grammar compression of a binary matrix in limited working
space, and a method of compressing while maintaining the input matrix on disk
is proposed.
Tabei et al. [TSYP16] propose another approximate version of Re-Pair, and it is
used for computing Partial Least Squares Regression on matrices too large to ﬁt
in memory. The approximate Re-Pair is in many ways similar to that of [CN10],
==PAGE:13==
3
however they show more sophisticated ways of counting pair frequencies. The
authors also show a way of achieving column access as well.
Francisco et al. [FGLN17] present a method/exploit to perform matrix-vector
multiplication in time proportional to the compressed size of the matrix. It is
proposed on the basis of the compressed graph (matrix) representation of Boldi
and Vigna [BV04].
Contribution
The work of this thesis comes from a very broad approach to matrix compression.
For every step taken in this project, we have gathered knowledge and tried the
methods and ideas out in practice by implementing them. All programs are
written in Java 8.
To give a very broad overview, we implement two compression algorithms: Ap-
proximate Re-Pair and Signature grammar compression. They are experimen-
tally tested and compared.
Then we propose and implement two ideas for
speeding up matrix-vector multiplication for compressed matrices: Reference
compression and Grammar-based compressed computation. The following pro-
vides a more detailed overview.
Compression of matrices is achieved by implementing a version of the Approxi-
mate Re-Pair, based on the one proposed in [CN10], as the paper describes the
algorithm in great detail. Re-Pair is known to achieve good compression. The
approximate version can run in limited worked space, enabling compression of
large datasets maintained on disk, however the running time is worse than the
original in-memory version. Approximate Re-Pair can obtain reduced working
space and faster construction at the cost of compression size.
Furthermore, we devise and implement an online version of Signature grammar
compression proposed in [CE17] which runs in linear time, even when the input is
maintained on disk, which makes it interesting for compression of large matrices.
It is the ﬁrst implementation of Signature compression as far as we are aware.
We have experimentally tested both algorithms on their ability to compress ma-
trices. Before compressing matrices, we have chosen to compare the algorithms
from a general perspective, deciding to address the performance of compressing
highly compressible character sequences. Even though the scope of this thesis is
matrices too large for memory, the matrices of the test-bench do ﬁt in memory.
This choice was made for ease of implementation. The aim of the implementa-
tions is to show compression performance with respect to size, and we do not
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
investigate compression time in practice, however we analyse it in theory. We
ﬁnd that Re-Pair compresses slightly better than the Signature compression in
practice. Signature grammars are constructed faster in theory, however we have
no experiments to support this in practice.
On the basis of the exploit of [FGLN17], we have tried to use the idea in a
direct way to compress a matrix by picking a set of reference rows. All rows
of the matrix are then compressed by referring to one of these reference rows,
hopefully achieving compression. We call this idea Reference compression. If
compression is achieved, it is possible to achieve matrix-vector multiplication
in compressed time.
This did not yield satisfactory results with respect to
compression size, however, it revealed a tendency that computation time can be
sped up in practice.
Lastly, we propose a technique of achieving matrix-vector multiplication in time
proportional to the compressed size for grammar compressed matrices. We call
the method Grammar-based compressed computation. It is a simple yet eﬀective
way of maintaining previously calculated results, inspired from the exploit of
[FGLN17] and of working with Reference compression in practice.
We ﬁnd
that speed-up is achieved in both theory and practice at the cost of small space
overhead proportional to the compressed size, thus we stay in compressed space.
For the case that the matrix does ﬁt in memory, this method can be useful as
well to speed up computations.
Overview
After this section we introduce the problem more formally in Chapter 2. This is
followed by the preliminaries containing deﬁnitions of grammars and matrices
found in Chapter 3, focusing on how to represent matrices.
Chapter 4 deﬁnes grammar compression of matrices and contains descriptions
and analysis of the Approximate Re-Pair and Signature compression algorithms.
Modiﬁcations and implementation-speciﬁc choices are also included.
In Chapter 5 we present ideas to eﬃciently compute the matrix-vector product
on compressed matrices. Reference compression as well as our Grammar-based
compressed computation are described.
The experimental results are all collected in Chapter 6, which starts with an
analysis of compression performance of Approximate Re-Pair and Signature
compression in general, on sequences. This is followed by compression of matri-
ces and concluded with compressed computation in practice.
==PAGE:15==
5
Chapter 7 contains the conclusions gathered along the way, followed by a brief
discussion of future work.
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Problem Statement
In this section we present the problem of this thesis, which is to represent highly-
repetitive matrices in compressed space.
The Problem
Let X be a binary matrix of n rows and m columns. Let ri be the i’th row of
X and let xij ∈{0, 1} be the element at row i, column j. Let v be a vector
of length n. In order to perform operations on X, access to the elements of
the rows must be available. When computing the matrix-vector product, Xv,
the rows of X must be accessed. The problem is to represent X in compressed
space such that any row ri can be retrieved eﬃciently without decompressing
the whole matrix. We intend to exploit the repetitiveness and other types of
patterns in matrices to represent them compactly.
Another important aspect of this problem is the working space of compressing
X. We investigate methods for compressing X in limited space, in accordance
with the goal of being able to process massive data matrices.
==PAGE:18==
8
Problem Statement
Aim of the project
The aim of the project is to investigate previous and current methods of com-
pressing matrices, with the goal of performing computations on them directly in
compressed format. We investigate the structure and compressibility of matrices
empirically and use it to gain an understanding of how the repetitiveness can
be exploited and what trade-oﬀs might be of interest. We carry out an analysis
and evaluation of the eﬃciency of current solutions. In the process, new ways
are explored and new solutions are investigated based on the experiences.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Preliminaries
This section outlines the models of computation used in this thesis, followed by
deﬁnitions of grammars and matrices.
3.1
Models of Computation
In this thesis we use two diﬀerent models of computation in algorithmic analysis:
The word RAM model for time and space of most algorithms, and the I/O model
for analysis of time for algorithms maintaining and/or reading the input from
disk while running. Two algorithms can have similar running time in the word
RAM model, however, if the bottleneck is reading and writing to disk, the I/O
model can be used to give a more accurate evaluation.
Word RAM Model
The classical model where memory is considered inﬁnite,
memory cells can be read and written, and arithmetic and boolean operations
carried out. The cost is the number of such operations.
I/O Model
The model is used between memory and disk. It assumes limited
memory of size M and an inﬁnite disk. A single I/O operation is a read or
==PAGE:20==
10
Preliminaries
write of a consecutive block of B cells between memory and disk. Arithmetic
and boolean operations can be carried out in memory. The cost is the number
of I/O operations, and therefore computation within memory is free.
3.2
Grammars
A grammar G is a set of production rules. Let Σ be an alphabet of symbols.
The goal of grammar compression is to represent a sequence S ∈Σn by a small
grammar G that generates S (and only S).
A production rule has the form Z →Y , where Y is a non-empty sequence
of production or terminal symbols.
The left-hand side of a production rule
must be a single production symbol, indicating that it can be expanded upon.
A grammar for compression is deterministic and producing a ﬁnite sequence,
therefore if Z →Y then we have that there exist no rules for which a symbol in
Y is on the left-hand side and Z is on the right-hand side, since there can not
be cycles. Terminal symbols are symbols that are part of the alphabet Σ.
A grammar can be represented by a dictionary or graph.
A dictionary is a
mapping between keys and values, and therefore a dictionary is useful for this
purpose when the keys are production symbols and the values the right-hand
side of the production rules. When representing a grammar as a graph, each pro-
duction symbol is an internal node with ordered children equal to each symbol
of the right-hand side. Terminal symbols are leaves.
(a) The compression c(S)
of sequence S.
(b) The dictionary D expressed as production rules
and visualized as a forest of grammar trees.
Figure 3.1: Example of a grammar compressed sequence S.
Denote by c(S) the compressed sequence constructed by compressing S.
It
is a sequence of symbols that are either production or terminal symbols. In
Figure 3.1a an example sequence is shown along with a compressed version of
it, c(S). The grammar used for compressing S is represented as dictionary D.
In Figure 3.1b the dictionary is depicted both as the set of production rules and
visualised as a forest of grammar trees. To decompress c(S), the sequence is
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Matrices
11
traversed from left to right, expanding each right-hand side of a production rule
into terminal symbols using D. We deﬁne the size of a grammar as follows.
Definition 3.1 (Size of Grammar) Let G be a grammar generating S.
Let the right-hand side of every production rule have constant length (2 if the
grammar is binary). The size of G, denoted |G|, is equal to the total number of
production rules in G.
A Single Root
Notice that c(S) is needed along with D to form S, since D
represents a grammar forest of disconnected trees. It is possible to let the gram-
mar of S have a single root, and therefore the compression can be expressed by
a single rooted tree. Imagine constructing a binary tree on top of c(S), result-
ing in a single root production symbol. Whether to end up with a compressed
sequence or single root symbol depends on the application.
Lossless Compression
Grammar compression is a lossless compression tech-
nique. It means that no data is lost, and the original sequence can be fully
recovered from the grammar. This is opposed to lossy compression, where one
allows some fraction of the data to be lost.
3.3
Matrices
In this section we deﬁne matrices for our purpose, providing examples for clarity.
The representation and encoding of matrices are covered. The section ends with
recalling the matrix-vector product and how to compute it using a sparse matrix
representation.
A matrix X is a two-dimensional array of symbols. The height of the matrix
is n, which is the number of rows.
The width of the matrix is m, which is
the number of columns. In this thesis we only concern ourselves with binary
matrices, that is, matrices where the symbols are either 0 or 1. More formally,
let xij be the number in the cell at row i and column j of X, where we have
that 1 ≤i ≤n, 1 ≤j ≤m, and also xij ∈{0, 1}. Figure 3.2 shows the general
matrix and an example binary matrix.
==PAGE:22==
12
Preliminaries
X =


x11
x12
x13
. . .
xm
x21
x22
x23
. . .
x2m
...
...
...
...
...
xn1
xn2
xn3
. . .
xnm


(a) A general matrix displaying nam-
ing of cells.
X =


11100000
11110000
01110000


(b) Example binary matrix with di-
mensions 3 × 8.
Figure 3.2: Visualisation of a matrix.
r1 = 11100000
r2 = 11110000
r3 = 01110000
(a) Plain matrix representation.
r1 = [1,2,3]
r2 = [1,2,3,4]
r3 = [2,3,4]
(b) Row list representation.
Figure 3.3: Diﬀerent representations of the rows of a binary matrix.
3.3.1
Representing Sparse Matrices
A sparse matrix is a matrix where the total amount of 0’s is far greater than
the total amount of 1’s. Such matrices are represented using a row list represen-
tation, which resembles the way graphs are represented using adjacency lists.
For each row ri store a list of integers indication the position of all the 1’s of
that row. The list is sorted in increasing order. Below is the formal deﬁnition.
In this thesis, any input matrix is in row list representation. This is a trivial
representation for sparse matrices and provides a fair basis for comparison of
size when compressing matrices.
In Figure 3.3 the rows of the example matrix in Figure 3.2b are shown using
the diﬀerent representations.
Definition 3.2 (Row List Representation) Let X be a binary ma-
trix.
The row list representation of X is an array of rows r1, r2, . . . , rn
where each row is constructed from the increasing order of positions of 1’s:
ri ←{j | xij = 1}.
Storing a plain matrix requires O(n · m) words of space if not using bit-vectors.
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Matrices
13
The row list representation requires only as many words as the total amount of
1’s. The size of a matrix is therefore deﬁned as follows.
Definition 3.3 (Size of Matrix) Let X be a binary matrix. The size
of X is denoted |X| and it is equal to the total number of symbols among all
rows in the row list representation of X.
Diﬀerential Encoding
A widely used transformation on a series of increasing numbers is to diﬀer-
entially encode them.
If applied to the row list representation, each row
ri = s1, s2, s3 . . . , st takes the encoded form
s1, (s2 −s1), (s3 −s2), . . . , (st −st−1).
This is useful when compressing matrices as it provides the opportunity for
repetitiveness within single rows. In the row list representation, each row con-
sists of unique numbers and is therefore not compressible by itself. The diﬀeren-
tial encoding can introduce similar subsequences at diﬀerent positions into the
row, making it compressible.
Tabei et al. [TSYP16] mention that this encoding tends to increase the number
of repeated pairs, allowing the Re-Pair algorithm to more eﬀectively compress
the rows. However, diﬀerential encoding does not necessarily increase compress-
ibility. Imagine a set of rows all sharing the same symbol pair at some point:
. . . , x, y . . .. These numbers are in increasing order, but not necessarily contin-
uous. As every row has this symbol pair, it would be wise to create a common
rule to represent it. If the symbols are not encoded, a single rule can be created,
no matter which symbols precede or succeed the pair in the rows. However,
if the rows are diﬀerentially encoded, we have that x is encoded based on the
distance from the symbol preceding it. Therefore, what seemed to be identical
symbol pairs can be invalidated by diﬀerentially encoding them. This is the
reason we conduct experiments both with and without this encoding to analyse
how it aﬀects the matrices in practice.
3.3.2
Plain Matrix-Vector Product
Recall the product between a matrix X and a vector v. It is denoted X · v = y
and can be iteratively computed, as shown in Algorithm 1. Vectors are indexed
as v[i].
==PAGE:24==
14
Preliminaries
Algorithm 1: MatrixVectorProduct
Input
: An n × m matrix X, and a vector v of length m.
Output: A vector y, of length n.
1 Let y be a new empty vector of length n.
2 for i ←1 to n do
3
Let sum ←0
4
for j ←1 to m do
5
sum ←sum + xij · v[j]
6
y[i] ←sum
7 return y
As every cell of X is accessed once, the time to compute the product is O(n·m).
Note that for binary matrices, if we look at line 5 in Algorithm 1, it is only a
question of adding the value of v or not. We use this observation in the following.
3.3.3
Matrix-Vector Products of Sparse Matrices
The row list representation takes up much less space when the matrix is sparse.
This representation can be utilized to compute the matrix-vector product on
binary matrices in time O(|X|). The plain product of Algorithm 1 takes O(n ·
m) time, because it also adds products of 0 to the sums. Using the row list
representation we can avoid considering the 0’s of the matrix when computing
products. The idea is simply to traverse the row lists of the matrix, indexing the
vector as many times as there are 1’s in the rows. The following Algorithm 2
describes it in detail.
Algorithm 2: RowListMatrixVectorProduct
Input
: An n × m matrix X in row lists representation, and a vector v of
length m.
Output: A vector y, of length n.
1 Let y be a new empty vector of length n.
2 for i ←1 to n do
3
Let sum ←0
4
for each symbol s in ri do
5
sum ←sum + v[s]
6
y[i] ←sum
7 return y
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4
Grammar Compression
The goal of grammar compression is to use a grammar to represent a sequence
of symbols using less space. A sequence S ∈Σn is compressed by constructing a
small grammar G that generates S. Constructing the smallest possible grammar
is a very hard problem, and the decision version of it is known to be NP-complete
[CLL+05].
First, grammar compression of matrices is described, followed by a simple algo-
rithm for sequence compression in Section 4.2. Then two diﬀerent algorithms
for constructing small grammars from sequences are described, namely Approx-
imate Re-Pair and Signature Compression.
Assumptions
The focus of this thesis is matrices too large to ﬁt in main
memory. We make the following assumptions when analysing the complexity
of algorithms and data structures regarding compression and computation on
matrices.
1. The compressed matrix ﬁts in main memory. For a dictionary D rep-
resenting the grammar and memory size M, we have that |D| ≤M for
sequences. Also, |D|+n ≤M for matrices, where n is the number of rows
in the matrix.
==PAGE:26==
16
Grammar Compression
The I/O analysis of the algorithms depends on this, as it is therefore not
needed to write the dictionary or parts of it back to disk at any point in
time.
2. A matrix has more symbols than rows. That is, |X| ≥n for a matrix X
of dimensions n × m.
When analysing running time, it takes constant time to process a row with-
out any symbols, and under this assumption is takes O(|X|) to traverse a
matrix, regardless of empty rows.
In the following, we brieﬂy introduce the two compression algorithms, to provide
an overview of their complexity, origin, and why they were chosen.
Overview of Algorithms
Re-Pair constructs a grammar by recursively re-
placing symbols pairs of high frequency.
Re-Pair is known to achieve good
compression on sequences [CN10, TSYP16]. The original Re-Pair uses linear
time and at least linear working space in the input size [LM00], even in the
implementations with least space usage [BGP17] where the working space is
(1.5 + ϵ)n words (text included), for input size n and some small constant ϵ. As
we focus on matrices too large for main memory, the input must be maintained
on disk, and the working space not be proportional to the input size. An ap-
proximate version of Re-Pair is proposed in both [CN10, TSYP16], where the
number of distinct pair replacements in each iteration, k, and the number of pair
frequencies maintained at once, t, can be chosen initially. The working space is
O(|D| + t). As the sequence is maintained on disk, the running time is analysed
using the I/O model, and the I/O cost of the algorithm is O(|D|/k · (n/B + k)),
for a disk block size B.
The Signature compression algorithm constructs a grammar by recursively re-
placing identical blocks using a block decomposition of the sequence. The Sig-
nature compression algorithm uses O(|D|+log n) working space in expectation.
The logarithmic term comes from the expected total number of unprocessed
blocks at any given time. A great property of this algorithm is that the Sig-
nature grammar can be constructed in linear time, in a single pass over the
sequence.
The original algorithm is oﬄine, and we devise an online version
producing the same grammar. The I/O cost of this is O(n/B).
Approximate Re-Pair was chosen for its already known good performance, and
has been implemented to compress sequences and matrices.
It is used as a
baseline for comparison. Signature compression was chosen due to its ability to
compress online and fast, without altering the functionality of the oﬄine version.
==PAGE:27==
4.1 Grammar Compressed Matrices
17
Also, it was chosen to benchmark a new grammar compression technique in
practice.
The grammar compressed representation of matrices is inspired by [CN10] and
[TSYP16]. Both papers show how to modify and use Re-Pair for compressing
binary matrices. The Approximate Re-Pair in this thesis is an implementation
of the algorithm on matrices proposed in [CN10]. The online Signature compres-
sion implementation is based on the oﬄine version of the Signature grammar
proposed in [CE17].
General Implementation Notes
The implementations of both algorithms
are written in Java 8.
The goal is to analyse and compare the compression
performance of the algorithms, and therefore compression speed is not experi-
mentally tested. The test-bench only consists of sequences and matrices that ﬁt
in memory. A choice made for the ease of implementation.
4.1
Grammar Compressed Matrices
In this section, the notion of grammar compressed matrices is described inde-
pendently of the algorithm used to produce the grammar. The general represen-
tation of compressed matrices, decompression and matrix-vector multiplication
is presented in the following.
4.1.1
Grammar Compression of Matrices
Let X be a binary matrix of dimensions n × m. We can grammar compress X
into G(X) = {D, P}, where D is a dictionary of production rules and P a list
of row identiﬁer production symbols. The dictionary D represents the grammar
itself which is a DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph) that might be disconnected. The
list of rules P has length n and P[i] is the production symbol representing row
ri. An example matrix and its grammar compression are shown in Figure 4.1.
Decompression
Let G(X) = {D, P} be a grammar compression of matrix
X.
Now, say that we want to decompress row ri.
Extract rule P[i], and
perform an in-order traversal of the subtree of P[i] in D. This results in sequence
x1, x2, . . . , xt. If the row is not diﬀerentially encoded, do nothing. Else, add back
==PAGE:28==
18
Grammar Compression
(a) Matrix X in plain (top)
and row list representa-
tion (bottom).
(b) The
grammar
compression
G(X)
=
{D, P}.
Figure 4.1: Example of a grammar compressed matrix.
the diﬀerences:
ri = x1, (x2 + x1), (x3 + x2), . . . , st + (st−1).
Storing The Grammar Compression
Store D as an array A of length
|D| with two entries at each position. Each production p →ab is stored as
A[p] = [a, b]. The production symbols should have continuous integer values to
not use more space than necessary, which can be enforced at construction. The
terminal symbols can either have indices outside the range of A or be stored
in A as well. If A stores the terminal symbols in range 0 to |Σ| (a one-to-one
correspondence with characters), we can for example let A[a] = [−1, −1] for
terminal symbol a, such that the invalid symbol index −1 indicates that a is
terminal. Assuming that |Σ| ≤|D|, the space is O(|D|).
Store P as an array of integers as well, such that P[i] = p when p is the
production symbol representing row ri. The space of P is O(n). Note that
n ≤|D| if all row productions are diﬀerent. However, identical rows have the
same row production, and it might be that n ≥|D|.
The total space of the grammar compression of a matrix of dimensions n × m
is O(n + |D|).
==PAGE:29==
4.1 Grammar Compressed Matrices
19
4.1.2
Grammar Compressed Matrix-Vector Product
Given a matrix X of dimensions n × m and a real-valued vector v of length m,
we can compute the product y = X · v. The same product can be computed
from the grammar compression G(X) and v. The idea is to decompress each
row, one at a time, and for every symbol sj in the decompressed row ri, we add
v[sj] to y[i]. As the matrix is binary, the symbols are simply used to index the
vector, as it is a question whether or not to add the numbers of the vector. The
algorithm can be implemented using a stack for the in-order traversal of the
grammar when decompressing rows. The pseudo-code is shown in Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3: GrammarMatrixVectorProduct
Input
: A grammar compressed matrix G(X) = {D, P}, where |P| = n, and
a real-valued vector v of length m.
Output: A vector y, of length n.
1 Algorithm Matrix-VectorProduct():
2
for i ←1 to n do
3
y[i] ←calculateRowSum(P[i])
4
return y
1 Procedure calculateRowSum(p):
2
Let sum ←0
3
Let S be an empty stack
4
S.push(p)
5
while S is not empty do
6
c = S.pop()
7
if c is a terminal symbol then
8
sum ←sum + v[c]
9
else
10
a, b = D(c)
11
S.push(b)
12
S.push(a)
13
return sum
In Figure 4.2 an example of the grammar matrix-vector product is shown. The
sum between the fourth row and the vector is visualised by showing the sub-
grammar used to obtain the values.
==PAGE:30==
20
Grammar Compression
(a) Example matrix-vector prod-
uct X · v = y.
(b) The row sum of the fourth
row is computed using an
in-order traversal from Z4
of the grammar.
Figure 4.2: Example of grammar matrix-vector product, with details of com-
puting the sum of a single row. The matrix and compression is
the same as in Figure 4.1.
Time
The running time of the algorithm is O(|X|). Every arithmetic opera-
tion takes constant time, and there are at most as many as the size of the plain
matrix, |X|, due to the in-order traversal visiting as many symbols as there are
symbols in the plain matrix. Therefore the matrix-vector product takes linear
time in the size of the matrix: O(|X|).
Space
The working space of the algorithm is the space of the grammar com-
pressed matrix and the input vector plus extra working space which is propor-
tional to the height of the grammar. However, since the height of the grammar
is bounded by the size of it, the working space becomes O(|D| + |P|).
The
resulting vector y can be output as a stream, as it is written in succession, thus
not using any working space. The height of the grammar comes from the total
size of the stack at any point in time. As the grammar is traversed in-order, the
symbols in the stack are the ones on the left path from the current sub-root.
This path can at most have length equal to the height of the grammar.
4.2
Paired Compression
The PairedCompression algorithm is a simple way of grammar compressing
a sequence of symbols in linear time. It does not exploit any patterns in the
sequence besides similar aligned pairs, and it is meant to be used as a ﬁnal
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Paired Compression
21
step in more sophisticated grammar compression schemes to go from an already
compacted sequence to a single grammar root.
Figure 4.3: Example of paired compression on sequence S = ababaca of length
7. The resulting grammar has size 5, and the grammar tree is
shown in blue. Note that productions might appear several times
in the tree, however, the grammar itself is a DAG containing only
unique symbols.
The algorithm works on a sequence S of length n. Let D be a dictionary repre-
senting the grammar G. It can be empty or consist of the grammar up until this
point in time, constructed by another algorithm. Conceptually, the algorithm
builds a grammar over S by joining symbol pairs in a way that constructs a bal-
anced binary tree on top of S. In Figure 4.3 an example is shown. The algorithm
works as follows. Note that input sequence S is altered in the description.
Algorithm 4: PairedCompression
Input
: A sequence S of length n, and a dictionary D.
Output: A grammar G representing S, with root p, and a dictionary D.
1 Split S = s1s2, s3, . . . , sn into as many consecutive pairs as possible:
(s1s2), (s3s4), . . . , (sn−1sn).
2 For each adjacent pair, sisj, i being odd, replace it by a production symbol p,
for production rule p →sisj. If the rule is already present in D, it is replaced
by the production symbol of that rule. Else, a new production rule with a new
unique symbol is created and added to D. If sn is not part of a pair due to n
being odd, it is not replaced in this iteration, and is just left at the end of S.
3 Repeat from step 1 until S consists only of a single production symbol p,
which is the root of G.
Notice that the dictionary representing the grammar contains production rules
on the form p →ab. However, upon construction the dictionary is maintained
==PAGE:32==
22
Grammar Compression
in the inverse order such that ab →p. This allows for constant time lookup
when building the grammar. The dictionary is then reversed at the end.
The algorithm takes linear time, O(n). Processing a symbol pair takes constant
time, due to constant time dictionary operations, and the size of the current
sequence is reduced by a factor 2 in each iteration.
It can be implemented using two queues. A queue for the current level and one
for the level above to process. Start by adding all symbols to the current queue.
In each iteration, the queue is emptied left to right. The pairs are replaced,
and the new symbols pushed to the above queue. At the end of the iteration,
exchange the queues, such that the current now holds the symbols of the above
and the above is empty.
The algorithm stops when the queues are empty and we are left with a single
root symbol. If D is empty initially, the height of the grammar G becomes
O(log |G|) = O(log n) because the length of the sequence is halved in every
iteration, resulting in a balanced grammar tree. If D is empty, the ﬁnal size
of the grammar is at most O(n). If D was not initially empty, the grammar is
expanded by at most O(n) new productions.
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Approximate Re-Pair
23
4.3
Approximate Re-Pair
Re-Pair [LM00] is a compression algorithm which produces a grammar by identi-
fying and replacing frequent pairs in an input sequence. The algorithm consists
of a few simple steps for an input sequence S of length n.
It maintains an
initially empty dictionary D of production rules and works as follows.
Algorithm 5: Re-Pair
Input
: A sequence S of length n.
Output: A grammar represented by dictionary D, and a sequence C.
1 Find the most frequent adjacent pair ab in S. If there are no pairs appearing
more than a single time, terminate. The ﬁnal version of S is denoted C.
2 Add a new production rule p →ab to D.
3 Replace all occurrences of ab by p in S.
4 Repeat process from step 1.
When this process is ﬁnished, the result is a compression which now consists of
the populated dictionary D and the ﬁnal small version of S, denoted C, without
any repeated pairs. Decompressing C to retrieve the original sequence is done
by traversing C from left to right, expanding all rules using an in-order traversal
by O(1) time loop-up in D for each production rule. This results in optimal
decompression of the whole sequence S in time O(n).
To
obtain
a
single
grammar
G
which
generates
S,
we
apply
PairedCompression (Algorithm 4) to C
to represent the original se-
quence by a single production rule. This rule is the root of G. Notice that this
ﬁnal procedure is diﬀerent for Re-Pair compression of matrices, which we cover
later in Section 4.3.2.
The approximate Re-Pair is a variant of the Re-Pair algorithm. The approx-
imate version used in this thesis is based on [CN10] where the application is
compression of web graphs. The fundamental diﬀerence from the original to
the approximate is, that the approximate version puts a limit on the memory
consumed by the algorithm, making it useful for compressing input too large for
main memory.
The algorithm works by replacing multiple symbol pairs in each iteration (some-
times referred to as pass). A threshold, t, is set as the maximum number of
pair frequencies maintained at once. In each iteration, it replaces occurrences
==PAGE:34==
24
Grammar Compression
of up to k distinct pairs, where k ≤t, making a trade-oﬀbetween accuracy and
speed. The meaning of accuracy is discussed in the end of the analysis. A spe-
cial simultaneous replacement is carried out since some pairs might invalidate
others when replacing multiple pairs in every iteration. This ensures that pairs
are only replaced if there are at least two occurrences. For an input sequence S
and parameters k and t, the approximate Re-Pair operates as follows.
Algorithm 6: ApproximateRePair
Input
: A sequence S of length n.
Output: A grammar represented by dictionary D, and a sequence C.
1 Find candidates for the most frequent pairs by approximately counting the pair
frequencies among all pairs, maintaining only up to t symbol pairs at a time.
2 Pick the k most frequent pairs among the t possible.
3 Add up to k new production rules, pi →ab, to D by simultaneously replacing
occurrences by their new production symbols followed by an invalid character
x /∈Σ, in S: ab is replaced by pix. This does not alter the length of S. If no
replacements were made, terminate. The ﬁnal version of S is denoted C.
4 Compact S by deleting all occurrences of x.
5 Repeat process from step 1.
As with the exact version, PairedCompression is applied to C, to obtain a
single root of the grammar.
In the following, steps 1-3 of the algorithm are described in more detail. It is the
same behaviour as in [CN10], and it is provided for completeness. Our version
diﬀers in that H (deﬁned in the following) is not enlarged when S is compacted.
1. The t (potentially) most frequent pairs are found in a single pass over S.
The threshold t determines the maximum size of a hash table H used to
keep track of these frequencies. For each pair ab in S: if ab is already in
H, increment its frequency. If not, add ab only if |H| < t. When S is
scanned, H reaches its maximum capacity at some position, not taking in
any new pairs. Every time step 1 is invoked, continue scanning from that
position to favour a uniform distribution of the replacements.
2. The k most frequent pairs of H are picked in a single pass over H using a
heap. Empty H after this.
3. The simultaneous replacement is carried out as follows: Let a hash table
K hold the k most frequent pairs as keys and let the values of all initially
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Approximate Re-Pair
25
be null, that is, not seen before. Another special value is proceed; else the
values are a position in the sequence. Let K(ab) be the value associated
with key ab. In a single pass over S, do the following for each pair ab (note
that subsequence abc has pairs ab and bc):
(a) If K(ab) = null, remember the position it occurred, i, by setting
K(ab) = i.
(b) If K(ab) = proceed, get the production rule of ab from p = D(ab).
Replace ab with px where x is an invalid symbol not in the alphabet.
(c) Default case, K(ab) = j, where j is the position where the pair
occurred last. Look back at position j in S and check whether the
pair is still intact. If not, update the position of the last occurrence
of the pair: K(ab) = i, i being the current position.
If still intact, perform the simultaneous replacement by replacing
both occurrences at position j and i. Add a new production rule
to D: p →ab, and thus D(ab) = p. Then set K(ab) = proceed,
meaning that it is now safe to keep on replacing this pair.
4.3.1
Complexity
The running time is analysed for both the version running in memory and on
disk. The version on disk is the interesting one in this setting, and the I/O
model is used to analyse the cost. Finally, the space complexity is provided.
Time (In Memory)
Consider ﬁrst the construction of the ﬁnal small sequence C, which is the Re-
Pair part of the algorithm. The following analysis is on the basis of [CN10], and
it is an approximate analysis, since it is hard to make guarantees about how
many pairs might be invalidated in each iteration. Therefore, assume |D| is the
number of new unique symbols in the exact method (without any invalidated
pairs). The approximate algorithm also considers |D| replacements, but might
end up creating fewer new symbols due to pairs invalidated during simultaneous
replacement.
The running time is O(|D|/k · (n + t log k)) on average. The algorithm runs in
a number of passes, determined by k and the compression size |D|. A total of
O(|D|/k) passes is carried out. In each pass, in step 1 the whole sequence is
scanned in O(n) time. In step 2, H is scanned and the k most frequent pairs
are kept used a heap, taking O(|H| log k) = O(t log k) time. Step 3 requires a
==PAGE:36==
26
Grammar Compression
single pass over S, and for each pair it uses constant time, involving a lookup
and a constant amount of accesses/writes to S. Therefore step 3 takes O(n)
time. Step 4 requires a single traversal of the sequence and takes O(n) time.
As mentioned, the actual ﬁnal dictionary might have fewer symbols than the
dictionary of the exact method. However, we will refer to the number of passes
as O(|D|/k) throughout this thesis, even though the analysis is on the exact
method. The reader should keep in mind this discrepancy. In the experiments
of [CN10], the authors ﬁnd that, as k doubles, the compression time is almost
halved, which supports the idea that the number of passes roughly decreases by
a factor of k.
At last, PairedCompression is applied to C, constructing at most |C| new
symbols in time O(|C|). Since all symbols created during this process is part
of the ﬁnal dictionary D, PairedCompression creates at most O(|D|) new
symbols in O(|D|) time. This term is smaller than n, and therefore the running
time is unchanged, asymptotically.
Time (On Disk)
If S is maintained on disk, the I/O cost of the algorithm becomes the bottleneck.
The I/O cost is O(|D|/k · (n/B + k)). Recall that it is the assumption that the
ﬁnal dictionary ﬁts in memory. The number of passes is still O(|D|/k). In each
pass the I/O cost of retrieving the full current sequence is O(n/B). A random
access on S occurs in step 3c. There is a look-back and a decision whether to
replace both pairs or update the position. There are at most k positions in S at
any time for which K holds a position. Storing and updating those k positions
in memory can save a number of random accesses. If a pair is invalidated, the
position is updated, but only in memory using the stored positions. Only when
a pair is ﬁnally replaced for the ﬁrst time, setting the value to proceed, the stored
value is written back to disk. This is a total of k random accesses on S per pass.
Therefore the cost is O(n/B + k) per pass. All replacements carried out when
the value is proceed, takes place in the current block in memory, and do not
require random access to S. For a more in-depth description of this, we refer to
[CN10]. At last, PairedCompression is applied to C and since |C| = O(|D|)
it can be processed in memory at no further I/O cost. If, however, it is read
from disk one last time, the I/O cost is O(|D|/B) which is smaller than O(n/B)
and therefore the cost is unchanged, asymptotically.
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Approximate Re-Pair
27
Space
The working space of the algorithm is O(|D| + t). The dictionary and H must
be maintained at all times. Along with these we maintain K, which is smaller
than H and a single block of S from disk of size B, and we assume B is smaller
than the ﬁnal dictionary.
Impact of Parameters k and t
We expect the ﬁnal dictionary size to increase for increasing k. The argument
is the following. Let A1 be the Approximate Re-Pair algorithm with k = i, for
some integer i. Now, let A2 be the algorithm with k = i + 1. A1 replaces up
to i distinct symbol pairs in an iteration j. In iteration j + 1 there is a most
frequent symbol pair, denote it xy. Now, A2 might replace one more symbol
pair in iteration j. If it does, it might be that this symbol pair invalidates xy
in iteration j + 1. Therefore, it does not create a rule for the most frequent
symbol pair, but might create one for a less frequent pair, resulting in a longer
sequence C, and perhaps a smaller dictionary D (before C is processed by
PairedCompression). Therefore, larger k might create fewer symbols and thus
a smaller dictionary D, however the ﬁnal sequence C becomes larger. Applying
PairedCompression to C results in O(|C|) new symbols, which yields worse
compression when C is larger.
We expect the ﬁnal dictionary size to increase when t decreases. The larger t,
the higher chance of maintaining the true most frequent symbol pairs. Replacing
pairs of higher frequencies results in smaller sequence C and smaller dictionary
D.
4.3.2
Matrix Compression Using Re-Pair
Let X be the input matrix with n rows. The rows can be diﬀerentially encoded
or not. If diﬀerentially encoded, the decompression must take this into account.
Construct a matrix sequence, SX as follows: For each row ri, append a unique
row identiﬁer ˆri followed by the symbols of that row to SX. Then the matrix
sequence has the following format:
SX = ˆr1r1 ˆr2r2 ˆr3r3 · · · ˆrnrn.
Now apply ApproximateRePair to SX, resulting in a compacted sequence C
and dictionary D. Now C is a sequence without any repeated pairs, and it has
==PAGE:38==
28
Grammar Compression
all the unique row identiﬁers since they would not be replaced, separated by
compacted symbol sequences:
C = ˆr1S1 ˆr2S2 ˆr3S3 · · · ˆrnSn.
Here each Si is the symbol sequence corresponding to row ri. Now every Si
is compressed to a single symbol, pi, by application of PairedCompression.
These symbols are row productions, and are stored in an array for constant time
access to any given row. The unique row identiﬁers are thrown away afterwards.
The construction time becomes O(|D|/k · (|X| + t log k)) if the input ﬁts in
memory or the I/O cost is O(|D|/k · (|X|/B + k)) if maintained on disk.
==PAGE:39==
4.4 Signature Grammar Compression
29
4.4
Signature Grammar Compression
In this section we present the Signature grammar, how to construct it and the
time and space complexity. The original algorithm produces grammars where
internal nodes can have an arbitrary amount of children. We alter the algorithm
to generate binary grammars, where internal nodes have two children. As Re-
Pair also produces binary grammars, the exact same procedures and algorithms
can then be applied to the grammars of both algorithms. The modiﬁcations and
implementation-speciﬁc details are described as well. Finally, we show how to
compress matrices using Signature grammars.
4.4.1
The Signature Grammar
The Signature grammar presented by Christiansen and Ettienne [CE17] is a
grammar based on a hierarchical representation of strings using signatures,
which is proposed by Melhorn et al. [MSU97]. In the following we deﬁne the
Signature grammar and afterwards show how to construct it, both consistent
with the paper. We describe it using the notation of nodes for the grammars.
Note that an internal node is the same as a production symbol, whereas leaves
are equal to terminal symbols. Following this, we describe how to construct the
grammar online and what changes we have applied for the actual implementa-
tion.
Let S be a string of length n from an alphabet Σ of all integers. The algorithm
constructs a signature tree of S, denoted sig(S). This tree is an ordered labelled
tree, and all internal nodes can have an arbitrary number of children. Only the
leaves hold symbols from S and all internal nodes have symbols not in S, some
of which might be the same. Every node in sig(S) is root in some subtree, t.
Let the label of a tree, l(t), be the symbol of the root of the tree.
A run is a consecutive subsequence of identical symbols. Consider the run-free
string S′ of length n′. This string is obtained by removing all maximal runs of
symbols, S[i] = S[i + 1] = . . . = S[i + m] in S by replacing them with a new
symbol, representing the run.
Now, let π be a uniformly random permutation of Σ. Assume that S is now
run-free. S is decomposed into blocks by identifying local minima in S. Deﬁne
a position i of a symbol S[i] to be a local minimum if the neighbours are larger
with respect to π:
π(S[i −1]) > π(S[i]) < π(S[i + 1])
==PAGE:40==
30
Grammar Compression
A block in S starts at the beginning of S and at every local minimum (the
symbol at the local minimum is the ﬁrst of the new block). Every block ends
before the beginning of the next and the last block ends with the last symbol
of S. Deﬁne the block decomposition of S to be this sequence of blocks. In
the following we describe how this block decomposition is used to construct the
Signature grammar. From now on we use the term sequence instead of string,
to be consistent with the other parts of the thesis.
4.4.2
Construction of the Signature Grammar
Initially, let every symbol, S[i], of S be represented by a tree, ti (of size one),
with label S[i]. Let F be an ordered forest of these trees such that ti is the
i’th tree. Let l(F) be the left-to-right concatenation of the labels of all trees in
F. The algorithm proceeds as follows. Initially, l(F) has length n and might
contain runs.
Algorithm 7: OfflineSignatureCompression
Input
: A sequence S of length n.
Output: The signature tree sig(S).
1 Eliminate runs: Replace all identical runs of l(F) in the following way: Let
l(t1) = l(t2) = . . . = l(tm) be a maximum length run in l(F). All identical
runs, t1, t2, . . . , tm, are replaced by a new tree. The root of this tree is a new
node with children t1, t2, . . . , tm and a new unique label which identiﬁes the
label and number of children. This leaves l(F) run-free.
2 Process blocks: Replace all identical blocks of the block decomposition of
l(F) in the following way: Each block in l(F) is formed by the labels of a
sequence of consecutive trees t1, t2, . . . , tm. All identical blocks t1, t2, . . . , tm
are now replaced by a new tree. The root of this tree is a new node with
children t1, t2, . . . , tm and a new unique label. As with runs, this procedure
replaces the identical blocks with the new identical trees in-place, preserving
the order of the forest.
3 Iterate: Repeat step 1 and 2 until F contains a single tree. Denote this tree
sig(S).
Finally, the signature tree sig(S) is processed into a DAG denoted dag(S), to
achieve compression.
Nodes with identical labels are merged.
That is, two
nodes representing identical blocks are merged. The same goes for runs of the
same symbol and length. Each internal node of dag(S) represents a production
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Signature Grammar Compression
31
symbol, and thus dag(S) represents the grammar generating S.
In Figure 4.4 the algorithm is visualised for a small sequence without any runs
for simplicity. The ﬁnal node Z6 is the root of the signature tree produced by
the algorithm. Note that π is a permutation of all integer symbols, both the
ones of S and all new symbols as well.
Figure 4.4: Visualisation of the oﬄine Signature grammar construction on se-
quence S = bacabacabab. Each iteration of the algorithm is shown
as a virtual layer with blue background, ordered from the bottom
up. Denote by Fw the ordered forest of trees at iteration w. The
permutation π is shown below the symbols. The vertical bars are
block beginnings/endings, and the nodes created along the way
are displayed to the right on a green background.
It takes O(n) time to construct the Signature grammar. The input sequence S
is reduced by at least a factor 2 in length in every iteration due to blocks having
at least length 2. The ﬁrst iteration works on n symbols, the next on at most
n/2 symbols and so on, resulting in O(n) steps. Every step takes constant time
since evaluation of π is constant and all dictionary operations are constant time
as well.
The Signature grammar has several interesting properties, two of which we will
refer to later, and we describe them in the following. We refer to the paper for
the proofs.
Lemma 4.1 (Block Property) Let S be a sequence of length n.
Any
block in the block decomposition of S has length at most 3 in expectation, and
the longest block has length O(log n) in expectation (From Lemma 3 of [CE17]).
Lemma 4.2 (Height Property) Let S be a sequence of length n. The
height of sig(S) and dag(S) is O(log n) (From Lemma 4 of [CE17]).
==PAGE:42==
32
Grammar Compression
4.4.3
Online Construction of the Signature Grammar
Process the input sequence S from left to right, one symbol at a time. The
oﬄine version builds a number of virtual layers of nodes equal to the number
of iterations. To mimic this behaviour we employ a notion of layers in order to
correctly process runs and blocks at all levels.
Maintain multiple levels of queues (a dynamic amount). The number of queues
needed is logarithmic in the size of S. Let Qq be the queue at level q. The
lowest level is q = 1, the queues hold nodes, and are initially empty. Maintain
equally many levels of queues for runs. The run queue at level q is denoted Rq.
The algorithm operates as a two-step pipeline: For each symbol of S, it is ﬁrst
determined if it is creating or continuing a run. Then, it is moved onwards to
Q1 if no run is present nor continuing. S is processed from left to right. For
every position i in S, there are three cases:
1. If S[i −1] ̸= S[i] and R1 is empty, then S[i] is pushed onto Q1 directly.
2. If S[i −1] = S[i] then S[i] is pushed onto R1.
3. In this case S[i−1] ̸= S[i] and R1 is not empty. When encountering a new
symbol diﬀerent from S[i −1], the run is terminated and processed into a
new production node. Note that the run is including the last symbol of
Q1. This new node is then pushed onto Q1.
Every time a block ends in Q1, a new node is created.
The block is re-
moved from the queue, and the production node is processed similarly at
the above layer:
First entering R2 then Q2 and so on.
This is in accor-
dance with the oﬄine version, as runs can form in any iteration. Every time
a symbol (production or terminal) is pushed to a queue, Qq, we check for
block endings. The pseudo-code for the online construction of Signature gram-
mars is presented in Algorithm 8. When the whole input sequence S is read,
the OfflineSignatureCompression is applied to the remaining symbols, in
line 7. There are at most O(log n) symbols remaining, and for the argument of
this we refer to the complexity analysis found later in this section.
In Figure 4.5 the algorithm is visualised for the same sequence as in Figure 4.4,
again without any runs for simplicity. Despite the diﬀerent node labels, the
produced signature tree is the same. Three diﬀerent steps of the construction is
depicted. The full sequence is shown at every step, however, only the yellow part
is currently in the queue. The last step forces all blocks to end and processes
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Signature Grammar Compression
33
1     2     3     4      5     6     7     8      9     10   11
1     2     3     4      5     6     7     8      9     10   11
1     2     3     4      5     6     7     8      9     10   11
Processed up to symbol 6
Processed up to symbol 9
After post-processing
Figure 4.5: Visualisation of the online Signature grammar construction. Se-
quence S = bacabacabab is processed left to right, ﬁrst entering
queue Q1. The permutation π is shown below the symbols. Queues
have blue background while the new unique nodes have green back-
ground. A red bar indicates already processed symbols, while the
yellow indices symbols currently in queue. The vertical bars are
block beginnings/endings.
the last blocks using OfflineSignatureCompression, resulting in the ﬁnal
grammar rooted in node Z6.
Finally, the signature tree sig(S) can be processed into dag(S), as with the
oﬄine version. However, this is taken care of online, by only creating new nodes
if they are not already seen before. This is done by maintaining a dictionary D
mapping symbol pairs to productions rules: D : ab →p. On line 5 and line 12
of Algorithm 8, a look-up in D is carried out, retrieving the single instance of
the node if seen before. Else, a new node is created. In this way dag(S) is built
immediately without the need to explicitly build sig(S) (which can always be
derived from dag(S)).
The online Signature grammar construction proposed in this thesis handles runs
and blocks diﬀerently than the original construction. The next section outlines
these distinctions with respect to Algorithm 8.
4.4.4
Modiﬁcations
The original Signature grammar has both run nodes and block nodes.
The
processing of runs and blocks is diﬀerent in our version of the algorithm. Our
treatment of blocks and runs ensures that only one type of non-terminal node
==PAGE:44==
34
Grammar Compression
Algorithm 8: OnlineSignatureCompression
Input
: A sequence S of length n.
Output: The signature tree sig(S).
1 Algorithm Compress():
2
for i = 1 to n do
3
Let v be a new node with label S[i].
4
processSymbolInQueue(i, v, 1)
5
Force all blocks to end by introducing a block ending at the right side of
every rightmost symbol in every queue.
6
Let ˆS be the concatenation of all remaining symbols of all queues. The
order of these is from left to right, from the top queue and down to the
bottom.
7
Apply OfflineSignatureCompression on ˆS to obtain sig(S).
8
return sig(S)
1 Procedure processSymbolInQueue(i, v, q):
2
if S[i −1] = S[i] then
/* A run has started or is continuing.
*/
3
Push v onto Rq.
4
else if S[i −1] ̸= S[i] and Rq is not empty then
/* A run has stopped.
Process run and next symbol at same
level.
*/
5
Let r be a new node representing the run in Rq.
6
Empty Rq.
7
processSymbolInQueue(i, r, q)
8
processSymbolInQueue(i, v, q)
9
else
/* No run is stored, nor beginning.
*/
10
Push v onto Qq
11
if S[i] ends the block then
12
Let b be a new node representing the block.
13
Empty Qq.
14
processSymbolInQueue(i, b, q + 1) // Process recursively on
all levels with non-empty queues.
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Signature Grammar Compression
35
is used, and that the resulting grammar is binary. In the following we describe
the modiﬁcations and the impact of them.
Runs (line 5)
Runs are not processed as single nodes with a label and a number, as in the origi-
nal version. They are instead processed by application of PairedCompression
(Algorithm 4) to the sequence of identical nodes representing the run. This
yields a tree of size O(n) for a run of length n, however the number of distinct
productions is only O(log n). This follows from PairedCompression produc-
ing a grammar of height O(log n), and a single new production rule is created
for each level of height. Processing runs in this way makes it possible to reuse
consecutive subsequences of runs.
It is expected that the grammar size is almost unaﬀected by treating the runs
as trees, however the height might become slightly larger. The reason is the
following. For O(1)-sized runs, we have a new unique symbol for every possible
length of that run, e.g. symbols for lengths 2, 3, 5 for runs aa, aaa, aaaaa. For
run trees, we have the same pattern. The grammar of a run tree is a DAG,
and therefore we have only a single new unique symbol for every possible length
of that run. For example, a run of length 7 can reuse all the nodes of the run
of length 6, needing only a new root. The height is slightly aﬀected since the
run trees do not have constant height. How run trees aﬀect the grammar as
opposed to O(1)-sized runs is tested experimentally, and the results reported in
Section 6.1.2.
The height of dag(S) is asymptotically unchanged by this way of processing
runs, and is still O(log n). The argument is the following. Assume to begin
with, that the algorithm uses O(1)-sized runs. Every node in dag(S) is root in
some subtree. Consider a node v. Let m be the number of leaves in the subtree
of v. From Lemma 4.2, we have that the height of this subtree is O(log m),
no matter the number of runs in it. Now, creating a run tree from a sequence
of length m produces a subtree of height O(log m), which is not worse than
the height of any subtree. Therefore, the height of dag(S) is asymptotically
unaﬀected.
Blocks (line 12)
Blocks are not processed with a single new parent having all the nodes of the
block as children. It is also processed by application of PairedCompression
==PAGE:46==
36
Grammar Compression
on the sequence of nodes in the block.
The dictionary D used to construct dag(S) online, is also passed on to
PairedCompression whenever it is invoked, such that no identical nodes are
present twice. Processing blocks in this way makes it possible for consecutive
subsequences of the block to match with other consecutive subsequences later
on.
The height of dag(S) is asymptotically unchanged by this way of processing
blocks, and is still O(log n). From Lemma 4.1, blocks have constant length on
average, in expectation. Application of PairedCompression on a sequence of
constant length constructs a grammar of constant height. Therefore the height
is only aﬀected by a constant factor in expectation.
4.4.5
Complexity
The running time is analysed for the online Signature compression, both the
version running in memory and on disk. The version on disk is the interesting
one in this setting, and the I/O model is used for analysing the cost. Finally,
the space complexity is provided.
Time (In Memory)
The running time is O(n), as with the oﬄine version.
The input sequence S is streamed from left to right. Every symbol (terminal or
non-terminal created during construction) is only considered once. There are a
total of O(n) such symbols, following from the block size being at least 2.
Time (On Disk)
If S is maintained on disk, the I/O cost of the algorithm
becomes the bottleneck. From our assumption, the ﬁnal dictionary ﬁts in mem-
ory. The I/O cost is O(n/B). The input sequence is streamed once from disk
to memory in chunks of size B while the grammar is constructed. One block is
treated in memory at a time, and the sequence is never written back to disk.
Space
The working space of the algorithm is at most O(|D| + log n) in ex-
pectation. The dictionary D is maintained in memory along with all symbols
in all queues. There are O(log n) queues in expectation and every queue holds
at most a single block of symbols. These blocks have length at most O(log n),
however it is O(1) in expectation. Therefore the space of all elements in all
queues is O(log n) in expectation. If the block length is greater than 3 then
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Signature Grammar Compression
37
the grammar is constructed again, using a new random permutation. It takes a
constant number of retries in expectation before this is not the case.
4.4.6
Implementation
This section describes a few important aspects of the implementation.
Queues In Practice
The number of queues is logarithmic with respect to the
input size. In practice, the implementation maintains a ﬁxed constant number
of queues and run queues. At the end of the compression, when no more new
symbols are read, all blocks are forced to end. In theory, the rest of these symbols
should be processed just like every other symbol processed earlier. However, in
the implementation, every run is processed and added to the queue at the same
layer. Afterwards, every queue is processed from the bottom up, not checking
for any new runs. This choice was made due to discovering the discrepancy
late in the process, and a decision was made to leave it like this. Note that
in practice, less than 100 symbols are left in the end for the datasets that we
consider. There are around 30 queues with an average below 3 symbols in each
one. This is insigniﬁcant compared to the dictionaries of sizes greater than a
million symbols, and was a factor in not correcting this. In theory there are at
most O(log n) symbols remaining in the queues, and therefore at most O(log n)
new nodes are created.
The correctness of the compression (that the input
sequence can be generated) is unaﬀected by this.
Permutation In Practice
The permutation π should be a uniformly random
permutation of all symbols of the input sequence as well as all symbols created
along the way. It is also important that the permutation function takes little
space. The cryptographic hash function SHA-1 was chosen for this purpose.
Every symbol s is used as a message and π(s) is the value of the digest. SHA-
1 is uniform and random. Collisions can occur, but it is very unlikely. The
properties of π must be in place in order to ensure that every block has length
at most 3 in expectation. In testing, we have found that this was the case for
the far majority of tests, and the average block length lies just below 3. The
key used in SHA-1 can be set as a seed for generating the same permutation.
==PAGE:48==
38
Grammar Compression
4.4.7
Matrix Compression Using Signature Grammars
Signature compression of a matrix is straightforward. Let X be the input matrix
with n rows. The rows can be diﬀerentially encoded or not. If diﬀerentially
encoded, the decompression must take this into account. Now, for each row
ri = s1, s2, . . . , st, apply OnlineSignatureCompression (Algorithm 8) on it
to get sig(ri), which has as root a production symbol pi representing that row.
Maintain the same dictionary D while compressing all rows. Finally, store all
row productions in an array for constant time access to any given row. The
construction time becomes O(|X|) if the input ﬁts in memory or the I/O cost
is O(|X|/B) if maintained on disk.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 5
Compressed Computation
In this chapter we present two ideas to compute the matrix-vector product in
time proportional to the compressed size of the matrix (sometimes referred to as
compressed time). Francisco et al. [FGLN17] present an exploit to achieve this
for a compressed matrix if the rows of the matrix can be described using refer-
ences to previous rows. In Section 5.1 we describe the exploit and present a very
direct method applying this exploit to represent matrices in compressed form
using a set of reference rows. We propose an idea to construct such reference
rows (Reference compression) and experimentally test if speed-up is achieved,
which is covered in Section 6.2. This did not achieve good compression, however
computation in compressed time is achieved. These experiments led to the idea
of using the exploit in relation with grammars, which proved to achieve good
results. Therefore further work and improvements of Reference compression was
not pursued. Despite being slow and not yielding good compression, we choose
to include the idea of Reference compression and our experiments, since it is a
proof of concept, showing how compression ratio scales with computation speed,
which motivates taking these ideas further, into grammar compression.
In Section 5.2 we propose an algorithm to achieve computations in compressed
time when the matrix is grammar compressed, and also experimentally test
this, with the results reported in Section 6.3.2. We call this algorithm Grammar-
based compressed computation. It yields compressed time and compressed space
proportional to the space of the grammar used.
==PAGE:50==
40
Compressed Computation
5.1
Reference Compression
In this section we describe how to achieve matrix-vector multiplication in com-
pressed space and time, and propose a representation and compression technique
to achieve this.
5.1.1
Matrix-Vector Products in Compressed Space and
Time
The following method is derived from the exploit proposed in [FGLN17], and
we present their idea in following as an introduction to the method used in this
thesis.
Their Idea
Let X be an n × n matrix and v a vector of length n. The idea
is to represent every row ri (1 ≤i ≤n) using a reference, l, to some previous
row rl, where l < i, along with the diﬀerences there might be between the row
and the reference. Let R be an array of length n and let R[i] = l if row ri has
reference row rl. If a row ri does not have a reference, and it is not compressed,
we have that R[i] = 0.
For example, consider rows r1 = 11000 and r2 = 11100. Now, we can express r2
in compressed form as follows: c(r2) = r2 −r1 = 00100 with reference R[2] = 1.
Restoring ri requires collecting rR[i] and adding back the diﬀerence, c(ri).
When computing y = X · v, if we encounter a row without a reference, we
calculate the sum of that row directly (using the procedure of Algorithm 2 on
page 14), and store it. The sum of that row and the vector is:
y[i] =
n
X
j=1
ri[j] · v[j].
When encountering a row with a reference, R[i], we calculate the sum as
y[i] = y[R[i]] +
n
X
j=1
c(ri)[j] · v[j],
using the stored result. This can be done in time proportional to the number
of 1’s in c(ri) if stored as row lists, omitting all 0’s, which is time proportional
to the compressed representation size. The row list representation comes from
Deﬁnition 3.2 on page 12.
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Reference Compression
41
While this idea uses previous rows as references, we now propose a version of
this method where the reference rows are contained within a separate set of
rows, not necessarily part of the input matrix. Therefore, any input row can
have any row of this set as a reference row, without having to refer to a row of
lower index.
Our Representation
Let r1, r2, . . . , rn be the rows of matrix X of dimensions
n×m. Note that we generalise to rectangular matrices. Now, let R1, R2, . . . , Rk
be reference rows. Denote ref(X) = {C, R} the reference compression of X,
where C is a list of compressed rows, c(r1), c(r2), . . . , c(rn), and R a list of
reference rows, R1, R2, . . . , Rk.
A compressed row, c(ri) = l, (s1, s2, . . . , st), is a reference number l followed by
a list of integer symbols indicating the positions where ri has a 1 not in Rl.
Therefore ri can be reconstructed by taking Rl and adding the bits at positions
s1, s2, . . . , st. Let R0 be a zero-bitvector. If a row can not be expressed using
any reference, the reference is 0. Note that the greatest symbol any row or
reference can have is m.
In Figure 5.1 an example of this representation is shown, and the rows and
references are displayed in both plain and row list representation. In Figure 5.1c
the reference compression is shown.
R1 = 11100000
R2 = 01010100
r1 = 11100000
r2 = 11110000
r3 = 01110000
r4 = 01010101
r5 = 11010100
(a) Plain matrix repre-
sentation.
R1 = [1,2,3]
R2 = [2,4,6]
r1 = [1,2,3]
r2 = [1,2,3,4]
r3 = [2,3,4]
r4 = [2,4,6,8]
r5 = [1,2,4,6]
(b) Row list representa-
tion.
R1 = [1,2,3]
R2 = [2,4,6]
c(r1) = 1, []
c(r2) = 1, [4]
c(r3) = 0, [2,3,4]
c(r4) = 2, [8]
c(r5) = 2, [1]
(c) Compressed
repre-
sentation.
Figure 5.1: An example matrix with 5 rows, compressed using 2 references.
The size of the input, |X|, is measured as total number of symbols in the row
list representation. The size of the compression, |ref(X)|, is the total number
==PAGE:52==
42
Compressed Computation
of symbols in the lists of compressed rows plus the total number of symbols in
the references, or more formally:
Definition 5.1 (size of reference compressed matrix) Let
|ref(X)| denote the size of the reference compression of X. Let all rows and
references be represented as row lists. Let |c(ri)| be the number of symbols in
row c(ri). This is including the reference symbol. Let |Rl| be the number of
symbols in reference Rl. Then we have that |ref(X)| = Pn
i=1 |c(ri)|+Pk
l=1 |Rl|.
In the example of Figure 5.1 the choice of reference rows yields a compression
ratio of |ref(X)|
|X|
= 17
18 = 0.94.
Note that the separate reference rows might take up additional space compared
to having the input rows as references. However, it is possible to have a row
represented fully by a reference row. In this case the compressed row only con-
sists of the reference number. Any matrix using the representation of [FGLN17]
can be converted into a matrix on our format. Let all rows that are referred
to from some row be the reference rows. Now, let those rows be compressed
by just using the reference number to their respective full reference row. This
takes a constant amount of extra space per compressed row, due to the reference
numbers.
The distance between a row and a reference is the number of 1’s in which they
diﬀer. However, if the reference contains a 1 that the row does not contain,
the row can not be expressed in compressed form by bitwise subtraction. The
deﬁnition is the following:
Definition 5.2 (Distance between row and reference) Let
dist(ri, Rl) denote the distance between row ri and Rl. It is equal to one of the
following: If Rl contains a 1 that ri does not contain, dist(ri, Rl) = ∞. Else,
dist(ri, Rl) is the number of coeﬃcients in which the rows diﬀer.
As an example, the distance between r2 = 11110000 and R1 = 11100000 is
dist(r2, R1) = 1, while dist(r3, R1) = dist(01110000, 11100000) = ∞.
The
distance between any row ri and R0 is dist(ri, R0) = |ri|.
Compressing Matrix From Reference Rows
Let r1, r2, . . . , rn be the rows
of matrix X and R a list of k already constructed reference rows. In order to
compress the matrix into ref(X) = {C, R}, all rows must be compressed with
respect to the reference rows.
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Reference Compression
43
For each row ri, pick a reference row Rj such that dist(ri, Rj) is minimum.
Then it is decided if compression using this reference yields smaller size than
storing ri directly. If dist(ri, Rj) < |ri| then compress row ri using reference
Rj. If not, let ri stay in plain form, with reference number 0.
Let |R| = Pk
l=1 |Rl| be the total number of symbols in all reference rows. Com-
puting the distance between reference Rj and row ri takes O(|Rj| + |ri|) time
by maintaining a pointer to each, since the rows are in increasing order and
compared symbol for symbol. Finding a reference row with minimum distance
to ri takes O(k · |ri| + |R|) time.
Compressing row ri with respect to reference row Rj can be carried out in time
O(|ri|+|Rj|) by maintaining a pointer to both rows. If the current symbol of ri
is smaller than that of Rj, add it to c(ri). Else, increment both pointers. When
the pointer to the reference reaches the end, add the rest of the symbols from
ri to c(ri). Compression of row ri is faster than determining the best reference,
which is the bottleneck of the running time.
Finding a reference and compressing row ri requires time O(k · |ri| + |R|). This
is a total time of O(Pn
i=1(k · |ri| + |R|)) for all rows, which can be reduced to a
total running time of O(k · |X| + n · |R|), since Pn
i=1 |ri| = |X|.
Decompression
Decompressing a reference compressed matrix is fairly
straightforward. For each compressed row, c(ri) = l, (s1, s2, . . . , st), let ri be
a row consisting of all symbols of Rl and the symbols s1, s2, . . . , st. The sym-
bols have to be in increasing order.
This can be achieved in linear time by
maintaining a pointer to Rl and to the list of symbols from c(ri), always ap-
pending the lowest symbol encountered. Therefore, decompression takes linear
time in the uncompressed size of the matrix, O(|X|).
Matrix-Vector Product on Reference Compressed Matrix
A matrix
vector product on a reference compressed matrix is calculated by ﬁrst calcu-
lating the product between all reference rows and the input vector v. These
intermediate results are stored in an array P, such that P[j] stores the result
of multiplication of Rj and v. Let P[0] = 0. Then the sum between each row
ri and v is calculated as follows: If the row has no precalculated reference,
calculate as in Algorithm 2, page 14. Else, if the row has a reference, add the
precalculated sum to the result and apply again the procedure of Algorithm 2 on
the symbols in the list of diﬀerences. This algorithm is outlined in Algorithm 9.
The running time is proportional to the compressed size of the matrix, which is
O(|ref(|X|)).
==PAGE:54==
44
Compressed Computation
Note that the algorithm of [FGLN17] stores the results of previous rows directly
in y. In our method, the results are stored separately, taking up an extra O(n)
working space.
Algorithm 9: CompressedMatrixVectorProduct
Input
: A reference compressed n × m matrix ref(X) = {C, R} with k
reference rows, and a vector v of length m.
Output: The product, y.
1 Let P be an array of length k for pre-calculated results.
2 for i ←1 to k do
3
Let sum ←0
4
for each symbol s in Rj do
5
Set sum ←sum + v[s]
6
Set P[i] ←sum
7 Let y be a new empty vector of length n.
8 for i ←1 to n do
9
Retrieve l from c(ri)
10
Let sum ←P[l]
11
for each symbol s in c(ri) do
12
Set sum ←sum + v[s]
13
Set yi ←sum
14 return y
5.1.2
Constructing Reference Rows
We present a technique of constructing reference rows.
Diﬀerent ideas have
been tried out, none being really good in practice with respect to compression
size. In the following we present the idea that achieved best results in practice,
namely Windowed Frequency Count. The intuition is to exploit repetitiveness
in a horizontal window across many rows, and hereby construct references to
represent the most repetitive patterns in this window. It is a slow algorithm and
therefore the tests are only on small matrices. The compression ratios achieved
are not that good, however speed-up of matrix-vector multiplication is achieved.
The experimental results are found in Section 6.3.1.
The algorithm consists of two steps at the top level: 1) Construct k reference
rows. 2) Compress all rows with respect to the reference rows, which is covered
in Section 5.1.1 under paragraph Compressing Matrix From Reference Rows.
Constructing reference rows using windowed frequency counting is carried out
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Reference Compression
45
as follows. Choose p to be the percentage of rows marked in each iteration.
Choose the number of reference rows k and a window size w.
1. Construct the reference rows one a time. Construct reference row Rj as
follows:
(a) Split X into windows of w columns. For each window, do the follow-
ing:
i. Determine the most frequent non-zero binary vector b of length
w among all unmarked rows within the window.
ii. Write b to the part of Rj corresponding to the window.
(b) Pick the p percent of rows that are most similar to Rj, that is, of
lowest distance, and mark them.
2. Compress all rows with respect to the constructed reference rows, regard-
less of when the rows where marked to give opportunity for better com-
pression.
The percentage is set dependent of k, such that p = x/k for some x. A fraction
is chosen because the larger k, the fewer rows must be marked for each reference
row in order to not run out of rows before constructing all references.
The algorithm constructs k reference rows and step 1 runs O(k) times. For
each reference row, all unmarked rows (which are all initially) are traversed
by considering a window of width w.
There are ⌈m/w⌉such windows.
In
step 1.(a).i. an initially empty hash map maintains the frequency of possible
combinations of a binary vector of length w. Populating this hash map takes
O(n · w) time. Finding the most frequent vector takes O(min{2w, n}) time due
to the worst case number of permutations across all rows. Step 1.(a).ii. takes
O(w) time. Step 1.(a). does this for every window and therefore the time of
constructing a single reference row is O(m/w · (n · w + min{2w, n})) = O(nm).
Constructing k reference rows takes O(kmn), which can be very slow, especially
for sparse matrices.
Finally, add the running time of step 2, which is O(k · |X| + n · |R|). This is
asymptotically smaller than the running time of step 1, since |X| = O(nm) and
|R| = O(mk).
Problem With Windowed Frequency Compression
The choice of k, w
and p is important for the performance of this algorithm. We have not devised
==PAGE:56==
46
Compressed Computation
strategies for these choices. In the experiments we have chosen them based on
trial and error.
We achieve compression in practice using this algorithm, however not that good.
Constructing reference rows in this way using windows has a disadvantage. De-
termining subvectors of Rj based on majority among rows suﬀers from the fol-
lowing: The rows determining one subvector of Rj can be completely diﬀerent
from the rows determining another subvector of Rj. In the end, it might be
that all these rows have lowest distance to Rj among the reference rows and
all these rows are compressed with respect to it. This has a negative eﬀect on
compression ratio.
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Grammar-Based Compressed Computation
47
5.2
Grammar-Based Compressed Computation
In this section we present a solution to speed up matrix-vector multiplication
on grammar compressed matrices. This solution is applicable if the compressed
matrix does not use more than two thirds of the main memory, plus some spare
memory for carrying out computations.
This extra memory can be utilised
to speed up the computation of the matrix-vector product. The speed-up is
proportional to the compression ratio, the better compression the faster.
The idea discussed in Section 5.1.1 of storing results along with repeated pat-
terns can be quite useful in combination with grammars. If a matrix is grammar
compressed without diﬀerential encoding, the symbols can be used directly for
computing the row sums, as with Reference compression. The algorithm works
as follows.
Let G(X) = {D, P} be a grammar compression of matrix X of dimensions
n × m. Let v be a vector of length m. Let l(p) be the sequence of symbols
obtained from an in-order traversal of the tree with root p, reporting all terminal
symbols. Then the product between p and v can be computed by summing v[s]
for all s ∈l(p).
Denote this product res(p).
This is the calculateRowSum
procedure of Algorithm 3 on page 19.
To compute the matrix-vector product in time proportional to the compressed
size of the matrix, the result res(p) of every node p is computed by a recursive
in-order traversal of the tree with root p.
As the grammar of a matrix can
have multiple roots, these results are computed from every production in P.
Then, the product y = X · v is computed by setting y[i] = res(P[i]) for all
1 ≤i ≤n. The recursive pre-computation and the assignment can be carried
out interleaved, as the result res(P[i]) is ready when needed for the assignment
y[i] = res(P[i]). The pseudo-code is shown in Algorithm 10.
In Figure 5.2 an example matrix and its grammar compression are shown. The
stored results are shown next to every production in the dictionary.
Time
Consider the dictionary D as a DAG. A single call of preComputeResult
on any node takes in worst case O(|D|) time. However, if a node already has
a precomputed result, the traversal does not move beyond it.
The running
time is therefore proportional to the total number of nodes visited. A node
can be visited more than once, from diﬀerent calls of preComputeResult. The
procedure is called O(|P|) = O(n) times, and therefore this is a lower bound for
the running time.
==PAGE:58==
48
Compressed Computation
Algorithm 10: CompressedGrammarMatrixVectorProduct
Input
: A grammar compressed matrix G(X) = {D, P}, where |P| = n, and
a real-valued vector v of length m.
Output: A vector y, of length n.
1 Algorithm Matrix-VectorProduct():
2
for i ←1 to n do
3
if If row ri is not empty then
4
y[i] ←preComputeResult(P[i])
5
else
6
y[i] ←0
7
return y
1 Procedure preComputeResult(p):
2
if res(p) is already computed then
3
return res(p)
4
else if p is a terminal symbol then
5
res(p) ←v[p]
6
return res(p)
7
else
8
a, b = D(p)
9
res(p) ←preComputeResult(a) + preComputeResult(b)
10
return res(p)
(a) Example
matrix-vector
product
X · v = y, using the stored results
of productions.
(b) The grammar compressed matrix
with stored results, res(p), for all
productions, shown in red.
Figure 5.2: Example of grammar-based compressed matrix-vector product.
The matrix and compression is the same as in Figure 4.1.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Grammar-Based Compressed Computation
49
When a node v gets visited the ﬁrst time, res(v) is computed, and the outgoing
edges (if any) of that node are never visited again. Therefore, every edge of the
DAG is only visited once. The DAG has at most 2 · |D| edges since it is binary,
and therefore the running time is O(n + |D|).
Implementation
Store D in an array A of length |D| such that A[p] = [a, b]
for production p →ab. Extend A to also hold the precomputed results: A[p] =
[a, b, res(p)]. Thus, A is a |D|×3 dimensional array holding the grammar and the
results of every production. Initially, let res(p) = ¯a for all p, where ¯a is special
character that any row sum can never equal. In practice, let it be the highest
or lowest possible integer if no sum never reaches it, or let it for example be −1
if the input vector holds positive numbers only. Handle the terminal symbols
as described in paragraph Storing The Grammar Compression in Section 4.1.1.
The array of productions P is unchanged.
The array arrangement is possible since the grammar can be built such that all
production symbols are continuous increasing numbers. Now, a production rule
can be retrieved in O(1) time, and storing the results next to productions is
cache-eﬃcient, because they can be retrieved when the node is visited without
a cache miss.
Space
The space of the grammar is 2 · |D| words if stored in an array. A
stored result for every production increases the space by |D| additional words,
thus increasing the space by around 50%, theoretically. This is an upper bound
on space usage. Adding the space of P, the algorithm remains in compressed
space asymptotically: O(n + |D|). In practice, the grammar might be squeezed
together even further by encoding of the symbols and/or compacting them to
avoid having spare space in the machine words. This is however outside the
scope of this thesis.
==PAGE:60==
50
Compressed Computation
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 6
Results
In this chapter we analyse the performance of both Approximate Re-Pair and
Signature Compression empirically. They are referred to as Re-Pair and Signa-
ture respectively in the following. Also, the performance of Reference compres-
sion and Grammar-based compressed computation is analysed.
The chapter is organized as follows: First, in Section 6.1 we focus on com-
pression of sequences, and how the two algorithms perform on datasets that
are well-known to be highly compressible. Next, in Section 6.2 the compres-
sion of matrices using the two algorithms is analysed. Finally, results regarding
compressed matrix-vector computations are presented in Section 6.3. As com-
pression of matrices also relies on compression of sequences (for the individual
rows), the more in-depth performance measurements of grammar structure are
only carried out for sequences.
Environment
All tests have been carried out on an Intel Core i7-4770HQ
with 2.2 GHz and 16 GB RAM. Other aspects of the experimental setup are
described in the appropriate section.
The common attributes of the headers of tables presented in this section are
brieﬂy described in Table 6.1.
==PAGE:62==
52
Results
Symbols
The input size of the dataset, measured in number
of symbols. For a sequence S it is |S| = n and for
matrices it equal to the total number of 1’s: |X|.
Dict. size
The size of the dictionary, measured in number of
production rules: |D|.
Compr. ratio
Ratio between dictionary and input size:
|D|
n for se-
quences and |D|
|X| for matrices. This is the most im-
portant attribute, and can be viewed as our standard
unit for compression performance.
Height
The height of the grammar.
k
In Re-Pair, the maximum number of pair replace-
ments in each iteration.
t
In Re-Pair, the maximum number of pair frequencies
maintained at once.
Table 6.1: Common attributes of table headers.
Scope and Limitations
When compressing sequences and matrices in these
experiments, the focus is on compression size and grammar structure.
This
does not mean that speed is not important. However, there are no tests on
the speed of compressing a dataset and no tests on the speed of random access
queries on the grammars. The grammar height does not say much about the
internal structure of the grammar. However, the leaf depths of the grammar
are interesting to analyse, as they collectively describe how many steps must
be taken to randomly access terminal symbols. Note that the leaf depths are
the lengths of the (unique) root-to-leaf paths. Therefore, the distribution of leaf
depths is computed and analysed to compare the structure of grammars.
The reason for the lack of speed test on compression, is that the implementations
are written with a focus on correctness and not running time. The implementa-
tion of Re-Pair uses simple data types where Signature uses several object types,
due to ease of implementation. Some subroutines of both implementations are
not optimal with respect to running time, and therefore this is not a fair basis
for comparison.
When computing matrix-vector products, speed is taken as a measurement using
several tests and averaging to get more stable results, as these tests have high
uncertainty associated with them.
This is due to the amount of other core
processes running at the same time coupled with the unpredictability of the
caches.
==PAGE:63==
6.1 Grammar Compression of Sequences
53
6.1
Grammar Compression of Sequences
In this section, the performance of both Re-Pair and Signature compression on
sequences is investigated.
The goal is to determine how well the algorithms
compress with respect to grammar size and structure.
The input data used
is gathered from Pizza&Chili Corpus [piz], and an overview is provided in Ta-
ble 6.2.
Dataset
Alphabet size
Description
xml.XMB
97
Combined XML ﬁles providing bibliographic
information on computer science journals.
dna.XMB
16
Several Gene DNA sequences. The alphabet size is due
to occurrences of special characters.
english.XMB
239
Selected English texts from the Gutenberg Project.
Table 6.2: Datasets for compression of sequences. Diﬀerent sizes are used for
each of the datasets, ranging in X ∈{25, 50, 75, 100}.
6.1.1
Re-Pair Compression of Sequences
For Re-Pair, we ﬁrst test how the parameters k and t impact the compression,
followed by compression performance on diﬀerent datasets.
Every sequence
is compressed using a termination condition, that if the most recent number
of pairs replacements went below 0.01% of the input size, the post-processing
starts (the compact sequence C is processed using PairedCompression). Even
though it worsens compression size, the reason for this is to reduce overall test-
ing time. It is evident that this condition yields performance reduction, with up
to an absolute increase of around 1.5% in compression ratio. For example, the
xml.50MB has compression ratio 0.0687 with the condition and 0.0563 without.
The last steps of the algorithm took exceptionally long time. Had the circum-
stances been diﬀerent, all tests would have been without conditional premature
termination.
Impact of Parameters
The Re-Pair algorithm takes two parameters: k (iteration size), which is the
maximum number of distinct pairs replaced in an iteration, and t (threshold),
the maximum number of pair frequencies maintained at once. We expect the
compression size to worsen when k increases and/or t decreases, as discussed in
the paragraph Impact of Parameters k and t in Section 4.3.1
==PAGE:64==
54
Results
Iteration size
In Figure 6.1 the results of increasing k while ﬁxing t is shown
on the xml dataset which is highly compressible. There is a strong indication
that the compression ratio has a linear relationship with k, which is expected.
However, the grammar height decreases with iteration size. This is an inter-
esting aspect of increasing k and we are unsure why. From the plot we have
that a doubling of iteration size yields around an absolute increase of 0.12% in
compression ratio.
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
Iteration size
0.0605
0.0610
0.0615
0.0620
0.0625
Compression ratio
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
Grammar height
Re-Pair: k impact on compression [xml.50MB]
Figure 6.1: Re-Pair: Relationship between iteration size k and compression
ratio and height. Threshold t = 1.000.000.
Threshold
In Figure 6.2 the results of increasing t while ﬁxing k is shown,
still on the xml dataset. There is a strong indication that the compression ratio
has a negative relationship with t that looks linear or exponentially decreasing.
The largest threshold is t = 10, 000 which is around 0.019% of the input size,
which means that very little extra memory is required. Looking at the grammar
height, the threshold does not seem to have any particular impact. From the
plot, if imposing a linear tendency line, we have that a doubling of threshold
yields an absolute decrease of around 0.45% in compression ratio. The full data
for these experiments on k and t are found in Appendix, Table A.2.
The conclusion of the parameter analysis is, that increase of iteration size, k,
yields very little increase in grammar size, while an increase of threshold t yields
only a slightly better compression. Therefore it might be favourable to choose
larger k to speed up compression time, since both the in-memory and on-disk
==PAGE:65==
6.1 Grammar Compression of Sequences
55
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Threshold
0.074
0.076
0.078
0.080
0.082
0.084
0.086
Compression ratio
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
Grammar height
Re-Pair: threshold impact on compression [xml.50MB]
Figure 6.2: Re-Pair: Relationship between threshold t and compression ratio
and height. Threshold k = 256.
version reduces the number of iterations by roughly a factor of k. Threshold t
should be chosen as large as possible, which is as large as memory allows. Doing
this in practice can be challenging, as the amount of free memory besides the
compression is uncertain to begin with. This problem is outside the scope of
this thesis. We see that thresholds set to very small percentages of input size
still yields good compression, indicating that the algorithm performs good even
with little excess memory.
Performance on Diﬀerent Sequences
Using a low k = 256 and large t = 100.000, 3 diﬀerent sequence datasets of
varying sizes have been compressed, with results shown in Table 6.3. The xml
sequences compresses best, as expected, followed by dna and english, which
have similar compression ratios. We experience small compression ratio gain for
larger input sizes. The best grammar height is associated with dna, and this
might be due to the small alphabet. A small alphabet yields fewer combina-
tions of terminal symbols and thus fewer distinct grammar trees, which are also
shorter in height.
==PAGE:66==
56
Results
Dataset
k
t
Symbols
Dict. size
Compr. ratio
Height
xml.25MB
256
100,000
26,214,400
1,864,287
0.0711
37
xml.50MB
256
100,000
52,428,800
3,602,225
0.0687
38
xml.75MB
256
100,000
78,643,200
5,196,739
0.0661
38
xml.100MB
256
100,000
104,857,600
6,871,833
0.0655
37
dna.50MB
256
100,000
52,428,800
6,988,990
0.1333
32
dna.100MB
256
100,000
104,857,600
13,419,863
0.1280
32
english.50MB
256
100,000
52,428,800
7,153,650
0.1364
35
english.100MB
256
100,000
104,857,600
14,069,810
0.1342
40
Table 6.3: Re-Pair Compression of diﬀerent sequences.
6.1.2
Signature Compression of Sequences
Signature compression takes no parameters. This version treats runs as binary
trees, as explained in Section 4.4.4. There is a separate section in the following
comparing this type of runs with the O(1)-sized runs. The tests are carried out
using a ﬁxed seed for the permutation, making it similar across all tests.
The results of compressing sequences using Signature compression are sum-
marised in Table 6.4. From the results, we see the same trends as with Re-Pair
on the diﬀerent types of sequence datasets.
Dataset
Symbols
Dict. size
Compr. ratio
Height
xml.25MB
26,214,400
2,548,098
0.0972
40
xml.50MB
52,428,800
4,762,657
0.0908
42
xml.75MB
78,643,200
6,803,235
0.0865
43
xml.100MB
104,857,600
8,861,269
0.0845
43
dna.50MB
52,428,800
7,057,793
0.1346
42
dna.100MB
104,857,600
13,484,441
0.1286
44
english.50MB
52,428,799
6,950,821
0.1326
43
english.100MB
104,851,944
14,335,120
0.1367
54
Table 6.4: Signature grammar Compression on diﬀerent sequences.
Diﬀerent Types of Runs
The results of compressing various sizes of xml using either run trees or O(1)-
size runs are shown in Table 6.5. The compression ratios using either type of
runs are very similar, as expected (described in Section 4.4.4). However, the
grammar height is slightly better using O(1)-size runs, as the run trees have
an increased height of a constant factor associated with them.
Overall, the
diﬀerences are marginal.
In order to investigate the expectation of random access times, we now look at
the internal structure of the grammars by analysing the leaf depths.
==PAGE:67==
6.1 Grammar Compression of Sequences
57
Dataset
Compr. ratio
Height
Run Trees
O(1)-size Runs
Run Trees
O(1)-size Runs
xml.25MB
0.0972
0.0982
40
39
xml.50MB
0.0908
0.0919
42
41
xml.75MB
0.0865
0.0875
43
42
xml.100MB
0.0845
0.0855
43
42
Table 6.5: Compression ratio and height comparison of sequence compression
by Signature with and without constant size runs.
Dataset
Mean
Variance
Run Trees
O(1)-size Runs
%-diﬀ.
Run Trees
O(1)-size Runs
%-diﬀ.
xml.25MB
26.66
26.59
+0.25%
6.357
6.135
+3.62%
xml.50MB
28.05
27.83
+0.08%
7.317
7.043
+3.89%
xml.75MB
28.57
28.55
+0.07%
7.388
7.322
+0.89%
xml.100MB
28.85
28.90
−0.18%
6.876
7.039
−2.32%
Table 6.6: Two types of runs for Signature compression: Mean and variance of
the distribution of leaf depths along with the percentage diﬀerence
from O(1)-size runs to run trees.
Distribution of Leaf Depths
To further address the similarity of the two
types of runs, we look at the distribution of leaf depths of the grammars. That
is the collection of unique paths from root to every leaf in the grammar. This
distribution provides a measurement of access times in the grammar, and a lower
mean will indicate a better random access performance. The grammars diﬀer
signiﬁcantly if a change in mean or variance does not follow each other between
the two types of runs.
The distribution of leaf depths has been computed for both types of runs on the
same 4 datasets of increasing size, and the histograms are shown in Figure 6.3
while the summary statistics are provided in Table 6.6. Looking at the percent-
age diﬀerence of means and variance between the two types of runs, we conclude
that they are very similar. This also follows from the similarity in the shapes
of the histograms. The slight increase in grammar height of the run trees does
not matter for the overall grammar, as the means of path lengths are close to
identical. Note that the sample size of 4 is too small to draw general conclusions
from, due to high uncertainty associated with it.
==PAGE:68==
58
Results
15
20
25
30
35
40
Path length
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Frequency
1e6 Distribution of root-to-leaf path lengths [xml.25MB]
sig. grammar
sig. grammar (const. size runs)
20
25
30
35
40
Path length
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
1e6 Distribution of root-to-leaf path lengths [xml.50MB]
sig. grammar
sig. grammar (const. size runs)
20
25
30
35
40
Path length
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Frequency
1e7 Distribution of root-to-leaf path lengths [xml.75MB]
sig. grammar
sig. grammar (const. size runs)
20
25
30
35
40
Path length
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Frequency
1e7Distribution of root-to-leaf path lengths [xml.100MB]
sig. grammar
sig. grammar (const. size runs)
Figure 6.3: Distribution of leaf depths in the grammars produced by the two
types of runs of Signature compression on an xml sequence of in-
creasing length.
==PAGE:69==
6.1 Grammar Compression of Sequences
59
6.1.3
Performance Comparison on Sequences
Now that the individual results of Re-Pair and Signature compression has been
presented and analysed, a comparison is made in the following.
Size of Compression
A comparison of compression ratio and grammar height for both algorithms is
shown in Table 6.7. This data is a summary from the individual results. For
xml sequences, Re-Pair outperforms Signature notably. The compression ratio
of Signature ranges from an absolute increase of 2.6% to an absolute increase
of 1.9% compared to that of Re-Pair, from the 25MB to 100MB dataset respec-
tively. For dna and english, we experience similar compression ratios, however,
Signature produces grammar of signiﬁcantly larger height.
Dataset
Compr. ratio
Height
Re-Pair
Signature
Re-Pair
Signature
xml.25MB
0.0711
0.0972
37
40
xml.50MB
0.0687
0.0908
38
42
xml.75MB
0.0661
0.0865
38
43
xml.100MB
0.0655
0.0845
37
43
dna.50MB
0.1333
0.1346
32
42
dna.100MB
0.1280
0.1286
32
44
english.50MB
0.1364
0.1326
35
43
english.100MB
0.1342
0.1367
40
54
Table 6.7: Compression ratio and height comparison of sequence compression
by Re-Pair and Signature compression.
Distribution of Leaf Depths
To further analyse whether there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in performance, the
structures of the grammars produced are compared. The distribution of leaf
depths is computed and shown in Figure 6.4.
The summary statistics behind the histograms are shown in Table 6.8. From
the histograms and the summary statistics we have that the diﬀerence in both
mean and variance increases with input size for the Signature grammar. This
means that the mean and variance worsens by a larger than constant factor as
input size increases. The increase in variance is signiﬁcant. This is an indication
that the structure of the Signature grammar worsens for larger inputs, talking
in favour of using Re-Pair to obtain better random access times on average.
==PAGE:70==
60
Results
15
20
25
30
35
Path length
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Frequency
1e6
Dist. of root-to-leaf path lengths [dblp.xml.25MB]
appr. re-pair
sig. grammar
15
20
25
30
35
Path length
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
1e6
Dist. of root-to-leaf path lengths [dblp.xml.50MB]
appr. re-pair
sig. grammar
15
20
25
30
35
Path length
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Frequency
1e7
Dist. of root-to-leaf path lengths [dblp.xml.75MB]
appr. re-pair
sig. grammar
17.5
20.0
22.5
25.0
27.5
30.0
32.5
35.0
37.5
Path length
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
Frequency
1e7 Dist. of root-to-leaf path lengths [dblp.xml.100MB]
appr. re-pair
sig. grammar
Figure 6.4: Distribution of leaf depths in the grammars produced by the two
algorithms on an xml sequence of increasing size.
Dataset
Mean
Variance
Re-Pair
Signature
%-diﬀ.
Re-Pair
Signature
%-diﬀ.
xml.25MB
27.24
26.66
+2.18%
6.081
6.357
−4.34%
xml.50MB
27.85
28.05
−0.07%
5.897
7.317
−19.4%
xml.75MB
27.89
28.57
−2.39%
4.897
7.388
−33.7%
xml.100MB
28.56
29.36
−2.73%
5.344
8.527
−37.3%
Table 6.8: Grammar Structure of Re-Pair and Signature: Mean and variance
of the distribution of leaf depths along with the percentage diﬀer-
ence.
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Grammar Compression of Sequences
61
However, the sample size of 4 is too small to draw general conclusions from due
to the high uncertainty associated with it.
Histograms have also been drawn for dna and english. These are included in
Appendix, Figure A.1. The tendency is, that Re-Pair have very low variance
relative to Signature on these datasets. Low variance implies a more balanced
grammar where the leaf depths are fairly similar.
6.1.4
Sub-Conclusion
Re-Pair slightly outperforms Signature with respect to compression size, most
notably on xml datasets. Signature produces grammars of sequences with an
absolute increase in compression ratio up to 2.6% compared to Re-Pair. The
structures of the grammars produced by the two algorithms are fairly similar.
There is a minor trend that the average leaf depth of grammars produced by
Signature compression worsens over time, compared to Re-Pair, however, there
is too little data to support it in general.
==PAGE:72==
62
Results
6.2
Grammar Compression of Matrices
In this section, the performance of Re-Pair and Signature compression on ma-
trices is analysed. From Section 6.1 there was a strong indication that Re-Pair
slightly outperforms Signature compression on sequences. In the following, the
compression ratios of matrices are compared as well as the structure of the
grammars produced.
First, the impact of the Re-Pair parameters is analysed, followed directly by
a comparison section of both algorithms. The datasets used are shown in Ta-
ble 6.9.
Dataset
Rows
Columns
Symbols
Description
BerkStan
685,230
685,230
7,600,595
Web graph of Berkeley and Stanford [sta]
Google
875,713
875,713
5,105,039
Web graph from Google [sta]
NotreDame
325,729
325,729
1,497,134
Web graph of nd.edu [sta]
Standford
281,903
281,903
2,312,497
Web graph of Stanford.edu [sta]
Wiki.100MB
8,246
290,498
5,939,992
Bag Of Words built from Wikipedia articles from [sea]
Wiki.200MB
18,004
429,363
11,904,592
Bag Of Words built from Wikipedia articles from [sea]
generatedX
X
X
-
Randomly generated matrices using normal dist. with
mean X/2 and std. dev. X/200 for numbers in rows.
Table 6.9: Datasets for compression of matrices. Symbols is the number of
1’s of the matrix (number of edges if the matrix is a graph).
Setup
All matrices are converted into a row list ﬁle format regardless of their
original format. The compression ratio is |D|/|X|, even though P is also part of
the compression, adding another n symbols to the compressed size. Two reasons
for not accounting for it: 1) There is no one-to-one correspondence between the
size of a production of D and a symbol of P. In theory every production of
D takes twice the space of a symbol of P, however, potential encoding and
compacting can inﬂuence this. 2) Independent of the compression algorithm,
the space of P remains the same. Note that the actual compression size will be
larger by an O(n) term in practice, and this should be taken into account when
looking at the results.
Unlike the sequence compression, the Re-Pair algorithm is now set to termi-
nate only when zero pair replacements were made in the previous round, not
terminating prematurely.
Signature compresses with run trees (described in
Section 4.4.4).
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Grammar Compression of Matrices
63
6.2.1
Re-Pair Impact of Parameters
As with sequences, the impact of parameters k (iteration size) and t
(threshold) on matrix compression is analysed on diﬀerent matrices.
Iteration size
In Figure 6.5 the results of increasing k while ﬁxing t is shown
on the BerkStan dataset which is highly compressible. The grammar size is
slightly increasing as iteration size increases, which is expected. However, the
height decreases and we are unsure why. From the plot we have that a doubling
of iteration size yields an absolute increase around 0.07% in compression ratio.
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Iteration size
0.1400
0.1425
0.1450
0.1475
0.1500
0.1525
0.1550
0.1575
0.1600
Compression ratio
10
12
14
16
18
20
Grammar height
Re-Pair: k impact on compression [Berkstan]
Figure 6.5: Re-Pair on matrix: Relationship between iteration size k and com-
pression ratio and height. Threshold t = 100.000.
Threshold
In Figure 6.6 the results of increasing t while ﬁxing k is shown,
still on the BerkStan dataset. There is a strong indication that the compression
ratio has a negative relationship with t. The largest threshold used, t = 30, 000
is around 0.32% of the input size, which means that little extra memory is used.
From the plot, if imposing a linear tendency line, we have that a doubling of
iteration size yields an absolute decrease around 1% in compression ratio. The
threshold slightly aﬀects the height. The full data for these experiments on k
and t are found in Appendix, Table A.3.
==PAGE:74==
64
Results
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
Threshold
0.150
0.155
0.160
0.165
0.170
0.175
Compression ratio
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Grammar height
Re-Pair: threshold impact on compression [Berkstan]
Figure 6.6: Re-Pair on matrix: Relationship between threshold t and com-
pression ratio and height. Iteration size k = 256.
The conclusion of the parameter analysis is the same as for Re-Pair on sequences.
Increase of iteration size k yields very little increase in grammar size. Therefore
it might be favourable to choose larger k to speed up compression time. Also,
t should be chosen as large as possible, which is as large as memory allows.
However, thresholds set to very small percentages of input size still yields good
compression, indicating that the algorithm performs good even with little excess
memory.
6.2.2
Performance Comparison
The performance of both Re-Pair and Signature compression is analysed by
looking at compression size followed by distribution of leaf depths.
Size of Compression
The grammar size and height from both algorithms on diﬀerent matrices are
shown in Table 6.10. All matrices have been compressed both with and with-
out diﬀerential encoding. BerkStan compresses best, followed by NotreDame.
==PAGE:75==
6.2 Grammar Compression of Matrices
65
Diﬀ. Enc.
Without Diﬀ. Enc.
Dataset
Symbols
Dict. size
Compr. ratio
Height
Compr. ratio
Height
Re-Pair
BerkStan
7,600,595
1,135,365
0.1494
16
0.2119
29
Google
5,105,039
2,191,577
0.4293
21
0.3654
26
NotreDame
1,497,134
240,188
0.1604
21
0.3660
30
Stanford
2,312,497
824,960
0.3567
25
0.3027
30
Wiki.100MB
5,939,992
2,642,722
0.4449
19
0.5765
23
Wiki.200MB
11,904,592
5,195,464
0.4364
19
0.5441
24
generated1000
35,876
19,382
0.5402
10
0.6586
11
generated2000
149,343
71,269
0.4772
12
0.6257
13
generated4000
591,750
255,181
0.4312
14
0.5893
15
Signature
BerkStan
7,600,595
1,510,094
0.1987
15
0.2663
13
Google
5,105,039
2,496,659
0.4891
13
0.4489
13
NotreDame
1,497,134
302,977
0.2024
20
0.4344
18
Stanford
2,312,497
942,032
0.4074
13
0.3712
12
Wiki.100MB
5,939,992
2,808,544
0.4728
21
0.6356
20
Wiki.200MB
11,904,592
5,521,917
0.4638
22
0.6002
20
generated1000
35,876
20,582
0.5737
13
0.7202
10
generated2000
149,343
75,181
0.5034
15
0.6881
12
generated4000
591,750
269,066
0.4547
18
0.6529
14
Table 6.10: Re-Pair and Signature compression of matrices. Re-Pair parame-
ters are k = 256, t = 100.000.
Re-Pair yields better compression on all datasets compared to Signature with
or without diﬀerential encoding. The grammar of Signature has an absolute
increase of 4.93% in compression ratio for BerkStan and an absolute increase of
5.98% for the Google matrix compared to Re-Pair, using diﬀerential encoding.
The compression gets larger without diﬀerential encoding for most datasets
except the Google and Stanford matrix. As discussed in the paragraph on
Diﬀerential Encoding in Section 3.3.1, this encoding can in some cases diminish
repetitive patterns. For web graphs, every node/row is representing a web page.
It is not unusual that several rows are very identical because some URLs are from
the same domain, and therefore they link to each other, creating a small cluster
in the graph. Compressing without diﬀerential encoding can be favourable when
rows are very similar and aligned, whereas diﬀerential encoding is strong if
patterns are similar and not aligned.
Diﬀerential encoding can also exploit
alignment, but a single symbol can invalidate an aligned pair. This might be part
of the explanation of the compressibility of the Google and Stanford matrices.
Signature generally has the greatest grammar height, however, the grammar
height of Re-Pair on Google is very high in comparison. An analysis of the leaf
depths can reveal if this is has any inﬂuence, or if we are dealing with an outlier
path in the grammar.
==PAGE:76==
66
Results
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
Path length
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Frequency
1e6
Dist. of root-to-leaf path lengths [Berkstan]
appr. re-pair
sig. grammar
0
5
10
15
20
Path length
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Frequency
1e6
Dist. of root-to-leaf path lengths [Google]
appr. re-pair
sig. grammar
Figure 6.7: Distribution of leaf depths in the grammars produced by the two
types of runs of Signature compression on Berkstan and Google
matrices.
Dataset
Mean
Variance
Re-Pair
Signature
Re-Pair
Signature
BerkStan
5.052
5.027
5.580
6.170
Google
3.629
3.420
3.557
2.444
Table 6.11: Grammar structure of Re-Pair and Signature on matrices: Mean
and variance of the distribution of leaf depths.
Distribution of Leaf Depths
The distributions of leaf depths of the BerkStan and Google matrices are shown
in Figure 6.7. The summary statistics are collected in Table 6.11. For BerkStan,
we have that the algorithms perform fairly similar, Signature having a slightly
larger variance. For Google, the Signature grammar has similar mean and a
lower variance. However, for a series of random access queries, the variance
does not have much impact. From this, there is a strong indication that the
random access times on these grammars will be very similar. Notice that the
diﬀerence in grammar heights only comes from one or few outlier paths (of
length 21) of the Re-Pair algorithm, and therefore the grammar height is not a
good measure for random access times.
6.2.3
Sub-Conclusion
As for sequences, Re-Pair slightly outperforms Signature with respect to com-
pression size. The structure of the grammars produced by the two algorithms are
fairly similar. When compressing matrices too large for memory, the I/O cost
==PAGE:77==
6.2 Grammar Compression of Matrices
67
of Re-Pair is O(|D|/k · (n/B + k)) while for Signature grammars it is O(n/B).
Tuning k decreases the running time of Re-Pair by reducing the number of it-
erations by roughly a factor of k.
However, large k still leaves the running
time worse than linear, theoretically. From the experiments we have that even
when choosing a k ≥2000 for the Berkstan matrix, Re-Pair still yields better
compression than Signature, making it worth the reduced compression time.
Signature compression can be used if time is more important than space.
Most matrices compresses best using diﬀerential encoding, however, for two
of the web graphs we see the opposite trend. Depending on the importance
of compression size, the matrices can be compressed both with and without
diﬀerential encoding and then choosing the best.
==PAGE:78==
68
Results
6.3
Computation of Matrix-Vector Product
In this section we present the results of testing the duration of matrix-vector
multiplication for compressed matrices. First, we present the results using the
techniques of Reference compression, then the results of Grammar-based com-
pressed computation.
Setup
The reported results are averages of 10 test runs. The datasets used
are the same as for compression performance, and are outlined in Table 6.9 on
page 62, however the generated matrices have smaller std. dev. = n/800 in
these tests to yield better compression. Every test consists of a matrix-vector
multiplication between the n × m input matrix and a vector with increasing
positive integers: [1, 2, 3, 4, . . . , m]. All matrices are Signature compressed prior
to computations, and a new instance of the program (creating a new JVM) is
run for every test, building the compression from scratch.
6.3.1
Computation Using Reference Compression
The goal is to investigate if computation on the reference compressed matrix is
faster than on the plain matrix (in row list representation). It is interesting to
analyse how computation speed scales with compression size, as we expect the
duration to be proportional to compression ratio. A single generated matrix of
dimensions 2000 × 2000 is used for this purpose. The Reference compression is
slow, and therefore we choose a small matrix. Compression ratio is altered by
tuning the number of reference rows, k. The windows size is ﬁxed at w = 32
and the percentage is set to p = 3/k, equivalent to 30% if k = 10 for example.
In Figure 6.8 the results of compressing this matrix with increasing number of
reference rows, k, is shown. Every point is an average of 10 test runs using the
same k. It shows the relationship between compression ratio and duration of
computing the matrix-vector product. There is a strong indication that speed of
computation is proportional to compression size, with increasing speed for better
compression. However, there is a lot of variation in the results. The matrix is
very small, and therefore the durations are small which can produce some error
of measurement. All runs of the computation using reference compression are
better than plain computation expect a single one (above the blue line in the
ﬁgure).
The test runs produce results that come in clusters. To identify what these
clusters mean, we plot the relationship between compression ratio and number
==PAGE:79==
6.3 Computation of Matrix-Vector Product
69
0.90
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
Compression ratio
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
Duration (ns)
1e6
Time of matrix-vector product [generated]
plain
reference compression
Figure 6.8: Reference compression on generated 2000 × 2000 matrix with
123,247 symbols. Duration of computation compared to compres-
sion ratio. Colour code is similar to that of Figure 6.9.
0.90
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
Compression ratio
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Number of reference rows (k)
Time of matrix-vector product [generated]
Figure 6.9: Reference compression on generated 2000 × 2000 matrix with
123, 247 symbols. Duration of computation compared to number
of reference rows, k.
==PAGE:80==
70
Results
of references, k, in Figure 6.9 for the same test. Both plots are colour coded
to keep track of the individual points. The best choices of k with respect to
compression size are from 8 to 36. However, if we look at Figure 6.8, we have
that the runs using k = 4, 6 achieves great speed even though the compression
ratio is worse. If the algorithm adds additional reference rows where no row can
be compressed with respect to it, the ratio increases, however computation time
will be the same.
Sub-Conclusion
Reference compression does not yield good compression, however there is a
strong indication that duration of computation decreases linearly with compres-
sion ratio, as expected.
6.3.2
Grammar-Based Compressed Computation
The goal is to investigate if our grammar-based compressed computation using
the exploit actually runs in time proportional to the compression size. Tests are
carried out for generated matrices of decreasing (better) compression ratio, to
analyse if the duration scales as expected. The matrices are generated and has
increasing size, as this is the way decreasing compression size is controlled in
this test.
Matrix-vector products are computed using the grammar compression directly
(Algorithm 3 of Section 4.1.2), denoted grammar and using the exploit (Algo-
rithm 10 of Section 5.2), denoted exploit. The results are shown in Figure 6.10
and Figure 6.11. The full data for these ﬁgures are found in Appendix, Ta-
ble A.1.
The plot of Figure 6.10 shows increasing curves when compression ratio is de-
creasing due to the increase in matrix size. It is the increasing diﬀerence between
them that is interesting. This tendency is zoomed in on in the plot of Figure 6.11,
which is depicting the duration of exploit as a percentage of the duration of
grammar. While the grammar solution is faster around 0.73 compression ratio,
there is a clear tendency that the exploit solution outperforms it for increasing
ratio, and increases this gap as compression ratio decreases. There is a clear in-
dication of a decreasing linear trend, which is expected due to the computation
duration being linearly dependent on the compression size. More speciﬁcally the
duration is O(|P| + |D|) from the theoretical analysis from Section 5.2. From
Table 6.10 we have that the dictionary size |D| is the dominating factor for
==PAGE:81==
6.3 Computation of Matrix-Vector Product
71
the generated matrices used in this test. For large compression ratios, we have
that exploit is slower than grammar. The exploit algorithm has a constant
overhead of checking for a stored result every time a node is visited, that the
grammar algorithm does not have. This might be the reason that the exploit
performs worse for large compression ratios.
Next, we look at the computation performance on the web graph matrices. The
results of running both solutions on the four web graphs are summarised in
Table 6.12. With the highly compressible web graph, BerkStan, we achieve a
great speed-up, and the product is computed in 70% of the time using exploit.
However, with Google, which is not compressed that well, there is almost no
gain in using the exploit.
Dataset
Symbols
Dict. size
Compr. ratio
Time in ns
(grammar)
Time in ns
(exploit)
Percentage
BerkStan
7,600,595
2,031,592
0.2673
102,208,298
71,147,283
69.61%
Google
5,105,039
2,291,404
0.4489
512,256,547
489,799,686
95.62%
NotreDame
1,497,134
650,773
0.4347
29,705,381
25,847,859
87.01%
Stanford
2,312,497
857,028
0.3706
148,511,524
111,833,779
75.30%
Table 6.12: Grammar compressed Computation on web graphs. Percentage
is the exploit time result as a percentage of the grammar time
result.
Sub-Conclusion
There is a strong trend that computation time decreases linearly with compres-
sion size. Achieving a speed-up requires not using diﬀerential encoding. Some
matrices get worse compression ratio if not diﬀerentially encoded, however, some
get better. Therefore we can not conclude that the compression ratio itself gets
worse using this algorithm. Taking the stored results into account, there is a
space overhead of around 50%, if the results are stored using a word per result.
Asymptotically, the algorithm is still using compressed space. Fitting the matrix
into main memory is important for computation speed, and this solution allows
for even further speed-up. Note that duration proportional to compression size
can still be achieved for matrices which do ﬁt in memory.
==PAGE:82==
72
Results
0.62
0.64
0.66
0.68
0.70
0.72
0.74
Compression ratio
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Duration (ns)
1e8
Time of matrix-vector product [generated]
grammar
exploit
Figure 6.10: Grammar compressed computation on generated matrices. The
plot shows relationship between compression ratio and duration
of matrix-vector multiplication, and the matrices are increasing
in size as the ratio decreases. This plot shows the real time used
compared to compression ratio.
0.62
0.64
0.66
0.68
0.70
0.72
0.74
Compression ratio
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Percentage
Time of matrix-vector product [generated]
Exploit time as % of Grammar time
Figure 6.11: Plot for the same data as Figure 6.10.
This plot shows the
exploit duration as a percentage of the grammar duration.
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
We have implemented an approximate version of Re-Pair and an online version
of Signature grammar compression. For a sequence of length n, the construc-
tion time of Approximate Re-Pair is O(|D|/k · (n + t log k)) while for Signature
grammars it is O(n). The I/O cost of Re-Pair is O(|D|/k · (n/B + k)) while for
Signature grammars it is O(n/B), which means that Signature compression is
faster in both cases and not dependent on the ﬁnal compression size. Approx-
imate Re-Pair can be tuned by choice of k, however still has cost worse than
linear. Both algorithms are applied to matrices, and by substituting n by |X|,
the complexities are the same as above.
Experimental tests show that Approximate Re-Pair slightly outperforms Signa-
ture compression with respect to compression size. The structure of the gram-
mars produced by the two algorithms were found to be very similar. Approx-
imate Re-Pair yields good compression in practice, even for larger choices of
iteration size, k, and small choices of threshold, t, with respect to input size. It
can be favourable to reduce compression time by picking a larger iteration size,
loosing only a little compression size performance. Signature compression was
changed to only produce binary grammars, and the binary tree type of runs did
not aﬀect the compression performance.
Reference compression proved to be slow in theory and practice, and the com-
pression performance poor. The construction time is O(kmn) for an n × m bi-
==PAGE:84==
74
Conclusion
nary matrix and k reference rows. However, as a proof-of-concept, we achieved
matrix-vector multiplication in compressed time and space using Reference com-
pression in practice.
Grammar-based compressed computation achieves matrix-vector multiplication
in compressed time and space, both in theory and practice. The time and space
is O(n+|D|) for an n×m binary matrix and dictionary D. The duration scales
linearly with compression size. The speed-up is achieved at the cost of a small
space overhead proportional to the compressed size, and therefore we stay in
compressed space. This algorithm is also applicable on matrices that do ﬁt in
memory, in order to speed up computation.
7.1
Future Work
In the following we present a few open problems and areas of future work.
7.1.1
Constructing Reference Rows
Recall the matrix representation of Section 5.1 where rows are compressed by
representing them using references from a set R of k reference rows. We have
investigated how such references can be picked. Using this representation, there
is an open problem of eﬃciently picking k reference rows to minimise the com-
pressed size of the input matrix. Part of this problem is also to determine k
such that the compression is good.
7.1.2
Improving Space of Matrix Compression
The compressed size of matrices might be improved at the cost of increased
access times for rows, which might be an interesting direction of future work. In
both Approximate Re-Pair and Signature compression, the boundaries of rows
are respected by compressing only up until the beginning of a new row. This
ensures that the beginning of a row is preserved and can be represented by
a single production. Constructing grammars on the concatenation of all rows
might exploit patterns not available before, resulting in a smaller compression.
However, now a row might have its ﬁrst symbol somewhere deep inside the
grammar. Retrieval of a row therefore requires maintenance of the position in
the sequence that it starts, combined with a traversal of the grammar to locate
==PAGE:85==
7.1 Future Work
75
the origin.
This increases the time it takes to retrieve a row, however, the
potentially reduced size of the grammar might make up for this. Other types of
(compact) indexes on the grammar are interesting to explore as well.
7.1.3
Cache Eﬃcient Grammar Layout
In order to operate on a grammar compressed matrix eﬃciently, we can con-
sider how the productions are laid out in memory. Computing a matrix-vector
production of a plain matrix is cache-eﬃcient if the symbols of the rows are con-
tiguous in memory, allowing for utilisation of the whole current block in cache.
However, if the matrix is grammar compressed, a row is accessed by in-order
traversal of the binary DAG representing the grammar. If the left child of a
node is not further away from its parent than a block, then a cache-miss can
be avoided. Given the structure of the grammar that a node can be left child
of many parents, it might be impossible for a perfect layout of the grammar.
Nevertheless, there is room for improvement, and it might be interesting to look
into methods for laying out the production rules such that the total number of
cache misses can be reduced in practice. Optimising the layout of the gram-
mar can speed up computations of grammar compressed matrices both with or
without the solution of Section 5.2.
7.1.4
Computation in Compressed Time and Limited Ex-
tra Space
The idea of Section 5.2 is applicable if memory still allows for |D| extra words
of space. If not, however, it might be interesting to explore methods to use any
excess memory besides the compressed matrix to speed up computations. Using
the idea of Grammar-based compressed computation, we present the following
ideas for an algorithm to potentially achieve time reduction proportional to
extra memory usage.
Let k be the parameter for determining the time/space trade-oﬀ. The extra
space used can be pre-determined, as the algorithm will use O(k) extra words
of space.
Any free memory can be used by choosing k as large as memory
allows. Instead of storing precomputed results of all productions of a grammar
compressed matrix, we aim to pick the productions of highest re-usability. A
production has high re-usability if its precomputed result can be used over and
over, thus speeding up the procedure.
Let G(X) = {D, P} be a grammar compression of matrix X of dimensions
==PAGE:86==
76
Conclusion
n × m, and let v be a vector of length m. The problem is to pick a subset
K ⊂D of k productions such that all productions in K have maximum possible
value. Note that if we have memory enough for K = D, we can just apply our
grammar-based solution of Section 5.2. Two problems now arise: 1) Deﬁning
the reuse value of a production and 2) Picking K in limited space.
The Value of a Production
The value of a production should be propor-
tional to how many operations on the matrix is saved, if computing the result of
that production only once. Let a production p have length len(p) and in-degree
deg−(p) in the DAG representation of the grammar. The value of p can for
example be set to val(p) = (deg−(p) −1) · len(p). The −1 is to give single use
productions a value of 0, since they are not reused.
Picking K in limited space.
It is important to pick K in space less than
O(k), otherwise the purpose is defeated. Here we can consider frequency count-
ing in limited space.
Tabei et al.
[TSYP16] propose two diﬀerent ways of
counting pair frequencies for their Approximate Re-Pair. For a parameter l, the
algorithms uses O(l) working space. One of these algorithms might be modiﬁed
and used for this purpose.
The problem now becomes picking K in limited space such that it contains the
productions that maximise the value val(p), for a production p. It is important
to also consider the working space of computing val(p) which requires traversal
of the grammar. Furthermore, storing K can be done using a hash map, but it
is very important that the access time is fast in practice, since it is competing
with access on an array, from Algorithm 3 of Section 4.1.2.
==PAGE:87==
Appendix A
Additional Results
This appendix consists of additional results from the experiments, which are
tied to Chapter 6, Results. Most tables consist of the underlying results from
plots. Besides, additional results are collected here.
Table A.1: [Full results] Grammar compressed computation on generated
matrices. The preﬁx g means generated matrix, gr is for grammar,
while ex is for exploit.
Dataset
Symbols
Dict. size
Compr.
ratio
Time in ns
g_4000x4000 (gr)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
18,261,470
g_4000x4000 (gr)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
19,402,274
g_4000x4000 (gr)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
18,214,055
g_4000x4000 (gr)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
21,341,697
g_4000x4000 (gr)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
17,928,180
g_4000x4000 (gr)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
19,397,531
g_4000x4000 (gr)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
20,567,571
g_4000x4000 (gr)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
19,341,367
g_4000x4000 (gr)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
17,475,732
g_4000x4000 (gr)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
17,620,105
g_6000x6000 (gr)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
50,274,740
g_6000x6000 (gr)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
47,458,265
g_6000x6000 (gr)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
51,162,139
g_6000x6000 (gr)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
49,423,604
g_6000x6000 (gr)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
49,906,280
g_6000x6000 (gr)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
52,085,536
g_6000x6000 (gr)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
48,157,354
g_6000x6000 (gr)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
47,868,976
g_6000x6000 (gr)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
50,486,419
g_6000x6000 (gr)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
53,085,351
g_8000x8000 (gr)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
101,565,313
g_8000x8000 (gr)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
104,143,344
==PAGE:88==
78
Additional Results
g_8000x8000 (gr)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
100,823,082
g_8000x8000 (gr)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
102,077,064
g_8000x8000 (gr)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
99,845,347
g_8000x8000 (gr)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
104,510,217
g_8000x8000 (gr)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
104,531,340
g_8000x8000 (gr)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
92,585,806
g_8000x8000 (gr)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
102,169,317
g_8000x8000 (gr)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
102,049,036
g_10000x10000 (gr)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
171,191,293
g_10000x10000 (gr)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
166,508,013
g_10000x10000 (gr)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
175,291,771
g_10000x10000 (gr)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
170,590,641
g_10000x10000 (gr)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
171,135,576
g_10000x10000 (gr)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
174,962,172
g_10000x10000 (gr)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
175,544,834
g_10000x10000 (gr)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
176,525,020
g_10000x10000 (gr)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
172,371,573
g_10000x10000 (gr)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
178,932,695
g_12000x12000 (gr)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
263,053,888
g_12000x12000 (gr)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
253,952,673
g_12000x12000 (gr)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
268,629,624
g_12000x12000 (gr)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
274,076,843
g_12000x12000 (gr)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
259,780,313
g_12000x12000 (gr)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
254,672,128
g_12000x12000 (gr)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
267,290,229
g_12000x12000 (gr)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
262,324,614
g_12000x12000 (gr)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
259,292,789
g_12000x12000 (gr)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
257,975,700
g_14000x14000 (gr)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
371,235,126
g_14000x14000 (gr)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
368,556,018
g_14000x14000 (gr)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
377,690,053
g_14000x14000 (gr)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
389,591,006
g_14000x14000 (gr)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
388,173,901
g_14000x14000 (gr)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
373,612,678
g_14000x14000 (gr)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
377,123,474
g_14000x14000 (gr)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
374,053,770
g_14000x14000 (gr)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
370,206,352
g_14000x14000 (gr)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
374,628,483
g_16000x16000 (gr)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
494,513,864
g_16000x16000 (gr)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
493,867,553
g_16000x16000 (gr)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
514,397,427
g_16000x16000 (gr)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
505,665,530
g_16000x16000 (gr)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
496,255,295
g_16000x16000 (gr)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
507,567,192
g_16000x16000 (gr)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
502,090,083
g_16000x16000 (gr)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
522,048,888
g_16000x16000 (gr)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
501,590,091
g_16000x16000 (gr)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
497,334,212
g_18000x18000 (gr)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
648,290,263
g_18000x18000 (gr)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
673,075,604
g_18000x18000 (gr)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
655,264,549
g_18000x18000 (gr)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
665,600,710
g_18000x18000 (gr)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
675,470,630
g_18000x18000 (gr)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
671,196,446
g_18000x18000 (gr)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
660,428,253
g_18000x18000 (gr)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
680,723,636
g_18000x18000 (gr)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
656,715,693
g_18000x18000 (gr)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
644,184,208
g_20000x20000 (gr)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
820,504,692
g_20000x20000 (gr)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
813,069,148
g_20000x20000 (gr)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
841,470,668
g_20000x20000 (gr)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
835,507,452
g_20000x20000 (gr)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
828,961,349
g_20000x20000 (gr)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
876,678,742
g_20000x20000 (gr)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
840,670,494
g_20000x20000 (gr)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
840,053,184
g_20000x20000 (gr)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
820,667,043
g_20000x20000 (gr)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
817,887,641
g_4000x4000 (ex)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
20,018,642
g_4000x4000 (ex)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
18,895,752
g_4000x4000 (ex)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
20,910,710
g_4000x4000 (ex)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
22,972,078
g_4000x4000 (ex)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
19,265,757
==PAGE:89==
79
g_4000x4000 (ex)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
19,594,251
g_4000x4000 (ex)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
20,070,016
g_4000x4000 (ex)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
16,925,211
g_4000x4000 (ex)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
21,209,223
g_4000x4000 (ex)
478,183
351,305
0.7347
18,155,512
g_6000x6000 (ex)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
52,937,962
g_6000x6000 (ex)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
52,051,153
g_6000x6000 (ex)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
47,953,504
g_6000x6000 (ex)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
55,132,249
g_6000x6000 (ex)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
53,031,841
g_6000x6000 (ex)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
51,278,632
g_6000x6000 (ex)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
47,876,337
g_6000x6000 (ex)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
49,284,920
g_6000x6000 (ex)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
49,437,632
g_6000x6000 (ex)
1,075,527
766,592
0.7128
49,469,453
g_8000x8000 (ex)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
93,574,435
g_8000x8000 (ex)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
104,477,550
g_8000x8000 (ex)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
101,823,088
g_8000x8000 (ex)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
104,224,205
g_8000x8000 (ex)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
96,165,233
g_8000x8000 (ex)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
101,929,164
g_8000x8000 (ex)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
93,301,129
g_8000x8000 (ex)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
106,069,359
g_8000x8000 (ex)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
95,440,926
g_8000x8000 (ex)
1,905,430
1,311,685
0.6884
94,609,392
g_10000x10000 (ex)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
164,890,871
g_10000x10000 (ex)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
164,566,777
g_10000x10000 (ex)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
157,126,824
g_10000x10000 (ex)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
169,354,603
g_10000x10000 (ex)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
161,693,589
g_10000x10000 (ex)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
165,242,015
g_10000x10000 (ex)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
175,990,961
g_10000x10000 (ex)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
161,274,311
g_10000x10000 (ex)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
165,612,764
g_10000x10000 (ex)
2,964,472
1,993,068
0.6723
173,032,334
g_12000x12000 (ex)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
249,450,624
g_12000x12000 (ex)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
253,556,583
g_12000x12000 (ex)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
242,720,836
g_12000x12000 (ex)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
252,554,270
g_12000x12000 (ex)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
236,884,178
g_12000x12000 (ex)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
241,447,165
g_12000x12000 (ex)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
236,560,512
g_12000x12000 (ex)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
249,030,460
g_12000x12000 (ex)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
240,419,954
g_12000x12000 (ex)
4,259,472
2,785,167
0.6539
249,702,651
g_14000x14000 (ex)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
331,599,112
g_14000x14000 (ex)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
355,052,643
g_14000x14000 (ex)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
343,477,531
g_14000x14000 (ex)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
336,466,117
g_14000x14000 (ex)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
357,276,084
g_14000x14000 (ex)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
351,305,839
g_14000x14000 (ex)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
334,497,296
g_14000x14000 (ex)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
355,778,806
g_14000x14000 (ex)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
364,748,070
g_14000x14000 (ex)
5,829,251
3,748,310
0.643
340,379,085
g_16000x16000 (ex)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
464,037,673
g_16000x16000 (ex)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
446,206,864
g_16000x16000 (ex)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
453,840,273
g_16000x16000 (ex)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
463,819,757
g_16000x16000 (ex)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
467,309,512
g_16000x16000 (ex)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
470,720,899
g_16000x16000 (ex)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
453,845,209
g_16000x16000 (ex)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
460,366,729
g_16000x16000 (ex)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
450,868,772
g_16000x16000 (ex)
7,620,182
4,809,238
0.6311
472,895,258
g_18000x18000 (ex)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
603,616,336
g_18000x18000 (ex)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
592,990,123
g_18000x18000 (ex)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
573,805,949
g_18000x18000 (ex)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
595,327,285
g_18000x18000 (ex)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
585,047,133
g_18000x18000 (ex)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
580,228,749
g_18000x18000 (ex)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
582,922,228
g_18000x18000 (ex)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
587,908,103
==PAGE:90==
80
Additional Results
g_18000x18000 (ex)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
557,269,878
g_18000x18000 (ex)
9,602,001
5,989,111
0.6237
566,562,912
g_20000x20000 (ex)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
718,449,925
g_20000x20000 (ex)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
723,324,821
g_20000x20000 (ex)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
704,552,693
g_20000x20000 (ex)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
722,646,882
g_20000x20000 (ex)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
728,641,343
g_20000x20000 (ex)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
726,281,177
g_20000x20000 (ex)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
742,224,324
g_20000x20000 (ex)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
738,095,445
g_20000x20000 (ex)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
746,875,332
g_20000x20000 (ex)
11,897,164
7,318,539
0.6151
748,427,497
Table A.1: [Full results] Grammar compressed computation on generated
matrices. The preﬁx g means generated matrix, gr is for grammar,
while ex is for exploit.
Dataset
k
t
Symbols
Dict. size
Compr. ratio
Height
xml.50MB
8,192
1,000,000
52,428,800
3,160,734
0.0603
41
xml.50MB
12,288
1,000,000
52,428,800
3,197,329
0.0610
38
xml.50MB
16,384
1,000,000
52,428,800
3,226,578
0.0615
38
xml.50MB
20,480
1,000,000
52,428,800
3,241,202
0.0618
39
xml.50MB
24,576
1,000,000
52,428,800
3,256,865
0.0621
37
xml.50MB
28,672
1,000,000
52,428,800
3,280,539
0.0626
36
xml.50MB
32,768
1,000,000
52,428,800
3,269,141
0.0624
35
xml.50MB
256
500
52,428,800
4,556,187
0.0869
39
xml.50MB
256
1,000
52,428,800
4,527,356
0.0864
37
xml.50MB
256
1,500
52,428,800
4,410,697
0.0841
37
xml.50MB
256
2,000
52,428,800
4,380,852
0.0836
37
xml.50MB
256
2,500
52,428,800
4,330,924
0.0826
37
xml.50MB
256
3,000
52,428,800
4,209,472
0.0803
38
xml.50MB
256
3,500
52,428,800
4,128,603
0.0787
38
xml.50MB
256
4,000
52,428,800
4,115,667
0.0785
36
xml.50MB
256
4,500
52,428,800
4,122,045
0.0786
36
xml.50MB
256
5,000
52,428,800
4,021,875
0.0767
35
xml.50MB
256
5,500
52,428,800
4,067,326
0.0776
37
xml.50MB
256
6,000
52,428,800
3,948,959
0.0753
36
xml.50MB
256
6,500
52,428,800
4,023,032
0.0767
37
xml.50MB
256
7,000
52,428,800
4,000,688
0.0763
36
xml.50MB
256
7,500
52,428,800
3,956,815
0.0755
37
xml.50MB
256
8,000
52,428,800
3,963,170
0.0756
36
xml.50MB
256
8,500
52,428,800
3,941,110
0.0752
36
xml.50MB
256
9,000
52,428,800
3,940,537
0.0752
37
xml.50MB
256
9,500
52,428,800
3,920,320
0.0748
36
xml.50MB
256
10,500
52,428,800
3,895,814
0.0743
37
xml.50MB
256
11,000
52,428,800
3,902,936
0.0744
36
xml.50MB
256
11,500
52,428,800
3,909,526
0.0746
36
xml.50MB
256
12,000
52,428,800
3,890,212
0.0742
36
xml.50MB
256
12,500
52,428,800
3,869,083
0.0738
37
xml.50MB
256
13,000
52,428,800
3,866,910
0.0738
35
xml.50MB
256
13,500
52,428,800
3,867,969
0.0738
38
Table A.2: [Full results] Re-Pair Compression of a sequence for diﬀerent com-
binations of parameters k (iteration size) and t (threshold).
==PAGE:91==
81
10
15
20
25
30
Path length
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Frequency
1e7
Dist. of root-to-leaf path lengths [dna.50MB]
appr. re-pair
sig. grammar
15.0
17.5
20.0
22.5
25.0
27.5
30.0
32.5
Path length
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
1e7
Dist. of root-to-leaf path lengths [dna.100MB]
appr. re-pair
sig. grammar
10
15
20
25
30
35
Path length
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Frequency
1e7
Dist. of root-to-leaf path lengths [english.50MB]
appr. re-pair
sig. grammar
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Path length
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Frequency
1e7
Dist. of root-to-leaf path lengths [english.100MB]
appr. re-pair
sig. grammar
Figure A.1: Distribution of leaf depths in the grammars produced by the two
algorithms on xml sequences of increasing size.
==PAGE:92==
82
Additional Results
Dataset
k
t
Symbols
Dict. size
Compr. ratio
Height
Berkstan
256
2,500
7,600,595
1,319,350
0.1736
12
Berkstan
256
5,000
7,600,595
1,329,135
0.1749
13
Berkstan
256
7,500
7,600,595
1,337,960
0.1760
12
Berkstan
256
10,000
7,600,595
1,216,529
0.1601
13
Berkstan
256
12,500
7,600,595
1,225,914
0.1613
13
Berkstan
256
15,000
7,600,595
1,192,117
0.1568
13
Berkstan
256
17,500
7,600,595
1,240,959
0.1633
13
Berkstan
256
20,000
7,600,595
1,209,216
0.1591
13
Berkstan
256
22,500
7,600,595
1,215,678
0.1599
13
Berkstan
256
25,000
7,600,595
1,150,013
0.1513
15
Berkstan
256
27,500
7,600,595
1,154,923
0.1520
14
Berkstan
256
30,000
7,600,595
1,146,346
0.1508
15
Berkstan
256
100,000
7,600,595
1,135,365
0.1494
16
Berkstan
512
100,000
7,600,595
1,130,779
0.1488
17
Berkstan
768
100,000
7,600,595
1,133,317
0.1491
15
Berkstan
1,024
100,000
7,600,595
1,135,648
0.1494
14
Berkstan
1,280
100,000
7,600,595
1,136,679
0.1496
15
Berkstan
1,536
100,000
7,600,595
1,139,126
0.1499
14
Berkstan
1,792
100,000
7,600,595
1,141,163
0.1501
14
Berkstan
2,048
100,000
7,600,595
1,141,024
0.1501
14
Berkstan
2,304
100,000
7,600,595
1,142,222
0.1503
14
Berkstan
2,560
100,000
7,600,595
1,144,466
0.1506
14
Berkstan
2,816
100,000
7,600,595
1,145,189
0.1507
13
Table A.3: [Full results] Re-Pair Compression of a matrix for diﬀerent combi-
nations of parameters k (iteration size) and t (threshold).
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[BGP17]
Philip Bille, Inge Li Gørtz, and Nicola Prezza. Practical and eﬀective
re-pair compression. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.08558, 2017.
[BV04]
Paolo Boldi and Sebastiano Vigna. The webgraph framework i: com-
pression techniques. In Proceedings of the 13th international confer-
ence on World Wide Web, pages 595–602. ACM, 2004.
[CE17]
Anders Roy Christiansen and Mikko Berggren Ettienne. Compressed
indexing with signature grammars. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.08217,
2017.
[CLL+05] Moses Charikar, Eric Lehman, Ding Liu, Rina Panigrahy, Manoj
Prabhakaran, Amit Sahai, and Abhi Shelat. The smallest grammar
problem.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 51(7):2554–
2576, 2005.
[CN10]
Francisco Claude and Gonzalo Navarro. Fast and compact web graph
representations. ACM Transactions on the Web (TWEB), 4(4):16,
2010.
[FGLN17] Alexandre P Francisco, Travis Gagie, Susana Ladra, and Gonzalo
Navarro. Exploiting computation-friendly graph compression meth-
ods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07271, 2017.
[LM00]
N. Jesper Larsson and Alistair Moﬀat. Oﬀ-line dictionary-based com-
pression. Proceedings of the IEEE, 88(11):1722–1732, 2000.
[MSU97]
Kurt Mehlhorn, Rajamani Sundar, and Christian Uhrig. Maintain-
ing dynamic sequences under equality tests in polylogarithmic time.
Algorithmica, 17(2):183–198, 1997.
==PAGE:94==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[piz]
Pizza&Chili Corpus.
http://pizzachili.dcc.uchile.cl/.
Ac-
cessed: 2018-02-28.
[sea]
Search
Engine
Project.
https://searchengineproject.
wordpress.com/. Accessed: 2018-03-12.
[sta]
Stanford Large Network Dataset Collection.
https://snap.
stanford.edu/data/. Accessed: 2018-03-07.
[TSYP16] Yasuo Tabei, Hiroto Saigo, Yoshihiro Yamanishi, and Simon J
Puglisi.
Scalable partial least squares regression on grammar-
compressed data matrices. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
pages 1875–1884. ACM, 2016.
