==PAGE:1==
MASTER THESIS
Improving acceptability of on-shore wind turbines by
means of innovation design
Author:
Dariusz Allam, s151874
Spring 2018
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Improving acceptability of on-shore wind turbines
by means of innovation design
Master Thesis
30 ECTS Credits
Supervisors:
Kristian Borch, Management Engineering DTU
Submitted CORRECT DATE: 21st June 2018 by:
Dariusz Allam | s151874
Department of Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark, DTU
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
It is becoming increasingly difﬁcult to install wind turbines onshore in Denmark. Project
development is often delayed or even stopped due to opposition from the community.
Reasons for lack of acceptance vary but the current trends in technological innovation,
i.e. the up-scaling of wind turbines as well as the top-down decision-making framework
need to be reconsidered to ensure sustainable development of the sector. Literature on
social acceptance is presented and solutions to key issues such as wind turbine size,
noise and impact on nature are proposed through innovation design. This includes the
use of down-scaled horizontal axis wind turbines (HAWT) with blades optimized for
noise reduction, the commercialization and up-scaling of vertical axis wind turbines
(VAWT) and the introduction of a novel technology involving ﬂying tethered wings
called Airborne Wind Energy (AWE). The Quadric framework is used to redesign a
wind turbine manufacturer’s strategy and incorporate improved dynamic capabilities
into a new value chain involving a collaborative approach from all stakeholders. Rec-
ommendations for future work involve equipping the R&D engineer with a set of softer
skills allowing improved interaction with the community as well as open access to work
published by academia.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Problem deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Available technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5.1
Onshore horizontal wind turbines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5.2
Onshore vertical wind turbines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5.3
Offshore ﬂoating wind turbines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2 Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1
Why case studies? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
The Quadric framework. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3 Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1
Social acceptance globally. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Local conditions in Denmark. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Social acceptance in Denmark. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4 Innovation through compromise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1
Surveys and interviews at Østerild test center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
R&D - community interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
The idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5 Dynamic capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1
The example of Vestas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6 A strategy for sustainable differentiation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.1
Internal and external communication. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Technology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.2.1
Noise reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2.2
VAWT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2.3
AWE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
iv
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
7 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
8 Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
List of Listings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I
v
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The main goal of this project is to facilitate the sustainable growth of the wind energy
industry, it being one of the answers to the challenges of climate change. Although the
timescales for these challenges can at times be intangible - the potential threats awaiting
us stretch 50, 60 years into the future - continuing with purely cost-driven innovation in
the wind industry but also within the renewable energy sector in general may simply be
insufﬁcient to face these challenges successfully on a global scale. An interdisciplinary
approach is taken here as technology, innovation, politics, social acceptance and many
other disciplines are vital to build a comprehensive framework of co-creation in the
industry. This chapter provides information on the motivation and background behind
this work and introduces the scope as well as problem deﬁnition. A preview of the
currently available technology is also given.
1.1
Motivation
The short version here would be planet-saving activities. Or humanity-saving activities
rather as the planet is here to stay, the only question being whether with or without all
the species (including our own) on board. This is where the motivation for this thesis
is strictly connected with the United Nations 2030 agenda. In a set of 17 goals to be
reached by 2030, the UN proposes an action plan to end poverty, protect the planet and
ensure prosperity for all. The goals are closely linked with each other in a strategic
manner as e.g. sustainable cities and communities (goal no. 11) contribute directly to
climate action (goal no. 13). The concrete scope of this project is most closely related
to goal no. 9 which focuses on building resilient infrastructure, promoting sustainable
industrialization and fostering innovation. The more speciﬁc and simultaneously most
relevant targets (or parts of them) relating to this thesis are (UN 2018):
1. the development of such an infrastructure which supports economic development
and human well-being while focusing on affordable and equitable access for all
2. promotion of inclusive and sustainable industrialization
3. integration of small-scale industrial and other enterprises into value chains and
markets
4. an upgrade of infrastructure and a retroﬁt of industries for more sustainability,
more efﬁcient use of resources with focus on clean and environmentally-friendly
1 of 34
==PAGE:10==
1.2. Background
1. Introduction
technologies and industrial processes. All countries are encouraged to take action
according to their capabilities
5. the enhancement of scientiﬁc research, the upgrade of technological capabilities
in industrial sectors worldwide and the encouragement of innovation. From an
academic perspective the target is to increase the number of RD workers per 1
million people and increase spending on research
6. a signiﬁcant increase in access to information and communications technology
Historically, quick growth in the wind energy industry has been spurred by a major
political event such as the oil crisis of 1973 and later 1979. The renewable energy
sector is in constant competition with fossil fuels measured by the Levelized Cost of
Electricity (LCOE) index. At the moment, the renewable energy sector is also partly
reliant on the oil sector as e.g. offshore wind turbines are both erected and maintained
with the use of ships. Onshore, transport of wind turbine components to the erection site
is also oil based. It is the hope of the author that these practices change over time with
the mass involvement of electric vehicles. Until then, the best attempt at improving our
planet’s sustainability is to simply increase the number of wind turbine units installed,
i.e. increase capacity.
1.2
Background
In the period 01 May 2014 – 31 October 2016 a project called Wise Power was run by
Wind Europe with the aim of investigating how the energy transition can be accelerated.
Currently, despite general public acceptance of Europe’s 2020 energy goals and overall
acknowledgement of wind energy being key in achieving these goals, wind farms are
sometimes perceived as intrusive and having limited value to the community. With vary-
ing reasons for such attitudes and varying scale of opposition, the project’s goal was to
increase social acceptance of wind energy where necessary as a means of tackling these
issues. The assumption was that to achieve this, local engagement would have to be
improved by project developers and more local community participation in the plan-
ning and implementation phases of wind energy projects would have to be encouraged
(WISE Power, 2016). This is where this master project adds a novelty by raising the
question: Is community engagement during the planning and development stage a case
of too little too late? Could it be even more efﬁcient to review the current RD processes
and introduce the very important matter of social acceptance at this early stage already?
Currently, innovation in the wind industry is mostly cost-driven. This is not surprising
as the challenges faced by the industry are quite unique in that energy is a commodity of
utilitarian value only. Once energy meets generally stringent speciﬁcations of quality,
the main requirement is for it to be dependably available and cheap. In wind turbine
2 of 34
==PAGE:11==
1. Introduction
1.3. Scope
design, innovation has as its end purpose the improvement of technology. This usually
means reducing the cost of energy but can sometimes also mean maximising energy re-
turn from an available area of land. Capital cost can sometimes also have a predominant
inﬂuence (Jamieson, 2011).
When the project started it was observed that many of the organisations involved did not
have a standard procedure to deal with public participation activity. Not much knowl-
edge or strategic use of guidelines and other advisory documents was reported. Even
if such knowledge existed, difﬁculties in transferring it to regional or country condi-
tions and a lack of a corresponding legislative framework were reported. Initial analysis
showed that project developers preferred consultation, dialogue and informational mea-
sures while public empowerment was viewed differently. Public participation so far has
focused on the permitting, construction and operation phases. It is recommended that
it is extended to the preparation phase as well as later project phases (decomissioning,
repowering, etc.). The project also analyses the ﬁnancial side by looking into innovative
ﬁnancing models where there seems to be a global and European consensus that citizen
and community involvement in project development makes the planning, construction,
operation and decomissioning phases easier. As for the models themselves, the most
promising innovative ﬁnancing measures are partnerships, either private or with at least
one cooperative or public ones. This is where the most positive impact on social ac-
ceptance is expected both in the short and long term to make the projects bankable and
transferable. Donation based crowd funding is not expected to produce such results. An
interactive tool for supporting stakeholders in fostering social acceptance was developed
and tested by the WISE Power consortium. It encompasses all engagement measures is
addressed to all stakeholders, local communities included. The tool provides guidelines
on how to hold effective and meaningful dialogue with the concerned stakeholders (de-
velopers, transmission network operators, communities and others) and can be adapted
to the needs of a speciﬁc project. Input from users across Europe is collected in order
to create a bank of case studies with good practice learning points from real life ex-
perience. The assumption of the project was that acceptance of wind energy projects
by local communities would accelerate permitting procedures this way allowing faster
and wider diffusion of the sector across Europe. Tangible beneﬁts and easily accessible
information, engagement and consultation are the best way for communities to accept
wind power. This naturally requires time and effort invested (WISE Power, 2016). Such
an investment is however very likely to pay off in the long run.
1.3
Scope
This thesis begins with an overview of the existing wind turbine solutions for onshore
wind with a mention given to ﬂoating wind turbines as the soon-to-be trending tech-
3 of 34
==PAGE:12==
1.4. Problem deﬁnition
1. Introduction
nology offshore. Other offshore technologies (monopile foundation based turbines and
jacket foundation based turbines) are not mentioned as it is believed that social accep-
tance is much less of an issue here. The next chapter presents a short discussion on
which type of methodology would be suitable for an extended version of this project.
The Quadric framework is suggested as a means of streamlining a wind manufacturer’s
long-term strategy in the desired event of the wind industry leaning towards a collabo-
rative approach in the near future. The phenomenon of social acceptance is explained
in the third chapter with a section dedicated to understanding the conditions of the local
framework in Denmark, followed by a literature review on social acceptance in Den-
mark. Chapter 4 introduces the idea of ﬁnding a compromise between technological
efﬁciency and acceptance of the technology by the end user. The next chapter discusses
the need for creating the right dynamic capabilities in the search for competitive ad-
vantage within a collaborative framework. A comprehensive strategy for sustainable
differentiation is ﬁnally presented in chapter 6. The strategy relies both on improved
internal and external communication and technological innovation. Internal communi-
cation should be especially highlighted here as for a company to be successful in a col-
laborative framework, a collaborative approach and mindset has to be nurtured within
the company ﬁrst. The ’Future work’ section provides guidance on the small changes
which can be introduced to give an overall positive impact on social acceptance of wind
turbines.
1.4
Problem deﬁnition
The emergence of the social acceptance topic is a hint that focus purely on technol-
ogy may be insufﬁcient a driver of the wind energy sector. This also concerns other
renewable energy technologies. Even the most technologically advanced product will
not achieve the goal of market penetration without a clear understanding of its value
proposition by the community. For this reason projects can be delayed and even stopped
(private communication with Kristian Borch). Until recently the wind industry has func-
tioned on a technology push basis. Additionally, in the case of this technology it is dif-
ﬁcult to point to the end user since added value of the product has many different levels
here - from very tangible ones such as proﬁt for the developer to very abstract ones such
as planet-saving activities for the generations to come. At the moment technology has
its own track of development while the issue of social acceptance is researched in paral-
lel focusing on communities as the ’passive receiver’ of this technology. Although this
thesis does not give deﬁnite answers on how technology can improve social acceptance,
it proposes that the issue be studied from a different angle, i.e. what kind of synergy can
be achieved through a more collaborative approach in which technology is much better
adapted to the needs of the community? Since both communities and technology are
4 of 34
==PAGE:13==
1. Introduction
1.5. Available technology
forced to deal with uncertainty as the main obstacle to development, uncertainty could
be used as a driver for cooperation already in the earliest stages of any project, i.e. in
turbine design.
1.5
Available technology
This section provides an overview of the currently available onshore wind technology.
Although focus here is on onshore turbines (both horizontal and vertical), a separate
category appears for ﬂoating wind turbines, the future of offshore wind energy.
1.5.1
Onshore horizontal wind turbines
1. Goldwind
A leading provider of comprehensive wind power solutions in China and abroad,
with a strategy for long-term development, where the focus is on product quality
and meeting varied demands. The acquisition of the German company VENSYS
led to the increase of R&D efforts. The company is known for its Permanent
Magnet Direct-Drive (PMDD) technology and its products are 1.5 MW, 2.5 MW
and 3MW turbines (Goldwind, 2018).
2. Vestas
Vestas is the only company working exclusively with wind energy, which makes it
unique in the global energy sector. Focus is on improving business case certainty
as well as cost of energy reduction. Vestas works with every aspect of the value
chain starting with site studies all the way to service and maintenance. The core
business is the development, manufacturing, sale and maintenance of wind power
plants. Vestas turbine sizes vary from 2 to 4.2 MW onshore (Vestas, 2018).
3. Siemens Gamesa
A turbine manufacturer and developer of wind farms. Its services include life
extension and reconditioning and O&M services such as predictive maintenance.
In between Siemens Gamesa, Gamesa and Siemens Wind Power the product range
is 2.1 - 5 MW for onshore application (SiemensGamesa, 2018).
4. GE
GE Renewable Energy has supplied over 35 000 wind turbines across the globe.
In the Industrial Internet era, one of their innovations is The Digital Wind Farm,
a hardware and software solution comprising of the actual turbines and a suite
of applications built on the Predix* software platform. This provides a digital
infrastructure for the windfarm where unit & site data can be collected, visualized
5 of 34
==PAGE:14==
1.5. Available technology
1. Introduction
and analyzed. A predictive model is built serving as the basis for the suite of
applications. The goal is optimized maintenance strategy, improved reliability
and availability as well as increase in energy production. Rated capacities vary
from 1.7 to 4.8 MW (GE Renewable Energy, 2018).
5. Enercon
The company manufactures turbines and also provides wind farm development
services. One of the company’s innovations was the direct drive system. Of all
the companies mentioned here Enercon offers the smallest turbine as the product
range is 0.9 - 4.2 MW. The 0.9MW turbine has a rotor diameter of 44 m and a hub
height of 45 or 55m (Enercon, 2018).
1.5.2
Onshore vertical wind turbines
1. V-AIR wind technologies
V-Air Wind Technologies, specializes in manufacturing vertical axis wind tur-
bines (VAWTs). The company’s products are VISIONAIR 3 with the following
speciﬁcation: Height: 3.2m, Width: 1.8m, Weight: 274kg, Swept Area: 5.76m2,
Cut in Wind Speed: < 4.0 m/s, Survival Wind Speed: 50 m/s and a larger ver-
sion, VISIONAIR5 with the following speciﬁcation: Height: 5.2m, Width: 3.2m,
Weight: 756kg, Swept Area: 16.6m2, Cut in Wind Speed: 3.5 m/s, Survival Wind
Speed: 50 m/s (V-AIR, 2018).
2. Aeolos Wind Turbine
Aeolos Wind Turbine specializes in manufacturing small wind turbines. Their
current product portfolio includes horizontal axis wind turbines from 500W to
60kW and vertical axis wind turbines from 300W to 10kW. These have applica-
tions for home, farm, village, school and small wind farms. The speciﬁcation for
their 10kW vertical axis wind turbine is: Height: 6.0m, Width: 5.5m, Weight:
680kg, Cut in Wind Speed: 2.5 m/s, Survival Wind Speed: 52.5 m/s (Aeolos,
2018).
3. BE-WIND
This company specializes in turbines for urban environments and offers the ver-
tical axis dual production system. This design is an attempt to increase the ef-
ﬁciency of a vertical wind turbine, know for its inefﬁciency due to rotation and
resistance being created simultaneously by the same wind. The primary applica-
tions of their 3 products are: the EOW-100 is suitable for remote extreme weather
locations, battery support and tiny house construction; the EOW-200 is suitable
for the urban environment and small business applications; the EOW-300 is used
with larger homes and cottages (BE-WIND, 2018).
6 of 34
==PAGE:15==
1. Introduction
1.5. Available technology
1.5.3
Offshore ﬂoating wind turbines
Floating wind turbines are an interesting addition to this project for innovation purposes.
Offshore wind energy is a ﬁeld where monopile and jacket foundation wind turbines
or in general, bottom-ﬁxed turbines have dominated for many years. The amount of
engineering knowledge is thus signiﬁcant and in many cases standardized. Yet, the
availability of wind resources in larger water depths has driven the industry to look for
new solutions. The technology is on its way to commercialization with a wind farm
running off the coast of Scotland called Hywind Scotland. The farm consists of ﬁve 6
MW turbines with a total installed capacity of 30 MW, and a transmission voltage of 33
kV. These are large turbines installed on a ﬂoating vertical spar. The rotor diameter is
154 m and overall height is 253 m. The pilot farm covers around 4 square kilometres in
water depths of 95—129 metres and powers around 22,000 households (Equinor, 2018).
7 of 34
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2
Methodology
This master thesis would be most precisely deﬁned as a thought experiment with the
lead question being: What would the world look like if there was synergy between
politicians, academia, the industry and communities? It is fairly easy to answer this
question and a key performance index for this synergy could be CO2 levels. More prac-
tical methods are however needed to reach this synergy on the ground. The suggested
method for tackling the ’How to improve acceptability of on-shore wind turbines by
means of innovation design’ question is a case study which along with experiments,
surveys, histories and economic research is one way of doing social science research.
2.1
Why case studies?
Case studies are useful methods when working with ’How’ or ’Why’ questions and
when there is little control over the events by the investigator. A third reason for choos-
ing case studies is placing a contemporary phenomenon in a real-life context. In the
context of this thesis, the case study fulﬁlls all three criteria:
1. the question at hand is ’How to improve social acceptance’
2. the events include the economic situation, political decisions, technological devel-
opment and individual behaviour, all of which are beyond control of any single
individual
3. low social acceptance in some areas all while planet-saving activities call for im-
mediate ’green’ action
There are clearly many variables of interest in this case. For the purpose of this case
study it is assumed that the decision-maker is the CEO of a wind turbine manufacturing
company trying to improve the dynamic capabilities of the company in preparation for
the company’s changing role in the value chain. The evidence in the case study com-
prises of: 1) scientiﬁc knowledge on social acceptance 2) social acceptance surveys 3)
an overview of the competition’s products 4) a sample calculation of the potential sav-
ings in a project receiving wide support from the local community. This project is an
example of a multiple-case study and this term can be understood in different dimen-
sions. Each wind farm can be treated as a separate single case, making a study involving
a few wind farms into a multiple-case study as despite different social acceptance issues
governing each wind farm, the context is common. Despite the fact that we are dealing
8 of 34
==PAGE:17==
2. Methodology
2.2. The Quadric framework
with two completely different disciplines, i.e. social acceptance and technology, even
here analogies can be found in e.g. compromise. On the social acceptance part this
compromise takes place between the global need for green energy and the local need
for e.g. undisturbed surroundings. On the technology part this compromise can be be-
tween short-term or long-term proﬁt. According to Yin case studies have at least four
different applications and hence their unique place in evaluation research. These are: 1)
where it is too complex for the survey or experimental strategies, the case study aims to
explain the casual links in real-life scenarios 2) the case study can describe an interven-
tion and the context for its occurrence 3) certain topics can be illustrated in a descriptive
mode using case studies 4) case studies can shed light on situations with no clear, single
outcome (Yin, 2003).
2.2
The Quadric framework
A useful management tool for wind turbine manufacturers is the Quadric Framework
which facilitates value creation along the whole supply chain. Let us assume an ideal
company trying to strategically differentiate itself from the competition. As a mar-
ket leader, the company is the ﬁrst one to incorporate social acceptance as part of its
long-term strategy. The founding values behind this strategy are: 1) planet-saving ac-
tivities 2) community empowerment through distributed decision-making, job creation
and focus on education 3) building and sustaining a friendly attitude towards wind tur-
bines and other renewable energy technologies in the society. Such a strategy guides
decision-making along the value chain when working on the details of creating cultural
uniqueness, operational evidence, an optimized brand portfolio and aligned marketing
(Sherain, 2009).
9 of 34
==PAGE:18==
2.2. The Quadric framework
2. Methodology
Figure 2.1: The Quadric framework (based on Sherain,2009)
10 of 34
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Literature
Social acceptance of wind energy projects has emerged as a key issue recently. Similar
considerations apply in general to all other energy projects and wind energy has become
a sort of test lab in the debate. This chapter provides a review of the literature available
on the topic and has been divided into two parts: a more global view and a more local
view where the country of interest is Denmark. It is worth noting that different countries
see different obstacles to social acceptance. Methods found to effectively improve ac-
ceptance in India may be of minor value in e.g. Germany. There is of course a need for
a global framework of cooperation within the area of acceptance in the wind industry.
Any such framework should however be customized to local conditions. Technology
in the wind industry has matured to the level where purely technical innovation is not
sufﬁcient to sustain development. In the implementation of wind farms, the social di-
mension has become an equally important factor and thus the amount of research here
has become very extensive. It is also important to differentiate between the terms ’ac-
ceptance’ and ’acceptability’ which are sometimes used interchangeably. The ’triangle
of acceptance’ involves 3 dimensions. These are: 1) socio-political acceptance where
the decision-makers are major social actors such as public opinion, key stakeholders
and politicians 2) community acceptance where siting decisions of renewable energy
projects are accepted by local stakeholders and where we are dealing with issues of
procedural and distributive justice and trust toward external actors 3) market acceptance
(also called the ‘process of market adoption of an innovation’) integrates consumers (do
they have a favourable attitude towards renewable energy?), investors and businesses
(choosing the right strategies and openings for renewable energy). Acceptance can thus
be understood in a binary manner. A wind farm can either be accepted by the commu-
nity or not. In the latter case the term resistance is also used. The traditional approach of
viewing the community as a ’barrier’ has however disappeared from scientiﬁc literature
(Fournis & Fortin, 2017). Acceptability is on the other hand viewed by some researchers
as a more complex and dynamic process. In Szarka’s approach the evolving social con-
tract linked to social acceptability, involves at least three levels of collective choice.
These are: 1) socioeconomic and technological choices between the path of renewable
energy and large-scale energy production 2) public policy choices between centering
on economic issues and mass production or environmental issues and renewable energy
3) governance choices between sustainable development philosophies and ecological
modernisation. In the former the economy is linked with the environment and social
development whereas the latter only narrowly integrates environmental issues into the
economy (Szarka, J., 2007a).
11 of 34
==PAGE:20==
3.1. Social acceptance globally
3. Literature
3.1
Social acceptance globally
20 years of research into the main trends and casual factors relating to the social ac-
ceptance of wind energy have been combined into a report titled ’The social acceptance
of wind energy: Where we stand and the path ahead’. This section provides a short
summary of this report. With some of the world’s best wind resources, the wind energy
sector now contributes to 11.4% of Europe’s electricity. This fairly cheap and easy to
exploit resource is the center of many Member States’ strategies for climate change and
energy transition. The growth of this sector has been facilitated by: massive private
investment, energy policy and support mechanism reforms, the shift from centralised,
fossil fuel based systems to more decentralised systems with a variety of renewables by
means of e.g. reconﬁguring grid systems. Throughout this process, people’s relation-
ships to energy production have also changed. Although wind energy as a technology
has received high level support, that has not always been the case with local projects.
Opposition to these throughout Europe appears to be increasing as a result of declining
levels of community acceptance and might have a negative impact on Europe’s energy
transition. Such a situation requires that wind energy projects are regulated more effec-
tively and sparks innovation in developer practices, all positive outcomes, but can also
increase implementation costs and cause delays. It is therefore necessary to look deeper
into social acceptance. Until recently this issue has been left to developers of individual
projects and customized solutions such as community beneﬁts have not improved social
acceptance in general. There is therefore a need for a more strategic approach where
promoting social acceptance is concerned. Building trust between the key actors as
well as improved forms of citizen engagement are the foundations of such an approach.
Other important factors include improvement of the process of translating national en-
ergy policy into local projects and how wind is conceptualised as a community asset.
Research has an important role to play here as does effectively applying research results
into policy and practice. The 5 groups of issues governing social acceptance are: indi-
vidual attitudes, relationships, contextual issues, perceived impacts and process-related
issues. The key inﬂuences on these issues are:
1. individual attitudes: age, gender, etc.; strength of place attachment; political be-
liefs and voting preferences; emotional response; prior experience of wind tur-
bines; attitudes to environmental issues; psychological factors including percep-
tion of social norms; individual roles (consumer, landowner etc.); familiarity with
wind energy
2. relationships: type and level of social capital; trust in government, other pub-
lic agencies and developers; proximity to and visibility of turbines; technology-
society relationships; time, reﬂecting the dynamic nature of social acceptance;
national-local policy; regulator-developer links; discourses within and between
12 of 34
==PAGE:21==
3. Literature
3.1. Social acceptance globally
communities
3. contextual issues: policy regimes; project design — turbine height, colour number
and massing; place attachment; range and mix of actors; ownership of proposed
project; speciﬁc siting issues; cumulative impacts
4. perceived impacts noise; landscape; shadow ﬂicker; property values; level of eco-
nomic beneﬁt; bio-diversity: bats, birds; infrasound; navigation lights; health con-
cerns; disruption of ‘place’; efﬁciency of turbines and wind energy; distributive
justice
5. process-related issues trust in institutions involved; transparency and openness;
procedural justice; expectations and aspirations of public participation; availabil-
ity and quality of information; power in the participation process; value placed on
lay and expert knowledge; timing; discourses of community, developer, regula-
tory bodies; fait accompli
It is not only wind energy that faces these issues. There has been local opposition to
many other forms of infrastructure development in general and this is similarly con-
nected with a wider social, political and economic structure. The challenges of social
acceptance should not be viewed as a purely negative issue, it is after all not surprising
that communities tend to maintain the status quo for fear of changing their localities and
that such fears may sometimes be difﬁcult to express. In fact, regulators and developers
of wind energy projects have in some cases been pressured into using more progressive
approaches by local communities. A negative ripple effect still exists however and com-
munity concerns in one project contribute to the list of challenges expansion of wind
energy is facing.
Social acceptance is a very broad issue and requires input and bridging between a wide
variety of disciplines. These include: engineering, political science, planning and psy-
chology, sociology and also geography and epidemiology. Such a disparate mix of
disciplines has led to difﬁculties in drawing consistent and general conclusions with re-
search varying in terms of scope, conceptual frameworks, methods and ultimately nature
of the ﬁndings. The key inﬂuences mentioned above give a hint of what drives social
acceptance. This is a combination of the attributes of the individuals making up a host
community and the relationships within that community as well as with other actors but
also physical features of the turbines such as size and proximity. How individuals per-
ceive the fairness of the decision-making process and its distributive outcomes is also
important.
There are questions on social acceptance that still need to be addressed and the exist-
ing research has potential for better utilisation. A more systematic and rigorous review
of the literature is needed as are common protocols and deﬁnitions to be able to better
compare and develop evidence in this ﬁeld. New forums and mechanisms as well as di-
13 of 34
==PAGE:22==
3.2. Local conditions in Denmark
3. Literature
alogue are needed for effective knowledge exchange in order to develop more efﬁcient
ways of translating academic research to policy and practice. Although speciﬁc projects
have room for improvement, social acceptance has to be addressed in a more holistic
way than the current one-off consultation events or community beneﬁt packages ’ﬁxes’.
Trust in state institutions, political cultures as well as citizen relationships with the en-
ergy system is a key factor which needs to be considered amid the tensions connected
with the transition to a low carbon economy. A more fundamental transformation of
institutions, regulation and the ways we engage with communities is needed to address
the long-term challenge of social acceptance (Ellis & Ferraro, 2016).
3.2
Local conditions in Denmark
In order to discuss social acceptance of onshore wind turbines in Denmark, it is useful
to look into how the local framework functions. This section is based on the ’Wind
turbines in Denmark’ booklet published by the Danish Energy Agency and aimed to
give more insight into the wind industry to municipalities, wind market players and
other interested parties.
Political framework conditions for the development of wind turbines
The political framework conditions are implemented in the Danish Promotion of Re-
newable Energy Act, adopted by the Danish Parliament. If the total height of the wind
turbine is up to 150 metres, it is the responsibility of the municipalities to secure the
necessary planning basis. This includes: designated wind turbine areas with associated
guidelines in the municipal plan, supplements to the municipal plans with associated
EIAs (environmental impact assessment) and also local plans for the particular wind
turbine projects being applied. When the wind turbine is over 150 metres, the plan-
ning authority responsible are the Environment Centres within the Danish Ministry of
the Environment. Their task is also to monitor that municipal plans for wind turbines
are in line with government interests. The government enters into various follow-up
agreements with local municipalities such as the scrapping scheme in 2004.
Municipal planning and regulations on EIAs
Citizens, associations, authorities and other stakeholders are in accordance with the reg-
ulations continuously involved in the process of municipal planning. The Wind Turbine
Secretariat under the Agency for Spatial and Environmental Planning was set up by the
Danish Ministry of Environment to assist the municipalities in the work. It normally
takes the municipality at least a year to designate wind turbine areas and to process a
speciﬁc project. This time is used for drafting various materials, citizen involvement,
etc. Since only household and small turbines can be erected in areas not designated
14 of 34
==PAGE:23==
3. Literature
3.2. Local conditions in Denmark
through reservations and guidelines in the municipal plan, full consideration must be
given by the local council to neighbouring residences, nature, the landscape and also
other aspects such as culturo-historical values, agricultural interests and how the wind
resource can be exploited. The expected maximum number of turbines, their size as
well as spacing between them are regulated by the guidelines for designated wind tur-
bine areas. The next step in planning is the initiative of a project sponsor, an association
of wind turbine owners or anyone interested in using the designated area to set up wind
turbines. After a project sponsor has notiﬁed the project to the municipality and if the
planning process requires an EIA, an idea phase begins in which a discussion paper is
drafted by the municipality. This is an invitation to citizens’ proposals on the content of
the EIA and the supplement to the municipal plan. The duration of this idea phase, also
called the pre-public phase must be at least two weeks. Consultation with neighbouring
municipalities, the region and national bodies granting environmental approvals is also
included before physical planning is implemented. Local and regional supply compa-
nies are also consulted about installations potentially affected by the project. Once all
feedback has been collected and considered, the municipal plan is supplemented with
guidelines on further local planning and the scope of the EIA is often jointly prepared
by the project owner and the municipality. At least eights weeks of public consultation
in this phase allow property owners, neighbours as well as associations and authorities
to submit objections, comments and alternative proposals. After that period, the wind
project can be ﬁnally adopted and the project sponsor is given an EIA approval by the
municipality. If needed, a local plan is drawn up in parallel by the local council. Here
regulations are included on the exact siting of the turbines, their number, minimum and
maximum total height as well as appearance. If the turbines have a total height of more
than 80 metres or there are more than three turbines, consequences for the environment
must be assessed in an EIA accompanying a supplement to the municipal plan. In other
cases, a rural zone permit may be sufﬁcient. It is normally required, as part of the EIA,
that the project owner draws up a visualisation to make it easier for citizens to create an
impression of the implications of the wind turbines. The assessment in the EIA also con-
cerns noise and shadow, nature, the landscape and information on local wind conditions.
For the sake of turbulence effects and aesthetics, turbines in multiple turbine projects
are recommended to be spaced at three to four times the rotor diameter intervals.
Regulations for siting onshore wind turbines
The various factors taken into consideration during the siting of new turbines are: wind
speed, distance to nearest neighbours, noise and shadow, other technical installations,
and regard for the landscape and nature. The coastal zone, a three-kilometre zone along
the coast does not generally have any buildings or installations. Special planning or
functional justiﬁcation are required for the municipality to erect wind turbines there.
An example of such a justiﬁcation are the favourable wind conditions in West Jutland.
15 of 34
==PAGE:24==
3.2. Local conditions in Denmark
3. Literature
The implications of wind turbines for landscape and nature can be very well illustrated
through visualisation. Impact does not signiﬁcantly increase for landscapes where there
have been large technical installations in the past since these are highly visible already.
The same applies for large and uniform landscapes where the ﬂat or evenly sloping
terrain matches the large dimensions of the turbines. This is the opposite for small-
scale landscapes with small hills or gentle slopes where large contrast would appear.
In order to achieve a high electrical output without impact on too large an area, new
wind turbines are sited in groups wherever possible. A municipality requirement can
state that wind turbines in a group are uniform and arranged in a simple geometric
pattern in order to create a calmer impression. A single row is an example of such a
pattern. Harmonious appearance is deﬁned by rotor/tower ratio and depending on the
total height, varies between 0.9-1.35.
Technical certiﬁcation of wind turbines
The Danish Secretariat for the Danish Wind Turbine Certiﬁcation Scheme is responsible
for helping ensure the safety of new wind turbines and that they can be incorporated
into the electricity system. Danish Energy Agency’s Order no. 651 of 26 June 2008
describes the speciﬁc regulations on the technical certiﬁcation scheme for the design,
manufacture, installation, maintenance and servicing of wind turbines. Energinet is
responsible for the technical prescriptions for the connection of wind turbines to the
electricity grid.
Household wind turbines and small turbines
A stand-alone turbine with a total height of less than 25 metres, connected directly to
existing housing in the open countryside is called a household wind turbine. Small wind
turbines have rotor areas of up to 1 m2 (“micro turbines”) or 1-5 m2 (“mini turbines”)
and may be installed on a building. All turbine types are subject to the Danish Ministry
of the Environment Order on noise in installation and operation phase. Turbines with
rotor areas larger than 1 m2 are subject to the Danish Energy Agency’s Order no. 651.
However, when the rotor area is 1-5 m2, a registration notiﬁcation is only required.
Household and small wind turbines do not normally require and EIA.
Erection of wind turbines in rural zones
Rural zone permits are issued by the municipality which is expected to carry out plan-
ning appraisals. The Danish Nature Protection Act requires that landscape considera-
tions, building lines and considerations towards neighbours (view, reﬂection, etc.) are
also taken care of. There are no ﬁxed requirements set by the Wind Turbine Circular
for household and small turbines regarding distance to neighbouring homes, etc. based
on the turbine’s total height. Case-to-case assessments are carried out by municipal-
ities. Here the municipality has the freedom in choosing the protection interests and
considerations receiving attention outside of the basis of a speciﬁc assessment.
16 of 34
==PAGE:25==
3. Literature
3.3. Social acceptance in Denmark
3.3
Social acceptance in Denmark
The bottom-up approach had been one of the main reasons for integrating renewable
energy into Danish energy policy since the start of the 1980s. The subsequent place-
ment of turbines in parks and clusters was aimed to speed up the green energy transition
by answering the resistance of traditional nature conservancy groups, among others, to-
wards the spreading of turbines over the landscape. The continued scaling up of turbines
also made a positive contribution to the image of wind energy until it reached a point of
saturation where the impact on the landscape of an individual turbine became a problem
in its own right. The competitiveness of the industry and ability to attract investors has
had a negative effect on the bottom-up approach and deepened the divide between sup-
port for renewable energy on a national level and opposition to particular projects on a
local level. It is recommended to revert to the ’think globally, act locally’ ways which
proved successful in terms of social acceptance in the ﬁrst place (Christensen & Lund,
1998).
Krohn and Damborg also foresaw the upcoming wave of negative wind energy publicity
in their work in 1999. Although support for wind power was about 80% at both national
and local level according to the surveys they investigated, they mention the ease with
which e.g. a legal procedure against a planning permit can be started by one devoted
opponent. Local scepticism and negative attitudes can be easily converted into actual
actions against speciﬁc projects in an atmosphere of lack of information and dialogue
between those living in the vicinity of the turbines, the developers, local bureaucracy
and the politicians (Krohn & Damborg, 1999).
Not surprisingly, negative media coverage can portray a much worse situation for wind
energy than the actual one. In a study based on data from 2006 involving 1072 respon-
dents the cumulative effects of seeing a number of turbines daily were assessed. The
aim was to understand if more contact with wind turbines led to certain preferences
concerning more onshore vs. more offshore wind power development and repowering
onshore wind turbines. These relationships were described as rather insigniﬁcant thus
creating an equal ﬁeld for the development of both. From a planning and economic
perspective it would still be however more preferable to raise wind power capacity by
installing new or repowering old turbines onshore (Ladenburg 2015).
Another interesting way of looking at social acceptance in Denmark is through the
deeply rooted community renewable energy (CRE) framework which commenced in
the late 1970s. Mey & Diesendorf ﬁnd a decline in the initial motivation of CRE actors
which started off as an anti-nuclear movement and developed into a climate change mit-
igation action. Institutionalization, focus on efﬁciency and cost reduction weakened the
motivation for this bottom-up action. Environmental concerns being insufﬁcient, new
drivers are needed to mobilize the movement again. These could be the desire for self-
reliant communities and contributing to local economic added value through revenues,
17 of 34
==PAGE:26==
3.3. Social acceptance in Denmark
3. Literature
employment and income. Initiative at local and municipal level also means advancing
energy democracy, another mobilizing factor. The current slowing down of the CRE
movement can be attributed to its initial dependence on state facilitation. As this fa-
cilitation shifted to focus on individual gains, CRE’s social principles were neglected.
Since it is in everybody’s common interest to realise the vision of 100% RE in Denmark
by 2050, there is a need for actors facilitating joint action between government and local
levels (Mey & Diesendorf, 2018).
In any debate on social acceptance it is necessary to acknowledge that certain com-
plaints from the community are legitimate and coping strategies are only effective to a
limited extent. This is the case with impacts from obstruction lights leading to perceived
annoyance inﬂuenced both by sense of place and the internalisation of planning-based
inequities. As wind turbines grow in size, the weight of this effect is believed to be-
come equal with that of visual impacts on landscapes in EIA procedures (Rudolph et
al., 2017). This also calls for a careful choice of wind turbine sizing and siting strate-
gies as respondents have been reported to slightly prefer fewer larger machines over
a larger number of smaller machines while visibility from residency also may cause
negative attitudes towards wind turbines. Interestingly though having many turbines in
the local area can be tolerated as long as they are not in the viewshed of a household
(Ladenburg et al., 2013).
Another interesting aspect in project development is impact on nature. Less restrictions
and social opposition as well as favorable renewable energy policies make forested ar-
eas attractive to developers, especially in Northern Europe which is heavily forested by
default. In order to free space for wind turbine installations, potentially increase wind
turbine performance and thus lower LCOE, felling of trees is carried out. Enevoldsen
has examined the consequences of deforestation within a socio-technical framework
and provided recommendations for the wind industry on deforestation strategies. Wind
project development in forested areas is also highlighted as an interesting area for future
academic research. The case study here was conducted in Sweden and the results may
not be directly transferable to Denmark, yet the conclusions still merit consideration.
Annual energy production does increase when a larger area of trees is clear-felled but
this requires signiﬁcant areas of forest. 1 ha yielded an increase of 3.8% only. When
clear-felling an area of 23.04 ha an increase in wind speeds was observed with poten-
tial decrease in turbulence intensity which calls for additional studies on wind turbine
loading. As far as impact of deforestation on social opposition is concerned, deploy-
ing wind turbines in natural forests rather than plantations and industrial forests seems
to yield more opposition. CO2 savings do not increase with increased deforestation as
the loss of 1 ha (if decommissioned without any purpose) is repaid within approx. 7
months of energy production from the wind turbine while an area of 23.04 ha requires
over 13 years (Enevoldsen 2018). The study also examines the impact on LCOE. An
interesting attempt at understanding social acceptance is made by Aaen in ’Beyond pub-
18 of 34
==PAGE:27==
3. Literature
3.3. Social acceptance in Denmark
lic acceptance of energy infrastructure: How citizens make sense and form reactions by
enacting networks of entities in infrastructure development’ (Aaen et al., 2016). The
paper aims to understand why reactions vary in a group of citizens similarly impacted
by new infrastructure. Citizens’ sensemaking processes are investigated using a novel
theoretical framework, a combination of sensemaking theory and actor-network theory
(ANT). The paper also argues that the currently used stakeholder analysis is too static in
a dynamically-changing environment of citizen attitudes. Citizens’ reactions are there-
fore considered not as opposition to a given development but as a reﬂection of agendas
and meanings that the individual possesses at any given time.
19 of 34
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 4
Innovation through compromise
This chapter presents the main idea behind this thesis which is to compromise on the
upscaling of onshore wind turbines in exchange for improved social acceptance leading
to less time-consuming project development as a whole. In some cases such a compro-
mise or the introduction of technologies other than HAWT may be necessary to even
run the project in the ﬁrst place. It starts with an overview of the results of surveys and
interviews at Østerild test center acquired through private communication with Kristian
Borch. The following section suggests that in order to further enhance the collaborative
approach, communication between technical departments responsible for wind turbine
design and communities is needed. Since to the author’s knowledge, R&D - community
interactions are currently very scarce or non-existent, a few ideas are given on how to
develop this collaboration. An attempt at estimating the costs of project delays (assum-
ing that they are not stopped completely) is also made.
4.1
Surveys and interviews at Østerild test center
Owned by the state of Denmark and managed by the Technical University of Denmark,
the test center is a place where very large wind turbines are tested. It was established
through Act of Parliament 5 in Østerild plantation in a political agreement on 28 May
2010 between the government and their allies in the Danish Parliament. This forest area
is primarily state-owned and up to 550 ha of forest can be clear-cut according to the act
in order to erect seven wind turbines of up to 250 m total height. Wetlands and other
nature restoration initiatives will replace some of the forest land. Due to considerable
local opposition to the project, an additional EIA report had to be performed by the
Ministry of Environment on request from the Attorney General. Discourse analysis of
137 responses recorded during public hearings shows the following 5 major thematic
concerns of the local community:
1. loss of nature values due to the cutting down of a large area of forest in order
to avoid turbulence. The concerns focus on compensatory afforestation being
insufﬁcient.
2. loss of unique landscape previously associated with silence and an absence of
light pollution
3. the fear that noise from the wind turbines and weather may be irritating and that
human and animal health will be affected by low frequent noise
20 of 34
==PAGE:29==
4. Innovation through compromise
4.2. R&D - community interaction
4. the feeling of disempowerment and discontent with planning processes
5. the fear that birdlife will be disturbed and bird fatalities appear in collisions with
wind turbine blades
Based on the interviews a strong division was noticed between opponents’ and propo-
nents’ views on the Test Centre. The decision process was most frequently addressed by
opponents with phrases such as ’undemocratic’ and ’arrogant’ while the environmental
and social impact on the community was addressed with phrases such as ’demolition
of a forest reserve’ and ’light pollution’. On the other hand proponents focused on the
necessity of a closed process using phrases such as ’avoid unnecessary concerns’ and
’the best solution’. The national importance of the Test Centre was also recognized by
proponents with phrases such as ’supporting green transition’ and ’creation of strate-
gic know-how’. Apart from the value of the demolished forest, different issues were
addressed by proponents and opponents (private communication with Kristian Borch).
4.2
R&D - community interaction
For the purpose of this project, it is assumed that R&D currently lacks the dynamic
capabilities to interact with communities and therefore such interaction is very limited
or non-existent. This is also a consequence of the training the engineer receives at
university level where focus until recently has been placed on building technical skills
only. An addition of a more humanistic-oriented skill-set as well as the introduction of
more application engineers, i.e. engineers with enough technical skill to understand and
’translate’ technology into everyday language could signiﬁcantly improve the quality
of such interaction. Such capacities can be built through e-learning. The additional
beneﬁt of e-learning is that the majority of courses offer discussion forums, a place
where different tracks within the wind industry can meet. Once in-house (i.e. within
the technical departments of the wind industry) interaction is improved, inclusion into
the process of co-creation can be further made available to a non-specialized public.
It is recommended to utilize forums with high numbers of users such as Facebook.
Facebook offers various possibilities of creating and administrating groups at different
levels of access. Such a group would allow a member of the community the opportunity
to ask an expert while the expert receives direct feedback on the product. Conﬁdentiality
may become an issue under such circumstances but it is nevertheless assumed that in
a new value chain with much more focus on co-creation and collaboration, the current
conﬁdentiality standards of the wind industry will have to be reassessed anyway. The
effectiveness of such a communication platform can be tested with the following study:
1. attitude towards wind turbines before joining the platform
21 of 34
==PAGE:30==
4.3. The idea
4. Innovation through compromise
2. attitude towards wind turbines after being a member of the platform for a period
of time (6 months, 1 year, etc.)
4.3
The idea
The main idea in this thesis is based on the assumption that increasing acceptance or
friendliness towards wind turbines reduces project costs through a positive ripple effect.
This might not immediately be a signiﬁcant reduction in the ﬁrst project but might result
in large savings in the long term. As debates around sustainable energy receive a lot of
publicity, the positive feedback and trust built within one community could accelerate
acceptance in other communities. How then can acceptance be increased? By adapting
technology in such a way that it offers the community a wind turbine which is less sus-
ceptible to the major concerns delaying or stopping projects completely: visual impact,
noise and e.g. bird/bat fatalities. This idea will receive a major boost as the necessity
for increased capacity becomes more obvious. Let us look at Denmark as an example.
At the moment political debates are centered around whether to install wind turbines
offshore or onshore. From a project development perspective, costs offshore are higher
but social acceptance is less of an issue. Additionally, economy of scale means that the
bigger the turbine, the lower the LCOE. This is unfortunately reverse for acceptance
which happens to be a key issue where onshore wind turbines are concerned. Why then
bother with onshore wind turbines in the ﬁrst place and not focus on reducing LCOE
further onshore? The key lies in total installed capacity and in the broader perspective of
lowering CO2 emissions. It is therefore the onshore wind turbine sector cannot be ne-
glected. In a refreshed version of the bottom-up approach,successful in validating wind
energy in the 80s, the reduced proﬁt from a smaller turbine will be (partially) balanced
by avoiding the costs of project delays. It is expected that the large wind turbine man-
ufacturers will have to introduce ’smaller’ turbines into their portfolio rather than the
small wind turbine manufacturers introducing ’larger’ turbines. Organizational mem-
ory will be very useful in the downscaling process. An attempt was made at calculating
the potential savings in avoiding a 6-month delay in project development. The numbers
given here were obtained in private communication with K2 Management, an energy
consultancy. It is assumed that acceptance issues arise during the development phase
of the project. This phase is manned by 2 senior consultants working at a rate of 1000
DKK/h. K2 Management also suggested adding overhead costs of around 2-3 million
DKK for a delay period of 6 months. The calculation produces the following result:
Cost of delay = 26 (weeks)*40 (hours/week)*2 (employees)*1000 (hourly rate) + 3M
DKK (overhead costs) = 5M DKK
22 of 34
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 5
Dynamic capabilities
A company’s ability to perform at a level ensuring survival and prosperity is called a
strategic capability. It is supported by the organization’s resources and competences. In
an even more rapidly changing competitive environment where technology stimulates
faster innovation which in turn can be imitated more easily, it is however increasingly
difﬁcult to achieve competitive advantage over others. Therefore the one strategic capa-
bility that needs to be emphasized more is dynamic capability which indicates how an
organization is able to adapt to a changing environment through change, innovation and
ﬂexibility. More formally, the ability to renew and recreate the organization’s strategic
capabilities. Dynamic capabilities can be both formal and informal:
1. formal: new product development systems; procedures for agreement for capital
expenditure; strategic moves such as acquisitions or alliances in order to learn
new skills
2. informal: when fast response is needed, how fast are decisions taken?; embed-
ded internal knowledge on how particular circumstances are dealt with or how
innovation is run
The divide into formal and informal is not always strict, e.g. a successful acquisition
may start from informal knowledge sharing (Johnson et al., 2009).
5.1
The example of Vestas
Since 2011 Vestas has made three acquisitions, OCAS AS in 2011, UpWind Solutions
in 2015 and recently in 2018, Utopus Insights. That is 3 acquisitions in an 8-year span
for a company founded in 1898 (Crunchbase, 2018).
1. Utopus Insights was acquired for $M100 for its operations as energy analytics
provider. (Utopus Insights, 2018)
2. UpWind Solutions offers third party asset management, operation and mainte-
nance services to the North American wind energy industry.(UpWindSolutions,
2018)
3. Ocas AS was acquired for an undisclosed amount and offers radar technology that
enables intelligent use of aviation lights on obstacles such as wind turbines.(Ocas,
2018)
23 of 34
==PAGE:32==
5.1. The example of Vestas
5. Dynamic capabilities
Of these three acquisitions, only Ocas AS directly adds value to the social acceptance
side as aviation lights have also been reported to cause irritation. The informal side
of the dynamic capabilities as far as social acceptance is concerned, can and should
be discussed based on Vestas values (ﬁg. 5.1). Although accountability, collaboration
and simplicity appear as the corporate foundation, focus on community would be useful
in streamlining the collaboration mentioned in the picture. Some of the other factors
which will improve informal dynamic capabilities are employee retention and engage-
ment with non-clients. The author is not in possession of any surveys regarding these
factors but investigates them from an innovation foresight perspective. The beneﬁts are:
1. High employee retention: a dynamic capability from a human resource perspec-
tive can be understood as the ability of employee A to carry out the duties of em-
ployee B. Knowledge sharing, network creation and building up organizational
memory require longer periods of time and the stability of human resources. In a
revised value chain of the wind industry, with focus on co-creation, the ﬁght for
competitive advantage will center around training the most versatile employees.
Versatility also means faster decision-making when needed.
2. Engagement with non-clients: one such group are students. It is students who
these days form the core of ’green’ initiatives, are experienced users of social
media and can supply the company with valuable market intelligence in a bottom-
up initiative. Competitive advantage can be boosted by community support for a
company. The more ’ﬂat’ structure of engagement stems from the way the UN is
encouraging work with Sustainable Development Goals in a bottom-up initiative.
A company’s ability to adapt here can also be turned into competitive advantage.
24 of 34
==PAGE:33==
5. Dynamic capabilities
5.1. The example of Vestas
Figure 5.1: The building blocks of Vestas strategy (Vestas annual report, 2017)
25 of 34
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 6
A strategy for sustainable differentiation
The aim of any good strategy is to introduce effective change without disrupting the
functioning of the whole company. The changes proposed here are divided into 2 cat-
egories: communication and technology and based on evolution of the value chain in
the future. Currently, Vestas supplies technological innovation to private developers
who later participate in a closed technical-regulatory space. Access to information and
knowledge to the communities, the end user, is rather restricted. The current set-up
also means that Vestas has less inﬂuence on decision-making once the product has been
delivered to the developer.
Figure 6.1: Current set-up of the value chain
In order to have more inﬂuence on the value chain under the assumption that the technical-
regulatory space remains unchanged, Vestas will have to create a feedback loop with the
end user. Communities can serve as bargaining leverage in communication with devel-
opers and policy-makers (red arrows in ﬁg. 6.2). This means that Vestas will have to
incorporate social innovation into its technological innovation during this phase.
Figure 6.2: Transition set-up of the value chain
Such a strategy during the transition phase can actually lead to Vestas being able to
refocus on technological innovation in the future. This will happen as a result of a
26 of 34
==PAGE:35==
6. A strategy for sustainable differentiation
6.1. Internal and external communication
Figure 6.3: Desired set-up of the value chain
more collaborative approach introduced into the value chain. Vestas’ future role will be
similarly to today’s, to feed technological innovation into the value chain.
6.1
Internal and external communication
It is difﬁcult to imagine a wind turbine manufacturer like Vestas signiﬁcantly improving
its relationships with communities and other stakeholders along the value chain without
ﬁrst looking into internal communication lines and what kind of inﬂuence they have
on the ultimately desired collaborative approach. The case described here comes from
the author’s own experience with a company (here called company A) from the CNC
machine industry.
Innovation in the company was proﬁt-driven meaning that ﬁnance, sales and purchase
departments were given higher priority over technical departments (R&D, engineering,
assembly, etc.). Certain patterns of conﬂicts between various departments could be
noticed and some of them were:
1. joint projects were usually run in a top-down fashion leaving engineers with a
low sense of enthusiasm for creative solutions, instead relying on organizational
memory
2. technical departments were often seen as an obstacle to proﬁt by ﬁnance depart-
ments
3. whenever the purchase department needed to make immediate savings, panic
27 of 34
==PAGE:36==
6.2. Technology
6. A strategy for sustainable differentiation
broke out in many technical departments including logistics
There are many manufacturing companies which operate in this way and manage to
remain successful. There is however one major difference between the CNC machine
industry and the wind energy industry (or renewable energy industry, in general). The
former has an end user with rather clearly deﬁned needs often looking for the most
technologically advanced product. The latter has a much broader spectrum of end users
going all the way to the community. The communication line opened by the designer
should not therefore end at developer level as the client or at ﬁnance department level
but should go all the way to the individual living in the vicinity of the turbine. It is of
course unrealistic to expect an engineer to be a social scientist at the same time. This is
where the non-engineering departments can take on a more active role in reaching out
to the community. The idea is to create a support network around the designer which
will allow him or her to take on a more humanistic approach. This is not a new idea,
it resembles the bottom-up approach of the 70s and early 80s in Denmark when the
community was proud of its turbines which led to a sharp increase in the number of
installed units.
Figure 6.4: Growth in number of turbines and capacity in Denmark (from K. Borch)
6.2
Technology
The two acceptance issues receiving most community and media attention (visibility
and noise) can most likely be only resolved through technology. Scaling down turbines
for onshore use has also other advantages in the form of e.g. lesser problems with
transportation of long blades to installation sites.
28 of 34
==PAGE:37==
6. A strategy for sustainable differentiation
6.2. Technology
6.2.1
Noise reduction
The two main classes of noise source are aero-acoustic (when the blade interacts with
wind) and mechanical (radiated from the tower nacelle) noise. The latter is considered
less important and can be suppressed with the use of sound absorbing materials around
the interior surface of the nacelle. It can still however be annoying and exceed noise reg-
ulation limits and its low frequency allows it to travel long distances. The main source
of noise in modern large wind turbines is considered to be aero-acoustic noise radiating
from the outer part of the blade close to the blade tip. Many variables such as rotor
speed, pitch angle, wind velocity and turbulence intensity as well as geometry of the
blade determine the noise level. The two main groups of noise reduction methods are
always concentrated on neutrality towards power production. This can be done either
through elaborate design for control laws or by taking noise reduction into consider-
ation during the blade design procedure, which has been the most promising trend in
recent years. When control strategies are applied for noise reduction, the two regulative
variables are rotor speed and pitch angle. Decreased rotor speed reduces noise but at the
same time reduces power output.
More recently noise effects have been included in the blade design phase through the
study of noise-optimized airfoils. Another method is to attach sawtooth serrations or
brushes on the blade trailing edge. The mechanism of this method is not however fully
understood yet and needs further investigation as some experiments have shown to con-
tradict theoretical analysis. Another concept, not yet applied in real wind turbines but at
the stage of wind tunnel research, is to use porous materials in those parts of the blade
where most noise is emitted. The principle here is that there is a dependency between
noise emitted by a surface and the acoustic impedance of the body (Yang, 2013).
6.2.2
VAWT
The more we understand vertical-axis wind turbine technology, the higher the chances
of it being more widely commercialized. The ﬁrst wind turbines rotated about a vertical
axis after all and there are applications where VAWT has advantages over HAWT. Both
technologies share many components but there are also some, often less obvious differ-
ences.
VAWT have longer blades than HAWT for a given swept area attached at both ends to
the tower. At higher wind speeds dynamic stall effects are important here and highly
cyclic aerodynamic loading is experienced by the blades. Gravity- and wind shear-
induced loading is however steady with the loads mainly carried in tension. The blades
usually have a constant cross section and are fairly cheap to manufacture but multiple
joints may be required on each blade due to their length. No yaw control and no pitch
mechanisms are required as vertical-axis wind turbines operate with wind from any di-
29 of 34
==PAGE:38==
6.2. Technology
6. A strategy for sustainable differentiation
Figure 6.5: The Archimedes concept
rection and can be stall regulated. Brakes on the rotor shaft are thus often the only active
control stopping a system with high inertia. A generator is used to spin the blades up to
operating speed for starting the VAWT. The location of drivetrains at ground level makes
them accessible for service in all types of weather while the rotor is the only moving
part above ground level. In the case of a HAWT service can be difﬁcult or impossible in
bad weather due to the placement of the drivetrain in the nacelle but on the other hand
the tower can be extended to exploit better wind resources as a result of positive vertical
shear. Access to blades for inspection is easier in the case of HAWT. VAWT foundations
are subject to the turbine weight and the loading from guy-cable tension (these however
decrease overturning moments) and require more amounts of land than HAWT.
Technological comparisons between VAWT and HAWT have yielded inconclusive re-
sults with cost of energy depending on the type of site. HAWT may be superior where
there is high positive wind shear and a dominant wind direction whereas VAWT may be
more efﬁcient at sites with low or negative wind shear and varying wind direction (Berg,
1996). More ﬁeld data is needed for reliable comparisons and this can be achieved by in-
vestment in already existing VAWT manufacturers or start-ups. Currently, VAWTS can
be found in small-scale and residential installations where the choice of renewables is
limited by tight spaces. The recently announced Archimedes design might be the game-
changer as it is closer to a HAWT but its small size shares the beneﬁts of both concepts
(Wind Power Engineering, 2018). Since 2003, the Dutch Msc Marinus Mieremet has
been working on a wind turbine yielding more energy, producing little noise and one
which is also bird friendly and has a positive visual impact. Three circular blades are
wrapped around one another and then expanded. Such a three-dimensional conical tur-
bine ensures that wind is drawn inside with an average yield much higher than that of a
standard urban windmill propeller (Archimedes, 2018).
30 of 34
==PAGE:39==
6. A strategy for sustainable differentiation
6.2. Technology
6.2.3
AWE
Novel technologies for electricity generation from renewable resources include Air-
borne Wind Energy Systems (AWESs), a new class of wind energy converters. Research
on these systems has rapidly accelerated in the past decade. Flying tethered wings or
aircraft allow access to much higher atmosphere layers (300 - 10000 meters) than tradi-
tional wind turbines which ensures high availability of the wind resource (Cherubini et
al., 2015).
Figure 6.6: An airborne wind energy system (from A. Panghal)
31 of 34
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
The inevitability of threats caused by climate change makes renewable energy a very at-
tractive proposition. The literature review shows however that the same individual can
be a strong supporter of global wind energy goals while at the same time deﬁant towards
wind turbines in his or her community. The reasons for lack of acceptance are many and
some issues can be tackled through innovation in technology, i.e. returning to ’smaller’
turbines can be an answer to complaints about visibility while more research and de-
velopment in the area of noise coupled with noise mitigation techniques implemented
already in the design phase can be an answer to complaints about noise. Investment in
less commercial technologies such as VAWT and AWE may also improve social accep-
tance of wind energy by providing alternatives to urban areas and area with high focus
on preservation of the landscape.
Technology will be a big part of the solution. The literature reviews reveals however
other complex issues which require a reevaluation of the whole value chain and the top-
down initiative driving wind energy deployment at the moment. The current structure
of the value chain requires that the wind turbine manufacturer innovates in a cost-driven
manner while the closed decision space imposes solutions on communities without a
comprehensive feedback loop. A very general and broad issue is the feeling of dis-
satisfaction with the current rigid framework and the feeling of disempowerment in
decision-making. This, coupled with access to social media, creates a negative ripple
effect in the debate around wind energy.
Despite the highest utilization rate of wind energy for wind power in the world, sus-
tained development of wind energy projects on land in Denmark requires new ap-
proaches or revisiting the grassroots thinking of the past. Local co-development and
co-ownership of projects is, according to existing research, associated with several ben-
eﬁts such as generating less opposition towards wind power, stimulating local economic
progress and business development as well as driving social coherence and empower-
ment in rural communities. Such a mutually beneﬁcial outcome for the multitude of
actors involved in these co-creation processes can be facilitated by applying the latest
scientiﬁc knowledge in real-life situations with the aim of assisting the strategic energy
planning process in municipalities through collaboration, public-private partnerships
and new types of sustainable business- and ownership models for energy solutions.
Although under above mentioned circumstances it may be tempting to focus on offshore
wind rather than labour through the current issues of onshore wind energy, the ﬁnal goal
is to reduce CO2 levels which will require the participation of every renewable energy
technology available.
32 of 34
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 8
Future Work
The implementation of many of the ideas mentioned in this thesis is beyond the author’s
control. This is especially where technology is concerned. Simultaneously, the already
existing vast amount of literature on social acceptance is pointing to repeating issues.
The separate study of either may not be as fruitful as a comprehensive approach to solv-
ing problems at the crossroads of society and technology.
An interesting continuation of this thesis may be the exploration of co-creation pro-
cesses in relation to wind energy solutions on land in Denmark, carried out through
participatory action research where the researcher takes on the role of consultant and
facilitator in the partnering cases’ development of new renewable energy solutions. Tra-
ditional means of data collection through interviews, focus groups and questionnaires
can be supported by workshops and strategically planned social media interaction with
key stakeholders. The aim of the social media exercise is to create open participatory
spaces in an attempt to stimulate social learning and help identify, select, acquire and
exploit appropriate renewable energy solutions.
The nature of co-creation makes the outcome unforeseeable, yet efforts can be made
to create business models and public-private partnership which stimulate green growth
based on local interests and values. The vast amount of scientiﬁc knowledge on social
acceptability of wind energy can be further tested in ﬁeld conditions. The goals of future
research in this are can be summarized in the following way:
1. with the use of predominantly social media create a network of participants well-
informed on wind energy affairs as a foundation for knowledge diffusion in the
future
2. such a network will facilitate the introduction of a collaborative approach and
have an inﬂuence on the creation of a new value chain
3. a new value chain will change the way competitive advantage is gained and enable
the manufacturer to customize the technological solutions better
4. the role of the engineer will be redeﬁned with a new skill-set involving more
social skills
5. research and access to data will also be redeﬁned by the nature of the collaborative
approach, Open Access or similar will take over the current publishing process as
a necessary means of communicating with the wider public
33
==PAGE:42==
Listings
34
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
UN, 2018. Sustainable Development Goals
http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals (accessed: 2018-
03-07)
WISE Power, 2016. WISE Power project – Fostering social acceptance for wind power
Jamieson, P., 2011. Innovation in wind turbine design. 1st ed. s.: Wind turbines
Yin, R. K., 2003. Case study research - Design and methods. 3rd ed. s.l.: Applied social
research methods series
Goldwind, 2018. Company website http://www.goldwindinternational.com (accessed:
2018-04-28)
Vestas, 2018. Company website https://www.vestas.com (accessed: 2018-04-28)
SiemensGamesa, 2018. Company website http://www.siemensgamesa.com (accessed:
2018-04-28)
GE Renewable Energy, 2018. Company website https://www.ge.com/renewableenergy/wind-
energy (accessed: 2018-04-28)
Enercon, 2018. Company website https://www.enercon.de/en/home (accessed: 2018-
04-28)
V-AIR, 2018. Company website http://visionairwind.com/ (accessed: 2018-05-01)
Aeolos, 2018. Company website http://windturbinestar.com/ (accessed: 2018-05-01)
BE-WIND, 2018. Company website http://www.be-wind.com/ (accessed: 2018-05-01)
Equinor, 2018. Company website https://www.equinor.com/en/what-we-do/hywind-where-
the-wind-takes-us.html (accessed: 2018-05-16)
Sherain, M., 2009. Using the Quadric Framework as a management tool
https://www.slideshare.net/msherain/using-the-quadric-framework-as-a-management-tool-
presentation (accessed: 2018-05-17)
Fournis,Y., Fortin,M.-J., 2017. From social ‘acceptance’ to social ‘acceptability’ of
wind energy projects: towards a territorial perspective, Journal of Environmental Plan-
ning and Management, 60:1, 1-21.
Szarka, J., 2007a. Wind Power in Europe: Politics, Business and Society: Energy,
Climate, and the Environment Series. Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan.
Ellis, G., Ferraro, G. 2016. The social acceptance of wind energy: Where we stand and
the path ahead, Joint Research Centre.
Danish Energy Agency, 2009. Wind turbines in Denmark.
I
==PAGE:44==
LISTINGS
LISTINGS
Christensen, P., Lund, H. 1998. Conﬂicting views of sustainability: the case of wind
power and nature conservation in Denmark, European Environment, vol. 8, 1–6.
Krohn, S., Damborg, S. 1999. On public attitudes towards wind power, Renewable
Energy 16 954-960.
Ladenburg, J., 2015. Does more wind energy inﬂuence the choice of location for wind
power development? Assessing the cumulative effects of daily wind turbine encounters
in Denmark, Energy Research & Social Science 10 26-30.
Mey, F., Diesendorf, M. 2018. Who owns an energy transition? Strategic action elds and
community wind energy in Denmark, Energy Research & Social Science 35 108-117.
Rudolph D., Kirkegaard J., Lyhne I., Clausen N.-E., Kørnøv L. 2017. Spoiled darkness?
Sense of place and annoyance over obstruction lights from the world’s largest wind
turbine test centre in Denmark, Energy Research & Social Science 25 80-90.
Ladenburg J., Termansen M., Hasler B. 2013. Assessing acceptability of two onshore
wind power development schemes: A test of viewshed effects and the cumulative effects
of wind turbines, Energy 54 45-54.
Aaen S. B., Kerndrup S., Lyhne I. 2016. Beyond public acceptance of energy infras-
tructure, Energy Policy 96, 576–586.
Enevoldsen P. 2018. A socio-technical framework for examining the consequences of
deforestation: A case study of wind project development in Northern Europe, Energy
Policy 115 138-147.
Walker G.B., Daniels S.E., Emborg J. 2015. Public participation in environmental pol-
icy decision making: Insights from twenty years of collaborative learning ﬁeldwork,
The Routledge Handbook Of Environment And Communication.
Johnson G., Scholes K., Whittington R. 2009. Fundamentals of strategy, Pearson Edu-
cation Limited.
Crunchbase, 2018. https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/vestas section-overview
(accessed 2018-05-30)
Utopus Insights, 2018. Company website https://www.utopusinsights.com/ (accessed
2018-05-31)
UpwindSolutions, 2018. Vestas company website www.upwindsolutions.com (accessed
2018-05-31)
Ocas, 2018. Company website http://www.ocas.no/ (accessed 2018-05-31)
Vestas annual report, 2017.
https://www.vestas.com/ /media/vestas/investor/investor20pdf/ﬁnancial20reports/2017/q4/
2017annualreport.pdf (accessed 2018-06-01)
Airborne wind energy sytem, 2016. https://www.slideshare.net/AnkitPanghal1/airborne-
wind-energy-system-ppt-66600059 (accessed 2018-06-04)
II
==PAGE:45==
LISTINGS
LISTINGS
Cherubini A., Papini A., Vertechy R., Fontana M. 2015. Airborne Wind Energy Sys-
tems: A review of the technologies, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 51.
Berg D.E., 1996. Vertical-axis wind turbines-the current status of an old technology,
Sandia National Laboratories.
Wind Power Engineering, 2018. Website https://www.windpowerengineering.com/design/vertical-
axis-wind-turbines/ (accessed 2018-06-04)
Archimedes, 2018. Website https://www.thearchimedes.com/ (accessed 2018-06-05)
Yang B., 2013. Research status on aero-acoustic noise from wind turbine blades, IOP
Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering.
III
