==PAGE:1==
Development of a Modular Destacker Architecture
Alexander Skov-Thuesen - S162888 
MSc. Design and Innovation at The Technical University of Denmark, 2018
Product Report
==PAGE:2==
2
Title Page	     	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
University	
	
	
Technical University of Denmark
Faculty	
	
	
	
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Education	
	
	
MSc. in Design and Innovation
Project Title	
	
	
Development of a modular Destacker Architecture
Project Participants		
Alexander Skov-Thuesen, S162888
Supervisor	
	
	
Niels Henrik Mortensen, Professor
Cooperating Company	 Teknik ApS
Pages	
	
	
	
Product Report 	
113
	
	
	
	
	
Appendix	
 	
75
==PAGE:3==
3
Table of Content       	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Abstract	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
5
Preface	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
6
Introduction	 	
	
	
	
	
	
7
Method	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
8
	
The Analysis Phase		
	
	
	
9
	
The Conceptualization Phase	 	
	
9
	
The Validation Phase	
	
	
	
9
The Analysis Phase	
	
	
	
	
10
Teknik ApS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
12
	
Product	 	
	
	
	
	
	
14
	
Economy		
	
	
	
	
	
20
	
Legal Factors	 	
	
	
	
	
22
Market	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
25
	
Porters Five Forces	 	
	
	
	
26
	
Target Segment	
	
	
	
	
29
	
Potential Customers	
	
	
	
30
	
Power Tower	 	
	
	
	
	
48
	
Market Criteria	
	
	
	
	
50
Competitor Analysis	
	
	
	
	
52
	
Patents	
	
	
	
	
	
	
62
	
Competitor Comparison		
	
	
64
Ambitions	
	
	
	
	
	
	
68
The Conceptualization Phase	
	
	
70
Idea Catalogue	
	
	
	
	
	
72
Idea Selection	 	
	
	
	
	
	
79
The Concept	 	
	
	
	
	
	
83
==PAGE:4==
4
The Validation Phase	
	
	
	
	
96
Concept Validation		
	
	
	
	
98
Functional Validation	
	
	
	
	
103
Conclusion	
	
	
	
	
	
	
109
Bibliography	 	
	
	
	
	
	
112
==PAGE:5==
5
Abstract
The main objective of this master thesis is to develop a modular destacker architecture, for the destacker made 
by Teknik ApS. The company Teknik is a very young company and can therefore benefit a lot from introdu­
cing a standardization of their product.
The goal for the project has been to investigate what benefits a company like Teknik could have by implemen­
ting a more modular architecture for their product. The main argument for doing this has been to make the 
product more adaptable to fit the customer needs in an ever changing market which in this project is foods 
manufacturing.
The project has gone through three different phases: the analysis phase, the conceptualization phase and the 
validation phase. In the analysis phase criteria for the new modular solution was found by interviewing po­
tential customers in order to get an understanding of what they expect the output to be of a destacker when 
implemented in their production areas. These criteria were later used to analyze how existing products were 
able to fulfill these criteria and where they had their drawbacks.
This information was later used in the conceptualization phase as goals, which the new modular design of 
the destacker from Teknik should achieve. By waging the ideas based on the criteria for the market it was 
concluded that a small mobile destacker, which were split into two parts, a tool and a stand, were the right 
way to go in order to apply a modular architecture and in that way make the destacker better fulfill the needs 
of the market.
After the concept was fully developed, by the use of 3D CAD drawings, it needed to be validated in order to 
make sure that the concept, like the idea, fulfilled the criteria of the market. In the validation it was concluded 
that this was still the case and that the new concept fulfilled the criteria. 
==PAGE:6==
6
Preface
This project serves as the master thesis for the student Alexander Skov-Thuesen at 
the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The thesis has been developed by the 
student, with assistance and supervision of the professor Niels Henrik Mortensen, 
head of the department of mechanical engineering. Also the company Teknik ApS 
has worked as a great help and sparring partner throughout the project.
Other than my supervisor and the CEO of Teknik I would like to thank the compa­
nies who let me inside their facilities and helped me get an understanding of what 
the product should achieve.
A big thanks therefore goes out to Thomas Hansen, Workshop & Maintenance ma­
nager at Bisca, Björn Malm, Technical Manager at Gille, Palle Jessen, Production 
manager at Dan Cake, Søren Flink Madsen, CEO at Yding Grønt, Lars Høgholt, part 
owner and responsible for the production at Legro Gartneri, Maria Jarbo, VD at Co­
candy, Olaf Brøchner, CEO at Vorgod Bageri and Jacob Jessen, Production manager 
at Elvirasminde.
Additionally I would like to take the opportunity to thank Frederik Petersen, tech­
nical manager at ST Plast, and Jacob Thuesen, freelance engineer, for assistance and 
sparring when my prototype had to be made.
Alexander Skov-Thuesen
Copenhagen 2018 
==PAGE:7==
7
Introduction
The market of foods manufacturing is ever changing. This 
means that the foods manufacturers have to be able to adapt 
in order to fulfill the change of demands of their customers. 
Manufacturers do this by optimizing their production area 
and by implementing machinery, which can help them en­
hance their competitiveness. These machines, when imple­
mented correctly, can help the manufacturers save expenses 
or increase their output.
One of the machines that are being used in order to help 
the foods manufacturers upgrade their production areas, is 
a destacker. A destacker is machine which separates a stack 
of trays, cups etc. and dispenses them one at a time. In this 
master thesis the focus have been on plastic trays.
By having a machine do the separating the foods manufactu­
rers can save manpower and they can increase the manufac­
turing speed due to the fact that the destacker can separa­
te the plastic trays faster than what is possible for a human 
being.
Teknik ApS provides the foods manufacturers with the de­
stacker Tray-Disp, which is a destacker that is specially de­
veloped for one type of plastic tray. When correctly imple­
mented this destacker should be able to fulfill the needs of 
the foods manufacturing market, previously described.
By having the Tray-Disp being specially designed for one 
single type of plastic tray, the product is not properly prepa­
red for the changes that the foods manufacturers go through 
and therefore might not be able to properly fulfill the needs 
of the market.
In order to make sure that the Tray-Disp destacker from 
Teknik will be able to provide the foods manufacturers with 
a product that fulfills their needs this thesis have been writ­
ten.
The thesis focuses on developing the destacker so that it 
would have a more modular architecture. 
Thus leading to the problem formulation:
”What benefits can Teknik ApS have from applying a modular 
architecture for their destackers?”
==PAGE:8==
8
METHOD
==PAGE:9==
9
Method
The method used in this project bears similarities to a traditional stage gate 
model. The stage gate model works by dividing the entire process of the pro­
ject into different stages, meaning that after one stage ends a new one picks up 
and continues to work with whatever was determined in the previous stage.
The model, which has been applied in this project, consists of three stages. 
These stages were the analysis phase, the conceptualizations phase and the 
validation phase.
The analysis phase
The main objective of this phase was to analyze factors like the product pro­
gramme and the market. 
The purpose of analyzing the product programme was to first get an under­
standing of what it consisted of and how the product worked. It was also ana­
lyzed in order to determine what strengths and weaknesses the current pro­
duct had. 
In the market analysis the main purpose was to investigate the market in 
which the product would potentially be sold. This was done in order to deter­
mine what criteria could be set by potential customers, and by that set some 
criteria for the product to achieve in the following conceptualization phase.
In the market analysis it was also important to analyze the type of similar 
products, which are already available on the market. This was done in order 
to both make sure that the concept, which needed to be made in the concep­
tualization phase, was able to set it self apart from the competition and also 
to analyze whether or not there was something, which could be learned from 
the existing competition.
The conclusion based on the analysis phase set criteria for the concept, which 
had to be developed in the next phase the conceptualization phase.
The conceptualization phase
The main objective of this phase was to build on what was already known 
from the analysis. As mentioned the analysis phase ended with setting crite­
ria, which should help determine the development of the concept. 
The end result of this phase should be a tangible concept, which would be 
fully designed and ready for the last phase the validation phase. 
The concept should be based on the criteria set in the analysis phase and has 
gone through different methods in order to make it ready for validation.
The validation phase
The objective of this phase was to analyze and validate the concept, which 
was developed in the conceptualization phase. In this phase the concept was 
tested based on the criteria set in the analysis phase and it was determined 
whether or not the concept could be validated. 
==PAGE:10==
10
ANALYSIS
==PAGE:11==
11
The analysis phase
Purpose
The purpose of this phase is to analyze both the market and the product pro­
gramme. This is done in order to help set criteria for the concept, which needs 
to be developed in the following phase the conceptualization phase.
Methods
In order to be able to set up the criteria needed for the conceptualization phase, 
different methods have been used.
First of all a technical analysis of the product was made, this was done in order 
to get an understanding of what the current product is capable of and where it 
had it’s limitations.
Secondly a Porters Five Forces analysis was conducted. This method was cho­
sen because by using it, it can give a fast understanding of the market and help 
pinpoint some possibilities in a market no matter if it is a blue ocean or a red 
ocean.
After the Porters Five Forces had been applied the market for destackers had 
been set and it was therefore relevant to investigate this market even further.
This was done by target segmentation and gathering qualitative information 
from these segments. Interviewing different potential customers whom both 
had experience with the product and also potential customers whom did not 
have any experience with the product did this. By interviewing the potential 
customers it was possible to set up criteria for the new product, which needed 
to be developed in the conceptualization phase.
Before exiting the analysis phase and entering the conceptualization pha­
se it was important to investigate what other type of similar products were 
available on the market. Therefore a competitor analysis was conducted. The 
purpose of this analysis was to gather information about the competition 
both to be able to make the new concept different from what is already avai­
lable but also to draw inspiration from the competition.
All the competing products were then compared based on the criteria set by 
the market. This was done to see how well each of them were fulfilling the 
needs of the market and to see if inspiration could be drawn based on how 
the products fulfilled these needs.
==PAGE:12==
12
Teknik ApS
Teknik ApS is a small business located in Esbjerg and was founded in 
2016. Teknik is a technical business which main focus is on developing 
and providing its customers with destacker solutions for their production 
areas. 
The founder of Teknik is Knud-Erik Skov-Thuesen who has a technical 
background as a mechanical engineer. Other than being the founder and 
CEO of Teknik Knud-Erik is also the founder and CEO of the company 
ST Plast. ST Plast has for many years developed and produced plastic 
packaging for different segments, mainly foods. Knud-Erik is the CEO of 
both companies but also works as the CSO, chief sales officer, at ST Plast 
and has through the customers received time and time again requests for 
destacking equipment, which worked with the plastic trays made at ST 
Plast. Knud-Erik then founded the company Teknik, which in coopera­
tion with the company Møn Maskinbyg develops machinery needed for 
the customers.
The cooperation between Teknik and Møn Maskinbyg started with the 
destacker. A destacker is a machine in which an operator puts in a stack of 
plastic trays and the machine then separates the trays and destacks them 
one at a time. The destacker from Teknik is called Tray-Disp and can be 
seen in figure 1.
As it can be seen in the figure a stack of plastic trays have been inserted 
into the destacker and underneath can be seen a tray which have been 
successfully destacked.
The destacker has all the components, which is required, integrated in 
order to function and requires only power to be applied.
Figure 1 - Tray-Disp Destacker
==PAGE:13==
13
Additional equipment
The main purpose of implementing a destacker on a production line is 
for the customer to be able to save manpower. This is for several reasons 
where the costs of having employees are one of them. The destacker, as 
seen in figure 1, is able to free up an employee because it runs by it self 
the only thing needed for the employee to do is to fill up the destacker 
whenever its amount of plastic trays is running low. There fore Teknik, 
in cooperation with Møn Maskinbyg have developed a construction to 
free up the employee for a longer period of time i.e. making them able to 
insert a larger amount of plastic trays into the destacker. 
The product, which fulfills the criterion of having more plastic trays in­
serted is the buffer stand seen in figure 2. In this a modified version of the 
destacker is inserted into the buffer stand giving the customer the oppor­
tunity to fill up the stand with up to fifteen minutes worth of plastic trays. 
The blue line of the buffer stand is a transportation band, which drags the 
stack of plastic trays to the end, where the destacker is mounted, and then 
drops them into the destacker.
Figure 2 - Buffer stand for Tray-Disp
==PAGE:14==
14
PRODUCT
==PAGE:15==
15
Figure 3 - Tray-Disp Destacker
==PAGE:16==
16
Function Description
The main function of the destacker is to separate a stack of plastic trays at the, determined by the user, required pace. 
This pace can differ depending on the type of tray or by the process in which the product needs to be packed. 
The destacking speed can be modified, increased or decreased, by the use of the controller seen in figure 4.
The destacker gets its purpose when a company wants to automate it’s packaging process. This can be interesting for 
the company for multiple reasons, these could be ergonomic, controlled expenses, speed etc. 
The main reasons why companies choose to implement this solution is in order to save money, it is therefore impor­
tant that the destacker is implemented in a way, which makes the need of having an employee at the line obsolete. A 
machine is much less expensive than having an employee separate the trays, and it can also do it much faster, if this 
is what is desired. 
The destacker from Teknik runs solely on servo. It connects to a normal 230V output socket, and then needs no other 
power input. A full PFMP of the Tray-Disp can be found in the appendix number 1 - PFMP.
Screw principle
The destacker from Teknik uses a screw principle. The way it works is by having multiple 
screws placed, according to the shape and size of the tray that needs to be destacked. As 
the screws turn the tray in the bottom of the stack, is being separated from the stack, until 
it reaches the end part of the screw. When it reaches the end part of the screw, the tray falls 
down, it then lands on whatever is placed underneath the destacker and this is in most cases 
a conveyor belt. 
As the screws are separating the lowest tray in the stack, it simultaneously pulls down the 
rest of the stack, and the second to last tray then follows the process described above. This 
process continues until the stack of trays reaches a minimum amount, then a sensor in the 
destacker detects this, and stops destacking more trays, until it is refilled with another stack. 
The screws are specially designed for a certain stacking height.
Figure 4 - Controller
Figure5 - Screws
==PAGE:17==
17
The driving system
In order to make the screws rotate the destacker has a motor and a gearing system. This is, as 
mentioned earlier, in order to get the desired motion from the screws, these need to be acti­
vated. In the destacker from Teknik this is done by having a servomotor with a gear attached. 
The motor and gear is shown in figure 6. 
The destacking speed is then, as mentioned earlier, regulated by the use of the controller shown 
in figure 4. 
Underneath the gear there is a toothed belt wheel, this wheel is connected, by the use of a doub­
le-sided toothed belt, to seven other wheels throughout the destacker. Four of these wheels are 
attached to the screws mentioned in the previous section Screw Principle. The entire driving 
system is shown in figure 7.
Figure 6 - Motor and Gear
Figure 7 - Driving System
==PAGE:18==
18
Sensors
The Tray-Disp destacker from Teknik has two retro reflective sensors incorporated into 
its construction. One is mounted underneath the destacker and one is mounted inside the 
destacker.
Underneath the destacker the first sensor is mounted. The objective of this sensor is to 
register whether or not the area underneath the destacker is clear. This is relevant, for the 
destacker, to know because if there is something underneath it, it should not destack a tray. 
If the destacker has destacked a tray it will not destack another, despite the speed setting, 
until this tray is out of sight from the sensor. This is to assure that the destacker doesn’t 
destack the entire stack without assuring that the area underneath is clear.
By using the sensor it becomes easier to synchronize the automation process. The sensor 
is shown in figure 8.
The second sensor is, as mentioned, mounted inside of the destacker. The purpose of this 
sensor is to monitor whether or not there are trays in the destacker. If the stack of trays 
reaches a specific low amount the machine will stop dispensing until it is filled with more 
trays.
This feature is part of the destacker in order to limit the amount of wasteful motions and 
also to increase the level of safety for the operator.  
Picture 8 - Sensor
==PAGE:19==
19
AS-IS flexibility
The current design of the destacker doesn’t take into account the fact 
that different trays might need to be destacked. If a company needs to 
destack trays with a different size, shape or stacking height, they need 
to buy a new machine, which will then be designed to that specific tray. 
The new unit however will be based on the same technology described 
in this chapter. 
AS-IS problems
The current destacker solution from Teknik has some problems. First 
of all it weights around 25kg, see appendix 7 - calculations, this means 
that according to Danish law, it is illegal for the employees to carry it in 
their arms, which results in the need of some kind of equipment if the 
destacker needs to be moved. 
In the example at DanCake, later explained, they have the destacker 
from Teknik with the extended capacity conveyor belt. Whenever they 
need to change the destacker according to Danish law the employees 
Maintenance
The destacker has been designed so there should be little to no need for 
maintenance. Several customers have mentioned that they have had 
the destackers for years and have had no need to maintain their units, 
as they say: ”It simply just works”.
has to use some kind of lifting equipment to carryout the changeover.
A second problem there is with the AS-IS solution is that it isn’t really 
flexible at all. If the customers need to destack a different size or shape, 
they need to purchase an entirely new destacker which leads to the last 
big problem of the AS-IS solution, the second buy is the same price as 
the first. 
==PAGE:20==
20
ECONOMY
==PAGE:21==
21
Investment calculation 
When choosing to invest in some new automation equipment, as a 
destacker, companies makes an investment calculation to know how 
much time it will take for them to earn back the money they invested, 
the break-even. This is to know when they will start to make money of 
the investment. When the numbers are on the table it is easier for them 
to say go or no go to the investment.
Break-even Denmark
In order to know when the investment reaches the break-even a few 
numbers need to be known, first of all the price of the investment. The 
destacker from Teknik costs 38.500 DKK. This destacker, if implemen­
ted correctly, should be able to replace a production worker, in the fac­
tories. In Denmark a production worker earns approximately 23.000 
DKK a month1. However the production worker costs, the company, 
135% of his pay2. This means that each month the production worker 
costs the company 31.050 DKK. 
With an investment cost of 38.500 DKK and a monthly cost, of the 
1	
https://www.jobindex.dk/tjek-din-loen/produktionsmedarbej­
der?lang=da
2	
 https://www.d-i-f.dk/2014/02/20/hvad-koster-en-medarbej­
der-1162/
production worker who gets replaced, of 31.050 DKK means that the 
investment will have a break-even point of 1,2 months. 
Break-even Sweden
Due to the fact that the destacker also has been sold on the Swedish 
market a break-even point for Sweden has been calculated. In Swe­
den, a production worker has a monthly payment of 16.449 DKK. This 
means that the production worker costs 22.207 DKK for the company 
each month, therefore the break-even point for the destacker sold on 
the Swedish market is at 1,7 months. 
==PAGE:22==
22
LEGAL FACTORS
==PAGE:23==
23
Materials in foods manufacturing
Because the destacker from Teknik is being used by 
foods manufactures, it is important to know what laws 
and regulations exist when developing and producing 
machinery, which are going to be used by these ma­
nufacturers. This is done to make sure that the machine­
ry, supplied by Teknik, fulfills these laws and regulations, 
and to give the customers the best product possible.
When it comes to foods manufacturing, there are laws 
and regulations, when there is direct contact between 
the foods and the machinery. In the case of the destacker, 
there is no direct contact. This is because the destacker 
feeds plastic trays onto a conveyor belt and later the food 
is inserted into the tray. So the destacker does not have 
contact with the foods but it is in contact with the trays, 
which are in contact with the foods.
Materials in contact with foods
As mentioned the destacker does not have direct con­
tact with the foods but is still used in foods manufactu­
ring. The research did not find any laws and regulations 
for this sort of contact with specific materials, however 
there are, as mentioned, laws and regulations for which 
materials can be used in direct contact with foods. This 
means that any material, which can be used in direct contact with foods, can be 
used for the destacker. 
Metals1 
The Danish food administration has made a clear description of which materi­
als that can be used in contact with foods and which cannot. The most relevant 
material for this project is metal, since almost all the parts of the destacker is 
made from this. In table 1 the metals which can and cannot be used in foods 
manufacturing are listed. 
1	
https://www.foedevarestyrelsen.dk/Leksikon/Sider/Metaller-og-legerin­
ger.aspx
Can be used in contact with foods
Cannot be used in contact with foods
Aluminum (If coated)
Lead
Iron (as cast iron or stainless steel)
Cobber
Chrome (When used for coating)
Stainless Steel
Table 1 - Materials
==PAGE:24==
24
EU Laws
In addition to the laws and regulations from the Danish 
foods administration, there are also some EU laws, which 
need to be taken into account, when developing machinery 
for the foods manufacturing industry. 
According to the EU regulation no. 852/2004 of the Europe­
an parliament and of the council “On the hygiene of foods” 
Annex II chapter II point I sub point F: “surfaces (including 
surfaces of equipment) in areas where foods are handled 
and in particular those in contact with food are to be main­
tained in a sound condition and be easy to clean and, where 
necessary, to disinfect. This will require the use of smoo­
th, washable corrosion-resistant and non-toxic materials, 
unless food business operators can satisfy the competent 
authority that other materials used are appropriate.”
Annex II chapter II point II: “Adequate facilities are to be 
provided, where necessary, for the cleaning, disinfecting 
and storage of working utensils and equipment. These faci­
lities are to be constructed of corrosion-resistant materials, 
be easy to clean and have an adequate supply of hot and 
cold water. “
Conclusion
The laws and regulations in this analysis describes, as men­
tioned, if the machine has direct contact with foods. The 
destacker from Teknik does not have direct contact with 
foods, but it does have contact with the plastic trays, the 
foods are packed in.
The materials listed are some of the metals, which can or 
cannot be used in direct contact with foods and as long as 
they are approved for direct contact with foods, they are 
also approved for indirect contact, meaning that the de­
stacker is in direct contact with the plastic trays and the 
plastic tray are then in direct contact with the foods. The 
Tray-Disp destacker is not in conflict with these materials, 
since most of it is stainless steel and aluminum. 
What could be bettered in the AS-IS construction, based 
on this analysis, is the cleaning process of the destacker. 
The AS-IS construction has a very closed of design, which 
makes it difficult to clean with anything other than a com­
pressed air gun, without taking the destacker apart. If the 
cleaning process were to be enhanced in the TO-BE con­
struction then the destacker from Teknik would better live 
up to the EU regulations. Not only would the construction 
follow the regulations better but Teknik could also use this 
as a great selling point, and in that way lower threat of sub­
stitutes and the degree of rivalry mentioned in the Porter’s 
Five Forces analysis. 
==PAGE:25==
25
MARKET
==PAGE:26==
26
Porters Five Forces
A porters five forces analysis has been conducted in order to exami­
ne the market that Teknik ApS is located in. The five forces are: The 
threat of new entrants, the degree of rivalry, the threat of substitutes, 
the bargaining power of the supplier and lastly the bargaining power 
of the buyers. 
The analysis has been conducted in order to clarify if there are some 
factors or actions that could help Teknik better their product and mar­
ket situation.
Threat of new entrants
Teknik ApS is a very young business, it has only been around for a 
couple of years, but is already gaining territory in the market. Since 
it has been so easy for Teknik to provide customers with solutions, 
which fit their needs, it can be expected that others might be able to do 
the same and try to challenge already existing businesses. 
Due to the fact that the machinery is not very complicated and is fairly 
easy to develop, and it should not be too difficult for new entrants to 
gather the know-how that Teknik have acquired over the last couple of 
years. The threat of new entrants is therefore relatively high.
It is therefore important that Teknik makes the most of what they al­
ready know and add on to this, in order to differentiate themselves 
on the market. This has to be done in order to lower the threat of new 
entrants and for Teknik to keep being preferred over these.
Degree of rivalry
Alone on the Danish market there are several businesses who focus 
on developing and producing destacker machines for plastic trays, 
some of the rivals can even destack aluminum trays. If the customers 
are willing to buy a non-Danish destacker, the rivalry intensifies even 
more. 
Because of this high degree of rivalry, some of the business will have 
a bigger and better product program than Teknik and their products 
might suit the customers better, due to the extra know-how these bu­
sinesses might posses.
Since Teknik is still new in the business it is relevant to learn from the 
existing solutions in order to find a way to improve and distinguish 
themselves, this is to provide the customers with a better product and 
also to make sure that the customers choose the solution that Teknik 
provides. 
Threat of substitutes
As mentioned earlier in this analysis, there are multiple existing busi­
ness and substituting products already on the market. Some of them 
use different technologies than Teknik, see competitive analysis, and 
some uses technologies similar to Teknik. 
This is one of the reasons why a modular product architecture is im­
portant for Teknik. If Teknik has this it will lower the threat of the sub­
stituting products, since Teknik will have a better way of developing 
new concepts and increase their already existing product programme.
==PAGE:27==
27
==PAGE:28==
28
Bargaining power of suppliers
As it is right now, Teknik does not produce the destackers in-house. 
This increases the bargaining power of the suppliers a lot, since Teknik 
is bringing the projects to the supplier and also needs them for when 
a new product is to be developed. Because of this it would make sense 
to have all production and development in-house. This would take 
away the bargaining power of the existing supplier but it might also 
increase expenses that Teknik might not be able to afford since are still 
very new in the market. 
But by doing as described and by implementing a product architecture 
at Teknik, the bargaining power might switch sides, and be in favor of 
Teknik, since they would need many of the same components for their 
machines.
Bargaining power of buyers
In the market of destackers there are, as mentioned earlier in this ana­
lysis, multiple providers. Because of this the bargaining power of the 
buyer is relatively high for first time purchases. This is due to the fact 
that they get many options to choose from. Some of the factors they 
could use to evaluate the options would be price, time to delivery and 
adaptability to existing or future equipment. For second time purcha­
sing the power of the buyer is lower since they would benefit most 
from getting machinery, which is compatible with what they already 
have installed.
When the product architecture is made for Teknik it should be possi­
ble to handle the earlier mentioned factors in such a way that minimi­
zes the bargaining power of the buyer most possible.
Conclusion
The market that Teknik chose to enter can be described as a red ocean 
with multiple existing competitors and as mentioned in the threat of 
new entrants, possibly more to come. By being in a red ocean Teknik 
has the opportunity to learn from these existing competitors and find 
a way to distinguish from them. If Teknik does this, it would provide 
them with a better product and lowering both the threat of substitutes 
and the bargaining power of the buyers.
The bargaining power of the supplier is, right now, really high, since 
Teknik does not have there own workshop where they build their ma­
chines. There are both advantages and disadvantages to this. If Teknik 
where to have their own workshop they might be able to lower the cost 
and selling price of their destacker and additional equipment, but it 
would also create expenses that they do not have today. There is howe­
ver a big advantage to Teknik not having there own workshop and that 
is the fact that they might be able to get different prices from different 
workshops and there by chose the one best suited. It can be concluded 
based on the analysis that Teknik needs to change their product, based 
on the requirements in the market, in order to follow the changes here 
and to lower the threat of new entrant and substituting products. 
==PAGE:29==
29
Target segment
Due to the fact that Teknik, already has a functioning cooperation 
with ST Plast, the target segment is based on their customers.
 
Description of ST Plast
ST Plast is a manufacturing company, who since 1991 have de­
veloped, manufactured and sold plastic packaging for foods and 
horticulture. The company is located in Esbjerg and has product 
development, production and sales in-house. The company has 
since the beginning focused on producing their products with the 
technology thermo forming, which is a process where a thin piece 
of plastic is heated up and then is pressed into the shape that is 
wanted. This means that the products can be very fragile, if they 
are not produced correctly. 
As mentioned the company makes plastic packaging for the foods 
sector and has different segments they provide with products. In 
the foods sector these segments are: sweets, bakery and horticul­
ture (salads and vegetables). Within these segments ST Plast has 
many different customers, both inside and outside of Denmark. 
Their primary market is Denmark, but they do also have custo­
mers in Sweden, Norway and Germany.1 
1	
http://www.st-plast.dk/en/about-us/
Customer
Segment
Destacker
Bisca
Bakery
Yes
Gille
Bakery/ Sweets
Yes
Dan Cake
Bakery
Yes
Yding Grønt
Horticulture
Yes
Legro Gartneri
Horticulture
No
Cocamdy Konfektyr
Sweets
No
Vorgod Bageri
Bakery
No
Elvirasminde
Sweets
No
Table 2 - Potential Customers
List of customers at ST Plast
ST Plast has many different customers in the different segments. 
A few of these have been chosen to investigate further. The custo­
mers have been chosen in order to get some who already have de­
stackers in-house and some who have not got them. The customers 
have also been chosen based on the segments, this is done to ana­
lyze if there are any differences or similarities in what they expect 
and want to benefit from by implementing a destacking solution in 
their production areas. In Table 2 is stated the different customers, 
their segment and whether or not they already have implemented 
destackers.
==PAGE:30==
30
POTENTIAL CUSTOMERS
==PAGE:31==
31
Customers with destacker experience
In order to get an understanding of the current situation of destackers being used by companies in Denmark and 
Sweden, these companies have been interviewed. The interviews can be found in appendix 2 – Interviews.
From the interviews knowledge like reasons to implement destackers can be specified and also the companies 
experiences, with destackers, can be used for the TO-BE construction.
First is a description of the potential customers in order to get an understanding of their AS-IS situation and to 
analyze what can be learned from that.
==PAGE:32==
32
also in this year that Bisca started 
cooperating with Kjærgaard A/S in 
developing and implementing pick 
and place robots for their produc­
tion lines. A pick and place robot is 
in short terms a robotic arm, which 
picks up something, in this case ba­
keries, and places them somewhere 
else, here in plastic trays. 
These pick and place robots are today 
an important part of the production 
line at Bisca. 
Attached to the production line is 
also the destacker. The destacker was 
developed through collaboration 
between Kjærgaard, Bisca and Møns 
Maskinbyg.
Figure 9 shows the place on the pro­
duction line, where the destacker ne­
eds to be put. It slides along the white 
POM rails until it reaches the gear in the top right corner. 
The destacking unit, which needs to be installed onto the production line, is 
shown in figure 10. 
Whenever Bisca needs to make a changeover on the production line, the de­
stackers needs to be changed as well. This takes somewhere between 5 and 10 
Bisca
Bisca is a production bakery located on Møn southeast of Zeeland. 
It was founded back in 1890 under the name Karen Wolff bakery, 
named after the founder Karen Wolff. Ever since the beginning, back 
in 1890, the bakery has expanded and developed its business struc­
ture starting from being a small bakery in Hellerup, to being a big 
manufacturing site in Stege. The company has gone through many 
fusions over the years and is today known as Bisca.  
The company makes all sorts of different bakeries these range from 
cookies to confectionery.1
AS-IS situation at Bisca
Bisca has since the beginning, when they were called Karen Wolff, 
been a business in development. Therefore it has been natural for 
them to stay innovative not only in their baking but also in their pro­
duction site. Today Bisca have a big production site in Stege where 
they employ around 250 people. This production site is filled with 
technology to improve the production process of the different pro­
ducts provided by Bisca. Their production lines make use of little to 
no human interaction and is mostly just robots and machines doing 
the job.
In 2015 Bisca could celebrate their 125 years anniversary. It was 
1	
 https://karenvolf.dk/tidslinje/
Picture 9 - Destacker Spot
==PAGE:33==
33
minutes. 
The reason why, is that the destackers are only able to destack trays 
with certain dimensions and a certain stacking height.
The production lines at Bisca have five destackers on every line.
Conclusion Bisca
The solution that Bisca has does have both some advantages and 
some disadvantages. The advantages of the system is first of all that 
the solution requires little to no maintenance, Bisca has had their 
destackers for a couple of years and has not had to lubricate or check 
on anything. 
A second advantage is the quick changeover time, as mentioned ear­
lier, the design of the destacker lets Bisca destack different trays on 
the same production line by using different destackers that fits on 
every line.  
When looking at the system used by Bisca there are also disadvanta­
ges. First of all the destacking unit has to be designed specifically to 
the tray, as mentioned earlier the destacker needs to fit to the trays 
dimensions and the stacking height of the tray. This means that if 
Bisca wishes to make a new product, which has to be packed in a tray 
that will not fit into any of their existing destackers, they will have 
to have a new set of five made. Another disadvantage of the system 
is that the destacker only can be filled up with half a meter of pla­
stic trays; the amount of trays depends on the stacking height. This 
means that Bisca needs a guy to go and fill up the destackers often, 
because they run out of trays too fast. 
A third and last disadvantage of Bisca’s destacking solution is that 
sometimes, very rarely, the destacker takes down two trays when it 
is only supposed to take down one.
Figure 10 - Bisca Destacker
==PAGE:34==
34
Gille
Back in the 1960s Tord Einarsson founded the Gille Brand, as a small 
business, focusing on making great cookies to the Swedish people. 
The company quickly became popular in Sweden and was within the 
first ten years of sales all over the country. In the 1980s the company 
started expanding to other countries including Denmark, Norway 
and Germany, because they, at Gille, could see that the demand for 
their cookies was increasing in these countries. As the export expan­
ded so did the assortment and Gille started making new cookies. 
The raise in demand meant that Gille had to expand and therefo­
re they opened a new factory in the 1980s. In the early 1990s Gille 
became the market leader in Sweden. The company employs around 
220 people and makes approximately 1.5 million cookies each year 
and has a market share in Sweden of about 40%. 
Today the company is owned by Continental Bakeries, which is part 
of a major European group.1 
1	
http://www.gille.se/en/om-gille/
AS-IS situation at Gille
The production lines at Gille works 
with very limited interaction from 
the employees, they have about 
4-6 people on the lines.  This has 
been made possible by investing 
in all sorts of different automation 
equipment, destackers being one 
of them. 
At Gille they have had destackers 
for the last thirty years and has 
today seven in total on their two 
factories. They started building 
them themselves, since nobody 
could provide them at the time. 
They chose to invest in these ma­
chines in order to enhance the ergo­
nomics for the employees and also in order to save some of them, 
there by saving money in the production of their products. 
As mentioned Gille started making their own destackers thirty years 
ago. These were all based on pneumatics and had a movable arm 
doing the destacking; they did however change to the screw princip­
le, back in 2005, due to the fact that this was working better. They 
also found out that they were able to go faster with fewer mistakes by 
using the screw principle. 
Figure 11 - Gille Destacker
==PAGE:35==
35
Figure 11 shows a destacker Gille bought from Teknik in 2017. The 
special thing about this solution is that it is for round tubs has the 
feeder band, which makes it possible to go fifteen minutes before it 
needs to be filled again.
Conclusion Gille
At Gille they have a lot of experience with automation in their pro­
duction area and especially with destackers. They have both tried 
to manufacture their own and bought some from suppliers. Due to 
their many years of experience it is worth to notice that they have 
also tried different principles when it comes to destacking these 
being pneumatics and servo driven screws, the latter being what 
they have experienced to be, the best option. A lot can be learned 
from a statement like this when it comes from a company with that 
much experience in the area and will be relevant to use for the Tek­
nik TO-BE construction.
==PAGE:36==
36
Dan Cake
Dan Cake was founded in 1931 by Jens Eskildsen in Simmelkjær just 
north of Give. Dan Cake has through the years moved the factory 
around due to the need of increasing their capacity. The first move 
was in 1959 where they moved into a bigger bakery in order to indu­
strialize the production and make it bigger. Less than 10 years later 
this factory was too small, and Dan Cake had to move again, this 
time they built a new factory themselves in order to make it as big 
and modern as they needed it to be. The last move was made in 1978 
where Dan Cake built their current factory. 
Dan Cake is a family owned company and has, almost, always 
been, it was sold for some years before Erling Eskildsen, son of Jens 
Eskildsen, bought it back. The CEO today, Klaus Eskildsen, is the 
third generation in the company. 
Dan Cake is known for making Swiss Rolls, Half Moon cakes and 
cut cakes.1 
1	
http://en.dancake.dk/the-story/
AS-IS situation at Dan Cake
At Dan Cake they have designed their factory in order to limit the 
human interaction as much as possible. An example is their muffin 
production line. Here the personnel don’t get in contact with the 
product before it has to be packed into cardboard boxes for shipping. 
Everything from making the cakes to fully filled trays all flow packed 
and ready to be put into boxes are done by machinery. At Dan Cake 
the destacker is only a small part of this huge production line. Figu­
re 12 shows the destacker implemented at Dan Cake. The solution 
they have chosen at Dan Cake has been purchased from Teknik and 
they have had it for a couple of years. The destacker has been deli­
vered with a feeder, which provides the system with trays for about 
10 minutes. The destacker tool can be changed so that it is possible 
to destack different kinds of 
tray in the machine. Figure 
13 shows the different tools 
owned by Dan Cake.
Figure 12 - Destacker at Dan Cake
==PAGE:37==
37
Conclusion Dan Cake
Since the beginning Dan Cake has been a company in growth and 
have had to move around and optimize their production in order 
to be able to keep up with this growth. This has resulted in them 
having a production site, which is more or less fully automated. The 
destacker they have implemented has been an important factor in 
doing this due to the fact that a single human being could not keep 
up with the pace, which was needed in the production line. This 
means that if employees where to be used instead of a destacker mul­
tiple would have to be located along the production line, separating 
and laying down the plastic trays, in order to keep up with the speed 
of which the production needs to be running. If employees would 
be used instead of a destacker, it would become more expensive for 
Dan Cake, and this is the reason why they chose to invest in and 
implement a destacker. 
Figure 13 - Dan Cake Tools
==PAGE:38==
38
Yding Grønt
Yding Grønt is located in Østbirk in Jutland, and was founded in 
2002. At Yding Grønt they focus mainly on producing different types 
of salads and cabbage. 
AS-IS situation at Yding Grønt
At Yding Grønt they have invested of time and money in order to 
automate their production as much as possible, this has been done 
to minimize the need for human interaction. Their complete system 
has been developed by Bilwinco, which is a Danish company located 
in Hjørring. In the system they have two destackers, one of which 
can be seen in figure 14. 
The system was implemented more than 12 years ago and the main 
reason for the implementation was speed. The needed speed was to 
fast for any human, and therefore automation was needed.
The destackers were a part of the full system and chosen by Bilwinco. 
The destacker solution they have at Yding today is with the screw 
principle, they have previously had experience with a suction prin­
ciple, but chose to change because they had a lot of trouble with this.
A limitation of their current destackers is the lack of flexibility. They 
use many different plastic trays in all shapes and sizes, and would 
like to be able to destack all of them.
The system at Yding is running on timing, this means that if they 
choose to change the destacker for a different tray, they need to 
change a lot on the different parts of the system. The dimensions, length and 
width, of the tray are locked but the depth can vary. This means they can pack 
different amounts of the products.
Conclusion Yding Grønt
At Yding Grønt they are aware of 
the need to implement automated 
machinery in order to increase the 
production speed and keep up with 
the demands. This has resulted in 
their production area becoming 
more automated and less reliable on 
personnel. In this automation pro­
cess, they have had to implement 
destackers for the same reasons as 
seen at Dan Cake, which is the speed 
of which the plastic trays needs to 
be destacked. Yding Grønt has tri­
ed two different types of destackers, 
one with suction cups and one using 
screws, and has, like Gille, experien­
ces that the screw principle is the one 
they get the best results from.
Figure 14 - Yding Destacker
==PAGE:39==
39
Conclusion customers with destacker experi­
ence
By interviewing those of ST Plast’s customers with destacker expe­
rience it can be concluded that some solutions are being preferred. 
All four customers have chosen to implement destackers with servo 
driven screws. This is interesting to see since other principles are 
available on the market, and also two, of the interviewed customers, 
have experience with alternative solutions. The two customers with 
additional experience are Gille and Yding Grønt. Gille had for many 
years destackers, which were driven by pneumatics, but still used 
screws to destack, however in the last couple of years they have cho­
sen to focus on servo driven instead, because it works better and is 
more reliant. At Yding they have had some experience with destack­
ers, which used suctions cups to pull down the destackers, but found 
that this was not the most reliable way to destack the plastic trays, 
and have since switched to the servo driven screw principle, which 
they say works best for them. 
All the four customers with experience say that they are satisfied 
with the result, being servo driven screws, and have little to no main­
tenance on these machines. It was however mentioned in the inter­
view with Bisca, that the screw principle, even though this happened 
very rarely, could destack two plastic trays when only one should 
have been destacked. 
It can be concluded based on the interviews that the solution the 
market wants is a destacker, which works with servo driven screws, 
since this is what the interviewed have stated is what works most 
optimal based on speed, low maintenance and reliability.
It is however important to state that all of the interviewed customers 
found the most important feature for the destacker was its ability to 
be flexible. 
==PAGE:40==
40
Customers without destacker experience
Since it is not all of the customers at ST Plast who has implemented the use of destackers, four of these have been interviewed 
to get an understanding to why this is not the case. From these interviews it should be possible to get an understanding to 
why these customers do not already have destackers. The interviews can be found in Appendix 2 - Interviews.
==PAGE:41==
41
Legro Gartneri
Legro was founded in 1958 in Karlslunde where they still are loca­
ted today. They specialize in horticulture and have since the begin­
ning changed their main focus of what products to produce. This has 
been due to changes in the market and requests from the customers. 
In the beginning Legro’s main focus was on different vegetables and 
berries but as the market has changed so did their main focus, and 
today it is on different kinds of lettuce and herbs. 
Legro employs, according to the season, between 25 and 35 person­
nel.1
AS-IS situation at Legro Gartneri
Legro does not have any destackers at the moment. This is, according 
to Lars Høgholt who is in charge of the production, because of their 
great need for the machine to be very flexible and minimal in size. 
Legro cut and packs almost all of their products by hand. Figure 15 
and 16 shows employees cutting, measuring and packing products. 
As the employees pack the products they are moving back and forth 
with the packing station, which has wheels attached in order to move. 
This means that if a destacker where to be implemented here it has 
to be extremely lightweight and flexible. The reason why it has to be 
flexible is because the product they are packing can have different 
trays this is because the customers might want different amounts or 
1	
http://www.legro.dk/?acc=1447
different packaging.
The packaging process at Legro is corrently done by hand; due to 
the high level of flexibility they experience, based on the customer 
requests. This is one of the reasons why they haven’t been able to 
implement any machinery for this jet. 
Even though Legro hasn’t been able to automate the packaging pro­
cess they have put a lot of effort into optimize and automate the rest 
of their production. All of their greenhouses work with very little 
human interaction.
Figure 15 - Packing at Legro
Figure 16 - Packing at Legro
==PAGE:42==
42
Conclusion Legro Gartneri
At Legro most of the packing is being done by hand, due to the large 
flexibility in their products. This means that Legro sometimes have 
to pack the same product in different trays at the same packing sta­
tion. Due to this the destacker, they need, has to be able to handle 
different products in order for it to become a success. Other than 
having to make sure that the right product gets into the right tray, 
the employees at Legro also sometimes have to weight the amount 
that goes into the tray, this complicates the implementation even 
further.
Furthermore the way the production area is designed at Legro, limits 
the space available to implement new machinery. 
This concludes that if a destacker where to be directly implemented 
at Legro it needs to have a very high level of flexibility and cannot be 
much larger than the plastic trays it need to destack due to the very 
limited space, which is available at Legro. 
==PAGE:43==
43
Cocandy Konfektyr
Bo Jarbo founded, in the southern part of Helsingborg, Cocandy in 
1966. The company is a family owned business and has always been. 
Since the beginning Cocandy has been moving around a lot, until 
1983 where the company moved to Åstorp, where it is still located 
today. 
At Cocandy they specialize in making cream puffs, both with and 
without coconut. Their markets include Sweden, Norway, Finland 
and Denmark.
They employ about 25 people spread over production, sales and of­
fice.1
AS-IS situation at Cocandy
Today Cocandy is packing all of their products by hand, this is due 
to different reasons, one of them being that cream puffs are very 
fragile so having a pick and place robot, like at Bisca, is not always a 
good idea, because it might simply destroy the cream puffs.
Figure 17 shows is a typical packing situation at Cocandy. An emplo­
yee sits at the end of the production line and picks up the creampuffs 
and puts them into a plastic tray, when the tray is full, this same 
employee puts on a lid and then the tray is placed on a transport 
band, which then goes through a label machine and then a different 
employee places the filled trays on a pallet. 
1	
http://cocandy.se/?pid=24
Conclusion Cocandy
Cocandy has tried and failed a couple of ti­
mes when they have implemented machine­
ry into their production area. These failures 
have been a result of the implemented ma­
chinery has been too specialized for one 
single product. Due to an ever-changing 
market, these machines never got to fulfill 
their purpose as intended. What can be concluded by the examination of 
Cocandy is that if machinery should be implemented, it has to be flexible 
and able to adapt to the market when it changes.
At Cocandy they have through the years made investments in order to 
become less dependent on manpower. They have invested in different ty­
pes of machinery, in the past, among others a machine, which puts on a 
lid automatically, this was done in order to 
save time when the personnel was packing 
the products.
Today this machine is not being used as 
much as earlier, due to the fact that the mar­
ket has changed and therefore the tray, for 
which the machine was developed, is no 
longer being used as much as earlier. The 
machine was developed for only one type of 
lid and cannot be used with any other lid.
Picture 17 - Packing at Cocandy
==PAGE:44==
44
Vorgod Bageri
Vorgod Bageri was founded in 1939 when Oluf Wedige Bøchner and 
his wife Anna Kristine, took over an already existing bakery in Vor­
god. They have since the beginning been a family owned business 
and has through the years gone through three generations. 
The bakery started out as a normal bakery, but after the first genera­
tional change, in 1972, the new owners Claus Wedige Bøchner and 
wife Anna, started focusing on production for distribution.  In 1999 
they changed the strategy by closing down their bakery shop and 
focusing 100% on manufacturing of cookies. 
The bakery grew out of its location in Vorgod back in 2004 and mo­
ved the factory to its current location in Videbæk.1 
AS-IS situation at Vorgod Bageri
As it is today all packing is done by hand. The cookies come into 
the packing area in racks, directly from the oven. When the cooki­
es have cooled down, they are being filled into plastic trays simul­
taneously being weighted, this can be seen in figure 18. This is all 
done by hand. When a metal tray is filled with filled plastic trays, 
the employee picks them up and places them at the label machine, 
where annoyer employee is making sure that all the packed cookies 
are labeled correctly.
1	
http://vorgodbageri.dk/om-os2/index
Conclusion Vorgod Bageri
As it can be seen from the AS-IS situation at Vorgod, their entire 
packaging process is done by hand. If Vorgod were to implement 
some more automation in their packaging area, they would be able 
to benefit a lot from this. 
Figure 18 - Packing Station at Vorgod Bageri
==PAGE:45==
45
Elvirasminde A/S
Elvirasminde was founded in 1866 in the middle of Århus and focused in the 
beginning on making confectionary, biscuits, soft drinks, water and dried fru­
its. In 1875 the company changed its name to Elvirasminde, after a former 
owners wife. 
As time went by the company and the staff grew larger and in 1925 Elviras­
minde employed approximately 500 people, and produced 12 tons of different 
chocolate and sweets, including cream puffs, daily. In 1954 the company chose 
to change the strategy to focusing mainly on producing cream puffs.
In 1960 the company decided to modernize the production, which resulted in 
a boost of the output and was now producing about 200.000 cream puffs daily. 
In 1967 the company chose to shut down the production in Århus and move to 
a new and even more modernized location in Hasselager. This location burnt 
down in 1985. After this the company chose to move to Skanderborg where 
it is still located today. 1988 was the year where, the now well-known brand, 
Samba was introduced, and led to the fusion of Guf and Elvirasminde in 1993.
Today the factory in Skanderborg produces between 1 and 2 million cream 
puffs each day, in different sizes and tastes, for customers all around the world.1 
In 2014 Elvirasminde was sold to Spangsberg Chocolates.2 
1	
 http://www.elvirasminde.dk/profil/historie.html
2	
https://finans.dk/live/erhverv/ECE8723189/danmarks-floedebolle­
konge-har-tidoblet-overskuddet/?ctxref=ext
AS-IS situation at Elvirasminde
At the factory in Skanderborg Elvirasminde use different kinds of packa­
ging for the different products. These can either be packed into cardboard 
boxes or plastic trays. 
At Elvirasminde they have two big selling products, a 6-pack and a 12-
pack, of the traditional cream puff shown in figure 19. These are the only 
ones, which, at the moment, can be packed with almost no manpower, due 
to a production line, acquired when the company bought Give Konfekture 
in 2017. All other packing is done by hand. They do however have some 
cardboard box folding machines, which both folds and closes the boxes, 
but they still need employees to put the cream puffs into these boxes. 
In 2017 Elvirasminde acquired the company Give Konfektur. Give Kon­
fekture has 
for 
many 
years been  a 
supplier big 
on the Da­
nish cream 
puff market. 
By 
acqui­
ring 
this 
c o mp a ny, 
Elvirasmin­
Figure 19 - Samba Cream Puffs
==PAGE:46==
46
de could gather  the entire cream puff production in Skanderborg 
and thereby incorporate the production line from Give, which is the 
one that works with little to no human interaction. 
The figures 20, 21 and 22 shows how this machine works. First the 
machine picks up the plastics trays moving in a pendulum motion. 
Then a robotic arm collects these trays and collects, in this example, 
12 cream puffs from the transportation band. The robotic arm then 
pulls the filled trays to the end of the line, where they get turned 180 
degrees and then picked up by a new robotic arm, which pressed 
them against a beam so that the tray is properly closed. The last step 
in this machine flips the tray, 180 degrees, down to a conveyor belt 
Conclusion Elvirasminde
At Elvirasminde they have, since their beginning, made sure to expand 
and automate in order to keep up with their growth. They have through 
the years invested in different types of automation equipment, in order to 
keep up with the rise in demand for their cream puffs. 
By acquiring Give Konfekture, they simultaneously acquired the packing 
machine, described in the AS-IS situation. This machine is specialized to 
pack one type of cream puffs in two different plastic trays. This is great 
for Elvirasminde, because this type of cream puff is the most sold product 
they have in their assortment.
When it comes to all other products in their assortment, then everything 
is packed by hand. These products are packed in both cardboard boxes 
and plastic trays. Only the cardboard boxes have some sort of automation, 
the boxes are folded by a machine, and then filled by employees and then 
a machine closes the boxes. 
The production lines at Elvirasminde are able to produce different types 
of cream puffs so whenever they choose to implement new machinery, the 
machinery should support this same level of flexibility.
so the filled tray is ready to be labeled and then packed for shipping. Only 
the last step where the filled plastic tray is packed for shipping requires 
personnel. 
Figure 20	
	
Figure 21	
	
Figure 22
==PAGE:47==
47
Conclusion customers without destacker 
experience
As it was the case with the customers with destacker experience, the 
customers without destacker experience operate in an ever-chan­
ging market. It is therefore paramount that wherever they experien­
ce any flexibility the machinery should be able to support this.
This can be concluded when looking at a customer like Cocandy. 
They have implemented, more than once, machinery which was spe­
cially developed to one type of product, when this product was no 
longer able to sell, these machines have become more or less useless 
for Cocandy. If they had focused more on getting flexible equipment 
they would have been able to alter it so that it could be used for the 
thing that came next.
==PAGE:48==
48
Power tower
A power tower has been made in order to map out the differences 
and similarities of the potential customers, divided into their seg­
ments, based on four different criteria, these being assortment, fle­
xibility, automation and income. The Power Tower can be seen in 
figure 23.
Assortment
This post describes the size of the assortment used in the different 
companies. The complete lists of the potential customers assortment 
scan be found in the appendix 3 - Assortment of Potential Custo­
mers.
Flexibility 
The level of Flexibility indicates the difference in the assortment 
used in the companies i.e. how many different plastic trays they use.
Automation level
The automation level, describes the level of automation already im­
plemented in the different companies in their packaging areas. The 
automation level also gives and indication of the automation level 
in the production, but is mainly focused in the packaging process, 
since this is where a destacker would have its primary purpose.
Income 
Income is used in order to get an understanding of the financial situation 
in the companies. This is used in order to see how much money they have, 
and it is used to assume how willing they are to invest some of this money. 
It is assumed that, the more money they have, the higher is their willing­
ness to spend money on new equipment.
Figure 23 - Power Tower
==PAGE:49==
49
Conclusion
As it can be seen in the power tower in figure 23, there are a lot of 
similarities and differences in both the different segments and the 
different companies.
First of all it tells that there is some coherence between the automa­
tion level and the income level. This indicates that the more automa­
ted a business is, the more money they make. There are some excep­
tions though. At Elvirasminde, they have a high level of automation, 
but they still struggle to make money.
At Bisca and Gille, the power tower shows, that they have very suc­
cessfully automated their production and packaging and as a re­
sult they are making a lot of money. This is possible for them even 
though they have a high level of flexibility in their assortment they 
have to take into account. A similar tendency can be seen at Dan 
Cake, where they also have a high level assortment, though with a 
lower level of flexibility, but they still have a high-income level. 
In the middle of the power tower are the two companies Yding Grønt 
and Legro Gartneri. These are both in the horticulture segment. Both 
of them have a low level of assortment, but the power tower shows, 
that Legro experiences a higher level of flexibility. This is interesting 
to see because it shows, when looking at their automation level, that 
Yding has been able to automate their process more than Legro. It is 
also interesting to look at these two because even though Yding has 
a higher level of automation, they and Legro has the same income 
level. This raises the question: “would Legro be able to make more 
money if they had a higher automation level, which could compre­
hend their high level of flexibility?”
In the low end of the power tower is Cocandy and Vorgod. Both of 
these have a low level of assortment, flexibility, automation, and in­
come. What is interesting though is to see their differences. Cocandy 
has a higher level of automation but a smaller level of flexibility and 
Vorgod is the other way around. 
==PAGE:50==
50
Market Criteria
The main purpose of the market analysis was to investigate whether 
or not the different segments had similar criteria, which had to be 
fulfilled for them to successfully implementing a destacker in their 
production.
In order to gather this information from the potential customers they 
were interviewed based on their AS-IS situation. Both the potenti­
al customers with destacker experience and those without destacker 
experience were interviewed. 
By interviewing both types of customers it was experienced that a lot 
of the criteria were the same, whenever they would choose to imple­
ment new machinery such as a destacker. 
The information received in the interviews was then put into a beam 
diagram, seen in figure 24, in order to better understand which of the 
criteria were most important for the market. 
The criteria, which were received in the interviews, were: Flexibility, 
price, size, capacity, speed and mobility, the different criteria all re­
ceived a score of 1-7.
As it can be seen in figure 24 some differences can be seen on how 
important the criteria are for the different customers. It can be seen 
that the criterion flexibility is by far the most important to the mar­
ket. This is due to the fact that the foods market is ever changing 
and there fore the needs of the customers is also constantly changing. 
This means that they have to be flexible and their equipment needs to 
be able to support this flexibility. As is was mentioned in the poten­
tial customers chapter, some of the interviewed had bad experience 
with equipment, which had been to specialized and learned from this 
that if new equipment had to be implemented it had to become more 
flexible.
The second and third most important criteria to the market are the 
capacity and speed. This is due to the fact that most of the interviewed 
potential customers wanted their destacker to only be filled every ten 
to fifteen minutes. When it says speed in the beam diagram it means 
the ability to modify the destacking speed, this was very important 
to some of the potential customers due to the fact that it would help 
them synchronize their production lines better.
==PAGE:51==
51
Figure 24 - Market Criteria
==PAGE:52==
52
COMPETITORS
==PAGE:53==
53
Competitor analysis
The objective of this analysis is to get an understanding of the pro­
ducts and business, which Teknik ApS, has to compete with on the 
Danish market. This is done so that similarities and differences can 
be exposed. By doing this it can be indicated what Teknik could focus 
on in order to differentiate themselves from the competition and the­
re by lower the degree of rivalry and the threat of substitutes. Three 
different manufacturers have been found, which products have si­
milarities to the destacker from Teknik. These three are JKT, Intech 
International and JOP Engineering. They are all Danish businesses.
==PAGE:54==
54
JKT
JKT is a Danish business located in Randers, Jutland. It is a develop­
ment engineering business and they have chosen to specialize them­
selves in development and manufacturing of dispensing equipment 
for trays of different sorts of materials. The company was founded in 
2003 and has 1 employee.
Speed-disp - the destacking unit
JKT has a central unit called Speed-Disp, seen in figure 25, this is 
the destacker machine. This can be driven either electrically or pne­
umatically. The destacker uses one of two different screw types both 
developed by JKT. These are called A1 and A2.
When JKT gets a request for a new destacker they will make a report 
for the tray that needs to be dispensed, this is done to check the qu­
ality, dimensions and differences (due to tolerances) of the tray and 
to see if it can be used for JKT’s destacker. When the report is being 
made JKT figures out how many screws are needed in order to sup­
port the tray in the best way possible. 
Some times JKT experiences, through the work they put into the re­
port, that the trays or the stacking lugs are of a to bad quality for 
them to be destacked.
The destacker can be adjusted for the wanted destacking speed.1 
1	
http://www.jkt.dk/speed-disp/
Figure 25 - JKT Speed-Disp
==PAGE:55==
55
A11
As mentioned, the destacker from JKT uses either an A1 or an A2 
screw. The A1 is being used if there is space between the trays and the 
stacking distance between the trays is known.
The design of the tray, which needs to be destacked, is not important 
when the A1 screw is being used, it can dispense trays which are squ­
are, rectangular, round, oval or even customer specific. All common 
plastics can be used in this destacker (C-PET, PP, PET, OPS, PE) and 
furthermore trays made of aluminum can also be destacked. In figure 
26 JKT A1 screws can be seen.
1	
http://www.jkt.dk/a1-bakke-dispenserings-teknologi/
A21
If there is no or a very small stacking distance between the trays the 
A2 screw is being used instead of the A1. 
Some times trays are being designed without stacking lugs; this me­
ans that it can be difficult to separate them. The A2 screw then goes 
in and separates the trays when they are being destacked. 
The advantage by using this kind of screw is by having no stacking 
lugs i.e. stacking distance between the trays, the manufacturer, of the 
trays, can fit more trays into their cardboard boxes. In figure 27 a JKT 
A2 screw can be seen.
1	
http://www.jkt.dk/a2-bakke-dispenserings-teknologi/
Figure 26 - JKT A1 Screws
Figure 27 - JKT A2 Screw
==PAGE:56==
56
Conclusion JKT
The speed-disp destacker from JKT is a small portable solution, 
which has chosen to focus on enhancing the flexibility by developing 
two different types of screws, these being the A1 and A2, seen in fi­
gures 26 and 27. Both of these screws can be used in the Speed-Disp 
and depending on the stacking distance of the trays one of them will 
be selected for the construction. The A2 screw has the advantage that 
it makes the need for stacking lugs unnecessary, this is great because 
then manufacturer, customer and JKT do not need to take this factor 
into account when a new destacker or tray is being developed. 
JKT has chosen to focus on maximizing the flexibility of the stacking 
height by developing these screws, but does not take into account the 
different sizes or shapes trays can come in. Therefore every time they 
need to develop a destacker for a new tray, a new machine needs to be 
made. Whenever they make this new machine the tray, which needs 
to be destacked, is analyzed and then JKT decides whether or not 
their destacker can be used for this tray, this means that they are not 
able to destack every kind of tray with the Speed-Disp. 
==PAGE:57==
57
Intech international1
Intech international was founded in 1999 in Brønderslev, Jutland. 
There are multiple market segments where Intech International is ac­
tive. These are fishing industry, both at sea and on land, foods, shar­
pening machinery and destackers for plastic trays. The destacking 
part of Intech International is called Intray. The destacker from In­
tray is divided into two products: the smart tool and a stand.
1	
http://www.intechint.dk
INTRAY smart tool - the destacking unit1
As mentioned, the destacker from Intray consists of two main parts: 
the smart tool and a stand. The smart tool is the heart of the Intray 
product, meaning that this is the central destacking unit, it can be 
seen in figure 28. The Intray smart tool is using denesting screws. The 
smart tool is designed for one specific tray and is driven by a servo­
motor. It is designed in such a way that tool changing is made very 
easy. The tool can be changed in just one minute. 
A downside by having this product architecture is that you can only 
use the smart tool, if you also have one of the stands.
1	
https://intray.dk/products/smart-tool/
Figure 28 - Intray Smart Tool
==PAGE:58==
58
Basic Stand
When the smart tool has been made, then the customer needs one of 
three solutions, in order to make it function. The first one is called 
the Basic Stand. This stand uses all the benefits from the smart tool, 
which means if you have different smart tools, you can use all of them 
in this machine, the change takes only one minute. 
By using the stand’s control unit, the operator is able to control and 
set-up stuff like destacking speed and amount of trays that needs to 
be destacked. The Basic Stand has a max capacity of 60 trays per mi­
nute. The Intray Basic Stand can be seen in figure 29.
Smart Stand
The smart stand is very similar to the Basic Stand the only difference 
is that the capacity is 150 trays per minute instead of the 60 trays per 
minute that you get in the Basic Stand. The Intray Smart Stand can 
be seen in figure 30.
Figure 29 - Intray Basic Stand
Figure 30 - Intray Smart Stand
==PAGE:59==
59
Buffer Stand1
The Buffer Stand builds on the same principle as the two previous 
solutions. Like the Basic Stand and the Smart Stand, the Buffer Stand 
serves as a machine for the Smart Tool to be inserted into. The dif­
ference is that the Buffer Stand gives the customer the opportunity 
to insert more trays into the solution, meaning that is frees up the 
operator for a longer period of time. The Buffer Stand can be seen in 
figure 31. 
The way it does this is by having a conveyor belt for storing and fee­
ding and then a mechanism, which lowers the stack of trays into the 
destacking unit. 
The buffer stand can be delivered in a 1000 unit and a 500 unit depen­
ding on how many stacks of trays the customer wants, the conveyor 
belt can be up to 2500mm but can be suited for the customers needs. 
If a customer wants the Buffer Stands they have to be aware of this 
when purchasing, since the Buffer Stand works as a separate stand, 
not compatible with the previous two.
1	
https://intray.dk/products/intray-buffer-stand/
Conclusion Intray
The destacker from Intray offer some great selling points to the customer 
fore example the fast change over, which they say can be done in one minute 
or less. Whenever a new tray needs to be destacked, a new Smart Tool needs 
to be developed, this does however not affect the stand needless of which 
one the customer has in their factory.
The stands from Intray do not support the same level of flexibility as the 
Smart Tool. The customer needs to know what they need before purchasing 
any of the stands since they are not compatible with each other. If Intray had 
found a way to make their stand solutions modular this could have helped 
them to strengthen their product and it would not be necessary for them 
to manufacture three different stand options, but left it to the customer to 
decide how many of the add-ons they were in need of. 
The destacker solution from Intray is big and it is therfore not possible to 
move it without some sort of lifting equipment. This means that companies 
might have to buy multiple destackers if they are required to use them on 
different production lines. 
Also the complexity of the stands can be a drawback. Instead of using some 
sort of standard controller, like in the Tray-Disp, it uses it’s own operating 
software, which requires the operator to learn this in order to change fore 
example the destacking speed.
Figure 31 - Intray Buffer Stand
==PAGE:60==
60
JOP Engineering1
JOP Engineering is located in Tommerup on Fyn. It was founded in 
2006 and is a small business with only two people employed. They 
focus on five different product areas. These being: Mechanical con­
structions, safety clutches, overload protection, strain gauges and 
tray destackers.
Tray dispenser
The destacker from JOP Engineering differs from the other two com­
petitors in one major way. Instead of having servo or pneumatic dri­
ven screws, it uses suction cups, which creates a vacuum and pulls 
down the trays and releases them onto a conveyer belt. By using this 
technology JOP Engineering do not have to focus on the stacking 
height of the trays but on the shape of the bottom of the tray. 
It is possible to change the tool in the destacker within 5 minutes, 
making it easy for customers to destack different trays in the same 
machine. 
The destacker can be delivered with either one or two racks and can 
be seen in figure 32.
1	
http://www.jopengineering.com/produktomraader/dispen­
ser
Conclusion JOP Engineering
At JOP Engineering they have chosen to destack with vacuum and 
suction cups instead of the previously seen concept of having special­
ly designed screws do the job. This way of destacking has the advan­
tage that the stacking height does not have any affect on what type of 
tray can be destacked in this so­
lution. It does however set some 
criteria for the production site; 
where it needs to be implemented. 
A great feature on this destacker is 
the opportunity to get it with two 
racks, meaning that it can destack 
two trays at the same time. This 
is the only destacker, which sup­
ports this option. 
By using vacuum and adding an 
extra rack increases the level of 
complexity of the destacker and 
there is many moving parts. The 
disadvantage to this is that if the 
destacker stops working, for some 
reason, the technician, who needs 
to repair the destacker, really ne­
eds to know the destacker. Service 
or reparation can therefore not be done by just anyone in the production.
Not only does the destacker from JOP Engineering have a really complex 
construction, it is also really big compared to the alternatives. It is therefo­
re not possible to move it around the production floor without additional 
lifting equipment. 
Figure 32 - JOP Tray Dispenser
==PAGE:61==
61
Conclusion
As it shows in the analysis there are many different existing solutions 
when it comes to destacking plastic trays. All have their advantages 
and disadvantages. The Speed-Disp’s ability to destack trays without 
any stacking distance could help eliminate the need for these and 
there by make it possible to pack more trays into cardboard boxes 
for shipping. This would mean that the shipped boxes would contain 
more trays and fewer boxes had to shipped to fulfill the order size. 
Further more when developing new plastic trays the manufacturer of 
these would not have to think of the stacking lugs either. 
The Intray solution with a separate tool makes for a great way to im­
prove the change over time. This is an advantage because the change 
over has been made simple enough for anyone to perform, which 
means that no specialized knowledge is required.
JOP Engineering has chosen to go in a different direction, by apply­
ing vacuum to their destacker. This gives them the advantage of not 
having to focus on the edge of the trays; they do however have to 
make sure that the tray has a flat bottom, so the suction cups can get 
a hold of the tray.
There are of cause also some disadvantages with these products. Both 
the Intray and the JOP destackers are too big to move around without 
additional equipment making them more or less stationary products. 
This is of cause only a problem if the destacker needs to be used on 
different production lines.
Furthermore could the destacker from Intray be redesigned so that 
it becomes much more modular, giving the customer more freedom 
to upgrade along the way or change the product they have already 
purchased. 
==PAGE:62==
62
Patents
In order to make sure that the TO-BE construction, from Teknik, 
isn’t designed in a way, which breaks valid patents, several has been 
found and investigated. Patents are valid in Denmark, if they are ap­
proved, 20 years after they have been applied for.1
Intray 2
Intech International has one valid patents which is relevant to this 
project, this one is on their destacker solution, has the patent num­
ber DK17644 and can be found in  appendix 4 - Relevant Patent. The 
patent is for the way Intech has designed the Intray destacker, with 
having a cassette and a basestation. The cassette is described in the 
patent as being fully made in stainless materials and having no elec­
tronics, it is fully mechanical. The basestation has all the electronics, 
and is also made of non-stainless materials.
By having the part separated like this enables the process of washing 
the cassette and thereby minimize the amount of bacteria gathered 
in the cassette. 
1	
http://www.patender.dk/faq.html#103
2	
https://intray.dk/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/IN­
TRAY-Brochure-UK-2016.pdf
The patent states that having a casette based destacker was already 
known, but all of these had something inside which made in unable 
to clean with water and cleaning supplies.
==PAGE:63==
63
JKT
JKT has a patent on their A1 solution. The patent is valid in the entire 
EU and has the code DK/EP 1685047 T3. The patent is on the A1 
screws and are therefore not relevant for this project.
JOP Engineering
JOP Engineering does not have any patents on their solution.
Conclusion
The different patents have different levels of relevance for the TO-
BE solution from Teknik. The screws, together with the guides, in 
the AS-IS construction already fulfills their purpose well enough for 
them to be reapplied onto the TO-BE solution. This is positive since 
they then do not interfere with any of the found patents. 
The patent, which does need some attention, though is one concer­
ning the destacker from Intray, patent number DK17644. This patent 
deals, as explained earlier, with a destacker consisting of a stainless 
tool with all the mechanics and a non-stainless stand with all the te­
chnics. This means that the tool is fully washable, which leads to the 
fact that if anyone where to make a destacker, inspired by the one 
from Intray, the tool in this destacker cannot be fully stainless, then it 
would be in conflict with the existing patent. 
==PAGE:64==
64
Competitor comparison 
In order to see how each of the competing products compared, each of 
them were valued on the criteria which were important to the market. 
The four competing products are: the Intray from Intech International, 
the Speed-Disp from JKT, the Tray denester from JOP Engineering and 
the Tray-Disp from Teknik. 
The score flexibility was given to the destacker based on how flexible the 
design is. This was to see how each of them compares and fulfills the need 
of the customer to have incorporated the flexibility in the production, 
this was due to the fact that the market for foods is always changing and a 
destacker needs to be able to fulfill this criteria.
The criteria size was used to determine how the different destackers differ 
in size. This was in order to see whether or not the destacker was eligible 
for moving around in a production. 
Capacity describes how many trays it is possible to insert into the de­
stacker. In the interviews with the potential customers multiple parties 
mentioned that they would want the destacker to be filled only every fif­
teen minutes. This means that the destackers should be able to contain a 
lot of plastic trays.
The employee who is going to operate the destacker is the man on the 
floor in the production area. Most of these employees do not have any 
technical background meaning that they might not be able to operate the 
destacker if the machine is not easy to operate. There fore the ease of ope­
ration of the destacers was also important. 
Mobility describes how easy it is to move around the solutions and use it 
someplace else in the production site. The mobility score was linked both 
to how big, heavy and easy to move the solution is and also how easy it 
would be to plug it back in and make it run.
When it comes to complexity, this is an indication of how complex the 
destacker’s construction is. If a destacker has a high level of complexity it 
might be difficult to copy but it might also difficult to repair.
Figures 33-36 shows the scores of the different competing destackers.
==PAGE:65==
65
JKT – Speed-Disp
When looking at the Speed-Disp from JKT it has some good features. It is a small and mobile 
destacker, which makes it optimal for a manufacturer that needs to use it multiple places in the 
production area. Other than not being too heavy it also has a low level of complexity this is great 
because a low level of complexity makes it both easy to operate and also to maintain if necessary. 
A drawback from this destacker is the flexibility, which is the most important criteria from the 
market.
The Speed-Disp can destack trays without any stacking distance, but the shape and size of the tray 
cannot vary, without a new destacker is made.
Intech Int. – Intray
The Intray destacker from Intech has some great features. By having the Smart Tool being the 
central destacking unit, gives it a high level of flexibility and it also becomes easy to operate for 
the end-user. 
The solution does however also have some drawbacks. The Intray destacker it really big meaning 
that it is not easy to move around in the production hence the low score in mobility seen in figure 
34.
A second disadvantage of the Intray destacker is the high level of complexity; this complexity is 
all in the stand. 
Figure 33 - JKT
Figure 34 - Intray
==PAGE:66==
66
Teknik – Tray-Disp
The Tray-Disp from Teknik is a small and mobile destacker solution, easy to move around and to 
reconnect due to the fact that is runs only on electrical power. The solution has a simple design 
that enhances the ease of operation and maintenance if that should be necessary. This destacker 
does however also has some drawbacks. The flexibility of the system is almost none existing as it 
can be seen in figure 35. The AS-IS destacker is being designed for one specific tray, and only trays 
with the same size, shape and stacking height can be destacked in this specific machine.
JOP Engineering – Tray dispenser
The solution from JOP Engineering does, like all other systems, have some advantages and some draw­
backs. The advantages of this system is that it is very adaptable, since it is using vacuum and suction cups 
to pull down the trays to a transportation band. This is an advantage, because it sets fewer criteria for the 
tray design, the suction cups just need a flat surface to grab onto. Despite the advantages of this destacker, 
the drawbacks from it are multiple. The system is really big, which limits the mobility a lot, and also it runs 
on a combination of pneumatics and power making it not applicable everywhere. The entire system is also 
without a doubt the most complex one on the Danish market right now. 
Figure 35 - Teknik
Figure 36 - JOP Engineering
==PAGE:67==
67
Conclusion
By putting all of the different competing, Danish, destackers into a spider 
charts, seen in figure 37, it can be seen which of them fulfill the criteria of 
the market. The interesting thing to see in this competitor comparison is 
how the Tray-Disp from Teknik is performing 
against the competition. Figure 37 shows that 
the Tray-Disp is getting high scores in almost 
all of the market criteria, except for the flexi­
bility. This is a problem since this is the most 
important criterion set by the market.  Some 
of the competitors does however manage to 
have a high level of flexibility, which makes it 
relevant to use this analysis to see how they 
have achieved this high level of flexibility and 
merge it with all the advantages of the Tray-
Disp from Teknik, in order to get a product, 
which fulfills all the criteria of the market.
Figure 37 - Competitor Comparison
==PAGE:68==
68
Ambitions
The ambitions are for the TO-BE construction and have been set by 
the project group. The ambitions are made based on the criteria set 
by the potential customers and also from what was learned in the 
competitor analysis and comparison chapter.
#1 Enhance the flexibility
This first ambition has been stated time and time again by the mar­
ket. The level of flexibility has the highest impact on whether or not 
the market sees it as a good investment do to the many changes in 
shapes and sizes. 
#2 Maintain the price level
In order to make sure that customers will buy the TO-BE constructi­
on from TEKNIK it is important to make sure that the new solutions 
price does not increase. This is due to the fact that the smaller the 
investment would be for the customers the more likely they are to 
invest in the product.
#3 Make second time purchase cheaper
The second time purchase of the AS-IS construction has the same 
price tag as the first time purchase, more or less. By reducing the cost 
of a second time purchase, TEKNIK gets a great argument to why 
customers should buy the TO-BE construction instead of the AS-IS 
construction.
#4 Reduce changeover time
The changeover time is the time it takes from changing from one type 
of plastic tray to another. This time should be as short as possible due 
to the fact that the longer it takes the more money it costs. The AS-IS 
solution change over time is relatively low, but if this time could be 
further reduced it would work as a great sales argument for the TO-
BE construction.
#5 Enhance the ergonomics
The total weight of the AS-IS construction is around 25 kg. This me­
ans, according to Danish law that a worker is not allowed, legally, to 
lift it without some lifting equipment.1 This means that every time 
there is a changeover, or if the company needs to move the destack­
ers, additional lifting equipment is needed. If the ergonomics were 
enhanced it would make changeovers easier and the worker wouldn’t 
have to use special lifting equipment, which the company would have 
to invest in. All in all enhancing the ergonomics would enhance the 
1	
https://arbejdstilsynet.dk/da/regler/at-vejledninger/l/d-3-1-
loft-traek-og-skub
==PAGE:69==
69
ease of operation and lower the total cost of ownership.
#6 Maintain or enhance the level of safety
Safety is everything, a product should be safe to use in any meaning 
of the word. The AS-IS solution has a fair level of safety, however the­
re is a crushing hazard, if a person chooses to put their hand into the 
machine while it is running. 
#7 Maintain the need for second time purchase
In order to make a continuous business case of the TO-BE solution 
the ambition to maintain the need for second time purchase has been 
set. If this need is maintained the customers will have to stay in busi­
ness with Teknik ApS. 
#8 Prepare the design for future enhancements
Technology and markets change and develop all the time; therefore 
the needs of the customers also change. It is therefore important that 
the TO-BE solution can comprehend the need to future development.
#9 Use as many of the existing components as possible
The AS-IS construction it well tested and has been implemented for 
years, which means that it works. Customers are satisfied with the 
functionality and the way it destacks the plastic trays. It makes a lot 
of sense to use existing components in order to keep development 
costs low by not having to test out new technologies and alternative 
construction.
#10 Maintain the low level of complexity
The level of complexity in the AS-IS construction is very low. It is 
simply a motor connected to a toothed belt system, which is conne­
cted to some wheels, that’s it. This means that the amount of know­
ledge you need to operate this machine is minimal. Further more if 
something goes wrong or does not work it is easy to spot where the 
mistake is happening and change the part, which needs to be chan­
ged.
==PAGE:70==
70
CONCEPTUALIZATION
==PAGE:71==
71
Purpose
The purpose of the conceptualization phase is to use the information gathe­
red in the analysis phase and turn these information into a concept. 
Methods
In order to turn the criteria, determined in the analysis phase, into a concept 
first different ideas were made therefore the conceptualization phase started 
with idea developing. 
In the idea developing it was possible to come up with different ideas by using 
the methods brainstorming and sketching. The brainstorming was used as 
an idea-generating tool and the sketching were used in order to shape these 
ideas into something tangible. A full morphology can be found in appendix 
5 - Morphology. 
After the ideas were generated a systematic idea selection approach was ta­
ken. The way this was done was by rating the ideas based on the criteria, 
which were determined by the market, and the ambitions, set by the project 
group, in the analysis phase, and see how each of the ideas compared. The 
idea, which fulfilled the criteria, of the market, and the ambitions best, was 
chosen for further development in order to turn it into a concept.
The chosen idea, was further developed and turned into a concept, this was 
done by dimensioning and construction in the 3D CAD program Autodesk 
Inventor. By constructing everything in Inventor it was possible to turn the 
idea into a working concept, which then was ready to be validated in the vali­
dation phase, based on the criteria set by the market. 
The CAD program also made it possible to design the construction in such 
detail that it was possible to construct technical drawings in order to determi­
ne that the dimensioning of the concept was done properly.
The conceptualization phase
==PAGE:72==
72
IDEA CATALOGUE
==PAGE:73==
73
Idea #1
The idea is to increase the flexibility of the destacker by making it possible 
to alter the dimensions of the hole where the plastic trays are inserted. 
This will be done by dividing the destacker into four pieces and design 
the innards in a way that makes it possible to pull the four pieces apart 
or closer together depending on the shape and size of the specific plastic 
tray, which needs to be destacked.
Whenever the need for a change over is present an operator will have to 
manually alter the proportions of the destacker in order to make it fit to 
the new plastic tray. A sketch of idea #1 can be seen in figure 38.
Advantages
This idea will become more flexible than the AS-IS construction due to 
the fact that it is possible to alter it’s proportions. However it is uncertain 
to which degree this flexibility will meet the required level of flexibility 
as it only focuses on the change in size but not in shape, meaning that it 
can destack whatever size, within the limits, as long as the plastic tray is 
square.
Because of the manner in which the change over is carried out, it elimina­
tes the need for lifting, which means that the total weight of the destacker 
becomes less of an issue.
Further more it will not have any interchangeable parts. This should re­
sult in a more efficient change over.
Disadvantages
As mentioned in the advantage section the idea does not take into account 
the change of shape in the plastic trays. This limits the level of flexibili­
ty and might result in a destacker, which ultimately become less flexible 
than the AS-IS construction. This idea limts the shape of a plastic tray to 
be square, simultaneously increasing the complexity of the destacker. The 
AS-IS construction has a relatively low level of complexity and as stated 
in the ambitions, the TO-BE solution should not increase this level. 
Figure 38 - Idea #1
==PAGE:74==
74
instead of multiple smaller ones. 
Lastly this idea will have a very open design, which lower the level of 
safety, due to the fact that it would become easier to get something stock 
in the destacker. 
Idea #2
The idea is to increase the flexibility of a TO-BE construction by making 
it possible to fully alter the positioning of the dispenser screws. In this 
idea placing the screws on an arm, which can extend or contract in length 
and move back and forth along the beam on which it will be mounted, 
will do this. 
Whenever an operator has to perform a change over what needs to be 
done is alter the positioning of the screws so that it fits with the new pla­
stic tray. A sketch of idea #2 can be seen in figure 39.
Advantages
By implementing this idea the flexibility of the TO-BE destacker will in­
crease. It will be able to destack all shapes and sizes, within the limited 
size range. As it was the case of idea #1 this second idea does not have any 
interchangeable parts which eliminates the need of any lifting whenever a 
change over needs to be carried out.
Disadvantages
As the level of flexibility increases with this idea so does the level of com­
plexity. There are a lot of new components, which needs to be developed 
and tested to see if this idea is as flexible as assumed. Since all these new 
components and technologies will have to be developed the price for this 
idea will likely increase. However it does eliminate the need for a second 
purchase, which is an advantage for the buyer but can be a disadvantage 
for Teknik, because they will have to make the money on the one big sale 
Figure 39 - Idea #2
==PAGE:75==
75
Idea #3
The third idea bears similarities to the previous one, idea #2. The idea 
builds on the idea of moving the screws to fit the desired plastic tray. In 
this idea the screws will be connected to beams and it will be possible to 
slide the screws along these beams. These two beams will be connected 
to two other beams mounted perpendicular to the beams, which have the 
screws mounted. The change over of this idea can be done in two diffe­
rent ways either manually or automatically. If the change over would be 
carried out manually then the destacker would have to have some locking 
mechanism of some sort. However if the changeover should be done 
automatically every time a new plastic tray is being implemented to the 
system a new program has to be written, to make sure that the tray can be 
successfully destacked. A sketch of the idea #3 can be seen in figure 40.
Advantages
This idea, like idea #2, would be 100% flexible, meaning that it would be 
able to destack plastic trays in all shapes and sizes, however this level of 
flexibility is possible with a lower level of complexity, compared to idea 
#2, even though it increases the complexity based on the AS-IS construc­
tion. 
If idea #3 were to be implemented the change over time would be reduced 
and improved because it does not require any specific tools or interchan­
geable parts. By eliminating the need for interchangeable parts the need 
for a second time purchase is also eliminated which is of cause an advan­
tage for the buyer.
Disadvantages
The main advantage with idea #3 is that it increases the flexibility to the 
maximum level. This does however result in a high level of complexity 
with all the new moving part, which all have to be connected and work 
together some how. Further more it is a very open design, which increa­
ses the chances of someone or something getting stock in the machine. 
By making a product, which is 100% flexible, the need for second time 
purchase has also been eliminated, which leads to the price tag of the first 
time purchase increases, due to the fact that Teknik would not have the 
opportunity to sell additional equipment to this idea.
Figure 40- Idea #3
==PAGE:76==
76
Idea #4
The idea is to mount the screws onto some sort of robotic arms. This is to 
enhance the flexibility of the destacker. Different programs will be written 
for the robotic arm and whenever a changeover needs to be carried out, 
the operator simply chooses the desired program and the arms will the 
adjust themselves. A sketch of idea #4 can be seen in figure 41.
Advantages
This idea will increase the level of flexibility to 100% meaning that it will 
be able to destack what ever size and shape a plastic tray could come in. 
Since it is an adjustable solution it does not have any interchangeable parts 
and therefore doesn’t require any second time purchase for the buyer.
By making the destacker self adjustable, it becomes really easy to operate, 
the operator only has to choose a program and the destacker does the 
rest, this would results in a fast change over.
Disadvantages
If this idea were to be implemented it would become a much more expen­
sive product than the AS-IS construction. This is due to the fact that the 
idea builds on implementing four small robots, which first of all is new 
technology that has to be modified and possibly redesigned for the pur­
pose of destacking plastic trays.
Furthermore this idea wouldn’t reuse a lot of the existing components 
and also the technology changes from being mechanical into something 
more digital, which leads to a more complex structure for the destacker. 
If something were to go wrong or break with this idea it would become 
harder to determine the cause of the problem, than it is with the AS-IS 
construction. 
It is stated as an advantage that the destacker would be able to perform a 
change over almost entirely by itself; all an operator has to do is choose 
the program. This means that for every plastic tray, which needs to be 
destacked a new program has to be written, which would have to be done 
by someone who possesses the knowledge to do this.
	
        Figure 41 - Idea #4
==PAGE:77==
77
Idea #5
The idea is to make the bottom plate the flexible part. Drilling a lot of 
holes in the plate, will make it possible to place the components as it is 
intended. This will enhance the flexibility. If this idea were to be imple­
mented all of the existing technology could be reused and mounted onto 
the new bottom plate. 
With this idea, customers would be able to alter the destacker themselves, 
if they needed it to destack different plastic trays. 
It would also shorten the development time, when a new destacker is ne­
eded, due to the fact that the bottom plate is where everything needs to 
be mounted and assembled. A sketch of idea #5 can be seen in figure 42.
Advantages
As mentioned this idea will reuse almost every component from the AS-
IS construction, in fact only the bottom plate will change. This means that 
no new technologies or constructions need to be tested. By implementing 
this idea, the manufacturer could stock up the components so that they 
could assemble a new destacker faster i.e. shorten the development and 
delivery time of the destacker. 
Disadvantages
Other than shorten the delivery time and letting the customer modify 
the destackers themselves, is doesn’t really enhance the flexibility a lot. By 
reusing everything, except the bottom plate, it can be argued whether or 
not this idea can be considered a new construction.
By giving the customer the opportunity to modify the destacker so it can 
be modified for different plastic tray in such a way as it would be in this 
idea, requires the operator to spend time and effort on the modifications, 
which will have to be done every time a change over is required. 
Figure 42 - Idea #5
==PAGE:78==
78
Idea #6
Idea number 6 has a lot of similarities to the AS-IS construction. The 
main difference is that it takes the AS-IS construction and divides it into 
two parts, a stand and a tool. This increases the flexibility of the destacker 
by making it easier, cheaper and faster to do change overs whenever this 
is relevant. 
Whenever a change over is needed the operator has to take out the tool, 
which is already sitting in the stand, and put in a new tool as demonstra­
ted in the sketch seen in figure 43.
Advantages
By implementing this idea, the time to perform a change over would be 
faster and easier. The AS-IS construction has a total weight of about 25 
kg, which makes it illegal for operators to carry without lifting equip­
ment, but by splitting the destacker into two parts, the weight, needed to 
be lifted, should be reduced.
Due to this ideas similarities to the AS-IS construction a lot of the existing 
technology can be modified and implemented into this TO-BE construc­
tion, which also ensures that the level of complexity does not escalate. 
Even though the technology and the components are almost the same as 
the AS-IS construction, the flexibility of this idea still improves a lot, by 
implementing a smarter and more efficient way to perform a change over. 
Disadvantages
If a new plastic tray does not share dimensions or shape of existing plastic 
trays, for which a company already has a tool, a new tool needs to be pur­
chased. This is also the case with the existing AS-IS construction however 
this purchase will, presumably, become cheaper.
Due to the fact that this idea implements the need for a tool, there are 
interchangeable parts. This means that there is a need for storing and 
moving these parts, which, if not done optimal, can cost potential buyer 
money. 
As mentioned in the advantages section, the total weight of the AS-IS 
construction is approximately 25kg this means that lifting it by manpow­
er is illegal. Idea #6 will require lifting of the tool and in order to make 
this tool optimal its combined weight, the weight that needs to be lifted, 
must not exceed 11 kg.
Figure 43 - Idea #6
==PAGE:79==
79
IDEA SELECTION
==PAGE:80==
80
Idea comparison
In order to make sure that the idea, which was chosen to further 
conceptualize, would fulfill the market criteria, set from the inter­
views, these were used to map the performance of each of the six 
ideas. In order to do this each of these ideas received a score of one 
to seven in each of the criteria and they were then put into a spider 
chart, seen in figure 44.
Figure 44 shows that idea #2, #3 and #4 were the ones, which recei­
ved the highest scores in the criterion flexibility. As mentioned in the 
market criteria chapter this was the most important criterion to the 
potential customers. 
However these three ideas did not receive very well scores in the rest 
of the criteria. The idea, which received the highest score overall was 
idea #6. This idea did not receive the highest possible score in flexi­
bility, but managed to score higher, in the rest of the criteria, than 
the three ideas, which received the highest score in flexibility.
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Flexibility 
Price 
Size 
Capacity 
Mobility 
Ease of operation 
#1 
#2 
#3 
#4 
#5 
#6 
Figure 44 - Idea Comparison
==PAGE:81==
81
Idea vs. ambitions
Other than the specific criteria set by the market a set of ambitions was set for 
the TO-BE construction to achieve. These ambitions are explained in the chapter 
ambitions. 
As mentioned in the chapter ambitions, these have been set by the project group, 
and are based both upon the criteria set by the potential customers but also takes 
into account what was learned from the complete market analysis.
Table 3 shows whether or not each of the ideas fulfilled the ambitions for the TO-
BE construction.
As it can be seen in table 3 idea #6 was the one, which fulfilled most of the criteria, 
it fulfilled, as it shows in the chart, all of them except the ambition to maintain the 
price level. 
It is interesting to see that idea #6, based on the ambitions, is the right idea to con­
tinue working with, since it, as mentioned in the idea comparison, did not receive 
a maximum score in the flexibility criterion.
Idea selection
Based on the idea comparison and the idea vs. ambitions, idea #6 was 
chosen for further development.
This was due to the fact that it was the one idea, which fulfilled most 
of the ambitions and it was also the one to receive the highest overall 
score in the idea comparison spider chart, see figure 44.
Table 3 - Idea vs. Ambitions
Figure 45 - Chosen Idea
==PAGE:82==
82
Screw Principle
A plastic tray has three different parameters, which are relevant for this 
project. These are the length, the width and the stacking distance, being 
the space between each tray when one is put on top of another. 
These three parameters put together results in a high level of differentia­
tion, meaning that the destacker should somehow be able to adapt onto 
the needs raised by this. 
This was why the need of the new destacker was relevant. The chosen 
idea, increases the flexibility in two out of the three parameters being 
the width and the length of the plastic tray, it doesn’t however take into 
account the need for a flexible stacking height. The way this would be 
done is by changing the existing screws so they no longer depended on a 
single value but became indifferent. 
If this were to be implemented in the new design the destacker would 
enhance it’s flexibility even further and also the same screws could be 
applied for all the tools in the future. However due to the fact that these 
screws do not exist yet time was needed in order to fully develop them. 
It was therefore decided to continue with the existing screw principle 
because this is known to work, the customers are very satisfied with it 
and it is cheaper than developing a new concept. 
However since the new destacker is designed the way that it is, it makes 
it possible for implementation of some new screws in the future once 
the new destacker has been successfully implemented and acknowled­
ged by the market. 
By keeping the existing screw principle it is also important to menti­
on that the flexibility, of these, is not being diminished, it is simple not 
enhanced either. 
Picture 46 - Destacking Screw
==PAGE:83==
83
THE CONCEPT
==PAGE:84==
84
Concept description
Purpose
The purpose of the concept description is to give an understanding 
of how the concept is going to work. The different parts and how they 
have influenced the shape and design of the concept will be described 
in this part as well. 
After reading this, an overall understanding of the TO-BE concept 
should be understandable and a clear picture of the concept should 
be in mind.
Method
In order to fully develop the idea into a concept the 3D CAD pro­
gram Autodesk Inventor was used. This program was also used for 
the making the technical drawings of the concept. The technical dra­
wings can be found in the appendix 6 – Technical Drawings.
The Concept
The concept was based on idea #6. This was the one, which received 
the highest scores after being validated on the criteria set by the mar­
ket and the ambitions set by the project group. 
==PAGE:85==
85
The full concept
In figure 47 the full concept is shown. Here it can be seen how the 
destacker will look when it is ready to use. The tool is already inserted 
into the stand and the door is closed in order to enhance the safety 
of the destacker, so no one risks getting their hand or something else 
stock in the destacker while it runs. 
The destacker can then be separated into two parts: the tool and the 
stand. This is as mentioned earlier in both the idea description and 
in the morphology, see appendix 5 - Morphology, to enhance the fle­
xibility of the destacker in a manner that is easy to use. What it looks 
like when the tool and stand are separated can be seen in figures 48 
and 49. As it can be seen in figure 49, the door will have to be opened 
in order to take out the tool. This is in order to both enhance the sa­
fety but also to make sure that the gears are connected.
Figure 47 - Full concept
Figure 48 - The Tool	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Figure 49 - The Stand
==PAGE:86==
86
The tool
As described in the morphology, see appendix 5 - Morphology, the 
tool should be the functional part, meaning that this is the part of the 
destacker, which actually does the destacking. The way it does this is 
by implementing the same screw principle seen in figure 46, from the 
AS-IS construction into the tool concept. In figure 50 the constructi­
on can be seen, here the top and bottom plate have been made trans­
parent in order to better get a look of the technology used in the tool. 
This tool has been designed for the ST Plast plastic tray number 1626. 
The tool consists of a top plate and a bottom plate, four screw pulley 
assemblies, two toothed belt dividers, one gear pulley assembly, four 
guide assemblies, four distance rods and a double sided toothed belt.
When the tool is inserted into the stand the gear pulley assembly 
connects with the gear attached to the motor. When the motor is tur­
ned on the gear pulley starts rotating. Because the double-sided too­
thed belt connects all of the pulleys, all of these including the screw 
pulleys start rotating. When the screws start rotating that is when the 
destacking happens.
Figure 50 - The Tool Transparant Top and Bottom Plate
==PAGE:87==
87
Tool part description
In this section the different parts of the tool will be described. The description will include the build of the part and what purpose the 
part fulfills.
Top plate
The top plate can be seen in figure 51. The top plate fulfills two purposes, one it conne­
cts, through the four distance rods to the bottom plate in order to ensure stability in the 
tool and two, it shields the technology in the tool and decreases the crushing hazard. 
An extra feature in the top plate is the engraved arrow at the top of the picture. This 
arrow indicated in which direction the tool should be inserted. The reason for having 
this arrow is to help the operator, whom needs to change the tool, and makes sure that 
this is performed correctly the first time, so no time is wasted trying to insert the tool in 
the wrong way. The top plate should be made on a laser cutter and all the holes are cut 
all the way through. The long hole seen in figure 51 is the toothed belt tightener, which 
is used when the tool is assembled to tighten the toothed belt.
Bottom plate
The bottom plate fulfills many of the same purposes as the top plate. It also decreases the 
crushing hazard by shielding of the innards of the destacker. It has the same cut out holes 
as the top plate, which is used for mounting the functioning parts of the destacker in the 
tool. In the bottom plate there are some extra holes in the middle, these are for mounting 
the guide assemblies. In figure 52 a top view of the bottom plate can be seen.
Figure 51 - Top Plate
Figure 52 - Bottom Plate
==PAGE:88==
88
Distance rod
The distance rods main purpose is to connect the top plate and the 
bottom plate at the desired distance. In order to make sure that the 
stiffness of the tool is optimal there is one distance rod mounted in 
each of the four corners, giving a total of four distance rods in the 
tool. The distance rod should be made on a lathe and has a hole with a 
thread drilled in both ends. When the tool is being assembled screws 
goes into these holes in order to fasten the distance rods. Figure 53 
shows one of the four distance rods, used in the tool.
Gear pulley assembly
The main purpose of the gear pulley assembly is to distribute the ro­
tary motion from the servomotor, in the stand, to the toothed belt 
wheel attached at the top of the gear pulley assembly. The gear pulley 
assembly consists of one pulley rod, one toothed belt wheel, two bea­
rings, one outer tube and one half of a bevel gear connection. Figu­
re 54 shows the gear pulley assembly and the innards of this. When 
being assembled the pulley rod and the outer tube are assembled by 
being press fitted with the two bearings, seen in the top and bottom 
of the outer tube, seen in figure 54. Along the outer tube the bevel 
gear and the toothed belt wheel is mounted with the use of a grub 
screw.
Figure 53 - Distance Rod
Figure 54 - Gear Pulley Assembly
==PAGE:89==
89
Screw assembly
In order to destack the stack of plastic trays, there has to be some me­
chanism, which does this. The chosen mechanism for this destacker 
is the screw principle. The reason for this was because those of the 
interviewed potential customers, who had experience with destack­
ers, said that this was the best principle that they had encountered. 
The way it works is by having, in this case, four screws two A screws 
which are turned clockwise and two B screws which are turned coun­
ter clock wise. These screws are then mounted in the destacker, and 
when they start rotating, the track in the screws pulls the bottom pla­
stic tray down. When it reaches the end of the track in the screw, the 
plastic tray falls down onto whatever is located underneath it. 
The screw assembly is similar to the gear pulley assembly but it uses 
a different outer tube called the mounting tube. The mounting tube 
has a mounting plate in the bottom, with three holes cut with thread, 
which makes it possible to attach the screws with three screws.
Other than this the screw assembly is assembled in the same manner 
as the gear pulley assembly. Figure 55 shows both the screw assembly 
and the innards of this.
Figure 55 - Screw Assembly
==PAGE:90==
90
Guide assembly
In order to make sure that the stack of plastic trays is inserted cor­
rectly into the destacker, and to make sure that the stack does not 
move in any unwanted direction, guides are being used. There are 
four guide assemblies mounted on the bottom plate, one on each side 
of the plastic tray. The guide assembly consists of two parts: the guide 
holder and the guide. These are assembled by two screws and atta­
ched to the bottom plate with two screws as well. Figure 56 shows a 
front and side view of the guide assembly.
Double sided toothed belt
In order to connect the gear pulley assembly with the too­
thed belt pulley assemblies and the screw assemblies there 
is a need for a double-sided toothed belt. A top view of the 
double-sided toothed belt can be seen in figure 58.
Toothed belt pulley assembly
The purpose of the toothed belt pulley assembly is to redirect the 
toothed belt, so that it does not get in contact with anything unin­
tended. In the tool construction there are two toothed belt pulley 
assemblies where one of them is stationary, it can only rotate, and the 
other one is being used as the toothed belt tightener. The toothed belt 
pulley assembly is identical to the gear pulley assembly except it does 
not have the bevel gear mounted; otherwise they consist of the exact 
same parts and are assembled the same way. Figure 57 shows one of 
the toothed belt pulley assemblies and the innards of this.
Figure 56 - Guide Assembly
Figure 57 - Toothed Belt Pulley Assembly
Figure 58 - Double Sided Toothed Belt
==PAGE:91==
91
The stand
The stand is the part of the destacker, which provides the driving for­
ce and also serves as the hub to which the tool is inserted.
The stand consists of the parts: one door, two snap locks, a sensor 
mount, a sensor-mounting rod, a reflector mounting rod, a motor, a 
power house, a left wall, a right wall, a back plate, four feet and two 
stiffening rods. Figure 59 shows the stand without a tool inserted.
Everything which is used to drive the destacker is mounted in the 
stand this is the motor and the power connection. These are mounted 
on the back of the stand and can be seen on the top right corner of 
figure 59.
In the stand there will be mounted two sets of retro reflective sensors. 
One set is mounted inside the stand and will monitor the amount of 
plastic trays, which are left in the stack, and will stop when the stack 
reaches a certain low quantity point. The other retro reflective sensor 
set is mounted underneath the destacker and will monitor whether 
or not there is anything located under the destacker.
The stand is mounted on four feet and in between these feet there 
are mounted two stiffening rods, which function is to stiffen up the 
construction. The feet and the stiffening rods can be seen in figure 59 
and will not be further described.
Figure 59 - The Stand
==PAGE:92==
92
The door
The doors main function is, like the top plate and the bottom plate, to 
function as a shield to decrease the chances of crushing hazards. The 
door does however have some sub functions. The first sub function of 
the door is as a reflector mount. There are two holes along the door, 
in where a reflector shall be mounted.
The second sub function is the locking mechanism. Together with 
the snap locks the folded edges in the top of the door, makes sure 
that the stand is locked and the tool can therefor not be taken out of 
the stand. 
The door can be seen in figure 60.
Snap locks
The snap locks works as the locking mechanism for when the tool is 
inserted into the stand. The advantage of having these is that it is fast 
and easy to unlock the stand whenever a tool change is required. The 
stand will have two snap locks mounted one on the left wall and one 
on the right. When an operator wishes to lock the stand the snap lock 
snaps around the folded edge at the top of the door, seen in figure 60. 
Figure 61 shows  one of the snap locks.
Figure 60 - Door
Figure 61 - Snap Lock
==PAGE:93==
93
Motor and bevel gear
As mentioned in the gear pulley assembly section when the tool is 
being inserted into the stand it connects with the servomotor. The 
connection is possible with the use of a ninety-degree bevel gear, 
which is mounted on the axis of the servomotor. This gear connects 
with the gear that is mounted on the gear pulley assembly. When the 
destacker is switched on the servomotor starts rotating, and due to 
the fact that the bevel gears are connected, the destacker starts de­
stacking the stack of plastic trays. A servomotor has been chosen due 
to the fact that it can be small and because it is much more precise 
than for example a stepper motor. The motor with the mounted bevel 
gear can be seen in figure 62.
Powerhouse
In order to make everything run, the destacker needs power and in 
order to connect to power the power socket from the AS-IS construc­
tion will be used. The advantage of using this power socket is that it is 
then also possible to use the same controller described in the AS-IS 
construction section.
The power house, in which the power socket will be mounted, is 
going to be mounted on the back of the destacker, see figure 59, this 
is so that the motor is easily connected to the power and also the two 
sensors can connect to power here.
The powerhouse consists of eight pieces and is assembled with screws. 
The powerhouse can be seen in figure 63.
Figure 62 - Servomotor with Gear
Figure 63 - Powerhouse
==PAGE:94==
94
Sensor mounts
As mentioned there are going to be mounted two sets of retro reflective 
sensors in the destacker. A retro reflective sensor consists of two parts a 
sensor and a reflector. The sensor emits a signal, which is reflected by the 
reflector and then it is sent back to the sensor. Whenever this signal is bro­
ken the sensor can detect that there is an object between the sensor and the 
reflector and then the sensor can either stop the destacker or make it go.
One set is mounted inside the destacker to detect the amount of plastic 
trays in the stack and the second set is mounted underneath the destacker 
to detect whether or not there is something placed underneath the de­
stacker. The inside sensor will be mounted on the back plate of the stand 
and the reflector will be mounted on the door, whenever the signal is bro­
ken the sensor send the signal to the motor that it shall keep going. The 
sensor mount for the back plate can be seen in figure 64.
The outside sensor set will be mounted on their own mounting rods. The 
mounting rods will be cut with a thread at the top, so that it can be fitted 
into both walls of the destacker. The sensor and reflector mounting rods 
can be seen in figure 65 and figure 66 .
Figure 64 - Sensor Mount
Figure 65 - Reflector Mounting Rod Figure 66 - Sensor Mounting Rod
==PAGE:95==
95
Conclusion concept description
Throughout the conceptualization the idea, which was thought of in the 
brainstorm and later chosen to work with based on the criteria set by the 
market and also the ambitions, have been further developed into a con­
cept. By conceptualizing the idea it can be concluded that the concept is 
now tangible and it should be both possible to manufacture and make it 
run as intended. 
In order to confirm this statement the concept will be validated in order to 
confirm that is fulfills the criteria and ambitions on which the idea of the 
concept was chosen.
==PAGE:96==
96
VALIDATION
==PAGE:97==
97
Purpose
The purpose of the validation phase is to determine whether or not the con­
cept, developed in the conceptualization phase, can be validated based on the 
criteria set in the analysis phase.
Method
In order to be able to validate the concept developed in the conceptualization 
phase different methods was applied. 
Firstly the concept was being compared to the competing product, from the 
analysis, based on the criteria set by the market in the analysis phase. 
For the new concept to be validated as a success, it needed further validation. 
First of all the weight of the concept needed to be validated, this was because 
lifting is required for the concept. 
After the weight had been validated an estimated cost price was calculated 
for the new concept. This was to get an estimate of what the new concept was 
going cost for the company to manufacture and to determine whether or not 
this price would be at an acceptable level.
Lastly what needed to be validated was the concept in it self. In order to do 
this a real size prototype was developed and made in order to be able to test 
the different functionalities of the concept. By building a prototype it was 
possible to get real life hand-to-hand contact with the concept and by using it, 
it could be determined whether or not the new concept lived up to the expe­
ctation which were based on the criteria, set by the market.
The validation phase
==PAGE:98==
98
Concept validation
In the concept validation the main purpose was to validate the concept, this 
was done by making sure that the concept fulfilled the criteria, on which the 
idea was chosen, these criteria are those set by the market and also the ambiti­
ons set by the project group. At the end of the concept validation, if successful, 
the concept should be validated as being able to fulfill the criteria in a better 
way than the AS-IS construction.
Competitive validation
First of all it was important to validate how the new TO-BE concept would 
perform against the competing destackers analyzed in the competitive analy­
sis. The TO-BE concept received a score of one to seven on the same criteria , 
which the four destackers from the competitive analysis were. 
As it can be seen in figure 67 the TO-BE concept is fulfilling a lot of the crite­
ria as well as the AS-IS solution and some much better, these are the mobility 
and the flexibility, were flexibility was the most important criteria from the 
market. The TO-BE concepts new flexibility leads to the fact that its level of 
complexity score is lower than the AS-IS solutions, but the TO-BE concept is 
the destacker which has the highest score based on flexibility and complexity 
combined, so the fact that the TO-BE concept does not get the highest score 
in the level of complexity is acceptable.
The reason why the TO-BE solutions ease of operation score is lower than 
the AS-IS solution is because of the fact that the operator has to interact with 
the TO-BE solution more than it is the case of the AS-IS solution, but due to 
the fact that this small interaction results in a higher flexibility score, this is 
accepted.
Conclusion
When looking at figure 67 it can be concluded that the TO-BE concept has 
the potential to become a great competitor on the market and it should be 
possible for this new destacker to be the preferred product. The TO-BE 
concept is small and mobile but still has a high level of flexibility, so it can 
be moved to any area in the production without additional lifting equip­
ment and it is able to destack every shape and size, within its dimensional 
limits.
Figure 67- Competitor Validation
==PAGE:99==
99
Weight validation
One of the great features of the TO-BE concept is its small size and potentially low 
weight. By having these features the TO-BE solution should be light enough for an 
employee to legally carry, when the tool and stand are separated. The Danish law states 
that any lifting above eleven kilos can be harmful and therefore should be avoided.1 For 
the TO-BE solution to receive a weight validation as being approved the eleven kilos 
can therefore not be exceeded.  Two of the metals, from the chapter materials in foods 
manufacturing, have been used to validate the weight these are stainless steel and alu­
minum. Steel has the properties of being stiff and cheap where aluminum is softer and 
more expensive, however aluminum is much lighter than steel.
Weight validation conclusion
As it can be seen in table 4 in order to meet the demand of keeping the liftable parts, 
being the tool, under eleven kilos the metal parts of the destacker will have to be made 
all in aluminum. The combined weight of the tool made completely of aluminum is just 
under six kilos whereas the same structure made of steel weights more than seventeen 
kilos. The material chosen for the tool is there fore aluminum. 
When it comes to the stand it was not a requirement to be able to lift this, as it was the 
case with the tool, however it would be a great feature if the personnel would be able to 
move the destacker to a different place in the production without having to use additio­
nal lifting equipment. If the stand is made completely of aluminum the combined weight is 
just above six kilos, this weight is only based on the metal, which is required for the stand, 
not the extra components such as the motor and sensors. However the combined weight of these components should not exceed five kilos so it can be 
concluded that if the stand is made completely from aluminum, it would be legal to lift it without the tool being inserted into it.
1	
https://arbejdstilsynet.dk/da/regler/at-vejledninger/l/d-3-1-loft-traek-og-skub
Table 4 - Weight Calculation
==PAGE:100==
100
Estimated Cost-price 
In order to get an idea of what the cost-price will be for the TO-BE concept 
this had been investigated. The cost-price was calculated as if Teknik where to 
make all the metal parts themselves, buy all the components and also perform 
the assembly of the destacker as well.
First of all the raw materials price was calculated, this can be seen in table 
5. This was done to get an estimate of how much it would cost to buy all the 
aluminum, which needed to be processed and made into the parts needed in 
order to build the destacker. The price list of the aluminum and components 
can be found in appendix 8 - Price List of Components.
The total estimated price for all the aluminum that needed to be bought for 
the tool was 1.360,4 DKK and for the stand the number was 4.717,3, which 
gave a total estimated cost of raw materials of 6.077,7 DKK. These prices were 
without VAT.
Table 5 - Raw Materials Price
==PAGE:101==
101
After the cost price for the materials was estimated what needed to 
be known was the price for all the components, which would have 
to be bought. The calculations can be seen in table 6.
The total estimated price for the parts that had to be bought for 
the tool was 4.276,85 DKK and for the components, which had to 
be bought for the stand, the price was 10.600,38 DKK. This gave a 
total price of components that had to be bought of 14.877,23 DKK. 
These prices were without VAT.
The last price needed to finish the estimated cost price for the TO-
BE concept destacker was the cost of having a machine worker ma­
chine the parts and assemble all the components. It was estimated 
that it would require four days of work for the tool and also four 
days of work for the stand.
The monthly expense for a company, for having a machine worker, 
is approximately 42.257,7 DKK1, this transfers into an expense per 
day of 2.124,84 DKK. The total cost of having a 
machine worker machine and assemble the parts 
was therefore 2.124,84 x 4 = 8.499,36 DKK.
1	
https://www.jobindex.dk/tjek-din-loen/
maskinarbejder?lang=da
Table 6 - Components Price
Table 7 - Machine Worker Cost
==PAGE:102==
102
Estimated cost price of the tool
1.360,4 + 4.276,85 + 8.499,36 = 14.136,61 DKK
Estimated cost price of the stand
4.717,3 + 6.323,53 + 8.499,36 = 19.540,19 DKK
This gives a total estimated cost price of the TO-BE concept of:
14.136,61 + 19.540,17 = 33.676,78 DKK
When all this information were added together the estimated cost price for 
both the tool and the stand could be specified.
==PAGE:103==
103
Functional validation
In order to be able to validate whether or not the TO-BE concept works, a 
prototype was made. The prototype mimicked the functionality of the TO-BE 
destacker and was made in such a detail, so the functionality could be tested in 
real life. The prototype consisted, as the concept, of the tool and the stand. The 
entire construction was made in order to be able to test if the concept worked 
like it was intended with having the stand being the driving part and the tool 
being the destacking part, only connected by a bevel gear. Further more the 
prototype could be used to test how well the change over would be performed. 
The prototype is made in 1:1 in order to be able to destack a real plastic tray. 
The prototype was made to destack the ST Plast plastic tray number 1626. 
The stand
First of all the stand was made. Figure 68 shows the prototyped stand. 
The stand is made of cut up wood and assembled by the use of screws. In the 
rear end of the stand, the back plate, the driving force is mounted just as it was 
described in the concept description. 
Between the two front legs 
the stiffening rod has been 
put, in order to stiffen up the 
construction.
Along the two walls, the left 
and the right, a track has 
been made for the tool to be 
placed on top of.
Driving force
What should mimic the driving force i.e. the servomotor is a handle atta­
ched to a rod. When the handle turns, so does the rod. At the end of the 
rod the stands bevel gear connection is mounted. The mimicked servo­
motor can be seen in figure 69.
Figure 68 - Prototype Stand
Figure 69 - Prototype Motor
==PAGE:104==
104
The tool
As mentioned in the introduction of the functional validation both the 
stand and the tool was prototyped in order to be able to test and validate 
the functionality of the TO-BE concept.
A picture of the prototyped tool can be seen in figure 70.
Guides
When the screws starts rotating they either 
push or pull the stack of plastic trays. In or­
der to fix the location of the stack of plastic 
trays the guides had to be prototyped. Two 
guides were made in order to fixate the stack 
of plastic trays. These were made of model 
foam and were mounted onto the bottom 
plate, as described in the concept descripti­
on, by the use of double sided tape. A picture 
of one of the prototyped guides can be seen 
in figure 71.
Figure 70 - Prototype Tool
Figure 71 - Prototyped Guide
==PAGE:105==
105
Bevel gear assembly
The tool prototype was made to validate whether or not it is possible to make 
a destacker, which is split into tool, and stand and drive it with a simple be­
vel gear connection. In order to do this the tool needed to be able to connect 
to the bevel gear from the driving force, seen in figure 69. This was done by 
prototyping the bevel gear assembly described in the concept description. The 
prototyped bevel gear assembly can be seen in figure 72. The construction 
consists of a rod with a full thread, the bevel gear, a POM wheel with a thread 
and then nuts for connecting the parts. The orange rubber band seen in the 
picture is what was used to mimic the toothed belt. 
Screw assembly
In order to test if the TO-BE concept could be 
used to destack the intended plastic trays, ST 
Plast’s tray number 1626, the screw assemblies 
had to be prototyped as well. The existing POM 
screws from the AS-IS construction were used in 
this prototyped TO-BE screw assembly. This was 
in order to validate that these would work with the new concept and the­
refore did not need any alterations in order to be implemented to the new 
solution. Figure 73 shows the prototyped screw assembly. Four of these 
assemblies were made and placed as described in the concept description.
Toothed belt 
tightener
In order to make 
sure that the mi­
micked 
toothed 
belt would conne­
ct to all the pul­
leys, as described 
in the concept de­
scription, a toot­
hed belt tightener 
was made in the 
tool. The toothed 
belt tightener was 
made, as descri­
bed, as a track cut 
in both the top 
plate and the bot­
tom plate. When 
the tool is being 
assembled it is 
then possible to 
tighten the toot­
hed belt to the optimal amount in order to 
make sure that all the driving parts, in the 
tool, are firmly connected.
Figure 73 - Prototyped Screw Assembly
Figure 72 - Prototyped 
Bevel Gear Assembly
Figure 74 - Prototyped 
Toothed Belt Tightener
==PAGE:106==
106
Bevel gear connection
When the tool is inserted into the stand the bevel gear from the tool and 
the bevel gear from the stand should connect in order to be able to transfer 
the rotating motion of the servo motor to the screws, making them able to 
rotate and by rotating separate the stack of plastic trays, which leads to the 
stack of trays being destacked. Figure 75 shows the bevel gear connection 
when the tool is inserted into the stand. It can be seen that the two bevel 
gears connect perfectly with each other, which means that when the hand­
le, seen in figure 69, is being rotated the prototype should start destacking.
Snap lock
The snap locks, which make sure that the door is closed and hold the tool in 
place, were also incorporated in the prototype. This was to make sure that 
when the handle started rotating the bevel would not push the tool out of 
the stand. The snap locks were mimicked by drilling a hole into the side of 
both the tool and the stand, in this hole a screw can be put in to lock the 
construction and taken out to unlock it. This can be seen in figure 76.
Figure 75 - Bevel Gear Connection
Figure 76 - Prototyped Snap Lock
==PAGE:107==
107
Tests
After all of the parts of the prototype was manufactured and assembled, the 
construction could be tested in order to find out if the concept worked as is 
was intended based on the concept description. 
Change over
First of all the whole concept with a separate tool and stand was tested. 
What needed to be tested, was how well and fast a change over could be 
performed. This was done by starting out with the tool being inserted into 
the stand, then taken out and put down, then it was picked up and put back 
into the stand again. It was possible to perform the changeover in less than 
thirty second. However this was done without having to open the door 
and simply putting the tool on the ground, it is therefore assumed that the 
measured time would be doubled when the final TO-BE concept would be 
build so the change over time of the TO-BE concept would turn out to be 
just under sixty seconds. In can therefore be concluded that the first test 
was a success. The prototype has been able to verify that the changeover 
process could be performed fast and therefore would cost the customer a 
small amount meaning that the cost of operation would be low.
Destacking
The second thing, which needed to be tested, was whether or not the pro­
totype was able to destack a stack of plastic trays and how well this would 
be done. In order to test this, a stack of plastic trays was inserted into the 
prototype as seen in figure 77. As it can be seen in the picture the stack of 
trays have been inserted into the prototype and are resting on the top of the 
screw, it can also be seen that the two guides are making sure that the stack 
is unable to move out of the area where it is in contact with the screws.
After the stack of trays were inserted into the prototype the handle, seen 
in figure 69, was turned in order to mimic the servomotor, and thereby 
starting the destacking of the prototype. In figure 78 it can be seen how the 
screws interact with the stack of trays and separates them one by one. It can 
also be seen that 
it 
successfully 
destacked 
one 
plastic tray, and 
if the rotation of 
the handle had 
continued a se­
cond tray would 
have fallen on 
top of the first 
one.
The second test 
can 
therefore 
also be validated 
as a success stating that the concept works 
and that the prototype is able to destack a 
stack of the intended ST Plast plastic tray 
number 1626.
Figure 77 - 1626 Inserted into Prototype
Figure 78 - Destacked 1626
==PAGE:108==
108
Validation conclusion
It can be concluded based on the facts discovered in the concept validation 
that the new TO-BE concept, has the potential to be a great new destacker 
for Teknik. It handles the criteria set by the market in a better manner than 
the AS-IS construction. From the estimated cost-price it can however be 
concluded that if the customers wished to invest in the TO-BE concept, it 
would become more expensive than the AS-IS contruction.
In order to be able to perform a changeover it needs to be legal for the 
operator to lift the tool in used in the TO-BE concept therefore the weight 
of this cannot exceed eleven kilos. It was calculated and validated that the 
combined weight of the tool does not exceed the eleven kilos and it can 
therefore be concluded that this requirement have been fulfilled and the 
operator would therefore not have to break any laws in order to perform 
the changeover fast, tested to be around sixty seconds, and easy.
By building a functional prototype it was possible to test if the TO-BE con­
cept would be able to destack a stack of plastic trays. The prototype was 
build in order to mimic the 3D CAD drawn concept as much as possible. 
As the prototype was build and tested it was concluded that the concept 
works as designed, developed and intended and since it was able to destack 
the plastic trays the prototype can be concluded to be successful and that it 
does proof the concept.
==PAGE:109==
109
CONCLUSION
==PAGE:110==
110
Conclusion
Throughout this master thesis, the project has gone through three diffe­
rent phases in order to answer the problem formulation:
What benefits can Teknik ApS have from applying a modular architecture 
for their destackers?
The market analysis showed that the most important criteria for the 
market was that the destacker needed to be flexible, the Tray-Disp from 
Teknik, did not support this, since it was specially designed for one plastic 
tray.
The end result of this thesis is a destacker, which is separated into two 
parts, a tool and a stand. This means that whenever another plastic tray 
needs to be destacked, the tool simply needs to be changed for another, 
hence the modular architecture. 
Whenever a new plastic tray needs to be implemented and does not fit the 
tool, a new tool will have to be developed. All of the same components 
will be used for the tool, except for the top plate and the bottom plate, 
which are product specific.
By implementing this new modular architecture for the destacker at Tek­
nik it can be concluded that they can benefit from this because this new 
concept enhances the flexibility for the customers.
Other than enhancing the flexibility it also makes the second time pur­
chase cheaper and it enhances the ergonomics, however the first time pur­
chase will be more expensive for the customer.
The new modular destacker enhances the ergonomics because of the low 
weight of the tool, meaning that it is now legal for the operator to carry; 
this was not the case of the Tray-Disp destacker.
Other than the advantages stated above, the new modular architecture, 
also makes it easier to clean the destacker, due to the fact that it does not 
have any closed of areas anymore.
==PAGE:111==
111
Personal conclusion
Through out this master thesis I have had the chance to develop several of 
my own competences. 
By doing the project by myself it set some criteria to me about how the 
work was done and also what had to be done. It turned out to be quite a big 
task, since there was so much to do in a project like this and I have really 
learned to cherish the use of teamwork. If I had done the project with ano­
ther student I would not have had all the responsibility on my shoulders 
and the workload would not have been as enormous as it has been. 
Further more when I was in the conceptualization phase and had to ge­
nerate ideas I didn’t manage to come up with as many different ideas as I 
would have wished for. If I had worked with another student we might have 
been able to come up with many more ideas and probably better ones. So 
the first thing I can take with me from writing this thesis is that teamwork 
is key when developing new products.
As mentioned the workload in this project have been enormous and there­
fore I, in the beginning, used a Gant chart to keep track of the tasks I had to 
do. Throughout the project that Gant chart was forgotten about and could 
have helped me structuring the project better and made positively sure that 
I didn’t use too much time on one task, which then would take available 
time away from other tasks. This happened to me when dividing time for 
the three phases. I spent about two out of five months in the analysis phase, 
which meant that I would only have one month for the conceptualization 
phase and one month for the validation phase. It turned out to be a very he­
ctic two last months of the project because I had to make a lot of decisions 
very fast, and therefore wasn’t able to go really into detail about stuff like 
what gearing the destacker should have or which motor to choose. On the 
other hand by being so limited on time, I had to make many decisions ba­
sed on the facts and then run with it. It gave me a chance to experience how 
well I perform under pressure. This have been a great experience because I 
found out about my self that I work well under pressure and I am capable 
of making fast decisions based on the facts that I have available.
Since this project is about a technical construction it gave me the chance 
to develop my construction competences as well. In the conceptualization 
phase I had to figure out how to make the construction function and make 
it so that everything fitted together. Since my knowledge about gearing, 
motors and so on was limited a lot of time was spend on finding out how 
the different components worked and even what the parts I needed was 
called. When I then got to the validation phase I trusted my decisions that 
the concept would work as intended and as it states in the conclusion of the 
validation phase, it did.
So all in all I would say that even though the workload was enormous and 
the time was very limited I ended up being able to juggle all of this and 
make a product that both works and fulfills the criteria, which were set in 
the analysis phase.
==PAGE:112==
112
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:113==
113
Bibliography
Mortensen, N. H., Boelskifte, P., Holmskov, L., Gamillscheg, B., Bruun, H. P. L., Hansen, C. L., Cleeman, K. K., Junkov, K. H., Christiansen, M. E., An­
dersen, C. L., 2013 ”Radikal Forenkling via Design”. Department of Mechanical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby.
Harlou, U., 2006. Developing Product Families Based on Architectures - Contribution to a Theory if Product Families. Department of Mechanical En­
gineering, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby. 
Meyer, M.H., Lehnerd, A.P., 1997. The power of Product Platforms - Building Value and Cost Leadership. The Free Press, New York
