==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering Design and Applied Mechanics
Considering the potential for radical
technological change on the energy
efficiency and emissions of ships
Karthick Vellaiappan (s161245)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 426
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone (+45) 45 25 19 60
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Mechanical Engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring
a MSc degree in Engineering Design and Applied Mechanics. The thesis was carried
out under the supervision of the Associate Professor Christopher Alan McMahon
(DTU Mechanical Engineering) and External supervisor, Hans Otto Holmegaard
Kristensen a Consulting Naval Architect and owner of HOK Marineconsult ApS.
This thesis was carried out in the spring semester 2018 and corresponds to 30
ECTS points.
Kongens Lyngby, June 25, 2018
Karthick Vellaiappan (s161245)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
For the current global environmental problems, the maritime field has chosen to
explore the radical opportunities for emission reduction. As the emission is directly
proportional to the emission content in the fuel and the energy demand, these as-
pects of shipping industry also has explored. A model was created to investigate
these effects and implications on ship design and operating conditions. Investi-
gation was carried through scenario analysis. Four alternative fuels have chosen
and the corresponding possible ship performance has been estimated for the po-
tential implications on the ship design and operations. The conclusion is different
fuels offers a different advantages and disadvantages, so from the environmental
perspective carbon-free fuels with the sustainable life-cycle which includes fuel
production through renewable sources would be a sensible path to zero-emission
shipping transportation. As a result, capacity needs to be optimally utilised as
none of the alternative fuels offers the better fuel storage volume than a current
conventional diesel oil.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to thank my supervisor Christopher Alan McMahon
for giving me an opportunity to work on this thesis and the continuous support
he has given me right from choosing a topic to finishing the thesis. I started this
thesis with a very little knowledge and exposure to the energy sector so he under-
stood my situation and guided me from the basics and then gradually helped me
to build this work.
A special thanks to external supervisor Hans Otto Holmegaard Kristensen for
providing a valuable insights into the shipping industry and the guidance for using
SHIP DESMO model in a proper way. He constantly gave me an update from
shipping industry which helped me to find the right trajectory with the sense of
purpose. Both have been always approachable for queries in person and through
email correspondence.
I am also immensely thankful to every person who have helped me through on-
line discussions specifically quora members. Not to forget, as always I am thankful
to my family, teachers and friends.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
List of Figures
ix
List of Tables
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Overview of Global Shipping Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Global Climate Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Introduction to the Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background Study
5
2.1
Marine Transportation and Emission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Marine Propulsion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Study on Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Potential Alternative Marine Fuels
9
3.1
Fuel Comparison Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Hydrogen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Methanol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Ammonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Scenario Analysis
31
4.1
SHIP DESMO Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Discussions
39
5.1
Alternative fuels summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Conclusion
43
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
A An Appendix -A
45
B An Appendix -B
47
Bibliography
63
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
3.1
Energy densities of selected alternative fuels and conventional MDO
(Table A.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Hydrogen production process flow [23] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Hydrogen fuel performance [24, 28] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Hydrogen fuel cell working principle [29] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Fuel cell technology and performance summary [28] . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.6
LNG production process flow [31] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.7
LNG fuel performance [16] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.8
Methanol production process flow [36] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.9
Methanol fuel performance [38] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.10 Ammonia production using haber-bosch process [45] . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.11 Ammonia fuel performance [16, 47, 46] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1
SHIP DESMO Model Overview [15]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Distance Coverage range of fuels for the same tank volume of 4546 m3
33
4.3
Tank Storage Volume of different fuels for 200 hours of Journey with
Constant Speed of 16.5 Knots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Fuel consumption of different fuels per Nautical Mile . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5
CO2 and NOx Emission of different fuels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6
CO, HC and PM Emission of different fuels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
List of Tables
3.1
Hydrogen engine specifications [24] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
LNG Engine Specifications [16] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Methanol Engine Specifications [38]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Engine specifications of carried experiments with ammonia fuel [46, 47]
27
5.1
Alternative fuels performance summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
A.1 Fuel Properties [49], [50], [51], [52], [37], [53], [54], [55], [56], [57],[58], [59] 46
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The world is currently facing a serious climate change problem that majorly caused
by the human activities like fossil fuel burning, land waste, emissions from energy
production and it will only continue to grow steep unless we take some actions and
mitigation measures.
”The changes in climate have caused impacts on natural and human systems on
all continents and across the oceans. Impacts are due to observed climate change,
irrespective of its cause, indicating the sensitivity of natural and human systems
to changing climate.”
— Intergovernmental panel on climate change (IPCC) [1]
As quoted above, the recent evidences collected by different researchers con-
firms that the climate change is happening and the severity level is high. IPCC
has warned that continued greenhouse emission will increase the likelihood of irre-
versible impacts for people and ecosystem [1]. Transportation is the second largest
contributor for the fast growth of Greenhouse Gas (GHS) emissions with a share of
27% only behind the energy sector which is the largest contributor to this global
issue [2]. London convention protocol has been in force since 1975 to limit all
sources of waste and pollution from maritime transport. For the given global sce-
nario, International Maritime Organisation (IMO) has brought a new regulation to
limit the sulphur content of the fuel to 0.5% from previous 3.5% which comes into
effect from January 1, 2020 [3]. In the meantime, researchers around the world are
constantly proposing the future pathways for maritime shipping by analysing the
technical, economical and environmental aspects. This thesis work is carried by
carefully analysing the various proposals and literatures to explore the potential
radical opportunities for energy efficiency and emissions.
1.1
Overview of Global Shipping Industry
Shipping is the most efficient transportation of all major forms [4] and it accounts
for around 90% of world trade [5]. Imagining a world without shipping, transport
of manufactured products, foods, commodities would be far less efficient or practi-
cally impossible in many cases and our world would not have improved this much
as it is today. This industry is being regulated by (IMO), a specialised agency
of the United Nations (UN) that sets universal standard for safety, security and
environmental protection [6]. A notable regulations introduced by IMO are man-
dating the new ships to follow Energy Efficiency Design Index (EEDI) which came
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
into effect in 2013. It means the new ships built between 2015-2019 are needs to
be 10% higher efficiency than the previous 10 years and this efficiency improve-
ment is predicted to be 25% and 30% during the years 2025 and 2030 [7]. And
the recently introduced regulation of limiting the sulphur content to maximum
0.5% in the maritime fuel and it is expected to control the SOx emission to larger
extent when considering the previous limit of 3.5% sulphur allowance in the fuel.
These regulatory measures gives a substantial amount of fuel savings and thereby
reducing the emission. While having continuously improving the energy efficiency
in one hand, the demand for maritime transport keeps increasing with unit time
in another hand. As a result, the absolute emissions from shipping sector still
increases despite the design and operational improvements [7].
Maritime transport is not only limited to passenger ships and cargo carriers
but also includes military vessels, fishing boats, lake & canal boats and all kind of
water based transports for various applications. The common commercial carriers
are passenger ships, Roll on Roll off (Ro-Ro) ferries, cargo ships, tankers and
fishing vessels. Among other mode of transportations, shipping amounts to 2.6%
of global CO2 emission and NOx, SOx, PM10 emissions are 16%, 11%, 5% of global
contribution respectively [8]. It is estimated that if we continue to take the current
path without any progress in emission control, shipping sector contribution to the
GHG emissions in 2050 will be around 17% and the cumulative CO2 emissions will
only reduce 3% over the period 2010 to 2050 at the current improvement pace [7].
1.2
Global Climate Problem
”The climate can be defined as an ’average of global weather’ and it is measured
in terms of mean and variability of temperature, precipitation and wind over a
period of time ”
— Intergovernmental panel on climate change (IPCC) [9]
We humans have not fully understood the climate and its behaviours. But
the advanced technological improvements and climate modelling abilities gives us
a reasonable resources to predict the future behaviours with regards to known
challenges. To our understandings, climate is a complex function that will vary
according to the internal and external dynamics. The current climatic problems
are mostly caused by external factors such as human footprint, human induced
chemical changes in the atmospheric conditions [9]. The consequences of climate
change are global warming that makes difficult for the plants, food sources like
crops and vegetables to sustain and it results in lower productivity further causes
increased food demands. Viruses and bacterium that limited to certain temper-
ature may expand in numbers that would cause new diseases. Along with these
problems, emission of Greenhouse gases (GHG) that mainly caused by energy
production and transportation aggregates to a whole set of new challenges. The
positive aspect of this challenge is now it getting an attention from different sectors
and countries that opened up a path to make essential remedy measures. As a
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Introduction to the Project
3
positive sign, the Paris climate agreement was adopted in 12 December 2015 and
178 countries have joined the party as of June, 2018 [10].
1.3
Introduction to the Project
This thesis is a theoretical which can be divided into two main parts. Firstly ex-
ploring the alternative fuel opportunities for potential improvements in energy effi-
ciency and emission characteristics of ships based on various literature and energy
pathway reports to consider the possible radical opportunities. The second part
is developing a Matlab based mathematical model on the basis of SHIP DESMO
that fundamentally used for estimating the energy demand and emissions of ships
in regards to ship design, operational conditions and actual sea conditions. A pur-
pose of a Matlab model is to develop a method which estimates the implications
on ship performance and capacity.
1.3.1
Motivation
A motivation for this work is to provide a resourceful insights and analysis on rad-
ical technological opportunities for maritime industry to mitigate environmental
impacts caused by shipping.
1.3.2
Research Questions
In order to have a effective project flow, a number of research questions were
formulated to conduct the study in a systematic way.
• What is the current energy and emission scenario in shipping sector?
• What are the methods to estimate and evaluate ship energy consumption
and corresponding emissions?
• How much space left for further technological energy efficiency improve-
ments?
• What would be the impacts on ship’s energy consumption and emission if
the potential technological opportunities were implemented?
1.3.3
Project Goals
The followings are project goals:
• To understand the shipping industry in a larger perspective of environmental
effects.
• To identify the potential alternative fuels and emission reduction options.
• To evaluate the identified alternative fuels with respect to fuel storage capac-
ity and distance coverage.
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
• To analyse the results in various practical aspects using scenarios.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Background Study
2.1
Marine Transportation and Emission
Marine transportation plays a key role in import and export of goods globally and
sea transportation is cheaper than air transportation. The ocean going cargo ships
is the main bulk of the fleets in terms of gross tonnage. Merchant ships consumes
bunker around 140 -150 million tons of fuels and at the same time it carry around
5.4 billion tons of cargo annually [11]. The emissions from bunker fuel mainly from
cargo and passenger fleets contributes in a significant amount [11] to the anthro-
pogenic emissions, specifically NOx and SOx.
Even though Paris Climate Agreement have not given a much focus in maritime
shipping, IMO continuously making efforts to control pollution by setting goals
and implementing strict pollution control regulations [12].
Particularly carbon
abatement has been talked about a lot and there is a considerable interest to
support that goal. Various environmental agencies also urges the shipping industry
to take emission reduction measures.
2.2
Marine Propulsion
Ships are manoeuvring in the water using propulsion forces and it the desired
propulsion force can be obtained from energy sources in terms of power. Various
factors that determines the choice of propulsion such as cost efficiency, reliabil-
ity, safety and marine ecosystem [13]. The various types of propulsion are wind
propulsion, nuclear propulsion, fuel cell propulsion, gas turbine propulsion, steam
turbine propulsion, solar propulsion, diesel-electric propulsion, water-jet propul-
sion and diesel propulsion.
Among them diesel propulsion predominately used by large number of ships
[13]. This propulsion converts thermal energy of energy source into mechanical
energy and this type of propulsion is used in all types of vessels. marine engines
are the biggest and expensive to produce.
These engine manufacturers has to
change themselves every now and then according the world changes, now there are
lots of modifications happening as a result of more stringent rules and to comply
with regulations.
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Background Study
2.3
Study on Models
2.3.1
GloTraM Model
In order to understand the previous approaches that carried the work of estimating
the energy efficiency and emission reduction, a model GloTraM was studied. This
model performs a holistic analysis to investigate the shipping development trajec-
tory.
This models covers various aspects which includes fuel price, availability,
environmental policies, production and wealth, operations, energy demands and
logistics. The summary of the model as follows [14]:
• This study is most ambitious which aims to attain zero carbon emission by
2035 which would stabilise the global temperature by around 1.5◦C.
• Total 10 Scenarios were considered for multi-dimension analysis.
• The operating speed needs to reduce by about 60% (i.e. 4.5 kt) from current
average.
• For model analysis, a steady state weather conditions have been assumed
• As the load has a direct influence on the energy consumption, any improve-
ment in capacity utilisation will have a linear relationship with carbon inten-
sity. If the capacity can be utilised to the double, the carbon intensity can
be halved.
• IMO had brought a regulation of energy efficiency design index (EEDI) for
new build ships. In this analysis, it is realised that EEDI regulation can only
bring a small reduction of approximately 3% in total carbon emission during
the considered timescale.
• In one of the scenario (Scenario 4), the energy demand growth cause was
observed and the key to reduce the demand growth is to use more efficient
engines.
• In scenario 4,5 and 6 the key trade-off between the operating speed and
use of low carbon fuel was highlighted. The more a fuel has lower emission
properties, more it will enable the ships to operate in higher speeds.
2.3.2
SHIP DESMO Model
SHIP DESMO Model is a generic program that created for the purpose of calculat-
ing energy demand and exhaust gas emissions for different ship types. In this work,
only the container ship model was studied as these ships makes up a majority of
numbers and also for the simplicity of focusing on one particular model to explore
the options. This model consist of following theoretical background [15].
1. Statistical analysis and determination of main dimensions o container ships.
2. Prediction of resistance and propulsion and propulsion power
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Study on Models
7
3. Exhaust gas emission and and energy demands of marine engines.
In this thesis work, the data of container ships which described above in the first
and second steps have been used to estimate the energy demand and exhaust gas
emission of alternative fuels. The detailed description is given in the Chapter 4. A
scenario analysis approach similar to GloTraM Model [14] is employed in this study
as the experiments are so expensive to perform in real-time to explore different
possible implications of alternative fuels on ship design and operations, using SHIP
DESMO Model in this study [16].
==PAGE:22==
8
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Potential Alternative
Marine Fuels
This chapter discusses the different alternative fuels that have a potential to re-
place conventional fuels for shipping.
It is important to define alternative fuel in a precise manner because trend is
constantly changing and there is a chance of having different interpretations. Ma-
rine fossil fuels can be categorised into two types namely residual fuel and distillates.
Distillates are the crude petroleum fractions processed through conventional dis-
tillation process and common distilled products used for maritime transports are
Marine Gas and Diesel Oil (MGO & MDO). The reminder of crude oil distillation
is called residual fuel or Heavy Fuel oil (HFO), the residual fuel grade will vary
depending on the percentage of sulphur content. To maintain the harmony, any
fuel type other than a conventional MGO\MDO and HFO can be called as an al-
ternative fuel. Lloyds Registry estimated that use of HFO will amounts to 47-66%
of total maritime fuel use by 2030 [17]. As of 2016, 84% of the global maritime
energy demand is met by conventional fuel oils [18].
3.1
Fuel Comparison Methodology
The engine performance data for an alternative fuels is not widely available at
the moment. Since a major interest has been given to alternative fuel in various
industries like road, rail and air transport that resulted in conduction of experi-
ments by different research groups with corresponding modification according to
the fuel types and specific industry requirements. This can give good insights of
what might be possible for maritime industry. These experiment results were col-
lected and interpolated in the best possible form to compare the fuel performance
in Internal Combustion engine by equal means. So, a standard methodology has
been developed to make a sensible comparison of alternative fuels. It should be
noted that for few fuels the actual ship engine performance data was not available
publicly for obvious reasons for which experimental study that were carried in a
relatively smaller IC engines are used to extrapolate to approximate its perfor-
mances. which values cannot be used for direct estimate of large marine engine
performance as the fluid behaviour in a large volume and engine design would
be considerably different but still it provides a good approximation and insights
==PAGE:24==
10
3 Potential Alternative Marine Fuels
of general characteristics like overall thermal efficiency and amount of emissions
per mass of fuel combustion. Hence these experimental results are processed to
estimate the performance changes that might be possible in ships.
3.1.1
Selection of Alternative Fuels
Every element in the earth contains energy, but the amount varies depending on
the type of molecule and bond structure presents on it. This energy content can be
observed in two forms namely Gravimetric density and Volumetric density
[19].
The gravimetric density is a measure of energy present in the unit mass
whereas the volumetric density is a measure of energy present in the unit volume.
For the transportation application, the good fuel is such that has both higher
gravimetric and volumetric energy density. It is mainly due to the need of having
higher specific energy to burn less fuel and the higher volumetric density to store
fuel in the less amount of space. The alternative fuels selected in this project work
are Hydrogen, Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG), Methanol and Ammonia which based
on fuel’s energy density, emission content and feasibility.
Figure 3.1: Energy densities of selected alternative fuels and conventional MDO
(Table A.1)
As it can be seen in the Figure 3.1, Hydrogen has the highest specific energy
per mass but comparatively the lowest energy per unit volume. In other words
hydrogen needs theoretically 5 times larger storage volume for the same amount
of specific energy equivalent to 1 kg of MDO along with some storage problems.
This makes hydrogen a less favourable fuel option despite the fact that it has
an impressive amount of specific energy. LNG has 17% more gravimetric density
and 16% lesser volumetric density than conventional MDO but comparatively it
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Fuel Comparison Methodology
11
is the second best option in terms of both specific energy and storage capability
that makes LNG a potential alternative fuel. Methanol and ammonia both have
relatively less energy capabilities but the fact that these two are non-fossil type
that makes them potentially favourable in regard to environment and interesting
for this thesis work.
Detailed evaluation of all the selected alternative fuels is
carried in the upcoming sections.
3.1.2
IC Engine Fuel Performance Calculation Terminologies
The aim of this work is to evaluate alternative fuels in terms fuel economy, storage
volume and emission characteristics. To find all these performance related data,
it is necessary to consider the losses in the IC engine combustion process like
thermal losses, heat escape through exhaust gas and the friction losses between
the components to estimate the actual performance values. Method used for such
calculations are as follows:
3.1.2.1
Brake Specific Fuel Consumption (BSFC)
As a general practice, in the maritime industry engine manufacturer will provide
the Maximum Continuous Rating (MCR) values to the ship owners. MCR power
output is an assurance value given by the manufacturer that engine will deliver the
guaranteed specific power output under maximum engine load which is essential
for ships to have that maximum limit value to make operational decisions under
rough sea conditions. Engine fuel consumption can be determined using operating
condition in relation to MCR (for an example 85% of MCR), but for this analysis
MCR data is not available as these observations were made in small pilot engines.
So, the engine fuel consumption shall be determined using the conventional method
of estimating BSFC value. BSFC data is a reflection of prime mover’s efficiency to
convert the energy amount of fuel intake into useful energy in terms of a rotational
power. The lower the BSFC value, the higher the engine efficiency and thereby we
can calculate the thermal efficiency of an engine [20].
BSFC = mf
Pe
(3.1)
where,
mf = Mass flow rate of the fuel [Kg/s]
Pe = Brake effective power output [KW]
Brake effective power can be written as a product of engine speed and torque
output, therefore the above equation can be rewritten as follows.
BSFC =
mf
ωe.Te
(3.2)
where,
ωe = Engine speed [rad/s]
==PAGE:26==
12
3 Potential Alternative Marine Fuels
Te = Brake effective engine torque [N-m]
Torque can be defined as a function of Engine Mean Effective Pressure (ρme)
Te = nc.Vd.ρme
2πnr
(3.3)
where,
Vd = Total cylinder displacement volume [m3]
nc = Number of cylinders
nr = Number of revolutions per power stroke
ρme= Mean effective pressure [Pa]
By re-arranging the equation 3.2 & 3.3, formula for BSFC can be derived:
BSFC =
2πnrmf
ncVdρmeωe
(3.4)
3.1.2.2
Engine Efficiency
In IC engines, the engine efficiency is defined as the function of specific energy
available in the fuel and the energy consumed to perform the work by means of
fuel consumption. The specific energy value used for engine efficiency calculation
should be made using the lower heating value (LHV) of the fuel, because LHV
is a measure of the total amount of heat released during the combustion and the
subtracted value of latent heat of vaporisation for the better estimate of calorific
value of fuel supply.
ηf =
1
BSFC × QLHV
(3.5)
where,
ηf= Brake Thermal Efficiency [%]
BSFC = Brake specific fuel consumption [g/KWh]
QLHV = Lower heating value of the fuel [KWh/g]
3.2
Hydrogen
Chemical formula: H2
Chemical Composition: 100% Hydrogen
Hydrogen is the lightest element which is highly flammable gas with colourless
and odourless property at room temperature and standard pressure conditions. It
cannot be found naturally on the earth but most of the organic compounds does
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Hydrogen
13
contains hydrogen and the earth’s abundant resource water contains two-third
of its molecules made up of hydrogen which amounts to 11% of its total mass.
It is difficult to measure the exact quantity of its total availability in the earth.
Hydrogen is not an energy source but energy carrier, however the energy stored in
hydrogen can be retrieved by burning it in Internal combustion engine or through
electrochemical processes. Since its composition is fully made up of hydrogen, it
has the potential to be a cleanest fuel.
It only emits water when hydrogen is
used in the fuel cell but it emits NOx and water vapours when it is combusted in
internal combustion engine.
3.2.1
Hydrogen Production:
The history dated back to 1874, a french novelist and sci-fi writer Jules Verne made
the statement that ¨Water will be the future coal¨ which words came after realis-
ing the possibilities of deriving hydrogen from water through electrolysis. In 1930,
a German engineer, Rudolf Erren suggested to use the hydrogen as a transporta-
tion fuel [21]. The fundamental aim of hydrogen production is to extract hydrogen
from the compound that contains hydrogen, natural gas, water, coal and biomass
are some of the compounds that have used for hydrogen production. As almost
all organic compounds contains hydrogen, the process method is determined ac-
cording to the type of compound have chosen for hydrogen extraction. The most
common methods of hydrogen production are steam reforming process and electrol-
ysis. In terms of technology, hydrogen production methods are: Thermochemical,
Elctrochemical, Photobiological, Photoelectrochemical. [22]:
3.2.1.1
Thermochemical Process
Thermochemical is a process of absorption or release of heat energy through chem-
ical reactions. Usually catalysts are used in elements to process thermochemical
reactions. Steam reforming is such process that produce hydrogen from the or-
ganic compounds like methanol, coal and natural gas. When solid or semi-solid is
used as a raw material, gasification and pyrolysis methods are employed. A gas
with the mixture of carbon monoxide, hydrogen and carbon dioxide is formed from
natural gas, during the At present, 50% of hydrogen production is carried through
steam reforming process [22] and this is currently the most energy efficient and
cheapest method to produce hydrogen in comparison with other production meth-
ods. The drawback of this approach is the production process emmits emissions
and certainly it is not the favourable option when considering the environmental
impacts.
3.2.1.2
Electrochemical Process
Electrochemical process is any process that accompanied by the flow of electric
charges between substances. Electrolysis is such a process that separates hydrogen
from the water. This process take place in a system called electrolyser which is
available in various sizes ranges from small scale to large scale depending upon
the application. An electrolyte consist of an anode and cathode partitioned by
==PAGE:28==
14
3 Potential Alternative Marine Fuels
Figure 3.2: Hydrogen production process flow [23]
an electrolyte. Different electrolysers uses a different material for an electrolyte
and some uses the specialised polymers as an electrolyte. The input fuel water
reacts with anode to form a positively charged hydrogen and oxygen ions. When
electrons starts to flow through the circuit, hydrogen ions joins with electrons and
then it becomes hydrogen gas. The reactions happens in the electrolyser as follows:
Anode: 2H2O −→O2 + 4H + +4e−
Cathode: 4H + +4e−−→2H2
The main drawback of this process is that it is an inefficient process with the
overall system efficiency of about 25% despite the fact that a modern commercial
electrolysers have an efficiency range of 60-75% which the requires the energy range
of 53-70 KWh to produce 1 kilogram of hydrogen [22] whereas the energy content
of 1 kilogram hydrogen is about only 39.4 KWh. So this process is currently highly
inefficient to produce hydrogen for transportation use.
3.2.1.3
Photobiological Process
Photo-biological process follows the photosynthesis process which occur naturally
in plants and it has wide range of approaches such as direct biphotolysis, indirect
biphotolysis, photo-fermentation and dark-fermentation [22]. This technology is
still in experimental stage due to the fact that a rate of energy production is slow
and slower kinetics makes it currently unfeasible to use it for large scale hydrogen
production.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Hydrogen
15
3.2.1.4
Photoelectrochemical Process
Photo-electrochemical process contains semiconductor which is illuminated by the
sunlight to split the water and obtain hydrogen as an outcome. This method has
the same drawbacks as photo-biological process which is slower production rate. In
addition to that, it also has some challenges to come up with a new semiconductor
that has a better band gap and solar spectra [22]. So this method also not feasible
to produce hydrogen as the technology is just booming up and it has long way to
go for an energy efficient production.
3.2.1.5
Hydrogen Production Using Renewable Sources
Currently hydrogen is being produced largely from fossil fuel sources and the em-
phasis on production from renewable sources is there within the scientific commu-
nity and the solution is to use the electricity which produced through renewable
sources like Hydro, wind, solar and similar methods. In that way, the hydrogen
life cycle would become entirely clean when compare to the present status that
emits large quantity of greenhouse gases during the production phase.
3.2.2
Hydrogen Fuel Performance:
Hydrogen is well known for its carbon free composition and high energy content per
mass. These two alone makes it worthwhile to explore hydrogen as an alternative
energy fuel. Use of hydrogen in transportation can be possible in two ways. The
First option is to burn hydrogen in internal combustion engine and an another
option is to use fuel cell to produce energy from hydrogen gas. Both the possibilities
are explored in this study.
3.2.2.1
Hydrogen in Internal Combustion Engine
Table 3.1: Hydrogen engine specifications [24]
Engine Specifications
Engine Type
4 Stroke
Model
M32C
No.of. Cylinders
6
Bore
320 mm
Stroke
420 mm
Maximum Power
2700 KW
Engine Speed
775 rpm
Fuels
Hydrogen
==PAGE:30==
16
3 Potential Alternative Marine Fuels
Hydrogen can be used in both spark and compression ignition engine but in
compression ignition engine it cannot be used without spark or glow plug. In com-
parison with hydrocarbon fuels, hydrogen has some special characteristics such as
low ignition energy, high flammability range and high flame speed provides com-
plete combustion [25]. However, the hydrogen should be burned with essential
safety precautions because of its flammability and it might cause explosion when
in contact with oxygen. The use of hydrogen in diesel engine is still in research
phase [25].
A study on SI engine [26] shows that it is difficult to detect in case of any
leakages due to its colourless and odourless characteristics, so special attention
requires in the crankcase to avoid explosion due to leakage or accumulation of hy-
drogen between the piston components. Another observation of the experiment is,
Occurrences of knocking and backfiring due to the accumulation of hydrogen near
intake manifold when the injection period is higher than the intake valve opening
duration which causes the engine to run at lower power output than its capability.
So, the fuel injection should be controlled for an an optimal supply. In addition,
the improper fuel mixture would also lead to knocking and power reduction.
In order to make use of the engine infrastructure which made of diesel and also
to avoid new manufacturing of systems through slight modification, it has been
suggested that hydrogen should be used in internal combustion engine [27] thereby
it saves cost. The high auto-ignition temperature of 571◦C suggests that hydrogen
cannot be used as a sole fuel in compression ignition engine but it can be used
with pilot fuel to initiate the combustion.
Figure 3.3: Hydrogen fuel performance [24, 28]
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Hydrogen
17
The results of the case study [24] is considered for the fuel performance esti-
mation as shown in Figure 3.3. The study was performed in relatively a smaller
engines as given in Table 3.1 and the performance results shows that the hydrogen
engine efficiency is very close to 30% whereas the engine efficiency when using
diesel as a fuel for the same engine specifications gives about 50% which is equiv-
alent to the large marine diesel engine. Hence based on this result, it is assumed
that the same efficiency of 30% would give a good estimate of large hydrogen
engine performance. The estimated specific fuel consumption of 100 g/KWh is ap-
proximately 30% lower than the conventional diesel oil which is a positive outcome
caused by its high gravimetric energy content.
3.2.2.2
Hydrogen in Fuel Cell
Fuel cell is a technology that converts chemical energy of a fuel to electric power
using electrochemical reactions.
Fuel cell was invented by a Welsh judge and
physical scientist Sir William Robert Grove as an electricity generator. But it
have not gained much attention for a long period for a general use due to the
success of internal combustion engine.
Fuel price fluctuations and the need of
reducing global emission have paved a path for late development and now the
efficiency and infrastructure have been improved to a significant level.
In the
fuel cell electrochemical process occurs between the interfaces anode, cathode and
electrolyte membrane. Fuel cell can be characterised by the type of material used
in the membrane.
Figure 3.4: Hydrogen fuel cell working principle [29]
As depicted in Figure 3.4, the hydrogen gas enters the cell and then chemical
reaction takes place in anode to separate the electrons that forms the hydrogen
ions with positive charge. Electrons produced with negative charge starts to flow
through electric circuit to produce electricity.
In the other side, oxygen gas is
injected at the cathode to produce negatively charged ions by combining with elec-
trons to form water when reacts it with hydrogen ions. Water is the only waste
product in this process which makes it pollution free energy conversion method.
==PAGE:32==
18
3 Potential Alternative Marine Fuels
Figure 3.5: Fuel cell technology and performance summary [28]
Different substances are used in different fuel cells and the overall summary
can be seen in Figure 3.5. Among them molten carbonate fuel cell is a promising
technology that offers the power output up to 500 KW and implementation can
be possible for large ships with series of fuel cells. Molten carbonate fuel cells uses
potassium or sodium as an electrolyte and operates at high temperature between
600-700◦C. The electrical efficiency is about 50% and the estimated fuel consump-
tion for this efficiency is approximately 60 g/KWh which is 40% less consumption
than hydrogen based internal combustion engine as shown in Figure 3.3.
3.2.3
Hydrogen Fuel Emission Characteristics:
Literature [26] shows that NOx emission will be there when burning hydrogen in
internal combustion engine. Due inadequate data, the NOx emission estimation
was not possible to make it for this study, However HC emision is estimated based
on the study performed between diesel and hydrogen in 4-stroke engine. The result
shows that HC emission of hydrogen engine is approximately 83% lower than diesel
engine and the result is extrapolated for marine engine with an assumption of
same proportion HC emission between marine diesel and hydrogen engines. The
calculated emission is relatively low with the value of 0.085 g/KWh as shown in
Figure 3.3. The other emissions can be occurred with respect to the amount of
carbon-based pilot fuel used for the purpose of ignition or as a dual fuel.
3.3
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG)
Chemical formula: CH4
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG)
19
Chemical Composition: 75% Carbon and 25% Hydrogen
Natural gas is naturally available hydrocarbon gas mixture [30] under earth’s
surface and it is formed from the plants and animal decays that had been decom-
posed millions of years ago , and it typically contains of 85-95% methane (CH4)
and few percent of ethane, propane, butane and few traces of nitrogen [31]. These
layers sedimented into rocks, sand and silt which later became natural gas due
to the applied pressure and heat by earth surface. Natural gas reserves in our
world are around 6254 trillion cubic feet (Tcf) [32] and the estimated remaining
recoverable natural gas resource in our world is around 16200 Trillion Tcf which
equivalent to 150 times of annual global gas consumption [33]
3.3.1
LNG Production
Figure 3.6: LNG production process flow [31]
Natural gas is produced from oil wells and the gas produced from oil wells is
known as associated gas. Russia is the largest producer of natural gas as it has
the most abundant natural reserves [32]. LNG production follows four crucial pro-
==PAGE:34==
20
3 Potential Alternative Marine Fuels
cesses namely Pre-treatment, Acid gas removal, Dehydration and Liquefaction [34].
Pre-treatment: Oil extracted from earth which contains water and other
gases will pass through the pipes that have been specially designed for processing
the oils through different stages that would filter down the heavy density gases
due to gravity by putting series of pipes connected downside.
Acid gas removal: A natural gas passes through a water-based solvent which
observes Carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulphate or acid gas remover (AGR) would
do the same job otherwise these gases would freeze while cooling in the liquefica-
tion process that would generate emission when it is combusted.
Dehydration: Water has to be separated from the fuel otherwise it would
cause ice formation during liquefaction process for which a water absorbent is
usually employed. Propane and butane are separated at the end to use them as
refrigerant during the cooling process.
Liquification: Now the rest of the gases methane and ethane are ready to
liquefy. Liquefaction happens in the heat exchanger to shrinking its volume by
600 times to the temperature -161◦C or below [34]. The resulted outcome gives a
clear, colourless, non-toxic liquid of LNG for easy and safe storage. The key is to
keep as much as energy from the natural gas and at the same time to make sure
that other impurities have also removed.
3.3.2
Fuel Performance:
Table 3.2: LNG Engine Specifications [16]
Engine Specifications
Model
MAN B&W S80ME-C8.2-GI-TII
Engine Type
2-Stroke
No. of. Cylinders
6
Bore
800 mm
Stroke
3200 mm
Max. Power Output
4500 KW @84 rpm
LNG has attracted transport industry with diesel equivalent or even more en-
ergy density and clean burning properties. LNG Possesses a significant advantages,
such as better combustion efficiency, lower greenhouse gas emission, sulphur-free
fuel composition, higher octane value, cost effective and slightly better lower heat-
ing value than conventional diesel oil [30].
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG)
21
Qijun Tang et al.[30] study shows that LNG engine which modified from diesel
or gasoline engine often does not come with clean design and one of the notable
stated reason is its low volumetric efficiency as gasification of liquid fuel occurs
when intake happens that gives poor torque performance at low speed. Further
LNG engine intake air system was developed which controls the air intake through
electromagnetic valve to regulate the air supply to an optimal condition.
Figure 3.7: LNG fuel performance [16]
The results obtained from simulating LNG fuel in SHIP DESMO model [16],
yields the results which values plotted in Figure 3.7.
This shows the specific
fuel consumption of 155 g/KWh which amounts to 50% engine efficiency and is
equivalent to diesel engine efficiency. Since the lower heating value is approximately
12% higher for LNG, the fuel consumption is 12% lower when comparing with diesel
oil at same efficiency.
3.3.3
Emission Characteristics:
A study that analysed the life cycle of greenhouse gas of LNG shows that GHG
emission is 10% lower by comparison with diesel [30]. Moreover it has an additional
benefit of no sulphur fuel, so a zero SOx emission. By comparing with conventional
diesel oil 14% CO2 reduction, 86% NOx reduction, 9% CO reduction and 93%
reduction in PM emission were achieved . In overall, LNG emissions are relatively
lower than diesel oil.
==PAGE:36==
22
3 Potential Alternative Marine Fuels
3.4
Methanol
Chemical formula: CH3OH
Chemical Composition: 50% Oxygen, 38% Carbon and 12% Hydrogen
Methanol is a colourless, toxic and volatile alcohol. It can form a good homoge-
neous mixture with water and most of the organic solvents. Methanol has gained
a large interest as an alternative fuel for the convenience it offers to produce from
different sources. Other common names of methanol are wood alcohol and methyl
alcohol. Approximately 65% of produced methanol is used for the production of
acetic acid, fuel additives and other chemicals. [35].
3.4.1
Methanol Production:
Methanol production can be carried from various carbon containing feedstocks
such as biomass, coal, CO2 in the atmosphere and natural gas [35] but currently
about 90% of methanol is produced from the natural gas. As it can be seen in
Figure 3.8, the production process follows three main steps namely [36]:
• Production of synthesis gas (syngas).
• Converting syngas into crude methanol.
• Distillation process to get pure methanol
Figure 3.8: Methanol production process flow [36]
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Methanol
23
3.4.1.1
Production of Synthesis Gas
In the first step, natural gas is desulphurised to prevent sulphur content in the
fuel and then the natural gas is compressed and sent to steam reformer. Steam
reformer is a common method that employed when natural gas feedstock is used.
In the steam reformer syngas which is a mixture of H2, CO2 and CO is created
from the natural gas (CH4) and steam involving chemical reaction is given below:
CH4 + H2O ⇐⇒CO + 3H2
(3.6)
Another method used for natural gas reforming is partial oxidation in which
CH4 reacts with partial amount of atmospheric air. This process is produces less
amount of hydrogen when compare to steam reforming however, this process is
faster and requires only small reactors.
CH4 + 1
2O2 −→CO + 2H2
(3.7)
3.4.1.2
Converting Syngas into Crude Methanol
The created syngas throuh steam reformer process is routed to methanol synhesis
as shown in Figure 3.8 to produce crude methanol through the below given chemical
reactions and it should be noted that, at this stage CO2 is added to gas stream
for an optimal mixture of components according to Le Chatelier’s Principle for an
effective methanol synthesis [36].
CO + 2H2 −→CH3OH + 3H2
(3.8)
CO + H2O −→CO2 + H2
(3.9)
CO2 + 3H2 −→CH3OH + H2O
(3.10)
3.4.1.3
Methanol Distillation Process
This is the final step which collects the methanol in the crude form at the purity
level of about 68%, and then routed to methanol distillation process for producing
consumer grade methanol. The purity of consumer grade methanol is 99% and
this can be used for multiple applications such as chemical production, blended
fuel in automotive industry and to produce formaldehyde etc.
3.4.2
Methanol Fuel Performance:
Methanol is an alcohol fuel with low viscosity, high fuel-air ratio that makes it
easy for fuel injection and provides the better air-fuel mixture property. Study
[37] shows that methanol cannot be used as a sole fuel in compression ignition en-
gine due to its high auto-ignition temperature, low cetane number. Morover, the
latent heat of vaporisation is high that would slightly affect the overall efficiency,
but it can be mixed with diesel as a pilot fuel and methanol as a primary fuel
==PAGE:38==
24
3 Potential Alternative Marine Fuels
[37]. There are two ways in which these two fuels can be mixed, firstly it can be
premixed with diesel and then injected into the cylinder and the second approach
is to inject both fuels using two different injectors following dual fuel engine. In
the second approach pilot fuel with good ignition property is first injected into
the cylinder to increase the temperature and then methanol injection follows to
achieve the required heat to start combustion.
Table 3.3: Methanol Engine Specifications [38]
Engine Specifications
Model
MAN B&W 4S50ME-T-9.5-LGI
Engine Type
2-Stroke
No. of. Cylinders
4
Bore
500 mm
Stroke
2214 mm
MCR Rating
7120 KW @117 rpm
Mean Indicated
Pressure
21 bar
Fuels
Methanol and Diesel
MAN Diesel have introduced ME-LGI series which is claimed to be suitable
for low flash point fuels like methanol which based on dual fuel injection approach.
Another suggested approach [39] is to use glow plug to initiate the combustion
which suggestion based on the understanding that methanol has a property of
good surface ignition. It is a challenge to design a glow plug that would withstand
the high combustion temperature but it can be achieved using the modern techno-
logical advancements in material science.
Based on MAN Diesel presentation on methanol engine performance [38], it is
estimated that efficiency of ME-LGI would be approximately around 55%. Based
on this assumption, specific fuel consumption is estimated to ≃336g/KWh, it is
because the energy content per mass of methanol is 56% lower than conventional
diesel oil. Hence more than double the amount (by mass) of fuel is required to
achieve the same power output as diesel engine. This hints that the volume of fuel
tank also be doubled which is one of the implication of using methanol alternative
to diesel.Another study [40] performed on the small ignition engine shows the
positive effect on emissions under optimal compression ratio .
3.4.3
Emission Characteristics of Methanol Fuel:
From the given performance results for the engine specified in Table 3.3, It is
showed that CO2 and NOx emissions are almost as same as conventional diesel oil.
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Ammonia
25
Figure 3.9: Methanol fuel performance [38]
Hydrocarbon emission is reduced to 60% and another great advantage of no sulphur
emission suggests that methanol could be a alternative fuel in the environmental
aspect. MAN & Diesel report on using methanol fuel in ME-LGI series engines
suggests that methanol can be used as a fuel for ships passing through emission
control areas (ECA) and this fuel meets the requirement of sulphur content level
which IMO regulated to enforce from the year 2020.
3.5
Ammonia
Chemical formula: NH3
Chemical Composition: 82% Nitrogen and 18% Hydrogen
Ammonia is a compound that majorly made up of nitrogen and minor portion
contains hydrogen. It can be naturally found as it naturally produced from ni-
trogenous waste produced by the animals and vegetables [41]. Ammonia is widely
used for fertilisers and some common applications like cleaning agents. Ammonia
is toxic in its concentrated form, In fact our body itself produces ammonia when
aminoacid level reduces which is not good for our brain cells [42]. It is estimated
that global annual production of ammonia would reach about 250 million metric
==PAGE:40==
26
3 Potential Alternative Marine Fuels
tons [43]. The commercial product of ammonia is sold in the liquid form with 28%
ammonia mixed with water or pressurised liquid ammonia [41]. It is commonly
used as fertilisers, refrigerant and as chemical for various applications.
3.5.1
Ammonia Production:
Ammonia can be produced in several methods but more than 90% of ammonia is
currently produced using Haber-Bosch process [44]. So, the emphasis is given to
this particular production method in this analysis. It is estimated that ammonia
production consumes about 1.2% of total world’s energy and around 1% of total
greenhouse gas emission comes from ammonia production. It is the largest synthe-
sised chemical in the world and mainly contributes to agriculture in the form of
fertilisers.
Figure 3.10: Ammonia production using haber-bosch process [45]
This process extracts hydrogen from water and nitrogen from air which both
combines together with iron oxide catalyst under the moderate temperature close
to 500◦C and high pressure. Iron oxide catalyst does not change the reaction but
used to increase the rate of reaction. Produced ammonia is sent to the condenser
to cool and store it in the liquid form. Similar to LNG, ammonia can be stored in
the liquid form under the 10-15 bar pressure that provides storage benefits. The
feedstock sources used for ammonia production is largely comprise of fossil fuels
and the estimated contributions are 72% natural gas, 22% coal, 4% fuel oil and 2%
naphta and others [44]. Around 72% of ammonia production is carried through
steam reforming process using the natural gas, hence the production cost is highly
depending on the cost of natural gas.
Another advantage of ammonia is hydrogen can be reformed from ammonia
with a very low energy requirement of 46.22 KJ/mol which connects hydrogen
economy with ammonia economy. However the main drawback of ammonia pro-
duction is that it is mainly depending on carbon rich fossil fuels, as a result 1.5
tonnes of CO2 is generated for the production volume of 1 ton ammonia [44]. So,
the long-term solution could be incorporating renewable sources like wind and
hydro power plants to generate power and transmit to electrolyser for carrying
==PAGE:41==
3.5 Ammonia
27
Haber-Bosch process to produce ammonia in a sustainable way. A feasibility of
producing ammonia using renewable electricity gives a great opportunity for build-
ing a carbon-free life cycle with ammonia.
3.5.2
Ammonia Fuel Performance:
Ammonia has a property of low flammability, high auto-ignition temperature and
low flame temperature. Experimental results confirms that ammonia can be best
used with an additional help to increase its combustion properties due to above
mentioned properties and high compression ratio required for using ammonia in
CI engine [46]. Ammonia can be used in both SI and CI engines with any other
fuels with sufficient cetane number as a combustion promoter or pilot fuel[47].
Table 3.4: Engine specifications of carried experiments with ammonia fuel [46, 47]
Engine Specifications
Engine Type
4 Stroke - SI Engine
4 Stroke - CI Engine
Model
Lombardini LGW 523 MPI
4045TT068
No. of. Cylinders
2
4
Bore
72 mm
106 mm
Stroke
62 mm
127 mm
Maximum Power
21 KW @ 6000 rpm
66 KW @ 2100 rpm
Maximum Torque
39 Nm @ 2200 rpm
387 Nm @ 1300 rpm
Fuels
Ammonia with Hydrogen
Ammonia and Diesel
3.5.2.1
Experiment with SI Engine
In this author performed experiment [46], hydrogen was used as combustion pro-
moter for its carbon-free composition to reduce effects on emission and the ability
to obtain hydrogen on board using catalytic reformer.
Moreover, the combus-
tion velocity and flammability range of hydrogen is high which serves the goal of
improving combustion properties to use it with ammonia. The notable modifica-
tion was carried in intake manifold by adding electro-injectors for the injection of
ammonia and hydrogen in a gaseous phase. Anhydrous ammonia SI engine can
only be burned if ammonia is introduced as vapour and it can be stored in room
temperature at 9 bar pressure for which the monitoring system was involved to
control toxicity.
The same experiment was carried with gasoline with suitable
slight modification to compare the results with ammonia.
The results shows that hydrogen-ammonia fuel mixture is mainly depend on
load and the engine speed effect is less. The recommended minimum hydrogen to
ammonia energy ratio is approximately 7% at full load. Due to lower flame speed,
the intake air gets diluted and it caused to decrease the engine performance. NOx
==PAGE:42==
28
3 Potential Alternative Marine Fuels
is the only emission occurred and the amount is low. Overall less emission and
2% decrease in thermal efficiency was noted in comparison with gasoline engine
performance.
3.5.2.2
Experiment with CI Engine
This experiment [47] was carried in CI engine using dual fuel approach with range
of mixture of ammonia and diesel. The diesel was first injected into the cylinder
to start combustion to develop the temperature that required for ammonia to ig-
nite and then ammonia fuel was injected. The stoichiometric air-fuel ratio is 6
for ammonia and 14.3 for diesel (Table A.1) and this proportion was optimally
balanced to compensate the energy content of ammonia which is approximately
half the amount of diesel. Ammonia was attempted to inject as a liquid ammonia
but the result was unsuccessful even at the compression ratio of 30:1 [47].
The results of this experiments are:
• The fuel efficiency can be best obtained between the dual fuel mixture of
40-60%.
• As ammonia has a lower ignition temperature of 651◦C which is 60% lower
than diesel, the ignition time can be delayed with the increase in ammonia
quantity in the fuel mixture.
• As the energy content per mass of ammonia is half the amount of diesel, a
increase in brake specific fuel consumption is observed when power contribu-
tion of diesel decreases.
• NOx emission of ammonia-diesel operation is lower than the standard diesel
operation because of lower combustion temperature due to the presence of
ammonia which reduces thermal NO emission. However, if ammonia is sup-
plied more than 60%, the NO emission can be higher as ammonia itself has
nitrogen in its fuel composition.
• CO and HC emissions of ammonia-diesel operation is higher due to the re-
duced combustion temperature that increases these emissions.
• As diesel contributes to soot emission, it can be decreased by increasing
the ammonia in the fuel mixture and soot emission is proportional to the
percentage of diesel added in the dual fuel mixture.
• The ammonia concentration in the exhaust was observed in the higher amount
than the recommended limit by regulations, so a further study on injection
strategies and exhaust gas treatment was suggested.
3.5.3
Extrapolation of Results to Estimate the Possible Ammonia
Fuel Performance in Large Marine Engine
Due to unavailability of actual engine performance data for the use of ammonia
in large engine, the small experimental results as presented in Section 3.5.2.1 and
==PAGE:43==
3.5 Ammonia
29
Section 3.5.2.2 are extrapolated by deriving the differences in the proportion of
100% diesel fuel operation and dual fuel operation. In order to extrapolate, an ap-
proximately the same proportion of differences would occur in large diesel engine
was assumed. From the SHIP DESMO model [16] , a data of diesel fuel operation
was obtained and the estimation of ammonia-diesel fuel performance for the large
marine engine is extrapolated which result is shown in Figure 3.11.
Figure 3.11: Ammonia fuel performance [16, 47, 46]
The experiment result [47], suggests that at the fuel mixture proportion of 60%
ammonia and 40% diesel, the BSFC of dual fuel operation is approximately dou-
ble the times higher than standard diesel alone operation. By investigating the
effects, it is clear that the mass energy content difference between ammonia and
diesel that caused that variation and based on this observation it was concluded
that the efficiency of diesel engine operation and ammonia-diesel operation are
approximately the same. The results shown in Figure 3.11 is based on the above
mentioned assumption.
Based on the study [47], the best suggested dual fuel combination of 60% am-
monia and 40% diesel is assumed for the estimation values. The fuel consumption
of dual fuel operation is roughly 57% higher when comparing to the conventional
diesel oil, the difference in the energy content caused this effect. The emissions of
dual fuel operation is estimated that CO and HC emissions would be approximately
==PAGE:44==
30
3 Potential Alternative Marine Fuels
66% and 83% higher due to the lower flame caused lower combustion temperature
that would lead to non-homogeneous combustion. NO emission is estimated to
rise 41% as the large portion of fuel ammonia has nitrogen presents on it. CO2
and PM emission are estimated to reduce 58% and 83% respectively as a result of
reduced carbon and sulphur content in the ammonia fuel mixture.
It should be noted that there is no known similar estimation was carried for
the use of ammonia in the large diesel engine. Hence this result would provide
a significant information for the future estimation of ammonia in regard to fuel
performance and emission characteristics.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4
Scenario Analysis
4.1
SHIP DESMO Model
SHIP DESMO is a generic model that used for energy demand and emission esti-
mation. This model is available for three different types of ships namely container
ships, tankers and bulk carriers.
Figure 4.1: SHIP DESMO Model Overview [15]
Key highlights of the model:
• The two important parameters in this energy demand estimation are speed
and cargo utilisation.
• The length of the ship can be modified and the model will calculate ship’s
lightweight by default.
==PAGE:46==
32
4 Scenario Analysis
• Ship Types Used: (Panamax, Post Panamax and Feeder ship).
• Service speed shall be defined to determine the engine power.
• Engine technology and fuel type are the main parameters to calculate EEDI
design.
• Conventional propeller is assumed by default and it is possible to change
if a special propeller is considered. The changes can be made in terms of
percentage of improvement.
• Use of Nox reduction technologies would often results in change of SFOC,
this can be calculated by specifying the type of emission reduction technology
used.
• Four types of fuels can be studied using this model such as Heavy fuel oil
(HFO), Marine diesel oil (MDO), Liquid natural gas in combination with a
small amount of diesel oil, i.e. Dual Fuel, Purely Liquid Natural gas (LNG).
• The power required to propel the ship is calculated as a product of propulsion
efficiency, total resistance and speed.
• For the actual sea condition including wind and weather caused resistance,
the energy demand and exhaust gas emissions are calculated with respect to
the actual deadweight. The energy demand and the CO2 emissions are also
related to the actual payload.
This model is originally available in spreadsheet format, but in this work Matlab
is used to exploit the opportunities which Matlab offers for the convenience.
4.2
Scenarios
The number of scenarios are created for exploring different possible design and
operational considerations. These scenario analysis is based on the container ship
data provided on the SHIP DESMO model for the actual payload conditions. In
this work, a very large container ship is considered as a ship type and the specifi-
cations are as follows:
Length = 396.85 m
Breadth = 57.32 m
Max. Design Draught = 15.6 m
Containers = 12600 Twenty-foot equivalent unit (TEU)
Deadweight = 132300 tons
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Scenarios
33
4.2.1
Scenario 1 - Distance Coverage
Distance = Vt × ρf
TF C
(4.1)
where,
Vt = Total Tank Volume [m3]
ρf = Density of the Fuel in [Kg/m3]
TF C= Total Fuel Consumption in [Kg/nm]
Exploration Question: If the tank volume is same for all fuels, how much
distance a ship can travel with an actual payload and actual weather conditions?
Analysis was carried to answer the above question and the results are shown in
Figure 4.2. The result shows that marine diesel oil can travel more than double the
distance than any of the alternative fuel. This is mainly due to the fact that MDO
has highest volumetric density among all of them. Hence the result is directly
proportional to the volumetric density of the fuel.
Figure 4.2: Distance Coverage range of fuels for the same tank volume of 4546 m3
4.2.2
Scenario 2 - Tank Volume
Vt = fsf c × TF C
fe × ρf
(4.2)
where,
Vt = Total Tank Volume in [m3]
==PAGE:48==
34
4 Scenario Analysis
ρf = Density of the Fuel in [Kg/m3]
TF C= Total Fuel Consumption in [Kg/nm]
fsf c= Specific Fuel Consumption Factor = 1.03
fe= Fuel Expansion Factor = 0.96
Exploration Question: For the estimated power required to propel the ship
being constant for all the fuels, how much volume a tank would require for the
journey?
For this analysis, a journey duration of 200 hours was assumed and the speed of
the is held at constant value of 16.5 Knots- The power required to propel the ship
was estimated using SHIP DESMO model and the result is shown in Figure 4.3.
The result shows the different storage volume the fuel would possibly have for
the specified conditions. This effect is mainly depends on the density property o
the fuel. The specific fuel factor and the expansion factor are considered for this
analysis.
MDO requires a very less storage volume when compare to other fuels. The
two different result for the fuel hydrogen is due to the nature of hydrogen being
used in fuel cell and internal combustion engine. In internal combustion engine
hydrogen is used in the liquid form whereas in fuel cell it is used in compressed
gas form that volume is relatively higher than liquid hydrogen requires. Rest of
the fuel requires a storage volume that directly proportional to their density.
Figure 4.3: Tank Storage Volume of different fuels for 200 hours of Journey with
Constant Speed of 16.5 Knots
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Scenarios
35
4.2.3
Scenario 3- Fuel Consumption
TF C = PD × SFCf
Ns
(4.3)
where,
PD = Propulsion power required at the deadweight in [KW]
Ns = Ship Speed [nm]
TF C= Total Fuel Consumption in [g/nm]
SFCf= Specific Fuel Consumption [g/KWh]
Exploration Question: For the observed fuel performances in Chapter 3,
what would be the fuel consumption of a ship for an actual sea conditions and
payload?
The results shows that hydrogen fuel cell is the least and ammonia and diesel
mixture is the most consuming fuels. Diesel and LNG are more or less the equal
whereas methanol stays in-between. Various factors that involved for this effect
and in general, fuel’s energy density by mass that determines how much energy
each fuel can contain for the unit mass. Another factor involved in this effect is
engine efficiency which ultimately depends on the different properties of fuels such
as flammability, viscosity and ignition qualities. These all together contributes to
the fuel consumption and in this analysis hydrogen offers good value.
Figure 4.4: Fuel consumption of different fuels per Nautical Mile
==PAGE:50==
36
4 Scenario Analysis
4.2.4
Scenario 4- Emissions
Exploration Question: For the observed emission performances in Chapter 3,
what would be the exhaust gas emissions of a ship for an actual sea conditions and
payload?
Figure 4.5: CO2 and NOx Emission of different fuels
The result of different emissions are given below:
• The CO2 emission is directly proportional to the amount of carbon content
presents on it and the stoichiometric air fuel ratio, the results confirms the
same and marine diesel oil has the highest carbon content of all as a result it is
the highest emission contributor. Methanol gas contains carbon and oxygen
which both gives an emission value almost equal to the diesel. Hydrogen has
no CO2 emission.
• The NOx emission of hydrogen in internal combustion engine is ignored
due to the unavailability of reliable data for the prediction of large engines.
However, the other fuel result shows that mixture of ammonia and diesel
emits more NOx as ammonia has nitrogen present on it and the rest due to
the thermal NOx emission at high temperatures.
• Carbon monoxide emissions is a dangerous emission than carbon monoxide,
this can occur when the incomplete combustion happens. So, this emission
is also depends on the fuel property like flammability, ignition temperature
and the air-fuel mixture. As a result both fuels ammonia-diesel mixture and
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Scenarios
37
Figure 4.6: CO, HC and PM Emission of different fuels
methanol with low combustion property like low cetane number of methanol
and low flammability of ammonia makes them the largest emitter of carbon
monoxide emission.
• Hydro carbon emission is also occurs due to the non-complete combustion
and the fuel hydrogen to carbon ratio and the air -fuel ratio has a signifi-
cant effect on these emission. Hydrogen has the least of this emission and
ammonia has the highest HC emission.
• MDO has the highest PM emission and ammonia-diesel fuel mixture and
LNG emissions are minimum. Other fuels does not has PM emissions and it
should be noted that other than MDO, none of other fuels has SOx emission.
==PAGE:52==
38
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5
Discussions
5.1
Alternative fuels summary
This section contains the general discussions and the summary of all considered
fuels as an alternative option.
5.1.0.1
Fuel Performance
From Table 5.1, the followings are the significant observations regarding the fuel
performance in either internal combustion engine or fuel cell.
• The currently used marine diesel oil is a better option in terms of required
storage volume and the fuel consumption also relatively good only behind
to hydrogen and LNG. The results of emission characteristics shows that
it is unfavourable in the environmental aspect, however given the fact that
IMO has brought a regulation regarding sulphur content and exhaust gas
treatment methods, it is expected to shipping industry run on conventional
fuels for quite some time in the near future.
• Hydrogen fuel poses some problems regarding storage as it needs to be stored
under cryogenic conditions which requires significant energy, moreover the
current production method is mostly from carbon based feedstock which
problem first needs to be addressed.
Although, there is a possibilities of
producing hydrogen completely through renewable sources but the process
that extracts hydrogen from water is ineffective and it requires electricity
which also needs to be produced in a sustainable way. Moreover the growing
water problem across the world is a challenge. If a carbon free production
can be achieved, it would be a potential fuel as it has zero emission in fuel
cell and lesser emission in internal combustion engine.
• LNG offers a good fuel performance and a low emission characteristics makes
it a quick alternative to diesel fuel but with fuel storage limitation alike
hydrogen, it also requires cryogenic storage. Infrastructure is already well
developed for LNG and so it can now be used with the slight modification
in tank. Scenario analysis shows that either tank size needs to be increased
or the refuelling has to be done often.
• the production of methanol from natural has would reduce the carbon inten-
sity of conventional fossil fuels if the electricity used for production is made
from renewable sources [48]. Performance wise, it consumes a double the
==PAGE:54==
40
5 Discussions
Table 5.1: Alternative fuels performance summary
Investigation
Performance Results
Fuel Name
Marine
Diesel
Oil
Hydrogen
Hydrogen
Fuel
Cell
LNG
Methanol
Ammonia
(60%)
&
Diesel
(40%)
Fuel Performance
Specific
Fuel
Consumption
(g/KWh)
163
100
60
155
336
387
Brake
Thermal
Efficiency
(%)
52
30
50
48
55
50
Design and Operational Requirements
Fuel Tank
Volume (m3)
(200 hours
journey)
842
6155
6555
1583
1866
2149
Distance
Coverage
(nm)
(16.5 Knots
constant)
19118
2615
2455
10171
8628
6647
Emission Characteristics
CO2
523
0
0
426
507
219
NOx
13.6
-
0
1.3
13
19.18
SOx
3.43
0
0
0
0
1.37
CO
0.35
0
0
0.30
0.45
0.58
HC
0.50
0.085
0
0.50
0.2
0.92
PM
0.44
0
0
0.03
-
0.075
amount of fuel than conventional diesel oil, hence the fuel storage volume
has to be doubled or the frequent refuelling is required.
• Both ammonia and methanol offers the double times lower storage capacity
comparing to MDO and both can be stored in atmospheric temperature and
low pressure. Ammonia can be produced from renewable sources and the
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Future Works
41
key observation is ammonia cannot be burned as a sole fuel and the best
performance can be obtained when it burned with 40% diesel. But currently,
ammonia production also carried mostly through natural gas feedstock.
5.2
Future Works
In this thesis, a method has been developed to use the data and estimate possible
performance predictions. The suggested future works is listed below:
• The developed Matlab model can be further improved to add multiple sce-
narios and various estimate various ship performances.
• A few more fuels can be added and possibly various dual fuel combinations
and its effects needs to be explored.
• Numerical codes can be improved for a user friendly interfaces to collect the
data and process automatically.
==PAGE:56==
42
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In this work, a four different alternative fuels are explored and the results are dis-
cussed with respect to the possible implications on the ship design and operational
changes. The followings are the outcomes:
• SHIP DESMO model has been used to collect the data and it laid the foun-
dation for the Matlab model.
• Fuel effects on engine and its emission characteristics are carefully studied.
• Scenario analysis is performed to explore the implications in the ship design
and the possible change in travel range is estimated.
• There is no concrete solution for alternative option because each fuel offers
distinct possibilities.
• In overall, a more focus on fuel production through renewable sources or
electricity production through renewable sources is identified as a basic re-
quirement for a long term solution.
• Fuel tank size needs to be increased irrespective of choice of alternative fuel
since none of the fuels offers better storage than a presently used diesel oil.
• For hydrogen and LNG fuels, cryogenic storage is required hence the energy
requirement for storage is comparatively higher for these two fuels but the
rest can be stored in atmospheric temperature at a relatively low pressure.
• Shipping industry is expected to use the current fuel under new IMO guide-
lines by using emission control technologies to meet the requirement.
• None of the fuels are produced in a completely sustainable way at the present,
in fact a large portion of production is carried through carbon-rich feedstocks.
It can be concluded that at present, none of the considered alternative fuels
are emission free. It emits pollutant gases either in a production process or
during direct combustion in internal combustion engines.
• It is identified that there is a way to becoming completely sustainable which
can be best attained through increased renewable source based electricity
production and using that electricity for fuel production processes to reduce
emissions.
==PAGE:58==
44
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix -A
==PAGE:60==
46
A An Appendix -A
Table A.1: Fuel Properties [49], [50], [51], [52], [37], [53], [54], [55], [56], [57],[58],
[59]
Marine
Diesel
Oil
Hydrogen
LNG
Methanol
Ammonia
Chemical Formula
C13H23
H2
CH3
CH3OH
NH3
Volumetric
Energy
Density (MJ/L)
38.6
10
22.2
17.86
11.5
Gravimetric
Energy Density
(MJ/Kg)
45.6
142
55.2
22.7
18.6
Lower Heating
Value (MJ/Kg)
42.6
120
48.6
19.9
18.6
Density (Kg/m3)
846
71
428
787
600
Auto-Ignition
Temp
(◦C at 1 bar)
254
571
595
464
651
Storage
Temp (◦C)
25
-253
-161
25
25
Boiling
Temp (◦C)
182
-253
-161
66
-35.5
Stoichiometric
Ratio by Mass
14.5:1
34.3:1
17.2:1
6.5:1
35:1
Flammability
Limits
(vol. % air)
0.7-5
4-75
4-16
6-36
15-28
Flame
Temperature
(◦C at 1 bar)
2054
2045
1960
1890
1843
Octane Number
30
130
120
109
120
Cetane Number
40-55
-
-10
<5
-
Carbon
Content (wt %)
85
0
75
37
0
Sulfur
Content (wt %)
<350 ppm
0
0
0
0
Oxygen
Content (wt %)
0
0
0
50
0
Hydrogen
Content (wt %)
15
100
25
13
18
Nitrogen
Content (wt %)
0
0
0
0
82
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX B
An Appendix -B
==PAGE:62==
48
B An Appendix -B
1 %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 %% Master Thesis
3 % This matlab script is written for estimating the fuel performances and
4 % its implication on ship design and operation
5 clc
6 clear all
7 close all
8 %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
9 %
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10 %%
Fuel Energy Properties
11
12 %Marine Diesel Oil
13
14 MDO_Gravimetric_Density = 45.6 ; %(MJ/Kg)
15 MDO_Volumetric_Density = 38.6 ; %(MJ/L)
16
17 %Hydrogen Fuel Cell (1)
18
19 HFC_Gravimetric_Density = 142
; %(MJ/Kg) Compressed at 700 bar
20 HFC_Volumetric_Density = 10 ; %(MJ/L)
21
22
23 %Liqified Nitrogen Gas
24
25 LNG_Gravimetric_Density = 55.2 ; %(MJ/Kg)
26 LNG_Volumetric_Density = 22.2 ; %(MJ/L)
27
28
29 %Ammonia Fuel [2]
30
31 Amm_Gravimetric_Density = 18.6 ; %(MJ/Kg)
32 Amm_Volumetric_Density = 11.5 ; %(MJ/L)
33
34 %Methanol
35
36 Met_Gravimetric_Density = 22.7 ; %(MJ/Kg)
37 Met_Volumetric_Density = 17.86 ; %(MJ/L)
38
39 %Plotting of Energy Density
40
41 Energy_Density = [HFC_Gravimetric_Density HFC_Volumetric_Density;
MDO_Gravimetric_Density MDO_Volumetric_Density;
LNG_Gravimetric_Density LNG_Volumetric_Density;
Met_Gravimetric_Density Met_Volumetric_Density;
Amm_Gravimetric_Density Amm_Volumetric_Density];
42 energy_desnity_figure=figure('Name', 'Energy Density');
43 b=bar(Energy_Density , 'EdgeColor',[0,0.2,0],'LineWidth',1.5);
44 set(gca,'XTickLabel', {'Hydrogen','MDO','LNG','Methanol','Ammonia'});
45 %set(gca, 'YTick', [0:25:150], 'YTickLabel ',[0:25:150]);
46 ylabel('Energy Density');
47 lgd=legend('Gravimetric Density (MJ/Kg)','Volumetric Density (MJ/L)');
48 lgd.FontSize = 12;
==PAGE:63==
B An Appendix -B
49
49 width = b.BarWidth;
50 for i=1:length(Energy_Density(:, 1))
51
row = Energy_Density(i, :);
52
offset = ((width) / length(row))/2;
53
x = linspace(i-offset, i+offset, length(row));
54
text(x,row,num2str(row'),'vert','bottom','horiz','center');
55 box off;
56 end
57 saveas(energy_desnity_figure , 'energydensity.png');
58
59 %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
60 %
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
61 %% Marine Diesel Oil
62
63 % Observed Data
64 MDO_BSFC=163; %g/KWh
65 MDO_CO_Emission= 0.35; %g/KWh
66 MDO_CO_2_Emission= 523; %g/KWh
67 MDO_NO_X_Emission= 13.6; %g/KWh
68 MDO_SO_2_Emission= 3.43; %g/KWh
69 MDO_HC_Emission= 0.50; %g/KWh
70 MDO_Particulates_Emission= 0.44; %g/KWh
71
72 %Plotting of MDO Fuel Performance
73
74 MDO_DATA = [MDO_BSFC ;MDO_CO_Emission; MDO_CO_2_Emission ;
MDO_NO_X_Emission;MDO_SO_2_Emission ; MDO_HC_Emission
;
MDO_Particulates_Emission];
75 MDO_DATA_image1=figure('Name', 'MDO Performance');
76 b=bar(MDO_DATA, 'EdgeColor',[0,0.2,0],'LineWidth',1.5);
77 set(gca,'XTickLabel', {'SFOC','CO','CO_2','NO_x','SO_2','HC','Particulates
'});
78 %set(gca, 'YTick', [0:25:150], 'YTickLabel ',[0:25:150]);
79 ylabel(' (g/KWh)');
80 %lgd=legend('Gravimetric Density (MJ/Kg)','Volumetric Density (MJ/L)');
81 %lgd.FontSize = 12;
82 title('Marine Diesel oil (MDO)');
83
84 width = b.BarWidth;
85 for i=1:length(MDO_DATA(:, 1))
86
row = MDO_DATA(i, :);
87
offset = ((width) / length(row))/15;
88
x = linspace(i-offset, i+offset, length(row));
89
text(x,row,num2str(row'),'vert','bottom','horiz','center');
90 box off;
91 end
92 saveas(MDO_DATA_image1 , 'MDODATA.png');
93 %
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
94 %% Hydrogen Fuel
95
96 % Observed Data
97
98 HE_LHV= 0.033333;
==PAGE:64==
50
B An Appendix -B
99 HE_efficiency=0.30;
100 HE_FC_efficiency=0.5;
101 HE_BSFC=round(1/(HE_efficiency*HE_LHV)); %g/KWh
102 HE_FC_BSFC= round(1/(HE_FC_efficiency*HE_LHV)); %g/KWh
103 HE_HC_Emission= 0.085; %g/KWh
104
105 %Plotting of Hydrogen Fuel Performance
106
107 HE_BSFC_Data = [HE_BSFC ;HE_FC_BSFC ;HE_HC_Emission];
108 HE_DATA_image1=figure('Name', 'Hydrogen Performance');
109 b=bar(HE_BSFC_Data , 'EdgeColor',[0,0.2,0],'LineWidth',1.5);
110 set(gca,'XTickLabel', {'SFC -IC','SGC -Fuell cell','HC'});
111 %set(gca,
'YTickLabel ',[0:90:550]);
112 ylabel(' (g/KWh)');
113 %lgd=legend('GraviHEetric Density (HEJ/Kg)','VoluHEetric Density (HEJ/L)')
;
114 %lgd.FontSize = 12;
115 title('Hydrogen Fuel');
116
117 width = b.BarWidth;
118 for i=1:length(HE_BSFC_Data(:, 1))
119
row = HE_BSFC_Data(i, :);
120
offset = ((width) / length(row))/15;
121
x = linspace(i-offset, i+offset, length(row));
122
text(x,row,num2str(row'),'vert','bottom','horiz','center');
123 box off;
124 end
125 saveas(HE_DATA_image1 , 'HEDATA.png')
126 %
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
127 %% LNG Fuel
128
129 % Observed Data
130
131 LNG_BSFC=155; %g/KWh
132 LNG_CO_Emission= 0.30; %g/KWh
133 LNG_CO_2_Emission= 426; %g/KWh
134 LNG_NO_X_Emission= 1.3; %g/KWh
135 LNG_HC_Emission= 0.50; %g/KWh
136 LNG_Particulates_Emission= 0.03; %g/KWh
137
138 %Plotting of LNG Fuel Performance
139
140 LNG_BSFC_Data = [LNG_BSFC ;LNG_CO_Emission; LNG_CO_2_Emission ;
LNG_NO_X_Emission
;LNG_HC_Emission ;LNG_Particulates_Emission];
141 LNG_DATA_image1=figure('Name', 'LNG Performance');
142 b=bar(LNG_BSFC_Data , 'EdgeColor',[0,0.2,0],'LineWidth',1.5);
143 set(gca,'XTickLabel', {'SFC','CO','CO_2','NO_x','HC','Particulates'});
144 ylabel(' (g/KWh)');
145 %lgd=legend('Gravimetric Density (MJ/Kg)','Volumetric Density (MJ/L)');
146 %lgd.FontSize = 12;
147 title('Liquified Natural Gas (LNG)');
148
149 width = b.BarWidth;
150 for i=1:length(LNG_BSFC_Data(:, 1))
151
row = LNG_BSFC_Data(i, :);
152
offset = ((width) / length(row))/15;
153
x = linspace(i-offset, i+offset, length(row));
==PAGE:65==
B An Appendix -B
51
154
text(x,row,num2str(row'),'vert','bottom','horiz','center');
155 box off;
156 end
157 saveas(LNG_DATA_image1 , 'LNGDATA.png');
158 %
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
159 %% Methanol Fuel
160
161 % Observed Data
162
163 Met_LHV= 0.005416667;
164 Met_efficiency=0.55;
165 Met_BSFC=round(1/(Met_efficiency*Met_LHV)); %g/KWh
166 Met_CO_Emission= 0.45; %g/KWh
167 Met_CO_2_Emission= 507; %g/KWh
168 Met_NO_X_Emission= 13; %g/KWh
169 Met_HC_Emission= 0.20; %g/KWh
170
171
172 % %Plotting of Methanol Fuel Performance
173
174 Met_BSFC_Data = [Met_BSFC ;Met_CO_Emission; Met_CO_2_Emission ;
Met_NO_X_Emission
;Met_HC_Emission];
175 Met_DATA_image1=figure('Name', 'Methanol Performance');
176 b=bar(Met_BSFC_Data , 'EdgeColor',[0,0.2,0],'LineWidth',1.5);
177 set(gca,'XTickLabel', {'SFC','CO','CO_2','NO_x','HC','Particulates'});
178 %set(gca,
'YTickLabel ',[0:90:550]);
179 ylabel(' (g/KWh)');
180 %lgd=legend('GraviMETetric Density (MetJ/Kg)','VoluMETetric Density (METJ/
L)');
181 %lgd.FontSize = 12;
182 title('Methanol');
183
184 width = b.BarWidth;
185 for i=1:length(Met_BSFC_Data(:, 1))
186
row = Met_BSFC_Data(i, :);
187
offset = ((width) / length(row))/15;
188
x = linspace(i-offset, i+offset, length(row));
189
text(x,row,num2str(row'),'vert','bottom','horiz','center');
190 box off;
191 end
192 saveas(Met_DATA_image1 , 'METDATA.png');
193 %
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
194 %% Ammonia Fuel
195
196 % Observed Data
197
198 Amm_LHV= 0.005166667;
199 Amm_efficiency=0.50;
200 Amm_BSFC=round(1/(Amm_efficiency*Amm_LHV)); %g/KWh
201 Dual_Fuel_AD_BSFC= Amm_BSFC; %Ammonia ans diesel
202 Amm_Diesel_CO_Emission= MDO_CO_Emission + (MDO_CO_Emission*0.66); %g/KWh
203 Amm_Diesel_CO_2_Emission=MDO_CO_2_Emission - (MDO_CO_2_Emission*0.58); %g/
KWh
204 Amm_Diesel_NO_X_Emission= MDO_NO_X_Emission + (MDO_NO_X_Emission*0.41); %g
/KWh
==PAGE:66==
52
B An Appendix -B
205 Amm_Diesel_HC_Emission= MDO_HC_Emission + (MDO_HC_Emission*0.83); %g/KWh
206 Amm_Diesel_Particulates_Emission = MDO_Particulates_Emission - (
MDO_Particulates_Emission*0.83); %g/KWh
207
208 %Plotting of Ammonia Fuel Performance
209
210 Amm_Diesel_BSFC_Data = [Dual_Fuel_AD_BSFC ;Amm_Diesel_CO_Emission;
Amm_Diesel_CO_2_Emission ;Amm_Diesel_NO_X_Emission
;
Amm_Diesel_HC_Emission; Amm_Diesel_Particulates_Emission];
211 Amm_Diesel_DATA_image1=figure('Name', 'Ammonia Performance');
212 b=bar(Amm_Diesel_BSFC_Data , 'EdgeColor',[0,0.2,0],'LineWidth',1.5);
213 set(gca,'XTickLabel', {'SFC','CO','CO_2','NO_x','HC','Particulates'});
214 %set(gca,
'YTickLabel ',[0:90:550]);
215 ylabel('(g/KWh)');
216 %lgd=legend('GraviAMM_DIESELetric Density (Amm_DieselJ/Kg)','
VoluAMM_DIESELetric Density (AMM_DIESELJ/L)');
217 %lgd.FontSize = 12;
218 title('Ammonia (60%) and Diesel (40%)');
219
220 width = b.BarWidth;
221 for i=1:length(Amm_Diesel_BSFC_Data(:, 1))
222
row = Amm_Diesel_BSFC_Data(i, :);
223
offset = ((width) / length(row))/15;
224
x = linspace(i-offset, i+offset, length(row));
225
text(x,row,num2str(row'),'vert','bottom','horiz','center');
226 box off;
227 end
228 saveas(Amm_Diesel_DATA_image1 , 'AMM_DIESELDATA.png');
229
230 %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
231 %
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
232 %% Tank Storage Volume For 200 hours of Journey with Constant Speed of
16.5 Knots
233
234 %MDO Storage
235
236 %Data
237 Power_Deadweight=20364; %Power Required to propel the deadweight
238 MDO_BSFC=163; %g/Kwh
239 MDO_Total_hours = 200;
240 MDO_SFC_Fcator= 1.03; %Specific fuel consumption factor
241 MDO_Expansion_factor=0.96;
242 MDO_Fuel_Density=846000; %g/m3
243
244 % Calculations
245 MDO_Total_Fuel_Consumption= MDO_BSFC * Power_Deadweight * MDO_Total_hours;
%in grams
246 MDO_Storage_Tank_Volume=round((MDO_SFC_Fcator*MDO_Total_Fuel_Consumption)
/(MDO_Expansion_factor*MDO_Fuel_Density)); %in m^3
247 %
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
248 % Hydrogen Storage
249
250 %Data
==PAGE:67==
B An Appendix -B
53
251 HE_Total_hours = 200;
252 HE_SFC_Fcator= 1.03; %Specific fuel consumption factor
253 HE_Expansion_factor=0.96;
254 HE_Fuel_Density=71000; %g/m3
255
256 % Calculations
257 HE_Total_Fuel_Consumption= HE_BSFC * Power_Deadweight* HE_Total_hours; %in
grams
258 HE_Storage_Tank_Volume=round((HE_SFC_Fcator*HE_Total_Fuel_Consumption)/(
HE_Expansion_factor*HE_Fuel_Density)); %in m^3
259
260 % Hydrogen Fuel cell
261
262 HE_Fuel_Cell_Fuel_Density=40000; %g/m3
263 HE_Fuel_Cell_Storage_Tank_Volume=round((HE_SFC_Fcator*
HE_Total_Fuel_Consumption)/(HE_Expansion_factor*
HE_Fuel_Cell_Fuel_Density)); %in m^3
264 %
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
265 % LNG Storage
266
267 %Data
268 LNG_Total_hours = 200;
269 LNG_SFC_Fcator= 1.03; %Specific fuel consumption factor
270 LNG_Expansion_factor=0.96;
271 LNG_Fuel_Density=428000; %g/m3
272
273 % Calculations
274 LNG_Total_Fuel_Consumption= LNG_BSFC * Power_Deadweight * LNG_Total_hours;
%in grams
275 LNG_Storage_Tank_Volume=round((LNG_SFC_Fcator*LNG_Total_Fuel_Consumption)
/(LNG_Expansion_factor*LNG_Fuel_Density)); %in m^3
276 %
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
277 % Methanol Storage
278
279 %Data
280 Met_Total_hours = 200;
281 Met_SFC_Fcator= 1.03; %Specific fuel consumption factor
282 Met_Expansion_factor=0.96;
283 Met_Fuel_Density=787000; %g/m3
284
285 % Calculations
286 Met_Total_Fuel_Consumption= Met_BSFC * Power_Deadweight * Met_Total_hours;
%in grams
287 Met_Storage_Tank_Volume=round((Met_SFC_Fcator*Met_Total_Fuel_Consumption)
/(Met_Expansion_factor*Met_Fuel_Density)); %in m^3
288 %
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
289 % Ammonia Storage
290
291 %Data
292 Amm_Total_hours = 200;
293 Amm_SFC_Fcator= 1.03; %Specific fuel consumption factor
294 Amm_Expansion_factor=0.96;
295 Amm_Fuel_Density=787000; %g/m3
==PAGE:68==
54
B An Appendix -B
296
297 % Calculations
298 Amm_Total_Fuel_Consumption= Amm_BSFC *Power_Deadweight * Amm_Total_hours;
%in grams
299 Amm_Storage_Tank_Volume=round((Amm_SFC_Fcator*Amm_Total_Fuel_Consumption)
/(Amm_Expansion_factor*Amm_Fuel_Density)); %in m^3
300 %
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
301 %Plotting of Storage Tank capacity
302
303 Storage_Tank_Volume = [MDO_Storage_Tank_Volume ; HE_Storage_Tank_Volume;
HE_Fuel_Cell_Storage_Tank_Volume; LNG_Storage_Tank_Volume;
Met_Storage_Tank_Volume; Amm_Storage_Tank_Volume];
304 Storage_image1=figure('Name', 'Storage Volume Capacity');
305 b=bar(Storage_Tank_Volume , 'EdgeColor',[0,0.2,0],'LineWidth',1.5);
306 set(gca,'XTickLabel', {'MDO','H_2-IC','Fuel Cell','LNG','Methanol','
Ammonia'});
307 %set(gca, 'YTick', [0:25:150], 'YTickLabel ',[0:25:150]);
308 ylabel('Storage
Tank
Volume
(m^3)');
309 %lgd=legend('Gravimetric Density (MJ/Kg)','Volumetric Density (MJ/L)');
310 %lgd.FontSize = 12;
311 title('Fuel Storage Tank Volume');
312 width = b.BarWidth;
313 for i=1:length(Storage_Tank_Volume(:, 1))
314
row = Storage_Tank_Volume(i, :);
315
offset = ((width) / length(row))/15;
316
x = linspace(i-offset, i+offset, length(row));
317
text(x,row,num2str(row'),'vert','bottom','horiz','center');
318 box off;
319 end
320 saveas(Storage_image1 , 'storagetank.png');
321
322 %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
323 %
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
324 %% Fuel Consumption Per Unit Deadweight Per Nautical Mile
325
326 Ship_speed=16.5; %In Knots
327 Power_Deadweight=20364; %KW
328 Capacity=12600; %containers
329 Deadweight=132300; %tons
330
331
332 %Fuel cell
333 HE_Fuel_Cell_LHV= 0.03333; %In KWh/g
334 HE_Fuel_Cell_efficiency=0.50;
335 HE_Fuel_Cell_BSFC=1/(HE_Fuel_Cell_efficiency*HE_Fuel_Cell_LHV); %g/KWh
336
337 %Ammonia
338 Amm_LHV= 0.0051667; %In KWh/g
339 Amm_efficiency=0.50;
340 Amm_BSFC_1=1/(Amm_efficiency*Amm_LHV); %g/KWh
341
342 %Calculations
343 MDO_Fuel_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*MDO_BSFC)/1000000; % t/hour
==PAGE:69==
B An Appendix -B
55
344 MDO_Fuel_consumption_nm=(MDO_Fuel_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %Fuel
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
345 MDO_Fuel_consumption_dwt=round((MDO_Fuel_consumption_nm*1000)); % Fuel
consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/nm
346
347 HE_Fuel_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*HE_BSFC)/1000000; % t/hour
348 HE_Fuel_consumption_nm=(HE_Fuel_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %Fuel
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
349 HE_Fuel_consumption_dwt=round((HE_Fuel_consumption_nm*1000)); % Fuel
consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/nm
350
351 HE_Fuel_Cell_Fuel_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*HE_Fuel_Cell_BSFC)
/1000000; % t/hour
352 HE_Fuel_Cell_Fuel_consumption_nm=(HE_Fuel_Cell_Fuel_consumption*1000)/
Ship_speed; %Fuel consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
353 HE_Fuel_Cell_Fuel_consumption_dwt=round((HE_Fuel_Cell_Fuel_consumption_nm
*1000)); % Fuel consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/
dwt/nm
354
355 LNG_Fuel_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*LNG_BSFC)/1000000; % t/hour
356 LNG_Fuel_consumption_nm=(LNG_Fuel_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %Fuel
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
357 LNG_Fuel_consumption_dwt=round((LNG_Fuel_consumption_nm*1000)); % Fuel
consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
358
359 Met_Fuel_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*Met_BSFC)/1000000; % t/hour
360 Met_Fuel_consumption_nm=(Met_Fuel_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %Fuel
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
361 Met_Fuel_consumption_dwt=round((Met_Fuel_consumption_nm*1000)); % Fuel
consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
362
363 Amm_Fuel_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*Amm_BSFC_1)/1000000; % t/hour
364 Amm_Fuel_consumption_nm=(Amm_Fuel_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %Fuel
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
365 Amm_Fuel_consumption_dwt=round((Amm_Fuel_consumption_nm*1000)); % Fuel
consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
366
367 Dual_Fuel_AD_Fuel_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*Dual_Fuel_AD_BSFC)
/1000000; % t/hour
368 Dual_Fuel_AD_Fuel_consumption_nm=(Dual_Fuel_AD_Fuel_consumption*1000)/
Ship_speed; %Fuel consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
369 Dual_Fuel_AD_Fuel_consumption_dwt=round((Dual_Fuel_AD_Fuel_consumption_nm
*1000)); % Fuel consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/
dwt/nm
370
371 %Plotting of Fuel Consumption
372 Fuel_consumption_mile = [MDO_Fuel_consumption_dwt ;
HE_Fuel_consumption_dwt; HE_Fuel_Cell_Fuel_consumption_dwt ;
LNG_Fuel_consumption_dwt; Met_Fuel_consumption_dwt;
Amm_Fuel_consumption_dwt; Dual_Fuel_AD_Fuel_consumption_dwt];
373 fuel_consumption_image1=figure('Name', 'Fuel Consumption');
374 b=bar(Fuel_consumption_mile , 'EdgeColor',[0,0.2,0],'LineWidth',1.5);
375 set(gca,'XTickLabel', {'MDO','H_2-IC', 'Fuel Cell','LNG','Methanol','
Ammonia','A & D'});
376 %set(gca, 'YTick', [0:25:150], 'YTickLabel ',[0:25:150]);
377 ylabel('Fuel Consumption
(g/nm)');
378 %lgd=legend('Gravimetric Density (MJ/Kg)','Volumetric Density (MJ/L)');
379 %lgd.FontSize = 12;
380 title('Fuel Consumption Per Nautical Mile');
==PAGE:70==
56
B An Appendix -B
381
382 width = b.BarWidth;
383 for i=1:length(Fuel_consumption_mile(:, 1))
384
row = Fuel_consumption_mile(i, :);
385
offset = ((width) / length(row))/15;
386
x = linspace(i-offset, i+offset, length(row));
387
text(x,row,num2str(row'),'vert','bottom','horiz','center');
388 box off;
389 end
390 saveas(fuel_consumption_image1 , 'totalconsumption.png');
391
392 %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
393 %
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
394 %% Distance Coverage for Tank Volume of 4546 m^3 (1 million gallons)
395
396
397 Total_Volume = 4546; % m^3 (Equivalent to 1 million gallon Diesel oil)
398
399 MDO_Density=846000; %g/m^3
400 HE_Density=71000; %g/m^3
401 HE_Fuel_Cell_Density=40000;
402 LNG_Density=428000; %g/m^3
403 Met_Density=787000; %g/m^3
404 Amm_Density=600000; %g/m^3
405 Amm_Diesel_Density=(MDO_Density*0.4)+(Amm_Density*0.6);
406
407 MDO_Total_Fuel=Total_Volume*MDO_Density; %g
408 HE_Total_Fuel=Total_Volume*HE_Density; %g
409 HE_Fuel_cell_Total_Fuel=Total_Volume*HE_Fuel_Cell_Density; %g
410 LNG_Total_Fuel=Total_Volume*LNG_Density; %g
411 Met_Total_Fuel=Total_Volume*Met_Density; %g
412 Amm_Total_Fuel=Total_Volume*Amm_Density; %g
413 Amm_Diesel_Total_Fuel=Total_Volume*Amm_Diesel_Density; %Kg
414
415 MDO_Distance_1=(MDO_Total_Fuel/MDO_Fuel_consumption_dwt); % nm
416 HE_Distance_1=(HE_Total_Fuel/HE_Fuel_consumption_dwt); % nm
417 HE_Fuel_Cell_Distance_1=(HE_Fuel_cell_Total_Fuel/
HE_Fuel_Cell_Fuel_consumption_dwt); % nm
418 LNG_Distance_1=(LNG_Total_Fuel/LNG_Fuel_consumption_dwt); % nm
419 Met_Distance_1=(Met_Total_Fuel/Met_Fuel_consumption_dwt); % nm
420 Amm_Distance_1=(Amm_Total_Fuel/Amm_Fuel_consumption_dwt); % nm
421 Amm_Diesel_Distance_1=(Amm_Diesel_Total_Fuel/
Dual_Fuel_AD_Fuel_consumption_dwt); % nm
422
423 % Rounding
424 MDO_Distance=round(MDO_Distance_1);
425 HE_Distance=round(HE_Distance_1);
426 HE_Fuel_Cell_Distance=round(HE_Fuel_Cell_Distance_1);
427 LNG_Distance=round(LNG_Distance_1);
428 Met_Distance=round(Met_Distance_1);
429 Amm_Distance=round(Amm_Distance_1);
430 Amm_Diesel_Distance=round(Amm_Diesel_Distance_1);
431
432 %Plotting of Distance Coverage
433 Distance_Coverage = [MDO_Distance ; HE_Distance; HE_Fuel_Cell_Distance;
==PAGE:71==
B An Appendix -B
57
LNG_Distance; Met_Distance; Amm_Distance; Amm_Diesel_Distance];
434 Distance_image1=figure('Name', 'Distance Coverage');
435 b=bar(Distance_Coverage , 'EdgeColor',[0,0.2,0],'LineWidth',1.5);
436 set(gca,'XTickLabel', {'MDO','H_2','Fuel Cell','LNG','Methanol','Ammonia',
'A & D'});
437 %set(gca, 'YTick', [0:25:150], 'YTickLabel ',[0:25:150]);
438 ylabel('Distance Coverage (Nautical Mile)');
439 %lgd=legend('Gravimetric Density (MJ/Kg)','Volumetric Density (MJ/L)');
440 %lgd.FontSize = 12;
441 title('Distance Coverage for Tank Volume of 4546 m^3');
442
443 width = b.BarWidth;
444 for i=1:length(Distance_Coverage(:, 1))
445
row = Distance_Coverage(i, :);
446
offset = ((width) / length(row))/15;
447
x = linspace(i-offset, i+offset, length(row));
448
text(x,row,num2str(row'),'vert','bottom','horiz','center');
449 box off;
450 end
451 saveas(Distance_image1 , 'Distance_coverage.png');
452
453 %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
454 %
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
455 %% CO2 Emission comparision
456
457 MDO_CO2_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*(MDO_CO_2_Emission))/1000000; % t/
hour
458 MDO_CO2_consumption_nm=(MDO_CO2_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %CO2
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
459 MDO_CO2_consumption_dwt=round(MDO_CO2_consumption_nm*1000); % CO2
consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
460
461 LNG_CO2_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*(LNG_CO_2_Emission))/1000000; % t/
hour
462 LNG_CO2_consumption_nm=(LNG_CO2_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %CO2
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
463 LNG_CO2_consumption_dwt=round(LNG_CO2_consumption_nm*1000); % CO2
consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
464
465 Met_CO2_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*(Met_CO_2_Emission))/1000000; % t/
hour
466 Met_CO2_consumption_nm=(Met_CO2_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %CO2
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
467 Met_CO2_consumption_dwt=round(Met_CO2_consumption_nm*1000); % CO2
consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
468
469 Amm_Diesel_CO2_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*(Amm_Diesel_CO_2_Emission))
/1000000; % t/hour
470 Amm_Diesel_CO2_consumption_nm=(Amm_Diesel_CO2_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed
; %CO2 consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
471 Amm_Diesel_CO2_consumption_dwt=round(Amm_Diesel_CO2_consumption_nm*1000);
% CO2 consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
472
473 %% NOX Emission comparision
474
==PAGE:72==
58
B An Appendix -B
475 MDO_NOX_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*mean(MDO_NO_X_Emission))/1000000; %
t/hour
476 MDO_NOX_consumption_nm=(MDO_NOX_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %NOX
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
477 MDO_NOX_consumption_dwt=round(MDO_NOX_consumption_nm*1000); % NOX
consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
478
479 LNG_NOX_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*mean(LNG_NO_X_Emission))/1000000; %
t/hour
480 LNG_NOX_consumption_nm=(LNG_NOX_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %NOX
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
481 LNG_NOX_consumption_dwt=round(LNG_NOX_consumption_nm*1000); % NOX
consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
482
483 Met_NOX_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*mean(Met_NO_X_Emission))/1000000; %
t/hour
484 Met_NOX_consumption_nm=(Met_NOX_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %NOX
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
485 Met_NOX_consumption_dwt=round(Met_NOX_consumption_nm*1000); % NOX
consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
486
487 Amm_Diesel_NOX_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*mean(Amm_Diesel_NO_X_Emission
))/1000000; % t/hour
488 Amm_Diesel_NOX_consumption_nm=(Amm_Diesel_NOX_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed
; %NOX consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
489 Amm_Diesel_NOX_consumption_dwt=round(Amm_Diesel_NOX_consumption_nm*1000);
% NOX consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
490
491 %% CO Emission comparision
492
493 MDO_CO_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*mean(MDO_CO_Emission))/1000000; % t/
hour
494 MDO_CO_consumption_nm=(MDO_CO_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %CO
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
495 MDO_CO_consumption_dwt=round(MDO_CO_consumption_nm*1000); % CO consumption
per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
496
497 LNG_CO_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*mean(LNG_CO_Emission))/1000000; % t/
hour
498 LNG_CO_consumption_nm=(LNG_CO_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %CO
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
499 LNG_CO_consumption_dwt=round(LNG_CO_consumption_nm*1000); % CO consumption
per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
500
501 Met_CO_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*mean(Met_CO_Emission))/1000000; % t/
hour
502 Met_CO_consumption_nm=(Met_CO_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %CO
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
503 Met_CO_consumption_dwt=round(Met_CO_consumption_nm*1000); % CO consumption
per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
504
505 Amm_Diesel_CO_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*mean(Amm_Diesel_CO_Emission))
/1000000; % t/hour
506 Amm_Diesel_CO_consumption_nm=(Amm_Diesel_CO_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed;
%CO consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
507 Amm_Diesel_CO_consumption_dwt=round(Amm_Diesel_CO_consumption_nm*1000); %
CO consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
508 %% HC Emission comparision
509
==PAGE:73==
B An Appendix -B
59
510 MDO_HC_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*mean(MDO_HC_Emission))/1000000; % t/
hour
511 MDO_HC_consumption_nm=(MDO_HC_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %HC
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
512 MDO_HC_consumption_dwt=round(MDO_HC_consumption_nm*1000);
513
514 HE_HC_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*mean(HE_HC_Emission))/1000000; % t/
hour
515 HE_HC_consumption_nm=(HE_HC_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %HC consumption
per nautical mile in kg/nm
516 HE_HC_consumption_dwt=round(HE_HC_consumption_nm*1000); % HC consumption
per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
517
518 LNG_HC_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*mean(LNG_HC_Emission))/1000000; % t/
hour
519 LNG_HC_consumption_nm=(LNG_HC_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %HC
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
520 LNG_HC_consumption_dwt=round(LNG_HC_consumption_nm*1000); % HC consumption
per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
521
522 Met_HC_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*mean(Met_HC_Emission))/1000000; % t/
hour
523 Met_HC_consumption_nm=(Met_HC_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %HC
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
524 Met_HC_consumption_dwt=round(Met_HC_consumption_nm*1000); % HC consumption
per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
525
526 Amm_Diesel_HC_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*mean(Amm_Diesel_HC_Emission))
/1000000; % t/hour
527 Amm_Diesel_HC_consumption_nm=(Amm_Diesel_HC_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed;
%HC consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
528 Amm_Diesel_HC_consumption_dwt=round(Amm_Diesel_HC_consumption_nm*1000); %
HC consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
529
530 %% Particulates Emission comparision
531
532 MDO_Particulates_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*mean(
MDO_Particulates_Emission))/1000000; % t/hour
533 MDO_Particulates_consumption_nm=(MDO_Particulates_consumption*1000)/
Ship_speed; %PARTICULATES consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
534 MDO_Particulates_consumption_dwt=round(MDO_Particulates_consumption_nm
*1000); % PARTICULATES consumption per ton deadweight per nautical
mile in g/dwt/nm
535
536 LNG_Particulates_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*mean(
LNG_Particulates_Emission))/1000000; % t/hour
537 LNG_Particulates_consumption_nm=(LNG_Particulates_consumption*1000)/
Ship_speed; %PARTICULATES consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
538 LNG_Particulates_consumption_dwt=round(LNG_Particulates_consumption_nm
*1000); % PARTICULATES consumption per ton deadweight per nautical
mile in g/dwt/nm
539
540 Amm_Diesel_Particulates_consumption=(Power_Deadweight*mean(
Amm_Diesel_Particulates_Emission))/1000000; % t/hour
541 Amm_Diesel_Particulates_consumption_nm=(
Amm_Diesel_Particulates_consumption*1000)/Ship_speed; %PARTICULATES
consumption per nautical mile in kg/nm
542 Amm_Diesel_Particulates_consumption_dwt=round(
Amm_Diesel_Particulates_consumption_nm*1000); % PARTICULATES
==PAGE:74==
60
B An Appendix -B
consumption per ton deadweight per nautical mile in g/dwt/nm
543
544 %Plotting
545
546 %For matrix match
547 HE_CO2_consumption_dwt=0;
548 HE_NOX_consumption_dwt=0;
549 HE_CO_consumption_dwt=0;
550 HE_Particulates_consumption_dwt=0;
551 Met_Particulates_consumption_dwt=0;
552
553 %Other Emissions
554 Emission_Comparision = [
MDO_CO_consumption_dwt MDO_HC_consumption_dwt
MDO_Particulates_consumption_dwt;
HE_CO_consumption_dwt
HE_HC_consumption_dwt HE_Particulates_consumption_dwt;
LNG_CO_consumption_dwt LNG_HC_consumption_dwt
LNG_Particulates_consumption_dwt;
Met_CO_consumption_dwt
Met_HC_consumption_dwt Met_Particulates_consumption_dwt ;
Amm_Diesel_CO_consumption_dwt
Amm_Diesel_HC_consumption_dwt Amm_Diesel_Particulates_consumption_dwt
];
555 Emission_Comparision_image=figure('Name', 'Emission Compariosn');
556 Emission_b=bar(Emission_Comparision , 'EdgeColor',[0,0.2,0],'LineWidth'
,1.5);
557 set(gca,'XTickLabel', {'MDO','Hydrogen','LNG','Methanol','Ammonia'});
558 %set(gca, 'YTick', [0:25:150], 'YTickLabel ',[0:25:150]);
559 ylabel('Fuel Emissions (g/nm)');
560 lgd1=legend('CO','HC','PM','Location','northwest');
561 lgd.FontSize = 12;
562 title('Fuel Emissions Per Nautical Mole');
563 width1 = Emission_b.BarWidth;
564 for j=1:length(Emission_Comparision(:, 1))
565
row1 =Emission_Comparision(j, :);
566
offset1 = ((width1) / length(row1)/1.1);
567
x1 = linspace(j-offset1, j+offset1, length(row1));
568
text(x1,row1,num2str(row1'),'vert','bottom','horiz','center');
569 box off;
570 end
571 saveas(Emission_Comparision_image , 'EmissionCompariosion.png');
572
573 %CO_2 & NO_x
574 Emission_main_Comparision = [MDO_CO2_consumption_dwt
MDO_NOX_consumption_dwt ;
HE_CO2_consumption_dwt
HE_NOX_consumption_dwt ;
LNG_CO2_consumption_dwt
LNG_NOX_consumption_dwt ;
Met_CO2_consumption_dwt
Met_NOX_consumption_dwt ;
Amm_Diesel_CO2_consumption_dwt Amm_Diesel_NOX_consumption_dwt];
575 Emission_main_Comparision_image=figure('Name', 'Primary Emission
Compariosn');
576 Emission_main_b=bar(Emission_main_Comparision , 'EdgeColor',[0,0.2,0],'
LineWidth',1.5);
577 set(gca,'XTickLabel', {'MDO','Hydrogen','LNG','Methanol','Ammonia'});
578 %set(gca, 'YTick', [0:25:150], 'YTickLabel ',[0:25:150]);
579 ylabel('Fuel Emissions (g/nm)');
580 lgd2=legend('CO_2','NO_x');
581 lgd.FontSize = 12;
582 title('Fuel Emissions Per Nautical Mole');
583 width1 = Emission_main_b.BarWidth;
584 for k=1:length(Emission_main_Comparision(:, 1))
==PAGE:75==
B An Appendix -B
61
585
row2 =Emission_main_Comparision(k, :);
586
offset2 = ((width1) / length(row2))/2;
587
x2 = linspace(k-offset2, k+offset2, length(row2));
588
text(x2,row2,num2str(row2'),'vert','bottom','horiz','center');
589 box off;
590 end
591 saveas(Emission_main_Comparision_image , 'Emission_main_Compariosion.png');
592
593 %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
594 %END
595 %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
Thesis_Matlab_Script.m
==PAGE:76==
62
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1]
IPCC. Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working
Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. Fifth Assessment Report. Cambridge University
Press, 2014. isbn: 9789291691432.
[2]
IPCC. Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Fifth Assess-
ment Report. Cambridge University Press, 2014, page 1454. isbn: 9781107654815.
[3]
IMO. Sulphur 2020. June 5, 2018. url: http://www.imo.org/en/MediaCentre/
HotTopics/Pages/Sulphur-2020.aspx.
[4]
Haifeng Wang, Dahai Liu, and Guilin Dai. “Review of maritime transporta-
tion air emission pollution and policy analysis”. In: Journal of Ocean Uni-
versity of China 8.3 (2009), pages 283–290. issn: 16725182.
[5]
International Chamber of Shipping. Shipping and world trade. June 5, 2018.
url: http://www.ics-shipping.org/shipping-facts/shipping-and-
world-trade.
[6]
International Maritime Organisation. Introduction to IMO. June 5, 2018.
url: http://www.imo.org/en/About/Pages/Default.aspx.
[7]
Naya Olmer et al. “Greenhouse Gas Emissions From Global Shipping, 2013-
2015”. In: October (2017).
[8]
M. A. Russo et al. “Shipping emissions over Europe: A state-of-the-art and
comparative analysis”. In: Atmospheric Environment 177 (2018), pages 187–
194. issn: 18732844.
[9]
Le Treut et al. “Historical Overview of Climate Change Science”. In: Earth
Chapter 1.October (2007), pages 93–127. issn: 00380717. doi: 10.1016/j.
soilbio.2010.04.001.
[10]
Wikipedia. Paris Agreement. June 5, 2018. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Paris_Agreement.
[11]
Øyvind Endresen. “Emission from international sea transportation and en-
vironmental impact”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research 108.D17 (2003),
page 4560. issn: 0148-0227. doi: 10.1029/2002JD002898. url: http://doi.
wiley.com/10.1029/2002JD002898.
[12]
Wikipedia. Maritime Transport. June 5, 2018. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Maritime_transport.
==PAGE:78==
64
Bibliography
[13]
Sharda. Different types of marine propulsion used in the system. June 5, 2018.
url: https://www.marineinsight.com/main-engine/different-types-
of-marine-propulsion-systems-used-in-the-shipping-world/.
[14]
T.W.P Smith et al. “CO2 Emissions from International Shipping: Possible
reduction targets and their associated pathways”. In: (2016), page 61. issn:
1537-5781. doi: 10.1002/yd.20075.
[15]
Hans Otto Kristensen and Harry Bingham. “Manual for the SHIP-DESMO
computer program for exhaust gas emission calculations for container ships”.
In: 2016 (2017).
[16]
Hans Otto Kristensen and Harry B. Bingham. SHIP-DESMO-Container
Ship. url: https://gitlab.gbar.dtu.dk/oceanwave3d/Ship-Desmo.
[17]
Dimitris Argyros et al. “Global Marine Fuel Trends 2030”. In: Mari-Tech:
Breaking Waves - A New Marine Era (2014), page 60.
[18]
Fuels Europe. Global marine fuel consumption. June 6, 2018. url: https:
//www.fuelseurope.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/Graphs_FUELS_
EUROPE-_2017_-16.pdf.
[19]
Wikipedia. Energy Density. June 5, 2018. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Energy_density.
[20]
x-engineer.org. Brake Specific Fuel Consumption (BSFC). June 5, 2018. url:
https://x-engineer.org/automotive-engineering/internal-combustion-
engines/performance/brake-specific-fuel-consumption-bsfc/.
[21]
John A Turner. “Sustainable Hydrogen Production Processes”. In: 305.Au-
gust (2017), pages 972–975. doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 319- 41616- 8. url:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-41616-8.
[22]
Agus Haryanto et al. “Current status of hydrogen production techniques by
steam reforming of ethanol: A review”. In: Energy and Fuels 19.5 (2005),
pages 2098–2106. issn: 08870624. doi: 10.1021/ef0500538.
[23]
ENGBOOK. Hydrogen Production Process. June 19, 2018. url: http://
www.enggbook.com/trending/production-hydrogen-fuel/attachment/
hydrogen-production-process-700x523px/.
[24]
Seediek Arab Academy. “The hydrogen-fuelled internal combustion engines
for marine applications with a case study”. In: 66.November 2016 (2015).
[25]
Dariusz Owierkowicz and Małgorzata Malinowska. “The future of the fuel
in the marine industry”. In: 76 (2017), pages 136–148.
[26]
Stefano Frigo and Roberto Gentili. “Analysis of the behaviour of a 4-stroke
Si engine fuelled with ammonia and hydrogen”. In: International Journal
of Hydrogen Energy 38.3 (2013), pages 1607–1615. issn: 03603199. doi: 10.
1016/j.ijhydene.2012.10.114. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2012.10.114.
[27]
The motor ship. Cutting through the hydrogen hype. June 19, 2018. url: http:
//www.motorship.com/news101/fuels-and-oils/cutting-through-the-
hydrogen-hype.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
65
[28]
DNV-GL. “Study on the use of Fuel Cells in Shipping”. In: (2017).
[29]
Tutor Vista. Hydrogen Fuel. June 19, 2018. url: https : / / chemistry .
tutorvista.com/physical-chemistry/hydrogen-fuel.html.
[30]
Qijun Tang et al. “Performance improvement of liquefied natural gas (LNG)
engine through intake air supply”. In: Applied Thermal Engineering 103
(2016), pages 1351–1361. issn: 13594311. doi: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.
2016.05.031. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.
2016.05.031.
[31]
Us Doe. “Liquefied Natural Gas: Understanding the Basic Facts”. In: Depart-
ment of Energy, USA (2005), page 24. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-397189-
0.00039-2.
[32]
Satish Kumar et al. “LNG: An eco-friendly cryogenic fuel for sustainable de-
velopment”. In: Applied Energy 88.12 (2011), pages 4264–4273. issn: 03062619.
doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2011.06.035. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.apenergy.2011.06.035.
[33]
L Bromberg and W K Cheng. “Options for sustainable and / or energy-secure
transportation”. In: 4000096701 (2010), page 78.
[34]
www.zoombd24.com. LNG Production Process Flow. June 17, 2018. url:
http : / / www . zoombd24 . com / /wp - content / uploads / 2015 / 04 / LNG -
process-flow-diagram.png.
[35]
Francesco Dalena et al. Methanol Production and Applications: An Overview.
Elsevier B.V., 2017, pages 3–28. isbn: 9780444640109. doi: 10.1016/B978-
0-444-63903-5.00001-7. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-
444-63903-5.00001-7.
[36]
Ministry of Energy and Trinidad Energy Industries. Methanol. June 21, 2018.
url: http://www.energy.gov.tt/our-business/lng-petrochemicals/
petrochemicals/methanol/.
[37]
Cengiz Deniz and Burak Zincir. “Environmental and economical assessment
of alternative marine fuels”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 113 (2016),
pages 438–449. issn: 09596526. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.11.089.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.11.089.
[38]
René Sejer Laursen. “The dual fuel engine designed for operation on methanol”.
In: (2017). url: http://www.methanol.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/
06/Rene-Laursen-Methanol-Vessel-Fuel-Blending-.pdf.
[39]
Marine Methanol. “Engine technology High pressure diesel cycle combustion”.
In: ().
[40]
M. Bahattin Çelik, Bülent Özdalyan, and Faruk Alkan. “The use of pure
methanol as fuel at high compression ratio in a single cylinder gasoline en-
gine”. In: Fuel 90.4 (2011), pages 1591–1598. issn: 00162361. doi: 10.1016/
j.fuel.2010.10.035.
[41]
Wikipedia. Ammonia. June 19, 2018. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Ammonia.
==PAGE:80==
66
Bibliography
[42]
Dr Ravi Kishore P. Why ammonia is toxic to the body. June 19, 2018. url:
https://biochemistrymedicine.wordpress.com/2014/06/28/why-is-
ammonia-toxic-to-the-body/.
[43]
The business journals. Global Ammonia Production Capacity to 2020. June 19,
2018. url: https://www.bizjournals.com/prnewswire/press_releases/
2015/01/22/MN13635.
[44]
Yusuf Bicer et al. “Comparative life cycle assessment of various ammonia pro-
duction methods”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 135 (2016), pages 1379–
1395. issn: 09596526. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.07.023.
[45]
Lumen. Zero Order Reactions. June 19, 2018. url: https : / / courses .
lumenlearning.com/introchem/chapter/zero-order-reactions/5.
[46]
Stefano Frigo and Roberto Gentili. “Analysis of the behaviour of a 4-stroke
Si engine fuelled with ammonia and hydrogen”. In: International Journal
of Hydrogen Energy 38.3 (2013), pages 1607–1615. issn: 03603199. doi: 10.
1016/j.ijhydene.2012.10.114. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2012.10.114.
[47]
Aaron J. Reiter and Song Charng Kong. “Combustion and emissions charac-
teristics of compression-ignition engine using dual ammonia-diesel fuel”. In:
Fuel 90.1 (2011), pages 87–97. issn: 00162361. doi: 10.1016/j.fuel.2010.
07.055. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2010.07.055.
[48]
Alan Ingham. “Reducing the Carbon Intensity of Methanol for Use as a
Transport Fuel”. In: Johnson Matthey Technology Review 61.4 (2017), pages 297–
307. issn: 2056-5135. doi: 10.1595/205651317X696216. url: http://www.
ingentaconnect.com/content/10.1595/205651317X696216.
[49]
Wikipedia. Energy Density. June 17, 2018. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Energy_density.
[50]
Wikipedia. Flammability Limits. June 17, 2018. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Flammability_limit.
[51]
The engineering tool box. Fuels - Higher and Lower Calorific Values. June 17,
2018. url: https : / / www . engineeringtoolbox . com / fuels - higher -
calorific-values-d_169.html.
[52]
Henry Brandhorst et al. “Ammonia – It ’ s Transformation and Effective Uti-
lization”. In: 6th International Energy Conversion Engineering Conference,
IECEC July (2008), pages 28–30.
[53]
Neutrium. Specific Energy and Energy Density of Fuels. June 17, 2018. url:
https://neutrium.net/properties/specific- energy- and- energy-
density-of-fuels/.
[54]
The engineering tool box. Gaseous Fuels and their Chemical Composition.
June 17, 2018. url: https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/chemical-
composition-gaseous-fuels-d_1142.html.
[55]
Dr.Song-Charng Kong. Developing Fuel Injection Strategies for Using Am-
monia in Direct Injection Diesel Engines. June 17, 2018. url: https://
nh3fuelassociation . org / wp - content / uploads / 2012 / 05 / veltman _
kong_fuelinjection09.pdf.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
67
[56]
The engineering tool box. Boiling Points for common Liquids and Gases.
June 17, 2018. url: https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/boiling-
points-fluids-gases-d_155.html.
[57]
Global Combustion System. Oil Fuel properties. June 17, 2018. url: http:
//www.globalcombustion.com/oil-fuel-properties/.
[58]
Liquefied gas carrier. Physical properties and composition of LNG. June 17,
2018. url: http://www.liquefiedgascarrier.com/LNG.html.
[59]
US Department of Agriculture. Physical and Chemical Properties. June 17,
2018. url: http://www.mda.state.mn.us/chemicals/spills/ammoniaspills/
properties.aspx.
==PAGE:82==
