==PAGE:1==
0
 
M.Sc. Thesis 
Master of Science in Engineering 
 
 
 
The challenge related to the rapid 
digitalization in service systems 
 
Jouliana Marjane Afroukh – s163064 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
2
Master Thesis 
Technical University of Denmark, DTU 
M.Sc. in Design and Innovation  
 
Project Title:  
The challenge related to the rapid digitalization 
in service systems. 
 
 
ECTS:  
 
 
30 
 
Author:  
 
 
Jouliana Marjane Afroukh 
 
Supervisor:  
 
Kristian Borch (Krbo@DTU.dk) 
 
Thesis Period:   
January 22nd 2018 - June 22nd 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
3
Summary 
The thesis focuses on the ability for Telenor to differentiate by using digitalization, without 
compromising the customer satisfaction. In the very rapidly changing environment in the 
telecommunication industry it is important to be able to adapt and recreate or renew their 
strategic capabilities. The telecommunication company is providing more or less the same 
service and products for all customers, which will not create any sustained competitive 
advantage for them. in order to obtain the sustained competitive advantage, they will have to 
differentiate and thereby also create value. Telenor slowly trying to become a digital service 
provider and differentiate on delivering excellent service to its customers around the clock. 
This is done by the implementation of a chatbot, which in turns will be tested on their smaller 
owned company CBB. The chatbot only has the ability to answer on simple questions and 
does not create any personal experience for the customers. The aim for most A.I. machines, 
are to create a chatbot that resembles a human very closely, which can be done by developing 
the chatbot to use both structured and unstructured data. The normal non-human like chatbot, 
uses NLP and structured data, so in order for the chatbot to become more advanced, it has to 
use a combination of the two data types. This will differentiate Telenor and CBB and in turns 
create a sustained competitive advantage or them.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
4
Preface 
This Master Thesis is written in a five month period from January 22nd to June 22nd, as a 
finalisation of a five-year- long engineering degree.  
 
I have always been interesting in the topic of new developments and very fascinated about 
how the world is becoming more and more digitized. While I was writing this thesis I came 
across a quote that stated that the question of what is digitized is irrelevant for the next 
generation and it is only the people who has lived in the transition age, that will question it. 
This quote explains exactly why I’m so interested in this development, as we are the 
generation that is going through this transition age of becoming digital. The question of how 
much can become digital and how far it can go is one of the reasons why I chose to write 
about this specific topic. My learning experience will not end after this thesis is handed in, it 
will continue to develop as this is only the beginning of a great ending.  
 
I would like to acknowledge the people who contributed greatly to the success of this Thesis:  
First I would like to thank my supervisor Kristian Borch for the continuous support before 
and while writing my thesis. It has been a pleasure to discuss my thesis with you and get the 
help, guidance and constructive feedback that I needed to get through this. He created a better 
experience for me to write my thesis and kept me calm throughout the five months. Secondly, 
I would also like to thank the Project Manager of CBB, which has help me with all of my 
questions regarding their company and to taking time to be interviewed.  
  
 
 
 
 
__________________________________ 
Jouliana Marjane Afroukh 
Date: 22.06.2018 
 
==PAGE:6==
5
Reading Guidance 
The thesis is build up with six main chapters, in which there will be an introduction and a sub 
conclusion for each chapter. except for the last chapter as it provides the conclusion and 
future research. The first introduction to the thesis is provided in the summary, which 
summarizes this thesis. A preface, which includes the acknowledgement of the influencers 
throughout the process of writing this thesis. The last chapter as mentioned, will consist of 
the conclusion and future research/recommendations. Finally the references are placed at the 
end of the thesis. The six main chapters are as follow:  
 
Introduction: This chapter will introduce the topic of the rapid change in the 
telecommunication companies and how it is handled by telenor and CBB. Further, the 
research questions and the sub research question will be introduced in this chapter as well.   
Litteratur review: This chapter will review the litteratur used for relevant information to 
carry out this thesis. First the technology management framework will be introduced, then a 
general study of strategy, followed by competitive advantage and strategic capabilities as 
well as dynamic capabilities. Finally litteratur related to the digital research has been stated, 
Artificial intelligence, Digitalization in telecommunication companies and at last A.I.-
powered chatbots. It has to be noted that both old and new litteratur has been reviewed.   
Methods: This chapter gives an overview of the methods used to analyse throughout the 
thesis, which is firstly the case study method, followed by the Quadric framework, dynamic 
Capabilities and finally the horizons framework. 
Results: This chapter will use the methods to analyse and examine Telenor and CBB. 
Further, the research question will be answered as well as the sub-research questions, which 
helped create and understanding of the main research question.  
Discussion: This chapter will discuss the main research question and the sub research 
questions.  
Conclusion  and Future Research: This will provide a comprehensive conclusion in which 
the main research question will be answered. Finally the section will end with the section 
stating the future research.   
The appendix is placed as a seperate part of the thesis, in which references can be found 
through the thesis, such as the Gantt Chart for the project plan and a transcripted interview.    
==PAGE:7==
6
Table of content 
Introduction 
8 
1.1 Research questions 
9 
Literaturereview 
10 
2.1 Technology management 
10 
2.2 Strategy 
12 
2.3 Competitive Advantage 
13 
2.4 Strategic Capabilities 
14 
2.5 Dynamic capabilities 
14 
2.6 Artificial Intelligence 
15 
2.7 Digitalization in telecommunication companies 
17 
2.8 AI- powered Chatbots 
19 
Methods 
22 
3.3 Dynamic capabilities 
27 
3.4 The three Horizons framework 
28 
Results 
30 
4.1 Telenor differentiation strategy 
31 
4.1.1 Telenors History 
31 
4.1.2 Competitive environment 
31 
4.1.3 The positioning Strategy of Telenor 
33 
4.2 Telenor’s daughter company 
36 
4.2.1 CBB’s Mobile 
36 
4.2.2 NPS customer satisfaction 
37 
4.2.3 CBB’s Chatbot Roberta 
39 
4.2.4 Customer satisfaction 
41 
4.3 Strategic capabilities 
43 
4.3.1 Technology Scanning 
43 
4.3.2 The three Horizons framework 
47 
4.3.3 The capability of CBB 
47 
4.3.4 CBB as a dynamic capability 
49 
Discussion 
51 
6.1 Conclusion 
56 
6.2 Future research 
57 
Referencer 
59 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
7
 
List of Tables and Figures 
Figure 1: Technology management framework 
Figure 2: Chatbot Architecture 
Figure 3: Quadric Framework Method 
Figure 4, The Three Horizons framework Method 
Figure 5: Quadric Framework 
Figure 6: Net Promoter Score (NPS) 
Figure 7: Chatbot results 
Figure 8: Likes vs. Dislikes 
Figure 9: Feedback score 
Figure 10: The Three Horizon framework 
 
 
Table 1: Competitive environment 
Table 2: NPS calculation 
Table 3: Technology scanning 
Table 4: Strategic capabilities of CBB 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
8
Chapter 1       
Introduction 
“The telecommunication industry sits at the core of the digital revolution and is taking over 
the industry quick.” - Stephan Gatien 
 
The telecommunication industry is rapidly changing into a digitalized industry and it will not 
be long before all organizations will need to follow the change in one way or another. The 
rapid changing environment is unpredictable and it is important for organizations to have the 
ability to adapt to changes as fast as possible. In order for organizations to create value and 
obtain a sustained competitive advantage, they will need to differentiate themselves from 
their competitors. As it looks today, the organizations in the telecommunication industry 
provides their customers with more or less the same value. They do not provide anything 
extraordinary, which will draw in customers to their organization more than its competitors.  
If they do not differentiate, they will in the long-term most likely decline in terms of value 
and profit for the organization. Thus, the organization has to differentiate and focus on what 
they do best.  
 
Telenor is the second largest telecommunication company in denmark out of three, and holds 
approximately 1.8 million danish mobile subscribers. They own a smaller company named 
CBB, which holds approximately 600.000 of their mobile subscribers. Telenor’s focus is to 
provide excellent service for customers, which in turns is the same focus for CBB, as they 
both use the same strategy. Telenor is trying to differentiate themselves by providing a 
service, their competitors does not provide, i.e. by providing a digital service by the use of a 
chatbot. This will be tested at CBB first, as they have a smaller customer base than Telenor 
and will lower the risk of damage in case the project fails. Thus far, the chatbot is only able to 
answer on simple and basic questions. If they want to differentiate and create more value, 
they have to improve the features of the chatbot and create a more advanced chatbot. The aim 
for most chatbots is to resemble a human employee as close as possible, which is more 
personalized and recognizes the customers. CBB does not have the capabilities to develop 
==PAGE:10==
9
this chatbot themselves, but they do have the capabilities to collaborate with an external 
company, which can help them create it. The question is just how far they can develop the 
chatbot and create a human resembled employee without compromising the customer 
satisfaction?    
 
1.1 Research questions  
The main research question of this thesis has been answered by the help of the sub-research 
questions and is stated as follow:  
 
How can digitalisation be a differentiator without compromising customer 
satisfaction? 
 
To answer the main research question, three sub-research questions were created to guide the 
answers in the right direction. The sub-research questions are as follow:  
How can digitalization differentiate Telenor and create a strong position so they 
remain strong positioned with their customer satisfaction?  
To answer this question a brief history of Telenor was provided and there competitive environment 
was analysed. Next the Quadric framework will give a clear overview of where Telenor has 
positioned themselves among its competitors and how its core idea results as a differentiation factor in 
the telecommunication industry.   
What is the customer satisfaction and how is it measured?  
To answer this question an analysis of the customer satisfaction measuring methods were 
evaluated.  
Can the strategic capability describe what digitalization does? 
 To answer this question an analysis of the Horizon framework was done to showed where 
the chatbot created by CBB, could be positioned and its potential for a further development.  
This then provided an understanding of the capabilities CBB has and how they can use them 
to differentiate themselves. Further, CBB as a dynamic capability was evaluated and 
analysed. Finally, a technology scanning was done in order to evaluate which other possible 
chatbots are on the market and how could CBB take advantage of them.  
  
==PAGE:11==
10 
Chapter 2   
Literaturereview 
This chapter provides a profound review of the literature used to evaluate the relevant topics 
within the thesis.  
Technology management and strategic management will be the first topics to be reviewed as 
they are the core focus of this thesis, as this thesis evaluates how existing and new 
technologies are managed by an organization, as well as maintain a stream of products or 
services to the market. Further, a review of competitive advantage, strategic capabilities and 
dynamic capabilities follow. Finally, the topic of digitalization used in service will be 
reviewed where litteratur about Artificial Intelligence, digitalization in telecommunication 
companies and A.I. powered Chatbots will be reviewed.  
 
The litteratur review is conducted through DTU Findit, Scopus and ResearchGate, in which 
keywords was used to find the right litterature. Further books and articles as not much 
literature could be found about certain topics. It should be noted that both new and earlier 
literature was obtained, with the strive to to use litteratur that has not been radically changed.   
  
2.1 Technology management  
Technology management (TM) focuses on both new and existing technologies and how they 
are managed, as well as how to maintain a stream of products or services to the market. TM is 
defined to be a process, which includes planning, directing, controlling and coordinating the 
development and implementation of technological capabilities to accomplish the strategic and 
operational objectives of the organization [1]. The technology management framework, see 
Figure 1 has been developed to support practical and theoretical understanding of how to 
manage technological innovation. 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
11 
 
Figur 1 Technology Management Framework 
  
 
In the core of the framework, the technology base of the company is placed, which represents 
the technology knowledge, competences and capabilities that support the development and 
delivery of competitive products and services, and other organizational goals. [2] 
Surrounding the technology base is where the five technology management processes 
(ISAEP) operates, which supports the generation and exploitation of the organisations 
technologies. The five technology management processes are as follows:  
 
- 
Identification of technologies that are not currently part of the firm’s technology base, 
but may be important in the future (e.g. by attending conferences, reading journals, 
visiting trade fairs, questioning suppliers, conducting pure research, etc.) [3] 
- 
Selection of those technologies that the firm needs for its future products and 
technologies (e.g. by using portfolio-type methods, expert judgement, pilot studies, 
financial  methods etc.) [4] 
- 
Acquisition of the technologies that have been selected (e.g. by R&D, licensing, 
purchase of equipment, hiring of staff, acquisition of firms, etc.) [5] 
- 
Exploitation of the technologies that have been acquired (e.g. by incorporating into 
products and services, licensing, etc.) [6] 
- 
Protection (e.g. by legal means such as patenting, contracts, trademarks, copyright, 
together with security measures, retention of key staff, etc.) [7] 
==PAGE:13==
12 
The three most important business processes are, strategy, innovation and operations (SIO), 
which are also to be found in the center of the framework. It is stated by Farrukh et al. “(...) 
these are the focus of management and action in the business, and the means for ensuring 
sustainable productive output of the firm.”[8], which essentially is the reason why these three 
core business processes are important. The pull seen on the right side of the framework is to 
ensure business and market requirements are understood in the product and technology 
levels. Further, the push on the left side of the framework is to ensure that technological 
capabilities are understood at the product and business levels. To ensure an effective 
technology management, the push and the pull has to be in balance. Farrukh et al. states “The 
potential competitive advantage of technological resources can only be fully realised if the 
knowledge flows between the elements of the framework are efficient and effective, creating a 
technological capability”[9]. Thus, to achieve and obtain a competitive advantage the 
company has to obtain a technological capability which in essence is the capacity of  the 
resource team to perform a task or activity.    
 
2.2 Strategy 
Strategy has been researched by many scholars, which has resulted in different definitions of 
the term. John et al. defines strategy as “The long-term direction of an organization”[10], 
while Alfred Chandler defines it as “The determination of the long-run goals and objectives 
of an enterprise and the adoption of courses of action and the allocation of resource 
necessary for carrying out the goals”[11]. Michael Porter defines competitive strategy as “A 
companies ability to be different, thus deliberately choosing a different set of activities to 
deliver a unique mix of value” [12]. Lastly, Henry Mintzberg states the definition of strategy 
as being “A pattern in a stream of decisions” [13]. None of the definitions should be 
evaluated as wrong, as they all incorporate important elements of strategy.   
 
John et al. discusses that the long - term direction perspective on strategy is emphasised by 
the three-horizons framework. This framework suggests that organisations should think of 
themselves as comprising three types of business or activity, defined by their ‘horizons’ in 
terms of years [14].  Horizon 1 shows that in the long-term the organisation will decline in 
terms of profit. Horizon 2 shows that organisations are emerging activities that should 
provide new sources of profit and finally Horizon 3 are organisations that are creating viable 
==PAGE:14==
13 
options or possibilities where nothing is sure, but it is a risk to take.  John et al. states 
“Strategy involves pushing out Horizon 1 as far as possible, at the same time looking to 
Horizons 2 and 3” [15]. Thus, an organization should always attempt to gain a position of 
advantage over competitors. Mintzberg agrees and argues that by being forward looking, 
there will always be uncertainty and risk associated with deciding strategy [16]. 
Organisations has to take this risk if they want to gain a long-term competitive advantage, 
which is further described in section 2.3.  
 
2.3 Competitive Advantage  
With clear goals, strategies and operations a company can build a sustainable competitive 
advantage and become leaders on the market. Wen-Cheng et al. discusses that competitive 
advantage exists in two forms, cost advantage or differentiation advantage [17]. Cost 
advantage refers to the ability of the company to deliver the same benefits as their 
competitors, but at a lower cost. While differentiation advantage is the ability for the 
company to delivers benefits that exceed those of the competitors. Wen-Cheng et al. further 
discusses the importance of both internal and external sources of competitive advantage as 
being a crucial factor to success [18] The internal source of change could be an organisation 
providing a greater creative and innovative capability than the competing organisations. The 
external sources of change could be how rapid organizations respond to change and changing 
customer demand. Further, Johnson et al. argues that there are four different types of 
organisational advantage [19]: 
- 
Competitive disadvantage is when an organisation is outperformed by its competitors 
which can result in failure.  
- 
Competitive parity is when an organisation performs just as good as its competitors 
and thereby obtained a threshold capability. 
- 
Temporary competitive advantage is when the competitive advantage of a company 
can be imitated by the competitors and is thus at risk.  
- 
Sustained competitive advantage is when two organisations compete within the same 
market, but one organisation possesses a competitive advantage over its rivals when it 
earns a higher profit.   
==PAGE:15==
14 
Companies are striving to obtain a sustained competitive advantage, especially in a rapid 
changing environment. For this to happen, the organization have to evaluate if they have the 
capabilities to change and adapt, which will be discussed further in the next section 2.4.   
 
2.4 Strategic Capabilities 
Teece et al. mentions that an organization can have four different capabilities (i) Strategic 
capabilities, (ii) Threshold Capabilities, (iii) Distinct capabilities and (iv) Dynamic 
capabilities. The strategic capabilities of an organization is defined by Johnson et al. as 
capabilities that contributes to the long-term or competitive advantage of an organization 
[20]. Typically the strategic capabilities are composed of both competences and resources, 
where the resources can be defined as ‘what they have’ and the competences as ‘what they do 
well’. The effectiveness and the efficiency of the physical, financial and human resources 
depend on the systems and processes by which they are managed, the relationships and 
cooperation between people, their ability, their innovative capacity, the relationship with 
customers and suppliers, and the experience and learning about what works well and what 
does not [21].  
    Further there is a difference between the strategic capabilities that are at a threshold level 
and those that might help the organization achieve competitive advantage. Johnson et al. 
states “Threshold capabilities are those needed for an organization to meet the necessary 
requirements to compete in a given market and achieve parity with competitors in that 
market.” [22]. Thus, the threshold capabilities are required for the company to survive over 
time, but they do not create competitive advantage alone. Distinctive capabilities are required 
along with the threshold capabilities to achieve competitive advantage. Distinctive 
capabilities are unique capabilities that are of value to customers and which competitors find 
difficult to imitate e.g. a strong brand reputation [23]. The last capability mentioned is the 
dynamic capability, which will be explained in the next section 2.5.   
 
2.5 Dynamic capabilities 
The dynamic capabilities framework analyzes the possibilities for organisations to achieve 
and sustain competitive advantage in a rapid changing environment. Johnson et al. discusses 
the importance of having dynamic capabilities for a long - term success, thus implies that 
==PAGE:16==
15 
strategic capabilities cannot be static, they need to change [24]. Teece, Pisano and Shuen 
agrees and states that the winners in the global marketplace are organisations that is able to 
demonstrate timely responsiveness and rapid and flexible product innovation, coupled with 
the management capability to effectively coordinate and redeploy internal and external 
competences [25]. Dynamic capabilities is the organization's ability to appropriately adapt, 
integrate and configure internal and external organizational skills. Teece developed a 
framework where he suggested three generic types of dynamic capabilities: sensing the 
opportunities and threats, seizing the opportunities and lastly managing the threats and 
reconfiguration. Teece describes the three types as follow [26]:  
 
- 
Sensing: Sensing implies that organisations must constantly scan, search and explore 
opportunities across various markets and technologies. Research and development and 
investigating customer needs are typical sensing activities.  
- 
Seizing: Once an opportunity is sensed it must be seized and addressed through new 
products or services, processes, activities, etc.  
- 
Reconfiguring: To seize and opportunity may require renewal of organisational 
capabilities and investments in technologies, manufacturing, markets etc. 
 
Teece claims these are a fundamental for any organization, however Helfat and Peteraf 
claims that dynamic capabilities are actually not present in new organizations, but they still 
have the potential to change without them and succeed [27]. Eisenhardt and Martin states that 
that the potential does not solely lie in having dynamic capabilities in order to succeed, but 
the organization has to use the dynamic capabilities sooner and smarter than its competitors 
in order to obtain sustained competitive advantage [28].   
 
2.6 Artificial Intelligence 
Artificial intelligence (A.I.) is known by definition as a machine with the ability to solve 
problem, which is usually done by humans [29]. Machine learning, Natural language 
processing, robotics, pattern recognition and knowledge management, is some few examples 
of what A.I. could be. Further, there are two different types of A.I. in terms of approach, i.e. 
strong and weak A.I. [30]. Weak A.I. functions like a human but does not give us an insight 
to how the brain works. It achieves only the results of a human, thus is not functioning better 
==PAGE:17==
16 
than a human. Whereas, strong A.I. performance as good as a human and sometimes even 
better. The A.I. today has not reached the strong type of A.I. yet, but has moved further than 
the weak A.I. In between the two types, a third A.I. type is found, where the system is 
inspired by human reasoning, but without them having to stick to it. This is seen in e.g. the 
chatbot created by IBM named Watson, as it reads information like humans, recognizes 
patterns and builds up evidence to state how confident it is with the answer provided from the 
information it has read [31]. A further description of the IBM’s Watson chatbot can be found 
in section 4.3.1. 
 
Companies that are more familiar with A.I. see more potential for growth in implementing it. 
Bughin et al. states “Firms that we consider more advanced A.I. adopters were 27 percent 
more likely to report using A.I. to grow their market than companies only experimenting with 
or partially adopting A.I. (...)”[32]. Companies that have less experience within A.I. focus 
more on reducing the cost. This is achieved by replacing employees with the A.I. technology. 
A research done by Foundational Research shows that the increasing automation could lead 
to a massive increase in unemployment within the next 10-20 years [33]. Though, it should 
be noted that not all jobs can be replaced by the A.I. technology. Mannino et al. states “The 
hardest jobs to automate are those which require high level of social intelligence (e.g. PR 
consultation), creativity (e.g. fashion design) and/or sensitive and flexible object 
manipulation (e.g. surgery).”[34]. Thus, it is not possible for the A.I. technology to imitate a 
human 100% with the current technology available and will therefore not be able to replace 
human experts in these sectors. In sectors such as the telecommunication industry, A.I. might 
actually be more beneficial than a human employee. Mannino et al. discusses the ability of 
A.I. to store information and data much better than a human, “A.I. is much faster compared 
to a biological brain, and it can store considerably more basic data than a brain can 
remember.” [35]. Customers often have a lot of questions they need answered and it is not 
always sure that the employee remembers the accurate information and thus seeks a colleague 
for answers. This could be avoided with the use of A.I. technology, as they have it stored in 
their database.  
 
It is not all companies that are interested in implementing the A.I. technology, some 
companies are actually hesitating to adopt it, as it could be a risk depending on what sector it 
will be implemented in. A.I. is not only about companies adopting the technology, but also 
about the user acceptance. Some sectors could have a difficulty in user acceptance and would 
==PAGE:18==
17 
fail if they adopted the technology. All though it is certain that A.I. is on the verge of a 
breakthrough and it will not be long before everyone are forced to implement it, in one way 
or another. Bughin et al. discusses organization’s use of A.I. and the potential to become 
major business disruptors, “The new generation of A.I. applications is based on the 
foundation of digitalization.’’[36]. In other words, the leading sectors in digital trend will also 
be the leading sectors in A.I., which is predicted to drive growth for companies. Their 
research further shows that the adoption of A.I. occurs faster in more digitized sectors, such 
as the high tech and telecommunication sector as well as in the automotive and assembly 
sector [37]. 
 
2.7 Digitalization in telecommunication companies  
Digitalization is becoming a key driver in the telecom industry to improve consumer lives 
and provide business with new opportunities. Patterson et al. discusses that companies have 
to be well-prepared to take advantage of the sweeping transformation taking place in 
consumer lives [38]. He states four broad digital themes, which will have the biggest impact 
on the telecommunication companies: 
 
- 
Network of the Future: Networks are likely to evolve in two different ways. First, 
digital capabilities will get more advanced and transform operators’ cost bases, i.e. 
they will move from expensive hardware to generic equipment that will allow greater 
share of resources to be invested in increasing reliability, flexibility and innovation 
through software. Second, industries will require networks that are more flexible, 
autonomous and customized, while ensuring that data flows are reliable and 
secure[39].  
- 
Beyond the pipe: The shift to internet-based business models provides operators with 
an opportunity to extend revenue streams beyond connectivity, through digital 
services. The focus is on building the capabilities that drive new digital revenue 
streams[40].  
- 
Redefining 
customer 
engagement: 
To 
establish 
customer 
loyalty, 
the 
telecommunication companies have to increase deploy features and tools, that deliver 
an excellent digital experience. This is important as customers now expect the same 
high-quality experience they received from one organization to another. They have 
==PAGE:19==
18 
the opportunity to compare now, which they have not had just some years ago. 
Patterson et al. argues that the question of what is digitalized is irrelevant for the next 
generation and only the people who has lived in the ‘transition age’ will question it 
[41].  
- 
Bridging the Gap on Innovation: The need for new services means that the 
telecommunication industries must fill capability gaps using new innovation models. 
[42] 
 
These four themes should be evaluated and managed in every telecommunication company in 
order to provide their customers a high quality experience, and thereby establish loyal 
customers. To create a high-quality experience it is important for customers to feel they are 
connected to the digital experience, and that they are recognized. Patterson et al. states 
“Digital tools that allows operators to improve customer experience through personalization 
and digital customer service options will create value for operators by both growing revenue 
and reducing costs.’’ [43]. Matthew et al. agrees and further discusses the digital 
transformation for telecom operators showing that consumer needs and behavior has changed 
since the transition into a digital economy occured. He states,“Mobile customers now desire 
(and prefer) immediacy, interacting with products and services wherever they are and 
whenever they want.’’  [44]. Consumers expect greater personalization, as it breeds trust and 
becomes a critical factor in people’s decision making. Consumers feel more connected to the 
product or service if they feel it already knows them. An analysis provided by Matthew et al. 
actually shows that 20 percent of customers are happy to have organizations use their 
personal information to offer them personalized products and services [45]. Digitalization is 
stated to be time saving for customers, by spending less time in contact with the customer 
service teams and Matthew et al. further states “the estimates show consumers could save 
almost 1.5 billion hours over the coming decade.’’ [46]. He continues to argue that customers 
can get around the customer service teams, by using the organizations chatbot, also known as 
an offline customer service software. This will as well be cost saving for the organization, as 
the live chat is offline and does not need an employee to control it unless it runs into 
difficulties in understanding the customer. The chatbot will further be described in the 
following section 2.8.   
 
==PAGE:20==
19 
2.8 AI- powered Chatbots  
Computer based chatbots, also called offline customer service as mentioned in the previous 
section, is software that imitates human interaction and attempts to respond on natural 
language inputs. Most of the chatbot systems use natural language processing (NLP) by 
matching the user’s input against a knowledge base of words and phrases and select a suitable 
response based on the input and the context of the conversation. [47]  
 
The chatbot consists of different parts that makes it function optimally and continually has to 
be updated and improved. The chatbot architecture is shown in Figure 2, is (i) the knowledge 
base, which encapsulates the intelligence of the system, (ii) a chat engine as an interface 
engine and (iii) an interpreter program [48]. The interpreter program is the part of the chatbot 
that takes the input dialog from the human and analyzes the sentence using different 
normalization techniques.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
               Figur 2 Chatbot architecture 
 
 
The techniques consists of pattern recognition, substitution and sentence splitting. These are 
all a part of the chatbot to help it understand the input and provide a more exact response to 
==PAGE:21==
20 
the questions asked. A chatbot can be built to interpret both chatting in the form of texting 
and by speech dialogue using the voice. The information is processed in the same way for 
both conversation techniques after the speech is converted to text in the case of speech 
dialogue. Depending on if the chatbot uses text or speech recognition, the level of 
understanding for the chatbot might be different. According to Abdul-Kader and John 
Woods, “writing a perfect Chatbot is very difficult because it needs a very large database 
and must give reasonable answers to all interactions.” [49], i.e. it is very difficult to create a 
chatbot that understands and responds 100% correct. 
 
 
Chatbots use a term called Big data, which is a large volume of data both provided as 
structured and unstructured data. The structured data is linked information in a format e.g. 
excel sheet, where it is easy for the chatbot to gather accurate information. The unstructured 
data consists of documents that are created in different formats and is able to gather 
information from documents, emails, articles and many other platforms. Companies hold 
80% of unstructured data and only 20% of structured data [50]. The chatbots differ in either 
using only structured data or a combination of both structured and unstructured data. Reshmi 
and Balakrishnan discusses the importance of using Big data, and states that it has a 
tremendous impact on business processes, “big data might help companies to make better 
strategic decisions, understand customer needs, efficiently control processes and reduce 
costs.” [51].  
 
The use of unstructured data is more advanced for a chatbot, but it will create a chatbot that 
resembles a human interaction employee much more, which is the aim for most chatbots. 
IBM’s Watson is known to be one of the advanced chatbots and uses a combination of 
unstructured and structured data, it discovers and evaluates potential answers and gathers and 
scores evidence for those answers in both unstructured sources, such as natural language 
documents, and structured sources, such as relational databases and knowledge bases [52]. As 
Reshmi et al. states, “one of the main aims for chatbots has always been to imitate and 
resemble humans as far as possible in order to hide their artificial nature while interacting 
with the users.” [53]. The possibility to create a chatbot that imitates a human very closely, 
will decrease the need of having a human customer service employee. Chatbots can handle 
multiple clients at a time and is therefore getting a lot of attention from the business 
community as it can save costs in customer service centers. Brandtzaeg and Følstad discusses 
the fact that many companies has already seen the potential of chatbots and were quick to 
==PAGE:22==
21 
develop their own,“Major internet companies such as Google, Facebook, and Microsoft see 
chatbots as the next popular technology.’’  [54]. He investigated the key motivational factors 
driving the chatbot use for customers and states that “The most frequently reported 
motivational factor is “productivity’’; chatbots help users to obtain timely and efficient 
assistance or information.’’ [55]. Customers avoid waiting in line to talk to a human 
customer service employee on the phone, and risk not obtaining the answer they were looking 
for. Actually 42% of the participants reported that their reason for using chatbots are ease of 
use, speed and convenience [56]. Over the time, the chatbot has improved and has become 
better at responding to customers and it only looks like the chatbots are getting more 
advanced as time proceeds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
22 
Chapter 3 
Methods 
This chapter describes the methods used throughout the case to analyse and helped to provide 
an answer for research question stated. The case study method is used to build up a good case 
study. The Quadric framework will be used to analyse Telenor and its positioning strategy, 
which in turns helped to answer the first sub-research question before providing an answer 
for the main research question. The Dynamic Capability will be used to analyse if CBB acts 
as a dynamic capability and has the ability to change in a rapid changing environment as the 
telecommunication industry is. It provides an answer for the third sub research question. The 
second sub-research question will be answered with the help of the literature review and an 
interview, instead of a specific method. 
    
 
3.1 Case Study Method  
The case study method is used to build up a good case study, as well as to collect, present and 
analyze data fairly. A case study is performed when there is a need of understanding a real-
world case, as defined by Yin: 
 
“A case study is an empirical inquiry that investigates a contemporary phenomenon (the 
“case’’) in depth and within its real-world context, especially when the boundaries between 
phenomenon and context may not be clearly evident.’’ [57]  
 
According to Yin the most important step in a research study is to define the research 
question(s). The case study research would be the preferred method when the questions asked 
are ‘’how or ‘’why’’ questions, when a researcher has little or no control over behavioral 
events and when the focus of study is a contemporary phenomenon[58]. The research 
question aimed to investigate in this case study are stated as follow:  
How can digitalisation be a differentiator without compromising customer satisfaction? 
 
This case study will be carried out as a single case study, due to the limited time frame and 
creating a possibility to make a more thorough analysis of the case.  
==PAGE:24==
23 
 
According to Yin, a good case study can be conducted using six steps (i) plan (ii) design (iii) 
prepare (iv) collect (v) analyze (vi) share [59]. The first step (plan) and last step (share) is not 
described in further detail, as they are subordinate in this case study research.  
 
Step 1. Designing the case study 
A research design is a logical plan created to get from point A to B, where point A is  the 
initial questions which has to be answered and point B is the conclusions of the questions. To 
get from point A to B, it is necessary to collect and analyze relevant data. According to Yin, 
the following five components of a research design are especially important (i) a case study’s 
questions (ii) its propositions, if any (iii) its unit(s) of analysis and (iv) the logic linking the 
data to the propositions [60]. The three first components identifies the data which is relevant 
for the case study, and the last component suggests what has to be done after the data has 
been collected.  
1.1. Study questions 
The research question has been stated with the focus on digitalization with a deeper 
focus on chatbots in the telecommunication industry. The questions are constructed to 
lead future research within the chatbot development in CBB. 
 
1.2 Study propositions 
The proposition is to investigate the use of digitalization in telecommunication
 
industries to create sustained competitive advantage on service without 
compromising the customer satisfaction.   
 
1.3 Unit of analysis  
The data collected for this case study and the research questions are limited to focus 
on the department of customer experience and digitalization in Telenor and CBB. It is 
further narrowed down to the people who are familiar and have worked with chatbots 
in CBB Denmark. The understanding of how chatbots provide service for CBB and 
how this can be improved, is also included in the context. The implementation of a 
chatbot will not be included in this case study nor the cost or detailed explanation of 
how the chatbot system works. 
 
 
==PAGE:25==
24 
1.4 Linking data to propositions 
The analysis will combine the case study data as a direct reflection of the initial study 
propositions. This will assure that only the data needed is collected, instead of 
collecting too much data, which is not used in the analysis or collecting too little data 
that prevent the proper use of a desired analytic technique.  
 
Step 2 Preparing to collect the case study evidence  
In order to prepare and collect the right data, the focus has been on formulating and asking 
good questions. Through the process new questions were added and the questions not 
relevant were deleted. Yin also argues that it is important to be a good ‘’listener’’ and not be 
trapped by existing ideologies or preconceptions [61]. Poor listeners may miss important 
information between the lines. while being a good listener it is still necessary to avoid bias 
interpretation of answers as well as maintaining an ethical standard. Furthermore, it is 
important to understand that not all case studies will end exactly as planned and while 
focusing on Telenor and CBB their strategies might change, thus staying adaptive in this case 
study is a prime factor. Thereby a confusion and delay will be avoided through the process of 
analysing this case study. Finally, it is important to have a profound understanding of 
chatbots and their purpose before collecting data. This will create a more focused data 
collection and make sure the right data is collected.  
 
The interviews carried out in the case study are candidates who has worked with chatbots and 
is working with the chatbot within CBB. The names will not be disclosed in order to protect 
the candidates involved. They will be informed why the interviews are carried out, which 
evidence is collected and for what purpose, before the interview.  
 
Step 3 Collecting case study evidence  
The case study will be based on qualitative research, in which the data comes from mutual 
sources leading to the analysis.  
 
3.1 Interviews: It is argued by Yin that “one of the most important sources of case 
study evidence is the interview” [62]. The Interviews are chosen primarily based on 
the information available to be obtained from the candidates as well as a targeted 
approach with a direct focus on the case study topic. The interviews performed are: 
short case study interviews which may be more focused and only takes about 1 hour 
==PAGE:26==
25 
or so. They are done face-to-face to eliminate any misunderstandings or 
miscommunications and insure any non-verbal cues are observed. The questions are 
open-ended questions to not limit the answers of the candidates and a way to create 
new questions during the interview based on the new knowledge gained. The 
interviews are audio-recorded with permission from the candidate. This ensures that 
the data is reliable and can be studied repeatedly during the case study analysis. 
Furthermore, each interview is transcribed stating the date to ensure reliability of the 
interviews. Finally after each interview, the interview questions are reviewed and 
questions are either deleted or added.      
 
3.2 Documentation: Documentation is a stable form of source and can be reviewed 
repeatedly, while also cover a long span of time, many events and many settings. In 
this case study, both internal and external documentations are used. The internal 
documentations are provided with the help from Telenor/CBB and the external 
documents are articles about e.g. chatbots and how it is used to improve the service 
for a company.  
 
3.3 Archival records: Other case studies and reports performed about chatbots in 
general and how they are used to improve the service.  
 
3.5 Others: Copenhagen Chatbots and AI meetup held May 8th 2018.  
 
Step 4 Analyzing the case study evidence  
All the data collected will be grouped together based on each research question in order to 
make it more manageable and then analysed in an analytical manner. Yin argues that one of 
the most desirable techniques to use is pattern matching logic [63], which is done by 
matching the pattern within the collected data and the pattern of the research question to 
obtain the best outcome.  
 
3.2 Quadric framework 
The Quadric framework, see figure 3, is a positioning strategy created to help the company 
understand its current position in the value chain and the position of their competitors [64]. It 
is a management tool created for the company to achieve differentiation, by continually 
==PAGE:27==
26 
refining their positioning strategy or creating a new strategy to sustain competitive advantage. 
As stated by Micheal Sherain, the Quadric framework cannot stand alone and has to be 
backed up by other methods and theories [65].  
 
 
Figur 3 Quadric Framework Method 
 
The framework consists of four interaction points and at each interaction point there is an 
internal and an external bias, as well as an emotional and rational point of the bias. The 
organization’s positioning strategy is found in the center of the framework, this is in other 
words their core idea. When the core idea is simply defined and understood, four areas will 
help reinforce the core idea and continually has to be assessed to align with the core idea. 
These areas include optimized brand portfolio, Cultural uniqueness, operational evidence 
and aligned marketing [66].  
- 
The core idea should be very clearly defined and create an understanding of the 
purpose of direction for the company. It should be stated simply and answer the 
questions of, where do we want to go and where do we stand. The purpose and 
direction should be relevant and of high value to everyone across the value chain.   
 
- 
Optimized brand portfolio should reflect the core idea as it reinforces the 
organization's positioning strategy and is an important differentiation parameter. It 
includes e.g. the corporate brand, unit brands, product/service brands and partner 
==PAGE:28==
27 
brands. The organization has to continually re-evaluate if the brand portfolio is 
optimized to best represent their position e.g. naming and visual identity.  
 
- 
Cultural uniqueness is the cultural traits that reflects the employees and how they 
work. It has to be evaluated if the organization is creating cultural uniqueness which 
directly supports their position e.g. behavior, norms and values while also visualizing 
their vision and mission.  
 
- 
Operational evidence relates the the positioning strategy as it highlights the success 
of the organization. The organization's capabilities are important when mentioning the 
success of the organization. This is due to the strategic capability being created by a 
combination of the organization’s resources and competences, which eventually 
provides them a sustained competitive advantage.  
 
- 
Alignment of Marketing is the activities the organization performs in order to grow 
and succeed with no wasted time. The marketing is provided in the form of e.g. 
advertisements or sponsoring, which attracts new customers while also keeping the 
current once. The marketing has to be aligned to build the positioning while driving 
sales. Micheal Sherain states that if all the other areas of the framework are aligned, 
the development of the aligned marketing will be the easiest step to do [67].  
 
The Quadric framework helps to identify where Telenor is positioned and where its 
competitors are, as well as clarifying what their core idea is. Through further analysis, this 
will also help to understand if it is necessary to change there differentiation strategy in order 
to create a competitive advantage.  
 
3.3 Dynamic capabilities 
Dynamic capabilities will be used to assess how well the organization is organised in a rapid 
changing industry and if they are able to adapt. Further, it will be decided if they have the 
ability to renew and recreate their resources and competences. David Teece introduces 
dynamic capabilities with his definition “(...)an organization’s ability to renew and recreate 
its strategic capabilities to meet the needs of changing environment”[68]. Thus, the ability to 
==PAGE:29==
28 
change is necessary in the telecommunication industry, as it is a rapidly changing 
environment. Teece further suggests three generic types of dynamic capabilities:   
 
- 
Sensing continually has to be performed by the organization in the form of research 
and investigation of customer needs. This is done to identify opportunities to prevent 
overlooking any new technology on the market. Tecce states ‘’Sensing implies that 
organisations must constantly scan, search and explore opportunities across markets 
and technologies.’’ [69] 
  
 
- 
Seizing is required when an opportunity is sensed. The organization has to be seized 
in the form of a new product or service, processes, activities etc. 
  
 
- 
Reconfiguring is the final step, which may be necessary when a new opportunity has 
been seized. As Teece mentions “To seize an opportunity may require renewal and 
reconfiguration of organizational capabilities and investments in technologies, 
manufacturing, markets, etc.”  [70] 
 
3.4 The three Horizons framework 
The three horizons framework will be used to evaluate where the organisation is currently 
placed, with the chatbot technology it provides its customers with now, and how it can 
possibly move from one Horizon to another. As mentioned previously in section 2.2 the 
framework consists of three different Horizons [71], see figure 4: 
==PAGE:30==
29 
 
Figur 4 The Three Horizons Framework Method 
 
- 
Horizon 1: Businesses are basically the current core activity, and needs defending 
and extending but the expectation is that in the long term they will likely be flat or 
declining in terms of profit. 
  
- 
Horizon 2: Businesses are emerging activities that should provide new sources of 
profit. 
 
- 
Horizon 3: Possibilities, for which nothing is sure. These are typically risky research 
and development projects or a like.  
 
The aim of the three horizons  framework is to avoid focusing on the short-term issues and 
push out Horizon 1 as far as possible, while also trying to reach Horizon 2 or 3.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
30 
Chapter 4  
Results  
This chapter focuses on analysing Telenor, CBB and their strategy as far as implementing the 
chatbot. With the research question in focus, the first sub-research question was answered by 
a brief introduction to Telenor and their history, continued with an analysis of their 
competitive environment to understand the organizations and their strategy. Further the 
Quadric framework was used to understand Telenors positioning strategy and how they 
compete with their competitors. 
  
 
The second sub-research question is answered by an analysis of CBB’s evaluation of their 
customer satisfaction for both human interaction customer service and their chatbot.  
 
Finally, the third sub-research question will be answered by the analysis of the three Horizon 
framework, which evaluates where CBB’s chatbot is positioned and if they have the 
capabilities to improve and develop the chatbot which is more personalized and resembles a 
human much more. Further, CBB ability to act as a dynamic capability and renew their 
strategy in the rapidly changing environment, was analysed. Followed by a technology 
scanning that analysed all the current chatbots on the market and the ability for CBB to 
collaborate with them in order to improve their chatbot.    
 
With the answers this analysis, the sub-research questions will provide an answer for the final 
research question.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
31 
4.1 Telenor differentiation strategy  
This section provides an answer for the  sub-research question “How can digitalization 
differentiate Telenor and create a strong position so they remain strong positioned with their 
customer satisfaction?”. To get an idea of who Telenor is, the section will start with a brief 
description of their history and then move to their competitive environment overview. This 
will give an idea of their strategy before moving to the Quadric framework, which will create 
and insight into how Telenor has positioned itself among the leading telecommunication 
companies.   
 
4.1.1 Telenors History  
In 2006, the two telecommunication companies known as Sonofon and Cybercity, merged 
and renamed to Telenor. Telenor A/S was founded in 1855 as a state-owned telegraph 
company in Norway, before it made its debut to Denmark. It is one of the leading 
telecommunication companies in Norway as well as one of the biggest in Scandinavia. They 
operate in 13 different countries around Europe, Asia as well as Scandinavia, with 1.827 
million mobile subscribers alone in Denmark[72]. They have 1425 employees in Denmark 
contributing to a total revenue of DKK 4.005 million [73]. Telenor offers customers different 
mobile subscriptions, mobile phones as well as cable TV and is Denmark’s second largest 
mobile operator. They have shared mobile network with the swedish owned 
telecommunication company Telia since 2012. Very often in the telecommunication industry, 
the large companies buy the smaller low priced companies, in attempt to increase their 
market share. Likewise, Telenor bought the low priced company CBB. CBB functions as a 
separate branch in which it has its own customers, products and so forth. However, it still 
works within Telenor’s strategy and larger decisions has to go through Telenor before it is 
carried out by CBB.     
 
4.1.2 Competitive environment 
It is important to have an overview of the external environment and Telenors competitors in 
order to understand the organization and their strategy. As this case study is focusing on how 
Telenor uses digitalization in the form of a chatbot to improve the service, it is evident that 
they are facing a lot of competition. The competition is due to the similar strategies used 
==PAGE:33==
32 
between all telecommunication companies and the lack of differentiation. The three largest 
telecommunication companies in Denmark, TDC, Telia and 3 are focused on in particular, as 
these are direct competitors to Telenor nationally. All other telecommunication companies in 
Denmark are either using one of the networks provided by these four large companies or 
owned by them, which is why only these are considered direct competitors to Telenor. Table 
1 shows an overview of Telenor and its direct competitors. A description of each competitor 
is shown in Appendix 2. 
 
Company 
TDC 
Telenor 
Telia 
3 mobile 
Logo 
 
 
 
 
Year founded  
1990 
2009  
1995 
2002 
Companies 
owned 
Telmore 
Fullrate  
Yousee 
CBB 
Bibob 
 
Call me 
Mit Tele 
Oister 
Zenji 
Employee 
size 
(Approximately) 
 8,000 (2017) 
1425 (2017) 
1026 (2017) 
650 (2016) 
Geography 
Denmark 
Norway, 
Denmark, 
Sweden, 
Bangladesh, 
Hungary, 
Serbia, 
Bulgaria, 
Montenegro, 
Pakistan, 
Thailand, 
Malaysia, 
Myanmar 
Norway, 
Denmark,  
Sweden 
Hong 
Kong, 
Denmark, 
Austria, 
Sweden, 
Indonesia, 
Ireland,  
Italy,  
UK 
 
==PAGE:34==
33 
Market 
Mobile 
phone 
network, 
broadband, 
television 
Mobile 
phone 
network, 
broadband, 
television  
Mobile 
phone 
network, 
landline 
telephony, 
broadband, 
television  
Mobile 
phone 
network, 
broadband 
provider  
Mobile 
subscribers 
(Approximately)  
2.643 
million 
(2017) 
1.827 
million 
(2017) 
1.479 
million 
(2017) 
1.249 
million 
(2017) 
Annual revenue 
(DKK) 
20.3 
million 
(2017) 
98.5 
million 
(2017) 
48.9 
million 
(2017) 
 n/a 
Net 
income 
(DKK) 
1.4 
million 
(2017) 
9.5 
million 
(2017) 
6.9 
million  
(2017) 
3.4 
million 
(2015) 
Table 1: Competitive enviornment 
 
4.1.3 The positioning Strategy of Telenor 
Telenor is using a positioning strategy to compete with the its competitors and this is 
analysed using the Quadric Framework, see figure 5.  
==PAGE:35==
34 
 
Figur 5 Quadric Framework 
 
Core idea 
Telenors core idea is ‘excellent service for customers’ and represents their purpose and the 
direction they want to go. Telenor is trying to differentiate themselves from other 
telecommunication companies, which they are trying to do by improving their service and 
providing customers with excellent service. In other words, they are aiming to become a 
digital service provider, which will create an around the clock service for customers.  
 
Cultural uniqueness 
Telenor operates as an international organization, but their culture is what binds them 
together as one organization across all the societies. An organization’s culture is difficult to 
change or imitate, thus being an internal strength. The culture of an organization is defined as 
the value, practices, and beliefs shared by members of the company[74]. The culture is 
present in the actions and behaviors of the employees. Telenor has four behaviors that always 
guides their way of working and defines their culture [75]:  
 
- 
Always explore: “We believe growth comes from learning every day. We’re curious 
==PAGE:36==
35 
and we dare to challenge, test, fail and pivot.” 
- 
Create together: “We believe diverse teams find better solutions. We seek different 
perspectives, share, involve and help each other succeed.” 
- 
Keep promises: “We believe that trust is key in all our relationships. We take 
ownership and pride in delivering with precision and integrity.” 
- 
Be respectful: “We believe in the unique human ability to understand what matters 
for people. We meet everyone at eye level, listen and show that we care.”  
 
Operational evidence  
Telenor is positioned as one of the leading telecommunication companies in Denmark, which 
is a result of the ongoing digitalization change. This is linked with Telenors core idea and the 
aim to provide digital service. They provide long hours of online customer service, both 
human interaction customer service and through live chat with longer opening hours. They 
provide the customers with a 1:1 loan phone when the customers phone is getting repaired. 
Furthermore, they have excellent coverage and package solutions, which gives customers the 
possibility to choose based on their needs. The different package solutions makes it possible 
for customers to change as they desire and as their needs change. 
 
Aligned marketing 
Telenors marketing strategy is mostly directed towards customers instead of businesses, thus 
the focus is on B2C customers. They advertise a lot on offering customers more than what 
they pay for. The slogans on marketing campaigns are e.g. ‘’outstanding service’’ reinforcing 
their core idea and ‘’everything for the family’’, referring to Telenors focus on package deals 
for families. The color blue is very symbolic in all their advertisements, as this also reflects 
on their blue logo, making it easy for customers to remember them. Furthermore, factors such 
as conferences, copenhagen marathons sponsored by Telenor and mouth-to-mouth words are 
used to attract new customers and keep a good brand reputation.  
 
Optimized brand portfolio 
Telenor launched a new visual profile in 2006 as a symbol of a new movement and change. 
[76]. Telenors has created a logo that is easily recognizable by everyone even though their 
logo has no direct significance to the company. Their logo signals the ongoing work of 
strengthening customer orientation in all parts of Telenor. [77] The logo reinforces the core 
==PAGE:37==
36 
idea of Telenor as Telenor’s CEO Jon Frederik Baksaas mentions that “(...) the change in 
Telenor is not only about changing the visual identity, but also about changing the way 
Telenor meet and service customers.“ [78].  
 
Sub-conclusion 
This section focused on answering the first sub-research question and it can be concluded that 
the core idea of Telenor is to create excellent service for their customers in order to 
differentiate from its competitors. They are already doing well compared to their competitors, 
but there is a need to differentiate in the telecommunication companies as they are all 
providing more or less the same products and services.  
 
4.2 Telenor’s daughter company 
This section will answer the second sub-research question and analyses how Telenor uses its 
daughter company, CBB, as a strategy to test-run a new service method. The customer 
satisfaction will further be analysed and evaluated, to determine if the implementation will 
create value for the customers.  
  
4.2.1 CBB’s Mobile 
As mentioned earlier, CBB Mobil is a low priced telecommunication company owned by 
Telenor. They were founded in 2000 as Club Blah Blah by Peer Kølendorf and Michael 
Moesgaard. In 2002 they changed the name to CBB and was in 2004 bought by Telenor. [79] 
CBB was one of the first companies to allow customers to administer their subscription 
online, which quickly created a solid customer base. CBB has around 625.502 subscribers 
and around 180 employees [80], but as they are owned by Telenor all numbers are counted 
under Telenors numbers. As a part of Telenors strategy to become more digitized, they 
invested in the development of a chatbot to improve the service of CBB. The chatbot would 
be a testrunner on CBB as the damage for a failed project would be smaller for Telenor. The 
chatbot will eventually decrease the need of human interaction customer service and be 
available around the clock, while increasing customer satisfaction.  
 
==PAGE:38==
37 
The human interaction customer service in CBB is available seven days a week either 
through telephone inquire, live chat on CBB’s webpage, Facebook or e-mail.  
- 
Telephone inquire: Monday to Friday from 08.30 am to 4.00pm. Closed in the 
weekends. 
- 
Live chat: Monday to friday from 08.30 am to 9.00 pm. The weekend from 10.00 am 
to 9.00 pm.  
- 
Facebook: Monday to Friday from 9.00 am to 9.00 pm. The weekend from 10.00 am 
to 9.00 pm.  
- 
E-mail: A response time of 1-2 days.   
The majority of CBB’s employees work in the customer service department, as the main 
focus for the company is their service. In 2016 they were named Denmark's best customer 
service, as well as being voted to have Denmark’s most loyal customers in 2012, 2014 and 
2017[81]. This was due to a survey showing that CBB’s customers experienced they got the 
most value for their money. To really assess the customer satisfaction, a closer look at their 
NPS score was taken.   
 
4.2.2 NPS customer satisfaction 
The Net Promoter Score (NPS) is defined as to how likely it is for customers to recommend 
CBB to other people e.g. family, friends etc. The score typically ranges from 0-10 and 
depending on what score each person has, they are placed as either promoters, passively 
satisfied or detractors. See figure 6 for a more visual understanding.  
 
Figur 6 Net Promotor Score (NPS) 
 
==PAGE:39==
38 
The participants who score 9-10 are named the promoters and are more likely to promote 
CBB. They are an extended marketing force and pay more for their products or services and 
will also try what is new at CBB. The passively satisfied are scored between 7-8 and they are 
more likely to choose another company if the offer is better. They could switch at any time 
and CBB would not know anything about it, because these customers would not say they are 
unsatisfied with what CBB offers, they would simply just switch to another company with a 
better offer. Finally, the detractors are found with a score between 0-6 and the important 
thing about them is, that they will express what they dislike and how CBB can improve. If the 
company listens to the detractors, they will eventually move into becoming promoters. They 
will stick by the company and make the company more profitable in the long run.  
 
The NPS is typically calculated to a percentage, which creates an understanding on the 
loyalty between the customers and the company. If the NPS score is above 0 it is considered 
Good, +50 is Excellent and above 70 is considered World Class. [82]  If the NPS score is 
below 0, it is a clear indication that the company needs to improve the customer satisfaction 
level.  
 
CBB’s Customer Service measure its customer satisfaction with an NPS score. The 
calculation of the obtained NPS is shown in table 2. 
 
Net Promotor Score = % Promotors - % Detractors  
 
Participants = 4500 
 
Percentage (%) 
Promoters 
3100 
3100/4500 = 69% 
Passively Satisfied 
949 
949/4500 = 21% 
Detractors 
451 
451/4500 = 10% 
NPS Score  
69% - 10% = 59% 
Table 2: NPS Calculation 
 
The NPS score is calculated automatically from surveys that are sent out to customers who 
have been in contact with the customer service chat. It is voluntary if a customer wants to 
==PAGE:40==
39 
answer the survey, and thus it should be noted that the customer satisfaction cannot solely be 
concluded from an NPS score. However, it does say something about the satisfaction. The 
current NPS score in CBB’s customer service is measured to 59%, which indicates that the 
the Customer Satisfaction is Excellent.  
 
4.2.3 CBB’s Chatbot Roberta 
Roberta was developed during a two-month project period. The period ran from 8th of 
November 2017 until Roberta's soft launch on the 24th of January 2018 [83]. The soft -launch 
was decided upon close to the deadline after several user-tests, which all indicated that the 
results were not satisfying yet to expose the whole customer base for Roberta. 
 
The development of the chatbot was carried out in collaboration with the suppliers, Boost.ai, 
a Norwegian based A.I. company, and consultants from Deloitte Denmark. As suppliers, 
Boost.ai delivered the chatbot platform to CBB i.e. the underlying algorithms and the 
platform in which all the data is developed and stored [84]. CBB along with consultants from 
Deloitte and two A.I. supervisors from Boost.ai developed the brain of the chatbot i.e. 
hierarchy of answers and conversation flows. Besides this, CBB designed, personalised it and 
integrated it with their homepage. The chatbot uses structured data and some form of NLP, 
which limits its understanding and answers. This forces the chatbot to refer to a human 
interaction customer service employee, in case it runs into questions it does not understand. 
When the chatbot soft-launched back in January its accuracy was 94,8%. This indicated a 
fairly good customer sentence prediction. As of today, the accuracy has increased to 97,4% 
with the help of 8 training rounds i.e. rounds of further answer and sentence development. 
However, through an analysis of conversations that the chatbot cannot answer, it was 
determined that the accuracy and thus the technical part does not determine the success of the 
chatbot. As the project manager of the CBB chatbot project stated: "We do not focus on 
increasing the accuracy more as we have realized that the performance of our chatbot does 
not solely rely on the accuracy. In other words, it comes down to how our customers write 
with our chatbot." [85]. This is further also one of the main reasons why CBB still has not 
chosen to fully launch their chatbot to their whole customer base, but instead has focused on 
optimizing the chatbot through filling it with actual customer sentences. According to CBB 
==PAGE:41==
40 
the optimization has already showed great results and today the chatbot can be found on their 
contact site. The chatbot is open all hours of the day, where as the customer service is only 
open from 8.30-21 in weekdays and 10-21 in the weekends as mentioned earlier. 
 
Due to the increase of effectiveness of the chatbot, CBB chose to make it available on all 
their chat entrances in a period of two days running from the 7th of June in 24 hours until the 
8th of June. This meant that everyone who started a chat anywhere on their website would 
meet the chatbot as the first thing. The test was carried out to understand how it performs 
when exposed to everyone, and furthermore to conclude if the chatbot can take chats from the 
human at customer service and hence be able to reduce human labour. The first results have 
been calculated (see figure 7), in which the chatbot received 561 chats.   
 
 
Figur 7 Chatbot results 
 
The first pillar from left shows that the chatbot has been able to answer 242 chats out of the 
561 i.e. 43% chats on its own without sending the customer to a human customer service 
employee. It should be noted that the chatbot is only build to be able to solve 50-70% chats 
and thus 43% is perceived as a good outcome. 
The second pillar shows that 291 chats out of the 561 i.e. 52% were send to a human 
interaction customer service. The percentage includes (i) 25% of customers who directly asks 
for a human, (ii) 13% solved chats that needs a human in the final step such as chats that 
==PAGE:42==
41 
concerns phone repair, and (iii) 14% unsolved chats that are referred to a human. The 
unsolved chats are furthermore a factor that CBB are working towards decreasing. The 
unsolved chats is due to the fact that the chatbot has difficulties in understanding and 
differentiating numbers, and thereby gives wrong information to the customer. Furthermore, 
the chatbot has also had difficulties understanding long sentences and would send a customer 
to the human interaction customer service as a solution. To improve this, CBB introduced 
shortcut and conversation flow, as well as a small introduction guide stating how to write 
with Roberta. This has proven to reduce long and complicated sentences and decreased the 
percentage of unsolved chats to the current percentage. The results as such are perceived as 
being satisfying as it was predicted that a large amount would be sent to the human 
interaction customer service. The third pillar in figure 7, shows that 28 chats out of the 561 
chats i.e. 5%, were placed as being without interaction. This includes 4% chats in which a 
customer has opened the chat and not proposed a question but rather closed the chat 
immediately again. And 1% unsolved chats, which never ends at a human and thus is left 
without any interaction.  
     
4.2.4 Customer satisfaction 
Customer service and hence customer satisfaction is an important point in CBB, and thus it is 
evident that since the chatbot is in contact with customers it needs to deliver a satisfying level 
of customer satisfaction. However, because the customers are anonymous in the chat it has 
been difficult to conclude if customers are satisfied. The statistics that the chatbot gives, is 
likes and dislikes as well as a feedback score, but even this makes it difficult to draw a 
conclusion, because it is such a small amount of customers who likes, dislikes or gives 
feedback in a conversation. As of today CBB is still struggling with understanding the 
customer satisfaction, however the like, dislikes and the feedback score does tell a positive 
progress (see figure 8 and 9). 
  
==PAGE:43==
42 
 
Figur 8 Chatbot Likes vs. Dislikes 
 
Figur 9 Chatbot Feedback Score 
  
Figure 8 shows that the chatbot started out with 7 likes and 24 dislikes when it soft launched 
back in January. Today it has 46 likes and only 14 dislikes, which when held against each 
other is drastic increase in likes and a relative good decrease in dislikes. Figure 9 shows the 
feedback score, which has increased from 2.6 out of 5 to now being 4 out of 5. 
It is fair to say that the performance of the chatbot has increased, and that it does answer a 
relative large amount of chats. But as the Project Manager of CBB states, “it is yet to be 
determined if it can actually reduce human labour as well as concluding if the customer 
satisfaction is positive”.[86] 
==PAGE:44==
43 
Sub-conclusion:  
This section focused on answering the second sub-research question and it can be concluded 
that CBB uses two different customer satisfaction measuring methods, thus not making it 
possible to compare the two customer service methods. It is not clear if the chatbot is 
increasing the customer satisfaction and providing a better service for the customers than the 
human interaction customer service. It was clear in the NPS results that the customers were 
already very much satisfied with the human interaction customer service, and the numbers for 
the chatbot only shows and increase in satisfaction but is not specific enough to determine 
anything.  
  
4.3 Strategic capabilities  
This section will focus on answering the third and final sub-research question, which analyses 
the strategic capabilities of CBB to improve and develop a chatbot resembling a human 
employee. 
 
4.3.1 Technology Scanning  
The technology scanning will provide an overview of the existing chatbot 
technologies on the market. This will be relevant for a further analysis of a potential 
new and improved chatbot for CBB.  
 
Microsoft Cortana   
Cortana is a virtual personal assistant launched in 2014 and created by Microsoft. It is 
available in 11 different languages, English, German, Italian, Spanish, French, Mandarin, 
Cantonese, Chinese, Portuguese, Japanese and Russian. It is used by Windows 10 laptops and 
mobile device users, as well as IOS, Android and Xbox One users. Cortana sets reminders, 
recognizes natural voices without any keyboard input and answers questions based on 
information retrieved from the Bing search engine, such as sport scores, weather or traffic. 
The more Cortana is used by the user, the more personalized the experience will be. It learns 
about its users by e.g. asking for information about their favorite sport, or by deducing the 
whereabouts of their workplace from the phones location data [87]. A location-based 
==PAGE:45==
44 
reminder is available, where Cortana can remind the user of a particular task based on the 
location e.g. if the user is at the supermarket, Cortana will remind them to buy milk. This 
makes the experience more personal and the user will feel more connected to the chatbot, as 
if it was a family member reminding them to pick up milk at the supermarket. Cortana 
partners with more than a thousand apps and services, which makes it possible for the chatbot 
to e.g. order food for the user on busy days[88]. It stores indexes and user information, but 
can be disabled manually by users. This will not make the chatbot delete all the previously 
stored user data on Microsoft’s servers, but it can again be deleted manually by users.  
 
Facebook Messenger   
The Facebook messenger platform was launched in 2016 by Mark Zuckerberg. It is powered 
by artificial intelligence, where it is possible for companies to build Natural language 
services. Facebook currently have 1.2 billion people using messenger and over 100.000 
monthly activity bots. [89]  Different companies connected to Messenger is able to send 
messages to the user through the chatbot, e.g. CNN can send daily news updates or the user 
can ask about a specific topic and the chatbot will provide the user with that information. 
Another possibility is to order something directly from the platform, e.g. the user can order a 
Pizza from Domino simply just by typing in their order and it will get delivered. Payments 
through the platform is only available in three countries, USA, France and UK. [90] The 
more it is used, the more personalized it will get for the user. Facebook is aiming to create a 
human-like chatbot, which can handle any request without the help of human interaction.   
 
Google Allo chatbot 
Google launched the instant messaging mobile app Google Allo in 2016 for Android and IOS 
mobile operating systems [91]. It is available in 10 different languages, English, French, 
Hindi, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese, Spanish, and German. Google Allo 
allows users to chat with Google virtual assistant, by typing @google in the chat before the 
question. The possibility to chat one-on-one with the google assistant is also available. It can 
answer basic questions, translate sentences to more than a 100 languages [92], as well as 
recommend restaurants or movies directly in a conversation between two people texting on 
Google Allo. It adapts its suggestions over time, as it analyzes the users behavior to improve. 
It is possible to delete the Google assistant history manually through the app or from a google 
account.   
 
==PAGE:46==
45 
IBM’s watson 
Watson is developed by IBM and is a question-answer computer system using Natural 
Language Processing and named after IBM’s first CEO, Thomas J. Watson. [93] It is 
available in 13 languages, Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Italian, Legacy 
Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish and Swedish. [94] It was initially 
developed to answer questions on the quiz show Jeopardy in 2011, but was later introduced to 
other areas such as healthcare, education and weather forecasting [95]. Compared to the 
conventional approaches to computing, which can only handle organized structured data from 
a database, Watson can understand unstructured data. Structured data consists of well defined 
fields that contains well specified information. Whereas,  unstructured data is all the data 
provided primarily by humans for other humans to consume, including articles, litterature, 
research reports and blogs posts. Watson continuously learns through ongoing interaction 
with the users. The system is periodically reviewed by experts and is updated so it is 
constantly adapting to knowledge in any given field.      
 
Apple’s Siri 
Siri is a virtual assistant developed by Apple Inc. in 2011 and is available for its IOS, 
watchOS, macOS, and tvOS operating systems. [96] It is available in 20 languages, English, 
Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, Finnish, French, German, Hebrew, Italian, Japanese, 
Korean, Malay, Norwegian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Thai and Turkish. Siri 
uses the different apps on the device to help the user, e.g it can help write a text while driving 
by voice recognition, making a call or setting a reminder to a specific time. It uses voice 
queries and a natural language user interface and adapts over time to the user behavior. It can 
likely misunderstand users as it only uses voice recognition, and can miss-interpret a word 
based on how it is pronounced.  
 
An overview is made of the five different chatbots and their parameters in table 3, to 
clarifying and comparing the parameters of each chatbot: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
46 
Parameters/product 
Cortana 
Messenger 
Allo 
Watson 
Siri 
Language 
availability (danish) 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
Voice recognition 
 
 
 
X 
X 
Chat 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
NLP 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Structured Data 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Unstructured Data 
 
 
 
X 
 
Supported by human 
interaction  
 
X 
 
 
 
Table 3: Technology Scanning 
 
The table creates an idea of which chatbots are similar and competing with each other. The X 
shows the parameters that the chatbot possesses e.g. they all use some form of Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) and structured data, which is very common for chatbots. Watson 
from IBM is the only chatbot that uses a combination of both structured and unstructured 
data, which is much more advanced for a chatbot. The users either use voice recognition or a 
chat function to communicate with the chatbots, the only one available with both functions 
are the Watson chatbot. This decreases any misunderstandings between chatbot and user. 
Only Messenger is supported by a human interaction customer service, incase the chatbot 
does not understand a question asked by the user. Finally, the only two chatbots that are not 
available in danish is Cortana and Allo, this will be relevant in the further analysis of a 
possibility to collaborate or implement parts of the chatbots in a new and improved chatbot 
for CBB. As it will be used in Denmark, the chatbot has to possess the danish language as a 
necessity.  
 
==PAGE:48==
47 
4.3.2 The three Horizons framework 
With the information given in section 4.2.3 about the chatbot Roberta, it is clear to state that 
it can be placed in Horizon 1, see figure 10. Roberta does not differ from a lot of the chatbots 
already on the market provided by other companies, as shown in the previous section 4.3.1. If 
CBB does not optimize or differentiate Roberta, it will likely flat out and not provide any 
value to CBB.  
 
 
Figur 10 The Three Horizon Framework 
 
In order for CBB to move to Horizon 2, they should be emerging activities, which will 
provide new sources of profit. To move even further to Horizon 3, they should create 
valuable options which in turns could be very risky. Roberta should preferably be on Horizon 
2 or 3, as the framework suggests that a company should use a strategy where they are 
focusing on the long-term success instead of the short-term. In order for CBB to develop the 
chatbot to move away from Horizon 1, they need to evaluate if they have the capabilities for 
it. CBB’s capabilities will be evaluated in the next section 4.3.3.   
4.3.3 The capability of CBB  
Table 4 shows an overview of the strategic capabilities of CBB, to identify a focus point and 
where the most important part of the analysis should be. Strategic capability is the adequacy 
and suitability of the resources and competences of an organisation for it to survive and 
prosper [97]. The three main areas to look at are the physical, financial and human 
capabilities, where the resources show what CBB has and the competenses show what they 
do well.  
==PAGE:49==
48 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic capability 
Resources -what we have 
 
Competences - what we do 
well 
Tools, buildings, products, 
databases, computer systems 
Physical 
Ways to handle a chatbot, 
flexibility, marketing 
Balance sheet, cash flow  
Financial 
Human labour decrease  
Managers, IT DevOps, 
Marked, Customer 
Experience and 
Digitalization, Online and 
Marketing, Operational 
Excellence, back office,  
customer service, partners, 
suppliers, customers 
Human 
Collaboration 
Table 4: Stratigic Capabilities 
 
As for the analysis concerning the chatbot, the focus is on the human capabilities and how 
CBB collaborates with other companies in order to develop chatbots, as they do not have the 
capabilities to do it themselves. To develop Roberta, CBB contacted Deloitte as mentioned in 
section 4.2.3, which is a consultancy firm and thus does not develop chatbots themselves, 
instead they have partners. One of their core partners in chatbots is Boost.ai. Boost.ai has 
therefore developed the chatbot platform for CBB and delivered a Telecommunication 
module inside of the chatbot platform. Before a chatbot can work it needs to have a brain 
which in other words is a structure of many sentences that the chatbot needs to understand 
==PAGE:50==
49 
and sentences that it needs to respond with. During the project period Deloitte assisted CBB 
mobil with the development of the chatbot brain in the Boost.ai platform. When the brain was 
developed, the design of the chat window was made by the Online & Marketing department. 
This department handed the design over to the in-house consultants, Novataris. Novataris 
consists of consultants who maintain and implement changes on the CBB Mobil website, 
hence is CBB Mobil's front-end developers. Thus, it is also them who needs to integrate the 
chatbot with the CBB Mobil website. Furthermore, it is also Novataris who handles for whom 
the chatbot is visible to, where it pops up on the website and so forth. IT DevOps, the back-
end developers, was not a big part of the project, because the back-end was already 
developed by Boost.ai and handed over to CBB Mobil and Novataris.  
4.3.4 CBB as a dynamic capability  
As mentioned earlier in section 2.5 Teece et al. states, dynamic capabilities are an 
organization’s ability to renew and recreate its strategic capabilities to meet the needs of 
changing environments [98]. Thus, CBB can be recognized as a dynamic capability due to 
their ability to adapt to the change of digitalization in the industry. The telecommunication 
industry sits at the core of the digital revolution and is taking over the industry quick [99]. 
They are all responding to the industry disruption by simultaneously digitizing and building 
out new business models [100]. CBB have the capabilities to collaborate with other 
companies that can provide them what is needed to digitize, as well as having the ability to 
make changes quicker than the mother company Telenor. This is due to CBB’s strategic 
change and decisions only having to be approved in Denmark, while Telenor has to be 
approved on an international level. The way CBB adapted to the change of a more digitized 
industry, was by implementing the chatbot Roberta. At the same time, CBB struggles to 
move beyond the traditional chatbot that answers basic and simplified questions from 
customers, which can easily be imitated. Teece suggest three generic types of dynamic 
capabilities [101]. 
 
 
- 
Sensing: This is as such an ability that CBB possesses, as they have already sensed 
that digitalization is the future of the telecommunication industry, they had to adapt 
and explore how much they can digitalize. As a starting point they have implemented 
a very simplified chatbot, but as the chatbot market evolves, the chatbot can become 
more humanoid. Sensing contains the ability to continuously innovate in order to 
satisfy the customers and deliver innovative solutions within digitalization. 
==PAGE:51==
50 
Furthermore, they are aiming at becoming a digital frontrunner, taking a clear lead in 
developing and adapting new technology[102]. This is something they have the 
capabilities to do, as they have the capability to collaborate with other companies in 
the development of becoming more digitized, and can potentially move towards the 
implementation of a more advanced chatbot.  
 
- 
Seizing: As the new opportunity of creating a more digitized telecommunication 
company immersed, it was seized by implementing a new chatbot as a starting point 
as mentioned in the previous section. As stated by the CEO of Telenor ‘’Our most 
important task moving forward is to deploy our knowledge, expertise and innovation 
to develop digital services people want and need, and that businesses and society 
really need.’’  [103] This also concerns CBB as they are owned by Telenor, hence it is 
inevitable to see traces of Telenor’s strategy in the way CBB is working. The 
implementation of the chatbot will mean less need for human interaction customer 
service and an around the clock help from the chatbot.  
 
 
- 
Reconfiguring: CBB continually reconfigure its capabilities to fit the rapid change in 
the telecommunication industry, by making new investments in products and people 
to join the team. They state that they will be making additional investment in people 
in order to succeed with the transformation of becoming digital[104].  
 
Sub-conclusion 
This section focused on the strategic capabilities of CBB and how digitalization can 
differentiate them from other companies. It can be concluded that CBB has the capabilities to 
collaborate with another company to provide a better chatbot service for its customers, which 
resembles a more humanoid chatbot.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
51 
Chapter 5 
Discussion  
This chapter will discuss the overall research question and the sub research questions in 
which results from the previous chapter will be evaluated, as well as the methods used. The 
aim is to try to create a greater and complete understanding of the results discovered. The sub 
research questions were created to finally answer the overall research question. The overall 
research question that this study has focused on is the following: 
      
 
How can digitalisation be a differentiator without compromising customer 
satisfaction?  
 
To answer the research question, three sub research questions were stated and will be 
answered accordingly:  
 
How can digitalization differentiate Telenor and create a strong position so they 
remain strong positioned with their customer satisfaction?  
The Quadric framework was used to analyse Telenor’s position and their competitor’s 
position to refine the strategy or develop a new strategy. The framework states the core idea 
of Telenor, which is their service, i.e. they provide a better service than their competitors. 
Through an analysis of Telenor’s direct competitors, 3 mobile, TDC and Telia, it is clear to 
state that they are more or less similar. Telenor are aiming at providing a better service by 
becoming a digital service provider and thereby differentiating their company from the 
competitors, as none of the competitors are providing a digital service. The digital service 
will be provided through a chatbot, which they are test-running on their daughter company 
CBB before implementing it themselves. This strategy is used by Telenor as they have a 
greater subscription base than CBB, and if the chatbot project would fail, it would affect a 
smaller part of their subscribers. As seen in new development by Google, they are providing 
customers with a chatbot, which resembles a human. It is an A.I. development and is called 
Google Duplex [105]. It is used as a Google Assistant and helps Google users make calls and 
==PAGE:53==
52 
books appointments or reserve a table at a restaurant, without the help of the user. It dials the 
number to the restaurant by itself and books the table using speech recognition to 
communicate with the restaurant service assistant. It uses words like ‘mm-hmm’, ‘uhm’, 
‘ohh’ etc. and can actually understand the nuances of the conversation, which gives the 
impression of communicating with a human, rather than a robot. It seems as the employee 
does not even notice that she is communicating with an A.I. machine, due to the human 
resemblance. Thus, it could be discussed if it is a necessity for customers/employees to know 
they are communicating with a robot if they cannot recognize the difference.    
 
What is the customer satisfaction and how is it measured?  
The customer satisfaction is measured in two different ways, depending on if it is the 
satisfaction of the human interaction customer service or the chatbot. The human interaction 
customer service is measured using an NPS score, that focuses on the percentage of 
promoters and detractors. The promoters are the customers that are most likely to promote 
CBB and could also be called the loyal customers. The detractors are the customers that can 
most likely become promoters if CBB listens to their needs. The NPS score at CBB is 59%, 
which in turns indicates that customers are very satisfied with the customer service. The 
customer satisfaction for the chatbot is measured by the likes and dislikes as well as a 
feedback score. The likes and feedback score show an increase in the customer satisfaction of 
the chatbot, which happened after the correction of its defaults. Due to the different 
measuring methods, it is not possible to compare the customer satisfaction for the two 
customer service methods. This creates a discussion of the reason for implementing the 
chatbot, i.e. is it due to the improvement of service and customer satisfaction or is it to 
reducing the cost of human labor. As mentioned in section 2.8, a chatbot can handle multiple 
clients at a time, thus reduce the need of human customer service employees and thereby also 
reduce cost. Currently it is not possible for the chatbot to run on its own, i.e. there is still a 
need of human customer service employees, as the chatbot does not understand and respond 
100% correct. This is based on the predicted questions and answers it gets from the 
customers, i.e. it is not able to respond to questions which does not have a relation to e.g. 
CBB subscriptions, mobile purchase, customer service hours etc. If the chatbot is asked any 
questions it cannot answer, the customer is forwarded to a human employee, thus CBB does 
not experience any cost savings by implementing the chatbot in the current moment.  
 
==PAGE:54==
53 
The implementation of the chatbot was a strategy provided by Telenor, to test-run it on CBB, 
before implementing it themselves. Telenor is the mother company of CBB with 1.827 
million mobile subscribers as mentioned in section 4.12, where CBB holds 625.502 of those 
subscribers. If the chatbot would be a failed project, it would only have an effect on the 
625.502 subscribers out of the 1.827 million Telenor subscribers, and would avoid creating a 
huge loss for Telenor. As the chatbot seems to have succeeded thus far at CBB, it has been 
discussed by Telenor to also implement the chatbot on their platform in the near future. The 
implemented chatbots will still only be able to answer basic and simple questions, and there 
will most probably still be a need of human employees. In order to save costs by 
implementing the chatbot, it has to be improved and closely imitating a human. This will 
reduce the amount of employees and by time be able to stand alone without the help of a 
human employee.    
 
Can the strategic capability describe what digitalization does? 
CBB can be recognized as a dynamic capability as mentioned in section 4.2.4, due to their 
ability to renew and recreate its strategic capabilities to meet the needs of the changing 
environment. They have already adapted to the digital revolution, which is taking over the 
telecommunication industry and are trying to differentiate by implementing the chatbot to 
differentiate and improve their service. It was clear by the Horizon framework analysis that 
Roberta was placed in Horizon 1, i.e. with the current features, it will not create any value to 
CBB in the long-term perspective of their success. Therefore, it was evaluated which 
possibilities would be available for CBB, to develop a chatbot that could differentiate them 
based on their service i.e. create value for them and thus be placed in Horizon 2 or 3. As 
mentioned in section 2.8, the aim for most chatbots is to imitate and resemble human 
interaction employees and thus differentiate and succeed in the telecommunication market.  
In order for CBB to create a chatbot that closely imitates a human, they have to evaluate if 
they have the capabilities to do so. The analysis of their capabilities show that they do not 
have the human capabilities to create or improve a chatbot. They are collaborating with 
Boost.ai, which has provided them the chatbot platform. They only have the capabilities to 
run the chatbot when it is needed and optimize the questions and responds feature. To create 
a more human like chatbot, they have to improve and optimize the data form it uses. 
Currently it is only using structured data, which is linked information in a format e.g. excel 
sheet as mentioned in section 2.8. Instead the chatbot has to use a combination of structured 
==PAGE:55==
54 
and unstructured data, as unstructured data consists of information from documents, emails, 
articles and other platforms, that create a chatbot resembling a human interaction employee 
much more. CBB does not have the capabilities themselves to develop a chatbot like this, but 
they do have the financial capabilities to collaborate with another company to do so. 
       
The sub research questions have lead us to answer on the research question stated above:  
 
How can digitalisation be a differentiator without compromising customer 
satisfaction? 
As mentioned in the Quadric framework in section 4.1.3, shows that Telenor’s core idea is 
providing their customers with excellent service. This is the same core idea for CBB as they 
share the same strategy, and as mentioned earlier they are trying to implement the chatbot to 
improve their service and be digital service providers. CBB can use digitalization to 
differentiate by implementing a chatbot that satisfies the customers and focuses mainly on 
providing a better service for them. As mentioned in the previous section, they have the 
capabilities to collaborate with a company to improve their chatbot. As discovered in section 
5.1, IBM’s Watson is a chatbot that uses both structured and unstructured data, which in turns 
create a more human resembled chatbot. With the use of both data forms, the chatbot will be 
able to answer more questions than a human employee, as mentioned in section 2.6 the 
chatbot can store more data than a human brain can remember. This could be a very 
important feature for CBB to implement and thus differentiate from its competitors.  
    To further improve the chatbot to satisfy the customers, a more personalized feature could 
be implemented as well. In section 2.7, it is argued how 20% of customers are actually 
willing to provide companies with their personal information, to offer them a more 
personalized service. They feel more connected to the service there receive when they feel 
that the chatbot already knows them. It could be discussed if this is a possibility, so that when 
the customer starts the chat with the chatbot, it already knows the name, personal interests, 
their personal needs etc. This could be provided by a collaboration with e.g. Facebook, as 
many uses the Facebook platform and through the likes and what they share on the profile, it 
could be possible for CBB to communicate with the customer on a more personal level with 
this information at hand. Though, there might be a huge risk in sharing customers personal 
data across companies, as Facebook is currently undergoing a lawsuit for sharing users 
personal information[106].  
==PAGE:56==
55 
   Thus far, CBB has access to the mobile subscriptions, customers most contacted numbers, 
the amount of data used pr. month, the amount of call hours used pr. month, the customer 
name, as well as location. This is information that the chatbot could easily use as a 
personalized feature, when it is contacted by the customer, to create a chatbot that the 
customer can feel more connected to. It could as well track the customer history of e.g. 
mobile subscriptions and thereby keep a track of the customer preferences and suggest it for 
the customer when needed.  
    It is important to create a chatbot that resembles a human employee as close as possible if 
they should be able to satisfy all customers, as it is not all customers that are willing to 
communicate with a chatbot, instead they would rather communicate with a human 
employee. As mentioned in the previous section, it could be discussed how important it is to 
inform people that they are communicating with an A.I. machine if they do not notice the 
difference, i.e. would it still be ethically acceptable to do it as long as they receive the help 
they need.  
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
56 
Chapter 6 
6.1 Conclusion 
This case has investigated one research question, to understand how digitalization can be a 
differentiator without compromising customer satisfaction.  
     It can be concluded that the challenge related to the rapid digitalization in service systems, 
is to differentiate in the telecommunication industry. As mentioned, the telecommunication 
companies are actually not offering anything different to their customers, and the customers 
can easily switch from one company to the other as the offers are the same. They are a 
dynamic capability and will have to adapt to the rapid changing environment, by renewing 
and recreating their strategic capabilities to meet the needs of the changing environment.    
  Telenor found a core idea to focus on, which is ‘to provide excellent service for the 
customers’. They have already taken a step towards differentiating, as they are test running 
the Chatbot Roberta on CBB, as it is a smaller company owned by them and the damage will 
be less severe if the project would fail. Thus far, it looks like the project has succeeded and 
they are evaluating when to implement the chatbot on their own platform as well in the near 
future. The chatbot provided by CBB at the moment is using NLP and structured data, which 
creates a chatbot that answers very simple and basic questions. If it does not understand what 
the customer is asking for, it forwards the customer to a human interaction customer service 
employee. This will not create the break through differentiation that Telenor has to achieve in 
order to move from Horizon 1 to Horizon 2 or even 3, to obtain sustained competitive 
advantage.  They will have to create a chatbot that resembles a human employee very closely 
and create a personalized experience.  
    Collaborating with IBM’s Watson and bringing the features it provides, to the chatbot at 
CBB, will create a chatbot that resembles a human very closely. This is due to the 
combination of structured and unstructured data, which provides the chatbot with data from 
documents that are created in different formats e.g. emails, articles, journals etc. This is more 
advanced for a chatbot to do, but it will provide the chatbot with more advanced answers as 
well. The chatbot will be able to answer on more personal questions and create a more 
personalized experience for the users. The chatbot can handle multiple clients at a time, and 
will decrease the need of a human employee and thereby also reduce costs for the company.   
==PAGE:58==
57 
    Finally, it was not possible to evaluate if the implementation of the chatbot was due to a 
lack of customer satisfaction or if it was to reduce costs, as they are using two different 
measurements to evaluate their customer satisfaction. Though it should still be important to 
point out that they will have to digitalise and differentiate in order to sustain competitive 
advantage, which the implementation of the chatbot is succeeding at thus far.  
 
6.2 Future research 
Throughout the case it was evident to notice that the telecommunication companies are not 
doing much to differentiate from their competitors. The four largest companies in Denmark 
are more or less providing the same products and services at their competitors. This is 
important to focus on, in order to provide value for the customers and a purpose to stay a 
loyal customer. The industry is becoming more and more digitized and it is therefore 
inevitable for the telecommunication companies to not digitalize. It could be researched if 
companies need to fully digitalised or if there is a benefit in only partially digitalising. 
 
Further, it could be investigated if how humanoid the chatbot has to be in order to satisfy 
customers and for everyone to accept it. It is mostly customers that are against the new 
technological changing environment, that would be against the implementation of a fully 
chatbot controlled customer service, as many would like to feel the interaction with a human 
employee. It could therefore be questioned of how ethically correct it is to implement a 
chatbot that resembles a human employee very closely and can not be distinguished by the 
customer. As mentioned earlier, Google Duplex is a great example of this. This also means 
that there is actually the technology out there to create a very humanoid robot. This is 
something Telenor and CBB should look into, as they have the capabilities to collaborate 
with other companies and provide this service for their customers. This would bring them to 
another level and differentiate them a lot from their competitors.   
 
Finally, another future research for the company could be to try and use the same customer 
satisfaction measuring method. The method they are using now does not provide a clear 
indication of the success of the chatbot. It actually only shows the improvements of the 
chatbot compared to itself, which creates a problem for CBB as they do not know if more 
people prefer the chatbot over the human employee.  
==PAGE:59==
58 
 
 To end this case, it should be mentioned at there has been limitations through the 
investigation of this case study. One of the limitations are the limited time constraints of a 5 
month period to research and thereby has not reached the full potential. Other necessary 
results could have been discovered if the time was not limited to 5 months. Lastly, a further 
limitation was the limited information provided as there was no company collaboration with 
Telenor in this case, to get all the necessary information needed to do an in depth research of 
their capabilities, financial statements and alike.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:60==
59 
Referencer 
[1] Cetindamar, D., Phaal, R. and Probert, D. (2009) Understanding technology management as a dynamic 
capability: A framework for technology management activities, ScienceDirect, page 237-246 
 
[2] Farruck, C., Phaal, R. and Probert, D. (2001) A framework for supporting the management of technological 
innovation, Eindhoven Centre for Innovation Studies, page 7 
 
[3]Farruck, C., Phaal, R. and Probert, D. (2003) Technology roadmapping: linking technology resources into 
business planning, Inderscience Enterprises Ltd, page 5 
 
[4] Farruck, C., Phaal, R. and Probert, D. (2003) Technology roadmapping: linking technology resources into 
business planning, Inderscience Enterprises Ltd, page 5 
 
[5] Farruck, C., Phaal, R. and Probert, D. (2003) Technology roadmapping: linking technology resources into 
business planning, Inderscience Enterprises Ltd, page 5 
 
[6] Farruck, C., Phaal, R. and Probert, D. (2003) Technology roadmapping: linking technology resources into 
business planning, Inderscience Enterprises Ltd, page 5 
 
[7]Farruck, C., Phaal, R. and Probert, D. (2003) Technology roadmapping: linking technology resources into 
business planning, Inderscience Enterprises Ltd, page 5 
 
[8]Farruck, C., Phaal, R. and Probert, D. (2003) Technology roadmapping: linking technology resources into 
business planning, Inderscience Enterprises Ltd, page 6 
 
[9]Farruck, C., Phaal, R. and Probert, D. (2003) Technology roadmapping: linking technology resources into 
business planning, Inderscience Enterprises Ltd, page 6 
 
[10]Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 3 
 
[11]Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 3 
 
[12]Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 3 
 
[13]Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 3 
 
[14]Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 3 
 
[15]Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 3 
 
[16]Mintzberg, H., et al. (2003). Strategies. The Strategy Process. 2nd ed. UK: Pearson Education Limited. p2-
22. 
 
==PAGE:61==
60 
[17]Wen-Cheng, W., Chien-Hung, L. and Ying-Chien, C. (2010) Types of Competitive Advantage and 
Analysis, page 100-103 
 
[18]Wen-Cheng, W., Chien-Hung, L. and Ying-Chien, C. (2010) Types of Competitive Advantage and 
Analysis, page 100-103  
 
[19]Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 59 
 
[20]Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 50. 
 
[21] Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 50. 
 
[22] Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 53. 
 
[23]Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 54. 
 
[24] Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 51 
 
[25]Teece, D., Pisano, G. and Shuen A. (1997), Dynamic Capabilitites and Stratigigc Management, Stratigic 
Management Journal p. 515 
 
[26]Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 51 
 
[27] Helfat, C. and Peteraf M. (2003), The dynamic resource-based view: capability lifecycles, stratigic 
management journal, page 998-1009 
 
[28]Eisenhardt, K. and Martin, J.(2000), Dynamic Capabilitites: What are they?, page 1117 
 
[29]Bughin, J., Hazan, E., Ramaswamy, S., Chui, M., Allas, T., Dahlström, P., Henke, N. and Trench, M. (2017) 
Artificial Intelligence The next digital frontier?, Mckinsey Global institute. page 4  
 
[30]Gams, M. (1995)  Strong vs. Weak AI, page 483 
 
[31]Ferrucci, D., Levas, A., Bagchi, S., and Mueller, E. (2012) Watson: Beyond Jeopardy!, Artificial 
Intelligence, page 1-12 
 
[32] Bughin, J., Hazan, E., Ramaswamy, S., Chui, M., Allas, T., Dahlström, P., Henke, N. and Trench, M. 
(2017) Artificial Intelligence The next digital frontier?, Mckinsey Global institute. page 20  
 
[33] Mannino, A., Althaus, D., Erhardt, J., Hutter, A. and Mertzinger, T. (2015) Artificial Intelligence: 
Opportunities and Risks, Foundational Research, page 5 
 
[34] Mannino, A., Althaus, D., Erhardt, J., Hutter, A. and Mertzinger, T. (2015) Artificial Intelligence: 
Opportunities and Risks, Foundational Research, page 5 
 
==PAGE:62==
61 
[35] Mannino, A., Althaus, D., Erhardt, J., Hutter, A. and Mertzinger, T. (2015) Artificial Intelligence: 
Opportunities and Risks, Foundational Research, page 7 
 
[36] Bughin, J., Hazan, E., Ramaswamy, S., Chui, M., Allas, T., Dahlström, P., Henke, N. and Trench, M. 
(2017) Artificial Intelligence The next digital frontier?, Mckinsey Global institute. page 15  
 
[37] Bughin, J., Hazan, E., Ramaswamy, S., Chui, M., Allas, T., Dahlström, P., Henke, N. and Trench, M. 
(2017) Artificial Intelligence The next digital frontier?, Mckinsey Global institute. page 2  
 
[38] Patterson, G., Mittal, B. S. and Weinelt, B. (2017) Digital Transformation Initiative Telecommunications 
Industry, World Economic Forum, Page 13 
 
[39] Patterson, G., Mittal, B. S. and Weinelt, B. (2017) Digital Transformation Initiative Telecommunications 
Industry, World Economic Forum, Page 13 
 
[40] Patterson, G., Mittal, B. S. and Weinelt, B. (2017) Digital Transformation Initiative Telecommunications 
Industry, World Economic Forum, Page 18 
 
[41] Patterson, G., Mittal, B. S. and Weinelt, B. (2017) Digital Transformation Initiative Telecommunications 
Industry, World Economic Forum, Page 24 
 
[42] Patterson, G., Mittal, B. S. and Weinelt, B. (2017) Digital Transformation Initiative Telecommunications 
Industry, World Economic Forum, Page 28 
 
[43] Patterson, G., Mittal, B. S. and Weinelt, B. (2017) Digital Transformation Initiative Telecommunications 
Industry, World Economic Forum, Page 27 
 
[44] Matthew, G., Adam, S. and Jane, S. (2016), Digital Transformation for telecom operators adapting to 
customer centric, mobile-first world, Deloitte MCS Limited, page 3 
 
[45] Matthew, G., Adam, S. and Jane, S. (2016), Digital Transformation for telecom operators adapting to 
customer centric, mobile-first world, Deloitte MCS Limited, page 3 
 
[46] Patterson, G., Mittal, B. S. and Weinelt, B. (2017) Digital Transformation Initiative Telecommunications 
Industry, World Economic Forum, Page 27 
 
[47] Reshmi, S. and Balakrishnan, K. (2016) Implementation of an inquisitive chatbot for database supported 
knowledge bases, page 1173 
 
[48] Reshmi, S. and Balakrishnan, K. (2016) Implementation of an inquisitive chatbot for database supported 
knowledge bases, page 1173 
 
[49]Abdul-Kader, S. and Woods, J. (2015) Survey on Chatbot Design Techniques in Speech Conversation 
Systems, Page 73 
 
[50]Frank, B. H. (2018) IBM declares AI the key to making unstructured data useful, Venturebeat, page 1 
 
[51]Reshmi, S. and Balakrishnan, K. (2018) Empowering Chatbots with business intelligence by Big Data 
inegration, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, page 1  
 
[52]Ferrucci, D., Levas, A., Bagchi, S., and Mueller, E. (2012) Watson: Beyond Jeopardy!, Artificial 
Intelligence, page 2 
==PAGE:63==
62 
 
[53]Reshmi, S. and Balakrishnan, K. (2018) Empowering Chatbots with business intelligence by Big Data 
inegration, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, page 1  
 
[54]Brandtzaeg, P. B. and Følstad A. (2017) Why people use chatbots, Forskningsveien, page 1 
 
[55] Brandtzaeg, P. B. and Følstad A. (2017) Why people use chatbots, Forskningsveien, page 1 
 
[56]Brandtzaeg, P. B. and Følstad A. (2017) Why people use chatbots, Forskningsveien, page 3 
 
[57] Yin, R. (2014). Case Study Research, Design and Methods. 5th ed. SAGE Publications. p16 
 
[58] Yin, R. (2014). Case Study Research, Design and Methods. 5th ed. SAGE Publications. p2 
 
[59] Yin, R. (2014). Case Study Research, Design and Methods. 5th ed. SAGE Publications. p2 
 
[60] Yin, R. (2014). Case Study Research, Design and Methods. 5th ed. SAGE Publications. p29 
 
[61] Yin, R. (2014). Case Study Research, Design and Methods. 5th ed. SAGE Publications. p73 
 
[62] Yin, R. (2014). Case Study Research, Design and Methods. 5th ed. SAGE Publications. p110 
 
[63]Yin, R. (2014). Case Study Research, Design and Methods. 5th ed. SAGE Publications. p143 
 
[64] Quadric, Clarify your differentiation to create competitive advantage (2018). Available: 
http://quadric.dk/positioning/. Last retrived 16/06/2018 
 
[65] Quadric, Clarify your differentiation to create competitive advantage (2018).  Available: 
http://quadric.dk/positioning/.  Last retrived 16/06/2018 
 
[66] Quadric, Clarify your differentiation to create competitive advantage (2018). Available:  
http://quadric.dk/positioning/. Last retrived 16/06/2018 
 
[67] Quadric, Clarify your differentiation to create competitive advantage (2018). Available:  
http://quadric.dk/positioning/. Last retrived 16/06/2018 
 
[68] Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 51. 
 
[69] Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D., Regnér, P., (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, Page 
51. 
 
[70] Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 51. 
 
[71] Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 5 
 
[72] Telenor Denmark by Telenor group (2017). Available: https://www.telenor.com/about-us/global-
presence/denmark/ . Last retrived 2/06/2018.   
 
==PAGE:64==
63 
[73] Telenor Denmark by Telenor group (2017). Available: https://www.telenor.com/about-us/global-
presence/denmark/ . Last retrived 2/06/2018.   
 
[74]How to develop an understanding of company’s culture, by F. John Reh (March 30, 2018). Available: 
https://www.thebalancecareers.com/company-culture-2275155 .  Last retrived 24/05/2018 
 
[75] Our culture, telenor group. Available: https://www.telenor.com/about-us/our-culture/. Last retrived 
24/05/2018 
 
[76] Telenor is changing - launches new brand identity, published 9 February 2006 by Telenor. Available: 
https://www.telenor.com/media/press-release/telenor-is-changing-launches-new-brand-identity/ . Last retrived 
24/05/2018 
 
[77] Telenor is changing - launches new brand identity, published 9 February 2006 by Telenor. Available: 
https://www.telenor.com/media/press-release/telenor-is-changing-launches-new-brand-identity/ . Last retrived 
24/05/2018 
 
[78]Telenor is changing - launches new brand identity, published 9 February 2006 by Telenor. Available: 
https://www.telenor.com/media/press-release/telenor-is-changing-launches-new-brand-identity/ . Last retrived 
24/05/2018 
 
[79] Værd at vide om CBB mobil. (2014). Available: http://www.forbrugseksperten.dk/mobil/udbydere/cbb/ . 
Last retrived 03/06/2018 
 
[80]Værd at vide om CBB mobil (2014). Available: http://www.forbrugseksperten.dk/mobil/udbydere/cbb/ . 
Last retrived 03/06/2018 
 
[81]Kundeservice hos CBB by CBB. (2017). Available: https://www.cbb.dk/cbb-bloggen/guides-og-
information/kundeservice-hos-cbb-mobil/ . Last retrived 03/06/2018 
 
[82]Net Promotor Score (NPS): what is a good Net Promotor Score? by Jamie Yan. (2018). Available: 
https://www.questionpro.com/blog/nps-considered-good-net-promoter-score/ .Last retrieved 04/06/2018 
 
[83] Interview, Project Manager. CBB at Telenor Denmark. Appendix 3 
 
[84] Interview, Project Manager. CBB at Telenor Denmark. Appendix 3 
 
[85] Interview, Project Manager. CBB at Telenor Denmark. Appendix 3 
 
[86] Interview, Project Manager. CBB at Telenor Denmark. Appendix 3 
 
[87] Microsoft wants you to educate its virtual assistant, by Tom Simonite. (24 April 2014). Available: 
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/526816/microsoft-wants-you-to-educate-its-virtual-assistant/ . Last 
retrieved 26/05/2018 
 
[88] Cortana is your truly personal digital assistant, Microsoft (2018). Available: https://www.microsoft.com/en-
in/windows/cortana . Last retrieved 26/05/2018 
 
 
[89] Chatbot comparison - Facebook, Microsoft, Amazon and Google by John Walker. (29 March 2018). 
Available: https://www.techemergence.com/chatbot-comparison-facebook-microsoft-amazon-google/ . Last 
retrieved 27/05/2018 
==PAGE:65==
64 
 
[90]Payments in Messenger by Facebook.com. Available: https://www.facebook.com/help/messenger-
app/750020781733477/?helpref=hc_fnav . Last retrieved 28/05/2018 
 
[91] Say Allo by Google. (2017). Available: https://allo.google.com . Last retrieved 29/05/2018 
 
[92]Chat med din google assistant i Google Allo by Google support. (2018). Available: 
https://support.google.com/allo/answer/6385794. Last retrieved 29/05/2018 
 
[93]IBM Watson supercomputer by Techtarget. (2016). Available: 
https://searchenterpriseai.techtarget.com/definition/IBM-Watson-supercomputer . Last retrieved 29/05/2018 
 
[94]IBM Knowledge Language configuration. Available: 
https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/en/SS8NLW_12.0.0/com.ibm.swg.im.infosphere.dataexpl.engin
e.doc/r_i18n-supported.html . Last retrieved 29/05/2018 
 
[95]IBM Watson supercomputer by Techtarget. (2016). Available: 
https://searchenterpriseai.techtarget.com/definition/IBM-Watson-supercomputer . Last retrieved 29/05/2018 
 
[96]IOS Siri by Apple Inc., 2018, last retrived 29/05/2018 https://www.apple.com/ios/siri/  
 
[97]What are resources and competences in Innovation for growth, by CWMIFG. (April 23 2012). Available:  
http://www.innovationforgrowth.co.uk/Blog/what-are-resources-and-competences/ . Last retrieved 01/06/2018 
 
[98]Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D. and Regnér, P. (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, 
Page 51. 
 
[99]Telecommunication Goes all in on Digital. (2018). Available:  
http://www.digitalistmag.com/iot/2018/02/07/telecommunications-goes-all-in-on-digital-05854982 . Last 
retrieved 02/06/2018 
 
[100]Telecommunication Goes all in on Digital. (2018). Available:  
http://www.digitalistmag.com/iot/2018/02/07/telecommunications-goes-all-in-on-digital-05854982 . Last 
retrieved 02/06/2018 
 
[101]Johnson, G., Whittington, R., Scholes, K., Angwin, D., Regnér, P., (2009) Fundamentals of strategy, Page 
51. 
 
[102]Change pace: Gearing up for a digital shift, by Sigve Brekke. (2016). Available: 
https://www.telenor.com/media/more-than-ceos/sigve-brekke/changing-pace-gearing-up-for-a-digital-shift/ . 
Last retrieved 03/06/2018 
 
[103]Change pace: Gearing up for a digital shift, by Sigve Brekke. (2016). Available: 
https://www.telenor.com/media/more-than-ceos/sigve-brekke/changing-pace-gearing-up-for-a-digital-shift/. 
Last retrieved 03/06/2018 
 
[104]Telenor CEO reveals strategy for 2018 and main achievements in 2017 by telecomlead. (2018). Available: 
http://www.telecomlead.com/telecom-services/telenor-ceo-reveals-strategy-for-2018-and-main-achievements-
in-2017-81783 Last retrieved 03/06/2018 
 
 
