==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Spatial Perception in Reverberant Envi-
ronments with Cochlear Implant Recipi-
ents
Rasmus
Oestergaard
Bendsen
(s134098)
Supervisors:
Abigail
Anne
Kressner and Torsten Dau
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This study investigates the eﬀects of amplitude compression and dynamic range on
spatial perception in cochlear implants using a vocoder simulation in experiments
with normal-hearing listeners. Three diﬀerent compression conﬁgurations were tested:
independent compression in each ear, a linked compression between the two ears and
"spatially aware" compression, where the compression was applied to anechoic signals
before spatialization. As a reference condition, linear processing without broadband
compression was considered.
Each of the compression schemes was tested using
two diﬀerent release times. The experiment was conducted both with and without
vocoding. Such experimental design was chosen in order to investigate, (1) the eﬀect
of the broadband compression on perceived localization and (2) the eﬀect of dynamic
range on the eﬀect of compression. The results for the non-vocoded conditions showed
that the amplitude compression did not have a strong eﬀect on spatial perception.
In contrast in the vocoded conditions, the listeners experienced a very diﬀuse sound
image. Most listeners could in the vocoded conditions indicate whether the sound
came from left or right, but the precise direction/angle of the sound was diﬃcult to
detect. Despite the diﬀuse sound image in the vocoded conditions, the results showed
that neither the broadband compression nor the dynamic range strongly aﬀected the
perceived sound image. Thus, the decreased ability to localize sound in the vocoded
conditions by the listeners came from another component of the signal processing
used in the cochlear implant simulation. A discussion about which components of the
signal processing may have the strongest eﬀect on spatial perception is provided.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Electrical Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring a
master degree in Electrical Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, June 22, 2018
Rasmus Oestergaard Bendsen (s134098)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Henrik Hassager for his design of the interface, Marton Marcshall
and Axel Ahrens for the HRTF code and Cochlear for the use of the Nucleus Toolbox.
Furthermore, I would like to thank Abigail Anne Kressner and Torsten Dau for their
supervision.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Method
5
2.1
The Cochlear Implant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Results
13
3.1
Eﬀect of Compression Conﬁguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Eﬀect of the Cochlear Implant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Root-Mean-Square Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Discussion
25
5
Conclusion
27
Bibliography
28
A Figures of all locations in each vocoded condition
31
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
The ability to localize sounds in everyday life is important for the segregation of sound
sources. To localize sound, people rely on binaural processing, which includes the
calculation of interaural time diﬀerences (ITDs) and interaural level diﬀerences (ILDs).
The ITD is the time diﬀerence between the two ears for a speciﬁc sound source and
has been shown to be the dominant cue for frequencies below 1000 Hz. The ILD is the
level diﬀerence between the ears and is the dominant cue for frequencies above 1500
Hz (Yost and Dye (1997), Shaw (1974)). Several studies have shown that ITD cues are
very limited for people with cochlear implants (Loiselle et al. (2016), van Hoesel and
Tyler (2003)), so therefore cochlear implant recipients must rely heavily on ILD cues.
However, natural listening situations contain reverberation which may mask the sound
by smearing the energy across frequencies and degrading the original sound, which can
disturb the ILDs and thereby make localization more challenging. It has been shown
that normal-hearing listeners, even in the presence of much reverberation, still have a
fairly good perception of localization, while the localization performance is typically
degraded signiﬁcantly for cochlear implant recipients in reverberant environments
(Zheng et al. (2011), Zheng et al. (2017)).
A typical electrical dynamic range of cochlear implant recipients from the threshold
current level (T-level) to the comfortable current level (C-level) is 10 −20 dB (Zeng
and J.Galvin, 1999). The dynamic range normally encountered for a single speaker is
40 −50 dB (Zeng et al., 2002). The dynamic range is therefore much lower for the
cochlear implant recipients. This means that the cochlear implant requires a form of
compression. There are typically several diﬀerent forms of compression implemented
in cochlear implants (Khing et al., 2013). Compression distort the ILDs and may
lead to a diﬀerent localization perception (Dorman et al., 2013). It seems therefore
important to evaluate in which way the compression in cochlear implants eﬀects the
spatial cues.
The eﬀect of compression in simulated hearing aids on spatial perception was
investigated in Hassager et al. (2017a). It was shown, how diﬀerent kinds of non-linear
compression can signiﬁcantly change the perceived localization of a sound source for
normal-hearing (NH) listeners. It was observed that splits occur, where listeners
perceived the sound as coming from two diﬀerent locations. Furthermore, the sound
was perceived as being broader using conventional non-linear compression than in the
case of linear processing. Hassager et al. (2017a) tested the ability to localize sound in
reverberant rooms using four diﬀerent compressor conﬁgurations: Independent, linked,
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
spatially ideal and linear processing. The eﬀect of the independent compression has
been shown to distort the spatial perception in anechoic acoustic conditions (Wiggins
and Seeber, 2012), while linked compression, where the same gain is applied to both
ears, has been shown to improve spatial perception (Schwartz and Shinn-Cunningham,
2013). However, in reverberant conditions Hassager et al. (2017a) demonstrated that
both independent and linked compression led to a distorted spatially perception, in
terms of perceived internalization and sound image splits. Hassager et al. (2017b)
suggested a fast-acting direct-sound driven compression system, which was shown to
restore some of the spatial cues both for independent and linked compression. These
studies were done for simulated hearing aids and therefore did not use the same
compression scheme which is used in cochlear implants.
The eﬀect of compression on localization in cochlear implants was investigated in
Dorman et al. (2013). Three diﬀerent frequency bands of noise were tested: wideband,
lowpass and highpass, where the lowpass and highpass had a cutoﬀfrequency of
1 kHz. The cutoﬀfrequency was chosen since ITDs provide the dominant cue for
frequencies below 1 kHz, while ILDs are dominant above 1.5 kHz. In their study the
diﬀerent noise types were tested in three conditions: (1) with the automatic gain
control (AGC) deactivated and no output compression, (2) with AGC activated and
no output compression, (3) with both AGC and output compression activated. The
AGC provided the front-end compression, which is placed in the beginning of the
signal processing. A comparison of the ILDs for the three diﬀerent conditions was
made.
The ILDs observed in Dormans study were substantially lower when both the
AGC and output compression was activated. In their discussion, the authors state
that the cochlear implant recipients had a maximum ILD of 3-4dB, when both AGC
and ouput compression were applied. The normal-hearing listeners had ILDs of up
to 20dB. The cochlear implant recipients thus need to adapt, such that the ILD of
3-4dB covers the same 180◦as the 20dB does for the normal-hearing listeners. A
test where NH were compared to cochlear implant recipients was done, and it was
shown that the cochlear implant recipients had a worse perception of localization
than the NH, which the authors hypothesized to be due to the severely degraded ILD
cues. The results in Dormans study showed that at least some of the cochlear implant
recipients were able to utilize their reduced ILD cues to localize as accurately as the
normal-hearing listeners, which would indicate that they have a high ILD resolution.
A smaller dynamic range however, may make it more diﬃcult for the cochlear implant
recipients to achieve this level of spatial perception given that the smaller dynamic
range will lead to lower ILD cues and therefore require even better ILD resolution.
The test for the localization in Dorman et al. (2013) was only done for the 180-
degree frontal plane, which means that the splits will not be seen in their study.
Furthermore, the test subjects could only choose which loudspeaker the signal came
from and could therefore not show if they perceived the sound from somewhere else
or how broad they perceived the sound. In their study only one type of compression
with one release time was used.
Furthermore, dynamic range was not explicitly
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
3
considered. A change of these parameters could possibly change the outcome of the
study, especially a diﬀerent compression conﬁguration.
The eﬀect of the release time used in the AGC for speech intelligibility has been
studied in Khing et al. (2013). Khing et al compared the front-end compression used
in Freedom cochlear implants, made by Cochlear, with a proposed multi-channel
compression. The two compression schemes were tested with two diﬀerent release
times. Khing et al concluded that the release time had a larger eﬀect on speech
intelligibility than the AGC type. Khing et al found that the longer release time
of 625ms was better for speech intelligibility than the shorter release time of 75ms.
Khing’s study did not investigate the eﬀect of the AGCs release time on spatial
perception.
So far, no study investigated the eﬀect of diﬀerent compression conﬁgurations
using multiple release times and dynamic ranges in cochlear implants. To create a
less diﬀuse sound image for cochlear implant recipients, it seems essential to examine
how these parameters eﬀect spatial perception. In the present thesis, the eﬀect of
compression on the ability to localize sound in the 360-degree horizontal plane for
reverberant room conditions were investigated using a vocoder simulation and normal
hearing listeners. The study furthermore investigated the compression conﬁguration,
release time and dynamic range eﬀect on spatial perception.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER2
Method
2.1
The Cochlear Implant
In this section the diﬀerent parts of signal processing in the cochlear implant will be
described. In this experiment eight diﬀerent functions from the Cochlear Nucleus
toolbox are used. The complete system can be seen in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Signal Chain for the Cochlear simulation
2.1.1
Microphone
The Freedom microphone implies the microphone transfer function to the stimuli.
The magnitude frequency response of the microphone can be seen in ﬁgure 2.2.
The microphone attenuates the lower and higher frequencies compared to the mid
frequencies around 4kHz.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
Frequency [Hz]
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
Magnitude [dB]
Figure 2.2: Frequency response of the microphone
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Method
2.1.2
Automatic Gain Control
The AGC is a front-end compression which compresses the broadband stimuli. The
Freedom AGC has a compression ratio of inﬁnity, which keeps the signal within range.
The kneepoint (compression threshold) value is determined by the level in dB SPL of
speech that gives the C-level simulation, by default 65dB SPL, a full-scale reference of
95dB SPL and an AGC oﬀset of 8dB SPL. The default kneepoint is 71.9dBSPL. The
input-output function can be seen in ﬁgure 2.3, where there is a linear compression
until the kneepoint and thereafter an inﬁnite compression ratio. Signals above the
C-SPL are not clipped but are limited to the C-level. It prevents clipping by its fast
attack time and slower decay. For a detailed description of the diﬀerences between the
compression used in the diﬀerent companies cochlear implants please read Vaerenberg
et al. (2014).
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Input Level [dB SPL]
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Output Level [dB SPL]
Input-output function
Figure 2.3: Input-output function of the AGC
The AGC applies the attack and release time. The eﬀect of these can be seen in
ﬁgure 2.4. The attack time is visible by the allowed overshoot in the beginning at 0.02s.
The diﬀerence in release time is clearly visible by the time it takes the compressed
signal to go back to the non-compressed signal values.
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
Time [s]
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Amplitude
Fast
slow
input
Figure 2.4: Eﬀect of the release and attack time on a 200 Hz sinusoid. The red is the
compressor with a slow release time, the blue is with a fast and the yellow is the non-compressed
signal.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 The Cochlear Implant
7
2.1.3
Filterbank
The ﬁlter bank divides the signal into 22 envelope frequency bands with characteristic
frequencies between 244.7Hz and 7279.2Hz. In ﬁgure 2.5 the frequency-time matrix,
FTM, of the word "asa" can be seen, where the AGC is applied to the signal using a
fast release time.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Time (s)
367 
612 
856 
1101
1407
1896
2447
3242
4282
5566
7279
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 2.5: The output FTM matrix of the ﬁlter bank. An AGC with a fast release time is
used before the ﬁlter bank
2.1.4
Loudness Growth Function
The loudness growth function can be seen in ﬁgure 2.6. The LGF maps the output
of the ﬁlter bank amplitudes to a value between 0 and 1 and does this for all 22
channels. All input values below the base level are mapped to 0 and all values above
the saturation level are mapped to 1. It can be seen that, as with the loudness function
for normal hearing listeners, the slope is steeper at the lowest levels and then linear
up until the saturation level. The base and saturation levels used in the experiment
are the default values from the Nucleus toolbox, which means a base level of 4/256
and saturation level of 150/256.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Method
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Filter band amplitude (dB)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Output magnitude
saturation level
base level
Figure 2.6: The LGF function with default values.
2.1.5
Sequence and Channel Mapping
The sequence creates the sequence for the 22 electrodes and can be seen in ﬁgure 2.7
for the word "Asa".
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Time (ms)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Channel
Figure 2.7: Sequence for the word "Asa"
The channel mapping converts the LGF output magnitudes into current levels
between the recipients T and C level. There are 256 current levels in the Cochlear
Nucleus implant, where each current level is a speciﬁed electrical current which is sent
to the electrodes. The T and C level implies the dynamic range for the recipient. A
recipient may, for example, ﬁrst be able to hear something at a current level of 80,
and the current level may not be comfortable above a current level of 100. This means
that there will only be 20 current levels that can be sent to that electrode, which
limits the dynamic range considerable in comparison to a person who will have a C-T
level diﬀerence of for example 100, and therefore, have 100 steps instead of only 20.
In Cochlear devices the channel mapping makes a n-of-m channel selection by
default. It chooses 8 out of the 22 channels to stimulate during each stimulation
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Subjects
9
period. This is done to remove the channels where the amplitude is lowest, so that
only the essential part of the stimuli is sent to the electrodes.
2.1.6
Vocoder
For this study it has been necessary to change the vocoder used in the Nucleus Toolbox.
The vocoder takes the discrete current levels from the channel mapping and changes
these into actual currents levels in uA. The discrete values are used in a reconstruct
function, which uses a noise carrier to combine the 22 channels into a broadband
signal.
2.2
Subjects
Five test subjects participated in the experiment (3 males and 2 females). All test
subjects were normal-hearing with an audiometric pure-tone threshold below 20 dB
HL at frequencies between 125Hz and 8kHz.
All participants provided informed consent and all experiments were approved
by the Science-Ethics Committee for the Capital Region of Denmark (reference
H-16036391).
2.3
Setup
The test took place in a reverberant listening room made in accordance with the
IEC 268-13 (1985) standard. The reverberation of the room corresponds to a living
room environment with a reverberation time T30 of 500ms. The dimensions of the
room were 752 cm x 474 cm x 276 cm (L x W x H). There were 12 Dynaudio BM6
loudspeakers in a circle with a radius of 125 cm and with an equal spacing of 30 degrees
on the circle. A chair with a headrest was placed in the middle of the circle. After
the recordings of the binaural room impulse responses, BRIR, a Dell s2240t touch
screen was placed in front of the chair. For the recordings of the BRIR a Fireface
UCX soundcard, a pair of DPA high sensitivity microphones and a pair of HD650
Sennheiser headphones was used.
2.4
Procedure
The test subjects were instructed to support their head on the headrest, remaining still
and looking directly at the loudspeaker at 0 degrees azimuth during the measurement
of the BRIR. The BRIR was measured from ﬁve diﬀerent azimuth angles of 0, 30,
150, 240 and 300 deg. The recordings were made using a frequency sweep from
20 to 8000Hz. The microphones were placed at the ear canal entrances. After the
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Method
loudspeaker to ear recordings, the headphones were placed on the listeners, and the
same signal was played to ﬁnd the headphone to ear impulse response. Afterwards, the
headphone impulse response was inversed in the time domain using the Moore-Penrose
pseudoinverse. The inverse impulse response was then convolved with each individual
loudspeaker to ear impulse response. This was done to compensate for the headphone’s
transfer function. This gave the individual HRTF for each loudspeaker.
The spectral cues, which results from the auditory periphery, is very limited
for cochlear implant recipients, due to the microphone being placed on top of the
pinna. The individual HRTFs measured in this study keep the spectral cues since the
microphone was placed at the ear canal. Sentences, from the Danish Hearing In Noise
Test (HINT)(Nielsen and Dau, 2010), were then convolved with the individual HRTFs.
This was to give the same auditory sensation at the ear canal using the headphones,
as the loudspeakers would have made in this particular setup.
Validation of the HRTFs for each individual test subject was done by playing a
sentence through the headphones from each location in a random order. The test
subjects were asked to point at the direction, where the sound came from and were
asked if it sounded as the stimuli was located in the same distance as the loudspeakers.
There was some front-back confusion for some of the test subjects, due to cone-of-
confusion errors. After this, training was performed to familiarize the test subjects
with the task and response interface. Fifteen uncompressed and non-vocoded sentences
were played, three from each of the ﬁve loudspeakers, in order to conﬁrm that the test
subjects could localize the sounds.
The interface, in which the listeners should reply using touch, contained a picture
of the loudspeaker circle. It was possible for the test subject to place as many circles
as they wanted, but in the vocoded conditions, see next section, they were asked only
to place one. This was done due to the pilot experiment, where it was seen that if
the test subjects could place as many circles as they wanted, they would place one
circle for all sentences on each side of the middle, without actually making an eﬀort to
localize the sound. The listeners could change the size of the circle if they perceived
the sound broader or narrower. The radius of the circles when the test subject placed
one was randomized, which made it necessarily for the subject to change the circle
size at almost every sentence.
The sound was calibrated so that the level coming from 0 degrees azimuth was
65dB SPL for each ear in all conditions. The four other loudspeaker levels were
calibrated after this, so that if they were located right in front there would have been
65dB SPL. The full experiment was done so that the listeners ﬁrst got training without
the vocoder. Then a second test with seven non-vocoded conditions were made (see
next section). Then there was a training set with 30 vocoded sentences and then the
last 14 vocoded test conditions were made.
==PAGE:21==
2.5 Conditions
11
2.5
Conditions
Four diﬀerent AGC conﬁgurations were tested: independent, linked, spatially aware
and linear. All AGC conﬁgurations, except the linear, had an attack time of 5ms and
were tested with two diﬀerent release times of 75ms and 750ms. This gave a total
number of seven AGC conﬁgurations. An overview can be seen in Table 2.1. All seven
conﬁgurations were tested in three diﬀerent situations:
1. Without vocoding, so only the microphone transfer function and the AGC were
applied.
2. Through all signal processing and vocoding with a high dynamic range of 100
current levels.
3. Through all signal processing and vocoding with a low dynamic range of 10
current levels.
In total 21 conditions were tested. For each condition there were three repetitions
from each of the ﬁve loudspeaker, which was presented in a random order. The
conditions for the seven non-vocoded where randomized, and the 14 vocoded conditions
were split up into the high and low dynamic ranges, whereupon the conditions were
randomized. It was randomized, if the listeners were presented with the high dynamic
or low dynamic range ﬁrst. The total amount of sentences in the test was then 315.
AGC Conﬁgurations
Independent
Linked
spatially aware
No AGC
Fast
Slow
Fast
Slow
Fast
Slow
-
Table 2.1: Compression conﬁgurations, where fast is with a release time of 75ms and
slow is with a release time of 750ms
Figure 2.8 shows a ﬂow chart of the three diﬀerent compressor conﬁgurations. The
diﬀerent compressors are made in the same way as in Hassager et al. (2017a). For
the independent, the sentence is convolved with the BRIR and thereafter run through
the AGC and further through the rest of the Cochlear implant signal processing and
vocoding. For the linked, the signal is convolved with the BRIR and the compression
gain is found in each ear. The gain from the AGC, which has the minimum gain (i.e.
highest compression), is then multiplied by the signal in each ear. For the spatially
aware compression, the signal is ﬁrst compressed and thereafter convolved with the
BRIR. This means that the compression is applied before the room impulse responses.
As described in Hassager et al. (2017a), this would in practice require a deconvolution
of the BRIR before compression and then be followed by a convolution with the BRIR
to provide the spatial cues for the listeners.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Method
Figure 2.8: Top view of the test setup
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER3
Results
3.1
Eﬀect of Compression Conﬁguration
The results for the non-vocoded signals can be seen in Figure 3.1 and 3.2, where each
plot shows all results for all locations for one particular condition. Each circle presents
one answer, meaning that for each test subject there are three responses for each
loudspeaker. The circles are colored in the same color as the respective loudspeaker
so red circles are the responses, when the sound came from the red loudspeaker. The
more circles which overlap each other, the darker the color of that particular area gets.
Table 3.1 gives an overview of the loudspeaker number, angle and color.
Loudspeaker number
1
2
6
9
11
Azimuth angle
0◦
30◦
150◦
240◦
300◦
Color
Cyan
Green
Pink
Blue
Red
Table 3.1: Loudspeaker overview
Compared to the linear condition in Figure 3.1, the results for independent fast
condition in Figure 3.2(a) indicate that the independent fast acting AGC, used
by default in Cochlear implants, does not have a negative inﬂuence on the spatial
perception. Furthermore, when comparing the independent fast to the linked conditions
it seems that the error is smaller in the independent fast condition. The results suggest
that the listeners obtain the best overall spatial perception in the spatially aware
conditions. This is especially apparent given that the width of the circles are generally
smaller for the spatially aware conditions. Furthermore, localization accuracy was
better with the fast-acting spatially aware compression as compared to the slow-acting.
Loudspeaker 6 and 9 situated behind the listeners were problematic to localize
correctly for all test subjects in all conditions. The reason for this is unknown since it
was not the case in the training. Furthermore, one test subject could not hear that
the sound came from the loudspeaker in front of him (Loudspeaker 1), which was not
the case in the training. Three of the cyan circles around the head correspond to that
test subject’s answers in all conditions.
There are only four test subjects in the spatially aware conditions, Figure 3.2b
and 3.2c, since there was a mistake in the code at these conditions for the ﬁrst test
subject. Front-back confusion is present in all conditions, especially for Loudspeakers
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Results
1, 2 and 9. Sound image splits only occurred in the case of independent slow acting
AGC and is shown as gray circles in Figure 3.1c. One test subject responded that at
one sentence in this condition it sounded like the sound was moving around him in a
circle. The results indicate that the listeners found the independent slow condition to
be the most challenging.
However, the diﬀerences between the compression schemes are relatively small,
especially in comparison to those reported in Hassager et al. (2017a). This may
indicate that the AGC has a very limited inﬂuence on the spatial perception.
(a) Linear
Figure 3.1: Linear non-vocoded results
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Eﬀect of Compression Conﬁguration
15
(a) Independent fast
(b) Independent slow
(c) Linked fast
(d) Linked slow
(e) Spatially aware fast
(f) Spatially aware slow
Figure 3.2: Results for the non-vocoded conditions. The left and right columns are with fast
and slow release time respectively. The ﬁrst row is independent, second is linked and third is
spatially aware
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Results
3.2
Eﬀect of the Cochlear Implant
3.2.1
The Vocoder and the Eﬀect of Dynamic Range
In Figure 3.3 the responses for the vocoded signals are shown. All four ﬁgures are
without an AGC. Figures (a) and (c) are with a high dynamic range and Figures (b)
and (d) are with a low dynamic range. To provide better visualization, responses for
just two loudspeakers are shown in Figure 3.3(c) and 3.3(d). By comparing Figure
3.3 with 3.1, it is clear that the task of localizing the sound gets a lot more diﬃcult
when every part of the cochlear implant’s signal processing and vocoding is applied
compared to only the AGC.
(a) Linear with high dynamic range
(b) Linear with low dynamic range
(c) Linear with high dynamic range
(d) Linear with low dynamic range
Figure 3.3: Vocoded condition without an AGC. (a) is with a high dynamic range and (b)
is with a low dynamic range. For a more simply view the responses only from loudspeaker 2
and 9 are shown in ﬁgure (c) and (d) for high and low dynamic range respectively
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Eﬀect of the Cochlear Implant
17
There are three general trends, which are visible in these plots:
1. The perception of the sound source moves closer to the head and is for most
subjects almost internalized.
2. Subjects are able to perceive which side of the head the sound is located.
3. The precise direction/angle of the sound is diﬃcult to detect.
Given the large variability between responses in the conditions with both the high
and low dynamic range, the increased dynamic range does not appear to provide cues
that aid with spatial perception when compared to the cues that are provided already
with the low dynamic range.
3.2.2
Eﬀect of Compressor Conﬁguration and Release Time
Figures 3.4 and 3.5 show the responses for each of the diﬀerent compression conﬁgura-
tions, with a high and low dynamic range, respectively. The ﬁrst row in both ﬁgures
is the independent conditions, the second row is the linked and the third row is the
spatially aware conditions. The left column is the conditions with a fast release time
of 75ms, and the right column is the slow acting compression with a release time of
750ms. For clarity the ﬁgures only contain the responses from Loudspeakers 2 and 9.
The ﬁgures including all responses for all loudspeakers for each condition can be seen
in Appendix A.
The results suggest that there is not a big diﬀerence between the diﬀerent com-
pression conﬁgurations when the stimuli are processed with the vocoder simulation.
Even the independent slow acting compression, which in the non-vocoded case seemed
to be worse, does not look very diﬀerent from the others. Since the test subjects were
asked only to place one circle, splits are not visible in these conditions except for the
low dynamic range independent slow acting AGC, where a test subject in two cases
placed a second circle and thereby indicated an image split.
The same trends as with the vocoded linear conditions in Section 3.2 are seen: In
most cases, subjects were able to correctly lateralize the sound, but they were unable
to identify accurately the speciﬁc angles. The sound was also perceived as being closer
than the loudspeakers and, in most cases, placed just outside of the ear.
The number of circles, which were placed on the opposite side of the head, relative
to where the sound came from, is almost the same for all conditions. The results for
the independent fast low dynamic range is the only condition where there is not a
single circle placed on the opposite side of the head for one of the loudspeakers. The
number of circles which are placed further away from the head seems similar between
the conditions both for the compression conﬁguration and release time. The results
overall indicate that the reduction in spatial perception is not due to the AGC.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Results
(a) Independent fast
(b) Independent slow
(c) Linked fast
(d) Linked slow
(e) Spatial aware fast
(f) Spatial aware slow
Figure 3.4: Vocoded condition with a high dynamic range. Left column is fast acting, right
is slow, top row is independent compression, middle row is linked and bottom row is spatially
aware
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Eﬀect of the Cochlear Implant
19
(a) Independent fast
(b) Independent slow
(c) Linked fast
(d) Linked slow
(e) Spatial aware fast
(f) Spatial aware slow
Figure 3.5: Vocoded condition with a low dynamic range. Left column is fast acting, right
is slow, top row is independent compression, middle row is linked and bottom row is spatially
aware
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Results
3.3
Root-Mean-Square Error
3.3.1
Distance
The root-mean-square (RMS) error of the Euclidean distance has been calculated for
all conditions. The Euclidean distance is the length of a straight line between two
points. The distance between two points p = (p1, p2), for example, the loudspeaker
the sound came from, and q = (q1, q2), the center of the circle placed by a test subject,
can be obtained as: d =
p
((q1 −p1)2 + (q2 −p2)2).
The RMS error of the Euclidean distance for the non-vocoded conditions from
Chapter 3 can be seen in Figures 3.6 and 3.7. The boxplot is divided into two due to
the fact that there are only four test subjects in the spatially aware conditions. Each
boxplot consists of ﬁve results, which are the mean RMS error of all loudspeakers for
each of the ﬁve test subjects (gray circles in ﬁgures). The red line is the median. The
top and bottom of the box is the 75% and 25% quantile respectively, and the whiskers
extend to the most extreme data points not considered outlines. The individual
outliers are shown with a + sign. The RMS error in the ﬁgures is measured in pixels
and normalized by the width and length of the ﬁgure. The splits are not taking into
account. Generally, the results do not show a normal distribution, which may be due
to the small number of test subjects.
The linear and the spatially aware conditions have the lowest median. There is one
test subject which in all conditions except the independent slow has a much higher
error than the others. The median is highest for the independent slow condition, and
the trend among the listeners is that this condition was the most challenging. An
ANOVA found no signiﬁcant eﬀect of either release time or compression conﬁguration.
Figure 3.6: RMS error of the Euclidean distance for ﬁve of the non-vocoded conditions
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Root-Mean-Square Error
21
Figure 3.7: RMS error of the Euclidean distance for two of the non-vocoded conditions
For the vocoded conditions from Chapter 3, RMS error of the distance can be seen
in Figures 3.8 and 3.9 for the high and low dynamic range, respectively. An ANOVA
found no signiﬁcant eﬀect of release time, compression conﬁguration or dynamic range.
The median is lowest in the independent fast condition for both dynamic ranges. In
the high dynamic range, the spatially aware condition have a fairly low median error,
whereas it has the highest median error in the low dynamic range. The median error is
generally lower for the conditions with a high dynamic range than with a low dynamic
range.
Figure 3.8: RMS error of the Euclidean distance for the high dynamic range conditions
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Results
Figure 3.9: RMS error of the Euclidean distance for the low dynamic range conditions
3.3.2
Angle
The RMS error has been calculated for the angle. The results for the non-vocoded
conditions can be seen in Figures 3.10 and 3.11. An ANOVA found no signiﬁcant
factors. The median RMS error varies between 10.7◦and 20◦. The results indicate
that the error is smaller for the spatially aware conditions, with both a lower median
error and a smaller variance. The independent slow has the highest median error, but
not the most extreme point, which is seen in linked slow condition. In the linked slow
and the spatially aware slow conditions, the median error is smaller than in the fast
conditions, whereas the most extreme point is higher. This is due to one test subject
that had poorer angle perception than the others. More listeners are needed to show
if this trend generalizes.
Figure 3.10: RMS error of the angle in degrees for ﬁve of the non-vocoded conditions
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Root-Mean-Square Error
23
Figure 3.11: RMS error of the angle in degrees for two of the non-vocoded conditions
The RMS error of the angle for the vocoded conditions can be seen in Figures
3.12 and 3.9 for the high and low dynamic range respectively. Compared to the
non-vocoded conditions the median is higher for all conditions and the variance larger
for most. The diﬀerence between the low and high dynamic range is not clear. The
median between the low and high dynamic range tends to be mostly the same, except
for the independent fast and spatially aware slow conditions, where the median error
is lower using low dynamic range. The variance between the dynamic ranges changes
a lot. In general, the median is situated around a RMS angle error of 40◦. The
median angle error is thereby at least 20◦higher in the vocoded conditions than in
the non-vocoded, except in the low dynamic range independent fast condition, where
the median error is smallest for the vocoded conditions.
Figure 3.12: RMS error of the angle in degrees for the high dynamic range conditions
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Results
Figure 3.13: RMS error of the angle in degrees for the low dynamic range conditions
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER4
Discussion
Hassager et al. (2017a) found a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the spatially aware
compression conﬁguration and linked/independent compression conﬁgurations. This
was not found in the present study. The reason for this is probably due to the diﬀerences
between compression schemes used in Hassager et al. (2017a) and the present study. In
Hassagers study, a 7-band multi-channel compression was implemented with diﬀerent
compression thresholds and ratios. The thresholds in Hassager’s study were in a range
between 9−40dB SPL, which is substantially lower than the 70dB SPL used as default
in the Freedom AGC. Therefore, Hassager’s compression would have compressed the
signal far more than in this study. The ILDs may in Hassager’s study have been
changed diﬀerently in each frequency band, which may have created a more diﬀuse
spatial perception in the independent and linked conditions. In Hassagers study, some
of the listeners verbally responded that in the independent and linked compression,
they perceived the reverberant sound as being enhanced and located at a diﬀerent
location than the main sound, leading to image splits. This was not the case in the
current study, where the listeners who experienced image splits, indicated that it was
the main sound which moved.
The default compression threshold (i.e. kneepoint) of the AGC may be the main
reason that the AGC in the present study does not have a major inﬂuence on spatial
perception. A lower compression threshold should lead to bigger changes to the ILDs,
which would make the ability to localize sound more challenging and the results more
similar to those found in Hassager. For the compression threshold of 70dB SPL and
the speech level of 65dB SPL used in this study, only the peak amplitudes of the
speech are compressed. Therefore, this may only limit the changes to the ILDs to a
short time period, such that it is easier to localize the sound than in Hassagers study,
where most of the speech stimuli were compressed.
In the Dorman et al. (2013) study a localization test was performed by cochlear
implant recipients using their own implant. Their results are similar to the results
obtained in the present experiment. However, in Dorman’s study, the mean RMS
error of the angle for the CI recipients was 20◦with wideband noise. The cochlear
implant recipients were therefore better at localizing the sound than the NH listeners
were in the present study, but in Dorman et al. responses which less than 10% of
the test subjects answered were removed from the ﬁgures. The results may, therefore,
be very similar to the ones obtained in this study. A lower RMS error than in the
present study was also found in Jones et al. (2014), where the average RMS error
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Discussion
of the angle was 27.9◦for the cochlear implant recipients. The fact that the RMS
error was higher in the present study for the normal-hearing listeners than the results
obtained in Dorman et al. (2013) and Jones et al. (2014) may indicate that either the
vocoder simulation does not provide a good enough representation of how cochlear
implant recipients perceive the sound or that a more comprehensive training is needed
for the normal-hearing listeners to show more similar RMS errors. The reason could
also be that the stimuli was diﬀerent in the other studies.
The results indicate that the AGC does not have a strong eﬀect of spatial perception.
The decreased ability of cochlear implant recipients to localize sound may, therefore,
not be due to the AGC but may be caused by other parts of the cochlear implant
signal processing. It is speculated that the reason for the decreased spatial perception
is a combination of the LGF and the n-of-m channel selection. When choosing only
eight channels with the highest envelope amplitude, as is the default behavior in the
Freedom processor, some of the reverberant energy may be removed from the signal
that is sent to the electrodes. This may change the distance the sound is perceived
to be coming from and may even cause the listener to internalize the sound. It may
also have reduced the spectral cues, which should still have been available for the test
subjects, since the microphone was placed at the opening of the ear canal.
The LGF may further alter the ILDs since it is a compressor working independently
in each ear. The compression scheme will amplify the lower envelope amplitudes more
than the higher amplitude values until a certain point where the gain is linear until the
saturation level (Figure 2.6). The sound provided to the ear closest to the loudspeaker
may be in the linear region of the LGF, while the sound to the ear further away may
be in the non-linear region of the LGF. Therefore, the sound will be ampliﬁed more in
the contralateral ear than in the ear closest to the loudspeaker. This will change the
ILD through the sentences and, therefore, worsen the localization and make the sound
being perceived broader, which will make a precise azimuth angle diﬃcult to perceive.
Future work will be a study which investigates the speciﬁc inﬂuence of the LGF
and the n-of-m channel selections on spatial perception. Additionally a study, which
investigates the eﬀect of diﬀerent kneepoint values in the AGC is required to see if
the AGC has a larger eﬀect on spatial perception for some of the cochlear implant
recipients with more aggressive compression schemes. Furthermore, a similar study as
the present study has to be conducted with cochlear implant recipients to investigate
the diﬀerences between normal-hearing listeners with simulated cochlear implant and
cochlear implant recipients.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER5
Conclusion
This study investigated the eﬀect of input compression and dynamic range in cochlear
implants on spatial perception with normal-hearing listeners using a vocoder simulation.
Three diﬀerent compression conﬁgurations were tested, where the automatic gain
control was either applied independently, linked or provided as spatially aware. The
compression conﬁgurations were tested using two diﬀerent release times and two
diﬀerent dynamic ranges. The AGC was tested both with and without the vocoder
simulation to understand how the AGC eﬀects spatial perception versus how the
other parts of the signal processing and vocoding aﬀect spatial perception. The study
suggests that, with the default compression parameters in the Freedom processor,
the AGC has only a minor eﬀect on spatial perception, because the results for the
non-vocoded conditions (i.e. the eﬀect of the AGC alone) were very similar regardless
of which compression conﬁgurations or release time that was applied.
Diﬀerent
compression conﬁgurations did not create more diﬀuse sound images than in the linear
reference condition.
The vocoded conditions, where all components of the Freedom cochlear implant
signal processing were applied, made the sound image very diﬀuse. Furthermore, the
perception of the sound source moved closer to the head and was almost internalized
for most listeners. However, the listeners were able to identify to which side of the
head the sound was located. Precise identiﬁcation of the direction of the sound was
diﬃcult to determine. There was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two dynamic
ranges.
Since the non-vocoded conditions did not create a diﬀuse sound image but the
vocoded conditions did, it can be concluded that the diﬀuse sound image experienced
by cochlear implant users may not be due to the AGC but other parts of the signal
processing in cochlear implants. It is speculated that it is the LGF and the channel
selection which may cause more diﬀuse sound images.
==PAGE:38==
28
==PAGE:39==
Bibliography
J. Catic, S. Santurette, and T. Dau. The role of reverberation-related binaural cues
in the externalization of speech. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 138:
1154–1167, 2015.
C. I. Cheng and G. H. Wakeﬁeld. Introduction to Head-Related Transfer Functions
(HRTF’s): Representations of HRTF’s in Time, Frequency and Space. University of
Michigan, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Ann Arbor,
Michigan, U.S.A.
M. F. Dorman, L. Loiselle, J. Stohl, W. A. Yost, A. Spahr, C. Brown, and S. Cook.
Interaural level diﬀerences and sound source localization for bilateral cochlear
implant patients. Ear and Hearing, 35:633–640, 2013.
H. G. Hassager, H. Gert, A. Wiinberg, and T. Dau. Eﬀects of hearing-aid dynamic
range compression on spatial perception in a reverberant environment. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 141:2556–2568, 2017a.
H. G. Hassager, T. May, A. Wiinberg, and T. Dau. Preserving spatial perception
in rooms using direct-sound driven dynamic range compression. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 141:4556–4566, 2017b.
O. Hazrati, J. Lee, and P. C. Loizou. Blind binary masking for reverberation sup-
pression in cochlear implants. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 133:
1607–1614, 2013.
H. Jones, A. Kan, and R. Y. Litovsky. Comparing sound localization deﬁcits in bilateral
cochlear-implant users and vocoder simulations with normal-hearing listeners. Trends
in Hearing, 0:1–16, 2014.
P. P. Khing, B. A. Swanson, and E. Ambikairajah. The eﬀect of automatic gain
control structure and release time on cochlear implant speech intelligibility. Plos
One, 8, 2013.
Y. Lai, F. Chen, and Y. Tsao. Adaptive dynamic range compression for improving
envelope-based speech perception: Implications for cochlear implants. Emerging
Technology and Architecture for Big-data Analytics, 2017.
==PAGE:40==
30
Bibliography
L. H. Loiselle, M.F. Dorman, W.A. Yost, S. J. Cook, and R. H. Giﬀord. Using ild
or itd cues for sound source localization and speech understanding in a complex
listening environment by listeners with bilateral and with hearing-preservation
cochlear implants. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 59:810–818,
2016.
J. Nielsen and T. Dau. The danish hearing in noise test. International Journal of
Audiology, 50:202–208, 2010.
A. H. Schwartz and B. G. Shinn-Cunningham. Eﬀects of dynamic range compression
on spatial selective auditory attention in normal-hearing listeners. The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 133:2329–2339, 2013.
S. D. Sechler, A. L. Valdes, S. M. Waechter, C. Simoes-Franklin, L. Viani, and
R. B. Reilly. Virtual reality sound localization testing in cochlear implant users.
International Ieee/embs Conference on Neural Engineering (ner), 8:379–382, 2017.
E. A. G. Shaw. Transformation of sound pressure level from the free ﬁeld to the
eardrum in the horizontal plane. J Acoust Soc Am, 56:1848–1861, 1974.
B. Vaerenberg, P. J. Govaerts, T. Stainby, P. Nopp, A. Gault, and D. Gnansia. A
uniform graphical representation of intensity coding in current-generation cochlear
implant systems. Ear and Hearing, 35:533–543, 2014.
R. J. M. van Hoesel and R. S. Tyler. Speech perception, localization, and lateralization
with bilateral cochlear implants. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 113:
1617–1630, 2003.
I. M. Wiggins and B. U. Seeber. Eﬀects of dynamic-range compression on the spatial
attributes of sounds in normal-hearing listeners. Ear and Hearing, 33:399–410, 2012.
W. A. Yost and R. H. Dye. Fundamentals of directional hearing. Seminars in Hearing,
18:321–344, 1997.
F. G. Zeng and J. J.Galvin. Amplitude mapping and phoneme recognition in cochlear
implant listnener. Ear and Hearing, 20:60–74, 1999.
F. G. Zeng, G. Grant, J. Niparko, J. Galvin, R. Shannon, J. Opie, and P. Segel. Speech
dynamic range and its eﬀect on cochlear implant performance. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 111:377, 2002.
Y. Zheng, J. Koenhnke, J. Besing, and J. Spitzer. Eﬀects of noise and reverberation
on virtual sound localization for listeners with bilateral cochlear implants. Ear and
Hearing, 32:569–572, 2011.
Y. Zheng, J. Koenhnke, and J. Besing. Combined eﬀects of noise and reverberation on
sound localization for listeners with normal hearing and bilateral cochlear implants.
American Journal of Audiology, 26:519–530, 2017.
==PAGE:41==
APPENDIXA
Figures of all
locations in each
vocoded condition
(a) Independent fast
(b) Independent slow
Figure A.1: Vocoded condition with an AGC. (a) is with a independent fast high dynamic
range cmompression. (b) is with a independent slow high dynamic range cmompression.
==PAGE:42==
32
A Figures of all locations in each vocoded condition
(a) Linear with high dynamic range
(b) Linked fast
(c) Linked sloe
(d) Spatially aware fast
(e) Spatially aware slow
(f) Independent fast low dynamic range
Figure A.2: Vocoded condition with an AGC. (a) is with a linear high dynamic range
compression. (b) is with a linked fast high dynamic range compression. (c) is with a linked
slow high dynamic range compression. (d) is with a spatially aware fast high dynamic range
compression. (e) is with a Spatially aware slow high dynamic range compression. (f) is with
a independent fast low dynamic range compression.
==PAGE:43==
A Figures of all locations in each vocoded condition
33
(a) Independent slow
(b) Linear with low dynamic range
(c) Linked fast
(d) Linked slow
(e) Spatially aware fast
(f) Spatially aware slow
Figure A.3: Vocoded condition with an AGC. (a) is with a independent slow low dynamic
range compression. (b) is with a linear low dynamic range compression. (c) is with a linked
fast low dynamic range compression. (d) is with a linked slow low dynamic range compression.
(e) is with a spatially aware fast low dynamic range compression. (f) is with a Spatially
aware slow low dynamic range compression.
