==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Digital Maturity Of An Organization
Development of a digital maturity assessment model
Mathilde Peyret (s161372)
Paris 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Thesis Supervisor
Lars Alkærsig
lalk@dtu.dk
(+45) 45 25 45 34
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Digital transformation has been becoming a fundamental process for today’s com-
panies in order to stay competitive in a highly changing market driven by digital
revolution and new operating models. To conduct their transformation, they need to
define a digital strategy based on the measurement of their digital maturity. Maturity
models are useful tools to easily measure it by evaluating the state-of-development of
the key components of digital maturity.
Wavestone, a consulting firm specialized in digital transformation, wanted to develop
its own maturity model to help its clients define their digital strategy and increase.
Using a Design Science approach, the aim of this report was to design a maturity
model via a rigorous step-by-step methodology combining several research methods
from focus group to nominal group technique to help companies determine their
positioning within the digital market.
Overall, four assessments streams were defined “Strategy”, “Data & AI”, “Digital
Capabilities”, and “Organization & People” including 60 criteria. Each criteria is
evaluating along a scale of 4 maturity stages. The model was finally converted into a
practicable tool which can be used in the context of client missions to assist compa-
nies in the evaluation of their digital maturity.
Key Words : digital maturity, digital transformation, maturity models,
design science
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master Thesis was prepared at the department of Management Engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring
a Master degree in Industrial Engineering and Management.
Paris, June 30, 2018
Mathilde Peyret (s161372)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to all those who contributed to the de-
velopment of this report :
First, I would like to thank Lars Alkærsig, the supervisor of my Master Thesis.
I would also like to thank the Wavestone staff for their welcome, their kindness, their
availability and what they taught me during my Master Thesis, especially :
• Chelsea Boren (Digital & IT Strategy Consultant) my corporate mentor
• Louis Mabru (Wavestone Recruitment Officer), my first contact with Wavestone
who was in charge of my recruitement process
A Special thanks to Romain Garilli (Digital & IT Strategy Manager, Wavestone), my
Career Development Manager, who gave me the opportunity to carry out this Master
Thesis in collaboration with Wavestone and guided me along the six months within
the company. His availability, his attention and his advice have helped me to discover
the consulting job and develop my professional skills.
Huge thanks to Matthieu Moutet (Digital & IT Strategy Senior Manager, Wavestone)
and Olivier Gentil-Beccot (IT & Data Architecture Senior Manager, Wavestone) who
supervised the project during the 6 months. Their experiences and advice were ex-
tremely valuable to structure the approach and ensure the pertinence of the tool
developed.
Last but not least, I would also like to express my appreciation to Chloe Viseux
(Digital & IT Strategy Consultant, Wavestone) for her management, her involvement
and the time she gave me which have enabled me to progress fast, with confidence,
on a professional and personal level.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
List of Tables
ix
List of Figures
x
Glossary
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Presentation of Wavestone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Company Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Presentation of the practice Digital & IT Strategy . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Context of the Master Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Project Scope Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Objectives of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Theoretical background and related work
7
2.1
Literature Review Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
The concept of digital transformation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
The concept of digital maturity framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Related works on maturity model development
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.1
Development methodology for maturity model
. . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.2
Focus on research techniques to Populate the model
. . . . . .
14
2.5
Benchmark of digital maturity frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.1
Digital Accelerator Index - BCG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.2
Digital Maturity Survey - Deloitte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.5.3
Digital Organization Readiness - Capgemini Consulting . . . .
22
2.5.4
Other concurrent maturity frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
3
Methodology
25
3.1
Problem definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Comparison of existing matrix
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Determination of development strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Iterative maturity model development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Conception and implementation of transfer media . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.6
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Development of the digital maturity model
29
4.1
Problem definition and development strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Iterative development of model criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.1
Development of criteria: first iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.2
Development of criteria: second iteration
. . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.3
Development of criteria: third iteration
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.4
Development of criteria: fourth iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3
Conception and implementation of the media . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4
Evaluation of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5
Conclusion
51
5.1
Main findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3
Recommendations for future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A Appendix
57
A.1 First version of the maturity models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.2 Second version of the maturity model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.3 Third version of the maturity model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.4 Final version of the maturity model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Bibliography
83
==PAGE:11==
List of Tables
2.1
The seven guidelines of Design-Science Research [14] . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Existing digital maturity frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1
Core value of the criteria Culture of innovation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Example of maturity stages for the criterion Culture of Innovation . . . .
34
4.3
Results of the idea generation during the nominal group technique . . . .
41
4.4
Results of the idea generation during the nominal group technique . . . .
42
A.1 First version of the list of criteria (Part 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.2 First version of the list of criteria (Part 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.3 List of criteria of the second version of the maturity model (Part 1)
. . .
59
A.4 List of criteria of the second version of the maturity model (Part 2)
. . .
60
A.5 List of criteria of the third version of the maturity model (Part 1)
. . . .
61
A.6 List of criteria of the third version of the maturity model (Part 2)
. . . .
62
A.7 List of criteria of the final maturity model (Part 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.8 List of criteria of the final maturity model (Part 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.9 Maturity levels of the category Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.10 Maturity levels of the category Ecosystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.11 Maturity levels of the category Target Operating Model . . . . . . . .
67
A.12 Maturity levels of the category Data Valorization & AI . . . . . . . . .
68
A.13 Maturity levels of the category Data Governance . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.14 Maturity levels of the category Data Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.15 Maturity levels of the category Digital Workplace . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.16 Maturity levels of the category Digital Process Automation . . . . . .
72
A.17 Maturity levels of the category Connectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.18 Maturity levels of the category IT Infrastructure & Architecture
. .
74
A.19 Maturity levels of the category Cybersecurity (Part 1) . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.20 Maturity levels of the category Cybersecurity (Part 2) . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.21 Maturity levels of the category Data Protection
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.22 Maturity levels of the category People & Talent
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.23 Maturity levels of the category Digital Culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.24 Maturity levels of the category Digital ways of working . . . . . . . . .
80
A.25 Maturity levels of the stream Digital Governance
. . . . . . . . . . . .
81
==PAGE:12==
List of Figures
1.1
Revenue of Wavestone per sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Rankings of consulting firms in Digital Transformation . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Presentation of Wavestone areas of excellence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Digital challenges of companies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Digital Maturity Assessment Framework of BCG . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
Global results (BCG)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
Results per stream (BCG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4
Digital Maturity Assessment Framework of Deloitte
. . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.5
Global results (Deloitte) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.6
Results per stream (Deloitte) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.7
Digital Maturity Assessment Framework of Capgemini Consulting
. . . .
23
2.8
4-stage Maturity Index (Capgemini) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.9
Strategies per maturity level (Capgemini) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1
Becker’s development methodology for maturity models [17] . . . . . . . .
25
4.1
Development method - Sequence of iterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
First version of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Second version of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Third version of the model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.5
Fourth version of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.6
Radar chart for the category “Cybersecurity” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.7
Radar chart for the stream “Organization & People” . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
==PAGE:13==
Glossary
Acculturation - Process of changing culture, processes, ways of working by blending
different cultures.
Agile Methodology - Project Management method which consists of short cycles of
product development accordingly with a preliminary prioritization of product features
in the product backlog. An agile team is composed by a Scrum Master, a Product
Owner and a development team.
API - Application Programming Interface (API) is a set of protocols, tools and pro-
cesses that a programmer uses to develop a software.
API Gateway - Front-end programming interface which enables the programmer to
manage distinct API and regulate traffic.
Artificial Intelligence - Subset of computer science which aims to solve tasks which
are easy for humans but hard for computer. An AI technology is able to solve all the
tasks a human can solve. It can be trained to handle situations / inputs which were
not initially defined in its capabilities.
Big Data Platform - IT solutions which combines the capabilities and features of
several big data solutions and applications in a unique platform.
BPMN - Business Process Management and Notation (BPMN) is a specific graphical
representation to detail business process and the steps to perform it.
Business Continuity Plan - Strategy which outlines to procedures to follow in case
of an unplanned disaster to continue the business activities. It includes a Business Im-
pact Analysis, the definition of roles and responsibilities in case of a disaster, training
and awareness sessions for employees and documents and procedures to implement.
Business Intelligence (BI) - The applications, infrastructure, tools and practices
which enable the collection, integration and analysis of business information. The
aim of BI is to improve the decision-making processes.
==PAGE:14==
xii
Glossary
Central Processing Unit (CPU) - CPU, also called processor, is the brain of the
computer which performs most of the calculation.
Continuous Delivery - Software development approach in which development teams
produce the software in small cycles, enabling the release of the software at any time.
It is associated with a pipeline of automated build, development and testing processes.
Data Ingestion Framework - Framework which enables the extraction and the
loading of data from disparate sources into data processing tools, data integration
software or data repositories such as data marts or data warehouses.
Data Integration - Technical and business processes which enable the combination
of data from different sources and the transformation to valuable information
Data Lake - Central repository of structured and unstructured data at any scale
which enables various types of analysis from reporting and dashboard to machine
learning purpose without the need of a pre-defined structure and schema associated
to the data (on the contrary of data warehouse).
Data Mart - Subset of data from a data warehouse which limits the data relevance
only on a specific business, activity or group of users.
Data Warehouse - It is a core component of Business intelligence. It combines re-
lational data from different sources (transactional data and data from business lines)
in a unique repository with a defined structure which enables better data reporting
and analysis. Data is cleaned and transformed to create a single source of truth.
Deep Learning - Deep Learning is a way to achieve machine learning just as deci-
sion trees, bayes, etc. It is inspired by the structure of the brain and especially the
connections between the neurons in the brain (Artificial Neural Networks).
Degraded Mode - Degraded mode of operations occurs when the system does not
meet its expected service level due to some failures in the system.
Digital Workplace - The digital workplace is a virtual space created by the collec-
tion of digital tools provided by the organization to employees in order to support
them in doing their job.
Disaster Continuity Plan (DRP) - Business plan which outlines the procedures
to implement for the IT department to recover enough data to resume quickly and
effectively the business after a disaster even at the minimal performance level.
Enterprise Architecture Integration - Use of software and architectural struc-
ture of the organization to integrate a set of applications within the business.
==PAGE:15==
Glossary
xiii
GRC Tools - Governance, Risk Management and Compliance tools which help the
company to manage activities subject to regulations. They often consolidate all the
actions into one unique package which enables the business to use a unique framework
to enforce law and procedures.
GUI - Graphical User Interface (GUI) is an interface which allows the user to inter-
act with electronic devices, software via graphical items, visual indicators rather than
text-based interface.
High-End computing - Process of aggregating processing power to deliver a higher
computing performance than an isolated computer in order to solve large and com-
plex engineering or data science problems.
Holacracy - Method of decentralized management and decision-making which gives
the authority on a topic to the person or group of people who are qualified on the topic.
Host IPS - Host Intrusion Prevention System (Host IPS) is a software package which
prevents malware activities by analyzing the events which occur on the host.
Identity & Access Management (IAM) - Framework for business processes which
includes the policy for managing identity and the technologies and processes needed
to support the policy.
IoT - IoT or Internet of Things represents a network of objects like vehicle, home
devices, etc. which have software or sensors which enable communication and data
exchange between them.
KPI - Key Performance Indicators are rigorous metrics use to quantitatively measure
the performance of an organization or an activity.
Learning Expedition - A learning expedition is a method to understand another
culture, way of working by living it from the inside. It enables companies to appre-
hend another working methods, processes from which they can get inspiration and
new ideas for their own business.
Lifecycle Management - Policy based-approach to define the flow of data through
their creation to the time they become obsolete.
Machine Learning - Given some AI problems which can be described in discrete
terms, machine learning is the use of algorithms to parse data and learn from it to
be able to make prediction or determination about new inputs regarding the rules
established during the training of the algorithms.
==PAGE:16==
xiv
Glossary
Master Data Management - Technology-enabled method which links all the cru-
cial business data to a unique reference point. It improves data quality by ensuring
the consistency, the accuracy, the uniformity and accountability of the data. Master
data is the critical business entities which are agreed and shared across the company
like customers, materials, etc. Any change in the master data is part of the the stan-
dard business processes
Message Queues Integration - Integration pattern which enables the commu-
nication and the exchange of information between software system which are not
synchronized. It is a asynchronous exchange protocol which enables connectionless
communication.
Metadata - Data which describe other data through three categories : structural
metadata, administrative metadata and descriptive metadata. It improves the usabil-
ity and the value of the data.
Metadata Management - Governance framework which establishes policies and
processes to ensure that data can be shared, analyzed, integrated and access through-
out the company.
NLP - Natural Language Processing (NLP) is the part of the AI which is related to
language (chatbot, predictive writing, etc.)
Patch Management - Management of the patches and upgrades of workstations,
infrastructures components (servers, etc.).
Product Owner - The product owner is in charge of the development of user stories
and the prioritization of the product backlog to streamline the execution program.
He represents the end-users and therefore he is responsible of the integrity of the
product, its features and the product ROI.
RPA Tools - Robotic Process Automation tools which can perform repetitive and
rule-based tasks, initially performed by humans, to automate business processes.
They can be configured to interpret applications, manipulate data, send responses,
etc. On the contrary of AI or Machine Learning, this technology is limited to the
rules defined, it cannot be trained to manage unstructured inputs.
RTE - The RTE’s major responsibilities are to facilitate the agile release train events
and processes and assist the teams in delivering value. RTEs communicate with stake-
holders, escalate impediments, help manage risk, and drive relentless improvement.
Rules Engine - It is a set of criteria within a software which set the behavior of the
software with an application code if all the conditions are met.
==PAGE:17==
Glossary
xv
Scrum Master - The Scrum Master guarantee the compliance of the scrum team
with Agile methodology. He has to ensure that milestones are met. He also has a
role of mediator between all the stakeholders involved in the project.
Single Sign-On Process - User authentication service which enables users to access
multiple applications with one set of login credentials.
SLA - Service-Level Agreement is a commitment between clients and provider about
availability, quality, responsibilities around the services or product provided.
Traffic Throlling - Limitation of the traffic of legitimate users on an application, a
software, a network, by the use of different techniques (connection, cookies, request,
etc.)
Workflow Engine - It is used to manage, edit, perform business processes auto-
matically via a business software pre-coded scripts to perform automated business
activities.
==PAGE:18==
xvi
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Presentation of Wavestone
The Master Thesis was performed in collaboration with Wavestone, a consulting firm.
Hence, to fully understand the context of the project, it is necessary to introduce the
company.
1.1.1
Company Background
Wavestone, with 2600 consultants, is the leader of French independent consulting
firms in digital transformation but also an influential actor of the international scene
with 10 offices in Europe, one in New-York, one in Hong-Kong and one in Casablanca.
It has been created on the 11th of July in 2016, as the result of a merger between
Solucom, an IT consulting firm, and the European activities of Kurt Salmon (ex-
cept Retail and Consumer Goods activities) as well as CIO advisory and Financial
Services, American practices of Kurt Salmon, a management consulting firm. This
merger was triggered by a common desire to create a unique offer, tailored to fit the
organizational and business needs of companies in the digital era.
This approach is based on the following convictions :
• Innovation is not an option anymore but a necessity for companies
• Defining relevant organizational strategies requires taking into account and hav-
ing a deep expertise about the technological dimension related to the companies
• Companies which are trying to evolve and transform themselves are looking for
more than consulting firms able to help them with concepts, but for partners
capable of implementing these concepts with concrete actions.
The company offer addresses the needs of the Information Systems Division (ISD) and
Business Division of major companies and national and international administrations
from all sectors.
==PAGE:20==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: Revenue of Wavestone per sector.
Wavestone has been developing in a highly competitive environment with 4 main
different types of competitors : the independent consulting firms (Bearing Point, Sia
Partners), the consulting departments of the leading international auditing companies
called the “Big Four” (EY, KPMG, Deloitte, PwC), the consulting departments of
leading companies in digital and IS (Accenture, CapGemini Consulting) and the niche
players, specialized in one particular sector or business fonction (Argon Consulting,
Carlisle & Gallagher).
Moreover, some leading strategy consulting firms (Bain &
Company, McKinsey) can also have a expertise in digital transformation.
However, according to Capital rankings, Wavestone is not only the leader of in-
dependent consulting firms in digital transformation but also the 6th best consulting
company, across all companies.
Figure 1.2: Rankings of consulting firms in Digital Transformation.
==PAGE:21==
1.1 Presentation of Wavestone
3
Wavestone distinguishes itself from its competitors by offering consulting services
across the entire value chain and not only a part of it. Moreover, the company can
help its clients via 18 areas of excellence which combine sector-specific, functional and
technological expertise.
Figure 1.3: Presentation of Wavestone areas of excellence.
1.1.2
Presentation of the practice Digital & IT Strategy
The Master Thesis was conducted within the practice “Digital and IT Strategy”. The
main clients of the practice are the Chief Information Officers and the Chief Digital
Officers who face technological challenges and digital transformations that directly
have an impact on their business.
Figure 1.4: Digital challenges of companies.
==PAGE:22==
4
1 Introduction
Digital & IT Strategy consultants address these challenges with 3 different streams :
• Operational Excellence, driven by levers like process optimization, cost re-
duction, sourcing models and also the implementation of agile methodology
• Delivery Model Transformation, closely linked to the improvement of op-
erational performance which can require changes in operating models, organiza-
tional changes, new digital skills, etc. especially with Cloud or Agile at Scale
implementation within the companies
• Business Value, a stream focusing on guiding companies along digital and
IS transformation while ensuring the link between business and technological
needs and coordination between the different stakeholders
Thus, Wavestone supports its clients within the industrialization and the improvement
of their IT performance, the transformation of operating models to enhance innovation
and agility and within the definition and the implementation of their digital strategy.
1.2
Context of the Master Thesis
One of the pillars of the Wavestone portfolio, ”Define and implement the digital strat-
egy of the clients”, is actually a core service for all digital consulting firms. Indeed,
with the digital revolution and the emergence of new business and operating mod-
els, IT support of business processes and organization is not a strategy anymore but
a fundamental requirement for companies [1]. In this context, they are aiming to
transform their business. Faced with a continuously changing market, digital trans-
formation enables them to stay competitive or outperform their competitors, optimize
their operational performance by transforming their processes and practices and be
agile with a fast development and launch of new products and services.
However, companies face several problems to define a digital strategy and conduct
their digital transformation. On one hand, they sometimes have a limited understand-
ing of the concept of ”digital maturity” and especially its concrete application in every
aspect of an organization. On the other hand, companies struggle to determine their
state of development regarding digital maturity and therefore cannot identify the
relevant strategy, with the suitable concrete actions, to develop themselves. Every
company starts its digital journey with a different digital readiness level and there-
fore needs to understand its position in the market regarding its competitors and the
external requirements like standards and policies, customer expectations, etc. before
defining a digital strategy which fits perfectly its needs.
==PAGE:23==
1.3 Project Scope Statement
5
In this context, methodologies and tools are required to help them assess their digital
maturity and identify their strengths, their areas for improvement and their require-
ments to achieve digital excellence. Digital maturity assessment is a critical step for
companies to ensure the definition of the optimal digital strategy and the associated
roadmap.
Moreover, as stated in the previous section, digital transformation consulting is a
highly competitive market with numerous and various actors. Each of them are aim-
ing to outperform their competitors not only with a deep expertise of the topic or
processes especially tailored for their clients but also with the development of their
own tools to support their services. One noteworthy tool usually developed by con-
sulting firms is a Maturity Matrix, a framework used to assess digital maturity of
companies across several dimensions like Technology, Organization or Culture.
Currently, unlike Wavestone, several major consulting firms like BCG, EY, Deloitte
or McKinsey have developed their own maturity matrix. It enables them to have
a formalized, detailed and uniform assessment for all of their clients, ensuring the
quality and the reliability of the results.
Wavestone has not developed its own maturity matrix to assess digital readiness.
Thus, for every new mission with a client, consultants have to create a new framework
and a new assessment process. It limits the productivity of Wavestone. Moreover,
without a unique framework, it is particularly difficult to compare results of their
clients and perform competitor analysis within a sector, a country, etc. There is also
a risk to assess different things from one client to another by forgetting some criteria
or changing the assessment perspective on others for instance.
In this context, Wavestone is willing to develop its own digital maturity assessment
methodology and toolkit to increase its service portfolio for its clients and be more
competitive regarding its competitors who already offer the service to their customers.
1.3
Project Scope Statement
As the practice in charge of the definition and implementation of the digital strategy
for the clients, the practice ”Digital & IT Strategy” is aiming to develop the Wavestone
Digital Maturity Matrix (WDMM).
The crucial challenge for Wavestone, is to develop a generic matrix which could be
used for any future mission, regardless of the business sector or the digital strategy
wanted by the client (e.g. deployment of a full digital offer or dematerialization of the
processes). Moreover, a infinite number of maturity matrix can be defined depending
of the assessment streams and criteria considered.
==PAGE:24==
6
1 Introduction
Wavestone has to create a matrix which is relevant compared to what consultants
need to assess within an organization and the existing maturity frameworks of the
market but they also have to create a matrix which distinguishes itself from the others,
reflecting Wavestone expertise and vision.
On the contrary of some major consulting firms like EY or Capgemini Consulting,
the matrix developed in this Master Thesis will no be designed to be an online form
and will not have any free version. The assessment framework will be used in the
context of missions and filled by the consultants all along interviews and other types
of interactions between the consultants and the clients.
The problem statement of the project can be formulated as follow :
“This Master Thesis aims to develop a viable maturity assessment
framework to measure the digital readiness of companies regardless of
their sector, size and digital strategy in the context of client mission with
quantitative results and identification of strengths and areas for
improvement.”
1.4
Objectives of the project
The objectives of the Master Thesis are the followings :
• Analyze the state-of-the-art of digital maturity assessment by performing a
market study on the existing maturity matrix developed by major competitors
of Wavestone.
• Identify the critical criteria for digital maturity assessment and the generic
digital strategies adopted by companies.
• Develop a assessment matrix to evaluate the digital maturity of companies based
on the research conducted and the knowledge of Wavestone consultants.
• Initiate the definition of a new service within Wavestone portfolio which offers
to clients a digital maturity assessment package which uses the maturity matrix.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical
background and
related work
2.1
Literature Review Method
In this section, the literature review method is used to present articles and other doc-
uments related to digital transformation, digital maturity and maturity assessment
framework.
First, a systematic literature search was conducted on scientific databases like Google
Scholar, Science Direct, DTU Findit and IEEE Xplore. More than 50 maturity models
were studied along the research project to develop the assessment streams. A literary
review was also conducted on the internal database of Wavestone to find presentations
or internal projects related to the Master Thesis in addition to client missions with
practical application of maturity assessment frameworks. Moreover, the internal re-
search enabled the identification of key stakeholders for the model development. For
the research, the key words used were ”Digital transformation”, ”Digital strategy”,
”Digital maturity”, ”Maturity Model” and ”Maturity Assessment Framework”. The
articles were analyzed to explain the different concepts and the existing methods used
to develop a maturity model.
Finally, a benchmark study was conducted among the major digital transformation
consulting firms to analyze the existing digital maturity assessment frameworks. Ten
companies were compared in terms of criteria, results and formats :
EY, BCG,
Deloitte, McKinsey, Adobe, Accenture, Capgemini Consulting, Bain & Company,
KPMG and PwC. They provide a clear overview of common assessment streams for
digital transformation and therefore provide a starting point for the model develop-
ment with a comprehensive list of criteria.
==PAGE:26==
8
2 Theoretical background and related work
2.2
The concept of digital transformation
As stated previously, digital transformation is a inescapable issue for all companies.
They have to wonder how to integrate and exploit new technologies within their busi-
ness. However, digital transformation is not only about technology exploitation but
also about all the opportunities digital technologies can bring in a company’s business
models, which result in changed products or organizational structures or process au-
tomation [2]. Thus, digital transformation is about reinventing the business processes
as well as the organization, the structure, the business model and all the aspects which
support them.
Digital transformation is a complex subject which remains unclear for many organi-
zations. During the past few years, several research projects have been conducted
aiming to provide explanations and guidance about aspects of digital transformation.
One key example is the Digital Transformation Framework [3] which provides the
four underlying dimensions behind digital transformation :
• Use of technology, the extent to which the organization has been integrating
and exploiting digital technologies
• Changes in value creation, the impact of technologies on value creation
• Structural changes, the extent to which an organization has to adapt its
processes, skills and structure to fully integrate digital technologies
• Financial aspects, the extent to which an organization can finance the in-
tegration of digital technologies as well as its needs for answer depending on
potential core business issues
The framework clearly describes the four components of digital transformation. How-
ever, there is no framework or formalized study which clearly states the behavior to
adopt to successfully implement the digital transformation.
2.3
The concept of digital maturity framework
The term “maturity” refers to something which has “reach[ed] a state of complete de-
velopment [4]. For instance, the process maturity has been defined as “the extent to
which a process is explicitly defined, managed, measured and continuously improved”
by Paulk et al [5]. Especially, “digital maturity is about adapting the organization to
compete effectively in an increasingly digital environment” [6]. Behind the concept
of maturity and maturity assessment, there is crucial implicit idea that performance
is closely related to the maturity level of the entity considered. Companies have to
progress through different maturity stages to reach their complete stage of develop-
ment and therefore increase their performance.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 The concept of digital maturity framework
9
As stated earlier, every company starts from a different positioning in the market
and needs less or more time and attempts to achieve digital transformation. How-
ever, they cannot avoid this evolution process to improve their performance and assert
themselves on the international scene [7].
Maturity models are useful tools to guide companies through this digital journey.
They conceptualize the path towards maturity with the definition of discrete inter-
mediary stages of maturity performance : ”At the lowest level, the performance of an
activity may be rather ad hoc or depend on the initiative of an individual, so that the
outcome is unlikely to be predictable or reproductible. As the level increases, activities
are performed more systematically and are well managed. At the highest level, ”best
practices” are adopted where appropriate and are subject to a continuous improvement
process” [8]. They measure the progression of an organization or a process along the
different steps by appraising their improvement regarding pre-defined criteria and
characteristics associated to each maturity level. However, if a maturity framework
uses metrics to assess an organization, the final output is not a quantitative result
but a qualitative assessment of the state-of-development, sometimes along with the
identification of best practices, areas for improvement and strengths of the assessed
entity, depending of the type of the model [8].
Maturity models present several advantages for maturity assessment compared to
other types of appraisal. First, they are easy to apprehend and use, either for ex-
ternal auditors or as a self-assessment tool. Moreover, they can either focus on a
functional or cross-functional analysis. Finally, they offer standardized language and
concepts on which the targeted audience can easily discuss, exchange views and ideas
driving consensus, shared initiatives and ways for improvement [9].
There are three existing types of maturity models which represent distinct phases of
the evolution of the maturity model : descriptive, prescriptive and comparative. A
descriptive model only assesses the as-is situation of the organization without pro-
viding any input to improve the maturity level or relate the results to the actual
performance of the company. A prescriptive model is able to relate domain relation-
ships to business performance and therefore can provide an approach to improve the
maturity level with defined action plans or roadmap. A comparative approach can
perform a benchmark with peers of the same sector or country to be able to compare
the value driven by the same practices within different sectors or geographical areas
[10].
==PAGE:28==
10
2 Theoretical background and related work
2.4
Related works on maturity model development
2.4.1
Development methodology for maturity model
The two first significant maturity models were developed by Nolan and Crosby in 1979
and dealt respectively with Data Processing and Quality Management [11]. Nolan’s
model assesses the data processing discipline through four processes and six discrete
stages of maturity development [12]. Crosby’s model took a different approach and
did not define the five maturity stages of his model as the necessary evolutionary
path of an organisation but as five different stages of maturity towards which an
organisation can evolve if it reckons that they bring positive outcomes compared to
its current situation [13].
However, few other models were created before the early 2000s and the release of
the Capability Maturity Model developed by the Software Engineering Institute at
Carnegie Mellon University [5]. This period marks a turning point for the creation of
maturity models and papers dealing with maturity models, the development processes
associated and the concepts underlying behind the subject [11]. In 2012, R. Wendler
performed a mapping study about the state of maturity models research by analyzing
237 articles. He found that existing papers on maturity models cover “more than 20
domains, heavily dominated by software development and software engineering” and
most of the papers focus on the development process of maturity models. [11].
The most widespread approaches to develop a maturity model are the conceptual
(55%) and the design-oriented (39%) approaches.
The critical difference between
them is the absence of a validation step within the conceptual method which consists
in testing the model with experts, organizations or practitioners to ensure the align-
ment of the analysis performed by the matrix with the needs of the domain or the
discipline. Thus, despite the high number of existing models, less than the half of
them guarantee bringing value to a specific issue [11].
Design-oriented approach, also called Design Science approach, is a research method
which “addresses important unsolved problems in unique or innovative ways or solved
problems in unique and innovative ways” [14]. The method is based on the building of
IT artifacts, namely “constructs (vocabulary and symbols), models (abstractions and
representations), methods (algorithms and practices) and instantiations (implemented
and prototyped systems) [15], which are evaluated regarding their utility for solving
the initial problem. Considering a maturity model, the artifact “Constructs” can be
identified as the choice of assessment streams and criteria, the artifact “Model” can
refer to the definition of the maturity levels, the assessment questions and outcomes,
the artifact “Method” can be assimilated to the analysis process associated to the
framework and the artifact “Instantiation” can be defined as the tool chosen to actu-
ally use the maturity model and deliver the results of the analysis [9]. The approach,
develop by Hevner et al. [14], is based on seven fundamental guidelines presented in
the following table.
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Related works on maturity model development
11
Nr
Guideline
Description
1
Design as
an Artifact
Design-Science research must produce a viable artifact
in the form of construct, a model, a method, or an
instantiation
2
Problem
Relevance
The objective of design-science research is to develop
technology-based solutions to important and relevant
business problems
3
Design
Evaluation
The utility, quality, and efficacy of a design artifact must
be rigorously demonstrated via well-executed evaluation
methods
4
Research
Contributions
Effective design-science research must provide clear and
verifiable contributions in the areas of the design, artifact,
design foundations, and/or design methodologies
5
Research Rigor
Design-science research relies upon the application of
rigorous methods in both the construction and evaluation
of the design artifact
6
Design
as a Search
Process
The search for an effective artifact requires utilizing
available means to reach desired ends while satisfying
laws in the problem environment
7
Communication
of Research
Design-science research must be presented effectively
both to technology-oriented as well as managed-oriented
audiences
Table 2.1: The seven guidelines of Design-Science Research [14].
The seven guidelines drive the entire development process of a maturity model and
ensure the quality, the relevance and the adequacy of the model resulting from the
research. Hevner et al. (2004) defined Design Science approach as a “paradigm for IS
research” [14] and several research papers refer to Design Science guidelines as the fun-
damental rules underlying behind the design of the development process for IS-related
maturity models. The IT artifacts aim to generate innovative ideas, models, methods
and tools that expand and improve significantly the problem-solving abilities for new
IS issues or “application areas that were not previously believed to be amendable to
IT support [16]. Based on this conviction, Becker et al. (2009) have elaborated a
procedure to develop maturity models whose defined stages are designed to perfectly
fit the seven guidelines of Design-Science research [17]. Another significant example
is the method of I. Boughzala and G.-J. Vreede who build a collaboration maturity
model following the guidelines formalized by Hevner et al. [9].
==PAGE:30==
12
2 Theoretical background and related work
As stated previously, a multitude of distinct development methods have been designed
during the past few years. Every method has its own concepts and its sequence of
development stages. Nevertheless, based on the similarities between the procedures,
five distinct and generic stages can be defined to describe the process: Scope, Design,
Populate, Test and Deploy.
During the Scope phase, the research team defines the problem the maturity model
has to resolve, in compliance with the guideline 2 “Problem relevance” [14]. It con-
sists in defining the scope through research techniques such as literature review or
stakeholder interviews (academic researchers, practitioners, organizations) [10] and
demonstrate the relevance of the study conducted regarding the needs of the stake-
holders.
The Design stage focuses on determining the target audience of the model and how to
design its structure and conditions of application to meet their needs. Their needs are
“reflected in why they seek to apply the model, how the model can be applied to varying
organizational structures, who needs to be involved in applying the model and what
can be achieved through application of the model” [10]. Considering the guidelines 5
“Research Rigor” and 7 “Communication of Research” [14] the research team has to
define the method and perimeter of application, the users and their responsibilities
as well as the different maturity stages included in the maturity model.
Designing the model is a critical step for relevance and practicability as it has a signif-
icant influence on its complexity. A maturity model has to find a balance between a
simple framework, understandable and user-friendly for the target group and a com-
plex model giving enough meaningful inputs to the audience to fully apprehend the
complex reality described within the model [10].
Following the definition of the problem and the model architecture, the development
process, called Populate, focuses on generating the content of the model. “In this
phase it is necessary to identify what needs to be measured in the maturity assessment
and how this can be measured [10]. In several model developments, based on the
guidelines 1 “Design as an Artifact” and 4 “Research Contribution” this stage begins
with a literature analysis on the subject and the existing frameworks dealing with it.
Considering the guidelines 5 “Research Rigor and 6 “Design as a Search Process” [14],
the actual conception of model content is performed iteratively. The research team
has to select one or a combination of research techniques such as literature review,
Delphi technique, Nominal Group technique, focus group or expert interviews to
develop relevant assessment streams and criteria integrated within the model design
and associated with requirements.
After producing the content of the maturity model, the stage Populate focuses on
building the tool associated to the model in terms of structure (survey, excel file,
etc.), design of the questions and answers and the selection of the assessment method
such as quantitative analysis.
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Related works on maturity model development
13
While considering the different solutions to develop the tools, it is crucial to consider
the strategy and the audience defined in the Design stage as well as the resources avail-
able to conduct the project. For instance, a survey using quantitative answers is an
inexpensive tool, easy to implement, which enables, in electronic form, a widespread-
publication via emails, websites or intranet. However, this design is subjected to the
extent to which the audience can understand the questions and the concepts used.
The wording along with the number and the sequence of the questions is a critical
point to the reliability of the model outputs.
An effective literature review or questions previously tested during development tech-
niques like Delphi Technique may minimize the risks of failure to understand the
survey by providing a list of comprehensive questions. On the contrary, a software-
based tool like an excel worksheet can be suitable when the tool is designed to be
used only by experimented or skilled people, such as auditors, as it can offer a higher
level of details and reach more complex analysis. Moreover, the research team has to
find an appropriate balance in the number of questions. A low number of questions
may result in insufficient information to assess accurately an organization whereas an
excessive number may reduce the reliability of the survey output due to a lower rate
of answers, a higher number of incomplete survey or a disproportionate complexity of
the survey regarding the audience. Finally, the response format has a direct influence
on data processing capabilities. For instance, to facilitate the use of a quantitative
analysis method, a Likert-style scale would be suitable as it is based on discrete and
classifiable numeric variables which can be used, without any treatment, in the ma-
turity calculations [10].
The next step of the development process is the Test stage which is based on the
guidelines 6 “Design as a Search Process” and 3 “Evaluation” of Hevner et al. (2004).
They state that the quality, the utility and the effectiveness of IT artifacts regard-
ing the initial problem and the environment constraints have to be appraised via a
structured assessment method [14].
First, the research team needs to assess the content validity of the model, that is to
which extent the model brings a solution to the initial problem and represents the
domain or the discipline is was intended to.
A first evaluation can be performed
via the literature review and benchmark of existing framework. This first validation
has to be reinforced by pilot tests in the form of case studies including surveys and
interviews to “improve the convergence of opinions that desired design objectives
have been achieved” [10]. Focus Groups and Nominal Group Technique could also be
invoked to assess the pertinence of the model.
After testing the model content, the research team has to “test any assessment in-
struments for validity to ensure they measure what it was intended to measure and
reliabiilty to ensure results obtained are accurate and repeatable” [10]. For instance,
De Bruin and Freeze (2005) used both a maturity assessment survey and pilot groups
to test the tool associated to the model with experts or practitioners of the domain.
==PAGE:32==
14
2 Theoretical background and related work
The output of the evaluation may result in another iteration of the development pro-
cess from the Scope stage or in the rejection of the model. The outcome may also
lead to the validation of the model without any changes.
However, as the world,
and especially the technological market, is constantly evolving, the retained model
will not be permanently valid and will need to be evaluated and adapted regularly [17].
The last generic stage of the development methodology is called Deploy and consists in
broadcasting the model to the audience and verify its reliability for the entire market.
The deployment can be structured in two distinct steps. First, it is deployed to the
stakeholders involved in the design process of the model (experts, practitioners, orga-
nizations, etc.) for a first evaluation. The scope of the broadcast is then widened to
organizations and entities which are fully independent from the development process.
Their results are analyzed to validate the extent to which the model is generalizable
on the market [10].
If similarities can be found between the different development stages of maturity
models and generic steps can be defined, it has to be noticed that the sequence of the
steps and the substeps may vary from one method to another. For instance, where
De Bruin and Freeze (2005) define the sequence as Scope, Design, Populate, Test and
Deploy, Boughzala decided to perform the stage Populate before the steps Scope and
Design [10] [9]. Another model designed by Schumacher et al. and based on Becker’s
methodology (2009), integrates the Design phase as a substep of the Populate stage.
The three models also use different research techniques for the content development
and the tests of the models which are explained in the following section.
2.4.2
Focus on research techniques to Populate the model
As stated previously, during the phase Populate, the research team has to design the
maturity framework in accordance with one or a combination of research methods
previously selected. Several methods exist and should be compared, considering their
respective advantages and drawbacks, to select the appropriate approach.
The literature review is a widespread research technique which enables the identifi-
cation of the core concepts of a subject and the hierarchical relations between the
related topics [18]. Nevertheless, it only provides a first framework for the maturity
model with a initial list of assessment topics and criteria which has to be reviewed
and completed by other research techniques.
Interviews are also a basic method for data collection within a research process. It
consists in a face-to-face session between an interviewer and a respondent during
which the interviewer asks questions about an issue. Saunders et. al identified three
different types of interviews : structured, semi-structured and unstructured.
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Related works on maturity model development
15
A structured interview is a session within which the interviewer verbally conducts
a questionnaire with pre-defined questions in a determined order, with no probe or
follow-up questions and limited variations between two respondents. It is an efficient
method when the interviewer is seeking for a specific information. However, it limits
the dialogue between the respondent and the interviewer with a formal structure
which prevents in-depth analysis and idea generation on a specific issue. This type
of interviews is not optimal for the development of a maturity model which requires
discussion and in-depth analysis to ensure an comprehensive list of criteria.
A semi-structured interview is a wide-ranging category of interview which also uses
a pre-defined questionnaire but the sequence of questions can vary between two in-
terviews and the interviewer is able to ask additional questions to probe a specific
research topic. The form of the interviews provides the structure required to obtain
precise and relevant answers without limiting the dialogue, the creativity and the
idea generation thanks to potential open conversation between the interviewer and
the respondent.
An unstructured interview is an informal session only guided by one or more themes
to discuss but without pre-defined questions. The form of the session fully encourages
open and creative discussion but the lack of structure increases the risks of irrelevant
or incomplete responses regarding what the interviewer is looking for [19].
A focus group is “a group interview” in which a moderator facilitates the meeting and
leads the participants on the different topics and issues to be addressed. The discus-
sions, the ideas and perspective expressed during the group interview constitute the
main output and the basis to work on [20]. The pertinence of a focus group depends
on the quality of the mediator and the diversity of experts, or practitioners, forming
the group. Biased judgment and decisions may arise from a mediator or a dominant
participant who imposes its rules and views to the participants without giving enough
way for discussion or from a group of people from the same sector, with the same
expertise or managing same-sized companies who are likely to share the same perspec-
tive. Focus groups are often used in medical research and are suitable for in-depth
investigations about problem identification [21]. Boughzala and Vreede chose to use a
focus group for all the steps of the design process and the evaluation of their model [9].
In the context of model development, consensus methods such as “Delphi Technique”
or “Nominal Group Technique” are a more appropriate solution as their structure
facilitates problem-solving and generation of ideas. The “Nominal Group Technique”
(NGT) is a structured face-to-face session in which participants can share their ideas in
turn. The questions and issues dealt during the meeting are communicated upstream
to the participants before the meeting.
==PAGE:34==
16
2 Theoretical background and related work
At the beginning of the session, a “silent generation” step lets the participants think
about their ideas and structure them before the ”round robin” stage where one par-
ticipant at a time can share a unique idea to the others. Discussions around the ideas
are avoided during this stage which consists uniquely in listing ideas until there are
no longer forthcoming inputs. The next step is the “clarification of the ideas” during
which experts discuss the ideas to ensure their complete understanding of the points
listed during the previous phase. The participants are then able to rank ideas via a
confidential answer sheet on which they have to select and weight a specific number of
ideas, commonly five, according to the importance they assign to them. Finally, the
ranking results are subject to discussion among the participants to validate the out-
puts of the group session [21]. An alternative approach is a pseudo-iterative process
during which the participants rank the ideas and then discuss their decision before
re-ranking the ideas in order to refine and increase the accuracy of the results.
As the “focus group”, the success of the NGT is highly based on the diversity of partic-
ipants involved in the brainstorming session. NGT, with the “round robin” method,
gives each participant the opportunity to contribute equally to the problem-solving
process, partially minimizing the risk of dominating contributors. It is a useful tech-
nique which can be implemented either with a small or large group and enables the
identification and prioritization of solutions and ideas to solve a specific problem.
However, it is a face-to-face technique in which anonymity is not guaranteed outside
the ranking step that can limit creativity and disruptive ideas. Moreover, “Nominal
Group Technique” may appear as a highly mechanical process, limiting discussion by
enforcing speaking on turn and therefore potentially limiting synergy and construc-
tive in-depth debate for idea generation [22].
The “Delphi Technique” is also a structured group interaction which differs from the
“Nominal Group Technique” by using questionnaires rather than face-to-face sessions.
The method is structured as an iterative process involving individual questionnaires
and individual feedback for every participant. The number of iteration is determined
upstream and is usually between 2 and 4 stages. The questionnaires present a list of
statements from literature search, “Nominal Group Technique” or practitioners’ quo-
tations. Participants are asked to rank them via a pre-defined likert-type scale. The
scale enables them to rank their attitude towards the statement from ”Completely
disagree” to ”Fully agree” with a various number of intermediary attitudes. Contrib-
utors are also encouraged to write comments about the statements. In the following
iterations, the same statements are submitted to every individual with an indica-
tion of his previous answer, the median rating and a personal selection of verbatim
comments for each statement.
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Related works on maturity model development
17
The multistage research process aims to converge towards a unique consensus by suc-
cessive iterations for which participants have to scale their satisfaction and validate
the output during a final stage. The “Delphi Technique” is suitable to combine per-
spectives and ideas to improve problem-solving capabilities and address complex or
innovative issues, like framework development which have not been fully analyzed
and solved by research papers or studies [23].
Similarly to the “focus group” and the “Nominal Group Technique”, the success of
this technique is correlated with the experts involved within the process and the out-
comes are intrinsically biased by the the number of iterations for the brainstorming
stages and the views of the different participants. These relations call into question
the reliability of the results which are fully based on researcher views. However, “Del-
phi Technique” offers some significant advantages: the anonymity induced by the
questionnaires can boost the creativity of participants who can suggest any idea with-
out fear of judgment or the threat of a dominant participant stifling the voice of the
others. Moreover, the technique widens the scope of analysis as the use of question-
naires removes the geographic and coordination constraints associated to face-to-face
sessions [24] [23].
==PAGE:36==
18
2 Theoretical background and related work
2.5
Benchmark of digital maturity frameworks
In addition to the literature research, a benchmark of existing digital maturity frame-
work was performed with a strong focus on maturity models developed by the com-
petitors. The study enabled a better understanding of the topics related to digital
maturity assessment, the content usually included in the associated framework and
all the conditions of applications designed by the competitors of Wavestone.
As stated previously, the section especially focuses on three existing digital maturity
assessment frameworks of competitors: BCG, Deloitte, and Capgemini consulting.
They were chosen regarding their maturity, the depth of analysis, that means the
scope of assessment with the streams, and criteria chosen and the quality of the
assessment results.
The other maturity frameworks considered during the preliminary phase of the project
will be presented in a summary table.
2.5.1
Digital Accelerator Index - BCG
BCG Consulting group is a maturity assessment framework which assesses the en-
tire organization. It is structured in four different building blocks which include 37
dimensions:
• Business strategy driven by the digital. It assesses the maturity of the
vision, ambitions, roadmap, and alignment of the company which are critical to
implement a digital strategy.
• Digitize the core. It is a focus on the core activities of the company like R&D
or the operations like manufacturing and procurement. It also includes the dig-
ital accelerators which are shared by all the enablers, for example, automation.
• New digital growth.
It assesses the impact of emerging technologies and
business models which create new digital topics like startup incubation, digital
disruption or prototyping.
• Enablers. It assesses the streams “People & Organization”, “Data & Analyt-
ics”, “Technology” and ”Ecosystem” which are considered as the enablers of the
digital transformation.
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Benchmark of digital maturity frameworks
19
Figure 2.1: Digital Maturity Assessment Framework of BCG.
The maturity assessment tool of BCG is a 60-minute online questionnaire which has
to be completed by top management representatives of the assessed company. For
each question, the user has to answer a percentage which indicates how agreed he is on
the criteria considered. The assessment framework is a part of a paid service of BCG
which offers 3 different assessment packages: the companies can choose to only have
a global maturity result for each criteria and areas for improvement or they can have
a deeper analysis with competitor and quid investment analysis including concrete
actions to implement or even the definition of a strategy and roadmap according to
the results of the study.
According to the percentage given for each criterion, the tool calculates the score and
identifies in which stage of the maturity model the company belongs to :
• Digital Starter (25% > x) - Ad hoc collaboration between business and IT
on some digital topics but there is no alignment between them. There is no
strategy for the development of digital technologies and organization.
• Digital Literate (25% < x < 50%) - Emergence of awareness about the need
of digital investment and a roadmap to close gaps is defined. Emergence of
digitized processes and digital initiatives within departments and functions but
the organization still works in silos.
• Digital Performer (50% < x < 75%) - Alignment of business functions and IT
to develop and manage digital capabilities across the company in a consistent
way. They build and commercialize jointly successful digital initiatives.
==PAGE:38==
20
2 Theoretical background and related work
• Digital Leader (75% < x) - Digital is a inherent part of the company which
supports every aspect of it from operations to innovation capabilities including
value proposition. There is a clear definition of the digital strategy and roadmap.
Digital is the key driver to create business value within the company and enable
the organization to outperform the competition [25].
Figure 2.2: Global results (BCG).
Figure 2.3: Results per stream (BCG).
2.5.2
Digital Maturity Survey - Deloitte
On the contrary of BCG, Deloitte has structured its matrix into one layer of 5 assess-
ment streams with no hierarchy between them. Except for the strategic vision and
the organization, the assessment focuses more on the capabilities driven by the digital
technologies (digital operations, products and services, customer relationships). The
matrix offers a less detailed analysis of the organizational maturity but aims to focus
on organizational capabilities to meet customers’ expectations.
• Strategy and Leadership. It assesses the existence and the integration of a
strategic vision within the organization.
• Customer Engagement. It assesses the strategy and the relationship between
the organization and the customers via the services delivered or the marketing
strategy and channel.
• Product and Services. It focuses on the strategy and the innovations related
to products and services.
• Organization & Talent. It assesses both people and their skills within the
organization and the structure of the company with the ways of working and
the project methodology.
==PAGE:39==
2.5 Benchmark of digital maturity frameworks
21
• Digital Operations.
It assesses the digital capabilities of the IT systems
within the organization with process automation, data analytics and also data
platforms.
Figure 2.4: Digital Maturity Assessment Framework of Deloitte.
The maturity assessment tool of Deloitte is a 30-minute online questionnaire. For
each question, the user has to answer a percentage which indicates the degree to
which he agrees. It is a free service available on internet. The survey delivers the
global maturity level of the company as well as an identification of areas for improve-
ment. Moreover, according to the score for each criterion, the survey gives guidelines
to improve the maturity level.
Deloitte has defined 5 stages of maturity for companies :
• Early (20% > x) - Poor definition of digital strategy with limited use of tech-
nology. Ad hoc digital initiatives within a silo organization.
• Developing (20% < x < 40%) - Emergence of digital initiatives along with a
digital strategy and governance. Organization still working in silos.
• Progressing (40% < x < 60%) - Development of a collaboration between digital
initiatives across departments. Limited integration of a digital strategy within
the business processes.
• Strong (60% < x < 80%) - Enterprise-wide digital strategy which supports
digital objective but digital is still dissociated from the core business of the
company.
• Maturing (80% < x) - Fully integrated digital strategy and culture within
the organization which is agile, collaborative and learning. Digital initiatives
significantly drive value [6] [26] .
==PAGE:40==
22
2 Theoretical background and related work
Figure 2.5: Global results (Deloitte).
Figure 2.6: Results per stream (De-
loitte).
2.5.3
Digital Organization Readiness - Capgemini Consulting
The Capgemini Consulting Framework offers a lighter analysis compared to the BCG
and Deloitte maturity models. It is structured in one layer of 4 assessment streams.
The assessment focuses especially on two aspects of the organization : the digital
integration within the business processes and operations and the impact of human
resources (digital mindset and empowered talent).
The matrix offers a less detailed analysis of the organizational maturity but aims
to focus on organizational capabilities to meet customers’ expectations.
• Digital-First Mindset. It assesses the extent to which an organization is open
to digital technology integration and choose it rather than another solution.
• Digitized Practices. It focuses on the digital capabilities driven by the tech-
nology like data-driven decision, collaborative learning and digitized operations.
• Empowered Talent. It assesses the impact of the use of technology on em-
ployees (empowerment, skills, engagement)
• Data Access & Collaboration Tools.It focuses on the data integration
within the processes and operations.
The maturity assessment tool of Capgemini Consulting is a online self-service ques-
tionnaire. For each question, the user has to answer a score from 1 (strongly disagree)
to 6 (strongly agree). The survey delivers the global maturity level of the company
as well as an identification of areas for improvement.
==PAGE:41==
2.5 Benchmark of digital maturity frameworks
23
Figure 2.7: Digital Maturity Assessment Framework of Capgemini Consulting.
Capgemini consulting has defined 4 stages of maturity for companies :
• Stalling (10 < x < 22.5) - Lack of awareness of the value driven by digital,
poor or nonexistent digital strategy and limited use of technology.
• Initiating (22.5 < x < 35) - Emergence of awareness about the value of digital
capabilities. The company is starting the transition but the digital maturity
stay limited.
• Engaging (35 < x < 47.5) - Companies are performing the digital transition
within their strategy, governance, processes and people. Digital is integrating
within the business and starts to create value.
• Self-reinforcing (47.5 < x < 60) - Fully digital company where digital creates
significant value [27].
Figure 2.8: 4-stage Maturity Index
(Capgemini).
Figure 2.9: Strategies
per
maturity
level
(Capgemini).
==PAGE:42==
24
2 Theoretical background and related work
2.5.4
Other concurrent maturity frameworks
Model Name
Source
Assessment Description
Digital
Readiness
Assessment
[28]
[29]
EY
Assessment in 7 streams including 11 criteria each to
measure maturity regarding 3 levels. Global score, grade
per stream and benchmark with peers of the same sec-
tor/country/size are provided
Digital
Quotient
[30] [31]
McKinsey
Company
Assessment in 4 streams including 3-6 criteria to mea-
sure maturity regarding 4 levels.
Global score, grade
per stream and best practices to identify areas for im-
provement are provided
Optimization
Maturity Tool [32]
[33]
Adobe
Assessment in 6 streams including 8 criteria to measure
maturity regarding 5 levels. Quantitative scores, bench-
mark with the peers of the same sector/country and rec-
ommendations for each stream regarding the associated
5-year goal are provided
Digital
Performance Index
[34] [35]
Accenture
Assessment in 4 streams including 3 criteria each to mea-
sure maturity regarding 4 levels. Global score and grade
for each category are provided
Digital
Readiness
Survey [36] [37]
Bain
&
Company
Quick assessment in 7 streams and 7 questions to mea-
sure maturity regarding 5 levels.
Global score and
grades for each category are provided
Digital
Readiness
Assessment
[38]
[39]
KPMG
Quick assessment in 7 streams and containing between
1 and 3 criteria to measure maturity regarding 4 levels.
Global score and grades for each category are provided
Digital
Readiness
Analysis [40]
PwC
Assessment in 3 streams and 16 criteria to measure ma-
turity regarding 5 levels.
Global score and grades for
each category are provided
CMMI [5]
Carnegie
Mellon
University
Quick assessment in 7 streams and containing between 1
and 3 criteria to measure maturity regarding 4 levels. No
details about the maturity levels and the model outputs
Data Management
Maturity [41]
Carnegie
Mellon
University
Quick assessment in 6 streams and containing between
3 and 6 criteria to measure maturity. No details about
the maturity levels and the model outputs
Table 2.2: Existing digital maturity frameworks.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
The following section focuses on the design-science approach and Becker’s method-
ology (2009), whose sequence of steps is detailed below, and which were chosen to
design the digital maturity assessment model. The choices made about the research
methods for content generation and the Test phase will also be discussed.
Figure 3.1: Becker’s development methodology for maturity models [17].
==PAGE:44==
26
3 Methodology
The literature review performed in a previous section led me to choose the Design-
Science approach because the development of a digital maturity model is a complex
and innovative unsolved issue for consulting firms and the majority of companies
which intend to expand their influence internationally. It requires a method which
enables both the structured design of an innovative solution and the evaluation of
the utility and the quality of the model regarding the initial problem. As Becker’s
methodology (2009) defines every step to fit perfectly with the requirements of the
Design-Science approach, it seems to be the best alternative to design the maturity
model.
3.1
Problem definition
The development process begins with the Problem definition stage with the deter-
mination of the domain or discipline of analysis and the audience addressed by the
digital maturity framework. The relevance of the research and the framework devel-
oped also have to be proved by literature, study analysis, market analysis, etc. In
the context of Master Thesis, the literature review was the main technique used to
define the problem.
3.2
Comparison of existing matrix
The next step of the design process is the Comparison of existing matrix. It gives
an overview of the work related to the subject.
It also enables to have a better
understanding of the problem defined and therefore it gives some insights to determine
the development strategy to adopt. The focus was mainly on existing digital maturity
matrix developed by the competitors of Wavestone as they are subject to similar
market constraints and are driven by similar stakes and strategy.
3.3
Determination of development strategy
Before generating the content of the maturity matrix, the research team has to deter-
mine the development strategy. Based on the documents and models collected within
the Problem definition and Comparison of existing matrix stages, the strategy has to
be selected from the development of a fully innovative solution to the improvement
of an existing model via the transfer of the model structure to a new discipline or the
combination of several models to create a new one.
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Iterative maturity model development
27
3.4
Iterative maturity model development
The next step is generating the content of the matrix with the Iterative maturity
model development stage which includes four sub-stages : Select design level,Select
approach, Design model section, Test result.
First, the research team defines the architecture of the matrix by selecting the highest
design level. A maturity model can have a one-dimension structure with only one axis
of analysis or a multidimensional structure with two or three dimensions (e.g. the
maturity stages on one axis and different assessment streams on another axis). As
digital maturity is a complex issue involving different disciplines, the matrix developed
was a multidimensional framework with distinct assessment streams in addition to
the maturity levels. After designing the global architecture, each dimension is broken
down into categories.
Once the architecture is defined, the research teams chooses the approach to generate
the content. As stated before, there are several ways to perform the design of the
criteria from literature review to Delphi of Nominal Group techniques. The approach
selected can vary from one iteration to another in accordance with the information
needed and the maturity degree of the model.
For the Master Thesis, literature
review, Nominal Technique Group, focus group and interviews were used within the
different iterations to build the criteria.
The method chosen is then implemented with the relevant actors and the outcome of
the generation process is evaluated by a focus group in accordance with the guideline
3 of Hevner et al. ”Evaluation” to validate “the comprehensiveness, consistency and
problem adequacy” [17]. Based on the test results, the research team will need to
perform another iteration or will be able to validate the content and move on to the
next step.
3.5
Conception and implementation of transfer
media
Following the iterative development, the next step is to design and implement the
transfer media. The research team selects the form of restitution for the maturity
model according to the target groups defined during the Problem definition. A com-
parison of potential forms, such as online form or software-based tool, is performed to
design the relevant transfer media. The solution to evaluate the final tool also needs
to be designed during this stage to be fully integrated within the assessment tool. It
facilitates, for instance, the feedback from users, from the pilot group to the control
group of the maturity model.
The media is then implemented in a timely fashion to be available for the target
audience defined beforehand.
==PAGE:46==
28
3 Methodology
3.6
Evaluation
The final stage is the Evaluation of the maturity model and the media associated to
ensure that they provide an effective solution to the initial problem. In the context
of the Master Thesis, a focus group was used to appraise the utility of the solution.
The Evaluation step can lead to another iteration of the design process, the model
rejection or the validation of the proposed solution.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4
Development of the
digital maturity model
4.1
Problem definition and development strategy
As stated previously, Wavestone has not yet developed a maturity matrix which could
help their clients to position themselves within the market regarding digital maturity.
It limits both the productivity of Wavestone and the relevance of its maturity assess-
ment as the framework is different for every client mission, preventing benchmarks
between clients and other peers from the same sector or geographical area.
First, the development of the maturity model will be based on an extensive literary
review about existing maturity models and related research projects, a benchmark of
matrix developed by competitors. Therefore, the first versions of the maturity matrix
will be a combination of existing models which gives a comprehensive list of criteria
as a starting point. Then, the model will be reviewed by Wavestone experts via in-
terviews and group sessions to refine the matrix architecture, the choice of criteria,
and the definition of the maturity levels for each criteria.
The maturity model developed aims to be used by Wavestone consultants in the
context of relevant client missions. The consultants will analyze the organizational
maturity of the client via their interactions with the management representatives
and will complete the assessment framework based on the information collected. The
model outcome will be a maturity score per criteria which will highlight the strengths
and the areas for improvement of the company. Then, this result could be used as a
basis for a further analysis via the identification of quick wins and the development
of an action plan or a roadmap to guide the digital transformation.
==PAGE:48==
30
4 Development of the digital maturity model
4.2
Iterative development of model criteria
The maturity model was developed via 5 iterations within which the architecture, the
criteria and the maturity levels associated were designed progressively. The sequence
of iterations is presented below and each iteration will be described.
Figure 4.1: Development method - Sequence of iterations.
Based on the literature, the design process has to ensure that the final version of the
maturity model reach the following requirements:
• The maturity model should only include criteria and themes understandable for
the different representatives interacting with the consultants
• The maturity model should provide a rich overview of the organization consid-
ering the main aspects of digital maturity
• The maturity model should be completed in a timely fashion by consultants
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Iterative development of model criteria
31
• The maturity model should be associated with a standalone tool which does
not require additional support or tool for result interpretation
• The maturity model should be integrated within an assessment process which
promotes organizational learning and enables the co-creation of a strategy and
an action plan to increase the maturity level of the company
4.2.1
Development of criteria: first iteration
Following the definition of the development strategy, the first iteration to generate
the model content was performed. During this stage, a first version of the global
architecture and the list of criteria was defined based of an extensive literary review.
Moreover, the maturity levels associated to the criteria were formulated.
4.2.1.1
Generation of criteria
Based on the literature research, 4 main parallel assessment streams were identified
to structure the framework: “IT capabilities & foundations”, “Strategy & leadership”,
“Organizational maturity” “End-user maturity”.
Figure 4.2: First version of the model.
For each stream, an exhaustive list of criteria was created by compiling all the core
topics related to digital maturity within the documents collected. The aim was to
gather all the potential criteria for each stream without structuring the streams. The
list of criteria per stream is available in Appendix 1.
4.2.1.2
Generation of maturity levels associated
As many existing maturity models, five specific maturity stages were defined for
every criteria included in the model. This division in five discrete stages provides a
sufficient level of details to describe realistically every possible state of development
of the assessed company. It aims to find a balance between the complex reality and
its simplification into discrete stages.
==PAGE:50==
32
4 Development of the digital maturity model
The nuances driven by five maturity levels increase the accuracy and the quality of
the assessment results compared to a model with fewer discrete stages.
Each criteria of the model describes a success factor or a component of digital maturity
and transformation which includes several key concepts. For each criteria, these key
concepts were identified and analyzed to build the maturity stages.
Indeed, each
maturity stage should introduce one or more key concepts related to the criterion.
The different sub-components of the criterion should be dispatched within the stages
in a meaningful order to provide a staggered index of maturity. For instance, for the
criteria “Culture of innovation”, a literature search was performed to analyze and list
the core value underlying behind the concept of innovation culture. The result are
presented in the table below.
Core values
Description
Risk Taking
culture [42]
The organization supports and rewards risk-taking behavior and
disruptive thinking with an active support from the management
to enhance employee’s creativity and generation of ideas
Allocation of
resources [43]
The organization allocates time and means (money, structure)
to boost the innovation capabilities of the employees
Test-and-Learn
approach [44]
A test-and-learn approach is systematically implemented within
the innovative projects to accelerate the recycling of ideas and
increase the projects’ flexibility and the speed
Innovation
monitoring [43]
The organization has clear goals regarding innovation which are
communicated and monitored through the missions and projects
Intrapreneurship [44]
Presence of innovative champions within the organization who
play an active role in the promotion and the implementation of
a culture of innovation within the company
Leadership &
Management
support [44]
Strong leadership and sponsorship from the management to pro-
mote innovation and initiatives associated
Market
orientation [44]
The innovation culture creates value by generating new ideas,
processes and products to reach customer needs
Motivation &
relationships [42]
Innovation initiatives are based on voluntary actions, collabora-
tion between employees and allowance of significant freedom for
employees
Tools &
Processes [42]
Culture of innovation is promoted by formalized event like chal-
lenges, contests and workshops as well as skill development and
training
Table 4.1: Core value of the criteria Culture of innovation.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Iterative development of model criteria
33
After mapping the core values supporting the culture of innovation, the next step is
to determine the appropriate sequence of maturity level integrating the main compo-
nents of innovative culture.
The first level of maturity is Ad-hoc and describes an organization with a limited
culture of innovation regarding initiatives and processes. The second level is a limited
implementation. Therefore, there is no formalization of activities and the culture of
innovation is only supported by the value of “Motivation & relationships”.
The third maturity level describes a defined culture of innovation. The next step
after isolated initiatives launched by employees is the emergence of a sponsorship
from employees and the management and the dissemination of the culture across the
company. The development of the culture is associated to the promotion of risk-taking
behavior and disruptive thinking. It corresponds to the values “Intrapreneurship”,
Risk Taking culture and Leadership and an improved integration of the value
“Motivation & relationships”.
The next stage defines a managed culture of innovation. In addition to an extended in-
tegration of the core value previously mentioned, the organization starts to transform
itself to fully integrate and optimize the value driven by innovative processes. There-
fore, time and means are allocated to employees for innovative projects according to
the value ”Allocation of resources”. Moreover, if innovation can trigger value,
innovative projects involve a high rate of failure and the development of innovative
activities can therefore lead to reduced productivity and significant loss of money. To
minimize the risks while enabling the research on innovation, the organization has to
introduce adapted processes such as the Test and Learn approach which speeds
the idea check to validate or reject them before generating potential significant lost
for the company.
The final stage corresponds to the optimal level of culture of innovation. The culture
is fully integrated within the company and its strategy. Following this, it should sup-
port the achievement of the strategic goals and the core activities of the organization.
Therefore, based on the value Market orientation, innovation contributes to the
creation of new processes and ideas designed to fit the customer needs or outperform
competitors. However, as innovation is an integral part of the organization’s strategy
and is supposed to create value, the organization needs to monitor the performance
associated to innovative activities in accordance with the value Innovation moni-
toring.
Following this evolution of the culture within the company, the different maturity
stages can be formulated as it is presented in the table below. Every sequence of
maturity levels associated to a criterion were defined and formulated with a similar
process.
==PAGE:52==
34
4 Development of the digital maturity model
Maturity Stages
Definitions
Level 1:
Ad hoc
Lack of formalized initiatives and processes
Level 2:
Limited
Isolated initiatives with variable success across the organization
Level 3:
Defined
Formalized processes with sponsorship and implementation of
innovation champions. Innovative initiatives and risk taking be-
havior are promoted by the management teams. Collaborative
innovative processes implemented across the organization
Level 4:
Managed
Established innovative processes and recurrent innovative events
with strong employee engagement.
Time and means are allo-
cated for innovation.
Test-and-learn approach for innovative
initiatives to enable early-stage recycling of ideas. Training and
skill development of employees are performed to facilitate the
implementation of an innovative culture
Level 5:
Optimized
Full integration of innovation within business processes which
enables value creation in new products/services and ways of
working. Innovation is fully monitored with KPI across the or-
ganization
Table 4.2: Example of maturity stages for the criterion Culture of Innovation.
4.2.1.3
Test of the outcome
The outcome of the iteration was tested via a focus group composed by 4 managers
from the following technical practices of Wavestone : 2 managers from Digital &
IT Strategy (DIS), 1 manager from Digital & Emerging Technologies (DET), and 1
manager from IT & Data Architecture (IDA). The focus group aimed to assess the
relevance of the streams selected and the criteria associated.
After discussion, it was decided to delete the stream “End-user maturity” because the
importance of this stream depends on the core activity and the sector of the company.
For instance, the client interaction and personalized user experience (interface, sup-
port, etc.) are much more critical for the banking sector than for refining companies
like Total. The stream ‘“end-user maturity” could strongly influence, negatively or
positively, the global maturity score regardless of the company needs and therefore
reduce the relevance of the model for Wavestone clients. The customer view is only
maintained in the stream “Strategy & Leadership” with the customer-centric strategy.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Iterative development of model criteria
35
Moreover, the focus group voted for the extraction of every criteria related to the
concepts of “Data”, “Artifical Intelligence” and “Analytics” from the stream “Tech-
nological capabilities and foundations” to create a distinct assessment stream. All
experts agreed that “Data” is a critical theme for digital maturity and that activities
related to data will continue to develop and offer new opportunities to the companies
within the next years. To create the new stream, some criteria like “Data Manage-
ment” and “Data Analytics” should be broken down into several criteria and other
criteria should be added thanks to research techniques.
The concept of emerging technologies, “UX Design”, “IoT and “Virtual Reality” for
instance, was abandoned after the first focus group because they were considered for
many companies as “nice-to-have” criteria rather than critical components.
The experts all agreed that the model was missing criteria about “Cybersecurity”.
With the development of digital technologies, the number of cyberattacks and threats
against companies has been growing during the past few years. Thus, cybersecurity
has been becoming a critical consequence of digital transformation, fully integrated
within the organizational strategy and processes. As a result, a model of digital ma-
turity should imperatively assess the maturity level of the organization in terms of
cybersecurity.
The experts also had an intensive debate about the relevance of several criteria col-
lected within the model to assess the digital maturity. Although those criteria, such as
“content management” within the stream “Technological capabilities and foundations”,
were relevant with their assessment stream, they were not all critical for company’s
digital performance and sometimes too detailed for a global maturity analysis. More-
over, some critical concepts related to the assessment streams were missing within
the first version of the maturity model. These results can be explained by the fact
that none of the research projects studied during the documentary research have de-
veloped a global digital maturity model but models focused on one particular domain
related to digital maturity such as ”Business intelligence model” or ”Innovation ca-
pability model”. Furthermore, digital capabilities and their impact on companies are
continuously changing and evolving to the extent that it is really difficult to have a
up-to-date map.
Thus, the first draft was not validated by the focus group which advised to break every
stream into sub-categories of criteria to develop a better understanding of the main
concepts underlying the assessment streams. They also suggested an identification of
critical criteria related to digital maturity.
==PAGE:54==
36
4 Development of the digital maturity model
4.2.2
Development of criteria: second iteration
4.2.2.1
Generation of criteria
To improve the maturity model, a second iteration of the content generation process
was performed. It consisted in the adaptation of the model architecture according to
the changes requested by the focus group, the identification of sub-categories for each
stream and the development of an improved list of criteria integrating the changes
requested by the focus group. The number of maturity level defined previously was
not questioned during this iteration.
For the second iteration, four assessment streams were considered “Digital capabili-
ties”, “Strategy”, “Organization & People”, and “Data & Analytics”. The assessment
streams were broken down into 4 to 5 sub-categories.
The methods selected to generate the criteria were the benchmark of concurrent
frameworks and semi-structured interviews with specific Wavestone experts.
First, a benchmark of existing maturity models developed by competitors was per-
formed. As described in a previous section, ten of the main consulting firms with
a framework were considered: BCG, EY, Deloitte, KPMG, McKinsey & Company,
Abode, Accenture, Capgemini consulting, Bain & Company and PwC.
Following the benchmark analysis, the documentary monitoring within the Wavestone
database enabled the identification of experts who have worked on digital maturity
via client missions or internal projects. Four of them were solicited to discuss and
share their knowledge about digital maturity:
• Jessica BESAGNI, Senior consultant of the practice IT & Data Architecture who
performed a first market analysis about existing digital maturity frameworks
• Olivier GENTIL-BECCOT, Senior Manager of the practice IT & Data Architec-
ture who had initiated the reflections about the creation of a Wavestone digital
maturity model and created a maturity framework for a specific mission
• Pierre-Emmanuel HAAS & Ophélie MAIGNE, consultant of the practice Con-
sumer Goods & Services who conducted a client mission on digital maturity
assessment with a maturity framework specifically designed for this purpose
These interviews were structured with questions about the concepts of digital trans-
formation and digital maturity, the best practices to build a maturity model, the
view of Wavestone on digital maturity assessment, that means what the firm aims to
achieve and address with the model, and the core topics related to digital maturity
assessment.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Iterative development of model criteria
37
The benchmark and the interviews shed new light on the initial problem by showing
it from the customer and consulting firm views. Thanks to the insights of the experts
and a trend analysis of the topics integrated within the frameworks, the second itera-
tion enabled a more precise identification of the core topics related to digital maturity.
Moreover, interviews and existing frameworks depicted the relations and the hierar-
chy between the different topics which facilitates the development of a second version
of the maturity matrix. A significant outcome of this analysis, is that the assessment
streams are no longer equivalent and two types of streams can be distinguished :
the streams which describe the company’s strategy regarding digital transformation,
such as “Strategy & Leadership”, and the streams whose criteria describe the enablers
to implement this strategy, such as the streams “Digital capabilities”, “Organization
& People”, and “Data”. This change modifies the overall architecture of the model.
Besides, the identification of 4 to 5 sub-categories for each assessment streams facili-
tates the understanding of the model, the identification of the criteria and the check
of criteria exhaustiveness.
The results of the second iteration are described below with the graphic representation
of the assessment streams and their sub-categories.
The detailed model with the
criteria per sub-category is available in the Appendix 2.
Figure 4.3: Second version of the model.
==PAGE:56==
38
4 Development of the digital maturity model
The second iteration completed the existing criteria stream “Strategy & Leadership”
with new concepts related to the category “Production & Delivery” with “Digital
supply chain & network” or “Operational governance & strategy”. Few other changes
were performed between the two iterations excepted the addition of two of three
criteria and the removal of two others.
The stream “Organization & People”, previously called “Organizational maturity”,
include the same criteria as the first version with some additional concepts such as
“People Performance Management”, “Knowledge Management” or ”Test-and-learn
approach” which are significant themes according to Wavestone consultants and com-
petitors’ models.
Several criteria were rephrased to adapt to the wording of the
consulting world.
Significant changes between the first and the second iteration rather involve the
streams “Data & Analytics” and “Digital Capabilities”.
After the interviews and the benchmark analysis, the stream “Digital Capabilities”
includes a sub-category “Cybersecurity” in accordance with the focus group discussion.
All the criteria involving the capabilities driven by the IT system were gathered into
the sub-category “Digitized Operations”. The criterion “Digital Architecture” was
divided into two categories “IT infrastructure & architecture” and “Data architecture”
(within the stream “Data & Analytics”). Finally, new criteria were introduced to
describe the ability of the information system to communicate and exchange data.
The previous criterion “Data & Analytics” was developed with four distinct assess-
ment sub-categories including “Data architecture” as stated previously. Besides, the
concept of “Data Management” mentioned within the first model was an umbrella
term referring to a few main concepts related to the concept of data. Thus, it was di-
vided into three categories : “Data Valorization”, “Data Analytics & AI”, and “Data
Governance”.
In this iteration, the emerging trend of DevOps, a combination of culture and pro-
cesses which expand agile practices to unify software development and software oper-
ations, was integrated within the model from a technical perspective. More and more
companies are implementing DevOps within their organization and therefore the con-
cept has to be included within the maturity models. It is divided into the criteria
“Continuous Development”, “Data Integration”, and “Infrastructure-as-code”.
4.2.2.2
Test of the outcome
The results are tested by a focus group composed by the same experts as the first
iteration and an additional member, a manager from the practice Cybersecurity &
Digital Trust, which provides a complementary expertise on cybersecurity.
After discussion, the experts suggested to remove the sub-category “Production &
Delivery” from the stream “Strategy & Leadership” because it significantly depends
on the sector of the organization assessed by the model.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Iterative development of model criteria
39
The experts also considered that within the category “IT equipment & tools” the
criteria selected were related to the concept of Digital Workplace which is defined as
a culture shift introducing a new working environment for employees. Based on this
definition, the category should be included in the stream “Organizational maturity”
rather than the stream “Digital capabilities”
The presence of an expert in cybersecurity enabled an in-depth analysis of the cri-
teria related to security. The lack of a sub-category focusing on Data Security was
highlighted during the discussion. The criteria “Data Security Management” was not
sufficient to describe all issues related to data security whereas this concept is critical
for companies in the same manner as the concept of cybersecurity.
Finally, some of the experts, such as one of the manager of the DIS practice and the
manager of the IDA practice, considered that some of the criteria selected within the
model were not critical to evaluate the digital maturity level of a company. They
suggested to refine the criteria and the model to improve the balance between the
complex reality and the required simplification of this reality within the model.
The different requests from the experts included within the focus group prevented the
validation of the second version of the maturity models which required the refinement
of the model and the modifications of few criteria.
4.2.3
Development of criteria: third iteration
4.2.3.1
Generation of content
As stated previously, the main purposes of the third iteration is to refine the model
and adapt its structure to the comments formulated during the second focus group.
During the previous focus group, one significant issue was identified : all categories,
criteria and concepts underlying behind them are interconnected within the model.
Therefore, it is sometimes challenging to define the appropriate structure of the as-
sessment streams and the relevant distribution of the criteria within the different
streams. These choices depends on the views of the experts solicited within the focus
group and some experts have a more rigorous view than others and thereby have a
strong influence of the development of the maturity models.
To cope this problem and enable an unbiased review of the maturity framework, the
third iteration involves a variation of the nominal group technique.
Six Wavestone managers from the technical practices were requested to perform
the group session, including Matthieu MOUTET & Olivier GENTIL-BECCOT, the
project sponsors.
The four other experts were not involved in the previous focus
group in order to bring a fresh perspective on the problem and the model.
==PAGE:58==
40
4 Development of the digital maturity model
The maturity model and the purpose of the meeting were shared with the participants
beforehand. At the beginning of the session, the purpose was explained again to every
participants to ensure their understanding.
The problem statement was formulated as follows : ”What changes within the model
can be performed to simplify the maturity model and avoid the overlaps between
categories and criteria ?”. Then, a piece a paper was distributed to every participant
and the “silent generation” step was performed. During half an hour, the experts
were invited to write up to 6 ideas.
Following this idea generation, the ideas were shared via a round robin without any
further explanation. The results consisted of ideas regarding the criteria the experts
wanted to modify, delete, or gather. At the end of the round robin, each partici-
pant was able to share the explanation behind the idea. For example, one expert
explained that the concept of agile culture was already described within several other
criteria such as “Collaborative processes”, “New roles & jobs”, and “Agile project
Management”. Another exposed that the “Test-and-learn” approach was too precise
compared to other criteria and could also be included in the criterion “culture of
innovation” as a key component.
Once all the ideas were understood by the participants, the experts were asked if new
ideas had emerged during the sharing of ideas. Four other ideas were added to the
initial result including the idea to reduce the number of maturity levels for each idea
to four stages. The expert who shared the idea explained that it could be an easy
way to simplify the model. Besides, he highlighted that four stages could provide
a sufficient degree of details to describe realistically the organizations’ maturity and
facilitate the generation of maturity levels for some criteria which were based on fewer
key concepts than others. Finally, he claimed that setting the number of stages to
four stages could increase the accuracy of the results. Indeed, when people complete
a survey, it is a common knowledge that they are more likely to answer an average
grade rather than choosing one of the extreme score. Defining 4 maturity stage results
in removing the middle stage and therefore forcing people to position themselves ei-
ther below average or above average which could increase the reliability of the results.
The final outcome of the round robin is available in the table below.
Criterion
Action
associated
Explanation
Idea
recurrence
Digital Roadmap
Removal
The digital roadmap is included in the matu-
rity stages of the digital strategy
3
Partner
&
Startup
relationship
Concatenation
The relationships with partners and startups
refers to the ecosystem of partnerships
1
Startup relationship
Removal
The startup relationships are included within
the concept of partner relationships
2
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Iterative development of model criteria
41
Criterion
Action
associated
Explanation
Idea
recurrence
Customer
experience
Removal
This criteria is the only one considered the cus-
tomer experience which is not consistent with the
rest of the framework
1
Customer experi-
ence & Customer
relationship
Concatenation
Customer experience and customer relationship
are two parts of the customer centric strategy of
the company
1
Agile Culture
Removal
The concepts behind agile culture are included
within other criteria such as Culture of Innova-
tion, Agile Project Management, New roles & job
1
Test-and-learn
approach
Removal
The test and learn approach has a higher level of
granularity compared to other criteria and is an
integral part of culture of innovation
2
Metadata
&
Lifecyle Manage-
ment
Concatenation
The two criteria refer to Data Management and
are closely dependent on each other
3
IT process
simplification
Removal
The maturity model is oriented towards the as-
sessment of tools which enable the digital capa-
bilities rather than the capabilities themselves
2
IT Service
Management
Removal
The importance IT Service Management depends
on the sector of the organization and can be not
be considered as a required concept
3
Risk
Management
Removal
The maturity model is oriented towards the as-
sessment of tools which enable the digital capa-
bilities rather than the capabilities themselves
1
Asset
Management
Removal
The criterion is not considered as critical to assess
the cybersecurity maturity of an organization
2
Flexible and
adaptive
architecture
Removal
The maturity model is oriented towards the as-
sessment of tools which enable the digital capa-
bilities rather than the capabilities themselves
1
Process
Automation
Removal
Process automation is an umbrella term which
can be partly described by Workflow Engine and
Rules Engine already included within the model
2
Real-time
information
Removal
The maturity model is oriented towards the as-
sessment of tools which enable the digital capa-
bilities rather than the capabilities themselves
1
File Exchange
System
Removal
The criterion is limited to a small part of connec-
tivity between users and has a different level of
granularity compared to other criteria
2
Enterprise
Data
Model
Removal
The criterion is not considered as critical to assess
the architecture maturity of an organization
2
API Gateway &
API Directory &
Portal
Concatenation
The two criteria refer to the same concept of API
Management
1
Number of
maturity stages
Remove 1 level
Simplification of the maturity model while pre-
venting people to choose the middle stage when
they are hesitating
1
Table 4.3: Results of the idea generation during the nominal group technique.
==PAGE:60==
42
4 Development of the digital maturity model
Then, the expert were asked to rank the ideas generated during the group session
based on their own views and the explanation given by the other participants. The
participants had to rank each criteria, with a score from 1 to 6, on an anonymous form
listing all the criteria mentioned during the round robin process. On the contrary
of usual nominal group technique, the aim of the session was not to select a limited
number of ideas to implement within the model according to their high score but
to select all the ideas with a score higher than 3. Indeed, as the main aim of the
third iteration is to simplify the model, every idea should be considered as long as
the median of the scores is higher or equal to 3.
The results of the ranking stage are described in the following table.
Change Description
Median
Remove “Digital Roadmap”
3
Concatenate “Partner Relationships & Startup relationship”
2
Remove “Startup relationship”
4
Remove “Customer experience”
3
Concatenate “Customer experience & Customer relationship”
3
Remove “Agile Culture”
5
Remove “Test-and-learn approach”
4
Concatenate “Metadata & Lifecyle Management”
3
Remove “IT process simplification”
4
Remove “IT Service Management”
5
Remove “Risk Management”
1
Remove “Asset Management”
3
Remove “Flexible and adaptive architecture”
4
Remove “Process Automation”
3
Remove “Real-time information”
3
Remove “File Exchange System”
2
Remove “Enterprise Data Model”
3
Concatenate “API Gateway & API Directory and Portal”
2
Reduce the number of maturity stages to four
5
Table 4.4: Results of the idea generation during the nominal group technique.
Thus, every change with a median higher or equal to three was integrated into the
model. Moreover, the two requests from the focus group of the second iteration were
also integrated with the removal of the sub-category “Production & Delivery” and
the creation of the sub-category “Data Security”.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Iterative development of model criteria
43
The third version of the matrix structure is detailed in the following picture and the
detailed list of criteria is available in Appendix 3.
Figure 4.4: Third version of the model.
4.2.3.2
Test of the outcome
The same focus group as the second iteration was in charge of evaluating the “com-
prehensiveness, consistency and problem adequacy” of the model [17].
According to the experts, with the simplification of the model and the additional
category dealing with “Data Security”, the model gained relevance and increased its
utility regarding the initial problem. It offers a reasonable overview of the concepts
related to digital maturity while being sufficiently simplified to be handled relatively
quickly by consultants.
Besides, the wording used is adapted to usual wording of consulting firms and there-
fore easily understandable by consultants. The model is structured in distinct streams
and sub-categories which increases the understandability of the framework and the
relevance of the criteria selected.
However, the experts still distinguished a lack a consistency and comprehensiveness
in the model. First, the distribution of some criteria within the categories is not
always consistent. For example, “RPA Tools”, in the “Analytics & AI”, refers to a
solution enabling process automation whereas the two others criteria deal with data
analysis via artificial intelligence capabilities. Therefore; the criterion “RPA Tools”
should be included within the category “Digitized Operations”.
The Wavestone Manager solicited pointed out the lack of consistency between the level
of details induced by some criteria compared to others. Most criteria offer a small
==PAGE:62==
44
4 Development of the digital maturity model
level of granularity regarding the concept assessed whereas some criteria maintain a
high level such as “Database Architecture”. It is an umbrella term whereas multiple
solutions exist to store data from Data Marts to Data Lake. On the contrary, within
the category “Digitized Operations” the three criteria “Workflow Engine”, “Rules
Engine”, “Continuous Delivery” are three criteria associated to the general concept
of process automation.
Finally, according to the experts, although the stream “Strategy” is supposed to de-
scribe the organization’s bias in favour of digital transformation, there are missing
items to fully describe it, such as the financial and the governance aspects.
For the third iteration, the focus group agreed that the maturity model gets closer to
its final state-of-development but some aspects remain incomplete and inconsistent,
preventing the validation of the development process.
4.2.4
Development of criteria: fourth iteration
Following the conclusions of the focus group, the aim of the fourth iteration was to
solve the inconsistencies remaining in the matrix and ensure the exhaustiveness of
the stream Strategy.
To that end, the methodology selected was semi-structured interviews with experts
to review one or more assessment categories according to their expertise. The experts
selected were independent from the previous development process to ensure unbiased
insights. The changes suggested were integrated iteratively within the model to obtain
the final version of the fourth iteration.
For each interview, the initial questions were the following:
• The relevance of the criteria selected within the category regarding their consis-
tency with the other criteria of the same category and their positioning within
the framework
• The relevance and the accuracy of the sequence of maturity levels and the
concepts developed in them
4.2.4.1
Review of the categories “Cybersecurity” and “Data Security”
These categories were reviewed by a Senior Manager of the practice Cybersecurity &
Digital Trust. First, the expert suggested to extract the two categories from their re-
spective streams to create a new stream focused on cybersecurity and data protection
as the two concepts are highly interconnected and dependent on each other.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Iterative development of model criteria
45
Moreover, the expert advised to replace “Data Access” by “Identity & Access Man-
agement” which could be therefore removed from the “Cybersecurity” category. The
criterion “Data backup” was also replaced by the precise concepts of Business Conti-
nuity Pan & Data Remediation Plan.
Finally, to ensure the exhaustiveness of the category “Cybersecurity”, he developed
the criteria “Logging & detection” and “Governance & Awareness”.
He agreed with the maturity levels developed for each criteria and participated, during
the interview, to the formulation of the maturity levels associated to the criteria he
suggested.
4.2.4.2
Review of the stream Organization & People
The expert interviewed, a Senior Manager of the Digital and & IT Strategy practice,
agreed with every criterion selected within the stream except for the category “Digital
Workplace”. According to the concepts developed within the maturity stages, the
criteria associated were more focused on the tooling supporting the Digital Workplace
than the ways of working. He requested to transfer the category to the stream Digital
capabilities. Moreover, he suggested to transfer the criterion “New roles & jobs” to
the category “People & Talent” as it involves people and their skills rather than the
governance associated to digital practices.
The review of the maturity levels led to some other changes within the concepts
described. For instance, regarding the criterion “Culture of openness”, he advised to
deal with the concepts of acculturation and learning expedition rather than diversity.
4.2.4.3
Review of the category “Ecosystem”
An expert of sourcing strategy, a Manager of the Digital and & IT Strategy practice,
was solicited to review this category. He centred the category on sourcing and its
different components. Therefore, he removed the criteria “Partner relationship” and
“Contract Management” in favor of the more generic and understandable concepts of
“Sourcing Governance” and “Sourcing tooling”. Following this, he helped to create
the maturity levels associated.
4.2.4.4
Review of the category “Connectivity”
A Manager of the practice Digital and Emerging Technologies with a specific exper-
tise on “Connectivity” reviewed the category. She agreed with the all the criteria
included within the category. She reviewed all the maturity levels associated and
only performed slight changes within the wording of the stages.
==PAGE:64==
46
4 Development of the digital maturity model
4.2.4.5
Review of the streams “Digital Capabilities” and “Data & AI”
First, the expert reviewing the categories suggested to remove the criterion “Database
architecture”.
Indeed, as stated before the term has a higher level of granularity
compared to the other criteria within the matrix and could be broken down into the
concepts of Data Lake, Data Mart and Data Warehouse. However, these two concepts
are already mentioned in other criteria of the framework : Business Intelligence and
Big Data Platform. Business Intelligence is closely related to Data Warehouse and
Data Mart as BI aims to analyze large amount of data within the company which is
usually stored in a central repository such as Data Warehouse and Data Mart. Then,
Data Warehouse is often considered as a component of BI. The same relationship
links the Big Data Platform and the Data Lake.
The transfer of the last criteria was the consequence of the removal of the category
“Artificial Intelligence”.
According to the experts, there was a huge inconsistency
within the type of criteria composing the category. The criterion “Big Data Platform
/ Data Lake” was related to the data architecture, the criteria “AI Execution Plat-
form” and “Machine Learning modelling” were describing the solutions to exploit
data and the criterion “RPA Tools” was about a solution to automatize processes
just as workflow engines for instance. Based on this observation, the criteria were
redistributed within the categories “Data Architecture”, “Data Valorization & AI”,
and “Digitized Operations” respectively.
Finally, the category “Digitized Operations” were renamed into “Digital Process Au-
tomation” to be more accurate and understandable.
4.2.4.6
Review of the stream Strategy
Finally, the stream Strategy was reviewed by a Manager from the Digital & IT strategy
practice of Wavestone.
He chose to replace the criteria “Operating Efficiency” and “Innovation culture” by
four other criteria which described clearly every aspect involved in the operating effi-
ciency and the innovation culture, namely the financial aspect with “Financial steer-
ing”, the improved efficiency with short and agile development cycles influencing the
time-to-market with “Agile Orientation” and “Time-to-market” and the governance
associated with “Governance.” For each new criterion, he gave insights to develop the
maturity stages associated.
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Iterative development of model criteria
47
4.2.4.7
Test of the outcome
The fourth version of the maturity matrix is presented in the picture below. Besides,
the detailed list of criteria and maturity levels associated are available in Appendix
4.
Figure 4.5: Fourth version of the model.
Following the review by manager with an in-depth expertise in precise assessment
categories, there was no longer inconsistency detected within the model regarding
the distribution of criteria, the wording or the granularity level considered.
The creation of a new stream for the concepts of cybersecurity of data protection
increased the readability of the model while reinforcing their importance for the as-
sessment.
Moreover, the interviews with the experts ensured the comprehensiveness of each
category. The fourth version of the model offers a complete overview of the critical
concepts related to digital maturity enabling an accurate and detailed assessment of
the state-of-development of organization.
Therefore, the results of this iteration were validated by the focus group which con-
sidered that the model develop could theoretically solve the initial problem. However,
the success of the process still depends on the transfer media and the evaluation of
the maturity assessment package including the model and the tools.
==PAGE:66==
48
4 Development of the digital maturity model
4.3
Conception and implementation of the media
During the “Design” phase, the target group defined was the consultants of Wavestone
in the context of their client missions. The consultants are supposed to complete the
assessment following their interactions with the client. Therefore, the transfer media
does not need to be an self-assessment online form, easily available. This type of media
would reduce the level of details provided for each criteria to ensure the readability.
The transfer media needs to be easy to handle for every consultant without requiring
any special skills. It also needs to provide a high level of detail to the user for each
criteria and maturity level associated. Finally, it should be an automatized tool which
enables the calculation of the scores as well the generation of a radar chart giving a
graphic view of the strengths and areas for improvement of the organization according
to the scores.
Figure 4.6: Radar chart for the category
“Cybersecurity”.
Figure 4.7: Radar chart for the stream
“Organization & People”.
Therefore, it was decided to use a simple Excel workbook can generate automatic
results and charts. The score of each category is the average of each criteria without
weighing factors and the global score is the average of each category. The transfer
media will not be attached to this report as a confidential document of the firm
Wavestone.
However, the criteria and maturity levels of the model are described
within the appendices.
4.4
Evaluation of the model
The final step of the design process is to validate or reject the model via the evaluation
of the model design and the model transfer media.
First, the face validity should be assessed by ensuring that all the concepts related
to digital maturity and used within the model were accurately translated into under-
standable terms and that the maturity levels form a staggered maturity evolution
scale with the introduction of new key concepts for every step. Second, the validity
of the content, that means the comprehensiveness and the consistency of the model
developed, should be measured.
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Evaluation of the model
49
In addition to the first part of the evaluation, this stage has to “test any assessment
instruments for validity to ensure they measure what it was intended to measure and
reliability to ensure results obtained are accurate and repeatable” [10].
Due to a lack of time at the end of the development process, none of the Wavestone
clients could be solicited to test the model and its instrument. Therefore, the pilot
group was composed of selected digital maturity experts within Wavestone.
A presentation session was organized to set up the development process and explain
the final version of the model with the tool associated. The participants were able
to ask all the questions they had to ensure their full understanding of the model and
the stakes of the session.
Then, the participants were invited to complete the assessment to check the consis-
tency of the maturity levels and test the model instrument.
All the participants acknowledged the global relevance of the model developed re-
garding their clients’ needs as well as Wavestone’s service portfolio. Some of them
asked how to use effectively the model in the context of missions and the pertinence
of the model compared to the existing frameworks based on a specific problem like
“Connectivity” or “Digital Workplace”.
The model was designed to be used in the context of missions dealing with the de-
velopment of a digital strategy and therefore the assessment of the global digital
maturity. On the contrary, missions which focus on one aspect of the problem such
as “Connectivity” should use specific maturity models which are more precise on the
domain.
One participant claimed that the appellation “Digital Maturity Model” could be con-
fusing. Indeed, the definition of digital maturity varies from one person to another.
Some people consider that digital maturity refers to the state-of-development of a
company regarding the actual trends. It is associated to the “need-to-have” criteria
to perform in today’s market. Other people consider the digital maturity as the de-
scription of the state-of-development of the entire information system from current
trends to older technologies still in use but not required to outperform its peers.
Most participants acknowledged the consistency and the comprehensiveness of the
final version of the model.
However, a few participants questioned the maturity
levels of some criteria and the consultants’ ability to measure them in the context of
a mission. Especially for the stream “Organization & People”, the stages describe the
evolution of the integration and implementation of the culture within the company for
instance. Yet, it is difficult to actually assess these criteria objectively and accurately
because it is not always based on concrete proofs but sometimes on a perception given
by the client representatives.
==PAGE:68==
50
4 Development of the digital maturity model
Finally, participants suggested some solutions to improve the current model. First,
they all agreed that the next step will be to offer a free assessment to key clients in
order to evaluate the model adequacy in a client environment. Moreover, most partic-
ipants emphasized the importance of creating a database of client answers to support
the assessment with relevant benchmark. Finally, one participant asked how to dif-
ferentiate this maturity model from the models of Wavestone’s competitors. Multiple
possibilities were mentioned from the adaptation of the framework to every sectorial
pratices of Wavestone to the creation of a differentiating assessment methodology
associated to the maturity framework.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
5.1
Main findings
This report aimed to use the Design Science approach to develop new artifacts, namely
the structure and the content of the model, the assessment process and the transfer
media associated, enabling the measurement of companies’ digital maturity.
During the research project, a rigorous method was designed to develop step-by-step
the final version of the maturity model by combining different research techniques
from literature review to focus group.
The creation of the model was driven by a clear business need from Wavestone which
needed to develop a tool facilitating the development of a digital strategy to conduct
the digital transformation. Wavestone also needed to stay competitive in a market
within which the main consulting firms have already developed their own tool.
The model was initially based on an intensive literature review which brought limited
guidance and inputs on the assessment of the overall digital maturity within organi-
zations. Several experts were solicited along the development process through focus
groups, interviews and nominal group technique to generate the content of the model
and evaluate its utility and adequacy with the initial problem.
Finally, the model was integrated and communicated via a transfer media to Wave-
stone consultants for validation. Then, it will be communicated to Wavestone key
clients which could use it to ensure its adequacy with their needs before generalizing
the model to every client.
Thus, this paper offers a first mature version of a digital maturity model which aims
to assist companies within the definition of their digital strategy, a critical step to
conduct their digital transformation and not to be surpassed by competitors within
the digital market. It constitutes the first corporate tool of Wavestone to help their
clients in the context of missions auditing the digital maturity. The solution helps
Wavestone to offer a tailored service to their customer. Moreover, it offers to Wave-
stone a cost and time-saving generic solution which is reusable all along the missions
to increase its productivity.
==PAGE:70==
52
5 Conclusion
5.2
Limitations
The development process selected and the involvement of several digital transforma-
tion experts enabled the creation of a maturity models which seems to meet com-
prehensiveness, consistency and problem relevance criteria mentioned by Becker et
al. [17]. However, several factors have limited the full development of the maturity
model and its validation.
First, at the beginning of the project, I had only a basic knowledge in digital trans-
formation, digital maturity and in the elements related to these concepts. I was able
to increase my knowledge via an intensive literature review and along the interviews
and group sessions with experts. Nevertheless, my limited expertise prevented me
from conducting an in-depth analysis of a few subjects, questioning the views of the
experts and from developing the maturity model in the most efficient manner.
Another obstacle to model development was the fact that the experts solicited often
had a different opinion on the optimal model structure and distribution of the criteria
within the different categories. From one expert interview to another, the structure
could have changed significantly because everyone had its own definition of digital
maturity and its own convictions on the approach to consider for the assessment. For
example, some of them advised to develop a model oriented towards the assessment
of the tools enabling the digital capabilities. Other experts considered that “Business
Intelligence” and “Master Data Management” are criteria which belong to data ar-
chitecture rather than data valorization. The differences of opinion made difficult to
reach consensus on the final version of the matrix.
Moreover, due to a lack of time at the end of the development process, the evalu-
ation of the maturity matrix could not be performed by Wavestone clients or even
external experts. Therefore, the model design and content fully depend on the views
of Wavestone experts.
Compared to a model developed and evaluated by several
independent stakeholders, the model presents a bias based on the strategic direction
of the firm and the specific expertise of the experts. Furthermore, the model cannot
be considered as validated until he has been tested within the client environment to
ensure that there is no gap between the model and the clients’ constraints and needs.
The evaluation of the model by a few clients from different sectors before officially
using it in the context of client missions also enables the creation of an initial database
of clients’ data. Then, the database could be used as a referential for new clients. The
model would be able to not only describe the as-is situation of the company but also
compare the organization with its peers from the same sector for instance, positioning
it within the market.
==PAGE:71==
5.3 Recommendations for future research
53
The creation of a maturity result database is also limited by the media transfer se-
lected at the end of the development process. Excel worksheet enables the automatic
generation of charts and calculations results but it does not store the previous answer
within a repository like some software-based tools. Thus, to enable the comparison
between client results, the consultants should add manually every result within a
summary worksheet which is a time-consuming process.
The choice of transfer media also limits the use of the maturity model. As defined
within the design stage of the development process, the target group was Wavestone
consultant in the context of missions related to digital maturity. The expertise of the
target group enabled the development of a precise, technical and complex maturity
models more likely to describe accurately the reality. However, the use of the model
requires the intervention of a consultant which needs to interview the client repre-
sentatives and understand the company’s context and constraints before completing
the assessment framework. This service cost time and money to the clients which
could prefer a self-assessment of their maturity, with a lighter version of the maturity
model for instance, before deciding if they need the service of the consulting firm.
5.3
Recommendations for future research
Based on the limitations mentioned, several guidelines for future research projects
were identified in order to improve the model and service delivered by Wavestone
regarding digital maturity assessment.
First, as stated in the section “Limitations”, the model has not been tested by any
Wavestone clients to ensure its utility and accuracy regarding its clients’ needs and
constraints. As a result, the next step should be to offer a free assessment to some of
the Wavestone key clients. It would enable the identification of potential adjustments
to be made within the model or the permanent validation of the model. Moreover,
this free service could trigger new missions with clients whose digital score is low.
In addition to the last part of the model evaluation, Wavestone should conduct mar-
ket analysis and create benchmark of the best practices per sector, company’s size or
geographical area. It would enable to develop the descriptive maturity model of this
Master Thesis into a comparative model able to position the company assessed within
the market. The implementation of a digital watch would be required to regularly
update the benchmark and ensure accurate comparisons.
==PAGE:72==
54
5 Conclusion
The aim of the Master Thesis was to develop a maturity framework which could be
used regardless of the sector of the company. However, if the current model can be
used as a working base to have a first estimation of the digital maturity, taking into
account the sector could improve the result accuracy. Therefore, the maturity model
could also be improved by the adaptation of the model to the various sectors related
to Wavestone clients such as Manufacturing, Energy & utilities or Financial Services.
Future research projects could focus on the development of new criteria or assessment
streams related to the core functions of a company regarding its sector. For instance,
the criterion “access to the core banking functions” for banks or a stream “Logistics”
for manufacturing companies could be integrated.
In order to go even further within the adaptation to sectors, the model could dis-
tinguish the “nice-to-have” and the “need-to-have” criteria for every sector. Indeed,
as mentioned previously within the report, the importance of a criterion within the
digital maturity of an organization can vary from one sector to another. Therefore,
one area for improvement of the model would be to no longer consider all criteria
as equivalent but to implement weighting coefficients reflecting the actual needs of a
company regarding its sector. It would increase the accuracy of the results and offer
a better base to the development of a digital strategy.
The implementation of weighting coefficients could be also integrated to take into ac-
count the digital strategy considered by the company assessed. In this case, the aim
of the model would be to measure the digital readiness of the company to implement
a strategy. Depending on if the company wants to accelerate the dematerialization
of its process or deploy a full digital offer for instance, every criterion will not have
the same importance within the assessment.
The previous section also highlighted the limits of the transfer media selected for the
model. Future research activities of Wavestone will focus on developing an online tool
with an advanced graphical user interface to complete the assessment and display the
results. Distinct strategies can be considered to perform this evolution.
First, without changing the design strategy which is to design a maturity model which
has to be completed by Wavestone consultants, an internal software-based tool could
be developed to offer a more user friendly assessment sheet compared to an Excel
workbook. It would also enable the collection of the previous assessment results to
form a database of client assessments.
However, in the future, Wavestone can opt for a self-assessment method for its clients,
with an online form, to reduce the cost of its service for instance. In this case, two
types of forms can be considered. First, Wavestone can develop a free form with
lighter version of the model as a marketing tool. It would give an overall result of
the digital maturity score based on which the organization would be encouraged to
contact Wavestone to develop and digital strategy and improve its digital maturity.
The second option could be an online form in the context of the client missions. The
platform would be available to the clients with a login and password specifically gen-
erated for the mission.
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Recommendations for future research
55
The Master Thesis only consisted in the creation of the digital maturity model. Thus,
Wavestone consultants still need to develop and formalize precisely the assessment
procedure integrating the maturity model.
From the Wavestone perspective, the maturity framework should continue to be de-
veloped by improving the accuracy of the maturity items with the existing maturity
frameworks focused on one specific domain and a digital watch of best practices.
Finally, the utility and the consistency of the maturity model demonstrated through
evaluation is not the only concern Wavestone. As mentioned by a participant of the
evaluation session, they also need to differentiate their model and their assessment
service from competitors’ offers. This aim may lead to the adaptation of the content
and the structure to offer an innovative view of digital maturity assessment which fits
perfectly with Wavestone expertise and strategy.
==PAGE:74==
56
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
First version of the maturity models
Assessment Streams
Criteria
Organizational maturity
Digital skills and expertise
Empowered employees
Ability to manage complex digital projects
Recruitment processes
Culture of openness
Culture of innovation
Collaborative culture
Agile culture & processes
Business-IT alignment
Change Management Teams
Digital KPIs
Digital vision shared to employees
End-user maturity
Marketing Management
Customer loyalty
E-reputation of the organization
Customer relationship management (CRM)
Digital marketing
Personalization of online services
Client interaction
Customer insight management
Continuous and responsive service to customers
Social networking
Table A.1: First version of the list of criteria (Part 1).
==PAGE:76==
58
A Appendix
Assessment Streams
Criteria
Strategy & Leadership
Ambitions 3/5 years
Digital roadmap
Digital watch
Sourcing Strategy
Sourcing Governance
Governance & Monitoring
Partnerships
Contract Management
Innovation culture
Business strategy
Customer-centricity strategy
IT capabilities and foundations
Flexible & adaptive architecture
Data Analytics
Data Management
Content management
Process Automation
Process simplification
Dematerialized process
Real-time information & traceability
Cloud solutions
Digital tools
Multi-device organization
IT hardware
Digital architecture
Internet of Things
Artificial Intelligence
UX Design
Virtual Reality
Table A.2: First version of the list of criteria (Part 2).
==PAGE:77==
A.2 Second version of the maturity model
59
A.2
Second version of the maturity model
Streams
Categories
Criteria
Strategy & Leadership
Vision
Ambition
Business-oriented strategy
Digital roadmap
Portfolio Management
Digital Watch
Ecosystem
Sourcing Strategy
Partner Relationship
Startup Relationship
Contract Management
Working Model
Operating Efficiency
Innovation Culture
Resource & Skill Management
Servicing Model
Customer relationship
Customer experience
Data for Business
Production & Delivery
Digital design and manufacturing
Operational governance & Strategy
Digital supply chain & network
Organization & People
People & Talent
Empowered workforce
Talent Management
People Performance Management
Talent Acquisition
Digital Culture
Culture of Innovation
Culture of Openness
Customer-centricity
Agile culture
Digital ways of working
Collaborative processes
Test and learn approach
Knowledge Management
Agile Project Management
Digital Governance
Change Management
Digital KPIs
Business-IT Alignment
New roles & jobs
Table A.3: List of criteria of the second version of the maturity model (Part 1).
==PAGE:78==
60
A Appendix
Streams
Categories
Criteria
Data & Analytics
Data Valorization
Business Intelligence
Master Data Management (MDM)
Big Data Platform / Data Lake
Data Analytics & AI
RPA Tools
Machine Learning Modelling
AI Execution Platform
Data Governance
Policies & Standards
Data Quality
Metadata Management
Lifecycle Management
Security Management
Data Architecture
Enterprise Data Model
Data integration
Database architecture
Digital Capabilities
Digitized Operations
Workflow Engine & BPM
Rules Engine
Real-Time information
Process Automation
IT Process Simplification
IT Service Management
Connectivity
File Exchange System
API Gateway
API Directory & Portal
IT Infra. & Architecture
Cloud-based infrastructure
Continuous Delivery
Fexible & Adaptive Architecture
Infrastructure-as-code
IT Equipment & Tools
Collaborative tools
Multi-device organization
Flexible & Online services
Application portability
Cybersecurity
Audit & Vulnerability
Incident & Crisis Management
Identity & Access Management (IAM)
Infrastructure Security
Risk Management
Workplace Security
Asset Management
Table A.4: List of criteria of the second version of the maturity model (Part 2).
==PAGE:79==
A.3 Third version of the maturity model
61
A.3
Third version of the maturity model
Streams
Categories
Criteria
Strategy
Vision
Ambition
Business-oriented strategy
Portfolio Management
Digital Watch
Ecosystem
Sourcing Strategy
Partner Relationship
Contract Management
Target Operating Model
Operating Efficiency
Innovation Culture
Resource & Skill Management
Customer centricity
Organization & People
People & Talent
Empowered workforce
Talent Management
People Performance Management
Talent Acquisition
Digital Culture
Culture of Innovation
Culture of Openness
Customer-centricity
Digital ways of working
Collaborative processes
Knowledge Management
Agile Project Management
Digital Workplace
Online Services
Information & Decision-making
Collaboration & Communication
Structure & Coherence
Digital Governance
Change Management
Digital KPIs
Business-IT Alignment
New roles & jobs
Table A.5: List of criteria of the third version of the maturity model (Part 1).
==PAGE:80==
62
A Appendix
Streams
Categories
Criteria
Data & AI
Data Valorization
Business Intelligence
Master Data Management (MDM)
Big Data Platform / Data Lake
Analytics & AI
RPA Tools
Machine Learning Modelling
AI Execution Platform
Data Governance
Policies & Standards
Data Quality
Data Management (Lifecyle,
Metadata)
Data Architecture
Data Integration
Database Architecture
Data Security
Data Security Controls
Data Access
Digital Capabilities
Digitized Operations
Workflow Engine & BPM
Rules Engine
Connectivity
File Exchange System
API Gateway
API Directory & Portal
IT Infra. & Architecture
Cloud-based infrastructure
Continuous Delivery
Infrastructure-as-code
Cybersecurity
Audit & Vulnerability
Incident & Crisis Management
Identity & Access Management (IAM)
Infrastructure Security
Risk Management
Workplace Security
Table A.6: List of criteria of the third version of the maturity model (Part 2).
==PAGE:81==
A.4 Final version of the maturity model
63
A.4
Final version of the maturity model
Streams
Categories
Criteria
Strategy
Vision
Ambition
Business & client-oriented strategy
Portfolio Management
Digital Watch
Ecosystem
Sourcing Strategy
Sourcing Governance
Sourcing Tooling
Target Operating Model
Agile Orientation
Financial Steering / Billing Model
Resource & Skill Management
Governance
Customer centricity
Time-to-market
Data & AI
Data Valorization & AI
Business Intelligence
Master Data Management (MDM)
AI Execution Platform
Machine Learning Modelling
Data Governance
Policies & Standards
Data Quality
Data Management (Lifecyle, Metadata)
Data Architecture
Big Data Platform / Data Lake
Data Integration
Organization & People
People & Talent
Empowered workforce
Talent Management
People Performance Management
Talent Acquisition
New roles and jobs
Digital Culture
Culture of Innovation
Culture of Openness
Customer-centricity
Digital ways of working
Collaborative processes
Knowledge Management
Agile Project Management
Digital Governance
Change Management
Digital KPIs
Business-IT Alignment
Table A.7: List of criteria of the final maturity model (Part 1).
==PAGE:82==
64
A Appendix
Streams
Categories
Criteria
Digital Capabilities
Digital Workplace
Online Services
Information & Decision-making
Collaboration & Communication
Structure & Coherence
Digital Process Automation
Workflow Engine & BPM
Rules Engine
RPA Tools
File Exchange System
API Gateway
API Directory & Portal
IT Infra. & Architecture
Cloud-based infrastructure
Continuous Delivery
Infrastructure-as-code
Cybersecurity
Audit & Vulnerability
Governance & Awareness
Incident & Crisis Management
Infrastructure Security
Cybersecurity
Logging & Detection
& Data Protection
Risk Management
Workplace Security
Data Protection
Data Security Controls
Identity & Access Management (IAM)
Business Continuity Plan & Data Reme-
diation Plan
Table A.8: List of criteria of the final maturity model (Part 2).
==PAGE:83==
A.4 Final version of the maturity model
65
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
Ambitions
There is no digital strategy estab-
lished
Objectives are defined for the
next year, declined into a short
term actions plan, without per-
formance analysis
The digital ambition is defined
for the next 3/5 years and trans-
lated into a long term actions
plan and implies reporting activ-
ities
The digital ambition is clearly
defined
and
translated
into
a
15+ years roadmap, submitted
to steering and performance man-
agement activities
Business
&
client-
oriented
strategy
There is no digital strategy estab-
lished
The
digital
strategy
involves
business at some point and/or do
not considers innovation and dis-
ruption as guiding principles
The
digital
strategy
involves
business and tends to integrate
innovation and disruption.
The
digital
strategy
is
driven
by
clients needs
The
digital
strategy
involves
business and is based on innova-
tion and disruption. The digital
strategy is driven by consumer
centricity
Portfolio
Management
Process exists to create portfo-
lio review boards Board relates
projects to strategies
Process exists to coordinate ac-
tivities of multiple boards. Align-
ment criteria established & main-
tained
Groups deliberate, defined prior-
ities & provide direction on max-
imizing strategic objectives
Optimized
process
to
manage
multiple boards and portfolios.
Baseline
data
collected
and
benchmarked
Digital
Watch
&
R&D
Capabilities
The technological watch is not
a current and/or shared practice.
Their is no budget dedicated to
R&D
The technological watch is incor-
porated to some activites in or-
der to keep the strategy up-to-
date
The technological watch is en-
couraged and tends to allow the
business to detect new opportuni-
ties. The practice is only shared
internally.
The R&D activities
are entrusted to the partners
The technological watch is incor-
porated to the daily activities
and allows the business to detect
new opportunities.
Its implies
both internal and external stake-
holders R&D implies experimen-
tation witch is part of projects
and drives the project portfolio
Table A.9: Maturity levels of the category Vision.
==PAGE:84==
66
A Appendix
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
Sourcing
Strategy
The sourcing strategy is strictly
limited
to
the
”traditional”
ESN
(Entreprises
de
Services
Numériques)
The sourcing strategy authorizes
occasionally the use of startups
and innovative firms
The
sourcing
strategy
encour-
ages partnerships with innova-
tive actors. The sourcing is tac-
tical and largely project-driven
The sourcing strategy is clearly
defined by the digital strategy of
the company and aims to create
a partner-based supplier ecosys-
tem for sustained digital advan-
tage.
The sourcing needs are
defined from both innovation &
projects
Sourcing
Governance
The sourcing process is strictly
limited to ”over-the-counter” or
long time RFP approaches
The choice of the right sourc-
ing process - from the decision-
making to the contractualization
- is based on the needs and their
features (timeline, strategic,…)
The sourcing processes include
the sourcing of new technologies
in the services, such as IA, RPA
(Robotics Process Automation),
Cybersecurity,...
The choice of the right sourcing
process is based on the needs
and their main features (time-
line, strategic,…).
On-demand
businesses can be sourced accord-
ingly to an Agile approach (i.e.
a lightened and accelerated RFP
process)
Sourcing
Tooling
The
sourcing
process
is
not
equipped
The sourcing process is linked to
the ERP of the company and/or
the sourcing process is equipped
through an internal purchasing
platform (connections to the ven-
dors)
The sourcing process is equipped
and
the
purchasing
platform
covers
the
whole
”lifecycle”
of
a
request/need,
from
the
needs expression to the vendor
performance
follow-up
(digi-
tization
of
the
contracts
and
their
appendixes,
performance
database,...)
The sourcing process include the
use
of
new
external
and
on-
line procurement platforms, such
as : digital marketplace gather-
ing freelance consultants, reverse
auctions marketplace,...
Table A.10: Maturity levels of the category Ecosystem.
==PAGE:85==
A.4 Final version of the maturity model
67
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
Agile
Orientation
Classic
frameworks
(organiza-
tion, process, ways of working) :
fully organized in silo and 1-year
roadmap
Some projects are agile but not
end-to-end Strong co-habitation
of agile and traditional project
management techniques
One part of the projects portfolio
is agile
Agile at scale with a full im-
plementation and the investment
management is also agile
Financial
Steering
/
Billing
Model
Operative
1-year
planning
fo-
cusing
on
financial
(Profit
&
Loss,
Balance
Sheet).
Plan-
ning process is characterized as
time-consuming, manually inten-
sive,
and typically error-prone.
Project Management is bound to
the 1-year financial planning
Long-term financial planning in
place (1 to 3-year plans).
At-
tempting
to
link
to
at
least
some basic long/mid-term busi-
ness steering to financial steering
KPI and data structure are con-
sistent with actual reporting, to
effectively measure and control
performance against the plan
Financial steering processes will-
ing to be ”Beyond budget”. The
financial steering model puts ac-
tivities toward budget
Resource
&
Skill
Management
The digital skills needs are con-
sidered ad-hoc There is no re-
sources/skills
adaptation
strat-
egy established
Digital expertise comes for the
main part from service providers.
Resources/skills
adaptation
strategy :
objectives are identi-
fied and defined for the next 6
months
The Next Gen skills are identi-
fied. Digital expertise still comes
mostly from outsourced activi-
ties and partnerships.
The re-
sources/skills ambitions are de-
fined and translated into long
term actions plans.
The Next
Gen skills are identified
subject to constant watch activi-
ties. The necessary skills for the
digital roadmap implementation
have been provided
Governance
There is no resources dedicated
to the digital strategy implemen-
tation
A dedicated team is referent for
the digital strategy
Steering
management
commit-
tees are in charge of the gover-
nance activities
Steering
management
commit-
tees are at stake and involve all
the Operational Directions
Consumer-
centricity
There is no focus on creating a
digital and consumer centric XP
Some clients Data are collected
but not exploited
Digital experience occurs as an
afterthought,
not
the
driving
force behind a Digital Market-
ing initiative Sophistication of
digital experience created is low
with minimal brand impact The
clients Data are collected and ex-
ploited independently depending
on channels
The servicing strategy tends to
integrate innovation to improve
the UX Creation of digital ex-
perience is a priority for mar-
keting teams and based in de-
tailed journey mapping. Sophis-
ticated digital experience aligned
to buyer engagement experiences
and measured on revenue impact.
The client Data are collected and
shared (unique client referential)
Alignment and delivery of dig-
ital
xp
based
on
persona
ex-
pectations.
Declined
cross-
functionality
to
ensure
touch-
point consistency.
Sophistica-
tion of digital xp created is very
advanced
and
drives
behavior.
The collected Data are use to
anticipate client needs and pro-
vide adapted solutions (predic-
tive marketing)
Time-to-
market
No V cycles
Short and iterative cycles with
variable duration and recurrence
Regular short time iterative cy-
cles
Incremental and short time it-
erative cycles.
Existence of a
backlog dynamically prioritized
and monitored between the de-
velopment team and the Product
Owner
Table A.11: Maturity levels of the category Target Operating Model.
==PAGE:86==
68
A Appendix
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
Business
Intelligence
Use
of
different
tools
on
a
project
level
basis
with
poor
standardization
between
busi-
ness units.
Poorly documented
processes with as-needed reports.
Significant use of spreadsheets
Centralized platform with Data
Warehouse and Data Mart.
De-
velopment of BI competency cen-
ter.
Definition of the BI gover-
nance and strategy
Development of KPI to measure
to performance of BI. Standard-
ized and extended documenta-
tion of BI processes and stan-
dards.
Integration of BI activ-
ities within business goals and
strategy
Established centralized platform
with Data Warehouse and Data
Mart with reliable distribution
of information on local, regional
or global level.
BI is fully inte-
grated into the business as an en-
abler for value creation. Various
tools to optimize analytics. Ad-
vanced predictive analysis with
identification of pattern and vari-
ables and use of big data.
Master Data
Management
(MDM)
MDM
is
centralized
into
one
DB but variances exist across
the company.
No control proce-
dure about data quality and data
cleansing
MDM is centralized into one DB
with emerging quality monitor-
ing and data flow rules
Established management frame-
work for Master data.
Integra-
tion of Master data governance
within general data governance.
Implementation of KPIs to en-
sure data quality.
Integration
of applications through a service
layer which maintains a master
repository with regular synchro-
nizations
Master data are centralized into
one DB which includes data lin-
eage and business rules (collect
customer client and build 360
View).
Various tools integrated
into the master data repository
enable data cleansing, data vali-
dation and duplication
Machine
Learning
Modelling
No AI lab with machine learning
modelling
Notebook with basic libraries -
no data source, manual upload -
standalone computer
Centralized
server
with
regu-
lar data science tools (Dataiku,
Jupiter, R Studio,etc.)
or soft-
ware
like
SAS,
with
required
hardware (high CPU and RAM)
High End Computing for Deep
Learning with CUDA or GPU
like - using deep learning frame-
work like Tensor Flow
AI Execution
Platform
No AI execution platform
(python, R, Spark, TensorFlow)
execution platform with no pro-
duction SLA
Monitored AI platform with pro-
duction SLA and tuning sugges-
tions (manually confirmed)
Monitored AI platform with auto
learning
Table A.12: Maturity levels of the category Data Valorization & AI.
==PAGE:87==
A.4 Final version of the maturity model
69
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
Policies
&
Standards
Unclear or poorly documented
policies
and
standards
about
data governance
Policies and standards are de-
fined for almost of the subjects in
the company and they are shared
among the employees. They are
adopted within the processes
Implementation of control pro-
cesses to ensure the implemen-
tation of standards and policies.
Training of the employees to in-
crease awareness about them and
develop of a culture integrating
data governance.
Definition of
clear data accountability
Continuous review and optimiza-
tion of data policies and stan-
dards by the entity in charge of
data governance.
Changes are
automatically adopted in the pro-
cesses of the organization
Data Quality
Emerging understanding of the
value driven by data quality. Im-
plementation of data quality con-
trol on a per department basis.
No coordination between depart-
ments on data quality require-
ments
and
control
procedures.
Data quality accountability is as-
signed to key IT team members
Definition of a data quality gov-
ernance and formalization of con-
trol procedures.
Emerging co-
ordination between departments
on data quality initiatives and
projects
Entreprise-wide data quality gov-
ernance and processes.
Defini-
tion of data quality leadership
and sponsorship with new roles
and responsibilities
Monitored
data
quality
with
dashboard.
Proactive approach
with predictive data issue assess-
ment
and
continuous
improve-
ment
Data
Management
(
Lifecyle,
Metadata)
No governance related to data
management.
Data lifecyle and
metadata are defined on a per
project basis but rarely formalize
/ consolidated at the company
level
Definition of a data lifecyle pol-
icy and and communication of
metadata best practices for struc-
tured data. Consistency of meta-
data across the company thanks
to metadata collection and con-
solidation.
Availability of meta-
data from a single portal
Implementation of processes and
standards associated to lifecyle
data policy.
Automated meta-
data
collection
and
reporting
for some systems and projects.
Metadatada quality management
with regular audit and monitor-
ing
Control and monitoring of pro-
cesses associated to data lifecy-
cle policy with regular reporting.
Metadata is defined and adopted
for both structured and unstruc-
tured data. The organization has
a unique access point to meta
data resources
Table A.13: Maturity levels of the category Data Governance.
==PAGE:88==
70
A Appendix
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
Big
Data
Platform
No hadoop-based data lake for
data management
Primary hadoop-based platform
with minimal projects - not pro-
duction associated
Centralized
and
industrialized
hadoop-based
platform
(data
lake) with more one production
use case - ingestion framework -
exposition framework
Industrialized data plaform with
real time process and advanced
analytics - hosted most data of
the IS
Data
Integration
Data migrations are performed
manually.
Data integration is a
ad-hoc process usually performed
point to point
Database changes are performed
through automated scripts with
versions
associated
to
applica-
tions. Implementation of a EAI
bus to facilitate the integration
within the different applications
Database and integration are in-
tegrated within the deployment
process. Database upgrades and
rollbacks are tested for each de-
ployment.
Monitoring and op-
timization
of
database
perfor-
mance.
Use
of
the
Message
Queues integration approach
Release to release reporting and
feedback loop.
Monitoring of
integration performance and de-
ployment processes
Table A.14: Maturity levels of the category Data Architecture.
==PAGE:89==
A.4 Final version of the maturity model
71
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
Online
Services
Basic online services like forms.
Sporadic use of online applica-
tions which are isolated from
each other
Key functions and activ-
ities of the company are
supported online like HR
or travel. However, the ap-
plications remain isolated
from each other and some
of them can be limited to
a certain perimeter
All the employees use the online services
on a regular basis.
All the applications
are within a unique consistent interface
with a SSO mechanism. Online services
for different departments / functions /
activities are connected with each other
enabling to trigger all the processes and
workflows available on online services for
a specific task
Online applications and services
are adapted to employee’s needs.
Employees can integrate and com-
bine data on the intranet from
multiple sources (external or inter-
nal) through the services like dash-
board
Information
&
decision-
making
Intranet is mainly a repository
of static information related to
the company and employees ac-
cess
information
through
an-
other channels like emails
Established
use
of
in-
tranet to deliver news re-
lated to the company but
employees
don’t
use
it
as the main information
channel.
Content on the
intranet is sometimes out-
dated
and
there
is
no
quality requirement about
it.
Local sites are dis-
connected from each other
and stay static
Intranet is used by most employees for
all communication and information needs.
Content of the intranet is structured , dy-
namic and of various types (audio, videos,
text, etc.). Intranet mixes content on a
department level, global level, team level,
etc.
with clear governance and quality
control for each level. Established struc-
ture and coordination of the communi-
cation teams.
Established dashboards.
User experience is taking into account
The intranet is a platform with
user-generated content. Most em-
ployees use the intranet to access
information, publish content and
access communications tools
Collaboration
& Communi-
cation
Emerging use of collaboration
tools but most of the collabo-
ration is performed via emails
or shared online drives which
are not necessarily the official
sharing tools of the company.
Decentralized contact lists and
finders
Established
use
of
ba-
sic
disconnected
collab-
oration
tools
for
docu-
ment sharing and messag-
ing.
Centralized address
book with contact details
and people finder. Emerg-
ing use of social media but
they stay isolated and dis-
connected from each other
Established use of real-time collaboration
tools (e.g. web conferencing), social me-
dia spaces for open collaboration and
private collaboration spaces for project
teams. Centralized people directory with
details about each person (skills, inter-
ests, social media presence, etc.)
in-
cluding partners and contractors. Estab-
lished sponsorship and employee support
to develop the use of collaboration tools
and the associated skills. Development of
a culture of collaboration
Fully
integrated
collaboration
tools and environment for internal
collaboration between employees
and
external
collaboration
with
3rd parties
Structure
&
Coherence
There is an emerging structure
with multiples disconnected in-
tranets designed for specific de-
partments.
Availability of in-
tranet limited to a location and
potentially to a limited num-
ber of people with laptop and
VPN. No communication, cen-
tralization and consistency be-
tween the different sites.
Po-
tential presence of some online
basic tools like wikis
Aggregation
of
several
platforms
(main
plat-
forms)
within
a
cen-
tralized
platform
which
enable
a
unique
search
engine
for
all
the
sites.
Definition
of
standards
(user experience) and key
tools for most of the sites
but
some
sites
remain
isolated
Unique user and gateway interfaces con-
taining all the applications of the com-
pany with single sing on (SSO). Imple-
mentation of mobility for the DW with
the creation of a home access.
Estab-
lished digital workplace culture among
the
employees.
Definition
of
a
gov-
ernance regarding user-generated docu-
ments and content in the digital work-
place
Fully integrated digital workplace.
All employees use the DW on a
regular basis through their laptop,
other professional or personal de-
vices which are supported by the
digital workplace.
The intranet
is fully integrated within the digi-
tal workplace among other services
and tools which are used uniformly
by the employees.
Employees in-
sight and disruptive initiatives are
encourage to enable continuous im-
provement of the digital workplace
Table A.15: Maturity levels of the category Digital Workplace.
==PAGE:90==
72
A Appendix
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
Workflow
Engine
Small workflow tool mainly use
into applications to schedule ba-
sic tasks
On-site industrialized workflow
manager (BPMN notation com-
pliant)
which
schedule
critical
business processes.
Access con-
trols are defined
Cloud-based industrialized work-
flow manager (BPMN notation
compliant) which schedule criti-
cal business processes
Cloud-based industrialized work-
flow manager which includes case
management. Implementation of
KPI-based reports for workflow
management performance
Rule Engine
Basic rules manager with service
to dialog with the information
systems of the organization
Industrialized
rules
manager
with basic Graphical User Inter-
face (GUI) to manage it (rule
creation, design, documentation,
editing)
and
a
business
rule
repository to store, manage and
audit rule
Industrialized
rules
manager
with complex rules is associated
to
a
GUI,
a
repository
and
tools
for
testing,
validating,
simulating rules and change
The industrialized rules manager
with complex rules is associated
with a workflow engine.
Im-
plementation
of
KPI-based
re-
ports for rules management per-
formance
RPA Tools
Use of automated processes with
excel automation, macro, etc.
Basic programmable robot with
no discovering intelligence to per-
form a task or assist the user
Use of RPA self-learning tools
to learn a task usually perform
by an employee autonomously ex-
cept for completely new inputs
from its learning phase
Autoforms
discover
with
ad-
vanced features like NLP or com-
puter vision
Table A.16: Maturity levels of the category Digital Process Automation.
==PAGE:91==
A.4 Final version of the maturity model
73
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
File
exchange
system
No file exchange system
File
exchange
system
with
a
unique exchange protocol
Monitored file exchange system
with various exchange protocols
Monitored file exchange system
with various exchange protocols
including security features like
antivirus
API
Gateway
Homemade HTTP Gateway with
Apache or equivalent
Industrial & robust API gate-
way with access monitoring ( Ba-
sic HTTP authentication). API
management
for
mobile
and
cloud
Industrial API Gateway with ac-
cess monitoring (basic HTTP au-
thentication).
Data encryption
with SSL. Threat protection with
payload
inspection,
prevention
for XML, REST, JSON, etc. and
threat
protection
against
XSS
and DoS
Industrial API Gateway with ac-
cess monitoring (Oauth2, SAML
or
other
authentication
proto-
cols). QoS monitoring and traffic
throttling.
Analytics with real-
time monitoring
RPA
Directory
&
Portal
Listing of API interface on cen-
tralized tool (regardless the tool
used)
N/A
Listing API interface with test-
ing tools
State of the art developer portal
(external and internal) with auto
enrolling
Table A.17: Maturity levels of the category Connectivity.
==PAGE:92==
74
A Appendix
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
Cloud-based
infrastructure
Non or limited use of the cloud
model and packages. No existing
service catalog. Low level of stan-
dardization and virtualization
Standardized and virtualized in-
frastructure. Emerging existence
of automation of some services.
Creation of a service catalog
Most
services
are
automated
as
the
infrastructure
becomes
more virtualized and standard-
ized. The cloud infrastructure in-
tegrates a security management
Intensive use of the cloud infras-
tructure which is fully standard-
ized, virtualized and automated.
Availability
of
advanced
auto-
mated practices regarding config-
urations of the software
Infrastructure
as Code
Manually generated (command
line,
GUI) and non-repeatable
infrastructure.
Provisioning is
based on script but performed
ad-hoc.
Provisioning provides
patching and provisioning
Repeatable provisioning of the
infrastructure resulting from an
automated pipeline of delivery.
Reliable and predictable infras-
tructure
Manual management of roll back
changes.
Fully
available
and
fault tolerant infrastructure
Automated management of roll
back.
Self-service provisioning
with zero-downtime
Continuous
Delivery
Manual processes (environment
provision, software deployment,
integration, tests).
Test is usu-
ally done after finishing the de-
velopment
Implementation
of
automation
within the build and test phases
(generation of test scripts and
tests data during the develop-
ment process).
Deployment is
a partially automated process to
some environments which can be
provisioned automatically. Some
middleware and database are pro-
vided centrally
Automated build and test cycle
(unit and acceptance tests) per-
formed upon changes in source
code.
Mutualization of scripts
and tools accordingly with de-
pendencies
between
projects.
Fully
automated,
self-service
deployment process, unique for
all
environments.
Definition
of metrics for build,
test and
deployment monitoring
Testing is fully automated and
integrated
within
the
develop-
ment process (rare production
rollbacks, quick identification of
defects).
Environment are man-
aged effectively, provisioning is
fully
automated
and
standard
topologies are communicated for
common components.
Continu-
ous improvement of the processes
based of the metrics defined
Table A.18: Maturity levels of the category IT Infrastructure & Architecture.
==PAGE:93==
A.4 Final version of the maturity model
75
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
Audit &
Vulnerability
A vulnerability management pol-
icy is defined and communicated.
Ad hoc vulnerability watch and
punctual audits are performed
Processes, standards, roles and
responsibilities associated to the
policy
are
defined
and
imple-
mented
on
a
per-department
scale.
A vulnerability watch is
done based on feeds subscription.
Emergence of an ad hoc vulner-
ability scanning (vulnerabilities,
obsolescence, configuration) with
preliminary remediation control.
Regular audits are performed on
critical applications and infras-
tructure components
Processes, standards, roles and
responsibilities associated to the
policy
are
defined
and
imple-
mented across the organization.
Regular
vulnerability
scanning
are
performed
upon
signature
with
preliminary
remediation
tracking and confirmation. Pen-
etration tests are performed at
least every two years on critical
assets
and
security
scan
are
implemented
for
applications
accessible
from
the
internet
(except SaaS applications)
Processes and standards are mon-
itored and documented and jobs
description are created for roles
and responsibilities.
Vulnerabil-
ity scans frequency & priority are
regularly reviewed. Security au-
dits for critical non-web applica-
tions (including ERP) are per-
formed
Governance
& Awareness
Awareness actions are realized
punctually for all entities.
Cy-
berthreat tendencies and changes
in regulation are informally fol-
lowed. IT users are informed of
their responsibilities without any
formal commitment. Cybersecu-
rity roles and responsibilities are
informal
Definition of an awareness rais-
ing
plan
(target
populations,
messages,
tools
&
planning).
Changes in regulation are fol-
lowed regularly but remains in-
formal.
Communication of the
charter to use IT resources to all
employees. Security officer is ap-
pointed and associated to a for-
mal job description
Cyberthreat
tendencies
and
changes in regulation are regu-
larly followed and formalized at
least once a year.
Specific IT
charters for IT users, IT admins,
developers
and
definition
of
disciplinary processes in case of
non-respect
Cybersecurity roles and respon-
sibilities are clearly defined.
A
CISO or equivalent exists at en-
tity / local level
Incident
&
Crisis
Management
There
is
no
security
incident
management process defined
Definition of a security incident
management
process
which
is
communicated across the organi-
zation.
Identification of cyber
response contractors which can
be mobilized on an ad hoc basis.
Single points of contact for Se-
curity Operation Centers (SOC)
are partially identified but it re-
mains informal
Full integration of the security in-
cident management process with
definition of roles and account-
ability.
Formalization of the re-
lationships with identified cyber
response contractors with the sig-
nature of a contract.
Single
points of contact for Security Op-
eration Centers (SOC) are iden-
tified and formalized with asso-
ciated job descriptions and com-
munication around it
The security incidents manage-
ment
process
is
regularly
up-
dated and its application is con-
trolled. Specific SLAs and confi-
dential requirements are defined
with cyber response contractors
Infrastructure
Security
Patching activities are performed
ad hoc. Hardening of assets con-
figuration is ad hoc. Logging is
activated on network devices
Patching objectives are defined
accordingly with risk exposure
(asset sensitivity, vulnerability).
Patching
processes
are
formal-
ized
and
adapted
to
risk
ex-
posure.
Patching accountabil-
ity is defined.
Hardened base-
line for servers OS, middleware,
database and network infrastruc-
ture
Implementation of an automated
end to end patching process with
vulnerability scan and monitor-
ing
through
regular
reporting
(KPI, dashboard). Logging is ac-
tivated with no automated era-
sure
Automated
patching
process
with
pre-defined
patching
ap-
proved
at
the
enterprise-level
and
patch
assessment
(vuln
scanning,
etc.)
Configuration
baselines are regularly reviewed
and
update
to
ensure
compli-
ance with cybersecurity policy.
Administration
segregation
ac-
cording to identity and access
rights
Table A.19: Maturity levels of the category Cybersecurity (Part 1).
==PAGE:94==
76
A Appendix
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
Logging
&
Detection
Patching activities are performed
ad hoc. Hardening of assets con-
figuration is ad hoc. Logging is
activated on network devices
Processes and standards associ-
ated to the log management pol-
icy are implemented. Infrastruc-
ture logs are collected, analyzed
in real-time and stored according
to the retention policy accord-
ingly to detection use cases based
on main risks for the company
(policy violations, abnormal ac-
tivity, known threats). Use cases
are regularly updated based on
threat intelligence outputs and
lessons learned
Control and monitoring of the
logs
management
policy,
pro-
cesses and standards.
Regular
update of documents.
Logs are
collected according to a planning
and use cases
Infrastructure
and
application
logs are collected to be analyzed
accordingly with use cases includ-
ing specifics ones based on busi-
ness activities.
A baseline of
network activities and expected
data
flows
is
established
and
maintain
Risk
Management
There is no or a limited risk gov-
ernance and strategy.
Risk re-
sponse and reporting are ad hoc:
risks are not continually assessed
(no reassessment at the end of a
project).
Risk registration and
remediation plans are defined lo-
cally but there is no consolida-
tion across projects or the com-
pany and no central follow-up
Cybersecurity risk management
is
integrated
within
the
stan-
dard risk management processes.
Cyber
risks
are
discussed
by
top management facing major cy-
ber events or regulatory alerts /
changes.
Emergence of risk re-
porting to the board about main
risks, response to them and risk
assessment results
Formalized
cyber
risk
gover-
nance with risk accountability,
structure,
scope,
budget,
etc.
and risk strategy with clear ob-
jective,
risk
policy,
documen-
tation,
processes
and
risk
ap-
petite. Department-wide consoli-
dation and follow-up of risk reg-
istration and remediation plans.
Periodical review of security level
and risk assessment update for
critical assets/infrastructure
Fully integrated cyber risk man-
agement within the organization
with decision-making, mandate,
commitment & leadership from
the board. Risk are documented
and managed through a treat-
ment plan (mitigation,
contin-
gency, transfer) and prioritized
according the classification. Use
of a GRC tools by all the stake-
holders to share centralized view
of residual risk on all assets (re-
mediation plan, follow-up, risk
score) Periodical review of secu-
rity level and risk assessment up-
date.
Risk management report-
ing is centralized and included
in the cybersecurity dashboard
with regular reporting of signif-
icant risks to the board
Workplace
Security
Patching activities are performed
ad hoc.
Workstation are pro-
tected
by
authentication,
ad-
ministration rights for specific
users and signature based anti-
malware protection.
Implemen-
tation of a detection and alerting
process for workspace security in-
cidents associated with an ad hoc
remediation
Patching
processes
are
formal-
ized and adapted to risk expo-
sure (asset sensitivity, vulnera-
bility).
Patching accountability
is defined. Administration rights
are prohibited and workstation
are
protected
by
a
strong
or
multi-factor authentication and
a Host IPS
Patching processes are reviewed
annually and monitoring through
regular
reporting
(KPI,
dash-
board). Workplace protection is
ensured by scanning all the files
received over networks & emails
before use, using of dedicated ac-
count when admin rights are re-
quired, and by the encryption of
all desktop, laptops & data stor-
age devices
Automated
patching
process
with
pre-defined
patching
ap-
proved
at
the
enterprise-level.
Workplace protection is ensured
by
automatic
review
and
de-
activation
of
admin
accounts
and
reinforced
authentication
measures on sensitive devices
Table A.20: Maturity levels of the category Cybersecurity (Part 2).
==PAGE:95==
A.4 Final version of the maturity model
77
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
Data
Security
Controls
Ad-hoc approach with the im-
plementation
of
some
controls
on
critical
data/functions/pro-
jects with limited reporting. Re-
sponsibility for data security and
compliance is unclear. The con-
trol procedures are done on a
best effort basis depending on
individual engagement, cost and
time needed
Established and documented con-
trol
processes
which
are
inte-
grated within the business pro-
cesses but remain manual. Data
security
accountability
is
as-
signed to key IT team members
by default
Partially automated controls for
critical data.
Data control pro-
cesses are monitored with ded-
icated metrics.
Control tools
are integrated within common
data and DMP. Data security
accountability is clearly defined
and widely known across the or-
ganization
Systematic and automatic con-
trols are established along the
business processes with reporting
on a daily basis enabling predic-
tive identification of security fail-
ure and risks, risk mitigation and
continuous process improvement
Identity
&
Access
Management
(IAM)
IAM is adapted for each appli-
cation or package of applications
and based on multiple directories
throughout the organization. No
record of user access history
IAM becomes partially central-
ized
with
a
unique
directory
for some applications.
Partial
records of user access history
IAM is fully centralized and inte-
grated for key applications. SSO
processes are established. A full
record of user access exists for
each systems / applications in
compliance with regulatory and
security policy of the company
A unique standard-based IAM
model is implemented through-
out the entire company and third
parties to enable access to data
from a single location throughout
the supply chain. Every user ac-
cess meets the regulatory and se-
curity policy of the company
Business
Continuity
Plan & DRP
Existence of an informal BCP
which covers some applications
and
is
updated
before
tests.
There is no manual process for-
malized to operate in degraded
mode if needed.
The DRP de-
fined
consists
of
back-ups
ex-
ternalization but they are per-
formed ad hoc. The DRP is up-
dated before tests which consists
of unit tests with no impact on
production environment
Definition of a BIA along with
a continuity strategy and roles
and responsibilities around BCP
are defined.
BCP is updated
reguarly (at least annually). For-
malization of the process to op-
erate in degraded mode and pro-
vision of required tools associ-
ated to the process.
Implemen-
tation of back-up policy (neces-
sary back-ups and frequencies)
and back-up performed in data-
center. The DRP is regularly up-
dated and integrate cyberattack
scenarrii
Implementation
of
operational
continuity procedures. Update of
BCP upon changes. Monitoring
of processes for degraded mode.
Regular restoration tests are in-
tegrated within the back-up pol-
icy.
The processes for DRP ac-
tivation are tested annually and
DRP is modified upen modifica-
tions on the system.
DRP in-
cludes cyberattack scenarii and
a roadmap to improve cyberre-
silience.
DRP tests now vocers
a wide functional perimeter like
a business
Business continuity processes are
regularly tested and people in-
volved in the BCP regularly par-
ticipate in those tests. The busi-
ness has a solution to rebuild or
restard quickly back-up servers
in case of crisis. DRP is detailed
and can be activated partially
in response to a local problem.
DRP cyberattack scenarii have
been tested and actions of the
roadmap are implemented. DRP
tests involves stopping/ restart-
nig production environment and
full switch to recovery systems
Table A.21: Maturity levels of the category Data Protection.
==PAGE:96==
78
A Appendix
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
Empowered
workforce
Strong vertical hierarchy. There
is no decision-making power for
employees : the top management
decides and the employees de-
liver
The key projects are delivered
and
managed
by
autonomous
and responsible teams. In these
cases, the team is accountable
and the management supports
their actions
Majority of projects are delivered
and
managed
by
autonomous
and responsible teams In these
cases, the team is accountable
and the management supports
their actions
Total holacracy deployed on the
whole organization
Talent
Management
Extremely limited strategy for
talent
management
activities.
Lack of awareness of the value
of
systemic
talent
relation-
ships.Lack of talent development
accountability resulting in non-
systematic
and
uneven
talent
development
Emerging understanding of the
value of systemic talent relation-
ships.Talent development on a
per project basis triggered by
managers demands
Established
skill
development
aligned
with
business
strat-
egy and needs.
Definition of
enterprise-wide
talent
develop-
ment
strategy
and
standards.
Targeted
professional
develop-
ment initiatives.
Implementa-
tion of a learning culture within
the company
Talent
development
is
fully
aligned
with
business
needs.
Automated up-skilling decisions,
talent development are tailored
to business needs. Use of analyt-
ics to continuously improve skill
need assessment, alignment and
predict future needs
People
Performance
Management
Nonexistent or sporadic perfor-
mance management
Definition of performance goals
for employees but disconnected
from the strategic goals of the
organization. Sporadic coaching
and
performance
conversations
between managers and employ-
ees. Clear compensation manage-
ment of the employee
Link between performance man-
agement and learning manage-
ment.
Regular coaching conver-
sations. Definition of succession
planning and development result-
ing from performance manage-
ment. Definition of KPIs for per-
formance monitoring and adjust-
ments based on the results
Established culture of high per-
formance driven by compensa-
tion, rewards, empowerment of
the employees, career and skill
development, etc. Managers lead
employees actively to high per-
formance (individual treatment)
and are able to make real time ad-
justments to people performance
to improve business value. Abil-
ity of the company to measure
ROI resulting from talent devel-
opment
Talent
Acquisition
Recruitment process performed
locally by HR employees. Talent
acquisition is triggered by man-
agers demands and is performed
on a ”As-Needed” basis to ac-
quire new talents or fill temporar-
ily skill gaps
Definition
of
a
talent
recruit-
ment strategy.
Enterprise-wide
talent acquisition processes and
tools.
Advanced assessment of
job
candidates
regarding
their
compliance
with
job
require-
ments.
Skill-gaps
and
talent
needs predicted with the collabo-
ration between managers and HR
recruiters
Active
recruitment
campaign
through
social
media,
employ-
ment brand development and TA
programs (alumni and employee
referral).
Integration
of
tal-
ent management & acquisition
within the business strategy to
define agile skill-portfolios
Recruitment is fully integrated
within business strategy as an en-
abler. Use of analytics to predict
recruitment needs and adopt an
agile recruitment approach. Au-
tomated recruitment decisions
New
roles
and jobs
No or limited evolution of the
roles and jobs within the organi-
zation
Deployment of the new roles and
responsibilities within the criti-
cal departments / projects of the
company.
In these cases, adap-
tation of processes to integrate
these changes. New roles and re-
sponsibilities are formalized with
job descriptions
New roles and responsibilities are
deployed and integrated within
most of the organization.
In
these cases, adaptation of pro-
cesses to integrate these changes.
Emergence of training sessions
for employees
All the roles and jobs are de-
fined and deployed within the
whole organization. Regular and
systematic training sessions open
for everyone within the organiza-
tion
Table A.22: Maturity levels of the category People & Talent.
==PAGE:97==
A.4 Final version of the maturity model
79
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
Culture of
Innovation
Isolated initiatives with variable
success across the organization
Formalized processes with emerg-
ing sponsorship and implementa-
tion of innovation champions. In-
novative initiatives and risk tak-
ing behavior are promoted by the
management teams.
Emergence
of test and learn approach in
projects and initiatives. Collabo-
rative innovative processes imple-
mented across the organization
Established innovative processes
and recurrent innovative events
with
strong
employee
engage-
ment. Systematic test and learn
approach
for
innovative
initia-
tives to enable early-stage recy-
cling of ideas.
KPI are imple-
mented to monitor key innova-
tive projects
Full
integration
of
innovation
within business processes which
enables value creation in new
products/services
and
ways
of
working. Innovation is fully mon-
itored with KPI across the orga-
nization
Culture
of
Openness
There is no time allocated to
these activities for the employees
and the company does not imple-
ment any initiative in this direc-
tion
Time can be allocated for these
activities after the presentation
of
a
project
with
at
least
a
report.
Emerging sponsorship
from champions within the em-
ployees who start to communi-
cate and share about the activ-
ities within their department
Existence
of
a
enterprise-wide
strong community interested in
these activities with time sys-
tematically allocated by the com-
pany. Sponsorship from the top
management to perform these ac-
tivities. The organization is try-
ing to open/widen its ecosystem
to these initiatives
Time is systematically allocated
to these activities for the whole
organization. Regular corporate
events are organized to involve
employees.
The actions create
significant value for the business
Customer-
centricity
Business has a basic knowledge
about its customers and their
needs.
The products/services
provided by the organization are
not necessarily aligned with their
expectations.
There is no ma-
jor investment in customer expe-
rience which is barely consistent
and pleasant
Business has a developed knowl-
edge about its customers and
their expectations. Data are col-
lected about customers and com-
pany’s services/products are tai-
lored according to the insights.
Definition
of
customer
experi-
ence leadership and governance
and a clear customer programs
starts to emerge
Customer
Experience
is
moni-
tored through metrics which are
integrated within operational re-
views.
Efforts are made to im-
prove customer experience based
on
the
metrics.
Established
customer-centric culture within
the company with a strong lead-
ership and employee engagement.
There is a strong relationship be-
tween customers and the busi-
ness
Customer-centricity is an inte-
gral party of the company cul-
ture and is not managed as an
activity anymore.
The business
is
focus
on
customer
satisfac-
tion and is therefore more fo-
cus on the solutions to solve cus-
tomer problems and reach cus-
tomer needs than the means to
achieve it.
Customers are the
champions of the company, they
are proud to be associated with
the company and share their ex-
perience with others
Table A.23: Maturity levels of the category Digital Culture.
==PAGE:98==
80
A Appendix
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
Knowledge
Management
No
formal
process,
KM
is
only based on individual efforts,
knowledge is spread across the
company
in
multiple
reposito-
ries/platform
and
experts
are
identified by topics
Emerging processes to capture,
store and share knowledge.
A
repository dedicated to KM is
created on a per department ba-
sis. Emerging awareness of value
driven by KM in terms of produc-
tivity, quality and cost reduction
Definition of KM strategy for the
entire company. Metrics are cre-
ated to measure the ROI driven
by KM and optimize publishing
/ storing process. Automation of
knowledge maintenance with use
of analytics to identify content
gaps, redundancy, etc.
Unified
and
documented
KM
processes
across
the
company
and the repository of each de-
partment
are
merged
into
a
unique,
enterprise-wide
reposi-
tory.
User-friendly infrastruc-
ture with tools facilitating knowl-
edge
access
(chatbot,
sugges-
tions,
etc.).
Dedicated
staff
and involvement of employees to
manage KM platform
Collaborative
Processes
The organization works in silos
with limited even non-existent in-
ternal and external collaboration
through informal relationships
Emerging awareness of the value
of collaboration within the or-
ganization among the employees
and management.
Few collabo-
rative processes between depart-
ments are defined
Enterprise
wide
business
pro-
cesses
based
on
collaboration
which
are
strongly
monitored
with
KPI
to
measure
perfor-
mance and identifies areas for im-
provement
Collaboration is an inherent part
of business processes.
Effective
knowledge
sharing
among
em-
ployees. Collaborative processes
are continuously monitored and
improved to ensure the value cre-
ation and efficiency
Agile
Project
Management
Agile
methodology
is
not
or
poorly implemented.
Initiatives
are based on individual effort.
Testing phase is mainly manual
Sporadic agile implementation in
some teams.
Improved quality
of the products.
Tools and pro-
cesses used in agile methodology
are in common
Significant agile maturity within
the organization.
Most of the
project portfolio is Agile.
Con-
sistent roles and responsibilities
of the Agile teams across the
company.Standardized processes
with high-quality outputs.
Use
of Agile at Scale within the orga-
nization
Agile is an integral part of the
organizational culture.
.
Im-
plementation of metrics to actu-
ally measure the success of ag-
ile methodology and the value
driven by it.
Innovation is en-
couraged.
Continuous improve-
ment and optimization of Agile
process
Table A.24: Maturity levels of the category Digital ways of working.
==PAGE:99==
A.4 Final version of the maturity model
81
Criteria
Maturity Stage 1
Maturity Stage 2
Maturity Stage 3
Maturity Stage 4
Change
Management
No change management. Lack of
awareness of the value driven by
the change management. Success
depends on heroic efforts
Sporadic
implementation
of
change
management
within
isolated project with a change
methodology
and
a
change
manager
Organization-wide change man-
agement with definition of gov-
ernance, standards and processes
regarding
change
management.
Project
are
designed
around
change management inputs and
strategy
Change management is an in-
herent part of the business pro-
cesses and the organization. Ac-
tive leadership and management.
Established monitoring with con-
tinuous assessment and improve-
ment of change management
Digital KPIs
Definition of KPIs for critical
functions / projects / activities
of the company
Definition of metrics for every ac-
tivities/projects to monitor the
digital performance.
Definition
of KPI accountability and imple-
mentation of processes and tools
to collect data related to KPIs
Implementation of regular auto-
matic reporting and definition
of reporting standards and pro-
cesses.
Use of analytics to ana-
lyze KPIs and reporting. Emerg-
ing dashboards
Enterprise wide-dashboards with
data from internal and external
sources to measure performance.
Daily reporting and data output
structured by function, depart-
ment, etc.
to facilitate analysis
and areas for improvement
Business-IT
Alignment
Business and IT are two inde-
pendent entities with different
goals.
There is a lack of aware-
ness regarding the dependencies
between them
Emerging awareness of dependen-
cies between IT and business .
They start to mutualize their ac-
tivities with isolated initiatives
but each of them except the other
to be flexible to its expectations
(business demands, IT standards,
etc.)
IT is considered as an enabler to
create business value and reach
business objectives. Shared pro-
cesses
which
combine
IT
and
business expectations and needs.
Interests
of
IT
and
business
are
ensured
through
delibera-
tions and discussions
IT is an integral part of business
processes and there is no distinc-
tion between the two
Table A.25: Maturity levels of the stream Digital Governance.
==PAGE:100==
82
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
[1]
A. Muller, L. von Thienen, and H. Schroder, “So messen Sie den Beitrag
der Informationstechnologie zum Unternehmenserfolg,” Arbeitspapiere der Nor-
dakademie, 2004. [Online]. Available: https://ideas.repec.org/p/zbw/
nordwp/200402.html.
[2]
D. J. Bowersox, D. J. Closs, and R. W. Drayer, “The Digital Transformation:
Technology and Beyond,” 2005. [Online]. Available: https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/266583511_The_Digital_Transformation_Technology_
and_Beyond.
[3]
T. Hess, C. Matt, F. Wiesböck, and A. Benlian, “Options for Formulating a Dig-
ital Transformation Strategy,” MIS Quarterly Executive, volume 15, number 1,
2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.misqe.org/ojs2/execsummaries/
MISQE_V15I2_Hessetal_Web.pdf.
[4]
Collins English Dictionary, Mature definition. [Online]. Available: https://www.
collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/mature.
[5]
M. C. Paulk, B. Curtis, M. B. Chrissis, and C. V. Weber, “Capability Maturity
Model SM for Software, Version 1.1,” Carneggie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
Tech. Rep., 1993. [Online]. Available: https://resources.sei.cmu.edu/
asset_files/TechnicalReport/1993_005_001_16211.pdf.
[6]
G. C. Kane, D. Palmer, A. N. Phillips, D. Kiron, N. Buckley, A. Abbatiello, G.
Andrus, C. Asselin, J. Copulsky, A. Dea, C. A. Geason, G. Gibbons, N. Haddad,
D. Rimm, L. Rosano, A. Ryder, G. C. Kane, D. Palmer, A. N. Phillips, D.
Kiron, and N. Buckley, “Achieving Digital Maturity,” Deloitte University and
MIT Sloan Management Review, Tech. Rep., 2017. [Online]. Available: http:
//sloanreview.mit.edu/digital2017.
[7]
A. Shapiro, Setting the PACE in product development : a guide to Product And
Cycle-time Excellence, Rev. ed. Boston, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1996,
isbn: 075069789X (pbk. : alk. paper).
[8]
P. Fraser, C. Farrukh, and M. Gregory, “Managing product development collaborations—
a process maturity approach,” Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical
Engineers, Part B: Journal of Engineering Manufacture, volume 217, num-
ber 11, pages 1499–1519, November 2003, issn: 0954-4054. doi: 10 . 1243 /
==PAGE:102==
84
Bibliography
095440503771909890. [Online]. Available: http://journals.sagepub.com/
doi/10.1243/095440503771909890.
[9]
I. Boughzala and G.-J. de Vreede, “A Collaboration Maturity Model: Develop-
ment and Exploratory Application,” in 2012 45th Hawaii International Con-
ference on System Sciences, IEEE, January 2012, pages 306–315, isbn: 978-
1-4577-1925-7. doi: 10.1109/HICSS.2012.47. [Online]. Available: http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6148645/.
[10]
T. Bruin, F. Ronald, K. Uday, and R. Michael, Understanding the Main Phases
of Developing a Maturity Assessment Model, January 2005. [Online]. Available:
https://www.scienceopen.com/document?vid=c91e71b2-8a21-424c-bef4-
c517c33961d1.
[11]
R. Wendler, “The maturity of maturity model research: A systematic map-
ping study,” Information and Software Technology, volume 54, pages 1317–
1339, 2012. doi: 10.1016/j.infsof.2012.07.007. [Online]. Available: http://
production.datastore.cvt.dk/filestore?oid=53a79a064ad04bb772042ae0&
targetid=53a79a064ad04bb772042ae3.
[12]
R. L. Nolan, “Managing the Crises in Data Processing,” Harvard Business Re-
view, volume 2, 1979. [Online]. Available: https://www.hbs.edu/faculty/
Pages/item.aspx?num=6680.
[13]
T. McBride, “Organisational theory perspective on process capability measure-
ment scales,” Journal of Software Maintenance and Evolution: Research and
Practice, volume 22, number 4, n/a–n/a, 2010, issn: 1532060X. doi: 10.1002/
spip.440. [Online]. Available: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/spip.440.
[14]
A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design Science in IS Re-
search,” MIS Quarterly, volume 28, number 1, pages 75–105, 2004. [Online].
Available: https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/a555/c8e9904b87ddec848f81bafb0fe5d8da45
pdf?_ga=2.45396708.1396112405.1529414785-1106427930.1529414785.
[15]
S. T. March and G. F. Smith, “Design and natural science research on informa-
tion technology,” Decision Support Systems, volume 15, pages 251–266, 1995.
[Online]. Available: http://production.datastore.cvt.dk/filestore?oid=
546cda9b897520ef6e0894ba&targetid=53a072adbf00a8181402d2e7.
[16]
L. Markus, A. Majchrzak, and L. Gasser, “A design theory for systems that sup-
port emergent knowledge processes,” MIS Quarterly, volume 26, number Septem-
ber 2002, pages 179–212, 2002. [Online]. Available: http://web.b.ebscohost.
com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?vid=1&sid=
21629eab-1094-4876-af8f-12b0223cf814%40sessionmgr104.
[17]
J. Becker, R. Knackstedt, and J. PopperbuS, “Developing Maturity Models for
IT Management – A Procedure Model and its Application,” Business & In-
formation Systems Engineering, pages 213–222, 2009. doi: 10.1007/s12599-
009-0044-5. [Online]. Available: http://production.datastore.cvt.dk/
filestore?oid=54808e240b2ed09c150b7744&targetid=54808e240b2ed09c150b7746.
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
85
[18]
H. Essmann and N. D. Preez, “An Innovation Capability Maturity Model –
Development and initial application,” International Journal of Industrial and
Manufacturing Engineering, volume 3, number 5, pages 382–392, 2009. [Online].
Available: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.
308.3061.
[19]
M. Saunders, P. Lewis, and A. Thornhill, Research methodes for business stu-
dents, 4th, Pearson Education Limited, Ed. Edinburgh, 2007. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://eclass.teicrete.gr/modules/document/file.php/DLH105/
Research%20Methods%20for%20Business%20Students%2C%205th%20Edition.
pdf.
[20]
D. L. Morgan, The Focus Group Guidebook. SAGE Publications, 1997, page 120,
isbn: 0761908188. [Online]. Available: https://books.google.fr/books?
hl=en&lr=&id=nrLdCQAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PR9&dq=focus+group&ots=
uuabKtQdA0 & sig = jMAYKOpKRY _ 2TDUoGSowO50q7L8 # v = onepage & q = focus %
20group&f=false.
[21]
S. S. McMillan, M. King, and M. P. Tully, “How to use the nominal group
and Delphi techniques.,” International journal of clinical pharmacy, volume 38,
number 3, pages 655–62, Jun. 2016, issn: 2210-7711. doi: 10.1007/s11096-
016-0257-x. [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
26846316%20http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?
artid=PMC4909789.
[22]
WBI Evaluation Group, “Nominal Group Technique,” Needs assessment knowl-
edge base, 2007. [Online]. Available: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
WBI/Resources/213798-1194538727144/7Final-Nominal_Group_Technique.
pdf.
[23]
C. Okoli and S. D. Pawlowski, “The Delphi method as a research tool: an
example, design considerations and applications,” Information & Management,
volume 42, number 1, pages 15–29, December 2004, issn: 0378-7206. doi: 10.
1016/J.IM.2003.11.002. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/abs/pii/S0378720603001794.
[24]
R. Loo, “The Delphi method: a powerful tool for strategic management,” Polic-
ing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, volume 25,
number 4, pages 762–769, December 2002, issn: 1363-951X. doi: 10.1108/
13639510210450677. [Online]. Available: http://www.emeraldinsight.com/
doi/10.1108/13639510210450677.
[25]
BCG, Digital Acceleration Index, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.bcg.
com/capabilities/technology- digital/digital- acceleration- index.
aspx.
[26]
Deloitte Digital, Digital Maturity Survey, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://
eu.deloittedigital.com/en/content/digital-maturity.
==PAGE:104==
86
Bibliography
[27]
D. Bonnet, A. Deora Puram, J. Buvat, S. KVJ, A. Khadikar, and Digital Trans-
formation Institute, “Organizing for Digital: Why Digital Dexterity Matters,”
Capgemini Consulting, Tech. Rep., 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.
capgemini.com/consulting/wp- content/uploads/sites/30/2017/07/
digital_orgns_cover_08-12.pdf.
[28]
EY, Digital maturity Index (EYDI) for Customer Engagement, 2018. [Online].
Available: http://www.ey.com/in/en/industries/life- sciences/ey-
dgital-maturity-index-for-customer-engagement.
[29]
——, EY Digital Readiness Assessment, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://
digitalreadiness.ey.com/.
[30]
T. Catling, J. Scanlan, and P. Willmott, “Raising your Digital Quotient,”
McKinsey Quarterly, volume June, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.
mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-and-corporate-finance/
our-insights/raising-your-digital-quotient.
[31]
McKinsey and Company, Digital Quotient evaluates four major outcomes, 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/digital-
disruption/raise-your-digital-quotient.
[32]
Adobe Systems Incorporated, “Transforming Digital Marketing: Executive’s
guide to optimization-centric cultures,” Transformation Digital Marketing: Op-
timization, volume May, number Transforming Digital Marketing, 2014. [On-
line]. Available: https://offers.adobe.com/content/dam/offer-manager/
en/na/marketing/Target/50812_digital_transformation_optimization_
centric_cultures_wp_v4.pdf.
[33]
Adobe Target, Optimization Maturity Assessment Self-Assessment Tool. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.adobetargetpro.com/#/target/start.
[34]
Accenture, “Achieving Digital Performance: Time to Rotate to the New,” Accen-
ture consulting, Tech. Rep., 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.accenture.
com / t00010101T000000Z _ _w _ _ / gb - en / _acnmedia / PDF - 30 / Accenture -
Digital-Performance-POV-RD6.pdf#zoom=50.
[35]
——, “Performance Digitale des Entreprises Francaises,” Accenture Digital,
Tech. Rep., 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.accenture.com/t00010101T000000_
_w__/fr-fr/_acnmedia/Accenture/fr-fr/Interactive/digital-performance-
index.pdf.
[36]
Bain and Company, Digital Readiness Assessment, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://www.bain.com/DigitalReadinessSurvey/.
[37]
J. Davis-Peccoud, L.-P. Baculard, G. Caimi, and O. Straehle, “Organizing
for a Digital World,” Bain Brief, volume February, number Bain Insights,
2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.bain.com/publications/articles/
organizing-for-a-digital-world.aspx.
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
87
[38]
KPMG Atlas, Digital Readiness Assessment, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://
atlas.kpmg.de/business-assessments/digital-readiness-assessment.
html.
[39]
KPMG, Digital Readiness Assessment, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.
slideshare.net/BernhardDrSchmalzl/digital- readiness- assessment-
dra-1492.
[40]
P. Behner, M. Ehrhardt, E. Luebben, and F. Riechert, “How a diverse business
is adaptive to Industry 4.0,” Strategy, volume June, number Digital Readiness
in Medtech, pages 10–20, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.strategyand.
pwc.com/media/file/Digital-readiness-in-medtech.pdf.
[41]
Data Management Maturity (DMM), 2018. [Online]. Available: https://cmmiinstitute.
com/data-management-maturity.
[42]
K. Szczepanska-Woszczyna, “The importance of organizational culture for in-
novation in the company,” The University of Dabrowa Gornicza, Tech. Rep.,
2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
269222787_The_importance_of_organizational_culture_for_innovation_
in_the_company.
[43]
G. Hamel and C. Prahalad, “Strategic Intent,” McKinsey Quarterly, volume July-
August, 2005. [Online]. Available: https://hbr.org/2005/07/strategic-
intent.
[44]
C. Johan, J. Alm, and E. Jönsson, “Innovation Culture in Five Dimensions Iden-
tifying Cultural Success Factors and Barriers for Innovation,” [Online]. Avail-
able: http://publications.lib.chalmers.se/records/fulltext/199661/
199661.pdf.
==PAGE:106==
