==PAGE:1==
Gesture Based Input Method for
Wearable Devices
Anders Beck
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Modern technologies has allowed for the opportunity to collect personal data
about human activities related to health. Some activities such as heart rate and
physical activity can be collected passively and fully automated, but collecting
psychological activities requires the user to manually log the data. Tradition-
ally this has been achieved with pen and paper. While modern solution utilizing
smartphones and smartwatches has greatly improved this, there still is a need
to reduce the burden related to self tracking. Therefore this thesis proposes a
solution using a wristband device together with arm gestures for self tracking.
This will allow for tracking psychological activities in the moment, and allowing
the user to rate the severeness on a continues scale similar to a Visual Ana-
logue Scale (VAS). The wristband should be used together with a companion
app that can import, display and export the data collected on the wristband.
The thesis details the design and implementation of this solution. An experi-
ment was designed and conducted to test the implemented solution compared
to digital version of a VAS. In the experiment participants rated shades of grey
and numbers using both the wristband with two diﬀerent gestures and a digital
VAS.
The results showed that the accuracy of the solution was not signiﬁcantly diﬀer-
ent from the digital VAS, when rating shades of grey. When rating numbers the
digital VAS performed signiﬁcantly better. Mapping the results to a 0-10 scale
(resembling a VAS), the mean absolute error using the wristband was within
±1, about 50% of the data points were within ±1 and about 80% of the data
points were within ±2, concluding that the solution is reliable. Comparing data
entry time showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the wristband and digital
VAS.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis detail the design and implementation of a wristband device and
companion app for manual collection of data on subjective experiences using a
gesture based system. An experiment was conducted in order to compare the
performance of the wristband with a touch screen implementation of a Visual
Analogue Scale.
Lyngby, 02-July-2018
Anders Beck
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First I would like to thank my supervisor Jakob Eg Larsen for suggesting me
the topic for this thesis. Furthermore I want to thank him for his guidance,
feedback and engagement throughout this project.
Thanks to everyone that volunteered their time to participate in the experiment.
Thanks to my friends, family and former colleagues at IBM for support and their
feedback to this project. A special thanks to my friends and former colleagues
Morten Due Christiansen and Alexander Lillelund for all their help and feedback
in the development process.
Last but not least I would like to thank my girlfriend Julia for all her help,
support and patience with me throughout this project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Reducing the Burden of Self Tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Long Term Use of Self Logging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Comparing Ratings of Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Authors Previous Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Relation to This Thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Analysis
13
3.1
Self Tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Usage of VAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Orientation in 3D Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Inertial Measurement Unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Design
19
4.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
From Gesture to Value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.1
Orientation of the Arm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.2
Problems with Yaw . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.2.3
Mapping Euler Angles to a 0-10 Scale . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Functionalities and Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Implementation
25
5.1
Proof of Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
Companion App
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Performance Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Experiment
35
6.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
Apparatus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2.1
Essential Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2.2
Tablet App . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2.3
Other
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.4
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.5
Pilot Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7
Results and Discussion
51
7.1
Accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.1.1
Distribution and Scatters of Stimuli and Responses . . . .
54
7.1.2
Error Distribution and Variance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.2
Task Completion Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.3
Post Experiment Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
8
Future Work
69
8.1
Improvement to the Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
8.2
Case Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
8.3
Improvements to Companion App
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
8.4
Investigating the Wrist’s Critical Point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
9
Conclusion
73
A Survey
75
B Outlier Visualization
79
C Code
87
C.1 Proof of Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
C.2 Companion App
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
C.3 Experiment App
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
C.4 Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
D Data
89
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
ix
E Experiment App Screens
91
Bibliography
101
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Many patients suﬀer with a chronic illness or disorder (e.g. chronic pain[28],
migraines[15], anxiety[7], panic attacks[8] or PTSD[34] just to name a few). To
better treat these illnesses it is important to ﬁgure out what can trigger an
episode (episode meaning the negative eﬀect of the illness, e.g. a headache if
suﬀering from migraines), this can be done by tracking when and where episodes
happen in order to look for patterns. The problem with these illnesses is that
their episodes require to be tracked manually by the patient, since no technology
yet exist that can measure these on its own. Providing a way to accurately
gather when patients are experiencing the eﬀects of their conditions would be
valuable information that could help treat their illness, or at least help to prevent
scenarios that can trigger episodes.
Manual tracking has traditionally been done with pen and paper, either in the
moment or as a daily diary where the patient by the end of the day will log
their experiences for the whole day. The problem with daily diaries are that
they introduce memory recall bias[35], which causes issues with the reliability
of data reported by patients. Thus it is important to gather data on patients
when they are exposed the eﬀects of their illness.
In recent times diﬀerent
diﬀerent solutions have been created trying to improve this, using an app on
either a smartphone or smartwatch eliminates memory recall bias by enabling
the patient to log what they are experiencing in the moment. At ﬁrst this seems
like an ideal solution, but one problem becomes apparent and that is burden
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
of use.
Using a tracking app on a smartphone requires the user to get the
smartphone out of their pocket, turn it on, unlock it, ﬁnd the app, open it and
then log the event. While this is a bit easier using a smartwatch since it in it
natures is always at your wrist, it still requires at least a couple of interactions
and requires the user’s full attention while interacting with the smartwatch. It
is of great importance to minimize the burden of logging experiences, and often
the simplest solutions are shown to be the most eﬀective.
An example has been a “smartbutton” which is a wristband device equipped
with a single button, pressing it will log a single time stamp[21]. The interaction
burden with such a device is very minimal, and it doesn’t require the user’s full
attention, since it can be done whit out looking at the device. The downside
of this solution is that it only allow to log when an event occurred and not
the severeness. Another problem is how to measure and compare psychological
events, in the medical ﬁeld a Visual Analogue Scale (VAS)1.1 is used to measure
such events by letting the patient rate the experience on a continuous scale from
0 to 10. The meaning of the scale is then described to ﬁt the domain, most used
is the pain scale as seen in Figure 1.1, where 0 is no pain and 10 is the worst
imaginably levels of pain. The VAS can easily be used in many other domains
simply by changing the explanation for the scale, for example to use with panic
attacks 0 would be no panic attack and 10 would be worst imaginably panic
attack.
Figure 1.1: VAS Pain Scale Ruler[2]
The proposed solution shall allow users to track whenever they experience events
related to their illness. It need to be simple to use in order to minimize the
burden of use. It should be able to track the severeness of the events in a way
that resembles a VAS. The solution proposed in this thesis will be to create
a wristband device that using gestures will map the rotation of the wrist or
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Thesis Goals
3
the elevation of the arm to a 0-10 scale. When the button on the wristband
is pressed it will log the information based on the gesture. A companion app
will be created to collect the data from the device and display the results to the
user.
1.1
Thesis Goals
In this thesis the design and implementation of a wristband device and compan-
ion app for manual collection of data on subjective experiences using a gesture
based system will be described. It aims to minimize the burden compared to
other solutions and it aims to be reliable. An experiment will be conducted in
order to compare the performance of the wristband with a digital version of a
VAS.
1.2
Contributions
The focus of this thesis has been to design, implement and test two gesture
based input methods to track the severeness of psychological experiences. The
work of this thesis has resulted in the following contributions:
1. Designed a system for tracking psychological experiences and their severe-
ness on a continuous scale
2. Implemented said system using a wristband device and Android app
3. Created a method to map gestures of wrist and arm orientation to a con-
tinuous scale
4. Designed an experiment for comparing said gestures to a VAS
5. Conducted said experiment which results demonstrated the reliability of
the implemented system
6. Stated further problems worth investigating and possible improvements to
the gesture based input technique
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
1.3
Thesis Structure
This thesis is structured as follows. Chapter 2 detail the some of the most related
work and it relates to this thesis. Chapter 3 analysis the key concepts for this
thesis that will form the foundation for this thesis. Chapter 4 details the design
process for creating the proposed solution. Chapter 5 details the implementa-
tion of the designed solution. Chapter 6 presents and details an experiment
conducted in order to compare the proposed solution to a digital VAS. Chapter
7 presents the results collected results and discusses their meaning. Chapter 8
describes potential future work that could improve both the designed solution
and experiment. Finally Chapter 9 concludes the thesis.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Related Work
With the popularity of smartphones and smartwatches a lot of new possibilities
has been made possible on the world of self tracking. This has in turn created
a lot of research related to the topic. This Chapter will go through the most
relevant work that related to this thesis, describing the work that has been done
by others and how it relates to this thesis.
2.1
Reducing the Burden of Self Tracking
Self tracking can solve the problem of memory recall bias, by letting the user
register observation in the moment (or very close to) they occur. But requiring
the user to self register observations introduces a burden of the work involved in
doing so. As mentioned traditionally this has been done with pen and paper, but
with the invention of smartphones and smartwatches this burden can be reduces.
The work of Ponnada et al., 2017[29] investigate the interruption burden with
both smartphones and smartwatches when used with both regular EMA and
µEMA. The diﬀerence between EMA and µEMA is that EMA will prompt the
user less than µEMA, but requires the user to answer several questions back to
back, where µEMA will instead prompt the user much more frequently, but only
require the user to answer one question, which can be answered on the same
screen showing the question.
==PAGE:18==
6
Related Work
In a prior 4 week pilot study Ponnada et al.[29] found that smartwatch µEMA
demonstrated higher response rates and participants reported a lower perceived
burden than smartphone EMA, even though the interruption rate for smart-
watch µEMA was 8 times higher than smartphone EMA. In a new 4 week study
they gathered data based on a smartwatch EMA in order to determine if the
previous result where due to the fact that the data was gathered on a watch,
or if it in fact was due to the µEMA. Their results showed that there were no
statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in compliance, completion, and ﬁrst-prompt
response rates observed between smartphone EMA and smartwatch EMA. But
smartwatch µEMA response rates where signiﬁcantly higher than smartwatch
EMA. Their results suggest that the higher compliance and lower perceived bur-
den is more likely to do with µEMA than the device itself and that compliance
with EMA may not improve simply by changing the device.
The work of Ponnada et al. only looked into EMA where the device prompts
the user for information, not situations where the user registers an observation.
In his thesis Kamiński[20] investigates how to enable self logging with diﬀerent
forms of input: a binary sample, selection input form a list, VAS and a numerical
scale. He designed and implemented all of the input methods onto a smartwatch,
where on the watch face each method input method could be selected. In Figure
2.1 we can see his design, the watch face has a shortcut for each input method.
In Figure 2.2 we see how the interaction occurs, and that it takes 1-3 touches
to log the desired data depending on the input method.
Figure 2.1: Design for self logging on a smartwatch by Kamiński[20, p.23]
For comparison Kamiński also implemented a similar design on a smartphone
following the Android material design guide[17] and conducted an experiment
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Reducing the Burden of Self Tracking
7
Figure 2.2: Interaction for self logging on a smartwatch by Kamiński[20, p.23]
where he compared the two devices performance (interaction time, lower is bet-
ter). His result showed a reduction in the user interaction time by approximately
30% on average, thus successfully reducing the burden related to self logging.
Beside his experiment Kamiński also had himself and to others use his design
to collect data about their daily life (sneezing, skin itching and water consump-
tion) over a 13-21 week period. What he found was a high compliance rate, all
though it is a fairly biased test, since all three participants where involved in
the project and are working with self logging technologies on a daily basis.
Even though Kamiński’s design was a success, there persist an underlying prob-
lem with smartwatches; that they still require the user to user to activate them
(often by tapping the screen several times) and then the user has to look at
the screen to touch the right section to register the input.
Dam-Jensen[16]
investigates this issue in his thesis.
He introduces three ways of performing
self logging, all using a “smartbutton” (wireless button connected to smart-
phone/smartwatch) to achieve a display-less logging system. The three input
method that Dam-Jensen designed was:
1. Hold Button: Measure the time the button is held down.
2. Rotate Lower Arm: Using the built in gyroscope in the smartbutton, the
diﬀerence in rotation from when the button was pressed to it was released
is measured. In order to achieve a measurement the user would hold the
button in the hand, rotate the lower arm to a neutral position, hold down
the button, rotate the lower arm to the end position and release the button.
3. Rotate Upper Arm Around Elbow: Similar to the previous method, but
instead of rotating the lower arm, the user would raise/lower his/hers
upper arm around the elbow.
==PAGE:20==
8
Related Work
For a comparison baseline method a standard VAS was used. In order to com-
pare his three methods to the VAS Dam-Jensen conducted an experiment based
on the work of Matejka et al.[23], where participants are asked to rate a color
between white and black on a grey scale where the colors are equally spaced out
on the CIELAB color space[14] (more on this later). His results showed that
there where no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in accuracy between his three designed
input methods compared and to the baseline, thus meaning that all three meth-
ods are viable and could be used for self logging, and in their simple nature can
reduce the burden on the user.
2.2
Long Term Use of Self Logging
As mentioned Ponnada et al.[29] conducted two four week studies with EMA
and µEMA and Kamiński conducted a even longer 13-21 week use case where
three people used his design to track daily activities. Both Ponnada et al. and
Kamiński’s work show great potential for real use, but none of them utilizes a
device similar to that of Dam-Jensen’s work, where there is no screen and only
a single button for registering observations.
In a case study Larsen et al.[21] investigated the real life use case of a novel de-
vice for self logging. They had a Danish veteran suﬀering from PTSD equipped
with a “smartbutton”, that when pressed will store a time stamp. By connecting
a smartphone the data can be transferred from the smartbutton to a data ﬁle
for further analysis. The veteran was then instructed to press the button when-
ever he experienced a speciﬁc “trigger event” related to his PTSD (the “bodily
sensation” was chosen after a two-hour assessment interview together with his
therapist). The veteran wore the smartbutton for 100 days, pressing the button
whenever he experienced the speciﬁc bodily sensation.
The results showed that the veteran had a high compliance, actively using the
device throughout the 100 days (due to a technical issue no data was collected
during the second week). The data collected revealed patterns that explained
why/when the veteran’s events would be triggered, which would not have re-
vealed itself from the conversational assessment. In other words, not only was
it a success from a technical and usability standpoint, but it also succeeded in
bringing valuable new information to the treatment process.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Comparing Ratings of Behavior
9
2.3
Comparing Ratings of Behavior
When developing new methods for self logging it is important to access the fea-
sibility of these methods. As mentioned Kamiński did this simply by comparing
the user interaction time, while Dam-Jensen did a more comprehensive compar-
ison by looking into how precise the data recorded with his designs compared
to the VAS. He did so by having his participants rate shades of grey with the
diﬀerent input methods. That experiment was inspired by the work of Matejka
et al.[23] where they investigate the bias of diﬀerent slider designs. In order to
do so they base their experiment on the work of Borg and Borg[12] that ex-
tensively studied using a “scale of blackness” as a stimulus and concluded that
it serves as a good test of general rating behaviour, and further more it pro-
vides a truth value (the color displayed) which can be compared to the response
rating from the participant. Matejka et al. designed their experiment to test
severely diﬀerent slider designs with various combinations of labels, tick marks
and bands. In Figure 2.3 a design with 2 labels and 5 ticks is shown. Matejka et
al. recruited participants via Amazon Mechanical Turk[6]. Participants where
then showed one of the 50 shades of grey (as seen in Figure 2.4), then asked to
rate the color from white to blakc using the slider. This process was repeated
50 times so each participants was exposed to all the shades of grey (in random
order), this was then repeated until the participants had been exposed to each
shade of grey 4 times, 200 trials in total. Each participant was only exposed to
one slider design, and was afterwards excluded to participate further.
Figure 2.3: Slider bias experiment by Matejka et al.[23] with 2 labels and 5
ticks
With their results they investigated the bias for each slider design by looking at
the distribution of responses and calculating a “smoothness” value representing
the bias as well as precision and response time. Their results showed that sliders
==PAGE:22==
10
Related Work
Figure 2.4: 50 shades of grey used by Matejka et al.[23]
with ticks introduces the most bias towards the tick marks, followed by sliders
with many labels and combination of the two.
Banded sliders showed only
small amount of bias and sliders with only two labels showed the least amount
of bias. The higher amount of both ticks and labels resulted in higher precision
and the average reaction dime only diﬀered by one second between the fastest
and slowest designs.
2.4
Authors Previous Work
In a previous project the author created an app for self tracking a person’s
mood[10]. The app’s main screen had 11 buttons, labeled from 0-10, with the
added text on “Very bad mood” on 0, “Neutral bad mood” on 5 and “Very good
mood” on 10 and a button labeled “Mood history” as seen on the left in Figure
2.5. When one of the buttons from 0-10 is pressed the “mood value” and a time
stamp is saved. Pressing the “Mood history” will take the user to the second
screen (seen on the right in Figure 2.5) and a scroolable list of all recorded moods
are shown, with the latest entry on top together with a button for sharing the
mood history (export to a CSV ﬁle and send via email) and a button to delete
the mood history.
The focus oﬀthat small project was on the implementation of the app, so no
investigation went in to the actual use of the app (beside the author testing it
on himself), but it was prioritized that the app was as quick and easy to use as
possible. With the limitation of being a smartphone app (not a widget similar)
this design seems to one of the most simple and efective solutions, it enables
the user to quickly register events, since the ﬁrst screen seen when the app is
opened is the main screen. But it does illustrate the limitation of smartphone
apps, comparing it to the designs of Dam-Jensen it is quite clear that the time
and burden of getting your phone out of your pocket, turning it on/unlocking
it, ﬁnding and opening the app before ﬁnally being apple to register a input is
much greater than the time and burden involved with for example rotating your
lower arm and pressing a button.
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Relation to This Thesis
11
Figure 2.5: Mood Tracker app. Register a mood on the left & mood history
on the right[10]
2.5
Relation to This Thesis
The work of Ponnada et al.[29], Kamiński[20] and Dam-Jensen[16] all point to-
wards the beneﬁt reducing the burdens. Their work has been a great inspiration
for this thesis, together with Larsen et al. work showing the real world beneﬁt of
in situ measurements. This thesis will further investigate two of Dam-Jensen’s
designs, the “Rotate Lower Arm” and “Rotate Upper Arm Around Elbow” meth-
ods, developing these methods a bit further and then comparing them to a VAS
by a “rating of blackness” experiment. And the authors previous work has shown
that even a well designed smartphone app still creates a lot of burden for the
user when comparing it to the more novel designs of Dam-Jensen[16].
==PAGE:24==
12
Related Work
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Analysis
The previous Chapter described the most relevant work related to this thesis.
This Chapter will analyze and describe the key concepts that will be used in
this thesis.
3.1
Self Tracking
Experience Sampling Method (ESM) and Ecological Momentary Assessment
(EMA) are the research methodologies that refer to the usage of self tracking[22].
What deﬁnes these methods are the use of collecting real world data in the
moment, whether that be psychological (thoughts, feelings, mood, pain etc) or
physical (food/drinks consumed, sneezing, cramps etc). Traditionally this had
been achieved with diaries, which could have the same set of questions printed
on each page designed to collect the desired data. In modern times digital diaries
have been created, for example as apps on smartphones and smartwatches. The
beneﬁt of these methods is that the prevent recall bias, since the data is collected
in the moment (or shortly after) compared to daily diaries where a user by the
end of the day has to think back and recall the data. The more time passed
between the event and the time the data is collected, the larger the risk of recall
bias will be, and the data can even be forgotten.
==PAGE:26==
14
Analysis
When collecting data that requires active self tracking, there will always be a
burden involved. The simpler the data is to collect, the smaller the burden can
be. For example tracking each time a person sneezes only requires a time stamp
which can be collected by wearing a smartbutton like the one made by Larsen
et al.[21]. On the other hand, if tracking the pain levels of a patient, the patient
needs a way to input that on scale preferably a VAS. One solution has been
to create a digital VAS on a smartphone or smartwatch, similar to the work of
Kamiński[20]. Compared to the smartbutton, this solution has a much higher
burden, the user must turn the display on, navigate the software to input the
value and it requires a user’s full attention to execute. With the improvements
Dam-Jensen[16] introduced, the burden was lowered to only have the user press,
hold and release a button while doing an arm gesture.
As a evolution to the design of Dam-Jensen[16], this thesis will introduce a self
tracking method where the user will follow the same gestures (described later
in this Chapter) and press a button only once (not press, hold and release).
This new method will reduce the burden even further compared to the other
mentioned methods.
3.2
Usage of VAS
In Figure 1.1 we see one of the VAS rulers that is sold to and used by hospitals to
measure the perceived pain level of patients, while they come in diﬀerent designs
their principals are the same. On one side of the ruler we see 5-6 faces with
expression going from happy to discomfort to sad and crying, these expression
are meant to illustrate the amount of pain and are often displayed together with
a text description explaining the feeling of pain as seen in Figure 3.1. On the
other side of the VAS ruler there is regular ruler of 10cm (sometimes shown as
100mm instead). On the ruler there is a slider, the patient will be shown the
side of the ruler with the faces, and asked to adjust the slider to ﬁt the level
of pain they experience, on the backside the slider will indicate a position on
the ruler from 0 (no pain) to 10 (most pain), this position is then registered
by a doctor or nurse as the pain level. The VAS is not limited to measuring
pain, it can be used for any subjective characteristics or attitudes that cannot
be directly measured, for example mood, annoyance, anxiety, but the measuring
of pain is the most common use of VAS.
The VAS can be compared to the Likert scale and Borg scale[18], but what
makes the VAS diﬀerent is that it is continuous where the others are discrete.
Evidence show that VAS have better metrical characteristics compared to dis-
crete scales and therefore a wider range of statistical methods can be applied to
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Orientation in 3D Space
15
Figure 3.1: Example of faces and descriptions on VAS for measuring pain[27]
the measurements[31].
Despite its beneﬁts VAS are a burden to use, even digital version since the
require a screen and attention. It is therefore interesting to investigate if other
solutions with less burden can perform equally or better than the VAS.
3.3
Orientation in 3D Space
Before creating a device that translates the orientation of the hand to a scale,
one must ﬁrst understand orientation in 3D space. We can rotate an object
around each of its 3 axis, these actions are refereed to as pitch, roll and yaw. In
Figure 3.2 we see an illustrations of these rotations performed on a airplane.
Pitch is rotation around the axis across the airplane, this rotation can be felt
during takeoﬀand climbing (shortly after the wheels lift of the ground) of a air-
plane, where the pitch is dramatically changed from 0o (parallel to the ground)
to ∼15-20o[9].
Roll is rotation around the axis along the airplane, this rotation can sometimes
be felt when an airplane has to perform a sharp turn and then rolls a little to
one side so one wing tip is higher in the air than the other (when airplanes turn
the yaw will also change), this rotational movement where the airplane rolls over
is the roll axis.
Yaw is the rotation around the last axis, the same axis you would measure the
height of airplane on. This rotation is barely felt in a airplane, but it is this
orientation that will change the direction of the airplane, from lets say facing
north to facing west by rotating 90o to the left (from the pilots perspective).
Getting the orientation of an object is then a matter of measuring the pitch,
==PAGE:28==
16
Analysis
roll and yaw, there a diﬀerent ways to do this and they will be discusses a little
later, for now we will measure each rotation in degrees and deﬁne the orientation
of 0o pitch, 0o roll and 0o yaw to be an object that is level in both directions
and facing north. A full rotation in one axis is 360o and would leave the object
in the same position as it started out. This deﬁnition is very similar to Euler
angles witch will be discussed further.
Figure 3.2: Pitch, roll and yaw of an airplane (edited version of ﬁgure found
online[1])
3.4
Inertial Measurement Unit
In order to measure the orientation we will mount a device on the wrist which
contains an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) from which the orientation can
be read. Most IMUs are equipped with accelerometers, gyroscopes and mag-
netometers and oﬀers either raw sensor values or the calculated Euler angles
and quaternions for absolute orientation. In it self the raw sensor values can’t
provide the orientation, since it measures change for example the gyroscope
alone will measure the rate of rotation, which in it self can’t lead to an absolute
orientation. But together the sensors provide enough data that this can be cal-
culated, such an algorithm is called Sensor Fusion and is illustrated in Figure
3.3. Each IMU will have a diﬀerent Sensor Fusion algorithm, and exactly was
goes on is often a trade secret, but the pricnipal is as follows. The IMU will
use its magnetometer to ﬁnd north and use this to calibrate yaw, using its ac-
celerometers the IMU can measure gravity and calibrate both pitch and roll. As
a result of this yaw is measured from 0o to 360o independently (like a compass),
pitch is measured from -180o to 180o degrees (0o to 180o is pointed towards the
ground and -180o to 0o is pointed towards the sky) and roll is measured from
-90o to 90o. Roll is dependent on pitch, which is why it only has a span of 180o
instead of the full 360o. All together this lets the IMU calculate the absolute
orientation. These calculations also requires the IMU to be calibrated and if
not done correctly this can lead to issues, such as drift, where the orientation
values will change even though the IMU sits completely still, this will be further
investigated in Chapter 5.
==PAGE:29==
3.4 Inertial Measurement Unit
17
Figure 3.3: Model of Sensor Fusion algorithm (icons taken from Bosch[13])
The most common ways to represent absolute orientation is using either Euler
angles[32] or quaternions[19]. Euler angles describes the orientation by angles of
the 3 axis, this is the most intuitive approach but it has it downfall. When two
of the gimbals in a gyroscope align into a parallel conﬁguration, then one of the
three degrees of freedom is lost, this is called Gimbal lock[36]. When Gimbal lock
occurs changes in the locked axis cannot be measured, in order to ﬁx it the axis
which aligned itself with the other must be changed to get out of alignment and
thus getting back the lost degree of freedom. This problem is often experienced
in animation, where by deﬁning movement only by total change in the three axis
can cause strange and unintended results. The solution is to use quaternions,
which is a mathematical number system which can represent the orientation of
an object. Not getting into the math behind quaternions, but they solve the
gimbal problem and quaternions can be transformed into Euler angles. Luckily
when measuring the angles for the arm movements described gimbal lock does
not occur, since the diﬀerent axis does not come close to alignment in any
position within the described movement.
==PAGE:30==
18
Analysis
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
Design
This Chapter will describe the design for the proposed solution, in the end a
list of functionalities and requirements will be created which will be the basic
for the implementation in the next Chapter.
4.1
Overview
The solution that has been proposed is to use the gestures deﬁned in Figure
4.2 and 4.3 instead of using a VAS. The orientation for each gesture should be
translated to a value on a scale from zero to ten. To achieve this a wristband
equipped with an IMU and a button will be used, the user will use one of the
gestures and the press of the button to input the desired value. In order to
view the data the wristband will be accompanied by a smartphone app. The
companion app will display the logged data and oﬀer the possibility to export
it to a data ﬁle. This design is illustrated in Figure 4.1.
Since the main focus of this report is to compare the gesture based input method
to a VAS, the approach to the design of the companion app will be to create a
Minimum Viable Product (MVP)[30]. This means that it will focus a minimal
set of features, just enough to be use able, like vise the user interface (UI) will
be kept simple.
==PAGE:32==
20
Design
Figure 4.1: Wristband device with sensors and a button for registering obser-
vation. Smartphone to import, display and export the data
4.2
From Gesture to Value
In order to convert a gesture to a value on a scale we must ﬁrst deﬁne said
gestures and then create function to map their measurement to the preferred
scale. We shall start by deﬁning the gestures based on the orientation of the
arm.
4.2.1
Orientation of the Arm
With the orientation deﬁned as the rotation of the three axis, we need to trans-
late this into movement of the arm. In Figure 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4 the movement to
adjust pitch, roll and yaw is described.
Pitch is changed by rotating the arm around the elbow, resulting in the lower
arm being raised/lowered. The angle between the lower arm and table (hori-
zontal plane) is then the measurement for this rotation.
Roll is changed by rotating the wrist/lower arm, the angle between the back of
the hand and table is then the measurement for this rotation.
Yaw is changed by bending the lower arm the elbow, keeping it level with the
==PAGE:33==
4.2 From Gesture to Value
21
Figure 4.2: The movement for adjusting pitch by rotating the arm around the
elbow
Figure 4.3: The movement for adjusting roll by rotating the wrist/lower arm
table, thus changing the direction of the lower arm. The angle of direction is
then the measurement for this rotation.
Of course all three rotation can be achieved in other ways, for example yaw can
be changed by turning the entire body to face another directions. But for the
purpose of this thesis we look at these motions because they are done in front
of one self, can be executed both while sitting at a table (for best reference)
or while standing, and for all these motions the body itself also is a reference
point, where turning your entire body would require another reference point to
make sense of the scale.
==PAGE:34==
22
Design
Figure 4.4: The movement for adjusting yaw by rotating the lower arm around
the elbow (note the arm is ﬂat/horizontal on the table)
4.2.2
Problems with Yaw
As described when measuring absolute orientation, then the magnetic north is
used as the calibration point, meaning that 0o yaw will be pointing north, 90o
pointing east and so on. Both pitch and roll is relative to the ground (horizontal
plane), therefore no matter the yaw orientation you can get an absolute reading
based on one point within the arm movement described earlier, e.g. you can
rotate your wrist to a desired angle and take one measurement and know the
orientation in that axis.
This can’t be done for yaw, it would require that
you either ﬁrst align yourself to a speciﬁc direction (north for example), and
then bend the lower arm out in front to the desired angle, or it requires two
measurement (one in the starting position, and one in the desired position)
in order to calculate the diﬀerence, and achieve the desired angle.
For this
reason using the yaw orientation will not be investigated further, since it would
introduce a higher burden for the user.
4.2.3
Mapping Euler Angles to a 0-10 Scale
We have now deﬁned the two gestures as seen in Figure 4.3 and 4.2, we shall refer
to them as wrist and arm gesture. We will assume that performing both gestures
will have a linear relation between the movement and the Euler angle measured.
As mentioned the roll angle will always be between -90o and 90o depending if
the orientation clock or counter clock wise compared to 0o (horizontal). To map
the values to a 0-10 scale the absolute value is divided by 9, e.g 90o and -90o
will become 10, 45o and -45o will become 5, 25o and -25o will become 2.7778
etc. Mathematically this can be expressed with the function seen in Equation
4.1 where sv is the scaled value from 0-10 and ra is the Euler angle for the roll
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Functionalities and Requirements
23
axis.
sv (ra) = abs (ra)
9
(4.1)
Equation 4.1: Mapping roll angle (ra) to scaled value (sv)
A consequence of this mapping is that if the wristband is turned pass the vertical
position the scaled value will begin to decrease. This means that the user won’t
achieve a 10 rating simply by turning the wrist way beyond the vertical position.
A diﬀerent solution could be made to detect when the wristband pass the vertical
position and set the scaled value at 10. It can be debated as to which solution
is the greater, but by letting the scaled value decrease will force the user to get
a better sense of the scale and won’t allow “lazy” inputs.
Mapping the pitch angle needs to take into account that the roll value will be
between -180o and 180o. The solution is to create a function that maps the value
diﬀerently depending if the absolute pitch angle is greater than 90, basically ﬁrst
mapping the -180o to 180o range down to a -90o to 90o degree range, and then
mapping it to the scaled value. The function in Equation 4.2 will express this
where sv is the scaled value from 0-10 and pa is the Euler angle for the pitch
axis.
sv (pa) =
(
90−(abs(pa)−90)
9
if abs(pa) > 90
abs(pa)
9
otherwise
(4.2)
Equation 4.2: Mapping pitch angle (pa) to scaled value (sv)
4.3
Functionalities and Requirements
With the general outline for the wristband and companion app laid out, we can
create a list of functionalities and requirements that shall be implemented in
order to create a MVP.
• Log data: The user should be able to log observation using the wristband,
this should be possible to do independently from the companion app
• Import data: The companion app shall import the logged data from the
wristband
==PAGE:36==
24
Design
• Display data: The companion app shall display the logged data (scaled
value and time stamp)
• Export data: The companion app shall be able to export the logged data
to a data ﬁle for further investigation
• Simple solution: It should be simple and easy to perform all of the
above actions.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 5
Implementation
This Chapter describes the implementation process of the design from the pre-
vious chapter. All non trivial issues will be described for both the wristband
and companion app. The end of the Chapter will shorty describe the testing
process that was done during the implementation.
5.1
Proof of Concept
Before the actual implementation of the design from the previous Chapter, a
Proof of Concept (PoC) was created. This had several purposed, most impor-
tantly to see if it was at all possible to have at least some sense of the scale when
performing the gestures. The component listed bellow was connected together
as shown in Figure 5.1 and 5.2, the ﬁnished PoC can be seen in Figure 5.3.
• Adafruit Feather M0 Adalogger[4] with a 350mAh 3.7V battery
• Adafruit 9-DOF Absolute Orientation IMU Fusion Breakout - BNO055[3]
• Flora Wearable Bluefruit LE Module[5]
• A push button
==PAGE:38==
26
Implementation
• A 100kΩresistor
The Feather M0 Adalogger was controlled by an Arduino script, that after
establishing a bluetooth connection waits for the button to be pressed. When
the button is pressed the Euler angles from the IMU is read, and transmitted
over the bluetooth connection, the LED is connected to the switch so it will light
up as long as the button is pressed. A simple GUI (as seen in Figure 5.6) was
created using a Python script, that connected to the bluetooth module and when
receiving data displayed the raw values and the mapped scaled value between
zero and ten using the mapping function seen in Equation 4.1 (the scaled value
was rounded for simplicity). Only the wrist gesture was tested using the PoC,
if the PoC proved the wrist gesture to be possible the arm gesture would too,
since the wrist gesture is much ﬁner than the arm gesture. Both the Arduino
and Python scrips are linked to in Appendix C.1.
Figure 5.1: Wiring for of the proof of concept. Battery not shown
Figure 5.2: Schematic for the proof of concept. Battery not shown
The ﬁrst thing that was tested using the PoC was sensor drift, since it was
important to prevent this. A test was preformed logging the Euler angles with
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Prototype
27
Figure 5.3: Proof of concept. Components from left to right on the bread-
board: Bluefruit LE Module, Feather M0 Adalogger and battery,
IMU Fusion Breakout - BNO055, push button and led.
Coins
below for scale (5dkk, 0.5e & 0.25$)
and without calibration while the IMU sat completely still. Once every minute
the Euler angles was read from the IMU and logged to a ﬁle. Two trials where
run, one for nine hours and one for twelve hours without and with calibration
respectively. The results can be seen in Figure 5.4 and 5.5, we see that without
calibration the sensor drifts and the Euler angles change quite dramatically
over time, while with calibration the Euler angles only had minor change. This
concluded that with proper calibration sensor drift would not be an issue.
The PoC was then tested by strapping it to the back of the lower arm using
rubber bands, then moving the arm to diﬀerent positions using the wrist gesture
and pressing the button. It was validated that the concept worked, and it was
possible to input diﬀerent values using the gesture. The question still remained
how precise it was. At this point the author thought that this concept would
only be precise enough to be used on a three point scale and would not be able
to compete with a VAS.
5.2
Prototype
With the PoC being a success the design from Chapter 4 could be implemented.
The components used for the PoC could in theory be rearranged and soldered
==PAGE:40==
28
Implementation
Figure 5.4: Reading the Euler angles from the BNO055 IMU[3] without cali-
bration
Figure 5.5: Reading the Euler angles from the BNO055 IMU[3] with calibra-
tion
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Prototype
29
Figure 5.6: PoC GUI. Top left shows the data mapped to the 0-10 scale. Top
right shows the raw data and calibration. Bottom shows a debug
log
together into a more compact design, but in practice it would be quite bulky
for a wristband device. Instead a small device called “MetaMotionR” created
by mbientlab[26] was used. The device is roughly the same size as a regular
wrist watch, although thicker, and is packed with sensors, most importantly an
IMU with the same Sensor Fusion algorithm as the BNO055. The MetaMotionR
is also equipped with a push button and has Low Energy Bluetooth built in,
making it an excellent hardware choice for this implementation.
The MetaMotionR must be programmed using mbientlab’s API, available for
several platforms[25]. Since the design all ready requires a companion app for
the wristband the API for Android will be used. The MetaMotionR has 8MB
of ﬂash memory which can be used to store commands and log data, it allows
for more than 200.000 log entries when logging Euler angles, which should be
==PAGE:42==
30
Implementation
Figure 5.7: MetaMotionR by mbientlab[26]
more than enough for this use case. The MetaMotionR is programmed to run
the Sensor Fusion algorithm and whenever the button us pressed it will log the
current orientation, turn its LED on and vibrate to give user feedback. It was
considered to use the vibration motor to give varied feedback dependent on the
value logged, but the vibration motor doesn’t oﬀer much customization, only
the time interval can be customized, and if the vibration is any shorter than
half a second it might not vibrate, therefore this idea was discarded for this
implementation.
When the companion app connects to the MetaMotionR the logged data can be
imported over the app and is afterwards deleted from the MetaMotionR to free
up space for future data entries. Beside storing the Euler angles each data entry
has a time stamp. The time on the MetaMotionR is synchronized whenever it
connects to a smartphone. The Euler angles are measured with three decimals
precision, which is much ﬁner than the precision that can be achieved by using
the gestures. One ﬂaw with the MetaMotionR is that logged entries and the
commands are stored in the ﬂash memory, which requires power, this means that
if the MetaMotionR runs of power all logged entries will be lost, and it needs to
connect to the companion app before it can be used to log entries again. The
battery life of the MetaMotionR will be explored later in this Chapter.
5.3
Companion App
Following the requirements from Section 4.3 the companion was implemented.
The app was build upon mbientlab’s Android tutorial “starter app”[24]. The
starter app handles the bluetooth connectivity (searching for devices and con-
nected), beside this the rest was left to be implemented. As explained the app
programs the MetaMotionR, this happens every time the device connects to
the app. The MetaMotionR is programmed to turn on its LED, log the Euler
angles (saved to on board memory), vibrate the motor and turn the LED oﬀ
again every time the button is pressed. Once programmed the MetaMotionR
==PAGE:43==
5.4 Performance Testing
31
can run independently.
The app itself consist of three buttons, one to import, share and delete data.
The largest part of the screen is reserved for displaying the data in a scroolable
list, with the latest entry on top. When the data is imported from the device the
Euler angles get mapped to the scaled value, this value together with the Euler
angles, time stamps and battery percentage of the MetaMotionR are saved to
internal ﬁle (in CSV format). The scaled values are displayed in the app together
with its time stamp and battery percentage. The scaled value is color coded
from green (low values) to yellow (middle values) to red (high values) as seen
in Figure 5.8. The color coding was implemented using HTML formatting and
simply looking at a color table to map the scaled value to colors based so 0.0-
0.99 gets the greenest color, 1.0-1.99 gets the next shade of green an so on (if
no scaled value was recorded the color is assigned to blue).
After data has been imported it is deleted from the MetaMotionR. The “Delete
Data” button lets the user delete the data that has been imported to the app,
when pressed a conﬁrmation dialogue appears to prevent accidental deletion. If
conﬁrmed the app will delete the internal ﬁle containing the data. The “Share
Data” button lets the user export the data via. email. When pressed the app
creates a copy of the internal ﬁle to external storage, an intent is then made
to create an email with the ﬁle attached. The email can then be send and the
attached data can be examined in a spreadsheet or other tool. Lastly the app
has a toggle switch labeled “Time Only”. The default conﬁguration is to have
this toggle oﬀ, in this state the MetaMotionR behaves as described. If the toggle
is on the MetaMotionR is programmed into a “Battery Saver” mode, where the
Sensor Fusion will be turned oﬀ, and therefore Euler angles and scaled values
wont be logged. Data entries made in this state will be listed with “–” instead
of the scaled value. This mode was implemented after it was discovered that
the battery life of the MetaMotionR didn’t live up to expectations, more on this
later. The ﬁnished app can be seen in Figure 5.8. The code used to display,
share and delete the data in the companion app was based on the code from the
authors previous project “Mood Tracker”[10], but has been heavily modiﬁed.
5.4
Performance Testing
The performance of the MetaMotionR and the companion app was tested through-
out the implementation process, this was done to ensure that it worked as in-
tended. The ﬁrst problem that was discovered was related to Sensor Fusion
module of the MetaMotionR. Using it the ﬁrst approach was to only start the
algorithm when the button was pressed, measure the Euler angles and then
==PAGE:44==
32
Implementation
Figure 5.8: Companion app. Main screen on the left, Delete Data in the mid-
dle & Share Data on the right
turn the algorithm oﬀwaiting for the next button press. The problem turned
out to be that the Sensor Fusion algorithm needed a short time to “catch up”
before it could be used, which resulted in the readings not being accurate, but
a little delayed. Solving this problem required the Sensor Fusion algorithm to
be turned on at all times, the downside of this is a higher power consumption.
It was then discovered that the battery life of the MetaMotionR was quite
limited, depended on the workload. A artiﬁcial test was setup to simulate a
worst case scenario, the MetaMotionR was programmed to read and transmit the
Euler angles to the companion app once every second. The battery percentage
was noted at about every 15-30 minutes until the MetaMotionR ran out of
battery. The test was run twice, and the results can be seen in Figure 5.9, the
ﬁrst test ran for a little less than ﬁve hours, while the second time only ran for a
little over two hours. These results disappointing, but the test were extreme and
real usage would not be that demanding. In order to get a feel of what could be
expected by the MetaMotionR in real use, the author choose to wear the device
every day for one week, logging entries at least 20 times a day at random times.
What was found that with this demand the device could run for at least one
day without a charge. It was discovered that the battery percentage would stay
in the ∼90-80% range through most of the day and night, and once the battery
percentage came below ∼70-60% it would dramatically drop to zero. Because of
this, it was decided to implement the option to disable the logging of orientation,
==PAGE:45==
5.4 Performance Testing
33
so if this device and app were to be used in real life, one could still get the time
stamp recorded which is still valuable information to collect as shown by Larsen
et al.[21]. When used in this mode the battery life is much longer, how long
is unknown but it was able to hold a comfortable battery percentage for over
a week. One beneﬁt to the battery is that it will fully charge in less than 2
minutes.
Figure 5.9: Battery Tests
==PAGE:46==
34
Implementation
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 6
Experiment
This chapter will describe the method of the experiment conducted in order to
compare the gestures using the wristband to a VAS. For comparison a test was
designed where the participants would be shown a stimuli and asked to input it
using the gestures or a digital VAS. Two kinds of stimuli was used, an integer
between zero and one hundred, or a box with a shade of grey between white
and black based on the experiment by Matejka et al.[23]. Before describing the
experiment further lets declare some terms for better clariﬁcation. As stated,
there are three input methods:
1. The digital VAS. This is using a slider on the tablet. This input method
will be referred to as “slider”
2. Using the wristband and the gesture of turning the wrist as described in
Figure 4.3. This input method will be referred to as “wrist gesture”
3. Using the wristband and the gesture of raising the lower arm as described
in Figure 4.2. This input method will be referred to as “arm gesture”
The two types of stimuli will be referred to as “number scale” and “grey scale”
for the integer and shade of grey respectfully. With these three input methods
and two stimuli a total of six diﬀerent exercises must be conducted. The naming
==PAGE:48==
36
Experiment
for each of these exercises is a combination of the input method and stimuli, e.g.
turning your wrist to input a shade of grey will be referred to as “wrist gesture
on grey scale”. All of the exercise’s names can be seen in the top of Table 6.2.
The rest of this section will cover every aspect of this in more detail.
In Figure 6.1 we see a participant during the training before the experiment, is
shows how the experiment was setup and provides a good basic understanding
of how the experiment was executed.
Figure 6.1: Participant during training with the wristband before starting the
experiment
6.1
Participants
Twenty four (24) participants where chosen for this experiment. Since the ex-
periment consist of six exercises a multiple of six was needed to ensure a mini-
==PAGE:49==
6.2 Apparatus
37
mal bias as explained later. Then based on the time frame for the experiment
twenty four seemed to be a reasonable amount while being large enough to col-
lect enough data. The participants volunteered their time and where not paid or
in other ways obligated to participate. All of the participants were either from
The Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at DTU or
the authors colleagues at IBM, thus most of the participants had above average
technical experience, but based on the survey conducted after the experiment
(Appendix A) 42% had not any prior experience with wearable devices.
Out of the twenty four participants 18 where men and 6 where female. The mean
age was 27.83 and the median age was 26.5, both age and gender distribution
can be seen in Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Age and gender distribution of the 24 participants: 18 males in
blue and 6 females in red
6.2
Apparatus
6.2.1
Essential Hardware
For the experiment three pieces of hardware was used:
1. MetaMotionR by mbientlab[26] as the wristband device for registering
input from the participant using the gestures
2. Samsung Galaxy Tab S2[33], this tablet run the app developed for the
experimenting, keeping track of exercises, showing stimuli, collecting input
==PAGE:50==
38
Experiment
from the participant, saving the data etc. Much more detail about this is
this section
3. A computer used to ﬁll in the survey after the experiment. In the exper-
iment a MacBook Pro 13 inch model was used, although the computer
used isn’t important
6.2.2
Tablet App
The app created for the experiment is built upon the same code as the companion
app described in Chapter 5, but changed to ﬁt the experiment. Has three main
functions: Settings, Train and Experiment as seen in Figure 6.3. The settings
is for conﬁguring the experiment and exporting or deleting the collected data
as seen in Figure 6.4.
Two variables can be changed that has inﬂuence on
the experiment, the ﬁrst is the “Number of stimuli”, this value will change the
number of stimuli the participant has to rate for each exercise, the number of
stimuli can be changed in steps of ﬁve. The “Next Subject ID” will change the
ID used to identify each subject in the data. The order of exercises for the
participant is bases on this value. Both of these settings should not be changed
though out the experiment, so that the participant’s IDs will be in sequential
order and that they have the same amount of stimuli for each exercise. For this
experiment the number of stimuli was set to 20 based on pilots tests. Beside
these two settings there is the option to “Toggle back button”, when this option
is enabled a “Back” button will appear on any screen in the app, and when
pressed will go back to the main screen. This option is purely for debugging
allowing one two go back to the main screen at any point, during the experiment
this options should be disabled.
The last actions on this screen is to export and delete data. There are two
options to export the date: “Move data” and “Email data”, the ﬁrst will simply
copy the collected data from the internal storage of the app to the external
storage on the tablet so it can be accessed by any ﬁle manager. The later will
also copy the date to external storage, but it will create an intent to email the
data which will start the default email app and attach the data. “Delete data”
will delete the collected data from internal storage, a conﬁrmation prompt will
appear ﬁrst to prevent accidental deletion. Whenever the main or setting screen
is accessed, the current battery percentage from the MetaMotionR is displayed
on the screen, keeping an eye on this prevent the wristband to run out of power
in the middle of the experiment.
The train screen is made to let the participant practice using the wristband
device and get a feeling of the scale. When this screen is activated the wrist-
==PAGE:51==
6.2 Apparatus
39
Figure 6.3: Experiment app main screen
Figure 6.4: Settings screen
band will be programmed similar as explained in Chapter 5, when the button is
pressed it will read the orientation from its IMU and transmit it to the tablet.
The light will ﬂash and vibration motor will do a short pulse to provide feed-
back. The diﬀerence between the previous described implementation and the
programming for the experiment is that instead of logging the data for later
export, it will transmit it instantly. When the orientation data is received by
the app it will map the Euler angles to a 0-10 scale and display the result.
The mapping is dependant on the toggle switch, if the switch is in the “Hand”
position as in Figure 6.5 the mapping will depend on the roll angle and if the
switch is in the “Arm” position as in Figure 6.6 the mapping will depend on the
pitch angle. This of course correspond to the gestures described in Figure 4.3
==PAGE:52==
40
Experiment
and 4.2. Mapping the Euler angles to the scaled value is done in the same way
as described in Chapter 4 using the simple mathematical functions as seen in
Equation 4.1 and 4.2. In order to map the two functions from a 0-10 scale to
the grey scale (0.49) and number scale (0-100), the result of the the functions
are multiplied by 4.9 and 10 for each scale receptively.
Figure 6.5: Train screen Hand (wrist gesture) mode
Figure 6.6: Train screen Arm (arm gesture) mode
The last screen is the experiment itself, this is the most complicated screen
and consist of many “sub screens”. Before the experiment begin a screen for
inputting the gender and age of the participant is presented as seen in Figure
6.7. In the top right the assigned ID for the participant is showed, this is just for
conﬁrmation and to be used in the survey after the experiment (so the survey
and experiment data can be synchronized if needed). Once the “Start” button is
pressed the experiment will begin. As mentioned the experiment consist of six
==PAGE:53==
6.2 Apparatus
41
exercises and the order of these is dependent on Table 6.2. Before each exercise
an explanation screen will show, this screen will have some text to explain the
task of the exercise and a short GIF that illustrates it. The text will stay on top
during the whole exercise. This screen purpose is to make sure the participant
is sure of what task they are required to do, the participant will have gotten
instructions beforehand, so this screen is just reassure them. Three of the six
explanation screens can be seen in Figure 6.8, 6.9 and 6.10.
Figure 6.7: Experiment start screen
Figure 6.8: Slider on grey scale explanation screen
After the explanation screen each exercise follow the same pattern: show stimuli,
wait for input, refresh input (optional), register input, next input. This pattern
is repeated until the set number of stimuli has been shown and then the next
exercise is started, after all six exercises are completed a “ﬁnish” screen is shown.
The slider on grey scale exercise will be used to explain this pattern in more
==PAGE:54==
42
Experiment
Figure 6.9: Arm gesture on number scale explanation screen
Figure 6.10: Wrist gesture on grey scale explanation screen
detail. After the exercise explanation the ﬁrst stimuli is shown as seen in Figure
6.11, then the participant registers a input using the slider as seen in Figure 6.12,
a small vertical bar indicate the input. The input can be changed simply by
adjusting the slider (for arm and wrist gesture exercises the participant can just
press the button on the wristband again), to register the input the participant
has to press the “Submit” button as seen in Figure 6.12. Once the input has been
registered the stimuli will disappear and the participant has to press the “Next”
button as seen in Figure 6.13, this button will alternate to appear on the left
and right side of the screen (this will be explained later), once the button has
been pressed the next stimuli will appear (as seen in Figure 6.14)and the process
will repeat until the participant has been through the set amount of stimuli and
==PAGE:55==
6.2 Apparatus
43
moves on to the next exercise. In Figure 6.15 we see a screen from the wrist
gesture on number scale exercise where the participant has pressed the button
on the wristband, beside the feedback from the wristband (light and vibration)
the screen also show that the button has been pressed, but no feedback is given
on what value was registered nor how well they performed.
This was done
on purpose to reﬂect the real life use case where the user wouldn’t know the
registered value before importing it to the companion app. In Figure 6.16 we see
the “Finish” screen after the participant has completed the experiment. All app
screens shown here plus a couple extra can be seen in larger scale in Appendix
E.
Figure 6.11: Show stimuli screen with shade of grey
Figure 6.12: Participant has given an input using the slider
The stimuli for each exercise follow a speciﬁc set of rules.
First of all the
stimuli for each exercise is independent. For number scale exercises the stimuli
==PAGE:56==
44
Experiment
Figure 6.13: Next stimuli screen
Figure 6.14: Pattern is repeated
is generated by creating an array of integers from 0-100, e.g. [0, 1, 2 .. 98, 99,
100]. This array is shuﬄed so the order is random. When a stimuli is needed the
ﬁrst element in the array is used, once used it is removed from the array. Once
the array is empty the process is repeated. For grey scale exercises the process
is the same, but the array consist of integers from 0-49, here 0 correspond to
pure white, 49 is pure black and the rest are the shaded of grey in between.
The shaded of grey are the same as used by Matejka et al.[23] as seen in Figure
2.4, where each shade is of equal distance from each other in the CIELAB color
space[14]. What this means is that the order of stimuli is completely random,
but the distribution of stimuli is completely even, this means that for each
participant the stimuli is random but not repeated, while keeping the overall
==PAGE:57==
6.2 Apparatus
45
Figure 6.15: Input registered from wristband with integer stimuli
Figure 6.16: Finished experiment screen
even distribution between participants. Again emphasizing on the fact that the
stimuli for each exercise is independent.
The data collected from the experiment is described in Table 6.1.
Data is
recorded whenever the participant pressed the submit button for each trial.
With the six exercises each having 20 trials, this results in 120 data points
for each participant and a total of 2880 data points for the complete experi-
ment. Most of the data is self explanatory and doesn’t need further explanation
than the table. The “type” refers to the exercise, the keyword for each exercise
should be self explanatory. “type_order” refers to the order of the exercises,
this data is redundant since it can be deducted based on the “id” and Table 6.2.
==PAGE:58==
46
Experiment
“stim_order” is the order the stimuli had and is also redundant since it can be
deducted based on the time stamp, but if any of these were to be investigated
this would greatly reduce the work. The “pitch”, “roll” and “yaw” are the Eu-
ler angles recorded, these could be used to change the mapping functions from
Euler angles to scaled value without needing to redo experiment (these values
are only recorded for wrist and arm gesture exercises). The “reaction_time”
is recorded from when the stimuli was shown on screen until the participant
pressed the submit button. The data collected is saved to a CSV ﬁle in the
apps internal storage, and can be exported from the settings screen as described
earlier. Beside this data, a separate data ﬁle was created where to total time
taken to complete the experiment (from pressing start in Figugre 6.7 to the
ﬁnsih screen was shown).
column name
type
descriptiom
id
int
Uniqe id for each particpant
gender
String
Participant gender: "Male" or "Female"**
age
int
Participant age**
time
Date object
Timestamp when input was registered
type
String
Type of exercise: "slider_grey", "slider_num", "wrist_grey",
"wrist_num", "arm_grey" or "arm_num"
type_order
int
Order for the type of exercise: 0-5*
stim_order
int
Order for the stimuli: 0-49 or 0-100*
stim
int
Stimuli: 0-49 or 0-100
response
double
Response: 0.0-49.0 or 0.0-100.0
pitch
double or String
Value of pitch for exercises using the wristband, else "NA"**
roll
double or String
Value of roll for exercises using the wristband, else "NA"**
yaw
double or String
Value of yaw for exercises using the wristband, else "NA"**
reaction_time
long
Time in milliseconds from the stimuli was shown
until a response was registred
*Redundant data. **Data not investigated
Table 6.1: Structure of Collected Data
6.2.3
Other
Beside the described hardware and software a small foam pad was used for the
participant to place their elbow on, this reduced fatigue. A power bank was
connected to the tablet to keep the it from running out of power and to keep
the angle between the display and table at 15o, this reducing the glance in the
display from the ceiling lights and gave a better viewing angle.
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Procedure
47
6.3
Procedure
Each participant completed the experiment in one continuous sitting, the whole
process took approximately 15 minutes from the entered the room until they
left. First participant was seated in front of the tablet and assisted to wear the
wristband correctly. They were told to wear it on the arm the felt most com-
fortable with, but all participants choose their left arm. Then the participants
was informed of how the device worked, they where shown the same gestures de-
scribed in Figure 4.2 and 4.3 (the gestured was performed on them, they weren’t
shown the Figures). It was made clear that the horizontal position would regis-
ter as a minimum value, that the horizontal position would register a maximal
value. They were instructed about how the scaled value would decrease if they
performed the gesture beyond the vertical point.
They were then taken to the “Train” screen of the app, where they were given
1-2 minutes with each gesture to get a sense of the scale.
They were asked
to produce an input as close to zero and ten as possible. Again they were told
about the what would happen if the went beyond the gesture, and they could see
the result. They where then instructed to after each input with the wristband
to lay their hand ﬂat on the table. This was to have the same baseline for each
input.
After training they were instructed on the structure of the experiment. They
were told about the three input methods and two kinds of stimuli, and that there
would be six exercises in total. They were told that each exercise would start
with an explanation screen, then show a stimuli that they had to rate according
to the instructions. They were told that each exercise had several stimuli, but
they weren’t told the exact amount, only that they had to continue the exercises
until the saw the ﬁnish screen. They where told that if they where unhappy with
an input, they could just press the button on the wristband again or adjust the
slider before they pressed submit, but after pressing submit the input was ﬁnal.
Once they conﬁrmed that they understood the instructions (any questions about
the procedure was answered) they where taken to the experiment screen, where
they registered their age and gender and then started the experiment. Most
participants had no problems following the on screen instructions, but some
participants asked questions during the experiment to clarify the task they had
to perform.
After completing the experiment they were handed the survey (Appendix A) on
a computer and asked to answer it.
==PAGE:60==
48
Experiment
Exercise
slider on
grey scale
slider on
number scale
wrist gesture on
grey scale
wrist gesture on
number scale
arm gesture on
grey scale
arm gesture on
number scale
ID
0
1
2
3
4
5
Exercise Order
Participant id
First
Second
Third
Fourth
Fifth
Sixth
0, 6, 12, 18
0
1
5
2
4
3
1, 7, 13, 17
1
2
0
3
5
4
2, 8, 14, 20
2
3
1
4
0
5
3, 9, 15, 21
3
4
2
5
1
0
4, 10, 16, 22
4
5
3
0
2
1
5, 11, 17, 23
5
0
4
1
3
2
Table 6.2: Exercise ordering based on a Balanced Latin Square
6.4
Design
This experiment was a 3 × 2 within-subject design.
There was three input
methods: the slider, wrist gesture and arm gesture. Te input types was shades
of grey and numbers. The independent variables has the stimuli value associated
to it, likewise the dependent variables has the response (input value) associated
to it. The goal of the experiment is to compare the accuracy of the dependent
variables to each other with the independent variables being the ground truth.
The within-subject design was chosen in order to achieve more data with less
participants, this also balance any variance due to participants’ predispositions
and it will be approximately the same across test conditions. Unfortunately this
can introduce bias because of the practice eﬀect. To prevent this as much as
possible counterbalancing has been introduced using the balanced Latin square
seen in Table 6.2. This requires a multiple of six participants and it was de-
cided to have 24 participants providing a good amount of data while still being
achievable within the given time frame.
Each of the six exercises consisted of 20 trials, with 24 participants that totaled
to 2880 trials/data points in total.
6.5
Pilot Tests
Small pilot test was ran throughout the development of the experiment and
app. This ensured that the experiment stayed as streamlined as possible. When
the implementation of the experiment app was completed some pilots test was
ran in order to determine how long it took to complete the exercises. Figure
6.17 shows the results of seven pilots with varying numbers of stimuli for each
exercise.
Not surprisingly there was a linear correlation between number of
==PAGE:61==
6.5 Pilot Tests
49
stimuli and completion time. It was a goal to only have the experiment take
about 15 minutes for each participant, with about 10 minutes for the experiment
and 5 minutes for introduction, training, survey etc. Therefore based on the
results 20 stimuli per exercise was chosen, since it took about 10 minutes to
complete.
Figure 6.17: Completion time of pilot tests, with the regression line in red
After the initial seven pilots tests, another four pilot tests was conducted, this
time with the form of the experiment in mind, looking to see if anything needed
changing e.g. the instructions given, the survey etc. Based on these four tests
the only thing that was changed was to include age and gender in the survey
(even though it could already be conducted by cross referencing participant ID
in the survey with the data collected). Since this was the only change to the
execution of the experiment it was decided to include these four pilot test in
the results of the experiment. No factors surrounding the experiment itself had
been changed, only the survey.
==PAGE:62==
50
Experiment
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 7
Results and Discussion
The data collected was described in the previous Chapter, in Figure 7.1 we see
a small snippet of the actual data collected. The whole data set and code for
analysis can be found in Appendix D and C.4.
In the work of Matejka et al.[23] they deﬁne any response with an error greater
than half the scale to an outlier, debating that an response this far from the
stimuli must be seen as a human error.
Using the same argument we will
remove any data point where the diﬀerence between the stimuli and response
was greater than half the scale. With the grey scale exercises 50 shades of greys
where shown, with a corresponding value from 0 (pure white) to 49 (pure black),
therefore we will remove any data point with a diﬀerence between stimuli and
response that is more than 25. Likewise with the number scale exercises where
the scale is from 0 to 100 any data point with a diﬀerence between the stimuli
and response greater than 50 is removed. This results in the removal of four
data points, which can be seen in Figure 7.2.
It seems reasonable to remove these four data points, but another approach is
visual inspection of the data. This can be done by plotting each participants
response over stimuli for each exercise, in Figure 7.3 we the result of this for
the slider on grey scale exercise, the plot has been divided into four plots with
six participants on each. It then becomes easy to see by looking at each line if
a point should be considered an outlier. If a line is fairly straight, but a single
==PAGE:64==
52
Results and Discussion
Figure 7.1: Snippet of the collected data
Figure 7.2: Four outliers that was removed from the data set
==PAGE:65==
53
Figure 7.3: Visualization of outliers for the slider on grey scale exercise. Each
line correspond to the response from a single participant. The red
diagonal would be a perfect response
point is way oﬀit can be considered an outlier, but if a line is ﬂuctuating a
lot, then it is more likely that the participant just wasn’t very consistent, and
therefore the a point on that line can’t be considered an outlier. If we look to
the lower right plot in Figure 7.3 an follow the orange line, we see that it is
fairly straight, with the one exception at about (28, 12), since this is a single
point that is way out line, this could be considered an outlier that must be due
to user error. While this method can be eﬀective at removing outliers, it can’t
be known for curtain if these point in fact are outliers, therefore this method
has been discarded. The plots for the other exercises can be found in Appendix
B.
In order to compare the wristband to the digital VAS we will look into how they
performed in two aspects, one is the accuracy which will be greatly investigated
as this is the most important aspect to validate the use ability of the wristband.
Beside the accuracy a short analysis of the task completion time of the diﬀerent
==PAGE:66==
54
Results and Discussion
methods will be discussed.
7.1
Accuracy
In this experiment error is measured as the absolute diﬀerence between the
stimuli and response, the lower the error the better the accuracy. Beside the
error we will look into the the distribution and variance in order to describe the
accuracy and compare it between the input methods.
7.1.1
Distribution and Scatters of Stimuli and Responses
Looking at the distribution of stimuli and responses will reveal if there is any
bias using any of the input methods. Since the stimuli was evenly distributed
we would expect to see the same of the responses if they don’t have any bias,
in the following Figures the expected amount of is marked with a red line. A
scatter plot of response over stimuli will visualize the errors, a perfect response
will fall along the diagonal (marked with a red line), the closer the scatter is
to the diagonal the smaller errors will be. We see both the distributions and
scatter plots of stimuli and responses for each exercise in Figure 7.4, 7.5, 7.6,
7.7, 7.8 and 7.9.
First lets investigate the distributions of stimuli and responses. First of all we
see that the stimuli is evenly distributed between either 0-49 for the grey scale
exercises or 0-100 for the number scale exercises, this of course is no surprise
since the experiment was designed this way. We do notice that there is a little
unevenness in the stimuli distribution, this is due to that each exercise had 24
participants that each performed 20 trials for a total of 480 trials. Neither 50
nor 101 is evenly dividable by this, resulting in a few stimuli being shown one
time less than the others. The four outliers removed also inﬂuence this, but
the overall distribution is as close to even as possible. With the distributions
of the responses we don’t see a perfect distribution, e.i. completely bias less,
but neither do we see a largely skewed distribution meaning there isn’t a strong
bias. That said there are some interesting observations.
In Matejka et al.[23] work they ﬁnd that when using a slider similar to the
one used in this experiment, that there was a bias towards the two extremes
(min and max) and the middle. In Figure 7.4 we see a similar bias towards the
extremes, and arguably towards the middle, although not as strong a bias as
Matejka et al.’s results. They explain that the bias observed was due to the
==PAGE:67==
7.1 Accuracy
55
Figure 7.4: Distributions and scatter plot of stimuli and responses for slider
on grey scale
Figure 7.5: Distributions and scatter plot of stimuli and responses for slider
on number scale
==PAGE:68==
56
Results and Discussion
Figure 7.6: Distributions and scatter plot of stimuli and responses for wrist
gesture on grey scale
Figure 7.7: Distributions and scatter plot of stimuli and responses for wrist
gesture on number scale
==PAGE:69==
7.1 Accuracy
57
Figure 7.8: Distributions and scatter plot of stimuli and responses for arm
gesture on grey scale
Figure 7.9: Distributions and scatter plot of stimuli and responses for arm
gesture on number scale
==PAGE:70==
58
Results and Discussion
use of a slider (easy for humans to ﬁnd the middle, and we tend to choose the
extremes). But the distribution seen in Figure 7.5 doesn’t show any strong bias,
since the only diﬀerence of these two exercises is the stimuli (shades of grey vs
integers) then these results suggest that the bias observed in both Figure 7.4
and observed by Matejka et al. is in fact not caused by the slider, but caused
by the shades of grey. Looking at the shades of grey in Figure 2.4 it becomes
quite apparent, since it is almost impossible to diﬀerentiate pure black from the
darkest shades. It is a bit easier to tell pure white apart from the light shades,
this also explains why the bias toward zero is less signiﬁcant. Dam-Jensen[16]
found in his results that participants where only able to diﬀerentiate around 11
shades of grey, this again explain why the darker shades of grey get registered
as pure black by the participants.
In Figure 7.6 and 7.7 we see greater amount of responses around the 32 and 65
mark respectively. We will come back to this observation soon.
Looking at the scatter plots we see can see the errors. First of all it is quite
clear that the slider on number scale exercise outperforms all of the others,
the scatter is very close to the diagonal. The other scatters also show a clear
correlation around the diagonal, but not as close to it. In Figure 7.6 and 7.7 we
see a very interesting observation. Looking at the scatters we see that there is
a trend, with stimuli at the lower half of the scale the responses are to high and
with stimuli in the upper half responses are to low. This is especially clear in
Figure 7.7. It seems that there is a turning point at approximately 32 and 65
for wrist gesture on grey scale and wrist gesture on number scale respectively.
These turning points are the same as we observed earlier in the distributions.
A reasonable explanation for this observation can be found in biology, when
investigating the wrist gesture (Figure 4.3) it becomes quite apparent, because
of the bone structure in the lower arm (as seen in Figure 7.10) the gesture
isn’t linear. In the starting position of the gesture the bones are crossed and
in the vertical position the bones are parallel. Since the bones aren’t the same
size and aren’t straight this movement becomes non linear, meaning that the
amount of movement required to turn the wrist from the starting position till
about the halfway point is much greater than the movement needed to turn the
wrist from the halfway point to the vertical position. In other words, we have
a ﬁner adjustment for the ﬁrst half of the rotation than we do for the last half.
It is plausible that a mathematical model could be created to compensate for
this, thus improving this method, but that is beyond the scope of this thesis.
In Table 7.1 we see the mean, median and scaled absolute error for each exercise,
these are the same values as displayed on the scatter plots. We also see see the
amount of data points within ±1 and ±2 on a 0-10 scale, more on this later.
The mean and median absolute errors are calculated across all trials for each
exercise. The scaled values is the value mapped to a 0-10 scale, this is simply
==PAGE:71==
7.1 Accuracy
59
Figure 7.10: Bone Structure of Lower Arm[11]
achieved by dividing the value by either 4.9 or 10 respectively for grey scale
and number scale exercises. We see that for all exercises that the mean and
median absolute error is relatively low, when scaled they are all within close to
one, meaning on a 0-10 scale the responses fall close to being withing ±1 of the
stimuli, of course the exception being the slider on number scale which performs
even better than the others.
To further illustrate how the point in the scatter plots fall based on the 0-10
scale we will add some colored bands to the plots, the green area is where the
points fall within ±1, together with the yellow area this is where the points fall
within ±2 on the 0-10 scale. On the plots the percentage of point that fall within
each area is also displayed (this is also in Table 7.1). This is seen in Figure 7.11,
7.12 and 7.13. We see that with the exeption of slider on number scale that
all the other exercises performed about the same, with arm gesture on number
scale performing just a bit better than the other (with the exception of slider
on number scale). Based on the results so far we see no signiﬁcant diﬀerent
between the three input methods when it comes to rating shades of grey. When
rating integers from 0-100 slider on number scale strongly outperforms the other
two while arm gesture on number scale is slightly better than wrist gesture on
number scale.
7.1.2
Error Distribution and Variance
To further investigate the diﬀerence in performance of the diﬀerent input meth-
ods we will look into the error distribution. They will be compared visually and
using t-test to see if the are statistically similar. In Figure 7.14, 7.15 and 7.16
we see the distribution of errors for the six exercises. As we would expect the
errors follow a normal distribution centered around zero. Again it is clear to
see that the slider on number scale performs way better than the other number
scale exercises, the variance is smaller resulting in a much steeper curve meaning
==PAGE:72==
60
Results and Discussion
Mean
abs. error
Median
abs. error
Scaled mean
abs. error
Scaled median
abs. error
Points
within ±1
Points
within ±2
slider on grey scale
5.267
4.0
1.075
0.8
51.98%
79.96%
slider on number scale
2.940
2.0
0.294
0.2
96.04%
99.58%
wrist gesture on grey scale
6.303
5.0
1.286
1.0
43.22%
72.03%
wrist gesture on number scale
11.374
10.0
1.137
1.0
48.54%
79.29%
arm gesture on grey scale
5.563
5.0
1.135
1.0
48.54%
77.92%
arm gesture on number scale
9.760
8.0
0.976
0.8
55.21%
88.33%
Table 7.1: Mean, median and scaled absolute error together with the percent-
age of points within ±1 and ±2 on the 0-10 scale for each exercise
Figure 7.11: Scatter plot with color bands for slider
==PAGE:73==
7.1 Accuracy
61
Figure 7.12: Scatter plot with color bands for wrist gesture
Figure 7.13: Scatter plot with color bands for arm gesture
==PAGE:74==
62
Results and Discussion
that the response are much closer to the stimuli. The other two number scale
exercises (wrist gesture on number scale and arm gesture on number scale) seem
to perform about the same. Likewise all the grey scale exercises seem to perform
about the same, no clear diﬀerence in the variance or steepness of the curves.
Figure 7.14: Error distribution for slider
Figure 7.15: Error distribution for wrist gesture
T-test where performed between the grey scale exercises and between the num-
ber scale exercises to see if the are statistically alike. The results of the t-test
can be seen in Table 7.2, for each comparison the errors from all trials of two
exercises where used.
Lets start by comparing the grey scale exercises to each other. We see that
wrist gesture on grey scale and arm gesture on grey scale are quite likely not
==PAGE:75==
7.1 Accuracy
63
Figure 7.16: Error distribution for arm gesture
to have a signiﬁcant diﬀerence. From the results of comparing slider on grey
scale with wrist gesture on grey scale and arm gesture on grey scale it is hard
to determine weather or not they are similar. On one hand slider on grey scale
and wrist gesture on grey scale is somewhat likely not to be signiﬁcant diﬀerent,
while slider on grey scale and arm gesture on grey scale on the other hand are
likely to have signiﬁcant diﬀerence. These results are a bit strange, since one
would assume if A and B are similar and A and C are diﬀerent, then B and C
must be diﬀerent too, but here we see that B and C are quite similar (A being
slider on grey scale, B being wrist gesture on grey scale and C being arm gesture
on grey scale). That being said, the p value for wrist gesture on grey scale and
arm gesture on grey scale is rather high and the calculated t-statistic is close to
zero, indicating that this is the most likely case to be true out of the three.
Comparing the number scale exercises we again see that there is a clear diﬀer-
ence between slide on number scale and the other two number scale exercises.
Comparing wrist gesture on number scale and arm gesture on number scale we
see that they are quite similar, meaning that statistically the change of the data
being part of the same distribution is high.
Comparing grey scale exercises to number scale exercises only makes sence if
comparing them with the same input method. Doing so we see the lowest p
value and highest calculated t-statistic across the board when comparing slider
on grey scale to slider on number scale, this is not surprising when we know
how well slider on number scale performed. This indicates that there is a large
diﬀerence when asked to rate shades of grey using the slider and rate integers
using the slider. Both wrist and arm gesture shows to be similar when comparing
the grey scale exercise to the number scale exercise, and it is quite interesting
==PAGE:76==
64
Results and Discussion
Exercises compared
p value
Calculated t-statistic
slider on
grey scale
wrist gesture
on grey scale
0.10045
1.64426
slider on
grey scale
arm gesture on
grey scale
0.01598
2.41378
wrist gesture on
grey scale
arm gesture on
grey scale
0.61034
0.50976
slider on
number scale
wrist gesture on
number scale
1.29468e-10
-6.49960
slider on
number scale
arm gesture on
number scale
9.35024e-19
-9.02859
wrist gesture on
number scale
arm gesture on
number scale
0.39349
-0.85370
slider on
grey scale
slider on
number scale
6.82003e-55
16.65620
wrist gesture
on grey scale
wrist gesture on
number scale
0.93712
0.07892
arm gesture on
grey scale
arm gesture on
number scale
0.14421
-1.46148
Table 7.2: T-test between exercises
to see that wrist gesture on number scale and wrist gesture on grey scale has
the highest change of being signiﬁcant similar across the board.
With these results we must conclude that the two input methods arm and wrist
gesture are quite alike, while we can’t say for sure if they are similar to slider
when rating shades of grey we can say for curtain that arm and wrist gesture
is quite diﬀerent from slider when rating integers.
While the t-test lest us
examine the likely hood of two data sets to be similar or not, it can’t tell us
which performs better.
Summarizing on the accuracy performance of the three input methods it is quite
clear when it comes to rating integers that the slider outperforms both arm and
wrist gesture. When it comes to rating shades of grey there seems to be no clear
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the three inputs methods. And with the input
methods arm and wrist gesture there doesn’t seem to be a signiﬁcant diﬀerence
in rating shades of grey to rating integers.
==PAGE:77==
7.2 Task Completion Time
65
Mean
Median
Standard
deviation
slider on grey scale
3.589
2.672
2.981
slider on number scale
4.552
3.942
2.436
wrist gesture on grey scale
4.089
3.195
2.588
wrist gesture on number scale
4.376
3.614
2.553
arm gesture on grey scale
4.338
3.563
2.522
arm gesture on number scale
4.618
3.823
2.633
Table 7.3: Task completion time (seconds) for each exercise. The time from
stimuli being shown until data was registered by the participants
in each trial
7.2
Task Completion Time
The task completion time for each trial was recorded, this was the time span from
the stimuli was showed to the participant registered the data. A short analysis
based on the results for all the trials showed that there were no signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between the six exercises as shown in Table 7.3. There is only a little
more than a second diﬀerence between the mean task completion time of the
fastest and slowest exercises. Because of this no further investigation of the
task completion time was conducted. The results mean that it doesn’t take
a signiﬁcantly longer time to use the wristband than to use the slider, keep in
mind that the task completion time was recorded from when stimuli was showed
on screen until the participant pressed the submit button. For real life use this
gives the wristband a signiﬁcant advantage, since it wouldn’t take much longer
to use the wristband in real life than it did in the experiment, but if one where
to use a digital VAS on a smartwatch the person would ﬁrst have to activate the
smartwatch and go through the interactions required to input the value This
would involve more steps than was present in the experiment, meaning a longer
total interaction time.
7.3
Post Experiment Survey
After the experiment the participants were asked to ﬁll in a survey, the full
survey and all the answers can be found in Appendix A. Unfortunately an
unknown error occurred while collecting the answers, resulting in three lost
answers. This section will show the results of the most relevant questions.
Given the option between the arm and wrist gesture method the participants
==PAGE:78==
66
Results and Discussion
Figure 7.17: Participants prior experience with wearable devices
where asked which method they preferred, which they felt was more accurate
and which they felt was most comfortable. For each question they were also
given the option to answer that they felt the same for both methods.
The
results can be seen in Table 7.4. Among the participants that preferred the arm
gesture method they the common answer to why was that the greater range of
motion allowed them to have higher precision. For the participant preferring
the wrist gesture the most common reason was that it was more comfortable.
For the participant that felt that the arm gesture method was more accurate
their reason was that it had more precision, making it easier to make small
adjustment. The two participants that felt the wrist gesture was more accurate
said that they just felt like it. One participant that felt the methods to be equally
accurate explained that the task felt diﬃcult in both cases, but with practice
and feedback that one could become accurate when using either method. The
many participants that felt that the wrist gesture method was more comfortable
explained that it was less hassle, less awkward movement and that they didn’t
get tired. Among the participant rating the two method equally comfortable
their comments was that neither of the methods were uncomfortable to use.
arm gesture
wrist gesture
equal
Preferred
38.1%
42.9%
19%
Accurate
81%
9.5%
9.5%
Comfort
9.5%
61.9%
28.6%
Table 7.4: Distribution of Answers about arm gesture vs wrist gesture (Ap-
pendix A)
The participants was asked if they had any prior experience using any kind
of wearable devices, and with which devices (it was possible to check multiple
devices). The results can be seen in Figure 7.17. This showed that participants
represented a good mixture of experience with wearable devices.
==PAGE:79==
7.3 Post Experiment Survey
67
Figure 7.18: Rating of preferred method (1 is most preferred, 5 is least pre-
ferred)
Lastly the participant had a use case explained, where the had to imagine that
they suﬀered from migraines and that their doctor had asked them to log when-
ever they had a headache and how severe it was. They where then presented
with ﬁve diﬀerent methods to log the headaches (which was described in detail)
pen and paper, app on smartphone, app on smartwatch, the arm gesture method
or the wrist gesture method. They where then asked to order all the method
from most preferred to least preferred, the result can be seen in Figure 7.18.
The results clearly show that the participants mostly preferred the wristband
over the other methods, with pen and paper being the most disliked method.
This question should only be seen as an indication, the question required the
participants to think of a complex use case and make decisions on things where
they probably don’t have every piece of information to in order to take an in-
formed decision. That being said the results shows promise for wristband device
using the arm and wrist gestures.
Based on all of the results, both from the experiment and the survey, is shows
great promise for a use case for the wristband. It was shown that the perfor-
mance of the wristband did just as good for rating shades of grey which argues
it would perform well for recording psychological events, where their isn’t a spe-
ciﬁc value to record, but instead what the user feels. The arm and wrist gesture
methods where shown to perform about the same, therefore either could be rec-
ommended. Based on the survey it seems to be a trade oﬀbetween the feeling of
accuracy and comfort, but since it has been shown that their isn’t a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence in accuracy the wrist gesture method would be preferred to achieve a
higher level of comfort.
==PAGE:80==
68
Results and Discussion
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 8
Future Work
The work done with the two input gestures is only the beginning. This Chapter
will suggest what could be of interest if more work were to be done to this
project.
8.1
Improvement to the Experiment
The experiment conducted was a success, but if anyone was to conduct the
experiment again a few improvements could be made. With the design of the
slider and submit button the button is positioned in the center below the slider.
This had the unintended eﬀect of serving as a reference point for the middle of
the slider. Simply changing the position of the submit button to either side of
the slider would resolve this. As discussed in the results, we humans are quite
good at ﬁnding the center of a slider anyway, so this is smaller detail that most
likely won’t have a signiﬁcant impact on the outcome.
It would be interesting to see if the results of the experiment is representative
of a more general population, so recruiting participants with a broader demo-
graphic would give an idea of this. Likewise it would be interesting to see if
the observed results will stay the same with a larger data set using more par-
==PAGE:82==
70
Future Work
ticipants. In would also be optimal to increase the number of stimuli for each
exercise, although it is a trade oﬀsince it could lead to fatigue.
Conducting another experiment where only 11 shades of grey and numbers be-
tween 0 and 10 would be of interest, to see how the three input methods would
compare in a setting closer to the real life use case. Likewise an experiment with-
out a ground truth could be of interest to compare the three input methods, e.g.
where participants are asked to rate pain levels, mood or other psychological
events. Such an experiment might be harder to conduct since you would need to
provide a stimuli for the psychological events, for pain that could be easy, but
might not be ethical. It is also harder to compare the results since there won’t
exist a ground truth, in this case it would be interesting to see how similar the
results would be. Such an experiment could be conducted over a longer period
of time, where the participants are asked to use both the digital VAS and one
or both of the gestures to rate psychological events.
8.2
Case Study
To further develop the work of this thesis, the next step would be to conduct a
case study. This could be done similar to the work of Larsen et al.[21], where a
patient suﬀering from PTSD was asked to log whenever he experienced a speciﬁc
event related to his illness using the smartbutton. The diﬀerence here would be
that the patient would be asked to rate whenever he/she using the wristband
and one of the two gestures (arm or wrist). PTSD is just one example that
could be used in a case study, it would be equally interesting to conduct a case
study on a patient suﬀering from migraines, chronic pain, anxiety, panic attacks
or any similar condition where the common thing is that it will create value
to track whenever the events of their conditions occurred and how severe the
events are.
With such a case study it would be interesting to see if the tracking of severeness
provides additional value over just tracking when events occur. It would be
interesting to investigate the compliance of using the wristband with the hand
or wrist gestures compared to the simpler smartbutton.
8.3
Improvements to Companion App
The companion app designed and implemented in this thesis was developed with
the intentions to be a MVP, therefore some features where left out, but given
==PAGE:83==
8.4 Investigating the Wrist’s Critical Point
71
more time it would create value to improve the companion app. Visualization
of the data collected could make it easier to spot patterns. A simple proposal
would be bar plot with days along x-axis and the number of tracked events on
the y-axis, the bars could be colored to represent the severeness logged. If a
given day had 5 data points with severeness rated at 1, 3, 6, 8 and 9 the bar
could be colored with multiple color bands based on a color scale going from
green, to yellow to red (like in the Mood tracker 2.5). This is just one suggestion,
there exist many papers on how to visualize such data, it is important that the
visualization is thoroughly tested on a wide demographic to ensure that it can
be understood by the users. Beside a better visual presentation of the collected
data, it would be interesting to the location of the observation, while this isn’t
possible with the wristband device, this can be achieved by synchronizing the
time stamps of the logged data to the smartphone location history. This could
provide additional value to the treatment process.
While these are the largest improvement that can be made to the companion
some other minor adjustments could be made. In order to use companion app
the wristband has to be connected ﬁrst, this is of course important to program
the wristband and import the data from it, but that means the user can’t aces
the collected data without ﬁrst connecting the wristband.
This is of course
a inconvenience, the app should let the user see the collected data and only
require the wristband to be connected when importing data or programming
the wristband. Improvements could be made to the UI of the app to make it
more visually pleasing, but that hasn’t been the focus of this thesis. Features
such as deleting individual data points would also improve the user experience
of the app.
8.4
Investigating the Wrist’s Critical Point
In connection to conducting a case study and improving the companion app it
would be reasonable to investigate the conditions surrounding the “critical point”
of the wrist gesture. As mentioned in the Chapter Results & Discussions7, the
“critical point” is the condition observed that caused the participant’s responses
to over estimated both the shades of grey and numbers when they where on the
lower half of the scale, and under estimate the responses for the upper half of
the scale. As mentioned this is likely do the bone structure of the lower arm
causing the movement of the gesture to be non linear. It would be interesting to
investigate this further and try to develop a mathematical model to compensate
for this. Another approach could investigate the use of machine learning and see
if that could compensate for this condition, all though for this to be successful
a larger data set would most likely be required.
==PAGE:84==
72
Future Work
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
This thesis cowered the design and implementation of a wristband device and
companion app for manual collection of data on subjective experiences using a
gesture based system. An experiment was conducted in order to compare the
performance of the wristband with a touch screen implementation of a Visual
Analogue Scale (VAS). The results showed the designed solution to be feasible.
The thesis analyzed the problem and the key concepts that would form the
foundation for the proposed solution. The two gestures of rotating the wrist
and raising the arm was chosen since they corresponds to the roll and pitch
axis.
The design of and implementation of the solution was described in detail. The
wristband device would have a companion app to collect, display and export the
data from the wristband. First a proof of concept was developed using oﬀthe
shelf components, which was a success and laid the groundwork for a prototype.
The prototype worked and was able to log values on a continuous 0-10 scale
based on the gestures together with a time stamp.
In order to validate the performance of the solution an experiment was designed
and conducted. Participants where tasked to rate diﬀerent shades of grey and
integers (stimuli), using both the gesture based methods and touch based VAS
input methods. The collected data was analyzed for performance in accuracy
==PAGE:86==
74
Conclusion
and task completion time. The results showed that both of the designed input
methods (arm and wrist gestures) had no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in accuracy to the
touch based VAS when rating shades of grey. When rating numbers the touch
based VAS showed to have higher accuracy, but when mapping the results to
a 0-10 scale, both of the gesture based inputs had e mean absolute within ±1,
and about 50% of the results was within this range and about 80% within ±2.
Thus it must be concluded that both methods are reliable as a replacement for a
VAS. When comparing task completion times there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between the methods. Based on user feedback the wrist gesture was a little more
preferred and they felt it to be more comfortable, although they perceived the
arm gesture to be more accurate. Since both gestures performed equally well
and are equally preferred, it would be recommended to use the wrist gesture
since it provide more comfort.
Finally, improvements where suggested that could improve the companion app
and the experiment. In case the experiment was to be replicated it would be
of interest to see if the results applies to a more general population and if the
result will stay the same with a larger data set. A case study was suggested in
order to investigate the real life performance of the solution.
==PAGE:87==
Appendix A
Survey
Questions for the survey answered by the participants after the experiment. Un-
fortunately an unknown error occurred while collecting the answers, resulting
in three lost answers.
The answers can be viewed on Google with charst following this link:
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfnv9BTGRywQlKB7XcPGaZfxnaf-ZsvQwbjxm_
Wyicw4aScaQ/viewanalytics
A CSV ﬁle is also available at this link: https://github.com/TheBatAss/
Gesture-Based-Input-Method-for-Wearable/blob/master/Survey/Post%20experiment%
20survey.csv
Questions:
ID (from the experiment):
Gender:
Male
Female
Age:
Which method did you prefer to use?
Arm
Wrist
==PAGE:88==
76
Survey
Perferred equally
Why?
Which method did you feel was more accurate?
Wrist
Arm
The same
Why?
Which method did you feel was most comfortable
Wrist
Arm The same
Why?
Do you have experience using any kind of wearable devices?
Smartwatch
Fitness trackers like ﬁtbit
Smart rings
Pulse belt
I have never used a wearable device
Other
Real usage
Imagine that you suﬀer from migraines and get headaches at irregular times
throughout the day.
Your doctor ask you to log whenever you have a headache and how severe it is
on a scale from 1-10.
You are given 5 options to do this:
Pen and paper You carry around a small notebook and a pen, and you have to
write down the date, time and severeness each time you experience a headache.
App on smartphone You install an app on your smartphone. Each time you
experience a headache you have to open the app which will ask you to select the
severeness. The app automatically collects the time and date.
App on smartwatch You install an app on your smartwatch. Each time you
experience a headache you have to open the app which will ask you to select the
==PAGE:89==
77
severeness. The app automatically collects the time and date.
The wristband turning your wrist Each time you experience a headache, you
turn your wrist to match the severeness and press the button. Time and date
is collected automatically.
The wristband elevating your arm Each time you experience a headache, you
elevate your arm to match the severeness and press the button. Time and date
is collected automatically.
Which method would you prefer? Order them from 1 to 5 (1 is most
preferred, 5 is least preferred)
Pen and paper
App on smartphone
App on smartwatch
The wristband using your wrist
The wristband using your arm
==PAGE:90==
78
Survey
==PAGE:91==
Appendix B
Outlier Visualization
==PAGE:92==
80
Outlier Visualization
Figure B.1: Visualization of outliers for the arm_grey exercise
==PAGE:93==
81
Figure B.2: Visualization of outliers for the arm_grey exercise
==PAGE:94==
82
Outlier Visualization
Figure B.3: Visualization of outliers for the arm_grey exercise
==PAGE:95==
83
Figure B.4: Visualization of outliers for the arm_grey exercise
==PAGE:96==
84
Outlier Visualization
Figure B.5: Visualization of outliers for the arm_grey exercise
==PAGE:97==
85
Figure B.6: Visualization of outliers for the arm_grey exercise
==PAGE:98==
86
Outlier Visualization
==PAGE:99==
Appendix C
Code
All the relevant code for this thesis is hosted on GitHub at the following URL:
https://github.com/TheBatAss/Gesture-Based-Input-Method-for-Wearable
C.1
Proof of Concept
The code for the PoC can be found here:
https://github.com/TheBatAss/Gesture-Based-Input-Method-for-Wearable/
tree/master/proofOfConcept
It consist of Python script “demo.py” which creates the GUI and communicates
with the Adafruit Feather M0 Adalogger[4] which is controlled by the Arduino
script “demo.ino”.
C.2
Companion App
The code for the prototype’s companion app “MetaWear Macro” can be found
here:
==PAGE:100==
88
Code
https://github.com/TheBatAss/Gesture-Based-Input-Method-for-Wearable/
tree/master/MetaWear-Macro
C.3
Experiment App
The code for the app “MetaWear Experiment” conduction the experiment can
be found here:
https://github.com/TheBatAss/Gesture-Based-Input-Method-for-Wearable/
tree/master/MetaWear-Experiment
C.4
Data analysis
The Python code for the data analysis can be found at this link:
https://github.com/TheBatAss/Gesture-Based-Input-Method-for-Wearable/
blob/master/Data%20analysis/Data%20analysis.ipynb
==PAGE:101==
Appendix D
Data
The data collected from the experiment can be found at this link:
https://github.com/TheBatAss/Gesture-Based-Input-Method-for-Wearable/
blob/master/Data%20analysis/ExperimentData.csv
The completion times of the experiement and pilot test can be found at this link:
https://github.com/TheBatAss/Gesture-Based-Input-Method-for-Wearable/
blob/master/Data%20analysis/completionTime.csv
==PAGE:102==
90
Data
==PAGE:103==
Appendix E
Experiment App Screens
Figure E.1: Main screen
==PAGE:104==
92
Experiment App Screens
Figure E.2: Settings screen
Figure E.3: Settings screen
==PAGE:105==
93
Figure E.4: Training screen
Figure E.5: Training screen
==PAGE:106==
94
Experiment App Screens
Figure E.6: Experiment start screen
Figure E.7: slider_grey explanation screen
==PAGE:107==
95
Figure E.8: slider_grey exercise screen
Figure E.9: slider_grey exercise screen
==PAGE:108==
96
Experiment App Screens
Figure E.10: slider_grey exercise screen
Figure E.11: slider_grey exercise screen
==PAGE:109==
97
Figure E.12: slider_num exercise screen
Figure E.13: arm_num explanation screen
==PAGE:110==
98
Experiment App Screens
Figure E.14: wrist_grey explanation screen
Figure E.15: wrist_grey exercise screen
==PAGE:111==
99
Figure E.16: wrist_grey exercise screen
Figure E.17: wrist_num exercise screen
==PAGE:112==
100
Experiment App Screens
Figure E.18: Experiment ﬁnish screen
Figure E.19: slider_grey exercise screen
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
[1] Pitch, roll and yaw of an airplane, non edited ﬁgure. https://pic2.zhimg.
com/2f32b07106e9c111da384b1afb7f2f12_r.jpg, 2018. [Online; accessed
18-June-2018].
[2] VAS
Pain
Scale
Rulers
0-10
cm
w/
Slider.
http://www.
custompromotionalrulers.com/visual-analog-scale-vas-rulers/
vas-pain-scale-rulers-0-10-cm-w/slider/, 2018.
[Online; accessed
16-June-2018].
[3] Adafruit. Adafruit 9-dof absolute orientation imu fusion breakout - bno055.
https://www.adafruit.com/product/2472.
[Online; accessed 18-June-
2018].
[4] Adafruit. Adafruit feather m0 adalogger. https://www.adafruit.com/
product/2796. [Online; accessed 18-June-2018].
[5] Adafruit. Flora wearable bluefruit le module. https://www.adafruit.
com/product/2487. [Online; accessed 18-June-2018].
[6] Amazon. Amazon Mechanical Turk. https://www.mturk.com/, 2018. [On-
line; accessed 16-June-2018].
[7] Anxiety and Depression Association of America. Facts statistics. https:
//adaa.org/about-adaa/press-room/facts-statistics.
[Online; ac-
cessed 2-July-2018].
[8] Anxiety and Depression Association of America. Panic disorder. https://
adaa.org/understanding-anxiety/panic-disorder.
[Online; accessed
2-July-2018].
==PAGE:114==
102
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] Bangalore
Aviation.
The
typical
takeoﬀ
and
climb
angles
of
all
boeing
planes.
https://www.bangaloreaviation.com/2009/05/
typical-takeoff-and-climb-angles-of-all.html.
[Online; accessed
18-June-2018].
[10] Anders Beck.
Mood Tracker.
http://science.beckup.dk/Mood%
20Tracker%20-%20Anders%20Beck%20s134540.pdf, 2017.
[Online; ac-
cessed 18-June-2018].
[11] bonetalks.com.
Broken
forearm.
http://www.bonetalks.com/
elbowforearmrad/. [Online; accessed 24-June-2018].
[12] Gunnar Borg and Elisabet Borg. A general psychophysical scale of black-
ness and its possibilities as a test of rating behaviour. 1991.
[13] Bosch.
Bosch sensortec.
https://www.bosch-sensortec.com/bst/
products/all_products/bno055. [Online; accessed 2-July-2018].
[14] U. Bosch and C. H. Stapfer. The cielab color space revisited: Surprise!
Spe Cad Retec 2004, Society of Plastic Engineers, Color and Appearance
Division, Regional Technical Conference: Hot Colors - Cool Plastics - Con-
ference Proceedings, pages 71–77, 2004.
[15] Rebecca C. Burch, Stephen Loder, Elizabeth Loder, and Todd A. Smither-
man. The prevalence and burden of migraine and severe headache in the
united states: Updated statistics from government health surveillance stud-
ies. Headache, 55(1):21–34, 2015.
[16] Kristian Ohrt Dam-Jensen. Exploring interaction methods for self- log-
ging with a wearable smartbutton, undersøgelse af interaktionsmetoder til
selvregistrering med en ’wearable smartbutton’, 2018.
[17] Android Developers. Material Design for Android. https://developer.
android.com/guide/topics/ui/look-and-feel/, 2018.
[Online;
ac-
cessed 16-June-2018].
[18] S Grant, T Aitchison, E Henderson, J Christie, S Zare, J McMurray, and
H Dargie. A comparison of the reproducibility and the sensitivity to change
of visual analogue scales, borg scales, and likert scales in normal subjects
during submaximal exercise. Chest, 116(5):1208–1217, 1999.
[19] Arthur S. Hathaway.
Quaternion space.
Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, 3(1):46–46, 1902.
[20] Thomasz Rafał Kamiński. A wearable system for acquiring data on sub-
jective experiences, 2016.
==PAGE:115==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
103
[21] Jakob Eg Larsen, Kasper Eskelund, and Thomas Blomseth Christiansen.
Active self-tracking of subjective experience with a one-button wearable: A
case study in military ptsd. Proceedings of the 2nd Computing and Mental
Health Workshop at Acm Chi 2017, 2017.
[22] Reed Larson and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi.
The experience sampling
method. Flow and the Foundations of Positive Psychology: the Collected
Works of Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, pages 21–34, 2014.
[23] Justin Matejka, Michael Glueck, Tovi Grossman, and George Fitzmaurice.
The eﬀect of visual appearance on the performance of continuous sliders
and visual analogue scales. 34th Annual Chi Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, Chi 2016, pages 5421–5432, 2016.
[24] mbientlab.
Android starter app.
https://github.com/mbientlab/
MetaWear-Tutorial-Android. [Online; accessed 18-June-2018].
[25] mbientlab. mbientlab apis. https://mbientlab.com/developers/. [On-
line; accessed 18-June-2018].
[26] mbientlab.
Metamotionr developer kit.
https://mbientlab.com/
product/metamotionr-dev-kit/. [Online; accessed 18-June-2018].
[27] Operative
Neurosurgery.
Visual
analog
scale
(VAS).
http:
//operativeneurosurgery.com/doku.php?id=visual_analog_scale,
2017. [Online; accessed 18-June-2018].
[28] National
Institutes
of
Health.
Nih
analysis
shows
americans
are
in
pain.
https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/
nih-analysis-shows-americans-are-pain.
[Online; accessed 2-July-
2018].
[29] Aditya Ponnada, Caitlin Haynes, Dharam Maniar, Justin Manjourides, and
Stephen Intille. Microinteraction ecological momentary assessment response
rates. Proceedings of the Acm on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiq-
uitous Technologies, 1(3):1–16, 2017.
[30] Dobrila Rancic Moogk. Minimum viable product and the importance of ex-
perimentation in technology startups. Technology Innovation Management
Review, 2012.
[31] Ulf-Dietrich Reips and Frederik Funke. Interval-level measurement with
visual analogue scales in internet-based research: Vas generator. Behavior
Research Methods, 40(3):699–704, 2008.
[32] Aleix Rull and Federico Thomas. On generalized euler angles. Mechanisms
and Machine Science, 24:61–68, 2015.
==PAGE:116==
104
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[33] Samsung. Samsung galaxy tab s2. https://www.samsung.com/global/
galaxy/galaxy-tab-s2/. [Online; accessed 18-June-2018].
[34] PTSD
United.
Ptsd
statistics.
http://www.ptsdunited.org/
ptsd-statistics-2/. [Online; accessed 2-July-2018].
[35] M. Van Den Brink, E. N G Bandell-Hoekstra, and H. Huijer Abu-Saad.
The occurrence of recall bias in pediatric headache: A comparison of ques-
tionnaire and diary data. Headache, 41(1):11–20, 2001.
[36] Gergely Vass. Avoiding gimbal lock. Computer Graphics World, 32(6):10–
11, 2009.
