==PAGE:1==
Diﬀerential Gene and Isoform
Expression Analysis of 15q13.3(-/-)
Mice
Ulrika Boulund
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Systems Biology
Anker Engelunds Vej 1
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 2525
dtu@dtu.dk
www.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The 15q13.3 microdeletion is a copy number variant that can yield odds ra-
tios varying between 2-68 for certain neurodevelopmental disorders, such as
schizophrenia, epilepsy, and autism spectrum disorder.
It covers six protein
coding genes, and the same genes are present in a homologous region on chro-
mosome 7 in mice. Previous studies have determined that 15q13.3(-/-) mice are
suitable as a model for the human condition. The deleted genes are annotated
to seemingly unrelated functions, such as ubiquitination, DNA-repair, calcium
signaling, and regulation of transcription. Despite previous research eﬀorts, the
driving forces behind the phenotypes seen in carriers of this microdeletion have
not been determined.
There is a lack of eﬀective treatment options for the neurodevelopmental disor-
ders associated with the 15q13.3 microdeletion. An improved understanding of
the genetic architecture and how it inﬂuences the pathogenesis of the 15q13.3
microdeletion may promote the development of novel drugs.
In this project diﬀerential gene and isoform expression, and isoform switch anal-
ysis, was performed based on mRNA-sequencing data from 19 mice, 11 wildtype
and eight with the homozygous 15q13.3 microdeletion. After passing quality
control, the reads were mapped to the mouse transcriptome and quantiﬁed.
Diﬀerential gene expression was tested with DESeq2 and EBSeq. These results
were compared to previous diﬀerential gene expression analysis of the same data
set done with edgeR. Diﬀerential isoform expression was also tested with EB-
Seq. The transcriptome mapped data was ﬁnally analyzed for signiﬁcant isoform
switches using IsoformSwitchAnalyzeR.
To identify novel isoforms the quality controlled reads were mapped to the
==PAGE:4==
ii
mouse genome, and assembled and quantiﬁed.
This data was also analyzed
for isoform switches. The four resulting gene sets (diﬀerentially expressed genes
identiﬁed by all tools; genes with diﬀerential isoform expression; genes with
isoform switches from transcriptome mapped data; genes with isoform switches
from genome mapped data) were analyzed for protein interaction networks using
STRING-db.
17 genes were identiﬁed as diﬀerentially expressed by both DESeq2 EBSeq, and
edgeR. More than 350 genes were found to have diﬀerential isoform expression.
Around 20 genes had a signiﬁcant isoform switch with a potential function
eﬀect in the data mapped to the transcriptome. In the data mapped to the
genome, which includes novel isoforms, more than 140 genes were identiﬁed
with a signiﬁcant isoform switch that may have a functional eﬀect.
The majority of the interactions identiﬁed in the network analysis were com-
prised of genes involved in calcium signaling, ubiquitination, the MAPK path-
way, cAMP interaction, and DNA-repair. These functions and pathways may
play a role in driving the phenotypes seen in the 15q13.3 microdeletion. Many
of the results presented in this thesis are supported by previous studies of this
microdeletion, as well as other studies of copy number variants and neurodevel-
opmental disorders.
Despite the contribution of isoform switch analysis to a more speciﬁc under-
standing of possible protein alterations in this microdeletion, it is apparent that
more substantial annotation on isoform level is needed to bring clarity to these
results. Experimental analyses determining the impact of isoform switches on
protein level and function may also aid in the interpretation of the cellular eﬀects
of the isoform switches. This is an important step in discerning the underly-
ing causes of the phenotypes. Replication studies in other brain regions of the
15q13.3(-/-) mice could provide further validity to the changes identiﬁed in this
project.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This report contains the work and results of my MSc thesis in Bioinformatics
and Systems Biology at the Technical University of Denmark.
It covers 30
ECTS points, and the work was done over the period of January 23rd to July
13th 2018. This report is written as a collaboration between H. Lundbeck and
the department of Bioinformatics at the Technical University of Denmark.
Lyngby, 2018
Ulrika Boulund
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Annika Grønborg-Forsingdal for her mo-
tivation, supervision, and guidance during the process of this project. I would
also like to thank my supervisors Anders Gorm Pedersen at DTU, and Kristoﬀer
Vitting-Seerup at KU, for their teaching and input.
I am also thankful for the rest of the Bioinformatics department at Lundbeck,
for their help and constructive criticism during the work of this thesis, and for
the encouraging work environment.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
15q13.3(-/-)
Homozygous microdeletion of 15q13.3
15q13.3(+/-)
Hemizygous microdeletion of 15q13.3
AS
Alternative splicing
ATSS
Alternative transcription start site
ATTS
Alternative transcription termination site
BAM
Binary alignment map
bp
base pair
BH
Benjamini-Hochberg
BWA
Burrows-Wheeler alignment
BWT
Burrows-Wheeler transformation
cAMP
cyclic adenosine monophosphate
cDNA
complementary DNA
CNV
Copy number variant
CREB
cAMP response element binding
DE
Diﬀerentially expressed
DGE
Diﬀerential gene expression
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid
ds cDNA
double stranded cNDA
dTTP
deoxythymidine triphosphate
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
dUTP
deoxyuridine triphosphate
EDA
Exploratory data analysis
ES
Exon skipping
FC
Fold change
FDR
False discovery rate
FM
Ferragina-Manzini
FPKM
Fragments per kilobase million
==PAGE:10==
viii
Abbreviations
GABA
Gamma-amminobutyric acid
GO
Gene ontology
GWAS
Genome wide association study
IR
Intron retention
KEGG
Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes
KO
Knock-out
KU
Copenhagen University
LCR
Low copy repeat region
MAPK
Mitogen-activated protein kinase
Mb
Megabases
MD
Microdeletion
MEE
Mutually exclusive exons
MEM
Maximal exact matches
MES
Multiple exon skipping
miRNA
micro RNA
mRNA
messenger RNA
NMD
Nonsense mediated decay
OR
Odds ratio
ORF
Open reading frame
PCC
Pearson correlation coeﬃcient
PCA
Principal component analysis
PCR
Polymerase chain reaction
PP
Posterior probability
PTC
Premature termination codon
QC
Quality control
qPCR
Quantitative PCR
RIN
RNA integrity number
RNA
Ribonucleic acid
RPKM
Reads per kilobase million
rRNA
ribosomal RNA
SMEM
Super maximal exact matches
SNP
Single nucleotide polymorphism
snRNP
small nuclear ribonoucleoproteins
ss cDNA
single stranded cDNA
TMM
Trimmed mean of M values
TPM
Transcripts per million
tRNA
transfer RNA
UTR
Untranslated region
WT
Wildtype
==PAGE:11==
ix
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviations
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Previous Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
15q13.3 Microdeletion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
15q13.3 Microdeletion Genes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Molecular Biology of Gene Expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Gene Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Transcription . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Splicing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.4
Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Copy Number Variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
RNA sequencing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1
Bias in RNA-sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Quality Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Mapping Methods of RNA-seq Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5.1
Transcriptome Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5.2
Genome Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Transcript Quantiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.7
Novel Isoform Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.8
Diﬀerential Gene Expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
2.9
Diﬀerential Isoform Expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.10 Alternative Splicing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.11 Isoform Switching
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Project Aim
25
4
Materials and methods
27
4.1
Data Generation and Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1.1
Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1.2
RNA Extraction and Sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Quality Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Transcript Quantiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Exploratory Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5
Diﬀerential Expression Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5.1
Diﬀerential Gene Expression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5.2
Diﬀerential Isoform Expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Novel Isoform Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.7
Isoform Switch Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.7.1
Transcriptome Mapped Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.7.2
Genome Mapped Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.8
Protein Network Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Results
35
5.1
Quality Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Exploratory Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Transcriptome Mapping and Quantiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
Genome Mapping and Quantiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.5
Diﬀerential Gene Expression Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.6
Diﬀerential Isoform Expression Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.7
Isoform Switch Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.7.1
Transcriptome Mapped Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.7.2
Genome Mapped Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.8
Protein Network Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Discussion and Further Work
51
6.1
Experimental Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3
Diﬀerential Gene Expression Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.4
Isoform Switch Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.5
Protein Network Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.6
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7
Conclusion
59
Appendices
61
==PAGE:15==
CONTENTS
xiii
Appendix 1 QC and EDA
63
Appendix 2 Results
69
Bibliography
83
==PAGE:16==
xiv
CONTENTS
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This section contains an introduction to the previous research made within
copy number variants (CNVs) associated with neurodevelopmental disorders,
and more speciﬁcally the 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome. It also contains a
description of the 15q13.3 microdeletion.
1.1
Previous Research
Family studies have identiﬁed genetic links for several neuropsychiatric disorders
such as epilepsy, schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorder, and cognitive disabil-
ity, among others [82, 135, 120, 137, 16]. Although progress has been made in the
understanding of genetic risk variants, some aspects of these disorders, such as
the genetic architecture, remain unclear. Several components contribute to the
complexity of these disorders. Not only do they not follow traditional Mendelian
inheritance, but the numerous genetic risk factors typically have variable pen-
etrance. Finally, intricate outcomes due to possible environmental factors can
also contribute to their complexity [12, 156, 45, 98, 121, 117, 135].
Patients who suﬀer from these disorders may exhibit symptoms such as seizures,
cognitive impairments, and social diﬃculties [90, 137, 86]. In many cases, the
==PAGE:18==
2
Introduction
existing treatments are not appropriate or not eﬀective [59]. A better under-
standing of the genetic architecture and how it inﬂuences these symptoms could
provide novel insights that could drive the development of new treatments.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identiﬁed multiple single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) that have been implicated in psychiatric disorders, al-
though many of them have low odds ratios for disease, around one [156]. How-
ever, several CNVs with very high odds ratios for these disorders have also been
found [90, 133, 88, 113, 87]. A CNV is a genetic variation where a segment of one
or several genes has been deleted or duplicated, Figure 2.3 illustrates this. Ex-
amples of these are the 22q11.2, 1q21.1 and 15q13.3 microdeletions, which have
odds ratios varying between 2-68 for disorders such as epilepsy, schizophrenia
and autism spectrum disorder [51, 36, 97, 70, 115, 94, 56, 127, 41]. See Figure
1.1 for an illustration of the relationship between odds ratios and population
frequency in schizophrenia.
Figure 1.1: Odds ratios estimated from several CNVs and SNPs in schizophre-
nia, compared to the frequency of the CNVs or SNPs, modiﬁed
from [51].
1.2
15q13.3 Microdeletion
The 15q13.3 microdeletion encompasses 1.5 Megabases (Mb) and covers seven
genes, six of them are protein coding genes. The seventh gene encodes micro
RNA (miRNA) 211 (miR-211) [89]. Figure 1.2 illustrates the microdeletion in
humans and mice. When this deletion aﬀects only one allele, i.e in hemizygotes,
the frequency in humans is about 1 in 40,000, however when aﬀecting both
alleles, as homozygotes, there has only been 11 human subjects identiﬁed [95,
==PAGE:19==
1.2 15q13.3 Microdeletion
3
45]. The human carriers can have various neurodevelopmental disorders such
as developmental delay, intellectual disability, epilepsy, language impairment,
abnormal behaviors, neuropsychiatric disorders, and hypotonia [158].
Previous studies of both 15q13.3 hemi- and homozygous mice have identiﬁed
multiple diﬀerences between these mice and controls, that have also been seen
in human carriers. Examples of such diﬀerences are decreased memory perfor-
mance, aggression, change in body weight, and changes in neuronal excitability
that lead to seizures. Other phenotypes that can be linked to neurodevelopmen-
tal disorders such as autism, schizophrenia, and epilepsy, have also been iden-
tiﬁed in mice with the microdeletion [73, 45, 41]. In addition to this, the mice
exhibit these symptoms in a gene-dose dependent manner [45]. These studies
thus suggest that these mouse models are suitable to study the biological eﬀects
of this microdeletion [96, 45, 139, 99].
Figure 1.2: The 15q13.3 microdeletion in humans is placed on the long arm of
chromosome 15, and covers 1.5 Mb and six protein coding genes.
There is a homologous region of the same genes on chromosome 7
in the murine genome, which covers 1.2 Mb [41].
1.2.1
15q13.3 Microdeletion Genes
The six protein coding genes that have been deleted in the 15q13.3 microdeletion
have several diﬀerent annotated functions, seemingly unrelated, and without a
clear culprit for the various phenotypes exhibited. The transcription of sur-
rounding genes have been found to be unaltered in the condition, indicating
that the deleted genes are responsible for the phenotypes seen [41]. The deleted
genes are FAN1, MTMR10, TRPM1, KLF13, CHRNA7, and OTUD7A. The
following section will describe the previous studies of these genes and their an-
notated functions.
==PAGE:20==
4
Introduction
The protein product of MTMR15 or FAN1, the Fanconi-associated nuclease 1,
is required in the repair of DNA interstrand crosslinks. Variants in the FAN1
gene have been correlated with autism and schizophrenia [61, 86].
MTMR10, encoding the Mytobuluarin-related protein 10, might be a catalyti-
cally inactive phosphatase [18].
The gene TRPM1 produces the protein named Transient receptor potential
cation channel subfamily M member 1, which as the name reveals is a cation
channel. It is expressed at low levels in the brain, but has been correlated with
night blindness and visual impairment [74, 63, 86].
KLF13, the Krueppel-like factor 13, encodes a transcription factor which re-
presses transcription through two diﬀerent mechanisms, one is by interacting
with Sin3A and HDAC1. It can also activate RANTES expression in T-cells
[66].
It has been suggested as important for embryo implantation, however
knock-out (KO) mice seem to be normal overall [86, 45].
CHRNA7, the Neuronal acetylcholine receptor subunit alpha-7, encodes a pro-
tein which leads to a release of Ca2+ ions from the endoplasmic reticulum once
bound to acetylcholine. It can be blocked by alpha-bungarotoxin. This is the
most well-studied gene in the microdeletion, and was initially thought to be re-
sponsible for the majority of neurological phenotypes. However recent research
demonstrated that KO mice had relatively subtle phenotypes [102, 108, 159].
OTUD7A, encoding the OTU domain-containing protein 7a, is a deubiquitinat-
ing enzyme towards Lys-11-linked polyubiquitin chains [18].
Humans with a smaller deletion of CHRNA7 and OTUD7A exhibit similar
phenotypes as those with the entire deletion spanning all six genes.
Recent
research shows that mice with a deletion of CHRNA7 do not exhibit these
phenotypes, whereas OTUD7A KO mice do.
This indicates that OTUD7A
may be a key contributor to some of the neurodevelopmental phenotypes of the
15q13.3 microdeletion [158, 159].
Despite previous research eﬀorts, there are still uncertainties regarding which
genes or combination of genes are the major driving forces in the neurological
symptoms of the 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome [53, 95].
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Background
In this section the molecular background of the relation between genes, messen-
ger RNA (mRNA), and proteins is covered. It also contains a description of how
a copy number variant (CNV) is formed through allelic recombination. This is
followed by a description of RNA-sequencing and the theoretical background of
the computational tools and methods used in this project.
2.1
Molecular Biology of Gene Expression
This section provides a description of the basics in eukaryotic gene expression.
2.1.1
Gene Structure
Figure 2.1 illustrates a gene, which contains several diﬀerent elements such as a
promoter, a 5’ and 3’ untranslated region (UTR), and the open reading frame
(ORF). The ORF contains the translation start and stop codon, as well as
introns and exons. The 5’ and 3’ UTRs, as well as the poly-A tail and the 5’
cap, are not translated into peptides. There may also be enhancers and silencers
==PAGE:22==
6
Background
that can aﬀect the expression of the gene. These can be located far away from
the gene, and can be bound by transcription factors [17].
Within the promoter is the consensus TATA-box, which transcription factors
can recognize, and a binding site for RNA Polymerase II [17].
The 5’ UTR can vary in length from 100 to several thousand nucleotides, however
the average length is around 200 nucleotides [44]. It starts at the transcription
start site, and ends right before the translation start codon, typically AUG [17].
It contains the Kozak consensus sequence, which plays a role in the initiation
process of translation [35]. The 5’ UTR typically has a high GC content, which
allows for secondary structures that can aﬀect translation [15].
It can also
contain introns [17].
The 3’ UTR is typically 800 nucleotides long, however it can vary between 60-
4000 nucleotides [65, 44]. Long 3’ UTRs may lower gene expression, due to
the presence of miRNA binding sites [17]. The 3’ UTR begins right after the
stop codon for translation. Regulatory regions contained within the 3’ UTR
can inﬂuence gene expression, polyadenylation, translation, localization, and
the stability of the mRNA [112, 17]. The length and secondary structure of the
3’ UTR can also regulate translation. Mutations in the 3’ UTR region can alter
the expression of numerous other genes as well [24].
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the components of a gene and the products made in
transcription, post-transcriptional modiﬁcation, and ﬁnally trans-
lation, from [126].
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Molecular Biology of Gene Expression
7
2.1.2
Transcription
Transcription is initiated when RNA Polymerase II and transcription factors
bind to the promoter of a gene.
A transcription bubble is created, which
separates the DNA strands by breaking the hydrogen bonds between the nu-
cleotides. The complementary RNA nucleotides are added, with Uracil instead
of Thymine, and the backbone is formed to create an RNA strand. The new
strand is then released, and then capping, polyadenylation, and splicing follows
[122].
The pre-mRNA product from transcription contains the 5’ UTR with a ribo-
some binding site, the 3’ UTR with a terminator, and the ORF. A 5’ cap is
added while the transcript is being transcribed, and splicing can occur simulta-
neously or right after transcription [122]. Since splicing occurs in the nucleus,
either in conjunction with or immediately after transcription, factors that aﬀect
transcription may also aﬀect splicing [141, 75].
2.1.3
Splicing
The spliceosome consists of ﬁve small nuclear ribonucleoproteins, snRNPs, and
binds to splice sites within the introns [141, 75]. Within the intron there is
a 5’ donor site, a 3’ branch site and a 3’ acceptor site, that are required for
splicing. The donor site typically contains a highly conserved GU sequence, and
the acceptor site a highly conserved AG sequence. Towards the 5’ end of the
AG there is a polypyrimidine rich region, and further upstream (towards 5’)
from this is the branchpoint which contains an adenine nucleotide [19, 27, 75].
Point mutations in these regions can aﬀect splicing and can have massive eﬀects
such as a truncated protein [75]. Figure 2.2 illustrates the binding sites for the
spliceosome in an intron.
Figure 2.2: Illustration of binding sites for the spliceosome in an intron, from
[8]. The blue segments are exons surrounding the intron in yellow.
Number 1 points to the AG acceptor site, number 2 points to the
polypyrimidine rich region, and number 3 points to the branch-
point, all in the 3’ end of the intron. In the 5’ end of the intron
number 4 points to the conserved GU sequence.
==PAGE:24==
8
Background
During the splicing process it is determined which exons will be kept in the
mature mRNA. Trans-acting activator and repressor proteins, and cis-acting
regulatory elements such as exonic splicing enhancers and silencers in the pre-
mRNA itself, regulate and select splice sites. The position of a splicing factor can
aﬀect whether it acts as an activator or repressor [83]. In addition to this, even
the secondary structure of the pre-mRNA may regulate splicing, by aﬀecting the
distance between splicing elements, or by masking binding elements [153, 116].
Once the introns are removed the exons are ligated. After splicing the 3’ poly(A)
tail is added, to stabilize the mature mRNA and allow it for transport out of
the nucleus [26].
2.1.4
Translation
Translation occurs in the cytoplasm, and to initiate translation the ribosome is
assembled around the mRNA, and transfer RNA (tRNA) is attached at the start
codon. During elongation the tRNA transfers an amino acid corresponding to
the codon, and this process is continued to create the growing amino acid chain.
Termination occurs when the stop codon is met, and the ribosome releases the
ﬁnished polypeptide [122].
2.2
Copy Number Variants
CNVs are genetic variants where segments of the genome has been deleted or
duplicated. This occurs non-uniformly throughout the genome. It often arises
due to non-allelic homologous recombination, between areas of the DNA that are
repetitive due to previous duplication through evolution. These areas are termed
low copy repeat regions (LCRs) [70]. These regions can range from 10-300 kb
in length, and typically share more than 95% sequence similarity. The genetic
rearrangement that results in a CNV can occur through the misalignment of
LCRs during meiosis or mitosis [29]. An illustration of this is available in Figure
2.3.
2.3
RNA sequencing
The transcriptome is all RNA molecules in an organism. This includes ribosomal
RNA (rRNA), tRNA, mRNA, miRNA etc. [40, 92, 149]. rRNA is the most
abundant RNA molecule in the cell, with a typical fraction of 90% of total RNA.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 RNA sequencing
9
Figure 2.3: Illustration of non-allelic homologous recombination, and how it
can yield CNVs [70].
The mRNA constitutes only about 1-2% of total RNA in the cell. The mRNA
in an organism provides a momentary insight into the expression of coding genes
in the genome. This can be useful when understanding the connection between
genetics and the functional biology of cells [69].
When total RNA has been extracted from the tissue, the mRNA can be enriched
with 3’ polyadenylated poly(A) tails, or the rRNA can be depleted [30]. The
selection of poly(A) tails is sensitive to degradation of the mRNA, which is
measured by the RNA integrity value (RIN). In addition to this, 3’ bias increases
with a decreasing RIN value [25].
The following paragraph explains the workﬂow used in this project, which is
also illustrated in Figure 2.4. The poly(A) tail enriched mRNA is fragmented,
and the ﬁrst complementary DNA strand (cDNA) is reversely transcribed us-
ing Reverse Transcriptase and random hexamer primers.
The second cDNA
strand is synthesized using deoxyuridine triphosphate (dUTPs), DNA Poly-
merase I, and RNase H. The dUTPs are used to replace deoxythymidine triphos-
phate (dTTPs), which allows for strand speciﬁcity. The 3’ ends are adenylated,
adapters are ligated using DNA Ligase, and then the dUTPs can be enzymat-
ically removed. This is followed by ampliﬁcation by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR), and sequencing on a next generation sequencing platform [145]. mRNA
is transcribed into cDNA because it is more stable, and because the vast major-
ity of sequencers are made for DNA [93]. There are variations to this workﬂow,
some examples are using oligo-dT primers instead of random hexamer priming,
or to do unstranded cDNA synthesis. It is also possible to fragment either the
RNA as done in this project, or the cDNA [79]. There are various steps in these
processes where errors may occur, and where biases are introduced, examples
are explained below in section 2.3.1. This is important to note for downstream
==PAGE:26==
10
Background
Figure 2.4: Workﬂow for the TruSeq stranded mRNA protocol used in this
project to extract mRNA and do library prep of samples, from
[145].
analysis and interpreting results.
The accuracy of RNA-sequencing has been thoroughly tested and found to be
comparable or even better than that of previous gene expression measuring
methods such as microarrays and quantitative PCR (qPCR) [52, 58, 40]. The
genes and transcripts that can be identiﬁed by RNA-sequencing depend on
several factors, one of which is sequencing depth. The choice of depth depends on
what type of analysis is to be performed downstream, and of course the budget
for the project. If one is interested in the gene level 20-50 million fragments 100
bp single reads per sample has been estimated to be enough for an organism
such as mouse. However for de novo transcriptome assembly, paired end reads of
a depth between 100-200 million is deemed necessary [39]. Regarding the choice
==PAGE:27==
2.3 RNA sequencing
11
between single or paired end reads, paired end reads should be preferred for
isoform level analysis and novel isoform detection, since it improves alignment
speciﬁcity and estimations of alternative splicing [30, 49].
2.3.1
Bias in RNA-sequencing
All high-throughput sequencing methods introduce bias, and there are also bi-
ases speciﬁc to RNA-sequencing. In this section some of the relevant biases are
explained.
GC bias is a general issue in high-throughput sequencing, it is typically due to
the ampliﬁcation by PCR. This bias appears because PCR selectively ampliﬁes
sequences within a certain GC content range more than others [140]. This bias
can either be computationally corrected or it can be balanced by keeping the
samples and sequencing within the same batch [39, 118, 106].
Position bias is speciﬁc to RNA-sequencing. This is due to non-uniform coverage
due to e.g poly(A) tail enrichment, which is more likely to extract sequences in
the 3’ end of the mRNA. It can also be due to RNA-degradation [119]. This
type of bias can thus be aﬀected by the RNA-sequencing workﬂow, or it can be
corrected for computationally [106].
To initiate reverse transcription oligo(dT) or hexamer primers can be used [11].
Random hexamer primers are used to allow for the generation of reads across
the entire length of all expressed transcripts. However the sequence coverage is
non-uniform [93]. Hexamer primers are more likely to bind certain nucleotide
motifs in the ends of fragments, leading to hexamer priming bias, also called
sequence bias [55, 106]. One way to make coverage more uniform is to fragment
the RNA prior to reverse transcription [93].
Fragment length distribution is also a common bias, which is due to the size
selection step of the library prep workﬂow. This step is conducted to give a
size range that the Illumina sequencing machines handle best, which is typically
150-1000 bp. The result is that fragments of a certain length interval (e.g below
150 bp) will be under-represented. [48, 103, 119]
==PAGE:28==
12
Background
2.4
Quality Control
There are many diﬀerent tools to assess the quality of sequencing data. Two
examples are the FastX toolkit and FastQC [3, 1]. They provide much of the
same functionality, for example summary reports regarding various aspects of
the sequenced reads.
The sequence quality per base of the read is a useful measure to consider, where
the sequence quality typically is measured as a Phred score. This score can be
converted into a probability score of a correct base call by the sequencer. The
per base sequence content is also important, since all four nucleotides should
have a steady level across the entire read. It can sometimes be unsteady in the
ﬁrst few bases of data from the Illumina platform, due to calibration between
the polymerase and chemicals in the machine [1].
In some cases a number of over-represented sequences or contamination from
adapters can be identiﬁed in the read data, which calls for examination. These
sequences can either be due to technical duplication from PCR, or it can be
misidentiﬁed as duplication due to e.g the high expression of mitochondrial genes
[1, 150]. In regards to sequence duplication levels, some amount of duplication
is typical for RNA-sequencing data, due to the often high sequencing depth used
to identify lowly expressed transcripts [2].
There are several ways to handle bad quality sequencing data, and many tools
provide such functionalities, a couple of popular ones are Trimmomatic and
prinseq. They can for example apply ﬁltering, often based on read length or
average quality of the entire read. Trimming of the 5’ or 3’ end of the read is
also possible, to remove low quality base calls, and to cut adapters [1].
2.5
Mapping Methods of RNA-seq Data
RNA-sequencing reads can be mapped to either the annotated transcriptome or
to the genome of the organism of interest. There are several diﬀerent types of
mapping methods available, all with diﬀerent advantages and drawbacks, and
they are suitable for diﬀerent types of data and analyses.
If the transcriptome is well annotated, it can be beneﬁcial to map the reads to
that instead of the genome due to an improvement in speed, while still retaining
a high accuracy [30]. However if the purpose is to identify novel isoforms, or if
the transcriptome is not well-annotated, then the reads should be mapped to
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Mapping Methods of RNA-seq Data
13
the genome [144, 54].
2.5.1
Transcriptome Mapping
Recently, several tools that map RNA-sequencing reads to the transcriptome
have become available, two examples are kallisto, Salmon, and Sailﬁsh [21, 106,
107]. In this section the mapping method of Salmon will be described, because
it is the tool used for transcriptome mapping in this project.
There are several biases that have been observed in RNA-sequencing data, some
are mentioned above in section 2.3.1. Salmon has parameters that allow for
the correction of GC bias, sequence (or hexamer priming) bias, and position
bias [106, 84]. Salmon consists of an oﬄine and an online phase. During the
online phase the algorithm learns the aforementioned biases as well as sample
speciﬁc information such as strand-speciﬁc protocols and fragment length distri-
bution, while it estimates transcript abundances. These parameters and biases
are utilized in the oﬄine phase to update the estimated abundances [106]. An
illustration of Salmon’s method is available in Figure 2.5.
To estimate the abundances Salmon quasi-maps the reads to a Burrows-Wheeler
alignment (BWA)-like Ferragina Manzini (FM)-index of the provided transcrip-
tome [22, 42, 132].
This allows for quantiﬁcation in the same step, without
creating intermediary alignment ﬁles. The index consists of two components; a
suﬃx array and a hash table. It does not have to be recreated to search with
diﬀerent parameters. The index is used to ﬁnd chains of maximal exact matches
(MEMs) and super maximal exact matches (SMEMs) between an input read and
the transcriptome. A MEM is a substring that the read and reference transcript
share, which if extended introduces a mismatch. A SMEM is a MEM that is
not within any other MEM in the query. Fragment-transcript assignment scores
are based on the following criteria:
1. chance of observing a fragment length given a particular transcript (derived
from fragment length distribution)
2. chance fragment starts at particular position on transcript
3. concordance of fragment orientation based on speciﬁc protocol (stranded,
paired-end)
4. positional, sequence-speciﬁc, and GC content based on computed mappings
Salmon does this continuously, and then equivalence classes are constructed over
all fragments, which is used in the oﬄine phase to reﬁne the abundance estimates
by using expectation maximization. The maximum likelihood estimates that are
output from this represents the estimated number of fragments that stem from
each transcript [106].
==PAGE:30==
14
Background
Figure 2.5: Overview of the components and methods in Salmon [105]. The
tool allows for two alternative inputs, either with an index and
sequenced reads, or with aligned reads. With an index and reads
as input the ﬁrst step is quasi-mapping, or lightweight align-
ment.
Then the online phase estimates abundances and equiv-
alence classes. The ﬁnal step, the oﬄine phase, consists of expec-
tation maximization (or variational Bayesian expectation maxi-
mization), denoted EM.
2.5.2
Genome Mapping
There is a whole host of tools that can map sequencing reads to the genome,
some examples are HISAT2, STAR, and TopHat [68, 37, 33]. Both HISAT2 and
TopHat2 use Bowtie to handle the core of the read alignment method, however
HISAT2 is very fast compared to TopHat2 [68, 33]. In this section the mapping
==PAGE:31==
2.6 Transcript Quantiﬁcation
15
method of HISAT2 will be explained, because it is the genome mapping tool
used in this project. An overview of the method can be seen in Figure 2.6.
HISAT2 is an aligner (hierarhical indexing for spliced alignment of transcripts)
which is based on generalized compressed suﬃx array, which is an extension
of Burrows-Wheeler transformation (BWT) for a graph [69, 22, 129]. It has a
graph FM index which represents the entire genome, and a large set of small FM
indexes, so called local indexes, that represent regions that collectively cover the
genome [42]. This is called a hierarchical graph FM index. The local indexes
overlap, which allows for aligning reads that would otherwise span the regions
that is covered by two indexes [6].
A part of the read is ﬁrst mapped using the global FM index, it then tries to
extend the alignment by using the genome sequence. If it succeeds the read is
aligned as it completely resides within an exon. If the extension hits a mismatch,
HISAT2 utilizes the local FM index that overlaps this location, in order to ﬁnd
the appropriate mapping for the rest of the read [68].
2.6
Transcript Quantiﬁcation
Some tools that have been developed for transcript quantiﬁcation is Salmon,
kallisto, Sailﬁsh, Cuﬄinks, HTSeq, and StringTie [106, 107, 21, 144, 13, 110].
Both Salmon and kallisto can perform alignment and quantiﬁcation in the same
step, when using the quasi-mapping mode or the pseudo-alignment mode, re-
spectively [106, 21]. In section 2.5.1 the quantiﬁcation by Salmon was described.
In this section the assembly and quantiﬁcation by StringTie, based on reads
aligned to the genome, will be described because it is the method used in this
project.
An illustration of the StringTie method is available in Figure 2.7. StringTie
uses a network ﬂow algorithm to assemble aligned RNA reads into potential
transcripts. It creates a splice graph based on overlapping reads in a speciﬁc
locus, where nodes represent exons and edges are reads that connect these exons.
An assembled transcript corresponds to the path that has the largest number
of reads on edges, i.e the highest weight, in the graph. The weight of the edges
is equal to the number of reads, so the abundance can be estimated at the same
time. All the reads that are associated with the found transcript are removed,
and the graph is updated and a new iteration begins. It starts with the most
highly expressed transcript, and each iteration is repeated until all reads are
used [110].
==PAGE:32==
16
Background
Figure 2.6: Mapping method of HISAT2 [68]. e1 and e2 represent exon 1 and
2, respectively, of chromosome 22 in this example. (1), (2), and
(3) represent the reads that map in situation a, b, and c. The blue
arrow represents the ﬁrst part of the read that is mapped to the
genome, using the global FM index. The purple arrow corresponds
to the extension of the alignment by using the genome sequence.
In a. the mapping of read 1 is successful since the entire read is
inside the exon. The mapping of read 2 is unsuccessful, due to
a mismatch. In b. by utilizing the local FM index it is possible
to ﬁnd the appropriate mapping for the rest of the read, which
is represented by a green arrow. In c. a combination of the two
previous approaches is illustrated when mapping read 3.
==PAGE:33==
2.7 Novel Isoform Detection
17
Figure 2.7: An illustration of the StringTie method. It iteratively ﬁnds the
heaviest path in the splice graph, generates a ﬂow network of this,
and the maximum ﬂow is used to calculate the abundance. The
splice graph is then updated, and the process is repeated [110].
This is more accurate than previous methods, since it calculates the abundance
and exon-intron structure simultaneously [109]. The genes from each sample are
assembled separately, and their expression levels are estimated at the same time.
The assemblies of each sample are merged, because transcripts in some samples
might not be completely covered by reads, and thus only partial versions of them
are assembled in the ﬁrst run. The merge creates a set of transcripts that is
consistent across all samples, which allows for downstream comparison. Finally
the merged transcripts are reentered into StringTie for a complete estimation
of abundances [69, 110].
2.7
Novel Isoform Detection
By mapping RNA sequencing reads to the genome novel transcripts that have
not previously been annotated to the transcriptome can be identiﬁed [144, 54].
There are several tools available for this, and a popular tool is Cuﬄinks in
combination with TopHat, however studies have found that StringTie in com-
bination with HISAT2 outperforms Cuﬄinks [144, 110]. The methods behind
HISAT2 and StringTie have been described in section 2.5.2 and 2.6, respectively,
so this will not be described further.
==PAGE:34==
18
Background
2.8
Diﬀerential Gene Expression
Gene expression estimates based on mRNA show little correlation with actual
protein levels, however studies have found that for diﬀerentially expressed genes
there is a much greater correlation between mRNA and protein levels, compared
to genes with constant expression levels [76].
There are multiple tools that have been developed to test for diﬀerential gene
expression, based on various computational approaches and statistical methods.
These tools have diﬀerent thresholds in regards to ﬁltering, distribution model-
ing, testing methods, multiple testing correction etc. which all play their parts
into yielding a multitude of results from the diﬀerent tools [125, 130].
The majority of the most used tools assume that the reads follow a negative
binomial distribution, this is what edgeR, DESeq, EBSeq, and baySeq does.
Cuﬀdiﬀassumes a beta negative binomial distribution, whereas tools such as
NOISeq and SAMseq are non-parametric, and limma does transformations on
gene-level read counts for linear modeling. As was mentioned above, it is not
only the assumed distribution, but also the type of statistical signiﬁcance test,
normalization, and ﬁltering that the tools apply that diﬀer vastly [125].
In the following section a more in-depth description of DESeq2 and EBSeq will
follow, because these two tools are used in this project. The major diﬀerence
between them is that DESeq2 is based on frequentist statistics, whereas EBSeq
is based on Bayesian statistics.
DESeq2 applies a ﬁlter of a mean count above or equal to six to all genes, in order
to reduce the size of the data set for statistical testing. It models the relationship
between the mean and variance when estimating dispersion. This gives a general
and data-driven parameter estimation. A scaling factor normalization is applied
to account for varying sequence depth across the diﬀerent samples, and an exact
test is used to test for diﬀerential expression. The false discovery rate (FDR)
is controlled by adjusting the p-values. e.g by the Benjamini-Hochberg method
[125, 85].
EBSeq was originally developed to carry out diﬀerential isoform expression anal-
ysis, but has been shown to be robust on gene level as well. EBSeq applies a
ﬁlter of the 100th percentile to reduce the size of the data set for statistical
testing. The median normalization procedure ﬁrst developed by DESeq is used
by EBSeq to account for varying sequencing depth across samples. It estimates
the posterior likelihoods of diﬀerential and equal expression, using empirical
Bayesian methods. A Bayesian FDR estimate is available [125, 77].
==PAGE:35==
2.9 Diﬀerential Isoform Expression
19
2.9
Diﬀerential Isoform Expression
There are a few tools available for diﬀerential isoform expression analysis. As
mentioned previously, EBSeq was ﬁrst developed for this purpose [78]. Another
example is Cuﬀdiﬀin the Cuﬄinks suite, and MetaDiﬀ[64, 143]. Diﬀerential iso-
form expression analysis is complicated due to ambiguous reads and uncertainty
in isoform expression estimates, however programs such as Cuﬀdiﬀand EBSeq
were developed to account for these isoform-speciﬁc uncertainties. EBSeq and
Cuﬀdiﬀdo not include batch eﬀects into their analyses, whereas MetaDiﬀdoes
[64].
The tool used for diﬀerential isoform expression in this project was EBSeq, since
this has been described previously it will not be covered further in this section.
2.10
Alternative Splicing
Despite the fact that the number of genes in higher vertebrates might be smaller
than ﬁrst expected, due to several mechanisms, such as post-translational mod-
iﬁcation and alternative splicing (AS), the end products can quickly become
very complex [28, 91, 71, 57, 19]. The most varied mechanism to alter protein
properties is through AS [50]. About 95% of genes with multiple exons use AS,
and about 60% of genes have at least one alternative transcription start site
[142, 104, 23, 75]. It has also been found that each gene has on average more
than six isoforms, where four are protein coding [38]. An extreme example of
the eﬀects of AS is the DSCAM gene in Drosophila, which has been estimated
to potentially result in 38,000 mRNA variants. If only 10% of these variants
were expressed, this number of transcripts due to AS would be unprecedented
[50].
The composition of the mature mRNA can be aﬀected by AS, and the tran-
script can thus contain various combinations of exons, protein domains, and
signal peptides, which may aﬀect the function, localization, and stability, of the
resulting protein [34, 19, 149]. Figure 2.8 illustrates how alternative splicing can
aﬀect the mRNA and the protein product. More than 99% of human and chim-
panzee genes are identical, however in the same tissues 6%-8% of alternative
exons have diﬀerent splicing patterns between the two species [75].
Whether a transcript is translated into an expressed protein can also be aﬀected
by AS, either by aﬀecting the coding capability of the transcript, or whether it
is likely to be targeted by NMD. The coupling of AS and NMD has regulatory
==PAGE:36==
20
Background
Figure 2.8: Illustration of alternative splicing eﬀects on mRNA level and pro-
tein product, from [7]. Depending on which exons are included
in the mRNA, the protein domains vary, which may alter protein
function.
eﬀects on protein expression levels. NMD is a surveillance mechanism which
degrades nonsense mRNAs. A transcript is targeted by NMD if it contains a
premature termination codon (PTC), i.e a stop codon that is located more than
50 nucleotides upstream (toward 5’) of the ﬁnal exon. Previous studies have
found that as much as one third of alternative transcripts may contain a PTC
[80].
It has been estimated that up to half of all mutations that cause diseases may af-
fect splicing, illustrating how important AS can be in human disease [151]. This
is particularly relevant in the nervous system, where thousands of diﬀerently
spliced mRNAs aﬀect learning, memory, neuronal cell recognition, ion channels
and receptors [50]. It is important to keep in mind that not only changes in
protein-coding sequences may cause disease, but also changes in the 5’ or 3’
untranslated regions (UTR) can cause disease in humans. Two examples of this
are fragile-X syndrome and myotonic dystrophy [151]. In addition to this, if a
single silent mutation occurred in an exon, it should not be dismissed as neu-
tral, since it can cause disruption of an exonic splicing enhancer, and thus cause
disease [75]. Examples of silent mutations which aﬀect AS have been found,
indicating that at least some of the eﬀects of AS are mediated on the RNA
level rather than protein level [50]. Intron retention has been found to aﬀect
gene expression levels, RNA stability, as well as rapid induction of expression
through post-transcriptional splicing of the retained introns [62].
Here follows some explanations of some generally recognized alternative splicing
mechanisms [123, 19]. These are also illustrated in Figures 2.9 and 2.10.
==PAGE:37==
2.11 Isoform Switching
21
Alternative transcription start site (ATSS): the start site for transcription
has been moved, either upstream or downstream. This can make the resulting
transcript longer or shorter, remove functionality of the end-product, or allow
for new functions. This can either occur through altered protein folding, or by
altering exon or protein domain content.
Alternative transcription termination site (ATTS): the termination site
for transcription has been moved, either upstream or downstream. This can
make the resulting transcript longer or shorter, and remove functionality of the
end-product, or allow for new functions.
Exon skipping (ES): one or multiple exons are removed by splicing. There
can also be mutually exclusive exons, where two exons may never be transcribed
together. Exon skipping is also called cassette exon, which refers to the exon
which is skipped [32].
Intron retention (IR): is when one or multiple introns that would typically
be spliced out are retained in the pre-mRNA. These are typically broken down
shortly after, but they may have important consequences in regards to managing
expression levels.
Alternative 3’ acceptor site or 5’ donor site: when the 3’ or 5’ end of an
exon is placed diﬀerently than the constitutively spliced isoform.
2.11
Isoform Switching
If a gene can be transcribed into multiple isoforms through AS, isoform switch-
ing can occur. This is the diﬀerential usage of isoforms between two or more
conditions, however much like gene expression, it can also be compared at dif-
ferent time points in the same cell, or between groups of cells [75]. The human
BCL2L1 gene is a prime example of important cellular eﬀects that may arise
due to isoform switching, where the Bcl-x(L) isoform is an antiapoptotic factor,
whereas the Bcl-x(S) isoform induces apoptosis [80]. Studies have found that
isoforms are often tissue-speciﬁc, and even species speciﬁc [149, 34, 75]. In Fig-
ure 2.11 three diﬀerent models are illustrated to explain the diﬀerence between
isoform switching and diﬀerential gene expression. It is important to note that
isoform switching is not based solely on the isoform expression levels, which
makes it diﬀerent from diﬀerential isoform expression analysis.
It is instead
based on the fraction each isoform is expressed relative to the gene expression
[148].
==PAGE:38==
22
Background
Figure 2.9: Alternative splicing mechanisms, inspired by [123, 19].
The
coloured boxes represent exons, and the thin lines connecting them
represent introns. The triangular lines represent the trajectory of
the spliceosome. The boxes on the right of the arrow represent
the resulting mRNA transcript.
Figure 2.10: Alternative splicing mechanisms, inspired by [123, 19].
The
coloured boxes represent exons, and the thin lines connecting
them represent introns. The triangular lines represent the tra-
jectory of the spliceosome. The boxes on the right of the arrow
represent the resulting mRNA transcript.
Isoform switching can be initiated through diﬀerent splicing mechanisms, some
of which are illustrated in Figures 2.9 and 2.10.
IsoformSwitchAnalyzeR is a tool that can identify isoform switches based on
==PAGE:39==
2.11 Isoform Switching
23
Figure 2.11: Illustration of isoform switching, from [128]. A illustrates one
gene with two diﬀerent isoforms, coloured blue and red. B shows
the comparison of the expression of the diﬀerent isoforms in each
condition, compared to the expression of the gene. Here, each
box represents the expression of either the red or blue isoform.
In model 0 there is neither DGE nor isoform switching. In model
1 there is DGE, however there is no isoform switching. In model
2 there is no DGE, but there is isoform switching.
transcript abundances. It applies a statistical test on each isoform for diﬀer-
ential usage, and annotates alternative splicing events based on the expressed
structures of the isoforms [148, 101, 147]. The statistical test used in this project
is based on the Dirichlet-multinomial model [101]. By identifying the dominant
ORF of the isoforms IsoformSwitchAnalyzeR can predict sensitivity to NMD
[80, 147, 148, 155, 60]. Based on the exon structure, it extracts the nucleotide
sequence, which can be input to the coding potential assessment tool (CPAT).
This tool estimates the coding potential of transcript sequences [152]. It is also
possible to extract the amino acid sequence, which can be input to SignalP and
Pfam. These tools can identify signal peptides and protein family domains in
protein sequences, respectively [111, 43].
==PAGE:40==
24
Background
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3
Project Aim
The aim of this project is to gain a greater understanding of the complicated
relationship between the genetic architecture and neurodevelopmental disor-
ders associated with the 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome. More speciﬁcally, the
analyses described here are conducted to identify genes with diﬀerential gene or
isoform expression, or isoform switching genes, that may contribute to the phe-
notypes seen in carriers of this microdeletion. The results of this study could aid
in detecting speciﬁc genes that may be instrumental in the pathogenesis of the
15q13.3 microdeletion, as well as highlighting potential pathways and functions
of importance in related neurodevelopmental disorders. Ultimately, the hope is
that a greater understanding of the biology of this microdeletion will promote
the discovery of novel treatments for the disorders associated with the 15q13.3
microdeletion.
The speciﬁc objectives of the project are the following:
• Identify a robust set of diﬀerentially expressed genes in 15q13.3(-/-) mice
• Identify genes with diﬀerentially expressed isoforms in 15q13.3(-/-) mice
• Identify genes with an isoform switch in 15q13.3(-/-) mice, both on anno-
tated data and for novel isoforms
• Investigate networks based on the identiﬁed genes that may highlight im-
portant pathways or functions
==PAGE:42==
26
Project Aim
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4
Materials and methods
This section contains descriptions of the methods used in this project. Figure
4.1 illustrates the overall workﬂow of this project.
Figure 4.1: Workﬂow of the analyses conducted in this project.
==PAGE:44==
28
Materials and methods
4.1
Data Generation and Preparation
4.1.1
Samples
The 15q13.3(-/-) mice were bred and genotyped as described previously [45]. All
mice were sacriﬁced at the age of 22 weeks, and brain tissue samples from the
parietal cortex were collected, see Figure 4.2.
4.1.2
RNA Extraction and Sequencing
Total RNA was extracted from the brain tissue samples, and mRNA was en-
riched by 3’ poly-adenylation and fragmented. Reverse transcription was done
with random hexamer priming, and 3’ ends were adenylated. Finally adapter
ligation and PCR ampliﬁcation was performed. All of this was done with the
TruSeq Stranded mRNA Sample Preparation kit according to manufacturer’s
instruction. See Figure 2.4 for an illustration of this workﬂow. Any samples
that had a RIN value below eight were not included for further analysis, as has
been suggested by previous research [25]. The resulting number of samples were
19, eight 15q13.3(-/-) and 11 wildtype. The sequencing was 100 bp paired end
sequencing on Illumina HiSeq 2500 [47].
The mean sequencing depth was approximately 89 million reads per sample,
corresponding to about 45 million fragments per sample. Table 4.1 contains
an overview of the samples and relevant meta data.
Table 5.3 contains the
sequencing depth for all samples.
Figure 4.2: The blue area is the parietal cortex in the human brain.
The
homologous area in mice was used for extraction of RNA.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Quality Control
29
Table 4.1: Sample information and meta data. It contains the genotype, sex,
RIN value, and sequencing lane of each sample. MD = Microdele-
tion, WT = Wildtype.
Sample
ID
Genotype
Sex
RIN
Sequencing
Lane
209
MD
Female
8.7
2
210
MD
Female
8.6
4
211
MD
Female
8.7
3
212
WT
Female
8.1
4
213
WT
Female
8.7
3
214
MD
Female
8.6
4
215
WT
Female
8.4
4
217
WT
Female
9.1
1
219
WT
Female
9.3
1
220
MD
Female
8.8
1
221
WT
Female
9.1
1
222
MD
Female
8.6
5
223
WT
Female
8.9
2
224
WT
Female
8.8
3
225
MD
Male
8.8
2
226
WT
Male
8.6
3
227
WT
Male
8.9
2
228
MD
Male
8.7
3
229
WT
Male
9.0
2
4.2
Quality Control
The raw reads were quality controlled with FastQC version 0.11.7 [1]. No trim-
ming was done, however all samples were ﬁltered for reads with mean quality
below a Phred score of 30, using prinseq-lite version 0.20.4 [124]. The reads
were subsequently paired with pairfq version 0.17.0 [9]. This was the data used
for all downstream analyses.
4.3
Transcript Quantiﬁcation
Salmon version 0.9.1 was used to map and quantify transcript abundances of
the sequencing data [106]. The index was built on the reference transcriptome
consisting of the nucleotide sequences of chromosomal regions from GENCODE
Mus Musculus release M17 (GRCm38.p6) [4]. The mapping was done using
==PAGE:46==
30
Materials and methods
the quasi-mapping mode, and the –keepDuplicates, –gcBias, and –seqBias ﬂags
were added. The resulting counts and relative transcript abundances, measured
in transcripts per million (TPM), were used for downstream analyses.
4.4
Exploratory Data Analysis
This part of the workﬂow aimed to investigate any potential batch eﬀects, out-
liers or erroneous data. All of the following analyses were conducted in Rstudio
with R version 3.5.0 [114]. The abundance matrices from Salmon was imported
into R using tximport [131]. The transcript abundances were summarized to
gene level with tximport, type was set to salmon [131]. The tx2gene was created
using the annotation of chromosomal regions from GENCODE Mus Musculus
release M17 (GRCm38.p6), and the X, Y and mitochondrial chromosomes were
ﬁltered out [4].
The amount of rRNA contamination was calculated as the ratio of the read
counts that mapped to rRNA annotated genes in the genome and the total
abundance of all genes.
Using the function prcomp with scale=TRUE, potential batch eﬀects were visu-
alized by principal component analysis (PCA) based on the abundance quantiﬁ-
cation imported from Salmon [114]. Batch eﬀects of the top 500 most abundant
genes were also visualized in a heatmap using the function heatmap.3 by Obi
Griﬃth, with hierarchical average clustering and Euclidean distance measure,
with scaling applied to the row (genes).
The abundance measures (in TPM) of all samples were compared pairwise using
the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient (PCC). This was calculated with the cor
function, the result was visualized with the corrplot function [154].
4.5
Diﬀerential Expression Analysis
Both gene and isoform level diﬀerential expression analysis was conducted, gene
level was done with both DESeq2 and EBSeq, and isoform level with EBSeq.
These analyses were conducted in Rstudio with R version 3.5.0 [114].
==PAGE:47==
4.5 Diﬀerential Expression Analysis
31
4.5.1
Diﬀerential Gene Expression
4.5.1.1
DESeq2
The quantiﬁcation data from Salmon was used as input to DESeq2 version
1.19.45, imported by DESeqDataSetFromTximport [85]. The design was set to
the two genotypes, WT and MD, and sequencing lane and sex were included
as co-variates. The diﬀerential expression analysis (i.e estimating size factors,
dispersion and negative binomial ﬁtting) was performed by the function DE-
Seq. The results were extracted using the function results, with alpha=0.05,
lfcThreshold=0.1, and based on the test of WT vs MD. The alpha was set to
0.05 because the FDR, or adjusted p-value cut-oﬀ, was set to 0.05 to ﬁlter for
signiﬁcant genes. The adjustment method for p-values was default (BH), which
is based on Benjamini-Hochberg described in 1995, also called FDR.
4.5.1.2
EBSeq
The input to EBSeq version 1.19.0 was the quantiﬁcation in counts by Salmon
that had been imported with tximport and summarized to gene level with
type set to salmon [77, 131]. The function MedianNorm was used to estimate
size factors. The function EBTest was used to detect diﬀerentially expressed
genes, with the maxround parameter set to 10. The signiﬁcant genes were ex-
tracted with the function GetDEResults, FDR=0.05, Threshold_FC=10, and
Threshold_FCRatio=0.
Threshold_FC=10 is equivalent to a calculated log
fold change threshold of 0.1
4.5.2
Diﬀerential Isoform Expression
4.5.2.1
EBSeq
The input to EBSeq version 1.19.0 was the quantiﬁcation in counts by Salmon
that had been imported with tximport, without summarization to gene level
(txOut=TRUE) [77, 131].
The function MedianNorm was used to estimate
isoform-level library size factors. To ﬁnd the group assignments used for prior
parameter ﬁtting, the function GetNg was used. Finally the EBTest function
was used with the maxround parameter set to 12.
The signiﬁcant isoforms
were extracted with the function GetDEResults, with parameters FDR=0.05,
Threshold_FC=10, and Threshold_FCRatio=0.
==PAGE:48==
32
Materials and methods
4.6
Novel Isoform Detection
The detection of novel isoforms was done by ﬁrst mapping the reads to the
UCSC mm10 referenced and indexed genome of Mus Musculus, using HISAT2
version 2.1.0 [68]. The resulting SAM ﬁles were converted to BAM and sorted
using SAMtools version 0.1.19 [81].
The alignments were assembled using StringTie version 1.3.4, guided with the
annotation from GENCODE Mus Musculus release M17 (GRCm38.p6) [110, 4].
The assembly ﬁles were merged using StringTie, guided with the same anno-
tation from GENCODE as the assembly. StringTie was also used to quantify
the abundances of the identiﬁed isoforms using the option -B, which produces
FPKM abundances on transcript level. It was guided by the merged GTF ﬁle
produced by the merge function.
A comparison between the annotated data from GENCODE Mus Musculus re-
lease M17 (GRCm38.p6) with the novel isoform data was done using GﬀCom-
pare [5].
4.7
Isoform Switch Analysis
This analysis was conducted in Rstudio with R version 3.5.0 [114]. To identify
potential isoform switches and functional eﬀects of these, IsoformSwitchAna-
lyzeR version 1.1.07 [148] was used. This was done based on the transcriptome
mapped data and the genome mapped data, both described below.
4.7.1
Transcriptome Mapped Data
Isoform switch analysis was done on the abundance measures (in TPM) from
Salmon, which was imported by the function importRdata. The annotation used
for importRdata was from GENCODE Mus Musculus release M17 (GRCm38.p6)
[4].
The statistical test applied to identify isoform switches in the function isoform-
SwitchAnalysisPart1 was DRIMSeq, and the BSgenome used was Mus Musculus
UCSC mm10 1.4.0 [138, 101]. This function also contains preFilter which re-
moves non-expressed isoforms and genes with only one annotated isoform. It
also contains the function analyzeORF which is used if there are no annotated
==PAGE:49==
4.8 Protein Network Analysis
33
ORFs. This function also identiﬁes transcripts that are likely to be targeted by
NMD.
Pfam version 31.0 [43, 10], CPAT version 1.2.4 (with Mouse GRCm38/mm10
assembly) [152], and SignalP version 4.1 [111], were used as external tests based
on the data supplied by isoformSwitchAnalysisPart1, and added to the analysis
in the function isoformSwitchAnalysisPart2. The coding cutoﬀapplied to CPAT
was 0.721. To test for functional consequences all possible consequences were
chosen.
4.7.2
Genome Mapped Data
Isoform switch analysis was also done on the abundance measures (in FPKM)
from StringTie, based on the reads mapped to the genome with HISAT2. The
data was imported with tximport and importRdata [131, 148]. The annotation
used for importRdata was the merged GTF ﬁle provided by StringTie after the
assembly and merge.
The preFilter function was used to ﬁlter out non-expressed isoforms (expression
cutoﬀat 0, and gene level expression cutoﬀat 1 in both conditions) or genes
with only one annotated isoform. isoformSwitchTestDRIMSeq was used to test
for isoform switches [101].
The function analyzeORF was used to annotate
ORFs with genomeObject BSgenome for Mus Musculus UCSC mm10 1.4.0 [138].
analyzeORF also identiﬁed transcripts that are likely to be targeted by NMD.
The extractSequence function was used to extract nucleotide and amino acid
sequences, with the same genomeObject as analyzeORF [148, 147].
Pfam version 31.0 [43, 10], CPAT version 1.2.4 (with Mouse GRCm38/mm10
assembly) [152], and SignalP version 4.1 [111], were used as external tests based
on the data supplied by extractSequence, and entered into the isoformSwitch-
AnalysisPart2 function. The coding cutoﬀapplied to CPAT was 0.721. To test
for functional consequences all possible consequences were chosen.
4.8
Protein Network Analysis
Four sets of genes were input to STRING-db in order to identify potential
protein-protein interactions [136]. The organism was chosen as Mus Musculus,
otherwise standard settings were used. The input sets were:
==PAGE:50==
34
Materials and methods
• The genes found to be DE by both the DESeq2, EBSeq, and edgeR anal-
yses
• The genes found to have diﬀerential isoform expression
• The genes found to have an isoform switch in the transcriptome mapped
data
• The genes found to have an isoform switch in the genome mapped data
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5
Results
This section contains a description of the main results from the analyses done
in Section 4.
5.1
Quality Control
All samples passed quality control. The mean number of reads per sample was
89 million. Since this is paired end reads, the average number of fragments per
samples was 44.5 million. Summary statistics of the raw and ﬁltered data is
available in Table 5.1. Table 5.3 contains the number of reads for all samples,
both before and after ﬁltering. All example ﬁgures of quality control results are
available in Appendix 7, more speciﬁc ﬁgure numbers are mentioned throughout
the text.
The average Phred score across all bases in the samples, as indicated by the
per base sequence quality plot generated by FastQC, varied between 32 and 36.
Some samples had some lower quality bases at the two very last bases of the
reads.
The per tile sequence quality was average or above for all samples except for
samples 217, 219, 220, and 221. These samples had severe patches of below
==PAGE:52==
36
Results
Table 5.1: Summary statistics of the depth of raw (before ﬁltering) and ﬁltered
reads. All numbers are in million fragments. Table 5.3 contains the
number of reads per sample.
Measure
Raw Reads
Filtered Reads
Mean
44.5
40.8
Standard Deviation
6.1
5.7
Range
36.2 - 60.2
33 - 54
average quality on the bottom surface of the ﬂow cell. The shape and location
of these areas were indicative of an obstruction to the imaging system of the
sequencer, such as a smudge or dust. This had no eﬀect on the per base sequence
quality. An example of good tile sequence quality is available in Figure 1. An
example of bad tile sequence quality is available in Figure 2. There are two
examples available of the tile sequence quality after ﬁltering in Figures 3 and 4.
The level of duplication in all samples were as expected for RNA-sequencing
reads, an example is available in Figure 7.
The number of over-represented
sequences were low, at the highest 0.3% of reads in one sample. Some of these
sequences were found in almost all samples. They were BLASTed and identiﬁed
as either rRNA, mitochondrial DNA, or adapter sequences.
The amount of
over-represented sequences diminished after ﬁltering, especially those identiﬁed
as adapters were ﬁltered out. The per base sequence content was unsteady at
the ﬁrst 10-12 bases as well as the last two bases of the reads for all samples, an
example is available in Figure 5. The GC content was similar to the expected
distribution across the entire sequence in all samples, a Figure is available in
Figure 6.
5.2
Exploratory Data Analysis
There were no clear batch eﬀects, as indicated by the PCA and the heatmap
in Figure 5.2. 2D PCA plots coloured by genotype and sex are available as
supplementary ﬁgures in Appendix 7. The only weak indication of batch eﬀect
that was identiﬁed can be seen in the PCA plot on sequencing lane in Figure
5.1.
The expression similarity patterns between the biological replicates as calculated
by PCC is visualized in Appendix 7 in Figure 10. Sources suggest that biological
replicates should exhibit a PCC >0.9 for diﬀerential gene expression analysis of
mRNA [31, 39]. 18 out of 19 samples exhibited a mean PCC >0.96, based on all
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Exploratory Data Analysis
37
Figure 5.1: PCA plot of the ﬁrst two principal components. Each sample is
colored by the sequencing lane it was placed in. The X and Y axes
exhibit the percentage of variance explained by the two principal
components.
Figure 5.2: Heatmap of the 500 most abundant genes (rows) per sample
(columns). The top rows contains the meta data for each sam-
ple, namely the Qubit value, RIN value, sequencing lane, sex, and
genotype. Gene expression values are in TPM.
pairwise comparisons. The sample with the lowest PCC was sample 212, with
a mean PCC of 0.94. There were ﬁve samples with a few or a single pairwise
==PAGE:54==
38
Results
PCC below 0.9, however none were below 0.88.
5.3
Transcriptome Mapping and Quantiﬁcation
Table 5.3 contains mapping rates to the transcriptome and genome for each
sample. Less than 1% of the reads mapped to rRNA genes in the transcriptome.
Table 5.2: Summary statistics of mapping rates of the ﬁltered reads to the
transcriptome and the genome. All numbers are percentages.
Measure
Transcriptome Mapping
Genome Mapping
Mean
82.2
98.2
Standard Deviation
4.5
0.32
Range
75.0 - 89.0
97.6 - 98.6
Table 5.3: Number of fragments per sample before (Raw) and after (Filtered)
ﬁltering. Mapping rates of the ﬁltered reads to the transcriptome
and genome. M = million.
Sample
ID
Depth
Raw
Depth
Filtered
Transcriptome
Mapping Rate (%)
Genome
Mapping Rate (%)
209
53 M
49 M
81.27
98.26
210
42 M
44 M
82.47
98.40
211
48 M
44 M
87.36
98.44
212
45 M
42 M
82.63
98.54
213
47 M
43 M
84.90
98.64
214
38 M
36 M
79.58
98.59
215
40 M
47 M
85.60
98.40
217
40 M
46 M
77.81
97.69
219
38 M
34 M
82.62
97.68
220
42 M
37 M
76.37
97.74
221
39 M
34 M
74.95
97.60
222
60 M
54 M
75.52
98.24
223
48 M
44 M
87.43
98.01
224
49 M
45 M
88.29
98.36
225
51 M
46 M
81.18
98.22
226
47 M
43 M
89.01
98.27
227
47 M
43 M
85.60
98.30
228
39 M
36 M
83.03
98.22
229
36 M
33 M
76.74
98.50
==PAGE:55==
5.4 Genome Mapping and Quantiﬁcation
39
5.4
Genome Mapping and Quantiﬁcation
The mapping and assembly with HISAT2 and StringTie to the reference genome
identiﬁed 21,631 novel isoforms. In the reference there were a total of 135,182
isoforms annotated. In Appendix 7 a comparison of the annotated data with
the novel isoforms with GﬀCompare is available.
5.5
Diﬀerential Gene Expression Analysis
DESeq2 identiﬁed 87 genes as diﬀerentially expressed, whereas EBSeq identiﬁed
81. Previous DGE analysis on the same data set using edgeR identiﬁed 50 genes
to be DE [47]. The overlap among these three methods can be seen in Figure 5.3.
Table 2 in Appendix 7 contains the 17 genes that were identiﬁed as DE by all
three methods, with their annotated functions. Five out of the six genes which
are present in the microdeletion were identiﬁed as DE by all tools. The only
gene that was not identiﬁed was TRPM1 which is lowly expressed in the brain.
Some of the genes that were identiﬁed as DE by all tools were a CYP450 enzyme,
a G-protein coupled receptor, and some genes involved in glucose metabolism
and suppressing cell growth.
Figure 5.3: Venn diagram of the number of diﬀerentially expressed genes iden-
tiﬁed by DESeq2, EBSeq, and edgeR. The reference are the results
from [47].
A scatter plot of the calculated log2 fold change values by DESeq2 and EBSeq
was made as a comparison of the overall agreement between the tools. This can
==PAGE:56==
40
Results
be seen in Figure 5.4. The two methods agree on the general direction of the
fold change for a majority of the genes.
Figure 5.4: Scatter plot of log2 fold change values calculated by EBSeq (Y-
axis) and DESeq2 (X-axis). It is zoomed in for better visualization.
The grey faded points were not found as DE by any tool. The pink
points were identiﬁed as DE by both tools, whereas orange points
were only identiﬁed as DE by EBSeq, and blue points by DESeq2.
Table 3 in Appendix 7 contains the genes found as DE by DESeq2 and EB-
Seq, along with the adjusted p-values from DESeq2, the log2 fold change (FC)
calculated by both tools, and the posterior probability from EBSeq.
5.6
Diﬀerential Isoform Expression Analysis
The number of isoforms identiﬁed that were diﬀerentially expressed between the
two genotypes was over 400. These isoforms are encoded by 351 genes. A table
with these isoforms and their calculated log2 FC and posterior probability is
available in Appendix 7 in Table 4.
==PAGE:57==
5.7 Isoform Switch Analysis
41
5.7
Isoform Switch Analysis
The number of genes identiﬁed with an isoform switch in the transcriptome
mapped was much smaller than the number of genes identiﬁed in the genome
mapped data. However several of the annotated functions of the genes found
in either data overlap.
Examples of these are various transcription factors,
ubiquitin related genes, and genes associated with calcium signaling. The genes
NR4A1 and ZFP281 were identiﬁed as having a switch in both the genome and
transcriptome mapped data. The AS events and switch consequences of these
two genes were similar in both data sets.
Bar charts that summarize AS events and switching consequences can be found
in Appendix 7. For the transcriptome mapped data, Figures 12 and 13 demon-
strates the consequences of the isoform switches identiﬁed, and Figure 11 demon-
strates the AS events that caused the switches. For the genome mapped data,
Figures 20 and 21 demonstrate the consequences of the isoform switches identi-
ﬁed, and Figure 19 demonstrates the AS events that caused the switches.
5.7.1
Transcriptome Mapped Data
The number of isoforms identiﬁed as having a switch in the transcriptome
mapped data was 62. The number of genes found to have an isoform switch
was 50, with 292 isoforms in total. The number of genes with an isoform switch
and potential functional consequence was 21, with 33 isoforms involved in a
switch.
Some examples of the annotated functions of these 21 genes are transcription
factors or regulators, transporters, genes involved in RNA processing, calcium
signaling, or ubiquitination.
In Figure 5.5 the isoforms of the gene SERINC2 are illustrated. It only codes
for one isoform with a signal peptide, and the MD mice use a signiﬁcant amount
more of this isoform compared to the WT mice.
The MD mice use more of the INO80D isoform which contains two DNA-binding
domains, compared to the WT mice. This can be seen in Figure 5.6.
The following examples of the potential functional consequences of genes with
an isoform switch are available as ﬁgures in Appendix 7.
Isoform switching can identify instances where a group has a higher expression
==PAGE:58==
42
Results
Figure 5.5: SERINC2 codes for the Serine incorporator 2 protein, which is an
L-serine transmembrane transporter. The MD mice use a signiﬁ-
cant amount more of the isoform which contains a signal peptide,
whereas the WT mice use more of the protein without the signal
peptide.
of an isoform which is sensitive to NMD, which may result in a smaller amount
of protein product. An example of this is in Figure 18, of the gene TRMT2b.
Figure 14 illustrates the isoforms of the SLC24A3 gene. In this case the two
isoforms contain diﬀerent numbers of introns, and the WT mice and MD mice
use diﬀerent amounts of each isoform.
Figure 15 of the gene KLF15 exempliﬁes an instance where the two genotypes
use isoforms of diﬀering 5’ UTR length and number of introns.
The isoforms of the NLK gene are illustrated in Figure 16. Both genotypes
transcribe the coding isoform the most, however the WT mice do use more of
the non-coding isoform compared to the MD mice.
In Figure 17, the isoforms of the EFL1 gene are illustrated.
The WT mice
mainly use the isoform which contains all protein domains, whereas MD mice
use more of the isoform containing only the ﬁrst domain.
==PAGE:59==
5.7 Isoform Switch Analysis
43
Figure 5.6: INO80D codes for INO80 complex subunit D, which is possibly in-
volved in DNA repair, replication, and transcriptional regulation.
The MD mice use more of the protein which contains two of the
zinc-ﬁnger domains, which are DNA binding.
5.7.2
Genome Mapped Data
The number of isoforms having a switch in the genome mapped data was 273.
The number of genes found to have an isoform switch were 235, with 1941
isoforms in total. The number of genes with an isoform switch and a potential
functional consequence was 141, with 179 isoforms involved in a switch.
Many of the genes detected to have an isoform switch were annotated to similar
functions as in the transcriptome mapped data. Examples of the gene functions
are calcium signaling, DNA-binding, transcription factors, RNA or proteasome
related, as well as ubiquitination.
The isoforms of the gene ZFAND5 are illustrated in Figure 5.7, where MD mice
use more of the isoform which is non-coding, compared to the WT mice which
use more of the coding isoform.
In Figure 5.8, the isoforms of the gene USF1 are illustrated. In this Figure the
MD mice use a signiﬁcant amount more of an isoform which has a longer 3’
UTR, compared to the WT mice which use more of an isoform with a shorter
==PAGE:60==
44
Results
Figure 5.7: ZFAND5 is the gene for the AN1-type zinc ﬁnger protein 5, which
is involved in protein degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome
system. This ﬁgure illustrates how the MD mice use more of the
isoform which is non-coding, and the WT use more of the coding
isoform.
3’ UTR.
The isoforms of the PNCK gene are illustrated in Figure 5.9. The WT mice use
more of the isoform which is NMD sensitive, as compared to the MD mice.
The following examples of the potential functional consequences of genes with
an isoform switch are available as ﬁgures in Appendix 7.
The MD mice use more of the isoform of the gene PHF21A which has a large
number of introns, whereas the WT mice use more of the isoform with fewer
introns, illustrated in Figure 22. A similar pattern is seen in the gene RFFL
in Figure 24, where the WT mice use more of the isoform with fewer introns
compared to the MD mice.
Figures 25, 26, and 31, and 32 illustrate some examples of isoform switching with
NMD sensitive isoforms in the genes SHPRH, NUCB2, RPAP3, and ARIH2,
respectively.
The MD mice use more of the isoform of the MIDN gene in Figure 27 which
==PAGE:61==
5.8 Protein Network Analysis
45
Figure 5.8: USF1 encodes the Upstream stimulatory factor 1, which is a tran-
scription factor. The MD mice use more of the isoform with a
longer 3’ UTR, whereas the WT mice use more of the isoform
with a shorter 3’ UTR.
contains a ubiquitin domain. Figure 30 illustrates the isoforms of the KDM5B
gene, and the MD mice use more of the isoform which is missing some of the
DNA binding protein domains. In Figure 28 of the gene HIVEP3, the WT mice
use more of the isoform which is non-coding, whereas the MD mice use more of
the coding isoform.
The SYNRG gene’s isoforms are illustrated in Figure 29. The MD mice use a
signiﬁcant amount more of the isoform which contains a signal peptide.
5.8
Protein Network Analysis
The STRING network of the genes with an isoform switch in the transcriptome
mapped data is available in Figure 33 in Appendix 7.
This network is not
connected at all.
Figure 5.10 illustrates the STRING network of the genes that were found to be
DE by all three tools. This network has four edges (interactions or connections
==PAGE:62==
46
Results
Figure 5.9: PNCK encodes for the Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein ki-
nase type 1B, which belongs to a proposed calcium-triggered sig-
naling cascade. The WT mice more of the NMD sensitive isoform.
between genes), where a random set of proteins of the same size would be
expected to have zero edges.
The STRING network of the genes with an isoform switch in the genome mapped
data in Figure 5.11 have a total of 33 edges where 21 edges would be expected
by a random set of proteins of the same size.
The proteins with the most
connections are transcription factors. There are several subsets of connected
networks in this gene list, containing for example calcium binding proteins.
One example is the CREB1 protein which had the most interactions, namely
six in total, which all expand further to other genes. CREB1 is a cyclic AMP
(cAMP) interacting protein. It interacts with NR4A1 which had an isoform
switch in both the transcriptome and the genome mapped data. It also interacts
with PNCK which in turn interacts with CABP1, both are calcium interacting
proteins.
The largest network consists of the genes identiﬁed with diﬀerential isoform
expression, in Figure 5.12. In this network only edges edges identiﬁed by exper-
imental validation or curated databases were included, to increase interpretabil-
ity. A network of this size is expected to have 91 edges, however this network
contains 141 edges. The genes with multiple edges are mostly associated with
calcium interaction, signaling systems, the MAPK pathway, and ubiquitination.
==PAGE:63==
5.8 Protein Network Analysis
47
Figure 5.10: STRING Protein-protein interaction network of the genes which
were identiﬁed as DE by EBSeq, DESeq2, and edgeR. The pink
edges are experimentally determined. The yellow edges are from
text-mining, and black from co-expression. Nodes without con-
nections were not included in the network.
Examples of these genes are CALM3, CACNA1D, MAPK7, EHMT1, GNB2,
CUL3, and SYNJ2.
==PAGE:64==
48
Results
Figure 5.11: STRING protein-protein interaction network of the genes with an
isoform switch in the genome mapped data. Pink edges have been
experimentally determined, and blue are from curated databases.
Purple edges are based on protein homology, and green edges rep-
resent gene neighborhood. Yellow edges are from text-mining,
black from co-expression, red are gene fusions, and blue repre-
sent gene co-occurrence.
Nodes without connections were not
included in the network.
==PAGE:65==
5.8 Protein Network Analysis
49
Figure 5.12: STRING protein-protein interaction network of the genes with
diﬀerential isoform expression from the transcriptome mapped
data. Pink edges have been experimentally determined, and the
blue edges are from curated databases.
All other edges have
been removed for clarity. Nodes without connections were not
included in the network.
==PAGE:66==
50
Results
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 6
Discussion and
Further Work
In this section the results and analyses performed in this project are discussed
and put in perspective to previous studies and potential future studies. Topics
such as bias and error management are discussed in conjunction with some of
the decisions made during the analyses.
6.1
Experimental Design
As mentioned in the background in Section 2.3, there are various steps in the
currently available methods for RNA-sequencing and analysis where biases and
errors can be introduced. Examples of these steps in the upstream laboratory
work are mRNA extraction, library prep, PCR, and sequencing. There are also
potential errors or biases in the downstream computational analyses, due to the
approximations and assumptions of the biological data done by the tools.
Preferably the experimental design should be set up to reduce the risk of bias
and errors.
For the data generation in this project there were a number of
eﬀorts in place to reduce these risks. One of these eﬀorts was a high number of
biological replicates to ensure enough biological variation was captured. Another
==PAGE:68==
52
Discussion and Further Work
was high sequencing depth in order to be able to accurately estimate expression
levels even for lowly expressed transcripts, and to identify novel isoforms. Finally
also balancing samples from each genotype across technical factors such as sex
and sequencing lane, and making and sequencing all samples at the same time
point and in the same batch, to reduce potential biases and batch eﬀects. To
reduce errors in gene expression estimates due to degraded RNA, the samples
were ﬁltered based on their RIN values. Another thing that could be done is
to include reference transcripts as spike-ins in the sequencing for quality control
and normalization [30].
In previous studies characterization of behavioral changes in 15q13.3(-/-) mice
revealed diﬀerences between male and female mice [45].
To reduce the sex-
speciﬁc variance, which is not the focus of this study, ideally only mice of one sex
would be analyzed. However the fraction of 15q13.3(-/-) mice was signiﬁcantly
lower than expected at birth, and they had lower survival rate into adulthood.
Because of this both male and female mice were included to ensure a high
number of biological replicates [45].
6.2
Mapping
One example of where possible errors can be introduced in the downstream
analyses is in the mapping. There can be both false positive and false negative
mapping reads, which can be aﬀected by the quality control and ﬁltering deci-
sions made. To lower the risk of falsely mapped reads, the reads in this project
were not trimmed, but instead they were ﬁltered based on a mean quality thresh-
old. This lowers the risk of false mappings compared to if the reads had been
trimmed to a shorter length. This was seen when it was tested to trim the reads
in both the 3’ and 5’ ends according to quality, resulting in a read length varying
between 50-100 bp. This yielded several thousand more transcripts identiﬁed in
the mapping, possibly due to reads being falsely mapped.
The presence of a technical sequence, such as an adapter, may aﬀect the ability
of a read to map. This is an example where the QC step of this project could
be changed. If adapters were cut, it could potentially increase the number of
reads that map. There is a very low risk of false mappings due to a presence
of adapters, since they are technical sequences and do not match the biological
reference. Due to the low number of adapters identiﬁed in the reads, and the
high mapping rate, the adapters were not removed in this project.
An example of falsely mapped reads was found in the isoform switch analysis.
There was a low number of reads which mapped to OTUD7A in the MD mice,
==PAGE:69==
6.3 Diﬀerential Gene Expression Analysis
53
which should not be expressed in this genotype at all. This is most likely a result
of multi-mapping reads from a transcript which is similar to OTUD7A, from
another part of the genome. In the isoform switch analysis of the transcriptome
mapped data a signiﬁcant isoform switch was identiﬁed in this artifact. This is,
as was seen in this case, more likely to be an issue in the transcriptome mapped
data, since there inherently is a high number of multi-mapping reads when
mapping to the transcriptome. The multi-mapping reads occur when reads fall
onto exons that are shared between diﬀerent transcripts [30]. This artifact was
excluded from further analysis and interpretation.
In many cases detecting false mapping reads is impossible. Testing diﬀerent ways
of ﬁltering and trimming, in addition to altering settings in the mapping tool, are
good ways to identify appropriate thresholds. Likewise, when identifying novel
isoforms, discerning between novel transcripts or false positives is not a simple
task. One straightforward, albeit time-intensive, sanity check would be to use
other mapping tools to compare the results, or setting a minimum expression
threshold for the downstream analysis. For further conﬁrmation the expression
would have to be tested in the laboratory, e.g by qPCR.
The results of the analyses and the conclusions that can be drawn from them
depends heavily on the data they are based on. One example used in this project
is the annotated transcriptome and genome from GENCODE. In this case the
mouse genome and transcriptome were used, which are well-annotated and cu-
rated. The mapping rate to the genome and transcriptome were as expected
by RNA-sequencing reads, with above 95% mapping to the genome and slightly
lower to the transcriptome, around 80%, presumably due to unannotated tran-
scripts or small RNAs [157].
6.3
Diﬀerential Gene Expression Analysis
EBSeq and DESeq2 both identiﬁed about 80 diﬀerentially expressed genes, with
an overlap of 33 genes. The major reason for the discrepancy between the tools
is most likely due to the diﬀerent statistical methods they are based on. This is
mainly responsible for the diﬀerential expression call made, however they also
apply diﬀerent pre-ﬁltering thresholds to even consider certain genes. A small
amount of the discrepancy could be due to the fact that EBSeq cannot account
for batch eﬀects, but in this data set the batch eﬀects were not strong. They
have the same log FC ﬁltering threshold, and both assume that the reads follow a
negative binomial distribution, which could contribute to the overlapping genes
identiﬁed.
==PAGE:70==
54
Discussion and Further Work
When comparing the 33 genes identiﬁed by both EBSeq and DESeq2 to the
previous DGE analysis with edgeR on the same data set, there are 17 genes
that overlap. These are regarded as very robust, since they were identiﬁed by
three diﬀerent tools.
The annotated functions of the genes identiﬁed as DE
by all tools are available in Table 2.
One of these genes is CAND2, which
is an assembly factor of E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes. This is notable since
the OTUD7A gene, which was part of the microdeletion, is a deubiqutinating
enzyme. GPR3, which was also found to be DE, activates cAMP, a molecule
which interacts with ion channels in the brain, with possible correlations to
brain-related disorders [14].
The X, Y, and mitochondrial chromosomes were ﬁltered out for the DGE anal-
ysis. The mitochondrial chromosome was ﬁltered out to avoid potential false
positives from the highly variable expression of mitochondrial genes. The sex
chromosomes were removed as a precaution to avoid sex-speciﬁc signiﬁcance
genes. However the mice were balanced according to sex and genotype, so this
would most likely not be an issue. By removing these chromosomes the power
of the signiﬁcance tests is increased for the rest of the transcriptome.
6.4
Isoform Switch Analysis
When combined with isoform level annotation, the isoform switches identiﬁed
can generate hypotheses of changes aﬀecting the protein product, which can be
conﬁrmed experimentally.
Several of the transcripts identiﬁed in the switch analysis coded for proteins that
were either transcription factors, involved in calcium signaling, ubiquitination,
or DNA repair. Four of the genes in the 15q13.3 microdeletion are involved in
analogous pathways, or are annotated to comparable functions.
Some of the genes identiﬁed with an isoform switch that are involved in calcium
signaling are PNCK, SLC24A3, and NUCB2, seen in Figures 5.9, 14, and 26,
respectively. This is notable since the gene CHRNA7 in the 15q13.3 microdele-
tion aﬀects Ca2+ release, and previous experimental studies found that cells
with the microdeletion exhibit altered calcium signaling [47].
The gene FAN1 in the microdeletion is involved in DNA repair, and INO80D
and SHPRH which were identiﬁed with a switch are also involved in DNA
repair and transcriptional regulation. They can be seen in Figures 5.6 and 25,
respectively. Transcriptional regulation and DNA-pair has been found to be
aﬀected in neurodevelopmental disorders in previous studies [20, 72].
==PAGE:71==
6.5 Protein Network Analysis
55
There are multiple genes that have been identiﬁed with an isoform switch which
have correlations to ubiquitin, such as ZFAND5, RFFL, MIDN, and ARIH2.
These can be seen in Figures 5.7, 24, 27, and 32, respectively.
The gene
OTUD7A in the microdeletion is a deubiqutinating enzyme, which is thought
to contribute to the neurodevelopmental phenotypes seen [158].
There are a couple of alterations that can be made to improve the integrity and
robustness of the isoform switch analysis in this project. One example would be
to include potential batch eﬀects, and another would be to compare the results to
other isoform switch analysis tools. However there is always a trade-oﬀbetween
time spent researching potential tools, setting up the pipelines, analyzing the
numerous results, and the more robust results and conclusions that can be based
on them. The power of the signiﬁcance test could be increased by ﬁltering out
e.g the X, Y, and mitochondrial chromosomes.
6.5
Protein Network Analysis
The STRING protein interaction network based on the DGE gene set in Figure
5.10 had an experimentally validated connection between CHRNA7 and GAD1.
CHRNA7, which is in the microdeletion, is involved in GABA transmission, and
GAD1 catalyzes the production of GABA. This is interesting because GABA
is a very important inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain, and GABA’ergic
fast spiking interneuron function is altered in mice with the 15q13.3 microdele-
tion [46]. GABA’ergic signaling has also been found to possibly be aﬀected in
epilepsy [67, 100]. Note that the interactions in this network are solely based
on text-mining and co-expression, which are diﬃcult to interpret on a biological
level.
The STRING network of the genes with an isoform switch in the genome mapped
data had the highest number of interactions, which can be seen in Figure 5.11.
In this network, the gene CREB1 had the highest amount of interactions, six,
which all expanded to additional genes. cAMP response element binding pro-
teins (CREB), such as CREB1, have been identiﬁed as important in the nervous
system for aﬀecting learning and memory [50]. One of the extended interac-
tions of CREB1 is with NR4A1, which had an isoform switch identiﬁed in both
the genome and transcriptome mapped data.
Another extended interaction
is PNCK which interacts with CABP1, both are calcium interacting proteins.
CREB1 also interacts with USF1 which is a transcription factor, and MAP2K4
which is an essential component of the MAPK signaling pathway. This is inter-
esting since previous studies have identiﬁed MAPK signaling as possibly being
involved in the development of phenotypes seen in 15q13.3(-/-) mice [47].
==PAGE:72==
56
Discussion and Further Work
The number of genes with diﬀerential isoform expression was more than 400,
which resulted in a very large interaction network from the STRING database.
The functional eﬀect of diﬀerential isoform expression is diﬃcult to assess, be-
cause the isoforms may be translated into equally functioning protein products.
In order to minimize the network and keep high-conﬁdence edges, the only in-
cluded edges were either experimentally validated or from curated databases.
The enrichment in this network highlighted similar results from the previous
analyses, mainly the MAPK pathway, calcium signaling, and ubiquitination.
Examples of these genes are MAPK7, CALM3, and CUL3.
The results of a network analysis depends greatly on the validity of the database
it is based upon. It could be relevant to use additional resources to substantiate
these results.
6.6
Further Work
The majority of the results from the analyses identify the same patterns, some of
which have been found in other studies. This concerns genes involved in calcium
signaling, ubiquitination, cAMP interaction, DNA-repair, the MAPK pathway,
and the large number of transcription factors identiﬁed. The ubiquitin pathway
and calcium signaling have been identiﬁed in previous reports both regarding
the 15q13.3 microdeletion, but also other neurodevelopmental disorders, which
accentuates the potential importance of these changes [146, 51, 156, 137, 134].
These results should be explored further to investigate if they are contributors to
the phenotypic changes seen in carriers of the 15q13.3 microdeletion. Replication
studies in other brain regions of mice with this microdeletion would be of interest
to build on these ﬁndings, and address the reproducibility of the results.
Some computational analyses that could be done on the available data is to
examine the binding motifs of some of the genes and isoforms identiﬁed with
DE or with an isoform switch. This could elucidate whether the deleted tran-
scription factor, or some of the DE or switching transcription factors, can have
a direct eﬀect. It would also be interesting to see if the binding motif is altered
in the genes identiﬁed with a switch aﬀecting the 5’ UTR.
Diﬀerential gene expression and isoform switching is not the entire story. Even
if an isoform seems to be fully functional, there are still many post-translational
modiﬁcations that can aﬀect its localization and function, and these cannot be
identiﬁed on an mRNA level. Therefore further research is needed to expand
these results. Laboratory tests such as enzyme assays could be used to test some
of the hypotheses regarding protein function and level.
==PAGE:73==
6.6 Further Work
57
Diﬀerential gene expression and isoform switch analysis identify diﬀerent aspects
of the data, and they seem to be two quite complementary analyses. Figure 6.1
and 2.11 exempliﬁes this.
They illustrate how some genes will be identiﬁed
in the DGE analysis, without any isoform switches, whereas some genes will
be identiﬁed in the isoform switch analysis, without DGE. Due to the large
amount of annotation on the gene level, the DGE analysis is slightly easier to
build on and interpret the results of. There is still little information regarding
tissue speciﬁcity and function of isoforms, including functional eﬀects of splicing
events. As this area continues to develop, the analysis of diﬀerential isoform
expression and isoform switching will provide great value to RNA-sequencing
data.
Figure 6.1: Scatter plot highlighting in red which genes were found to have
a signiﬁcant isoform switch, compared to the log fold change of
the gene expression (on the X-axis). This is based on the genome
mapped data in the isoform switch analysis.
==PAGE:74==
58
Discussion and Further Work
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
This project identiﬁed a robust set of diﬀerentially expressed genes and iso-
forms, and numerous genes with an isoform switch in 15q13.3(-/-) mice. The
majority of the analyses conducted in this project highlighted similar pathways
and functions that are altered in these mice. The results that were accentuated
the most in this project consists of the numerous genes involved in calcium sig-
naling, DNA repair, ubiqutination, as well as cAMP interaction and the MAPK
pathway. The network analysis further emphasized these results. These path-
ways and functions have been implicated in the 15q13.3 microdeletion, but also
other CNVs and neurodevelopmental disorders, in previous studies. This study
highlights the importance of these biologies as potential targets for drug devel-
opment.
The isoform switch analysis supported the results of previous studies, while it
also identiﬁed potential changes in not only protein level but also function, which
may contribute to the eﬀects of the 15q13.3 microdeletion. It complemented the
diﬀerential gene expression analysis well, and allowed for a more exhaustive use
of the RNA-sequencing data available. These results emphasize the potential
value of this analysis in other CNV data sets.
Many of the isoform switching events identiﬁed in this project may lead to a
change in protein level or function. In order to interpret these results with more
clarity and conﬁdence, an expansion of isoform speciﬁc annotation is needed.
==PAGE:76==
60
Conclusion
Experimental studies could also provide further insight to the cellular eﬀects of
the 15q13.3 microdeletion.
Future replicate studies in other brain regions of the 15q13.3(-/-) mice could
provide more robustness and validity to the results presented in this project. The
combined knowledge gained from computational and experimental studies may
allow for the identiﬁcation of novel drug targets and ultimately the advancement
of future treatment strategies.
==PAGE:77==
Appendices
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
Appendix 1 QC and EDA
Figure 1: Example of sample 211 forward read tile quality by FastQC. This is
an example of good tile quality, which was seen in the vast majority
of samples.
==PAGE:80==
64
Appendix 1 QC and EDA
Figure 2: Example of sample 220 forward read tile quality by FastQC. This
is an example of bad tile quality, which was seen in four samples.
The placement and size of this quality glitch is consistent with an
obstruction to the imaging system, and is present on the bottom
part of the ﬂow cell.
Figure 3: Example of sample 220 forward read tile quality by FastQC after
ﬁltering out reads with a mean quality Phred score below 30.
==PAGE:81==
65
Figure 4: Example of sample 220 reverse read tile quality by FastQC after
ﬁltering out reads with a mean quality Phred score below 30.
Figure 5: Example of sample 210 forward read per base sequence quality by
FastQC.
==PAGE:82==
66
Appendix 1 QC and EDA
Figure 6: Example of sample 210 forward read GC content by FastQC.
Figure 7: Example of sample 210 forward read sequence duplication by
FastQC.
==PAGE:83==
67
Figure 8: PCA plot of the ﬁrst two principal components.
The points are
coloured according to the genotype of the sample. The X and Y axes
exhibit the percentage of variance explained by the two principal
components.
Figure 9: PCA plot of the ﬁrst two principal components.
The points are
coloured according to the sex of the sample.
The X and Y axes
exhibit the percentage of variance explained by the two principal
components.
==PAGE:84==
68
Appendix 1 QC and EDA
Figure 10: Correlation matrix based on PCC comparisons pairwise of the
abundance measures (in TPM) from Salmon mapped reads be-
tween all samples.
==PAGE:85==
Appendix 2 Results
GﬀCompare Results
Results from the GﬀCompare analysis between the annotated genome and the
novel isoform results.
Query mRNAs : 156813 in 53322 loci (129394 multi-exon transcripts)
(20131 multi-transcript loci, 2.9 transcripts per locus)
Reference mRNAs : 134402 in 51903 loci (108784 multi-exon)
Super-loci w/ reference transcripts: 45976
Matching intron chains: 108784
Matching transcripts: 134402
Matching loci: 51903
Missed exons: 0/431659 ( 0.0%)
Novel exons: 7794/461042 ( 1.7%)
Missed introns: 1356/277985 ( 0.5%)
Novel introns: 3119/289813 ( 1.1%)
Missed loci: 0/51903 ( 0.0%)
Novel loci: 1715/53322 ( 3.2%)
Total union super-loci across all input datasets: 53322
156813 out of 156813 consensus transcripts written in merged.annotated.gtf (0
discarded as redundant)
==PAGE:86==
70
Appendix 2 Results
Table 1: GﬀCompare results between the annotated genome and the novel iso-
form results.
Level
Sensitivity
Precision
Base level:
100.0
87.1
Exon level:
100.0
94.6
Intron level:
99.5
95.4
Intron chain level:
100.0
84.1
Transcript level:
100.0
85.7
Locus level:
100.0
96.4
Table 3: Table containing results from DGE analysis of DESeq2 and EBSeq.
For genes which have an annotated Gene Symbol, this is used, for
genes without annotated Gene Symbol, the Ensembl ID is used. DE
by Tool indicates which tool found each gene as DE. FC = log2 Fold
Change. EBSeq PP is the Posterior Probability from EBSeq. DE-
Seq2 Adj. p-value is the Benjamini-Hochberg ajdusted p-value from
DESeq2.
Gene Symbol
or Ensembl ID
DE by
Tool
EBSeq
FC
EBSeq
PP
DESeq2
FC
DESeq2
Adj. p-value
ENSMUSG00000116417
EBSeq
2.76E+01
9.91E-01
3.25E+00
1.00E+00
ENSMUSG00000115914
DESeq2
1.04E-01
2.14E-11
-1.90E+01
7.23E-06
ENSMUSG00000115628
DESeq2
2.52E+00
2.85E-03
1.55E+01
7.49E-04
ENSMUSG00000112693
DESeq2
2.19E-01
2.21E-12
-1.80E+01
4.44E-05
ENSMUSG00000111940
DESeq2
5.74E+00
5.13E-12
1.68E+01
2.68E-04
ENSMUSG00000111554
DESeq2
1.17E-01
2.45E-11
-1.79E+01
4.44E-05
ENSMUSG00000110633
Both
1.89E-01
9.57E-01
-2.41E+00
7.27E-03
ENSMUSG00000110497
DESeq2
8.55E-01
1.08E-13
-2.90E+00
2.50E-02
ENSMUSG00000110344
EBSeq
1.37E+00
9.95E-01
4.88E-01
4.82E-01
Gdf1
EBSeq
5.74E+01
1.00E+00
3.90E+00
1.00E+00
ENSMUSG00000109057
Both
4.82E+00
9.87E-01
2.19E+00
7.06E-04
ENSMUSG00000108421
Both
1.24E+02
1.00E+00
6.54E+00
1.10E-10
ENSMUSG00000108393
Both
7.02E+01
1.00E+00
5.65E+00
3.39E-07
ENSMUSG00000106275
EBSeq
2.79E+00
1.00E+00
1.40E+00
2.29E-01
ENSMUSG00000104727
EBSeq
2.83E+00
9.86E-01
1.57E+00
1.33E-01
Gbp6
EBSeq
7.27E-01
9.63E-01
-4.45E-01
7.89E-01
ENSMUSG00000100671
Both
4.93E-01
9.79E-01
-1.05E+00
8.41E-04
ENSMUSG00000098763
DESeq2
2.35E-01
1.93E-12
-1.80E+01
4.44E-05
ENSMUSG00000098708
Both
1.53E+02
1.00E+00
6.90E+00
1.04E-12
ENSMUSG00000098169
DESeq2
5.81E+00
4.51E-12
1.56E+01
1.55E-03
ENSMUSG00000097796
EBSeq
7.17E-01
9.99E-01
-4.59E-01
1.34E-01
Dcpp1
DESeq2
3.06E-02
5.67E-02
-2.01E+01
1.21E-06
==PAGE:87==
71
Table 3: (continued)
ENSMUSG00000095690
EBSeq
1.03E-01
9.80E-01
-6.46E+00
1.00E+00
ENSMUSG00000095196
DESeq2
2.27E-01
8.23E-03
-1.78E+01
5.62E-05
E030018B13Rik
Both
7.68E+01
1.00E+00
5.50E+00
7.03E-07
ENSMUSG00000092187
Both
6.28E+02
1.00E+00
8.91E+00
1.29E-25
Sco2
DESeq2
2.31E+00
4.89E-01
1.08E+00
1.85E-02
Apold1
Both
1.52E+00
9.97E-01
6.46E-01
4.81E-03
Mndal
Both
6.12E-01
1.00E+00
-7.61E-01
1.27E-02
ENSMUSG00000086547
DESeq2
2.78E+00
1.10E-12
1.50E+01
3.66E-03
ENSMUSG00000084071
DESeq2
4.83E+00
1.40E-02
1.57E+01
1.48E-03
ENSMUSG00000081788
Both
8.28E+00
1.00E+00
3.46E+00
4.44E-05
ENSMUSG00000079362
EBSeq
9.02E-02
9.80E-01
-4.05E+00
1.00E+00
Iﬁ27l2a
DESeq2
5.04E-01
7.46E-01
-9.71E-01
2.35E-02
ENSMUSG00000076370
EBSeq
1.37E+01
9.58E-01
2.81E+00
1.00E+00
Klhl21
EBSeq
1.26E+00
9.99E-01
3.63E-01
8.49E-02
ENSMUSG00000073164
EBSeq
6.22E-01
9.86E-01
-5.97E-01
5.69E-01
ENSMUSG00000070960
DESeq2
6.82E+00
6.12E-12
1.54E+01
2.05E-03
Gad1
Both
1.39E+00
1.00E+00
4.72E-01
4.83E-03
Arid3c
EBSeq
4.23E-01
9.82E-01
-1.06E+00
6.55E-01
Rpp25
EBSeq
1.29E+00
9.58E-01
3.84E-01
1.97E-01
Pip
EBSeq
7.76E-02
9.60E-01
-6.97E+00
1.00E+00
Apol9a
DESeq2
1.18E+00
5.38E-04
1.60E+00
3.09E-02
Dmac2
EBSeq
1.13E+00
1.00E+00
1.02E-01
1.00E+00
Klf2
DESeq2
1.66E+00
8.27E-02
7.56E-01
2.92E-02
Pla2r1
EBSeq
6.94E-01
9.79E-01
-3.23E-01
1.00E+00
ENSMUSG00000053706
Both
1.47E+02
1.00E+00
2.22E+01
2.05E-08
Ier2
DESeq2
2.10E+00
2.51E-01
1.28E+00
1.06E-09
Hunk
Both
1.39E+00
9.99E-01
5.07E-01
4.06E-02
Junb
DESeq2
2.50E+00
4.34E-02
1.44E+00
9.07E-12
Klf13
Both
6.79E+02
1.00E+00
9.44E+00
0.00E+00
Irf2bp2
DESeq2
1.24E+00
2.95E-02
3.88E-01
5.12E-03
Sstr5
DESeq2
2.52E-01
4.02E-01
-2.13E+00
2.15E-02
Gpr3
Both
1.73E+00
9.56E-01
9.57E-01
7.51E-05
Rimkla
EBSeq
1.19E+00
9.60E-01
3.35E-02
1.00E+00
Trpt1
EBSeq
1.21E+00
9.89E-01
3.25E-01
7.61E-01
Bdh1
EBSeq
1.27E+00
1.00E+00
2.52E-01
1.00E+00
Henmt1
EBSeq
1.66E+00
9.79E-01
7.56E-01
1.00E+00
Kcns3
Both
1.36E+00
1.00E+00
5.06E-01
1.53E-02
Bpifa2
EBSeq
2.40E-03
1.00E+00
-8.46E+00
8.22E-01
Slc19a2
EBSeq
1.22E+00
9.72E-01
2.12E-01
1.00E+00
C1qtnf4
DESeq2
1.40E+00
6.16E-03
5.24E-01
1.38E-02
Chrm4
DESeq2
1.32E+00
9.46E-01
4.77E-01
1.75E-03
Iﬁ203
Both
5.79E-01
9.95E-01
-8.28E-01
4.44E-05
==PAGE:88==
72
Appendix 2 Results
Table 3: (continued)
Galnt12
EBSeq
6.97E-01
9.73E-01
-5.13E-01
9.17E-01
Mreg
EBSeq
1.39E+00
1.00E+00
5.43E-01
8.49E-02
Fchsd1
EBSeq
6.96E-01
1.00E+00
-3.95E-01
1.00E+00
Pcp4l1
Both
1.42E+00
1.00E+00
5.28E-01
7.20E-03
Cldn22
DESeq2
3.04E+00
8.99E-02
2.86E+00
5.23E-03
Mrm3
EBSeq
1.25E+00
9.73E-01
3.68E-01
2.62E-01
Klf10
DESeq2
1.46E+00
3.32E-01
6.55E-01
2.05E-03
Asap3
EBSeq
7.11E-01
1.00E+00
-5.07E-01
8.31E-02
Rbm42
DESeq2
1.33E+00
3.16E-01
4.30E-01
4.54E-04
Siah2
DESeq2
1.33E+00
3.93E-01
4.66E-01
1.38E-02
Pim3
DESeq2
1.53E+00
1.96E-01
6.11E-01
1.33E-05
Selenoo
EBSeq
1.13E+00
9.71E-01
1.97E-01
1.00E+00
Arl4d
DESeq2
1.80E+00
1.14E-01
9.17E-01
5.16E-09
Dusp5
DESeq2
1.68E+00
6.87E-03
9.06E-01
1.70E-04
Tiparp
DESeq2
1.43E+00
6.88E-03
6.27E-01
1.16E-03
Mad2l1bp
EBSeq
1.26E+00
9.85E-01
3.82E-01
1.34E-01
Gbp8
EBSeq
4.08E-01
9.96E-01
-1.39E+00
1.47E-01
Exosc1
EBSeq
1.16E+00
9.92E-01
2.39E-01
1.00E+00
Parl
EBSeq
1.16E+00
9.59E-01
1.28E-01
1.00E+00
Otud7a
Both
4.72E+01
1.00E+00
2.31E+00
1.05E-40
Fan1
Both
8.37E+00
1.00E+00
2.93E+00
2.63E-75
Csrnp1
Both
1.76E+00
9.95E-01
8.64E-01
7.28E-08
Trib1
DESeq2
1.67E+00
3.64E-01
8.32E-01
3.22E-06
Rwdd2a
Both
1.38E+00
9.52E-01
4.82E-01
3.57E-02
Lpar2
EBSeq
6.33E-01
9.60E-01
-6.56E-01
7.67E-01
Babam1
DESeq2
1.24E+00
7.94E-01
2.94E-01
4.09E-02
Gsr
EBSeq
1.26E+00
9.71E-01
3.36E-01
2.29E-01
Coq7
DESeq2
1.25E+00
5.67E-01
3.95E-01
9.29E-03
Nfkbib
DESeq2
1.30E+00
4.76E-01
4.45E-01
2.12E-02
Chrna7
Both
2.20E+02
1.00E+00
8.17E+00
1.82E-30
Mtmr10
Both
1.55E+01
1.00E+00
3.30E+00
4.27E-148
Cand2
Both
7.01E-01
1.00E+00
-5.21E-01
4.33E-02
Arl6ip4
Both
1.26E+00
9.61E-01
3.31E-01
2.50E-02
Smr3a
EBSeq
6.06E-03
1.00E+00
2.46E+00
1.00E+00
Casz1
EBSeq
1.29E+00
9.94E-01
2.06E-01
1.00E+00
Car6
EBSeq
6.44E-02
1.00E+00
-3.24E+00
5.33E-01
Reck
EBSeq
7.56E-01
9.70E-01
-4.07E-01
1.88E-01
Cyr61
DESeq2
2.42E+00
2.71E-03
1.21E+00
1.12E-02
Lmna
Both
1.28E+00
9.98E-01
4.09E-01
2.82E-02
Fam110a
EBSeq
1.42E+00
9.87E-01
4.82E-01
4.96E-01
Ptges2
DESeq2
1.19E+00
4.04E-02
3.52E-01
3.08E-02
Slc25a10
EBSeq
1.31E+00
9.99E-01
3.18E-01
1.00E+00
==PAGE:89==
73
Table 3: (continued)
Larp1b
EBSeq
1.30E+00
9.98E-01
3.38E-01
1.00E+00
Cyp2e1
Both
3.08E-01
1.00E+00
-1.75E+00
2.56E-06
Fuom
EBSeq
1.22E+00
9.96E-01
2.96E-01
8.09E-01
Atp5b
DESeq2
1.23E+00
2.05E-02
3.75E-01
3.08E-02
Gsto1
DESeq2
1.36E+00
8.55E-01
4.45E-01
1.26E-02
Dusp1
DESeq2
2.22E+00
6.55E-01
1.35E+00
1.61E-18
Sik1
DESeq2
1.94E+00
2.07E-02
1.02E+00
4.68E-06
Tnfrsf12a
EBSeq
1.57E+00
9.73E-01
6.76E-01
3.83E-01
Arc
DESeq2
2.79E+00
1.34E-02
1.73E+00
2.53E-14
Ly6g
DESeq2
7.10E+00
7.18E-12
1.54E+01
2.05E-03
Adsl
EBSeq
1.16E+00
1.00E+00
1.53E-01
1.00E+00
Fos
DESeq2
2.60E+00
3.95E-03
1.52E+00
2.51E-03
Pygl
Both
6.12E-01
1.00E+00
-7.35E-01
1.38E-02
Per1
DESeq2
1.41E+00
6.50E-04
5.96E-01
4.06E-02
Btg2
DESeq2
2.13E+00
4.95E-03
1.16E+00
4.06E-02
Col6a2
DESeq2
5.51E-01
6.09E-01
-8.25E-01
2.11E-02
Ndufs7
DESeq2
1.26E+00
7.23E-02
3.38E-01
1.36E-02
Mybpc1
EBSeq
1.42E+00
9.89E-01
3.76E-01
1.00E+00
Mdh2
DESeq2
1.27E+00
1.30E-01
3.82E-01
4.05E-03
C1qbp
Both
1.26E+00
9.71E-01
3.72E-01
4.06E-02
2310057J18Rik
EBSeq
1.01E-01
9.69E-01
-2.46E+00
1.00E+00
Endog
Both
1.38E+00
9.92E-01
5.23E-01
1.56E-02
Gadd45b
DESeq2
1.75E+00
6.11E-01
8.61E-01
7.39E-03
Edf1
DESeq2
1.25E+00
1.26E-02
3.81E-01
4.06E-02
Sertad1
DESeq2
1.53E+00
8.62E-01
6.79E-01
1.90E-04
Etv3
EBSeq
1.18E+00
9.98E-01
2.51E-01
1.00E+00
Rabac1
DESeq2
1.32E+00
3.93E-02
4.28E-01
7.39E-03
Ggct
Both
1.18E+00
1.00E+00
4.43E-01
2.35E-02
Cox5a
EBSeq
1.30E+00
1.31E-01
4.52E-01
4.71E-02
Table 4: Table containing results from diﬀerential isoform expression analysis.
FC = log2 Fold Change.
Isoform ID
Posterior Probability
FC
ENSMUST00000115403.8
0.9999952843
-8.797577716
ENSMUST00000168546.2
0.99995014
-3.388180242
ENSMUST00000186103.6
0.9909143839
-1.933120725
ENSMUST00000139157.7
0.9990067023
-1.674606243
ENSMUST00000185627.1
0.9914123725
-0.9789093356
ENSMUST00000087659.10
0.9984918931
0.6375763506
ENSMUST00000097724.9
0.9990872616
-8.7895362
==PAGE:90==
74
Appendix 2 Results
Table 4: (continued)
ENSMUST00000114157.2
0.9759050208
2.362057781
ENSMUST00000048860.8
0.9973086604
0.5475154104
ENSMUST00000188460.2
0.9999923956
4.50565339
ENSMUST00000167794.1
0.9911086154
2.88458187
ENSMUST00000179127.7
0.9810569047
2.328417121
ENSMUST00000186543.6
0.9999968775
4.129421716
ENSMUST00000186487.6
0.9552183108
0.5786785474
ENSMUST00000133725.1
0.9813464
4.441629505
ENSMUST00000159230.7
0.9906050656
3.072604815
ENSMUST00000195443.5
0.9977514402
4.582813519
ENSMUST00000111326.7
0.9935455121
3.401545069
ENSMUST00000042228.14
0.9997905547
9.128905642
ENSMUST00000129829.7
0.9996733603
-1.27903575
ENSMUST00000193687.5
0.9966645464
3.977647391
ENSMUST00000100429.10
0.9999999999
11.37042494
ENSMUST00000195779.5
0.9726430627
2.541421786
ENSMUST00000194100.5
0.9946976054
3.599379578
ENSMUST00000193675.1
0.999994142
9.561782056
ENSMUST00000140164.7
0.9999999804
7.145901395
ENSMUST00000139038.7
0.9999690205
-9.343202693
ENSMUST00000114544.9
0.9854549539
-8.164453761
ENSMUST00000091348.10
0.9955745132
2.36128131
ENSMUST00000114388.7
0.95202262
2.708858436
ENSMUST00000114317.9
0.998491652
2.947922706
ENSMUST00000066889.12
0.9858428402
-1.442316441
ENSMUST00000153388.1
0.9655307714
-3.031441639
ENSMUST00000134364.7
0.9954757641
4.970955869
ENSMUST00000113562.8
0.9999999815
7.887151225
ENSMUST00000140983.7
0.9806726582
4.717499027
ENSMUST00000113123.7
0.9859223791
-2.641476467
ENSMUST00000112967.11
0.9931810645
2.363961636
ENSMUST00000072114.3
0.9999977818
-9.809022589
ENSMUST00000112877.7
0.99851193
9.463702603
ENSMUST00000112136.1
0.9999998998
8.286744759
ENSMUST00000111695.7
0.9999995094
-6.203229683
ENSMUST00000066177.9
1
7.354133013
ENSMUST00000130729.2
0.9999580433
-4.113319496
ENSMUST00000068726.12
0.9986060858
-0.2866258045
ENSMUST00000185715.6
0.9999878862
-4.21581502
ENSMUST00000137942.7
0.9992904202
3.457126483
ENSMUST00000075269.9
0.9864588496
-5.733254247
ENSMUST00000099716.10
1
10.95269634
==PAGE:91==
75
Table 4: (continued)
ENSMUST00000170926.7
0.9999999999
6.594807124
ENSMUST00000099588.3
0.9835676113
0.692736221
ENSMUST00000110837.1
0.993564991
8.276189046
ENSMUST00000151500.1
0.9999999987
9.844362964
ENSMUST00000082130.12
0.9999999967
-5.675831632
ENSMUST00000089912.11
0.9999931074
-3.391927371
ENSMUST00000110277.1
0.9976716068
1.118922285
ENSMUST00000128994.7
0.9993562415
-1.459306688
ENSMUST00000148833.7
0.9999768791
3.602283828
ENSMUST00000056760.3
0.9848248077
-0.864420723
ENSMUST00000062047.5
0.9677273966
0.6370901594
ENSMUST00000126421.7
0.9999834051
7.935638891
ENSMUST00000116389.8
0.997065285
7.699015179
ENSMUST00000092995.5
0.9901220894
0.5731556201
ENSMUST00000169335.7
0.9995486879
-8.450523414
ENSMUST00000052927.10
0.9999237625
9.40816258
ENSMUST00000099067.9
0.9625935402
0.9722324506
ENSMUST00000119838.8
0.9584075941
2.87486211
ENSMUST00000132527.8
1
11.81097258
ENSMUST00000130986.7
0.9999999998
-5.648258983
ENSMUST00000126835.1
0.9981003627
3.507028411
ENSMUST00000162485.7
0.9999884469
-9.078908468
ENSMUST00000108182.9
0.997680861
0.4144052035
ENSMUST00000165956.2
0.9788260649
3.944141764
ENSMUST00000108078.8
0.9999996879
6.722154676
ENSMUST00000066298.2
1
10.83218902
ENSMUST00000118408.7
1
-9.840002631
ENSMUST00000139419.1
0.9999391816
9.17953448
ENSMUST00000143637.1
0.961408558
-0.4765483101
ENSMUST00000204709.2
0.9999999957
9.872475829
ENSMUST00000039537.13
1
10.1708481
ENSMUST00000159536.1
0.9811404677
5.773685493
ENSMUST00000029729.14
0.998108976
2.969681374
ENSMUST00000120541.7
0.9873807612
-8.18571695
ENSMUST00000117150.7
0.9999999809
-4.959150122
ENSMUST00000106491.6
0.9980347085
4.380467679
ENSMUST00000163620.7
0.9954062472
-4.664880037
ENSMUST00000117811.7
0.9999999997
-9.350829605
ENSMUST00000197325.1
0.9999329641
3.232284175
ENSMUST00000191606.1
0.9765699604
5.74770921
ENSMUST00000108340.8
0.9877703074
-7.830948255
ENSMUST00000035982.7
0.9604328672
-2.951234043
==PAGE:92==
76
Appendix 2 Results
Table 4: (continued)
ENSMUST00000108214.8
0.9947965635
-8.546678685
ENSMUST00000139922.1
0.9645412897
-2.159391407
ENSMUST00000098163.8
0.9999993164
7.386709614
ENSMUST00000030198.6
0.9745128881
-0.3680673656
ENSMUST00000079697.9
0.9651584524
3.205559297
ENSMUST00000211875.1
0.9732012045
4.345768178
ENSMUST00000124016.7
0.9616161971
-3.181210266
ENSMUST00000095038.7
0.9999993795
7.245380529
ENSMUST00000095037.1
0.9999991912
9.782743756
ENSMUST00000174831.7
0.9999546606
9.050042161
ENSMUST00000149366.1
0.9998333316
9.268919492
ENSMUST00000106708.7
0.993353674
-1.264657958
ENSMUST00000106462.8
0.9996112399
8.937445116
ENSMUST00000049994.7
0.9838260567
0.333627136
ENSMUST00000106224.7
0.9999987942
8.474303134
ENSMUST00000137769.2
0.9999986209
4.247631505
ENSMUST00000094713.3
0.9905293271
-2.765506766
ENSMUST00000154224.1
0.9957562815
-0.9527176059
ENSMUST00000105981.8
0.9999645084
9.609365051
ENSMUST00000105951.7
0.9952317333
9.523384024
ENSMUST00000105911.1
0.9964044504
0.8369685104
ENSMUST00000052458.2
0.9574619013
0.680622655
ENSMUST00000122222.7
0.9563175211
0.5455543346
ENSMUST00000138181.2
0.9999990155
3.808617136
ENSMUST00000030817.4
0.9999412074
-4.986990706
ENSMUST00000097773.3
0.9633303655
0.4036041717
ENSMUST00000149177.1
0.9876101987
-1.630419384
ENSMUST00000105637.7
0.9999982037
9.635691052
ENSMUST00000126846.1
0.9970221242
3.076826143
ENSMUST00000169095.5
0.9972254281
3.332716431
ENSMUST00000208852.1
0.9999444048
-0.3140945258
ENSMUST00000087360.8
0.9998835461
3.39629604
ENSMUST00000202131.3
1
5.231301751
ENSMUST00000072971.12
0.9999991112
-4.777517287
ENSMUST00000031211.5
1
-8.549235906
ENSMUST00000031364.4
0.995295035
0.1946758048
ENSMUST00000137750.7
0.9979432932
2.98894831
ENSMUST00000117364.7
0.9999999966
8.36179728
ENSMUST00000089906.6
0.9990353975
-3.061544129
ENSMUST00000050011.9
0.9857132202
-3.574507292
ENSMUST00000071455.5
0.9999739726
-6.282893034
ENSMUST00000120506.7
0.9891063774
3.954084879
==PAGE:93==
77
Table 4: (continued)
ENSMUST00000152156.7
0.9999994421
9.688294667
ENSMUST00000046073.15
0.9979455042
3.046619669
ENSMUST00000111561.7
0.9999999999
-10.01456437
ENSMUST00000196282.4
0.9998992373
9.615673458
ENSMUST00000200324.1
0.9998930199
1.588305289
ENSMUST00000199898.1
0.994074227
1.598615919
ENSMUST00000111346.5
0.9872054766
-9.367338001
ENSMUST00000082057.9
0.9999866475
-3.104877711
ENSMUST00000111245.8
0.9999978228
9.857596742
ENSMUST00000150838.1
0.9999796888
9.5093491
ENSMUST00000111023.7
0.9999932448
-9.313795421
ENSMUST00000198783.4
0.9964920713
-3.167990602
ENSMUST00000110496.4
0.9997305687
8.799119191
ENSMUST00000031637.7
0.9832098285
2.514441535
ENSMUST00000140358.7
0.99994947
9.414770873
ENSMUST00000115405.8
0.9993892347
8.972483337
ENSMUST00000163871.8
0.9999916648
9.82980487
ENSMUST00000172974.7
0.9790300344
-7.684986163
ENSMUST00000031850.9
0.9826709513
-8.298325341
ENSMUST00000169350.8
0.9883847963
8.424391749
ENSMUST00000227493.1
0.9999948776
-8.915198256
ENSMUST00000074301.9
0.9804939801
9.529713805
ENSMUST00000126399.1
1
10.69586168
ENSMUST00000032122.10
0.964160535
-3.18305466
ENSMUST00000138941.2
0.9944588588
-3.876756122
ENSMUST00000204987.2
0.998102609
-3.518393676
ENSMUST00000203695.2
0.9999984723
9.924173517
ENSMUST00000113818.7
0.9959254046
3.128418319
ENSMUST00000168531.1
0.9874427899
1.271255538
ENSMUST00000141961.3
0.994416762
1.635777114
ENSMUST00000032174.11
0.9996947331
1.655551126
ENSMUST00000113509.1
0.9999987385
10.04578993
ENSMUST00000203619.2
0.978059772
-2.834466215
ENSMUST00000156764.1
0.9655238444
-0.9589381087
ENSMUST00000075995.6
0.9997674845
-0.4440865098
ENSMUST00000223041.1
0.9999444109
9.400642076
ENSMUST00000079560.9
0.9999851779
5.033921864
ENSMUST00000167323.2
0.9998379795
0.6639891159
ENSMUST00000108587.8
0.9949620631
-8.615046498
ENSMUST00000108528.8
0.9988100571
-8.44280403
ENSMUST00000173139.1
1
-10.75302596
ENSMUST00000078908.4
0.999607162
8.991235647
==PAGE:94==
78
Appendix 2 Results
Table 4: (continued)
ENSMUST00000137615.7
0.9783809605
-1.221331585
ENSMUST00000131759.7
0.989138301
2.893966315
ENSMUST00000066503.13
0.987992559
-3.260311945
ENSMUST00000108369.8
0.9998763049
7.224839851
ENSMUST00000172269.1
0.9999999929
-9.478036662
ENSMUST00000032813.9
0.9999998417
-10.10443969
ENSMUST00000170699.7
0.9980932041
3.759080779
ENSMUST00000207476.1
0.9553201409
-6.569345729
ENSMUST00000056820.12
0.9999994955
10.1129056
ENSMUST00000032738.6
1
7.998494011
ENSMUST00000208304.1
1
9.959829967
ENSMUST00000207503.1
0.9999982133
2.370570096
ENSMUST00000058476.13
1
15.81642911
ENSMUST00000177534.1
1
9.742656466
ENSMUST00000121016.2
0.9999999993
3.174662575
ENSMUST00000206886.1
1
10.68334323
ENSMUST00000063694.9
1
9.490726999
ENSMUST00000183907.1
0.9999999541
9.801901109
ENSMUST00000183782.7
1
10.93699799
ENSMUST00000177638.1
1
9.965172619
ENSMUST00000205726.1
0.9999951341
9.437528122
ENSMUST00000206732.1
0.9999588198
0.6482183938
ENSMUST00000032736.10
1
11.49541171
ENSMUST00000206452.1
0.9986895357
5.463904128
ENSMUST00000173374.1
1
13.04710364
ENSMUST00000163289.6
1
7.928442841
ENSMUST00000206778.1
1
5.084950248
ENSMUST00000176209.1
0.9999973498
9.702530036
ENSMUST00000207102.1
0.999998506
-9.687454344
ENSMUST00000178048.7
0.9644432447
-4.678378878
ENSMUST00000168435.6
0.9999999909
6.844975524
ENSMUST00000084979.10
0.9552313675
2.740595103
ENSMUST00000208924.1
1
8.964324388
ENSMUST00000139790.7
0.9889874594
8.508591975
ENSMUST00000143630.7
0.9999710743
-9.267268241
ENSMUST00000164479.8
0.9999557114
9.588267814
ENSMUST00000094134.4
0.9996467891
4.692792323
ENSMUST00000131840.2
0.9667827851
1.478008666
ENSMUST00000106550.10
0.9963073905
8.722220502
ENSMUST00000207233.1
0.9967589768
3.139655438
ENSMUST00000165608.1
0.9808600638
3.458571897
ENSMUST00000067425.5
0.9625280226
0.3325487259
==PAGE:95==
79
Table 4: (continued)
ENSMUST00000094026.9
0.999999513
-9.400382141
ENSMUST00000068996.12
0.9973952741
0.9682847449
ENSMUST00000026546.15
0.9999531798
9.482018544
ENSMUST00000026547.8
1
11.67772635
ENSMUST00000026552.8
0.9995742612
-1.939154743
ENSMUST00000026559.13
0.9934204185
3.230944606
ENSMUST00000151644.7
0.9972668662
-0.7944760274
ENSMUST00000153191.7
0.9990919107
-8.306345113
ENSMUST00000121075.7
0.9903118064
0.7306261897
ENSMUST00000084032.5
0.9997418088
-4.621462989
ENSMUST00000164504.1
1
7.702435172
ENSMUST00000039540.11
0.9998915209
-5.213614923
ENSMUST00000212308.1
1
10.70244639
ENSMUST00000155771.1
0.9965873428
-4.16207872
ENSMUST00000207684.1
0.9999999975
9.457376234
ENSMUST00000110095.2
0.9941361528
-3.244680791
ENSMUST00000126885.1
0.9959019821
-3.033336877
ENSMUST00000052250.14
0.9999999941
9.822958841
ENSMUST00000171456.8
0.9787261918
-4.044629324
ENSMUST00000212119.1
0.9506520106
-2.440367616
ENSMUST00000109394.2
0.9901790578
2.844818394
ENSMUST00000169312.1
0.9999999997
6.735740019
ENSMUST00000034163.8
0.956000396
2.029393399
ENSMUST00000162536.7
0.9998322074
4.882191335
ENSMUST00000059579.11
0.9969265785
0.5070610964
ENSMUST00000034643.11
0.9782385162
8.032373119
ENSMUST00000216720.1
0.9955814793
-8.334644017
ENSMUST00000098868.3
0.9981858598
7.178840047
ENSMUST00000168502.7
0.9999562714
3.782161468
ENSMUST00000215488.1
0.9721972149
1.868851496
ENSMUST00000068367.13
1
7.351440241
ENSMUST00000037504.6
0.977124619
0.828216571
ENSMUST00000183372.7
0.9999999983
9.85951927
ENSMUST00000189564.6
0.9530595785
0.3832257163
ENSMUST00000034988.9
0.9551015602
0.6202846559
ENSMUST00000190226.6
0.999938324
-8.127334737
ENSMUST00000152359.1
0.9602785739
-0.8018812138
ENSMUST00000217496.1
0.996446331
4.61674198
ENSMUST00000073448.11
0.9634641997
-7.563711571
ENSMUST00000160649.7
0.9998967134
-4.179228883
ENSMUST00000195615.1
0.9993993505
-8.482078255
ENSMUST00000051873.14
0.9999999925
-10.09991757
==PAGE:96==
80
Appendix 2 Results
Table 4: (continued)
ENSMUST00000165596.7
0.9999999963
5.518788686
ENSMUST00000123869.7
0.9945412601
8.527590554
ENSMUST00000141185.7
0.9844409745
3.230974709
ENSMUST00000035101.8
0.9999586731
1.04880907
ENSMUST00000215696.1
0.999647658
2.904989562
ENSMUST00000105527.1
0.9999932461
9.229059998
ENSMUST00000099934.10
0.9976511549
5.387829098
ENSMUST00000019951.15
0.9725780126
2.43387416
ENSMUST00000127820.1
0.9999961691
4.883614478
ENSMUST00000137857.7
0.9767591886
-0.5561759892
ENSMUST00000020349.6
0.9999997276
8.509710923
ENSMUST00000124789.7
0.9907612511
1.260951703
ENSMUST00000015456.9
0.9849401871
0.869245239
ENSMUST00000099366.10
0.9999999996
11.50923448
ENSMUST00000126278.1
0.9888632947
3.030349835
ENSMUST00000167943.7
0.9999918942
9.704948691
ENSMUST00000019611.14
0.9997002804
9.169244909
ENSMUST00000167353.2
0.9999999252
10.12422256
ENSMUST00000084771.2
0.9999999999
10.50858071
ENSMUST00000179770.7
0.9999960252
9.907744066
ENSMUST00000075118.9
0.9999969182
-3.950231906
ENSMUST00000109721.2
0.9999479762
6.000813323
ENSMUST00000045167.10
1
12.27798916
ENSMUST00000121638.7
0.9668112442
3.557475299
ENSMUST00000038210.11
0.9722667476
-3.192108913
ENSMUST00000109081.8
0.9999999982
10.28096731
ENSMUST00000068853.12
0.9999924184
-8.037035888
ENSMUST00000132620.7
0.9999991287
5.289097402
ENSMUST00000125840.7
0.9948024278
3.709959673
ENSMUST00000178202.7
0.9998753682
9.750147023
ENSMUST00000177336.7
0.9999816755
-9.165978648
ENSMUST00000108689.7
0.9986922934
4.602632742
ENSMUST00000108674.8
0.9999998703
10.46558367
ENSMUST00000161455.7
0.9998326489
-8.95771916
ENSMUST00000035539.11
0.9904790273
-7.431507915
ENSMUST00000039093.9
0.9639202451
-2.278186166
ENSMUST00000072873.13
0.9661785057
8.108516823
ENSMUST00000139958.1
0.998399284
-4.052564299
ENSMUST00000092849.11
0.9838123889
-3.468844297
ENSMUST00000092821.9
0.9999463825
-9.388620556
ENSMUST00000142329.7
0.9999323522
3.448962213
ENSMUST00000151729.7
0.9513794212
2.808195729
==PAGE:97==
81
Table 4: (continued)
ENSMUST00000107562.1
0.996235903
7.013098788
ENSMUST00000164748.7
0.9956076999
2.734274303
ENSMUST00000165111.7
1
12.23390406
ENSMUST00000141531.7
0.9999964073
-2.825647872
ENSMUST00000130229.7
0.9925608203
2.804266267
ENSMUST00000092382.9
0.9999999847
8.760580189
ENSMUST00000144529.1
0.9543780988
5.620103292
ENSMUST00000183654.1
0.994553729
4.24184868
ENSMUST00000177162.7
0.9840029197
2.832642526
ENSMUST00000110567.7
0.9992273931
-8.733560179
ENSMUST00000218851.1
0.9999244239
-3.506539099
ENSMUST00000169158.1
0.9773828348
-1.009206812
ENSMUST00000200911.3
0.9999933865
3.433571188
ENSMUST00000223230.1
0.9824616911
2.934983056
ENSMUST00000110224.7
0.9999970678
0.8169840273
ENSMUST00000190588.1
0.9563004889
2.020451047
ENSMUST00000101146.3
0.9722767975
2.419625117
ENSMUST00000110065.7
0.9999274696
2.068696386
ENSMUST00000174780.1
0.9972291035
4.294814615
ENSMUST00000228243.1
0.9992409883
9.049861833
ENSMUST00000167746.7
0.999999934
-7.65073359
ENSMUST00000178421.7
0.9999999934
-6.338794633
ENSMUST00000222178.1
0.9969473143
-3.540982323
ENSMUST00000159559.7
1
-10.10279325
ENSMUST00000224765.1
0.9999999523
4.528826581
ENSMUST00000021958.5
1
-10.8380699
ENSMUST00000224300.1
0.9954815051
0.3568145753
ENSMUST00000184915.7
0.9873715007
2.788572348
ENSMUST00000171282.1
1
10.25279304
ENSMUST00000112249.8
0.9989243277
3.925922443
ENSMUST00000224692.1
0.9916843532
-7.980211014
ENSMUST00000186131.6
0.9999948442
8.156182083
ENSMUST00000137590.7
0.9852534965
-1.990991813
ENSMUST00000185940.6
0.997868273
-9.424100798
ENSMUST00000168485.7
0.99260603
-3.194816017
ENSMUST00000062861.14
0.9999999989
6.955790052
ENSMUST00000100529.9
0.9734599647
2.56404921
ENSMUST00000159806.1
0.9811625884
1.708387506
ENSMUST00000160207.7
0.9999999999
-9.776217503
ENSMUST00000137867.7
0.9815327254
-3.052699888
ENSMUST00000168992.7
0.9968794057
2.92340115
ENSMUST00000090096.10
0.9852973541
2.230446916
==PAGE:98==
82
Appendix 2 Results
Table 4: (continued)
ENSMUST00000090095.12
0.9998906864
2.573659466
ENSMUST00000037260.7
0.9696241826
0.2187637476
ENSMUST00000109967.9
0.9641255859
2.518130723
ENSMUST00000228994.1
0.9874693805
-2.652581646
ENSMUST00000229287.1
0.9980877354
5.141166448
ENSMUST00000155735.1
0.9544869566
8.155572291
ENSMUST00000228990.1
0.979442038
2.101350669
ENSMUST00000111581.3
0.9999962519
-8.455160949
ENSMUST00000230264.1
0.9985128955
-8.190921493
ENSMUST00000166711.7
0.9613029864
0.2822010498
ENSMUST00000134469.7
0.9991623602
-8.764744261
ENSMUST00000171496.8
0.9625954434
4.790072928
ENSMUST00000163507.7
0.9999862022
9.739402735
ENSMUST00000023754.5
0.964377589
2.143040591
ENSMUST00000229835.1
0.9980312229
-3.104765672
ENSMUST00000115860.7
0.999999397
-9.625361942
ENSMUST00000115824.9
0.9996128029
9.326704533
ENSMUST00000121750.1
0.9964115271
-5.679279785
ENSMUST00000035426.6
0.9742986818
8.333960413
ENSMUST00000133454.7
0.9601267458
-2.241023014
ENSMUST00000228998.1
0.9810109734
-3.777499571
ENSMUST00000115227.9
0.9985964321
0.4742456307
ENSMUST00000230281.1
0.9500051186
7.994379486
ENSMUST00000167115.7
0.9991480414
-9.306251014
ENSMUST00000121129.7
0.9571189295
3.833393856
ENSMUST00000023434.14
0.9977025555
-7.530563554
ENSMUST00000135415.1
0.9990536883
5.226902503
ENSMUST00000226801.1
0.9979579512
-3.589669258
ENSMUST00000163370.7
1
7.063609635
ENSMUST00000089084.11
0.9743043913
-3.318202089
ENSMUST00000065856.6
0.9999865114
0.5287558074
ENSMUST00000115791.8
0.9704661588
3.303582841
ENSMUST00000167152.7
0.9988611482
9.125478526
ENSMUST00000068580.3
0.9697078863
-8.494644335
ENSMUST00000208043.1
0.9999795913
-9.291483949
ENSMUST00000114792.7
0.9514748368
-2.646551111
ENSMUST00000128410.7
0.9721990085
-2.537193175
ENSMUST00000073556.11
0.9999891197
-9.491469098
ENSMUST00000171872.1
0.9998444185
-4.242557231
ENSMUST00000114242.8
0.999994188
8.680512638
ENSMUST00000015595.12
0.9944416116
8.587978684
ENSMUST00000171847.7
0.969240859
9.314113688
==PAGE:99==
83
Table 4: (continued)
ENSMUST00000113038.7
0.9933223801
2.82156285
ENSMUST00000024889.13
1
9.033700076
ENSMUST00000006205.13
0.9963714768
8.571914069
ENSMUST00000195069.1
0.9956187104
-0.6791463101
ENSMUST00000192103.1
1
10.12143302
ENSMUST00000043437.13
0.9974571831
-0.6032090884
ENSMUST00000159405.2
0.9976514917
2.557081983
ENSMUST00000159389.7
0.9895026427
-3.175106227
ENSMUST00000125640.1
0.9999649832
-3.783547976
ENSMUST00000130619.8
0.9998259429
8.99345626
ENSMUST00000134194.7
0.9903652778
-3.67691164
ENSMUST00000118483.1
0.9998318065
9.144249498
ENSMUST00000025723.8
0.9978356906
8.06681837
ENSMUST00000179142.1
0.9924301886
0.5742254834
ENSMUST00000154580.1
1
11.055143
ENSMUST00000178377.1
0.9843849604
-3.35844155
ENSMUST00000102415.1
0.9867222706
4.113793074
ENSMUST00000181592.1
0.9994275326
-4.678106967
ENSMUST00000095947.10
0.9823824363
2.553035427
Figure 11: Bar chart of the alternative splicing events causing isoform switches
in the transcriptome mapped data. A3 is Alternative 3’ acceptor
site. A5 is Alternative 5’ donor site.
ATSS is alternative tran-
scription start site. ATTS is alternative transcription termination
site. ES is exon skipping. IR is intron retention. MEE is mutually
exclusive exons. MES is multiple exon skipping.
==PAGE:100==
84
Bibliography
Table 2: Table containing genes identiﬁed as diﬀerentially expressed by anal-
yses done by DESeq2, EBSeq and edgeR, with annotation data re-
garding function and tissue expression of the genes. In MD refers
to whether the gene is deleted in the 15q13.3 microdeletion.
The
annotation data is from [18].
Gene
In MD
Annotated Function
Pygl
No
Enzyme in metabolism
Cyp2e1
No
CYP450 enzyme
Cand2
No
Assembly factor
Mtmr10
Yes
Pseudophosphatase
Chrna7
Yes
Acetylcholine receptor
Rwdd2a
No
Fan1
Yes
Nuclease
Otud7a
Yes
Deubiquitinating enzyme
Pcp4l1
No
Iﬁ203
No
Gpr3
No
Orphan receptor
Klf13
Yes
Transcription factor
Gad1
No
Glutamate decarboxylase
Mndal
No
Suppresses cell growth
Apold1
No
ENSMUSG00000092187
No
Predicted gene
ENSMUSG00000098708
No
Predicted gene
Figure 12: Bar chart of some of the consequences of the isoform switch event
in the transcriptome mapped data. TSS is transcription start site.
TTS is transcription termination site.
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
85
Figure 13: Bar chart of some of the consequences of the isoform switch event
in the transcriptome mapped data.
Figure 14: SLC24A3 is a gene that codes for the Sodium/potassium/calcium
exchanger 3 protein. It transports 1 Ca2+ and 1 K+ in exchange for
4 Na+. It has two isoforms, one of which is annotated by Ensembl
as being protein coding and containing the transporter domain.
IsoformSwitchAnalyzeR was able to identify an ORF in the second
isoform as well, and then Pfam could identify the domain. WT
mice use more of the isoform with fewer introns.
==PAGE:102==
86
Bibliography
Figure 15: The KLF15 gene codes for the Krueppel-like factor 15 protein,
which is a transcription regulator. The two isoforms that are used
diﬀerently between the genotypes diﬀer in their 5’ UTR length and
the number of introns they contain.
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
87
Figure 16: The NLK gene encodes the Serine/threonine-protein kinase NLK
protein. It regulates a number of transcription factors with key
roles in cell fate determination.
Both genotypes transcribe the
coding isoform the most, however the WT mice transcribe more of
the non-coding isoform.
==PAGE:104==
88
Bibliography
Figure 17: The protein Elongation factor-like GTPase 1 is encoded by the gene
EFL1. It is involved in the biogenesis of the 60S ribosomal subunit
and translational activation of ribosomes. WT mice use more of the
isoform which contains all three protein domains, whereas MD mice
use more of the protein which only contains one of the domains.
The EFG domains are DNA binding.
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
89
Figure 18: TRMT2B codes for a tRNA (uracil(54)-C(5))-methyltransferase
homolog.
This protein interacts with tRNA. The MD mice use
more of the isoform which is NMD sensitive, whereas the WT mice
use the coding isoform.
Figure 19: Bar chart of the alternative splicing events causing isoform switches
in the transcriptome mapped data. A3 is Alternative 3’ acceptor
site. A5 is Alternative 5’ donor site.
ATSS is alternative tran-
scription start site. ATTS is alternative transcription termination
site. ES is exon skipping. IR is intron retention. MEE is mutually
exclusive exons. MES is multiple exon skipping.
==PAGE:106==
90
Bibliography
Figure 20: Bar chart of some of the consequences of the isoform switch event
in the transcriptome mapped data. TSS is transcription start site.
TTS is transcription termination site.
Figure 21: Bar chart of some of the consequences of the isoform switch event
in the transcriptome mapped data.
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
91
Figure 22: PHF21A encodes the PHD ﬁnger protein 21A, which is a co-
repressor complex that represses transcription of neuron-speciﬁc
genes in non-neuronal cells. WT mice use more of the short iso-
form with no introns, whereas MD mice use more of the longer
isoform with several introns.
==PAGE:108==
92
Bibliography
Figure 23: TFEB encodes the Transcription factor EB. MD mice use more of
the isoform with fewer introns, whereas the WT mice use more of
the isoform with many introns.
Figure 24: RFFL encodes the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase riﬁfylin, which reg-
ulates several biological processes through the ubiquitin-mediated
proteasomal degradation of various target proteins. WT mice use
more of the isoform with fewer introns compared to the MD mice.
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
93
Figure 25: SHPRH is the gene coding for the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase SH-
PRH, which is involved in DNA repair. The MD mice use more of
the isoform which is NMD sensitive.
Figure 26: NUCB2 encodes the Nucleobindin-2 protein, which binds Calcium.
The MD mice use more of the NMD sensitive isoform.
==PAGE:110==
94
Bibliography
Figure 27: MIDN encodes the Midnolin protein, which facilitates ubiquitin-
independent proteasomal degradation of polycomb protein CBX4.
The MD mice use more of the isoform which contains the ubiquitin
domain.
Figure 28: HIVEP3 codes for a transcription factor, and in this case the MD
mice use more of the isoform which is coding, compared to the WT
mice.
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
95
Figure 29: SYNRG codes for the Synergin gamma protein, which may play a
role in endocytosis and/or membrane traﬃcking at the trans-Golgi
network (TGN). MD mice use more of the isoform which contains
a signal peptide.
==PAGE:112==
96
Bibliography
Figure 30: KDM5B encodes for a Lysine-speciﬁc demethylase 5B, which acts
as a transcriptional corepressor. The MD mice use more of the
isoform which is missing the ARID and JmjN domains. The ARID
domain binds to DNA.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
97
Figure 31: RPAP3 codes for the RNA polymerase II-associated protein 3,
which forms an interface between the RNA polymerase II enzyme
and chaperone/scaﬀolding protein. MD mice use more of the iso-
form which is NMD sensitive.
==PAGE:114==
98
Bibliography
Figure 32: The ARIH2 gene encodes a protein E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase
which catalyzes ubiquitination of target proteins. The MD mice
use more of the coding isoform whereas the WT mice use more of
the NMD sensitive isoform.
Figure 33: STRING protein-protein interaction network of the genes with an
isoform switch in the transcriptome mapped data.
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
[1] FastQC.
https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/
fastqc/.
[2] FastQC
duplicate
sequences
interpretation.
https://www.
bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/Help/3%
20Analysis%20Modules/8%20Duplicate%20Sequences.html.
[3] fastX. http://hannonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit/.
[4] GENCODE.
https://www.gencodegenes.org/mouse_releases/
current.html.
[5] GﬀCompare. http://ccb.jhu.edu/software/stringtie/gffcompare.
shtml.
[6] HISAT2
Website.
http://ccb.jhu.edu/software/hisat2/index.
shtml.
[7] Illustration of Alternative Splicing. https://www.genome.gov/images/
edkit/bio2j_large.gif.
[8] Illustration of Intron. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Intron_
miguelferig.jpg#globalusage.
[9] pairfq. https://github.com/sestaton/Pairfq.
[10] Pfam. https://pfam.xfam.org/.
[11] Thermo Fisher - Reverse Transcription.
http://www.thermofisher.
com/dk/en/home/life-science/cloning/cloning-learning-center/
==PAGE:116==
100
BIBLIOGRAPHY
invitrogen-school-of-molecular-biology/rt-education/
reverse-transcription-applications.html.
[12] C. E. S. Anand K. Srivastava, Intellectual Disability and Autism
Spectrum Disorders: Causal Genes and Molecular Mechanisms, Neurosci
Biobehav Rev, (2014), pp. 161–174.
[13] S. Anders, P. T. Pyl, and W. Huber, HTSeq-A Python framework
to work with high-throughput sequencing data, Bioinformatics, 31 (2015),
pp. 166–169.
[14] A. F. Arnsten and L. E. Jin, Guanfacine for the treatment of cognitive
disorders: A century of discoveries at Yale, Yale Journal of Biology and
Medicine, 85 (2012), pp. 45–58.
[15] J. R. Babendure, J. L. Babendure, J.-h. Ding, and R. Y. Tsien,
Control of mammalian translation by mRNA structure near caps Control
of mammalian translation by mRNA structure near caps, Rna, 12 (2006),
pp. 851–861.
[16] A. Bailey, A. Lecouteur, I. Gottesman, P. Bolton, E. Simonoff,
E. Yuzda, and M. Rutter, Autism As a Strongly Genetic Disorder -
Evidence From a British Twin Study, 25 (1995), pp. 63–77–.
[17] L. W. Barrett, S. Fletcher, and S. D. Wilton, Regulation of eu-
karyotic gene expression by the untranslated gene regions and other non-
coding elements, Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences, 69 (2012), pp. 3613–
3634.
[18] A. Bateman, M. J. Martin, C. O’Donovan, M. Magrane, E. Alpi,
R. Antunes, B. Bely, M. Bingley, C. Bonilla, R. Britto,
B. Bursteinas, H. Bye-AJee, A. Cowley, A. Da Silva, M. De
Giorgi,
T. Dogan,
F. Fazzini,
L. G. Castro,
L. Figueira,
P. Garmiri,
G. Georghiou,
D. Gonzalez,
E. Hatton-Ellis,
W. Li, W. Liu, R. Lopez, J. Luo, Y. Lussi, A. MacDougall,
A. Nightingale, B. Palka, K. Pichler, D. Poggioli, S. Pundir,
L. Pureza, G. Qi, S. Rosanoff, R. Saidi, T. Sawford, A. Shyp-
itsyna,
E.
Speretta,
E.
Turner,
N.
Tyagi,
V.
Volynkin,
T. Wardell, K. Warner, X. Watkins, R. Zaru, H. Zellner,
I. Xenarios, L. Bougueleret, A. Bridge, S. Poux, N. Redaschi,
L. Aimo, G. ArgoudPuy, A. Auchincloss, K. Axelsen, P. Bansal,
D. Baratin,
M. C. Blatter,
B. Boeckmann,
J. Bolleman,
E. Boutet, L. Breuza, C. Casal-Casas, E. De Castro, E. Coud-
ert, B. Cuche, M. Doche, D. Dornevil, S. Duvaud, A. Estre-
icher, L. Famiglietti, M. Feuermann, E. Gasteiger, S. Gehant,
V. Gerritsen, A. Gos, N. Gruaz-Gumowski, U. Hinz, C. Hulo,
==PAGE:117==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
101
F. Jungo, G. Keller, V. Lara, P. Lemercier, D. Lieberherr,
T. Lombardot, X. Martin, P. Masson, A. Morgat, T. Neto,
N. Nouspikel, S. Paesano, I. Pedruzzi, S. Pilbout, M. Pozzato,
M. Pruess, C. Rivoire, B. Roechert, M. Schneider, C. Sigrist,
K. Sonesson, S. Staehli, A. Stutz, S. Sundaram, M. Tognolli,
L. Verbregue, A. L. Veuthey, C. H. Wu, C. N. Arighi, L. Armin-
ski, C. Chen, Y. Chen, J. S. Garavelli, H. Huang, K. Laiho,
P. McGarvey, D. A. Natale, K. Ross, C. R. Vinayaka, Q. Wang,
Y. Wang, L. S. Yeh, and J. Zhang, UniProt: The universal protein
knowledgebase, Nucleic Acids Research, 45 (2017), pp. D158–D169.
[19] D. L. Black, Mechanisms of Alternative Pre-Messenger RNA Splicing,
Annual Review of Biochemistry, 72 (2003), pp. 291–336.
[20] T. Bourgeron, From the genetic architecture to synaptic plasticity in
autism spectrum disorder, Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 16 (2015), p. 551.
[21] N. L. Bray, H. Pimentel, P. Melsted, and L. Pachter, Near-
optimal probabilistic RNA-seq quantiﬁcation, Nature Biotechnology, 34
(2016), pp. 525–527.
[22] M. Burrows and D. Wheeler, A block-sorting lossless data compres-
sion algorithm, Algorithm, Data Compression, (1994), p. 18.
[23] P.
Carninci,
A.
Sandelin,
B.
Lenhard,
S.
Katayama,
K. Shimokawa, J. Ponjavic, C. A. Semple, M. S. Taylor, P. G.
Engström, M. C. Frith, A. R. Forrest, W. B. Alkema, S. L.
Tan, C. Plessy, R. Kodzius, T. Ravasi, T. Kasukawa, S. Fukuda,
M.
Kanamori-Katayama,
Y.
Kitazume,
H.
Kawaji,
C.
Kai,
M. Nakamura,
H. Konno,
K. Nakano,
S. Mottagui-Tabar,
P. Arner, A. Chesi, S. Gustincich, F. Persichetti, H. Suzuki,
S. M. Grimmond, C. A. Wells, V. Orlando, C. Wahlestedt,
E. T. Liu, M. Harbers, J. Kawai, V. B. Bajic, D. A. Hume, and
Y. Hayashizaki, Genome-wide analysis of mammalian promoter archi-
tecture and evolution, Nature Genetics, 38 (2006), pp. 626–635.
[24] S. Chatterjee and J. K. Pal, Role of 5- and 3-untranslated regions of
mRNAs in human diseases, Biology of the Cell, 101 (2009), pp. 251–262.
[25] E. A. Chen, T. Souaiaia, J. S. Herstein, O. V. Evgrafov, V. N.
Spitsyna, D. F. Rebolini, and J. A. Knowles, Eﬀect of RNA in-
tegrity on uniquely mapped reads in RNA-Seq, BMC Research Notes, 7
(2014), pp. 5–7.
[26] Y. Chu and D. R. Corey, RNA sequencing: platform selection, ex-
perimental design, and data interpretation., Nucleic acid therapeutics, 22
(2012), pp. 271–4.
==PAGE:118==
102
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[27] S. Clancy, N. E. Citation, and A. Other, What ’ s the diﬀerence
between mRNA and pre-mRNA ? It ’ s all about splicing of introns .
See how one RNA sequence can exist in nearly 40 , 000 diﬀerent forms .
Early Studies in Bacteria How Splicing Occurs Self-Splicing and Alterna-
tive Splicing, 1 (2011), pp. 1–4.
[28] F. S. Collins, E. S. Lander, J. Rogers, and R. H. Waterson,
Finishing the euchromatic sequence of the human genome, Nature, 431
(2004), pp. 931–945.
[29] R. Colnaghi, G. Carpenter, M. Volker, and M. O’Driscoll, The
consequences of structural genomic alterations in humans: Genomic Dis-
orders, genomic instability and cancer, Seminars in Cell & Developmental
Biology, 22 (2011), pp. 875–885.
[30] A. Conesa, P. Madrigal, S. Tarazona, D. Gomez-Cabrero,
A. Cervera, A. McPherson, M. W. Szcześniak, D. J. Gaffney,
L. L. Elo, X. Zhang, and A. Mortazavi, A survey of best practices
for RNA-seq data analysis, Genome Biology, 17 (2016), pp. 1–19.
[31] T. E. Consortium, Standards, Guidelines and Best Practices for RNA-
Seq, Vasa, 0 (2011), pp. 1–7.
[32] Y. Cui, M. Cai, and H. E. Stanley, Comparative Analysis and Clas-
siﬁcation of Cassette Exons and Constitutive Exons, BioMed Research
International, 2017 (2017).
[33] K. Daehwan, G. Pertea, C. Trapnell, H. Pimentel, R. Kelley,
and S. L. Salzberg, TopHat2 : accurate alignment of transcriptomes in
the presence of insertions , deletions and gene fusions, (2013), pp. 0–9.
[34] R. V. Davuluri, Y. Suzuki, S. Sugano, C. Plass, and T. H. M.
Huang, The functional consequences of alternative promoter use in mam-
malian genomes, Trends in Genetics, 24 (2008), pp. 167–177.
[35] M. De Angioletti, G. Lacerra, V. Sabato, and C. Carestia,
β+45 G C: A novel silent β-thalassaemia mutation, the ﬁrst in the Kozak
sequence, British Journal of Haematology, 124 (2004), pp. 224–231.
[36] M. Didriksen, K. Fejgin, S. R. Nilsson, M. R. Birknow, H. M.
Grayton, P. H. Larsen, J. B. Lauridsen, V. Nielsen, P. Celada,
N. Santana, P. Kallunki, K. V. Christensen, T. M. Werge,
T. B. Stensbøl, J. Egebjerg, F. Gastambide, F. Artigas, J. F.
Bastlund, and J. Nielsen, Persistent gating deﬁcit and increased sensi-
tivity to NMDA receptor antagonism after puberty in a new mouse model
of the human 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome: A study in male mice,
Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, 42 (2017), pp. 48–58.
==PAGE:119==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
103
[37] A. Dobin, C. A. Davis, F. Schlesinger, J. Drenkow, C. Zaleski,
S. Jha, P. Batut, M. Chaisson, and T. R. Gingeras, STAR: Ultra-
fast universal RNA-seq aligner, Bioinformatics, 29 (2013), pp. 15–21.
[38] I. Dunham, A. Kundaje, S. F. Aldred, P. J. Collins, C. A.
Davis, F. Doyle, C. B. Epstein, S. Frietze, J. Harrow, R. Kaul,
J. Khatun, B. R. Lajoie, S. G. Landt, B. K. Lee, F. Pauli, K. R.
Rosenbloom, P. Sabo, A. Safi, A. Sanyal, N. Shoresh, J. M.
Simon, L. Song, N. D. Trinklein, R. C. Altshuler, E. Birney,
J. B. Brown, C. Cheng, S. Djebali, X. Dong, J. Ernst, T. S.
Furey, M. Gerstein, B. Giardine, M. Greven, R. C. Hardison,
R. S. Harris, J. Herrero, M. M. Hoffman, S. Iyer, M. Kellis,
P. Kheradpour, T. Lassmann, Q. Li, X. Lin, G. K. Marinov,
A. Merkel, A. Mortazavi, S. C. Parker, T. E. Reddy, J. Ro-
zowsky, F. Schlesinger, R. E. Thurman, J. Wang, L. D. Ward,
T. W. Whitfield, S. P. Wilder, W. Wu, H. S. Xi, K. Y. Yip,
J. Zhuang, B. E. Bernstein, E. D. Green, C. Gunter, M. Sny-
der, M. J. Pazin, R. F. Lowdon, L. A. Dillon, L. B. Adams,
C. J. Kelly, J. Zhang, J. R. Wexler, P. J. Good, E. A. Fein-
gold, G. E. Crawford, J. Dekker, L. Elnitski, P. J. Farn-
ham, M. C. Giddings, T. R. Gingeras, R. Guigó, T. J. Hub-
bard, W. J. Kent, J. D. Lieb, E. H. Margulies, R. M. My-
ers, J. A. Stamatoyannopoulos, S. A. Tenenbaum, Z. Weng,
K. P. White, B. Wold, Y. Yu, J. Wrobel, B. A. Risk, H. P.
Gunawardena, H. C. Kuiper, C. W. Maier, L. Xie, X. Chen,
T. S. Mikkelsen, S. Gillespie, A. Goren, O. Ram, X. Zhang,
L. Wang, R. Issner, M. J. Coyne, T. Durham, M. Ku, T. Truong,
M. L. Eaton, A. Dobin, A. Tanzer, J. Lagarde, W. Lin, C. Xue,
B. A. Williams, C. Zaleski, M. Röder, F. Kokocinski, R. F. Ab-
delhamid, T. Alioto, I. Antoshechkin, M. T. Baer, P. Batut,
I. Bell, K. Bell, S. Chakrabortty, J. Chrast, J. Curado,
T. Derrien, J. Drenkow, E. Dumais, J. Dumais, R. Duttagupta,
M. Fastuca, K. Fejes-Toth, P. Ferreira, S. Foissac, M. J. Full-
wood, H. Gao, D. Gonzalez, A. Gordon, C. Howald, S. Jha,
R. Johnson, P. Kapranov, B. King, C. Kingswood, G. Li, O. J.
Luo, E. Park, J. B. Preall, K. Presaud, P. Ribeca, D. Robyr,
X. Ruan, M. Sammeth, K. S. Sandhu, L. Schaeffer, L. H. See,
A. Shahab, J. Skancke, A. M. Suzuki, H. Takahashi, H. Tilgner,
D. Trout, N. Walters, H. Wang, Y. Hayashizaki, A. Reymond,
S. E. Antonarakis, G. J. Hannon, Y. Ruan, P. Carninci, C. A.
Sloan, K. Learned, V. S. Malladi, M. C. Wong, G. P. Bar-
ber, M. S. Cline, T. R. Dreszer, S. G. Heitner, D. Karolchik,
V. M. Kirkup, L. R. Meyer, J. C. Long, M. Maddren, B. J.
Raney, L. L. Grasfeder, P. G. Giresi, A. Battenhouse, N. C.
==PAGE:120==
104
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Sheffield, K. A. Showers, D. London, A. A. Bhinge, C. Shes-
tak, M. R. Schaner, S. K. Kim, Z. Z. Zhang, P. A. Mieczkowski,
J. O. Mieczkowska, Z. Liu, R. M. McDaniell, Y. Ni, N. U.
Rashid, M. J. Kim, S. Adar, Z. Zhang, T. Wang, D. Winter,
D. Keefe, V. R. Iyer, M. Zheng, P. Wang, J. Gertz, J. Viel-
metter, E. C. Partridge, K. E. Varley, C. Gasper, A. Bansal,
S. Pepke, P. Jain, H. Amrhein, K. M. Bowling, M. Anaya, M. K.
Cross, M. A. Muratet, K. M. Newberry, K. McCue, A. S. Ne-
smith, K. I. Fisher-Aylor, B. Pusey, G. DeSalvo, S. L. Parker,
S. Balasubramanian, N. S. Davis, S. K. Meadows, T. Eggleston,
J. S. Newberry, S. E. Levy, D. M. Absher, W. H. Wong, M. J.
Blow, A. Visel, L. A. Pennachio, H. M. Petrykowska, A. Aby-
zov, B. Aken, D. Barrell, G. Barson, A. Berry, A. Bignell,
V. Boychenko, G. Bussotti, C. Davidson, G. Despacio-Reyes,
M. Diekhans, I. Ezkurdia, A. Frankish, J. Gilbert, J. M. Gon-
zalez, E. Griffiths, R. Harte, D. A. Hendrix, T. Hunt, I. Jun-
greis, M. Kay, E. Khurana, J. Leng, M. F. Lin, J. Loveland,
Z. Lu, D. Manthravadi, M. Mariotti, J. Mudge, G. Mukher-
jee, C. Notredame, B. Pei, J. M. Rodriguez, G. Saunders,
A. Sboner, S. Searle, C. Sisu, C. Snow, C. Steward, E. Tapa-
nari, M. L. Tress, M. J. Van Baren, S. Washietl, L. Wilming,
A. Zadissa, Z. Zhang, M. Brent, D. Haussler, A. Valencia,
N. Addleman, R. P. Alexander, R. K. Auerbach, S. Balasub-
ramanian, K. Bettinger, N. Bhardwaj, A. P. Boyle, A. R. Cao,
P. Cayting, A. Charos, Y. Cheng, C. Eastman, G. Euskirchen,
J. D. Fleming, F. Grubert, L. Habegger, M. Hariharan, A. Har-
manci, S. Iyengar, V. X. Jin, K. J. Karczewski, M. Kasowski,
P. Lacroute, H. Lam, N. Lamarre-Vincent, J. Lian, M. Lindahl-
Allen, R. Min, B. Miotto, H. Monahan, Z. Moqtaderi, X. J.
Mu, H. O’Geen, Z. Ouyang, D. Patacsil, D. Raha, L. Ramirez,
B. Reed, M. Shi, T. Slifer, H. Witt, L. Wu, X. Xu, K. K. Yan,
X. Yang, K. Struhl, S. M. Weissman, L. O. Penalva, S. Kar-
makar, R. R. Bhanvadia, A. Choudhury, M. Domanus, L. Ma,
J. Moran, A. Victorsen, T. Auer, L. Centanin, M. Eichenlaub,
F. Gruhl, S. Heermann, B. Hoeckendorf, D. Inoue, T. Kell-
ner, S. Kirchmaier, C. Mueller, R. Reinhardt, L. Schertel,
S. Schneider, R. Sinn, B. Wittbrodt, J. Wittbrodt, G. Jain,
G. Balasundaram, D. L. Bates, R. Byron, T. K. Canfield, M. J.
Diegel, D. Dunn, A. K. Ebersol, T. Frum, K. Garg, E. Gist,
R. S. Hansen, L. Boatman, E. Haugen, R. Humbert, A. K. John-
son, E. M. Johnson, T. V. Kutyavin, K. Lee, D. Lotakis, M. T.
Maurano, S. J. Neph, F. V. Neri, E. D. Nguyen, H. Qu, A. P.
Reynolds, V. Roach, E. Rynes, M. E. Sanchez, R. S. Sandstrom,
A. O. Shafer, A. B. Stergachis, S. Thomas, B. Vernot, J. Vier-
==PAGE:121==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
105
stra, S. Vong, H. Wang, M. A. Weaver, Y. Yan, M. Zhang, J. M.
Akey, M. Bender, M. O. Dorschner, M. Groudine, M. J. Mac-
Coss, P. Navas, G. Stamatoyannopoulos, K. Beal, A. Brazma,
P. Flicek, N. Johnson, M. Lukk, N. M. Luscombe, D. So-
bral, J. M. Vaquerizas, S. Batzoglou, A. Sidow, N. Hussami,
S. Kyriazopoulou-Panagiotopoulou, M. W. Libbrecht, M. A.
Schaub, W. Miller, P. J. Bickel, B. Banfai, N. P. Boley,
H. Huang, J. J. Li, W. S. Noble, J. A. Bilmes, O. J. Buske,
A. D. Sahu, P. V. Kharchenko, P. J. Park, D. Baker, J. Taylor,
and L. Lochovsky, An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the
human genome, Nature, 489 (2012), pp. 57–74.
[39] F. Dundar, S. Luce, and P. Zumbo, Diﬀerential gene expression anal-
ysis using RNA-seq, 2018.
[40] z. et al Wang, RNA-seq:
A revolutionary tool for transcriptomics,
Bioinformatics: A Practical Guide to the Analysis of Genes and Proteins,
10 (2001), pp. 57–63.
[41] K.
Fejgin,
J.
Nielsen,
M.
R.
Birknow,
J.
F.
Bastlund,
V. Nielsen,
J. B. Lauridsen,
H. Stefansson,
S. Steinberg,
H. B. D. Sorensen, T. E. Mortensen, P. H. Larsen, I. V. Klewe,
S. V. Rasmussen, K. Stefansson, T. M. Werge, P. Kallunki,
K. V. Christensen, and M. Didriksen, A mouse model that recapit-
ulates cardinal features of the 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome including
schizophrenia- and epilepsy-related alterations, Biological Psychiatry, 76
(2014), pp. 128–137.
[42] P. Ferragina and G. Manzini, Opportunistic data structures with ap-
plications, Proceeding FOCS ’00 Proceedings of the 41st Annual Sympo-
sium on Foundations of Computer ScienceProceeding FOCS ’00 Proceed-
ings of the 41st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
(2000), pp. 390–398.
[43] R. D. Finn, P. Coggill, R. Y. Eberhardt, S. R. Eddy, J. Mis-
try, A. L. Mitchell, S. C. Potter, M. Punta, M. Qureshi,
A. Sangrador-Vegas, G. A. Salazar, J. Tate, and A. Bateman,
The Pfam protein families database: Towards a more sustainable future,
Nucleic Acids Research, 44 (2016), pp. D279–D285.
[44] M. Flavio and P. Graziano, mRNA Untranslated Regions (UTRs),
jan 2018.
[45] A. Forsingdal, K. Fejgin, V. Nielsen, T. Werge, and J. Nielsen,
15Q13.3 Homozygous Knockout Mouse Model Display Epilepsy-, Autism-
and Schizophrenia-Related Phenotypes, Translational psychiatry, 6 (2016),
p. e860.
==PAGE:122==
106
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[46] A. Forsingdal, T. Nygaard Jørgensen, M. Didriksen, L. Olsen,
T. Werge, and J. Nielsen, Animal models of copy number variants
that predispose schizophrenia, in prep, Biological Psychiatry.
[47] A. Forsingdal, T. Werge, and J. Nielsen, Molecular changes in
a mouse model of the 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome, in prep, Human
Molecular Genetics.
[48] L. Gao, Z. Fang, K. Zhang, D. Zhi, and X. Cui, Length bias cor-
rection for RNA-seq data in gene set analyses, Bioinformatics, 27 (2011),
pp. 662–669.
[49] M. Garber, M. G. Grabherr, M. Guttman, and C. Trapnell,
Computational methods for transcriptome annotation and quantiﬁcation
using RNA-seq, Nature Methods, 8 (2011), pp. 469–477.
[50] P. J. Grabowski and D. L. Black, Alternative RNA splicing in the
nervous system, Progress in Neurobiology, 65 (2001), pp. 289–308.
[51] J. Gratten, N. R. Wray, M. C. Keller, and P. M. Visscher,
Large-scale genomics unveils the genetic architecture of psychiatric disor-
ders, Nature Neuroscience, 17 (2014), pp. 782–790.
[52] M. Griffith, J. R. Walker, N. C. Spies, B. J. Ainscough, and
O. L. Griffith, Informatics for RNA Sequencing: A Web Resource for
Analysis on the Cloud, PLoS Computational Biology, 11 (2015), pp. 1–20.
[53] A. Grønborg-Forsingdal, Molecular dissection of the 15q13.3 mi-
crodeletion syndrome - Biological insight to neruodevelopmental disorders
- PhD Thesis, (2017).
[54] M. Guttman, M. Garber, J. Z. Levin, J. Donaghey, J. Robin-
son, X. Adiconis, L. Fan, M. J. Koziol, A. Gnirke, C. Nusbaum,
J. L. Rinn, E. S. Lander, and A. Regev, Ab initio reconstruction
of transcriptomes of pluripotent and lineage committed cells reveals gene
structures of thousands of lincRNAs, Nature biotechnology, 28 (2010),
pp. 503–510.
[55] K. D. Hansen, S. E. Brenner, and S. Dudoit, Biases in Illumina
transcriptome sequencing caused by random hexamer priming, Nucleic
Acids Research, 38 (2010), pp. 1–7.
[56] I. Helbig, H. C. Mefford, A. J. Sharp, M. Guipponi, M. Fichera,
A. Franke, H. Muhle, C. D. Kovel, C. Baker, S. V. Spiczak,
K. L. Kron,
I. Steinich,
A. a. Kleefu,
C. Leu,
V. Gaus,
B. Schmitz, K. M. Klein, P. S. Reif, F. Rosenow, Y. We-
ber, F. Zimprich, L. Urak, K. Fuchs, M. Feucht, P. Genton,
==PAGE:123==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
107
P. Thomas, F. Visscher, G.-j. D. Haan, R. S. Møller, H. Hjal-
grim, D. Luciano, M. Wittig, M. Nothnagel, C. E. Elger,
C. Romano, A. Malafosse, B. P. C. Koeleman, D. Lindhout,
U. Stephani, S. Schreiber, E. E. Eichler, and T. Sander, 15q13.3
microdeletions increase risk of idiopathic generalized epilepsy, 41 (2011),
pp. 160–162.
[57] W. A. Hide, V. N. Babenko, P. A. Van Heusden, C. Seoighe, and
J. F. Kelso, The contribution of exon-skipping events on chromosomes
22 to protein coding diversity, Genome Research, 11 (2001), pp. 1848–
1853.
[58] R. Hitzemann, D. Bottomly, P. Darakjian, N. Walter, O. Iancu,
R. Searles, B. Wilmot, and S. Mcweeney, Genes, behavior and
next-generation RNA sequencing, Genes, Brain and Behavior, 12 (2013),
pp. 1–12.
[59] J. R. Homberg, E. J. Kyzar, A. M. Stewart, M. Nguyen, M. K.
Poudel, D. J. Echevarria, A. D. Collier, S. Gaikwad, V. M.
Klimenko, W. Norton, J. Pittman, S. Nakamura, M. Koshiba,
H. Yamanouchi, S. A. Apryatin, M. L. Scattoni, D. M. Diamond,
J. F. Ullmann, M. O. Parker, R. E. Brown, C. Song, and A. V.
Kalueff, Improving treatment of neurodevelopmental disorders: recom-
mendations based on preclinical studies, Expert Opinion on Drug Discov-
ery, 11 (2016), pp. 11–25.
[60] W. Huber, V. J. Carey, R. Gentleman, S. Anders, M. Carl-
son,
B.
S.
Carvalho,
H.
C.
Bravo,
S.
Davis,
L.
Gatto,
T. Girke, R. Gottardo, F. Hahne, K. D. Hansen, R. A. Irizarry,
M. Lawrence, M. I. Love, J. MacDonald, V. Obenchain, A. K.
Oleś, H. Pagès, A. Reyes, P. Shannon, G. K. Smyth, D. Tenen-
baum, L. Waldron, and M. Morga, Orchestrating high-throughput
genomic analysis with Bioconductor, Nature methods, 14 (2015), pp. 280–
287.
[61] I. Ionita-Laza, B. Xu, V. Makarov, J. D. Buxbaum, J. L. Roos,
J. A. Gogos, and M. Karayiorgou, Scan statistic-based analysis of
exome sequencing data identiﬁes FAN1 at 15q13.3 as a susceptibility gene
for schizophrenia and autism, Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 111 (2014), pp. 343–348.
[62] A. G. Jacob and C. W. Smith, Intron retention as a component of reg-
ulated gene expression programs, Human Genetics, 136 (2017), pp. 1043–
1057.
==PAGE:124==
108
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[63] Y. Jang, Y. Lee, S. M. Kim, Y. D. Yang, J. Jung, and U. Oh,
Quantitative analysis of TRP channel genes in mouse organs, Archives of
Pharmacal Research, 35 (2012), pp. 1823–1830.
[64] C. Jia, W. Guan, A. Yang, R. Xiao, W. H. W. Tang, C. S.
Moravec, K. B. Margulies, T. P. Cappola, C. Li, and M. Li,
MetaDiﬀ: diﬀerential isoform expression analysis using random-eﬀects
meta-regression, BMC Bioinformatics, 16 (2015), p. 208.
[65] H. John, 3 UTRs and Regulation, sep 2005.
[66] J.
Kaczynski,
J.
S.
Zhang,
V.
Ellenrieder,
A.
Conley,
T. Duenes, H. Kester, B. Van der Burg, and R. Urrutia, The
Sp1-like Protein BTEB3 Inhibits Transcription via the Basic Transcrip-
tion Element Box by Interacting with mSin3A and HDAC-1 Co-repressors
and Competing with Sp1, Journal of Biological Chemistry, 276 (2001),
pp. 36749–36756.
[67] K. Kaila, E. Ruusuvuori, P. Seja, J. Voipio, and M. Puskar-
jov, GABA actions and ionic plasticity in epilepsy, Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 26 (2014), pp. 34–41.
[68] D. Kim, B. Langmead, and S. L. Salzberg, HISAT: A fast spliced
aligner with low memory requirements, Nature Methods, 12 (2015),
pp. 357–360.
[69] D. Kim, M. Pertea, D. Kim, G. M. Pertea, J. T. Leek, and S. L.
Salzberg, Transcript-level expression analysis of RNA- seq experiments
with HISAT , StringTie and Transcript-level expression analysis of RNA-
seq experiments with HISAT , StringTie and Ballgown, Nature Protocols,
11 (2016), pp. 1650–1667.
[70] G. Kirov, CNVs in neuropsychiatric disorders, Human Molecular Genet-
ics, 24 (2015), pp. R45–R49.
[71] I.
R.
Kirsch,
E.
D.
Green,
R.
Yonescu,
R.
Strausberg,
N. Carter, D. Bentley, M. a. Leversha, I. Dunham, V. V.
Braden, E. Hilgenfeld, G. Schuler, A. E. Lash, G. L. Shen,
M. Martelli, W. M. Kuehl, R. D. Klausner, and T. Ried, ISIS
, the intron information frequency of alternative, America, 24 (2000),
pp. 340–341.
[72] K. Kochinke, C. Zweier, B. Nijhof, M. Fenckova, P. Cizek,
F.
Honti,
S.
Keerthikumar,
M.
Oortveld,
T.
Kleefstra,
J. Kramer, C. Webber, M. Huynen, and A. Schenck, Systematic
Phenomics Analysis Deconvolutes Genes Mutated in Intellectual Disability
into Biologically Coherent Modules, American Journal of Human Genetics,
98 (2016), pp. 149–164.
==PAGE:125==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
109
[73] J. H. Kogan, A. K. Gross, R. E. Featherstone, R. Shin, Q. Chen,
C. L. Heusner, M. Adachi, A. Lin, N. M. Walton, S. Miyoshi,
S. Miyake, K. Tajinda, H. Ito, S. J. Siegel, and M. Matsumoto,
Mouse Model of Chromosome 15q13.3 Microdeletion Syndrome Demon-
strates Features Related to Autism Spectrum Disorder, Journal of Neuro-
science, 35 (2015), pp. 16282–16294.
[74] C. Koike, T. Obara, Y. Uriu, T. Numata, R. Sanuki, K. Miyata,
T. Koyasu, S. Ueno, K. Funabiki, A. Tani, H. Ueda, M. Kondo,
Y. Mori, M. Tachibana, and T. Furukawa, TRPM1 is a component
of the retinal ON bipolar cell transduction channel in the mGluR6 cascade,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107 (2010), pp. 332–337.
[75] A.
R.
Kornblihtt,
I.
E.
Schor,
M.
Alló,
G.
Dujardin,
E. Petrillo, and M. J. Muñoz, Alternative splicing: A pivotal step
between eukaryotic transcription and translation, Nature Reviews Molec-
ular Cell Biology, 14 (2013), pp. 153–165.
[76] A. Koussounadis, S. P. Langdon, I. H. Um, D. J. Harrison, and
V. A. Smith, Relationship between diﬀerentially expressed mRNA and
mRNA-protein correlations in a xenograft model system, Scientiﬁc Re-
ports, 5 (2015), pp. 1–9.
[77] N. Leng, J. A. Dawson, J. A. Thomson, V. Ruotti, A. I. Riss-
man, B. M. Smits, J. D. Haag, M. N. Gould, R. M. Stewart,
and C. Kendziorski, EBSeq: An empirical Bayes hierarchical model for
inference in RNA-seq experiments, Bioinformatics, 29 (2013), pp. 1035–
1043.
[78] N. Leng,
Y. Li,
B. E. McIntosh,
B. K. Nguyen,
B. Duf-
fin, S. Tian, J. A. Thomson, C. N. Dewey, R. Stewart, and
C. Kendziorski, EBSeq-HMM: A Bayesian approach for identifying
gene-expression changes in ordered RNA-seq experiments, Bioinformatics,
31 (2015), pp. 2614–2622.
[79] J. Z. Levin, M. Yassour, X. Adiconis, C. Nusbaum, D. A. Thomp-
son, N. Friedman, A. Gnirke, and A. Regev, Comprehensive
comparative analysis of strand-speciﬁc RNA sequencing methods, Nature
Methods, 7 (2010), p. 709.
[80] B. P. Lewis, R. E. Green, and S. E. Brenner, Evidence for the
widespread coupling of alternative splicing and nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay in humans, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100
(2003), pp. 189–192.
==PAGE:126==
110
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[81] H. Li,
B. Handsaker,
A. Wysoker,
T. Fennell,
J. Ruan,
N. Homer, G. Marth, G. Abecasis, and R. Durbin, The Se-
quence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools, Bioinformatics, 25 (2009),
pp. 2078–2079.
[82] P. Lichtenstein, B. Yip, C. Björk, and Y. Pawitan, Common ge-
netic inﬂuences for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder: a population-based
study of 2 million nuclear families, Lancet, 373 (2009).
[83] K. H. Lim, L. Ferraris, M. E. Filloux, B. J. Raphael, and W. G.
Fairbrother, Using positional distribution to identify splicing elements
and predict pre-mRNA processing defects in human genes, Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 108 (2011), pp. 11093–11098.
[84] M. I. Love, J. B. Hogenesch, R. A. Irizarry, and C. Biology, Sys-
tematic Errors in Transcript Abundance Estimation, 34 (2017), pp. 1287–
1291.
[85] M. I. Love, W. Huber, and S. Anders, Moderated estimation of fold
change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2, Genome Biology,
15 (2014), pp. 1–21.
[86] C. Lowther, G. Costain, D. J. Stavropoulos, C. K. Silversides,
D. M. Andrade, and J. So, Delineating the 15q13.3 microdeletion phe-
notype: a case series and comprehensive review of the literature, 17 (2015),
pp. 149–157.
[87] D. Malhotra and J. Sebat, CNVs: Harbinger of a Rare Variant Rev-
olution in Psychiatric Genetics, Nature genetics, 43 (2013), pp. 749–64.
[88] C. R. Marshall, D. P. Howrigan, D. Merico, B. Thiruvahin-
drapuram, W. Wu, D. S. Greer, D. Antaki, A. Shetty, P. A.
Holmans, D. Pinto, M. Gujral, W. M. Brandler, D. Malho-
tra, Z. Wang, K. V. Fuentes Fajarado, M. S. Maile, S. Ripke,
I. Agartz, M. Albus, M. Alexander, F. Amin, J. Atkins, S. A. Ba-
canu, R. A. Belliveau, S. E. Bergen, M. Bertalan, E. Bevilac-
qua, T. B. Bigdeli, D. W. Black, R. Bruggeman, N. G. Buc-
cola, R. L. Buckner, B. Bulik-Sullivan, W. Byerley, W. Cahn,
G. Cai, M. J. Cairns, D. Campion, R. M. Cantor, V. J. Carr,
N. Carrera, S. V. Catts, K. D. Chambert, W. Cheng, C. R.
Cloninger, D. Cohen, P. Cormican, N. Craddock, B. Crespo-
Facorro, J. J. Crowley, D. Curtis, M. Davidson, K. L. Davis,
F. Degenhardt, J. Del Favero, L. E. DeLisi, D. Dikeos, T. Di-
nan, S. Djurovic, G. Donohoe, E. Drapeau, J. Duan, F. Dud-
bridge, P. Eichhammer, J. Eriksson, V. Escott-Price, L. Es-
sioux, A. H. Fanous, K. H. Farh, M. S. Farrell, J. Frank,
==PAGE:127==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
111
L. Franke, R. Freedman, N. B. Freimer, J. I. Friedman, A. J.
Forstner, M. Fromer, G. Genovese, L. Georgieva, E. S. Ger-
shon, I. Giegling, P. Giusti-Rodríguez, S. Godard, J. I. Gold-
stein, J. Gratten, L. De Haan, M. L. Hamshere, M. Hansen,
T. Hansen, V. Haroutunian, A. M. Hartmann, F. A. Henskens,
S. Herms, J. N. Hirschhorn, P. Hoffmann, A. Hofman, H. Huang,
M. Ikeda, I. Joa, A. K. Kähler, R. S. Kahn, L. Kalaydjieva,
J. Karjalainen, D. Kavanagh, M. C. Keller, B. J. Kelly, J. L.
Kennedy, Y. Kim, J. A. Knowles, B. Konte, C. Laurent, P. Lee,
S. H. Lee, S. E. Legge, B. Lerer, D. L. Levy, K. Y. Liang,
J. Lieberman, J. Lönnqvist, C. M. Loughland, P. K. Mag-
nusson, B. S. Maher, W. Maier, J. Mallet, M. Mattheisen,
M. Mattingsdal, R. W. McCarley, C. McDonald, A. M. McIn-
tosh, S. Meier, C. J. Meijer, I. Melle, R. I. Mesholam-Gately,
A. Metspalu, P. T. Michie, L. Milani, V. Milanova, Y. Mokrab,
D. W. Morris, B. Müller-Myhsok, K. C. Murphy, R. M. Mur-
ray, I. Myin-Germeys, I. Nenadic, D. A. Nertney, G. Nestadt,
K. K. Nicodemus, L. Nisenbaum, A. Nordin, E. O’Callaghan,
C. O’Dushlaine, S. Y. Oh, A. Olincy, L. Olsen, F. A. O’Neill,
J. Van Os, C. Pantelis, G. N. Papadimitriou, E. Parkhomenko,
M. T. Pato, T. Paunio, D. O. Perkins, T. H. Pers, O. Pietiläinen,
J. Pimm, A. J. Pocklington, J. Powell, A. Price, A. E. Pulver,
S. M. Purcell, D. Quested, H. B. Rasmussen, A. Reichenberg,
M. A. Reimers, A. L. Richards, J. L. Roffman, P. Roussos, D. M.
Ruderfer, V. Salomaa, A. R. Sanders, A. Savitz, U. Schall,
T. G. Schulze, S. G. Schwab, E. M. Scolnick, R. J. Scott, L. J.
Seidman, J. Shi, J. M. Silverman, J. W. Smoller, E. Söderman,
C. C. Spencer, E. A. Stahl, E. Strengman, J. Strohmaier, T. S.
Stroup, J. Suvisaari, D. M. Svrakic, J. P. Szatkiewicz, S. Thiru-
malai, P. A. Tooney, J. Veijola, P. M. Visscher, J. Wadding-
ton, D. Walsh, B. T. Webb, M. Weiser, D. B. Wildenauer, N. M.
Williams, S. Williams, S. H. Witt, A. R. Wolen, B. K. Worm-
ley, N. R. Wray, J. Q. Wu, C. C. Zai, R. Adolfsson, O. A.
Andreassen, D. H. Blackwood, E. Bramon, J. D. Buxbaum,
S. Cichon, D. A. Collier, A. Corvin, M. J. Daly, A. Darvasi,
E. Domenici, T. Esko, P. V. Gejman, M. Gill, H. Gurling,
C. M. Hultman, N. Iwata, A. V. Jablensky, E. G. Jönsson, K. S.
Kendler, G. Kirov, J. Knight, D. F. Levinson, Q. S. Li, S. A.
McCarroll, A. McQuillin, J. L. Moran, B. J. Mowry, M. M.
Nöthen, R. A. Ophoff, M. J. Owen, A. Palotie, C. N. Pato, T. L.
Petryshen, D. Posthuma, M. Rietschel, B. P. Riley, D. Rujescu,
P. Sklar, D. St Clair, J. T. Walters, T. Werge, P. F. Sullivan,
M. C. O’Donovan, S. W. Scherer, B. M. Neale, and J. Sebat,
Contribution of copy number variants to schizophrenia from a genome-
==PAGE:128==
112
BIBLIOGRAPHY
wide study of 41,321 subjects, Nature Genetics, 49 (2017), pp. 27–35.
[89] A. Masurel-Paulet, I. Drumare, M. Holder, J. M. Cuisset,
L. Vallee, S. Defoort, B. Bourgois, P. Pernes, J. C. Cuvellier,
F. Huet, S. E. Chehadeh, J. Thevenon, P. Callier, C. Thauvin,
L. Faivre, and J. Andrieux, Further delineation of eye manifestations
in homozygous 15q13.3 microdeletions including TRPM1: A diﬀerential
diagnosis of ceroid lipofuscinosis, American Journal of Medical Genetics,
Part A, 164 (2014), pp. 1537–1544.
[90] H. C. Mefford,
H. Muhle,
P. Ostertag,
S. von Spiczak,
K. Buysse, C. Baker, A. Franke, A. Malafosse, P. Genton,
P. Thomas, C. A. Gurnett, S. Schreiber, A. G. Bassuk, M. Guip-
poni, U. Stephani, I. Helbig, and E. E. Eichler, Genome-wide copy
number variation in epilepsy: novel susceptibility loci in idiopathic gener-
alized and focal epilepsies., PLoS genetics, 6 (2010), pp. 1–9.
[91] B. Modrek, A. Resch, C. Grasso, and C. Lee, Genome-wide detec-
tion of alternative splicing in expressed sequences of human genes, Nucleic
Acids Research, 29 (2001), pp. 2850–2859.
[92] S. B. Montgomery, RNA Sequencing and Analysis, Cold Spring Harbor
Protocol, 2015 (2016), pp. 951–969.
[93] A. Mortazavi, B. A. Williams, K. McCue, L. Schaeffer, and
B. Wold, Mapping and quantifying mammalian transcriptomes by RNA-
Seq, Nature Methods, 5 (2008), pp. 621–628.
[94] S. A. Mullen, G. L. Carvill, S. Bellows, M. A. Bayly, S. F.
Berkovic, L. M. Dibbens, I. E. Scheffer, and H. C. Mefford,
Copy number variants are frequent in genetic generalized epilepsy with
intellectual disability, Neurology, 81 (2013), pp. 1507–1514.
[95] National Library of Medicine (US), 15q13.3 microdeletion, (2018).
[96] E. J. Nestler and S. E. Hyman, Animal Models of Neuropsychiatric
Disorders, Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 13 (2013), pp. 242–267.
[97] J. Nielsen, K. Fejgin, F. Sotty, V. Nielsen, A. Mørk, C. T.
Christoffersen, L. Yavich, J. B. Lauridsen, D. Clausen, P. H.
Larsen, J. Egebjerg, T. M. Werge, P. Kallunki, K. V. Chris-
tensen, and M. Didriksen, A mouse model of the schizophrenia-
associated 1q21.1 microdeletion syndrome exhibits altered mesolimbic
dopamine transmission, Translational Psychiatry, 7 (2017).
[98] P. R. Nielsen, U. Meyer, and P. B. Mortensen, Individual and
combined eﬀects of maternal anemia and prenatal infection on risk for
==PAGE:129==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
113
schizophrenia in oﬀspring, Schizophrenia Research, 172 (2016), pp. 35–
40.
[99] S. R. Nilsson, P. Celada, K. Fejgin, J. Thelin, J. Nielsen,
N. Santana, C. J. Heath, P. H. Larsen, V. Nielsen, B. A. Kent,
L. M. Saksida, T. B. Stensbøl, T. W. Robbins, J. F. Bastlund,
T. J. Bussey, F. Artigas, and M. Didriksen, A mouse model of the
15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome shows prefrontal neurophysiological dys-
functions and attentional impairment, Psychopharmacology, 233 (2016),
pp. 2151–2163.
[100] J. Noebels, Pathway-driven discovery of epilepsy genes, Nature neuro-
science, 18 (2015), pp. 344–350.
[101] M. Nowicka and M. D. Robinson, DRIMSeq: a Dirichlet-multinomial
framework for multivariate count outcomes in genomics, F1000Research,
5 (2016), p. 1356.
[102] A. Orr-Urtreger,
F. M. Göldner,
M. Saeki,
I. Lorenzo,
L. Goldberg, M. De Biasi, J. A. Dani, J. W. Patrick, and A. L.
Beaudet, Mice deﬁcient in the alpha7 neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor lack alpha-bungarotoxin binding sites and hippocampal fast nico-
tinic currents., The Journal of Neuroscience, 17 (1997), pp. 9165–9171.
[103] A. Oshlack and M. J. Wakefield, Transcript length bias in RNA-seq
data confounds systems biology, Biology Direct, 4 (2009), pp. 1–10.
[104] Q. Pan, O. Shai, L. J. Lee, B. J. Frey, and B. J. Blencowe, Deep
surveying of alternative splicing complexity in the human transcriptome by
high-throughput sequencing, Nature Genetics, 40 (2008), pp. 1413–1415.
[105] R. Patro, G. Duggal, and C. Kingsford, Salmon: Accurate, Ver-
satile and Ultrafast Quantiﬁcation from RNA-seq Data using Lightweight-
Alignment, bioRxiv, (2015), p. 021592.
[106] R. Patro, G. Duggal, M. I. Love, R. A. Irizarry, and C. Kings-
ford, Salmon provides fast and bias-aware quantiﬁcation of transcript
expression, Nature Methods, 14 (2017), pp. 417–419.
[107] R.
Patro,
S.
M.
Mount,
and
C.
Kingsford,
Sailﬁsh
en-
ables alignment-free isoform quantiﬁcation from RNA-seq reads using
lightweight algorithms, Nature Biotechnology, 32 (2014), pp. 462–464.
[108] R. Paylor, M. Nguyen, J. N. Crawley, J. Patrick, A. Beaudet,
and A. Orr-Urtreger, α7 Nicotinic Receptor Subunits Are Not Nec-
essary for Hippocampal-Dependent Learning or Sensorimotor Gating: A
Behavioral Characterization of Acra7-Deﬁcient Mice, Learning & Mem-
ory, 5 (1998), pp. 302–316.
==PAGE:130==
114
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[109] M. Pertea, D. Kim, G. Pertea, J. T. Leek, and L. Steven, HHS
Public Access, 11 (2017), pp. 1650–1667.
[110] M. Pertea, G. M. Pertea, C. M. Antonescu, T. C. Chang, J. T.
Mendell, and S. L. Salzberg, StringTie enables improved reconstruc-
tion of a transcriptome from RNA-seq reads, Nature Biotechnology, 33
(2015), pp. 290–295.
[111] T. N. Petersen, S. Brunak, G. Von Heijne, and H. Nielsen, Sig-
nalP 4.0: Discriminating signal peptides from transmembrane regions, Na-
ture Methods, 8 (2011), pp. 785–786.
[112] X. Pichon, L. A. Wilson, M. Stoneley, A. Bastide, H. A King,
J. Somers, and A. E Willis, RNA Binding Protein/RNA Element
Interactions and the Control of Translation, Current Protein & Peptide
Science, 13 (2012), pp. 294–304.
[113] D. Pinto, A. T. Pagnamenta, L. Klei, R. Anney, D. Merico,
R. Regan, J. Conroy, T. R. Magalhaes, C. Correia, B. S. Abra-
hams, J. Almeida, E. Bacchelli, G. D. Bader, A. J. Bailey,
G. Baird, A. Battaglia, T. Berney, N. Bolshakova, S. Bölte,
P. F. Bolton, T. Bourgeron, S. Brennan, J. Brian, S. E. Bryson,
A. R. Carson, G. Casallo, J. Casey, B. H. Chung, L. Cochrane,
C. Corsello, E. L. Crawford, A. Crossett, C. Cytrynbaum,
G. Dawson, M. De Jonge, R. Delorme, I. Drmic, E. Duketis,
F. Duque, A. Estes, P. Farrar, B. A. Fernandez, S. E. Fol-
stein, E. Fombonne, C. M. Freitag, J. Gilbert, C. Gillberg,
J. T. Glessner, J. Goldberg, A. Green, J. Green, S. J. Guter,
H. Hakonarson, E. A. Heron, M. Hill, R. Holt, J. L. Howe,
G. Hughes, V. Hus, R. Igliozzi, C. Kim, S. M. Klauck, A. Kolev-
zon, O. Korvatska, V. Kustanovich, C. M. Lajonchere, J. A.
Lamb, M. Laskawiec, M. Leboyer, A. Le Couteur, B. L. Leven-
thal, A. C. Lionel, X. Q. Liu, C. Lord, L. Lotspeich, S. C. Lund,
E. Maestrini, W. Mahoney, C. Mantoulan, C. R. Marshall,
H. McConachie, C. J. McDougle, J. McGrath, W. M. McMahon,
A. Merikangas, O. Migita, N. J. Minshew, G. K. Mirza, J. Mun-
son, S. F. Nelson, C. Noakes, A. Noor, G. Nygren, G. Oliveira,
K. Papanikolaou, J. R. Parr, B. Parrini, T. Paton, A. Pickles,
M. Pilorge, J. Piven, C. P. Ponting, D. J. Posey, A. Poustka,
F. Poustka, A. Prasad, J. Ragoussis, K. Renshaw, J. Rickaby,
W. Roberts, K. Roeder, B. Roge, M. L. Rutter, L. J. Bierut,
J. P. Rice, J. Salt, K. Sansom, D. Sato, R. Segurado, A. F. Se-
queira, L. Senman, N. Shah, V. C. Sheffield, L. Soorya, I. Sousa,
O. Stein, N. Sykes, V. Stoppioni, C. Strawbridge, R. Tancredi,
K. Tansey, B. Thiruvahindrapduram, A. P. Thompson, S. Thom-
son, A. Tryfon, J. Tsiantis, H. Van Engeland, J. B. Vincent,
==PAGE:131==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
115
F. Volkmar, S. Wallace, K. Wang, Z. Wang, T. H. Wassink,
C. Webber, R. Weksberg, K. Wing, K. Wittemeyer, S. Wood,
J. Wu, B. L. Yaspan, D. Zurawiecki, L. Zwaigenbaum, J. D.
Buxbaum, R. M. Cantor, E. H. Cook, H. Coon, M. L. Cuccaro,
B. Devlin, S. Ennis, L. Gallagher, D. H. Geschwind, M. Gill,
J. L. Haines, J. Hallmayer, J. Miller, A. P. Monaco, J. I. Nurn-
berger, A. D. Paterson, M. A. Pericak-Vance, G. D. Schellen-
berg, P. Szatmari, A. M. Vicente, V. J. Vieland, E. M. Wijsman,
S. W. Scherer, J. S. Sutcliffe, and C. Betancur, Functional im-
pact of global rare copy number variation in autism spectrum disorders,
Nature, 466 (2010), pp. 368–372.
[114] R Core Team, R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Comput-
ing, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2018.
[115] E. Rees, J. T. R. Walters, L. Georgieva, A. R. Isles, K. D.
Chambert, A. L. Richards, G. Mahoney-Davies, S. E. Legge,
J. L. Moran, S. A. McCarroll, M. C. O’Donovan, M. J. Owen,
and G. Kirov, Analysis of copy number variations at 15 schizophrenia-
associated loci, British Journal of Psychiatry, 204 (2014), pp. 108–114.
[116] D. C. Reid, B. L. Chang, S. I. Gunderson, L. Alpert, W. A.
Thompson, and W. G. Fairbrother, Next-generation SELEX iden-
tiﬁes sequence and structural determinants of splicing factor binding in
human pre-mRNA sequence, Rna, 15 (2009), pp. 2385–2397.
[117] S. Ripke,
B. M. Neale,
A. Corvin,
J. T. Walters,
K. H.
Farh, P. A. Holmans, P. Lee, B. Bulik-Sullivan, D. A. Col-
lier, H. Huang, T. H. Pers, I. Agartz, E. Agerbo, M. Al-
bus, M. Alexander, F. Amin, S. A. Bacanu, M. Begemann,
R. A. Belliveau, J. Bene, S. E. Bergen, E. Bevilacqua, T. B.
Bigdeli, D. W. Black, R. Bruggeman, N. G. Buccola, R. L.
Buckner, W. Byerley, W. Cahn, G. Cai, D. Campion, R. M.
Cantor, V. J. Carr, N. Carrera, S. V. Catts, K. D. Cham-
bert, R. C. Chan, R. Y. Chen, E. Y. Chen, W. Cheng, E. F.
Cheung, S. A. Chong, C. R. Cloninger, D. Cohen, N. Co-
hen, P. Cormican, N. Craddock, J. J. Crowley, D. Curtis,
M. Davidson, K. L. Davis, F. Degenhardt, J. Del Favero,
D. Demontis, D. Dikeos, T. Dinan, S. Djurovic, G. Donohoe,
E. Drapeau, J. Duan, F. Dudbridge, N. Durmishi, P. Eichham-
mer, J. Eriksson, V. Escott-Price, L. Essioux, A. H. Fanous,
M. S. Farrell, J. Frank, L. Franke, R. Freedman, N. B.
Freimer, M. Friedl, J. I. Friedman, M. Fromer, G. Genovese,
L. Georgieva, I. Giegling, P. Giusti-Rodríguez, S. Godard,
J. I. Goldstein, V. Golimbet, S. Gopal, J. Gratten, L. De
==PAGE:132==
116
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Haan, C. Hammer, M. L. Hamshere, M. Hansen, T. Hansen,
V. Haroutunian, A. M. Hartmann, F. A. Henskens, S. Herms,
J. N. Hirschhorn, P. Hoffmann, A. Hofman, M. V. Holle-
gaard, D. M. Hougaard, M. Ikeda, I. Joa, A. Julià, R. S.
Kahn, L. Kalaydjieva, S. Karachanak-Yankova, J. Karjalainen,
D. Kavanagh, M. C. Keller, J. L. Kennedy, A. Khrunin, Y. Kim,
J. Klovins, J. A. Knowles, B. Konte, V. Kucinskas, Z. A.
Kucinskiene, H. Kuzelova-Ptackova, A. K. Kähler, C. Laurent,
J. L. C. Keong, S. H. Lee, S. E. Legge, B. Lerer, M. Li, T. Li,
K. Y. Liang, J. Lieberman, S. Limborska, C. M. Loughland,
J. Lubinski, J. Lönnqvist, M. Macek, P. K. Magnusson, B. S. Ma-
her, W. Maier, J. Mallet, S. Marsal, M. Mattheisen, M. Mat-
tingsdal, R. W. McCarley, C. McDonald, A. M. McIntosh,
S. Meier, C. J. Meijer, B. Melegh, I. Melle, R. I. Mesholam-
Gately, A. Metspalu, P. T. Michie, L. Milani, V. Milanova,
Y. Mokrab, D. W. Morris, O. Mors, K. C. Murphy, R. M. Mur-
ray, I. Myin-Germeys, B. Müller-Myhsok, M. Nelis, I. Nenadic,
D. A. Nertney, G. Nestadt, K. K. Nicodemus, L. Nikitina-Zake,
L. Nisenbaum, A. Nordin, E. O’Callaghan, C. O’Dushlaine, F. A.
O’Neill, S. Y. Oh, A. Olincy, L. Olsen, J. Van Os, C. Pantelis,
G. N. Papadimitriou, S. Papiol, E. Parkhomenko, M. T. Pato,
T. Paunio, M. Pejovic-Milovancevic, D. O. Perkins, O. Pietiläi-
nen, J. Pimm, A. J. Pocklington, J. Powell, A. Price, A. E. Pul-
ver, S. M. Purcell, D. Quested, H. B. Rasmussen, A. Reichen-
berg, M. A. Reimers, A. L. Richards, J. L. Roffman, P. Roussos,
D. M. Ruderfer, V. Salomaa, A. R. Sanders, U. Schall, C. R.
Schubert, T. G. Schulze, S. G. Schwab, E. M. Scolnick, R. J.
Scott, L. J. Seidman, J. Shi, E. Sigurdsson, T. Silagadze, J. M.
Silverman, K. Sim, P. Slominsky, J. W. Smoller, H. C. So, C. C.
Spencer, E. A. Stahl, H. Stefansson, S. Steinberg, E. Stog-
mann, R. E. Straub, E. Strengman, J. Strohmaier, T. S. Stroup,
M. Subramaniam, J. Suvisaari, D. M. Svrakic, J. P. Szatkiewicz,
E. Söderman, S. Thirumalai, D. Toncheva, S. Tosato, J. Vei-
jola, J. Waddington, D. Walsh, D. Wang, Q. Wang, B. T. Webb,
M. Weiser, D. B. Wildenauer, N. M. Williams, S. Williams,
S. H. Witt, A. R. Wolen, E. H. Wong, B. K. Wormley, H. S.
Xi, C. C. Zai, X. Zheng, F. Zimprich, N. R. Wray, K. Stefans-
son, P. M. Visscher, R. Adolfsson, O. A. Andreassen, D. H.
Blackwood, E. Bramon, J. D. Buxbaum, A. D. Børglum, S. Ci-
chon, A. Darvasi, E. Domenici, H. Ehrenreich, T. Esko, P. V.
Gejman, M. Gill, H. Gurling, C. M. Hultman, N. Iwata, A. V.
Jablensky, E. G. Jönsson, K. S. Kendler, G. Kirov, J. Knight,
T. Lencz, D. F. Levinson, Q. S. Li, J. Liu, A. K. Malhotra, S. A.
McCarroll, A. McQuillin, J. L. Moran, P. B. Mortensen, B. J.
==PAGE:133==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
117
Mowry, M. M. Nöthen, R. A. Ophoff, M. J. Owen, A. Palotie,
C. N. Pato, T. L. Petryshen, D. Posthuma, M. Rietschel, B. P.
Riley, D. Rujescu, P. C. Sham, P. Sklar, D. St Clair, D. R.
Weinberger, J. R. Wendland, T. Werge, M. J. Daly, P. F. Sulli-
van, and M. C. O’Donovan, Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-
associated genetic loci, Nature, 511 (2014), pp. 421–427.
[118] D. Risso, K. Schwartz, G. Sherlock, and S. Dudoit, GC-Content
Normalization for RNA-Seq Data, BMC Bioinformatics, 12 (2011), p. 480.
[119] A. Roberts,
C. Trapnell,
J. Donaghey,
J. L. Rinn,
and
L. Pachter, Improving RNA-Seq expression estimates by correcting for
fragment bias, Genome Biology, 12 (2011), p. R22.
[120] A. Ronald and R. A. Hoekstra, Autism spectrum disorders and autis-
tic traits: A decade of new twin studies, American Journal of Medical
Genetics, Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics, 156 (2011), pp. 255–274.
[121] H. H. Ropers, Genetics of Early Onset Cognitive Impairment, Annual
Review of Genomics and Human Genetics, 11 (2010), pp. 161–187.
[122] D. Sadava, D. M. Hillis, C. H. Heller, and M. R. Berenbaum,
Life, the science of biology, 9th ed., 2011.
[123] M. Sammeth, S. Foissac, and R. Guigó, A general deﬁnition and
nomenclature for alternative splicing events, PLoS Computational Biol-
ogy, 4 (2008).
[124] R. Schmieder and R. Edwards, Quality control and preprocessing of
metagenomic datasets, Bioinformatics, 27 (2011), pp. 863–864.
[125] F. Seyednasrollah, A. Laiho, and L. L. Elo, Comparison of soft-
ware packages for detecting diﬀerential expression in RNA-seq studies,
Brieﬁngs in Bioinformatics, 16 (2013), pp. 59–70.
[126] T. Shafee and R. Lowe, Eukaryotic and prokaryotic gene structure,
2017.
[127] A. J. Sharp, H. C. Mefford, K. Li, C. Baker, C. Skinner, R. E.
Stevenson, R. J. Schroer, F. Novara, M. De Gregori, R. Ci-
ccone, A. Broomer, I. Casuga, Y. Wang, C. Xiao, C. Barba-
cioru, G. Gimelli, B. D. Bernardina, C. Torniero, R. Giorda,
R. Regan, V. Murday, S. Mansour, M. Fichera, L. Castiglia,
P. Failla, M. Ventura, Z. Jiang, G. M. Cooper, S. J. Knight,
C. Romano, O. Zuffardi, C. Chen, C. E. Schwartz, and E. E.
Eichler, A recurrent 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome associated with
mental retardation and seizures, Nature Genetics, 40 (2008), pp. 322–328.
==PAGE:134==
118
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[128] Y. Shi and H. Jiang, rseqdiﬀ: Detecting diﬀerential isoform expression
from rna-seq data using hierarchical likelihood ratio test, PLOS ONE, 8
(2013), pp. 1–11.
[129] J. Sirén, N. Välimäki, and V. Mäkinen, Indexing graphs for path
queries with applications in genome research, IEEE/ACM Transactions
on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, 11 (2014), pp. 375–388.
[130] C. Soneson and M. Delorenzi, A comparison of methods for diﬀeren-
tial expression analysis of RNA-seq data, BMC Bioinformatics, 14 (2013).
[131] C. Soneson, M. I. Love, and M. D. Robinson, Diﬀerential analyses
for RNA-seq : transcript-level estimates improve gene-level inferences [
version 1 ; referees : 2 approved ] Referee Status :, (2018), pp. 1–18.
[132] A. Srivastava, H. Sarkar, N. Gupta, and R. Patro, RapMap: A
rapid, sensitive and accurate tool for mapping RNA-seq reads to transcrip-
tomes, Bioinformatics, 32 (2016), pp. i192–i200.
[133] H. Stefansson,
D. Rujescu,
S. Cichon,
O. P. H. Pietiläi-
nen, S. Steinberg, R. Fossdal, E. Sigurdsson, J. E. Buizer-
voskamp, T. Hansen, K. D. Jakobsen, P. Muglia, C. Francks,
P. M. Matthews, A. Gylfason, B. V, D. Gudbjartsson, T. E.
Thorgeirsson, A. Sigurdsson, A. Jonasdottir, A. Jonasdottir,
A. Bjornsson, S. Mattiasdottir, T. Blondal, M. Haraldsson,
B. B. Magnusdottir, I. Giegling, J. Möller, A. Hartmann, K. V.
Shianna, D. Ge, and A. C. Need, Large recurrent microdeletions as-
sociated with schizophrenia, 455 (2009), pp. 232–236.
[134] P. F. Sullivan, M. J. Daly, and M. O’Donovan, Genetic architec-
tures of psychiatric disorders: The emerging picture and its implications,
Nature Reviews Genetics, 13 (2012), pp. 537–551.
[135] P. F. Sullivan, K. S. Kendler, and M. C. Neale, Schizophrenia as
a Complex Trait, Archives of General Psychiatry, 60 (2003), p. 1187.
[136] D. Szklarczyk, J. H. Morris, H. Cook, M. Kuhn, S. Wyder,
M. Simonovic, A. Santos, N. T. Doncheva, A. Roth, P. Bork,
L. J. Jensen, and C. Von Mering, The STRING database in 2017:
Quality-controlled protein-protein association networks, made broadly ac-
cessible, Nucleic Acids Research, 45 (2017), pp. D362–D368.
[137] G. W. Tam, R. Redon, N. P. Carter, and S. G. Grant, The Role
of DNA Copy Number Variation in Schizophrenia, Biological Psychiatry,
66 (2009), pp. 1005–1012.
==PAGE:135==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
119
[138] T. B. D. Team, BSgenome.Mmusculus.UCSC.mm10: Full genome se-
quences for Mus musculus (UCSC version mm10), 2014. R package ver-
sion 1.4.0.
[139] J. Thelin, P. Halje, J. Nielsen, M. Didriksen, P. Petersson, and
J. F. Bastlund, The translationally relevant mouse model of the 15q13.3
microdeletion syndrome reveals deﬁcits in neuronal spike ﬁring matching
clinical neurophysiological biomarkers seen in schizophrenia, Acta Physi-
ologica, 220 (2017), pp. 124–136.
[140] P. A. T’Hoen, M. R. Friedländer, J. Almlöf, M. Sammeth,
I. Pulyakhina, S. Y. Anvar, J. F. Laros, H. P. Buermans,
O. Karlberg, M. Brännvall, J. T. Den Dunnen, G. J. B. Van
Ommen, I. G. Gut, R. Guigó, X. Estivill, A. C. Syvänen, E. T.
Dermitzakis, and T. Lappalainen, Reproducibility of high-throughput
mRNA and small RNA sequencing across laboratories, Nature Biotech-
nology, 31 (2013), pp. 1015–1022.
[141] H.
Tilgner,
D.
G.
Knowles,
R.
Johnson,
C.
A.
Davis,
S. Chakrabortty, S. Djebali, J. Curado, M. Snyder, T. R. Gin-
geras, and R. Guigó, Deep sequencing of subcellular RNA fractions
shows splicing to be predominantly co-transcriptional in the human genome
but ineﬃcient for lncRNAs, Genome Research, 22 (2012), pp. 1616–1625.
[142] C. Trapnell, D. G. Hendrickson, M. Sauvageau, L. Goff, J. L.
Rinn, and L. Pachter, Diﬀerential analysis of gene regulation at tran-
script resolution with RNA-seq, Nature Biotechnology, 31 (2013), pp. 46–
53.
[143] C. Trapnell, A. Roberts, L. Goff, G. Pertea, D. Kim, D. R. Kel-
ley, H. Pimentel, S. L. Salzberg, J. L. Rinn, and L. Pachter, Dif-
ferential gene and transcript expression analysis of RNA-seq experiments
with TopHat and Cuﬄinks, Nature Protocols, 7 (2012), pp. 562–578.
[144] C. Trapnell, B. A. Williams, G. Pertea, A. Mortazavi, G. Kwan,
M. J. Van Baren, S. L. Salzberg, B. J. Wold, and L. Pachter,
Transcript assembly and quantiﬁcation by RNA-Seq reveals unannotated
transcripts and isoform switching during cell diﬀerentiation, Nature
Biotechnology, 28 (2010), pp. 511–515.
[145] I. TruSeq, Illumina: TruSeq Stranded mRNA Sample Preparation Guide,
Manual, (2013), pp. 1–4.
[146] M. Uddin, B. K. Unda, V. Kwan, N. T. Holzapfel, S. H. White,
L. Chalil, M. Woodbury-smith, K. S. Ho, E. Harward, N. Mur-
taza, B. Dave, G. Pellecchia, L. D. Abate, T. Nalpathamkalam,
S. Lamoureux, J. Wei, M. Speevak, J. Stavropoulos, K. J. Hope,
==PAGE:136==
120
BIBLIOGRAPHY
B. W. Doble, and J. Nielsen, OTUD7A Regulates Neurodevelopmen-
tal Phenotypes in the 15q13 . 3 Microdeletion Syndrome, The American
Journal of Human Genetics, 102 (2018), pp. 278–295.
[147] K. Vitting-Seerup, B. T. Porse, A. Sandelin, and J. Waage,
SpliceR: An R package for classiﬁcation of alternative splicing and pre-
diction of coding potential from RNA-seq data, BMC Bioinformatics, 15
(2014), pp. 1–7.
[148] K. Vitting-Seerup and A. Sandelin, The Landscape of Isoform
Switches in Human Cancers, Molecular Cancer Research, 15 (2017),
pp. 1206–1221.
[149] E. T. Wang, R. Sandberg, S. Luo, I. Khrebtukova, and L. Zhang,
Alternative Isoform Regulation in Human Tissue Transcriptomes, 456
(2009), pp. 470–476.
[150] G. Wang, E. Yang, I. Mandhan, C. L. Brinkmeyer-Langford,
and J. J. Cai, Population-level expression variability of mitochondrial
DNA-encoded genes in humans, European Journal of Human Genetics, 22
(2014), pp. 1093–1099.
[151] G. S. Wang and T. A. Cooper, Splicing in disease: Disruption of
the splicing code and the decoding machinery, Nature Reviews Genetics, 8
(2007), pp. 749–761.
[152] L. Wang, H. J. Park, S. Dasari, S. Wang, J. P. Kocher, and
W. Li, CPAT: Coding-potential assessment tool using an alignment-free
logistic regression model, Nucleic Acids Research, 41 (2013), pp. 1–7.
[153] M. Warf and J. Berglund, The role of RNA structure in regulating
pre-mRNA splicing, Trends in biochemical sciences, 35 (2010), pp. 169–
178.
[154] T. Wei and V. Simko, R package "corrplot": Visualization of a Corre-
lation Matrix, 2017. (Version 0.84).
[155] J. Weischenfeldt, J. Waage, G. Tian, J. Zhao, I. Damgaard,
J. S. Jakobsen, K. Kristiansen, A. Krogh, J. Wang, and B. T.
Porse, Mammalian tissues defective in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay
display highly aberrant splicing patterns, Genome Biology, 13 (2012).
[156] T. Werge and A. J. Schork, A genome-wide association study for
shared risk across major psychiatric disorders in a nation- wide birth co-
hort implicates fetal neurodevelopment as a key mediator, (2017).
[157] D. C. Wu, J. Yao, K. S. Ho, A. M. Lambowitz, and C. O.
Wilke, Limitation of alignment-free tools in total RNA-seq quantiﬁca-
tion, bioRxiv, (2018), p. 246967.
==PAGE:137==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
121
[158] J. Yin, W. Chen, E. S. Chao, S. Soriano, L. Wang, W. Wang,
S. E. Cummock, H. Tao, K. Pang, Z. Liu, F. A. Pereira, R. C.
Samaco, H. Y. Zoghbi, M. Xue, and C. P. Schaaf, Otud7a Knock-
out Mice Recapitulate Many Neurological Features of 15q13 . 3 Microdele-
tion Syndrome, The American Journal of Human Genetics, 102 (2018),
pp. 296–308.
[159] J. Yin, W. Chen, H. Yang, M. Xue, and C. P. Schaaf, Chrna7
deﬁcient mice manifest no consistent neuropsychiatric and behavioral phe-
notypes, Scientiﬁc Reports, 7 (2017), pp. 1–10.
