==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
An airborne platform for magnetic ﬁeld observations on
Mars
Athanasios Belantonas
M.Sc., s162704
Supervisors:
Professor Jos´e M.G. Merayo, National Space Institute
Lukas Alexander Mads Christensen, PhD, National Space Institute
DTU, Lyngby
Spring 2018
==PAGE:2==
Dedication
-Dedicated to all four members of my family, for their unwavering love and
support.
==PAGE:3==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
Contents
1
Abstract
3
2
Introduction
4
3
Mission requirements
7
3.1
General parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Mars magnetic ﬁeld dipole model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Scanning area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Summary-Additional requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Magnetic ﬁeld sensors
13
4.1
Sensor classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Spacecraft magnetometers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
The Swarm vector ﬁeld magnetometer
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.4
Magnetic sensor selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Platform considerations
20
5.1
Possible platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Propeller thrust evaluation above the Martian surface . . . . .
21
5.3
Quadcopter geometry and kinematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
Thrusting methods
27
6.1
Pressurized gas thrusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Rocket thruster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7
Hypergolic rocket thruster design
33
7.1
Design structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.2
General parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.3
Combustion chamber design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.4
Nozzle design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.5
Propellant tanks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.6
Propellant injectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.7
Platform total mass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.8
Cooling system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.9
Design conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8
Flight physics, dynamics and control
47
8.1
Platform forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8.2
Thrust vectoring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8.3
Platform dynamics-3D force decomposition . . . . . . . . . . .
49
1
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:4==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
8.4
Platform kinematics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.5
Nozzle control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.6
Flight capabilities - example scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
9
Proof of concept - Control of a thrust vectoring drone
59
9.1
Experimental process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
9.2
Drone design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
9.3
System assembly
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
9.4
PID controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
9.5
One-motor experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
9.6
Complete drone testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
10 Results and conclusions
75
11 References
77
2
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:5==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
1
Abstract
The scientiﬁc community shows increasing interest in the exploration of
Mars, as a consequence of the space industry exploding towards planetary
exploration, in the past two decades. However, little is still known about
some of the most fundamental scientiﬁc topics, concerning the red planet,
such as the nature of it’s crustal magnetic ﬁeld and the path that led to it in
time.
This project was undertaken, in an attempt to tackle speciﬁc challenges
engineers face, as far as exploration and scientiﬁc data acquisition is con-
cerned, in planets within our solar system. In particular, the absence of a
well documented data set, concerning the magnetic ﬁeld pockets on the sur-
face of Mars, as well as the lack of a swift, airborne means of transportation,
that can carry scientiﬁc equipment and perform remote measurements while
ﬂying in a thin atmospheric environment, gave rise to this project.
In the chapters that follow, research is done and presented on 2 basic
topics: The measurement of Mar’s magnetic ﬁeld (magnetic pockets) and
the diﬀerent ways a platform can be designed to ﬂy and cover distances on
the surface of the planet, in order to perform the measurements.
This project is divided into a theoretical and an experimental part. In
the ﬁrst part, the challenge of measuring Mar’s magnetic ﬁeld just above the
surface is discussed, while research is done on diﬀerent types of magnetic ﬁeld
sensors. Furthermore, diﬀerent methods of producing thrust and possible
platforms than can employ them are evaluated. The selected platform and
rocket thrusters are designed and have their corresponding design equations
and calculations presented. Lastly, the physics, kinematics and dynamics of
the platform are illustrated and evaluated.
In the experimental part of this project, a thrust vectoring technique is
proposed, in order to assist with in-ﬂight stability on the surface of Mars.
A custom made quad-copter drone is designed and constructed to employ a
thrust vectoring mechanism on one of its motors, as proof of concept for the
above proposition. In addition, a PID controller is researched on, developed
and applied to the thrust vectoring drone, with a ﬁnal goal of accelerating in
a given direction, without forcing the body of the drone to tilt towards that
direction.
3
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:6==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
2
Introduction
As stated in the previous chapter, the purpose of this project is to research
on the design of a platform suitable for ﬂight in the atmospheric and gravi-
tational conditions on Mars. This platform, must be capable of performing
remote sensing measurements in ﬂight, namely magnetic ﬁeld anomaly mea-
surements above the martian surface. The general design of the platform will
also take into account future mission needs on Mars and will, as a result, be
able to provide with solutions for future human activities on and above the
surface of the red planet.
Since 1960, 7 landing missions have been successfully deployed on the
surface of Mars, including 3 rovers [2]. The accessibility and mobility factors
of such missions are of great importance, as scientiﬁc measurements and
operations are directly related to local topological parameters of the areas of
interest. Rocky surfaces, meteor craters and high angled hills are examples
of how terrain parameters can challenge the mobility of a robotic system
(i.e. a rover). Accessibility to the martian surface is an issue which was
initially approached with static landing missions, followed by rover missions
capable of autonomously traversing to diﬀerent locations to perform scientiﬁc
operations.
These missions’ objectives, were mainly related to biological, environmen-
tal and imaging measurements, while all the performed operations were land-
based. Additionally, mobility technologies were developed, in order to assist
the rovers with maneuvering through harsh terrains [6].
The land based solutions in these past missions, have also proved to be
restricted by low speed limitations, resulting from the need to overcome small
obstacles while avoiding hazardous -to the scientiﬁc gear- perturbations. For
instance, NASA’s Curiosity rover can travel an average of 30 m/h, a value
dependent on the terrain to be traversed [7].
Furthermore, none of the past missions on the martian surface, have per-
formed magnetic ﬁeld observations on the surface of the planet, although
orbital measurements have been taken by NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor [8].
However these observations were taken at high altitudes ( 100-200 km above
the surface), while the spatial resolution proved to be rather poor, as the
magnetic sources proved to originate mainly from ”magnetized pockets” in
the crust of the planet [1].
Therefore, higher resolution surface measurements must be taken, in order
to accurately represent and map these magnetic ﬁeld anomalies. Additionally,
the global magnetic ﬁeld created by those pockets, is deemed critical from
various points of view, including the support of life.
The ﬁeld acts as a
4
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:7==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
Figure 1: Mars magnetic ﬁeld representation [5]
protective mantle from the incoming, highly energetic solar particles and is
therefore necessary to be investigated thoroughly.
Furthermore, even though human interaction on Mars is still minimal,
the future of humanity on the red planet appears promising. As shown in
ﬁgure 2, power, mining, and life support infrastructure missions are planned
by SpaceX during the year 2022. The ﬁrst humans to set foot on Mars are
expected to do so by 2024, while plans to build small colonies by the year 2030
went public by SpaceX and NASA [10]. It is therefore essential to provide
Figure 2: SpaceX plans for Mars colonization [10]
mobility through an unmanned platform for those missions. Such a platform
could not only perform scientiﬁc tasks, but would also be able to support
the colonization of Mars in various ways, such as assisting with building
infrastructure, carrying payloads across diﬀerent outposts or performing with
5
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:8==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
agile repair tasks in various engineering ﬁelds.
In this report, an airborne platform is proposed to solve the velocity limi-
tations and mobility issues posed by present day rovers. The platform under
investigation, will carry the necessary scientiﬁc payload above the surface of
the red planet, in order to autonomously perform crustal magnetic ﬁeld ob-
servations. The design process will also take into account the needs of future
missions on Mars, in order for the platform to be able to provide assistance
with human interactions on the surface of the red planet.
6
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:9==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
3
Mission requirements
In order to derive the requirements for the project of this report, a few
basic parameters must ﬁrstly be derived or calculated.
For instance, at-
mospheric parameters such as pressure and air density must be taken into
account, as they constitute possible restrictions for the platform’s physics
and kinematics.
Furthermore, the magnitude of the expected magnetic ﬁeld components
must be calculated, in order to derive the requirements with respect to the
sensor of the system, namely the magnetometer, which will come under in-
vestigation in a later chapter of this report.
3.1
General parameters
The proposed platform, must be designed to obtain remote sensing mea-
surements under the atmospheric and gravitational conditions above the sur-
face of Mars. Therefore, it must be modiﬁed to be able to ﬂy under those
conditions autonomously, namely through the thin atmosphere of Mars and
under its -weaker than Earth’s- gravitational forces, taking into account other
parameters that might aﬀect the overall system. Table 1 illustrates some of
the basic parameters to be taken into account, concerning the design of an
airborne platform.
Parameter
Value
Gravitational acceleration
3.711 m/s^2
Surface pressure (mean radius)
6.36 mb
Atmospheric density at surface
0.020 kg/m^3
Table 1: Relevant parameters on the surface of Mars
The thrusters of the platform must be able to provide with the needed
thrust, while operating in a thin, low pressure atmosphere under a gravi-
tational constant of 3.711 m/s2. The chemical composition of Mars’ atmo-
sphere, illustrated in table 2, must also be mentioned, as it may interfere
with the development of the thrusters’ design in this report.
7
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:10==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
Martian atmospheric composition
Carbon dioxide 95.97%
Argon 1.93%
Nitrogen 1.89%
Oxygen 0.146%
Carbon monoxide 0.0557%
Table 2: Atmospheric composition on Mars
3.2
Mars magnetic ﬁeld dipole model
The magnitude of the observations to be recorded from the magnetometer
of the system, must be determined before the sensor is selected. In order to
perform the latter, a data set of the vertical magnetic ﬁeld component Br was
manually input to a MatLab vector, based on the magnetic ﬁeld observations
taken by NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor at orbital height ( 100-200km above
surface). The data set was constructed using the map provided by Acu˜na et
al. [1], as illustrated in ﬁgure 3. The thickness of the subsatellite tracks was
used to approximate the pixels’ size on the corresponding map. In a later
chapter of this report, this information will be used for the determination of
the scanning area size.
Figure 3: Distribution of crustal magnetic ﬁeld sources on Mars (vertical component). The
distribution of craters greater than 15 km in diameter and the dichotomy boundary (solid
line) are illustrated on the map [1].
8
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:11==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
The manually input data set, including 684 values distributed over the
surface of the planet , was then interpolated in MatLab over a ﬁner grid of
2280x2280 points. The initially produced map of the interpolated magnetic
ﬁeld observations at orbit height, is illustrated in ﬁgure 4.
Figure 4: Initial map of the magnetic ﬁeld at orbit height, after interpolation (vertical
component).
Under the assumption of a dipole model for each of the represented mag-
netic ﬁeld values [1], located at a depth of 100 km below the surface, the
magnetic ﬁeld intensities at surface height can be approximated using equa-
tion 1. The distance from the dipole centers to the satellite height is assumed
to be 250 km (100 km dipole center-surface, 150 km surface-satellite).
Using equation 1, the magnetic moment was calculated for each of the as-
sumed dipoles and was then used to determine the magnetic ﬁeld at surface
height (100 km above dipoles).
Br=∇× A = µ0
4π( 3r(m · r)
r5
−m
r3 )
(1)
where A is the magnetic potential of the dipole,
µ0 is the permeability constant in vacuum,
m is the magnetic moment,
r contains the coordinates of the observation location with
respect to the dipole,
r is the distance of the observation from the center of the dipole.
9
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:12==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
Through equation 1, the magnetic ﬁeld intensity on surface, was approxi-
mated in the range of ± 40000 nT, while ﬁgure 5 illustrates the corresponding
map.
Figure 5: Magnetic ﬁeld intensity, calculated at Mars’ surface (vertical component).
It is therefore expected, that the sensor used in this project must be
able to record measurements in the previously mentioned ranges, within the
boundaries of acceptable uncertainty. However, the expected values are -in
magnitude- comparable to Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld intensity, therefore a mag-
netometer used for applications on Earth, could be utilized in this application.
3.3
Scanning area
The distance between neighboring magnetic pockets can be rather short,
as shown in ﬁgure 2, therefore various pixels on the map partly overlap, giving
rise to the need of a ﬁner grid of measurements, to determine how each of the
locally formed mini-magnetospheres intertwines with each other to create a
magnetic ﬁeld, located mainly in the southern hemisphere of the planet.
As mentioned by Acu˜na et al. [1], the pixels used to illustrate the center
of the magnetic pockets were determined by the thickness of the sub-satellite
tracks. Therefore, in order to perform discrete measurements to discriminate
between dipole centers, the platform must be able to scan an area in between
neighboring pockets, to determine their location and intensity, as well as the
local mini-magnetosphere that forms. The latter would require a magnetic
ﬁeld sensor with the ability of measuring both the strength and the direction
of the magnetic ﬁeld vector.
10
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:13==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
Using the map in ﬁgure 5, an initial approximation of the needed scanning
area was determined as 3.9x8.5 km2. Performing scans on a surface of this
size, ensures that areas in between neighboring sources can be suﬃciently
measured, to discriminate between the dipole centers and locate them.
However, the scanning area is aﬀected by a number of parameters, such as
the sensor sampling rate and resolution or the platform’s velocity, therefore it
will come under more thorough investigation after the design of the platform,
in a later chapter.
3.4
Summary-Additional requirements
As mentioned in the second chapter of this report, the platform will also
be designed according to the needs of future missions on Mars. Such a ﬂying
platform would be able to ﬂy over distant areas, carry lightweight payloads,
perform various tasks such as scientiﬁc measurements or engineering tasks
including mechanical repairs and maintenance.
Consequently, the platform must be able to carry additional equipment, pro-
vide with adequate ﬂight control against noisy ﬂight conditions, cover areas
with velocities greater than present day standards and maintain satisfactory
ﬂight times.
The requirements for the design of this mission are summarized in the list
that follows.
• Measurements: The platform must be able to obtain magnetic ﬁeld
measurements over the surface of Mars, for the purpose of mapping the
magnetic pockets of the planet.
• Working principles: The platform must be able to ﬂy under the atmo-
spheric and gravitational conditions on the Martian surface.
• Scanning area: The capability of scanning an area of 3.9x8.5 km2 in a
single ﬂight is desirable but not necessary. The scanned area can be
divided into smaller regions to be covered by multiple ﬂights, if this
solution proves optimal. A data grid over the complete area must be
formed to distinguish between individual magnetic pockets.
• Maneuver capabilities: The platform must be able to control ﬂight di-
rection at all times. 6 degrees of freedom, namely movement on and
rotation with respect to the X, Y, and Z axes, are desirable.
• Velocity and ﬂight time: The platform’s ﬂight time and velocity must
be able to be comparable with or exceed the ones of airborne platforms
11
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:14==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
operating on Earth. This requirement relates to the scanning area and
is only limited by it.
• Payload: The platform must be able to carry the necessary payload
at an insigniﬁcant cost to the maximum possible distance it can cover.
Flight must be able to occur at nearly constant standards, when the
payload’s mass is changed by adding or removing lightweight scientiﬁc
equipment (< 1kg).
• Magnetic sensor: The sensor must be able to measure magnetic ﬁeld
magnitudes similar to the ones observed in low Earth orbit, therefore a
range of approximately ±60,000 nT must be measurable, a value typi-
cal in numerous space magnetometers. High resolution is desirable but
not mandatory, as individual magnetic pockets on Mars have abruptly
varying ﬁelds.
12
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:15==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
4
Magnetic ﬁeld sensors
4.1
Sensor classiﬁcation
In order to select the magnetic ﬁeld sensor of the platform, according to
the mission requirements, research had to be done on the diﬀerent types of
sensors. In this chapter, diﬀerent categories of magnetometers are presented
and evaluated.
Magnetic ﬁeld sensors, or magnetometers, are instruments that can mea-
sure a magnetic ﬁeld’s direction, strength or relative change. They are di-
vided into two basic categories, vector and scalar magnetometers. Vector
magnetometers measure the vector components (magnitude and direction)
of a magnetic ﬁeld, while the scalar ones measure the scalar value of the
magnetic ﬂux intensity.
Diﬀerent magnetometers are employed according to the application type.
Each of those categories is further sub-divided according to the sensor’s
functioning principles.
Vector magnetic ﬁeld sensors include: Hall eﬀect,
magneto resistive, ﬂuxgate, search coil and SQUID magnetometers. As far
as scalar magnetometers are concerned, they are further divided into proton
precession, overhauser eﬀect and ionized gas magnetometers.
A magnetometer is characterized by parameters that determine the sen-
sor’s performance and capabilities [32]:
• Sample rate: The amount of readings the sensor can obtain every second.
This parameter combined with the platform velocity onto which the
sensor is attached, determined how many measurements can be taken
for over a given area.
• Resolution: Resolution deﬁnes the minimum magnetic ﬁeld changes that
can be resolved by the magnetometer while changing its output.
• Sensitivity: Sensitivity refers to the smallest diﬀerence between two
measurements, which the instrument can detect, but do not necessarily
change its output.
• Bandwidth: Characterizes the ability of the sensor to track rapid changes
in the magnetic ﬁeld.
13
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:16==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
• Absolute and quantization error: The absolute error of the sensor de-
scribes the diﬀerence between readings and the true values of the mag-
netic ﬁeld. Additionally, the quantization error occurs due to the round-
oﬀand truncation that occurs to numerical data, when digitally stored.
• Noise: Noise refers to the random ﬂuctuations generated by the sensor
or the involved electronics.
• Drift Drift describes the rate of change of the absolute error of the
sensor.
• Dynamic range: The ratio between the maximum and minimum de-
tectable magnetic ﬁeld change.
In the sections that follow, the performance parameters of diﬀerent types
of magnetic ﬁeld sensors suited for space applications, are presented and eval-
uated according to the requirements of this project.
4.2
Spacecraft magnetometers
1.) Fluxgate magnetometers
Fluxgate magnetometers are among the most popular sensors used in space
applications. The reason for their popularity, is that they oﬀer an optimal
trade-oﬀbetween resolution, stability, power consumption, mass and volume.
Furthermore, they are becoming increasingly aﬀordable both in price and size.
Figure 6: Schematic of a classical ﬂuxgate magnetometer
A ﬂuxgate magnetometer consists of a magnetically active susceptible
core, wrapped around a set of coils of wire. Any changes in the surrounding
14
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:17==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
magnetic ﬁeld, induces a measurable current in the secondary coil, which is
recorded by the detector. This current relates to the strength and direction
of the magnetic ﬁeld. Figure 6, shows the schematic of a classical ﬂuxgate
magnetometer [33].
These sensors are able to measure magnetic ﬁelds ranging from mT to a few
pT and can operate in frequencies of up to tens of kHz. In space applications,
their dynamical range is in the order of approximately ±64.000nT (close
to the magnitude of Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld) and are precisely oriented in
the orders of arcseconds. Furthermore, they can tackle large temperature
variations with increased stability and can measure magnetic ﬁeld diﬀerences
of approximately 1 nT. Better readings are usually obtained with 3 sensors
pointing in diﬀerent directions.
The main drawbacks behind ﬂuxgate magnetometers is their high mass
and power consumption, typically in the range of 0.5 kg and 2 W respec-
tively. Furthermore, early type magnetometers manifested non-linear out-
puts for magnetic ﬁelds greater than 5 µT. However, creating a spherical
structure with feedback wires transverse to the ring in the sphere, can tackle
this issue eﬀectively [34].
2.) Search-coil magnetometers
Search-coil, or induction magnetometers, are sensors that have a core of
high magnetic permeability with coils wrapped around it. These types of
sensors are inductive sensors that can measure the varying magnetic ﬂux due
to Lenz’s law, while their output voltage is proportional to the time deriva-
tive of the magnetic ﬂux. It is a vector magnetometer which can measure one
or more components of the magnetic ﬁelds from a few, up to hundreds of MHz.
Figure 7: Photograph of the search coil magnetometer used in the THEMIS mission [35]
15
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:18==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
They are mainly used in applications where measuring a highly alternat-
ing magnetic ﬁeld is a priority, as this sensor can resolve such changes in a
rapid manner. Examples of search-coil magnetometers in space applications
include the Pioneer 5, Vela and THEMIS missions.
3.) Ionized gas magnetometers
These types of magnetometers, use ionized gases with metastable electron
states. The gas is optically pumped with light of a speciﬁc wavelength until
all atoms are in the same state. Such senors depend on the variations in
absorptivity of the gas, helium for example, when excited by an magnetic
ﬁeld. When the gas atoms in the sensor chamber encounter photons, the
energy levels of the electrons are varied at the frequency corresponding to
the external magnetic ﬁeld. This frequency variation measures the intensity
of the magnetic ﬁeld. This frequency variation is used to determine the ﬁeld’s
intensity.
Literature suggests that these types of magnetometers are frequently found
in complementary use with ﬂuxgate magnetometers. For example, Cassini’s
MAG instrument, carried both a ﬂuxgate and a helium magnetometer. Ei-
ther of them could measure the magnitude and direction of the magnetic
ﬁeld, but the helium sensor had a second mode in which in only detected
ﬁeld strength. The ﬂuxgate magnetometer however, could measure magnetic
strength almost 3 times greater than the helium one.
4.) Proton precision-Overhauser magnetometers
Proton precession magnetometers, use the nuclear magnetic resonance
principle to measure the resonance frequency of protons in a magnetic ﬁeld.
A current ﬂowing in a solenoid creates a strong magnetic ﬁeld around a
proton-rich ﬂuid like kerosene or decane, which in turn causes a portion of
the protons to align with that ﬁeld. When the current is interrupted, protons
realign with the external (ambient) magnetic ﬁeld and precess at a frequency
proportional to the measured magnetic ﬁeld [34].
The Overhauser magnetometers on the other hand, employ the same fun-
damental principles as the proton precession sensors. By adding free radicals
(i.e. atoms with unpaired valence electrons) to the sensor ﬂuid, the nuclear
Overhauser eﬀect allows for a signiﬁcant improvement over proton preces-
sion magnetometers.
The sensors diﬀer mainly in the sense that instead
of a solenoid, Overhauser magnetometers use a low power radio frequency
to align electron spins, which in turn couple to the ﬂuid protons via the
Overhauser eﬀect. Two main advantages emerge using this technique, lower
16
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:19==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
power consumption and faster samping rates. Such a magnetometer can ob-
tain measurements with a standard deviation of 0.01 nT to 0.02 nT, when
sampling at 1 Hz.
An example of a space application where an Overhauser sensor was used,
is the Danish Ørsted satellite. The sensor was used to take extremely accu-
rate measurements of the strength of Earth’s geomagnetic ﬁeld, aided by a
ﬂuxgate vector magnetometerwhich measured both the strength and direc-
tion of the ﬁeld.
4.3
The Swarm vector ﬁeld magnetometer
The main magnetic sensor used in the Swarm mission was a magnetome-
ter designed and developed by the National Space Institute of Denmark, at
DTU [36-37]. The Swarm vector ﬁeld magnetometer (VFM) uses the ﬂux-
gate sensor principles, on a spherical structure equipped with feedback wires.
Figure 8 illustrates a photo of the sensor.
Figure 8: The Swarm vector ﬁeld magnetometer [37]
The coils of the magnetometer are isotropically wound on the body of the
sensor, which oﬀers increased mechanical support. In turn, this allows for ex-
tremely high stability for this particular magnetometer, which has increased
resistance against vibrations and noisy ﬂight conditions. The coils create an
homogeneous vector ﬁeld inside the sphere and uniquely deﬁne the magnetic
axes of the sensor. Therefore, readouts occur for all directions, for a ﬁxed
sample rate of 50 Hz.
17
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:20==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
In order to tackle the noise emerging from the satellite electronics, the
magnetometer was placed on a boom extending from the body of the satel-
lite.
The sensor itself however shows very low inherent noise levels (<10
pT/
√
Hz).
The VFM’s dynamic range of ±65536 nT to 0.0625 nT, provides with
excellent resolution and a large measurement range, while the sensor’s accu-
racy is below 0.5 nT. On the negative side, the magnetometer weights 280
gramms, while the data processing unit that comes with weighs 750 grams.
Thus, the VFM’s relatively large mass sums to a total of 1.03 kg.
It should be noted that this sensor has functioned continuously on all
Swarm satellites since the Swarm mission deployment and is therefore, a
very robust solution. Furthermore, the sensor experiences gradual but large
temperature oscillations, which come at minimal cost to the sensor’s perfor-
mance (thermal drift at ±50 C < 0.2 nTrms).
4.4
Magnetic sensor selection
The Ben diagram illustrated in ﬁgure 9, shows that the optimal solution for
a magnetometer measuring a geomagnetic ﬁeld comparable (in magnitude)
to Earth’s ﬁeld, falls in the categories of ﬂuxgate, nuclear precession, optical
pumping and search-coil sensors.
Figure 9: A Ben diagram for magnetic ﬁeld sensors [38].
18
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:21==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
The application examined in this project, demands a sensor that can per-
form magnetic ﬁeld measurements in a noisy environment, that will poten-
tially be subject to perturbations originating from the platform’s engines.
Furthermore, the sensor must be minimally aﬀected by temperature varia-
tions and must also be resilient to noisy ﬂight conditions and engine vibra-
tions.
The vector ﬁeld magnetometer, designed at DTU and used in the SWARM
mission, is selected as it provides with the desired characteristics described
above. In order to deal with the overall noise inﬂicted on the sensor, electri-
cal or mechanical, a technique similar to the one employed in the SWARM
satellites is proposed. The sensor can hang at a distance below the platform’s
main body, while attached to it through a string, made of the proper -for the
application- material.
19
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:22==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
5
Platform considerations
5.1
Possible platforms
According to the mission requirements, the platform to be selected must
be able to perform scans over a wide area, while having the ability to make
swift maneuvers and change its orientation to ﬂy over the chosen ﬂight path.
Such a platform could be designed as a standard balloon, airplane or a
rocket. However these platforms require diﬀerent standards to maintain the
desired characteristics during ﬂight. For example, a balloon would be able
to ﬂy over large areas, but would not be able to maintain high velocities or
adequate ﬂight control to perform swift maneuvers and precise positioning of
the system.
Additionally, a platform designed as a rocket powered airplane, would be
able to ﬂy at high speeds and cover large areas.
However, such as plat-
form, would have major issues in the static position control of the system.
Furthermore, the low atmospheric density on Mars, would pose additional
impediments for the design of the system, as standard airplane physics and
kinematics greatly rely on the thick atmosphere on the surface of Earth to
become airborne. Consequently, even though this platform would fulﬁll the
requirements for remote sensing missions, there is an alternative that would
satisfy most of the requirements set in chapter 3 of this report.
A quadcopter platform, would be able to ﬂy at relatively high speeds,
while the geometry of conventional quadcopter drones provide with great
position control, both static and dynamic. The ability of such platforms to
make swift maneuvers, change orientation and cover complex ﬂight paths is
unprecedented. That is the reason why their usage has ﬂourished over the
past decade, along with the technological progress and market availability of
micro controllers, which are responsible for the industries’ ability to massively
produce drones with exceptional ﬂight characteristics.
However, conventional drones rely on air propellers to produce thrust and
are therefore, dependent on the atmospheric density to produce it. As a re-
sult of the low average atmospheric density of Mars (compared to that on
Earth), the produced thrust would be greatly reduced. In the following chap-
ter of this report, such conﬁgurations are investigated and possible solutions
are proposed.
20
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:23==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
5.2
Propeller thrust evaluation above the Martian surface
In order to evaluate the thrust produced by a propeller on the surface
of Mars, the equation describing propeller thrust in correlation to the local
atmospheric density must be considered. Eq. (2) describes how thrust can
be derived:
F = π
4 D2 dv ρ

v + dv
2

(2)
where:
F is the produced thrust [N],
D is the propeller diameter [m],
υ is the velocity of incoming ﬂow [m/s],
dv is the additional velocity produced after the propeller [m/s],
ρ is the local atmospheric density [kg/m3].
Figure 10: Propeller airﬂow [12]
In order to make a valid comparison between the thrust of the same motor
and propeller in diﬀerent atmospheric densities, the parameters of a standard,
medium sized quadcopter were used as inputs for eq.(2).
At maximum throttle, a propeller with a wing diameter of 12.7 cm, can
produce forces equivalent to 400 grams or Fearth = 3.9 Newtons. Inputting
the latter in eq. (2), for an atmospheric density of 1.225 kg/m3 above sea level
on Earth (at 15 degrees Celsius) and solving for dv, the airﬂow exit velocity
of the propeller becomes dvearth = 22.71 m/s.
Using the exit velocity of
air from the propeller, along with the Martian atmospheric density of 0.02
21
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:24==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
kg/m3, the maximum thrust of the same propeller on Mars can be calculated
as Fmars = 0.0653 N.
The thrust ratio for these diﬀerent cases equals Fmars/Fearth=0.01633. It
becomes apparent, that the same propeller on Mars would produce less than
1.7% of the thrust produced on Earth.
Figure 11: Thrust for diﬀerent propeller diameters on Earth and Mars
In order to increase thrust, two diﬀerent conﬁgurations can be arranged.
Either increasing the propeller’s angular velocity or increasing the propeller’s
diameter. Figure 11 illustrates how thrust changes relative to the wingspan
of the used propeller. In order to increase the thrust of a propeller on Mars
to the standards of the same propeller on Earth, a wing diameter of approx-
imately 1 meter must be used. Consequently, a quadcopter on Earth with a
wingspan of 0.127 meters would have to increase its propeller diameter by a
factor of 7.8, to achieve a thrust of equivalent magnitude on Mars.
Figure 12 also illustrates, that the residuals between the thrust of pro-
pellers of diﬀerent diameters, increase exponentially as diameter increases.
Thus, as the quadcopter’s size becomes larger, the factor by which the pro-
pellers’ wingspan have to increase to achieve the same thrust on Mars, as
they would on Earth, also increases.
It quickly becomes apparent, that
a propeller thrusting drone on Mars, would have to dramatically increase
power consumption either to drive such larger propellers, or to increase the
angular velocity of the same propellers in order to achieve adequate thrust,
hence increasing power consumption or decreasing ﬂight time by a factor of
equivalent magnitude.
In fact, a team of engineers at NASA’s Langley Research Center, publi-
cized plans for the design of a small drone powered by electrical motors and
22
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:25==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
propellers, whose purpose would be to scan areas in a perimeter around a
rover on the surface of Mars and provide the optimal paths for the rover
to move through [13]. However, as previously described, this design would
provide minimal payload carrying capabilities and ﬂight times in the range
of 60-120 seconds. Furthermore, the geometry of this drone would be dif-
ferent than that of a quadcopter, carrying only 2 propellers, thus providing
with decreased ﬂight control capabilities and increased susceptibility to noisy
ﬂight conditions.
Figure 12: Thrust residuals for diﬀerent propeller wingspans on Earth and Mars
In order to fulﬁll the mission requirements for a quadcopter, as described
in chapter 3, a new thrusting system must be designed, in order to provide
the platform with increased ﬂight time, ﬂight control and payload carrying
capabilities.
The quadcopter platform geometry however, will be further
evaluated, as it provides with excellent maneuver and ﬂight control abilities.
5.3
Quadcopter geometry and kinematics
The geometry of a quadcopter is rather convenient, as the the platform
has its center of mass located in the same distance from each of the four
propellers. This geometry allows for 6 degrees of freedom, as shown in ﬁgure
13.
In order to perform an analysis of a quadcopter’s kinematics, a 3D
coordinate system has to be deﬁned, where the X axis is parallel to the local
surface over which ﬂight occurs . Figure 14 illustrates the concept.
23
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:26==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
Figure 13: The 6 degrees of freedom of a quadcopter’s geometry [15]
A quadcopter can move along the vertical (Z) axis, in three diﬀerent ways:
hover, ascend or descend. Hovering demands that the net force produced by
all the propellers equals the gravitational force that is applied on the center
of mass of the quadcopter. In order for the platform to ascend or descend, a
simultaneous increase or decrease in the thrust of all the propellers must be
applied. During any of the above three states, the produced thrust acts only
on the Z axis.
Figure 14: Quadcopter fundamental forces and reference axes [14]
Additionally, a quadcopter can move along the X and Y axes. Assuming
that propellers 1 and 2 have their thrust increased, while that of propellers
24
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:27==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
3 and 4 is decreased (ﬁg. 15), the platform is expected to tilt towards the
former propeller set, increasing the roll angle of the platform. During this
maneuver, the net thrust produced by the propellers changes its orientation,
thus it can be decomposed into the sum of two separate forces acting on the
Y and Z axes. The force acting on the Y axis, will cause the platform to move
towards the direction of propellers 1 and 2. However, the force exerted on
the Z axis will now be reduced, hence the overall thrust must be increased to
maintain the position of the platform on the Z axis constant. Furthermore,
the quadcopter can also move along the X axis, by changing its pitch angle
through the same principles.
Figure 15: Top perspective of a quacopter’s propellers
Lastly, a quadcopter can rotate on the X-Y plane, by changing its yaw
angle. The angular momentum of the system, provided by the clockwise or
counterclockwise rotation of the propellers, is determined by the direction of
rotation of each propeller, as shown in ﬁgure 15. In order for the angular
momentum of the platform to remain minimal, the diagonal propellers 1,3
(green colored) and 2,4 (red colored) must have the same rotational direction,
while these two sets of propellers must have opposite rotational directions.
This way, the angular momentum caused by the two propeller sets, cancel
each other out and the yaw of the platform remains constant. In order for
the platform to now rotate on the X-Y plane, thrust must be increased in one
2 the two sets of propellers and decreased by the same amount in the other
set. This way the net thrust remains the same, but the angular momentum
25
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:28==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
of the platform changes, allowing it to rotate.
In conclusion, the geometry of a quadcopter, provides with multiple de-
sired characteristics and will be employed as the geometrical design of the
platform. However, the standard method to produce thrust in quadcopters is
largely aﬀected by the local air density, as described in chapter 5.2, therefore
diﬀerent thrusting methods will be evaluated in the following chapter.
26
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:29==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
6
Thrusting methods
6.1
Pressurized gas thrusters
A cold gas thruster, is a type of rocket thruster that uses pressurized gas
as the reaction mass. The source of energy is the thermal energy of the gas,
usually described in the form of its heat capacity. Figure 16 illustrates the
schematic of a pressurized gas thruster.
Figure 16: Pressurized gas thruster engine schematic
Such thrusters have been widely used for a number of space applications,
including orbital corrections of satellites and rocket trajectory control. The
main purpose of such thrusters is to provide with the forces needed to make
small adjustments, while their thrust output is considered low yielding[14].
A typical gas used in cold gas thrusters is Nitrogen (N2), with a speciﬁc
heat ratio of 1.4 at 20 oC and a pressure of 1 atmosphere, which will be used
as reference in the following calculations.
Using an oriﬁce with a diameter of 0.8 mm as the gas exit area, 250 gr of
N2 in a 1 liter tank and assuming room temperature in the tank, the thrust
abilities of the platform will be approximated. The thrust equation will be
used as follows:
F = ˙mVe + (pe −p0)Ae
(3)
where:
F is the produced thrust [N],
˙m is propellant mass ﬂow rate [kg/s],
Ve is the gas exit velocity [m/s],
pe is gas exit pressure [Pa],
p0 is the ambient pressure [Pa],
27
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:30==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
Ae is exit area[m2].
The throat of such a thruster, will be assumed to be choked, since the
pressure diﬀerences are large between the tank and the atmosphere of Mars.
A choked ﬂow is a compressible ﬂow eﬀect, that takes place when a ﬂowing
ﬂuid at a given pressure, passes through a restriction into a lower pressure
environment [20]. The condition for a choked ﬂow to take place, is deﬁned
by the critical pressure ratio as shown in equation 4. It is worth noting, that
the limiting parameter during choked ﬂow, is the velocity of the exiting gas
which equals the local speed of sound (240 m/s on Mars), while mass ﬂow
rate can be increased by increasing the pressure in the tank.
p∗
p0
=

2
γ + 1

γ
γ−1
(4)
The speciﬁc heat ratio γ for N2, is 1.4. Therefore from equation 4, the
critical pressure ratio becomes 0.528, meaning that the ambient pressure has
to be equal to or less than 0.528 times the pressure in the tank for choked
ﬂow to occur. This condition can easily be met, taking into account the low
atmospheric pressure on Mar’s surface. The mass ﬂow rate of choked ﬂow
through an oriﬁce, can be given by equation 5[20]:
˙m = CdAo
r
γρ0P0
 2
γ + 1
 γ+1
γ−1
(5)
where:
˙m is the mass ﬂow rate [kg/s],
Cd is the oriﬁce discharge coeﬃcient ( ≃0.6 [18]),
A0 is the exit area[m2],
P0 is the tank pressure [Pa] ,
ρ0 is the gas density in the tank [kg/m3].
Using the previously described parameters in eq. 3, the thrusting capa-
bilities of such a pressurized gas thruster can be approximated. Figure 17,
shows the trend of thrust against pressure in the tank.
On valve opening, mass ﬂow begins out of the tank. The continuously
decreasing mass of nitrogen in constant volume, gradually drops the pressure
28
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:31==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
in the tank, as the ideal gas law dictates (eq 4), which in turn decreases the
mass ﬂow rate:
PV = nRT
(6)
where:
P is the gas pressure [atm],
V is the gas volume [m3],
n is the number of moles [mol],
T is the gas temperature [K],
R is the universal gas constant [0.0821 Latm
molK].
Figure 17: Pressure-thrust graph for a nitrogen thruster
Using equations 3-6, the thrust out of the valve oriﬁce can be iteratively
solved for time, using the mass ﬂow rate to calculate the remaining mass and
pressure in the tank. Figure 18 presents the fact that such a gas thruster
can produce an initial thrust of 14 N, using highly pressurized gas (≃213
atm initial tank pressure). The latter suggests that the tanks will have to
be thick enough to withstand the inner pressure from the gas, which in turn
translates in increased platform mass.
29
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:32==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
Figure 18: Thrust over time
Furthermore, the pressure in the tank drops as rapidly as the mass ﬂow
rate from the oriﬁce, as Figure 19 illustrates. As a result, the platform is
unable to sustain constant thrust for more than a few second.
Figure 19: Mass ﬂow rate-Pressure diagram
The mass ﬂow rate has an initial value of 15.2 gr/sec, to produce an
initial thrust of 14.53 N. The high mass ﬂow rate needed to achieve low
thrust forces, demands high amounts of pressurized gas, which is one of the
primary limiting factors of such thrusters. Furthermore, the high mass ﬂow
rates deplete the remaining fuel mass relatively fast, decreasing the platform’s
thrust capabilities by 25%, 25 seconds after the valve opening.
30
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:33==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
The above are also supported by the testing of a cold gas thruster design by
A.A.Hashem [17], where a larger thruster’s case was investigated. A platform
weighting 100 kg, carrying 10 kg of pressurized N2 , produced
10 N of
thrust for approximately 300 seconds. Thus, the thrust levels achieved by
pressurized gas thrusters, are low compared to the mass of the platform which
is relatively large, having the heavy tanks needed for these applications to
account for a large part of it.
It is concluded, that the thrust yield of pressurized gas thrusters does not
match the mission requirements for the platform under investigation in this
report. Both their large weight to thrust ratio, as well as the limited amount
of time they can produce thrust forces larger than the gravitational force
acting on them, make these thrusters unﬁt for the needs of this project.
6.2
Rocket thruster
Rocket thrusters have the ability of providing with large amounts of thrust
and high speciﬁc impulses, the latter translating in a high thrust to propellant
mass ﬂow rate ratio. The propellants are ignited in a combustion chamber,
before being expanded through the nozzles of the rocket, through which the
produced gases exit at velocities much larger than the corresponding ones of
other engines such as cold gas thrusters. Equation 3, illustrates that the exit
velocity Ve of these gases is linearly related to the resulting thrust, thus rocket
thrusters are the primary engines used in applications where large amounts
of thrust is required, especially in vacuum conditions.
Furthermore, thrust is delivered through the combustion of a propellant
and an oxidizer, which is brought on board for applications in vacuum. The
combustion heats up the gases, which in turn expand through the nozzles of
the rocket ,dramatically increasing their velocity in the process. Figure 20
shows the schematic of a liquid rocket combustion engine [7]. Injectors deliver
the pressurized propellants from the tanks to the combustion chamber, where
they are ignited and combustion occurs.
The rocket propellants make up for most of the rocket’s weight, serving
as the propulsive mass that is ejected in the form of a ﬂuid jet from the
nozzles. Typical propellants include liquid hydrozen or kerosene as fuel and
liquid oxygen or nitric acid as the oxidizing means.Most of these propellants
require ignition of the propellant mixture, thus requiring a complex pipe
system along with pumps, cooling conﬁgurations and ignition mechanisms.
However, there are propellants that can ignite on contact with each other,
known as hypergolic propellants. Typically used propellants of this kind,
31
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:34==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
Figure 20: Rocket engine schematic
include hydrazine (N2H4) as fuel, used with nitrogen tetroxide (N2O4) as
the oxidizer. Hypergolic thrusters are usually simple and reliable, due to the
fact that no ignition system is needed, as the propellants ignite on contact.
These propellants can be stored as liquids at room temperature and are
easy to ignite reliably and repeatedly[21]. The injectors of these systems are
usually pressure fed, typically using pressurized helium in the tanks to drive
the propellants to the combustion chamber.
In the next chapter of this report, a hypergolic rocket thruster will be
designed and presented, as it possesses numerous desirable characteristics
and could provide with the needed thrust, for the platform of this project.
32
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:35==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
7
Hypergolic rocket thruster design
7.1
Design structure
In the chapters that follow, the theoretical background on the design of
a rocket engine is presented. At the end of each subsection, the resulting
calculations are presented in a table.
In advance, tables 3-6 contain the
calculation results for the combustion chamber, nozzle, propellant tanks and
propellant injectors respectively. All the calculations were done through the
Matlab scripts created for and provided with this project’s report.
At ﬁrst, some of the general parameters and equations are presented. In
the steps that follow, the theoretical background and calculation results are
given for each part of the rocket, in the order that follows: Combustion
chamber, nozzles, propellant tanks, propellant injectors. Lastly a subsection
is devoted to the platform’s total mass, the cooling system and the design
conclusions.
The geometrical parameters of a rocket engine, which will be used in the
following chapter, can be found in ﬁgure 21 which follows. The reader can
refer back to this ﬁgure to visualize which part of the engine is under discus-
sion at each point.
Figure 21: Visualization of the geometrical parameters of a typical rocket thruster
33
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:36==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
7.2
General parameters
In order to design the geometrical characteristics of the N2H4-N2O4 rocket,
the propellant characteristic parameters must be determined. These param-
eters will be later used in the calculation of the dimension of the injectors,
combustion chamber, throat and nozzle of the engine. The following calcula-
tions (presented in table 3) were based on the small rocket design equations
provided by [3],[4] and [18].
N2H4 −N2O4 parameter
Value
Optimum oxidizer to fuel ratio
1.34
Combustion temperature
3250 K
Ratio of specific heats
1.25
Fuel density
1.008 g/cc
Oxidizer density
1.450 g/cc
Product density
1.22 g/cc
Product mean molecular mass
22.29 kg/kmol
Specific impulse at sea level
292 sec
Table 3: Hydrazine-nitrogen tetroxide propellant parameters
The combustion temperature of the N2H4-N2O4 mixture is 3250 K, how-
ever the resulting gases have a lower temperature at the throat of the system,
due to the loss of thermal energy in accelerating the gas to the local speed
of sound (Mach number=1). The temperature at the throat is given by eq.
7[18]:
Tt = Tc

1
1 + γ−1
2

(7)
where:
Tt is the throat temperature [K],
Tc is the combustion temperature [K],
γ is ratio of speciﬁc heats (1.25 for N2H4-N2O4).
Furthermore, the pressure at the throat can be found using eq. 9[18], us-
ing the combustion pressure of the requirements:
Pt = Pc

1 + γ −1
2
−
γ
γ−1
(8)
34
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:37==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
where:
Pt is the throat pressure [K],
Pc is the combustion pressure[K].
Using the throat pressure from eq. 8 , the throat area for the previously
set requirements can be calculated using eq. 9.
At = F
Pc
"
2γ2
γ −1
 2
γ + 1
 γ+1
γ−1

1 −
Pe
Pc
 γ−1
γ #−1
2
(9)
where:
F is the resultin thrust [N],
Pe is the exit pressure[K].
At this point, it is worth mentioning that the exit pressure Pe equals the
ambient pressure Pa for a correctly expanded nozzle. A correctly expanded
nozzle accelerates the gases from the throat sonic conditions (choked ﬂow) to
higher velocities through the nozzle exit area Ae. The gases will continue to
expand through the nozzle gaining velocity while decreasing their pressure,
until the point where they reach the exit area Ae. If they are allowed to
expand until their pressure equals the ambient one, the maximum possible
exit velocity is achieved. Therefore it is crucial to calculate Ae for the correct
expansion of the exiting gases, through eq. 10 which follows:
Ae = At
Me
"
1 + γ−1
γ M 2
e
γ+1
2
#
γ+1
2(γ−1)
(10)
where Me is the local Mach number. The latter can be calculated for the
atmospheric conditions on the surface of Mars, namely the pressure Pm, using
eq. 11:
M 2
e =
2
γ −1
" Pc
Pm
 γ−1
γ
−1
#
(11)
35
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:38==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
The next step is to calculate the exhaust velocity υe, which will later be
used to calculate thrust. This can be achieved by inputting the combustion
temperature and the mean molecular mass M of the exiting gases (table 3)
to eq. 12:
υe =
v
u
u
t 2γ
γ −1
RTc
M
"
1 −
Pe
Pc
 γ−1
γ #
(12)
Furthermore, the calculation of thrust also requires the mass ﬂow rate ˙m
of the reacting propellants in the combustion chamber. This value is given by
equation 13, which for a correctly expanded nozzle (Pe ≃Pa) equals thrust
over the exit velocity:
˙m =
F
(Pe −Pa)Ae + υe
(13)
The mass ﬂow rate, exit velocity, throat and exit areas for a hypergolic
rocket thruster, able to achieve 25 N of thrust above the atmosphere of Mars,
can now be determined. The results are presented in table 4.
7.3
Combustion chamber design
The geometry of the combustion chamber, is primarily determined by its
characteristic length L∗, which a substitute for the calculation of the resi-
dence time of the propellants in the chamber. The customary method of
selecting a L∗value depends on past experimental data. When N2H4 is used
as the propellant in small rockets, L∗empirically ranges from 0.76 to 0.89[23]
and can be used to calculate the combustion chamber volume, as eq. 14
illustrates. For the purpose of this design, a value of L∗=0.83 m is going to
be used.
Vc = L∗At
(14)
36
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:39==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
By calculating the volume of the chamber, the geometry of its interior can
be determined. It is worth noting that the transition from the combustion
chamber to the throat of the nozzle, has to be achieved gradually, so that the
gases can accelerate to the local sonic velocity. For that purpose, one tenth
of the total volume of the chamber must be devoted to a conical transition
from the chamber cylinder to the throat area. This part of the combustion
chamber is known as the convergent volume.
Figure 22: Throat diameter-Chamber length graph using past experimental data[23]
The length of the combustion chamber Lc, can be determined using ﬁg.
22, which shows the trend of chamber length versus throat diameter, as taken
from past experimental data[23]. Using the throat diameter, as calculated
from the throat area given by eq. 9, the length of the cylindrical chamber
can be determined.
It should also be noted, that the cross-sectional area of the chamber cylin-
der, must be a minimum of three times the area of the nozzle throat At, as
an empirical rule for smaller rockets[18]. This condition is usually met, to
employ complete combustion of the reactants in the chamber.
7.4
Nozzle design
The nozzles of the thrusters, are the parts that accelerate the outgoing
gas masses from the point of the nozzle throat, to the exit area. The main
37
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:40==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
purpose of this part of the thrusters, is to translate the pressure from the
throat area, to the maximum velocity that can be achieved.
The latter, is achieved for a correctly expanded nozzle, which is deﬁned as
the nozzle that has an exit area large enough, to accelerate the exiting gases
to the ideal exhaust velocity. When the gases acquire inreased velocity, a
pressure drop is employed corresponding to the nozzle exit pressure equaling
the ambient one. Such a conﬁguration provides with the maximum amount
of thrust[2]. Figure 23, shows the three possible cases for the outgoing jet
out of a nozzle, depending on the exit pressure.
Figure 23: Diﬀerent exit pressure cases for a conical nozzle: (a)over-expanded nozzle;
(b)correctly expanded; (c)under-expanded [2].
Therefore, the design feature to expand a nozzle correctly is the nozzle
exit area, according to the propellant properties (γ) and the exit velocity of
the gases, as described in chapter 7.1. For this purpose, one of the most
popular choices is the bell or contour shaped nozzle. Such a nozzle, has a
diameter that increases more rapidly near the throat area, while it remains
almost constant towards the nozzle exit area. A bell nozzle is illustrated in
ﬁgure 24(b).
Figure 24: Nozzle type schematics: (a) conical; (b) bell(contour); (c) spike; (d) aerospike.
38
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:41==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
The length of the nozzle can be calculated, according to the divergence
angle θcone, as shown in ﬁgure 24. This angle usually ranges from 10o to 20o,
with a typical value being that of 15o[2]. Equation 15 shows how the nozzle
length L can be calculated, for a divergence angle of 15o, using the predeter-
mined throat and exit diameters of the nozzles (De and Dt respectively), as
calculated in chapter 7.1.
L =
De −Dt
2tan(θcone)
(15)
The calculation of the length of the nozzle, concludes the determination
of the geometry and dimensions of the nozzle, as shown in table 4.
Nozzle parameter
Value
Mass flow rate ˙m
0.0077 kg/s
Exit area Ae
10 cm2
Exhaust velocity ue
3120 m/s
Throat area At
6.45 mm2
Divergence angle θcone
15o
Length L
6.15 cm
Table 4: Nozzle design parameters
7.5
Propellant tanks
Each of the four thrusters of the platform, will need both a fuel and an
oxidizer injector. The most eﬃcient way to design the tanks, would be to
devote one tank for fuel storage and one for the oxidizer, each connected to
all four thrusters. A standard way to provide with the needed pressure in
the propellant tanks, is to pressurize them with helium[18]. However, as the
propellant mass decreases in the tanks, the pressure provided by the helium
mass would decrease, as the available volume for it expand in the tanks, would
also increase. The latter, must be taken into account, as it would result in a
dynamic ∆P, which deﬁnes the mass ﬂow rates through the injectors.
In order to control the propellant mass ﬂow rates , despite the ranging
∆P in the injectors, it is common practice to conﬁgure the duty cycle of
an electronically controlled valve (usual reaction time∼2.5 ms), to provide
with the needed mass ﬂow rates[2]. Therefore the tanks must be designed to
provide with an initial pressure that is higher than Pc to force the propellants
39
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:42==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
in the chamber, while taking into account that the tanks are constantly being
depleted and the pressure in an almost empty tank, must still be high enough
to drive the remaining propellants in the chamber.
Using the ideal gas law (eq. 6), the initial volumes for the propellants
were calculated.
Through a trial and error process, extra volume in the
tanks was devoted for the pressurized helium and its mass was calculated to
provide with the needed starting and ending tank pressures. Table 5 shows
the calculation results.
Tank parameter
Value
Fuel volume
3.373 L
Oxidizer volume
3.172 L
Fuel mass
3.4 kg
Oxidizer mass
4.6 kg
Fuel tank volume
10 L
Oxidizer tank volume
10 L
Helium mass (for each tank)
50 gr
Starting fuel tank pressure
45.32 atm
Ending fuel tank pressure
30.03 atm
Starting oxidizer tank pressure
43.98 atm
Ending oxidizer tank pressure
30.02 atm
Tank length (same for both tanks)
0.4 m
Tank width (same for both tanks)
0.4 m
Tank height (same for both tanks)
0.0625 m
Table 5: Tank design parameters
The two tanks have been designed to have the same dimensions, while
their length and width are equal, forming a square base for the platform.
This provides with the ability to distribute the tanks’ mass uniformly on
the platform, thus keeping its center of mass in the same distance from each
thruster. This will simplify the ﬂight physics and control of the platform and
will be discussed in a later chapter of this report.
7.6
Propellant injectors
The function of the propellant injectors, is to introduce the propellants
into the combustion chamber, to allow for eﬃcient combustion to occur.
For smaller rocket engines, injectors such as the spray nozzle system are
commonly used[18].
The propellants are fed to the combustion chamber
through small oriﬁces provided by the injector, where ﬂow is controlled by
40
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:43==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
an electric valve. The liquid then passes through the spray nozzle, where it is
broken down into smaller droplets. This principle is similar to the one used
in commercial spray cans, where a small oriﬁce on top of the can, forces a
liquid substance through the spray nozzle, which in turn vaporizes the liquid
into small droplets.
The mass ﬂow of a liquid through a simple oriﬁce, is given by eq. [16]:
˙m = CdAo
p
2gρ∆P
(16)
where:
˙m is the mass ﬂow rate through the oriﬁce [kg/s],
Ao is the oriﬁce area [m2],
Cd is the oriﬁce discharge coeﬃcient [∼0.6],
∆P is the pressure drop across the oriﬁce [Pa],
g is the gravitational constant [m/s2].
The ∆P term in eq. 16[18], determines the mass ﬂow rate, as the rest of
the parameters remain constant, and is given by the diﬀerence in pressure
between the pressure in the propellant tank and the combustion chamber.
The injection pressure drop must be high enough to eliminate combustion
instability inside the combustion chamber, but not so high that the tankage
system is penalized. Typical pressure drops for smaller engines can range
around ∼10 atm, while injection velocities are preferably low (∼30m/s)[18].
Furthermore, the injection velocity ui can be calculated though eq. 17:
ui = Cd
s
2g
 ∆P
ρ

(17)
Given the pressure drop range from the pressurized tanks of the platform,
the dimensions of the oriﬁce of the injectors are presented in table 6. The
oriﬁce can now be split into multiple smaller oriﬁces, to provide with better
combustion eﬃciency.
Lastly, it is common practice to place the fuel and oxidizer injector exits
in the top part of the combustion chamber and at 45o with respect to each
other, so that the 2 jets meet in the upper areas of the chamber and ignite
at contact.
41
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:44==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
Injector parameter
Value
Orifice area (fuel or oxidizer) Ao
0.196 mm2
Orifice diameter (fuel or oxidizer) Ao
0.5 mm
Initial fuel pressure drop ∆Pfi
24.92 atm
Ending fuel pressure drop ∆Pfe
9.63 atm
Initial oxidizer pressure drop ∆Poi
23.58 atm
Ending oxidizer pressure drop ∆Poe
9.62 atm
Injectors’ angle θinj
45o
Table 6: Injector design parameters
The injectors can now be controlled electronically, to allow with the exact
needed mass ﬂow rates for the propellants, through PWM pulses of diﬀerent
duty cycles, depending on the pressure drop at any given time. Figure 25,
illustrates the PWM duty cycles for a ﬁxed mass ﬂow rate of the propellants,
as a function of ∆P.
Figure 25: Injector valves’ PWM duty cycles depending on ∆P
The above duty cycles for the designed injectors, are conﬁgured to produce
the exact mass ﬂow rates needed to achieve the requirement of 25 N of thrust.
However the valves can adjust their duty cycles to provide with throttled
thrust.
Furthermore, the pressure drops across the injector oriﬁces, have
been designed in a manner that larger amounts of thrusts can be produced
if needed. Assuming a constant exhaust velocity, an increase in the injector
mass ﬂow rates will result in an increase in thrust.
However, a large increase in ˙m should be avoided, as it would not result
in a linear increase in thrust, as eq. 13 suggests. A change in the mass ﬂow
rates would mean a change in the dynamic design parameters, such as that
42
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:45==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
of the the combustion pressure. In turn, the exit area needed for the gases
to be correctly expanded would also change, resulting in an over or under
expanded nozzle, aﬀecting the thrust output of the platform.
Figure 26: Tank remaining propellant mass in time, for diﬀerent PWM settings that pro-
duce the max, 0.8*max and 0.6*max ﬂow rates.
Given the above, the manipulation of the PWM cycles will aﬀect the ﬂight
time of the platform, by allowing diﬀerent amounts of propellants through
the tanks. Figure 27 shows three diﬀerent settings of PWM cycles and thus,
the three diﬀerent tank depletion times. As expected, a maximum thrust
output can be sustained for more time, by limiting its upper limit through
smaller PWM cycles.
For example, the platform can run on maximum throttle, for 4.5 minutes
before tank depletion. Allowing 80% of the max ﬂow rate however, while
decreasing the upper limit of the thrust output, will also allow the platform
to remain functional for 5.5 minutes.
However, it should be noted that the net thrust forces acting on the over-
all platform, have been designed to be a maximum of twice the gravitational
forces acting on it. Therefore, reducing the thrust output can occur to extend
the total ﬂight time, up to the point where thrust can sustain the platform’s
weight and velocity. The latter will be further discussed in chapter 8 of this
report.
7.7
Platform total mass
The largest contributing factor on a rocket’s total mass, is the mass of
the propellants. Depending on the type of rocket, this parameter can possess
43
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:46==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
a diﬀerent percentage over the total mass of the rocket. This parameter is
called the propellant mass fraction of the rocket, and is used to describe the
ratio between the propellant mass and the initial mass of the vehicle[24].
For standard liquid fueled rockets, the propellant mass fraction ranges
depending on the design of the vehicle. As an example, the Space Shuttle
system had a fueled weight of 1,708,500 kg and a dry weight of 342.100 at
liftoﬀ, the latter being the vehicle’s mass excluding that of the propellants.
Using the above information, the propellant mass fraction of the Space Shut-
tle system is given as 79.98%. However, the latter system employs staging,
which increases the payload fraction of the total vehicle mass signiﬁcantly.
In single stage to orbit rockets (SSTOs), a propellant mass fraction of
approximately 90% is the usual design parameter. For the purposes of this
project, the same value will be used to approximate the platform’s total
weight. As presented in the previous chapter, the mass of the fuel and oxidizer
used for each of the platform’s four rocket thrusters is 2 kg, making the
platform’s propellant mass a total of 8 kg. Therefore, using a propellant mass
fraction of 90%, the expected total weight of the platform is approximately
8.9 kg.
However, this number is deﬁned by the amount of the propellants in the
tanks, which can vary depending on the desired ﬂight time and ∆v. Rock-
ets with such propellant mass fractions, are designed to provide with the
forces needed to lift the vehicle towards the orbital height, which require
large amount of forces, thus employing larger amounts of propellants. In
this project, the propellants’ mass are designed to provide with the smaller
forces needed for the platform to hover and increase its velocity to drone
standards (a maximum of approximately 40 km/h), therefore the propellant
mass fraction is expected to be signiﬁcantly lower.
To determine the exact weight of the platform, a material research has to
be undergone and each of the parts of the platform, such as the tanks, frame,
nozzles, combustion chambers and piping systems must be independently
calculated. However, this researched is placed outside the boundaries of this
project, thus to calculate the net force on the platform, a safe assumption
concerning its mass should be made.
In the next chapters of this report, an assumed dry mass of 5 kg will be
assumed, making up a total mass of 13 kg for the platform. The propellant
mass fraction can be calculated as 61.54%, which while being a rather low
ratio compared to standard liquid SSTO rockets, is also considered as a safe
assumption.
44
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:47==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
7.8
Cooling system
The heat created during combustion in a rocket thruster, is contained
within the exhaust gases, most of which is expelled along with the combustion
products through the nozzle. However, the combustion chamber and nozzle
walls retain some of the heat. For this purpose, the walls of the above parts
are usually coated with a jacket of pipes, that carry the fuel prior to injection.
This technique is called regenerative cooling, and is commonly used with
liquid fueled rockets, including hypergolic engines[26]. The principle relies on
a system of small pipes forming an exterior wall that surrounds the chamber
and nozzles. The pipes carry the fuel prior to injection across the hotter
walls of the engine and is then driven for injection in the chamber, as shown
in ﬁgure 27.
The schematic in the ﬁgure above concerns a non-hypergolic rocket, how-
ever the principles remains the same.
Regenerative cooling is commonly
used with hypergolic propellants, and provides with a cooling solution for
the purposes of this project. The design of such cooling systems, is usu-
ally a challenge for applications where the combustion chamber pressures are
high[23]. However in this project Pc is designed to be 20.4 atm, thus the
implementation of this cooling system is rather simple.
Figure 27: Regenerative cooling for a bi-propellant rocket [26]
The exact heat transfer rates that determine the parameters of a regen-
erative cooling system, are strongly dependent on the chamber and nozzle
material at hand and are usually determined through the testing processes
of rocket engines[23]. Therefore, the research on this matter will not go into
further depth, as it drifts oﬀfrom the purpose of this project.
45
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:48==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
7.9
Design conclusion
In order to determine whether the design of the hypergolic thrusters are
close to usual rocket parameter values, the NASA Rocket Thrust Simulator
was used. A rocket of similar dimensions and parameters was assumed, the
main diﬀerences being the oxidizer (O2 instead of N2O4) and the smaller
exit area used, due to the simulator’s limitations. As ﬁgure 28 depicts, the
Figure 28: NASA RocketThrust simulator design
simulator in use provides results that match the calculations presented in
this report. A small-sized rocket with the ability of yielding 23 Newtons of
thrust, a slightly increased speciﬁc impulse (304 s) and a mass ﬂow rate of
7 grams per second can be designed using dimensions nearly matching the
ones calculated in this project.
Speciﬁcally, the simulation outputs which include the mass ﬂow rate, ex-
haust gas velocity and nozzle exit area , are similar to the ones calculated in
this report. Therefore, the design equations and calculations as presented in
this chapter, can be veriﬁed through comparison with the simulation outputs.
After the design of the rocket thrusters, the platform’s dynamics and
control must be evaluated, in order to determine the ﬂight capabilities of the
platform, in terms of its velocity, acceleration and/or the maximum distance
that can be covered.
46
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:49==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
8
Flight physics, dynamics and control
8.1
Platform forces
A ﬁrst step towards decomposing the forces acting on a symmetrical quad-
thruster platform, as the one designed in this project, is to determine the
forces acting on each thruster and the overall body frame.
In a hovering state, each of the platform’s engines will produce a vertical
thrust component. The sum of these vertical forces, equals the vertical net
forces acting on the platform. When one of the thrusters is tilted, thrust is
decreased in the vertical direction Z, while it increases in the directions X and
Y according to the angle of the thruster. Figure 29 illustrates the concept
for the vertical forces acting on the platform.
Figure 29: Vertical forces acting on a hovering quad-thruster platform.
Given the above, the forces acting on the platform, can be determined
through:
Fz =
4
X
i=1
Fz(i)
(18)
47
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:50==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
Fx =
4
X
i=1
Fx(i)
(19)
Fy =
4
X
i=1
Fy(i)
(20)
i being the corresponding thruster number.
Equations 18-20 show that the force components produced by the four
thrusters, are summed to produce a net force in the X,Y or Z axis.
By
employing thrust vectoring, as explained in the next chapter, each of the
thrusters will have the ability to tilt, allowing for the decomposition of forces
on each of them. After all three components on the X,Y and Z axes have
been determined for each thruster, equations 18-20 can be used to determine
the net forces on the platform.
8.2
Thrust vectoring
Due to the nature of the rocket platform at hand, a challenge is detected
concerning the ﬂight conditions and maneuvers the platform will be able to
execute. The propellant tanks contain more than 60% of the platforms mass,
which will require to operate in certain angles during ﬂight, in the case of the
platform being operated as a standard quad-copter. The oscillation of the
liquids in the tanks and the relocation of the center of mass of the platform
during angled ﬂight, pose an issue for the ability of the platform to control its
position in a stable manner. Furthermore, the oscillations in the tanks, once
the propellants are being drained, would also pose a threat to the operational
stability of the thruster, as it could lead to in-continuous propellant ﬂow from
the tank pipes to the injectors, as well as giving rise to unpredictable forces.
To tackle this issue, an alternative way of directing the thrust forces is
proposed, that of thrust vectoring or gimbaled thrust [27]. In a thrust vec-
toring system, the exhaust nozzle can be mechanically deﬂected at diﬀerent
positions on the horizontal plane, using mechanisms that relocate the nozzles
or the whole thruster, towards a desired position. The concept is illustrated
in ﬁgure 30.
The thrust vector of each thruster is now at a diﬀerent angle to the horizon-
tal plane. As a consequence, it can be decomposed into its three-dimensional
48
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:51==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
Figure 30: Gimbaled thrust [27].
components Fz(i)(vertical component) and Fx(i), Fy(i) (horizontal compo-
nents), and the system inherits the ability to manipulate the trade-oﬀbe-
tween these components. The latter will allow for the control of the direction
of thrust in every thruster, without requiring the platform to change its orig-
inal pitch/roll angles in order to do so. Consequently, the platform will be
able to accelerate towards all directions, while forcing the tanks to remain in
the same angle, with respect to the horizontal plane.
Gimbaled thrust is the equivalent of tilting the propellers for a standard
quadcopter, instead of tilting the whole system in order to accelerate towards
a desired direction. For the purposes of this project, a proof of concept ex-
periment for the gimballed thrust technique will be developed in lab and
presented in chapter 9 of this report.
8.3
Platform dynamics-3D force decomposition
Each of the 4 thrusters of the platform, can now be directed to provide
with the desirable forces in each direction. By controlling the angle of the
thrust vector in the horizontal plane, the forces acting on the X,Y, Z axes
can be determined to provide with the necessary set of the Fx, Fy and Fz
components.
Figure 31 illustrates how these forces can be decomposed in three dimen-
sional space, through the angles θ and φ. For example, if F is the thrust
acting on the platform during lift-oﬀ, both θ and φ are 0 degrees for all
thrusters, thus F acts only on the vertical axis Z.
By increasing φ on each thruster by the same amount, the trade-oﬀbe-
49
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:52==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
tween the vertical component Fz and the horizontal ones Fx-Fy is activated.
As φ increases Fz drops, while Fx and Fy increase. In turn, changing θ will
aﬀect the trade-oﬀof the forces distributed in the X and Y direction. As it
increases, Fy drops and Fx increases as a consequence.
Figure 31: 3D force decomposition for a nozzle implementing gimbaled thrust.
Using ﬁgure 31 as reference, the equations for each decomposed compo-
nent can be inferred as follows:
Fz(i) = Fcos
 φ(i)

(21)
Fx(i) = Fsin
 φ(i)

sin(θ(i)

(22)
Fy(i) = Fsin
 φ(i)

cos
 θ(i)

(23)
Each combination of φ and θ angles correspond to the angle the thrust
vector each thruster i must have, in the Z-Y and X-Y plane respectively. The
latter is the input information the nozzle angle control system must obtain,
to place the nozzles in the desired position. As ﬁgure 32 shows, a mechanism
attached to the nozzle of the thrusters can relocate the nozzle and provide
with the expected forces in all 3 of the axes.
The most important attribute of this system, is its ability to allow for
6 degrees of freedom, without the demand for tilting(pitch,roll) in order to
50
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:53==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
Figure 32: Thrust vectoring mechanism illustration [28].
move on the X-Y plane. These degrees of freedom, as explained in chapter
5.3, include moving on the X, Y, Z axes as well as rotating with respect
to them (roll, pitch and yaw respectively). Standard multi-copter platforms
allow changing the pitch and roll angles in order to move on the X and Y
axis, while in the platform proposed in this report, roll and pitch angles can
be locked for the platform frame. However, accelerating on the X-Y plane is
done by tilting only the nozzles of each rocket to the desired position.
8.4
Platform kinematics
Another important aspect of thrust vectoring, as employed by the platform
designed in this report, is also that it provides with the ability to control Fz
for a constant thrust output F by the thrusters. The latter is of rather great
signiﬁcance, as it can provide with stable ﬂight conditions.
A change in altitude can now be controlled not only by throttling of the
thrusters (at zero φ-θ), but also through Fz and thus, the control angles φ-θ.
The latter is true however, as long as F > W, where W is the weight of the
platform. Therefore, all changes in any of the three components of F, are
now limited only by the reaction times of the thrust vectoring mechanisms
and not by the throttling of the thrusters to the desired levels, a process
where error changes dynamically and is harder to control.
In other words, changing altitude can occur by a simple and fast movement
of the thrust vectoring mechanisms and not only by increasing the mass ﬂow
rates in the combustion chambers, a process more complex and diﬃcult to
control. This also applies to all other possible movements of the platform,
that would otherwise depend solely on the precise throttling of the thrusters.
Given the above, the kinematics of the system may include a variety of
diﬀerent maneuvers, all comprising of some basic movements of the platform.
The requirements for these maneuvers to take place are F > W and φ ̸= 0◦.
51
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:54==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
This way the platform can devote the extra thrust forces to Fx and Fy and
determine the trade-oﬀbetween them through θ (eq. 22-23).
Figure 33 shows an example of acquiring angular momentum to perform
a counterclockwise rotation with respect to Z (yaw change). The coordinate
system presented in this ﬁgure, is the reference system for the description of
the basic movements listed below.
Figure 33: Manipulating φ and θ for a clockwise rotation (yaw angle).
• Hover and altitude change (moving on the Z axis): Change in alti-
tude would require a change in the net Fz forces of the platform. For
example, a starting hover position could occur through the following set
of angles:
Thrusters 1, 3: φ1 = φ3 ̸= 0◦and θ1 = 0, θ3 = 180◦.
Thrusters 2, 4: φ2 = φ4 ̸= 0◦and θ2 = −90◦, θ4 = 90◦.
In the setting above, Fz can be increased by decreasing the absolute
values of the φ angles on 2 diagonal thrusters (1-3,2-4) by the same
amount (eq.21). This would increase the vertical forces on the platform
and keep it in a horizontal position, while decreasing the forces on the X-
Y axes. It should be noted, that any forces on the latter axes cancel out
as a result of the two sets of diagonal thrusters, providing with opposite
forces on the X-Y plane (Fy1=-Fy3, Fx2=-Fx4). An illustration of how
forces on each thruster are directed, can be found in ﬁgure 34.
52
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:55==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
• Yaw rotation: The platform can change its yaw angle and reorient
itself, by tilting at least 2 diagonal thrusters in opposite directions. Fig-
ure 33 illustrates how a clockwise maneuver would occur for:
Thruster 1: φ1 ̸= 0◦, θ1 = 90◦.
Thruster 3: φ3 = φ1, θ3 = −90◦.
The angle φ controls the trade-oﬀbetween Fz and Fx in this case, while
θ = 90◦ensures that Fy=0.
The platform’s angular momentum in-
creases this way, due to Fx being equal to the sum of Fx1 and Fx3. The
magnitude of Fz will decrease as Fz1 and Fz3 decrease due to the tilting
of the nozzles. The latter must be accounted for by the same increase
in the vertical components of thrusters 2 and 4.
A counter-clockwise movement follows the same logic, the only diﬀerence
being that the signs on θ1 and θ3 must be inverted.
• Accelerating on the X-Y plane : Tilting the thrusters on the X-Y
plane results in accelerating on the corresponding axes. To accelerate
on the Y axis, for example, would require θ = 0 and the same angle φ
being applied on the thrusters located on the Y axis. In particular, the
set of angles θ1 = θ3 = 0◦and φ1 = φ3 > 0, increases Fy1 and Fy3 by the
same amount, while angular momentum remains constant. Once again
the decrease in Fz1 and Fz3 must be accounted for in the same manner
described for the altitude maneuver.
Using any of the 3 basic movements, or one of their possible combinations,
the platform can move in all 3 directions. Using thrust vectoring can there-
fore, be used to move in space in the same manner a commercial quad-copter
moves, without however, requiring the whole platform to be at an angle with
the X-Y plane to do so. As a consequence less oscillations and noise is in-
troduced in the system, which is rather important for the application under
research in this report.
8.5
Nozzle control
In order to position the thrust vector of each thruster in the desired angles,
the control system of the platform must have constant feedback on the yaw,
pitch, roll angles and the platform’s altitude. The control software then uses
that feedback, in order to reduce the errors on any of the parameters. By
53
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:56==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
providing constant feedback and calculating these errors, a control algorithm
such as a PID controller, can determine when relocation of each of the nozzles
is necessary, to keep errors at a minimum.
Such a PID controller is presented, designed and implemented in the ex-
perimental part of this report and is therefore omitted at this point. Further
research on how such a controller can be applied in the quad-thruster plat-
form designed for this project, will be presented in chapter 9.
8.6
Flight capabilities - example scenario
The platform is designed to carry 8 kg of propellants, with a total platform
mass of 13 kg. Using Newton’s second law, it can be calculated that gravity
will initially pull the platform with a force of W=48.24 N. However, the
weight reduction of the platform as it consumes fuel, must be taken into
account during ﬂight.
Throttling each thruster at a maximum of 25 N, would produce 100 N on
the Z axis of the platform, for φ(i) = θ(i) = 0 deg (common on all thrusters).
Consequently a force of 100-48.24=51.78 N remains for the Fx and Fy com-
ponents. In addition, all thrusters can obtain diﬀerent angles simultaneously
for diﬀerent X-Y force allocation, therefore a number of diﬀerent settings can
be used to move the platform with the desired acceleration and velocity. This
in turn, aﬀects the maximum distance that can be covered by the platform.
Furthermore, apart from W, the only extra force acting against the plat-
form’s movements, is the drag force. The latter can be calculated using:
FD = 1
2ρCdA
(24)
where Fd is the drag force [N],
ρ is the atmospheric density [kg/m3],
u is the velocity of the platform [m/s],
A is the area perpendicular to the direction of motion [m2],
Cd is the drag coeﬃcient.
The drag coeﬃcient is a dimensionless quantity used to quantify the drag
of an object in a ﬂuid environment. It is usually determined experimentally
and is subject to change according to the orientation of the object at hand
54
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:57==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
[30]. In this case, a value of Cd=1 can be a safe assumption, as it can range
from 0.25 for a sports car, to 2 for a plate standing perpendicular to airﬂow.
As far as the area A is concerned, the tanks are assumed to be stacked on
top of each other, creating a side surface area of 0.05 m2 (table 5), which is
perpendicular to the direction of motion. Twice this area is assumed to be
A, as another safe assumption.
To present an example, suppose that the platform lifts-oﬀthe surface
of Mars at 70% throttle and then hovers at a desired altitude (see ”Hover
and altitude change” in chapter 8.4). In this state, the platform hovers as
the nozzle positions allow the forces on the X-Y plane to cancel each other
out, while W=-Fz. Figure 34 illustrates the direction of the forces for the
platform in a hover state.
Figure 34: Illustration of the direction of forces in a hover state, where total thrust exceeds
the platform’s weight.
To determine the distance that can be covered in a straight path, for the
setting described above, the platform will relocate all nozzles to θ = 0◦and
φ = 45◦, where Fz=-W, Fy = 49.5 N and Fx = 0 (eq. 20-22). This will cause
the platform to accelerate on the Y direction, until the nozzles are relocated.
Once the desired velocity has been reached, the nozzles can be rearranged to
provide only the acceleration needed to cancel out the weight and drag forces
on the platform.
55
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:58==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
In order to save fuel, the platform can throttle down all the thrusters
after constant velocity has been reached. This can be achieved through a
combination of throttle levels and nozzle angles that provide with only the
necessary vertical forces to keep the altitude stable and the necessary Fy to
counter drag forces.
For the above settings, a target velocity of 250 km/h can be reached in 16
seconds, a velocity racing drones on Earth can also approach and is therefore
a safe assumption [31]. Air drag can now be calculated as Fd=4.83 N, through
equation 24. However higher velocities can be used in practice, as drag is
proportional to the atmospheric density on Mars (0.02 kg/m3), which is more
than 61 times lower than the one on Earth.
After reaching the targed velocity, all thrusters throttle to 50% and it is
assumed that each thruster produces 12.5 N of thrust, for a net force of 50
N. Using φ = 5.7◦and θ = 0◦on all thrusters, Fz becomes equal to -W and
Fy cancels out the drag forces. The platform can now move with constant
speed, by re-adjusting the vertical forces according to the propellant weight
loss.
In summary, the example examined in this case involves the next steps:
1.) Lift oﬀthe ground at full throttle, φ = θ = 0◦for all thrusters.
2.) When at the desired altitude, throttle down to 70% of full throttle and
deﬂect the nozzles to φ = 45◦to accelerate up to 250 km/h (Fz =
48.2Fx = 0, Fy=49.5). This takes approximately 16 seconds.
3.) Throttle down to 50% and deﬂect the nozzles to φ = 5.7◦, just enough
to counter both the weight and the drag forces acting on the platform.
As weight decreases, throttle must be decreased and φ increased (ﬁg.
35).
In the above scenario, ﬂight time and covered distance of the platform
can be iteratively calculated for constant velocity, until the platform’s fuels
are depleted. The calculation of the total thruster force F and the common
angle φ on all nozzles, for a constantly dropping platform weight, results in
the calculation of the platform’s ﬂight time and covered distance.
In order to determine which combination of F and φ results in the desired
Fz and Fy forces, all the possible F-φ combinations were calculated and the
ones with the minimum error compared to the target values were selected.
The target values were the platform’s decreasing weight in the Z axis, as
well as the constant drag force on the Y axis. Figure 34 shows the diﬀerent
combinations of F and φ in time, for the 800 seconds the platform has enough
56
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:59==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
fuel. The latter was calculated, according to the throttle levels driven by
F and therefore the propellant mass ﬂow rates (see time distance.m script
provided with this report).
Figure 35: Required net thrust force F and common thruster angle φ in time, as platform
weight drops. In the given example the platform remains in the same altitude and counters
the drag forces for a constant velocity of 250 km/h.
Flying into a straight path and a constant speed would require an increase
in φ and a decrease in F over time. Given the platform velocity and ﬂight
time, the covered distance can be easily calculated as 55.6 km.
It should be noted, that the platform can only cover greater distances,
by increasing the velocity in which the platform ﬂies. This would increase
the drag force quadratically (eq. 24), which is the only force that increases
with velocity and needs to be counteracted, after the platform reaches its
target velocity. However the low atmospheric density on Mars would mean
only a slight increase in fuel consumption due to the increased drag. As a
consequence, sustaining velocity and altitude comes at a small increase in
fuel cost, when the target velocity is increased.
For example, if the target velocity drops to 200 km/h, drag reduces by
36% to Fd = 3.08N, however the covered distance drops by more than 10
km (44.8 km). This occurs due to the fact that after the target velocity is
reached, the amount of burnt fuel increases only due to drag, which may only
increase by a few Newtons for a large increase in the target velocity.
57
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:60==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
Table 7 below, sums the above example’s parameters, calculations and
results, including ﬂight with the vector ﬁeld magnetometer that adds 1 kilo-
gram to the platform’s total mass.
Parameter
Value
Throttle until target velocity is achieved
70%
Control angles until target velocity is achieved
φ = 45◦, θ = 0◦
Throttle while maintaining altitude and velocity
50% to 19%
Control angles while maintaining altitude and velocity
φ = 5.7◦to 14.6◦, θ = 0◦
Target velocity
250 km/h
Flight time
13.6 min
Covered distance (no payload)
55.6 km
Covered distance (with VFM sensor)
49.5 km
Distance between measurements (@50 Hz)
1.4 m
Table 7: Parameters for the ﬂight example given in this section. The platform lifts oﬀthe
ground and travels a straight path at constant speed/altitude, until fuel depletion.
58
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:61==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
9
Proof of concept - Control of a thrust vectoring drone
9.1
Experimental process
In the experimental part of this project, a quad-copter drone was designed,
constructed and programmed to employ the concept of thrust vectoring. The
motivation behind this part of the project, was to test and evaluate how
a thrust vectoring system behaves in ﬂight, while being governed by the
the same geometry, dynamics and kinematics of the quad-thruster platform
designed for this project.
The project was scheduled to provide with the necessary knowledge on
multi-copter platforms and their control, before the construction of the com-
plete system with the thrust vectoring mechanism.
The work-ﬂow of the
experimental process presented in this chapter, was structured as follows:
1.) Research was done on the physics and working principles of quad-copters,
as well as the functional parts required to construct one. The motors,
electronics, battery, body frame and the micro-controller of the drone
were selected at this stage.
2.) The theory behind Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) controllers
was researched on. A PID algorithm was developed to be incorporated
with the control software of the drone.
3.) Thrust vectoring was ﬁrst employed and tested on a 1-motor wing, con-
trolled by a PID algorithm.
4.) The frame of the drone was laser-cut at DTU’s ’Skylab’ facilities. All
the hardware was coupled to the frame and the micro-controller software
was developed.
5.) Testing of the system, data measurements and analysis were performed.
In the sections that follow, the experimental process is presented and
discussed.
59
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:62==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
9.2
Drone design
In order to construct a quad-copter system, several parts must be assembled
together. Most of the commercially available quad-copters, require the fol-
lowing parts to function in a controlled manner [30]:
• Micro-controller: The µcontroller is responsible for the control of all the
system’s hardware.
It uses sensor feedback and input commands to
control the motors of the drone. The µcontroller used in this project
was an Arduino UNO.
Figure 36: The µcontroller used in this project.
• Motors and propellers: They are responsible for delivering thrust, while
the motors are usually brushless and three-phase powered.
The are
characterized by their KV rating, which shows, in technical terms, how
fast a motor can rotate under no load, for every applied volt. It is a
measure of torque for brushless motors, while the rating of the motors
selected for this project, was KV-2300. Each of the selected motors, can
produce a maximum of 406 gr of thrust.
Figure 37: The motors used in this project.
60
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:63==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
• Battery: Responsible for delivering electrical power to the system. Se-
lected according to the motor needs. The most typical battery types
used in multi-copter systems are Lithium-Polymer (LiPo) batteries. The
latter, come in a grid of independent 4.2 volt cells connected in series or
in parallel. Additionally, they are characterized by their discharge rate
C, a measure of how protected the battery is against rapid discharging.
The C rating is selected according to the maximum current rates of the
motors. For this project, a 3S1P, 50C, LiPo battery was used, which
translates to 3 cells in series for a total of 12.6 volts.
Figure 38: The LiPo battery used in this project.
• Electronic speed controllers (ESCs): An ESC is responsible for the power
distribution on the brushless motors. According to the input PWM sig-
nal, they regulate the voltage on the three phase motors. They are often
equipped with a battery eliminator circuit (BEC), that has a regulated
5 volt output and can be used to power the system’s electronics. An
ESC can be attached to only one motor.
Figure 39: The electronic speed controller used in this project.
• Gyroscope-Accelerometer: These sensors are responsible for the deter-
mination of the angles of the system on all 3 axes. The gyroscope deter-
mines the instantaneous angular momentum around each axis, whereas
61
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:64==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
the accelerometer measures acceleration on all 3 axes. Combined, they
can provide with the yaw, pitch and roll angles of the system.
The
MPU6050 board was used in this project, a board that employs both a
gyroscope and an accelerometer.
Figure 40: The MPU6050 gyroscope/accelerometer board used in this project.
• Servo motors: These small motors are used in angle control mechanisms.
Their input is a PWM pulse corresponding to a speciﬁc angle, to which
the rotor turns.
Figure 41: The servo motor used in this project.
9.3
System assembly
Using a laser-cutter, a wooden frame was designed to carry a quad-copter’s
hardware, forming 4 perpendicular wings. Furthermore, one of the wings was
designed to allow for tilting of the area where the motor is placed. A servo-
motor was then attached to the moving part of the wing, in order to control
the tilt angle. Figure 42, shows how the mechanism controls the angle of the
motor, by rotating the motor with respect to the axis perpendicular to the
62
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:65==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
wing.
Figure 42: The thrust vectoring mechanisms on one of the four wings.
Each of the motors, had to be connected to a separate speed controller,
which was in turn connected to the micro-controller and the battery. Both
the servo-motor and the micro-controller, were powered by one of the battery
elimination circuits of the speed controllers. The connections are illustrated
in ﬁgure 43.
Figure 43: An illustration of the system’s connections.
Initially a single wing experiment was executed. The wing employing the
thrust vectoring mechanism, was attached to a metal joint and the mech-
anism was tested before the complete assembly of the drone. The purpose
behind this part of the experiment, was to research on the physics of thrust
63
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:66==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
vectoring and how it can be applied in practice. After securing the diﬀerent
parts of the drone on the wooden frame and applying the corresponding con-
nections, the system could be programmed and tested. Figure 44-(a) shows a
photo of the completed drone as seen from the top view, while 44-(b) shows
a side-view of the drone and the motor that employs the thrust vectoring
capability (motor 1).
Figure 44:
(a): The top view of the completed drone, (b): Side view of the drone, showing
the tilting of motor-1
9.4
PID controller
A proportional–integral–derivative controller, is a control feedback algo-
rithm used to minimize the error of an output parameter on a given system.
The controller’s output is re-determined in discrete time steps, in order to
minimize the error between the desired and present value of a parameter.
In practical terms the PID controller automatically applies accurate and
responsive correction to that parameter. The error is fed back to the al-
gorithm in every time step, and the output that controls the parameter is
re-determined. Equation 25 illustrates the mathematical representation of
the algorithm [31].
u(t) = Kp e(t) + Ki
Z t
t0
e(t) dt + Kd
d e(t)
dt
(25)
64
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:67==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
where u(t) is the PID output signal,
e(t) is the error at time t,
Kd, Ki and Kp is the proportional, integral and derivative constant
gain respectively.
The algorithm is comprised of 3 terms, the proportional P, integral I and
derivative D terms that vary in time. The proportional term, as the name
suggests, increases proportionally to the current error. On the other hand,
the integral term increases according to the time interval for which the error
has persisted. Lastly, the derivative term increases as the rate of change of
error increases. Figure 45 shows a block diagram of the control process [31].
Figure 45: Block diagram of the control process, using a PID controller
As shown above, r(t) is the desired value for the parameter under control.
The error e(t) of the parameter is then calculated by subtracting its current
value from r(t), using the system’s sensor feedback. Each of the PID terms
is then calculated according to e(t) and summed into the control signal u(t).
The latter is then used as the input signal to the process that takes place
and is responsible for changing the controlled parameter (the motors of the
drone for example, responsible for changing the yaw/pitch/roll angles).
In practice each of the P, I and D terms provide with a diﬀerent type of
reaction to the system it applies to. The proportional term takes the magni-
tude of the error into account and increases proportionally to it. It provides
with the foundation of the controller, however this term alone cannot provide
stability towards the desired state. In addition, the integral term integrates
the measured error in time and minimizes the steady-state overshoot of the
controlled parameter. It is usually used to correct smaller errors that the P
or D terms cannot account for. The third term of the PID (derivative) is
used to control how fast the PID output changes and is driven by the rate
65
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:68==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
of change of error. When the error increases faster, so does the D term by
diﬀerentiating e(t) in time.
As equation 25 shows, all three of the PID terms are multiplied by a gain
constant. Each of these constants, determines the weight of each of the terms
in the PID ouput signal. PID controllers have to be tuned by changing these
constants to provide with the optimal control for the system.
The latter
however, is subject to the mechanical properties of the system that can only
be approximated. In the case of the drone of this project, every motor is
mechanically diﬀerent from another motor of the same type and the gains
must be diﬀerent for each of them. For example, during the experimental
process, it was noted that motor 3 of the drone produced diﬀerent amounts
of thrust that the rest of the motors, for the same control signal. Therefore,
the PID controller could only be ﬁne tuned through a trial-and-error testing
process.
Figure 46: Block diagram of the PID functions on the quad-copter.
For the drone presented in this report, the control parameters were the
yaw, pitch and roll angles as given by the gyroscope-accelerometer of the
system. They constituted the feedback signal to the micro-controller and
66
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:69==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
had to be separately controlled, in order for the drone to behave in a de-
sirable manner. Therefore three diﬀerent PID controllers had to be applied
on the quad-copter simultaneously. Figure 46, shows a block diagram of the
functions performed on the quad-copter by the PID algorithm.
Furthermore, table 8 shows the selected gains for each of the three PID
algorithms. These constants were selected after a trial-and-error process, by
evaluating and minimizing the residuals between the desired and steady-state
control angles.
Parameter
Value
Yaw PID
Kp = 3.5, Ki = 0.005, Kd = 0.7.
Pitch PID
Kp = 3, Ki = 0.005, Kd = 0.7.
Roll PID
Kp = 2, Ki = 0.001, Kd = 2.
Table 8: PID gains for each of the controlled yaw, pitch and roll angles.
In addition, a custom made control board was designed and connected
to the reserved control signal pins of the microcontroller, as shown in ﬁgure
43.
The user inputs the desired yaw, pitch and roll angles for the drone
through the control board, which in turn correspond to a speciﬁc orientation
of the platform. For example, a positive roll angle would force motor 2 to be
throttled down and motor 4 throttled up. This arrangement would force the
platform to tilt and accelerate towards motor 2.
Equations 26-30 that follow, depict how the error and PID terms were
calculated within the micro-controller. Equation 28 illustrates that error in-
tegration can occur by adding the current and previous integral terms, while
equation 29 shows that the derivative term is the diﬀerence between current
and previous error, divided by time interval between them and multiplied by
the derivative gain. The same equations were used to control all three of the
yaw, pitch and roll angles of the drone.
e(t) = current angle −desired angle
(26)
P(t) = Kp e(t)
(27)
I(t) = I(t −t0) + Ki e(t)
(28)
D(t) = Kd
e(t) −e(t −t0)
t −t0
(29)
u(t) = P(t) + I(t) + D(t)
(30)
67
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:70==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
The ﬁnal output signal u(t) is applied to the ESCs of the system, with
a value ranging from 1000 µsecs to 2000 µsecs. These values represent a
discrete PWM pulse with a duty cycle of 50% and 100% respectively (for
the default Arduino PWM frequency of 500 Hz). In terms of throttle, the
ESCs can translate these signals as minimum (50% duty cycle) and maximum
(100% duty cycle) throttle.
In order to balance the wings of the complete drone however, the PID
output must be subtracted from one of the motors and added to the motors
in the opposite side of the corresponding wing. In this case, the roll PID out-
put is subtracted from motor 3 and added to motor 1, while the pitch PID is
subtracted from motor 4 and added to motor 2. Lastly, the yaw PID output
is subtracted from motors 1 and 2 and added to motors 3 and 4, which share
the same direction of rotation.
9.5
One-motor experiment
The ﬁrst experiment that was executed, was testing the PID controller
and the thrust vectoring mechanism on motor 1, by attaching one of the
wings to a ﬁxed joint. In this setting, throttling the motor would mean a
change in the roll angle of the wing, thus the roll PID controller presented in
the previous section, had to be used. The purpose behind this experimental
stage, was to test and tune both the PID algorithm and the vectoring mech-
anism. Through this experiment, it was also possible to determine if the PID
could control the movement of the wing in a satisfactory manner, while the
motor was tilted.
Figure 47-(a) shows a photo of the one wing experiment, while the motor
keeps the wing at a 0◦angle. The thrust vectoring mechanism is deactivated
at this point. In ﬁg. 47-(b) however, the mechanism is activated and tilts the
motor at an angle of φ = 30◦. When the motor tilts, thrust is reduced in the
vertical axis according to equation 21. As a result, the wing’s angle decreases
and the PID forces the motors to increase thrust, in order to account for the
thrust reduction in the vertical direction.
During the experiment, the roll angle and motor throttle values were
recorded every 15 milliseconds and the resulting error and thrust curves are
shown in ﬁgure 48. For the duration of the experiment, the thrust vectoring
mechanism was activated and data measurement was initiated when the wing
68
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:71==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
Figure 47: The thrust vectoring mechanism deactivated (a) and activated (b).
was stable at 0◦. As ﬁg. 48 clearly illustrates, noise was introduced to the
angle of the wing, by dislocating it three times, each time by a larger angle.
Figure 48: Roll error and thrust curves for the 1-wing experiment
69
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:72==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
The roll error curve, shows 3 discrete time intervals where error oscillates
by a large amount. Those are the times at which noise was introduced to the
system. It should be noted that the motor can only produce thrust in the
positive Z direction, thus it can react only against movements in the negative
Z direction. This is the reason why the oscillations persist for approximately
1 seconds each. When the error becomes negative, the motor can resist the
corresponding movement by increasing in thrust. However, when it is positive
the motor decreases the thrust output, but relies on gravity to re-position
the wing.
Given the above, the PID algorithm behaves in the expected manner, by
reacting to noise and re-positioning the wing, while the motor is tilted at
30◦. At this point, the drone could be assembled with all four of the motors,
having motor 1 employ the thrust vectoring mechanism.
9.6
Complete drone testing
Once the system was fully assembled and functioning, test ﬂights were
performed to assess and calibrate the drone. During this process, the micro-
controller had a small part of its memory reserved for records of the calculated
roll error, which corresponds to the axis of motor 1 (the thrust vectoring mo-
tor).
The ﬁnal goal of this part of the experimental process, was to test the
ability of the PID controller of the drone, to keep the platform close to
0◦(roll angle), while the tilted mechanism accelerated the platform. The
throttle levels of the platform were also recorded, during the activation of
the thrust vectoring mechanism.
The platform was expected to accelerate towards the thrust vectoring
motor, while at the same time decreasing in altitude, as the forces on the
Z direction were decreased, due to the tilting of the motor. The latter was
proven in practice, as moving in all other directions with the standard tilt-
and-turn method, kept the drone in the same altitude during ﬂight. However,
when the thrust vectoring mechanism was activated, the drone accelerated
towards the expected direction, while keeping an overall horizontal position
of its main body.
10 consecutive test were performed and the roll error of the platform was
recorded, once the drone was able to ﬂy in a controlled manner. During all of
these tests, the recorded data concerned movements executed with only the
thrust vectoring mechanism. Data was recorded only when the mechanism
was activated, therefore the roll error had a diﬀerent starting value when the
70
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:73==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
mechanism was deactivated and re-activated. Figure 49 illustrates a data set
taken from one of the experiments.
Figure 49: Roll error in time, during the activation of the thrust vectoring mechanism
The data shown in ﬁgure 49, was recorded during a test ﬂight that occured
in an outdoor environment at a time where wind velocities were minimal, yet
present. The drone was stabilized in a horizontal position and the vectoring
mechanism was activated to accelerate the platform towards the direction
of motor 1, while slowly decreasing in altitude. The roll error curve shown
above, illustrates the ability of the platform to accelerate through thrust
vectoring, while keeping the platform in desired angle.
Figure 49 also depicts that the noise on the roll error curve, was intro-
duced in discrete and rather abrupt steps. In reality, the latter occurred as a
consequence of recording data only when the mechanism was activated. For
example at t=5, roll error abruptly changes from -2 degrees to 0 degrees. This
translates in the drone having a roll error of -2 degrees while the mechanism
is active. The mechanism was then deactivated and the drone changed into a
normal hovering state, for the duration of which no data was recorded. The
next re-activation of the mechanism, ﬁnds the roll error of the drone close to
0◦, which is kept stable while it re-accelerates horizontally.
Therefore, the system succeeded in accelerating towards the expected di-
rection, while the PID controller kept the angle errors at a minimum. Ad-
ditionally, a linear ﬁt was applied on the error curve, to illustrate how the
eﬀect of altitude loss or noisy ﬂight conditions (i.e. wind) is tackled by the
71
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:74==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
PID controller. During the activation of the mechanism, the platform be-
gins to decrease in altitude, while there is a simultaneous acceleration of the
drone towards motor 1. In all of the diﬀerent cases where the mechanism
was activated, error suppression by the PID controller kept the system’s roll
angle close to the desired value of 0◦.
However, one of the drawbacks of employing the thrust vectoring mecha-
nism in only one of the motors, can also be seen through the roll error curve.
Even though the system succeeds in keeping the roll angle close to the de-
sired one, it seems to be unable to correct the error when it falls between
-2 and 2 degrees. The latter is controlled by the integral term of the PID
algorithm, which is responsible for small angle corrections. One of the possi-
ble explanations, is that when the thrust vectoring mechanism is activated,
the throttle levels of the motor do not provide with the same forces on the
Z axis. Therefore, when the integral term attempts to correct these small
errors, it fails to do so as the correction is now applied in both the Z and Y
direction, Y being the axis on which the drone accelerates. As a consequence
the correction is smeared out or has little eﬀect, however the new roll angle
at the mechanism’s reactivation, is once again kept close to desired value.
In order to verify that the thrust vectoring mechanism was behaving ac-
cording to theory, the acceleration of the platform due to the tilting of motor
1 was calculated. This was done by measuring the time and covered distance
in all 10 of the experiments, every time the mechanism was activated and the
motor was tilted by 10 ◦in a clockwise direction. To calculate acceleration,
the total mass of the drone had to be determined, which proved to be ﬁxed
at 650 grams.
The motors have a maximum thrust output of 405 grams each, which must
also be taken into account. During the experiment the motors kept a throttle
level of approximately 42% (a PWM pulse at 1420 ms), thus producing a ver-
tical net thrust force that slightly surpassed the drone’s weight, at 680 grams.
This diﬀerence can be attributed in asymmetries on the drone’s dimensions,
the center of mass and/or the motor positions on the drone’s body. When
tilted by φ = 10◦(for a ﬁxed θ = 0◦), equation 23 suggests that thrust in
the Y direction must be 0.171 times the single motor’s thrust output. This
value is roughly 0.29 N , which is the only force acting on the drone in the
Y direction.
Consequently, the expected acceleration of the drone in theory, when
thrust vectoring is activated on motor 1 at φ = 10◦, can be calculated as
0.45 m/s2. This value falls very close to the averaged acceleration of the
drone, as measured in practice for 10 similar instances and proved to be 0.56
m/s2. The diﬀerence can be attributed to a number of possible reasons, in-
cluding non-linearity of the motor’s throttle levels, windy ﬂight conditions or
72
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:75==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
sporadic angle corrections implemented by the PID controller, which directly
relate to the motor throttle levels.
On the other hand, ﬁgure 50 shows the throttle levels of motor 1 before
and after the activation of the mechanism. During this part of the experiment
larger propellers were used, which explains why hovering now occurs for lower
throttle levels on each motor (32.4%). Additionally, the angle φ of the thrust
vectoring mechanism was increased to 20◦.
For the ﬁrst 7 seconds of the experiment, the drone hovers and motor 1
is throttled at an average of 32.4%. During the next seconds, the tilting
mechanism is activated and thrust in the vertical direction is reduced. Con-
sequently the drone tilts towards motor 1 and the PID controller increases
the motor’s thrust at 34.4% to correct the error.
Figure 50: Throttle levels of motor 1, before (0-7 sec) and after the mechanism is activated
(7-11 sec) at 20◦
Using equation 21 once again, suggests that activating the mechanism
at 20◦would theoretically decrease thrust on the Z axis of the motor by
6%, or the vertical net thrust forces of the drone by 1.5%. However, the PID
controller increases thrust by 2% on motor 1, at 34.4% of maximum throttle,
which in turn increases the vertical component of motor 1. At the same time,
thrust on motor 3 is decreased by the same amount to correct the roll error,
which further reduces the vertical components on the platform.
The PID controller does not take into account the overall vertical forces
on the platform, it only corrects its angles. Therefore, the above adjustments
do not re-balance the forces on the Z axis, but changes the trade-oﬀbetween
73
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:76==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
throttle levels of motors 1 and 3, until the roll angle is corrected. Therefore,
the Z thrust component of the drone remains reduced, which can explain why
altitude is slowly decreased when the mechanism is activated.
In conclusion, the thrust vectoring mechanism was successfully employed
in the quad-copter designed for this drone and the resulting ﬂight behavior
seems to approach the one predicted in theory. The drone hovers and accel-
erates towards motor 1 in a horizontal position, while losing altitude due to
the reduced forces on the Z axis, when the mechanism is activated.
74
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:77==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
10
Results and conclusions
An airborne platform with the ability of ﬂying over the surface of Mars
has been developed, which relies on 4 hypergolic rocket thrusters to deliver
thrust. Furthermore, it is equipped with the necessary scientiﬁc equipment
to perform scientiﬁc measurements in ﬂight, namely magnetic ﬁeld measure-
ments, using the vector ﬁeld magnetometer designed at DTU.
The quad-thruster platform was geometrically designed as a standard
quad-copter drone, with the platform’s weight distributed evenly across the
body of the platform. Six degrees of freedom are available, however thrust
vectoring is employed to allow for acceleration across the surface of Mars,
without tilting the body of the platform and therefore, the propellant tanks.
Instead, the rocket nozzles are tilted to provide with the necessary accelera-
tion forces, while keeping the platform in a horizontal position.
Prior to the platform’s design, diﬀerent platforms, sensors and thrusting
methods were researched on and evaluated.
Furthermore, the rocket de-
sign equations and calculations were presented, along with the corresponding
calculations. The platform’s physics, dynamics and kinematics have been
analyzed and an example of a ﬂight scenario using thrust vectoring was de-
picted, resulting in a steady-state platform velocity of 250 km/h for a covered
distance of 55.6 km. The covered distance can be extended signiﬁcantly, by
employing larger in-ﬂight velocities or by increasing the propellant amount on
the platform. Therefore the original requirement of the scanned area (3.9x8.6
m2) can be satisﬁed, by swiping the given area through diﬀerent paths and
maneuvers, according to the data grid that needs to be created.
In the experimental part of this project, a custom made quad-copter drone
implementing thrust vectoring on one of the motors, was designed and con-
structed. The drone performed numerous test ﬂights and proved to match the
underlying theory, by accelerating in a given direction while keeping the body
of the system in a horizontal position. Through the experimental process,
thrust vectoring control proved to be applicable to a quad-copter system,
through the usage of appropriate control algorithms. Consequently, a PID
controller was research on, presented and implemented on the quad-copter.
This experimental process served as proof of concept for the propositions
made in this report, namely the concept of accelerating without tilting the
platform’s body, by employing thrust vectoring on each thruster’s nozzles.
Furthermore, the platform can deliver high amounts of thrust, making it
ideal for carrying heavier equipment across large distances, with the proper
scaling and modiﬁcations.
The philosophy behind the platform, has the
potential of aiding future human colonization in foreign planets, were the
75
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:78==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
atmosphere is thinner than the one on Earth. The platform can be used for
diﬀerent engineering and scientiﬁc tasks, to provide with airborne solutions
other thrusting means -such as standard propellers- cannot deliver.
Given the design parameters and equations for the four-engine platform
depicted in this report, future improvements may concern the capabilities of
the platform to enter an orbit, perform the required task and return on the
surface in a controlled manner. The high thrust yield of the platform, as well
as the in-ﬂight control capabilities it provides with, may tackle the issues
present day rockets face in their attempt to safely land back to the surface,
hence making them re-usable. The platform can provide with precise control
over the desired movements and maneuvers, an element of vital importance
to re-landing a spacecraft, which most present day rockets do not possess.
In conclusion, the requirements set for the design of this mission are met,
while providing with increased capabilities in terms of control and stability.
Future improvements for this platform, may include re-scaling and equipping
the platform, with the necessary payload to perform diﬀerent engineering and
scientiﬁc tasks in ﬂight.
76
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:79==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
11
References
[1] Global Distribution of Crustal Magnetization Discovered by the Mars
Global Surveyor MAG/ER Experiment BY M. H. ACU˜NA, J. E. P.
CONNERNEY, N. F., NESS, R. P. LIN, D. MITCHELL, C. W.
CARLSON, J. MCFADDEN, K. A. ANDERSON, H. R`EME, C.
MAZELLE, D. VIGNES, P. WASILEWSKI, P. CLOUTIER SCIENCE30
APR 1999 : 790-793.
[2] List of missions to Mars. Extracted through
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_missions_to_Mars.
[3] Spacecraft systems engineering, 4th Edition, Peter Fortescue-University
of Southampton, UK, Graham Swinerd, University of Southampton, UK,
John Stark, Queen Mary, University of London, UK.
[4] Fundamentals of Space Systems, Second Edition, Edited by Vincent L.
Pisacane, OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS, 2005.
[5] Magnetic ﬁeld theory. Extracted through http://www.space.dtu.dk/
Research/Universe_and_Solar_System/magnetic_field.
[6] Mars exploration. Extracted Through https://mars.nasa.gov/msl/
mission/technology/insituexploration/planetarymobility/
[7] Jet propulsion laboratory, NASA, California. Extracted through
https://mars.nasa.gov/msl
[8] Global surveyor, NASA. Extracted through https:
//mars.nasa.gov/programmissions/missions/past/globalsurveyor/
[9] Magnetic dipole information. Extracted through
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_dipole
[10] Mars exploration, SpaceX. Extracted through
http://www.spacex.com/mars
[11]Drone physics. Extracted through
https://www.wired.com/2017/05/the-physics-of-drones
[12] Propeller thrust. Extracted through
https://www.mh-aerotools.de/airfoils/propuls4.htm
[13] Langley research center. Extracted through
$https://www.nasa.gov/langley
[14] Drone physics.
$https://www.wired.com/2017/05/the-physics-of-drones/
[15] Degrees of freedom. Extracted through
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Six_degrees_of_freedom
[16] [Hashem(2004)]2004ESASP.555E..86H Hashem, A. A. 2004, 4th
International Spacecraft Propulsion Conference, 555, 86.1
[17] Cold Gas Propulsion System – An Ideal Choice for Remote Sensing
Small Satellites Assad Anis, NED University of Engineering and Technology
77
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:80==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
Pakistan
[18] Rocket physics. Extracted through
https://risacher.org/rocket/eqns.html
[19] Rocket simulator, NASA. Extracted through
https://www.grc.nasa.gov/www/k-12/airplane/thrsteq.html
[20] Choked ﬂow. Extracted through
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Choked_flow
[21] Hypergolic propellants. Extracted through
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypergolic_propellant
[22] Propellant information. Extracted through
http://www.astronautix.com/n/n2o4hydrazine.html
[23] Rocket propulsion equations. Extracted through
http://www.braeunig.us/space/index.html
[24] Proppelant information. Extracted through
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Propellant_mass_fraction
[25] Nozzle physics. Extracted through
http://aerorocket.com/Nozzle/Nozzle.html
[26] Nasa Technical Memorandum, Nasa Tm X-52394, Exploring In
Aerospace Rocketry 7, Liquid-propellant Rocket Systems By E. William
Conrad, Lewis Research Center Cleveland, Ohio,1967.
[27] Gimbaled thrust information. Extracted through https://
spaceflightsystems.grc.nasa.gov/education/rocket/gimbaled.html
[28] Thrust vectoring. Extracted through
www.zmescience.com/space/rockets-101-gimbaled-thrust/
[29] Nemati, Alireza, Kumar, Manish. (2014). Modeling and control of a
single axis tilting quadcopter. Proceedings of the American Control
Conference. 3077-3082. 10.1109/ACC.2014.6859328.
[30] Lithium Polymer batteries. Extracted through
https://rogershobbycenter.com/lipoguide./
[31] PID schematic, Arturo Urquizo. Extracted through
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PID.svg, CC BY-SA 30,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=17633925
[32] Magnetometer applications. Extracted through
https://www.elprocus.com/magnetometers-types-applications/
[33] Bulsara, Adi & Kho, Andy & Palacios, Antonio & Longhini, Patrick &
Acebron, Juan & Aglio, Salvatore & Ando, Bruno. (2004). Self-Induced
Oscillations in Electronically-Coupled Fluxgate Magnetometers. 742.
10.10631.1846460.
[34] Vector magnetometers. Extracted through https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spacecraft_magnetometer#Vector_sensors
78
Athanasios Belantonas
==PAGE:81==
DTU-National Space Institute
An airborne platform for m.f. observations on Mars
[35] By A. Roux and O. LeContel, CETP - NASA - THEMIS Mission,
Public Domain, Extracted through
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=4407207
[36] Primdahl, F., Merayo, J. M. G., Brauer, P., & Risbo, T. (2003).
Design, calibration and testing of precise magnetometers. In Proceedings of
IEEE Sensors, 2003. (Vol. 1). IEEE. DOI: 10.1109ICSENS.2003.1278981
[37] Jose M. G. Merayo, 3rd Swarm Science meeting -The Swarm Vector
Field Magnetometer (VFM) instrument commissioning & performance
assessment
[38] Small Magnetic Sensors for Space Applications, Marina D´ıaz-Michelena
Sensors2009, 9(4), 2271 −2288; doi : 10.3390/s90402271
79
Athanasios Belantonas
