==PAGE:1==
Design of Steel Grid Shell Structure
Master’s Thesis, July 2018
Lasse Bøgel Jensen
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Lasse Bøgel Jensen
Design of Steel Grid Shell Structure
Master’s Thesis, July 2018
Supervisor
Henrik Almegaard, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2018
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Design of Steel Grid Shell Structure
This report was prepared by:
Lasse Bøgel Jensen
lasse.b.jensen@gmail.com
Supervisor:
Henrik Almegaard, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
DTU Civil Engineering
Architectural Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period:
January 2018 - July 2018
ECTS:
30
Education:
MSc
Field:
Architectural Engineering
Class:
No confidentiality
Remarks:
This master’s thesis is submitted as partial fulfilment of the re-
quirements for graduation in the above education at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark.
Disclaimer:
This master’s thesis contains Grasshopper scripts which are
presented as is and without warranties. Every effort has been
made to ensure the correctness of the computations, however,
the use of any script and/or component presented in this thesis
is entirely at own risk.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as a partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree
of Master of Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark.
The project is credited to 30 ECTS points.
The subject of the project was suggested by the supervisor, however, the final
theme was made during the process in collaboration between the author and Jonas
Hoffmann Jeppesen who is Chief Divisional Engineer at Per Aarsleff A/S and thus
is overall responsible for the construction of the project in question.
I would like to thank my supervisor Henrik Almegaard for his excellent advise
and supervision during this process.
Also a big thank you to Jonas Hoffmann
Jeppesen of Aarsleff for providing valuable information making this master’s thesis
possible. Furthermore I would also like to thank Teddy Kristensen and Michael
Stappert of Glassolutions A/S and also Clemens Preisinger, Daniel Piker and Jon
Mirtschin for helping out with software and scripting issues. Finally I would like to
thank Line for support and proof reading.
Kgs. Lyngby July 2nd 2018
Lasse Bøgel Jensen (s123105)
i
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
This master’s thesis concerns a new building which is to be constructed at the Nat-
ural History Museum of Denmark in Copenhagen. The building is to be constructed
as a steel grid shell by contractor Per Aarsleff A/S. The purpose of this thesis is
to investigate the possibilities and potentials in optimisation of this grid shell. The
optimisation is done in regards to the material usage and by having a critical look
at the builder’s requirements. The purpose of the optimisation is to reduce the cost
of the building. In order to do a optimisation that benefits as many stakeholders as
possible the criteria for optimisation is determined. To estimate the results of an
optimisation the steel members of the grid shell are designed using a finite element
software. The design includes applying various loads and load combinations to ob-
tain the most critical combination. The analysis shows that global displacement and
the buckling load factor are the two critical factors. The optimisation shows that it
is possible to reduce the amount of steel without making any visual change to the
structure. By differentiating cross section thickness a reduction of 37.2% is found.
The optimisation also shows that a critical approach to the builder’s requirements
can have substantial a effect on material use.
iii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Resumé
Dette kandidatspeciale omhandler en bygning, som skal bygges i forbindelse med det
nye Statens Naturhistoriske Museum i København. Entreprenøren er Per Aarsleff
A/S og bygningen skal opføres som en gitterskalkonstruktion i stål. Formålet med
dette speciale er at undersøge mulighederne og potentialerne i en optimering af
denne gitterskal. Optimeringen bliver udført i forhold til materialeforbrug og ved
at se kritisk på nogle af bygherrens krav. Målet med optimeringen er at reducere
den endelige pris for opførelsen af bygningen. For at gavne så mange interessenter
som muligt bliver det klarlagt, hvilke parametre der kan ændres og hvilke der ikke
kan. For at vurdere resultaterne af en optimering er det nødvendigt at etablere
et sammenligningsgrundlag. Derfor dimensioneres den nuværende konstruktion ved
hjælp af finite element analyse. Denne dimensionering inkluderer brugen af forskel-
lige laster og lastkombinationer for at finde det mest kritiske lasttilfælde. Analysen
viser at global flytning og lastfaktor mht. elastisk instabilitet (buckling load fac-
tor) er dimensionerende faktorer. Optimeringen viser, at det er muligt at reducere
materialeforbruget uden at gå på kompromis med den arkitektoniske vision. Ved at
differentiere stængernes tværsnitstykkelse kan der opnås en stålreduktion på 37,2%.
Optimeringen viser også, at en kritisk tilgang til bygherrens krav kan have en bety-
delig indvirkning på materialeforbruget.
v
==PAGE:12==
Table of Content
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Description of the structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Structural requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Examples of grid shells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Method
7
2.1
Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Optimisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Critical approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Finite element analysis
13
3.1
Karamba
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Supports and degrees of freedom
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Cross sections and materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Load cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.6
Load combinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Optimisation
29
4.1
Differentiating cross section thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Lower steel quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Different cross section
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Equivalent grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5
Optimisation before design freeze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6
Alternative requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
vi
==PAGE:13==
TABLE OF CONTENT
vii
5
Results and Discussion
43
6
Conclusion
47
6.1
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
Appendices
49
A Figures
51
B Interview
57
C Calculations
59
D Tables
77
Bibliography
87
List of Figures
89
List of Tables
91
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
Chapter1
Introduction
The Natural History Museum of Denmark, consisting of the Zoological Museum, the
Geological Museum and the Botanical Garden, is to be relocated to existing and new
buildings in the Botanical Gardens in Copenhagen. One of the new buildings is the
”Ocean Hall” (danish: Oceansalen) which is a grid shell structure of super-ellipsoidal
shape. The grid shell is constructed in steel and clad with glass. The building is
to be used for exhibitions and can be seen in Figure 11. One of the builder’s ideas
for an exhibition is to hang a skeleton of a blue whale from the roof in cables.
Designed by Lundgaard & Tranberg Architects and Claus Pryds the building is
to be constructed by contractor Per Aarsleff A/S (PAA). The builder, the Danish
Building and Property Agency, has requested PAA to make recommendations on
how to reduce the cost of the project including this building. The purpose of this
master’s thesis is not to deliver a final design but to give PAA a basis on how to
reduce the cost of construction.
Figure 11: The architect’s visualisations of the project (Lundgaard & Tranberg
Arkitekter 2018).
The main focus of this master’s thesis will be on how to reduce the cost of the steel.
To give an adequate response to the ambition of this thesis these four questions,
and others, will be answered:
1
==PAGE:16==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1. Which parameters of the current design could be changed?
2. What will the cross section dimensions be for the current design?
3. Can the amount of material be reduced and how?
4. Could the requirements be changed and at which consequences?
To answer Question 1 different requirements for the building is established. This
is done in chapter 2. Question 2 is treated in chapter 3 by conducting a struc-
tural analysis of the grid shell. When the criteria and basis for comparison have
been established Question 3 can be answered. This is done in chapter 4. The final
question, Question 4, is treated in section 4.6 where the builder’s and self imposed
requirements are evaluated.
In this master’s thesis the word grid is used for geometry consisting of a system of
lines whereas the word model is used for a system of beams in a finite element model.
The word beam is used for all linear steel members in the grid shell. The decimal
notation used throughout this thesis is a dot ”.”, not a comma ”,”. This also applies
for the appendices. All figures, tables and calculations are own production unless
specifically stated otherwise. Not all figures, tables and calculations are located in
the actual report but have been placed in the appendix and it is explicitly stated
when this is the case.
1.1
Description of the structure
The shape of the grid shell originates from a super-ellipsoid which is the 3D equiv-
alent to a 2D super-ellipsis. The super-ellipsoid is described mathematically by the
equation:
(∣𝑥
𝐴∣
𝑟
+ ∣𝑦
𝐵∣
𝑟
)
𝑡
𝑟
+ ∣𝑧
𝐶∣
𝑡
≤1
(1.1)
where 𝐴, 𝐵and 𝐶respectively controls the ”width”, ”depth” and ”height” of the
super-ellipsoid and the parameters 𝑡and 𝑟controls the flattening at the tips and the
equator of the solid. (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) describes every point that is included in Equation 1.1
thus included by or on the surface of the super-ellipsoid. A super-ellipsoid is shown
in Figure 12.
The values 𝑡= 𝑟= 2 and 𝐴= 𝐵= 𝐶is a special case of the
super-ellipsoid resulting in a sphere.
==PAGE:17==
1.2. BOUNDARY CONDITIONS
3
Figure 12: A superellipsoid created in the mathematics software Maple.
The particular shape of the Ocean Hall is given by the values 𝑡= 𝑟= 2.7 and 𝐴,
𝐵and 𝐶as the values described further on. To get the shape of Ocean Hall the
super-ellipsoid is cut by a plane two meters above the center plane. This doubly
curved surface results in an area of 2390 𝑚2 covering a ground area of 679 𝑚2
giving a volume of 11248 𝑚3. The rectangular boundary dimensions of the surface is
approximately 49.9 x 15.8 x 22.2 𝑚(width, depth, height). To transform the smooth
surface into segments the surface created from the super-ellipsoid is discretised into
triangular faces. This has been done by the architect and has resulted in a mesh
consisting of 1898 faces of various sizes. The mesh and the mesh edges are shown in
Figure 13 and 14 respectively. In the following sections the combined mesh edges
(lines) are referred to as Grid 0. This geometry has been supplied to the author by
PAA.
The points where the lines of the mesh edges intersect are called vertecies. The
building is to be constructed as grid shell in steel. The vertecies constitute the
nodes, the mesh edges constitutes the steel beams and the faces constitutes the
glass panels which the steel structure is to be clad with. The glass panels are to
have an overlap to hide the seal between bordering panels.
1.2
Boundary conditions
The building is to be placed in a small courtyard surrounded by buildings on all four
sides. The size of this site is about 58 𝑚x 19 𝑚and is longitudinally oriented NW-
SE. The four surrounding buildings are one, two and three storeys. As described
==PAGE:18==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 13: Mesh.
Figure 14: Face edges/Mesh edges.
above the architect have envisioned a super-ellipsoidal shape. The fact that the glass
has to overlap has some influence on how the smooth surface is approximated into
faces. Vertical lines are undesirable as an overlap of glass panels at this line would
leave an exposed seal. Furthermore the size of the individual faces are restricted due
to manufacturing limitations of the glass panels. This will be described in section 2.1.
The grid shell is supported by a concrete beam following the naked edge of the mesh.
The concrete beam changes to a concrete walls in the far ends of the building. The
concrete parts acts as a ring beam (Arbejds- og bygningsdelsbeskrivelse 2018). The
concrete part will not be treated in this thesis.
1.3
Structural requirements
To show that the building is structurally sound, demands regarding the serviceability
limit state (SLS) and the ultimate limit state (ULS) will have to be met. All stresses
in elements have to be lower than the yield stress of the steel material and the
resistance of elements must be higher than the effect applied on them. The local
beam displacement must be lower than 𝐿/300 where 𝐿is the length of the individual
beam (DS/EN 1993-1-1 DK NA:2010 2010). Besides these demands Arbejds- og
bygningsdelsbeskrivelse (2018) states that the maximum global displacement must
be less than 40 mm. To ensure that the system does not buckle a requirement of a
minimum buckling load factor of 5 is introduced. The reason for choosing this value
will be substantiated in section 3.4: Buckling.
==PAGE:19==
1.4. EXAMPLES OF GRID SHELLS
5
1.4
Examples of grid shells
Grid shell structures have been around since the late 1800 so they are not new in the
architectural, engineering and construction (AEC) industry (Wikipedia: Vladimir
Shukhov 2018).
Nonetheless they the have become increasingly popular among
architects and designers during the last decades perhaps due to the development in
digital tools for designing. The following section gives a short description of some
of the more known and unknown steel grid shells in recent past.
Hippo House, Berlin
Constructed in 1996 the Hippo House, Figure 15, in Berlin Zoo houses the zoo’s
hippopotamus’. The grid shell consists of two spherical domes ”fused” together with
the bottom part cut off by a circle. The principle of translational surfaces has been
used to create quadrangular planar faces (Pottmann et al., 2007) which covers a
span 29 𝑚(SBP: Hippo House 1996). The structure was engineered by German
Schlaich Bergermann Partner. The beams used are 60 x 40 𝑚𝑚and diagonal steel
cables are used to obtain the structural characteristic of a shell.
(a) Photo of Hippo House (SBP: Hippo
House 1996).
(b) Plan drawing of the Hippo House (Hippo
House 2009).
Figure 15: Hippo House.
British Museum, London
A well known example of a grid shell is the roof of the courtyard of the British
Museum in London. Completed in 2001 and designed by Foster + Partners the
grid shell roof covers an area of 6700 𝑚2. The structural engineering was done by
Buro Happold and the triangular grid is constructed by steel members welded to
node pieces. To create this geometry a method called mesh relaxation was used
(Williams, 2001).
==PAGE:20==
6
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 16: The Great Court at the British Museum (British Museum 2000).
Chadstone Shopping center, Melbourne
Serving as a roof for the Chadstone Shopping Center in Melbourne this complex
freeform grid shell roof was constructed in 2016. The roof is designed by RTKL and
consists of almost 2700 planar trapezoidal glass panels of which 95% are unique. The
structural design was done by Atelier One (UK) and German façade engineer Seele.
This structure has about 2810 nodes and 5200 beam elements (Seele: Chadstone
Shopping Center 2016).
Figure 17: The roof of Chadstone Shopping Center (Seele: Chadstone Shopping
Center 2016).
==PAGE:21==
Chapter2
Method
The method for making reductions is divided into three steps. First of all, it is
needed to determine which parameters of the building can be altered and which
limitations the different elements has. When these criteria have been established
an optimisation can take place avoiding undesirable changes. Then an optimisation
is carried out in regard to the material used. This can be done in various ways.
The final method for optimisation is for the contractor to have a more critical
approach in regard to the builder’s requirements. Some requirements might have
severe consequences on cost compared to the actual benefit of the requirement.
These three steps are described in this section.
2.1
Criteria
To determine how to make cost reductions it is important to know where to make
them. Changes can not be implemented every where in the structure as not all
parameters of the structure can be altered. To establish this knowledge an interview
with a glass manufacturer has been conducted. Regarding the architects vision the
points in this section are assumptions.
Glas manufacturer
The findings from this interview is based on structures in general and not this specific
building. As this interview was conducted with a specific glass manufacturer it is
uncertain if other manufacturers has other requirements. This glass manufacturer
was at the time of writing not involved in the project. The glass is an important
part of this project so the aim of the interview was to determine how to facilitate
7
==PAGE:22==
8
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
savings on the production of the glass and what limitations the glass will have. The
key point from the interview is described below.
Organisation Glassolutions A/S (A Saint-Gobain subsidiary)
Persons Sales Manager Teddy Kristensen & Market Manager Michael Stappert
Date
May 2nd 2018
Glass panels are cut out of larger pieces of glass (sheets) with certain standard
dimensions.
Glass sheets can be produced wider in certain facilities but this is
costly compared to the standard sized sheets. This size sets some limitations on
the size of the triangular glass panels of the structure. The current structure has
a maximum of four similar pieces of glass as the building is symmetrical about the
x and y axis respectively. To achieve a series effect in the production of the glass
panels there will have to be at least 100 identical panels and the production of all
the glass should be done at same time to fit as many panels onto the glass sheets.
The length of the edge that needs to be cut has no influence on the price. A full
summery of the interview can be found in Appendix B. As desctibed above, the key
points were:
• maximum sheet size: 3.21 𝑚x 6 𝑚
• maximum sheet size: 2.65 𝑚x 5 𝑚(if produced in Denmark)
• series effect at 100+ identical pieces
• longer edge length not more expensive to cut than shorter
• one production
Architect
The architect’s vision with the building is sparsely described. Only the short quote
below have been found. Thus the architect’s criteria for optimisation is based on
assumptions.
The whale-hall (now Ocean Hall) towers over the smaller buildings, and
is visible from a distance as the new museums visual attraction and
landmark. (Lundgaard & Tranberg Arkitekter 2018).
As the building is very unique, one could imagine that the willingness of the architect
to make changes would be limited. The shape of the structure is derived from a
specific mathematical term which leads one to think that the shape should not
be altered as the architect has chosen this specific shape for a reason. Also the
==PAGE:23==
2.2. OPTIMISATION
9
overlapping glass panels are a distinct feature which is unique to this building. To
have the overlapping glass panels, the grid needs to have vertical lines as described
earlier. Not many mesh types have this property while having triangular panels.
To get as much daylight into the building the steel profiles should be as slender as
possible. For this reason a rectangular hollow section (RHS) should be used instead
of a circular (CHS) or a square hollow section (SHS). As the inner volume of the
building is to be used for exhibition this area should not be intersected by beams.
From these assumptions the points that from an architectural point of view could
be important could be:
• to keep the shape as a super-ellipsoid
• to keep mesh/grid as is
• to keep glass overlap
• to use rectangular cross sections
• not to obstruct the inner volume
2.2
Optimisation
On the basis of the previous section the investigation of how to reduce the cost will
be limited to how to reduce the amount of steel used in the construction. At the
current state the design is locked and the potential for optimisation is narrow. But
a potential reduction of material could be found within:
• differentiating cross section thickness
• lower steel quality
• smaller cross section size (height, width)
These points are on different levels in regards to the visual appearance of the change.
Differentiating cross section thickness and lower steel quality will have no visual
change in appearance whereas as smaller cross sections would. This is mentioned
due to the assumptions in the above section. How these alternatives could affect
the material usage is described below.
With a cross section type selected different, cross section sizes could be inves-
tigated to check for any material optimisation. The cross section size affects both
the SLS and the ULS and a finite element analysis could show effects of alternative
sizes. The cross section thickness could have a considerable effect on the material
usage if the thickness varied throughout the structure. As the utilisation of elements
vary so could the cross section thickness to get more utilised cross sections. A lower
==PAGE:24==
10
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
steel quality affects the ULS in regards to resistance. If the effect on the element
is within limits a lower steel quality could be effective on reducing the price of the
steel assuming that a lower steel quality is less costly.
Optimisation before design freeze
If optimisation of the structure was considered before design freeze there would be
more possibilities for reducing cost. Some of these potentials could be:
• size of grid
• shape of the structure
How these alternatives could affect the material usage is described below.
The current shape of the structure has an area on the longitudinal sides of the
building where the surface curvature is small. A wind load acting on this part is
assumed to result in relatively large displacements and moments in the affected ele-
ments as the individual element would be affected more by moment than by normal
force. If the shape of the structure could be altered to increase the curvature, the
elements in this area could possibly be longer or have smaller cross section dimen-
sions. The mesh size of the current grid could be increased or decreased to
evaluate if this would have an effect on the material usage.
2.3
Critical approach
Another way of optimising in regards to reducing cost could be to have a critical look
at the builder’s requirements. Some of these requirements could have been made
without knowing the exact consequences of the requirement.
The requirements
described in the following are based on Arbejds- og bygningsdelsbeskrivelse (2018).
Node load
According to Arbejds- og bygningsdelsbeskrivelse (2018) the builder has the require-
ment that the grid shell should be able to carry a live load of 10 𝑘𝑁in each node.
With 978 nodes in the grid shell this would amount to roughly 1000 ton in total.
And this is besides the self weight of the structure. This seems as an excessive
requirement remembering that the building is to be used as a exhibition hall. For
==PAGE:25==
2.3. CRITICAL APPROACH
11
reference the suspended blue whale skeleton of the Natural History Museum in Lon-
don weighs 5 ton (Daily Mail 2017). It is assumed that the stiffness of the structure
will have to be high to comply with the requirement of 10 𝑘𝑁in each node. More
stiffness means larger, thicker beams which means more steel and an increased cost.
Therefore, a reduction of the nodal live load requirement could mean a reduction of
cost.
Wind load
The building specification states that for dimensioning purposes wind load should
act with peak velocity pressure from ground to the top of the structure not taking
the surrounding buildings into account. The surrounding buildings can be seen in
Figure 21. This assumption eases calculations but could in reality be the subject of
over dimensioning as the building is, in fact, surrounded by buildings which could
have an effect on the peak velocity pressure. To withstand large wind loads due to
a high peak velocity pressure the grid shell might need more stiffness than if the
wind load was less. Hence a different approach for calculating wind load could lead
to a reduction of cost.
Figure 21: A transverse section of the grid shell showing the surrounding
buildings. Drawing provided by PAA.
Displacement
The builder, or the builder’s advisor, requires that the structure should be designed
in such a way that the glass suppliers demands in regards to displacements and
angular rotations are met. Furthermore, the builder requires a maximum global
displacement of 40 𝑚𝑚from the worst characteristic wind load. It is not specified
from where this latter requirement originates. To put this demand in perspective
==PAGE:26==
12
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
the shortest span of the grid shell is used as an example. With a width/span of 15
𝑚a displacement requirement for a beam, 𝑑<
𝐿
200, is applied (DS/EN 1993-1-1
DK NA:2010 2010). The situation is described in Figure 22.
𝐿= 15 𝑚
Figure 22: Simplification of a transverse section of the grid shell.
With this requirement resulting in:
𝑑< 𝐿
200 = 15000 𝑚𝑚
200
= 75 𝑚𝑚
(2.1)
it is almost twice the requirement of this specific structure. This little exercise is
simply to show that the stated requirement of 40 𝑚𝑚might be excessive and that
a less strict requirement might be sufficient.
As for the two other requirements
described above the same applies for this one: Less displacement requires more
stiffness and more stiffness could require more material and thereby a higher cost.
By using a critical approach like the points described above along with the points
from section 2.1 and 2.2 the contractor could be guided to reduce the cost of the
structure while respecting the architectural vision of the building. These findings
could also help guide architects, engineers and contractors on similar buildings in
the future.
Before a reduction of materials can be calculated the current state needs to be deter-
mined. This is done by dimensioning the structure. To carry out and evaluate these
alternatives a parametric 3D model is set up using the CAD software Rhinoceros.
This process is described in the following chapter.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter3
Finite element analysis
To compare parameters of different alternatives a structural analysis of Grid 0 will
have to be performed. How this analysis is carried out and which loads, cross sec-
tions, supports etc.
are used is described in this chapter.
The software chosen
is CAD software Rhinoceros (Version 5, SR6) with the plugin Grasshopper (Build
0.9.0076). Grasshopper is a visual programming tool which is developed for handling
complex geometry and therefore ideal for the modelling of this structure. Grasshop-
per also has a finite element analysis (FEA) plug-in called Karamba (Version 1.3.0.,
Build 180528). The validity of Karamba as a FEA software for analysis of simple
structures has been established by others e.g. Henriksen (2017) and Harksen (2016).
As this is regarded (by the author) as a complex model the results of the analysis
are not a complete design of the structure but it should give a sound indication of
how the building behaves structurally. As the output from Karamba is limited the
results should act as a guide for a complete design with a suitable FEA software.
The output is used to estimate different options to help PAA to make decisions
regarding optimisation. It should be stressed that Karamba does not deliver a final
design.
3.1
Karamba
With a suitable grid to be used for comparison, the geometry is used as input in
the parametric structural modelling software Karamba. Karamba is developed by
researcher and engineer Clemens Preisinger in collaboration with German engineer-
ing company Bollinger+Grohmann (About Karamba 2018).
Karamba does finite
element analysis and in this case a 2nd order analysis is performed. The analysis
is initially performed for Grid 0 to determine a basis for comparison. A short de-
scription of how Karamba works can be seen in Figure 31. In Figure 31 the Input is
13
==PAGE:28==
14
CHAPTER 3. FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS
geometry created/loaded in Grasshopper. The Grasshopper geometry is then trans-
formed into an analytical model with Karamba in the Pre-processor and additional
components are added such as support conditions, load cases and so on. The Pro-
cessor performs the analysis in question and the different results of the analysis can
be viewed with the various Post-processor components.
INPUT
VECTOR GEOMETRY
POINT
LINE
MESH
PRE-PROCESSOR
GEOMETRICAL TO STRUCTURAL MODEL
NODE
BEAM
SHELL
SUPPORTS
LOADS
CROSS SECTIONS
MATERIALS
...
PROCESSOR
FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS
1st ORDER ANALYSIS
2nd ORDER ANALYSIS
LARGE DEFORMATIONS
BUCKLING MODES
EIGEN MODES
NATURAL VIBRATIONS
...
POST-PROCESSOR
ANALYSIS RESULTS INTERPRETATION
FINITE ELEMENT MODEL VIEW
DISPLACEMENTS
STRESSES
ELEMENTS UTILISATION
...
Figure 31: How Karamba works (from Alberto Pugnale) (Tutorial G01.1 2016).
3.2
Supports and degrees of freedom
All nodes on the naked edge of the mesh corresponding to all nodes in the bottom
of the grid shell are converted into supports. Each support suppresses translations
in the 𝑥, 𝑦, and 𝑧direction corresponding to a degree of freedom (DOF) of zero.
Rotation is permitted. Beams that meet in a common node are rigid, meaning that
section forces are transferred between beams.
3.3
Cross sections and materials
The cross section prescribed by the Arbejds- og bygningsdelsbeskrivelse (2018) is a
RHS profile. Initially a RHS160x80x10.0 hot rolled section is selected for the model.
The prescribed steel quality is S355 J2. To apply surface loads on the steel grid
shell the faces are converted into shell elements. The shell acts only as facilitator
for distribution of the loads to the beams and does not contribute to the structural
stiffness. This is a conservative assumption as the glass in reality would contribute
to the overall stiffness. The shell is provided with the self weight of glass so that
the self weight of it can be taken into consideration. The specific weight of the glass
is set to 25 𝑘𝑁
𝑚3 and the thickness to a total of 36 𝑚𝑚based on Løsningsforslag og
beskrivelse (2017).
==PAGE:29==
3.3. CROSS SECTIONS AND MATERIALS
15
Beam axis orientation
By default local beam axes are oriented according to the global coordinate system.
This however is undesirable as loads in horizontal direction such as wind loads will
act on the weak axis of the beam. Therefore all beams are reoriented to have their
local z-axis to be perpendicular to the surface on which the grid is based. The
surface is described in section 1.1.
The Grasshopper script for this is shown in
Figure 32. The reorientation is done by dividing each line (beam) into two pieces
creating three points: Start-, mid-, and endpoint. The midpoint is selected and the
point on the surface closest to the midpoint is found. The normal vector at the
point on the surface is then used to orient the beams local z-axis.
Figure 32: Grasshopper script for reorientation of local beam axes.
Figure 33: Before reorientation.
Figure 34: After reorientation.
==PAGE:30==
16
CHAPTER 3. FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS
3.4
Analysis
As mentioned earlier the analysis carried out is a 2nd order analysis. This type of
analysis takes into account the influence of axial forces on the stiffness of the beams
(Preisinger, 2016). The requirements described in section 1.3 are incorporated in
the analysis.
Displacement
The global displacement is calculated in the FEA by solving:
𝐊𝐝= 𝐅
(3.1)
where 𝐊the global linear elastic stiffness matrix, 𝐝is the global nodal displacement
vector and 𝐅is the global nodal force vector. Karamba only outputs the global beam
displacement and not the local beam displacement which is required to be less than
𝐿
300 where 𝐿is the length of the beam.
Therefore another method to find the
local beam displacement is used. This method assumes that the largest local beam
displacement is at the middle of the beam. The idea of how to obtain the local
beam displacement can be seen in Figure 36 and found by the following method: 1)
the Beam Displacements component is used to find the global displacement at three
points, start-, mid- and endpoint of the beam. The values are given as a translation
in the x, y, and z direction respectively. The distance of the translation vector is
found with Vector Length and the global displacement of the start- and endpoint are
removed with a cull component leaving only the global beam displacement at the
middle of the beam. As this is a global displacement it will need to be subtracted
from the position of the globally translated non deflected beam (the thick dashed line
in Figure 36) to get the local displacement. 2) The midpoint of the beam subjected
to rigid body movement is found by evaluating two points (start- and endpoint) of
the globally displaced beam and getting the length of the translation vector. These
values are the values that were culled before. The average of the start- and endpoint
is found thus resulting in the midpoint of the globally translated deflected beam.
The difference between the values of the midpoint in 1) and the values from 2)
corresponds the the local beam displacement, 𝑑. The Grasshopper script for finding
the local beam deflection can be seen in Figure 35.
==PAGE:31==
3.4. ANALYSIS
17
Figure 35: Grasshopper script for finding local beam displacement.
Initial position
Displaced position
1)
1)
2)
𝑑
1)
x
y
Figure 36: Method for calculating local beam displacement, 𝑑(shown in 2D).
Buckling
Global buckling of the system is taken into account and evaluated through the
Buckling Modes component. This component outputs buckling load factors to the
corresponding buckling modes. As the first buckling mode is the critical one only
the first buckling load factor is regarded. To find the buckling load factor Buckling
Modes solves the eigenvalue problem:
det(𝐊−𝜆⋅𝐊𝐺) = 0
(3.2)
where 𝐊is the global linear elastic stiffness matrix, 𝐊𝐺is the geometric stiffness
matrix and the scalar 𝜆is the buckling load factor (Karamba Discussions 2015).
This method assumes linear material behaviour, linear geometric behaviour and
no imperfections. As this is a linear bifurcation analysis (LBA) it will produce a
==PAGE:32==
18
CHAPTER 3. FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS
non-conservative result, hence a conservative buckling load factor of minimum 5 is
chosen.
Local buckling of the beams is considered in the way that Karamba displays if any
cross sections are cross section class 4. The determination of cross section class is
done in accordance with DS/EN 1993-1-1 (Preisinger, 2016). If a cross section is
class 4 it should be evaluated if it could be subject to local buckling. With cross
sections classes 1-3 yield stress will be reached before local buckling occurs, hence
class 1-3 cross sections are not considered for local buckling only for stresses (DS/EN
1993-1-1 + AC 2007).
Stresses and utilisation
Karamba only outputs the axial stress so to evaluate stresses the utilisation ratio
for each stress resultant is used as Karamba provides this output (Preisinger, 2016).
The utilisation of beams is calculated according to Eurocode 3 by:
𝑁𝐸𝑑
𝑁𝑅𝑑
+ 𝑀𝑦,𝐸𝑑
𝑀𝑦,𝑅𝑑
+ 𝑀𝑧,𝐸𝑑
𝑀𝑧,𝑅𝑑
≤1
(3.3)
In Equation 3.3 𝑁𝐸𝑑, 𝑀𝑦,𝐸𝑑and 𝑀𝑧,𝐸𝑑are the design value of the normal force and
the design bending moment about the y- and z-axis respectively. The values 𝑁𝑅𝑑,
𝑀𝑦,𝑅𝑑and 𝑀𝑧,𝑅𝑑are the design values of the resistance depending on the cross
sectional classification and including any reduction that may be caused by shear
effects. This is a conservative approximation (DS/EN 1993-1-1 + AC 2007).
3.5
Load cases
This section contains a description of the loads on the grid shell including nature
load and live load. Self weight of the structure is not described but it is included
in the finite element analysis as well. It should be emphasised that accidental loads
and fire loads are not taken into consideration.
Live load
The building specification Arbejds- og bygningsdelsbeskrivelse (2018) provided by
PAA includes a live load consisting of a surface load due to MEP installations and
curtains which leads to a surface load of 2 𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 . The specification also describes a
point load of 10 𝑘𝑁in each node. The purpose of this load is to take into account the
possibility of hanging objects e.g. whale skeletons in cables from the grid shell. As
==PAGE:33==
3.5. LOAD CASES
19
described in section 2.3 this requirement seems excessive but none the less it is taken
into account. During the analysis these nodal loads will be moved around to find a
combination which is the most unfavourable. It is stated that the surface load and
the node load does not occur at the same time (Arbejds- og bygningsdelsbeskrivelse
2018).
Snow load
Snow load is calculated according to DS/EN 1991-1-3:2007 (2007) and DS/EN
1991-1-3 DK NA:2015 Version 2 (2015). To simplify calculations faces with an
inclination of more than 60∘are neglected. To determine, select and visualise the
slope of the faces a Grasshopper tool is developed. The tool shows the inclination
both individually and in intervals as well as numerical values. The visualisation of
the slope is shown in Figure 37 and the Grasshopper script of the tool for the slope
of individual faces is shown in Figure 38.
Figure 37: Inclination from horizontal [∘] of the faces divided individually (left)
and into intervals (right).
Figure 38: GH script of the tool for visualising the slope for individual faces.
The characteristic snow load, 𝑠[ 𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 ], is found by:
𝑠= 𝜇𝑖𝐶𝑒𝐶𝑡𝑠𝑘
(3.4)
==PAGE:34==
20
CHAPTER 3. FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS
where 𝜇𝑖is the snow load shape coefficient, 𝐶𝑒is the exposure coefficient, 𝐶𝑡is the
thermal coefficient and 𝑠𝑘[ 𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 ] is the characteristic value of snow on the ground at
the relevant site. Recommended values for 𝐶𝑒and 𝐶𝑡are 1.0 (worst case scenarios)
and 𝑠𝑘= 1.0 𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 according to DS/EN 1991-1-3 DK NA:2015 Version 2 (2015). In
regards to snow load the grid shell is calculated as a cylindrical roof. The Eurocode
along with the Danish national annex describes three different cases for snow load
distribution on cylindrical roofs. All three are taken into consideration and in both
the x and the y direction. The snow loads are applied as surface loads on the faces
in the FEA. The full calculation can be found in Appendix C. As mentioned above
the code describes three different cases for snow build up on cylindrical roofs. The
three cases are shown in Figure 39.
(a) Cases (i) and (ii) (DS/EN
1991-1-3:2007 2007).
(b) Case (iii) (DS/EN 1991-1-3 DK
NA:2015 Version 2 2015).
Figure 39: Snow load shape coefficients for cylindrical roof.
The specific snow load shape coefficient 𝜇3 and 𝜇4 are used in the calculation. The
value of 𝜇4 is not described in the code DS/EN 1991-1-3 DK NA:2015 Version 2
(2015) but in a previous version of the national annex the coefficient is called 𝜇3
and has the value 2 (DS/EN 1991-1-3 DK NA:2012 2012). Hence 𝜇4 is taken as
==PAGE:35==
3.5. LOAD CASES
21
𝜇4 = 𝜇3 = 2. To apply the loads of case (ii) and (iii) which varies in size, the surface
on which they act, being the width, 𝑙𝑠, in Figure 39a, is divided into smaller strips
and the linear load variation is turned into segmented values (Figure 310 and 311)
projected globally to the surface. These values are calculated in Appendix C. The
load for case (i) computes to 𝑠= 0.8 𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 and the results for case (ii) and case (iii)
can be found in Table 31.
A B C D E F G H I
J K L M N O P
𝜇3
2
𝜇3
𝑙𝑠
Figure 310: Snow load distribution, Case (ii).
A B C D E F G H I
J K L M N O P
𝜇4
𝜇4
2
𝑙𝑠
Figure 311: Snow load distribution, Case (iii).
Table 31: Results of snow load calculation for snow load on a cylindrical roof [𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 ].
Case
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
(ii)
0.125
0.375
0.625
0.875
0.875
0.625
0.375
0.125
(iii)
1.875
1.625
1.375
1.125
0.875
0.625
0.375
0.125
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
(ii)
0.250
0.750
1.250
1.750
1.750
1.250
0.750
0.250
(iii)
0.063
0.188
0.313
0.438
0.563
0.688
0.813
0.938
Wind load
Wind load calculations are done according to DS/EN 1991-1-4 (2007). As the shape
of the building is neither a dome or a rectangular box the pressure coefficient 𝑐𝑝𝑒
for the wind load calculations will have to be determined as a somewhat subjective
assessment. In this case, the approach used is to calculate all faces with an inclina-
tion of 80∘-90∘from horizontal as vertical walls with no inclination. The rest of the
==PAGE:36==
22
CHAPTER 3. FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS
faces (with a slope of 0∘-80∘) are calculated as vaulted roofs with rectangular base
according to DS/EN 1991-1-4 (2007). The distinction between these two parts can
be seen on Figure A1 in Appendix A. Wind from both the x and the y direction is
taken into consideration. For wind load on vaulted roofs the curved section of the
roof is divided into three parts (A,B, and C) with equal curved lengths according
to Figure 312a (DS/EN 1991-1-4 2007). The result of this division can be seen
in Figure 312b for wind in the x-direction. A larger version of this image exist in
Appendix A Figure A2. In regards to wind load on the vertical walls the parts of
the structure with an inclination of 80∘-90∘have been simplified to be a rectangular
building. An image of the division of this part, Figure A2a, can be found in Ap-
pendix A. The division of the faces when wind from the y-direction can be seen in
Figure A3.
(a) Areas for applying different wind loads
(DS/EN 1991-1-4 2007).
(b) Areas for applying different wind loads
on the model with wind from the
x-direction.
Figure 312: Wind on vaulted roof with rectangular base.
The external wind load 𝑤𝑒is calculated by:
𝑤𝑒= 𝑞𝑝(𝑧𝑒) ⋅𝑐𝑝𝑒
(3.5)
In Equation 3.5 𝑞𝑝(𝑧𝑒) is the peak velocity pressure which in Arbejds- og bygn-
ingsdelsbeskrivelse (2018) is prescribed to 𝑞𝑝(𝑧𝑒) = 0.75 𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 . The external pressure
coefficient is calculated both for rectangular walls and for vaulted roofs. The calcu-
lated wind load for the vaulted roof section can be found in Table 32. In Table 32
==PAGE:37==
3.5. LOAD CASES
23
𝐴is the upwind side, 𝐵is the middle part (spanning two lengths) and 𝐶is the
downwind side. The full calculation is in Appendix C.
Table 32: Characteristic external wind load on vaulted roof in x- and y-direction
[𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 ].
𝐴
𝐵
𝐶
X
0.34
-0.75
-0.3
Y
0.6
-0.9
-0.3
The calculated wind load for the vertical walls section can be found in Table 33. In
Table 33 𝐷is the upwind side and 𝐸is the downwind side. 𝐴, 𝐵, 𝐶are the sides
divided into different sections. The full calculation can is described in Appendix C.
Table 33: Characteristic external wind load on vertical walls in x- and y-direction
[𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 ].
𝐴
𝐵
𝐶
𝐷
𝐸
X
-0.9
-0.6
-0.375
0.525
-0.225
Y
-0.9
-0.6
-
0.585
-0.345
Internal wind pressure 𝑤𝑖is calculated by:
𝑤𝑖= 𝑞𝑝(𝑧𝑖) ⋅𝑐𝑝𝑖
(3.6)
The Arbejds- og bygningsdelsbeskrivelse (2018) states that 𝑐𝑝𝑖= 0.2 for over pressure
and −0.3 for under pressure. The characteristic internal wind load is found to be
𝑤𝑖= 0.15 𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 for over pressure and 𝑤𝑖= −0.225 𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 for under pressure. For external
wind load surrounding buildings are not taken into consideration so the wind has
full effect from the ground to the top of the building.
Result of the individual loads
The results from the individual characteristic load cases can be seen in Table 34.
From the individual load cases (self, wind, snow and live load) it is seen that the
largest displacement stems from the external wind load and the live load as a point
loads. The analysis show that the largest displacement occur on the longitudinal
side of the structure. As each load case in some cases have more than one option
(e.g. live load with a nodal load or a surface load), the option which leads to the
largest displacement on the longitudinal span is chosen. Wind from the y-direction
is the largest contributor to the displacement so, this is used as a basis for finding
the most critical load combination. Initially self weight, Wind Y and Snow (iiiY) are
==PAGE:38==
24
CHAPTER 3. FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS
chosen. The internal wind load, set to under pressure, has an unfavourable effect
on this combination so it is chosen. The last loads to choose from are the two live
loads. The surface load is assumed to act at every surface as it originations from
MEP installations. The nodal load on the other hand may vary, as described earlier,
as it is assumed that it could be moved around from time to time as the exhibition
in the building in changes. By testing different setups it can be concluded that
loading all nodes of the grid shell results in larger displacements compared to the
surface load.
Table 34: Initial load cases and their resulting global displacement.
Load case
Displacement
(Characteristic)
[𝑚𝑚]
Self weight
7.7
External wind load, x direction
8.3
External wind load, y direction
25.5
Snow load, i
1.3
Snow load, iiiX
3.8
Snow load, iiiY
3.9
Live load, point load (all)
18.0
Live load, surface load
9.8
Internal wind load, under pressure
8.1
3.6
Load combinations
With the load cases determined the following load combinations (LC) are consid-
ered for the serviceability limit state (SLS) (Jensen, 2013). In SLS the safety factor
𝛾= 1.0 is used.
Leading live load, LC1:
𝐺⋅1.0 ⋅𝐾𝐹𝐼+ 𝑄𝑘⋅𝛾⋅𝛼𝑛,1 ⋅𝐾𝐹𝐼+ 𝑆𝑘⋅𝛾⋅0.3 ⋅𝐾𝐹𝐼+ 𝑉𝑘⋅𝛾⋅0.3 ⋅𝐾𝐹𝐼
(3.7)
Leading snow load, LC2:
𝐺⋅1.0 ⋅𝐾𝐹𝐼+ 𝑄𝑘⋅𝛾⋅𝜓0,1 ⋅𝐾𝐹𝐼+ 𝑆𝑘⋅𝛾⋅𝐾𝐹𝐼+ 𝑉𝑘⋅𝛾⋅0.3 ⋅𝐾𝐹𝐼
(3.8)
Leading wind load, LC3:
𝐺⋅1.0 ⋅𝐾𝐹𝐼+ 𝑄𝑘⋅𝛾⋅𝜓0,1 ⋅𝐾𝐹𝐼+ 𝑉𝑘⋅𝛾⋅𝐾𝐹𝐼
(3.9)
Live load only, LC4:
𝐺⋅1.0 ⋅𝐾𝐹𝐼+ 𝑄𝑘⋅𝛾⋅𝛼𝑛,1 ⋅𝐾𝐹𝐼
(3.10)
==PAGE:39==
3.6. LOAD COMBINATIONS
25
Leading self weight, LC5:
𝐺⋅1.2 ⋅𝐾𝐹𝐼
(3.11)
In the load combinations above, 𝐺is the self weight, 𝑄𝑘is the characteristic live
load, 𝑆𝑘is the characteristic snow load, and 𝑉𝑘is the characteristic wind load.
The factors 𝛼𝑛,1 and 𝜓0,1 are reduction factors. The 𝐾𝐹𝐼factor is a safety factor
in regards to the consequence class. The consequence class is chosen to be CC3
as this structure can be considered as ”a building with large spans ...
often is
occupied by many people e.g. for concerts, sports, theatre or exhibition” (DS/EN
1990 DK NA:2013 2013). This results in 𝐾𝐹𝐼= 1.1. As it is a one storey building
𝛼𝑛,1 = 1 and a conservative choice of reductions meaning 𝜓0,1 = 1 (Arbejds- og
bygningsdelsbeskrivelse 2018).
Results of load combinations in SLS
While computing the results of the load combinations different choices and ap-
proaches have been made in regards to the type and location of live loads, the snow
load cases, and the wind direction.
There are numerous ways of combining the
loads. Every effort have been made to find to most critical load combination but
this does not rule out that an even more critical load combination exists. For all
five load combinations in SLS it applies that all stresses are within limits. Also the
global displacement is within limits. The buckling load factor is also evaluated even
though it is a ULS requirement. The analysis show that in SLS the buckling load
factor is below the ULS requirement of minimum 5. Hence a ULS analysis should
be conducted as the dimensioning property is within this state. The results of load
combinations that have been analysed is shown in Table 35.
==PAGE:40==
26
CHAPTER 3. FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS
Table 35: The results of load combinations (RHS160x80x10).
Displacement
Buckling factor
Live load
Snow load
Wind load
[𝑚𝑚]
[-]
location
Case
direction
LC1
28.5
6.8
all
iii
Y
28.0
8.7
top
iii
Y
11.0
9.3
bottom
iii
Y
LC2
28.5
8.5
top
iii
Y
29.1
6.7
all
iii
Y
28.4
6.8
all
ii
Y
LC3
33.5
4.7
all
-
Y
32.7
5.5
top
-
Y
27.0
5.4
bottom
-
Y
LC4
8.7
12.6
bottom
-
-
25.6
11.0
top
-
-
26.1
8.1
all
-
-
LC5
8.8
19.0
-
-
-
As shown in Table 35, the lowest buckling load factor and the largest displacement
both occurs in LC3 when all nodes are applied a nodal load of 10 𝑘𝑁. This combi-
nation will be examined further and will be used as the most critical situation. It
is thereby assumed that with a larger cross section this situation would still be the
most critical. For this model to comply with the SLS requirement the cross section
will have to be increased from a RHS160x80x10 to a RHS160x80x12 which yields a
buckling load factor of 5.3 and a global displacement of 29.1 𝑚𝑚for LC3.
ULS analysis
As the dimensioning factor (for now) is the buckling load factor a ULS analysis is
carried out to estimate the size of the cross section that should be used. In the
ULS analysis the safety factor 𝛾is set to 𝛾= 1.5. Otherwise the load combinations
are the same as stated in Equation 3.7, 3.8, 3.9, 3.10, and 3.11. Starting with LC3
this results in a buckling load factor of 3.7. Hence the cross section will have to be
increased further to comply with ULS requirements. To find an appropriate cross
section different cross sections are analysed with LC3. The results can be found in
Table 36.
==PAGE:41==
3.6. LOAD COMBINATIONS
27
Table 36: Results of LC3 in ULS with different cross sections. *contains cross
section class 4.
Cross section
Displacement
Buckling factor
Live load
Snow load
Wind load
[𝑚𝑚]
[-]
location
Case
direction
RHS160x80x12
40.7
3.7
all
-
Y
RHS160x80x12.5
39.4
3.8
all
-
Y
RHS180x100x4*
86.9
2.2
all
-
Y
RHS180x100x6
58.7
3.2
all
-
Y
RHS180x100x8
45.2
4.1
all
-
Y
RHS180x100x10
37.4
4.8
all
-
Y
RHS180x100x12
32.3
5.5
all
-
Y
With a RHS180x100x12 the buckling load factor is more than 5. To ensure that
the remaining load combinations are still within limits, the most critical in each
combination of the SLS analysis is tested with the ULS loads with the new stiffer
cross section. The most critical values are the ones with the lowest buckling load
factor. The analysis shows that LC3 is indeed the most critical situation with this
cross section and these load combinations in regards to the buckling load factor.
The complete results are in Table D5 in Appendix D.
Results of ULS analysis
The load combination that resulted in the lowest buckling load factor, LC3, is used
throughout the different analysis’ for the rest of this master’s thesis. It is thereby
assumed that the most critical load combination for this grid shell is the most critical
for other types of grids with the same overall shape.
The finite element analysis of Grid 0 shows that the buckling load factor require-
ment of minimum 5 is the dimensioning factor. All stresses are within limits as well
as local beam displacement and global displacements. Local buckling is not an issue
as all cross sections are either cross section class 1, 2 or 3 with a RHS180x100x12.
With this cross section the buckling load factor is 5.5 and the amount of steel used
is 226573 𝑘𝑔. These results are used as a basis for comparison for the rest of this
master’s thesis and will be referred to as the reference model.
==PAGE:42==
==PAGE:43==
Chapter4
Optimisation
As described in chapter 2 some of the potentials for material reduction could be
found by:
• differentiating cross section thickness
• lower steel quality
• smaller cross section size (height, width)
The main focus on how to reduce cost will be put on the points described above. The
method and results for optimising using these points is described in this chapter.
4.1
Differentiating cross section thickness
The reference model described in section 3.6 showed that to comply with require-
ments the cross section used should be a RHS180x100x12. As this cross section is
used throughout the whole structure some parts have very low utilisation. A way of
reducing material and thereby cost could be to differentiate cross section thickness
to get a larger utilisation in areas of low utilisation.
Optimisation by beam length
A way to differentiate cross sections could be by beam length.
The beams are
divided into three groups in regards to their length, 𝐿. Then three different cross
section thicknesses are assigned to each group.
The boundaries of these groups
are the variables as they are changed in an iterative process, to reach the lowest
possible weight of steel given the selected cross sections. The different cross section
thicknesses are parameters as they are fixed while the boundaries of the beam lengths
change. The longest beam of the grid shell is 2.897 𝑚and the shortest is 0.329 𝑚.
29
==PAGE:44==
30
CHAPTER 4. OPTIMISATION
The beams in the bottom of the grid shell, the ones that connect to the underlying
concrete structure, are all given the same cross section. Through an iterative process
where looking at the buckling load factor and the global displacement and varying
the beam length intervals, one optimum division is found by:
• beams with 𝐿< 0.78 𝑚are assigned RHS180x100x5
• beams with 0.78 𝑚≤𝐿≤2.44 𝑚are assigned RHS180x100x6
• beams with 𝐿> 2.44 𝑚are assigned RHS180x100x12.5
By optimum is meant that with these variables and parameters the buckling load
factor is above 5 in ULS and that global displacement is less than 40 𝑚𝑚in SLS.
All stresses are within limits. This combination of cross section thicksnesses yields a
steel reduction of 40.5% compared to the reference model. The distribution of cross
sections is shown in Figure 41. No cross sections are cross section class four so local
buckling is not an issue. To reach this result a number of iterations have been made
manually and they are listed in Table D1 in Appendix D. It is likely that other/more
divisions of the beam length with different cross sections assigned will lead to an even
more efficient structure and thereby a larger steel reduction. Hence the emphasis on
one above. Other alternatives are not explored further. This combination of cross
section still leaves beams with low utilisation as the optimisation is done in regards
to buckling load factor and displacement and not in regards to utilisation.
Figure 41: Distribution of cross sections: RHS180x100x12.5, RHS180x100x6 and
RHS180x100x5.
This optimisation is done in regards to the loads from the critical load combina-
tion, LC3. After the optimisation the other load combinations are applied to ensure
==PAGE:45==
4.1. DIFFERENTIATING CROSS SECTION THICKNESS
31
structural requirements are met by the optimised structure. All applied load combi-
nations are within limits as seen in Table 41. Stresses and local beam displacement
is not listed but they are within limits as well.
Table 41: Results of all load combinations on the grid shell with optimised cross
sections.
Displacement
Buckling factor
Live load
Snow load
Wind load
[𝑚𝑚]
[-]
location
Case
direction
LC1
28.3
6.5
all
iiiY
Y
LC2
29.0
5.5
all
iiiY
Y
LC3
32.9
5.0
all
-
Y
LC4
25.8
8.0
all
-
-
LC5
7.6
26.0
-
-
-
The analysis shows, and this can be seen in Figure 42a, that the largest displace-
ments occur on the downwind side and not the upwind side as could have been
expected. This is due to the fact that the suction on the grid shell in many ar-
eas is larger than the pressure. Also, the images in Figure 42 also show that large
displacements occur in the top part of the grid shell. As described in section 3.5
the initial analysis showed that internal wind loads set to under pressure had an
unfavourable effect on the grid shell in regards to displacement. With the optimised
grid shell, one could assume that, over pressure would be unfavourable, as this most
likely would enhance the displacements on the downwind side.
==PAGE:46==
32
CHAPTER 4. OPTIMISATION
(a) Displacement.
(b) Legend, displacement [𝑐𝑚].
(c) Utilisation.
(d) Legend, utilisation. Positive values
(blue) mean tension. Negative values (red)
mean compression [%].
(e) Axial stress.
(f) Legend, axial stress. Positive values
(blue) mean tension. Negative values (red)
mean compression [ 𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 ].
Figure 42: Results of ULS analysis of LC3.
==PAGE:47==
4.2. LOWER STEEL QUALITY
33
For the purpose of completion, it is investigated if a situation with over pressure is
more critical. The critical factor was the buckling load factor. With over pressure
the buckling load factor is 6.5 which is fine as the requirement was a minimum of 5
in ULS. In SLS the displacement requirement was 40 𝑚𝑚. With the optimised grid
shell and over pressure the maximum global displacement in SLS yields to 43.5 𝑚𝑚.
So the optimised structure described above does not have the sufficient stiffness to
comply with the displacement requirement. Therefore the optimisation has to be
repeated in regards to displacement. A new optimisation iteration is conducted and
the results show a new optimum division of beam length:
• beams with 𝐿< 0.78 𝑚are assigned RHS180x100x5
• beams with 0.78 𝑚≤𝐿≤2.34 𝑚are assigned RHS180x100x6
• beams with 𝐿> 2.34 𝑚are assigned RHS180x100x12.5
The new optimisation creates a 37.2% reduction of steel and a displacement (SLS)
and buckling load factor (ULS) of 39.8 𝑚𝑚and 6.8 respectively. This case showed
the buckling load factor is critical for under pressure while the displacement is critical
for over pressure. For this reason both under and over pressure will be evaluated
for in rest of this thesis unless stated otherwise.
4.2
Lower steel quality
The Arbejds- og bygningsdelsbeskrivelse (2018) states that steel quality used should
be S355 J2. If this requirement is eased to e.g. S235 or S275, which is assumed to
be less costly, there could be a cost reduction. To determine if it would be feasible
to use a lower quality steel, an analysis is carried out for S235 to confirm if this
steel quality complies with the requirements. Only the yield stress is affected by
lower steel quality. The local and global displacements are not affected by using a
lower steel quality. The analysis shows that the stresses in the structure are within
the limits. So e.g. S235 and S275 could also be used without compromising the
structural capacity. This result corresponds to the finding that the displacement
and/or the buckling load factor is the critical factor. The beam utilisation for S235
and S355 are shown in Figure 43. In both cases for the optimised grid shell.
The utilisation in this visualisation is calculated as the ratio between the normal
stress and the yield stress of the corresponding material (Preisinger, 2016). Shear
and buckling are not considered for the utilisation in this visualisation. Figure 43
clearly shows the low utilisation in both cases and a difference in utilisation between
the two.
==PAGE:48==
34
CHAPTER 4. OPTIMISATION
Figure 43: Utilisation of beams. To the left S235, to the right: S355. Legend in
the middle [%] (Over pressure only).
4.3
Different cross section
Another way to optimise the grid shell could be to use other cross sections. As
described in chapter 2 rectangular sections are preferred.
It could be assumed
that choosing smaller cross sections would reduce material. But previous analysis
showed that a RHS160x80x12.5 has not got the sufficient capacity to comply with
the buckling load factor requirement.
Neither does a RHS150x100x12.5 with a
buckling load factor of 3.9 with under pressure. Therefore a larger cross section is
chosen for optimisation. A RHS200x100x8 yields a buckling load factor of 5.0 with
under pressure and a displacement of 39.8 𝑚𝑚with over pressure resulting in a steel
reduction of 25.2%. With a 200 x 100 section the material usage is further reduced
by 36.6% by differentiating cross section thickness. Full results can be found in
Table D2.
4.4
Equivalent grid
As the model based on Grid 0 is non parametric with no possibility of making
parametric changes an equivalent parametric grid is created. This is done in order
to evaluate the effects of changing e.g. the grid size as described in section 2.2. An
attempt to reverse engineer the original grid to a new equivalent grid is described
in the following section.
Geometry
The basis of the new geometry is the surface which is described in section 1.1. By
sectioning the surface with horizontal planes a number of planar ellipsis (super-
==PAGE:49==
4.4. EQUIVALENT GRID
35
ellipsis) are created, like the horizontal bands of lines seen on Figure 44a. These
ellipsis are then divided into segments by a particular number of points. The end-
point of every second line segment in the bottom ellipsis is then connected by a
line to a point on the above ellipsis, not the corresponding point just above, but
the point just before and just after. This creates a triangular shape as seen in Fig-
ure 44b. These points and their neighbour points are then connected horizontally
by a line.
(a) Surface cut by horizontal planes.
(b) Ellipsis is divided and connected to
the ellipsis above.
Figure 44: Reverse egnigeering the original grid.
This procedure is repeated all the way up to the top horizontal section. The very
last ellipsis is split longitudinally and the two parts are divided into triangles. This
result does not match the original geometry, so relaxation is used on the geometry
to make it more similar to the original.
Relaxation is a mass-spring simulation
where the lines of the grid are springs and the vertices are mass points (Pottmann
et al., 2007). Some points are fixed, in this case the points on the grid edge are
prevented from movement in the x, y, and z, direction. All other points are prevented
from movement in the z direction only. The vertices are then moved around on
the surface ”stretching” the springs (lines) between them until an equilibrium is
achieved. The result of the relaxation can be seen in Figure A4 in Appendix A
and the Grasshopper script for the operation can be found in Figure A5. The same
method was used to create the roof of the British Museum described in section 1.4
(Williams, 2001) (Pottmann et al., 2007).
The relaxed grid is estimated to be
a sufficient approximation of the original grid and is from here on referred to as
Grid 1A. Grid 1A does not match the original exactly but it comes close on most
geometrical parameters. Table 42 shoes some of the geometrical parameters of Grid
==PAGE:50==
36
CHAPTER 4. OPTIMISATION
0 and Grid 1A.
Table 42: Comparison of Grid 0 and Grid 1A.
Grid 0
Grid 1A
Difference [%]
Total length of beams [𝑚]
4903
4532
7.6
Min. beam length [𝑚𝑚]
334
106
68.3
Max. beam length [𝑚𝑚]
2904
2756
5.1
Min. face area [𝑚2]
0.129
0.013
89.9
Max. face area [𝑚2]
3.109
2.947
5.2
Number of faces
1898
1794
5.5
Number of nodes
978
925
5.4
Number of beams
2875
2718
5.5
Two values have a large deviation: The minimum beam length and the minimum
face area.
As these are the minimum values it is assumed that they have little
significance on the structural analysis as it is assumed that the critical structural
requirement for this grid will be the global displacement or the buckling load factor
and that the global displacement will occur where the beams have longer spans.
The small beam length and small face area could be an issue when manufacturing
and assembling the parts. Solving this issue however is not within the scope of this
master’s thesis. A more detailed comparison with more properties can be found in
Table D3 in Appendix D.
4.5
Optimisation before design freeze
With this new equivalent grid it is possible to make parametric changes and analyse
the structural consequences in an equivalent FEA-model. The equivalent model is
analysed and compared to the reference model. The comparison shows that the
equivalent model is 5.9% lighter than the reference model. With this result, along
with the results from Table 42, it is assessed that the reference model and the
equivalent model are approximately equivalent. Grid 1A can be seen in Figure A6
in Appendix A. The equivalent model can be used to optimise the grid shell in an
earlier stage of the project. Some of the things that could be used as a basis for
optimisation are:
• size of grid
• shape of the structure
==PAGE:51==
4.5. OPTIMISATION BEFORE DESIGN FREEZE
37
Size of the grid
As shown in Table 42 Grid 0 and Grid 1A almost have the same number of nodes.
The ultimate cost of the structure is affected by the number of nodes, as each indi-
vidual node is to be machine milled (Løsningsforslag og beskrivelse 2017). Therefore
a reduction in number of nodes could lead to a reduction of the final cost. Changes
to Grid 1A can be done parametrically, so a new grid is created. This is done by
dividing the elliptical sections described in section 4.4 and Figure 44b into fewer
segments thereby generating a coarser grid. A coarser grid is assessed to be a rather
big alteration of the visual appearance of the structure. This new coarser grid is
called Grid 1B. The number of nodes is hereby reduced to 777. A more detailed
comparison of Grid 0 and Grid 1B can be found in Table D3. Furthermore, Grid
1B obtains a material reduction of 13.6% compared to the reference model, while
complying to the displacement and the buckling load factor requirements. To ensure
that is it possible to produce the glass cladding for Grid 1B the largest face is found.
This face is 3.5 𝑚2 and is a isosceles triangle with a base length of 3.291 𝑚(the
longest beam length) and a height of 2.13 𝑚. The leg length is 2.692 𝑚. With these
dimensions the face is able to fit on the glass sheet described in section 2.1.
As the global displacement and the buckling load factor, are within requirements the
cross sections are optimised as described in section 4.1. The optimisation leads to a
steel reduction of 37.0% and results in a maximum global displacement of 39.6 𝑚𝑚
and a buckling load factor of 5.1. Grid 0 and Grid 1B can be seen in Figure 45 and
46. A more detailed result for optimisation of Grid 1B can be found in Table D4. It
is possible to create a coarser grid, but this would result in faces that do not follow
the surface described in section 1.1. Furthermore the faces becomes too large to fit
on the glass sheet.
Shape of the structure
The current shape of the grid shell is based on the surface of a super-ellipsoid
described in section 1.1. This shape results in areas with low curvature and this
is where the global displacement is critical. The curvature is evaluated through
the Grasshopper component Principal Curvature which outputs the minimum and
maximum curvature, 𝜅1 and 𝜅2 respectively, in a specific point (𝑢, 𝑣). From this the
mean curvature, 𝐻, and the gaussian curvature, 𝐾, are computed by Equation 4.1
and 4.2 and visualised in Figure 47. In Figure 47 the surface curvature is evaluated
in more than 100000 points. A way of reducing material could be to increase the
==PAGE:52==
38
CHAPTER 4. OPTIMISATION
Figure 45: Grid 0.
Figure 46: Grid 1B.
curvature of the surface in these areas. This would be a radical change of the visual
appearance of the grid shell.
𝐻= 𝜅1 + 𝜅2
2
(4.1)
and
𝐾= 𝜅1𝜅2
(4.2)
(a) Mean curvature, 𝐻.
(b) Gaussian curvature, 𝐾.
Figure 47: Curvature of the surface. Blue indicates low curvature and red
indicates high curvature.
With a visualisation and understanding of the curvature it could be possible to
make changes to the shape, so the curvature could be reduced. Less curvature could
result in less displacement depending on how the shape changes. With displacements
==PAGE:53==
4.6. ALTERNATIVE REQUIREMENTS
39
reduced the stiffness of the grid shell could be reduced as well resulting in a reduced
material use.
4.6
Alternative requirements
With the points from section 2.3 in mind the grid shell is analysed with alternative
requirements. This section will treat the following requirements:
• A nodal live load of 10 𝑘𝑁in each node
• A minimum buckling load factor of 5
• A maximum global displacement of 40 𝑚𝑚
Nodal live load
Each load should be able to carry 10 𝑘𝑁. This requirement is treated as this is
the one that seems the most excessive. Both the node load and a surface load is
described in Arbejds- og bygningsdelsbeskrivelse (2018). As these two live loads does
not act simultaneously, the nodal load, is for this analysis, disregarded. Only the
surface load of 2 𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 is used.
This load was initially ignored as the nodal load
was more critical. For the analysis load combination 3 is still used and the only
difference is the live load. For comparison the nodal load of 10 𝑘𝑁transformed into
a surface load, would have resulted in a load of about 4.09 𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 . With the surface
load of 2 𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 the analysis shows that a RHS180x100x10 is sufficient. This cross
section leads to a material reduction of 15% resulting in a buckling load factor of
5.1 and a displacement of 28.9 𝑚𝑚. The grid shell could be optimised further by
use of the method described in section 4.1. This approach could lead to a reduction
of 42.0% with the following division of beam length:
• beams with 𝐿< 2.45 𝑚are assigned RHS180x100x6
• beams with 2.45 𝑚≤𝐿≤2.50 𝑚are assigned RHS180x100x8
• beams with 𝐿> 2.50 𝑚are assigned RHS180x100x12
Full results can be found in Table D6.
Buckling load factor
As mentioned earlier the chosen buckling load factor is a conservative estimate and
the LBA is connected to some uncertainty. Hence it could be interesting to see
what would happen if this requirement was reduced to 2.5. This means that the
grid shell would buckle if the current collective loads were multiplied by a factor of
==PAGE:54==
40
CHAPTER 4. OPTIMISATION
2.5. As the loads used in ULS are multiplied by safety factors and that e.g. the peak
velocity used in the wind load calculation theoretically only occurs once every 50
years (DS/EN 1991-1-4 2007), a reduction to a factor of 2.5 seems reasonable. By
using load combination 3 with nodal live load the analysis shows that when trying
to optimise, in regards to a buckling load factor of 2.5, the displacement requirement
is quickly exceeded. Reducing the buckling load factor requirement only has little
effect unless the displacement requirement is reduced as well. When looking at the
results from the other optimisations: Table D1, D2, D4 and D6, it shows that a
displacement of about 40 𝑚𝑚corresponds to a buckling load factor of about 5.
A correlation between displacement and buckling load factor makes sense as the
computation of both contains the global stiffness matrix, 𝐊. The result from the
this analysis can be found in Table D7.
Global displacement
Previous results have shown that it is in most cases the buckling load factor, and not
the displacement which is most critical. As the buckling load factor is conservative
and associated with the global displacement, both of these requirements are reduced
to estimate the consequences of them. The minimum buckling load factor is reduced
to 2.5 as above and the maximum global displacement is increased to 60 𝑚𝑚. With
these alternative requirements the analysis shows that the cross section thickness
can be reduced to 6 𝑚𝑚using a RHS180x100x6 profile.
This profile results in
displacement of 55.7 𝑚𝑚and a buckling load factor of 3.2. The steel reduction is
46.9% compared to the reference model. Further results can be found in Table D8.
Displacement and utilisation for this load combination and cross section is visualised
in Figure 48. The reduced requirements, combined with the optimisation method
described in section 4.1, could lead to even further reductions.
==PAGE:55==
4.6. ALTERNATIVE REQUIREMENTS
41
(a) Displacement.
(b) Legend, displacement [𝑐𝑚].
(c) Utilisation.
(d) Legend, utilisation. Positive values
(blue) mean tension. Negative values (red)
mean compression [%].
Figure 48: Results of ULS analysis of LC3 with a RHS180x100x6 throughout the
grid shell with reduced requirements.
==PAGE:56==
==PAGE:57==
Chapter5
Results and Discussion
The results of this master’s thesis have been presented throughout the course of the
different chapters. The discussion in this chapter is mainly based on chapter 2 and
some of the results from chapter 4.
Criteria
In chapter 2 the criteria for optimisation was established. The criteria was based on
the basis of a glass manufacturer’s production limitations and the architect’s vision
of the project. In the case of the requirements and limitations submitted by the
glass manufacturer the most important requirement was the maximum size of the
glass panels. The size is based on international standard dimensions of glass sheets,
hence an other glass manufacturer would give the same dimensions. Furthermore,
the glass manufacturer in question, Glassolutions, is a subsidiary of Saint-Gobain
which is one of the worlds largest supplier of materials for the construction industry.
Glassolutions therefore have great experience within the field of production of glass
cladding.
The architect’s vision of the building have been considered and implemented in
the criteria for optimisation. The assumptions made in this part leaves very little
room, if any, for making alterations to the visual appearance of the building. If
the architect would have a more open approach to changes this would facilitate the
optimisation process. The solution space would be less narrow, and a final reduction
of cost could potentially be larger.
Optimisation
Several approaches for optimising is described in section 2.2.
The ones treated
in this master’s thesis are: to differentiate cross section thickness, to use a lower
43
==PAGE:58==
44
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
steel quality, and to use a smaller cross section size. This is a limited approach
and these are not the only ways to optimise, but they where within the limits of
the architectural requirements and the outcomes of these changes are quantifiable.
This optimisation was also possible to do with the selected software. Only the steel
grid shell have been optimised. If the focus had been on e.g. the glass cladding
other ways of optimising would have been relevant. For differentiating cross section
thickness the optimisation was done in regards to beam length. The beam length
property was chosen as it does not vary with varying loads. This would have been
the case if optimisation was done in regards to e.g. normal force, bending moment,
displacement and such. This would have resulted in an uneven distribution of cross
sections only resisting the external forces acting in a specific direction.
But as
e.g.
wind load changes direction this would not have been taken into account.
As described in section 4.1 the used beam length interval are not final.
Other
more optimum divisions could exist. By differentiating cross section thickness the
reduction of material was found to be 37.2%. This combination of cross sections
yielded a displacement of 39.8 𝑚𝑚and a buckling load factor of 6.8.
Another possible optimisation could be to use a lower steel quality. This study
has shown that it was possible to use S235 instead of S355 without compromising the
SLS or ULS requirements. Although it is not known if using S235 would compromise
any other requirements which are not SLS or ULS.
By using a larger cross section it was possible to achieve a material reduction of
25.2%. This reduction was found by using a RHS200x100x8 resulting in a displace-
ment of 39.8 𝑚𝑚and a buckling load factor of 5.0. A larger cross section would
allow less light into the building and the appearance of the building could become
more ”heavy”.
If an optimisations was done before design freeze the geometry of the grid could
be different. So could the shape of the grid shell. By using a coarser grid the number
of nodes could be reduced to 777 and material could be reduced by 13.6%. This
coarser grid would not necessarily be approved by the architect, but an alternative
coarser grid could have been created in collaboration with the architect resulting in
a material reduction. As less coarse grid has not been tested as this would result in
more beams and more nodes and therefore more material and higher cost.
Critical approach
The method of using a critical approach towards the builder’s requirements might
be the most interesting way of optimising, as it requires that both builder and con-
tractor thoroughly consider, what they require and what they question. This could
==PAGE:59==
45
make the builder’s tender material more complete and coherent thereby reducing
the request for information on behalf of the contractor. The requirements that are
questioned in this thesis are the nodal live load, the method for calculating wind
load and the displacement requirement. Besides these points the self imposed buck-
ling load factor requirement was questioned. The nodal live load of 10 𝑘𝑁seems
excessive compared to the idea behind the requirement. The project material de-
scribes this load as a suspension force but the reason for the value of 10 𝑘𝑁is not
accounted for. If the surface load was used instead of the nodal load a reduction
of 15% was achieved. By further optimisation the use of the surface load led to a
reduction of 42%.
In regards to the wind load it was stated that surrounding buildings should not
be taken into account. This is a conservative approach which most likely affects
the dimensioning of the grid shell. If a proper wind analysis was made, the actual
wind loads on the structure could be determined, possibly resulting in a material
reduction. However the likeliness that one of the stakeholders would be willing to pay
for this study is low, as they probably would argue that it is not their responsibility.
The argument for lowing the global displacement requirement is described in
chapter 2. The argument might be based on a simplified method but it is used to
show how much this requirement actually effects the material use. The effects from
a reduced displacement requirement from 40 𝑚𝑚to 60 𝑚𝑚results in a reduction
of steel of 46.9%. This result was possible as a RHS180x100x6 is needed to comply
with requirements.
A summery of the results can be seen in Table 51. As shown in the thesis further
reductions could be found by combining the different methods.
Table 51: Results of the different methods for optimisation.
Method
Reduction [%]
Differentiating cross section thickness
37.2
Larger cross section
25.2
Equivalent grid (Grid 1A)
5.9
Coarser grid (Grid 1B)
13.6
Surface live load of 2 𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 instead of nodal live load of 10 𝑘𝑁
15.0
Maximum global displacement of 60 𝑚𝑚instead of 40 𝑚𝑚
46.9
==PAGE:60==
==PAGE:61==
Chapter6
Conclusion
This thesis has investigated the design and optimisation of a steel grid shell. The
grid shell in question was the Ocean Hall which is to be built by Per Aarsleff A/S.
The optimisation has been done considering the architectural vision of the current
design and the limitations of the glass cladding which will be mounted to the grid
shell. The optimisation has been done by minimising the amount of steel used. The
criteria for optimisation has been established as the following: To use a rectangular
cross section, to use the same cross section height and width throughout the grid
shell, to keep the current shape of the structure, to keep the current grid, to enable
the glass to overlap, not to obstruct the inner volume, and to keep glass panels and
thereby grid size within the dimensions 2.65 𝑚x 5 𝑚.
A structural design of the grid shell has been carried out using FEA. The analysis
has
shown
that
the
current
grid
shell
should
be
constructed
of
a
RHS180x100x12 to comply with all requirements. The analysis also showed that
a load combination of leading live load was the most critical, and that the dimen-
sioning factor was both the global displacement requirement of maximum 40 𝑚𝑚
and the buckling load factor of minimum 5.
This study has shown that it was possible to make reductions to the use of
steel material. By differentiating cross section thickness it was possible to achieve a
reduction of 37.2%. It would also be possible to use steel quality S235 instead of the
prescribed S355. A larger but thinner cross section resulted in a material reduction
of 25.2%. These optimisation methods could be combined to yield an even larger
reduction.
Another way to optimise was to have a critical approach to the builder’s require-
ments. Some requirements could possible be eased to accommodate reductions. If
the requirement of a nodal live load of 10 𝑘𝑁in each node was substituted by a
surface load of 2 𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 a RHS180x100x10 would be sufficient, resulting in a material
47
==PAGE:62==
48
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION
reduction of 15%. If the displacement requirements was eased, a reduction of 46.9%
would appear, provided that buckling load factor of 3.2 is sufficient.
6.1
Further work
The overall premiss for the results in this thesis is that Karamba computes as any
other FEA software. To ensure this, the accuracy and validity of Karamba should be
confirmed by analysing the model using e.g. Autodesks Robot Structural Analysis
or FEM-Design by StruSoft. These are both used worldwide and acknowledged in
the AEC industry for supplying valid results. The reason that none of these software
packages have been chosen for use in this thesis is their advanced user interface and
their disability to handle and parametrically change complex geometry.
This thesis has only treated some aspects needed to design a structure. To make
a complete design one should also consider the structural capabilities of the glass,
how connections should be made, accidental load, fire load, fatigue and more.
Another thing that could be examined is the wind load. As mentioned the wind
load should be calculated with peak velocity pressure from bottom to top. This
approach could be rejected and a proper wind pressure analysis could be made by
wind tunnel experiments or by use of computational fluid dynamics software.
==PAGE:63==
Appendices
49
==PAGE:64==
==PAGE:65==
AppendixA
Figures
Figure A1: Division of faces into vertical walls (red) and vaulted roof (green)
(Grid 0).
51
==PAGE:66==
52
APPENDIX A. FIGURES
(a) Wind on part calculated as vertical walls (Wind from
x-direction).
(b) Wind on part calculated as vaulted roof (Wind from
x-direction).
Figure A2: Division of faces when wind from y-direction (Grid 0).
==PAGE:67==
53
(a) Wind on part calculated as vertical walls (Wind from
y-direction).
(b) Wind on part calculated as vaulted roof (Wind from
y-direction).
Figure A3: Division of faces when wind from y-direction (Grid 0).
==PAGE:68==
54
APPENDIX A. FIGURES
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A4: Top view of the reverse engineered grid (a) before relaxation, (b) after
relaxation (Grid 1A) and (c) top view of the original grid (Grid 0).
==PAGE:69==
55
(a) Grid 0.
(b) Grid 1A.
(c) Grid 1B.
Figure A6: Three different grids.
==PAGE:70==
56
APPENDIX A. FIGURES
Figure A5: Grasshopper script for relaxation of grid.
==PAGE:71==
AppendixB
Interview
Glas manufacturer
Organisation Glassolutions A/S (A Saint-Gobain subsidiary)
Persons Sales Manager Teddy Kristensen & Market Manager Michael Stappert
Date
May 2nd 2018
Summary
Glassolutions recieve glass sheets produced in Germany. The standard measure-
ments for the sheets are 3.21 m by 6 m. Most production and processing facilities
can handle sheets this size. It is possible to produce sheets up to 12 and 18 m in
length but the price will be increased by a factor 4-5. At Glassolutions the machine
which assembles the glass to insulated glazing can only produce sheets of 2.65 m x
5 m. At other facilities is is possible to precess full sheets of 3.21 m x 6 m. The
cutting of the single layer glass sheets is automated and edge length has no influence
on price. To obtain a series effect in production more than 100 pieces of glass has
to be identical. All the pieces should be produced in one production at the same
time and should not be prolonged to fit time of delivery. The latter would raise the
price as waste would be higher.
57
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
AppendixC
Calculations
59
==PAGE:74==
Snow load calculation
(When wind from Y-direction)
≔
h
10 m
≔
b
15 m
≔
ls
10 m
=
―
h
b
0.6667
≔
μ3
2
≔
Ce
1
Recommended value
≔
Ct
1
Recommended value. Worst case. No snow melt due 
to heat from building
≔
sk
1.0 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
μi
0.8
≔
s
⋅
⋅
⋅
μi Ce Ct sk
Case i:
≔
si
=
s
0.8 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
60
APPENDIX C. CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:75==
Case ii:
=
μ3
2
Functions for the slopes are found:
≔
xf1.II
0
≔
xf2.II
――
ls
⋅
4 m
≔
xg1.II
0
≔
xg2.II
――
ls
4 m
≔
yf1.II
⋅
0.5 μ3
≔
yf2.II
0
≔
yg1.II
=
μ3
2
≔
yg2.II
0
≔
af.II
=
――――
-
yf2.II
yf1.II
-
xf2.II
xf1.II
-0.4
≔
ag.II
=
――――
-
yg2.II
yg1.II
-
xg2.II
xg1.II
-0.8
≔
fII((x))
+
⋅
af.II x
0.5 μ3
≔
gII((x))
+
⋅
ag.II x
μ3
Specific values are found at one side of each slope in four points along l_s/4:
≔
b1II
=
――――――
+
fII((0))
fII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
16 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
0.875
≔
c8II
=
――――――
+
gII((0))
gII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
16 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
1.75
≔
b2II
=
―――――――
+
fII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
16 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
fII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
8 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
0.625
≔
c7II
=
――――――――
+
gII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
16 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
gII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
8 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
1.25
≔
b3II
=
――――――――――
+
fII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
8 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
fII
⎛
⎜
⎝
+
――
ls
8 m
――
ls
16 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
0.375
≔
c6II
=
――――――――――
+
gII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
8 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
gII
⎛
⎜
⎝
+
――
ls
8 m
――
ls
16 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
0.75
≔
b4II
=
――――――――――
+
fII
⎛
⎜
⎝
+
――
ls
8 m
――
ls
16 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
fII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
4 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
0.125
≔
c5II
=
――――――――――
+
gII
⎛
⎜
⎝
+
――
ls
8 m
――
ls
16 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
gII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
4 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
0.25
l_s is divided into 16 segments and the corrosponding load is applied.
≔
sA.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b4II Ce Ct sk
0.125 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sB.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b3II Ce Ct sk
0.375 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sC.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b2II Ce Ct sk
0.625 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sD.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b1II Ce Ct sk
0.875 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sE.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b1II Ce Ct sk
0.875 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
kN
kN
kN
kN
61
==PAGE:76==
≔
sF.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b2II Ce Ct sk
0.625 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sG.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b3II Ce Ct sk
0.375 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sH.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b4II Ce Ct sk
0.125 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sI.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c5II Ce Ct sk
0.25 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sJ.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c6II Ce Ct sk
0.75 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sK.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c7II Ce Ct sk
1.25 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sL.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c8II Ce Ct sk
1.75 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sM.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c8II Ce Ct sk
1.75 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sN.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c7II Ce Ct sk
1.25 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sO.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c6II Ce Ct sk
0.75 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sP.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c5II Ce Ct sk
0.25 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
62
APPENDIX C. CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:77==
Case iii:
≔
μ4
=
μ3
2
Functions for the slopes are found:
≔
xf1
0
≔
xf2
8
≔
xg1
0
≔
xg2
8
≔
yf1
=
μ4
2
≔
yf2
0
≔
yg1
=
―
μ4
2
1
≔
yg2
0
≔
af
=
―――
-
yf2
yf1
-
xf2
xf1
-0.25
≔
ag
=
―――
-
yg2
yg1
-
xg2
xg1
-0.125
≔
f((x))
+
⋅
af x
μ4
≔
g((x))
+
⋅
ag x
―
μ4
2
Specific values are found at along each slope in four points (along b/2):
≔
b1
=
――――
+
f((0))
f((1))
2
1.875
≔
c8
=
――――
+
g((7))
g((8))
2
0.063
≔
b2
=
――――
+
f((1))
f((2))
2
1.625
≔
c7
=
――――
+
g((6))
g((7))
2
0.188
≔
b3
=
――――
+
f((2))
f((3))
2
1.375
≔
c6
=
――――
+
g((5))
g((6))
2
0.313
≔
b4
=
――――
+
f((3))
f((4))
2
1.125
≔
c5
=
――――
+
g((4))
g((5))
2
0.438
≔
b5
=
――――
+
f((4))
f((5))
2
0.875
≔
c4
=
――――
+
g((3))
g((4))
2
0.563
≔
b6
=
――――
+
f((5))
f((6))
0.625
≔
c3
=
――――
+
g((2))
g((3))
0.688
63
==PAGE:78==
b6
2
0 6 5
c3
2
0 688
≔
b7
=
――――
+
f((6))
f((7))
2
0.375
≔
c2
=
――――
+
g((1))
g((2))
2
0.813
≔
b8
=
――――
+
f((7))
f((8))
2
0.125
≔
c1
=
――――
+
g((0))
g((1))
2
0.938
b is divided into 16 segments and the corrosponding load is found for each segment.
≔
sA.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b1 Ce Ct sk
1.875 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sB.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b2 Ce Ct sk
1.625 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sC.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b3 Ce Ct sk
1.375 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sD.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b4 Ce Ct sk
1.125 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sE.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b5 Ce Ct sk
0.875 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sF.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b6 Ce Ct sk
0.625 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sG.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b7 Ce Ct sk
0.375 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sH.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b8 Ce Ct sk
0.125 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sI.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c8 Ce Ct sk
0.063 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sJ.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c7 Ce Ct sk
0.188 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sK.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c6 Ce Ct sk
0.313 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sL.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c5 Ce Ct sk
0.438 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sM.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c4 Ce Ct sk
0.563 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sN.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c3 Ce Ct sk
0.688 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sO.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c2 Ce Ct sk
0.813 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sP.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c1 Ce Ct sk
0.938 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
64
APPENDIX C. CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:79==
Snow load calculation
(When wind from X-direction)
≔
h
10 m
≔
b
50 m
≔
ls
44 m
=
―
h
b
0.2
≔
μ3
2
≔
Ce
1
Recommended value
≔
Ct
1
Recommended value. Worst case. No snow melt due 
to heat from building
≔
sk
1.0 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
μi
0.8
≔
s
⋅
⋅
⋅
μi Ce Ct sk
Case i:
≔
si
=
s
0.8 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
65
==PAGE:80==
Case ii:
=
μ3
2
Functions for the slopes are found:
≔
xf1.II
0
≔
xf2.II
――
ls
⋅
4 m
≔
xg1.II
0
≔
xg2.II
――
ls
4 m
≔
yf1.II
⋅
0.5 μ3
≔
yf2.II
0
≔
yg1.II
=
μ3
2
≔
yg2.II
0
≔
af.II
=
――――
-
yf2.II
yf1.II
-
xf2.II
xf1.II
-0.091
≔
ag.II
=
――――
-
yg2.II
yg1.II
-
xg2.II
xg1.II
-0.182
≔
fII((x))
+
⋅
af.II x
0.5 μ3
≔
gII((x))
+
⋅
ag.II x
μ3
Specific values are found at one side of each slope in four points along l_s/4:
≔
b1II
=
――――――
+
fII((0))
fII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
16 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
0.875
≔
c8II
=
――――――
+
gII((0))
gII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
16 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
1.75
≔
b2II
=
―――――――
+
fII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
16 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
fII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
8 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
0.625
≔
c7II
=
――――――――
+
gII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
16 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
gII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
8 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
1.25
≔
b3II
=
――――――――――
+
fII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
8 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
fII
⎛
⎜
⎝
+
――
ls
8 m
――
ls
16 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
0.375
≔
c6II
=
――――――――――
+
gII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
8 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
gII
⎛
⎜
⎝
+
――
ls
8 m
――
ls
16 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
0.75
≔
b4II
=
――――――――――
+
fII
⎛
⎜
⎝
+
――
ls
8 m
――
ls
16 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
fII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
4 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
0.125
≔
c5II
=
――――――――――
+
gII
⎛
⎜
⎝
+
――
ls
8 m
――
ls
16 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
gII
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
ls
4 m
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
0.25
l_s is divided into 16 segments and the corrosponding load is applied.
≔
sA.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b4II Ce Ct sk
0.125 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sB.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b3II Ce Ct sk
0.375 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sC.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b2II Ce Ct sk
0.625 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sD.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b1II Ce Ct sk
0.875 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sE.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b1II Ce Ct sk
0.875 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
kN
kN
kN
kN
66
APPENDIX C. CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:81==
≔
sF.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b2II Ce Ct sk
0.625 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sG.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b3II Ce Ct sk
0.375 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sH.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b4II Ce Ct sk
0.125 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sI.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c5II Ce Ct sk
0.25 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sJ.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c6II Ce Ct sk
0.75 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sK.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c7II Ce Ct sk
1.25 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sL.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c8II Ce Ct sk
1.75 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sM.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c8II Ce Ct sk
1.75 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sN.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c7II Ce Ct sk
1.25 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sO.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c6II Ce Ct sk
0.75 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sP.ii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c5II Ce Ct sk
0.25 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
67
==PAGE:82==
Case iii:
≔
μ4
=
μ3
2
Functions for the slopes are found:
≔
xf1
0
≔
xf2
8
≔
xg1
0
≔
xg2
8
≔
yf1
=
μ4
2
≔
yf2
0
≔
yg1
=
―
μ4
2
1
≔
yg2
0
≔
af
=
―――
-
yf2
yf1
-
xf2
xf1
-0.25
≔
ag
=
―――
-
yg2
yg1
-
xg2
xg1
-0.125
≔
f((x))
+
⋅
af x
μ4
≔
g((x))
+
⋅
ag x
―
μ4
2
Specific values are found at along each slope in four points (along b/2):
≔
b1
=
――――
+
f((0))
f((1))
2
1.875
≔
c8
=
――――
+
g((7))
g((8))
2
0.063
≔
b2
=
――――
+
f((1))
f((2))
2
1.625
≔
c7
=
――――
+
g((6))
g((7))
2
0.188
≔
b3
=
――――
+
f((2))
f((3))
2
1.375
≔
c6
=
――――
+
g((5))
g((6))
2
0.313
≔
b4
=
――――
+
f((3))
f((4))
2
1.125
≔
c5
=
――――
+
g((4))
g((5))
2
0.438
≔
b5
=
――――
+
f((4))
f((5))
2
0.875
≔
c4
=
――――
+
g((3))
g((4))
2
0.563
≔
b6
=
――――
+
f((5))
f((6))
0.625
≔
c3
=
――――
+
g((2))
g((3))
0.688
68
APPENDIX C. CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:83==
b6
2
0 6 5
c3
2
0 688
≔
b7
=
――――
+
f((6))
f((7))
2
0.375
≔
c2
=
――――
+
g((1))
g((2))
2
0.813
≔
b8
=
――――
+
f((7))
f((8))
2
0.125
≔
c1
=
――――
+
g((0))
g((1))
2
0.938
b is divided into 16 segments and the corrosponding load is found for each segment.
≔
sA.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b1 Ce Ct sk
1.875 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sB.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b2 Ce Ct sk
1.625 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sC.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b3 Ce Ct sk
1.375 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sD.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b4 Ce Ct sk
1.125 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sE.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b5 Ce Ct sk
0.875 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sF.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b6 Ce Ct sk
0.625 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sG.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b7 Ce Ct sk
0.375 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sH.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
b8 Ce Ct sk
0.125 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sI.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c8 Ce Ct sk
0.063 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sJ.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c7 Ce Ct sk
0.188 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sK.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c6 Ce Ct sk
0.313 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sL.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c5 Ce Ct sk
0.438 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sM.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c4 Ce Ct sk
0.563 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sN.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c3 Ce Ct sk
0.688 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sO.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c2 Ce Ct sk
0.813 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
sP.iii
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
c1 Ce Ct sk
0.938 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
69
==PAGE:84==
Wind in Y-direction on rectangular walls
Walls with the inclination 80-90 degrees gives a rectangular building with the following 
dimensions
≔
Length
50 m
≔
Height
13 m
≔
Width
15 m
≔
h
=
Height
13 m
≔
b
=
Length
50 m
=
ifififif ((
,
,
≤
h
b “Yes” “No”))
“Yes”
=
ifififif ((
,
,
≤
<
b
h
⋅
2 b “Yes” “No”))
“No”
=
ifififif ((
,
,
>
h
⋅
2 b “Yes” “No”))
“No”
≔
ze
=
h
13 m
≔
qp
0.75 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
e
=
min(( ,
b
⋅
2 h))
26 m
=
b
50 m
≔
d
=
Width
15 m
=
ifififif ((
,
,
<
e
d “Yes” “No”))
“No”
=
ifififif ((
,
,
≥
e
d “Yes” “No”))
“Yes”
=
ifififif ((
,
,
≥
e
⋅
5 d “Yes” “No”))
“No”
≔
Alen
=
―
e
5
5.2 m
≔
Blen
=
-
d
―
e
5
9.8 m
=
―
h
d
0.867
≔
cpe.10.A
-1.2
≔
cpe.10.B
-0.8
≔
cpe.10.D
0.78
(Linear interpolation)
≔
cpe.10.E
-0.46
(Linear interpolation)
≔
we.A
=
⋅
qp cpe.10.A
-0.9 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
we.B
=
⋅
qp cpe.10.B
-0.6 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
=
――――
+
we.A
we.B
2
-0.75 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
we.D
=
⋅
qp cpe.10.D
0.585 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
we.E
=
⋅
qp cpe.10.E
-0.345 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
70
APPENDIX C. CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:85==
Wind in Y-direction on vaulted roof
External pressure coefficients c_pe10 for vaulted roofs with rectagular base.
(DS/EN 1991-1-1-4:2007, page 50, 7.2.8)
≔
Length
50 m
≔
Width
15 m
≔
Height
22 m
≔
l
Length
=
l
50 m
≔
h
13 m
=
h
13 m
≔
f
-
Height
h
=
f
9 m
≔
d
Width
=
d
15 m
≔
ze
+
h
f
=
ze
22 m
=
―
f
d
0.6
=
―
h
d
0.867
≔
cpe.10.A
0.8
(red)
≔
cpe.10.B
-1.2
(yellow)
≔
cpe.10.C
-0.4
(blue)
≔
qp
0.75 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
we.A
=
⋅
qp cpe.10.A
0.60 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
we.B
=
⋅
qp cpe.10.B
-0.90 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
we.C
=
⋅
qp cpe.10.C
-0.30 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
71
==PAGE:86==
Wind in X-direction on rectangular walls
Walls with the inclination 80-90 degrees gives a rectangular building with the following 
dimensions
≔
Length
15 m
≔
Height
=
―
13
2
m
6.5 m
≔
Width
50 m
≔
h
=
Height
6.5 m
≔
b
=
Length
15 m
=
ifififif ((
,
,
≤
h
b “Yes” “No”))
“Yes”
=
ifififif ((
,
,
≤
<
b
h
⋅
2 b “Yes” “No”))
“No”
=
ifififif ((
,
,
>
h
⋅
2 b “Yes” “No”))
“No”
≔
ze
=
h
6.5 m
≔
qp
0.75 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
e
=
min(( ,
b
⋅
2 h))
13 m
=
b
15 m
≔
d
=
Width
50 m
=
ifififif ((
,
,
<
e
d “Yes” “No”))
“Yes”
=
ifififif ((
,
,
≥
e
d “Yes” “No”))
“No”
=
ifififif ((
,
,
≥
e
⋅
5 d “Yes” “No”))
“No”
≔
Alen
=
―
e
5
2.6 m
≔
Blen
=
―
4
5
e
10.4 m
≔
Clen
=
-
d
e
37 m
=
―
h
d
0.13
≔
cpe.10.A
-1.2
≔
cpe.10.B
-0.8
≔
cpe.10.C
-0.5
≔
cpe.10.D
0.7
≔
cpe.10.E
-0.3
72
APPENDIX C. CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:87==
≔
we.A
=
⋅
qp cpe.10.A
-0.9 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
we.B
=
⋅
qp cpe.10.B
-0.6 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
we.C
=
⋅
qp cpe.10.C
-0.375 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
we.D
=
⋅
qp cpe.10.D
0.525 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
we.E
=
⋅
qp cpe.10.E
-0.225 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
73
==PAGE:88==
Wind in X-direction on vaulted roof
External pressure coefficients c_pe10 for vaulted roofs with rectagular base.
(DS/EN 1991-1-1-4:2007, page 50, 7.2.8)
≔
Length
50 m
≔
Width
15 m
≔
Height
22 m
≔
l
Width
=
l
15 m
≔
h
―
13
2
m
=
h
6.5 m
≔
f
-
Height
h
=
f
15.5 m
≔
d
Length
=
d
50 m
≔
ze
+
h
f
=
ze
22 m
=
―
f
d
0.3
=
―
h
d
0.13
≔
cpe.10.A
0.45
(red, linear interpolation between A(h=0) = 0,5 and A(h/d>0.5) = 0,3
≔
cpe.10.B
-1.0
(yellow)
≔
cpe.10.C
-0.4
(blue)
≔
qp
0.75 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
we.A
=
⋅
qp cpe.10.A
0.34 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
we.B
=
⋅
qp cpe.10.B
-0.75 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
≔
we.C
=
⋅
qp cpe.10.C
-0.30 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
74
APPENDIX C. CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:89==
Internal wind load calculation
Peak velocity pressure:
≔
qp
0.75 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
Pressure coefficient, over press.:
≔
cpi.o
0.2
Pressure coefficient, under press.:
≔
cpi.u
-0.3
Internal wind pressure, over press.
≔
wi.o
=
⋅
qp cpi.o
0.15 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
Internal wind pressure, under press.
≔
wi.o
=
⋅
qp cpi.u
-0.225 ――
kN
kN
kN
kN
m2
75
==PAGE:90==
==PAGE:91==
AppendixD
Tables
77
==PAGE:92==
78
APPENDIX D. TABLES
Table D1: Results from optimisation in regards to beam length.
Cross section
L<
L>
Weight
Buckling load factor (ULS)
Displacement (SLS)
Reduc. of weight
Grid
[HxWx(t𝐿<, t≤𝐿≤, t𝐿>)]
[𝑚]
[𝑚]
[𝑘𝑔]
[-]
[𝑚𝑚]
[%]
Grid 0
180x100x12
-
-
226573
5.5
23.3
0.0
Grid 0
180x100x10
-
-
192531
4.8
26.8
15.0
Grid 0
180x100x(6, 8, 12)
2.1
2.48
141430
5.0
30.2
37.6
Grid 0
180x100x(5, 8, 12)
1.70
2.48
142787
5.0
29.5
37.0
Grid 0
180x100x(6, 10, 12)
2.00
2.55
153893
5.0
27.3
32.1
Grid 0
180x100x(6, 6.3, 12)
2.40
2.41
136126
5.0
32.2
39.9
Grid 0
180x100x(6, 12)
-
2.41
136093
5.0
32.3
39.9
Grid 0
180x100x(5, 6, 12)
0.84
2.41
135627
5.0
32.3
40.1
Grid 0
180x100x(6, 12.5)
-
2.44
135026
5.0
32.9
40.4
Grid 0
180x100x(5, 6, 12.5)
0.78
2.44
134742
5.0
32.9
40.5
==PAGE:93==
79
Table D2: Results from optimisation with different cross sections. o.p. = over pressure, u.p. = under pressure.
Cross section
L<
L>
Weight
Buckling load factor (u.p.)
Displacement (o.p.)
Reduc. of weight
Grid
[HxWx(t𝐿<, t≤𝐿≤, t𝐿>)]
[𝑚]
[𝑚]
[𝑘𝑔]
[𝑚𝑚]
[%]
Grid 0
200x100x10
-
-
207661
5.9
32.5
8.3
Grid 0
200x100x8
-
-
169457
5.0
38.9
25.2
Grid 0
200x100x(6, 6.3, 10)
1.9
2.4
143556
5.5
39.9
36.6
==PAGE:94==
80
APPENDIX D. TABLES
Table D3: Comparison of Grid 0, Grid 1A and textitGrid 1B.
Cross section
RHS180x100x12
Grid
Grid 0
Grid 1A
Grid 1B
Weight of steel [𝑘𝑔]
226573
213130
195871
Weight of glass [𝑘𝑔]
206978
213517
213105
Total length of beams [𝑚]
4903
4532
4165
Total edge length [𝑚]
9692
8217
8951
Min. beam length [𝑚𝑚]
334
106
132
Max. beam length [𝑚𝑚]
2904
2756
3219
Total face area [𝑚2]
2386
2367
2372
Min. face area [𝑚2]
0.129
0.013
0.023
Max. face area [𝑚2]
3.109
2.947
3.507
Number of faces
1898
1794
1506
Number of nodes
978
925
777
Number of beams
2875
2718
2282
Reduction [%]
Weight of steel
100.0
5.9
13.6
Weight of glass
100.0
-3.2
-3.0
Total length of beams
100.0
7.6
15.1
Total edge length
100.0
15.2
7.6
Min. beam length
100.0
68.3
60.5
Max. beam length
100.0
5.1
-10.8
Total face area
100.0
0.6
0.6
Min. face area
100.0
89.9
82.2
Max. face area
100.0
5.2
-12.8
Number of faces
100.0
5.5
20.7
Number of nodes
100.0
5.4
20.6
Number of beam
100.0
5.5
20.6
==PAGE:95==
81
Table D4: Results from optimisation with Grid 1B.
Cross section
L<
L>
Weight
Buckling load factor (u.p.)
Displacement (o.p.)
Reduc. of weight
Grid
[HxWx(t𝐿<, t≤𝐿≤, t𝐿>)]
[𝑚]
[𝑚]
[𝑘𝑔]
[𝑚𝑚]
[%]
Grid 0
180x100x12
-
-
226573
5.5
23.3
0.0
Grid 1B
180x100x12
-
-
195871
5.4
37.4
13.6
Grid 1B
180x100x10
-
-
166441
4.8
43.1
26.5
Grid 1B
180x100x(6, 8, 12)
2.20
2.35
143857
5.1
39.1
36.5
Grid 1B
180x100x(6, 12)
-
2.31
142648
5.1
39.6
37.0
==PAGE:96==
82
APPENDIX D. TABLES
Table D5: Result of load combinations in ULS with a RHS180x100x12.
Load combination
Displacement
Buckling factor
Live load
Snow load
Wind load
[𝑚𝑚]
[-]
location
Case
direction
LC1
27.3
8.1
all
iii
Y
LC2
27.8
7.9
all
iii
Y
LC3
32.3
5.5
all
-
Y
LC4
27.8
9.7
all
-
-
LC5
6.9
27.1
-
-
-
==PAGE:97==
83
Table D6: Results of LC3 with a live load of 2𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 . *reference model.
Cross section
L<
L>
Weight
Buckling load factor (u.p.)
Displacement (o.p.)
Reduc. of weight
Grid
[HxWx(t𝐿<, t≤𝐿≤, t𝐿>)]
[𝑚]
[𝑚]
[𝑘𝑔]
[𝑚𝑚]
[%]
Grid 0
180x100x12*
-
-
226573
5.5
31.4
0.0
Grid 0
180x100x12
-
-
226473
5.8
25.2
0.0
Grid 0
180x100x10
-
-
192531
5.1
28.9
15.0
Grid 0
180x100x(6, 8, 12)
2.45
2.50
131392
5.0
35.0
42.0
Grid 0
160x80x12
-
-
190261
3.9
31.7
16.0
Grid 0
150x100x12
-
-
199339
4.1
30.4
12.0
==PAGE:98==
84
APPENDIX D. TABLES
Table D7: Results of LC3 with a minimum buckling load factor of 2.5. *reference model.
Cross section
L<
L>
Weight
Buckling load factor (u.p.)
Displacement (o.p.)
Reduc. of weight
Grid
[HxWx(t𝐿<, t≤𝐿≤, t𝐿>)]
[𝑚]
[𝑚]
[𝑘𝑔]
[𝑚𝑚]
[%]
Grid 0
180x100x12*
-
-
226573
5.5
31.4
0.0
Grid 0
180x100x10
-
-
192531
4.9
36.2
15.0
Grid 0
180x100x8
-
-
157353
4.1
43.4
30.6
Grid 0
150x100x(6, 12)
-
2.15
144567
4.8
39.9
36.2
==PAGE:99==
85
Table D8: Results of LC3 with a minimum buckling load factor of 2.5 and a maximum global displacement of 60 mm. *reference
model. **contains cross section class 4.
Cross section
Weight
Buckling load factor (u.p.)
Displacement (o.p.)
Reduc. of weight
Grid
[HxWxt]
[𝑘𝑔]
[𝑚𝑚]
[%]
Grid 0
180x100x12*
226573
5.5
31.4
0.0
Grid 0
180x100x10
157353
4.1
43.4
30.6
Grid 0
180x100x6.3
125958
3.3
53.3
44.4
Grid 0
180x100x6
120284
3.2
55.7
46.9
Grid 0
180x100x5**
100993
2.7
65.7
55.4
==PAGE:100==
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
About Karamba (2018). url: https://www.karamba3d.com/#about (visited on
04/28/2018).
Arbejds- og bygningsdelsbeskrivelse (2018). Statens Naturhistoriske Museum (ARB-
BYB) K01_C08CN440 Lukningsarbejder. 1st ed. Bygningsstyrelsen.
British Museum (2000). url: https://www.fosterandpartners.com/projects/
great-court-at-the-british-museum/ (visited on 05/25/2018).
Daily Mail (2017). url: http : / / www . dailymail . co . uk / femail / article -
4650736/Blue-whale-skeleton-exhibited-Natural-History-Museum.html
(visited on 06/13/2018).
DS/EN 1990 DK NA:2013 (2013). Nationalt anneks til Eurocode 0: Projekterings-
grundlag for bærende konstruktioner. 1st ed. Energistyrelsen.
DS/EN 1991-1-3 DK NA:2012 (2012). Nationalt anneks til Eurocode 1: Last på
bærende konstruktioner - Del 1-3: Generelle laster - Snelast. 1st ed. Ener-
gistyrelsen.
DS/EN 1991-1-3 DK NA:2015 Version 2 (2015). Nationalt anneks til Eurocode 1:
Last på bærende konstruktioner - Del 1-3: Generelle laster - Snelast. 1st ed.
Energistyrelsen.
DS/EN 1991-1-3:2007 (2007). Eurocode 1: Last på bærende konstruktioner - Del
1-3: Generelle laster - Snelast. 2nd ed. Dansk Standard.
DS/EN 1991-1-4 (2007). Eurocode 1: Last på bærende konstruktioner - Del 1-4:
Generelle laster - Vindlast. 2nd ed. Dansk Standard.
DS/EN 1993-1-1 + AC (2007). Eurocode 3: Stålkonstruktioner - Del 1-1: Generelle
regler samt regler for bygningskonstruktioner. 2nd ed. Dansk Standard.
DS/EN 1993-1-1 DK NA:2010 (2010). Nationalt Anneks til Eurocode 3: Stålkon-
struktioner - Del 1-1: Generelle regler samt regler for bygningskonstrutioner.
1st ed. Erhvervs- og Byggestyrelsen.
87
==PAGE:102==
88
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Generating Bibliographies with biblatex and biber (2016). Wikibooks. url: https:
/ / en . wikibooks . org / wiki / LaTeX / Generating _ Bibliographies _ with _
biblatex_and_biber (visited on 03/07/2016).
Harksen, Tina Moikjær (2016). “Implementation of Finite Element Analysis in the
Parametric Design of a Shell Structure with Openings”. MA thesis. Technical
University of Denmark.
Henriksen, Thea Nørshov (2017). “Geometry, Materials and connections for Ad-
vanced Structures”. MA thesis. Technical University of Denmark.
Hippo House (2009). url: https://www.flickr.com/photos/hermyone1610/
3362321123/in/photostream/ (visited on 05/25/2018).
Jensen, Bjarne Chr. (2013). Teknisk Ståbi. 22nd ed. Copenhagen: Nyt Teknisk For-
lag.
Karamba Discussions (2015). url: http : / / www . grasshopper3d . com / group /
karamba / forum / topics / buckling - and - spectral - analysis (visited on
06/13/2018).
Løsningsforslag og beskrivelse (2017). Per Aarsleff A/S.
Lundgaard & Tranberg Arkitekter (2018). url: http://www.ltarkitekter.dk/
statens-naturhistoriske-museum-1/ (visited on 05/25/2018).
Pottmann, Helmut et al. (2007). Architectural Geometry. Bentley Institute Press.
Preisinger, Clemens (2016). Karamba User Manual. For Version 1.2.2.
SBP: Hippo House (1996). url: https://www.sbp.de/en/project/house-for-
hippopotamus-zoo-berlin/ (visited on 05/25/2018).
Seele: Chadstone Shopping Center (2016). url: https://seele.com/references/
chadstone-shopping-centre/ (visited on 05/25/2018).
Tutorial G01.1 (2016). url: http://www.albertopugnale.com/resources/ (vis-
ited on 04/28/2018).
Wikipedia: Vladimir Shukhov (2018). url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Vladimir_Shukhov (visited on 05/25/2018).
Williams, C.J.K. (2001). “The analytical and numerical definition of the geometry
of the British Museum Great Court roof”. In: Mathematics & Design, pp. 434–
440. doi: http://people.bath.ac.uk/abscjkw/BritishMuseum.
==PAGE:103==
List of Figures
11
The architect’s visualisations of the project (Lundgaard & Tranberg Arkitek-
ter 2018). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
12
A superellipsoid created in the mathematics software Maple. . . . . . .
3
13
Mesh.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
14
Face edges/Mesh edges.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
15
Hippo House. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
16
The Great Court at the British Museum (British Museum 2000).
. . .
6
17
The roof of Chadstone Shopping Center (Seele: Chadstone Shopping
Center 2016). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
21
A transverse section of the grid shell showing the surrounding buildings.
Drawing provided by PAA.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
22
Simplification of a transverse section of the grid shell. . . . . . . . . . .
12
31
How Karamba works (from Alberto Pugnale) (Tutorial G01.1 2016).
.
14
32
Grasshopper script for reorientation of local beam axes. . . . . . . . . .
15
33
Before reorientation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
34
After reorientation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
35
Grasshopper script for finding local beam displacement. . . . . . . . . .
17
36
Method for calculating local beam displacement, 𝑑(shown in 2D). . . .
17
37
Inclination from horizontal [∘] of the faces divided individually (left) and
into intervals (right). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
38
GH script of the tool for visualising the slope for individual faces. . . .
19
39
Snow load shape coefficients for cylindrical roof. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
310
Snow load distribution, Case (ii). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
311
Snow load distribution, Case (iii). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
89
==PAGE:104==
90
List of Figures
312
Wind on vaulted roof with rectangular base. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
41
Distribution of cross sections: RHS180x100x12.5, RHS180x100x6 and
RHS180x100x5. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
42
Results of ULS analysis of LC3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
43
Utilisation of beams. To the left S235, to the right: S355. Legend in the
middle [%] (Over pressure only).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
44
Reverse egnigeering the original grid. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
45
Grid 0. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
46
Grid 1B. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
47
Curvature of the surface. Blue indicates low curvature and red indicates
high curvature. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
48
Results of ULS analysis of LC3 with a RHS180x100x6 throughout the
grid shell with reduced requirements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A1
Division of faces into vertical walls (red) and vaulted roof (green) (Grid
0). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
A2
Division of faces when wind from y-direction (Grid 0).
. . . . . . . . .
52
A3
Division of faces when wind from y-direction (Grid 0).
. . . . . . . . .
53
A4
Top view of the reverse engineered grid (a) before relaxation, (b) after
relaxation (Grid 1A) and (c) top view of the original grid (Grid 0). . .
54
A6
Three different grids. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A5
Grasshopper script for relaxation of grid. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
==PAGE:105==
List of Tables
31
Results of snow load calculation for snow load on a cylindrical roof [𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 ].
21
32
Characteristic external wind load on vaulted roof in x- and y-direction
[𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 ]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
33
Characteristic external wind load on vertical walls in x- and y-direction
[𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 ]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
34
Initial load cases and their resulting global displacement. . . . . . . . .
24
35
The results of load combinations (RHS160x80x10).
. . . . . . . . . . .
26
36
Results of LC3 in ULS with different cross sections.
*contains cross
section class 4.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
41
Results of all load combinations on the grid shell with optimised cross
sections. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
42
Comparison of Grid 0 and Grid 1A. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
51
Results of the different methods for optimisation. . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
D1
Results from optimisation in regards to beam length. . . . . . . . . . .
78
D2
Results from optimisation with different cross sections.
o.p.
= over
pressure, u.p. = under pressure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
D3
Comparison of Grid 0, Grid 1A and textitGrid 1B. . . . . . . . . . . .
80
D4
Results from optimisation with Grid 1B. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
D5
Result of load combinations in ULS with a RHS180x100x12. . . . . . .
82
D6
Results of LC3 with a live load of 2𝑘𝑁
𝑚2 . *reference model.
. . . . . . .
83
D7
Results of LC3 with a minimum buckling load factor of 2.5. *reference
model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
91
==PAGE:106==
92
List of Tables
D8
Results of LC3 with a minimum buckling load factor of 2.5 and a maxi-
mum global displacement of 60 mm. *reference model. **contains cross
section class 4.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
