==PAGE:1==
J A K O B S PA R R E S P I E G E L H A U E R
M U LT I P H Y S I C A L C A L C U L AT I O N M O D E L F O R
P R E - H E AT I N G O F R E P L A C E M E N T A I R T H R O U G H
V E N T I L AT E D FA Ç A D E E L E M E N T S
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
M U LT I P H Y S I C A L C A L C U L AT I O N M O D E L F O R P R E - H E AT I N G
O F R E P L A C E M E N T A I R T H R O U G H V E N T I L AT E D FA Ç A D E
E L E M E N T S
jakob sparre spiegelhauer
Thesis for the Master of Science in Architectural Engineering
Summer 2018
==PAGE:4==
Jakob Sparre Spiegelhauer, s133601: Multiphysical calculation model for
pre-heating of replacement air through ventilated façade elements , Thesis
for the Master of Science in Architectural Engineering.
Primary supervisor: Toke Rammer Nielsen, Technical University of
Denmark
Illustration on titlepage: Edit of visual representation of COMSOL
mesh. Unless otherwise stated all illustrations, graphs and ﬁgures
are produced by the author.
The layout of this paper is done using the open source typographical
template developed and published by André Miede. The paper is in-
tended to be read in a two-page view with uneven pages on the right.
Figures are best read in color.
Technical University of Denmark © Summer 2018
==PAGE:5==
A B S T R A C T
This paper comprises the work and results of a master thesis project
carried out in the spring and early summer of 2018 at the Technical
University of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineering.
By the application of numerous numerical simulations the project
demonstrates that the ventilated façade concept is able to both pre-
heat and pre-cool replacement air ﬂowing through a vertical gap in
the façade construction.
It is found that the degree of pre-heating is highly dependent on
the amount of thermal resistance between the ventilated gap in which
the replacement air ﬂows and the internal environment and also the
velocity of which the replacement air ﬂows. A thin layer or even no
insulation between the ventilated gap and the internal environment
combined with a low ﬂow velocity yields a very convincing degree
of pre-heating. With a thick layer of insulation on the interior side
of the ventilated gap and a high air ﬂow velocity the pre-heating
will in many instances be insigniﬁcant. Furthermore, the ventilated
façade will in most conﬁgurations result in a very low transmission
loss, and when comparing to corresponding non-ventilated façades
approximately 40-90 % of the transmission loss is recovered. How-
ever, not all façade constructions are suitable, and in a few instances
the transmission loss of the ventilated façade is bigger than what is
the case for the non-ventilated reference façade.
Additionally it is found that during an average summer day, the
ventilated façade is capable of pre-cooling the replacement air. The
pre-cooling will occur only if the construction includes a layer of ther-
mal mass, in this case modelled as a concrete layer, that is decoupled
from both the exterior- and interior environment by either the re-
placement air in the ventilated gap or by a layer of insulation. The
ventilated façade will in the best case reduce the peak temperature
of the replacement air by more than 2 °C, while a notable temporal
shift in the peak temperature occurs. During the daytime hours, 8:00-
16:00, the total heat loss caused by 1 m2 of ventilated façade will be
up to 59 % bigger than a comparable non-ventilated façade with that
showcasing a signiﬁcant cooling effect.
v
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S
I wish to thank my supervisor Toke Rammer Nielsen for frequent,
thorough and accurate guidance and counselling throughout the course
of this project.
Jakob Sparre Spiegelhauer, July 2018
vii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
C O N T E N T S
i
formalities and introduction
1
1
project formalities
3
2
the ventilated building facade
5
ii
initial verification case
9
3
methodology of initial verification case & com-
sol introductions
11
4
initial verification case - setup and results
23
iii
stationary simulations - pre-heating potential
31
5
methodology of stationary simulations
33
6
facade type i - stationary, 2d
41
7
facade type ii - stationary, 2d
49
8
facade type iii - stationary, 2d
57
9
deliberations and summary
63
iv
transient simulations - pre-cooling potential
67
10 methodology of transient simulations
69
11 facade type iv - transient, 2d
77
12 facade type v - transient, 2d
85
13 facade type vi - transient, 2d
91
14 facade type vii - transient, 2d
97
15 facade type viii - transient, 2d
103
16 facade type ix - transient, 2d
109
17 facade type ix with radiation- transient, 2d
117
18 deliberations and summary
121
v
room scale pre-study
125
19 pre-study setup
127
20 pre-study results and observations
133
vi
discussion and conclusion
139
21 discussion
141
22 conslusion
145
references
149
vii
appendices
153
a
appendices - initial verification case, data
155
b
appendices - ηT -charts
159
c
appendices - Ti of 50 °c
161
ix
==PAGE:10==
x
C O N T E N T S
d
appendices - transient simulations
167
e
description of digital appendices
195
==PAGE:11==
L I S T O F F I G U R E S
Figure 1
Illustration of the pre-heating of replacement
air and recovery of transmission loss during
cold winter day in the ventilated facade . . . .
6
Figure 2
Illustration of the pre-cooling of replacement
air during a warm summer day . . . . . . . . .
7
Figure 3
Typical buildings with spandrel sections . . . .
8
Figure 4
Development of velocity proﬁle in laminar ﬂow
in ducts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
Figure 5
Thermal development of laminar ﬂow in ducts
13
Figure 6
Velocity and temperature proﬁles in turbulent
ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
Figure 7
Simple Case Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Figure 8
Simple Case Setup, 2D . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
Figure 9
Simple Case Setup, COMSOL mesh
. . . . . .
26
Figure 10
Simple Case Setup, Ansys Fluent mesh
. . . .
26
Figure 11
Simple case result - duct width = 0.01 m . . . .
27
Figure 12
Simple case result - duct width = 0.03 m . . . .
28
Figure 13
Temperature and velocity proﬁles for initial ver-
iﬁcation case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
Figure 14
Energy ﬂows in the ventilated facades depend-
ing on control volume
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
Figure 15
Entities of the parietodynamic facade
. . . . .
38
Figure 16
Facade Setup I - Geometry and Boundary Con-
ditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
Figure 17
Facade Setup I - ηT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Figure 18
Facade Setup I - Comparison of Simulation -
and analytical Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Figure 19
Facade Setup I - ηU for Reference Facade 1 . .
45
Figure 20
Facade Setup I - ηU for Reference Facade 2 . .
46
Figure 21
Facade Setup I - ηU for Reference Facade 3 . .
47
Figure 22
Facade Setup II - Geometry and Boundary Con-
ditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Figure 23
Facade Setup II - ηT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Figure 24
Facade Setup II - Comparison of simulation -
and analytical Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Figure 25
Facade Setup II - ηU for Reference Facade 1 . .
53
Figure 26
Facade Setup II - ηU for Reference Facade 2 . .
54
Figure 27
Facade Setup III - Geometry and Boundary Con-
ditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Figure 28
Facade Setup III - ηT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
xi
==PAGE:12==
xii
List of Figures
Figure 29
Facade Type III - Comparison of simulation -
and analytical Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
Figure 30
Facade Type III - ηU for Reference Facade 1 . .
61
Figure 31
Facade Setup III - ηU for Reference Facade 2 .
62
Figure 32
Cut-planes positions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
Figure 33
Energy ﬂows of the ventilated facade
. . . . .
71
Figure 34
Reference Facades for transient simulations . .
72
Figure 35
Temperature proﬁles of an average July day . .
73
Figure 36
Facade Type IV - Geometry and boundary con-
ditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Figure 37
Time-dependent temperature proﬁles for ven-
tilated Facade Type IV . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
Figure 38
Facade type IV, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 02:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
Figure 39
Facade type IV, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 07:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
Figure 40
Facade type IV, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 14.00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
Figure 41
Facade type IV, integrated normal boundary
heat ﬂuxes, velocity: 0.1 m/s
. . . . . . . . . .
82
Figure 42
Facade type IV, heat ﬂux through facade
. . .
83
Figure 43
Facade Type V - Geometry and boundary con-
ditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
Figure 44
Time-dependent temperature proﬁles for ven-
tilated Facade Type V . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
Figure 45
Facade type V, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 02:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
Figure 46
Facade type V, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 07:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
Figure 47
Facade type V, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 14:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
Figure 48
Facade type V, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity:
0.1 m/s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
Figure 49
Facade type V, heat ﬂux through facade . . . .
89
Figure 50
Facade Type VI - Geometry and boundary con-
ditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
Figure 51
Time-dependent temperature proﬁles for ven-
tilated Facade Type VI . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
Figure 52
Facade type VI, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 02:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
Figure 53
Facade type VI, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 07:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
Figure 54
Facade type VI, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 14:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
Figure 55
Facade type VI, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity:
0.1 m/s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
==PAGE:13==
List of Figures
xiii
Figure 56
Facade type VI, heat ﬂux through facade
. . .
95
Figure 57
Facade Type VII - Geometry and boundary con-
ditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
Figure 58
Time-dependent temperature proﬁles for ven-
tilated Facade Type VII . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
Figure 59
Facade type VII, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 02:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
Figure 60
Facade type VII, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 07:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
Figure 61
Facade type VII, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 14:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
Figure 62
Facade type VII, boundary heat ﬂuxes, veloc-
ity: 0.1 m/s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
Figure 63
Facade type VII, heat ﬂux through facade . . .
101
Figure 64
Facade Type VIII - Geometry and boundary
conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
Figure 65
Time-dependent temperature proﬁles for ven-
tilated Facade Type VIII
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
Figure 66
Facade type VIII, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 02:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
Figure 67
Facade type VIII, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 07:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
Figure 68
Facade type VIII, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 14:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106
Figure 69
Facade type VIII, heat ﬂux through facade
. .
106
Figure 70
Facade type VIII, heat ﬂux through facade
. .
107
Figure 71
Facade Type IX - Geometry and boundary con-
ditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
Figure 72
Time-dependent temperature proﬁles for ven-
tilated Facade Type IX
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
110
Figure 73
Facade type IX, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 02:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
Figure 74
Facade type IX, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 07:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
Figure 75
Facade type IX, Temperatures at three cut planes
at 14.00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
Figure 76
Facade type IX, heat ﬂux through facade
. . .
113
Figure 77
Facade type IX, heat ﬂux through facade
. . .
114
Figure 78
Facade Type IX - Geometry and boundary con-
ditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117
Figure 79
Time-dependent temperature proﬁles for ven-
tilated Facade Type IX with radiation
. . . . .
118
Figure 80
Facade type IX with radiation, heat ﬂux through
facade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
Figure 81
Room scale simulation setup, inlet type B . . .
128
Figure 82
Room scale simulation setup, inlet type A . . .
129
==PAGE:14==
Figure 83
Reference Facade Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
130
Figure 84
Inlet Type A, Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . .
133
Figure 85
Inlet Type A, air velocity and direction . . . . .
134
Figure 86
Inlet Type B, Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . .
135
Figure 87
Inlet Type B, air velocity and direction . . . . .
135
Figure 88
Replacement air temperature
. . . . . . . . . .
137
Figure 89
Interior Surface Temperature, Inlet Type A
. .
138
Figure 90
Interior Surface Temperature, Inlet Type B
. .
138
L I S T O F TA B L E S
Table 1
General calculation inputs for the simple case
veriﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
Table 2
k-ω wall treatment comparison . . . . . . . . .
30
Table 3
Velocity input and façade width required for a
ﬂow of ∼0.035 m3/s
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Table 4
Material Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
Table 5
Facade Type I - Simulation input . . . . . . . .
42
Table 6
Facade Type I - Uref-values for reference façades 42
Table 7
Facade Type II - Simulation input . . . . . . . .
50
Table 8
Facade Type II - Uref-values for reference façades 50
Table 9
Facade Type III - Simulation input . . . . . . .
58
Table 10
Facade Type III - Uref-values for reference façades 58
Table 11
Facade Type IV-IX - Material Properties . . . .
74
Table 12
Facade Type IV - Simulation input . . . . . . .
77
Table 13
Facade Type IV - heat balance pr. m2 facade. .
82
Table 14
Facade Type V - Simulation input . . . . . . . .
85
Table 15
Facade Type V - heat balance pr. m2 facade.
.
90
Table 16
Facade Type VI - Simulation input . . . . . . .
91
Table 17
Facade Type VI - heat balance pr. m2 facade. .
96
Table 18
Facade Type VII - Simulation input . . . . . . .
97
Table 19
Facade Type VII - heat balance pr. m2 facade. .
102
Table 20
Facade Type VIII - Simulation input . . . . . .
103
Table 21
Facade Type VIII - heat balance pr. m2 facade.
108
Table 22
Facade Type IX - Simulation input . . . . . . .
110
Table 23
Facade Type IX - heat balance pr. m2 facade. .
114
Table 24
Facade Type IX with radiation - Simulation input117
Table 25
Facade Type IX with radiation - heat balance
pr. m2 facade. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
Table 26
Comparison of all transient simulations - heat
balance pr. m2 facade. IX* denotes results of
simulations including radiation . . . . . . . . .
122
Table 27
Room Scale Simulation - Simulation input
. .
127
xiv
==PAGE:15==
acronyms
xv
Table 28
Room Scale Simulation - Material Properties .
128
Table 29
Transmission loss comparison and recovery rate 136
Table 30
Water content and saturation temperature, [21] 137
Table 31
Simple Veriﬁcation Case Data, Duct depth =
0.01 m, [C°] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
156
Table 32
Simple Veriﬁcation Case Data, Duct depth =
0.03 m, [C°] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
157
==PAGE:16==
==PAGE:17==
Part I
F O R M A L I T I E S A N D I N T R O D U C T I O N
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
1
P R O J E C T F O R M A L I T I E S
1.1
project definition
The starting point of the project described in this document is as
follows:
Title:
Multiphysical calculation model for pre-
heating of replacement air through venti-
lated façade elements
Problem statement:
During the heating-season pre-heating
of replacement air diminishes the risk
of draught and decreases the need for
additional space heating in buildings with
exhaust systems without the possibility of
heat-recovery. Meanwhile, in the summer
it is desirable to pre-cool the replacement
air to diminish the occurrence of overtem-
peratures.
The project investigates the potential
of pre-heating replacement air through
façade elements by utilizing the naturally
occurring heat transmission. Additionally
it is analysed if the thermal inertia of
the ventilated façade is able to pre-cool
replacement air. The analyses focus on
solutions for buildings where façades
are extensively renovated or completely
replaced.
The project is a Master Thesis carried out in the pursuit of the de-
gree of Master in Architectural Engineering from the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark. The work has been carried out during the spring
and early summer of 2018 and ﬁnally handed in July 13 2018. The
project accounts for 35 ECTS points.
3
==PAGE:20==
4
project formalities
1.2
document structure
This paper is composed by seven parts, Part I-VII, each with a num-
ber of chapters. Part I-VI contain the report, while Part VII contains
appendices. Note that digital appendices are available - the folder
hierarchy and ﬁle content is described in Part VII, Appendices E.
Throughout this paper there will be made no further references to
the digital appendices.
==PAGE:21==
2
T H E V E N T I L AT E D B U I L D I N G FA C A D E
2.1
utilizing the façade
In the search for increasingly energy efﬁcient buildings, the build-
ing façade plays an important role. The façade is most importantly
a barrier between the interior and exterior climate, however façades
are increasingly utilized in a more pro-active manner improving the
energy performance and indoor climate conditions. Both built and
more theoretical façade design solutions are countless and vary sig-
niﬁcantly in the degree of complexity stretching from fairly simple
automated sun screen systems to façade elements containing photo-
voltaics and HVAC-units [1] [12].
Meanwhile, in this project the focus is directed to a more passive
application of - what in this context will be called - ventilated façades
addressing two overall questions:
q.1 When replacement air is run through a vertical section of a given
façade structure; to what degree is the air pre-heated, and to
what extend will the transmission loss that causes the pre-heating
be recovered?
q.2 To what extend is it possible to utilize the thermal inertia of a
given façade structure to alter the temperature of replacement
air running through it?
The ventilated façade - elsewhere referred to as dynamic insula-
tion [10] [11] - is especially relevant when renovating the façades
of older dwellings equipped with exhausts from kitchen and bath,
but where ﬁtting a fully balanced ventilation system with heat ex-
change is unattainable. When the warm indoor air is forced out of the
building by the exhaust fans it is replaced by outdoor air. Depending
on the speciﬁc building, the cold replacement air will enter through
cracks and chinks or in conventionally renovated buildings through
air valves made for the purpose exactly. Regardless the entryway, the
replacement air is not heated in any signiﬁcant manner potentially
resulting in draught-related issues, and most certainly increasing the
heating demand. The problem just stated resonates very well with the
ﬁrst of the two overall questions underlining the interest in increas-
ing the temperature of the otherwise non-heated replacement air. The
idea of pre-heating the replacement air by recovering the transmis-
sion loss through the façade construction is primitively illustrated in
5
==PAGE:22==
6
the ventilated building facade
Figure 1. The exhaust - a cooker hood, bathroom exhaust or just a gen-
eral exhaust system removes air from the inside and cold air replaces
it through the ventilated façade. Some of the transmission loss on the
inside of the façade, A , is recovered in the replacement air ﬂow, B ,
and eventually the effective transmission loss on the exterior of the
façade becomes C = A −B . In any non-ventilated conventional
façade non of the transmission loss is recovered and C = A .
Figure 1: Illustration of the pre-heating of replacement air and recovery of
transmission loss during cold winter day in the ventilated facede.
Figure inspired by [11]
Q.2 becomes relevant in a summer situation where most dwellings
or similar building types offer no means of active cooling and where
the occurrence of over-temperatures are not unheard of. As such it
would be desirable if the replacement air provided to the rooms of
the dwelling during the day was pre-cooled to a temperature lower
than the warm outside air. In the summer the day-night variation of
the outside temperature is large, and the hypothesis is that the façade
construction will be cooled down during the night and remain so
during some of the day providing a potential source of cooling to
the replacement air. The idea of pre-cooling the replacement air is
illustrated in Figure 2. The ﬁgure illustrates how parts of the façade
construction are still somewhat colder than the outside temperature
enabling a pre-cooling of the replacement air.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Utilizing the Façade
7
Figure 2: Illustration of the pre-cooling of replacement air during a warm
summer day obtained by utilizing the thermal mass of the facade
construction
All analyses carried out in this project intends to mimic the wall
construction often found beneath windows - the so-called spandrel.
The spandrel is typically not a part of the structural system, and is in
many cases poorer insulated than the remainder of the building en-
velope. When ageing building are renovated, both windows and the
spandrel sections are likely to be replaced, presenting an opportunity
to pre-condition the replacement air through a new sprandel-section,
as a stand-alone solution or as a part of an element façade system. A
viable solution might be to combine the ventilated spandrel sections
with so-called ventilated windows [8] thus allowing the replacement
air to run in almost the entire height of the building - ﬁrst through the
spandrel section and then through the ventilated window before en-
tering the internal environment. Figure 3 shows a range of buildings
with spandrel sections below and adjacent to windows, illustrating
where the concept of ventilated façades could be implemented. Alter-
natively the concept of the ventilated façade could be implemented
as a part of a integrated façade element system.
Note that this project exclusively investigates the ventilated spran-
del section which from here on out is referred to as a ventilated façade.
==PAGE:24==
8
the ventilated building facade
(a) Spurvegården, Hvidovre
(b) AAB afdeling 54, Ballerup
(c) AAB afdeling 39, Kongens Lyn-
gby
(d) Højestrupparken, Vallensbæk
Figure 3: Typical buildings with spandrel sections
2.2
multiphysical simulation approach
Analytical hand calculation methods would not sufﬁce when the in-
vestigated façade geometries get slightly complicated, and thus the
need for a simulation software is evident. The need is only empha-
sised by the desire to evaluate transient problems which would be
almost impossible to treat analytically with any kind of precision.
In this project the programme COMSOL Multiphysics is used. COM-
SOL Multiphysics is a well-renowned ﬁnite element analysis, solver
and simulation software. The software allows for solving multiple
systems of partial differential equations, thus enabling the coupling
of multiple physical phenomena. In this context, the coupling of heat
transfer in ﬂuids and solids and ﬂuid dynamics is the most important.
COMSOL Multiphysics will - if the user wishes so - analyse almost
any physical phenomena from structural mechanics to semiconduc-
tors as long as it described by differential equations. Even though the
analyses of ventilated façades will only demand the application of
a fraction of what COMSOL offers, the simulation setup is not nec-
essarily straight forward, hence it has been necessary to carry out
a preliminary veriﬁcation of the general COMSOL setup. The initial
veriﬁcation case is presented in the next part.
==PAGE:25==
Part II
I N I T I A L V E R I F I C AT I O N C A S E
==PAGE:26==
==PAGE:27==
3
M E T H O D O L O G Y O F I N I T I A L V E R I F I C AT I O N C A S E
& C O M S O L I N T R O D U C T I O N S
Before going into the analysis of the more detailed façade geome-
tries shown in the later parts of this paper, the performance of COM-
SOL needs to be evaluated on a simple case which can be compared
to and veriﬁed with the use of well-proven analytical approaches as
well as simulations made in Ansys Fluent. Ansys Fluent is in many
aspects the go-to CFD application. Besides evaluating the accuracy
of the COMSOL results, the initial simulations will ensure that ﬂaws
related to the setup of the models are exterminated.
In this initial veriﬁcation process the case of the ventilated façade
is simpliﬁed into a case of the heating of air ﬂowing through a wide
rectangular duct with a ﬁxed wall temperature. Disregarding the sim-
pliﬁed geometry, this initial case includes the crucial aspect of heat
transfer at the boundary of the ﬂuid domain, which is of paramount
importance for the performance of later more detailed models of fa-
cade systems.
While this part of the thesis functions as an introduction and ver-
iﬁcation of the COMSOL simulation tool, the ﬁrst-coming sections
will also help to elaborate on the nature of forced ﬂow in duct-like
geometries especially relevant for the analytical approach.
3.1
the analytical approach to forced convection
In forced convection heat transfer is caused by the movement of air
generated by an external source, e.g. a fan or a blower. In the case
of the simpliﬁed veriﬁcation case and later when engaging the venti-
lated facade, air is sucked through a slit- or duct-like geometry which
partly or entirely has a different temperature than the incoming air.
In the ventilated façade the air movement is caused by a remote ex-
haust fans removing air from the inside of the building, while in the
simpliﬁed case air is moved by a ﬁctitious fan that induces a ﬁxed air
velocity at the inlet of the duct.
Hydrodynamic and Thermal Development in Duct-like Geometries
In the context of the initial simpliﬁed veriﬁcation case the aim of the
analytical approach is - put roughly - to ﬁnd the heat transfer co-
efﬁcient, h, or the average heat transfer coefﬁcient, h, describing the
heat transfer between the solid and the ﬂuid domains, that eventually
11
==PAGE:28==
12
methodology of initial verification case & comsol introductions
yields the increase in temperature of the air ﬂowing through. While
a complete derivation of the many correlations relating to the solu-
tion of forced convection is far out of scope, a concise description is
however needed, allowing for a better understanding of the dynamics
inﬂuencing the results of later investigations.
Note, that for the ease of illustration, some ﬁgures are depicting
circular ducts.
Figure 4 shows the velocity proﬁle of a laminar ﬂow in a duct. As
the ﬁgure illustrates, the velocity proﬁle changes as the air moves
along in the duct. At the duct-entry the ﬂow velocity is uniform over
the entire cross-section, however as the ﬂow enters the duct, the wall
imposes a shear-stress on the outer layers of the ﬂow resulting in a de-
celeration. To maintain the mass ﬂow, the core of the ﬂow accelerates.
The boundary layer shown on the ﬁgure is essentially a hypothetical
concept, however it illustrates the division between the outer layer
of the ﬂow where viscous effects affects the ﬂow and the inner core
where the viscous effects are yet insigniﬁcant. At the point, xe, called
the hydrodynamic entry length, the boundary layer ﬁlls up the en-
tire duct and the ﬂow is hydrodynamically fully developed, meaning
that the relative velocity distribution in the ﬂow will not change in
the ﬂow direction [9].
Figure 4: Development of velocity proﬁle in laminar ﬂow in duct, [9]
An important learning illustrated by Figure 4 is the concept of the
no-slip condition at the wall. The condition implies that the most out-
lying molecules of the ﬂuid domain touching the wall will have zero
velocity.
Figure 5 shows the thermal development of a laminar ﬂow for a uni-
form wall heat ﬂux and for a uniform wall temperature, respectively.
As for the velocity, the thermal proﬁles of the ﬂow undergoes a de-
velopment in the beginning of the duct. The thermal proﬁles are fully
developed at the thermal entry length, xet. When the ﬂow is ther-
mally developed we expect that for qw = constant the difference
between Tw and Tb will remain constant, and that the temperature
==PAGE:29==
3.1 The Analytical Approach to Forced Convection
13
proﬁles will maintain its shape. For the case of constant wall tem-
perature - which is what we soon will apply in our initial simpliﬁed
analysis - the amplitude of the temperature proﬁles decreases, as Tb
→Tw and the heat ﬂux, qw, decreases. However, most importantly; in
the fully thermally developed ﬂow h will become constant, which is
not the case for the hydrodynamically and thermally developing ﬂow.
Note, that for both qw = constant and Tw = constant the temper-
ature of the outermost layer in the ﬂow equals the wall temperature.
Figure 5: Thermal development of laminar ﬂow in ducts, left hand side de-
picts case of uniform wall heat ﬂux, while right hand site depicts
uniform wall temperature [9]
The bulk temperature, Tb, used in the Figure 5 and 6 is used as a de-
scription of the average temperature of a cross-section of the moving
ﬂuid.
Dimensionless Quantities
To enable a better understanding of the analytical approach to the
initial veriﬁcation case elaborated shortly, a few dimensionless quan-
tities are introduced. Before the aid of computers allowed for numer-
ical or computational solutions of differential equations, the dimen-
sionless quantities eased the task of analytically solving the equations
and they still characterise ﬂows in various useful ways [16].
Reynold’s number is used widely in ﬂuid dynamics and is deﬁned
as:
Re = uL
υ
(1)
==PAGE:30==
14
methodology of initial verification case & comsol introductions
u
the ﬂuid velocity [m/s]
L
characteristic length [m]
υ
kinematic viscosity of the ﬂuid [m2/s]
For the ﬂow in non-circular pipes or ducts, L will equal the the hy-
draulic diameter, Dh, which will be described shortly. In this context,
Reynold’s is primarily used to predict whether the ﬂow is laminar
of turbulent. In the previous section on hydrodynamic and thermal
development, the description was limited to laminar ﬂow. However,
much ﬂow in ducts or pipes belong in the turbulent regime. In the
turbulent regime the ﬂow pattern is less ordered and eddies or vor-
texes occur. Figure 6 shows the velocity and temperature proﬁles in
turbulent ﬂow - note that due to the increased mixing in the radial di-
rection and the increased friction factor at the wall, both velocity and
temperature proﬁles are more evenly distributed in most of the duct
diameter, while decreasing drastically approaching the wall [17].
Figure 6: Velocity and temperature proﬁles in turbulent ﬂow [9]
Laminar ﬂow in pipes or ducts will occur in ﬂows where Re < 2100-
2300, while turbulent ﬂow will occur where Re > 4000-6000-10000,
where the stated intervals consider numbers stated in the literature
[9] [14] [16]. A ﬂow with a Reynold’s number in-between the two in-
tervals is in the transitional regime characterized by part laminar and
part turbulent ﬂow patterns. When dealing with ﬂows in the tran-
sitional area, one should be careful - the most common method in
analysing transitional ﬂows is calculating the ﬂow both as laminar
and turbulent, and then ﬁnd the mean of the value of interest. From
the deﬁnition of the Reynold’s number it can be seen, that high ve-
locity ﬂow in larger pipes will move towards the turbulent regime,
while relatively lower velocity ﬂows in smaller pipes trends towards
the laminar regime.
The Prandtl number deﬁnes the ratio between the viscous and ther-
mal diffusion rate:
Pr = Cpµ
κ
(2)
==PAGE:31==
3.1 The Analytical Approach to Forced Convection
15
Cp
the speciﬁc heat of the ﬂuid [J/kg K]
µ
dynamic viscosity of the ﬂuid, [N s/m2]
κ
thermal conductivity of the ﬂuid [W/m K]
As seen from the deﬁnition, the Prandtl number depends on mate-
rial properties, and for air Pr ≃6.8 - 7.3 depending on the tempera-
ture.
The Nussels number gives the ratio of convective to conductive heat
transfer normal to the solid-ﬂuid interface:
Nu ≡hDh
κ
(3)
h
heat transfer coefﬁcient
Dh
hydraulic diamter [m]
κ
thermal conductivity of the ﬂuid [W /m K]
In a constant Tw-case, the temperature difference between Tw and
Tb changes as the air travels down the duct, and thus the Nusselt
number changes accordingly. However, what will become useful in
the coming calculations is the analogous coherence of the average
Nusselt number,
¯
Nu, and the average heat transfer coefﬁcient, ¯h over
the entire duct length:
¯
Nu ≡
¯hDh
κ
(4)
Equation 4 is applicable only in the case of constant Tw. What is
evident from the deﬁnition is that relatively large Nusselt numbers
yield large heat transfer coefﬁcients and vice versa [9] [17].
Hydraulic Diameter
Most pipe or duct related analytical solutions are based on circular ge-
ometries. For the initial simpliﬁed case and for the ventilated façade
as well, the geometry rather resembles that of a very narrow duct or
that of two parallel plates where the width of the plates are far greater
than the distance between the plates. With that in mind the diameter,
D is replaced with the hydraulic diameter Dh. The hydraulic diame-
ter is deﬁned as:
Dh ≡4Ac
P
(5)
Ac
the cross-sextional area
P
the wetted perimeter
For a rectangular duct of width a and height b:
==PAGE:32==
16
methodology of initial verification case & comsol introductions
Dh = 2ab
a + b
(6)
The geometries of the current investigations will resemble very
wide parallel plate where a»b which means that the hydraulic di-
amter eventually is calculated as:
Dh = 2b
(7)
Applied Analytical Approach
The following sub-sections contain the step-wise analytical approach
used for the calculations of the simpliﬁed geometry of the initial ver-
iﬁcation case. The aim is to ﬁnd the average temperature, henceforth
denoted TA, of the air when it exits a piece of rectangular duct with
isothermal wall temperature. The detailed geometry and conditions
are speciﬁed in Chapter 4. The result is found in the same chapter
where it is compared to the results obtained from the simulations of
the same case made in COMSOL as well as Ansys Fluent.
Recollect that while the following calculation procedures are based
on the ﬂow-theory discussed above, the detailed derivation of the ex-
pressions are far too extensive to include in this document. Moreover,
throughout this paper the focus will remain on the application of the
theory - both for the analytical and numerical part - and not on the
development of it. Elaborate descriptions of the applied theory will
be found in the speciﬁed references.
In the simpliﬁed case the following boundary conditions and ma-
terial properties are known and deﬁned:
Te
the average inlet air temperature
Tw
the wall temperature
uin
the average air inlet velocity
υ
the kinematic viscosity
Cp
heat capacity [kJ/kgK]
µ
dynamic viscocity [kg/ms]
κ
thermal conductivity [kW/mK]
ρ
density [kg/m3]
Note that for the analytical calculations, the approximate values of
ν, Cp, µ, κ and ρ are evaluated at Tw+Te
2
.
==PAGE:33==
3.1 The Analytical Approach to Forced Convection
17
Calculation in the Laminar Regime
The following calculation steps follow the procedure described in [9]
p. 375-376. The procedure is valid for fully developed laminar ﬂow in
smooth pipes.
1. For a ﬁxed Tw the laminar ﬂow in a parallel plate geometry is
constant and deﬁned as:
¯
Nu = 7.541
(8)
2. Based on the
¯
Nu, ¯h is calculated:
¯h =
¯
Nuκ
Dh
(9)
3. Finally the bulk exiting air temperature, Ta, is calculated using
an expression where the case is treated as a mere heat-exchange
problem, where L is the length of the duct in [m]:
Ta −Te
Tw −Te
= 1 −exp(−
¯h
ρuCp
4L
Dh
)
(10)
Calculation in the Turbulent Regime
The following calculation steps follow the procedure described in [9]
p. 373-375. The procedure is valid for fully developed turbulent ﬂow
in smooth pipes. Different from other expression of the Nusselt num-
ber, Eq. 13 applies all the way down to the transition Reynolds num-
ber [9].
1. Reynolds number is calculated:
Re = uinL
υ
(11)
2. The friction factor is calculated:
f = (1.82log10(Re) −1.64)2
(12)
3. The average Nusselt number is calculated using the Gnielinski
equation:
¯
Nu =
f
8(Re −1000)Pr
1 + 12.7
q
f
8(Pr
2
3 −1)
(13)
4. Based on
¯
Nu, ¯h is calculated:
¯h =
¯
Nuκ
Dh
(14)
==PAGE:34==
18
methodology of initial verification case & comsol introductions
5. Analogous to laminar case the bulk exiting air temperature, Ta,
is calculated using an expression where the case is treated as
a heat-exchange problem, where L is the length of the duct in
[m]:
Ta −Te
Tw −Te
= 1 −exp(−
¯h
ρuCp
4L
Dh
)
(15)
Considering the Entry Length
One should note, that the two calculation methods mentioned above
are applicable for fully developed ﬂows, and as such do not take
eventual development regions into account. For Tw = constant the
thermal entry length is estimated as:
xet ≃0.034RePrDh
(16)
In fact the initial simpliﬁed case analysis contains instances where
the thermal entry length approaches 75% of the total geometry length
(∼1.5 m out of 2 m). [9] does actually offer an expression that ad-
justs the Nusselt number according to the entry length utilizing an
additional dimensional quantity, the Graetz number. Without no im-
mediate explanation the application of that expression did however
present widely deviating and unreasonable results, and the method
was abandoned.
3.2
the computational approach using comsol
The analytical calculation approach presented above will only be ap-
plied in the initial case veriﬁcation, where it will serve as a control
benchmark for the results obtained through the use of COMSOL Mul-
tiphysics, which will be the software application used throughout this
project.
COMSOL is a FEM-software that enables the modelling and anal-
ysis of a wide range of physical or coupled multiphysical problems.
COMSOL is suitable for this projects, since it allows the coupling
of both ﬂuid and solid domains in one integrated simulation model.
Additionally COMSOL offers a wide range of tools that makes e.g.
parameter variation effortless.
COMSOL applies the concept of conjugate heat transfer when solv-
ing the heat transfer in a solid-ﬂuid interface. The solid and the ﬂuid
domain shares the same independent variable, temperature, and thus
no special conditions is needed in the boundary layer. As such the
conjugate heat transfer solution substitutes for the earlier empirical
relation stating that heat transfer through a solid-ﬂuid boundary was
proportional to the difference between the solid body temperature
and the ﬂuid temperature far away from the shared boundary with a
==PAGE:35==
3.2 The Computational Approach using COMSOL
19
proportionality factor, the heat transfer coefﬁcient, h. That approach
is handy and used widely and is essentially the method applied in the
analytical calculations described in the previous section. However, the
accuracy of the result is determined by the accuracy of which the heat
transfer coefﬁcient, h, is decided. In practice, the heat transfer coefﬁ-
cient is in many cases determined as the result of part empirical data
and part theory. With the desire to evaluate transient problems with
time-dependent boundary conditions, inhomogeneous temperature
distribution or complex geometries, determining a usable heat trans-
fer coefﬁcients becomes increasingly difﬁcult. In such cases utilizing
FEM- or FVM-method programmes is the only reasonable way for-
ward. In a stepwise process each computational domain is discredi-
zised (meshed) and the applied differential equations are numerically
solved with respect to the boundary conditions. The discretization -
dividing the domains into cells - allows for a very detailed solution of
the applied physics with a resolution determined by the ﬁneness of
the mesh [4] [5].
The following sections will contain a brief description of the COM-
SOL interface and the procedures that goes into setting up and solv-
ing the computational model. Additionally the most important equa-
tions that govern the physical behaviour of the models in the studies
of the initial simpliﬁed case as well as the detailed models of station-
ary and transient simulations are introduced.
Geometry
The geometry of the model is created by deﬁning a series of domains
- each with a speciﬁc set of dimensions and a coordinate of origin.
COMSOL does offer CAD-import functionality, but the complexity
of the facade geometries in question did not make utilizing that func-
tionality worthwhile. Note that all simulations carried out are 2D sim-
ulations.
Materials
Each domain is assigned with a material from the COMSOL material
library or a material composed by the user. In this study the COMSOL
material library did offer a sufﬁcient range of predeﬁned materials.
The materials and the properties applied in the simulations will be
introduced in the context of the individual simulation set-up.
Physics
The physics set-up deﬁnes which physical laws or models are applied
to the simulation in question. Throughout the simulations presented
in this paper, the physics of Heat Transfer and Flow (COMSOLs deno-
tation of CFD, Computations Fluid Dynamics) are applied. The Heat
==PAGE:36==
20
methodology of initial verification case & comsol introductions
Transfer interface is applied to both solid and ﬂuid components, while
the Flow interface is applied to the ﬂuid components in the models.
Eq. 17 and 18 gives the heat equation that models the heat transfer
in solids, [7]:
ρCp
∂T
∂t + ∇q = Q
(17)
q = −k∇T
(Fourier’s Law)
(18)
Eq. 19 and 20 applies for the heat transfer in the ﬂuid domains, [2]:
ρCp
∂T
∂t + ρCpu∇T + ∇q = Q
(19)
q = −k∇T
(Fourier’s Law)
(20)
ρ
material density, [kg/m3]
Cp
speciﬁc heat capacity, [J/kgK]
T
absolute temperature, [K]
u
ﬂuid velocity ﬁeld, [m/s]
q
heat ﬂux by conduction, [W/m2]
k
material thermal conductivity [W/mK]
Q
heat sources [W/m3]
For the stationary problems presented in the initial simpliﬁed ver-
iﬁcation case and the following stationary simulations of detailed
façades presented in Part III and Part V temperature does not change
with time and the terms containing time derivatives are removed.
The ﬂuid ﬂow simulations are based on the Navier-Stokes equa-
tions, which in their most general form are shown in Eq. 21 (Conser-
vation of mass), Eq. 22 (Conservation of momentum) and and Eq. 23
(Conservation of energy in terms of temperature), [2]:
∂ρ
∂t + ∇· ρu = 0
(21)
ρ∂u
∂t + ρ(u · ∇)u = ∇· [−pI + τ] + F
(22)
ρCp(∂T
∂t + (u · ∇)T) =
−(∇· q) + τ : S −T
ρ
∂ρ
∂T |p (∂p
∂t + (u · ∇)p) + Q
(23)
==PAGE:37==
3.2 The Computational Approach using COMSOL
21
ρ
density, [kg/m3]
p
pressure, [Pa]
Cp
speciﬁc heat capacity, [J/kgK]
T
absolute temperature, [K]
u
ﬂuid velocity ﬁeld, [m/s]
F
volume force vector, [N/m3]
Q
heat sources [W/m3]
τ
viscous stress tensor
q
heat ﬂux vector, [W/m2]
S
strain-rate tensor
As for the equations concerning heat transfer, terms containing
time are removed in cases of steady state problems.
To attain a reasonable evaluation of turbulent ﬂows COMSOL in-
cludes a wide range of turbulence models based on the Reynolds-
averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS)-model. In the initial veriﬁcation case
the k-ϵ- and the k-ω models are used. The assumptions used to derive
k-ϵ are not valid close to a wall boundary, hence COMSOL employs
a wall-function which is an analytical expression of the ﬂow in the
near-wall region. The k-ω-model is a Low-Reynolds model and is solv-
able in the near-wall region if the mesh is sufﬁciently dense; falling
this the wall function is applied. The k-ω-model can either be forced
to use the fully solvable k-ω-model, the wall-function or the automatic
setting that uses either depending on the mesh quality [2] [6]. As the
forced convection is highly inﬂuenced by the near-wall air ﬂow an
assessment of the three options mentioned above is offered as a part
of the initial veriﬁcation case.
Furthermore, the no-slip condition is applied to all wall-boundary
for all simulations carried out in this project.
Elaborative explanations of the Navier-Stokes equations and the
theory on the turbulence models are available in the literature and in
the COMSOL documentation [2], and no further elaboration will be
found in this context. Likewise is the theory related to other physics
applied in the simulations, e.g. radiation, available in the COMSOL
documentation, [7].
Mesh
The simulated geometries are discretizised in a so-called mesh. A
low mesh-resolution will result in imprecise results. Throughout the
simulations carried out in the project the models are meshed using
the ﬁne physics-deﬁned option.
==PAGE:38==
22
methodology of initial verification case & comsol introductions
A Note on Ansys Fluent
Ansys Fluent is used only in the initial veriﬁcation case, as an addi-
tional source of validation of the COMSOL results complimenting the
analytical hand calculations. The Ansys model is setup so it matches
the COMSOL model to the highest possible degree.
==PAGE:39==
4
I N I T I A L V E R I F I C AT I O N C A S E - S E T U P A N D
R E S U LT S
In this context the idea of pre-heating the replacement air in a venti-
lated façade relies on the nature of forced convection. As outside air
is forced through the ventilated part of the façade it is surrounded
by solid walls, which due to heat transmission might be warmer than
the entering air. In reality the ventilated façade will be composed of
a range of different layers of insulation and structural systems etc.
However, the idea of forced convection in a ventilated façade is sim-
pliﬁed in order to make a case that can be handled using analytical
calculations.
Geometry and Common Simulation and Calculation Conditions
The following paragraph describes the common geometry and the
simulation and calculation conditions that are applied in COMSOL-
and Ansys Fluent simulations as well as the analytical hand calcula-
tions. Conditions concerning only the speciﬁc simulation or calcula-
tion method are described subsequently.
Figure 7: Isometric view of initial case setup. Grey plane illustrates area
used for 2D simulation in COMSOL
23
==PAGE:40==
24
initial verification case - setup and results
Figure 7 shows the geometry of the initial simpliﬁed case. The anal-
ysed duct is 1 m wide and 2 m tall. Calculations and simulations are
carried out for two cases where the duct has a depth of 0.01 m and
0.03 m respectively. The air enters the duct in the bottom opening at
a known velocity and temperature and exits through the top open-
ing. The temperature of the exiting air denoted, Ta, yielded by the
simulation and calculation approaches are eventually compared. To
signiﬁcantly reduce simulation time, the case is modelled as a 2D
problem in COMSOL and Ansys Fluent. The grey area in the Figure 7
illustrates the plane simulated in COMSOL, while Figure 8 illustrates
the 2D geometry.
Figure 8: Illustration of the initial case 2D geometry simulated in COMSOL
and Ansys Fluent
The common simulation/calculation inputs are speciﬁed in Table
1. The duct wall temperature is kept constant at 25 °C, while the inlet
air temperature is kept constant at -12 °C. The range of inlet air ve-
locities are chosen with the intend to describe a range of air velocities
that might become relevant in the case of the ventilated facade. Addi-
tionally the velocity range will yield air ﬂows in both the laminar and
turbulent regime. This in done intentionally to analyse how especially
COMSOL treats the different ﬂow patterns, including the transition
regime. Ta shown in Figure 8 denotes the average temperature of the
air leaving the duct.
Note that in neither of the three methods - COMSOL, Ansys Fluent
or hand calculation - no actual wall is modelled or calculated for. As
such, the modest temperature gradient over an eventual duct wall is
not considered.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 COMSOL Conditions
25
Description
Input
Tw
Constant wall temperature,
25°C
Te
Inlet air temperature
-12°C
v
Inlet air velocity
0.1 - 5.0 m/s
Table 1: General calculation inputs for the simple case veriﬁcation
4.1
comsol conditions
All simulations carried out in the initial case veriﬁcation are station-
ary. Overall four different simulation types has been carried out in
COMSOL for the simple case veriﬁcation:
◦COMSOL, laminar ﬂow
◦COMSOL, laminar ﬂow, f.dvlp. ﬂow
◦COMSOL, turbulent ﬂow, k-ϵ
◦COMSOL, turbulent ﬂow, k-ω
The ﬂows are treated as compressible ﬂows and as such the thermal
conductivity, dynamic viscosity are given as a function of the air tem-
perature etc. and COMSOL automatically assigns the correct value in
each cell. No gravitational force is applied to the ﬂuid domain, and
therefore no eventual, and presumably quite limited - buoyancy is
accounted for.
The two laminar simulations are identical besides the varying in-
let conﬁguration. In the COMSOL, laminar ﬂow, the inlet velocity is
applied homogeneously over the entire cross section of the inlet face.
The COMSOL, laminar ﬂow f.dvlp. ﬂow is modelled with a so-called
fully developed ﬂow which alters the velocity proﬁle at the inlet mim-
icking a fully developed ﬂow.
For the two turbulence models, k-ϵ and k-ω, the Automatic Wall
Treatment is applied. The laminar ﬂow is solved to the very edge of
the ﬂuid domain and no wall treatment is needed.
Figure 9 shows the meshing of a section of the duct with depth =
0.01 m and 0.03 m, respectively. As shown, COMSOL generally ap-
plies a triangle-mesh while a more reﬁned boundary mesh is applied
at the edge of the ﬂuid domain.
==PAGE:42==
26
initial verification case - setup and results
Figure 9: Meshing of initial simple case in COMSOL for depth = 0.01 m and
0.03 m
4.2
ansys fluent conditions
The model setup in ANSYS Fluent is almost identical to the laminary
COMSOL setups. There is no option to model the inlet ﬂow as fully
developed, and as such the velocity proﬁle is ﬂat over the inlet face.
The meshes used in Ansys Fluent is shown in Figure 10. As for
the COMSOL simulations a reﬁned boundary mesh is applied at the
edge of the ﬂuid domain.
Figure 10: Meshing of initial simple case in Ansys Fluent for depth = 0.01 m
and 0.03 m
4.3
comparison of results
Figure 11 shows Ta of the exiting air in the simpliﬁed case with a
duct depth of 0.01 m.
There is a strong agreement between analytical calculation, laminar
COMSOL and Ansys Fluent results in the laminar regime in ﬂows
with Reynolds number < 2100-2300. The small deviation increases
as the air ﬂows approaches the transient regime; with a worst case
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Comparison of Results
27
Figure 11: Simple case result - duct width = 0.01 m. Average temperature of
exiting air, Ta
difference between the analytical calculation and the Ansys Fluent
simulation of ∼1.4 °C at V = 1.8 m/s. Simulations using the k-ϵ and
k-ω turbulence models were carried out for the entire range of air
ﬂow velocities. As expected, the two models perform poorly in the
laminar regime, where especially the k-ϵ shows deviating trends. In
the transient regime > Re = 2100-2300 the deviation between the tur-
bulence models and the hand calculation decreases as the Reynolds
number increases, however the k-ω model does not become convinc-
ing until Reynolds number = ∼6000, and at that point the k-ϵ model
stills deviates with ∼1 °C.
The laminar simulation in COMSOL were carried twice; one where
the inlet had a constant velocity over the entire inlet cross-section, and
one were the inlet ﬂow was set to be fully developed. This was done to
account for any eventual signiﬁcant impacts caused by the the nature
of the inlet ﬂow. The data on the ﬁgure for COMSOL, laminar ﬂow and
COMSOL, laminar ﬂow, d.dvlp. ﬂow respectively show no signiﬁcant
difference, and the option to simulate for a fully developed ﬂow will
not be utilized henceforth.
As such, the analysis for a duct depth = 0.01 m shows that ana-
lytical hand calculations and simulations perform quite convincingly
in the laminar regime, while some uncertainty presents itself in the
transient regime and the early turbulent regime.
==PAGE:44==
28
initial verification case - setup and results
Figure 12: Simple case result - duct width = 0.03 m. Average temperature of
exiting air, Ta
Figure 12 shows Ta of the exiting air in the simpliﬁed case with a
duct depth of 0.03 m. Referring to the deﬁnition of Reynolds number,
turbulent ﬂow is now expected at lower velocities, than what was the
case for a duct depth of 0.01 m. Similar to the previous case, reason-
able agreement is present in the laminar regime, where however the
analytical hand calculation presents quite lower temperatures than
the simulation carried out in COMSOL and Ansys Fluent with a de-
viation that increases towards the transitional regime. In the turbulent
regime the hand calculations, the k-ϵ and k-ω models coincide at a
Reynolds number of approximately 10,000 - 12,000. In the lower tran-
sition regime the deviation between the simulation models and the
hand calculations is 3-4 °C. Note, that the k-ω now in fact presents
reasonable results in the laminar regime.
The data shown in Figure 11 and Figure 12 are available in Ap-
pendix A.
Overall the two initial investigations show that COMSOL presents
reasonably reliable results in the laminar region using the laminar
ﬂow model, while one should be cautious when simulating ﬂows in
the transient regime. In turbulent ﬂows with Reynolds number of
above 10,000-12,000 COMSOL again present reasonable results. An-
other signiﬁcant learning from the initial simulations is, that the du-
ration of simulations where turbulence models are employed is easily
100-500 times longer than the same geometry analysed with the lam-
inar model. In other words; where a simulation of a laminar ﬂow
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Additional Observations
29
models may take 10 seconds, the simulation of a turbulent model
may last for 30 minutes - off course depending on the computational
power at hand.
4.4
additional observations
Temperature and Velocity Patterns
Figure 13 (a) and (b) show the air ﬂow velocity proﬁle and the air
temperature proﬁle at an arbitrary cross-section for a simulation of
the initial veriﬁcation case where v = 0.1 m/s and the duct depth is
0.01 m; the ﬂow is modelled as laminar.
(a) Air ﬂow velocity
(b) Air ﬂow temperature
Figure 13: Temperature and velocity proﬁles for initial veriﬁcation case. Fig-
ures show results valid for v = 0.3 m/s and duct width = 0.01
m
The parabolic nature of both temperature and velocity distribution
shown in the ﬁgure is very analogous to the illustrations shown in
Chapter 3 - Figure 4 and 5 - and thus the general reliability of the
COMSOL simulations is reafﬁrmed.
Comparison of k-ω wall treatment options
As mentioned in Chapter 3, Section 3.2, COMSOL offers three differ-
ent wall treatment options when using the k-ω turbulence model; ei-
ther Automatic, Low-Reynolds or Wall function. The Low-Reynolds-setting
offers the most precisely calculated ﬂow, as it forces the application of
the k-ω-turbulence model to the very boundary of the ﬂow. The Wall
function offers the most coarse simulation of the near-wall ﬂow, as it
enforces a pre-determined analytical model in a given distance from
the wall. The Automatic wall treatment is the middle course of the two
other options; if the mesh quality is high enough Low-Reynolds wall
treatment is applied, otherwise a reﬁned Wall function is applied.
For the k-ω simulations shown in Figure 11 and Figure 12 the Au-
tomatic treatment was applied. To examine the potential differences
==PAGE:46==
30
initial verification case - setup and results
between the wall treatment options, a quick analysis was carried out
simulating a ﬂow with v=1.5 m/s through the duct with width = 0.01
m.
Wall treatment
Ta
Simulation Duration
Automatic
23.70°C
18 min 31 sec
Low −Reynolds
23.71°C
51 min 5 sec
Wall Function
23.40°C
10 min 20 sec
Table 2: k-ω wall treatment comparison
Table 2 shows the result of the k-ω wall comparison. The Automatic
and Low-Reynolds -options result in nearly identical Ta while the Wall
Function differs with ∼0.3 °C - which in this context is a lot. The du-
ration of the simulation carried out with Automatic wall treatment is
less than 1/3 of the Low-Reynolds-simulation, and with the insignif-
icant temperature deviation in mind, the Automatic wall treatment
overall offers the most precise and efﬁcient option. This brief exercise
approves the application of the Automatic wall treatment in the ini-
tial simpliﬁed veriﬁcation case and strongly suggest its use in Part V,
where turbulent ﬂow is simulated.
==PAGE:47==
Part III
S TAT I O N A RY S I M U L AT I O N S - P R E - H E AT I N G
P O T E N T I A L
==PAGE:48==
==PAGE:49==
5
M E T H O D O L O G Y O F S TAT I O N A RY S I M U L AT I O N S
The evaluation of the pre-heating potential of ventilated façades is
based on the analyses of a 1 m2 (1 m wide x 1 m high) façade section.
The methodology given in the following applies to the simulations
carried out for Facade Type I, Facade Type II and Facade Type III. The
aim is to account for the potential pre-heating of the replacement
air and to compare the stationary energy balance of the ventilated
façades with comparable non-ventilated reference façades. An analyt-
ical method for calculating the performance of ventilated façades is
presented later in this chapter. The results of the analytical approach
will serve as a comparison to the results obtained through the COM-
SOL simulations.
5.1
temperatures and energy balance
The key entities used in the calculations are shown in Figure 14.
Figure 14: Energy ﬂows and temperature conditions in the ventilated fa-
cades
33
==PAGE:50==
34
methodology of stationary simulations
Before elaborating on the energy balance of the ventilated façade a
dimensionless quantity, ηT, is introduced:
ηT = Ta −Te
Ti −Te
(24)
Ta
pre-heated inlet air temperature [°C]
Te
outside air temperature [°C]
Ti
inside air temperature [°C]
ηT allows for a more condensed representation of the pre-heating
of the replacement air, when comparing the results of simulations car-
ried out with varying values of Te. A ηT closer to 1 means that Ta due
to the pre-heating is close to Ti, and that the inlet air will cause only
a limited heating demand when it enters the inside of the building. A
low ηT closer to 0 illustrates a very limited pre-heating were Ta is not
very different from the original outside temperature of the air ﬂow,
Te.
Returning to the energy balance introduced in Figure 14 it is in-
dicated that the energy balance of the ventilated façade can be ex-
pressed in two ways depending on where the control volume is placed
- see 1⃝and 2⃝in Figure 14. Besides the control volumes, Figure 14
illustrates the transmission loses, Qtrans,1 and Qtrans,2, correspond-
ing to the two control volumes and the relevant temperatures, Te, Ti,
Ta as well as the air ﬂow through the facade, qv [m3/s]. On the inte-
rior - and exterior side of the ventilated gap a number of construction
layers are located yielding a thermal resistance between the venti-
lated gap and the internal environment and between the ventilated
gap and the external environment.
For control volume 1⃝the total heat loss through the ventilated
façade caused by transmission - and ventilation loss is expressed in
Eq. (25), where the ﬁrst term on the right hand side expresses the
heat transmission and the second term expresses the ventilation loss.
Q1 = Qtrans,1
|
{z
}
COMSOL output
+qvρCp(
COMSOL input
z}|{
Ti −Ta
|{z}
COMSOL output
)
[W]
(25)
For control volume 2⃝the total heat loss through the ventilated
façade caused by transmission - and ventilation loss is expressed in
Eq. (26).
Q2 = Qtrans,2
|
{z
}
COMSOL output
+qvρCp(Ti −Te
| {z }
COMSOL input
)
[W]
(26)
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Temperatures and Energy Balance
35
The value of qv depends on the inlet velocity applied in the simu-
lations and is recalculated to reﬂect the air ﬂow through one meter
of façade width. As the simulations carried out for Façade Type I-III
are stationary Q1 equals Q2. Eventually the results of the simulations
show minor insigniﬁcant differences between Q1 and Q2 in the mag-
nitude of < 1 %.
As isolated values Q1 and Q2 are not that interesting as they present
no notion of whether the energy loss of the ventilated façade is higher
or lower than what is the case of a non-ventilated conventional façade
which is the obvious solution for most building envelopes. Therefore
a number of reference façades are introduced as benchmarks. The ref-
erence façades are conventional façades that do not contribute to any
pre-heating of the replacement air. As such the heat loss associated
with a given reference façade is the sum of the transmission loss and
the ventilation heat loss of the unheated replacement air. The heat
loss of a given reference façade is shown in Eq. 27.
Qref,i = Uref,iA(Ti −Te) + qvρCp(Ti −Te)
[W]
(27)
Uref,i
U-value of given reference façade, i [W/m2K]
A
facade area [m2]
Referring back to the deﬁnition of Q2 from Eq. 25 the following
expression of Qtrans,2 is deﬁned, where eventually Uvent,i - the U-
value of a given ventilated façade - is a quantity deduced from the
COMSOL output of Qtrans,2 and the values of Ti and Te applied in
the simulation:
Qtrans,2
|
{z
}
COMSOL output
= Uvent,iA(Ti −Te
| {z }
COMSOL input
)
[W]
(28)
Substituting Qtrans,2 in Eq. 26 with the right-hand-side of Eq. 28
yields:
Q2 = Uvent,iA(Ti −Te) + qvρCp(Ti −Te)
[W]
(29)
By studying the heat loss of the reference façade, Qref,i, given by
Eq. 27 and the heat loss of the ventilated façade Q2 given by Eq. 29
it becomes clear that the only cause of difference between Qref and
Q2 is the difference between Uref,i and Uvent,i - all other terms and
variables are identical. By choosing Q2 and not Q1 as the expression
of heat loss from the ventilated façades, Ta is conveniently omitted.
In other words: comparing the heat loss of the ventilated façades and
the reference façades is limited to the comparison of the magnitude
of the transmission loss given by Uvent,i and Uref,i, where:
==PAGE:52==
36
methodology of stationary simulations
Uvent,i =
COMSOL output
z
}|
{
Qtrans,2
A (Ti −Te)
|
{z
}
COMSOL input
[W/m2K]
(30)
, and Uref,i is the U-value of the given reference façade. In the fol-
lowing chapters presenting the results of the stationary simulations,
the quantity ηU = (Uref,i −Uvent,i)/Uref,i is used to compare the en-
ergy performance of the ventilated - and the reference façades. A rela-
tively lower Uvent,i will yield a ηU closer to 1, indicating that almost
the entire transmission heat loss associated with the non-ventilated
façade is recovered in the ventilated façade. If ηU equals zero the
ventilated will result in the same energy loss as the reference façade,
while if ηU < 0, the energy performance of the reference façade is
superior.
The next step is to deﬁne reasonable reference façades. The ref-
erence façades are conventional façade structures that offer no pre-
heating of the replacement air. The U-values of the three reference
façades are calculated on the basis of the following:
◦Reference Façade 1: the air gap of the ventilated façade is removed.
All other dimensions including the insulations thickness are
kept identical. As such the width of the reference façade is
smaller than the width of ventilated façade by the thickness of
the ventilated gap.
◦Reference Façade 2: the air gap of the ventilated façade is replaced
with insulation. All other dimensions including the insulations
thickness are kept identical. As such the width of the ventilated
façade and the width of the reference façade are identical.
◦Reference Façade 3: the air gap of the ventilated façade is main-
tained, however no air is forced through, and the air gap is no
different from the void found behind any façade-cladding. All
other dimensions including the insulations thickness are kept
identical. As such the width of the ventilated façade and the
width of the reference façade are identical. Eventually Reference
Façade 3 is only included in the evaluation of Façade Type I.
The U-values of the reference façades - Uref,1, Uref,2 and Uref,1
- are not found by simulations but instead calculated according to
DS 418 - Calculation of heat loss from buildings [18] with respect to the
material properties used in the simulations for the ventilated façades.
Note that according to DS 418, the thermal resistance of the air gap
present in reference façade 3 should be set to equal the indoor ther-
mal resistance of 0.13 m2K/W, while the thermal resistance of any
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Temperatures and Energy Balance
37
layers on the exterior side of the air gap should be omitted in the cal-
culations [18]. As the layer composition of Facade Type I, Facade Type II
and Facade Type III varies, the speciﬁc calculations of corresponding
Uref,1−3 are found in the respective chapters.
Ventilation air ﬂow
Besides the façade geometry one important aspect to consider is the
air ﬂow applied in the simulations. According to the Danish Building
Code, in dwellings it must be possible to exhaust up to 20 l/s from
kitchens and 15 l/s from bathrooms. The total ventilation ﬂow in an
apartment with one bathroom and a kitchen is thus 35 l/s = 0.035
m3/s. The airﬂow through the 1 m wide façade sections is inevitably
connected to the cross-sectional area of the ventilated gap and the
velocity of the air ﬂow. Throughout Façade Type I-III (and IV-IX for
that matter) the depth of the ventilated gap is 0.03 m and as such
the cross-sectional area of the ventilated gaps is 0.03 m2 pr. m façade
width. Remaining is to decide on reasonable air velocities. The air
ﬂow velocities used in Façade Type I-III are shown in Table 3, which
also illustrates the façade width necessary to provide an airﬂow of
0.035 m3/s - e.g. will an airﬂow velocity of 0.1 m/s entail a width
of the ventilated façade of 12 m. The coherency between air velocity
and the required width of the ventilated façade is important to bear
in mind when studying the results of the simulations shown in the
following chapters. Note that the chosen air velocities yield air ﬂows
in the laminar regime, and thus the very(!) time consuming turbulent
simulations are avoided.
Flow velocity,
m/s
Req. façade width,
m2
Cross-sectional area,
m2
0.1
∼12.0
∼0.360
0.2
∼6.0
∼0.180
0.3
∼4.0
∼0.120
0.4
∼3.0
∼0.090
0.6
∼2.0
∼0.060
Table 3: Velocity input and façade width required for a ﬂow of ∼0.035 m3/s
In addition to the required exhaustion from kitchen and bathroom,
the Danish Building Code states that in dwellings ventilation must
be provided at a rate of 0.3 l/s/m2 or 0.0003 m3/s/m2. As such an
applied ﬂow of 0.035 m3/s satisﬁes the ventilation requirement in a
dwelling with one kitchen and one bathroom with a ﬂoor area not
exceeding 116.67 m2.
==PAGE:54==
38
methodology of stationary simulations
Analytical Approach to Ventilated Facades
As noted brieﬂy in the beginning of the chapter, an analytical ap-
proach to the ventilated façades does exist [11] [10]. In that context
the type of ventilated façade analysed in this paper is denoted the
parietodynamic façade. The entities used in the analytical method are
shown in Figure 15.
Figure 15: Entities of the parietodynamic facade, [11]
At a given distance, y, into the parietodynamic or ventilated wall
the replacement air temperature is given by:
T(y) = M + (To −M)e−Ny
[◦C]
(31)
, where
M = (Ro + αRs)Ti + (Ri + (1 −α)Rs)To
Ro + Rs + Ri
[−]
(32)
, and
N =
Ro + Rs + Ri
(Ro + αRs)(Ri + (1 + α)Rs)vuρaca
[−]
(33)
==PAGE:55==
5.2 COMSOL Setup
39
To
outside temperature [◦C]
Ti
inside temperature [◦C]
Ro
thermal resistance on ext. side [m2K/W]
Ri
thermal resistance on int. side [m2K/W]
Rs
thermal resistance in ventilated layer [m2K/W]
α
outward facing fraction of RS [−]
ρa
air density [kg/m3]
Ca
air speciﬁc heat capacity [J/kgK]
vu
air ﬂow rate per width of wall of height, h [m3/m2s]
h
wall height [m]
By using the analytical method the temperature at h = 1 m - T(1) - is
calculated and compared to the simulation results. What is important
to note is that despite the sources of the calculation method, [11] [10],
are written by the same author they present different expressions for
the calculations of M and N. The difference does not result in widely
deviating results, however the ambivalence is not ideal, and further-
more it seems that a fully elaborated paper on the subject is still in
preparation with the author. Therefore the derivation of the analytical
method presented here is not quite clear. The expressions of M and
N presented above and used in this context are the ones found in [11].
As the façade simulations are numerous, a quantity or ratio is intro-
duced to assess the pre-heating from Te to Ta found by simulations
in COMSOL and by using the analytical approach:
Ta,analytic −Te
Ta,simulation −Te
[−]
(34)
Perfect agreement between analytical calculations and simulations
will yield a ratio of 1 while a ratio < 1 means that the simulations
predict the pre-heating to be larger than what is predicted by the
analytical approach and vice versa.
5.2
comsol setup
It is important to note, that given the chosen air velocities and the ge-
ometry of the ventilated gap, the modelled air ﬂows are laminar, and
thus the Laminar Flow model is applied. Additionally the ﬂows are
treated as compressible ﬂows and as such the thermal conductivity,
dynamic viscosity etc. are given as a function of the air temperature
etc. and COMSOL automatically assigns the correct value in each cell.
The inlet of air into the ventilated is modelled as a non-developed
ﬂow.
==PAGE:56==
40
methodology of stationary simulations
To account for the radiation between the two walls in the venti-
lated gap an emissivity of 0.9 is applied to the walls. This value cor-
responds to what is usually expected from building materials [19].
Other relevant properties of the materials used in the simulations
are described in Table 11.
Material
Thermal Conductivity, W/mK
Concrete
1.8
Wood
0.1
Insulation
0.037
Table 4: Material Properties
The meshing of the simulated geometries is carried out using the
build-in physics deﬁned meshing option.
Convergence of Simulations
Following the standard COMSOL conﬁguration the simulations are
set to terminate when the error-size becomes < 10−4 for the velocity
and < 10−7 for temperature. Besides the error-size, the convergence
of the simulations is assessed based on mass - and energy imbalance.
The maximum encountered imbalance will be noted for each façade
type. The imbalance will tell if the models conserve mass and energy.
==PAGE:57==
6
FA C A D E T Y P E I - S TAT I O N A RY, 2 D
6.1
simulation setup
Geometry and Conditions
Façade Type I is the most conventional of the analysed façade construc-
tions. It consists of a sandwich element with a layer of insulation be-
tween two thin concrete slabs. The exterior side the ventilated gap is
enclosed by a wooden cladding. Figure 16 illustrates the overall geom-
etry and the input parameters of the simulated model. The horizontal
edges of all layers are adiabatic.
Figure 16: Facade Setup I - Geometry and Boundary Conditions
Ta denotes the temperature of the exiting air after pre-heating. The
input parameters for Façade Setup I are given in Table 5. The param-
eter variation yields a total of 330 simulations.
By varying the thickness of the insulation layer from 0.02 m to 0.3
m, the simulations span from wall constructions with very poor in-
sulation performance to constructions with very good insulation per-
formance. Increasing the insulation thickness will naturally increase
the total thickness of the façade construction - e.g. will a façade with
0.3 m insulation have a total thickness of 0.4 m, which is not always
desirable or even possible in a renovation case.
41
==PAGE:58==
42
facade type i - stationary, 2d
Description
Input
Ti
Indoor temperature
20 °C
Te
Exterior temperature
-12, -5, 0, 5, 10, 15 °C
Rsi
Indoor thermal resistance
0.13 m2K/W
Rse
Exterior thermal resistance
0.04 m2K/W
ϵ
Emissivity
0.9
v
Inlet velocity
0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.6 m/s
Di
Insulation thickness
0.02, 0.04, 0.06, 0.08, 0.1, 0.12,
0.14, 0.16, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3 m
Table 5: Facade Type I - Simulation input
Convergence of Simulation
The simulations converge. The maximum energy imbalance is 2.58 %
while no mass imbalance occurs. The very limited imbalance in terms
of energy is unlikely to have any notable inﬂuence on the results.
Reference Façades
Table 6 shows the calculation of reference U-values for Reference Fa-
cade 1, 2 and 3. The calculations are carried out in accordance with
descriptions set forth in Chapter 5. Evidently, the reference u-values
become functions of Di.
Reference
Façade
Uref, W/m2K
1
1
0.04 m2K
W + 0.01m
0.1 W
mK
+ 0.03m
1.8 W
mK
+
Di
0.037 W
mK
+ 0.03m
1.8 W
mK
+0.13 m2K
W
2
1
0.04 m2K
W + 0.01m
0.1 W
mK
+
0.03m
0.037 W
mK
+ 0.03m
1.8 W
mK
+
Di
0.037 W
mK
+ 0.03m
1.8 W
mK
+0.13 m2K
W
3
1
0.13 m2K
W + 0.03m
1.8 W
mK
+
Di
0.037 W
mK
+ 0.03m
1.8 W
mK
+0.13 m2K
W
Table 6: Facade Type I - Uref-values for reference façades
6.2
results - temperature
Figure 17 shows ηT of all simulations carried out for Facade Type I.
From the ﬁgure it is clear, that the pre-heating of air is dependent
on the air ﬂow velocity and the amount of insulation. The slowest
air ﬂow of 0.1 m/s yields the highest ηT compared to the faster air
ﬂows. Similarly will a thin layer of insulation result in a higher ηT
compared to a wall with a thick layer of insulation.
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Results - Temperature
43
Figure 17: Facade Setup I - ηT
The speciﬁc temperature of the pre-heated air, Ta, is found by us-
ing the expression of ηT found in Chapter 5 or by using the chart
provided in Appendix B. For instance, in a case where the insulation
thickness is 0.02 m and the airﬂow velocity is 0.1 m/s, ηT is approx-
imately 0.180 which is highest value obtained Façade Type I. For Ti =
20 °C and Te = - 12 °C, this means a Ta of approximately - 6 °C and
thus an increase in the temperature of the replacement air of approxi-
mately 6 °C. However, increasing the velocity to 0.2 m/s or increasing
the insulation thickness to 0.04 m, decreases ηT to about 0.085, and
thus the replacement air is only heated from - 12 °C to approximately
- 9 °C. In cases where Te is higher the relative pre-heating of the re-
placement air gets correspondingly lower. It must be noted that the
predominant part of the simulations result in ηT lower than 0.06 and
with air velocities of 0.2 m/s or above and with Di larger than 0.15
m ηT is even less than 0.04 meaning insigniﬁcant pre-heating effects
disregarding the value of Te and Ti.
Figure 18 shows the comparison of the pre-heating found from the
simulations and with the application of the analytical approach. The
comparison shows that for all velocities and for the entire range of in-
==PAGE:60==
44
facade type i - stationary, 2d
sulations thickness, the analytical results are more conservative than
the simulation results. As the insulation layer increases the analytical
prediction get even more conservative and with an insulation thick-
ness of 0.3, the analytical expression yields a pre-heating of approx-
imately 0.3/1 of what the simulations predicts. However, the rather
big difference is in the majority of the instances an expression of a
very vague pre-heating with the use of thick insulation layers; e.g. for
a case with 0.3 m insulation, a Te = 15 °C and an air ﬂow velocity
of 0.4 m/s, the analytical model predicts Ta = 15.032 °C while the
simulations predict a Ta = 15.124 °C. This difference will result in a
ratio 0.26, immediately indicating an incredible deviation, while the
fact is that the two methods only deviate by 0.092 °C in a case where
the pre-heating is absolutely insigniﬁcant. Supporting this inference
is the indication of minimum and average absolute deviation shown
in Figure 18; the minimum deviation is approximately 0.05 °C, while
the average deviation is approximately 0.3-0.4 °C for the entire range
of Di.
Figure 18: Comparison of simulation - and analytical Results. Min., max.
and average deviation is read off the secondary axis
The maximum deviation is almost constant for all Di with a value
of approximately 1.05 - 1.1 °C which cannot be explained with the ex-
==PAGE:61==
6.3 Results - Energy
45
ample stated above. The rather large deviation is caused by cases were
Te = - 12 °C, hence the potential for pre-heating is big. For instance,
in a case with 0.3 m of insulation, Te = - 12 °C and an air ﬂow velocity
of 0.1 m/s, the analytical calculations predict Ta = -11.55 °C while the
simulations predict a Ta = -10.48 °C. The fact that the data points for
the entire range of velocities are relatively on par indicates that the
observed difference between the two methods is primarily caused by
deviating assumptions about the signiﬁcance of the amount of insu-
lation. The deviation is discussed further in Chapter 9.
6.3
results - energy
The following section contains the assessment of the energy-performance
of the ventilated façade compared to the non-ventilated reference
façades introduced in Chapter 5.
Figure 19: Facade Setup I - ηU for ventilated facade and Reference Facade 1.
Avg. Uvent and Uref1 are read off the secondary axis
Figure 19 shows ηU for the comparison of the ventilated façade and
Reference Façade 1. Note, that the tendency lines shown in the ﬁgures,
should only be used to better distinguish the data points representing
the range of air velocities.
==PAGE:62==
46
facade type i - stationary, 2d
The ﬁgure shows that the recovery ratio, ηU, is highly dependent
on both insulation thickness and the air ﬂow velocity. In general
higher air ﬂow velocities mean a higher ηU, while increasing the insu-
lation layer will decrease ηU. For low insulation thickness, 0.02 m - 0.1
m, the recovery rate will be approximately 0.3-0.6 depending on the
air ﬂow velocity. However, most notable is the fact that approximately
1/3 of the data points show a negative value of ηU, meaning that
the transmission loss associated with the ventilated façade is in fact
larger than the one associated with the reference façade. One must re-
member, that for the thick layers of insulation, the transmission loss
is very small for both the reference- and the ventilated façade, and
even though the recovery rate reaches almost - 0.8, it is a matter of a
very limited amount of energy. The average U-value for the ventilated
façade and the average U-value for the Reference façade 1 is available
in the ﬁgure, illustrating the limited transmission loss when using
a thick layer of insulation in both the ventilated- and the reference
façade.
Figure 20: Facade Setup I - ηU for Reference Facade 2. Avg. Uvent and Uref2
are read off the secondary axis
Figure 20 shows ηU of the ventilated façade and Reference Façade
2. The results are rather similar to the ones found for in the previous,
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Results - Energy
47
however the additional insulation layer introduced in the reference
façade which replaces the ventilated gap means that for low values of
Di, the recovery rate ηU decreases even more. The decrease is equally
notable for all of the air ﬂow velocities. This means that the recovery
rate, ηU, never exceeds 0.4, while for the thick insulation layers, ηU,
reaches approximately - 0.9. The added layer of insulation in the ref-
erence façade 2 is also illustrated by the fact that the U-value of ref-
erence façade 2 intersects with the average U-value of the ventilated
façade at a lower Di than what was the case for reference façade 1.
The comparison of the ventilated façade and Reference Façade 3
is shown in Figure 21. The results are almost identical to Reference
Façade 1, and what eventually appears is the fact that the U-values
for the Reference Facade 1 and 3 are almost the same, and thus so is
ηU. As such Reference Facade 3 is abandoned in the evaluation of the
remaining two façades investigated using stationary simulations.
Figure 21: Facade Setup I - ηU for Reference Facade 3. Avg. Uvent and Uref3
are read off the secondary axis
It might be of interest to make use of some sort of heat source em-
bedded in the façade construction. The heat emitter would replace a
==PAGE:64==
48
facade type i - stationary, 2d
conventional radiator and naturally be placed somewhere on the in-
ternal side of the façade construction. The solution would be suitable
especially if included in a more integrated façade element system. If
a heat emitter was placed on the internal side of the ventilated façade,
the temperature here would most likely be higher than the 20 °C ap-
plied in simulations just reviewed. To make a rather coarse estimation
of the effect of such an embedded heat source, simulations are once
again carried out for Façade Type I, but this time Ti is set to 50 °C.
Eventually it appears that the change in Ti has only a slight de-
creasing effect on the values of ηT already found for the simulations
where Ti was 20 °C - e.g. is the maximum attainable ηT decreased
from approximately 0.182 to 0.161. This means the the temperature
of the inlet of replacement air, Ta, increases almost proportionally to
the increase of Ti for a façade geometry like Façade Type I. In terms
of energy the picture is though somewhat different; and for a Ti of
50 °C Façade Type I has a higher transmission loss than the reference
façades for any value of Di. Figures depicting ηT and ηU for Façade
Type I with Di = 50 °C are found in Appendix C.
Generally, Façade Type I will not entail a signiﬁcantly lower trans-
mission loss than comparable non-ventilated façades, and while a
Façade Type I with very low values of Di will actually reduce the trans-
mission loss to some degree, applying thicker layers of insulation will
in fact result in larger transmission losses than non-ventilated façades
with the same amount of insulation.
==PAGE:65==
7
FA C A D E T Y P E I I - S TAT I O N A RY, 2 D
7.1
simulation setup
Geometry and Conditions
Facade Type II is essentially the mirrored version of Facade Type I.
In this facade type the ventilated gap is moved to the warm side of
the insulation layer with the concrete-insulation-concrete sandwich
moved outwards next to the external environment. In this context
the layer next to the internal environment is modelled as a wooden
plate - alternatively the layer could be a slim drywall construction or
something similar in thickness and thermal resistance.
Figure 22: Facade Setup II - Geometry and Boundary Conditions
Figure 22 shows the geometry of Facade Type II. The intention of
the simulations of Facade Type II is to analyse if the revised geometry
will lead to different pre-heating or heat-loss reducing capabilities.
With coincident reasoning the simulation inputs chosen for the sim-
ulations of the Facade Type II are identical to the inputs of the simu-
lations of Facade Type I. The inputs are shown in Table 7. The param-
eter variation yields a total of 330 simulations.
49
==PAGE:66==
50
facade type ii - stationary, 2d
Description
Input
Ti
Indoor temperature
20 °C
Te
Exterior temperature
-12, -5, 0, 5, 10, 15 °C
Rsi
Indoor thermal resistance
0.13 m2K/W
Rse
Exterior thermal resistance
0.04 m2K/W
ϵ
Emissivity
0.9
v
Inlet velocity
0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.6 m/s
Di
Insulation thickness
0.02, 0.04, 0.06, 0.08, 0.1, 0.12,
0.14, 0.16, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3 m
Table 7: Facade Type II - Simulation input
Convergence of Simulation
The simulations converge. The maximum energy imbalance is 0.02145
% while no mass imbalance occurs.
Reference Façades
Table 8 shows the calculation of reference U-values for Reference Fa-
cade 1 and 2. The calculations are carried out in accordance with the
descriptions set forth in Chapter 5.
Reference
Façade
Uref, W/m2K
1
1
0.04 m2K
W + 0.03m
1.8 W
mK
+
Di
0.037 W
mK
+ 0.03m
1.8 W
mK
+ 0.01m
0.1 W
mK
+0.13 m2K
W
2
1
0.04 m2K
W + 0.03m
1.8 W
mK
+
Di
0.037 W
mK
+ 0.03m
1.8 W
mK
+
0.03m
0.037 W
mK
+ 0.01m
0.1 W
mK
+0.13 m2K
W
Table 8: Facade Type II - Uref-values for reference façades
7.2
simulation results - air temperature
Figure 23 shows ηT of Facade Type II. Moving the ventilated gap to
the warm side of the insulation has not surprisingly increased the pre-
heating of the incoming replacement air. Additionally, the pre-heating
seems almost independent of the thickness of the insulation layer, Di.
The slowest air ﬂow with a velocity of 0.1 m/s gains the highest
degree of pre-heating with an ηT of 0.6 - 0.65 while the fastest air
ﬂow achieves ηT of 0.21 - 0.22. In a case with a velocity of 0.1 m/s,
Ti= 20 °C and Te= -12 °C, the replacement air will be pre-heated to
==PAGE:67==
7.2 Simulation Results - Air Temperature
51
approximately 7 - 9 °C depending on the speciﬁc Di - a heating of
the air of 19 - 21 °C. For a ﬂow of 0.6 m/s and the same internal and
external temperatures as the former example the replacement air will
be heated to approximately -5 °C - an increase in the temperature
of the inlet air of 7 °C. Further assessment of the results shown in
Figure 23 can be done using the expression of ηT found in Chapter 5
or by using the chart provided in Appendix B. Eventually it must be
noted, that Façade Type II enables a pre-heating of the ventilation air
far superior to the one exhibited for Façade Type I.
Figure 23: Facade Setup II - ηT
The ratio between the results of pre-heating obtained from the sim-
ulations and analytical calculations is shown in Figure 24. In this case
- contrary to Façade Type I - there is a stronger immediate agreement
between the simulation and analytical results, with a ratio ranging
from approximately 0.75 - 1.05. The tendency is, that for the faster
air ﬂow velocities the analytical calculations are conservative, while
for the 0.1 m/s and 0.2 m/s there is an agreement within a deviation
of 0.05/1. The average deviation is approximately 0.5 - 0.6 °C, while
the minimum deviation is much lower at around 0.05 - 0.1 °C, regard-
less of Di. The maximum deviation increases with Di, and ranges
from approximately 1.4 °at Di = 0.02 m to 1.75 °C. As for the pre-
==PAGE:68==
52
facade type ii - stationary, 2d
vious façade type, the largest absolute deviation measured in °C is
present in cases with a large pre-heating, and since the pre-heating is
signiﬁcant throughout the range of simulations the deviation is not
as alarming in this case, however still not ideal.
Figure 24: Comparison of imulation - and analytical Results. Min., max. and
average deviation is read off the secondary axis
7.3
simulation results - energy
Figure 25 shows the ηU of the Ventilated Facade Type II and the ref-
erence Facade I. Again the value of ηU is dependent on the air ﬂow
velocity and Di. Depending on the air ﬂow velocity and Di ηU varies
from approximately 0.48 - 0.82, with the highest air ﬂow velocity and
thinnest layer of insulations answering for the highest values of ηU.
Note, that contrary to the former façade type, the transmission loss of
Façade Type II is lower than the transmission loss of reference façade
1 in the entire range of Di. Again it must be noted that for façades
with thick insulation layers, the transmission loss will be low, and
even if the ventilated façade recovers ∼0.5 - 0.7 of transmission loss,
it is a matter of a few watts. This is again illustrated by the average
Uvent and Uref, that decreases drastically when Di increases. Most
==PAGE:69==
7.3 Simulation Results - Energy
53
interesting is the fact, that the ventilated façade is able to recover ap-
proximately 0.6/1 - 0.83/1 of the transmission loss associated with
the reference façade in a case where the insulation layer is thin. As
such Façade Type II is especially interesting in places where it is not
possible or just inappropriate in terms of space concerns to place a
well-insulated non-ventilated wall.
Figure 25: Facade Setup II - ηU for Reference Facade 1. Avg. Uvent and
Uref1 are read off the secondary axis
For Reference Façade 2 the pattern is somewhat similar, however
the performance in the low Di-range is lowered slightly by the addi-
tion of insulation applied in reference façade 2. Figure 26 shows how
the ηU for the ventilated facade and Reference Façade 2 ranges from
approximately 0.4 to 0.7, with the slowest air ﬂow of 0.1 m/s answer-
ing for the lower values of ηU. With that said it appears, that even
when the reference façade beneﬁts from an additional, layer of 0.03
m of insulation, the ventilated façade will still be superior in terms of
decreasing the transmission loss.
The generally higher ηu corresponds well with the fact, that the
replacement is pre-heated to a way larger extend, than what the case
==PAGE:70==
54
facade type ii - stationary, 2d
Figure 26: Facade Setup II - ηU for Reference Facade 2. Avg. Uvent and
Uref2 are read off the secondary axis
for Façade Type I. Overall the assessment of Façade Type strongly sug-
gests that in order to pre-heat the replacement air running through
a ventilated façade the thermal resistance between the ventilated gap
and the internal environment must be minimal. Additionally, such
a façade will be able to recover ∼0.4/1 - 0.8/1 - or 40 - 80 % - of
the transmission loss associated with comparable non-ventilated ref-
erence façades.
As for Façade Type I the analyses carried out in the above were also
carried out with Ti = 50 °C coarsely mimicking the temperature con-
ditions if the ventilated façade was equipped with an embedded heat
source on the internal side. The results are almost identical to the
ones found for Ti = 20 °C in terms of both ηT and ηU. This means
that the temperature of the inlet air, Ta, increases proportionally to
the increase of Ti from 20 °C in the original simulations to the re-
vised value of 50 °C. Additionally - and contrary to Façade Type I -
Façade Type II is still able to reduce the transmission loss when com-
pared to the reference façades and even with Ti = 50 °C, 40 - 80 % of
the transmission loss associated with comparable non-ventilated ref-
==PAGE:71==
7.3 Simulation Results - Energy
55
erence façades will be recovered. The ﬁgures relevant for Façade Type
II with Ti = 50 °C are found in Appendix C.
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
8
FA C A D E T Y P E I I I - S TAT I O N A RY, 2 D
8.1
simulation setup
Geometry and Conditions
In Façade Type III the ventilated gap is placed between two sandwich
constructions, each with a layer of insulation enclosed by concrete on
both sides. As such Façade Type III becomes a middle course between
the two former façade geometries where the insulation layer is placed
either entirely on the interior or the exterior side of the ventilated gap.
Figure 27: Facade Setup III - Geometry and Boundary Conditions
The two insulation layers are denoted Di,ext and Di,int for the ex-
ternal and internal layer respectively. To decrease the number of sim-
ulations needed, Te is constant at -12 °C and does not vary. This will
not depreciate the accuracy of the the results given the proportional
relation between ηT and the value of Te which is already shown in the
analysis of the two former façades. Additionally the number of differ-
ent insulation thicknesses has been reduced. The simulation input is
shown in Table 9 yielding a total of 125 simulations.
57
==PAGE:74==
58
facade type iii - stationary, 2d
Description
Input
Ti
Indoor temperature
20 °C
Te
Exterior temperature
-12°C
Rsi
Indoor thermal resistance
0.13 m2K/W
Rse
Exterior thermal resistance
0.04 m2K/W
ϵ
Emissivity
0.9
v
Inlet velocity
0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.6 m/s
Di, ext
Exterior insulation thickness
0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25 m
Di, int
Interior insulation thickness
0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25 m
Table 9: Facade Type III - Simulation input
Convergence of Simulation
The simulations converge. The maximum energy imbalance is 0.0085
% while no mass imbalance occurs.
Reference Façades
Table 10 shows the calculation of U-values for Reference Facade 1 and
2. The calculations are carried out in accordance with descriptions set
forth in Chapter 5. Note that the concrete layers originally included
in the ventilated façade geometry is kept and included in the calcula-
tion of U-value for the reference façades - in reality the amount and
number of concrete layers would be optimized in the case of a non-
ventilated façade. However, due to the very limited thermal resistance
of the concrete material, the inclusion is very unlikely to distort the
results to any signiﬁcant degree. The U-values of the two reference
façades are now a function of Di,ext and Di,int.
Reference
Façade
Uref, W/m2K
1
1
0.04 m2K
W + 0.03m
1.8 W
mK
+
Di,ext
0.037 W
mK
+ 0.06m
1.8 W
mK
+
Di,int
0.037 W
mK
+ 0.03m
1.8 W
mK
+0.13 m2K
W
2
1
0.04 m2K
W + 0.03m
1.8 W
mK
+
Di,ext
0.037 W
mK
+ 0.06m
1.8 W
mK
+
0.03m
0.037 W
mK
+
Di,int
0.037 W
mK
+ 0.03m
1.8 W
mK
+0.13 m2K
W
Table 10: Facade Type III - Uref-values for reference façades
8.2
simulation results - air temperature
Figure 28 shows ηT for Façade Type 3 as a result of the variation
of Di,int. The presence of the exterior layer of insulation, Di,ext is
==PAGE:75==
8.2 Simulation Results - Air Temperature
59
indicated by the slight scattering of the data point for each value
of Di,int and v. This immediately indicates that the degree of pre-
heating is mostly determined by the layer of insulation on the interior
side of the ventilated gap, while the insulation on the exterior side is
far less inﬂuential. For v = 0.1 m/s, ηT reaches approximately 0.17-
0.19 when Di is 0.05 m. This will yield a reasonable pre-heating of
the replacement air, but no way near as potent as what was exhibited
for Façade Type II. When v = 0.6 m/s, ηT is consequently below 0.05
meaning only an insigniﬁcant degree of pre-heating. As such it is
reasonable to infer that in order to pre-heat the replacement air to
any signiﬁcant degree the air ﬂow velocity must be low and the inner
layer of insulation must be thin.
Figure 28: Facade Type III - ηT
Figure 29 shows the comparison of simulation - and analytical re-
sults and there is a strong similarity with the patterns shown for
Façade Type I. Again the analytical calculation method gives a more
conservative estimation of the pre-heating, with a ratio ranging from
approximately 0.23 - 0.8. As noted previously, the strong deviation
shown for especially the thick insulation thickness, is primarily an
implicit result of the very vague pre-heating, while the maximum net
==PAGE:76==
60
facade type iii - stationary, 2d
deviation - reaching approximately 1.8 °C - occurs in instances where
Te = -12 °C. The average deviation is approximately 0.7 °C. Generally
the data points are more scattered than what was the case for Façade
Type I and II, which is likely caused by the presence of the additional
insulation layer.
Figure 29: Comparison of simulation - and analytical Results. Min., max.
and average deviation is read off the secondary axis
8.3
simulation results - energy
The ηU for the ventilated façade and reference façade 1 and 2 is
shown in Figure 30 and 31, respectively.
When compared to Reference façade 1, Façade Type III, is able to re-
cover somewhere between 0.67/1 and 0.95/1 of the transmission loss
associated with the non-ventilated façade. What generally appears is
that the faster air ﬂows obtain the highest values of ηU, while the
slower airﬂows yield a lower ηU. Due to the addition of an exter-
nal layer of insulation, Di,ext, the visual representation of ηU is not
as distinct as what was shown for the two former façade types. For
each value of Di,int and v, ﬁve different values of Di,ext is present.
==PAGE:77==
8.3 Simulation Results - Energy
61
Figure 30: Facade Type III - ηU for Reference Facade 1. Uvent, Max. Uref1,
Min. Uref1 and Avg. Uref1 are read off the secondary axis
When keeping the value of Di,int and v constant an increased value
of Di,ext will result in a higher ηU. E.g. will a case where v = 0.1
m/s, Di,int = 0.05 m and Di,ext = 0.05 m result in an ηU = 0.735, but
when increasing Di,ext to 0.25 m, ηU is increased to 0.827. The vari-
ance depending on the actual thickness of Di,ext is also illustrated by
the indication of both minimum, maximum and average U-values for
the reference façade 1. As also implied by the values of ηU, the aver-
age U-value for the ventilated façade is signiﬁcantly lower than the
U-value of the reference façade no matter the amount of insulation
on the exterior side of the ventilated gap.
For Reference Façade 2 - see Figure 31 - the additional amount of
insulation means, that for low values of Di,int, ηU decreases slightly.
This pattern recurs for Facade Type I and Facade Type II and illustrates
that the additional layer of insulation added in the Reference Facade
2 is only signiﬁcant for poorly insulated ventilated façades.
==PAGE:78==
62
facade type iii - stationary, 2d
Figure 31: Facade Setup III - ηU for Reference Facade 2. Uvent, Max. Uref2,
Min. Uref2 and Avg.s Uref2 are read off the secondary axis
Based on the above elaboration it is reasonable to infer that Façade
Type III offers a appreciable degree of pre-heating, however not at po-
tent as what was exhibited for Façade Type II. The difference is caused
by the layer of insulation placed between the ventilated gap and the
interior environment, which was not present Façade Type II where
only a thin layer of wood separated the ventilated gap and the inter-
nal environment. On the other hand Façade Type III is able to recover
a relatively larger part of the transmission loss otherwise associated
with comparable non-ventilated reference façades resulting in a ηU
that in some instances reaches above 0.9.
For Façade Type III no simulations were carried out with Ti = 50 °C.
Meanwhile it is not unlikely, that the proportionality between Ti, ηT
and ηU shown for Façade Type II will recur for Façade Type III.
==PAGE:79==
9
D E L I B E R AT I O N S A N D S U M M A RY
9.1
deliberations
For all three ventilated façades an apparent deviation between the
simulation results and the results brought forward by the analytical
approach appears. Relatively the deviation is most conspicuous for
Façade Type I and III, while the maximum net deviation ranges from
1.5 - 1.9 °C for all three façade types. The difference is not satisfactory,
but also difﬁcult to explain as the derivation of the analytical calcu-
lation method is not immediately available. However, what could be
a reasonable explanation is the absence of any parameters related to
radiation, which - as brieﬂy elaborated shortly - has some importance.
It is reasonable to state, that the COMSOL simulations take into to ac-
count a wider range of factors than the analytical method, and, as is,
one should be cautious when using the analytical method. In fact the
source of the analytical method includes a benchmark test with con-
ditions relatively equal to the ones carried out in this context, where
real-life results are compared to the results obtained by calculations.
Here the calculation method also underestimates the pre-heating il-
lustrating the claimed coarseness of the approach.
In terms of applied methodology it is worth mentioning that the
reduction of transmission loss, quantiﬁed as ηU, is obtained by com-
paring the results of two different methods. The heat loss of the venti-
lated façades are found by applying COMSOL simulations, while the
reference values are obtained by hand-calculations complying with
the approach set forth in DS418 [18]. As expounded in Chapter 5 the
values found by the two methods are perfectly comparable, but the
difference in methodology will alone create some inaccuracy with a
magnitude which is essentially unknown. With that said, the results
show clear trends, and it is very improbable that the possible inac-
curacy introduced by the variance in methodology will render that
differently.
Another phenomenon that deserves enlargement is the fact, that
generally ηU increases with larger air ﬂow velocities. Inferentially,
this is mainly a result of the cohesion between higher air ﬂow ve-
locities and the decrease of replacement air ﬂow temperatures which
eventually results in a reduced transmission heat loss between the
replacement air ﬂow and the exterior environment. It is important to
note, that increasing the air ﬂow velocity beyond the demands of the
63
==PAGE:80==
64
deliberations and summary
indoor climate with the sole aim of a higher value of ηU is unwise, as
this will result in an increased ventilation heat loss regardless of the
lowered transmission heat loss.
Furthermore one question appears: is it reasonable to expect an
air temperature of 20 °C just on the interior side of the thin wooden
cladding when the cold replacement air runs just on the other side of
it? This question cannot be answered sufﬁciently by the analyses of
the three façade types as the surface temperature - with the addition
of the modest internal thermal resistance - is a boundary condition.
The uncertainty related to a potential cold surface also opens up for
questions related to condensation on the interior side of the ventilated
façade. These questions are treated in Part V where simulations in a
room-scale scope are carried out.
9.2
summary
The pre-heating of the replacement air is primarily determined by the
amount of insulation between the ventilated gap and the indoor envi-
ronment and the speed of which the replacement air travels through
the ventilated gap. The former is best illustrated by Façade Type II
where the thermal resistance between the ventilated gap and the in-
door environment is constituted only by a thin wooden layer resulting
in a convincing degree of pre-heating reaching values of ηT close to
0.65 for the slow air ﬂow velocity of 0.1 m/s. A ηT of 0.65 answers to
a pre-heating from - 12 °C to approximately 8.8 °C when Ti = 20 °C.
The velocity of the replacement air dictates the time it takes for the
air to travel through the ventilated gap and consequently the amount
of air that travels through the gap, and by increasing the velocity the
pre-heating of the replacement air naturally decreases. For instance
for Façade Type II ηT is lowered to 0.43 - 0.45 when increasing the air
ﬂow velocity to 0.2 m/s, which means that the replacement air is pre-
heated to only 1.8 - 2.4 °C and not the former 8.8 °C. For Façade Type
III, ηT is generally signiﬁcantly lower, ranging from 0.025 with a thick
layer of insulation between the ventilated gap and the interior envi-
ronment to around 0.19 with only 0.05 m of insulation. Façade Type I
generally yields even lower and insigniﬁcant values of ηT where only
few instances result in a ηT higher than 0.1.
The transmission loss is lowered the most in Façade Type III where
insulation is found on both the interior- and exterior side of the insu-
lation. The fact that Façade Type II offers the best pre-heating, but not
the greatest reduction of transmission loss might be counter-intuitive,
but a reasonable explanation is related to the radiation between the
two walls of the ventilated gap. When there is no insulation on the in-
==PAGE:81==
9.2 Summary
65
terior side of the ventilated gap, the wall in the ventilated gap closest
to the interior environment gets warm and naturally the replacement
air is heated. However the warm wall in the ventilated gap means
that some heat is lost to the wall on the opposite side of the venti-
lated gap by means of radiation. The warm wall temperature on the
external side of the ventilated gap results in transmission loss through
the part of the construction on the exterior side of the ventilated gap.
When there is insulation on the interior side of the ventilated gap, the
pre-heating is reduced and so is the wall temperature on the internal
side of the ventilated gap, eventually resulting in a decreased radi-
ation between the two walls in the ventilated gap. This explanation
is supported by a brief investigation of the radiative heat transfer on
the exterior wall in the ventilated gap. For a Façade Type II with Di =
0.15, Te = -12 °C and v = 0.2 m/s, the average radiative heat ﬂux is
three times bigger than what is the case for Façade Type III where 0.05
m of insulation is added on the interior side of the ventilated gap. Be-
sides the radiation, the fact that the replacement air of Façade Type II is
in fact warmer, will naturally also result in a increased transmission
loss on the exterior side of the ventilated gap resulting in a generally
lower ηU.
For Façade Type I, ηU is signiﬁcant only in instances with thin in-
sulation layers, while cases with larger amounts of insulation even
yields negative values of ηU meaning that the transmission loss is in
fact larger than what is the case for the corresponding non-ventilated
reference façade.
For all three façades types it must be noted, that for thick layers of
insulation the transmission loss of the non-ventilated reference façade
will be low, and even if the ventilated façades are capable of recover-
ing upwards of 0.7/1 of the loss, the savings are rather small in ab-
solute terms. This launches the ventilated façade as a well-qualiﬁed
solution especially in cases where it is not attainable or possible to
build a well-insulated conventional façade construction.
Eventually it can be summarized that it is possible to both pre-heat
the replacement air and decrease the transmission loss by the appli-
cation of a ventilated façade, however the effect is highly dependent
on a range of factors - air velocity, insulation thickness, location of
insulation etc. - that must be considered if planning to use ventilated
façades. Façade constructions similar to Façade Type II, Façade Type III
will perform well, while façade constructions similar to Façade Type I
are not suitable and that especially not in cases with a thick layer of
insulation.
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
Part IV
T R A N S I E N T S I M U L AT I O N S - P R E - C O O L I N G
P O T E N T I A L
==PAGE:84==
==PAGE:85==
10
M E T H O D O L O G Y O F T R A N S I E N T S I M U L AT I O N S
In the previous part of this paper, the pre-heating of the replacement
air is evaluated using stationary simulations. However, in the follow-
ing, a different take on the ventilated façade is employed with the
question: to what extent is the ventilated façade able to cool down
the replacement air during a summer day? The idea is, that the ther-
mal inertia of the façade construction will enable a temporal shift in
the temperature of the replacement air or even dampen it, resulting
in lower inlet air temperatures during a warm summer day. As this
is now a matter of time-dependent thermal inertia, transient simula-
tions are used.
The potential is analysed through the simulations of six different
façade geometries - IV-IX - all elaborated in the coming seven chap-
ters and compared to a non-ventilated reference façade, in which the
replacement air is not pre-cooled. The pre-cooling potential is evalu-
ated by observing the decrease in inlet temperature and by evaluating
the overall energy balance of 1 m2 (1 m wide x 1 m high) façade for
an entire 24 hours and for the time frame of 08.00-16.00 in which the
cooling effect is particularly desirable during a warm summer day.
As for the former investigations, COMSOL is set to simulate 2D
representations of the façade geometries.
10.1
temperatures and energy balance
Besides the obvious interest in the directly measurable pre-cooling ef-
fect on the replacement air, it is interesting to have a closer look at the
temperature gradients through the façade geometries. The insight in
the temperature proﬁle through the given façade will yield a better
understanding of which parts of the façade that contribute to the cool-
ing effect - and which do not. As the transient simulations generate
an immense amount of data, it has been necessary to focus the exam-
ination on speciﬁc locations in the façades at speciﬁc times. As such,
three cut-planes are placed within each simulation model. On these
cut planes temperature probes are placed with a distance of 0.01 m
from one another each logging the temperature at that exact location
at every time-step of the simulation. The locations of the cut-planes
are shown in Figure 32.
The cut-planes are positioned so that they cover the bottom, mid-
dle and the top of the façade - and thus the progression of air temper-
69
==PAGE:86==
70
methodology of transient simulations
Figure 32: Cut-planes positions in the ventilated facades
ature through the façade. The temperature proﬁles at the cut-planes
are found and elaborated for each façade type in the coming chapters.
In terms of energy the heat ﬂux at four speciﬁc boundaries are par-
ticularly interesting; the heat ﬂux between the indoor environment
at the façade, the heat ﬂux at the internal side of the ventilated gap,
the heat ﬂux at the external side of the ventilated gap and the heat
ﬂux between the façade and the external environment. The four heat
ﬂuxes are denoted Q1flux-Q4flux and their locations are illustrated
in Figure 33. Together with the information on the temperature dis-
tribution obtained through the evaluation of the cut planes, the heat
ﬂuxes will indicate which parts of the façades that contributes to the
cooling effect - e.g. will Q2flux and Q3flux inform about the heat ﬂux
in and out of the air ﬂow in the ventilated gap.
The energy ﬂux of 1 m2 of ventilated façades is denoted Qvent.
Qvent includes transmission loss and ventilation loss, and the expres-
sion of Qvent is shown in Eq. 35. Note, that the transmission loss -
the ﬁrst term on the right hand side - is found as the Q1flux shown
in Figure 33. qv depends on the chosen velocity of the replacement
air ﬂowing through the ventilated gap.
Qvent = Qtrans,vent
|
{z
}
COMSOL output, Q1flux
+qvρCp(
COMSOL input
z}|{
Ti −Ta
|{z}
COMSOL output
)
[W/m2]
(35)
The energy balance of 1 m2 of non-ventilated reference façade also
includes transmission loss and ventilation loss, and the expression of
Qref is shown in Eq. 36. Note how the ventilation loss of the reference
façade depends on the non-cooled/non-heated outside air tempera-
ture, Te.
==PAGE:87==
10.1 Temperatures and Energy Balance
71
Figure 33: Energy ﬂows of the ventilated facade and position of boundary
heat ﬂuxes Q1flux-Q4flux; direction of arrow of boundary ﬂuxes
denotes negative heat ﬂow direction (heat loss).
Qref = Qtrans,ref
|
{z
}
COMSOL output, Q1flux
+qvρCp (Ti −Te
|
{z
}
COMSOL input
)
[W/m2]
(36)
Ta
inlet air temperature [°C]
Te
outside air temperature [°C]
Ti
inside air temperature [°C]
qv
air ﬂow [m3/s]
ρ
air density [kg/m3]
Cp
air thermal capacity [J/kgK]
Contrary to the stationary simulations of Part III, the reference
façade used in this context are simulated using COMSOL, and only
one general type of reference façade is deﬁned. The reference façade
is essentially a sandwich construction with the same amount of in-
sulation as the ventilated façade enclosed by concrete, and with the
ventilated gap removed. The ventilated Facade Type IV, V, VI, VIII and
IX all contain 0.15 m of insulation, and is therefore compared to the
reference façade shown in Figure 34 (a). The ventilated Facade Type
VII contains only 0.05 m of insulation and is therefore compared to
the reference façade shown in Figure 34 (b). The horizontal arrow il-
==PAGE:88==
72
methodology of transient simulations
lustrates the non-cooled/non-heated ﬂow of replacement air, qv, that
enters the interior environment with a temperature of Te.
(a) Valid for Façade Type IV, V, VI, VIII and IX
(b) Valid for Façade Type VII
Figure 34: Reference facades for transient simulations
Eventually the total aggregated heat ﬂux is found for both the ven-
tilated façade and the reference façade for the entire 24 hours and
for the time-frame of 08.00-16.00. The energy ﬂux is aggregated us-
ing the method of trapezoidal integration, [13]. The energy quantities
are measured in Wh and denoted E24,vent, E8−16,vent and E24,ref,
E8−16,ref for the ventilated façade and the reference façade respec-
tively. A negative quantity denotes a heat loss, while a positive quan-
tity denotes a heat gain and essentially a large heat loss indicates
a good cooling performance. The energy quantities will reveal the
overall performance of the ventilated façades compared to the perfor-
mance of the non-ventilated reference façade. The two time frames
are chosen to give a nuanced quantiﬁcation of the façade perfor-
mance; the performance of the entire 24 hours is interesting in a gen-
eral perspective, while the period of 08.00-16.00 will account for the
cooling performance in the time when cooling is most desirable.
10.2
simulation setup
The following section describes the simulation setup valid for all fa-
cade types, IV-IX.
In terms of deﬁning a reasonable outdoor temperature proﬁle, the
aim has been to establish a representative imitation of a fairly average
summer day. Eq. 37 gives the idealized outdoor temperature proﬁle,
Te, of a day (24 hours) used in the transient simulations [3].
==PAGE:89==
10.2 Simulation Setup
73
Te = ¯Te + ∆Tcos2π(t −tmax)
24
(37)
Te
outside temperature [°C]
¯Te
exterior 24-hours average temperature [°C]
∆T
24-hours temperature amplitude [°C]
t
time [hr]
tmax
time of maximum temperature [hr]
According to the DRY 2013 weather ﬁle for Denmark the average
outdoor temperature for July is 17.8 °C [20]. The solid line in Figure 35
shows the temperature proﬁle given by Eq. 37 for an average July day
with ¯Te = 17.8 °C and a peak at 14:00. The average temperature vari-
ation is ∆Te=6 °C [3]. The resulting outdoor temperature proﬁle used
in the simulations is plotted together with the actual time-dependent
temperatures of the DRY 2013 weather ﬁle - it illustrates that the cho-
sen outdoor temperature proﬁle models a fairly average July day.
Figure 35: Temperature proﬁles of an average July day. Solid line: Te with
¯Te = 17.8 °C and ∆Te=6 °C. Dashed line: Ti with ¯Te = 22.0 and
∆Te=4 °C. Temperature maximum at t=14.00. Crosses illustrate
DRY2013 time-dependent temperature for all July days.
==PAGE:90==
74
methodology of transient simulations
The dashed line in Figure 35 shows the indoor temperature proﬁle,
Ti, used in the simulations. The indoor temperature proﬁle is mod-
elled using Eq. 37, with a ¯Te = 22 °C and a ∆Te = 4 °C. The two
temperature proﬁles illustrates the assumption that Ti > Te through-
out the 24 hours. The varying indoor temperature intends to take into
account the increased solar gain during the day-time.
COMSOL Setup
The inlet velocities applied in the transient simulations are chosen
with the same intentions as mentioned for the stationary simulations,
however to decrease the number of simulations the intermediate ve-
locities of 0.3 m/s and 0.4 m/s are omitted. Given the chosen air ve-
locities and the geometry, the ﬂows are laminar, and thus the Laminar
Flow model is applied. The inlet of air is modelled as a non-developed
ﬂow.
The thermal conductivity, dynamic viscosity etc. is given as a func-
tion of the air temperature, and COMSOL automatically assigns the
correct value.
Other relevant properties of the materials used in the simulations
are described in Table 11. Note, that since the simulations are now
transient, the material density and heat capacity matters.
Material
Thermal Conductivity,
W/mK
Density,
kg/m3
Heat Capacity,
J/kgK
Concrete
1.8
2300
880
Wood
0.1
521
2700
Insulation
0.037
22
850
Table 11: Facade Type IV-IX - Material Properties
COMSOL is set to solve the model with a time-step of 120 seconds.
This is a time-step size deemed ﬁt for this purpose, as it allows for
a high level of resolution of the results (720 pr. 24 hours) while not
making the duration of the simulation too long. As this is a time-
dependent or transient simulation it is crucial that the ﬁnal results are
independent of the initial values applied to the models. In this con-
text, independence is achieved when all quantities are periodic with
a period time of 24 hours. More speciﬁcally, the simulation is set-
up with a stop condition that terminates the simulation if the average
temperature of the entire model 1 time-step ago equals the average
temperature 721 time steps ago (24 hours) with a tolerance of ± 1%.
To further ensure independence of the initial values, the stop condition
cannot be employed before 72 hours of simulated time. The simula-
tions carried out for all six façade types terminated after exactly 72
hours, suggesting that the required periodicity and thus the indepen-
==PAGE:91==
10.2 Simulation Setup
75
dence of initial values was achieved already before 72 hours were
simulated.
As the simulations carried out in this context are now transient, the
energy- and mass balance in and out of the models are not necessarily
balanced at each speciﬁc time-step. Actually it is the temporal energy
imbalance that will result in an eventual cooling effect that these simu-
lations are seeking to evaluate. Therefore, energy- and mass balances
are not accounted for as an indication of convergence, and conver-
gence is now only assessed by the independence of initial values and
tolerable error-sizes with values equal to the ones stated for the sta-
tionary simulations.
Note, that following the simulation and interpretation of all transient stud-
ies it appeared that the possible effect of radiation between the two walls of
the ventilated gap had been left out of the simulation setup. This is not ideal,
however it is reasonable to believe that the radiation between the two sur-
faces are less inﬂuential than when compared to the pre-heating case, as the
difference between outside and inside temperatures in the summer situation
is much smaller. The interpretation of the following façades, IV-IX will stay
true to the results of the simulation where eventual effects of radiation are
not considered. Following that, a brief re-study of Façade Type IX will reveal
what the effect of including radiation will imply.
==PAGE:92==
==PAGE:93==
11
FA C A D E T Y P E I V - T R A N S I E N T, 2 D
11.1
geometry and conditions
Façade Type IV is the ﬁrst façade analysed by using transient simula-
tions. The façade is a rather heavy concrete structure with an internal
sandwich construction and an outer layer of concrete enclosing the
ventilated gap. The speciﬁc geometry of Facade Type IV is illustrated
in Figure 36. Note, that contrary to the stationary simulations the
insulation thickness is now kept constant.
Figure 36: Facade Type IV - Geometry and boundary conditions
The boundary conditions applied in the simulations are shown in
Table 12.
Description
Input
Ti
Indoor temperature
see Eq. 37
Te
Exterior temperature
see Eq. 37
Rsi
Indoor thermal resistance
0.13 m2K/W
Rse
Exterior thermal resistance
0.04 m2K/W
v
Inlet velocity
0.1, 0.2, 0.6 m/s
Table 12: Facade Type IV - Simulation input
77
==PAGE:94==
78
facade type iv - transient, 2d
11.2
simulation results - temperature
Figure 37 shows the inside temperature, Ti, the outside temperature,
Te, and the inlet temperatures related to the three air inlet velocities
- Ta 0.1 m/s, Ta 0.2 m/s and Ta 0.6 m/s. The ﬁgure shows that the
ventilated façade is able to signiﬁcantly reduce the inlet temperature
during the day-time hours when comparing to a case where the inlet
temperature equals Te. Not surprisingly the temperature of the slow-
est air ﬂow, 0.1 m/s, decreases the most, while the temperature of the
faster ﬂow of 0.6 m/s is reduced the least. The difference between Te
and the three Ta peak at around 14:00 with and approximate differ-
ence of 2.5 °C, 1.9 °C and 1.2 °C for the three air velocities respectively.
Note the slight shift in time of the peak of the temperature proﬁles.
Whereas Te peaks at 14:00, Ta with v= 0.1 m/s does not peak before
15:00.
Figure 37: Time-dependent temperature proﬁles for ventilated Facade Type
IV
With the immediate results illustrated in Figure 37, the notion of us-
ing the thermal mass of the concrete façade as cooling storage is con-
ﬁrmed. What also becomes evident from Figure 37 is that the façade
will inevitably function as a heat storage which - together with pre-
sumed heat loss from the interior environment - increases the inlet
temperature during night-time. The night-time offset between Te and
the three Ta is the same as the daytime offset only with opposite sign.
Whether the night-heating is considered an advantage or a drawback
will depend on the application of the façade, however the dynamic
is an unavoidable effect of the thermal inertia of the heavy concrete
==PAGE:95==
11.2 Simulation Results - Temperature
79
façade and the transmission heat loss.
Figure 38, 39 and 40 show the temperature proﬁles for the three
cut planes at 02:00, 07:00 and 14:00 for the simulations with an inlet
velocity of 0.1 m/s. The three times are chosen to illustrate the temper-
ature proﬁle at the point of minimum, maximum and a approximate
intermediate outdoor temperature.
Figure 38: Facade type IV, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02:00, velocity:
0.1 m/s
At 02:00 Figure 38 shows how the middle concrete layer is still sig-
niﬁcantly warmer than the inlet air, however the concrete layer facing
the exterior is approximately the same temperature as the inlet air,
and as such the heat ﬂux between the outermost layer and the in-
let air is likely to be insigniﬁcant. The temperature of the concrete
layer facing the interior is constant throughout the layer and is ap-
proximately the same as the interior temperature at the time. The
temperature proﬁles for the 0.5 m and 0.95 m cut planes are approx-
imately the same, while the cold inlet air reduces the temperature of
the middle concrete layer at the 0.05 m cut plane.
At 07:00, as shown in Figure 39, the exterior temperature has risen
signiﬁcantly and the temperature of both the middle and outer layer
of concrete is now lower than the incoming inlet air. Note, however,
how the temperature of the outer layer of concrete has changed sig-
niﬁcantly from ∼12 °C at 02.00 to ∼15.5 °C at 07.00 - while the
temperature of the middle concrete layer is more stable showing no
signiﬁcant increase or possibly even a slight drop in temperature in
==PAGE:96==
80
facade type iv - transient, 2d
the deeper parts of the layer.
Figure 39: Facade type IV, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07:00, velocity:
0.1 m/s
At 14:00, the exterior temperature peaks and Figure 40 shows how
the temperature of the middle concrete layer is still signiﬁcantly lower
than the inlet air enabling the cooling of the inlet air. The ventilated
gap appears with a steep temperature gradient going from ∼24 °C at
the exterior side of the ventilated gap to ∼18.5 - 20.5 °C at the inte-
rior side of the ventilated gap. Analogues to the temperature proﬁles
relevant for time 02:00 the temperature at the 0.05 m cut plane in the
middle concrete layer is more affected by the temperature of the inlet
air and is now higher than the somewhat similar temperatures at cut
plane 0.5 m and 0.95 m.
The ﬁgures for the simulations with inlet velocity of 0.2 m/s and
0.6 m/s are available in Appendix D. The ﬁgures show results very
similar to the ones elaborated above, however most notable is the fact
that the increased air ﬂow through the façade results in slightly larger
temperature variations of the middle concrete layer, increasing the
temperature at 14.00 and decreasing the temperature at 02:00. This
conforms with the temperature proﬁles for the three air velocities
already illustrated in Figure 37. Overall the results suggest that the
middle layer of concrete affects the air temperature the most, while
the temperature of the outer concrete layer never varies signiﬁcantly
from the inlet air temperature, thus offering no real effect on the pre-
cooling of the replacement air.
==PAGE:97==
11.3 Simulation Results - Energy
81
Figure 40: Facade type IV, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14.00, velocity:
0.1 m/s
11.3
simulation results - energy
Figure 41 shows the heat ﬂux over the four boundaries, Q1flux-Q4flux.
Q1flux and Q4flux seem simply governed by the temperature varia-
tions imposed by the temperature boundary conditions. Studying the
heat ﬂux of Q2flux and Q3flux reconﬁrms the notion, that the change
of replacement air temperature is almost entirely caused by the ﬂux
between the middle layer of concrete and the ventilated gap (Q2flux),
while the heat ﬂux between the outermost layer of concrete and the
ventilated gap (Q2flux) only slightly deviates from nought.
To further substantiate the analysis, the heat balance of the ven-
tilated façade structure is compared to a non-ventilated reference
façade. The reference façade is a collapsed version of the ventilated
façade without the ventilated gap and the outermost layer of concrete
simulated with same boundary conditions as the ventilated facade
(see Figure 34. Figure 42 (a) shows the transmission - and ventilation
heat ﬂux for the ventilated façade and the reference façade. A heat
ﬂux into the building is indicated as a positive ﬂux, while a heat ﬂux
out of the building - heat loss - is indicated as a negative ﬂux. While
the transmission ﬂux of the ventilated façade and the reference façade
are nearly identical, the ventilation losses deviate. The deviation in
ventilation ﬂux is a direct result of the difference between Te and Ta,
and as such the proﬁle of the ventilated façade is more damped and
with a temporal shift of about two hours.
==PAGE:98==
82
facade type iv - transient, 2d
Figure 41: Facade type IV, integrated normal boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity:
0.1 m/s
Figure 42 (b) shows the total heat ﬂux of the two façades - the
sum of transmission and ventilation ﬂuxes. The proﬁles perfectly il-
lustrates the temporal shift already noted in Figure 42 (a).
The ﬁgures relevant for the air ﬂow velocities of 0.2 and 0.6 m/s
are found in Appendix D. They show similar tendencies only with a
larger ventilation heat loss reﬂecting the increased air ﬂow.
Table 13 shows the energy balances for all three air velocities and
the corresponding reference façade.
E24,vent,
Wh
E24,ref,
Wh
E8−16,vent,
Wh
E8−16,ref,
Wh
0.1 m/s
-368.7
-392.4
-194.8
-135.6
0.2 m/s
-733.8
-760.7
-275.7
-176.2
0.6 m/s
-2203.6
-2234.1
-533.5
-335.2
Table 13: Facade Type IV - heat balance pr. m2 facade.
In keeping with the results of the stationary results the heat loss
of the ventilated façade is slightly lower than the reference façade
when accounting for the entire 24 hours. However, during the day-
time, 08:00-16:00, the heat loss of the ventilated façade is larger than
the reference façade. For instance does the ventilated façade provide
a relative cooling effect of approximately 200 Wh pr. m2 when the
air ﬂow velocity is 0.6 m/s, while the relative cooling effect with an
air ﬂow velocity of 0.1 m/s is approximately 60 Wh pr. m2. With that
==PAGE:99==
11.3 Simulation Results - Energy
83
(a) Transmission and ventilation heat ﬂux
(b) Total heat ﬂux
Figure 42: Facade type IV, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity: 0.1 m/s
said, one should have in mind that lower air ﬂow velocities will also
mean larger areas of the façades occupied as ventilated façades. Re-
ferring to Table 3 in Chapther 5 an air velocity of 0.1 m/s requires
∼12 m of ventilated façade to ventilate a standard apartment while
a velocity of 0.6 m/s means that only ∼2 m of façade are made de-
mands on. Hence does the air velocity of 0.1 m/s yield a 08:00-16:00
cooling effect of ∼60x12 = 720 Wh while a velocity of 0.6 m/s yields
only ∼200x2 = 400 Wh when aiming for a total air ﬂow rate of 0.035
m3/s.
==PAGE:100==
==PAGE:101==
12
FA C A D E T Y P E V - T R A N S I E N T, 2 D
12.1
geometry and conditions
From the analysis of Façade Type IV carried out in the previous chap-
ter, the most signiﬁcant discovery was the fact, that the outer layer
of concrete facing the outside environment affected the temperature
of the air ﬂow to only a very limited extend, while the middle layer
of concrete seemed much more inﬂuential. As such Façade Type V
presents a geometry, where the outermost layer of concrete has been
reduced to a thin cladding layer with a sole purpose of enclosing the
ventilated gap. The insulation thickness is kept at 0.15 m. The geom-
etry is illustrated in Figure 43.
Figure 43: Facade Type V - Geometry and boundary conditions
The boundary conditions used in the simulations are shown in Ta-
ble 14.
Description
Input
Ti
Indoor temperature
see Eq. 37
Te
Exterior temperature
see Eq. 37
Ri
Indoor thermal resistance
0.13 m2K/W
Re
Exterior thermal resistance
0.04 m2K/W
v
Inlet velocity
0.1, 0.2, 0.6 m/s
Table 14: Facade Type V - Simulation input
85
==PAGE:102==
86
facade type v - transient, 2d
12.2
simulation results - air temperature
The temperature proﬁles relevant for Façade Type V are shown in
ﬁgure 44. The proﬁles are almost exactly identical to the ones found
for Façade Type IV, and as such the notion that the thermal mass of
the exterior layer of concrete is insigniﬁcant is conﬁrmed.
The ﬁgure shows a decrease in inlet temperature of approximately
2.5 °C, 1.9 °C and 1.2 °C for the three respective air ﬂow velocities
at 14:00. At 02:00 the inlet temperatures are warmer than the outside
temperature, with approximately the same offsets as during the day
only with an opposite sign.
Figure 44: Time-dependent temperature proﬁles for ventilated Facade Type
V
Figure 45, 46 and 47 show the temperature proﬁles at the three
different cut planes at 02:00, 07:00 and 14:00 for the air ﬂow veloc-
ity of 0.1 m/s. The temperature proﬁles are very similar to the ones
found for Façade Type IV; at 02:00 the middle layer of concrete is sig-
niﬁcantly warmer than Te and as the air travels through the venti-
lated gap the air temperature increases. The air closest to the middle
layer of concrete is naturally heated the most, and the heating of the
air abates when approaching the outer layer of concrete. The well-
deﬁned, almost linear gradient illustrates the laminar nature of the
air ﬂow where no turbulent mixing occurs.
At 07:00 there is still some potential for pre-heating in the middle -
and upper parts of the middle concrete layer, while the temperature
of the lower part of the middle concrete layer (at 0.05 m) is somewhat
==PAGE:103==
12.2 Simulation Results - Air Temperature
87
lower. At 14:00 the middle concrete layer is still a signiﬁcant source
of cooling with a temperature well below Te.
Figure 45: Facade type V, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02:00, velocity:
0.1 m/s
Figure 46: Facade type V, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07:00, velocity:
0.1 m/s
==PAGE:104==
88
facade type v - transient, 2d
Figure 47: Facade type V, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14:00, velocity:
0.1 m/s
The ﬁgures relevant for the air ﬂow velocities of 0.2 and 0.6 m/s
are found in Appendix D. The ﬁgures show results very similar to
the ones elaborated above, however with slightly larger temperature
variations in the middle concrete layer as a result of the increased air
ﬂow. This means that the temperature is generally higher during the
day and colder during the night - a fact that resonates well with the
values of Ta shown in Figure 44.
12.3
simulation results - energy
Figure 48 shows the boundary heat ﬂuxes Q1flux - Q4flux. While
Q1flux, Q2flux and Q3flux are very similar to what is already found
for Facade Type IV, the amplitude for Q4flux has decreased signiﬁ-
cantly. The decline is most likely a result of the reduced thermal mass
of the outer concrete layer, which however does not affect the temper-
ature conditioning of the replacement air in any signiﬁcant way.
Figure 49 (a) shows the ventilation - and transmission loss for both
the ventilated façade and the non-ventilated reference façade. Not
surprisingly the ﬁgure shows results more or less identical to the ones
found for Facade Type IV; there is only a slight deviation between the
transmission losses for the ventilated façade and the reference façade,
while the difference between the ventilation losses illustrates the pre-
cooling and pre-heating effect of the ventilated façade.
==PAGE:105==
12.3 Simulation Results - Energy
89
Figure 48: Facade type V, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity: 0.1 m/s
(a) Transmission and ventilation heat ﬂux
(b) Total heat ﬂux
Figure 49: Facade type V, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity: 0.1 m/s
The total heat ﬂux of the ventilated - and the reference façade is
shown in Figure 49 (b). The total heat ﬂuxes are super-positions of
the transmission - and ventilation loss illustrated in Figure 49 (a) and
illustrates the temporal shift in both maximum and minimum heat
ﬂux as well as a slightly damped amplitude.
The ﬁgures relevant for the air ﬂow velocities of 0.2 and 0.6 m/s
are found in Appendix D. Generally the patterns found for 0.1 m/s
recur for the faster air ﬂows, however the ventilations loss increases
proportionally with the increased air ﬂow.
==PAGE:106==
90
facade type v - transient, 2d
Table 15 shows the energy balance for the three air ﬂow velocities.
The table show results very similar to the former façade type and
should be considered with the same remarks as already stated. Over-
all the inference suggested in the former chapter can be repeated;
because the temperature of the outer layer of concrete more or less
follows the temperature of the external environment the layer has no
signiﬁcant effect on the replacement air. Meanwhile, the temperature
of the middle concrete layer is more stable and therefore it is able to
cool the replacement air during the day and heat it during the night.
E24,vent,
Wh
E24,ref,
Wh
E8−16,vent,
Wh
E8−16,ref,
Wh
0.1 m/s
-368.8
-392.4
-187.4
-135.6
0.2 m/s
-734.0
-760.7
-262.3
-176.2
0.6 m/s
-2204.0
-2234.1
-508.1
-335.2
Table 15: Facade Type V - heat balance pr. m2 facade.
==PAGE:107==
13
FA C A D E T Y P E V I - T R A N S I E N T, 2 D
13.1
geometry and conditions
Facade Type VI is a revised version of the two previous façade types.
The ventilated air gap remains on the exterior side of the insulations
layer, however the middle concrete layer is now removed. The outer
layer of concrete facing the exterior environment and the inner layer
of concrete remain - both with a thickness of 0.07 m. If the conclusion
reached based on the two former façade analysis holds up, the tem-
perature of the replacement air should not be pre-cooled signiﬁcantly.
The geometry and dimensions of facade Type VI are shown in Figure
50.
Figure 50: Facade Type VI - Geometry and boundary conditions
The boundary conditions used in the simulations are shown in Ta-
ble 16.
Description
Input
Ti
Indoor temperature
see Eq. 37
Te
Exterior temperature
see Eq. 37
Ri
Indoor thermal resistance
0.13 m2K/W
Re
Exterior thermal resistance
0.04 m2K/W
v
Inlet velocity
0.1, 0.2, 0.6 m/s
Table 16: Facade Type VI - Simulation input
91
==PAGE:108==
92
facade type vi - transient, 2d
13.2
simulation results - air temperature
Figure 51 shows the temperature proﬁle for Te, Ti and the inlet tem-
perature of the replacement air, Ta, for the three different air ﬂow
velocities. Regardless of the air ﬂow velocity during the day the re-
placement air is cooled to no or only a very limited degree; the peak
value of Ta for the three ﬂow velocities are identical and the time of
maximum temperature is only shifted slightly from 14.00 to approx-
imately 14.15-14.30. At night, the inlet air is pre-heated slightly, and
depending on the ﬂow velocity, the inlet air is 0.2-0.5 °C warmer than
the current Te. The night-time pre-heating is most likely a result of
a combination of heat transmission from the internal environment
and some very limited left-over heat remaining in the outer layer of
concrete.
Figure 51: Time-dependent temperature proﬁles for ventilated Facade Type
VI
The temperatures of the cut-planes in the façade are shown in Fig-
ure 52, 53 and 54 for the time of 02:00, 07:00 and 14:00. At 02:00 a
slight temperature gradient is observed in the layer of air in the ven-
tilated gap, however the pre-heating is nowhere as potent as shown
for the previous façade types.
At 07:00 a rather peculiar phenomenon is observed; the part of the
outer layer of concrete adjacent to the ventilated gap is now ∼1 °C
colder than the outside air, and as such a source of slight pre-cooling
pre-cooling. At the same time, the replacement air adjacent to the
insulation layer is warmed by the transmission loss from the interior
==PAGE:109==
13.2 Simulation Results - Air Temperature
93
Figure 52: Facade type VI, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02:00, velocity:
0.1 m/s
side of the façade. Eventually the two opposite sources equalize each
other, resulting in only a very limited effect on the inlet temperature.
Figure 53: Facade type VI, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07:00, velocity:
0.1 m/s
==PAGE:110==
94
facade type vi - transient, 2d
At 14:00 the temperature is homogeneous throughout the entire
façade construction, and virtually no pre-cooling is obtained conﬁrm-
ing the results of Figure 51.
Figure 54: Facade type VI, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14:00, velocity:
0.1 m/s
The ﬁgures relevant for the air ﬂow velocities of 0.2 and 0.6 m/s
are found in Appendix D. As for the former façades, the patterns
recur for the increased air ﬂows displaying only a slight increase in
the maximum and minimum temperatures.
13.3
simulation results - energy
Figure 55 shows the boundary heat ﬂuxes, Q1flux - Q4flux.
As mentioned previously Q1flux and Q4flux are mainly governed
by the imposed boundary temperatures and are very similar to ones
of the previous façade type. Q2flux and Q3flux deviates only slightly
from nought illustrating how little thermal impact the façade con-
struction has on the replacement air. The comparison of the ventilated
façade and the non-ventilated reference façade is shown in Figure 56.
Figure 56 (a) shows how the transmission loss of the two façades
are nearly identical, while a slight difference is observable between
the ventilates ﬂuxes. The inlet temperature of the replacement air in
the reference façade equals Te, and the small difference between the
two ventilation losses is therefore directly related to the difference be-
tween Te and Ta. Referring to Figure 56 (b) the results show that for
the ventilated façade the aggregated loss is now slightly higher than
==PAGE:111==
13.3 Simulation Results - Energy
95
Figure 55: Facade type VI, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity: 0.1 m/s
for the reference façade from around 16.00 to around 04.00, while in
the remaining time - the day-time hours - the losses are equal.
(a) Transmission and ventilation heat ﬂux
(b) Total heat ﬂux
Figure 56: Facade type VI, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity: 0.1 m/s
With the very limited to non-existing capability to pre-cool - and
pre-heat for that matter - the replacement air, Facade Type VI is in
this context inferior to the two former façade types. Eventually the
performance of Facade Type VI is quantiﬁed and shown in Table 17 for
all three air ﬂow velocities. For the period of the entire 24 hours the
heat loss associated with the ventilated façade is only slightly lower
==PAGE:112==
96
facade type vi - transient, 2d
than the reference façade. For the time of 08.00-16.00 the ventilated
façade delivers a relative cooling effect of insigniﬁcant magnitude.
E24,vent,
Wh
E24,ref,
Wh
E8−16,vent,
Wh
E8−16,ref,
Wh
0.1 m/s
-368.4
-392.4
-137.4
-135.6
0.2 m/s
-733.5
-760.7
-180.0
-176.2
0.6 m/s
-2203.8
-2234.1
-350.1
-335.2
Table 17: Facade Type VI - heat balance pr. m2 facade.
==PAGE:113==
14
FA C A D E T Y P E V I I - T R A N S I E N T, 2 D
14.1
geometry and conditions
The geometry of Façade Type VII is a modiﬁed version of the former
Facade Type VII with a much thinner layer of insulation. The inner
and outer layer of concrete remain - both with a thickness of 0.07 m.
Based on the learnings from the previous façade types one should
expect only a very limited degree of pre-cooling, while the decreased
thickness of the insulations layer between the ventilated gap and the
interior environment will supposedly result in a higher degree of pre-
heating during the night. Figure 57 shows the geometry and dimen-
sions valid for Facade Type VII. The boundary conditions are shown
in Table 18.
Figure 57: Facade Type VII - Geometry and boundary conditions
Description
Input
Ti
Indoor temperature
see Eq. 37
Te
Exterior temperature
see Eq. 37
Ri
Indoor thermal resistance
0.13 m2K/W
Re
Exterior thermal resistance
0.04 m2K/W
v
Inlet velocity
0.1, 0.2, 0.6 m/s
Table 18: Facade Type VII - Simulation input
97
==PAGE:114==
98
facade type vii - transient, 2d
14.2
simulation results - air temperature
Figure 58 illustrates Te, Ti and Ta for the three air ﬂow velocities. As
anticipated the day time pre-cooling effect is very limited, again illus-
trating that the outer layer of concrete is mostly irrelevant in terms of
pre-cooling the replacement air. At night the replacement air is pre-
heated more than what was experienced in the former Facade Type
VI. The replacement air is now pre-heated 0.2-1.2 °C depending on
the air ﬂow velocity. The increased pre-heating is a natural effect of
the reduced insulation thickness between the ventilated gap and the
interior environment, and as such the results also resonate very well
with the conclusions based on the stationary simulations of Part III.
Figure 58: Time-dependent temperature proﬁles for ventilated Facade Type
VII
Figure 59, 60 and 61 show the temperature conditions in the façade
at the times 02:00, 07:00 and 14:00 respectively. The patterns shown
in the former Façade Type VI generally recur. Most notably is again
the phenomenon observed at 07:00 where the transmission loss from
the interior heats the replacement in the inner part of the ventilated
gap, while the outer layer of concrete adjacent to the outer part of
the ventilated gap cools the nearby air. As the insulation layer is now
thinner than what was the case for the former façade type, the pre-
heating effect yielded by the transmission loss outweighs the vague
pre-cooling effect.
At 14:00 the temperature proﬁle is completely ﬂat throughout the
façade, and as illustrated in Figure 58 one can expect no pre-cooling
of the replacement air at the warmest part of the day.
==PAGE:115==
14.2 Simulation Results - Air Temperature
99
Figure 59: Facade type VII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02:00, veloc-
ity: 0.1 m/s
Figure 60: Facade type VII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07:00, veloc-
ity: 0.1 m/s
==PAGE:116==
100
facade type vii - transient, 2d
Figure 61: Facade type VII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14:00, veloc-
ity: 0.1 m/s
The ﬁgures relevant for the air ﬂow velocities of 0.2 and 0.6 m/s
show trends very similar to ones valid for an air ﬂow velocity of 0.1
m/s. The ﬁgures are found in Appendix D.
14.3
simulation results - energy
Figure 62 shows the boundary heat ﬂuxes, Q1flux - Q4flux for Façade
Type VII. Analogous to the former façades, the very vague oscillation
of Q2flux and Q3flux illustrates how little the replacement air is in-
ﬂuenced by the ventilated façade - they barely deviate from nought.
Q1flux and Q4flux seems to follow the imposed interior and exterior
temperature boundary conditions.
Figure 63 (a) and (b) shows the comparison of the heat ﬂuxes of
the ventilated façade and non-ventilated reference façade. (b) illus-
trates how the decreased insulation thickness means that the total
net heat ﬂux into the interior is now almost consequently higher for
the ventilated façade than for the reference façade, while during the
mid-day hours the heat balances overlap. In other words; the total
relative cooling effect of the ventilated façade is now mostly inferior
to the cooling effect of the conventional non-ventilated façade - dead
against the intentions.
==PAGE:117==
14.3 Simulation Results - Energy
101
Figure 62: Facade type VII, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity: 0.1 m/s
(a) Transmission and ventilation heat ﬂux
(b) Total heat ﬂux
Figure 63: Facade type VII, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity: 0.1 m/s
Figures valid for the air ﬂow velocities of 0.2 and 0.6 m/s are avail-
able in Appendix D.
The performance of Facade Type VII is quantiﬁed similarly to the
former façades and the result is shown in Table 19. As stated in the
table the heat loss - indicating the overall cooling potential - is now
greater for the reference façade for both the entire 24 hours and for
the time span of 08.00-16.00. As such further work with façade types
identical or similar to Façade Type VII (or Façade Type VI) should not
be pursued with the intention of pre-cooling in mind.
==PAGE:118==
102
facade type vii - transient, 2d
E24,vent,
Wh
E24,ref,
Wh
E8−16,vent,
Wh
E8−16,ref,
Wh
0.1 m/s
-369.8
-438.6
-136.4
-144.1
0.2 m/s
-729.1
-806.9
-178.0
-184.0
0.6 m/s
-2194.3
-2280.3
-347.4
-349.7
Table 19: Facade Type VII - heat balance pr. m2 facade.
==PAGE:119==
15
FA C A D E T Y P E V I I I - T R A N S I E N T, 2 D
15.1
geometry and conditions
In Facade Type VIII the ventilated gap is located on the interior side of
the insulation layer, while a layer of concrete with a thickness of 0.15
m is located between the ventilated gap and the internal environment.
On the exterior side of the insulation layer a thin layer of concrete is
placed mimicking a typical plaster ﬁnish.
The coming analysis will disclose whether the thermal mass of the
inner concrete layer will impact the replacement air. The speciﬁc ge-
ometry of Facade Type VIII is shown in Figure 64.
Figure 64: Facade Type VIII - Geometry and boundary conditions
The boundary conditions used in the simulations are shown in Ta-
ble 20.
Description
Input
Ti
Indoor temperature
see Eq. 37
Te
Exterior temperature
see Eq. 37
Ri
Indoor thermal resistance
0.13 m2K/W
Re
Exterior thermal resistance
0.04 m2K/W
v
Inlet velocity
0.1, 0.2, 0.6 m/s
Table 20: Facade Type VIII - Simulation input
103
==PAGE:120==
104
facade type viii - transient, 2d
15.2
simulation results - air temperature
Figure 65 shows that no pre-cooling of the replacement air is created
by using Facade Type VIII - the inlet temperature of the replacement
air is throughout the entire 24 hours higher than the exterior temper-
ature, Te for all three air ﬂow velocities. Especially during the night,
the replacement air is pre-heated signiﬁcantly and reaches tempera-
tures ∼4 °C higher than the exterior air temperature. At around 14:00
both Te and the three Ta reaches the same maximum temperature.
Figure 65: Time-dependent temperature proﬁles for ventilated Facade Type
VIII
Figure 66, 67 and 68 shows that the observed pre-heating of the
replacement air is a natural result of the relatively unhindered trans-
mission loss through the inner layer of concrete, which offers no sig-
niﬁcant degree of thermal insulation. At 02:00 and 07:00 only the very
bottom of the concrete layer appears with temperatures signiﬁcantly
below the temperature of the internal environment. At 02:00 for the
middle and top cut plane the temperature of the inner layer of con-
crete is just slightly - ∼0.4 °C - lower than the indoor temperature,
while at 07:00 the greatest difference between the temperature any-
where in the inner layer of concrete and the indoor environment is
reduced to ∼0.2 °C.
As observed for the previous two façades geometries, at 14:00 the
temperature is almost completely homogeneous throughout the en-
tire façade and naturally no pre-cooling occurs.
==PAGE:121==
15.2 Simulation Results - Air Temperature
105
Figure 66: Facade type VIII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02:00, veloc-
ity: 0.1 m/s
Figure 67: Facade type VIII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07:00, veloc-
ity: 0.1 m/s
==PAGE:122==
106
facade type viii - transient, 2d
Figure 68: Facade type VIII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14:00, veloc-
ity: 0.1 m/s
15.3
simulation results - energy
The four boundary ﬂuxes, Q1flux - Q4flux, are shown in Figure 69.
Figure 69: Facade type VIII, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity: 0.1 m/s
The heat ﬂuxes of the boundaries facing the inner and the outer
environment, Q1flux and Q4flux follows the current temperatures
==PAGE:123==
15.3 Simulation Results - Energy
107
for the two environments. Meanwhile, Q2flux and Q3flux - the heat
ﬂuxes of the inner and outer side of the ventilated gap - does not dif-
fer signiﬁcantly from zero, again illustrating the lack of heat exchange
to and from the replacement air.
Figure 70 (a) shows the transmission and the ventilation heat ﬂux
for both the ventilated Façade Type VIII and the reference façade. In
terms of transmission loss, the ventilated façade generally has a higher
loss during the night and a lower heat gain during the late day than
the reference façade. In terms of ventilations loss, the pre-heating of
the replacement air observed in the ventilated façade observed dur-
ing the night means that the ventilation heat loss associated with the
ventilated façade is generally lower than the the ventilations loss as-
sociated with the reference façade.
(a) Transmission and ventilation heat ﬂux
(b) Total heat ﬂux
Figure 70: Facade type VIII, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity: 0.1 m/s
The total heat loss - the superposition of the both transmission
and ventilations loss - is shown in Figure 70 (b). It emerges from
the ﬁgure that during the night, the heat loss of the ventilated façade
is slightly higher than what is the case for the reference façade. From
the late afternoon to early night, the relation is reversed, with the
ventilated façade obtaining a higher heat gain, however the difference
is of minuscule proportions.
Referring to Table 21 it is stated, that during the entire 24 hours
the heat loss associated with the ventilated façade is higher than the
reference façade for the two slower air ﬂow velocities, while for the
air ﬂow velocity of 0.6 m/s the heat loss associated with the reference
façade is the highest. In the daytime hours, 08:00-16:00, in which the
cooling effect is particularly desirable the reference façade actually
delivers a better relative cooling performance than the the ventilated
façade when the air ﬂow velocity is 0.1 m/s, while for the two faster
air ﬂow velocities the ventilated façade offers a relative cooling per-
formance of absolutely insigniﬁcant magnitude.
==PAGE:124==
108
facade type viii - transient, 2d
E24,vent,
Wh
E24,ref,
Wh
E8−16,vent,
Wh
E8−16,ref,
Wh
0.1 m/s
-414.0
-392.4
-119.3
-135.6
0.2 m/s
-760.9
-760.7
-178.0
-176.2
0.6 m/s
-2165.3
-2234.1
-338.1
-335.2
Table 21: Facade Type VIII - heat balance pr. m2 facade.
Eventually it can be stated that Façade Type VIII is not a suitable
construction when attempting to pre-cool the replacement air.
==PAGE:125==
16
FA C A D E T Y P E I X - T R A N S I E N T, 2 D
16.1
geometry and conditions
Façade Type IX is a revised version of the former Façade type VIII - here
the thick layer of concrete is still placed on the inner side of he insu-
lation layer, however now the ventilated gap is placed between the
thick layer of concrete and the internal environment. A thin layer of
wooden material separates the ventilated gap and the internal envi-
ronment. On the outside of the insulation layer a thin layer of concrete
is added mimicking a typical plaster ﬁnish. The geometry is shown
in Figure 78.
The hypothesis is that by avoiding the direct contact between the
thermal mass of the thick concrete layer and both the internal environ-
ment and the external environment, the temperature of the concrete
will appear more stable. This was the case for Facade Type IV and V
where the temperature of the middle concrete layer in Facade Type V
was only approximately 20.5 °C at 14.00 when the outside tempera-
ture was almost 24 °C.
Figure 71: Facade Type IX - Geometry and boundary conditions
Referring to the stationary simulations, the general conclusion reached
was, that besides the actual temperature conditions and the air veloc-
ity, the pre-heating of the replacement air is almost solely depend-
ing on the amount of thermal resistance between the ventilated layer
and the internal environment. The thin wooden layer in Facade Type
109
==PAGE:126==
110
facade type ix - transient, 2d
IX constitutes no signiﬁcant thermal resistance and thus the façade
should in any case provide good pre-heating conditions. If the façade
is capable of pre-cooling the replacement air as well, the construction
naturally becomes even more interesting.
The boundary conditions used in the simulations are shown in Ta-
ble 22.
Description
Input
Ti
Indoor temperature
see Eq. 37
Te
Exterior temperature
see Eq. 37
Ri
Indoor thermal resistance
0.13 m2K/W
Re
Exterior thermal resistance
0.04 m2K/W
v
Inlet velocity
0.1, 0.2, 0.6 m/s
Table 22: Facade Type IX - Simulation input
16.2
simulation results - air temperature
Figure 72 immediately shows that the replacement air is in fact pre-
cooled during the warmest part of the day. With an air ﬂow velocity
of 0.1 m/s the replacement air reaches a maximum of approximately
21.5 °C. The maximum temperature is approximately 22 °C and 22.7
°c for the air ﬂow velocities of 0.2 m/s and 0.6 m/s, respectively. Com-
pared to the maximum outdoor air temperature of 23.8 it is a notable
decrease.
Figure 72: Time-dependent temperature proﬁles for ventilated Facade Type
IX
==PAGE:127==
16.2 Simulation Results - Air Temperature
111
From 18:00 to around 09:00 the replacement air is pre-heated. As
the thermal resistance of the inner wooden layer is very limited, the
pre-heating is very conspicuous; at 02:00 for an air ﬂow velocity of
0.1 m/s the temperature of the replacement air is increased from ap-
proximately 12 °C to approximately 18 °C. For an air velocity of 0.2
m/s the temperature is increased to approximately 16.5 °and for the
a velocity of 0.6 m/s the temperature is about 14.5 °C.
Referring to Figure 73 it is illustrated how at 02:00 the replacement
air is both heated by the transmission loss from inside the building
and from the concrete layer which is signiﬁcantly warmer than the
outside air temperature.
Figure 73: Facade type IX, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02:00, velocity:
0.1 m/s
At 07:00, as shown in Figure 74, the temperature of the concrete
layer has decreased somewhat more, while the outdoor temperature
has increased. The difference between the outdoor air temperature
and the concrete layer is not as great and thus the replacement air is
not affected to any further extent by the concrete layer. However, the
temperature of the interior environment is still signiﬁcantly higher
than the outside environment, and as a result of that, the part of the
ventilated gap closest to the wooden cladding is heated signiﬁcantly.
At 14:00 the temperature of the external and internal environment
reaches maximum at approximately 24 °C, meanwhile the tempera-
ture of the concrete layer is not higher than approximately 18-20 °C.
This means, that the part of replacement air in the ventilated gap
closest to the concrete layer is pre-cooled, while the temperature of
the part of of the ventilated gap closest to the wooden cladding is
unaltered.
==PAGE:128==
112
facade type ix - transient, 2d
Figure 74: Facade type IX, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07:00, velocity:
0.1 m/s
Figure 75: Facade type IX, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14.00, velocity:
0.1 m/s
==PAGE:129==
16.3 Simulation Results - Energy
113
16.3
simulation results - energy
The heat ﬂuxes over the four interesting boundaries, Q1flux - Q4flux,
are shown in Figure 76. Q1flux and Q2flux are relatively similar, and
follows the temperature difference between the internal environment
and the temperature in the ventilated gap; the difference in temper-
ature is biggest at night and so is the heat loss. Q3flux denotes the
heat ﬂux between the concrete layer and the ventilated gap; not sur-
prisingly there is a negative heat ﬂux into the ventilated gap during
the day, while the ventilated gap gains heat during the night. Q4flux
denotes the heat ﬂux between the concrete layer and the external en-
vironment, and seems dictated by the external temperature and the
temperatures appearing in the façade construction.
Figure 76: Facade type IX, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity: 0.1 m/s
Figure 77 (a) shows the transmission and ventilation heat ﬂux for
both the Façade Type IX and the reference façade. In terms of trans-
mission loss, the loss associated with the reference façade varies the
most, while the transmission loss of the ventilated façade is more sta-
ble, however it never becomes positive. In terms of ventilation loss,
the loss associated with the reference façade is almost consequently
higher than what is the case for the ventilated face, except during the
warmer mid-day hours where the ventilation loss of the ventilated
façade is higher due to the pre-cooling.
The total heat ﬂuxes associated with Façade Type IX and the refer-
ence façade are shown in Figure 77 (b). The ﬁgure shows that the heat
ﬂux of the ventilated façade is more stable than the reference façade.
At night the heat loss of the ventilated façade is signiﬁcantly lower
than what is the case for the reference façade due to the pre-heating of
==PAGE:130==
114
facade type ix - transient, 2d
the replacement air. The slight pre-cooling also means that the heat
gain observed around 15:00-21:00 for the reference façade does not
occur for the ventilated façade.
(a) Transmission and ventilation heat ﬂux
(b) Total heat ﬂux
Figure 77: Facade type IX, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity: 0.1 m/s
Figures valid for the air ﬂow velocity of 0.2 m/s and 0.6 m/s are
available in Appendix D.
Eventually the performance of Façade Type IX is evaluated analo-
gous to the former façade types. Table 23 shows that for the entire 24
hours the heat loss of the ventilated façade is somewhat lower than
the reference façade.
E24,vent,
Wh
E24,ref,
Wh
E8−16,vent,
Wh
E8−16,ref,
Wh
0.1 m/s
-359.5
-392.4
-110.5
-135.6
0.2 m/s
-711.9
-760.7
-184.0
-176.2
0.6 m/s
-2138.4
-2234.1
-429.5
-335.2
Table 23: Facade Type IX - heat balance pr. m2 facade.
In the period of 08:00 to 16:00 the reference façade actually deliv-
ers a relatively higher cooling performance with an air velocity of
0.1 m/s, while with the two faster air velocities the ventilated façade
delivers a better cooling performance. The former is most likely ex-
plained by the relatively higher transmission loss observed around
06:00 - 11:00 for the reference façade - see Figure 77 (a). In that time
frame some cold imaginably remains in the thermal mass of the ref-
erence façade resulting in the observed transmission loss. This illus-
trates how the replacement air of the ventilated façade might very
well be lower than the air provided by the case of the non-ventilated
reference façade, but when observing the total heat balance - both
ventilation and transmission loss - the non-ventilated façade delivers
==PAGE:131==
16.3 Simulation Results - Energy
115
the best relative cooling performance. This phenomenon is likely only
observable in cases of low air ﬂow velocities, for when the air speed
increases the transmission ﬂux - gain or loss - becomes increasingly
insigniﬁcant.
==PAGE:132==
==PAGE:133==
17
FA C A D E T Y P E I X W I T H R A D I AT I O N - T R A N S I E N T,
2 D
As brieﬂy mentioned in the end of Chapter 10 the potential effects of radiation
between the two wall-boundaries in the ventilated gap were not included
in the simulations of the facade types IV-IX just assessed in the previous
chapters. The following re-evaluates the performance of Façade Type IX, this
time taking into account the possible effect of radiation between the two
surfaces.
17.1
geometry and conditions
Besides the addition of emissivity of the two surfaces and the appli-
cation of surface-to-surface radiation in the simulation, the boundary
conditions and simulations setup applied here are the same as al-
ready described in Chapter 16.
Figure 78: Facade Type IX - Geometry and boundary conditions
Description
Input
ϵ
Emissivity
0.9
Table 24: Facade Type IX with radiation - Simulation input
117
==PAGE:134==
118
facade type ix with radiation- transient, 2d
17.2
simulation results
Figure 79 shows the temperature proﬁles of the replacement air for
Facade Type IX with radiation accounted for in the simulations. Com-
pared to the simulations without radiation, the pre-cooling effect dur-
ing the day-time hours is reduced slightly. For v = 0.1 m/s the peak
temperature has increased from approximately 21.5 °C to 21.6 °C; for
v = 0.2 m/s the peak temperature increases from 22 °C to 22.3 °C and
for v = 0.6 m/s the peak temperature increases from 22.7 °C to 23 °C.
In fact, most notably is not the change in pre-cooling performance
during the day, but actually the pre-heating performance during the
night. Here, the replacement air is pre-heated signiﬁcantly more than
what was the case in which radiation was not accounted for.
Figure 79: Time-dependent temperature proﬁles for ventilated Facade Type
IX with radiation
Figure 80 (a) shows the transmission- and ventilation loss of the
façade. Compared to the simulations where the radiation was not ac-
counted for, the transmission loss has increased while the change in
the temperature of the replacement air illustrated above is also no-
table in the ventilation heat ﬂux. The sum of transmission- and ven-
tilation heat ﬂux is shown in Figure 80 (b), which most signiﬁcantly
illustrates an increased heat loss during the night and morning when
compared to the simulations without the effects of radiation applied.
==PAGE:135==
17.2 Simulation Results
119
(a) Transmission and ventilation heat ﬂux
(b) Total heat ﬂux
Figure 80: Facade type IX with radiation, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity:
0.1 m/s
The energy balance is accounted for similarly to the previous sim-
ulations. The balances for the Façade Type IX with radiation and the
reference façade are illustrated in Table 25. What appears from the
table is that the heat loss of the ventilated façade - and with that rel-
ative cooling effect - has increased as a result of the application of
radiation. This is the case for all velocities and in both time-frames
except for E24,vent with v = 0.6 m/s. The increased cooling effect is
solely a consequence of the augmented transmission loss, which is
able to counteract the declined cooling effect of the ventilation loss
caused by the generally increased replacement air temperatures.
E24,vent,
Wh
E24,ref,
Wh
E8−16,vent,
Wh
E8−16,ref,
Wh
0.1 m/s
-389.7
-392.4
-162.3
-135.6
0.2 m/s
-727.4
-760.7
-232.1
-176.2
0.6 m/s
-2121.9
-2234.1
-459.1
-335.2
Table 25: Facade Type IX with radiation - heat balance pr. m2 facade.
The ﬁgures relevant for the velocities of 0.2 m/s and 0.6 m/s are
available in Appendices D.
Eventually it can be stated, that generally the inclusion of radia-
tion does not weaken the pre-cooling effect of the ventilated Façade
Type IX. In fact, due to the an increased transmission loss, the relative
cooling effect of the ventilated is actually increased, although the tem-
perature of the replacement air rises slightly. It is likely that the same
dynamic will apply to Façade Type IV and V if radiation is applied
here, meanwhile this has not been analysed.
==PAGE:136==
120
facade type ix with radiation- transient, 2d
Furthermore, the dynamic simulations carried out here for Façade
Type IX re-conﬁrms the notion of possible pre-heating set-forth for
Façade Type II in Part III. The pre-heating is notable in 80 (b) between
approximately 23:00 and 10:00.
==PAGE:137==
18
D E L I B E R AT I O N S A N D S U M M A RY
18.1
deliberations
While it appears that Facade Type IV, V and IX delivers the best day-
time cooling performance, it might be interesting to investigate how
the performance would be affected by increasing or decreasing the
thickness of the middle concrete layer and thereby changing the ther-
mal mass of the façade. This will however be an investigation left for
future projects, also noting that the thickness of the concrete might
also be decided based on structural considerations.
Furthermore, with the aim to limit the number of variables used in
the simulations and thereby the simulation time and the complexity
of the results, solar radiation has not been included in the models.
This is also the case for the stationary simulations of the Part III, but
as the dynamic simulations presented here are depicting a summer
day, the sun is naturally an even more important consideration here.
As is, the cooling effect described for the range of façade types in
the former former chapters are valid for a north-facing façade not ex-
posed to any solar gain. It is reasonable to assume that the cooling
effect of any of the ventilated façades in question will decline if ex-
posed to appreciable solar irradiation.
Additionally it is important to bear in mind, that the temperature
proﬁles of the external and internal environment, Te and Ti, are very
idealized average expressions. In reality, the temperature curves will
not be perfectly periodic, and temperature ﬂuctuations will off course
impact the pre-cooling performance of the ventilated façades. Future
studies will proﬁt by the inclusion of real climate data, which will
yield a more elaborated depiction of e.g. a full-year performance.
18.2
summary
The results of the simulations carried out for the six different façade
types are summarized with the overall results shown in Figure 26.
None of the ventilated façades offered any signiﬁcant relative cooling
performance when accounting for the entire 24 hours, E24,vent, how-
ever when observing the period of 08:00 - 16:00, E8−16,vent, Façade
Type IV, V and IX do actually offer a relative cooling effect when com-
paring to the reference façade.
121
==PAGE:138==
122
deliberations and summary
Facade
Type
v, m/s
E24,vent,
Wh
E24,ref,
Wh
E8−16,vent,
Wh
E8−16,ref,
Wh
0.1
-368.7
-392.4
-194.8
-135.6
IV
0.2
-733.8
-760.7
-275.7
-176.7
0.6
-2203.6
-2234.1
-533.5
-335.2
0.1
-368.8
-392.4
-187.4
-135.6
V
0.2
-734.0
-760.7
-262.3
-176.7
0.6
-2204.0
-2234.1
-508.1
-335.2
0.1
-368.4
-392.4
-137.4
-135.6
VI
0.2
-733.5
-760.7
-180.0
-176.7
0.6
-2203.8
-2234.1
-350.1
-335.2
0.1
-369.8
-438.6
-136.4
-144.1
VII
0.2
-729.1
-806.9
-178.0
-184.0
0.6
-2194.3
-2280.3
-347.4
-349.7
0.1
-414.0
-392.4
-119.3
-135.6
VIII
0.2
-760.9
-760.7
-178.0
-176.2
0.6
-2165.3
-2234.1
-338.1
-335.2
0.1
-359.5
-392.4
-110.5
-135.6
IX
0.2
-711.9
-760.7
-184.0
-176.2
0.6
-2138.4
-2234.1
-429.5
-335.2
0.1
-389.7
-392.4
-162.3
-135.6
IX*
0.2
-727.4
-760.7
-232.1
-176.2
0.6
-2121.9
-2234.1
-459.1
-335.2
Table 26: Comparison of all transient simulations - heat balance pr. m2 fa-
cade. IX* denotes results of simulations including radiation
For Façade Type IV and V the relative cooling effect increases with
the replacement air velocity, and for Façade Type IV the heat loss is ap-
proximately 59 % bigger than what is the case for the reference façade
during the day-time hours. For Façade Type IX without the inclusion of
radiation the cooling effect occurs for replacement air velocities of 0.2
m/s and 0.6 m/s, where for the latter the heat loss is approximately
28 % bigger than what is the case for the reference façade. At 14.00,
excluding the radiation effect and with a replacement air velocity of
0.1 m/s, all three façades where able to decrease the inlet air tem-
perature at 14:00 to approximately 21.5 °C. This should be compared
to the outdoor temperature of 23.8 °C at 14:00. At higher velocities
the replacement air temperature for all three façade types increases
==PAGE:139==
18.2 Summary
123
to approximately 22 °C and 22.6 °C - 22.7 °C for 0.2 m/s and 0.6 m/s
respectively.
When radiation is accounted for, Façade Type IX delivers an even
more convincing pre-cooling performance. Meanwhile, the increased
cooling performance is mainly caused by a higher transmission loss
during the morning hours and as the Ta generally increases slightly,
the part of the cooling effect caused by the pre-cooling of the replace-
ment air is lowered. The same dynamic will possibly recur when in-
cluding radiation in the simulations for Façade Type IV and V, however
that has not analysed.
When comparing the pre-cooling performances of the three differ-
ent air velocities, it is important to bear in mind that the numbers are
given as heat balances pr. m2. If one chooses a replacement air veloc-
ity of 0.1 m/s and not 0.6 m/s it will require 6 times the façade width
and thus yielding 6 times the relative cooling performance. For in-
stance for Façade Type IX with radiation will the cooling performance
of both v = 0.1 m/s and 0.2 m/s outperform the cooling performance
of 0.6 m/s when adjusting for the required façade area.
Eventually, it can be summarized that during a warm summer day
it is possible to pre-cool the replacement air when running it through
a ventilated façade. However, it is crucial that the thermal mass that
provides the cooling effect is placed "de-coupled" from both the in-
ternal and external environment. This is the case for Facade Type IV,
V, and IX where either the ventilated gap or the insulation layer is
located between the the thick concrete layer and the internal or exter-
nal environment. For the remaining façade types the concrete layer
was not sufﬁciently decoupled and no or only insigniﬁcant cooling
performances where obtained.
==PAGE:140==
==PAGE:141==
Part V
R O O M S C A L E P R E - S T U D Y
==PAGE:142==
==PAGE:143==
19
P R E - S T U D Y S E T U P
With the results of Part III and IV in mind the next logical step is to
include the ventilated façades in a room-scale simulation. This type
of simulation setup will among other things yield a more comprehen-
sive evaluation of the replacement air ﬂow into the occupied space
and the surface temperature on the interior side of the ventilated
façade.
The room-scale simulations will focus on the evaluation of a façade
type similar to Facade Type II and IX. For this façade type the sta-
tionary simulations carried out in Chapter 7 showed reasonable pre-
heating abilities while the results shown in Chapter 16 (and Chapter
17) illustrated fair pre-cooling abilities. The room-scale simulations
will be carried out for a winter situation where pre-heating is desir-
able, and for that reason the model includes a radiator placed beneath
the window. This pre-study will - as the title indicate - function as a
limited preliminary evaluation of the performance of the ventilated
façade in a room-scale scope, while more elaborate analyses will be
left for the future; among these the dynamic simulations needed to
evaluate the pre-cooling ability in a summer situation.
19.1
geometry and conditions
The simulation input is shown in Table 27 and 28.
Description
Input
Te
Exterior temperature
-12 °C
Tr
Radiator surface temperature
44.5 °C
Rse
Exterior thermal resistance
0.04 m2K/W
v
Inlet velocity
0.2 m/s
Uw
Window U-value
1.1 W/m2K
ϵ
Emissivity
0.9
Table 27: Room Scale Simulation - Simulation input
The modelled window has a U-value corresponding to a 3-layer
energy window [15]. Tr is chosen, so that the average internal air tem-
perature is ∼20 °C. To evaluate the signiﬁcance of the angle at which
the replacement air enters the room, two inlet geometries are analy-
ses; inlet type A and B. Inlet type A forces the replacement air to enter
127
==PAGE:144==
128
pre-study setup
Material
Thermal Conductivity,
W/mK
Concrete
1.8
Wood
0.1
Insulation
0.037
Table 28: Room Scale Simulation - Material Properties
horizontally into the room, while inlet type B leads the replacement
air vertically up along the window. Inlet type A is shown in Figure
82 and inlet type B is shown in Figure 81. The air exits the room
at the top-right corner. Note that the applied air ﬂow velocity of 0.2
m/s will yield an air ﬂow of 0.006 m3/s pr. m façade. The surfaces
denoted Interior surface are adiabatic.
Figure 81: Room scale simulation setup, inlet type B. All entities besides the
inlet conﬁguration equals inlet type A
==PAGE:145==
19.2 Reference Facade
129
Figure 82: Room scale simulation setup, inlet type A
19.2
reference facade
Together with the two geometries shown above, a reference façade
is modelled and simulated as well. The geometry of the reference
façade is chosen with the same intentions as argued for in the former
parts of this paper. The geometry of the reference façade is shown in
Figure 83. The replacement air is provided through the simpliﬁed air
valve placed in the top part of the window.
The results of simulations of the reference façade will allow for the
comparison of the transmission loss related to the ventilated façade
and the reference façade, respectively. Note that in order to maintain
an average air temperature of approximately 20 °C the surface tem-
perature of the radiator is increased to 46.7 °C.
==PAGE:146==
130
pre-study setup
Figure 83: Reference Facade Setup
19.3
comsol setup
The simulations are stationary and in 2D. The ﬂuid domain is mod-
elled as fully compressible. Together with the application of a gravity
force this enables the simulation of buoyancy forces, which is partic-
ularly important for the motion of air around the radiator and the
potentially cold inlet of replacement air.
The model includes surface-to-surface radiation for all four sur-
faces of the radiator, all interior walls and the two walls of the venti-
lated gap with an emissivity as indicated in Table 27.
Note that the simulation models contain a number of limitations be-
sides the generally simpliﬁed geometry already illustrated in Figure
81, 82 and 83:
◦The non-homogeneous temperature distribution normally ex-
pected in a hydronic radiator is not modelled. The temperature
==PAGE:147==
19.3 COMSOL setup
131
of the radiator surface is homogeneous and chosen so that it
upholds an average indoor temperature of ∼20 °C.
◦The entire ﬂuid domain is modelled using the k-ω turbulence
model which enables the simulation of buoyancy induced turbu-
lence. With respect to the air ﬂow velocity and the width of the
ventilated gap, ideally the ﬂuid ﬂow in the ventilated gap in the
façade should have been modelled as laminar ﬂow, meanwhile
it has not been possible to subdivide the air domains into lam-
inar and turbulent sub-domains. With that said the results of
the initial veriﬁcation case with a duct width of 0.03 m showed
that the k-ω turbulence model actually yields very reasonable
results in the laminar regime (see Chapter 4, Figure 12) and thus
the simpliﬁcation is deemed reasonable.
◦No supply - or return pipes to and from the radiator are mod-
elled. Running the pipes beneath the radiator would most likely
locally increase the temperature of the lower left corner of the
room.
The potential impact of the the simpliﬁcations are hard to predict
with any further accuracy, hence this analysis should be considered
as a "pre-study" of the performance of the ventilated façade concept
in a room-scale scope.
==PAGE:148==
==PAGE:149==
20
P R E - S T U D Y R E S U LT S A N D O B S E RVAT I O N S
Figure 84 shows the temperature distribution in the façade construc-
tion and ﬂuid domain including the room air with the use of Inlet
Type A. The replacement air is clearly colder than the remainder of
the room, however the "tongue" of cold air quickly disperses within
< 0.5 m from the inlet. Additionally a slight stratiﬁcation is noticed
as the air in the top 0.2 - 0.3 m of the room is slightly warmer than
the average room temperature. The effect of the radiator is shown
clearly as the air surrounding the radiator is signiﬁcantly warmer
than the remainder of the air, however as for the cold inlet air, the
"tongue" of warm air rising form the radiator disperses within < 0.5
from the top of the radiator. More importantly, the radiator seems to
be able to heat the inlet air as it travels along in the ventilated gap,
just as expected based on the learnings from Part III. Just how much
the replacement air is pre-heated is elaborated following this initial
evaluation of temperature- and velocity distribution.
Figure 84: Inlet Type A, Temperature. °C. Average temperature in ﬂuid do-
main: 20.224 °C
Figure 85 shows the velocity distribution in the ﬂuid domain with
Inlet Type A. Overall two circulating ﬂow patters are observed. The
most distinct one occurs in the area just in front of the radiator, where
133
==PAGE:150==
134
pre-study results and observations
a more vague one is present in the right half of the room. The air
movement is primarily driven by a combination of the inlet of replace-
ment air, a vague bouncy-driven ﬂow downwards along the colder
window and the buoyancy-driven ﬂow upwards around the warm
surfaces of the radiator. The latter is seemingly the most powerful
contributor of the three. In close proximity to the radiator, just around
the air inlet and at the bottom of the window the air velocity is rather
high with velocities upwards of 0.35 m/s. However, the general air
velocity level is low, and even in the distinct circulation zone in front
of the radiator the air velocity is mostly < 0.20 m/s. In the upper half
of the room the air is almost stagnant. With that said, choosing an air
velocity higher than 0.2 m/s will naturally contribute to a generally
higher air velocity level in the occupied zone - e.g. should the air ve-
locity distribution be a subject to re-examination if the inlet velocity
is chosen to be 0.6 m/s, which is a value also proposed earlier in this
project.
Figure 85: Inlet Type A, air velocity and direction. m/s
Figure 86 and 87 show the temperature and velocity distribution re-
lated to Inlet Type B. The two ﬁgures are almost identical to the ones
related to Inlet Type A, and so it is evident that with an inlet velocity
of 0.2 m/s the shape of the replacement air inlet is insigniﬁcant.
==PAGE:151==
pre-study results and observations
135
Figure 86: Inlet Type B, Temperature. °C. Average temperature in ﬂuid do-
main: 20.329 °C
Figure 87: Inlet Type B, air velocity and direction. m/s
The energy performance of the ventilated façade is assessed by
comparing the transmission loss on the exterior side of the wall sec-
tion for the ventilated façade (Inlet Type A and B) and the reference
façade. By evaluating the transmission loss on the exterior side of
the wall section, the ventilation losses associated with the ventilated
façade and the reference façade are equal and does not need to be ac-
==PAGE:152==
136
pre-study results and observations
counted for in the comparison. The approach is essentially the same
as the one employed in Part III, which is explained in Chapter 5, Sec-
tion 5.1, however in that part the results where further normalized
with respect to the applied outside temperature. The short horizon-
tal sill just beneath the window is included in the transmission loss
evaluation. What is shown in Table 29 is that the transmission loss of
the ventilated façade is signiﬁcantly lower than the reference façade.
The numbers state that the ventilated façades will recover upwards of
0.73/1 of the transmission loss otherwise associated with the conven-
tional reference façade. This corresponds well with the results of the
more simple simulations described in Chapter 7, where Façade Type II
when compared to reference façade 1 recovers approximately 0.69/1
to 0.7/1 of the transmission loss. The small deviation is likely caused
by - among other things - the inclusion of the short horizontal piece
of sill which is not accounted for in the simple simulations of Chapter
7.
Transmission
loss, W/m2
Recovery Rate,
-
Reference façade
11.998
-
Ventilated facade, Inlet type A
3.284
0.726
Ventilated facade, Inlet type B
3.323
0.7223
Table 29: Transmission loss comparison and recovery rate
Figure 88 shows the average temperature of the replacement air as
it travels through the ventilated gap. Note that the initial horizontal
part of the ventilated gap is included making up the ﬁrst approxi-
mately 0.23 m of the replacement air route. The development of the
average air temperature is nearly identical for the two inlet types, and
the replacement air is pre-heated signiﬁcantly from -12 °C to 1.98 °C,
at which it enters the room.
The interior side of the wooden layer has an average temperature
of 20.266 °C and 20.166 °C for inlet type A and B, respectively (the
distribution of the surface temperature will be speciﬁed shortly). As
mentioned in the previous chapter, the façade geometry analysed in
these room-scale simulations are very similar to Façade Type II and
IX analysed in Part III and IV. In the evaluation of the pre-heating
ability of Façade Type II it appeared that with an air velocity of 0.2
m/s one should expect an ηT of approximately 0.43. Hence, by apply-
ing the deﬁnition of ηT or by referring to the ηT-graphs provided in
Appendix B one should anticipate a pre-heating from -12 °C to 1.831
°C or 1.874 °C depending on if the value of Ti is set to 20.166 °C or
20.266 °C. As such the results exhibited by the room-scale simulations
seem to be on par with the result of the more simpliﬁed simulations
for Façade Type II only varying with ∼0.1 - 0.15 °C. (Note, that the
==PAGE:153==
pre-study results and observations
137
Figure 88: Replacement air temperature.
internal heat transfer coefﬁcient applied in the simulations of Part III
is not accounted for in this brief comparison.)
A real cause of concern is whether the surface temperature on the
interior side of the wooden layer enclosing the ventilated gap locally
will be lower than the saturation temperature resulting in condensa-
tion. Assuming that the ventilated façade construction is used in a
dwelling, during winter (January) the water content in the air can
be expected to be 6-9 g/m3 (conforming with Fugtbelastningsklasse
2 - dwelling with normal occupant density or Fugtbelastningsklasse 3 -
dwelling with unknown occupant density) [21]. Table 30 shows that con-
densation will occur at a surface temperature at either ∼3 °C or ∼10
°C depending on the water content in the air.
Water content,
g/m3
Relative humidity at
20 °C, %
Saturation
temperature, °C
6
∼35
∼3
9
∼51
∼10
Table 30: Water content and saturation temperature, [21]
Figure 89 and 90 show the surface temperature of the interior side
of the wooden layer for the two inlet types. Note that the temperature
distribution does not deviate signiﬁcantly between the two inlet types.
The ﬁgures show that nowhere on the surface of the wooden layer,
the temperature reaches or falls below the saturation temperature.
With that said, the surface temperature is low at both the top and
the bottom of the wooden layer, and the water content should not
increase a lot from 9 g/m3 before condensation occurs. Additionally
==PAGE:154==
138
pre-study results and observations
it might be worth the effort to carry out a more elaborate investigation
into the risk of condensation, as the chosen time of year for these
simulations implies quite dry indoor air. As such it is not unlikely that
other times of the year actually poses a greater risk of condensation,
e.g. a sudden drop in temperature during a humid autumn or the
like.
Figure 89: Interior Surface Temperature, Inlet Type A. Figure shows the tem-
perature of the surface of the wooden layer facing the radiator
Figure 90: Interior Surface Temperature, Inlet Type B. Figure shows the tem-
perature of the surface of the wooden layer facing the radiator
Figure 89 and 90 also illustrate - not that surprisingly - that the
heating of the wooden layer is most noticeable in the section of the
layer which is level with the radiator - from around 0.25 m to 0.8 m
from the bottom of the wooden layer, the surface temperature is sig-
niﬁcantly warmer than the bottom and top section which is not level
with the radiator. This suggests that in order to limit the amount of
cold internal surfaces it is advisable to choose a heat source that is
able to cover the entire area of ventilated façade.
Eventually the room-scale pre-study reconﬁrms the notion reached
in Part III, that it is possible to decrease the transmission loss and
pre-heat the replacement air by using ventilated façades. However,
what is also shown is, that during a winter day it is likely necessary
to place a heat source in close adjacency to the ventilated façade to
avoid condensation issues and to obtain the pre-heating performance
found in Part III.
==PAGE:155==
Part VI
D I S C U S S I O N A N D C O N C L U S I O N
==PAGE:156==
==PAGE:157==
21
D I S C U S S I O N
Laminar Flows
In the simulations of Part III and IV all of the air ﬂows are - in accor-
dance with the Reynold’s number - modelled as laminar ﬂows. This
means that in the ventilated gap there is no air mixing transversely
to the ﬂow direction resulting in no convective heat transfer across
the ventilated gap. In a real life version of the ventilated façades one
can imagine that the walls of the ventilated gap are not perfectly
smooth and construction parts such as screws, bolts or other pro-
trusions might cause a disturbance of the laminar air ﬂow causing a
local or more overall state of turbulent ﬂow. Another factor that might
inﬂuence the ﬂow type is the design of the air inlet of the ventilated
gap. For many reasons it might be necessary to guard the inlet to the
ventilated gap with grills or gratings, that will inevitable inﬂuence
the air ﬂow. A turbulent ﬂow will mean air movement transversely to
the general ﬂow direction - e.g. will an air molecule that one moment
is heated by the adjacency to the interior environment be moved next
to the cold layer of concrete where it is cooled down again. In general
terms, this will likely mean that the ability of the replacement air to
recover the transmission loss is reduced. Additionally it is likely to
mean that the concrete layer responsible for the pre-cooling of the re-
placement air will come into contact with air with an averagely higher
temperature during the day and air with an averagely lower temper-
ature during the night. If this holds up, the temperature stability of
the concrete layer will likely decline, increasing the overall tempera-
ture of the concrete layer during the day and decreasing it by night.
That will eventually yield a reduced capability of the thermal mass of
the concrete layer to pre-cool the replacement air during the day and
pre-heat it during the night.
Overall there is no question that the laminar nature of the ﬂow,
and thus the absence of convectional heat transfer across the venti-
lated gap, beneﬁts the energy performance of the ventilated façades.
Therefore it is highly advisable that future detailed design of the ven-
tilated façade is carried out in a way that introduces the least amount
of possible disturbances into the airﬂow, and that the geometry of the
ventilated gap and the air velocity are chosen so they will enable a
replacement air ﬂow in the laminar regime.
Furthermore it might not be attainable to create an inlet that stretches
in the entire width of the ventilated façade, hence limiting the re-
141
==PAGE:158==
142
discussion
placement air to access into the façade through fewer and smaller
inlet vents. This will change how the replacement air travels through
the ventilated gap, and if the distribution of air is very uneven in-
side the ventilated gap, the pre-heating and the energy performance
will most likely decrease. The issue is well-illustrated in Chapter 19,
where the entire façade construction essentially hovers above the hori-
zontal section of the ventilated gap if not supported somewhere along
the façade.
The impact of the eventual disturbances are hard to predict with
any further accuracy, however it must be noted that they are not mod-
elled and as such not accounted for in the simulations and results.
Simplicity of The Model Geometry
Generally the simulated models are fairly simple, and only elements
that are likely to have an signiﬁcant impact on the energy perfor-
mance of the façade types are included. As such no bolts, screws,
nuts, wall ties or the like are modelled. If a future detailed design
of the ventilated façades demands large numbers of elements not in-
cluded in the simulations, the performance of the façades needs to be
re-evaluated.
Additionally, the models of Part III and IV do not contain the
two short horizontal pieces of ventilated gap, that would lead the re-
placement air from the outside into the vertical ventilated gap and
from the ventilated gap into the inside of the building. The change
of air ﬂow direction from horizontal to vertical might result in some
ﬂow disturbances, and the replacement air will anyhow go through
a longer route in the façade construction before entering the inter-
nal environment, than what is modelled in the simulations. However,
later simulations carried out in Part V indicated that the horizontal
section(s) did not have any noticeable effect on the pre-heating per-
formance.
What is also worth mentioning is the fact, that all simulations are
carried out for 2D sections of the façades. Naturally, rooms eventually
equipped with ventilated façades will in some places differ from the
2D representations simulated. For instance does the 2D simulations
not disclose anything about the performance at surfaces parallel to
the cross-section of the 2D simulations.
Radiation
As illustrated by the simulations of Façade Type IX it is important to
account for radiation when evaluating the performance of the venti-
lated façades. This is the case, even if the temperature differences in
the model are fairly small.
==PAGE:159==
discussion
143
Boundary Conditions
The validity of the results are of course very dependent on the rea-
sonableness of the applied boundary conditions. For one it is again
important to mention that solar radiation is not included in the sim-
ulations. This omission is important to observe especially for the
summer-time pre-cooling simulations, where the effect of eventual
solar gains will have an - probably adverse - impact on the cooling
potential.
In terms of the stationary simulations, it is an approximation to
expect steady-state conditions for both the internal and external envi-
ronment. As shown in the dynamic simulations of Part IV the ther-
mal inertia of the façades will have a notable impact on the perfor-
mance, meanwhile the dynamic simulations did in fact reafﬁrm the
possibility of pre-heating. Although the dynamic simulations does
help illustrating the dynamics of the thermal inertia, the periodicity
of the applied temperature proﬁles of Part IV is an idealization, and
an even more detailed impression of the performance would appear
by the application of real climate data. Such an analysis would also
help to a reveal a "yearly savings"-measure for the ventilated façades.
Thickness of The Ventilated Gap
Throughout the simulations described in this project the thickness
of the ventilated gap has been 0.03 m (or 3 cm). This was initially
deemed a reasonable measure in terms of buildability, the caused
air ﬂow velocities and air ﬂows, however the width is not necessarily
ideal - nor nonideal for that matter. It is not clear how the pre-heating
and pre-cooling performance would be affected if the thickness was
changed, and this author does not dare to conjecture. As such it might
be feasible to carry out an additional investigation on the impact of
varying the gap thickness.
Buildability
The focus of this project has been the thermal performance of the
ventilated façades. While the analysed façade geometries are fairly
simple, the buildability has not been the focus, hence the future work
and cultivation of the most promising façade geometries must also
include a well thought-out detailed design.
The Invariable Coherence Between Air Flow, Air velocity and Façade Width
As already demonstrated and mentioned several times, one must note
the invariable coherence between the required air ﬂow into the build-
ing, the available façade width at disposal and the resulting air ﬂow
==PAGE:160==
144
discussion
velocity. Generally in this context, the performance has been mea-
sured as a consequence of the air ﬂow velocity, while in many real
life cases, it is likely that the air ﬂow velocity cannot be chosen freely
because the available façade width naturally is not unlimited. This re-
mark must be kept in mind when assessing the results of this project
and again when considering the applicability of ventilated façades in
a speciﬁc project.
Embedded Heat Source
For especially Facade Type II the brief evaluation of an embedded heat
source letting Ti = 50 °C showed promising results. The model setup
was however quite coarse, and the accuracy of the performance pre-
diction would naturally beneﬁt from a more detailed model geometry
including the geometry and temperature of the actual embedded heat
source. The eventual detailed design will however depend on other
considerations that will not appear before later design phases.
User Behaviour
The performance of the ventilated façades requires a constant air ﬂow
through the façade construction and therefore it is important that the
replacement air is not offered an easier way into the building than
through the ventilated gap. The most imminent risk is that the occu-
pants decide to open the windows. This will short-cut the air-ﬂow
and the effect of the ventilated façade will cease. It is most likely that
occupants are tempted to open the windows during summer-time to
let in fresh and imaginably colder air, although closing the windows
and let the replacement air run through façade would in many cases
allow for a better cooling effect inside the building as demonstrated
in Part IV. Such considerations will not come natural to most occu-
pants, hence instructing the occupants in the most suitable behaviour
is advisable.
During the heating-season it is less likely that the windows are
opened for longer periods at the time, meanwhile the pre-heating
effect is likely to cease completely when they are.
==PAGE:161==
22
C O N S L U S I O N
As demonstrated through the analyses described in this paper, and
with results summarized in Chapter 9 and 18, the ventilated façade
can be utilized for both pre-heating and pre-cooling of replacement
air.
The obtained pre-heating effect depends on a range of factors of
which the thickness of the insulation layer between the ventilated gap
and the interior environment and also the velocity of the replacement
air are the absolutely most decisive. On the most favourable terms
- low replacement air velocity and essentially no thermal resistance
on the interior side of the ventilated gap - a ventilated façade will
be able to pre-heat the replacement air from an outside temperature
of -12 °C to an inlet temperature of approximately 8.8 °C when the
internal environment is 20 °C. Furthermore, a brief investigation in-
dicates that if a heat-source of 50 °C is embedded on the interior side
of the ventilated gap one should expect an even higher degree of pre-
heating. Increasing the amount of insulation on the internal side of
the ventilated gap as well as increasing the air ﬂow velocity of the re-
placement air will reduce the pre-heating. If the insulation is placed
entirely on the internal side of the ventilated gap and if the thickness
of the insulation is above approximately 0.1 m, the pre-heating will
in almost any instance be insigniﬁcant.
Concerning the reduction of transmission loss, certain ventilated
façade types are indeed very effective. If the amount of heat resistance
between the ventilated gap and the internal environment is minimal,
a ventilated façade will recover between 0.4/1 to above 0.8/1 (40 %
to above 80 %) of the transmission loss associated with comparable
non-ventilated façades. If the ventilated gap is located in-between a
thinner layer of insulation towards the internal environment and a
thicker layer towards the external environment, the ventilated façade
will in some cases even be able to recover above 0.9/1 (90 %) of the
normally occurring transmission loss. Even if the space used for the
ventilated gap is instead used for an extra layer of insulation, the
ventilated façade clearly prevails.
With that said, it must be stated, that for well-insulated non-ventilated
façades the transmission loss will be low, and even though a ven-
tilated façade will decrease the transmission loss even further, the
reduction will eventually be small in absolute terms. As such the ven-
145
==PAGE:162==
146
conslusion
tilated façade is especially suitable in situations where a slim façade
solution is required.
The investigations did also show that not any ventilated façade ge-
ometry will reduce the transmission loss. In a case where essentially
all of the thermal resistance is located on the interior side of the venti-
lated gap, the performance of the ventilated façade is less convincing
and will in some instances result in a higher transmission loss than
what can be expected from comparable non-ventilated façades.
The later room-scale pre-study conﬁrmed the performance of one
of the suitable ventilated façade types, but the brief investigation did
also show that in a winter situation it is likely necessary to place a
radiator next to the inside of the ventilated façade to obtain the pre-
heating performance shown in the prior investigations. The nearby
radiator will also help preventing cold surface temperatures and even-
tually condensation on the internal side of the ventilated façade.
The pre-cooling effect of the ventilated façade is highly dependent
on the location of the heavy concrete layer that provides the thermal
inertia and also the velocity of the replacement air. If the concrete
layer is "decoupled" from both the internal- and external environ-
ment by either an insulation layer or the ventilated gap, the venti-
lated façade will yield a replacement air that during the day-time
hours is lower than the outside temperature. Additionally it is possi-
ble to obtain a slight temporal shift in the time of peak-temperature,
meaning that the pre-cooled inlet air will reach its maximum tem-
perature later than the peak of the outside temperature. The suitable
ventilated façade types are able to reduce the peak temperature of
the replacement air from 23.8 °C to approximately 21.5 - 23.0 °C de-
pending on the air ﬂow velocity, where the slowest air ﬂow yields the
highest degree of pre-cooling.
The cooling effect of the ventilated façade is furthermore quantiﬁed
as the sum of transmission heat loss and ventilation heat loss. When
comparing to the heat loss of a non-ventilated reference façade the
ventilated façade does not yield any signiﬁcant cooling effect when
accounting for the entire 24 hours. This is mainly due to the night-
time pre-heating of the replacement air. However, when observing
the daytime period, 8:00-16:00, in which the cooling effect is especially
desirable, the ventilated façade will, depending on the air ﬂow veloc-
ity, yield a per area cooling effect approximately 20-59 % bigger than
a non-ventilated reference façade. For 1 m2 of ventilated façade, the
faster air ﬂows yield the biggest relative cooling effect, however when
adjusting for the façade area needed to provide the same amount of
air ﬂow, the slower replacement air velocities are superior.
As for the pre-heating performance, not any ventilated façade ge-
ometry will yield a pre-cooling effect. If the heavy concrete layer is
==PAGE:163==
conslusion
147
located next to the internal- or external environment one should ex-
pect only an insigniﬁcant- or no pre-cooling at all.
Through a wide range of simulations, this project has uncovered
how and to what extend pre-heating and pre-cooling of replacement
air can be obtained by utilizing ventilated façades. The focus has been
the thermal performance of the façades, and it goes without saying
that plenty more work is required before reaching an actual buildable
product. Hopefully will the results of this project ease the work still
to come.
==PAGE:164==
==PAGE:165==
R E F E R E N C E S
[1]
Jaime Santa Cruz Astorqui and César Porras-Amores. Ventilated
Facade with double chamber and ﬂow control device. Universidad
Politécnica de Madrid: Energy and Buildings, 2017 (cit. on p. 5).
[2]
CFD Module - User’s Guide, 5.3a. COMSOL, 2017 (cit. on pp. 20,
21).
[3]
Jørgen Erik Christensen. Solindfald i Bygninger. DTU: Depart-
ment of Civil Engineering, DTU BYG, 2014 (cit. on pp. 72, 73).
[4]
Abram Dorfman. Analytical Heat Tranfer Analysis under Boundary
Conditions of the Fourth Kind (Conjugate). University of Michigan:
Frontiers in Aerospace Engineering, Vol 5, 2016 (cit. on p. 19).
[5]
Abram Dorfman. Conjugate Problems in Convective Heat Transfer.
University of Michigan: CRC Press, 2016 (cit. on p. 19).
[6]
Walter Frei. Which Turbulence Model Should I Choose for My CFD
Application. https://www.comsol.com/blogs/which-turbulence-
model-should-choose-cfd-application/: COMSOL Multiphysics,
COMSOL Blog, Accessed March 2018, published July 6 2017 (cit.
on p. 21).
[7]
Heat Transfer Module - User’s Guide, 5.3a. COMSOL, 2017 (cit. on
pp. 20, 21).
[8]
Homepage of Ventilationsvinduet. http://ventilationsvinduet.dk/,
Accessed June 2018 (cit. on p. 7).
[9]
John H. Lienhard IV and John H. Lienhard V. A Heat Transfer
Textbook, Fourth Edition. Cambridge, Massachusets: Phlogiston
Press, 2016 (cit. on pp. 12–15, 17, 18).
[10]
Mohammed Imbabi. A passive-active dynamic insulation system
for all climates. The University of Aberdeen, School of Engi-
neering: International Journal of Sustainable Built Environment,
2010 (cit. on pp. 5, 38, 39).
[11]
Mohammed Imbabi. Application of Energyﬂo® Dynamic Insula-
tion in SAP Appendix Q. 2010 (cit. on pp. 5, 6, 38, 39).
[12]
E. Iribar-Solaberrieta, C. Escudero-Revilla, M. Oidrozola-Maritorna,
A. Campos-Celador, and C. Garcia-Gafaro. Energy performance
of the opaque ventilated facade. University of the Basque Country:
Energy Procedia, 2015 (cit. on p. 5).
[13]
William Karush. Matematisk Opslagsbog (The Crescent Dictionary
of Mathmatics. Oversat til dansk af Poul Einer Hansen of Finn
Berg Rasmussen: Steen Hasselbalchs Forlag, 1966 (cit. on p. 72).
149
==PAGE:166==
150
references
[14]
Y. Nakayama and R.F. Boucher. Introduction to Fluid Mechanics.
Oxford: Butterworth Heinemann, 2016 (cit. on p. 14).
[15]
Toke Rammer Nielsen, Svend Svendsen, Jørgen M. Schultz, Morten
Møller Mogensen, Jesper Kragh, and Jacob B. Laustsen. Ruder
og vinduers energimæssige egenskaber - Kompendium 1: Grundlæggende
energimæssige egenskaber. Lyngby: DTU Byg, Danmarks Tekniske
Universitet, 2009 (cit. on p. 127).
[16]
Warren M. Rohsenow, James P. Hartnett, and Young I. Cho.
Handbook of Heat Transfer, third edition. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1998 (cit. on pp. 13, 14).
[17]
Ramesh K. Shah and Duˆsan P. Sekuli´c. Fundamentals of Heat
Exchange Design. New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2003 (cit.
on pp. 14, 15).
[18]
Danish Standards. DS 418 - Calculation of heat loss from buildings,
7. udgave. Charlottenlund: DS, 2011 (cit. on pp. 36, 37, 63).
[19]
Cecilie Vej-Hansen and Carsten Rode. Varmetransmission ved led-
ning, konvektion og stråling - Forelæsningsnotat. Lyngby: DTU Byg,
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, 2010 (cit. on p. 40).
[20]
Peter Grunnet Wang, Mikael Sharling, Kristian Pagh Nielsen,
Kim Bjarne Wittchen, and Claus Kern-Hansen. Technical Report
13-19. Copenhagen: DMI, 2013 (cit. on p. 73).
[21]
Erik Brandt m.ﬂ. SBi-anvisning 224: Fugt i bygniner. Aalborg Uni-
versitet, København: Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut, 2013 (cit.
on p. 137).
==PAGE:167==
T R O O G L O V E - S O L E M N D E C L E R AT I O N
"Det erklæres herved på tro og love, at undertegnede egenhændigt og selvstændigt
har udformet denne rapport. Alle citater og referencer i teksten er markeret
som sådanne, og rapporten eller væsentlige dele af den har ikke tidligere
været fremlagt i anden bedømmelsessammenhæng."
"It is hereby declared that the present writer personally and independently
has prepared this report. All quotes and references in the text are marked as
such, and the report or signiﬁcant parts of it has not previously been pre-
sented in other assessed contexts."
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, Lyngby,
July 13 2018
Jakob Sparre Spiegelhauer
151
==PAGE:168==
==PAGE:169==
Part VII
A P P E N D I C E S
==PAGE:170==
==PAGE:171==
A
A P P E N D I C E S - I N I T I A L V E R I F I C AT I O N C A S E ,
D ATA
155
==PAGE:172==
156
references
Table 31: Simple Veriﬁcation Case Data, Duct depth = 0.01 m, [C°]
Air ﬂow speed, v, m/s
Reynolds number
Analytical Calculation - turb. ﬂow
Analytical Calculation - lam. ﬂow
ANSYS Fluent - lam. ﬂow
COMSOL - lam. ﬂow
COMSOL - lam. ﬂow, f. dvlp. ﬂow
COMSOL - turb. ﬂow, k-ω
COMSOL - turb. ﬂow, k-ϵ
0.1
127.55
25.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
24.7
0.2
255.1
25.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
24.6
0.3
382.65
25.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
24.5
0.4
510.2
25.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
24.4
0.5
637
24.9
24.9
24.9
24.9
24.9
24.3
0.6
765.3
24.8
24.8
24.8
24.8
24.8
24.2
0.7
892.85
24.6
24.6
24.6
24.6
24.7
24.1
0.8
1020.4
24.3
24.3
24.3
24.2
24.6
24.1
0.9
1147.95
23.9
24.0
23.9
23.9
24.4
24.0
1
1275.51
23.4
23.7
23.5
23.4
24.3
23.9
1.1
1403.06
22.9
23.2
23.1
23.0
24.1
23.8
1.2
1530.61
22.3
22.7
22.6
22.5
23.9
23.7
1.3
1658.16
21.7
22.3
22.1
22.0
23.8
23.6
1.4
1785.71
21.1
21.8
21.6
21.4
23.6
23.5
1.5
1913.27
20.4
21.4
21.1
20.9
23.5
23.4
1.6
2040.81
20.3
19.8
20.8
20.6
20.4
23.4
23.3
1.7
2168.36
20.5
19.1
20.3
20.1
19.9
23.2
23.2
1.8
2295.91
20.6
18.5
20.0
19.6
19.4
23.1
23.2
1.9
2829.48
20.7
23.0
23.1
2
2978.41
20.8
22.8
23.0
2.1
3127.33
20.8
22.7
22.9
2.2
3276.25
20.8
22.6
22.8
2.3
3425.17
20.9
22.5
22.8
2.4
3574.09
20.9
22.4
22.7
2.5
3723.01
20.9
22.3
22.6
3
4467.61
20.8
21.8
22.2
3.5
5212.21
20.7
21.4
21.9
4
5956.81
20.6
20.9
21.7
4.5
6701.4
20.4
20.5
21.4
5
7446.01
20.2
20.2
21.2
==PAGE:173==
references
157
Table 32: Simple Veriﬁcation Case Data, Duct depth = 0.03 m, [C°]
Air ﬂow speed, v, [m/s]
Reynolds number
Analytical Calculation - turb. ﬂow
Analytical Calculation - lam. ﬂow
ANSYS Fluent - lam. ﬂow
COMSOL - lam. ﬂow
COMSOL - lam. ﬂow, f. dvlp. ﬂow
COMSOL - turb. ﬂow, k-ω
COMSOL - turb. ﬂow, k-ϵ
0.1
371
24.0
23.9
24.6
24.6
24.5
16.9
0.2
743
18.9
19.4
21.5
21.4
21.4
14.9
0.3
1114
13.9
15.2
17.5
17.2
17.6
13.6
0.4
1486
10.0
12.1
13.9
13.4
14.2
12.4
0.5
1857
7.1
9.8
11.2
10.6
11.6
11.4
0.6
2229
6.8
4.8
8.0
9.2
8.5
9.7
10.5
0.7
3127.2
7.1
8.9
9.9
0.8
3574.08
7.2
8.6
9.4
0.9
4020.85
7.2
8.4
9.0
1
4467.6
7.1
8.3
8.6
1.1
4914.37
7.0
8.1
8.3
1.2
5361.13
6.9
7.9
8.0
1.3
5807.89
6.8
7.7
7.7
1.4
6254.65
6.7
7.5
7.5
1.5
6701.41
6.5
7.2
7.2
1.6
7148.18
6.4
7.1
7.0
1.7
7594.93
6.3
6.9
6.8
1.8
8041.69
6.2
6.7
6.7
1.9
8488.46
6.0
6.5
6.5
2
8935.21
5.9
6.3
6.3
2.1
9381.98
5.8
6.2
6.2
2.2
9828.74
5.7
6.0
6.0
2.3
10275.5
5.6
5.9
5.9
2.4
10722.26
5.5
5.8
5.7
2.5
11169.02
5.4
5.7
5.6
3
13402
4.9
5.1
5.1
3.5
15636
4.5
4.6
4.7
4
17870
4.1
4.1
4.3
4.5
20104
3.8
3.7
3.9
5
22338
3.5
3.2
3.7
==PAGE:174==
==PAGE:175==
B
A P P E N D I C E S - η T - C H A RT S
Figure 91: Coherency between ηT and TA at Ti=20 °C
159
==PAGE:176==
160
references
Figure 92: Coherency between ηT and TA at Ti=50 °C
==PAGE:177==
C
A P P E N D I C E S - T i O F 5 0 ° C
Figure 93: Facade Setup I - ηT. Ti = 50 °C.
161
==PAGE:178==
162
references
Figure 94: Facade Setup I - ηU for ventilated facade and Reference Facade 1.
Avg. Uvent and Uref1 are read off the secondary axis. Ti = 50 °C.
==PAGE:179==
references
163
Figure 95: Facade Setup I - ηU for ventilated facade and Reference Facade 2.
Avg. Uvent and Uref1 are read off the secondary axis. Ti = 50 °C.
==PAGE:180==
164
references
Figure 96: Facade Setup II - ηT. Ti = 50 °C.
==PAGE:181==
references
165
Figure 97: Facade Setup II - ηU for ventilated facade and Reference Facade
1. Avg. Uvent and Uref1 are read off the secondary axis. Ti = 50
°C.
==PAGE:182==
166
references
Figure 98: Facade Setup II - ηU for ventilated facade and Reference Facade
2. Avg. Uvent and Uref1 are read off the secondary axis. Ti = 50
°C.
==PAGE:183==
D
A P P E N D I C E S - T R A N S I E N T S I M U L AT I O N S
Figure 99: Facade type IV, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02.00, velocity:
0.2 m/s
Figure 100: Facade type IV, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07.00, veloc-
ity: 0.2 m/s
167
==PAGE:184==
168
references
Figure 101: Facade type IV, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14.00, veloc-
ity: 0.2 m/s
Figure 102: Facade type IV, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02.00, veloc-
ity: 0.6 m/s
Figure 103: Facade type IV, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07.00, veloc-
ity: 0.6 m/s
==PAGE:185==
references
169
Figure 104: Facade type IV, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14.00, veloc-
ity: 0.6 m/s
Figure 105: Facade type IV, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity 0.2 m/s
Figure 106: Facade type IV, aggregated heat ﬂux through facade, velocity:
0.2 m/s
==PAGE:186==
170
references
Figure 107: Facade type IV, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity: 0.2 m/s
Figure 108: Facade type IV, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity 0.6 m/s
Figure 109: Facade type IV, aggregated heat ﬂux through facade, velocity:
0.6 m/s
==PAGE:187==
references
171
Figure 110: Facade type IV, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity: 0.6 m/s
Figure 111: Facade type V, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02.00, veloc-
ity: 0.2 m/s
Figure 112: Facade type V, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07.00, veloc-
ity: 0.2 m/s
==PAGE:188==
172
references
Figure 113: Facade type V, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14.00, veloc-
ity: 0.2 m/s
Figure 114: Facade type V, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02.00, veloc-
ity: 0.6 m/s
Figure 115: Facade type V, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07.00, veloc-
ity: 0.6 m/s
==PAGE:189==
references
173
Figure 116: Facade type V, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14.00, veloc-
ity: 0.6 m/s
Figure 117: Facade type V, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity 0.2 m/s
Figure 118: Facade type V, aggregated heat ﬂux through facade, velocity: 0.2
m/s
==PAGE:190==
174
references
Figure 119: Facade type V, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity: 0.2 m/s
Figure 120: Facade type V, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity 0.6 m/s
Figure 121: Facade type V, aggregated heat ﬂux through facade, velocity: 0.6
m/s
==PAGE:191==
references
175
Figure 122: Facade type V, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity: 0.6 m/s
Figure 123: Facade type VI, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02.00, veloc-
ity: 0.2 m/s
==PAGE:192==
176
references
Figure 124: Facade type VI, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07.00, veloc-
ity: 0.2 m/s
Figure 125: Facade type VI, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14.00, veloc-
ity: 0.2 m/s
Figure 126: Facade type VI, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02.00, veloc-
ity: 0.6 m/s
==PAGE:193==
references
177
Figure 127: Facade type VI, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07.00, veloc-
ity: 0.6 m/s
Figure 128: Facade type VI, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14.00, veloc-
ity: 0.6 m/s
Figure 129: Facade type VI, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity 0.2 m/s
==PAGE:194==
178
references
Figure 130: Facade type VI, aggregated heat ﬂux through facade, velocity:
0.2 m/s
Figure 131: Facade type VI, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity: 0.2 m/s
Figure 132: Facade type VI, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity 0.6 m/s
==PAGE:195==
references
179
Figure 133: Facade type VI, aggregated heat ﬂux through facade, velocity:
0.6 m/s
Figure 134: Facade type VI, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity: 0.6 m/s
==PAGE:196==
180
references
Figure 135: Facade type VII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02.00, ve-
locity: 0.2 m/s
Figure 136: Facade type VII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07.00, ve-
locity: 0.2 m/s
Figure 137: Facade type VII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14.00, ve-
locity: 0.2 m/s
==PAGE:197==
references
181
Figure 138: Facade type VII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02.00, ve-
locity: 0.6 m/s
Figure 139: Facade type VII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07.00, ve-
locity: 0.6 m/s
Figure 140: Facade type VII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14.00, ve-
locity: 0.6 m/s
==PAGE:198==
182
references
Figure 141: Facade type VII, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity 0.2 m/s
Figure 142: Facade type VII, aggregated heat ﬂux through facade, velocity:
0.2 m/s
Figure 143: Facade type VII, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity: 0.2 m/s
==PAGE:199==
references
183
Figure 144: Facade type VII, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity 0.6 m/s
Figure 145: Facade type VII, aggregated heat ﬂux through facade, velocity:
0.6 m/s
Figure 146: Facade type VII, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity: 0.6 m/s
==PAGE:200==
184
references
Figure 147: Facade type VIII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02.00, ve-
locity: 0.2 m/s
Figure 148: Facade type VIII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07.00, ve-
locity: 0.2 m/s
Figure 149: Facade type VIII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14.00, ve-
locity: 0.2 m/s
==PAGE:201==
references
185
Figure 150: Facade type VIII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02.00, ve-
locity: 0.6 m/s
Figure 151: Facade type VIII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07.00, ve-
locity: 0.6 m/s
Figure 152: Facade type VIII, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14.00, ve-
locity: 0.6 m/s
==PAGE:202==
186
references
Figure 153: Facade type VIII, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity 0.2 m/s
Figure 154: Facade type VIII, aggregated heat ﬂux through facade, velocity:
0.2 m/s
Figure 155: Facade type VIII, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity: 0.2 m/s
==PAGE:203==
references
187
Figure 156: Facade type VIII, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity 0.6 m/s
Figure 157: Facade type VIII, aggregated heat ﬂux through facade, velocity:
0.6 m/s
Figure 158: Facade type VIII, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity: 0.6 m/s
==PAGE:204==
188
references
Figure 159: Facade type IX, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02.00, veloc-
ity: 0.2 m/s
Figure 160: Facade type IX, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07.00, veloc-
ity: 0.2 m/s
Figure 161: Facade type IX, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14.00, veloc-
ity: 0.2 m/s
==PAGE:205==
references
189
Figure 162: Facade type IX, Temperatures at three cut planes at 02.00, veloc-
ity: 0.6 m/s
Figure 163: Facade type IX, Temperatures at three cut planes at 07.00, veloc-
ity: 0.6 m/s
Figure 164: Facade type IX, Temperatures at three cut planes at 14.00, veloc-
ity: 0.6 m/s
==PAGE:206==
190
references
Figure 165: Facade type IX, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity 0.2 m/s
Figure 166: Facade type IX, aggregated heat ﬂux through facade, velocity:
0.2 m/s
Figure 167: Facade type IX, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity: 0.2 m/s
==PAGE:207==
references
191
Figure 168: Facade type IX, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity 0.6 m/s
Figure 169: Facade type IX, aggregated heat ﬂux through facade, velocity:
0.6 m/s
Figure 170: Facade type IX, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity: 0.6 m/s
==PAGE:208==
192
references
Figure 171: Facade type IX with radiation, aggregated heat ﬂux through fa-
cade, velocity: 0.2 m/s
Figure 172: Facade type IX with radiation, boundary heat ﬂuxes, velocity:
0.2 m/s
Figure 173: Facade type IX with radiation, heat ﬂux through facade, velocity
0.6 m/s
==PAGE:209==
references
193
Figure 174: Facade type IX with radiation, aggregated heat ﬂux through fa-
cade, velocity: 0.6 m/s
==PAGE:210==
==PAGE:211==
E
D E S C R I P T I O N O F D I G I TA L A P P E N D I C E S
The following describes the folder hierarchy and ﬁle content of the
available digital appendices. Due to space concerns the included COM-
SOL models do not contain any result data. Further documentation
is available upon request.
\Digital Appendices - Multiphysical Calculation Model for Pre-heating
of Replacement Air Through Ventilated Facade Elements
\Part II - Initial Verification Case
\COMSOL-models
ini_ver_0.01_0.3_lam.mph
Model of the initial veriﬁcation case where duct width is 0.01
m and the air ﬂow velocity is 0.3 m/s. Laminar ﬂow. The re-
maining models used in the initial veriﬁcation case are simi-
lar to this, however with varying gap width, air ﬂow velocity,
air ﬂow model and inlet conﬁguration.
\Part III - Stationary Simulations - Pre-heating Potential
\COMSOL-models
ftI_all_param.mph
Model of Façade Type I. Including all parameter variations
ftII_all_param.mph
Model of Façade Type II. Including all parameter variations
ftIII_all_param.mph
Model of Façade Type III. Including all parameter variations
\Simulation Data
part_III_data_all.xlsx
Result data for simulations of Façade Type I-III including cases
of Ti = 50 °C.
\Part IV - Transient Simulation - Pre-cooling Potential
\COMSOL-models
195
==PAGE:212==
196
references
ftIV_all_01.mph
Model of Façade Type IV with air ﬂow velocity 0.1 m/s.
ftV_all_01.mph
Model of Façade Type V with air ﬂow velocity 0.1 m/s.
ftVI_all_01.mph
Model of Façade Type VI with air ﬂow velocity 0.1 m/s.
ftVII_all_01.mph
Model of Façade Type VII with air ﬂow velocity 0.1 m/s.
ftVIII_all_01.mph
Model of Façade Type VIII with air ﬂow velocity 0.1 m/s.
ftIX_all_01.mph
Model of Façade Type IX with air ﬂow velocity 0.1 m/s.
ftIX_all_01.mph
Model of Façade Type IX with air ﬂow velocity 0.1 m/s. Radi-
ation applied.
\Simulation Data
ftIV_data_all.xlsx
Data from the simulations of Façade Type IV for all air ﬂow
velocities.
ftV_data_all.xlsx
Data from the simulations of Façade Type V for all air ﬂow
velocities.
ftVI_data_all.xlsx
Data from the simulations of Façade Type VI for all air ﬂow
velocities.
ftVII_data_all.xlsx
Data from the simulations of Façade Type VII for all air ﬂow
velocities.
ftVIII_data_all.xlsx
Data from the simulations of Façade Type VII for all air ﬂow
velocities.
ftIX_data_all.xlsx
Data from the simulations of Façade Type IX for all air ﬂow
==PAGE:213==
references
197
velocities. Includes data for simulations accounting for radi-
ation effect.
\Part V - Room Scale Pre-study
\COMSOL-models
full_room_inlet_A.mph
Model of full room-scale simulation. Inlet type A.
full_room_inlet_B.mph
Model of full room-scale simulation. Inlet type B.
