==PAGE:1==
 
 
==PAGE:2==
ABSTRACT 
 
Through the course of this project, a concept for power transfer systems in homes have been 
developed. In the Exploration Activity, the target users were defined to be newly educated 
people in the age from 26-35 years old who have an interest in interior design. Furthermore, the 
contextual aspects in the problem space were explored and in the end a Goal Formulation and 
Design Specification was defined ensuring a focus on interior integration and accessibility in the 
following Concept Synthesis. 
By using both creative – and systematic methods like Brainstorming and SCAMPER, 74 idea 
elements were generated, which as a result of evaluation methods like the C-Box, Harris Profile 
and the vALUe Method led to the decision to focus on the specific solution space: “Mobile 
Modular Battery Systems”. By using the Morphological Chart and combining previous ideas and 
concepts, three main concepts within this solution space were defined and presented by 
describing the Idea With and the Idea In the concepts. The three concepts “Delta Bricks”, “TYLES” 
and “The Kite” were evaluated by using the Weighted Objective Method and the TYLES concept 
was chosen as the final concept – a concept consisting of hexagon-shaped battery tiles, which 
can be moved to any location making power accessible anywhere in the home. In the end, the 
TYLES concept was embodied by describing the activities and organs in the concept and thereby 
applying Domain Theory. This led to the creation of conceptual and functional mockups showing 
the essence of the concept in real life.  
 
 
==PAGE:3==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
Even though this project was a solo project, it could not have been 
done without the help of the following individuals. So thank you to 
the following: 
 
Claus Thorp Hansen, for supervising my Master’s Thesis and 
especially ensuring that I got on to the right track again after doing 
a much too broad exploration in the beginning of the project.  
 
Erik Bjerre Fisker, for taking your time to show me around in ‘Den 
Gamle By’ and give your thoughts on the big collection of outlets 
through the last 100 years. 
 
Kjeld Ole Jensen for helping me with gathering 5 employees from 
Radius to do a group interview – an interview that introduced me 
to the electrician’s world and helped me to define the solution 
space. 
 
Thomas Meier Sørensen for taking his time to have a short 
meeting with me to validate my thoughts on transferring power 
between power tiles. 
 
 
 
 
Paul Downey and Simon Wolff for helping me to generate and 
reflect on idea elements and design methods during our weekly 
work days. 
 
Salli Anderscou, Dennis Nygaard, Christian Herschend, Linn Elster 
and Joel August Stein Pedersen for letting me interview you for 
the project. 
 
All the 75 respondents from the quantitative questionnaire.  
 
DTU Skylab for providing material and facilities for prototyping 
 
In the end, thank you to my girlfriend for putting up with me 
talking about plugs and outlets during the last months and my 
parents for letting me use their backyard as a prototyping 
workshop. 
==PAGE:4==
TABLE OF CONTENT 
 
CHAPTER 1: SETTING THE SCENE 
 
MOTIVATION AND PRESUMPTIONS 
 
 
 
 
3 
OBJECTIVE OF MASTER’S THESIS 
 
 
 
 
4 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
PROJECT PLAN 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
FRAMING THE DESIGN PROCESS  
 
 
 
 
8 
CREATING THE DESIGN SPACE 
 
 
 
 
10 
PROJECT BOUNDARIES 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
CHAPTER 2: EXPLORATION: DISCOVERING THE PROBLEM SPACE  
 
18 
 
WHY EXPLORING?  
 
 
 
 
 
21 
BEHIND THE CURRENT POWER TRANSFER SYSTEM 
 
 
 
24 
MARKET RESEARCH – LK’S MONOPOLY IN DENMARK  
 
 
34 
EXPLORING THE PROBLEM SPACE 
 
 
 
 
35 
ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS IN INTERIOR DESIGN 
 
 
 
51 
CONTEXT MAPPING 
 
 
 
 
 
52 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 
 
 
 
 
53 
 
CHAPTER 3: EXPLORATION: DEFINING THE DESIGN TASK 
 
 
54 
 
FROM DESIGN PARADOX TO PROBLEM DEFINITION 
 
 
 
57 
DEFINING THE CONTEXT   
 
 
 
 
59 
USER SEGMENTATION 
 
 
 
 
 
64 
==PAGE:5==
TALK TO THE USERS 
 
 
 
 
 
67 
PERSONA CREATION 
 
 
 
 
 
76 
NORDIC AND SCANDINAVIAN INTERIOR  
 
 
 
79 
DESIGN SPECIFICATION  
 
 
 
 
 
82 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 
 
 
 
 
88 
 
CHAPTER 4: CONCEPT SYNTHESIS: IDEA GENERATION 
 
 
89 
 
CAPTURING EMERGING IDEAS DURING EXPLORATION 
 
 
92 
BRAINSTORMING MINI WORKSHOP 
 
 
 
 
93 
SYNECTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
97 
SCAMPER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
101 
VISUAL THINKING 
 
 
 
 
 
105 
DECIDING ON 5 SOLUTION SPACES 
 
 
 
 
110 
ASSESSING AND EVALUATION 
 
 
 
 
118 
DECIDING ON THE SOLUTION SPACE 
 
 
 
 
124 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 
 
 
 
 
124 
 
CHAPTER 5: CONCEPT SYNTHESIS: CONCEPT CREATION 
 
 
125 
 
MORPHOLOGICAL CHART  
 
 
 
 
128 
COMBINING IDEA ELEMENTS INTO 3 CONCEPTS 
 
 
 
132 
WEIGHTED OBJECTIVE METHOD 
 
 
 
 
142 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 
 
 
 
 
146 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
CHAPTER 6: EMBODIMENT OF CONCEPT 
 
 
 
147 
 
CONCEPTUAL CHANGES 
 
 
 
 
 
150 
THE PRODUCT’S NATURE  
 
 
 
 
156 
BUILDING MOCKUPS 
 
 
 
 
 
168 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 
 
 
 
 
175 
 
CHAPTER 7: CONCEPT VALIDATION 
 
 
 
 
176 
 
EVALUATING THE CONCEPT 
 
 
 
 
179 
TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY 
 
 
 
 
 
183 
CONCEPTUAL VULNERABILITY 
 
 
 
 
185 
FURTHER DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
 
 
188 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 
 
 
 
 
190 
 
CHAPTER 8: CONCLUSION AND REFLECTIONS 
 
 
 
191 
 
VISUAL PRESENTATION OF THE FINAL CONCEPT 
 
 
 
194 
REFLECTIONS ON THE LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 
 
 
199 
REFLECTING ON THE PROJECT WORK 
 
 
 
 
203 
CONCLUSION 
 
 
 
 
 
207 
 
REFERENCE LIST 
 
 
 
 
 
208 
FIGURE LIST  
 
 
 
 
 
210 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
1 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
2 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
 
MOTIVATION AND PRESUMPTIONS 
OBJECTIVE OF MASTER’S THESIS 
PROJECT PLAN 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
FRAMING THE DESIGN PROCESS  
CREATING THE DESIGN SPACE 
One Man Team 
Work Group 
An Ocean of Methods and Tools 
 
East West, Home Is Best? 
RECURRING DEFINITIONS 
PROJECT BOUNDARIES 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
3 
MOTIVATION AND PRESUMPTIONS 
 
Power plugs and extension cords are a big part of our daily lives and have been domesticated 
through many years to a point where they are in many ways taken for granted. I started asking 
myself questions like:  
1. Why do the power connectors need to have two long pins?  
2. Why are all the plugs very often placed in quite inaccessible places like in the bottom 
corners for example? 
I have a bias that people generally do not like the aesthetics of the design and the long cords 
attached to the power plugs – therefore they are placed in anonymous positions like close to the 
floor. Also, when working I am often confronted with the frustration of finding power for my laptop 
– even in my own living room where there is less than two meters to the closest power plug. I find 
it very interesting that the current solutions available on the Danish market are very limited. If you 
look at a big player like LK, former Lauritz Knudsen, they have many smart solutions and creative 
products, but they are all based on the traditional ways of connecting to electricity. With all the 
available technology present and an electronic market where people are used to new innovations I 
find it very illogical from a designer perspective that the field has not been more exploited. For me 
the solutions available are hardly the tip of the iceberg and I feel confident that going through a 
typical design process as the one described in Conceptual Design (Andreasen et al. 2015) I will be 
able to reveal more of the iceberg underneath the surface.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
4 
OBJECTIVE OF THE MASTER’S THESIS 
 
In this master’s thesis, the objective is to: 
 
“Identify needs within the use of power plugs and extension cords, analyse and interpret these 
needs into goal specifications and create a number of innovative concepts by using theories and 
methods within the area of conceptualization.” 
 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 
As a part of my Master’s Thesis theories and methods obtained through the bachelor and master 
program at DTU will be used to support the design process as well as to showcase the academic 
attainment after studying Design and Innovation. 
Below are the learning objectives for this Master’s Thesis. These will be used as an integrated part 
of the supervision and as a basis for evaluating the Master’s Thesis deliverables including a 
presentation (Andreasen et al. 2015): 
 
1. Engage with users and relevant actors to collect data on needs and context. 
2. Find, analyse and reflect on relevant literature. 
3. Analyse available technology and existing solutions on the market. 
4. Identify needs and contexts on the basis of data collection and research and outline a 
number of design paradoxes. 
5. Define goal formulation and product specifications on the basis of need interpretation and 
research. 
6. Create innovative ideas through creative, systematic – and visual thinking. 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
5 
7. Evaluate and choose 3-5 ideas by using relevant design methods and including relevant users 
and design experts. 
8. Define and communicate a final concept using Domain Theory. 
9. Evaluate and review the main concepts by involving relevant users and design experts.  
10. Prepare a basis for concept selection taking into account vulnerability, realise ability, and 
other relevant criteria. 
11. Dynamic adjust the staging in relation to current project status and obtained results. 
 
1-3 explain the learning objectives related to the preliminary research. The project plan suggests 
the use of qualitative interviews, cultural probes, physical and online surveys, field observations and 
general research through literature. 
 
4-5 relates to the part of the exploration phase that analyse and interpret the data and information 
gained from 1-3 to identify needs and idea elements resulting in defining a goal statement and 
product specifications. 
 
6-11 are the core learning objectives where the use of conceptualization methods and theory will 
be examined in order to assess the level of the project. 
 
For 6 and 8 external users and design experts are included in the evaluation process. The underlying 
reason for this is that the project is a solitary project. Therefore, I will need external inputs in order 
to secure a good design process. The ‘design experts’ in this project is a small group of my co-
students at Design and Innovation. Including them in the process will ensure I do not go through the 
project with blinders on. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
6 
PROJECT PLAN 
Before beginning the thesis, a project plan was made. The project plan is visualized in the Gantt 
Chart in figure 1, which can also be found in Appendix A1. 
In the first row the design activities are placed as the elements in the overall design process with 
the encapsulation model as foundation. 
The second and third row place the deliverables and report tasks that all lead up to the deadlines 
visualised by the red vertical lines. 
The fourth row shows the plan for collecting data by common research, but also though user 
interaction. These can be changed during the project. 
In the last row, the methods are positioned with relation to the different design activities. The 
methods included should be seen as a listing of the methods available. During the project these can 
change, be erased or new methods can be added. This will depend on the staging of the project at 
the specific design activity. In the end of this report, reflections will be made regarding the project 
plan and the process in general. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Project plan in the form of a Gantt Chart 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
8 
FRAMING THE DESIGN PROCESS 
 
To ensure a good outcome from the project it is important to consider the design process and which 
design strategies to follow. The design process can be built in many ways and sequences depending 
on the design project. Some design processes are clarified from the beginning with a specific design 
task from a company and could be described as Koen (2004) describes it: “The formal and well-
structured New Product Development portion.” For this project, the design process begins before 
this part and includes what is called the fuzzy front end. (Andreasen et al. 2015) 
The design process for this project is framed on the basis of the Encapsulation Design Model 
presented by Andreasen et al. (2015) – a framework describing the overall design process. (See 
Figure 2) 
The model shows a sequence of activities that lays foundation for different design results such as 
the task description, which is created from the exploration phase. This Master’s Thesis will focus on 
describing and reflecting on the creation of the task, concept and design and hereby elaborating on 
the exploration phase, concept synthesis and product synthesis.  
The different elements will be a part of an iterative process where the activities exchange 
information during the entire design process, which is important to fulfill each element in the 
Encapsulation Design Model. (Andreasen et al. 2015) 
Along the Encapsulation Design Model the Double Diamond model, introduced by the Design 
Council (2005), will be used as a mental model for the design process as well. To visualize the whole 
process of this Master’s Thesis, an overall process model is shown below. The different phases in 
the model are also the titles of the chapters in order to make the whole process more transparent 
to the reader. 
 
Figure 2: Encapsulation Design Model 
(Hansen et al. 2015) 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
9 
 
Figure 3: Overall design process model 
 
The first diamond represents the exploration phase where the problems are discovered to open up 
the problem space and then defined afterwards – defining the context, target users and the task in 
the form of a design specification.  
The second diamond portrays the concept synthesis where the solution space is firstly opened up 
by applying different ideation methods followed by an evaluation of the ideas and concepts, which 
leaves on final chosen concept as output.  
The third diamond shows how the concept is embodied by applying Domain Theory and using 
mockups and in the end of the process the concept will be validated by putting the final concept 
and the design specification up against each other. 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
10
 
CREATING THE DESIGN SPACE 
 
ONE MAN TEAM 
This Master’s Thesis has been made solitarily, which immediately makes the design project lack 
some mechanisms that appears in design teams. Through the Design & Innovation courses at DTU I 
have established a theoretical foundation for making the project on my own. However, realizing a 
new product on your own is very hard to do according to Andreasen et al. (2015) and therefore the 
staging of the project has been very important. 
Andreasen et al. (2015) describes staging as “the act of establishing and fitting a team’s space to a 
project, to best support the design activity”. Staging brings together designers to work effectively as 
a team on a design task. Working solitary, the important aspects regarding the staging of the project 
was to create the right surroundings both to compensate for not working in a design team and in 
order to encourage myself to think differently. 
Looking at figure 4 below there are some important elements missing, which need to be 
compensated in order to create a good design space. 
 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
11
 
Figure 4: Missing aspects when working solitarily 
 
 
Especially the competences and knowledge is more comprehensive in a team than in solitary work. 
In order to create a design space to compensate for this it has been very important to include 
experts and users.  
 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
12
WORK GROUP 
To create a space that welcomes reflections, a working group was created together with two other 
design engineer students working on their Master’s Thesis as well.  
 
 
Figure 5: Work group at KUB Nord Library in Copenhagen 
 
Specifically, two days a week, Tuesday and Thursday, were booked for working side by side in order 
to have a space where we could ask questions about useful design methods and share insights about 
experiences gained during the project – for example experiences involving users or experts. How 
did the other handle interviewing actors and which methods was used in order to analyze the data 
gathered from the interviews?  
Questions and reflections like these during the project helped to compensate the before mentioned 
challenges related to working alone. 
 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
13
METHODS AND TOOLS 
Many designers are of the opinion that a designer does not need methods and tools, but only 
intuition, creativity and expertise. (Boeijen et al. 2016) However, methods and tools for designing 
new products have for a long time been integrated in product design education such as at Delft 
University of Technology who have been raised with textbooks on design methods and as the world 
is constantly changing with new demands and new technology new methods will keep seeing the 
light of day. (Boeijen et al. 2016) 
By looking into existing methods and tools you can quickly get a headache as there are many 
available for many different tasks. For this project, the methods and tools have been chosen from 
my point of view as a soon-to-be design engineer. Some has been introduced through courses like 
Conceptualization and Advanced Design Methods where others have been introduced through 
external literature such as the Delft Design Guide. 
 
EAST WEST, HOME IS BEST? 
In continuation of staging Andreasen et al. (2015) says that a condition for innovation is that things 
are done differently from your usual routines. This also means to work in different environments 
than your living room. By working at home, you will not break out of your routines and will not be 
stimulated creatively.  
To ensure new stimulation and inspire to reflect on new aspects multiple work spaces was used 
during the design project.  
 
Home 
For reading extensive literature I stayed home and created a convenient atmosphere where I could 
deepen myself in the literature.  
The home environment was also useful when sketching or handling bigger organization tasks. For 
example, the wall at home was used as a big canvas where I could put post-it’s without having to 
take them down again. 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
14
 
 
Figure 6: Using apartment wall to post-its 
KUB Nord library 
This library was very close to my apartments (200m) and it was therefore easy to go there instead 
of working home. Working at home, there are a lot of different distractions and being at the library 
with other students in a quiet space increased motivation and work efficiency.  
The library was also used for the weekly meetings with the work group and to stage a smaller 
brainstorming session as whiteboards were available and made it easy to facilitate sessions like this. 
 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
15
DTU Skylab 
The facilities at DTU Skylab was used for meetings with the work group. Also, there are people there 
that will be able to help getting in contact with the right people and there is generally an inspiring 
environment with focus on entrepreneurship, which stimulates and encourage working with 
innovative product design. There are furthermore many fablab facilities, which will be used later in 
the project for prototyping. 
 
Cafes 
Sometimes I went to cafes to write to get new impressions and inspiration from observing people’s 
behavior while writing. This made me reflect on other things and helped me to have small incubation 
intervals while writing. 
 
RECURRING DEFINITIONS 
This Master’s Thesis concerns the use of power for our different electronic products and devices. 
Within the transfer of electricity there are different components that often gets mixed together. 
For example, if you say extension cord people associate it with two different products: (1) the 
extension cord per definition without outlets extra outlets or (2) the extension cord with multiple 
outlets. In this report, the components are defined as below: 
 
 
Figure 8: Power transfer system definitions 
 
Figure 7: Laser-cutting at Skylab for 
mockup 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
16
 
Together the components form an overall system, which will be described as the ‘power transfer 
system’. For this project, the aim is to design a concept with either some or all of the components. 
The aim is to improve the system, which can be done by re-conceptualize one or more of the 
components or by creating a whole new system – possibly re-conceptualizing the whole system. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
17
PROJECT BOUNDARIES 
This project will concern power transfer systems in Denmark and the research will mainly be based 
on Danish designs and legislation. 
As this is not a Master’s Thesis in electronic engineering the creation and assembly of specific 
electronic components in a design not be considered as a part of the project se scope.  
 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
18
 
 
 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
19
This chapter will explain the divergent process of exploring the problem space within power transfer systems. The background of power 
transfer systems will be explored as well as legislative, market and technology aspects. The problem space will be explored by observing 
specific problematic situations and by doing a qualitative online survey. Then three interviews will be conducted with users in different 
context in order to explore contextual issues. In the end, the context will be explored by assessing which electronic products we use the 
most and how the products differ regarding mobility. To sum up the explored problem space a context map will be made and include the 
aspects covered in the divergent exploration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Divergent exploration phase highlighted in overall design process  
 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
20
TABLE OF CONTENT  
 
WHY EXPLORING?  
 
BEHIND THE CURRENT POWER TRANSFER SYSTEM 
THE HISTORY OF ELECTRICAL POWER TRANSMISSION 
THE DESIGN HISTORY OF THE DANISH OUTLETS 
POWER TRANSFER TECHNOLOGIES 
LEGISLATION 
 
MARKET RESEARCH – LK’S MONOPOLY IN DENMARK 
 
EXPLORING THE PROBLEM SPACE 
MY PROBLEMS WITH POWER TRANSFER SYSTEMS 
QUALITATIVE ONLINE SURVEY 
EXPLORING USER CONTEXTS 
PLACEMENT OBSERVATIONS 
 
ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS IN INTERIOR DESIGN 
 
CONTEXT MAPPING 
 
CHAPTER SUMMARY
==PAGE:27==
 
 
21 
Figure 10: Exploration Model 
WHY EXPLORING? 
 
The staging of the design space has now been defined, but at this point, everything is still quite 
vague and you hear many refer to this initial activity of the design process as The Fuzzy Front End. 
In the Merged Process Model (Figure 9) and by Andreasen et al. (2015) it is referred to as the 
exploration activity.  
So, why do we need an exploration activity? You can argue that you could jump straight into idea 
creation as we already have some initial problems through the motivation for the project. Well, 
foremost the exploration activity is something that follows through the entire design process as a 
supporting role in the search for new ideas and for conceptualizing with the right arguments.  
 
The reason why we begin the design process with exploration is to explore the whole problem space 
instead of carelessly going for the first idea that pops into mind. This can just be the tip of the iceberg 
and an exploration activity is therefore very critical to as Andreasen et al. (2015) say ensure that the 
right product is developed!  
The exploration activity will for this project be helpful for defining the main problems and contexts 
and in the end result in a clearer problem formulation based on a need interpretation of the insights 
and findings. In the end, this will lead to a design specification including requirements and criteria 
for the concept synthesis. Normally in a design company the trigger for starting a design project is 
giving from a higher-level authority like a customer or marketing manager. For this project, the 
trigger is given by the motivation described in ‘Motivation and Presumptions’ on page X. At this 
point I am left in an open water situation where it is not evident which island to swim towards. This 
ocean can be compared to the Exploration Model by Andreasen et al. (2015), which describes five 
feed chains leading towards concept synthesis.  
 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
22 
All individual feed chains can lead to the concept synthesis activity and are not necessarily 
dependent on each other. However, all the feed chains will be considered in the exploration activity 
for this project in order to ensure the most fruitful design conditions.  
By a quick Google search, it is obvious that I am not the only one bothered by the traditional power 
transfer systems and many ideas and concepts are being created in this second.  
 
 
 
Figure 11: Searching for ‘Power plug innovation’ on Google (19.05.2018) 
 
In Figure 11 several idea elements from other designs in the internet are shown both regarding 
flexibility and modularization. However, these are still rather conventional where this design project 
seeks to create something more innovative. 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
23 
Before generating ideas, there is a lot of information and a lot of problem areas to research on. 
Therefore, the first part of the exploration activity will be open and divergent in order to gather as 
many observations as possible.  
At some point, something will draw attention and drive us towards a more specific problem space. 
This chapter will explain the divergent process of exploring the problem space where Chapter 3 will 
explain the converging process of defining the problem space and design task.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
24 
BEHIND THE CURRENT POWER TRANSFER SYSTEM 
 
A concurrent process in the exploration activity was to do research on how power transfer systems 
work and how they have developed through time. This section will shortly explain the design history 
of power transfer systems in general and in Denmark by interviewing an expert within the 20th 
century where power transfer systems emerged.  
Current technology within the field will also be elaborated as well as a brief overview of the most 
important legislative aspects when designing electrical systems in homes. 
 
THE HISTORY OF ELECTRICAL POWER TRANSMISSION 
The history of electronic appliances is quite short and the modern way of using electricity was 
founded in by Edison in the end of the 1800s when he introduced electrical lighting through the 
direct current or DC in short. After what is commonly known as the ‘War of the Currents’, Tesla and 
his alternative current AC slowly won as it had the significantly advantage of distributing electricity 
at longer distances than DC. (Casazza & Delea, 2003) Ironically DC is nowadays preferred over AC in 
modern electronic devices like laptops, tablets and smartphones etc. (Sethi, 2016) 
In the beginning people used the lamp output for other appliances and in 1904 Harvey Hubbell 
patented his separable plug, which have many similarities with the plugs we see today.  
 
From the end of the 1800s the exploration of wall sockets led to many different designs – one of 
them being the Chapman plug in Figure 13 with connectors on the sides and brass doors that closed 
when plugged in making the plug itself invisible. In 1917, six manufacturers went together and 
agreed on a standard for power plugs that from this point defined the look of the power plug and 
still do today.  
 
 
Figure 12: Hubbell Separable Plug 
Figure 13: Frederick A. Chapman plug. 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
25 
THE DESIGN HISTORY OF THE DANISH OUTLETS 
To gain design-historical insights on the development of power transfer systems in Denmark, I got 
in touch with building archaeologist, Erik Bjerre Fisker, from the museum Den Gamle By located in 
Aarhus. 
 
 
Figure 14: Picture of Erik Bjerre Fisker at Den Gamle By in Aarhus 
 
Besides being a museum with a comprehensive architecture picturing the last century, Den Gamle 
By has a collection of over 150 power switches and outlets showing how the designs have changed 
in Denmark through the years.  
 
My trip to Den Gamle By included two qualitative interviews – one unstructured interview and one 
semi-structured interview with Erik Bjerre Fisker. The interviews were conducted in line with Kvale 
& Brinkmann (2009) and their phenomenological view on qualitative methods. The interview gave 
insights on historical as well as design aspects. This section will summarize the most important 
insights from a design perspective. A more detailed elaboration of the interviews can be found in 
Appendix E.  
==PAGE:32==
 
 
26 
Choice of Material 
Among the many outlets different material was used. Among other things porcelain as seen above, 
but also Bakelite, brass and the more common one, plastic. Mostly the choice of material has to do 
with its ability as an electrical insulator. As I noticed the lack of colour variety in the selection of 
outlets and switches Erik said specifically that this has something to do with the material. 
However, in even earlier designs brass was also chosen despite the weak isolating ability. Especially 
the early LK outlets from 1911 was noticeable with the shell patterns and golden finish. 
 
Correlation Between Design and Home Decoration 
Why the brass solution shown above was chosen despite the lack of ability to isolate electricity 
could be related to time-related trends or decoration style. Erik explained how the Victorian age 
was a very decorative age and therefore this could be closely related to the early shell-patterned 
designs, which diverge a lot from the present designs that are more simple and clean in their look. 
 
The Popular “Minitangent” 
The Minitangent from LK was one outlet that according to Erik was very durable and that may be 
one of the reasons why this specific design was the most popular design for about 14 years. 
 
Figure 15: LK brass outlet and 
switch, dated 1911 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
27 
 
Figure 16: Minitangent model from LK 
 
As Erik said: “They [people] only change [the outlets] when they break” So durability therefore 
seems like a very important aspect regarding power outlets. 
 
Colours in the Designs 
If you look at Danish outlets through time there are not many colours except white, black and grey. 
The only design experimenting more with colour was the “Plantangent” from ‘Nordisk Elektricitets 
Selskab’ or in short NES around 1965. With the Plantanget-switch the user had the opportunity to 
change the tangent from for example olive-green to orange as seen below. 
 
  
Figure 17: (Left) Plantangent in grey, orange and olive-green and (right) Different color tangents.  
==PAGE:34==
 
 
28 
 
NES vs. LK 
Before merging, NES and LK was competing brands. Their main difference was their designs of the 
switches. NES used push switches and LK used vertical switches, which made it very obvious which 
brand was which.  
 
 
 
Figure 18: Difference between NES and LK switches. The left side shows NES’ push-switches and to 
the right are LK’s turn-switches. 
 
As a general conclusion, you could say that the design principles of outlets have not changed 
particularly since the first designs. There have been different colours, shapes and switches, but the 
principle of plugging two pins into two holes has always been the foundation. 
 
POWER TRANSFER TECHNOLOGIES 
This section will explain some of the technologies that are available or beginning to be applicable in 
new solutions. 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
29 
Induction 
Already in 1820, after Faraday discovered that all materials had magnetic properties, H. C. Ørsted 
took the first steps towards inductive charging as we see today in our electrical toothbrushes or in 
the new smartphone-charging IKEA lamps. He discovered that a straight conductor created a 
magnetic field. This electro-magnetic phenomenon has since been explored and one of the findings 
is, that by wrapping a conductor like a cobber wire around a coil amplifies the magnetic field around 
the coil. (Lauritsen 2016)  
 
The reason why these magnetic fields are interesting is because they can be used as ‘transporters’ 
of electricity, which makes wireless power transfer or WPT possible. Today the leading developer of 
the technology is the Wireless Power Consortium (WPC), who’s standard Qi has been chosen by 
Apple in their Iphone X, 8, and 8 Plus and currently has around 90 percent of the market share of all 
wireless charging products. (Web 1) By having a common standard through the industry the 
technology is now getting more efficient. One of the new wireless charging pads from Powermat is 
called Charging Spot 4.0 and supports up to 40W with its ‘SmartInductive’ technology, which makes 
it able to charge smartphones, tablets and even laptops. (Web 2) With regular inductive technology 
most available charging pads supports up to 15W.   
 
Resonant Inductive Coupling 
Powermat’s technology ‘SmartInductive’ is an example on how the inductive technology can be 
enhanced in different ways. A company called Witricity has developed a wireless power technology 
from the phenomenon of resonant inductive coupling, which was experimentally proven at 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology MIT in 2007 by one of the founders, professor Marin Soljacic 
of WiTricity and his team. Resonant inductive coupling happens when two electro-magnetic 
resonators couples through their magnetic fields and is able to transfer electricity efficiently over a 
distance. (Web 3) A common analogy to this phenomenon is the acoustic phenomenon of a wine 
Figure 19:  Charging Spot 4.0 
Powermat 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
30 
glass breaking when an opera singer sings a note that match the frequency of the glass’ natural 
frequency making the glass vibrate more and more until it breaks. 
 
In 2017, Dell was the first in the world to introduce a wireless charging opportunity for laptops by 
implementing the WiTricity technology into their Latitude 7285 Wireless Charging Keyboard that 
together with their Wireless Charging Mat can charge the laptop with 60W. (Web 4) 
 
USB-C 
Within power outlets LK has recently released power outlets with USB outputs such as in the LK 
FUGA series. The USB outputs deliver 5W which will be able to charge smaller electronic devices. 
This shows how USB-connections is a broad standard when it comes to smaller consumer products. 
However, the new USB type C or USB-C have begun to draw attention as it is being implemented in 
smartphones and even in laptops as Apple’s new MacBook Pro due to its speed both regarding 
power transfer and data transfer.  
 
In general USB-C has on its own already received good reviews among others the online publication 
Laptop Mag writes that “USB Type-C is the new standard connector for both charging and data on 
laptops, phones and tablets” (Web 5), Digital Trends writes that “the shift toward USB-C cables is 
well underway, and with good reason” (Web 6) and Android Authority writes that “the hot new USB 
Type-C standard is here to stay.” (Web 7) 
 
However, the loss of the MagSafe charging connector in the new Macbook Pro has made many 
frustrated. The online publication Wired.com writes:”In exclusively embracing USB-C, Apple has 
abandoned its MagSafe charging technology. You know, that magical magnetism that constantly 
saves you from tripping your $2,000 laptop off the coffee table.” (Web 8) As a result new small 
companies are beginning to develop MagSafe-like adapters to recreate the ‘magical mechanism’. 
 
Figure 20: Dell Latitude 7285 Wireless 
Charging Keyboard and Wireless Charging 
Mat. 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
31 
 
 
Figure 21: MacBook Pro with USB-charging (www.appleinsider.com) 
 
But even though Apple lovers might be frustrated about the new USB-C in their MacBooks it might 
only be a onetime frustration if the entire electronic industry switches to one standard. 
 
 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
32 
LEGISLATION 
This section will shortly describe what is legal to do on your own without authorisation. All 
information for the section is retrieved from the Danish Safety Technology Authority. (Web 21)  
 
To get an overview of the different regulations the section will include bullet points with the most 
relevant regulations that needs to be considered in a new solution. All regulations regarding 
installing electricity can be found on www.sik.dk. 
 
1. You can change a switch to a new one, but only to one that fits with the installation. You 
are not allowed to alter or build something new that was not there to begin with. This also 
means that you cannot install new outlets anywhere in the house. In this case you need 
authorized help. 
2. The same goes for the outlet. You are allowed to change it if you do not change the 
installation in the wall. You are not allowed to move the installation behind the wall. 
3. You are allowed to extend cables from outlets to lamps for instance.  
4. A rule of thumb is that you can work with whatever is visible and accessible.  
5. If there is an earth connection in the power outlet then you have to transfer this earth 
connection to the product if this product can take in an earth connection. Big products like 
refrigerators or freezers have to have an earth connection if the outlet has an earth 
connection. It is not required to fit earth and not earthed cables in homes if the objects are 
mobile products. But it is when it is stationary objects like refrigerators.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
33 
The bullet points overall say, that you can change everything except for the installation behind the 
wall. This also means that you cannot move the installation or install new installations on your own. 
Below is a new outlet installation guide. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 22: Installation guide fra elviden.dk (Web 9) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
34 
MARKET RESEARCH – LK’S MONOPOLY IN DENMARK 
 
As the section title says, there is almost no competition within the Danish electrical industry. LK has 
a market share on around 95%, based on numbers from 2005. (web 10) The only real small 
competition is the company L-Team who are trying to fight the electrical giant. The Danish 
Competition Authority also have LK on the 36-short list of businesses with competitive challenges. 
Within the electronical business one of the challenges is, that LK have over 90% market share on 
multiple product areas. (web 11) A consequence is that the prices are much higher than other 
countries like Germany whose prices are half of the Danish prices. (web 12) With the legalization of 
the so-called Schuko plugs in 2011 (web 13) the industry should have been opened for new 
competitors like German or Belgian brands, but LK still have a strong monopoly on the market. 
 
Due to the dominance of LK the existing solutions that are commonly used in Denmark are products 
of LK. Especially the FUGA series is preferred by retailers and el-blogs (web 14, web 15, Web 16) 
 
 
 
Figure 23: Existing solutions on the Danish market 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
35 
EXPLORING THE PROBLEM SPACE 
 
Now that some background knowledge has been obtained it is time to dig into the problem space 
concerning power transfer systems. This section will shortly present some of my own personal 
struggles with the current systems, but more objective problem statements will be gathered from a 
qualitative online survey. Furthermore, contextual problems will be identified through three 
qualitative interviews with a student, an operational director and a hairdresser, respectively. In the 
end the use of electronic products will be explored. 
 
MY PROBLEMS WITH POWER TRANSFER SYSTEMS 
 
The reason for choosing power outlets as a subject for my Master’s Thesis was because of problems 
I had experienced myself when using plugs and power outlets in the past.  
One of the problems I have found is that the outlets in my apartment are placed rather inconvenient 
in corners near the floor making the outlets become inaccessible when putting a bed or a sofa 
against it.  
 
 
Figure 24: My bed pushed away from the wall showing an outlet that cannot be used. 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
36 
 
 
Also, there are not enough outputs in my outlet meaning that in one outlet I can only insert one plug. This 
means that I have four extended power sockets lying around in my living room as I need power for lamps, TV, 
loudspeakers, computer, iPhone and other electronic products. And these sockets are not particularly 
beautiful as they are big and cubic, which does not fall into my personal taste. Furthermore, it is hard to clean 
around them if they lie on the floor as mine does. 
 
Another thing that had been bothering me is the way plugs are inserted into the outlets. I find it 
very ‘primitive’ the way you need to push two pins into two holes and occasionally it is hard to either 
push in or pull out again and in some cases the outlet itself can fall out of the wall as mine in my 
bedroom. This is probably due to misuse such as pulling in the cord sideways, but nonetheless the 
way I use that outlet is not translated in the design if it breaks when I am using it. More frustrating 
observations can be found in Appendix B. Below is a few of the problem observations. More 
observations will be presented in the section ‘Placement Observations’. 
 
 
 
Figure 25: Pictures of problematic situations. More observations in Appendix B 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
37 
QUALITATIVE ONLINE SURVEY 
 
One of the first things I did in the project was to send out an online survey with qualitative questions 
in order to get an idea of the iceberg below the surface. The fuzzy front end can be hard to 
comprehend and to be taken by the current, metaphorically speaking, this was the way I chose to 
do it at this point. Due to the choice of online software I was only allowed to ask 10 questions 
including demographic questions. The questions were open in order for the respondents to answer 
freely. Later in the project an online survey was also made showing how a quantitative structured 
questionnaire is normally conducted according to Kvale & Brinkmann (2009). This survey was 
however more a way to open up the problem space rather than defining the space, hence the 
unstructured qualitative survey.  
This section will go through some of the answers from the survey and present the key insights from 
the respondents’ answers. All the answers on the individual questions can be found in Appendix E1.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
38 
Question 1: Describe ‘wall power outlets’ with 1-3 short sentences (Whatever comes to your mind) 
 
With their short sentences, the respondents first of all expressed the 
need of electricity in their homes as it is an “Important part of the 
household” and therefore the outlets are the “Necessary evil”. 
However, they have big frustrations about not being able to find the 
outlets and in the case that they find them they are often too far 
away – often hidden behind couches or placed low on the floor. One 
respondent writes: “Never enough and close to where I need them” 
Regarding the appearance, the respondents are very short words like 
“white”, “ugly” and “unattractive”, but in general they do not like 
the appearance of the outlets. 
 
Figure 26: Power outlet (Bauhaus) 
 
Question 2: Describe ‘Extension plugs’ with 1-3 short sentences (Whatever comes to your mind) 
 
With extension plugs and sockets the respondents acknowledge some flexibility as you can insert 
more plugs and also acknowledge that they are “very, very essential (because there are never 
enough wall outlets” However as one respondent says power sockets are “practical and impractical 
in one” and there can be connecting problems if some does not fit to three-pin plugs. It can also 
be a problem if a plug is too big, like one respondent writes: “Many of them are made in a way, with 
a straight line of connectors, so the computer charger unnecessarily blocks more connectors” 
As with the outlets, the respondents are not happy with the appearance of the power sockets and 
one respondent writes “discount look”. The addition of cables lying on the floor also adds to this 
frustration. 
 
Figure 27: Power socket from 
‘jem & fix’  
==PAGE:45==
 
 
39 
Question 3: Describe ‘cords and wires’ with 1-3 short sentences (Whatever comes to your mind) 
 
Regarding cords and wires the respondents are frustrated about the cords are “Never the right 
length” and that they are “Annoying as they tangle up”. Some also writes about how wires can be 
unsafe as “It’s easy to stumble in the wires”. Regarding the appearance there it is the same as the 
two prior questions. The respondents do not like the appearance of the cords and wires. It is 
“something messy you’d rather not see” and furthermore they are “Dust collectors”. 
 
Question 4: Have you had any problems with connecting an electronic product to a power source? 
 
This question led to insights to the problem space and some specific issues regarding the use of 
power transfer systems. First of all, the respondents wrote about concrete problems regarding 
distance where they have been too far away from the power socket. The respondents also named 
several situations regarding safety and one respondent writes: “I also remember a situation where 
a classmate had spilled coffee on himself and his computer because another student had not seen 
that person's cord and therefore walked into it.” 
However, the respondents mostly wrote about problems related to connection problems like 
“having the wrong adapter” or in many of the examples having a hard time to either insert of pull 
out a plug of an outlet. One respondent writes: “Sometimes it is stuck or is difficult to get into the 
wall socket” and another write: “The connector was so firm that it tore the plug out of the wall”. 
Other problems were related to mobility like this respondent’s answer: “The power source is always 
fixed, so if I want to relocate in the room I often have to take that extension cable with me.” 
 
Question 5: What do you think about the appearance of power outlets? 
 
The respondents’ answers for this question can be divided into neutral, negative and positive 
statements. In general, there were not many positive statements. One respondent wrote “They are 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
40 
invisible which is good”, which is more a statement that support some of the negative statements, 
which there were most of. The negative statements were that the power outlets were big, ugly, 
grey and boring, bulky, old looking, clumsy, unnecessary big, too boring and uninspiring. Of the 
more constructive statements were that power outlets are “missing more options/looks” and 
“There is definitely a potential to break with the invisible design in grey and white and give them a 
little more.” 
There was however also a lot of neutral answers such as “It’s fine”, “They are so part of everyday 
life so I do not think about aesthetics” and “I think they are okay, but I’m sure you can come up with 
something smarter”. This means that there are also a lot of people who are actually quite satisfied. 
 
Question 6: What do you think about the appearance of extension cords/power sockets? 
 
For this question, there was almost only negative comments. The only positive comment was that 
“Some can be really nice.” Also, there was only one neutral comment: “safety goes over design 
(makes sense)”. Of the negative comments were among other things that “Not very aesthetically 
nice looking, function based design”, “something you never want to be left visible” and “Ugly - 
seems like something cheap for the most part.” 
 
Findings from Online Survey 
Power outlets, cords and sockets seem like something people have gotten used to in their daily life 
with electronic devices, which also means that many have accepted how power transfer systems 
look and then it is just a question of hiding them as good as possible like behind furniture. As one 
of the respondent writes, it is a “Necessary evil”. However, there are people who are very frustrated 
about some of the daily challenges as being too far away from the outlets, having a hard time to 
insert of pull out a plug or tripping over a wire. Many of the respondents thinks that the current 
appearance of the designs is boring and uninspiring, where other respondents are fine with this as 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
41 
it is not something they notice. Later in the converging part of the exploration a quantitative 
questionnaire will be made in order to find a more specific target group.  
 
EXPLORING USE CONTEXTS 
 
At this early point in the process the target group users have not been chosen. To get an idea of 
different users’ view on power transfer systems I made three semi-structured interviews with an 
DTU student, Dennis, an Operational Director for a small/medium sized company, Christian, and a 
hairdresser, Salli. This was to elaborate on some of the statements from the survey described in the 
last section, but most important was the contextual aspects – how did the users interact with power 
transfer systems depending on their work area? This section will therefore focus on the contextual 
findings. 
 
 
Figure 28: Pictures of interview persons 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
42 
 
The interviews were all conducted from the phenomenological perspective according to Kvale & 
Brinkmann (2009), which among other things include an interview guide. The interview guide for 
the three interviews can be found in Appendix E2, E3 and E4. The interviews have all been recorded 
and transcribed and the transcriptions of the interviews can be found in the same Appendix. 
 
General Findings 
Besides the contextual aspects the interviews gave some confirmation on the previous findings. 
There was a general opinion about that the aesthetic quality in power transfer systems were very 
poor. Therefore, the aim when installing power transfer systems is to hide them as good as possible 
or choose very minimalistic designs. 
The three interview persons had different personalities and preferences with future designs. 
Christian wanted minimalism, Salli wanted more creative design opportunities for her saloon and 
Dennis were very frustrated about the big amount of useless plastic around the socket outlets. Salli 
is very passionate about things being organic and not trying to be something it is not like the bike 
helmet hat, which tries to hide its real purpose. 
 
Contextual Elements 
One of the reasons for making these interviews was to see how different people have different 
preferences due to their line of work, which has been elaborated in the previous sections. Another 
reason for the interviews were that I wanted to explore how power transfer systems worked in 
different working contexts.  
 
With Dennis, I talked about how he as a student interacted with power transfer systems. He did not 
have that much to say about it, but mentioned how some new tables at the innovation fab lab DTU 
Skylab was designed in a ‘smart’ way making them movable. However, the ‘smart’ was not as smart 
as the outlets where placed very inconvenient underneath the tables.  
==PAGE:49==
 
 
43 
 
With Christian, I wanted to hear about how power transfer systems worked in an office space.  
Some of the problems in the office space is that there are many wires hanging under the tables 
making it hard to clean. This creates a practical challenge because it quickly becomes a mess around 
the desk.  
Another thing Christian mentions is the lack of flexibility when you have installed a permanent 
outlet:  
“Sometimes we’ve put up outlets somewhere on a wall and that is something that annoys me. It can 
be hard to expand. It is hard to just put in an extra down her. It really is. I can’t just put in an extra 
one here. Imagine that I could place one more there, which was the same size as this one. That 
would’ve been cool.” 
 
The one with the most problems was however Salli who in her work as a hairdresser meets a lot of 
challenges everyday as she uses electronic equipment like the hairdryer, which is very important 
for her in order to do a good haircut: “I can’t do my work without a hairdryer. I can’t do a good 
haircut only in wet hair… It would be as bad for me to not have electricity as not having my scissor 
almost.” 
Due to the importance of the electronic equipment she needs to have power outlets and cords in 
many places in order to make it easy to work around the customer. When talking about why the 
outlets are not moved higher she as previously mentioned thinks that they are too ugly, but if they 
were good-looking it could however be better: “It would be much better because then I wouldn’t 
get as much dust and hair down in it and then I wouldn’t have to bend down and up all the time. 
Then the wire would also be higher.” 
But this also creates some challenges as she has to work on both sides of the customer: “But there 
would be some challenges because it can’t just be placed high because if I then have to go to the 
other side of the customer then they get the wire in their head.” 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
44 
A salon is a place where interior is very important and Salli have used a lot of time picking out the 
right furniture and lighting. Not being able to get the outlets to fit the rest of the interior is a big 
frustration for her: 
 
“If there is a trend in interior with wood or cobber or something. Why doesn’t it follow? It is a thing 
as well. It doesn’t matter if you have a nice couch, nice vases, nice everything and then you have 
an ugly plug or socket like that lying around.” 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
45 
PLACEMENT OBSERVATIONS  
 
Besides the insights from the interviews user observations have been made during the whole 
exploration phase by taking pictures of different situations and reflecting on power transfer systems 
in the work group. 
 
As many other students, cafes have been one of my workspaces during this project. After 
interviewing Salli her opinions on interior in the salon made me observe similar issues in cafes. 
 
 
 
Figure 29: Andersen & Maillard coffee shop 
 
In the picture above is an example from the newly opened café Andersen & Maillard in Nørrebro, 
Copenhagen. Time have been used in picking out the right interior, but they have not been able to 
do anything to the power outlets, which they have consequently placed in the bottom to the 
frustration of students who needs to bend down to get power for their laptop. 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
46 
While visiting ‘Marienlyst Strandhotel’ in Helsingør, north from Copenhagen I also made some 
observations. Marienlyst is a luxury hotel with spa among other things. In contrast to the hair salon 
and café, the outlets were in this case chosen to fit the interior style. 
 
Figure 30: Marienlyst Strandhotel 
 
The cover for the outlets were golden-colored with defining patterns making them visible instead 
of hidden away. 
During the project, I have been working at home in my apartment, but also in my parents’ house in 
Lyngby. One of the observation made was that there was longer to an output in my parents’ house 
that in my apartment, which is actually not so surprising considering that the house is much bigger 
than my apartment.  
 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
47 
     
 
 
Figure 31: Parents house 
 
However, it is an important observation as this can influence the design depending on the context 
to which the design must fit. 
 
When I do the dishes at home I like to watch series on my laptop and I therefore always have my 
charger plugged in the kitchen outlet by the sink.  
 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
48 
 
Figure 32: Kitchen sink at home 
 
This is a bit annoying and looking into my kitchen in general I noticed that the outlets were placed 
rather irritating. 
As Dennis mentions in his interview it is frustrating that there are no outlets in the bathroom where 
he uses electronic products. In my apartment, I noticed an absurd gathering of electrical products 
in one of my sockets. 
 
 
 
Figure 33: Cords on the shelf 
 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
49 
Here you can see a socket where the things plugged in are: A vacuum cleaner, a toothbrush charger, 
a laptop charger and a beard trimmer. This is an example of the result of not having outlets in the 
bathroom. 
 
While working in a course last semester I could not keep my MacBook charger from falling out of 
the outlet so we strapped on the cords from the curtains.  
 
        
 
 
Figure 34: Outlets at the DTU Library 
 
Working at the library at DTU and a library called ‘KUB Nord’ in Copenhagen several observations 
were made. One of the most obvious ones were the way power sockets hang from the ceiling at 
DTU. They have just finished a new renovation and together with my work group we discussed why 
this was the best solution they could come up with. 
 
On the positive note power is very available and there are lesser wires on the floors. However, we 
all agreed that aesthetically it did not work. Also, the socket would be very hard to move as it is 
attached in the ceiling. 
 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
50 
Working alone at KUB Nord I made some observations as well. Here is an environment that all year 
long is used for the same purpose every single day. Everybody places their laptop and smartphone 
on the square desks in the reading rooms where every desk has three power outlets.  
 
       
 
Figure 35: Left: Outlets from the ceiling at DTU Library. Right: Reading room at the library ‘KUB Nord’ 
in Copenhagen 
 
This is very easy and convenient most people would say. However, can it be exploited that the 
routines in this context are so constant? The tables will stay where they are, the same type of people 
will visit the library with the same user needs – how can these constants be used in a design-related 
equation? 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
51 
ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS IN INTERIOR DESIGN 
 
One of the previous findings was that users does not like the look of the power transfer systems 
and one of the design objective could be to make it more appealing or alternatively hide it in 
somehow. One of the ways to hide it or make it easier to look at could be through integrating it 
more in the interior. Some electronic companies have tried to do this such as Sonos, Bang & Olufsen 
and Samsung. By making their products more integrated in the home interior the products have 
another function as an interior design object. 
Sonos also joined forces with interior design brand HAY to create a branding argument to the users, 
which is also an example on how to affect the users’ perspective on the product.  
An example from Bang & Olufsen is the Shape concept, which is a build-yourself concept with 
speakers so you can make your own loudspeaker structure on the wall. The design looks more like 
an interior installation than a speaker system. 
Then there is Samsung who together with the Bouroullec brothers have created a minimalistic TV 
called Serif TV due to the edges on both the top and bottom. The edges make it easy to put plants 
and other smaller interior objects on top of the TV making it blend more into the interior. 
 
 
Figure 38: Electronic products in interior 
 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
52 
CONTEXT MAPPING  
 
At this point, several contexts have been explored. There are many more to explore if more time 
was given, but to give an overview of the contextual space as it is at this point a context map was 
made both to sum up some of the contextual aspects, but also to inspire to find new problematic 
hotspots. 
 
Figure 39: Context Map 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
53 
CHAPTER SUMMARY  
 
By observing different placements of power transfer systems and conducting a qualitative online 
survey the problem space was explored. At this point, there are many aspects concerning power 
transfer systems that need improvements according to the answers from the survey. The 
motivational questions and biases was confirmed as users do not like the appearance of power 
transfer system and also find them to be inaccessible. Different user needs have therefore been 
clarified. To get an idea of how these needs differ in different use contexts three qualitative 
interviews were conducted with a student, an operational director and a hairdresser. This gave 
some validation of the statements from the online survey, but also showed that especially the 
hairdresser, Salli, had many opinions when it comes to power transfer systems as an interior object. 
The aspects of integrating electronic products in interior was explored in the last sections where 
examples were given of companies who have tried to design for interior integration. Lastly a context 
map was used to frame the aspects covered in the divergent exploration phase as a way to visualise 
the problem space. With more time, the problem space could have been more comprehensive, but 
at this point the problem space should be big enough in order to define a more specific problem 
space. In Chapter 3 this problem space will be defined before Chapter 4 and 5 will explore and define 
the corresponding solution space. 
 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
54 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
55 
In Chapter 2, the divergent exploration process opened up the problem space and confirmed initial 
presumptions and motivation for the project. Power transfer systems are hard to reach due to the 
placement of them and in general people do not like the looks of them. By starting with a diverging 
exploration of the problem space the reliability in the overall process is strengthened and supports 
the next converging exploration phase of determining a specific problem space. To define the 
problem space, a more specific problem definition will be defined, that still fulfils the objective of 
the Master’s Thesis followed by a definition of the contextual space. This lays foundation for a new 
exploration phase, but this time it will be within a more defined frame and the objective will be to 
define rather than explore. This exploration phase will include a user segmentation based on a 
quantitative online questionnaire, two qualitative interviews with representatives of the segmented 
users and an exploration of Nordic interior style. As a result, two personas will be created and a 
design specification will frame the design task based on the findings from the exploration both from 
the divergent – and the convergent phase. This will be the foundation for the Concept Synthesis, 
which will be covered in Chapter 4, 5 and 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 39: Converging exploration phase highlighted in overall design process  
==PAGE:62==
 
 
56 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
 
FROM DESIGN PARADOX TO PROBLEM DEFINITION 
DEFINING THE CONTEXT  
 
USE ENVIRONMENT 
 
PRODUCT SCOPE 
USER SEGMENTATION 
 
TALK TO THE USERS 
APPROACH 
FINDINGS FROM INTERVIEWS 
PERSONA CREATION 
NORDIC AND SCANDINAVIAN INTERIOR 
DESIGN SPECIFICATION  
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
57 
FROM DESIGN PARADOX TO PROBLEM DEFINITION  
 
Kees Dorst (2006) argues that describing a design situation by thinking in design paradoxes can be 
inspiring for creating new solutions. An example given by Dorst (2006) is actually very relevant for 
my design situation: 
 
“…a certain product, that cannot be moved, needs to be there to perform its function at one moment 
in time, and it needs to be invisible and not take up space at another moment in time.” 
 
In order to create design solutions to a paradoxical design situation it requires that the design 
situation is creatively redefined. (Dorst 2006) 
One of the key problems concerning power transfer systems, found in the exploration phase, can 
also be expressed as in a design paradox with looks on one side and accessibility on the other. The 
user both want power to be accessible, which means that they for example needs to be placed 
higher. However, the users on the other hand do not like the look of current power transfer 
systems and therefore outlets are often placed low making the users buy cheap power sockets, 
which they also do not like the looks of.  
 
In the section “Electronic Products in Interior” it was observed that some electronic elements can 
be integrated into interior and at the same time the section “Power Transfer Technologies” gave 
examples of technologies that could be used in a new design. The design task can be described 
through the following goal formulation: 
 
“Design a power transfer system that can be an integrated part of the home 
interior design in order to make electricity more accessible for users in home 
environments.” 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
58 
 
By integrating the power transfer system in home interior as a design piece on the same level as a 
lamp or a shelf, another kind of ‘camouflage’ can be created and can make power transfer systems 
more accessible. People seem to want to hide power transfer systems as they do not like the current 
look. However, there are examples on other electronic products like loud speakers, which are 
getting accepted as a more integrated part of the home interior as the designs become more 
adapted to the aesthetics of interior, which are different from when you only focus on functionality. 
This goal formulation redefines the previous design paradox into a more tangible and workable 
problem situation.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
59 
DEFINING THE CONTEXT 
 
As the goal formulation has now been defined the context will now be specified as well. The choice 
of focusing on power transfer system in the context of interior design, the user context can be 
further defined.  
 
USE ENVIRONMENT 
The context of where we use power transfer systems can be in almost all kinds of contexts as 
electricity is a common necessity in modern society. With the focus on interior design the contextual 
space can however be limited to home environments and places where aesthetics is more important 
than normally. Salli’s hair salon is an example of a context, which could fit to the new interior design 
perspective because aesthetics is very important here. Yet, as this project have a time limit the 
context of hair salons will be outside of the scope as it requires much more knowledge about the 
daily life of hairdressers – knowledge that I assess I cannot acquire enough of in order to create a 
good design. However, many hair salons look like home environments with couches, coffee tables, 
shelfs and mirrors. Mostly, they look like living rooms rather than kitchens or bathrooms. As all 
respondents from the first survey have homes and living rooms, choosing the living room as a 
contextual space makes all these respondents relevant for the further process. Also, especially living 
rooms are where many design objects and interior design can be found.  
 
“The contextual scope of the design task will be home environments with focus on 
living rooms” 
 
Mostly, living rooms will be the focus, but as many kitchens nowadays are ‘open kitchens’ and 
bedrooms can also be very decorative these will also be a part of the context. To put it in another 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
60 
way, when a product is designed for the living room it should also fit into an open kitchen or the 
bedroom. This can also be done by making customization an aspect in the solution.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figur 40: Home contexts 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
61 
PRODUCT SCOPE 
With all the different electronic product present in the home environment there is also a need to 
define which electronic products that the design should provide power to.  
In this project, the objective is to make power more accessible for the user, but the user is not the 
one actually using the power, but more specifically it is the electronic products and devices the users 
use that needs power. Therefore, it is important to get an overview of electronic products in the 
home and how they are used. This section will explore some of the main electronic products in the 
home and describe some of their differences. This will lead to a product segmentation of which 
products the power transfer system needs to provide power for. 
 
ENERGY USAGE 
As stationary electronic products like ceiling lamps, dryers and dishwashers are more or less 
permanently plugged into an outlet these will not be in the scope of the project. Instead I will look 
into the more mobile electronic products such as toasters, TV’s and laptops. These are however 
very different products both regarding the use of electricity and the use situations. First of all, they 
have different needs when it comes to energy usage. Below is a table of different electronic 
products in the home with the one that consumes most energy on the top. 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
62 
 
Figure 36: Table of energy usage from home electronics 
 
As seen in the figure water boilers, hairdryers, toasters, vacuum cleaners and blenders have bigger 
power needs than the other products in the table. The energy usage of course also depends on the 
exact product. Some toasters might be more efficient than other, but in this table, there is a clear 
line from the top five and down. The rest of the products except the loudspeakers are below 100W 
and as the loudspeakers are speakers that are used for music production the number might be lower 
with more conventional loudspeakers.  
 
MOBILITY 
Besides having different needs of energy, the products also differentiates in how often they are 
moved around. A TV is mobile as it can be moved to new positions, but in most cases, this does not 
PRODUCT 
EFFECT (W) 
RESISTANCE (V) 
PRODUCT NAME 
ELKOGER 
2400 
230 
KITCHENAID 
HAIRDRYER 
1600 
220-240 
DYSON HAIRDRYER 
TOASTER 
700 
220-240 
OBH INOX HORIZON 
VACUUM CLEANER 
650 
100-240 
ELEXTROLUX SILENT PERFORMER 
BLENDER 
500 
230 
OVH BLENDER 
 
 
LOUDSPEAKERS 
130 
230 
AVANTONE GROTBOX MONITORS 
LAPTOP 
87 
100-240 
MACBOOK PRO 
FLAT SCREEN 
40 
220-240 
SONY LED SMART TV 
TABLE LAMP 
40 
110-240 
IKEA 
HALOGEN BULB 
18 
230 
MUUTO PENDEL HALOGEN TERRACOTTA 
TABLET 
12 
100-240 
IPAD ADAPTER 
PRINTER 
10 
100-240 
HP DESKJET 1510 
SMARTPHONE 
5 
5 
IPHONE ADAPTER 
TRIMMER 
0,5 
4,3 
PHILLIPS 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
63 
happen that often. Then there are devices like smartphones, which key characteristic is to be 
mobile. This product is therefore almost always near the user and is moved around all the time. To 
give an indication of how much the products are moved around in relation to each other, a graphic 
was made including all the products. 
 
 
Figure 37: Graphic over how mobile different home electronics are. 
 
As seen in the figure the mobile devices such as laptops, tablets and smartphones are viewed as 
being the products that are most frequently moved around at home, where TVs, ceiling lamps, 
loudspeakers and printers are more stationary. When a product is moved around more frequently, 
this creates a bigger need for outlets to be available in multiple places. With a ceiling lamp a specific 
outlet is assigned from the beginning when the home is build and with other more stationary 
products like the TV the plug will always be placed in the same outlet. You could therefore argue 
that the need for power to be more accessible for the user mostly comes from the use of the more 
mobile electronics and most of all the mobile devices in the last third of the graphic. This leads to 
the following product scope definition: 
 
“The design of an accessible power transfer system should meet the power demands 
from laptops, tablets and smartphones”  
==PAGE:70==
 
 
64 
USER SEGMENTATION 
 
This section will present the result of a quantitative structured questionnaire conducted with the 
purpose of getting more specific insights regarding user preferences. The results will be analysed 
and a group of users will be segmented as the target group of users. Later, these target users will be 
further defined among other things by analysing two semi-structured interviews with people from 
the segmented group. 
 
The questionnaire included answers from 75 different respondents in from the ages of 18 to over 
66. All the data and answers can be found in Appendix E5. As there was an overweight of 
respondents in the age of 26-35-year-olds these were chosen as main target group. Besides the 
age, the target group was further condensed by excluding people earning below 10,000 kr. per 
month. In the questionnaire, 23 of the questions had to be answered in scales from one to five and 
another choice was to condense the respondents by filtering the answers to only include 
respondents who were interested in home interior meaning respondents who answered four or 
five out of five. This gave me the following main characteristics for my target group that is now 
condensed to include 19 of the respondents’ answers: 
 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
65 
Demographics 
• Number of respondents: 19 
• Age: 26-35 years 
• Monthly salary: Above 10,000 kr. 
• Gender: 14 women, 5 men 
• Work area: 16 works within either Science, engineering or design and art. 
• Civil status: 15 live together with a girlfriend or boyfriend. 
• Kids: 13 have no kids 
 
Characteristics: 
• Very passionate about home interior (average: 4.6) 
 
Preferences: 
• Likes wood material (average: 4.1) 
• Do not like plastic (average: 2.0) 
 
Needs in a new design: 
• Care about the appearance (average: 4.1) 
• Want the solution to be as small as possible. However, if they like the appearance they 
would be willing to compromise. (14 out of 19) 
 
 
It is hard to conclude more than this as the rest of the averages on the scale responses were in 
between 2 and 4, which mean that the respondents did not have any strong opinions on these 
topics. The topics could be mobility and flexibility in a new design where the respondents rated the 
importance to be 3.2 and 3.7 respectively. A datasheet with all the responses from the target group 
can be found in Appendix E6. A larger scale could have maybe distinguished the answers better. 
==PAGE:72==
 
 
66 
Instead of a scale of 1 to 5, it could have been from 1 to 10. Below are two graphs from the 
questionnaire:
 
 
Figure 41: How highly the respondents value interior design in their homes. 
 
 
Figure 42: How highly the respondents value wood in interior design. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
67 
TALK TO THE USERS 
 
In order to capture more qualitative insights regarding the users’ values and identity two semi-
structured interviews were made with two potential users within the target group segmented from 
the quantitative questionnaire presented in the last section. This section will present some of the 
important insights from the interviews and interpret these in order to create personas ensuring 
that the concept synthesis will have the user in the centre.  
 
The interview persons that I chose are both between 26 and 35 years old and work within 
engineering and design. They earn more than 10,000 kr. monthly and live together with their 
girlfriend and boyfriend respectively. My first interview person Joel lives at Nørrebro and works in 
a Danish design company as an Interaction Designer. The second interview person, Linn, lives at 
Østerbro and works as a Senior Consultant in an app agency.  
 
APPROACH 
The previous interviews with Dennis, Christian and Salli presented in last chapter were very open. 
For these interviews, I wanted to focus more specifically on the interview persons characteristics 
and what their personal taste was in interior design. The interviews were conducted from a 
phenomenological point of view. (Kvale & Brinkmann 2008) According to Kvale & Brinkmann (2008), 
semi-structured qualitative interviews are a way to get insights into a person’s so-called ‘life-world’. 
In my case, I wanted to get insights in the persons ‘life-world’ with relation to power transfer 
systems and the way they are perceived as a part of the home interior. Kvale & Brinkmann (2008) 
recommends being aware of several aspects from an interviewer’s perspective. These are listed in 
Appendix E6A, but two of the most important aspects are to ask open questions and to have an 
interview guide just as in the case of the previous interviews. The interview guide for the interviews 
and transcriptions of the interviews can be found in Appendix E6. 
==PAGE:74==
 
 
68 
 
In the next section, personas will be created from the interviews and describe the two interview 
persons personalities. This section will focus on their relationship to interior design and their 
preferences regarding the design, the current solutions and interior taste. 
 
FINDINGS FROM THE INTERVIEWS 
 
DIY-MINDED 
Both couples are very Do-It-Yourself (DIY) minded. Joel and his girlfriend have made their 
own sofa – and shelving system. The shelving system is Joel’s favorite part of his interior. 
One of the reasons for this is that they made it themselves. Joel’s appreciation of self-made 
interior is also exemplified in the Børge Mogensen chairs as just mentioned. Instead of 
buying new chairs he refurbishes old classic chairs because as he says: “It’s the thing about 
renovating stuff that adds some affection value, right?” 
Linn also likes to ‘think in DIY-solutions’ as she says, but it is her boyfriend who mainly do 
the practical work. They have recently transported wood from Bornholm to Copenhagen 
which has now been used for a new dining table. So, both Joel and Linn can be described 
as persons who are very DIY-minded. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Findings from Interviews: 
•
Both Joel and Linn likes to think in DIY solutions. 
•
Doing things yourself makes you appreciate it more. 
 
FIGURE 43: Joel’s DIY sofa system 
FIGURE 44: Linn’s DIY dinning table 
==PAGE:75==
 
 
69 
WHAT IS THEIR RELATIONSHIP TO INTERIOR DESIGN? 
They both care a lot about aesthetics and how their home is decorated. Both of them have good 
knowledge within interior and furniture design. Linn names some of her favorite brands to be Hay, 
Paustian and Muuto where Joel names Barber & Osgerby and Anglepoise that are light design 
companies as Joel has a big interest in lamps. 
 
Linn cares a lot about how her home looks and express how especially women care a lot about 
interior design: “To a woman it just means a lot to regarding her own identity”. She describes her 
interior style as Nordic with clean lines. Mostly new things. She is not a fan of too many things 
pointing in different directions.  
 
Joel is however not too afraid of mixing things and him and his girlfriend have among other things 
four different chairs and a bench, which they bought in a shop because they liked them. In general, 
he likes to find things in shops like art and then pay what it cost to frame it. He does not have any 
IKEA things. In contrast to Linn he is not a fan of brands like Hay and Muuto. 
 
Joel is a big fan of what he refers to as one-room-thinking. For example, he and his girlfriend’s 
apartment has a shared the living room and the kitchen. This creates a social environment where 
they can cook, eat and be together at the same time. 
 
 
 
 
Findings from Interviews: 
•
Linn likes Nordic style of minimalism. 
•
Joel likes to mix the interior. 
•
Joel likes shared spaces like a room that is both a kitchen and living room. 
 
FIGURE 45: HAY tray table 
FIGURE 46: Anglepoise 
lamp 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
70 
MATERIALS 
Joel and Linn’s answer to which materials they like in their interior are very similar to the answers 
from the quantitative questionnaire. Both favorite wood as material and perceive plastic as 
something that can seem cheap. Stone like marble depends on the use of it. Joel says that there 
could be advantages with marble in kitchen as it does not scratch easily, but in general he perceives 
it as something that can express a bit of arrogance: “…I think it can become a bit too much like ‘we 
live on Strandvejen [expensive street in Denmark] and are wealthy’” Wood is on the other hand 
something that both Linn and Joel have a lot of. Both because it is organic material and it looks lively 
and is easy to build and shape yourself.  
Regarding metals and industrial elements Linn starts of by saying that she finds it very corny, but 
then realizes she just bought some metal legs for her new tabletop. So, metal can be used in 
different aspects of the interior. Joel also explains how they use metal hooks in the kitchen and that 
him and his girlfriend consider using metal pipes for hanging cloth on.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Findings from Interviews: 
•
Wood is preferred as it looks organic, lively and is easy to shape and build yourself. 
•
Plastic can look cheap. 
•
Stone can work in kitchen environments, but some materials like marble can look a bit to 
showy. 
•
The use of metal in interior depends on the situation and is more a component material 
rather than a main material. 
 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
71 
COLORS 
Neither Linn or Joel have any strong colors in their homes. Joel describes his home as very neutral 
due to the white walls and pale wood. Instead it is the art and plants that add color. Linn says that 
she feels very ambivalent towards color, but she likes nuances and tones of colors. She also says 
that her decoration in general expresses calmness and to add color she for example place colored 
pillows on the bed – things she can change easily again if she wants to.  
 
 
 
ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS IN THE INTERIOR 
In general Linn and Joel are both rather skeptical about electronic products in the home interior. 
Joel names objects like the toaster and the challenge of finding a nice-looking water boiler. However, 
Linn has an espresso machine that she likes a lot. She explains that it is because of the brand and 
what this represent. “I think it’s because you think ‘well it’s an espresso machine – it looks nice’ 
because it is branded as something that looks nice. That is something you would like to be associated 
with”. She also mentions her KitchenAid mixer as a product with similar expression.  
 
 
 
 
Findings from Interviews:  
•
Colors should not be too invasive and be more shades of color rather than strong colors. 
 
FIGURE 47: KitchenAid 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
72 
Of specific things that they do not feel fits into interior Joel names gaming consoles like Playstation 
and also the TV. However, he finds it interesting when Samsung in collaboration with the 
Bouroullec Brothers try to fit the TV into the interior with their Serif TV. However, Joel points out 
that it cost 50,000 DKK and that that he likes the TV to be placed high so he does not get hold of 
the neck.  
 
 
 
PERCEPTION ON POWER TRANSFER SYSTEMS? 
Both Linn and Joel talks about experiences where the outlet has fallen out of the wall. In Linn’s case 
the outlet stopped working as well.  
In Joel’s current rented apartment, the owner has been good to place outlets around in the rooms, 
but in the new apartment that he will be moving into soon there is not enough outlets at all and it 
is something that he express that they really need to figure out.  
He mentions how it can be problematic when an outlet is placed by the door if it does not fit with 
how the room is decorated. Then you need to pull a cord over there. 
Linn also mentions how they have pulled sockets around in the apartment in order to make power 
available where they need it.  
This often makes cords visible and cords are not favored by either Joel or Linn. Joel hates the visual 
mess it creates and Linn just says very shortly: “I hate cords.” However, she responds differently 
when I comment on the colored cords from one of her lamps. In some cases, cords can work, but 
then it has to be a part of the design. 
 
Findings from Interviews: 
•
The brand and branding of the product has something to say. 
•
Integrating electronic products in interior is interesting, but it should not compromise 
the usability. 
 
FIGURE 48: Samsung Serif TV 
==PAGE:79==
 
 
73 
For Joel flexibility is also an issue. For example, Joel express a wonder about why cords are often 
placed low when he is working at his work station. “Why can’t you just pull up the outlet from the 
buttom?” he says. That would also take away the sight of all the cords on the floor, that create a 
visual mess that is not preferable.  
The flexibility also applies to the functionality where he appreciates hotels that knows their users 
and have integrated permanent USB outlets to easily plug in your phone.  
In general, he would like everything to be more flexible or at least have some possibility to influence 
where he can place his outlets. The frustration of not having any control on the design as a user is 
strongly expressed in the following sentence: 
 
“I think it is boring [outlets appearance]. So boring. There hasn’t been caressed at all. It’s just two 
holes in the wall and you have nothing to say at all. I can’t customize anything at all… It could be 
cool if you could do something to hide it or give people the opportunity to give it some identity”  
 
However, giving the outlets identity should be done with caution according to Linn as she explains 
that she would not like it to dominate her interior as she has pictures for that. “I don’t feel that my 
outlet should be the center of my interior, so it’s limited how much money I would spend on it.” she 
says.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
 
 
74 
In the previous interview with the hairdresser Salli we talked about hiding outlets in other products, 
which she said could be a bit corny as the bike helmet that looks like a hat, when everyone knows it 
is a helmet. Joel on the other hand likes the thought and says that it depends of the shape and the 
looks of the product. He himself is a big fan of the Plug Lamp, which is a lamp with a plug. “… I would 
rather have the lamp there than a big power socket with four outlets.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Findings from Interviews  
•
Permanent outlets that are not placed according to the wanted room decoration can be 
problematic. 
•
Outlets should be placed higher. 
•
Elimination of visual mess of cords by the floor. 
•
Have influence on the placement as a user. 
•
Flexibility regarding adaptability of USB 
•
Either hide it or give it identity 
•
Hates cords. However, if they are a part of the design it could work. 
•
If the design looks good a merged product like a lamp and an outlet would be preferred 
rather than usual power sockets.  
•
The design should not be the dominant element in the interior. 
•
It is limited how much money the user will spend for an outlet. 
 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
75 
TECHNOLOGY 
In the interviews, different technological aspects were covered and both Linn and Joel loved the 
thought of wireless solutions both connection-wise, but also in the form of mobile battery solutions. 
In this case however, the docking station would be important in order to make it work in the interior. 
Because as Linn says: “How big is it? How many can be charged at the same time and how long time 
does it take per unit?”  
Joel also mentions the phenomenon of haptic feedback – getting feedback from an action like for 
example a sound or light from the Rejsekort station when placing the Rejsekort. Feedback from 
electronics could also be used to watch your use of electricity and give you an environmental aspect 
in the design. Joel would buy that kind of technology, but only because he is that type of person as 
he says.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Findings from Interviews: 
•
Love wireless solutions 
•
A mobile solution would be great, but the design of the charging station should be 
highly considered.  
 
==PAGE:82==
 
 
76 
PERSONA CREATION 
 
After conducting the two interviews with Joel and Linn the insights from the interviews will now be 
used to create two personas. The personas will be based on Joel and Linn and the pictures are the 
actual interview persons. This makes them real-life people. According to Nigel Cross (2008) personas 
are imaginary examples of real users they represent. In my case the personas are a very true picture 
of two persons within the target user group rather than imaginary. This makes it possible to create 
very specific descriptions of the personas and to give a visual impression of them I have included 
two pictures to each of the personas – one profile picture and one picture in their favorite place in 
their apartment. This not only gives an expression of the person, but also the interior style, which 
in our case has a lot to say.  
A shortcoming in the personas are that these are only based on two interviews. If more interviews 
were conducted with users within the target group these could have been condensed into more 
comprehensive representations of the target group. For this project, these two personas will 
represent the target user group, but in further iterations more interviews should be conducted. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
77 
 
==PAGE:84==
 
 
78 
 
==PAGE:85==
 
 
79 
 
NORDIC AND SCANDINAVIAN INTERIOR 
 
Our personas in general like a neutral interior where there are not too many sharp contrasts in 
colours. Linn herself describes that she likes the Nordic and Scandinavian interior style, which 
favourites many of the characteristics that both personas look for. Then there are ways to 
personalize the style to their different preferences regarding personal heirlooms and DIY-projects. 
This section shortly describes the Nordic and Scandinavian way of decorating the home with the 
three following lifestyle magazines as reference: Boligmagasinet.dk (web 18), Alt For Damerne (web 
19) and iBoligen.dk (web 20) describing the interior style from a general point of view, through an 
interview with interior consultant and stylist Anna Cor and an interview with the interior influencer 
Mikkel Dahlstrøm respectively. 
The paragraphs presented in this section is more a guide to different tendencies within the Nordic 
and Scandinavian style and they are therefore continuously changing and not set in stone. However, 
it gives a direction for this design project where interior style is an important aspect. 
 
 
==PAGE:86==
 
 
80 
  
 
 
==PAGE:87==
 
 
81 
To sum up the Nordic style aspects I made a Moodboard with pictures from Anna Cor and Mikkel 
Dahlstrøms Instagram profiles together with two pictures of lamp products from Nordlux and 
Normann Copenhagen respectively. 
 
 
 
Figure 49: Moodboard visualizing Nordic and Scandinavian interior style. 
==PAGE:88==
 
 
82 
 
DESIGN SPECIFICATION 
 
As the result of the exploration activity a design specification can be 
made. The design specification is a list of normative objective that 
defines what aspects of the new design has value and can be judged 
from. The appraisal is according to Roozenburg & Eekels (1995) the 
primary function of the design specification. However, the design 
specification also gives the required feedback to ensure that the 
design process is still on the right track. (Roozenburg & Eekels 1995)  
In order to not exclude any important parts of the solution space the 
design specification is therefore rather vague with a lot of objectives, 
but only a few specific requirements. (Cross 2008) In figure 50 to the 
right, three examples are shown from the design specification. 
The boxes ‘Heat’ and ‘Battery Time’ express requirements where the 
boxes ‘Dimensions’ and ‘Cords’ express objectives that depends on 
other design aspects such as aesthetics. This is an example on how 
some objectives overlap. If I had set up a requirement about the 
dimension for example that it should be smaller than 15 cm2 that 
would exclude solutions above that limit. If a design solution has a high 
aesthetic value users would be willing to compromise this dimensional 
limit. However, as the design specification and requirements keeps 
evolving during the development process the objectives and 
requirements will become more concrete as I get further in the 
concept synthesis. (Boeijen et al. 2016)  
The next five pages will present the full design specification. 
 
Figure 50: Examples of requirements and objective from the design 
specification 
==PAGE:89==
 
 
83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
 
 
84 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
 
 
85 
 
 
==PAGE:92==
 
 
86 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
 
 
87 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
 
 
88 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 
After exploring the problem space in Chapter 2, this chapter firstly defined a more specific problem space by 
presenting a goal formulation and defining the context to be home environments – mainly living rooms. Then 
a user group was segmented after conducting and analysing a quantitative online questionnaire concerning 
users’ characteristics and views on power transfer system. After defining the user group as being between 
26 and 35 years old, earning more than 10,000 kr. per month and having an interest in home interior, two 
semi-structured interviews were conducted with representatives from this group. The result was the creation 
of two personas and a design specification, which will be the foundation for the Concept Synthesis in the next 
two chapters. 
==PAGE:95==
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
 
 
90
After defining the problem space and the objectives for the design through a design specification, it 
is now time to answer these through the creation of concepts.  
The defined problem space has a corresponding solution space that needs to be defined as well. The 
process in Chapter 4 and 5 will be similar to the exploration process in Chapter 2 and 3. This chapter 
will explain the divergent process of creating ideas and expanding the solution space in order to 
ensure that enough idea elements are found and considered in the concept synthesis. This will 
include the use of creative – and visual thinking and methods like Brainstorming and Synectics. In 
the end of the chapter, five solution spaces with individual affinities are defined. These will be 
evaluated through the use of the C-Box method and the Harris Profile method in order to decide on 
one solution space. In Chapter 5 three concepts will be presented as a result of the ideation process 
in this chapter, but also by using a Morphological Chart combined with intuition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 51: Diverging concept synthesis and idea generation highlighted in overall design process 
model 
 
==PAGE:97==
 
 
91
TABLE OF CONTENT 
 
CAPTURING EMERGING IDEAS DURING EXPLORATION 
BRAINSTORMING MINI WORKSHOP 
SYNECTICS 
SCAMPER 
VISUAL THINKING 
DECIDING ON 5 SOLUTION SPACES 
ASSESSING AND EVALUATION 
DECIDING ON THE SOLUTION SPACE 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 
 
 
==PAGE:98==
 
 
92
CAPTURING EMERGING IDEAS DURING EXPLORATION 
 
During the exploration activity ideas occurred during incubation periods. Andreasen et al. (2015) 
enhances capturing ideas as a key element in in creativity and during the exploration I had a sketch 
book on me most of the time. Many ideas were captured – some very trivial and some more 
ambiguous. Below are three samples of ideas captured during the exploration activity. 
 
 
Figure 52: Captured ideas from the exploration activity. From left: Modularity Idea (See Appendix 
C43), Triangle On/Off Function Idea (See Appendix C66) and Mobile Battery Idea (See Appendix 
C73) 
 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
93
The sketches are not too detailed and the quality is not prioritised as the most important thing is to 
capture the ideas before they disappear again. Simple functional ideas such as the ‘Triangle On/Off 
Function Idea’ can be used later in the conceptualisation work as an added function. 
 
BRAINSTORMING MINI WORKSHOP 
 
In Delft Design Guide (2016), Boeijen et al. use a quote of Godfried Boman saying that: “In the realm 
of the mind a method is comparable to a crutch; the true thinker walks freely.” 
 
This quote argues that you do not need methods or tools, but great ideas can come from intuition, 
creativity and expertise. (Boeijen et al. 2016) It also supports Andreasen et al. (2015) when they 
define the ideation process as extremely open, where no approach is incorrect.  
In this project methods have been used as a way to support the ideation process and help the ideas 
out in the open and to encourage to think in new directions. Both creative and systematic methods 
have been used with the purpose of creating as many idea elements as possible within the 
timeframe of this Master’s Thesis. 
To begin my ideation process, I wanted to start getting immediate ideas written down from the 
start. An effective way to create a lot of ideas is by using the brainstorm method - capturing a large 
amount of ideas in a short time. Brainstorming can be done individually, but is typically a carried out 
in groups. (Boeijen et al. 2016) Creating dialogues is also key in order to be creative. (Andreasen et 
al. 2015) Therefore, I gathered my working team in order to create a three-man brainstorming 
session. Doing a small session like this can also be referred to as doing a workshop. A workshop 
should not just be carried out without any kind of preparation, but with a time schedule to guide 
the workshop and exercises for the three main activities in a workshop: 1) Creates comfort, 2) Stage 
Discussion and 3) Develop Together. (DTU course 42081: Staging Co-Creation, 2017) 
As my session was not a bigger workshop, but rather a small session with people I knew the schedule 
was kept very simple and the session only included two exercises; a How-To exercise for the stage 
==PAGE:100==
 
 
94
discussion and a Brainwriting/Braindrawing exercise for the develop together part of the session. 
The create comfort part included a presentation of the exploration insights and the goal 
formulation. The schedule can be seen in Appendix F. 
 
HOW-TOS 
The How-To’s exercise is a way to create a lot of problem statements in the form of questions that 
starts with ‘How to…’. This is an exercise that supports idea generation and therefore perfect as a 
warm up exercise before the brainstorming exercise. Below are the results of the How-To’s exercise: 
 
            
 
Figure 53: Left: Pictures from the ‘How-To’s’ exercise. 
 
In the Delft Design Guide (Boeilen et al. 2016) a part of the How-To’s method is to discuss and select 
a number of How-To’s that cover different point of views. In this case we discussed the correlation 
between some of the different How-To’s visualized by the two numbers: 
 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
 
 
95
How-To’s cluster number 1: 
• How to combine charging with existing products 
• How to make PTS modular 
 
How-To’s cluster number 2: 
• How to make power accessible for the user 
• How to make PTS mobile, move power 
• How to make PTS flexible 
 
The final step of the method is to generate ideas from the individual How-To’s. This was in our 
session replaced with an open Brainwriting/Brain drawing session where the How-To’s where used 
as inspiration during the idea generation.  
 
BRAINWRITING AND BRAIN DRAWING 
With the How-Tos visible on the whiteboard beside the table a Brainstorming session was initiated 
with the 6-5-3 method. In this method six participants uses five minutes to generate three ideas and 
pass them around, in the end generating 90 ideas in 25 minutes. (Boeijen et al. 2016) In our session 
we were only three participants and the method was therefore scaled down to a 3-5-3 method with 
the aim of generating 27 ideas. Using the Brainwriting method ideas are captured by writing them 
down in text and in Brain Drawing the ideas are captured through quick sketching. Our session 
allowed both ways in order to ensure that all ideas that popped into mind could be captured. Below 
are pictures from the session. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
 
 
96
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 54: Pictures from Brainstorming session Brainstorming activity (to the right), a sample of the 
generated ideas (top left) and the activity of explaining and discussing the ideas generated (bottom 
left). 
 
The result of the Brainstorming session was 23 ideas or idea elements, which can all be found in 
Appendix C numbered from C15-C37. These were more functional elements than comprehensive 
concepts. These can however be useful in combination with later concepts. 
 
 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
97
SYNECTICS 
To support my ideation, I used two methods to encourage creative thinking and expand my solution 
space. One of the methods I used was the Synectics method which allows you to think in analogies. 
(Cross 2008) The method can be done both individually or in groups (Boeijen et al. 2016) and in my 
case, it was an individual process where especially personal – and symbolic analogies inspired for 
new ideas.  
 
PERSONAL ANALOGIES 
For ideating within personal analogies, a Mind Map with an outlet in the center was used to visualize 
aspects of personal analogies where the idea is to imagine that you are the product. (Cross 2008) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 55: Mind Map 
visualizing personal 
analogies 
==PAGE:104==
 
 
98
 
 
The Mind Map gives the outlet some interesting personal characteristics based on my own 
personality. An example from the Mind Map is the characteristic regarding being proud. What 
relates to this characteristic? One of the things is to be tall and in some industries, like the model 
industry, being thin is also something that relates to this characteristic. This can be translated into 
design ideas, most simple the one in Figure X, which is just a slim and long rectangle. 
               
 
 
Figure 56: Examples of proud designs. From the left: Idea 51 (Appendix C51) and Idea 57 (Appendix 
C57) 
 
==PAGE:105==
 
 
99
SYMBOLIC ANALOGIES 
Another aspect from the Synectics method was the use of symbolic analogies. In my case I took this 
very literal and used concrete electrical symbols to ideate from – translating the symbols into 3D 
designs with outlets. This gave me some inspiration regarding shapes and also made me think about 
how different shapes encouraged different use, which can among other things be seen in the idea 
with the crystal symbol as inspiration. The top plate and bottom plate are used as a wireless 
connection plate and a magnetic key chain hanger, respectively.  
 
 
 
Figure 57: Taking electrical symbols literal in the ideation process 
==PAGE:106==
 
 
100 
 
The symbolic analogies also included inspiration from other objects such as a kite, a diamond and a plant, 
which are shown below: 
 
 
Figure 58: Symbolic analogies 
==PAGE:107==
 
 
101 
SCAMPER 
As another way to inspire the ideation I also used the method SCAMPER, which is a creativity 
method that can help creating ideas by using the seven heuristics: Substitute, Combine, Adapt, 
Modify, Put to another use, Eliminate and Reverse. (Boeijen et al. 2016) For this method 
mindmapping was again used for capturing the idea elements. Using mindmaps is a good way to 
structure your thoughts and ideas and provides an overview, which also allows you to connect 
different ideas and thoughts to each other. (Boeijen et al. 2016) 
Below are the 7 mindmaps in scaled down versions, but they can be found in full sizes in Appendix 
A2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:108==
 
 
102 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:109==
 
 
103 
 
 
 
==PAGE:110==
 
 
104 
Again, several ideas were generated during and after this session, which were captured. In the figure 
below is an idea using elements from the combine mind map and adapt mind map as the idea is to 
combine outlets and a lamp and be able to change the outlet circular blocks. In the figure is also a 
picture of a functional idea where two lanes can be pulled up from a mobile battery to create a 
laptop stand. 
 
 
 
Figure 59: Ideas from SCAMPER. To the left: multilamp, to the right: laptop stand functionality 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:111==
 
 
105 
VISUAL THINKING 
 
During the ideation process, visual communication has been an important boundary object to both 
generate ideas, but also to ensure a correlation between the solution space and problem space. For 
example, a Collage was created to give a sense of the context, problem space and product category. 
According to Boeijen et al. (2016) a collage ‘helps you to develop visual design criteria and to 
communicate these criteria to your stakeholders’. So, if this was a real life case the collage would 
also be a good way to align expectations between me as the designer and the client. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 60: Inspirational Moodboard 
==PAGE:112==
 
 
106 
 
Besides pictures and collages visual communication also include drawing and sketching, which is the way the 
design world communicates and is also a way to ‘self communicate’ as a designer. (Andreasen et al 2015) It 
is an important part of the process of taking an idea sketch and develop it into formal drawings of a final 
embodiment of a concept. (Andreasen et al 2015) 
Sketching has therefore been one of the activities I have used a lot of time on while considering the aspects 
from the Mind Maps, Personas and findings from the exploration phase. The next three pages will show some 
of the visual communication work made by sketching in hand followed by scanning it and transforming it into 
graphic illustrations. Gathering all sketches and drawings 74 idea elements can be counted and they are all 
listed in Appendix C. 
 
 
==PAGE:113==
 
 
107 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:114==
 
 
108 
 
 
 
==PAGE:115==
 
 
109 
 
 
 
==PAGE:116==
 
 
110 
DECIDING ON 5 SOLUTION SPACES 
 
74 idea elements are a lot of ideas and it might seem a bit overwhelming to find a way through 
these. This section will explain how an evaluation was made of the ideas to get from 74 ideas to only 
10. Choosing which ideas are most promising can be done in a lot of ways. Intuition, experience or 
an arbitrary decision is a way to do it, but in order to feel secure as a designer there are also concrete 
methods that can be used – ensuring an openness in the process, which in a real-life situation can 
help clients or other stakeholders in assessing the validity of the choice. (Cross 2008) 
The first step is to reduce the amount of ideas to a more manageable amount from where these can 
be further developed and evaluated more in-depth. The eliminated ideas are not eliminated for 
good, but are still elements that can be included in the chosen ideas. The whole process of the 
concept synthesis is to keep searching for ideas and maturing these eventually narrowing the 
solution space. Andreasen et al. (2015) describes it as a funnel or a ‘death curve’ where one final 
concept will remain in the end.  
 
C-BOX METHOD 
To begin this ‘death curve’ I used the C-Box method, which is a good method to use in the beginning 
of idea generation when you have a lot of ideas for example more than 40. (Boeijen et al. 2016) By 
placing the ideas on a XY-diagram with feasibility on the y-axis and innovativeness on the x-axis you 
can narrow the space down; the ideas in the bottom left are eliminated and the most promising 
ideas are placed in the top right quadrant. In my case, due to the time perspective of this Master’s 
Thesis, I chose to eliminate everything except the top right quadrant. In the later process of creating 
concepts past idea elements can be re-evaluated and possibly be integrated in the chosen concepts.  
 
Figure 61: The funnel or death curve of 
conceptualization (Andreasen et al. 2015) 
==PAGE:117==
 
 
111 
 
 
Figure 62: C-Box Method 
 
During the process of evaluating and placing the ideas some ideas where immediately dropped 
either because they were duplicates, the idea was too vague or the solution already exist. 
Furthermore, some ideas where put aside as ‘Idea Elements’ to be used in later conceptualization. 
These idea elements are more concrete ideas to a specific problem than an idea for solving the 
general problem of making power transfer systems more accessible. Below are examples of the two 
different categories: 
FAMILIAR
INNOVATIVE
NOT FEASIBLE
FEASIBLE
46
4
5
6
7
10
25
44
35
62
48
67
68
11
9
73
19
42
74
15
8
29
24
16
27
47
59
49
26
36
51
56
61
17
22
32
37
52
57
18
23
53
58
34
54
69
20
30
45
50
55
70
3
12
Discarded
41
66
71
72
33
38
43
63
39
64
40
60
65
Idea Elements
1
2
13
14
28
31
==PAGE:118==
 
 
112 
 
    
 
 
Figure 63: To the left: Example on deleted idea, to the right: Example on future idea element. 
 
As seen in Figure 62, the chosen ideas were: 5, 6, 7, 10, 15, 19, 42, 44, 46, 62. As some of these ideas 
had similarities the group of 10 ideas was condensed to 5 solution spaces based on the core 
principles. I gave the solution spaces general titles like ‘Stationary Flexible Solution’ and ‘Aesthetic 
Frame Design’ in order to keep the solution space open for new idea elements. The next five pages 
presents the solutions spaces defined from the ideas chosen from the C-Box method. It includes 
general ‘Idea With’ and ‘Idea In’ considerations. 
 
 
==PAGE:119==
 
 
113 
 
 
==PAGE:120==
 
 
114 
 
 
==PAGE:121==
 
 
115 
 
 
==PAGE:122==
 
 
116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:123==
 
 
117 
 
 
==PAGE:124==
 
 
118 
ASSESSING AND EVALUATION 
 
This section will show how 5 solution spaces 
are narrowed down to 1 by using the vALUe 
method 
and 
its 
principles 
‘Advantage, 
Limitation and Unique Elements together with 
the use of Harris Profiles. The vALUe method 
is a good way to assess the current ideas or 
clusters of ideas – in this case the solution 
spaces. The method reflects on the solution 
space and gives more insights into valuable 
directions for solution finding. (Boeijen et al. 
2016) 
I will use this method to describe the solution 
spaces before using the Harris Profile, which is 
going to be based on the five main objectives 
in the design specification. In the end, I will 
make a decision on which solution space to 
create concepts from based on the two 
methods and my own intuition. To the left is a 
visualization of this process and the next five 
pages will present the vALUe method and 
Harris Profile of the five solution spaces. 
 
Figure 64: Choosing most potential solution 
space 
 
 
==PAGE:125==
 
 
119 
 
 
==PAGE:126==
 
 
120 
 
 
==PAGE:127==
 
 
121 
 
 
==PAGE:128==
 
 
122 
 
 
==PAGE:129==
 
 
123 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:130==
 
 
124 
DECIDING ON THE SOLUTION SPACE 
 
Judging from the Harris Profile the solution space ‘Mobile Modular Battery System’ and 
‘Outlet/Lamp Combined’ are the most favourable. By assessing the points in the vALUe method and 
following my intuition I choose to focus on creating three concepts around mobile modular battery 
systems fulfilling the design objectives. The process of creating the concepts will be explained in the 
next chapter. 
 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 
In this chapter, the findings from the problem space was utilised for generating idea elements 
framing a corresponding solution space. Already during exploration ideas were created, which were 
captured in drawings. To expand the solution space as much as possible within the limited time 
frame for this Master’s Thesis ideation methods like Brainstorming, Synectics and SCAMPER was 
used. These resulted in 74 idea elements that were evaluated by using the systematic evaluation 
method C-BOX, which isolated 10 idea elements that were gathered into 5 solution spaces due to 
the different idea element’s affinities. In the end, the solution space ‘Mobile Modular Battery 
System’ was chosen for further conceptualisation after applying the vALUe method and Harris 
Profile. Chapter 5 will focus on the creation of more specific concepts within the chosen solution 
space and in the end, choose one final concept, which will be embodied in Chapter 6.  
==PAGE:131==
 
 
125
 
 
==PAGE:132==
 
 
126
This chapter will explain the creation and evaluation of concepts within the chosen solution space Mobile 
Modular Battery System. Methods like the Morphological Chart and Weighted Objectives will be used for 
this. Three concrete concepts will be created, presented and evaluated and the end a final concept will be 
chosen. The final concept will be further detailed in Chapter 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 65: Divergent exploration phase highlighted in overall design process 
 
 
==PAGE:133==
 
 
127
TABLE OF CONTENT 
MORPHOLOGICAL CHART 
 
COMBINING IDEA ELEMENTS INTO 3 CONCEPTS 
CONCEPT 1: DELTA BRICKS 
CONCEPT 2: TYLES 
CONCEPT 3: THE KITE 
 
WEIGHTED OBJECTIVE METHOD 
CHOICE OF OBJECTIVES 
WEIGHING OF OBJECTIVES 
RESULT OF THE WEIGHTED OBJECTIVE METHOD 
 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:134==
 
 
128
MORPHOLOGICAL CHART 
 
Despite an ideation process has already been made, another short ideation iteration will be be run 
through within the chosen solution space in order to explore the specific solution space just as the 
convergent exploration phase explored the chosen problem space after having a divergent phase. 
One of the method used for generating idea elements was the analytical and systematic method 
Morphological Charts, which can help create principle solutions. It is often used in the beginning of 
ideation. (Boeijen et al. 2016) However, I will use the method to inspire for new design aspects by 
making counterintuitive combinations through this method. Firstly, the morphological chart is made 
by including four parameters. The morphological chart is best when there are not too many 
parameters and they are as independent of each other as possible. (Cross 2008) 
 
The chosen parameters are: 
1. Shape of the Modules 
2. Module Charging 
3. Current Carrying Element 
4. Technology 
 
The method was conducted by hanging the different elements on the wall, throwing a dice to decide 
which elements to include and pulling them down from the wall. Then I did a 30-minute free 
sketching session with the elements as inspiration. Below is a picture of the morphological chart on 
the wall. 
 
==PAGE:135==
 
 
129
        
 
 
Figure 66: Left: Morphological Chart on the wall. Right: Dice used for picking elements 
 
By throwing the dice the following three combinations was chosen: 
• Combination 1: Circle, charging station, connection glue and pin connection. 
• Combination 2: Square, electrical grid, non-flexible elements, WPT 
• Combination 3: Trapezoid, charged individually, cords, USB-C 
 
If more time was given it could have been more combination would have been made in order to 
encourage more counterintuitive thinking. Also, you could argue that more options could have been 
added to the morphological chart or that the categories could be something else than the chosen 
ones.  
==PAGE:136==
 
 
130
          
          
 
 
Figure 67: From left: Combination 1, combination 2 and combination 3. 
 
During this sketching session, I decided to look away from the conducting glue as it did not inspire 
my ideation process. However, different conceptual elements started from the other ideation 
constraints. The constraint about the pin connection was in the first session interpreted as physical 
connection so that idea elements such as the cylindrical connection idea ‘Idea 2’ (Appendix C2) could 
be applied. Also, the constraint about using different shapes helped to inspire new conceptual 
aspects. Below are some of the sketches from the Morphological Chart ideation sessions. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:137==
 
 
131
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 68: Concept ideas from Morphological Chart session 
==PAGE:138==
 
 
132
COMBINING IDEA ELEMENTS INTO 3 CONCEPTS 
 
Andreasen et al. (2015) describes the transformation of ideas into concept by presenting four 
elements: create, combine, visualise and complete. In general, the creation of concepts can be 
described as consisting of both new idea elements and past product’s elements. (Andreasen et al. 
2015). Combining elements is therefore an important aspect when generating ideas and concepts. 
During this concept synthesis, many idea elements have been created – some more unique than 
others and some more concrete than others. Methods like SCAMPER, Synectics and Morphological 
chart have been used to support the activity and insights from the exploration activity that have 
been the foundation for the ideation processes. A gradual identification of the solution space has 
now made it possible to create concepts within a well-defined solution space where it is now a 
question of combining the right idea elements for creating more complete concepts. This section 
will present three concepts that have been created as a result of gradually identifying the solution 
space and combining past idea elements.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:139==
 
 
133
CONCEPT 1: DELTA BRICKS 
This concept was created based on user insights about stilleben spaces, minimalism, mobile battery 
technology and by combining previous idea elements such as Idea 47, Idea 11, Idea 9 and Idea 2. 
Some of the idea elements and insights leading to this concept can be seen below followed by a 
presentation of the Delta Bricks concept including the Idea With and the Idea In the concept and 
the difference that matters compared to the other two concepts that will be presented later in this 
section. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 69: Foundation of the Delta Bricks concept 
==PAGE:140==
 
 
134
 
 
Figure 70: Visual presentation of Delta Bricks concept 
==PAGE:141==
 
 
135
 
 
==PAGE:142==
 
 
136
CONCEPT 2: TYLES  
This concept was based on creating an as accessible mobile battery solution as possible, but still 
make it blend into the interior. By using previous idea elements such as Idea 6, Idea 10, Idea 27, Idea 
62, Idea 63, Idea 69 and technological insights such as the possibilities within wireless technology 
the concept was created. Below are some of these element that inspired the concept followed by a 
presentation of the concept. 
 
 
 
Figure 71: Foundation of Tyles concept 
==PAGE:143==
 
 
137
 
 
Figure 72: Visual presentation of TYLES concept 
==PAGE:144==
 
 
138
 
 
==PAGE:145==
 
 
139
CONCEPT 3: THE KITE  
This concept was inspired by thinking of the solution as a design object with personality. The idea 
to the concept was born through symbolic analogies and by combining it with past idea elements 
such as Idea 6c, Idea 6e and Idea 62.  
 
 
Figure 73: Foundation of THE KITE concept 
==PAGE:146==
 
 
140
 
 
Figure 74: Visual presentation of THE KITE concept 
==PAGE:147==
 
 
141
 
 
==PAGE:148==
 
 
142
WEIGHTED OBJECTIVE METHOD 
 
In this section, a final concept will be chosen and the reasoning behind the decision will be 
explained. Evaluation and choice are uncertain activities and can only be indirectly influenced by 
methods. (Andreasen et al. 2015) However, methods can be used to evaluate concepts with regards 
to the design objectives and this section will explain how the Weighted Objective Method was 
used. 
 
For choosing a final concept of the three presented in the last section the Weighted Objective 
Method was used. This method is used in order to evaluate concepts and make a decision on a final 
concept that will then be further detailed. (Boeijen et al. 2016) The method is based on the design 
objectives and the weighing of these according to their importance. These objectives have been 
established earlier in the process from exploring the problem space. However, at this point the 
objectives can have become modified and therefore a clarification of the objective chosen and their 
followed weighing will therefore be necessary before initiating the evaluation process. (Cross 2008) 
 
CHOICE OF OBJECTIVES 
 
Accessibility: 
• How many places will power be available for the user? 
• Will it be within reach of the user? 
 
Looks:  
• How does the design look to the user? 
• Are the shapes and design pleasing for the eye? 
 
==PAGE:149==
 
 
143
Interior Integration: 
• How well does it blend into the interior? 
• How well does it work together will other interior objects? 
 
Customization: 
• How can the user influence on the design? 
• How can the user personalize the design? 
 
Usability: 
• How easy is it to use? 
• How many sequences does the user have to include in order to use the product? 
 
Flexibility: 
• How easy can the user add new power sources or features to the design? 
• How can the design adapt to different spaces? 
 
Further objectives could have been chosen, but in order to keep focus on the most important 
objectives a limitation of six objectives was made. An example could be ‘adaptability’ towards new 
trends and technologies, but if the objective is not more important than the ones chosen above it 
would not have any big influence on the overall result as it would be weighed very low. 
 
WEIGHING OF OBJECTIVES 
There are different ways to weigh the objectives. According to Cross (2008) a ranking of the 
objectives is usually a good first step before giving the objectives different weighing and one way to 
do it is to compare the objectives against each other one pair at a time resulting in a scoring chart. 
If one objective is more important than the other it is given the value 1 and if it is less important, 0. 
==PAGE:150==
 
 
144
This gives a total score for each of the objectives and leaves a ranking order that will make it easier 
to weigh the objectives. Below is the result of the rank-order of the chosen objectives: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 75: Ranking the objectives 
 
==PAGE:151==
 
 
145
Now that the rank order has been decided there are many ways to weigh the objectives. One of the 
ways is to decide on a total sum for example 100 and then assign numbers to the individual 
objectives based on the importance, which is now more transparent from the rank order. Below the 
weighing is applied. As it can be seen the two top objectives ‘Accessibility’ and ‘Looks’ share the 
same value. This is because they are dependent on each other and a way to implement this is the 
chart was to give them an equal importance. Should two concepts have an equal sum the one with 
most value in Accessibility will be favorited. 
 
RESULT OF THE WEIGHTED OBJECTIVE METHOD 
The criteria in the form of the objectives have now been chosen and weighed. The Weighted 
Objective Method can now be used and the concepts will one by one be evaluated by giving them a 
value from 1-10 where 1 is the lowest and 10 is the highest value. As seen in Figure 77 on the next 
page, the “TYLES” was the concept that scored highest and this concept will be the final concept and 
will in the next chapter be detailed further. However, before choosing this concept as the final 
concept, I discussed the decision with the work group to help me reflect on the decision. As they 
both agreed with the decision the choice was made. 
 
Figure 76: Weighing the 
objectives 
==PAGE:152==
 
 
146
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 
From the Ideation process a solution space was chosen concerning mobile modular battery systems. 
This chapter explained how previous idea elements from ideation processes and methods like the 
morphological chart helped with developing new concepts. Three main concepts were presented 
with considerations about the Idea With and Idea In the concepts including the difference that 
matters when comparing the concepts to each other. In the end, TYLES was chosen as the final 
concept to further detail as a result of the systematic method called the Weighted Objective 
Method. By giving the design objectives a value depending on their importance the three concepts 
were evaluated from these and in the end TYLES had the highest score. The concept will now be 
further developed in Chapter 6. 
Figure 77: Results of the 
Weighted Objective Method 
with the TYLES concept as 
the one with most value 
==PAGE:153==
 
 
147
 
 
==PAGE:154==
 
 
148
This chapter will detail the final concept TYLES and determine the concepts technical feasibility and 
how the it will work in the use contexts.  
First, some conceptual changes will be presenting concerning the shape of the tiles. Due to these 
changes, new elements will be introduced and explained.  
To detail the concept and describe how it works more specifically, the Domain Theory will be applied 
including the concepts of the Activtity Domain and Organ Domain.  
In the end, a physical mock-up will be presented in different use settings. In Chapter 7 the concept 
will be validated through the creation of a mock-up and user feedback resulting in an evaluation of 
the concepts conceptual vulnerability. 
 
 
 
Figure 78: The process of embodying the concept highlighted in overall design process 
 
 
==PAGE:155==
 
 
149
TABLE OF CONTENT 
 
CONCEPTUAL CHANGES 
ADAPTER TILE 
MAIN TILE 
SUPPORT TILE 
MAGNETIC ACCESSORY OBJECTS 
 
THE PRODUCT’S NATURE 
VISUALISING USE SCENARIOS 
APPLYING ACTIVITY DOMAIN 
LOOKING INSIDE THE TILES (ORGAN DOMAIN) 
 
BUILDING MOCKUPS 
SIZE AND STRUCTURE 
MAGNETIC ATTACHMENT 
TESTING USE SITUATIONS 
CREATING FUNCTIONAL MOCKUP 
 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 
 
==PAGE:156==
 
 
150
CONCEPTUAL CHANGES 
 
By focusing on only one concept new ideas emerged. In the morphological chart one of the 
combinations included trapezoid shapes. When two trapezoids are put together they create a 
hexagon – a shape, which has a certain aesthetic appeal. By exploring this specific shape in interior 
design, I found multiple examples where hexagon shapes were visual in the interior. Some of these 
are illustrated in Figure 79. 
The way the tiles can be structured in multiple ways have some advantages compared to the original 
octagon shaped tiles. In general, the hexagon shapes are actually very used within interior design. 
Bang & Olufsen have also recently created a concept called Shapes (see Figure 79) which is a 
modular speaker system. A decision was made to change the shapes of the tiles into hexagons 
instead of octagons with square connectors. Below is a picture of the structural advantage of being 
able to attach more tiles to one connector tile.  
 
Figure 80: Advantages by using hexagon shapes instead of octagon shapes 
 
Figure 79: Hexagon shapes in 
interior 
==PAGE:157==
 
 
151
By changing the shape other conceptual aspects changed and the different conceptual elements will 
be explained in this section. 
 
The concept is now a product system consisting of hexagon-shaped tiles in two colors indicating 
which tile is a so-called ‘adapter tile’ and which is a ‘main tile’. The tiles can be structured in many 
different ways and colors, making the design customizable for the user.  
 
 
Figure 81: New TYLES concept 
 
They can be used everywhere in the home as it is a mobile concept and it has an appealing look, 
which makes it possible to let it be visible on the walls. 
==PAGE:158==
 
 
152
 
ADAPTER TILE  
The ‘adapter tile’ (turquoise color) is a mobile power bank that can be 
brought anywhere the user needs power. It has three outlets on the 
sides; a pin connection, USB and USB-C. Furthermore, a Qi wireless 
transmitter is integrated behind the front surface making wireless 
transfer possible. Around the wireless transmitter is a magnetic ring 
that connects with the corresponding adapter, that can be plugged 
into the smartphone. This makes the wireless connection as efficient 
as possible and gives a ‘magical’ feeling what attaching the 
smartphone adapter. Furthermore, there is an integrated USB C laptop 
charger that can be pulled out of the tile, so no external charger Is 
needed. 
 
 
 
Figure 82: Visual presentation of the concept behind the adapter tile 
Idea With:  
•
Distribute power to mobile devices like laptops, tablets and 
smartphones 
•
Distribute power between main tiles, making it possible to power 
more adapter tiles 
•
Fit to different plug sizes 
•
Create a good emotional feeling when connecting to electricity 
•
Enable integration of other interior objects 
•
Available everywhere in the home 
•
Charge laptop without user has to have a laptop charger 
Idea In:  
•
Outlets for pin, USB, USB-C and WPT 
•
Expansion function 
•
Internal connecting grid 
•
Magnetic WPT attachment  
•
Integrated rechargeable battery 
•
Integrated USB-C charger cable 
==PAGE:159==
 
 
153
 
 
MAIN TILE 
The adapter tile is charged by attaching it to the main tile (in pink color).  
 
The main tile is screwed into the wall from which the whole system can be built from. One main 
tile can charge six adapter tiles and two can charge 10 adapter tiles. The adapter tile can then 
transfer electricity to a new main tile, that can charge 5 new adapter tiles. Below is a visualization 
of how the current flows in the structure: 
 
 
Figure 84: Flow of electrical current in the tile structure 
 
Idea With:  
• Distributing electricity to adapter tiles 
• Connecting with the adapter tiles 
• Hide functional parts 
• Keeping all tiles on the wall 
Idea In:  
• Electrical grid 
• connecting lanes 
• Push in function 
Figur 83: Visual presentation of the 
main tile 
==PAGE:160==
 
 
154
 
SUPPORT TILE 
Aside from the adapter – and main tile, a triangle shaped tile can be placed in different locations in 
the home. These are called ‘support tiles’ and enable the adapter tiles to be hanged other places 
than the TYLES system. The support tile can also be used as a charging tile by connecting a cord to 
it.  
 
 
Figure 85: Visual presentation of support tile 
 
Idea With:  
• Make it possible to hang adapter tiles individually 
• Enable charging other places than at the main structure 
• Be an alternative to the bigger system 
• Minimalistic design 
 
 
Idea In:  
• Support tile that has the same attaching mechanism as 
the main tile 
• Can be screwed into the wall 
• USB input for giving the support tile a charging function 
• Slim triangle shape with same push function as the main 
tile 
==PAGE:161==
 
 
155
 
MAGNETIC ACCESSORY OBJECTS 
One of the unique perspectives in the concept is the creation of magnetic accessory objects like 
lamps, speakers, charging shelves and even non-electronic accessories like mirrors, or pencil racks. 
Below is a visualization of these. 
 
 
Figure 86: Visual presentation of magnetic accessory objects like lamps, loudspeakers and 
smartphone wireless charger shelves. 
 
The user can move the accessory object to whichever tile and even move the tile with a lamp if light 
is needed anywhere else in the home.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:162==
 
 
156
THE PRODUCT’S NATURE 
 
Now that the new conceptual elements have been further described, this section will explain the 
nature of the product through the use of Domain Theory, which will describe how the product is 
used and how the design is composed. (Andreasen et al. 2015) The Activity Domain will be covered 
by creating storyboards and activity models and the Organ Domain will explain by visualising the 
components inside the tiles. 
 
VISUALISING USE SCENARIOS 
Before applying the Activity Domain, the concept has to be clarified regarding the different use 
contexts and possible use scenarios. Due to the certain flexibility in the concept there are a lot of 
ways for the user to use the TYLES concept. First of all, the use scenario depends on which device 
the user wants to power; a laptop, a smartphone or a tablet. Other USB-devices could be included 
here, but due to the scope of the project these are the one I will focus on.  
The later activity model will explain the exact activity sequences, where this section will just visualise 
the scenarios in order to make the activity models more transparent.  
 
 
SMARTPHONE AND TABLETS 
If the user wants to charge their smartphone or tablet there are many different ways to do it. Three 
of them are listed and visualised below: 
1. Using standard USB cord 
2. Using the TYLES-adapter to magnetically connect through WPT 
3. Laying the smartphone on a WPT shelves (only for the smartphone) 
 
==PAGE:163==
 
 
157
 
Figure 87: Use scenarios for smartphones and tablets 
 
 
 
==PAGE:164==
 
 
158
LAPTOPS 
If the user wants to charge a laptop there is one main questions that determine the sequence of the 
followed user activities: Are the TYLES within reach of the user? 
1. If yes, this enables the user to attach the laptop charger directly or pull out the USB-C cord 
if USB-C is the charging input on the laptop. 
2. If the system is out of reach for the user, the user has to either move near the wall the design 
is placed on or bring one of the tiles to the laptop. 
 
 
Figure 88: Use scenarios for laptops 
 
 
 
==PAGE:165==
 
 
159
APPLYING ACTIVITY DOMAIN 
With the different main use scenarios described the Activity Domain theory will now be applied in 
order to describe how the product is used more specifically. This will be done through activity 
models including the possible sequences based on the scenarios in the last section. Again, there is 
a difference in the activity models depending on the device the user wants to charge. The activity 
models will focus on when the system is out of reach as this include the use sequences when the 
system is within reach.  
 
To follow the chronology from last section the smartphone will be the first device under the loop. 
Tablet devices should be covered by this activity model as well as a tablet and smartphone are very 
similar. The activity model or sequence model can be seen on the next page in Figure 89. 
The model explains the activity that transforms the operand, which is the smartphone and more 
specifically the electricity stored in the smartphone battery. It goes from discharged to fully charged. 
The activity can be divided in multiple sequences and are in this model visualised in the dark 
turquoise boxes with the effects that support the activities. These effects are the dashed boxes and 
are either product related effects like a ‘push button mechanism’, method related like ‘WPT 
technology’, human related like ‘user walks back to the use space’ or active surroundings related 
like ‘electricity flow’. As seen the result of sequences depends of the users’ choice of connection 
method; they can charge by laying the smartphone on the tile surface using WPT or using the USB 
or pin output. They can also use the TYLES smartphone adapter to snap the adapter magnetically 
on to the surface of the tile.  
 
==PAGE:166==
 
 
160
 
Figure 89: Activity/Sequence model of charging a smartphone/tablet (See Appendix A for full scale picture) 
==PAGE:167==
 
 
161
 
The laptop use activity sequences depend on many factors as previously explained. On the next 
page is a full sequence overview of possible use activities. As seen this activity model is a lot more 
comprehensive than with the smartphone example. This is due to the greater need for power that 
means than a tile may be switched during the use activity because the need for power is not satisfied 
by one tile. This creates an iterative loop, which is illustrated with the pink arrow. 
Applying the activity domain specify the use activities and as a designer you reflect on the different 
functional parts like the battery indicator, the push button mechanism, that will detach the tile from 
the TYLES system – how can this be done? Some of these aspects will be clarified in the next section 
where the Organ Domain will be applied where the concept will be detailed. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:168==
 
 
162
 
Figure 90: Activity/Sequence model of charging a laptop (See Appendix A for full scale picture) 
  
==PAGE:169==
 
 
163
 
 
LOOKING INSIDE THE TILES 
 
This section will explain the functions in the product through applying the concepts in the Organ Domain 
theory. This will be done by describing the inside of the adapter tile and main tile individually. 
 
THE ADAPTER TILE 
Inside the adapter tile are different electronic components. These will not be specified as this is out 
of the project scope, but by using Domain Theory the functionality elements can be described by 
defining the so-called organs in the adapter tile. 
 
 
Figure 90: Inside the adapter tile 
==PAGE:170==
 
 
164
 
Power organ: This organ is represented by the battery, which stores and distribute power to the 
other electronic organs. 
 
USB-adapting organ: This organ makes it possible to connect the power distributed from the power 
organ to the user’s USB devices such as an iPhone or iPad. 
 
USB C-adapting organ: This organ makes it possible to connect the power distributed from the 
power organ to the user’s USB C devices such as laptops. 
 
Pin-adapting organ: This organ makes it possible to connect the power distributed from the power 
organ to strong current devices such as laptops or hairdryers. 
 
Charging organ: This organ makes is possible to charge laptops directly without using external 
laptop chargers. 
 
Retriever organ: This organ retrieves the charging organ. Due to the complexity of the drawing this 
organ is not visualized, but will be integrated in the tile as well.  
 
Wireless adapting organ: This organ makes it possible to connect the power distributed from the 
power organ wirelessly to a receiver product such as the smartphone adapter. 
 
Tile connecting organ: This organ makes it possible to connect the adapter tile to the charging tile 
electrically, but physically as well in order to stabilize the tiles to the wall. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:171==
 
 
165
THE MAIN TILE 
The main tile does not have as many functionalities as the adapter tiles as its main function is to 
charge the adapter tiles. The organs in the support tile is similar to the charging tile and the following 
organs describes therefore applies to the support tile as well. 
 
 
Figure 91: Inside the main tile 
==PAGE:172==
 
 
166
 
 
Charging organ: This organ consists of the plug, the cord and a power distributor element, which is 
not defined. The organ gets power from a main outlet in the room. 
 
Tile connecting organ: This organ distributes the electricity from the charging organ to the adapter 
tiles. At the same time, it holds the adapter tiles in structure on the wall. 
 
Wireless adapting organ: Same as in the adapter tile. 
 
Connector hiding organ: This organ makes it possible to hide the two connectors by pushing them 
into the sides. They are released again by pushing in the button in the middle. 
 
 
Figure 92: Connector hiding organ 
==PAGE:173==
 
 
167
TYLES SMARTPHONE ADAPTER 
The TYLES smartphone adapter is a product made for the TYLES concept, that enables the user to 
charge a smartphone with Qi wireless technology by ‘magically’ snapping the adapter to the tile 
after which the smartphone will start charging. This is useful when the user wants to charge her or 
his smartphone while using it. 
 
 
Figure 93: Inside the TYLES smartphone adapter 
 
 
==PAGE:174==
 
 
168
BUILDING MOCKUPS 
 
After defining the organs that create the functions in the TYLES concept a natural step would be to 
materialize the ideas in the concept. Andreasen et al. (2015) says that the value of an idea depends 
on its ability to deliver. One of the ways to create value is through conceptualization. This activity 
was covered in the last two chapters where Concept Synthesis increased the value of the concept 
through the use of different design methods.  
This section will explain the process of creating physical appearance models and pre-stage 
prototypes, popularly known as mockups.  
 
SIZE AND STRUCTURE 
One of the aspects I wanted to test out in reality was the feeling of the size. In drawings and sketches 
it is hard to know exactly how it ‘feels’ to use the product and know how you feel about the 
dimensions. It might look good on paper, but to feel different in reality. A way to test this, is through 
modelling, that can be a substitute for true clarification when the product does not yet exist. 
(Andreasen et al. 2015) In this case, the tiles were cut out in cardboard in two different sizes and 
stuck to the wall by using sticky tack. A smaller size with the dimensions of 200 mm x 231 mm was 
made as well as a bigger sized tile with the dimensions of 278 mm x 240 mm. As Figure 94 and 95 
shows, the two different sizes on the wall have the same expression due to the placement. However, 
the smaller one might be preferred by the user as they want power transfer systems to be as small 
as possible.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 94: Small size tile 
Figure 95: Big size tile 
==PAGE:175==
 
 
169
 
 
The cardboard cutouts were very easy to work with and put in different structures and by gluing 
different colored carton it was possible to try different combinations with different colors. It was 
therefore possible to create physical appearance models to display the form and appearance of the 
product. (Ulrich & Eppinger 2012) Two color combinations were visualised: Black/white and 
red/green, which can be seen in the pictures below: 
 
 
Figure 96: Testing out different structures and color combinations 
==PAGE:176==
 
 
170
 
The green and red color was not the exact ones that I wanted to test out, but it gave an idea of how 
the tiles would look in color. However, the black/white combination looked surprisingly appealing 
and was not, as Linn expressed ‘the center of the interior’ as the colored combinations might be to 
some users.  
 
MAGNETIC ATTACHMENT 
One of the unique elements in the TYLES concept is the magnetic attachment of the smartphone 
adapter, the smartphone charging shelf or the LED lamp. In order to do some early testing of this, I 
made a cardboard adapter with integrated magnets to imitate how the magnetic attachment 
could feel like. Below are pictures of the magnets inside the cardboard mockups and the TYLES 
system with both a mockup of the smartphone adapter and a charging shelf. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 97: Magnets inside the 
cardboard adapter 
Figure 98: Magnets inside the 
adapter tile 
Figure 99: Mockup of the TYLES system with magnetically 
attached objects 
==PAGE:177==
 
 
171
TESTING USE SITUATIONS 
One of the things you can do with physical models is to test some of the use situations instead of 
only be relying on sketches. Therefore, I imitated using the product in order to show learn how the 
TYLES concept might be used in a real-life context. Different use situationS can be seen below and 
in bigger format in Appendix A4. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 100: Use situations with mockup 
==PAGE:178==
 
 
172
CREATING A FUNCTIONAL MOCKUP 
After working with cardboards and sticky tack I wanted to build a working prototype model in order 
to test the functionality of the wireless transmission of electricity and the attachment of the USB 
and pin connectors. As the model was not fully functional I will still refer to the model as a mockup.  
As I am no electronic engineer my approach was to tear electronics apart in order to see how things 
worked and to use already fabricated and functioning components. Below are pictures of some of 
the things I tore apart for technical exploration. 
 
 
Figure 101: Electronics torn apart 
==PAGE:179==
 
 
173
Due to the size of the components I had to model the tile from their dimensions and the tile got the 
dimensions of the bigger tile mockup from previous section: 278 mm x 240 mm x 20 mm.  
The tile frame and smartphone adapter were made by laser cutting plywood and acrylic plastic at 
DTU Skylab and glued together at my parent’s house in some of the rare summer days in Denmark. 
Below are pictures of the mock up. 
 
 
 
Figure 102: Mockup of adapter tile and TYLES smartphone adapter 
==PAGE:180==
 
 
174
Inside the mockup were the following electronic organs: 
• A small mobile power bank 
• Magnets to attach smartphone adapter to adapter tile 
• Qi Wireless transmitter 
• Qi Wireless receiver 
• Lightning extender cable 
• Gaffa tape 
• USB outlet dummy 
• Pin outlet dummy 
• USB to Micro USB cable 
 
In the end, it was possible to charge a smartphone by attaching the smartphone adapter 
magnetically to the tile enabling a precise positioning between the wireless transmitter and 
receiver. 
 
Figure 103: Smartphone charging by using functioning mockup 
==PAGE:181==
 
 
175
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 
After choosing TYLES as the final concept in Chapter 5, Chapter 6 explained the process of maturing 
the TYLES concept by changing the shapes from octagons to hexagons resulting in conceptual 
changes in the original concept. TYLES is now a concept consisting of three key tiles; a mobile 
adapter tile, a permanently placed main tile and a support tile. 
After explaining the conceptual changes the concept was embodied by applying Domain Theory and 
describing the activities and organs in the concept. This led to the creation of different mockups to 
give some insights on physical appearance – and functional aspects. My creating a cardboard 
physical appearance model the structure and size was explored and a functioning mockup of the 
wireless transmission showed that this was possible. This leads to the next chapter, where the 
concept will be further evaluated and validated among other things by looking back on the Design 
Specification to see if how well the TYLES concept fulfills the design objectives.   
==PAGE:182==
 
 
176
 
 
==PAGE:183==
 
 
177
After having specified the organs and activities in the concept and build some mockups to explore and test some of the functionalities, this 
chapter will include the final validation of the concept. By looking back on the design specification, the concept will be evaluated on the 
basis some of the important design objectives. The concept’s technical feasibility will shortly be elaborated including the battery and 
wireless power transfer. To evaluate the process of creating a design solution for the goal formulation the conceptual vulnerability will be 
assessed and in the end a future design iteration will be sketched and future technology aspects will be presented. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 103: The process of validating the concept highlighted in overall design process  
 
==PAGE:184==
 
 
178
TABLE OF CONTENT 
 
EVALUATING THE CONCEPT 
 
TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY 
 
CONCEPTUAL VULNERABILITY 
 
EVALUATING THE DESIGN PROCESS 
 
INTRACTABLE PROBLEMS IN THE CONCEPT 
CONCEPTUAL WEAKNESSES 
 
FURTHER DEVELOPMENT 
 
USER FEEDBACK  
 
TECHNICAL EXPLORATION AND PROTOTYPING 
 
FURTHER DETAILING 
 
FUTURE DESIGN ASPECTS 
 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 
 
==PAGE:185==
 
 
179
EVALUATING THE CONCEPT 
 
In the exploration activity insights were made on the users and their needs in a power transfer 
system. Furthermore, contextual aspects were explored, which together with the user insights led 
to the creation of a comprehensive design specification. This section will discuss the concept with 
relation to three of the main objectives from the design specification: Accessibility, looks/interior 
integration and customization.  
 
ACCESSIBILITY  
The main objective for this project was to make power accessible for the user. The TYLES concept 
fulfills several of the objectives in the design specifications related to accessibility, which can be 
seen on the next page. In general, the objective of making power accessible is very fulfilled as the 
mobility in the adapter tiles makes it possible for the users to bring power wherever they need it in 
the home. By placing them on the wall they are easier for the users to reach and if the user finds 
other places where they find a new need for power they can attach a support tile on the wall with 
an adapter tile. The only thing is that they need to exchange it when the battery runs out. 
 
==PAGE:186==
 
 
180
 
 
Figure 104: Accessibility design objective versus concept solution 
 
==PAGE:187==
 
 
181
LOOKS AND INTERIOR INTEGRATION 
Through surveys and interviews with the target users it was obvious that they did not like the looks 
of current power transfer systems. A way to solve this would be to integrate the power transfer 
system in the interior as a kind of design object. The looks therefore go hand in hand with the 
potential of fitting with the interior style. Below are two of the objectives and the conceptual 
solutions for them. 
 
 
 
Figure 105: Interior integration design objective versus concept solution 
 
==PAGE:188==
 
 
182
As seen on the left side of Figure 105, the slim hexagon-shaped tiles fit with the Nordic, minimalistic 
interior style and as the tiles can be bought in different colors and material this makes it possible to 
fit into any room in the home.  
 
To make an overall evaluation of the concept it could also be discussed how well the design solution 
solves the goal formulation, which was, in Chapter 3, defined as: 
 
“Design a power transfer system that can be an integrated part of the home interior 
design in order to make electricity more accessible for users in home environments.” 
 
The TYLES concept is a correspondent solution to this goal formulation as it transfers power 
through the adapter tile’s outlets, it is an integrated part of the home interior design as a wall art 
piece, where interior objects like lamps can be attached magnetically and it is very much more 
accessible than current power transfer systems.  
 
 
==PAGE:189==
 
 
183
TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY 
 
As previously mentioned, the design of electronic components does not lie within the scope of this 
project. However, the technical feasibility can be somewhat covered by looking at current solutions. 
 
BATTERY SIZE 
One of the big questions is the battery time of the adapter tile and how this relates to the 
dimensions of the battery. To give an idea of the feasibility of this I took out an old battery from my 
MacBook to see how the size would fit with the tile. Below, in Figure 106, it can be seen that the 
MacBook battery actually fits into the bigger size dimensions from the mockup. This means that it 
is possible to include a battery that can charge one whole MacBook. Further exploration has to be 
done within this area of course, but this gives us a validation that it should be possible. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 106: MacBook battery within 
the tile dimensions 
==PAGE:190==
 
 
184
WIRELESS POWER TRANSFER 
In the previous chapter, a mockup was made where it was possible to charge a smartphone by using 
a TYLES smartphone adapter and from the tile. This validates that the functionality works. However, 
there is a need to find out how efficiently it works in order to conceptualize further with the 
accessory objects like lamps and wireless charging shelves. 
 
==PAGE:191==
 
 
185
CONCEPTUAL VULNERABILITY 
 
Conceptual vulnerability is something Stuart Pugh (1996) also describes as conceptual weakness. 
There is always a risk of choosing the wrong concept, which makes the concept conceptually 
vulnerable.  
Pugh (1996) describes two ways where conceptual weakness manifests itself, which Hales & Gooch 
(2001) interpret as either (1) choosing the wrong concept where no amount of detail design will 
save it or (2) choosing a concept that seems excellent, but is conceptually weak due to a small 
intractable problem. These two types of conceptual vulnerability will be investigated and 
evaluated in the TYLES concept through the two sections in this chapter. 
 
EVALUATING THE DESIGN PROCESS 
This section will evaluate the first vulnerability aspect by reflecting on the design process where the 
focus will be on the evaluation approach. To get a clear overview of the methods used a graphic is 
shown on the next page. Methods and approaches like the Weighted Objective Method and the 
creation of Design Specification are highlighted in Figure 107 as being important ways to minimize 
the conceptual vulnerability in the concept. Especially the Weighted Objective Method is an 
important evaluation method that is very similar to the procedure that Pugh (1996) provide in 
“Creating Innovative Products Using Total Design”. He argues that using a procedure like that 
minimizes conceptual vulnerability, which therefore means that the vulnerability in the chosen 
concept for this project should be minimal or at least limited by using the Weighted Objective 
Method.  
Leading to the evaluation methods was a thorough exploration phase, which included interviews, 
the creation of Personas and a Design Specification and a Concept Synthesis activity where different 
creative and structural ideation methods were used to increase the number and originality of ideas. 
By having a strong foundation like this further minimizes the vulnerability in the concept. 
==PAGE:192==
 
 
186
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 107: Important methods and approaches for 
minimizing conceptual vulnerability highlighted in red 
==PAGE:193==
 
 
187
INTRACTABLE PROBLEMS IN THE CONCEPT 
This section will evaluate the second vulnerability aspect concerning possible intractable problems 
the TYLES concept might have.  
Due to the lack of knowledge within the electro-technical field, different design aspects have been 
blackboxed – meaning that they will be taken up again at a later point. This however require that 
the aspects are not unrealistic. In this case the electronic components have been blackboxed. By 
looking at already existing electronic products and exploring what is inside the different electronics 
the blackboxing can be defended – especially after doing a fast mockup in Chapter 6. If someone 
with almost no electro-technical experience can do a working mockup like the one in Chapter 6 it 
should be possible to design an even better solution. 
The conceptual vulnerability within the concept itself should therefore be minimal as well as the 
technical solution space has already been explored a bit. However further technical exploration will 
need to be done in order to ensure, that no tractable problems will occur.  
 
CONCEPTUAL WEAKNESSES 
At this point in the process there is still a need for further design iterations where user feedback 
should be included in order to identify the specific weaknesses in the concept. One of the aspects 
that could be a weakness is the size of the product, which is much bigger that traditional outlets. 
However, the users would need to evaluate this as they in the quantitative questionnaire agreed 
that if the concept was good, they might compromise with the size.  
The users also strongly agreed on disliking cords. The current concept still has one cord that needs 
to be connected to a main tile and the TYLES smartphone adapter also includes a cord. This could 
be a weakness in the concept and the smartphone adapter might have to be redesigned or 
reconsidered.  
The biggest conceptual weakness at this point, is not knowing exactly how much power the adapter 
tile can carry. This has a lot to say as the usability of the TYLES concept depends on this. This aspect 
should be prioritized in later design iterations.  
==PAGE:194==
 
 
188
 
FURTHER DEVELOPMENT 
 
In “Conceptual Design”, Andreasen et al. (2015) explain the iterative nature of the design process. 
The solution is iteratively refined and all the design activities needs to feed on each other. In this 
Master’s Thesis one iteration has been ran through with information floating between the design 
activities. This section will draw up a new design iteration and which aspects could be prioritized 
in this.  
 
USER FEEDBACK 
One of the important aspects that needs to be prioritized in the next iteration is the involvement of 
users. If more time was given, this would have been included in this report.  
A way to get feedback would be by conducting a survey with some of the same respondents from 
the surveys in the exploration phase. These are already engaged with the problem and would be 
interested in giving their opinion on the concept.  
Semi-structured interviews could be made with the Joel and Linn who are within the segmented 
target users and therefore the users the concept is designed to. This would give important insights 
that cannot be given without involving users.  
 
TECHNICAL EXPLORATION AND PROTOTYPING 
In order to explore the electro-technical elements, experts could be contacted in order to verify 
different technical aspects and to give an indication of the solution space when a technical boundary 
is included.  
One of the concrete aspects would be the connection of the tiles and how the power is concretely 
transferred from one tile to another. A way to support this exploration process would be to make 
Figure 108: What does 
the users think of the 
concept? 
==PAGE:195==
 
 
189
functional prototypes and test the efficiency in the connection by using electro-technical equipment 
like electrometers.  
More prototyping could also be done regarding the accessory tiles. It would be interesting to see if 
a lamp or a charging shelf could be prototyped and verify the functionality in this.  
 
FURTHER DETAILING 
At this point, there are still a lot of conceptual aspects that have not been fully defined. Some of 
these are listed below: 
• The connectors on the side that connects the tiles (Figure 109) 
• Choice of material and color 
• The integrated USB-C charger 
• Outlet for overheating 
• Push/hide mechanism on the adapter tile (Figure 110) 
These aspects would be refined simultaneously with the technical exploration and user feedback. 
 
FUTURE DESIGN ASPECTS 
During the end of the project I recognized that there are other electronic products that gave me 
some of the same frustrations as current power transfer systems does. For example, an internet 
router is something everybody have to own in order to have a WiFi connection, but they are typically 
not very nice-looking and involve a lot of cords and useless outlets. One future design aspect could 
be to explore which other electronic products could be integrated in the TYLES concept. Maybe a 
router could be integrated in the main tile where there is a lot of space inside. Then the router would 
always be hidden and create a wireless connection from the main tile.  
Another thing is the TV antenna cord. Could one of the main tile include a wireless TV transmitter? 
And lastly there are still technological aspects like Bluetooth and NFC, which have not been explored 
in the Concept Synthesis. It would be interesting to see, which ideas would be created by including 
these more in the ideation process.   
Figure 109: Connectors on 
the side 
Figure 110: Push/hide 
mechanism 
==PAGE:196==
 
 
190
CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 
By looking back on the design specification, this chapter showed that the TYLES concept fulfills the 
main design objectives created on the basis of the findings from the exploration phase. The 
conceptual vulnerability has also been assessed and should be minimal due to the use of important 
methods like the Weighted Objective Method, that is similar to Pugh’s procedure for minimizing 
conceptual vulnerability. In the end, further development aspects as well as future design aspects 
were presented in order to draw up the next design iteration, which as one of the important points, 
should include user involvement and technical exploration. 
==PAGE:197==
 
 
191
 
 
==PAGE:198==
 
 
192
This chapter is the final chapter in the report and will give a conclusion on the project along reflections on the process, the completion of 
the learning objectives, some of the challenges in the project work. Furthermore, the concept will be fully presented to close the design 
process. 
 
 
==PAGE:199==
 
 
193
TABLE OF CONTENT 
 
VISUAL PRESENTATION OF THE FINAL CONCEPT 
 
REFLECTIONS ON THE LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 
REFLECTING ON THE PROJECT WORK 
 
TIME ALLOCATION 
 
DOUBLE EXPLORATION 
 
METHODS USED 
 
THINGS THAT WAS NOT INCLUDED IN THE REPORT 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
 
==PAGE:200==
 
 
194
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:201==
 
 
195
 
 
==PAGE:202==
 
 
196
 
 
==PAGE:203==
 
 
197
 
 
==PAGE:204==
 
 
198
 
 
==PAGE:205==
 
 
199
REFLECTIONS ON THE LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 
This section will reflect on how the work in this project has corresponded with the learning 
objectives for the Master’s Thesis. The learning objectives will be reflected upon individually from 
1-11.  
 
OBJECTIVE 1: Engage with users and relevant actors to collect data on needs and 
context 
 
Users were engaged through a qualitative and quantitative online survey and five semi-structured 
qualitative interviews. An interview with Erik Bjerre from Den Gamle By was made as well to clarify 
the design history for power transfer systems in Denmark.  
 
OBJECTIVE 2: Find, analyse and reflect on relevant literature. 
 
A selection of relevant design literature that was used and reflected on during the project:  
• ’Conceptual Design’ (Andreasen et al. 2015) 
• ‘Engineering Design Methods’ (Nigel Cross 2008) 
• ’Creating Innovative Products Using Total Design’ (Stuart Pugh 1996) 
• ‘Product Design: Fundamentals and Methods’ (Roozenburg & Eekels 1995) 
• ‘Delft Design Guide’ (Boeijen et al. 2016) 
 
Examples: 
• This quote argues that you do not need methods or tools, but great ideas can come from 
intuition, creativity and expertise. (Boeijen et al. 2016) It also supports Andreasen et al. 
==PAGE:206==
 
 
200
(2015) when they define the ideation process as extremely open, where no approach is 
incorrect.  
 
• One of the methods I used was the Synectics method which allows you to think in analogies. 
(Cross 2008) The method can be done both individually or in groups (Boeijen et al. 2016) and 
in my case, it was an individual process where especially personal – and symbolic analogies 
inspired for new ideas.  
 
 
OBJECTIVE 3: Analyse available technology and existing solutions on the market. 
 
This was done in ‘POWER TRANSFER TECHNOLOGIES’ and ‘MARKET RESEARCH – LK’S MONOPOLY IN 
DENMARK’ in Chapter 2.  
 
OBJECTIVE 4: Identify needs and contexts on the basis of data collection and research 
and outline a number of design paradoxes. 
 
Based on analysing data from the quantitative online survey a target group was segmented and their 
needs in a new design was interpreted from the data. A main design paradox was identified, which 
led to the goal formulation in Chapter 3. Other identified design paradoxes can be found in Appendix 
A6. 
Contextual aspects were found through research within legislative, design historical – and 
technological areas.  
 
OBJECTIVE 5: Define goal formulation and product specifications on the basis of need 
interpretation and research. 
==PAGE:207==
 
 
201
 
This was done in the end of Chapter 3 and in the beginning of Chapter 4. 
 
OBJECTIVE 6: Create innovative ideas through creative, systematic  
– and visual thinking. 
 
Sketches and drawings were a way to self-communicate throughout the whole project and by using 
creative methods like Brainstorming and systematic methods like Morphological Chart ideas were 
created. It can be argued how innovative the ideas are. By evaluating the ideas by using the C-Box 
Method 10 ideas were categorized as both innovative and feasible.     
 
OBJECTIVE 7: Evaluate and choose 3-5 ideas by using relevant design methods and 
including relevant users and design experts. 
 
The categories in the Harris Profile was chosen from the design specification, which was created 
from involving users. Design experts were not included for this, but will be included in the next 
design iteration. Besides the Harris Profile, the vALUe Method and Weighted Objective Method was 
used. 
 
 
OBJECTIVE 8: Define and communicate a final concept using Domain Theory. 
 
The final concept TYLES was described using the activity – and organ domain. 
 
OBJECTIVE 9: Evaluate and review the main concepts by involving relevant users and 
design experts.  
==PAGE:208==
 
 
202
The concepts were reviewed and evaluated by using the Weighted Objective Method. Design 
experts, in this case my working group who include two other design master students, were used in 
the early creation of ideas and the concepts were discussed with them during the project. It was 
however not achieved to involve the users in this process within the given timeframe. 
 
OBJECTIVE 10: Prepare a basis for concept selection taking into account vulnerability, 
realise ability, and other relevant criteria. 
 
The vALUe Method ensured considerations about advantages, limitations and unique elements in 
the concepts. This prepared a basis for concept selection – in this case the selection of solution 
space. 
 
OBJECTIVE 11: Dynamic adjust the staging in relation to current project status and 
obtained results. 
 
In the early stages of exploration, the work was mainly done at home or at DTU due to the amount 
of reading, which was preferred to do solitarily. Post-it’s and a notebook was used in this phase to 
ensure emerging idea elements were captured.  
In the concept synthesis, a mini brainstorming workshop was made. To stage this activity a 
whiteboard was used along with post-it’s, paper and pencils. Later in Chapter 6 DTU Skylab was 
used to make mockups and materials like cardboards and sticky tack was used to make 
appearance models.  
 
==PAGE:209==
 
 
203
 
REFLECTING ON THE PROJECT WORK 
 
In this section, reflection will be made on the process from my perspective. This will be reflections 
concerning the exploration phase and a revision of the project plan, which was made in before the 
project.  
 
TIME ALLOCATION 
During the project, I had to postpone both of the milestone reports. Due to my work as leadsinger 
in a Copenhagen band I had many concerts during the Master’s Thesis and the first milestone 
coincided with an EP release concert. As doing a Master’s Thesis is a fulltime job, the postponing 
of the milestone was an indication of exactly this.  
The second milestone was postponed as well. This was however only two days and the reasoning 
behind this was that I wanted to be able to finish a section I was not done with at that point. This 
section was important to include in order to get feedback on some theoretical aspects.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:210==
 
 
204
DOUBLE EXPLORATION 
One of the things that the project suffered from was the long exploration phase. After the first 
milestone, I realized that the exploration work had been done with no real sense of the scope. I 
did not have any specific users in mind, which is very important in order to create and evaluate 
good products. This meant that my whole project plan was pushed together as I had to go through 
a new exploration iteration to define the project before I could start with the Concept Synthesis. In 
Figure 111, it can be seen how the time for Concept Synthesis and Product Synthesis were reduced 
as a result of longer Exploration Activity.  
 
 
 
Figure 111: Initial project plan over activities where the purple boxes mark the final result. (Appendix 
A1a) 
 
 
==PAGE:211==
 
 
205
METHODS USED 
Before the project I included all the different methods available for the project in the Gannt Chart, 
which can be seen below in Figure 112. 
 
 
 
Figure 112: Used methods in green, not used in red and partly used in yellow. The purple boxes are 
elements, that were added during the project. (Appendix A1b) 
 
20 of the 36 different methods were used through the project such as the Collage, which in the 
report was referred to as Moodboard. Some methods were also used together such as the 
Mindmap and SCAMPER and of the most important was the use of Persona and Weighted 
==PAGE:212==
 
 
206
Objective Method. There were also methods like Synectics, Domain Theory and Design 
Specification that were not included in the initial project plan. These are marked with purple. 
The red boxes mark the methods that were not used in the project. Due to the double exploration 
phase, there was not the same amount of time as predicted and methods like the Actor Network 
and Workshop was not used. These two methods would however have benefitted the project. 
They could however be a part of a new design iteration; The Actor Network would reveal how 
different actors in the actor world would have influence in the end product and its lifecycle and a 
workshop could be made with the users in order to get feedback on the final concept. 
Even though an Affinity Diagram was made, it was not included in the report. This was due to the 
confusing start where it was created and a decision was made to exclude it in order to make the 
overall process more transparent. A picture of the process of creating the Affinity Diagram can be 
found in Appendix A5. 
 
THINGS THAT WAS NOT INCLUDED IN THE REPORT 
In the beginning of the process I went to Radius and did a group interview with 5 workers from 
Radius. This was to get early validation on what was possible and what was not. The conclusion 
was, that anything was possible, it was more a question of dimensioning. Notes from the interview 
can be found in Appendix E7 
During the Concept Synthesis, I had a small meeting with Thomas Meier Sørensen, project officer 
at DTU’s Electro-Technical Institute, who validated my ideas of having squares that could be 
structured as one electrical grid. This therefore also creates an argument for the technical 
feasibility in the final concept TYLES. However, this meeting was poorly documented and the few 
notes, that were taken were lost. Therefore, it could not be included in the report. 
 
 
==PAGE:213==
 
 
207
CONCLUSION 
 
Over the course of this project, a power transfer system concept has been developed on the basis of a design process framed by the 
Encapsulation Design Model.  
This included the two activities of Exploration and Concept Synthesis and elements from Product Synthesis like Domain Theory. The 
objective for the project was to design of a product system, that makes power supply more accessible – a broad objective that eventually 
was rephrased to a more specific goal formulation of designing a power transfer system that can be an integrated part of the home interior 
design in order to make electricity more accessible for users in home environments. 
The goal formulation was defined after a divergent and a convergent exploration activity that expanded the problem space to identify a 
more specific problem space with a target user group and a Design Specification to set the boundaries for the Concept Synthesis. 
In the divergent part of the Concept Synthesis methods like Brainstorming and Synectics was used to encourage creative thinking. This led 
to the creation of 74 idea elements, which was evaluated by using the C-Box method in the end resulting in 5 solution spaces. These were 
further evaluated by using the vALUe Method and Harris profile resulting in a decision to choose the solution space about Mobile Modular 
Battery Systems. In the convergent phase of the Concept Synthesis the method Morphological Chart was used to enable systematic thinking 
and by combining old idea elements with the ideas from the Morphological Chart, three concepts were presented by describing the Idea 
With and Idea In and the Difference that Matters in the concepts. The concepts were then evaluated by using the Weighted Objective 
Method based on six of the important objectives from the design specification. This combined with intuition led to the choice of the final 
concept – the TYLES concept, that is a modular battery system consisting on minimalistic hexagon-shaped tiles, that are placed on the wall 
when they need to charge.  
The TYLES concept was further detailed by using the concepts of the activity – and organ domains and early mockups were made to test 
functionality and to test the structure in real life. 
Holding the TYLES concept up against the project statement and design specification the concept corresponds with the objectives. By 
having a design strategy from the beginning and including methods for creating and evaluating ideas and concepts along the way, the 
vulnerability of the concept should also be minimal. The concept will however need to be further conceptualized in future design iterations 
and user involvement should be highly prioritised in order to stay on the right conceptualization path. 
 
 
==PAGE:214==
 
 
208
REFERENCE LIST: 
 
Andreasen, M.M., Hansen, C.T. & Cash, P. (2015): ‘Conceptual design: Interpretations, 
Mindset and Models’ 
 
Cross, N. (2008): ‘Engineering Design Methods: Strategies for Product Design’ 
 
Design Council (2005): ’A Study of the Design Process’, Design Council, 44(0), pp.1–144. 
 
Ulrich, K.T. & Eppinger, S.D. (2012): ‘Product Design and Development’ 
 
Pugh, S. (1996) ‘Creating Innovative Products Using Total Design’ 
 
Van Boeijen, A. G. C., Daalhuizen J. J., M. Zijlstra J. J. and van der Schoor R. S. A. (2016): ‘Delft Design Guide’, Amsterdam: BIS Publishers 
 
Roozenburg N. F. M. & Eekels J. (1995): ‘Product Design: Fundamentals and Methods’ 
 
Kvale S. & Brinkmann S. (2009): ’Interview: Introduktion til et håndværk’, Hans Reitzels Forlag. 1. udgave, 1. oplag 
 
Dorst K. (2006): ‘Design Problems and Design Paradoxes’, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Design Issues: Volume 22, Number 3 
Summer 2006 
 
Koen P. A. (2004): ‘The fuzzy front end for incremental, platform, and breakthrough products’, In: 
PDMA Handbook of New Product Development, 2nd edn, pp 81–91 
 
Casazza J.  & Delea F. (2003): ‘Understanding Electric Power Systems’, IEEE Press 
 
==PAGE:215==
 
 
209
Sethi A. K. (2016): ‘The European Edisons’. Chapter 2: Nicola (Nicolae) Tesla  
 
Lauritsen F. L. (2016): ‘Grundlæggende elektroteknik’, Praxis – Nyt Teknisk Forlag, 1. udgave 
 
Valgeirsdóttir, D. (2017): DTU course 42081: ‘Staging Co-Creation’ 
 
Crispin Hales & Shayne Gooch, 2001: “Managing Engineering Design: Edition 2” 
 
WEB REFERENCE LIST 
 
Web 1: https://www.androidauthority.com/wireless-charging-qi-pad-technology-580015/  (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 2: https://www.powermat.com/news/press-releases/new-charging-spot-4-0-smartinductive/  (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 3: http://witricity.com/company/our-story/   (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 4: https://www.theregister.co.uk/2017/07/12/dell_latitude_7285_wireless_charging_two_in_one_pc/   (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 5: https://www.laptopmag.com/articles/best-usb-type-c-accessories-cables   (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 6: https://www.digitaltrends.com/mobile/best-usb-type-c-cables/   (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 7: https://www.androidauthority.com/best-usb-type-c-cables-682801/   (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 8: https://www.wired.com/2016/11/first-dongle-new-macbook-needs/  (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 9: https://www.elviden.dk/stikkontakter-monteringsvejledning.html   (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 10: https://ing.dk/artikel/nye-danske-saerregler-spaerrer-billige-stikkontakter-102568  (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 11: https://www.business.dk/evb-archive/ingen-konkurrence-paa-stikkontakter   (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 12: https://www.business.dk/diverse/kortslutning-af-lauritz-knudsen-monopol   (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 13: https://www.sik.dk/Global/Publikationer/Artikler/OEvrige-artikler/2011/Schuko-myter-og-fakta   (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 14: http://blog.elvvs.dk/lk-fuga-danmarks-mest-populaere-stikkontakt  (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 15: http://www.lemu.dk/da/schneider-electric/lk%20fuga/fuga   (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 16: https://www.billigvvs.dk/El-artikler-Fuga.html   (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 17: https://www.dst.dk/Site/Dst/Udgivelser/GetPubFile.aspx?id=20738&sid=itbef2016   (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
==PAGE:216==
 
 
210
Web 18: http://boligmagasinet.dk/indretning/12-mader-at-fa-den-nordiske-stil-ind-i-hjemmet   (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 19: https://www.alt.dk/artikler/sadan-indretter-du-et-hjem-i-nordisk-stil   (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 20: https://www.iboligen.dk/boligmagasin/100178/mikkel-dahlstroem-gennemfoert-maskulin-og-nordisk-stil-paa-63-m2   (Last 
visited: 21.06.2018) 
Web 21: Sikkerhedsstyrelsen: www.sik.dk  (Last visited: 21.06.2018) 
 
FIGURE LIST 
 
Figure 1: Project plan in the form of a Gantt Chart 
Figure 2: Encapsulation Design Model (Hansen et al. 2015) 
Figure 3: Overall design process model 
Figure 4: Missing aspects when working solitarily 
Figure 5: Work group at KUB Nord Library in Copenhagen 
Figure 6: Using apartment wall to post-its 
Figure 7: Laser-cutting at Skylab for mockup 
Figure 8: Power transfer system definitions 
Figure 9: Divergent exploration phase highlighted in overall design process 
Figure 10: Exploration Model 
Figure 11: Searching for ‘Power plug innovation’ on Google (19.05.2018) 
Figure 12: Hubbell Separable Plug 
Figure 13: Frederick A. Chapman plug 
Figure 14: Picture of Erik Bjerre Fisker at Den Gamle By in Aarhus 
Figure 15: LK brass outlet and switch, dated 1911 
Figure 16: Minitangent model from LK 
Figure 17: (Left) Plantangent in grey, orange and olive-green and (right) Different color tangents. 
==PAGE:217==
 
 
211
Figure 18: Difference between NES and LK switches. The left side shows NES’ push-switches and to the right are LK’s turn-switches 
Charging Spot 4.0 (Powermat) 
Figure 19: Charging Spot 4.0 Powermat 
Figure 20: Dell Latitude 7285 Wireless Charging Keyboard and Wireless Charging Mat 
 
Figure 21: MacBook Pro with USB-charging (www.appleinsider.com) 
Figure 23: Existing solutions on the Danish market 
Figure 24: My bed pushed away from the wall showing an outlet that cannot be used. 
Figure 25: Pictures of problematic situations. More observations in Appendix B 
Figure 26: Power outlet (Bauhaus) 
Figure 27: Power socket from ‘jem & fix’  
Figure 28: Pictures of interview persons 
Figure 29: Andersen & Maillard coffee shop 
Figure 30: Marienlyst Strandhotel 
Figure 31: Parents house 
Figure 32: Kitchen sink at home 
Figure 33: Cords on the shelf 
Figure 34: Outlets at the DTU Library 
Figure 35: Left: Outlets from the ceiling at DTU Library. Right: Reading room at the library ‘KUB 
Nord’ in Copenhagen 
Figure 36: Table of energy usage from home electronics 
Figure 37: Graphic over how mobile different home electronics are. 
Figure 38: Electronic products in interior 
Figur 40: Home contexts 
Figure 41: How highly the respondents value interior design in their homes. 
Figure 42: How highly the respondents value wood in interior design. 
==PAGE:218==
 
 
212
FIGURE 43: Joel’s DIY sofa system 
FIGURE 44: Linn’s DIY dinning table 
FIGURE 45: HAY tray table 
FIGURE 46: Anglepoise lamp 
FIGURE 47: KitchenAid 
FIGURE 48: Samsung Serif TV 
Figure 49: Moodboard visualizing Nordic and Scandinavian interior style. 
Figure 50: Examples of requirements and objective from the design specification 
Figure 51: Diverging concept synthesis and idea generation highlighted in overall design process model 
Figure 52: Captured ideas from the exploration activity. From left: Modularity Idea (See Appendix C43), Triangle On/Off Function Idea (See Appendix 
C66) and Mobile Battery Idea (See Appendix C73) 
Figure 53: Left: Pictures from the ‘How-To’s’ exercise. 
Figure 54: Pictures from Brainstorming session Brainstorming activity (to the right), a sample of the generated ideas (top left) and the 
activity of explaining and discussing the ideas generated (bottom left). 
Figure 55: Mind Map visualizing personal analogies 
Figure 56: Examples of proud designs. From the left: Idea 51 (Appendix C51) and Idea 57 (Appendix 
C57) 
Figure 57: Taking electrical symbols literal in the ideation process 
Figure 58: Symbolic analogies 
Figure 59: Ideas from SCAMPER. To the left: multilamp, to the right: laptop stand functionality 
Figure 60: Inspirational Moodboard 
Figure 61: The funnel or death curve of conceptualization (Andreasen et al. 2015) 
Figure 62: C-Box Method 
==PAGE:219==
 
 
213
Figure 63: To the left: Example on deleted idea, to the right: Example on future idea element 
Figure 64: Choosing most potential solution space 
Figure 65: Divergent exploration phase highlighted in overall design process 
Figure 66: Left: Morphological Chart on the wall. Right: Dice used for picking elements 
Figure 67: From left: Combination 1, combination 2 and combination 3. 
Figure 68: Concept ideas from Morphological Chart session 
Figure 69: Foundation of the Delta Bricks concept 
Figure 70: Visual presentation of Delta Bricks concept 
Figure 71: Foundation of Tyles concept 
Figure 72: Visual presentation of TYLES concept 
Figure 73: Foundation of THE KITE concept 
Figure 74: Visual presentation of THE KITE concept 
Figure 75: Ranking the objectives 
Figure 76: Weighing of objectives 
Figure 77: Results of the Weighted Objective Method with the TYLES concept as the one with most value 
Figure 78: The process of embodying the concept highlighted in overall design process 
Figure 79: Hexagon shapes in interior 
igure 80: Advantages by using hexagon shapes instead of octagon shapes 
Figure 81: New TYLES concept 
Figure 82: Visual presentation of the concept behind the adapter tile 
Figur 83: Visual presentation of the main tile 
==PAGE:220==
 
 
214
Figure 84: Flow of electrical current in the tile structure 
Figure 85: Visual presentation of support tile 
Figure 86: Visual presentation of magnetic accessory objects like lamps, loudspeakers and 
smartphone wireless charger shelves. 
Figure 87: Use scenarios for smartphones and tablets 
Figure 88: Use scenarios for laptops 
Figure 89: Activity/Sequence model of charging a smartphone/tablet 
Figure 90: Inside the adapter tile 
Figure 91: Inside the main tile 
Figure 92: Connector hiding organ 
Figure 93: Inside the TYLES smartphone adapter 
Figure 94: Small size tile 
Figure 95: Big size tile 
Figure 96: Testing out different structures and color combinations 
Figure 97: Magnets inside the cardboard adapter 
Figure 98: Magnets inside the adapter tile 
Figure 99: Mockup of the TYLES system with magnetically attached objects 
Figure 100: Use situations with mockup 
Figure 101: Electronics torn apart 
Figure 102: Mockup of adapter tile and TYLES smartphone adapter 
Figure 103: The process of validating the concept highlighted in overall design process  
 
Figure 104: Accessibility design objective versus concept solution 
==PAGE:221==
 
 
215
Figure 105: Interior integration design objective versus concept solution 
Figure 106: MacBook battery within the tile dimensions 
Figure 107: Important methods and approaches for minimizing conceptual vulnerability 
highlighted in red 
 
Figure 108: What does the users think of the concept? 
Figure 109: Connectors on the side 
Figure 110: Push/hide mechanism 
Figure 111: Initial project plan over activities with purple markings of the final result. 
 
