==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Numerical modelling of ribs in acoustic and
classical guitars
Jorge
Lazaro
Richards
Espinosa
(s161589)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Elektro
Department of Acoustic Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Akustikvej
Building 352
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This thesis project aims to describe the acoustic and structural effects that arise due
to the addition of ribs on classical guitar plates. Ribs are physical supports or bars
that are glued to the bottom part of the top plate of modern guitars; in order to
modify the vibration patters of plate and create a better sound. Guitar makers have
empirical rules for the creation and design of the ribbing patters, and some have be-
come standardized in the guitar building industry.
This project attempts to bring a modern approach into the problem by using sim-
ple constructions and numerical simulations to model the net effect of the addition
of ribs in the vibration rectangular plates.
A numerical simulation of plate vibrations requires a detail description of the elas-
tic properties of the material in order to be reliable. Guitars, and string instruments
in general, have been made out of wood for centuries. Wooden plates naturally have
fibers that go in a certain direction and the stiffness of the material changes accord-
ingly along or perpendicular to the fibers.
To properly model the vibration of the wooden plates, an orthotropic plate model
is used in which different modulus of elasticity can be specified for different orthogo-
nal directions, and in this way the properties of the plate vibration can be modeled
accurately.
The impulse and frequency response of rectangular box is evaluated with different
plates with different ribbing patterns by a simple impulse response measurement.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Engineering Acoustics at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Msc. degree
in Engineering Acoustics.
Kongens Lyngby, July 2, 2018
Jorge Lazaro Richards Espinosa (s161589)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the two Costa Rican luthiers, David Chavez and Guillermo
Porras, that took the time to arrange logistics across the world in order to have a
conversation on guitar ribs. DTU Skylab was also crucial in the construction of the
models that were employed.
Last but not least, to my three supervisors, Vicente, Peter, and particularly Jonas,
for having the patience of dealing with whom is probably the most unconventional of
engineering students.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Numerical models of ribbed plates used in acoustic and classical
guitars
1
1.1
Flexural vibration of a beam
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Orthotropic plate model, eigenmodes and frequency response of
ribbed plates
13
2.1
Numerical modeling of orthotropic parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Effects of ribbed plates in the frequency response of a rectangular
box
27
4
Conclusions, observations and future work
35
Bibliography
37
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Numerical models of
ribbed plates used in
acoustic and classical
guitars
Stringed instruments almost certainly predate recorded history. Anthropologists be-
lieve that the bow and arrow was perhaps the first machine made by early man and
stringed instruments followed shortly afterwards.[Mar09] In contrast with other string
instruments, however, the development of the guitar is quite recent. The first early
versions of guitars started appeared in the late Baroque period, roughly (1600-1750),
and the famous violin maker Antonio Stradivari is known to have made guitars. Fig-
ure 1.1 shows an early model of a guitar.
Though there were many guitar builders around Europe by the mid 19th century,
the one who is generally attributed the title as the father of the modern classical
guitar is Antonio Torres (1817-1982). His instruments incorporated incremental im-
provements over those of his predecessors and included design features that had been
introduced by other luthiers. Among the developments attributed to Torres, is the
so called fan bracing pattern that is now standard among classical guitars. After
Torres contributions, almost all modern guitars have some kind of rib pattern in the
top plate that varies in complexity depending on the luthier and the expectations
required from the instrument. As the instrument grew in popularity and famous mu-
sicians, such as Andres Segovia, began treating the guitar more seriously as a solo
concert instrument, luthiers started to experiment with the constructions in order
to produce higher quality instruments that could keep up with the demands of the
musicians. In contrast with other string instruments such as the violin, that were
evolved to their optimal structure quite a few centuries ago, the guitars have been in
constant evolution ever since they were introduced.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Numerical models of ribbed plates used in acoustic and classical guitars
Figure 1.1: Baroque guitar with 10 strings.[Mar09].
In the development of this project some interviews were made with luthiers, gui-
tar makers. Two Costa Rican luthiers, namely David Chavez and Guillermo Porras,
kindly accepted to have a conversation about the importance and function of the
guitar ribs and bracing patterns. Their description of the ribs is that they serve a
double function. First, the thin wooden plate needs to resist the tension of the strings,
which on average can range between 50kg and 70 kg depending on the type of string.
Without structural support, the top plate will break instantly when the strings are
tightened. At the same time, it was recognize by Torres in his design that the ribs also
modified the acoustic response of the instrument, allowing it to have more sustain
and balance between the low and high frequencies.
One interesting anecdote that came in this conversation goes as following. Mr.
Porras was telling the story on a construction he did on a Mexican guitar when he
was beginning his carrier. Mexican traditional guitars do not have ribs, but a stan-
dard group has many guitar-like instruments of different sizes. Each one will play
a specific range and are built for their specific purpose. Mr. Porras was building
a new guitar, but with his experience he built it on a simple way without any rib
==PAGE:13==
1 Numerical models of ribbed plates used in acoustic and classical guitars
3
bracing. The result was that the guitar had good basses, but as one started playing
higher in the register of the instruments in the first string, the higher notes did not
had any sustain and very poor volume. Also, within one month of usage, the top
plate of the guitar was completely deformed and leaving the guitar practically useless.
This simple experiential anecdote implies the complexity that modern guitars have
in order to fully radiate sound equally along all their range, as well as the structural
importance of the rib addition.
The other luthier, David Chavez, was kind enough to provide pictures of his top
plates with ribs before the construction of the guitar. Many such pictures can be
found online, but the following were provided by the luthier for this report. Figure
1.2 shows a top plate with the traditional Torres bracing. This is the model that is
standard and most commonly used among guitar makers.
Figure 1.2: Traditional Torres bracing.
Figure 1.3 shows another model, named the inverted fan model. Mr. Chavez has
been using this model in some of his guitars and he says that it has brought good
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Numerical models of ribbed plates used in acoustic and classical guitars
quality results. It can be seen that the design is similar but the ribs are angled in the
opposite direction.
Figure 1.3: Inverted fan bracing.
Figure 1.4 shows another inverted fan model. This one is more robust since it has
been specially designed for a steel string guitar, and the bracing needs to support the
extra tension provided by the metal strings.
Figure 1.5 shows a more modern bracing used in concert quality guitars. This ”re-
jilla” or grid design has a higher density of ribs and this allows to make the top plate
thinner, which is reflected as a higher volume according to Mr. Chavez. However he
specified that sometimes higher volume does not imply good sound quality.
==PAGE:15==
1 Numerical models of ribbed plates used in acoustic and classical guitars
5
Figure 1.4: Inverted robust model.
Figure 1.5: ”Rejilla” or grid model.
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Numerical models of ribbed plates used in acoustic and classical guitars
Essentially, a guitar is made of many wooden plates that are glued together in or-
der to form the top plate, back plate, and the resonance box. Of all the parts, the top
plate of the guitar is the most dominant acoustic part of the entire instrument. Gui-
tar makers have empirical and intuitive methods of selecting the wood that they are
going to use, yet they deeply understand than no piece of wood is alike and therefore
no plate will be the same regardless of being of the same wood type and sometimes
the same tree. Some guitar constructors take the effort of doing measurements similar
to the ones performed in the following sections in order to parameterize properties
of the wood they are using and optimize their design according to this information.
Most guitar builders, however, have to work with what they have available and rely
on intuition as to how to treat and select different types of wood for their construction.
The ribs or support bars are added to the top plate in order to modify its acoustic
properties and add resistance to the plate. As mentioned before, the top plate is un-
der tremendous stress due to the tension of the strings, and without the addition of
the ribs, the plate would deform rapidly leaving the instrument useless. The addition
of the ribs also modifies the frequency response of the plate allowing it to project
and sustain more higher frequencies. In this way, the ribs serve a double function of
giving structural resilience to the plate, at the same time as modifying the acoustic
response on higher frequencies. Depending on the details of the rib bracing as it
is called, the guitar can also be specifically made for right hand users or left hand
users, or for both. This was also commented in the interviews with the guitar makers.
In order to develop a numerical model that can be used to study and analyze the
effects of the ribs in a given plate, the intuition of the guitar makers needs to be trans-
lated into a more scientifically structured language that can be systematically used
to run measurements and simulations that can yield insight into the structural and
acoustic effects of the addition of the ribs. Deep studies have already been done in
this area in which the entire mechanics of the instrument was analyzed and modelled
in order to essentially generate a fully functional model [Bad05] in which the coupling
between all the parts is taken into consideration. Such deep studies are beyond the
scope of this report and the main focus will be on numerically and experimentally
setting up a system for verifying and observing how rib patterns affect the quality of
the vibration of plates, and for simplicity reasons rectangular plates.
In this sense, the first difficulty lies in the understanding that wood is not an
isotropic material. Wooden plates have different stiffness in different directions with
respect of the natural direction of the fibers. This is a fundamental property of the
material and in order to obtain a valid numerical model this needs to be taken into
account.
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Flexural vibration of a beam
7
1.1
Flexural vibration of a beam
In order to estimate the elastic properties of the material, first a frequency response
function needs to be defined in order to have a mathematical framework to do the
necessary calculation.
A simple method of measuring elastic properties of materials is through analyzing
the vibrations of small beams excited in the center. The location of the resonance
frequencies will allow the calculation of the Young’s modulus in each given case .
This relatively simple measurement provided values for the Young modulus along the
fibers and in the direction perpendicular to the fibers, by using two different set of
beams that were cut with the same dimensions but one with fibers along the length
of the beam and another set with the fibres running transversely to the length of the
beam. Figure 1.6 shows the sample beams that were used for the experiment.
Figure 1.6: Caption.
As expected these 2 values were significantly different by orders of magnitude and
this has a considerable effect in the description of the material and the numerical
model.
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Numerical models of ribbed plates used in acoustic and classical guitars
1.1.1
Input Mobility
Generally, the frequency response is generated by the ratio between two complex field
variables within the system. In this case, the input mobility for a beam is defined as:
Yo(ω) = v0eiωt
F0eiωt
(1.1)
and its is the ratio between the velocity and the driving force at the force input
[Ohl11].
For the measured resonance frequencies, the Young’s modulus of elasticity E is
determined by using the theoretical expressions for the natural frequencies of the
beam. For a flexural vibrating beam the resonance frequencies are given by :
fn = Cn
L2
√
B
m′ ,
n = 1, 2, 3...
(1.2)
where Cn are constants that depend upon de boundary conditions of the beam,
L is the length of the beam, B = EI its bending stiffness and m′ = ϱS its mass per
unit length, S being the cross section area.
Similarly, from the half-power-point bandwidth (3 db bandwidth) of each reso-
nance frequency one can determine the corresponding value of damping. In terms
of the damping loss factor ηn for the nth natural mode of vibration with a natural
frequency fn this gives:
ηn = fn,upper −fn,lower
fn
,
(1.3)
where the frequency difference fn,upper −fn,lower is the so-called 3db bandwidth.
Despite being the standard procedure to calculate the loss factors, they showed to
have no visible effect in the simulations, at least in the range of interest. Therefore
the loss factors are left out of the report.
1.1.2
Instrumentation and measurements
The vibratory velocity of the structure to be tested is measured with a small accelerom-
eter, which has an output signal proportional to the acceleration of the motion and
thus requires to be integrated in order to obtain the velocity. The accelerometer is
attached with bee-wax. Vibration is generated by an electrodynamic vibration ex-
citer (shaker) that is being fed by a white noise signal. The beam is balanced at
its center of mass as shown in figure 1.7 and the excitation force on the structure is
measured by a force transducer. The signals from the transducers are analyzed with
a dual-channel FFT frequency analyzer BK Pulse system type.
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Flexural vibration of a beam
9
Figure 1.7: Beam measurement experimental setup.
1.1.3
Measurement results
Figures 1.8 and 1.9 show the input mobility for the wooden beam with both fiber di-
rections. For the calculation of the Young’s modulus, measurements were performed
taking only the first two resonances into consideration.
Only the first two peaks are considered in the analysis since this mobility measure-
ment method is designed for isotropic materials. In the case of wood, the Young’s
moduli are frequency dependant and can be seen to change with each resonance fre-
quency.
==PAGE:20==
10
1 Numerical models of ribbed plates used in acoustic and classical guitars
Figure 1.8: Input mobility beam - Horizontal fibers.
Figure 1.9: Input mobility beam - Longitudinal fibers.
==PAGE:21==
1.1 Flexural vibration of a beam
11
By using the described method the Young’s moduli for the wooden beams were
calculated for each sample and the results are shown in Tables 1.1 and 1.2. Tables
1.4 and 1.3 show the first two resonances frequencies of the beams.
As expected
there are some variations between each sample, despite the fact of being from the
same material and even the same sheet of wood. This was to be expected and the
standard deviation normalized to the mean of the values is presented in table 1.5. It
is interesting to note that both resonances, in each direction, give the exact same
standard deviation. This implies some level of homogeneity in the material and may
be connected to the fact that all the samples where cut from a single sheet of wood.
Table 1.1: Young’s Modulus for beam samples - Horizontal fibers.
1st Resonance
2nd Resonance
H1
9.08255E+08
9.75298E+08
H2
9.06811E+08
9.73747E+08
H3
9.14031E+08
9.81500E+08
H4
9.18652E+08
9.86462E+08
H5
9.16630E+08
9.84291E+08
H6
9.30493E+08
9.99176E+08
H7
9.10566E+08
9.77779E+08
H8
9.16630E+08
9.84291E+08
H9
9.14031E+08
9.81500E+08
H10
9.18363E+08
9.86152E+08
Table 1.2: Young’s Modulus for beam samples - Longitudinal fibers.
1st Resonance
2nd Resonance
L1
1.49022E+10
1.29495E+10
L2
1.50225E+10
1.30541E+10
L3
1.51670E+10
1.31796E+10
L4
1.48299E+10
1.28867E+10
L5
1.50322E+10
1.30625E+10
L6
1.47577E+10
1.28240E+10
L7
1.50899E+10
1.31127E+10
L8
1.52248E+10
1.32298E+10
L9
1.49262E+10
1.29704E+10
L10
1.57400E+10
1.36775E+10
==PAGE:22==
12
1 Numerical models of ribbed plates used in acoustic and classical guitars
Table 1.3: Resonance frequencies of beams.
1st Resonance
2nd Resonance
H1
39.0625
218.75
H2
40.3125
220.625
H3
40.625
220.625
H4
37.5
212.1875
H5
40.625
219.0625
H6
41.5625
226.5625
H7
42.5
229.0625
H8
42.8125
232.8125
H9
43.125
232.34375
H10
41.5625
225.625
Table 1.4: Resonance frequencies of beam: Longitudinal fibers.
1st Resonance
2nd Resonance
L1
159.5
803.5
L2
158.5
797.5
L3
159.5
796
L4
158.5
780
L5
160
795.5
L6
158
805.5
L7
160.9375
810.3125
L8
159.375
795.3125
L9
162.1875
811.5625
L10
164.6875
843.4375
Table 1.5: Normalized standard deviation of Young’s Modulus.
Longitudinal fibers
Horizontal fibers
0.00730125
0.018377878
Table 1.6: Standard deviation of resonance frequencies [Hz].
Longitudinal fibers
Horizontal fibers
1st resonance
1.7458
2.0244
2nd resonance
6.6317
16.6153
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Orthotropic plate
model, eigenmodes
and frequency
response of ribbed
plates
Orthotropic materials are a special classification of anisotropic materials in which
the material presents different stiffness in the three orthogonal directions. Wood is
the classical example of a material that can be modeled by orthotropic parameters.
Orthotropic materials form an intuitive subset of all anisotropic materials, as they
generalize the familiar isotropic, and transversely isotropic, materials to materials
with three different stiffness values in some three orthogonal directions. Although
simpler than fully general anisotropic materials, orthotropic materials still require
tuning nine independent parameter values. In practice, this task is difficult due to
the large number of parameters and because many of the settings lead to unstable
simulations in a non-obvious way. The simulation stability was addressed by using a
proposed scheme [Bar15] that extends concepts from the isotropic materials to allocate
automatically the values for the different Poisson ratios and the shear modulus using
a variation of the isotropic formulas for plates in each orthogonal direction. By using
the measurements from the beams, a complete set of orthotropic parameters resulted
in consistent and stable results.
2.0.1
Setting the Orthotropic parameters
The general anisotropic material is described by a 6x6 elasticity tensor that is de-
scribed with detail in [Bar15]. This tensor needs to be symmetric and therefore it has
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Orthotropic plate model, eigenmodes and frequency response of ribbed plates
21 independent entries for a general anisotropic material. In a general anisotropic
material, both the normal are shear components of strain affect both the normal and
shear components of stress. In orthotropic materials, the normal and shear compo-
nents are decoupled. Normal stresses cause normal strains and shear stresses only
cause shear strains. Under these assumptions the elasticity tensor is reduced and
only has 9 free parameters. In order to keep the elasticity tensor symmetric, the
Poisson’s ratios have to satisfy:
νij
Ei
= νji
Ej
,
(2.1)
for all i ̸= j. This leaves a total of 9 free parameters, namely E1,E2,E3,ν12,ν23,ν31,µ12,µ23,µ31.
There are stability limitations on these 9 parameters. The measurements performed
in the previous section provided with values for the Young’s Modulus in 2 of the 3
orthogonal directions, across and perpendicular to the fibers of the wood respectively.
The Poisson’s ratio’s are unknown but they can be estimated from the measurements
by the application of the scheme proposed by [Bar15]. In order to keep the elasticity
tensor positive-definite, the following restrictions have to be fulfilled:
ν2
12 < E1
E2
,
ν2
23 < E2
E3
,
ν2
31 < E3
E1
.
(2.2)
Guided by the intuition from isotropic materials, one parameter will be used to
simplify and control the assignments of all the three free νij parameters. The three
parameters can be controlled by using a single Poisson’s ratio-like parameter ν as:
ν12 = ν
√
E1
E2
,
ν23 = ν
√
E2
E3
,
ν31 = ν
√
E3
E1
.
(2.3)
By this scheme, in order to ensure a positive-definite elasticity tensor, ν must
satisfy the condition -1 < ν < 0.5.
In an orthotropic material, the shear moduli µij are independent of E and ν.
Suboptimal values of shear parameters, however, easily lead to excessive shear or
stiff simulations that lock. It is useful to compute some reasonable µij based only
on Young’s moduli and Poisson’s ratios.
A scheme is proposed to set this values
automatically. The shear modulus for a linear isotropic material is:
µ =
E
2(1 + ν).
(2.4)
This equations is extended to set µij for linear orthotropic materials. Since a
parameter ν has been allocated to control all νij, a reasonable equation for µij would
be:
==PAGE:25==
2 Orthotropic plate model, eigenmodes and frequency response of ribbed plates
15
µij =
¯Eij
2(1 + ν),
(2.5)
for some choice of scalar ¯Eij. There are several methods for assigning ¯Eij. For
example, one can set ¯Eij to the maximum, minimum, arithmetic mean of geometric
mean of Ei and Ej. In this case, the geometric mean considers the magnitude of
the Young’s moduli in the two directions more evenly than the arithmetic mean,
especially when the values differ by orders of magnitude as was the case with the
beam measurements. This yields:
µij =
√
EiEj
2(1 + √νijνji),
(2.6)
for (i, j) = (1, 2), (2, 3), (3, 1). By using one parameter to control all Poisson’s ratios,
then √νijνji is equal to ν and the shear formula becomes equivalent to the isotropic
formula.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Orthotropic plate model, eigenmodes and frequency response of ribbed plates
2.1
Numerical modeling of orthotropic parameters
In order to verify the accuracy of the orthotropic material model, the input mobility
of a beam was simulated in COMSOL and compared with the initial measurements.
The material properties were determined using the orthotropic material parameter
allocation scheme presented in the previous section. The results show reasonable ac-
curacy in predicting the resonance frequencies in each of the directions of the fibers,
as well as the magnitude response to an applied force. For each beam, the same
set of data was used but the orthogonal direction in which they were applied was
interchanged. Figures 2.1 and 2.2 show the input mobility of each beam with the
respective COMSOL simulation. The Poisson’s ratios were calculated from the mea-
surements and a parametric sweep was used to tune the Young’s modulus in the
thickness direction of the material.
Figure 2.1: Input mobility beam COMSOL - Horizontal fibers.
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Numerical modeling of orthotropic parameters
17
Figure 2.2: Input mobility beam COMSOL - Longitudinal fibers.
2.1.1
Eigenmodes and mobility of rectangular plates, with and
without ribs
With the material properties in place, the mobilities of different rectangular plates
are evaluated, with and without ribs, to see what is the effect in the modes of vibra-
tion due to the addition of a single rib in the longitudinal and horizontal direction.
The input mobility of the plates was measured in a similar way as with the beams
in the center of the plate and used to verify that the material properties are yielding
stable results. Figure 2.3 shows the set up for the measurement of the mobility of the
ribbed plates. Figures 2.4, 2.6 and 2.5 show the respective comparison between the
measured and simulated mobilities.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Orthotropic plate model, eigenmodes and frequency response of ribbed plates
Figure 2.3: Experimental setup for plate measurements.
Figure 2.4: Input mobility plate COMSOL - Longitudinal rib plate.
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Numerical modeling of orthotropic parameters
19
Figure 2.5: Input mobility plate COMSOL - Normal plate, no ribs.
Figure 2.6: Input mobility plate COMSOL - Horizontal rib plate.
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Orthotropic plate model, eigenmodes and frequency response of ribbed plates
2.1.1.1
Eigenmodes
The first 3 eigenmodes of each plate were also calculated. The results show that the
modes that imply complete deformation of the rib are cancelled out by the stiffness of
the rib. The preferred resonances are those in which the entire rib remains unmoving
or the entire is vibrating up and down.
Figure 2.7: 1st Eigenmode normal plate.
Figure 2.8: 2nd Eigenmode normal plate.
Figure 2.9: 3rd Eigenmode normal plate.
==PAGE:31==
2.1 Numerical modeling of orthotropic parameters
21
page
Figure 2.10: 1st Eigenmode long rib plate.
Figure 2.11: 2nd Eigenmode long rib plate.
Figure 2.12: 3rd Eigenmode long rib plate.
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Orthotropic plate model, eigenmodes and frequency response of ribbed plates
Figure 2.13: 1st Eigenmode horizontal rib plate.
Figure 2.14: 2nd Eigenmode horizontal rib plate.
Figure 2.15: 3rd Eigenmode horizontal rib plate.
2.1.1.2
Mobilities of different plates
Different plates, with and without holes, with varied rib patterns were also built and
measured with the same setup. Due to the complications and the heavy computational
demands of calculating individual frequency responses for the plates, the other plate
geometries were not numerically simulated as with the most simple cases. Figures
==PAGE:33==
2.1 Numerical modeling of orthotropic parameters
23
2.16 and 2.17 show the plates that were used in the measurements. Figures 2.18,
2.19 and 2.20 show the corresponding mobilities for each plate. It is very interesting
to observe that the different rib patters modify greatly the frequency response of
the plates, either cancelling, shifting of adding different resonances depending on the
configuration.
Figure 2.16: Plates with holes.
Figure 2.17: Plates without holes.
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Orthotropic plate model, eigenmodes and frequency response of ribbed plates
Figure 2.18: Plates with holes.
Figure 2.19: Plates without holes.
==PAGE:35==
2.1 Numerical modeling of orthotropic parameters
25
Figure 2.20: Input mobility plates.
Since the total response of a guitar is determined by the vibration of the plate
coupled with the resonator box, it is expected that different top plates should yield
different frequency responses.
In general terms, the presence of the rib increases
the stiffness and cancels out or reduces significantly modes that would imply the
deformation of the rib. It can be seen that for the angled ribs many new resonances
appear that were not present in the other cases. As seen in the first section of the
report, the standard model for building guitar ribs is to have them in angle across
the plate. The angle and the number of ribs will influence the resonances that the
plate will naturally have.
==PAGE:36==
26
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
Effects of ribbed
plates in the
frequency response of
a rectangular box
In order to observe correlation between the different ribbing patterns and the acoustic
response of the system, a small rectangular box was built and its impulse response
was measured under different conditions. This experimental setup was not easy to
accomplish and therefore the presented results are shown using a very simple mea-
surement scheme. Measurements were performed using MATLAB ”Impulse Response
Measurer” application. The default setup were used with a MLS (maximum length
sequence) method with 10 runs of two seconds.
3.0.1
Experimental setup
A rectangular box was constructed in DTU Skylab facilities using some default tem-
plates. The proportions of the box were 20 x 34 x 9 cm. The box itself was made of
thicker wood, 6mm, while the top plate was kept at 3mm. Some metal weights were
used to hold the plates in position and a standard audio microphone was used to mea-
sure the response. A loudspeaker was placed below the box to excite the system as
shown in figures 3.0.1 and 3.1. The Impulse Response Measurer app from MATLAB
was used to perform the measurements in a simple manner.
After each run, the top plate of the box was changed and the system rearranged.
The bottom part remains the same at all times, as well as the positioning of the
microphone and the amplitude of the signal in the loudspeaker. A different scheme
was also attempted in which the loudspeaker was placed inside the box and the
spectrum was calculated accordingly. A similar measurement was attempted with an
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Effects of ribbed plates in the frequency response of a rectangular box
actual guitar by placing a small loudspeaker inside the guitar and reading the response,
as well as placing the loudspeaker below the guitar. Due to technical problems in the
post-processing of the data and time constraints, these results could not be included
in the report but show similar trends and interesting comparisons could be explored
in future work.
Figure 3.1: Impulse response experimental setup.
Figure 3.2: Impulse response measurement app.
==PAGE:39==
3 Effects of ribbed plates in the frequency response of a rectangular box
29
3.0.2
Results
Despite the cheap and simple set up used for the measurements, significant changes
can be observe in the frequency response of the system with only a change of plate.
The first measurement was of the experimental setup itself, by placing the microphone
on top of the loudspeaker. Figure 3.3 shows the coherence between the output and
input signals. It can be seen that after 2 kHz the system is no longer reliable, as well
as in the very low frequencies. Therefore the focus will be in the range between 50
Hz to 1 kHz. In a guitar, this range represents a pretty much the entire range of the
instrument, of course without counting any harmonics.
Figure 3.3: Coherence of signals.
Figures 3.4 to 3.9 show the frequency response for different combinations of plates.
Since in general spectrum measurements are always very irregular, the main focus will
be in comparing the response of the different plate results.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Effects of ribbed plates in the frequency response of a rectangular box
Figure 3.4: No rib plate and no rib with hole.
Figure 3.5: No rib plate and 2 long ribs.
==PAGE:41==
3 Effects of ribbed plates in the frequency response of a rectangular box
31
Figure 3.6: Horizontal rib and long rib.
Figure 3.7: Hole no rib and hole angle ribs.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Effects of ribbed plates in the frequency response of a rectangular box
Figure 3.8: Long 1 rib and long 2 ribs.
Figure 3.9: Hole 2 ribs and hole 1 rib.
==PAGE:43==
3 Effects of ribbed plates in the frequency response of a rectangular box
33
It is interesting to see how some features are consistent between the different cases.
Each measurement was performed multiple times and the results were very consistent
in each case, so the differences that are visible here are due only to the change in the
top plate of the box, since all other parameters remained constant and there was no
significant deviation between measurements of the same system. All measurements
were performed with the microphone resting in the center of the plate. A few samples
were taken in different positions but that affected the response, as expected, different
parts of the plate radiate differently in particular if compared with the center of the
plate that had many ribs passing through that position.
For example, figure 3.4 shows an area of almost perfect match around 300 Hz. As
well, all the plates with holes have a common peak around 450 Hz that is not present
when the plate does not have a hole. This suggests that this particular resonance
corresponds to the Helmholtz frequency of the resonator with a open cavity.
Despite the simplicity of the experiment, some interesting correlations can be
found by careful observation of the similarities and differences between the results.
Due to time constraints, a more detailed analysis of this data was not able to be
carefully carried out but nonetheless the results show that this simple experiment
can give insight into the behaviour of the coupled system of the plates with the
resonator box.
==PAGE:44==
34
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4
Conclusions,
observations and
future work
Modern guitars have complex rib patterns that are fundamental to the sound and
structure of the instrument. Without the addition of the ribs the sound of the gui-
tar as it is known today would not exist, and the sound radiation of the instrument
would be quite poor. Guitars in general have a low volume when compared with
other stringed instruments, such as cellos or violins, yet the popularity of the instru-
ment demanded that the construction evolved into what is known today. Without
the invention of the ribs, the guitar would have never become a respected concert
instrument, or the opposite can be true as well, the increasing demands by the part
of the musicians has encouraged guitar makers to evolve techniques and designs that
allow to push the boundaries of what the instrument is capable of.
Orthotropic models have proven very useful in modeling wood samples for nu-
merical models. The elastic properties of wood change significantly depending on
the direction of the fibers and this effect can be taken into consideration by the or-
thotropic model. The full anisotropic model is very complicated to work with, and
it has been shown in this report that by doing simple measurements and approx-
imations, the elastic properties in along and across the fibers of the wood can be
measured and this can provide the necessary information for developing numerical
simulations with wood as a material. Wood cannot be approximated as an isotropic
material without losing many important properties and adding great uncertainty to
the model. Despite this, the natural irregularities in wood in general make difficult
to use the same values even for very similar material samples. Each wooden plate is
different from another despite being taken from the same sheet of wood.
The mobility and mode shapes of simple rectangular plates with and without
ribs were analyzed.
The numerical predictions were in good agreement with the
measurements for the simplest cases. It is seen that the ribs reinforce the plate to
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Conclusions, observations and future work
deformations, which bring structural support but at the same time modify the fun-
damental mode shapes of vibration. This results in an altered frequency response
when coupled with the resonator box. Simple constructions and measurements show
that the effect is clear and noticeably along the relevant frequency range of a guitar,
namely between 50 to 1200 Hz. The ribs are sure to also affect the higher frequencies
but the quality of the measurements was not sufficient to claim any results on this
region. The same measurement setup can be used to measure real guitars and other
similar instruments. Using wireless speakers, it is possible to excite the instrument
from the inside and measure in different locations to see the radiation patterns as
well as frequency distributions across the instrument. Despite being a simple and
cheap set up, its simplicity becomes a important strength if enough care is taken into
processing of the signal and averaging of many measurements.
This project shows that with simple models and measurements, complicated be-
haviour can be modelled and observed for study. The methods applied in this project
can be escalated to higher precision with relative ease, assuming the right equipment is
in place. By identifying the effect on the modal behaviour and the coupled behaviour
of the plates and the resonance box in the frequency spectrum, more advanced numer-
ical model or optimization schemes could be performed in order to characterize and
predict more accurately either specific results of reverse engineer rib patterns from
desired frequency outputs.
As a guitar player myself, this project has give insight into the intricacies and
complexities of instrument design and musical acoustics. Future work may imply try-
ing different plate geometries, different materials and different rib patterns to observe
the effects, as well as applying more complicated models that already exists in the
literature for modeling of guitars. The coupling of the strings to the top plate, the
different geometries of the ribs themselves, as well as the effects of the neck and the
back plate of the guitar, play a fundamental role in the final output of the instrument.
All the parts of a guitar can be described separately, but none of them by itself can
characterize the sound as the system changes completely when all parts are coupled
together.
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[Bad05]
Wolf Bader. Computational Mechanics of the classical guitar. Springer,
2005.
[Bar15]
Jernej Barbic. “Stable Anisotropic Materials”. In: (2015).
[Mar09]
Richard Mark French. Engineering the guitar. Springer, 2009.
[Ohl11]
M. Ohlrich. Vibration and waves in solid structures at audible frequencies.
2011.
==PAGE:48==
