==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mechanistic studies of the Palladium catalyzed 
Carbonylation of Anilines in ionic liquids 
Master thesis (35 ECTS) 
30th of July 2018 
Author: 
Klaus August Moltved 
 
DTU student number S134484 
Supervisors: 
Professor Kasper P. Kepp 
Professor Anders Riisager  
Postdoc Nanette Zahrtmann 
==PAGE:2==
Page 2 of 79 
 
Preface 
This M.Sc. thesis titled “Mechanistic studies of the palladium catalyzed carbonylation of 
anilines in ionic liquids” is a collaboration between the research group of Professor Kasper P. 
Kepp and the group of Professor Anders Riisager. The thesis is a 35 ECTS point project as a 
part of a degree in Advanced and Applied Chemistry at the Technical University of Denmark. 
The project was intended to be a computational and experimental study trying to explain 
the influence of ionic liquids on the carbonylation of aniline found by Nannette Zahrtmann in 
her Ph.d. thesis1 (later published2). The project later developed into a theoretical investigation 
of the complete reaction mechanism of the carbonylation of anilines. Originally it was intended 
that the computations could be used to explain the results produced by Zahrtmann and this was 
partially successful. The experiments conducted helped to give indirect evidence for the 
hypotheses set forth in the report, but experimental ideas that would have been valuable 
contributions could not be complete because of limited time and resources.  
A supporting information file with all computed electronic energies and raw experimental 
data will be made available. Optimized structured will be made available in a separate zip-
folder.  
I would like to thank Nanette Zahrtmann and Professor Riisager for the opportunity to use 
and elaborate on the work from Nanette’s Ph.d. thesis. I would also like to thank Nanette for 
her patience and helpfulness for a theoretician in the laboratory. The guidance in all theoretical 
and computational aspects of my primary supervisor Professor Kepp has been invaluable.  
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Page 3 of 79 
 
Table of content 
 
Preface........................................................................................................................................ 2 
List of abbreviations .................................................................................................................. 4 
Abstract ...................................................................................................................................... 5 
1. 
Introduction. ....................................................................................................................... 6 
2. 
Theory ................................................................................................................................. 9 
Wave Function Theory .......................................................................................................... 9 
Density Functional Theory .................................................................................................. 13 
Palladium catalyzed urea formation in ionic liquids ............................................................ 15 
3. 
Computational Methods ................................................................................................... 17 
4. 
Experimental ..................................................................................................................... 24 
Synthesis of catalyst Trans-PdCl2(PPh3)2 ............................................................................ 24 
Catalytic tests ....................................................................................................................... 24 
5. 
Results and discussion ...................................................................................................... 28 
Structures and mechanism ................................................................................................... 28 
Gibbs free energies of reaction ............................................................................................ 43 
Experimental results............................................................................................................. 50 
6. 
Conclusions ...................................................................................................................... 57 
7. 
References ........................................................................................................................ 59 
8. 
Appendix .......................................................................................................................... 71 
 
==PAGE:4==
Page 4 of 79 
 
List of abbreviations 
DPU  
Diphenyl urea 
RDS  
Rate determining step 
DFT 
 
Density functional theory 
L 
 
Ligand 
R 
 
Alkane or phenyl Group 
Ph 
 
Phenyl 
PPh3  
Triphenyl Phosphine 
IL 
 
Ionic Liquid  
BMIM  
1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium  
TOF 
 
Turnover frequency 
WFT  
Wave function theory 
HF 
 
Hartree-Fock 
CI 
 
Configuration interaction 
CCA  
Coupled cluster approximation 
CC 
 
Coupled cluster 
KS 
 
Kohn Sham 
LDA  
Local density approximation 
LSDA  
Local spin density approximation 
GGA  
generalized gradient approximation 
ECP 
 
Effective core potential 
BDE  
Bond dissociation energy 
ZPE 
 
Zero-point energy 
SE 
 
Signed error 
AE 
 
Absolute error 
MSE  
Mean signed error 
MAE  
Mean absolute error 
THF 
 
Tetrahydrofuran 
DIPEA 
Diisopropylethylamine 
TS 
 
Transition state 
GC 
 
Gas chromatography 
HPLC  
High performance liquid chromatography 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Page 5 of 79 
 
Abstract 
The importance of urea compounds for several industrial application has merited the 
investigation to produce urea’s by alternative means to the industrially employed phosgene 
process. The mechanistic details of the carbonylation of primary amines to urea compounds 
was investigated computationally with DFT and experimentally. The investigation was based 
on the proposed mechanism by Hiwatari et al.3 for the carbonylation of primary amine to urea 
compounds. During experiments and computations, the catalytic species trans-PdCl2(PPh3)2 
and aniline were used as model substrates. From benchmark studies the optimal DFT functional 
was found to be a customized version of B3LYP with 30 % HF-exchange (B3LYP-30). 
Following a literature study and using computationally optimized structures the reaction 
mechanism proposed by Hiwatari et al.3 was extended to include all possible intermediates. 
This resulted in a complete mechanism to be proposed (Figure 10). Subsequently, the B3LYP-
30 functional was used to estimate Gibbs free energies of reaction for the postulated 
mechanism. The Gibs free energies were used to estimate reaction barriers, which lead to the 
hypothesis that the rate determining step was the dissociation of Cl- from the catalytic species 
trans-PdCl2(PPh3)2. The estimated reaction barriers also led to the hypothesis that the beneficial 
effect of the ionic liquids BMIMCl and BMIMBr observed by Zahrtmann et al.2 was caused 
by the presence of BMIM+ stabilizing the dissociation of Cl-. Experiments with the addition of 
base showed support for the hypothesis that the rate determining step was dissociation of Cl- 
from the catalytic species. Experiments with the salts LiCl, LiBr and LiI showed support for 
the hypothesis that the presence of BMIM+ stabilizes the dissociation of Cl- from the catalytic 
species. 
     
 
==PAGE:6==
Page 6 of 79 
 
1. Introduction. 
The field of catalysis is of very high scientific and technological importance and will 
increasingly be so for many years to come4. Heterogeneous catalysis, where reactants and 
catalyst are in separate phases, is a very active research field and its theoretical study has 
received much attention5. In contrast, the theoretical study of homogenous catalysis has 
received less attention. Homogenous catalysis offers several advantages vs. heterogeneous 
catalysis such as high selectivities6, milder reaction conditions7, and higher activity pr. catalyst 
atom7. However, the separation of products and catalysts is a major challenge6. Studying the 
theoretical mechanistic aspect of homogenous catalysis opens new promising perspectives in 
rational homogeneous catalyst design. 
Palladium catalyzed Carbonylation reactions are an important tool in organic chemistry 
since they allow for the direct synthesis of carbonyl compounds from simple building blocks 
such as CO. The importance of this type of reactions is also stressed by the 2010 Nobel prize 
in chemistry being awarded to Professors Heck, Negishi and Suzuki for their work on Pd 
catalyzed cross coupling reactions8. The Carbonylation reaction involving the formation of 
urea’s from anilines (scheme 1) has received much attention, since urea’s are important 
compounds used in a large number of agrochemicals, antioxidants dyes, anti-cancer 
medications, HIV-inhibitors8–10, plasticizers and stabilizers11. 
 
Scheme 1. Representation of the reaction of aniline using Pd-catalysts to form diphenyl urea 
(DPU). 
==PAGE:7==
Page 7 of 79 
 
Hiwatari et. al.3 have suggested a catalytic cycle based on experimental results which can 
be seen in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Mechanism proposed by Hiwatari et. al3 for the catalytic formation of urea from 
primary amines. 
Since the molecular details and intermediates of the cycle in Figure 1 are not known, 
elucidating the full mechanisms with computational methods could establish a framework for 
finding the rate determining step (RDS). There are numerous examples12–14 of computational 
chemistry being used to study homogeneous catalytic mechanisms and assist experiment in 
==PAGE:8==
Page 8 of 79 
 
determining the catalytic cycle. The computational method of choice will be Density functional 
theory (DFT) and where possible, ab initio methods for comparison, benchmarked against 
available experimental data. 
The reaction of the cycle proposed by Hiwatari et al.3 has been studied experimentally by 
Zahrtmann et al.2 with 𝐿= triphenylphosphine (PPh3) and X = Cl-. Zahrtmann et al2. studied 
the reaction in a biphasic mixture of toluene and ionic liquids (ILs). The use of the ILs 1-butyl-
3-methylimidazolium (BMIM+) Cl- and Br- gave some of the to date highest reported TOFs for 
this type of reaction2. Notably however the use of BMIMI gave a 0 % conversion of aniline to 
DPU. Using the experimental results and conditions optimized by Zahrtmann et al2. in 
combination with the mechanistic studies of the reaction, new experiments were conducted to 
gain insight into the reaction mechanism. 
The aim of this thesis is thus to investigate computationally and experimentally the 
suggested catalytic cycle, by exploring unknown reaction pathways, to elucidate the full 
reaction mechanism. This could allow for the determination of the RDS, which in turn might 
lead to design of new and improved catalytic systems. The influence of the ILs on the reaction 
mechanism, which is to a large part unknown, will also be investigated where possible. Besides 
the scholarly interest in understanding the role of the ILs, it might allow for the design and 
rationalization of new ILs suiTable for the reaction.  
 
 
==PAGE:9==
Page 9 of 79 
 
2. Theory 
The goal of computational chemistry is to solve the electronic structure problem, in a way that 
is feasible with current computational resources. At the heart of the conceptual understanding 
and formalism of electronic structure theory lies the Schrödinger equation15. Unfortunately, 
direct solutions to the Schrödinger equation are unfeasible for many-electron-systems. The two 
most common ways of approximating a solution to electronic structure problems are; 
wavefunction theory (WFT) and density functional theory (DFT).  
Below a brief introduction to the most important concepts of the two approximations will 
be given. For a rigorous and mathematical description of WFT and introduction to the concepts 
of computational chemistry the reader is referred to the book by Szabo and Ostlund16. For a 
description of DFT and its modern day applications the reader is referred to the review by 
Mardirossian and Head-Gordon17 
Wave Function Theory 
Wavefunction theories are based on finding approximate ways of solving the non-relativistic 
Born-Oppenheimer approximated Schrödinger equation (electronic Schrödinger equation). 
One of the simplest but also historically most important approaches is the Hartree-Fock (HF) 
method. The central axiom in HF theory is to approximate the many electron wave function of 
the Schrödinger equation, by a single Slater determinant constructed of one-electron functions 
(molecular orbitals). In this way the many electron wavefunction can be approximated by 
molecular orbitals, while fulfilling the Pauli exclusion principle. Since the true representation 
of the molecular orbital is not known they are approximated by a linear combination of atomic 
orbitals obtained by solving the one electron Schrödinger equation. The atomic orbitals are 
further approximated by other mathematical functions (often Gaussian type functions) known 
as the basis set, for easier evaluation of integrals. The basis set employed has a large impact on 
==PAGE:10==
Page 10 of 79 
 
the accuracy of the computation, since they determine the spatial distribution of the electron 
during computation. The number of basis set functions (often referred to as the basis set size) 
is thus to some extent a measure of the spatial freedom allowed for the electron during 
computation. The molecular orbital approximation leads to a set of one electron functions 
having to be solved with an approximate Hamiltonian operator known as the Fock operator 
𝑓(1), effectively a one electron Hamiltonian given by equation 1 
𝑓(1) = ℎ(1) + ∑𝑗𝑏(1) −𝑘𝑏(1)
𝑏
  
 
 
(1) 
The Fock operator consist of three terms; the single electron interaction with the nucleus ℎ(1), 
the averaged potential felt by one electron from the remaining electrons 𝑗𝑏(1) (Coulomb term) 
and a term describing the interaction of electrons with parallel spin 𝑘𝑏(1) (Exchange term). 
The Coulomb term can be given a classical interpretation since it is the interaction of two 
electrons and how their repulsion effects their distribution in space. The exchange term has no 
straight forward interpretation but is a manifestation of the fact that electrons with parallel spin 
are forbidden to be found at the same point in space18. Since the motion of electrons with 
opposite spin is not correlated within HF, the full correlation between electrons is not accounted 
for in HF theory (the exchange term describes some of the correlation but not all). This has led 
to the definition of the correlation energy 𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟 which is the difference between the exact 
energy obtained using the Born-Oppenheimer approximation ε0 and the energy at the HF limit 
𝐸0. 
𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟= ε0 −𝐸0 
 
 
(2) 
Numerous WFT methods in modern chemistry improve on the HF theory description of the 
electron correlation (referred to as post HF methods), often by approximating 𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟. Describing 
all of these is beyond the scope of this thesis. For a more detailed description and introduction 
of many important post HF methods the reader is referred to the book by Szabo and Ostlund16.  
==PAGE:11==
Page 11 of 79 
 
One way of improving upon the HF method is be increasing the number of determinants 
used in the description of your system. A great disadvantage of this is however, that the number 
of determinants severally increases the amount of computation needed. A way of capturing 
“much” of the correlation energy is by including determinants that are constructed by excited 
states of the HF ground state. The limit of including all possible excitations of the HF ground 
state is known as full configuration interaction (CI) but is unfortunately computationally 
unfeasible due to the number of determinants needed, even for small systems. Approximations 
to full CI are then to include only the most important excitations for the description of the 
correlation energy. In most systems much of the correlation energy can be captured by 
including doubly excited HF ground states16 (DCI), where singly occupied states mainly 
influence first order effects such as the dipole moment. Depending on the accuracy desired a 
treatment of the triplet states and even quadruplet states might also be necessary. One method 
for approximating the full CI equations is through the coupled cluster approximation (CCA), 
including the desired excitations (e.g. CCD is coupled cluster with only double excitations). 
The great advantage of coupled cluster (CC) methods are that unlike many other 
approximations to full CI, CC scales correctly with the number of electrons (size 
consistency)19. The details of how exactly the CC approximation is implemented and its 
mathematical background is laborious, however the central aspect which makes CC so valuable 
and computationally feasible is, that the excitation coefficients with which each of the excited 
states is weighted become coupled to only depend on the coefficients of the double 
excitations19.  
Using CCA, the description of the electronic structure problem has thus been defined in a 
way that is solvable and is known to have excellent accuracy for many systems. The CCSD(T) 
which employs the CCA with single, double and a perturbation of the triples has in fact shown 
such great accuracy compared to experiment, that is has been referred to as the golden standard 
==PAGE:12==
Page 12 of 79 
 
of computational chemistry20. Unfortunately, even with the approximations made the 
evaluation of CC for large systems is still unfeasible with current computational resources, 
since the cost of computations scales with number of electrons raised to the power of 7 for 
CCSD(T)21. Therefore, one most turn to alternative approaches when solving the electronic 
structure problem for large systems. 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
Page 13 of 79 
 
Density Functional Theory 
The proof by Hohenberg and Kohn, that the electron density determines the external potential 
and that there exists a variational principle for the electron density22 means, that DFT provides 
an exact approach to the solution of electronic structure theory17. The proof requires the 
existence of a universal functional E[ρ]. Unfortunately, to this date the exact functional is not 
known. Current DFT methods are thus based on approximations to the universal functional.  
Kohn and Sham23 introduced two approximations used in almost all modern DFT 
calculations known as Kohn Sham (KS) DFT given by equation 3 
𝐸[𝜌] = 𝑇𝑠[𝜌] + 𝑉𝑒𝑥𝑡[𝜌] + 𝐽[𝜌] + 𝐸𝑥𝑐[𝜌]  
 
 
(3) 
The first approximation is treating the system as non-interacting electrons used to calculate the 
kinetic energy term 𝑇𝑠[𝜌], the second approximation is treating the electron-electron repulsion 
𝐽[𝜌] classically. 𝑉𝑒𝑥𝑡[𝜌] is the external potential determined by the interaction of the nuclei 
with the electrons. The error made by the two approximations are collected in what is known 
as the Exchange Correlation functional 𝐸𝑥𝑐[𝜌]. 𝐸𝑥𝑐[𝜌] is thus a correction introduce to treat the 
part of the kinetic energy neglected in a non-interacting system 𝑇𝑠[𝜌]; and the non-classical 
behavior of electron-electron repulsion 𝐽[𝜌]21. The KS formalism also reintroduces the 
concepts of molecular orbitals from WFT to DFT calculations (and thus the same basis set can 
be used). The role of the molecular orbitals is here however as a density generator for the 
system. 
Expressions for 𝑇𝑠[𝜌], 𝑉𝑒𝑥𝑡[𝜌] and 𝐽[𝜌] are known and the challenge of KS DFT is thus the 
expression of 𝐸𝑥𝑐[𝜌]. Many different approaches to the formulation of 𝐸𝑥𝑐[𝜌] exists and 
descriptions of the formulation and hierarchy of these can be found throughout literature 
exemplified by refs17,24. Widely used, the Jacobs ladder establishes a logical hierarchy of DFT 
functionals based on their expected accuracy. 
==PAGE:14==
Page 14 of 79 
 
The first in the Jacobs ladder Hierarchy of Exchange correlation functionals are the local 
density approximation (LDA) and local spin density approximation (LSDA). LDA’s use only 
the local electron density in their description of 𝐸𝑥𝑐[𝜌]. For chemical applications considering 
only the Local density usually introduces large errors, since the electron distribution is more 
dispersed than the LDA description can account for. 
 Next in the hierarchy are the generalized gradient approximations (GGA). GGA’s include 
also the gradient of the density. Meta GGA functionals have contributions from the gradient as 
well as the Laplacian of the density and/or the kinetic energy density gradient. Including the 
gradient can be viewed as considering the surroundings of the local point considered in LDA. 
Because of this GGA methods can usually better account for the distribution of the electron 
density than LDA counterparts. 
At the top of the hierarchy are the hybrid functionals.  Hybrid functionals include a fraction 
of HF exchange (sometime referred to as exact exchange), this fraction differs substantially 
and significantly effects chemical energies25,26. HF-exchange is included in combination with 
both LDA, GGA and meta-GGA methods. Hybrid functionals were motivated by the 
overbinding tendencies of LDA and GGA methods27 and to reduce this tendency by including 
HF-exchange (HF-methods are known to underbid28). 
DFT provides a great advantage to WFT because it has the density, only a 3 coordinate 
dependent variable as the fundamental parameter instead of the multi coordinate wavefunction. 
This and the fact that DFT is much simpler mathematical than CCSD(T) means that KS DFT 
formally scales with the number of electrons raised to a power of 3, but in some 
implementations is dropping towards scaling to a power of 121. This means that for large 
systems the computation time is lowered significantly compared to CCSD(T) and allows DFT 
to be used on larger systems. However, the utility of the DFT rests on the used 𝐸𝑥𝑐[𝜌] and how 
well it is suited for describing the behavior of the electron in the chemical situation of interest. 
==PAGE:15==
Page 15 of 79 
 
Palladium catalyzed urea formation in ionic liquids 
The formation of urea-compounds from higher order amines (scheme 1) is of much scientific 
interest, since these are key intermediates in organic synthesis and can be used to produce 
polymers, agrochemicals and pharmaceuticals1 amongst others. Historically the most effective 
route to produce urea’s has been through the coupling of amines with the highly toxic 
phosgene29, and thus alternative methods of producing urea’s have long been sought after. 
Nonphosgen routes with numerous homogeneous transition metal catalysts have been 
studied30, where Pd catalyst are generally the most effective31. The use of palladium is however 
usually limited to aromatic amines and systems of high temperature and CO pressure. Also the 
TOF for many of the early nonphosgen systems was found too low for industrial applications29. 
Using ILs has been found to improve the TOF of the Pd catalyzed reactions considerable, along 
with allowing for lower temperature and CO pressure1 and thus shows promise for the road to 
an industrial application of this process.  
ILs are salts of organic cations and organic/inorganic anions which by definition have 
melting points below 100 ℃. For most ILs these comparably low melting points (NaCl has a 
melting point of 801 ℃) is due to the bulkiness of the cations and or anions making the crystal 
lattice structure more entropic. General statements on the physical and chemical properties of 
ILs should be viewed in the context of the large number of different ILs that exist32. Thus, 
generally ILs have been described by their difference to conventional reaction media. Amongst 
the properties that are often highlighted as beneficial are the low vapor pressure, high thermal 
stability (although this has been debated32), non-flammability and highly tunable chemical and 
physical properties (arising from the many possible combination of cations and anions, each 
with distinct chemical and physical properties). ILs have in recent years received considerable 
attention as an alternative reaction medium in homogeneous catalysis. The interest has been 
growing particular because of their tunable properties, allowing the ILs to be used as promoters 
==PAGE:16==
Page 16 of 79 
 
and co-catalysts. This has led too many catalytic reactions, where ILs were found to have 
beneficial effects32.  The use of ILs in biphasic systems with water or organic solvents, has also 
received attention since this allows for easy separation of products and catalyst.  
When a biphasic system of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium Cl (BMIMCl) and BMIMBr with 
toluene was studied by Zahrtmann et al.2, they were found to have highly beneficial effects on 
the Carbonylation of aniline to diphenylurea (scheme 1). This was achieved with the catalyst 
trans-PdCl2(PPh3)2, using a CO/O2 mixture with relatively low pressure and temperature (10 
bar and 140 ℃) and yielded one of the highest to date reported TOF’s of 1900 h-1. Zahrtmann 
et al2 postulated that the positive influence of the ILs with the cation BMIM+ could arise from 
an increased solubility of the basic aniline33 due to the weak acidity of BMIM+. When the IL 
BMIMI was used a conversion of 0 % of aniline to DPU was observed. This was surprising 
since I- had previously in literature been found to play a key role in the catalytic ability of the 
reaction34,35.  
The mechanistic details concerning Pd catalyzed reactions of the type in scheme 1, have 
been studied by Hiwatari et. al.3 and their proposal for a mechanism can be seen in Figure 1. 
The suggested catalytic cycle has 3 intermediates, the starting catalytic species trans- PdX2L2. 
A, the palladium carbomyl complex B and the Pd(0)L2 complex C. The mechanism also needs 
an oxidant to be present as co-catalyst. The cycle in Figure 1 was proposed by Hiwatari et al.3 
based on their observation, that when the carbomyl complex B was isolated and reacted with 
primary and secondary amines it produced N,N-dialkylureas and N,N,N-trialkyl urea’s 
respectively, while the reaction with tertiary amines formed free isocyanate. The mechanism 
proposed by Hiwatari et al.3 has been supported by numerous observation that N,N,N,N-
tetraalkylureas cannot be formed with CO and secondary amines as the only substrate34,36–38. 
Further support for the mechanism has also been given by Giannoccaro et al.39 who proposed 
a mechanism largely in agreement with the mechanism proposed by Hiwatari et al.3 
==PAGE:17==
Page 17 of 79 
 
3. Computational Methods 
Calculations were performed with the Turbomole software version 7.040. All computations 
were converged to 10-6 au, and the resolution of identity approximation was used to accelerate 
all calculations. Closed shell calculations were performed in all possible cases. Geometry 
optimizations and analytical calculations of vibrational frequencies were performed with the 
BP8641,42 functional using the def2-SVP43 basis set. BP86 has shown accepTable performance 
for reproducing crystallographic structural data of organometallic complexes44,45. Vibrational 
frequencies and geometry calculations have been found to be relatively unaffected by basis set 
choice44,46, justifying the use of the rather small def2-SVP basis. To account for the relativistic 
effects (influencing mainly Pd and I) the effective core potential (ECP) basis set def2-ecp47 
was used for Pd and I. It has previously been shown that ECPs describe the relativistic effects 
of the second and third row of the d-block well48. However, the ECP description does not 
account completely for relativistic effects, most notably the effect of spin-orbit coupling is 
neglected. An explicit treatment of the spin-orbit coupling would likely increase the accuracy 
of the computations but, it is computationally very costly and accepTable accuracy has been 
achieved with the ECP method for many systems49.  
To account for solvation effects the dielectric continuum model COSMO was used in 
Turbomole. The solvation model was used during geometry optimization, frequency 
calculations and single-point energies50,51. To describe the electrostatic screening of Toluene, 
a dielectric constant (𝜖) of 2.452 was used in COSMO.  For the effective radius of solvation in 
COSMO, the default optimized radii were used for all atoms, except for Phosphorous (P) and 
Pd ions which were modeled using a radius of 2.106 Å for P and 2.223 Å for Pd (this has a 
small effect on coordination-saturated complexes but could influence unsaturated complexes 
where the solvent probe can approach the metal ion53–55). The effect on the energy of the 
effective radii of P and Pd and the value of 𝜖 was evaluated with a small benchmark. The result 
==PAGE:18==
Page 18 of 79 
 
of this can be found in the Appendix Figure A1. The main conclusion was that for 4-
coordinated Pd and P the radii used (2.106 Å and 2.223 Å) gave the lowest energy and thus 
justified the use of these radii. Changing the value of ε from 2.4 to 20 did not influence the 
energy ordering for 4- and 3-cooridnated Pd, for P a small change was observed but not found 
to be significant. For 3 coordinated Pd a smaller value for the radii gave a lower energy, this is 
most likely because of the uncoordinated Pd being able to interact with the solvation probe at 
smaller radii thereby lowering the energy. The low values used (down to 1.6 Å) were however 
not thought to be a realistic radius of solvation for Pd2+ and it was thus decided to use the value 
of 2.223 Å, since this gave the lowest energy for 4-coordinated Pd. 
Long range dispersion interactions were accounted for using the D3 dispersion correction56, 
applied to all calculations, both geometry optimizations and single-point energies, because it 
has been found that the best performance for DFT calculations involving transition metals is 
achieved when dispersion effects are accounted for57. 
To find the optimal Exchange correlation functional for single point energy calculations 
two benchmarks were performed. The first benchmark was performed to estimate the ability of 
CCSD(T) to reproduce experimental bond dissociation energies (BDE) for relevant Pd 
complexes with available experimental BDEs. The second benchmark was performed to find 
which DFT functional best reproduces BDEs calculated by CCSD(T) for Pd complexes of 
relevance to the catalytic cycle of Figure 1. The first benchmark was thus performed to justify 
the use of CCSD(T) as DFT benchmarking reference, the second benchmark using CCSD(T) 
as reference since no relevant experimental data was available. The Pd complexes with 
experimental BDEs available used for the first benchmark were PdC, Pd+C, Pd+CH3, Pd+CH4, 
Pd+C2H2, Pd+CS, PdH, Pd+H, PdO, Pd+O, PdOH (The + next to the Pd indicating that the 
dissociation product of the bond is Pd+ and the corresponding radical (CH4 not a radical)). 
Having optimized the geometries (with BP86 and def2-SVP as described above) a HF energy 
==PAGE:19==
Page 19 of 79 
 
calculation was performed with the aug-cc-pV5Z58 basis set for the ligands and the def2-
QZVPPD43 basis set for Pd with the def2-ecp47. Using the converged HF ground state, a 
CCSD(T) calculation was performed. Because the experimental data was in the gas phase these 
calculations did not include D3 or COSMO corrections. Zero-point energies (ZPE) were 
however included and the BDEs were calculated according to equation 4.  
𝐵𝐷𝐸(𝑃𝑑−𝐿) = −𝐸(𝑀−𝐿) + 𝐸(𝑃𝑑) + 𝐸(𝐿) −𝐸𝑍𝑃𝐸(𝑃𝑑−𝐿) + 𝐸𝑍𝑃𝐸(𝐿) 
 
(4) 
𝐵𝐷𝐸(𝑃𝑑−𝐿) is the BDE of the Pd ligand bond, 𝐸(𝑃𝑑−𝐿) is the single point energy of the 
Pd ligand complex, 𝐸(𝑃𝑑) is the single point energy of Pd, 𝐸(𝐿) is the single point energy of 
the ligand, 𝐸𝑍𝑃𝐸(𝑃𝑑−𝐿) is the ZPE of the Pd ligand complex and 𝐸𝑍𝑃𝐸(𝐿) is the ZPE of the 
ligand. The signed errors (SE) discussed below were calculated by equation 5 and the absolute 
errors (AE) discussed are the absolute values of the SE calculated by equation 5. 
𝑆𝐸= 𝐵𝐷𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑑−𝐵𝐷𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑙  
 
 
(5) 
𝐵𝐷𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑑 is the energy calculated by equation 4 and 𝐵𝐷𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑙 is the experimental 
value from Table A1. 
In Figure 2 the performance of CCSD(T) compared to the experimental data can be seen. 
Except for Pd+CH3, CCSD(T) completely fails to describe Pd-C bonds with SEs of up to –202 
kJ/mol. Transition metal carbon bonds have already previously been found difficult to study 
by computational methods48, most likely because of their multi reference character. That 
CCSD(T) describes the Pd+-CH3 bond much better (SE of -18 kJ/mol) is important however, 
since this bond resembles bonds that are formed and broken in the catalytic cycle of Figure 1. 
For the bonds not including Carbon, CCSD(T) performs quit well with a mean SE (MSE) of 
only 2 kJ/mol and a mean AE (MAE) of 12 kJ/mol. It would have been preferable to verify the 
ability of CCSD(T) to estimate Pd-L bonds further but no suiTable experimental values could 
be found. Because of CCSD(T)’s performance for Pd+-CH3 and bonds without carbon it was 
==PAGE:20==
Page 20 of 79 
 
judge that CCSD(T) was an adequate benchmark reference. It is clear however, that more work 
estimating the ability of CCSD(T) (and DFT) to describe Pd-L bonds is needed.  
 
Figure 2. SE between experimental value and BDE calculated by CCSD(T) in kJ/mol for the 
11 Pd-L complexes seen on the x-axis. Experimental values available in Table A1 and 
calculated CCSD(T) BDEs (using equation 4) in Table A2. 
The second benchmark to estimate the ability of DFT to reproduce CCSD(T) BDEs and 
determine the optimal exchange correlation functional, used the following 6 Pd complexes as 
data set: [PdCH3]+, [PdNH3]2+, [PdPH3]2+, PdPH3, [PdCl]+, [PdCO]2+. These 6 complexes were 
used since they are representative for the type of Pd bonds formed and broken during the 
catalytic cycle of Figure 1. First the BDE of the 6 complexes were calculated by equation 4 
using CCSD(T) data and then compared to BDEs calculated using DFT data. The 15 
functionals used in the benchmark against CCSD(T) data can be seen in Table 1 along with 
their references, design type and amount of HF-exchange. They include many popular DFT 
functionals59 also within the field of homogenous catalysis57 and span across different design 
types of DFT functionals24 to ensure a spread in performance. When possible, these were 
studied using their Turbomole keywords, the remaining were studied using the xcfun library 
-240
-200
-160
-120
-80
-40
0
40
80
120
160
kJ/mol
==PAGE:21==
Page 21 of 79 
 
module of Turbomole60. The 4 functionals OPBE-15, B3LYP*, B3LYP-30 and CAM-B3LYP-
30 are customized versions implemented with the amount of HF-exchange changed to 15, 15, 
30 and 30 % respectively. 
Table 1. The 15 exchange-correlation functionals used during benchmark, their functional 
type, the amount of Hartree-Fock exchange, and their key references. 
Functional 
Type 
% HF exchange References 
BLYP 
GGA 
0 
42,61 
PBE 
GGA 
0 
62 
OLYP 
GGA 
0 
63,64 
OPBE 
GGA 
0 
62,65 
rPBE 
GGA 
0 
66 
OPBE-15 
Hybrid GGA 
15 
62,65 
B3LYP 
Hybrid GGA 
20 
27,64,67 
B3LYP* 
Hybrid GGA 
15 
27,64,67 
B3LYP-30 
Hybrid GGA 
30 
27,64,67 
PBE0 
Hybrid GGA 
25 
62,68 
TPSSh 
Hybrid meta GGA 
10 
69 
M06 
Hybrid meta GGA 
27 
70 
TPSS 
Meta GGA 
0 
69 
CAM-B3LYP 
Range-separated 
19 
71 
CAM-B3LYP-30 Range-separated 
30 
71 
In Figure 3 the performance of the 15 functionals can be seen. As expected from the Jacobs 
ladder hierarchy the hybrid functionals can be seen to be the best performing (except for the 
customized OPBE-15), whereas the GGA’s perform substantially worse. Notably the 
customized B3LYP-30 performs very well compared to the CCSD(T) benchmark data with an 
MSE and MAE of 4 and 20 kJ/mol respectively. The range-separated functional CAM-B3LYP 
(often employed for calculations on catalytic species) closest in performance to B3LYP-30 has 
an MSE and MAE of 31 and 35 kJ/mol respectively and the standard B3LYP functional 
performing third best with an MSE and MAE of 38 and 47 kJ/mol respectively. Because of the 
good performance of B3LYP-30 in the benchmark this was used for calculating single point 
energies. For the sake of comparison and to have a functional where the D3-dispersion 
==PAGE:22==
Page 22 of 79 
 
correction could be implemented single point energies were also calculated using the standard 
B3LYP functional. B3LYP has also proven to give good accuracy for a wide range of transition 
metal systems45,72 and for modeling 3d transition metal ligand BDEs73. For single point energy 
calculations, the larger basis set def2-TZVPP43 was used since the energy calculations are more 
basis set dependent. Triple zeta basis sets have shown to give reasonable accuracy for systems 
of relevance for homogenous catalytic proceses57. 
 
Figure 3. Mean signed error (MSE) and Mean absolute error (MAE) between CCSD(T) 
computed BDE and DFT computed BDE using the 15 functionals listed for the 6 Pd complexes: 
[PdCH3]+, [PdNH3]2+, [PdPH3]2+, PdPH3, [PdCl]+, [PdCO]2+. The red line represents the 
average +/- the standard deviation of the signed error, and the blue line is the same for the 
absolute error. Tabulated data available in Table A3 
Zero-point energies (ZPE) and Gibbs free energy corrections were calculated and used to 
correct the single point energies. ZPE’s have proven to be important when modeling BDEs46 
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
kJ/mol
MSE
MAE
==PAGE:23==
Page 23 of 79 
 
and were thus included. The ZPE and Gibbs free energy corrections were calculated in 
Turbomole using the interactive module Freeh40 at 298.15 K and 1 bar. The analytical 
calculation of the Gibbs free energy corrections and ZPE uses calculated vibrational 
frequencies, allowing for the calculation of the molecular partition functions and thus the 
prediction of thermodynamic functions at temperatures above 0 K and 0 Pa. The Gibbs free 
energy was calculated using equation 6 or 7, where 𝐸𝐵3𝐿𝑌𝑃−30 is the single point energy 
calculated using the B3LYP-30 functional, 𝐸𝐵3𝐿𝑌𝑃 is the single point energy calculated using 
the B3LYP functional, 𝐸𝐵3𝐿𝑌𝑃 𝐷3 is the empirical dispersion correction term calculated using 
the B3LYP functional, and 𝐸𝑍𝑃𝐸 and 𝐸𝐺𝑖𝑏𝑏𝑠 are the ZPE and Gibbs free energy corrections.  
𝐺𝜃= 𝐸𝐵3𝐿𝑌𝑃−30 + 𝐸𝐵3𝐿𝑌𝑃 𝐷3 + 𝐸𝑍𝑃𝐸+ 𝐸𝐺𝑖𝑏𝑏𝑠 
 
 
(6) 
 
𝐺𝜃
 = 𝐸𝐵3𝐿𝑌𝑃 + 𝐸𝑍𝑃𝐸+ 𝐸𝐺𝑖𝑏𝑏𝑠 
 
 
(7) 
Δ𝐺𝜃
𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛= ∑𝐺𝜃
𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑠−∑𝐺𝜃
𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑠 
 
 
(8) 
The Gibbs free energy of reaction was accordingly calculated using equation 8 with 
∑𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑠 being the sum of the 𝐺’s calculated by equation 6 or 7 for the products and 
∑𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑠 being the same for the reactants. 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
Page 24 of 79 
 
4. Experimental 
Synthesis of catalyst Trans-PdCl2(PPh3)2 
Catalyst previously synthesized by Zahrtmann1  was used for experiments 1 and 2 (Table 2), 
for all remaining experiments newly synthesized  catalyst was used. New catalyst was 
synthesized by the following procedure: In a Schlenk flask under nitrogen 159.2 mg (0.56 
mmol) Dichloro(1,5-cyclooctadiene)palladium(II) was dissolved in 25 mL dichloromethane. 
Once the salt was completely dissolved (after string for approximate 1 hour) 340.6 mg PPh3 
(1.3 mmol) was added. Immediately thereafter a yellow precipitate was observed, and the 
reaction stood for 10 minutes. The product was then washed in ethanol to remove impurities 
and dried. The dried sample was weighed to 344.8 mg corresponding to a yield of 87.7 %. To 
verify that the desired catalyst had been formed 31P-NMR was run by dissolving part of the 
sample in dichloromethane. The 31P-NMR spectrum showed a peak at a chemical shift of 24.3 
consistent with published data74 for Trans- PdCl2(PPh3)2, spectra can be found in Figure A2. 
The 31P-NMR Spectra were recorded with a 400 MHz variant spectrometer and recorded at 
room temperature. 
Catalytic tests 
For the catalytic tests a 300 mL mechanically stirred Parr autoclave was used. To a Parr control 
unit, a manometer, thermocouple, heating mantle and pressure transmitter were connected. The 
temperature was set to 140 ℃ and a total pressure of 10 bar, with 2 bar air and 8 bar CO. All 
experiments were run for 4 hours once the desired temperature of 140 ℃ was reached. The 
stirring rate was set to 500 rpm for all experiments. For an experimental run the reactor was 
filled with 8.0 mg of catalyst, 1.1 mL of aniline, 200 𝜇L mesitylene (internal standard for GC) 
and Toluene or THF to a volume of 24.7 mL. The details concerning each individual 
experiment can be seen in Table 2. All experiments were run with double determination except 
==PAGE:25==
Page 25 of 79 
 
for blank runs with no catalyst (run to rule out false positives). The above stated experimental 
conditions were used based on the experimental conditions optimized by Zahrtmann1. The 
experiments conducted by Zahrtmann were in toluene and toluene was therefore the solvent of 
choice. However, because one of the bases used during experiments was in a THF solution and 
because of solubility issues of toluene for inorganic salts used, THF was employed for some 
experiments and therefore a test of the reaction in THF was also performed. 
Table 2. List of experiments conducted with a description/note of what was added besides 1,1 
mL aniline, 200 𝜇L mesitylene, 8 mg catalyst (0.012 mmol), 8 bar CO and 2 bar Air. 
Experiment number 
Solvent (mL) 
Experiment description 
1 and 2 
Toluene (23.4) 
Blank run, no catalyst added 
3 
Toluene (23.4) 
No catalyst 12 mmol BIMIMCl 
4 and 5 
Toluene (23.4) 
Test of old catalyst 
6 
Toluene (23.4) 
Test of newly synthesized catalyst 
7 and 8 
THF (23.4) 
Test of THF as solvent 
9 and 10 
Toluene (21) 
12 mmol BIMIMCl 
11 and 12 
Toluene (20.4) 
3 mL 1.0 M potassium tertbutoxide in THF 
13 and 14 
Toluene (22.9) 
523 μL DIPEA (3 mmol) 
15 and 16 
Toluene (22.75) 
649 μL 2,6-Di-tert-butylpyridine (3 mmol) 
17 
THF (23.4) 
No catalyst 12 mmol LiCl 
18 
THF (23.4) 
No catalyst 12 mmol LiBr 
19 
THF (23.4) 
No catalyst 12 mmol LiI 
20 and 21 
THF (23.4) 
12 mmol LiCl 
22 and 23 
THF (23.4) 
12 mmol LiBr 
24 and 25 
THF (23.4) 
12 mmol LiI 
For the experiments with base, 3 mmol (25 mol % of aniline) of the 3 bases potassium 
tertbutoxide, N,N-Diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA) and 2,6-Di-tert-butylpyridine were added 
(Figure 4). These bases were specifically chosen because of their suiTable pKa, non-
nucleophilicity and steric strain hindering coordination to Pd.   
 
==PAGE:26==
Page 26 of 79 
 
 
Figure 4. Structure of the 3 bases used. Left potassium tertbutoxide, middle N,N-
Diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA) and right 2,6-Di-tert-butylpyridine. 
Experiments were conducted with the salts LiCl, LiBr and LiI and were added in a 1:1 in 
molar ratio to aniline. These salts were chosen to test the influence of Cl-, Br- and I- on the 
reaction. The salts were dissolved in THF since solubility experiments showed a higher 
solubility in THF than Toluene (appendix Table A4). When salt was added for experiments 20-
21 and 24-25 only a partial dissolution of LiCl and LiI was observed (at room temperature). 
The solubility was tested at room temperature and thus the solubility at the experimental 
conditions of 140 ℃ is unknown. It was assumed that more salt would dissolve at 140 ℃, but 
how much is uncertain and thus the concentration of LiCl and LiI during experiment might 
have been lower than the 1:1 molar ratio with aniline aimed for.  
The conversion % of aniline was determined by gas chromatography (GC) with a flame 
ionization detector or high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with a UV detector. 
GC was used for experiment 1-16 and the internal standard method with mesitylene as the 
internal standard was used, GC calibration curve can be found in the appendix Figure A3. For 
experiment 17-25, the conversion % of aniline was determined by HPLC, the internal standard 
method with mesitylene as the internal standard was used, and a calibration curve can be found 
in the appendix Figure A4. For experiment 3, 9 and 10, Quantitative NMR measurements of 
the amount of aniline dissolved in the BMIMCl were used to adjust the GC measured 
conversion based on the toluene phase. 
==PAGE:27==
Page 27 of 79 
 
To verify the formation of DPU 1H-NMR was performed in DMSO for solid samples or 
chloroform for liquid samples. DPU was detected by its characteristic 1H-NMR shifts at: 6.98, 
7.29, 7.46 and 8.6375. A representative spectrum observed for DPU can be seen in Figure A5. 
Spectra were recorded with a 400 MHz Variant spectrometer. 1H spectra were referenced to 
the residual solvent signal in accordance with literature76. Spectra were recorded at room 
temperature. 
 
==PAGE:28==
Page 28 of 79 
 
5. Results and discussion 
Structures and mechanism 
Computations were performed to estimate the activation energy for the reactions of the 
mechanism depicted in Figure 1, which could lead to the determination of the RDS from an 
energetic point of view. The first step to estimate the activation energy was to find the possible 
intermediates of the mechanism. Since experiments were conducted with the species trans-
PdCl2(PPh3)2, this structure and the thereby following intermediates were optimized. The 
structures of trans-PdBr2(PPh3)2 and trans- PdI2(PPh3)2, were also optimized to investigate the 
effect of halide coordination, and asses the trend prediction of the computations.  
The detailed mechanism from the starting material A (Figure 1) to carbomyl complex B 
was postulated based on basic chemical principles and when possible drawing on available 
literature. Since structure B has 1 less halogen then A at some point it must dissociate from Pd. 
It is also evident that at some point CO must associate to Pd. Following CO coordination aniline 
can nucleophilicly attack the CO carbon. After the nucleophilic attack, the aniline nitrogen 
must be deprotonated to become the intermediate B. The possibility of aniline coordinating to 
Pd followed by a 1,2 migration to CO was considered but rejected, since the steric hindrance 
on the palladium center caused by the two rather large phosphine ligands, should hinder aniline 
coordination. It has also been shown for a series of Pd complexes, that amines never attack the 
Pd atom when CO is present77–79. This lead to the suggestion that the mechanism would 
include: dissociation of Cl-, association of CO, nucleophilic attack of aniline on coordinated 
CO and deprotonation of the aniline nitrogen. Below in scheme 2 the steps specified can be 
seen, where aniline acts as the base.  
==PAGE:29==
Page 29 of 79 
 
 
Scheme 2. Possible reactions for the formation of  PdXCONHPh(PPh3)2 (B) from the starting 
material PdX2(PPh3)2 (A). X = Cl-, Br- or I-. Chronological reaction number above reaction 
arrow. 
The structure of the 4 species in scheme 2 were optimized as described in the computational 
methods section with X = Cl-, Br- or I-. In Figure 5 a depiction of the 3-dimensional structure 
for X = Cl- can be seen (all xyz-files will be made available in a separate zip-folder). As can 
be seen from Figure 5, all 4 species are square planar as expected for 4-coordinated Pd 
complexes. The computations all produced what was judged to be “chemically reasonable” 
structures, that is that no artifacts were created by the geometry optimization (as can sometimes 
be observed). For the structure of A2 a C-N bond length of 2.25 Å was observed, which 
compared to average aniline ammonium salts with a bond length of  ≈ 1.5 Å80 is rather long.  
==PAGE:30==
Page 30 of 79 
 
 
Figure 5. Optimized structure of the 4 intermediates shown in Scheme 2. Black = C White = 
H, Blue = N, Green = Cl, Red = O, Orange = P and Cyan = Pd  
Table 3. Pd-X bond distance in Å for structures in scheme 2. 
Structure 
Pd-Cl distance 
Pd-Br distance 
Pd-I distance 
A 
2.36 and 2.33 
2.46 and 2.49 
2.70 and 2.65 
A1 
2.33 
2.46 
2.65 
A2 
2.35 
2.49 
2.68 
B 
2.45 
2.58 
2.77 
This is however as expected since as noted by Ragaini78 the formed species following the 
nucleophilic attack would break apart if not deprotonated. Once the Nitrogen has been 
deprotonated in B the C-N bond distance becomes 1.38 Å, which is much closer to the expected 
value of ≈ 1.4 Å80, and thus characteristic of a sTable bond. A structure similar to A2 has been 
==PAGE:31==
Page 31 of 79 
 
studied by Yamamoto et al.81, and they suggested based on experimental studies that a 
rearrangement would occur moving the acidic proton to the neighboring carbonyl oxygen. 
Because of this the A2 structure with a proton moved to the oxygen was also optimized. The 
structure produced by this showed a C-N bond distance of 1.34 Å, characteristic of a sTable 
bond. The rearrangement could therefore be a part of the mechanism (depending on the rate of 
deprotonation) and thus for the rearrangement pathway reaction barriers were also estimated. 
The corresponding structures with X = Br- or I- are almost identical to the structures in Figure 
5 with only the Pd-halogen bond length varying significantly. As can be seen from Table 3 the 
bond distance between halogen and Pd increases as we move down in the periodic Table, that 
is the bonds become weaker. This trend is what one would expect based on the increasing size 
of the halogens when moving down in the periodic Table, making it harder for the negative 
charge of the halogen to get close to the positive Pd. The 4 structures in Figure 5 and the 8 
corresponding structures for Br- and I- were thus deemed plausible enough to use for the 
estimation of reaction barriers, based on their correlation with the expected halogen trend and 
their “chemically reasonable” structures. 
Having established probable reactions and their structures the possible elementary reactions 
taking place still need to be addressed. Reaction 1 could happen associatively, dissociatively 
or through interchange82 and could therefore have a 3-coordinated intermediate, 5-coordinated 
intermediate or 5-coordinated transition state (TS). A review by Barnard83 for carbonylation of 
aryl and vinyl halides describes the formation of 5 coordinated intermediates for the insertion 
of CO. Garrou et al84. showed that for reactions of vinyl and aryl halides the insertion of CO to 
square planar Pt was through a 5-coordinated intermediate and argue that the same could be 
true for Ni and Pd. Because of this a 5-coordinated intermediate for reaction 1 was optimized 
with X = Cl-, the structure of which can be seen in Figure 6 to the left. As can be seen the 
structure produced by this has a Cl- bound to the carbonyl carbon instead of Pd. Several 
==PAGE:32==
Page 32 of 79 
 
different input structures were used, and all produced the Cl carbonyl carbon bond. This 
structure seems a highly unlikely intermediate and would not lead to the desired product of 
DPU. Thus, based on the computed geometry, a 5-coordinated intermediate for reaction 1 
seems unlikely. 
 
Figure 6. Optimized structure of the possible 5-coordinated intermediate (left) and 3-
coordinated intermediate (right) for reaction 1. Black = C White = H, Green = Cl, Red = O, 
Orange = P and Cyan = Pd  
To find a possible 5-coordinated TS, a TS search for reaction 1 was performed with 
Gaussian85 and Turbomole40. Unfortunately, the TS search proved unsuccessful even after 
multiple attempts, possibly because there is no sTable TS or because of the computational 
method not being accurate enough for this situation. The steric hindrance cause by the two 
large PPh3 ligands also made it very difficult to produce suiTable input structures for the TS 
search since the Pd atom was very hindered making it difficult for the incoming CO to approach 
Pd. 
==PAGE:33==
Page 33 of 79 
 
Two possible 3-coordinated pathways were investigated for reaction 1. The first 3-
coordinated pathway investigated was the dissociation of Cl- followed by CO coordination as 
can be seen in scheme 3. The structure of the 3-coordinated intermediate can be seen to the 
right in Figure 6. The produced intermediate has a T-shaped form and not a tetragonal as would 
be expected from 3-coordnated Pd. Stambuli et al.86 showed with X-ray diffraction that T-
shaped Pd complexes are formed for Arylpalladium(II) complexes. This would indicate that 
the structure of the 3-coordinated Pd to the right in Figure 6 is a plausible intermediate.  
 
Scheme 3. Possible elementary reactions of reaction 1 (scheme 2) by immediate Cl- 
dissociation. 
The observation of free PPh3 and rapid exchange between PPh3 and CO observed by 
Zahrtmann et al.2 indicates that a reaction pathway involving the dissociation of PPh3 is likely. 
The possible elementary reactions following the PPh3 dissociation for reaction 1 can be seen 
in scheme 4, the 3-coordinated optimized structures of which can be seen in Figure 7. As in 
Figure 6, the 3-coordinated intermediates are T-shaped. For the reactions of scheme 4 there is 
also the possibility of a TS following the PPh3 dissociation. Again, a TS search was performed 
based on multiple different input structures. Although several TS were successfully converged 
the fact that the Cl-Pd bonds had the same length (not likely if one chlorine is going to 
dissociate) and that in most cases very long  of up to 3.5 Å CO-Pd bond lengths were observed 
==PAGE:34==
Page 34 of 79 
 
indicate that instead of TS local optimums were found. Thus, the inability to find a TS or 5-
coordinated intermediate and the observation by Zahrtmann et al.2 suggests that reaction 1 
proceeds through a 3-coordinated intermediate and the energetics of the 3-coordinated 
pathways in scheme 3 and 4 will therefore be discussed subsequently.  
 
Scheme 4. Possible elementary reactions of reaction 1 (scheme 2) through PPh3 dissociation.  
 
Figure 7. Optimized structure of the intermediates following PPh3 dissociation for reaction 1. 
Black = C White = H, Green = Cl, Red = O, Orange = P and Cyan = Pd 
 
==PAGE:35==
Page 35 of 79 
 
Reaction 2 and 3 have the possibility of a TS or dissociation of PPh3 from Pd. Again, a TS 
search was performed in Gaussian and Turbomole, but none of them proved successful. This 
might again be because of the method used or simply because the TS of the reaction is very 
unsTable. Figure 8 shows the optimized structures for the possible 3-coordinated intermediates 
following dissociation of PPh3 for reaction 2 and 3. Once again, the T-shaped Pd complexes 
are observed. When the 3-coordinated intermediate to the middle of Figure 8 is compared to 
its analogue A2 in Figure 5, the C-N bond distance has fallen to 1.67 Å, much closer to the 
value expected. This could indicate that the dissociation of a PPh3 could reduce some of the 
steric hindrance around Pd making better room for the nucleophilic attack of aniline. The 
structures in Figure 8 are 1 of 6 possible isomers for the 2 intermediates and were obtained 
from input structures corresponding to dissociation PPh3 from the 4-coordinated trans isomer.  
 
Figure 8. Possible 3-coordinated intermediates of reaction 2 and 3. Black = C White = H, Blue 
= N, Green = Cl, Red = O, Orange = P and Cyan = Pd  
The mechanism when going from species B to C can be seen in scheme 5. The mechanism 
was proposed by Hiwatari et al3, who showed using kinetic experiments that the Pd-carbomyl 
complex undergoes base-assisted 𝛽-elimination to form isocyanate and the PdL2 species3.   
==PAGE:36==
Page 36 of 79 
 
 
Scheme 5. 𝛽-elimination from Pd-carbomyl species to form isocyanate and Pd(0). 
Chronological reaction number above reaction arrow. 
The formed isocyanate then reacts with another primary amine to form urea as can be seen in 
Scheme 6.  
Scheme 6. Reaction of aniline with phenyl isocyanate to form DPU. 
The catalyst structures in scheme 5 are B which can be seen in Figure 5 and C which will be 
addressed shortly. For the computations aniline was used as the base and the salts (BaseHX) 
produced were thus anilinium chloride, bromide and iodide. Reaction 4 was also modeled 
forming the isolated ions anilinium and Cl-, Br- or I- as in reaction 1. Reaction 4 was modeled 
with the isolated ions for comparison with reaction 1. It is likely however that reaction 4 will 
proceed as depicted in scheme 5, since the formation of the salt would lower the energy of 
reaction significantly. Also, the negatively charged halogen is in very close proximity to the 
positive anilinium when dissociating and this would imply that the two species would attract 
each other to form the salt. With aniline as the substrate the produced isocyanate was phenyl 
isocyanate, which upon reaction with aniline produces DPU. Since the Gibbs free energy of all 
structures involved in reaction are needed, the structures of aniline, phenyl isocyanate and 
anilinium halogen were optimized. All these were controlled for abnormalities and found to be 
==PAGE:37==
Page 37 of 79 
 
as expected. It is unlikely that reaction 4 would happen by a preceding dissociation of PPh3 
since this would lead to a very unsTable mono-coordinated Pd. Thus, reaction 4 is likely to go 
through a TS, but again multiple attempts at finding a TS were unsuccessful. 
Possible mechanisms for the oxidation by O2 of Pd(0)L2 complexes has amongst others 
been discussed by Jin et al.87  and Stahl et al.88–90. The mechanism suggested can be seen in 
Scheme 7, and the corresponding optimized structures can be seen in Figure 9. 
 
 
Scheme 7. Possible mechanism for oxidation of Pd(0) species with O2 as oxidant. 
Chronological reaction number above reaction arrow. 
 
Figure 9. Optimized structure of the 3 intermediates shown in Scheme 7. Black = C White = 
H, Green = Cl, Red = O, Orange = P and Cyan = Pd   
==PAGE:38==
Page 38 of 79 
 
The first step of the mechanism is O2 coordinating to the Pd(0) center. The peroxopalladium-
η2–O2L2 complex formed by this, has been observed experimentally and studied 
computationally by Adamo et al.91 in similar reactions with 𝑃𝑃ℎ3 as ligand. Following the O2 
coordination 
the 
mechanism 
postulates 
a 
reaction 
with 
HX, 
forming 
a 
hydroperoxopalladium(II) complex. Evidence of hydroperoxopalladium(II) complexes have 
been found by Konnick et al89 for N-Heterocyclic-Carbene-Coordinated Pd. The last step 
involves another reaction with HX to produce the starting material in its cis form and H2O2. 
The H2O2 formed has been found to disproportion to water and O2 under catalytic conditions88, 
making it difficult to observe once the reaction has finished, but could possibly be observed by 
in situ measurements. This result also indicates that the hydrogen peroxide, a stronger oxidant 
than O2 is not kinetically available to act as an oxidant during reaction. Following the last 
reaction in scheme 7, an isomerization to the trans isomer would thus complete the catalytic 
cycle. An alternative mechanism involving a dimeric oxygen bridged Pd species has been 
discussed by Stahl88 and could possible also influence the reaction. However, there is more 
data supporting the mechanism depicted in Scheme 788. 
Structure C optimized in Figure 9 has a very low coordination number of only 2 and will 
therefore likely coordinate solvent. To test the influence of THF and Toluene coordination to 
C, these structures were also optimized and used for estimating reaction barriers. Alternatively 
as proposed by Amatore et al.92 structure C could be stabilized by Cl- or Br- bonding to complex 
C and form bridged dimeric Pd-species as seen in scheme 8.  
 
Scheme 8. Equilibrium between dimeric Pd species, [𝑃𝑑(𝑃𝑃ℎ3)2𝑋2]2− and 𝑃𝑑(𝑃𝑃ℎ3)2. 
Adapted from92.  
==PAGE:39==
Page 39 of 79 
 
The bridged Pd species would thus create a reservoir from which the low coordinated Pd(PPh3)2 
could be formed. Species C1 has previously been studied by Adamo et al91 and was also 
isolated experimentally. In Table 4, X-ray crystallography obtained bond distances are 
compared to bond distances of the optimized structure in Figure 9.   
Table 4. Selected bond distances in Å of complex C in Figure 9 compared to X-ray data from93 
Bond 
X-Ray93 
DFT optimized 
d (O-O) 
1.42 
1.40 
d (Pd-O1) 
1.99 
2.05 
d (Pd-O2) 
2.01 
2.05 
d (Pd-P1) 
2.27 
2.29 
d (Pd-P2) 
2.29 
2.29 
As can be seen the DFT model agrees well with the X-ray data with the largest error being 
0.049 Å an error of 2.5 %. This would suggest that the DFT method chosen reproduces X-ray 
data well, as expected.  The C2 complex was investigated and found to have a “chemically 
reasonable” structure. Again, the structures with X = Br- and I- were found to be almost 
identical to the structure with Cl-, were only the halogen Pd bond length varied significantly. 
The bond lengths once more followed the expected trend, increasing as we move down in the 
periodic Table from 2.39 Å, 2.51 Å to 2.79 Å for X = Cl-, Br- and I- respectively. As mentioned 
hydroperoxopalladium(II) complexes similar to C2 have been studied by Konnick et al89 for 
N-Heterocyclic-Carbene-Coordinated Pd. This would suggest that the species C2 could exist 
in solution, making the suggested mechanism plausible. As noted the last step of the reaction 
sequence in scheme 7 involves an isomerization back to the trans form of the catalyst. In fact, 
for the intermediates A, A1, A2 and B with X = Cl- were also optimized in their cis 
configuration to judge if the Gibbs free energy associate with the isomerization reactions could 
play a role in the catalytic ability. 
==PAGE:40==
Page 40 of 79 
 
Thus, all the catalytic structures needed for a complete catalytic cycle have been discussed 
and in Figure 10, the complete mechanism with these structures can be seen. Figure 10 neatly 
shows the intermediates discussed and the reagents and products for all steps in the catalytic 
cycle.  
 
Figure 10. Complete postulated reaction mechanism for the carbonylation of aniline to DPU, 
using O2 as the oxidant. Chronological reaction number next to reaction arrows. 
So far then a complete catalytic cycle has been established and modelled for reaction taking 
place in toluene (𝜖= 2.4 used in COSMO see computational methods section). The question 
of the effect of the ionic liquids on the reaction still needs to be addressed though. Since the 
ILs BMIMCl and BMIMBr showed promising results when studied by Zahrtmann et al2, their 
effect on the catalytic cycle was modeled by including Cl- and Br- in the second coordination 
sphere of the catalytic species. I- was also modeled in the second coordination’s sphere for 
==PAGE:41==
Page 41 of 79 
 
completeness of the halogen series and because when studied by Zahrtmann et al.2 it showed 
no catalytic activity. The positive BMIM+ ion was thought to have little influence on the second 
coordination’s sphere because of its size and its charge, making it less likely to approach the 
positively charged Pd center and was therefore not included in the second coordination’s 
sphere. The small negatively charged halogen ions were however expected to have a much 
larger influence on the second coordination environment. Most notably the effect of the second 
coordination sphere on reaction 1 was of interest. As already mentioned the role of the halogen 
might influence the species C because of the formation of dimeric Pd species. The 
concentration of the halogen will also influence the reactions 6 and 7 since here they are 
reagents taking part in the reaction. It is also evident that if the starting catalytic species is 
trans-PdCl2(PPh3)2 then if the reaction is taking place in a medium with a very high Br- or I- 
concentration it is likely that the catalytic species trans- PdBr2(PPh3)2 or trans-PdI2(PPh3)2 will 
be formed after the completion of the catalytic cycle. The catalytic species A and A1 for trans- 
PdCl2(PPh3)2 were accordingly optimized with Cl-, Br- and I- in the second coordination sphere. 
The optimized structures of the three A species can be seen in Figure 11.  
 
Figure 11. Optimized structure of the 5-coordinated species created when trying to describe 
the second coordination’s sphere . Black = C White = H, Purple=I, Green = Cl, Red = Br,  
Orange = P and Cyan = Pd   
The optimization produced 5-coordinated complexes even when the halogen in the second 
coordination’s sphere was placed as far as 10 Å away from the Pd center, as evident from the 
==PAGE:42==
Page 42 of 79 
 
structure in Figure 11. Thus, the A structures optimized to account for second coordination 
sphere effects fail to do so, since they penetrate the first coordination sphere. The structures 
produced may be species present at high halogen concentration, but they are not likely to be 
the main active catalytic compounds since this would require the dissociation of 2 rather than 
1 halogen for the mechanism to follow the cycle of Figure 10. The effects of an extra halogen 
in the first coordination sphere is also very different from the effects of a halogen in the second 
coordination’s sphere since this is a much more indirect influence. The optimization for the A1 
intermediates all produced structures like the 5-coordinated structure in Figure 6 and as already 
discussed this kind of structure seems rather unlikely and would not contribute to the catalytic 
cycle. Because of this, the attempt to model the influence of the ILs by a second coordination’s 
sphere was abandoned 
Instead the influence of the ILs was estimated by including the BMIM+ ion for the Cl- 
dissociation reaction as shown in scheme 9. By modeling the reaction as in scheme 9 much of 
the destabilizing effect of removing the halogen should be negated because of the higher 
stability of BMIMX compared to an isolated halogen in toluene. The same holds true for 
reaction 4 where the positive BaseH+ stabilizes the dissociation of the halogen ion. However, 
it is unlikely that upon dissociation that the halogen will be in as close proximity to the BMIM+ 
ion as when the two ions are modeled together. This way of modeling the reaction is therefore 
probably an overestimation of the stability provided by BMIM+, but it does give an indication 
to the magnitude of the effect of a high BMIM+ concentration. 
 
Scheme 9. Reaction 1 with the inclusion of BMIM+  
 
==PAGE:43==
Page 43 of 79 
 
Gibbs free energies of reaction 
With the structures and mechanism established it was now possible to estimate the activation 
energies of the reactions. Using TS-theory which establishes a relationship between the rate 
constant and the reaction barrier, the activation energy was used to postulate the RDS by 
assuming that the largest activation energy would lead to the smallest rate constant (thus 
assuming that the pre-exponential factors for the reactions studied have values of similar 
magnitude). The activation energies were approximated by Gibbs free energies using equation 
6-8. An approximation was needed since finding the true activation energies would require the 
determination of the potential energy as a function of the reaction coordinates94, which is 
beyond the scope of this project. Using the Gibbs free energy to approximate the activation 
energy is not the activation energy predicted by transition state theory (since this requires a 
TS). The approximation is based on the assumption that the Gibbs free energy scales linearly 
with the activation energy, known as the linear-free-energy relationships95. This has amongst 
others been supported by Michaelides et al.96 who found a linear relationship between the 
enthalpy of reaction (which can be further extrapolated to the Gibbs free energy from 𝐺= 𝐻−
𝑇𝑆 if the term TS is assumed to be relatively constant) and the activation energy for a large 
number of elementary reactions of relevance for homogenous catalysis. If the linear scaling is 
valid and similar in magnitude for the reactions studied, the relative magnitude of the Gibbs 
free energies calculated should be an indication to which reaction has the highest activation 
energy and thus which reaction is the RDS.  
Figure 12 shows the Gibbs free energy of reaction for the mechanism in Figure 10. As 
discussed, reaction 1 was modelled in two ways forming an isolated X- called reaction 1A or 
as depicted in scheme 9 forming an ion-pair BMIMX called 1B. As also discussed reaction 4, 
was modeled in two ways forming an isolated X- called reaction 4A or as depicted in scheme 
5 forming an anilinium salt called 4B. The largest energy can be seen for reaction 4A but as  
==PAGE:44==
Page 44 of 79 
 
 
Figure 12. Gibbs free energies of reaction estimated using equation 6 (B3LYP-30) and 8 for 
the cycle in Figure 10 with X = Cl-, Br- and I- (tabulated values available in Table A4). Reaction 
1A with X- dissociating into toluene and 1B X- dissociating to become BMIMX (scheme 9). 
Reaction 4A with X- dissociating into toluene and 4B X- dissociating to become BaseHX 
(Scheme 5). Tabulated values in Table A5. 
already discussed it is thought unlikely that the reaction would proceed in the way modeled in 
reaction 4A. The energy of reaction 4 is expected to be much closer to the value predicted with 
4B, because of the proximity of the ions at the time of reaction stabilizing each other to a much 
higher degree than predicted by the calculations, where each ion is isolated in a COSMO 
environment of toluene. Reaction 1A has the next highest energy, 97 kJ/mol lower than the 
energy of reaction 4A for Cl-. For reaction 1 in toluene there is no ion in close proximity to 
stabilize the dissociating halogen and the value of reaction 1A is thus believed to be a better 
-200.0
-100.0
0.0
100.0
200.0
300.0
400.0
1A
1B
2
3
4A
4B
5
6
7
kJ/mol
Reaction number
Cl-
Br-
I-
==PAGE:45==
Page 45 of 79 
 
approximation than 4A. Reaction 1A is 199 kJ/mol higher in energy than reaction 4B closest 
in energy. Because of this it was concluded that in toluene, the RDS would likely be reaction 
1. For reaction 1B the Gibbs free energy drops by 187, 184 and 179 kJ/mol for X = Cl-, Br- and 
I- respectively compared to 1A. As already mentioned this way of estimating the presence of 
BMIMX will probably overestimate the stabilizing effect of BMIMX compared to the situation 
in solution. For the reaction in IL, the reactions 1A and 1B are then both extremes in either way 
and it is therefore not unlikely that the energy lies somewhere in between the two values of 1A 
and 1B. This would still put the energy of reaction 1 considerably higher in energy than any of 
the other reactions of Figure 12, if it is assumed that the value of reaction 4 is close to the value 
predicted by 4B. Accordingly, based on these assumptions it was hypothesized that reaction 1 
would be the RDS in both toluene and IL. The large difference between 1A and 1B gives a 
clear indication that the positive effect of BMIMCl and BMIMBr on the reaction observed by 
Zahrtmann et al.2 could be contributed to the fact that Cl- can dissociate into a solution 
environment where it is stabilized to a much higher degree. However, the calculations fail to 
give any indications as to why BMIMI showed 0 % conversion when studied by Zahrtmann et 
al.2 (postulated by Zahrtmann et al. to be cause by an oversaturation of Iodide), since the energy 
of X = I- dissociating to become BMIMI does not show any significant energy difference.  
In Figure 13, the Gibbs free energy of reaction can be seen calculated with the standard 
B3LYP functional. Figure 13 was included to have a comparison to Figure 12 and to see if the 
conclusions based on Figure 12 are still valid if standard B3LYP is employed. Although most 
reaction energies have shifted by ≈ 10-20 kJ/mol the general trends are the same as in Figure 
12, and the conclusion based on Figure 12 are therefore still valid when using Figure 13. 
  
==PAGE:46==
Page 46 of 79 
 
 
Figure 13. Gibbs free energies of reaction estimated using equation 7 (B3LYP) and 8 for the 
cycle in Figure 10 with X = Cl-, Br- and I- (tabulated values available in Table A5). Reaction 
1A with X- dissociating into toluene and 1B X- dissociating to become BMIMX (scheme 9). 
Reaction 4A with X- dissociating into toluene and 4B X- dissociating to become BaseHX 
(Scheme 5). Tabulated values in Table A6. 
In the appendix Figure A5, shows the energies of reaction removing the Gibbs free energy 
correction term from equation 6. Removing this term has shifted the energy calculated for each 
reaction. Most notably reaction 1A and 4B are seen to be much closer in energy than in Figure 
12. The difference arises from the fact that the ZPE correction closely resembles the enthalpy 
correction (neglecting 4RT and thermal vibrational energy at 298.15 K). Figure A5 is thus 
Figure 12 without any entropy corrections to the reaction energy. This shows that reaction 4 is 
lowered significantly in energy by entropy corrections. This is as would be expected since the 
-200.0
-100.0
0.0
100.0
200.0
300.0
400.0
1A
1B
2
3
4A
4B
5
6
7
kJ/mol
Reaction number
Cl-
Br-
I-
==PAGE:47==
Page 47 of 79 
 
number of molecules goes from 2 to 3 and that the products are smaller molecules than the 
reactants meaning more degrees of freedom are available after reaction compared to the 
situation prior to reaction.  
The Gibbs free energy corrections used in Figure 12 and 13 were calculated using a 
temperature of 298.15 K and a pressure of 1 bar. For completeness and testing the influence on 
temperature and also pressure (has very small influence) the Gibbs free energy correction of 
equation 6 was also calculated at 413.15 K and 10 bar which were the experimental conditions. 
Using the Gibbs free energy correction at 413.15 K and 10 bar, can be seen in Figure A6. The 
change of temperature and pressure has shifted most energies by 10-20 kJ/mol up or down 
depending on whether they are exothermic or endothermic. Interestingly reaction 1A has 
increased in energy by approximately 10 kJ/mol while reaction 4B has fallen by the same 
amount. This supports the hypothesis that at the experimental conditions used, the dissociation 
of the halogen is the RDS. 
If reaction 1 is modeled by the 3-coordinated pathway in  scheme 3, the Cl- dissociation 
step energy is 305 kJ/mol instead of the 263 kJ/mol seen for reaction 1A in Figure 12. If the 
reaction is instead modeled by the 3-coordinated pathway in scheme 4, the Cl- dissociation step 
energy is 369 kJ/mol. The lower energy favors scheme 3 but as mentioned experimental data 
by Zahrtmann et al.2 favors scheme 4. Which of the two reaction pathways will be followed is 
therefore inconclusive and it is not unlikely for both to occur in solution. If the 3-coordinated 
pathway of scheme 3 is modeled with BMIMCl the energy becomes 118 kJ/mol compared to 
the 77 kJ/mol for reaction 1B in Figure 12. If the reaction proceeds though the 3-coordinated 
pathway of scheme 3, the best available estimate of the activation energy for the RDS in 
BMIMCl is thus 118 kJ/mol. The accuracy of this absolute number is questionable, but it is not 
an unreasonable number, indicating that the activation energy of the RDS could be in the 
vicinity of the 118 kJ/mol estimated. 
==PAGE:48==
Page 48 of 79 
 
If reaction 2 and 3 are modeled with trans-PdCl2(PPh3)2 and the intermediates in Figure 8 
with a PPh3 dissociated, the energy of reaction 2 changes from 44 kJ/mol to 35 kJ/mol and 
from 52 kJ/mol to 3 kJ/mol for reaction 3. This would indicate that the deprotonation of reaction 
3 becomes easier, likely because there is less steric hindrance for the base to approach the 
coordinated aniline when a PPh3 ligand has dissociated. The energy of reaction 2 has not change 
significantly meaning that even though there is more room for the aniline to attack the 
coordinated CO this is not a major influence on the reaction. The energy of dissociation of PPh3 
for the 4 complexes A, A1, A2 and B was found to be 80, 140, 131 and 81 kJ/mol respectively. 
This shows that the equilibrium between 3 and 4-coordinated complex heavily favors the 4-
coordinated complex. However, the observed free PPh3 during reaction by Zahrtmann et al2 
and the increased reactivity of the 3-coordinated complex means it could play a role kinetically. 
This result is thus non-conclusive, but it does show that the 3-coordinated pathway for reaction 
2 and 3 are a possibility and might happen alongside the 4-coordinated pathway. As discussed 
reaction 3 could also proceed through a rearrangement intermediate and energy for the 
formation of the rearrangement intermediate was found to be 7 kJ/mol, lowering the following 
deprotonation (reaction 3) energy with 7 kJ/mol. This indicates that whether the deprotonation 
will occur through rearrangement depends on the rate of deprotonation compared to the rate of 
rearrangement. 
The stability of the Pd(PPh3)2 species has also been discussed and the effect of modeling 
the species with a Toluene or THF has been investigated. The results showed that the energy 
for the coordination of THF was 29 kJ/mol and for coordinating toluene 59 kJ/mol. This shows 
that the coordination of a solvent molecule could happen in solution, as would be expected for 
a low coordinated Pd complex.  
As has also been discussed the cis/trans isomerization between the catalytic species is 
necessary for the completion of the catalytic cycle and thus merited investigation. The 
==PAGE:49==
Page 49 of 79 
 
isomerization Gibbs free energies for the species A, A1, A2 and B were found to be -27, -20,  
-5 and -36 kJ/mol respectively. The values are all negative and the isomerization to the trans 
isomer will thus happen spontaneously for all 4 complexes. This is what one would expected 
based on the large bulky PPh3 ligands with much lees steric strain in the trans isomer compared 
to the cis. This testifies to the ability of the computational model to correctly identify an 
expected trend. This also shows that upon completion of the catalytic cycle the isomerization 
from the cis to the trans isomer for species A will happen spontaneously. The small energy 
difference between the cis and trans isomer also indicates that in solution reactions could 
proceed with either isomer.  
The energetic view established above is not the complete picture, as there in solution are 
many other effects that play a major role on the reaction and are possibly contenders for the 
RDS. Amongst these are the solubility of O2 and CO in the reaction medium. If these are not 
to influence the rate of reaction the concentration of these gasses in the bulk solvent must be 
sufficiently high and not only the solubility of the gasses but also their ability to diffuse into 
the bulk solution could be significant (if sufficient stirring is applied this should be avoidable). 
The nature of the amine to be converted to urea is also of importance since this will influence 
not only the ability of the amine to nucleophilic attack the coordinated CO but also the 
deprotonations necessary for the completion of the catalytic cycle. The effect of the diffusion 
and solubility of CO and O2 are not easily modeled (the software needed was also not 
accessible) and was therefore not investigated here but could be of interest for future work to 
model. In principle a screening of many different amines could be done for the complete cycle, 
but due to time restriction this was not pursued.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
Page 50 of 79 
 
Experimental results 
The goal of the experiments was to test the two hypotheses established based on calculated 
Gibbs free energies, namely that the RDS is the dissociation of Cl- from the catalyst and that it 
is the presence of BMIM+ that provides the beneficial effect of IL to the catalytic reaction.  
First experiments were conducted with only the catalyst and solvent (Toluene and THF), 
to establish a baseline from which alterations to the experimental conditions could be judged. 
Experiments were also conducted with BMIMCl to verify the beneficial effect of BMIMCl 
reported by Zahrtmann et al.2 could be reproduced. The results of these experiments can be 
seen in Figure 14.  
 
Figure 14. Conversion of aniline for experiment number 1-10 (Table 2) with red line 
representing standard deviation calculated from uncertainty in calibration curve (2.7 %) and 
triple determination measurements. 
Figure 14 shows that for experiments 1 and 2 with no added catalyst, 0 % conversion was 
achieved and no DPU was observed by 1H-NMR as should be the case. Experiment 3 with no 
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Conversion % of Aniline
Experiment number
==PAGE:51==
Page 51 of 79 
 
catalyst but addition of BMIMCl showed a 11 % conversion. As mentioned in the experimental 
methods section the conversion for experiments with BMIMCl were modified by a quantitative 
1H-NMR measurement of aniline in the BMIMCl phase. Since no catalyst was added and no 
DPU was observed by 1H-NMR 0 % conversion was expected. The uncertainty in the 
quantitative NMR measurement is unknown and it is believed that the 11 % observed occurs 
because of uncertainty in the quantitative NMR measurements. When toluene was used as 
solvent (experiments 4-6) an average conversion of 45 % was achieved. The conversion of 45 
% was surprising since preliminary unpublished experiments conducted by Zahrtmann showed 
a very low conversion in toluene. The difference in conversion observed is thought to be caused 
by the use of two different reactors, where the reactor used by Zahrtmann was smaller which 
might have influenced the ability of oxygen and CO to dissolve in the toluene. When THF was 
used as the solvent (experiments 7-8) an average conversion of 56 % was observed. When a 
biphasic mixture of toluene and BMIMCl was used (experiments 9-10) a conversion of 55 % 
was achieved. This results shows that the addition of BMIMCl improves the conversion by 10 
% compared to the results in pure toluene. It was believed that the addition of BMIMCl would 
have benefited the reaction more than the 10 % improvement observed. The reason why only 
a 10 % improvement was seen is in part caused by the results in toluene being much better than 
expected and possibly because of the above-mentioned uncertainty in the quantitative NMR 
measurements. The value of 55 % is however close to unpublished values previously found by 
Zahrtmann when using air as the oxidant. For experiments 4-10 DPU was observed by 1H-
NMR (as described in the experimental section). Experiments 4-10 did not show any other 
products in the 1H-NMR spectrum and it was thus assumed that the selectivity was 100 %. 
To test the first hypothesis that the RDS is the dissociation of halogen, a series of 
experiments with addition of base were conducted. This was done since the computations 
showed that the reaction closest in energy to the halogen dissociation was reaction 4, which 
==PAGE:52==
Page 52 of 79 
 
needs a base to proceed. This way of testing is a rather indirect approach, since the point of 
these experiments was to test if adding a stronger base than aniline would influence the rate of 
the reaction and thus the conversion observed after 4 hours. More direct approaches for testing 
the hypothesis were considered e.g. in situ IR measurements. Unfortunately, experimental 
resources were limited and in situ measurement experiments could not be performed. To test 
the influence of addition of base to the reaction, 3 different bases were chosen as can be seen 
in Figure 4. The results of experiments with the addition of 25 mol % base to aniline can be 
seen in Figure 15.  
 
Figure 15. Conversion of aniline for experiment number 11-16 (Table 2) with red line 
representing standard deviation calculated from uncertainty in calibration curve (2.7 %) and 
triple determination measurements. 
From Figure 15 it becomes immediately evident that for experiments 11-14 conversions close 
to 0 % are observed. In fact, for experiments 11-14 no DPU was observed by 1H-NMR. This 
would indicate that the addition of DIPEA and  potassium tertbutoxide somehow hinder the 
-5
0
5
10
15
20
11
12
13
14
15
16
Conversion % of Aniline
Experiment number
==PAGE:53==
Page 53 of 79 
 
catalytic ability. The small conversion that is observed could possibly be caused by the base 
reacting with aniline in an acid base reaction. DIPEA and potassium tertbutoxide could 
possibly hinder catalytic ability by coordinating to the Pd, even though they were specifically 
chosen to try and avoid this. For experiments 15 and 16 a higher conversion of on average 14 
% can be seen. These experiments are with the much bulkier base 2,6-Di-tert-butylpyridine, 
which should make coordination to Pd very unlikely. For experiments 15-16, DPU was 
observed however, the 14 % conversion is much lower than the reference experiments (4-6) 
which showed a conversion of 44 %. This indicates that the presence of the base is not 
beneficial for the reaction. Why the presence of base in this case should slow the reaction is 
unknown and as of yet no possible explanation has been established. The conclusion based on 
the experiments with addition of base is thus that they seem to hinder the catalytic reaction 
somehow. It indicates that reaction 4 (and 3) where base is part of the reaction is not rate 
determining and thus the hypothesis that the RDS is dissociation of Cl- has not been disproven 
by these experiments.  
To test the hypothesis that the beneficial role of the ILs was the presence of BMIM+ 
stabilizing the negative charge of halogen upon dissociation a series of experiments with 
halogen salts were performed. This was done to verify if it was the presence of the Cl- and Br- 
that had the beneficial effect on the reaction in BMIMCl and BMIMBr when studied by 
Zahrtmann et al.2, and to try and explain why the IL BMIMI hindered catalytic ability. Thus, 
again experiments were conducted to test the conversion compared to reference experiments, 
in this case the experiments with THF. The results of the experiments with LiCl, LiBr can be 
seen in Figure 16. Unfortunately, the conversion of experiments with LiI (19, 24, 25) could not 
be determined since the HPLC measurements were affected by the presence of LiI, giving UV 
intensity measurements at the retention time of aniline much higher than expected yielding 
conversions of –800 %.  
==PAGE:54==
Page 54 of 79 
 
 
 
Figure 16. Conversion of aniline for experiment number 17-20 and 24-25 (Table 2) with red 
line representing standard deviation calculated from uncertainty in calibration curve (4.8 %) 
and triple determination measurements. 
For experiment 17 with LiCl and no catalyst a 0 % conversion and no DPU observed by 
1H-NMR as expected. For experiment 18, a conversion of -8 % was observed, which is 
obviously not a plausible result. The uncertainty of 5 % could partially explain this, the 
remaining 3 % unaccounted for could be explained by the UV intensity being influenced, 
giving higher than expected measurements at the retention time of aniline. This is also 
supported by the lack of DPU (or other similar products) in the 1H-NMR spectra indicating that 
a 0 % conversion was achieved in this experiment. Experiments 20-21 with LiCl showed a 
conversion of 41 % and DPU was observed with 1H-NMR. The 41 % is 15 % lower than the 
same experiment conducted in THF without LiCl. Experiments 22 and 23 with LiBr gave a low 
conversion with an average of only 9 %, with DPU observed with 1H-NMR. The intensity 
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
17
18
20
21
22
23
Conversion % of Aniline
Experiment number
==PAGE:55==
Page 55 of 79 
 
measured at the retention time of aniline might also have been affected for experiment 22 and 
23, indicating that the conversion might be higher than the 9 % observed. If the conversion is 
corrected by 8 % the conversion would be 17 %. The result with LiBr is then still 38 % worse 
than the corresponding experiment in pure THF. Since the presence of the salts LiCl and LiBr 
lowered the observed conversion compared to the reference experiments, the results would 
indicate that the 10 % improvement in conversion with addition of BMIMCl and the beneficial 
effect observed by Zahrtmann et al.2 when adding BMIMCl and BMIMBr, were not caused by 
the presence of Cl- and Br-. For this to be valid it must be assumed that the presence of Li+ ions 
has no influence on the reaction. A scenario where Li+ could stabilize this dissociation of Cl- 
should also be considered. In the THF solution with LiCl the concentration of Li+ is much 
lower than the concentration of BMIM+ in BMIMCl. This would mean that although the Li+ 
might have the capacity to stabilize the postulated RDS, the much lower concentration and 
solubility of the salts in organic solvents would make it difficult for them to compete with 
reactions taking place in ILs where the positive ions are much more concentrated. The 
hypothesis established that the beneficial effect observed with BMIMCl is cause by the 
presence of the positive BMIM+ stabilizing the dissociation of Cl- from the catalyst, has thus 
not been disproven and is at present still the best available hypothesis. The hypothesis of the 
beneficial effect of BMIM+ does not however explain why BMIMBr gave better results than 
BMIMCl when studied by Zahrtmann et al.2. The hypothesized positive effect of BMIM+ is 
therefore only part of the reason why BMIMCl and BMIMBr improve upon the conversion of 
the reaction. As already mentioned Zahrtmann et al2 postulated that the positive influence arose 
from an increased solubility of the basic aniline33 due to the weak acidity of BMIM+ which 
might also be a contributing factor to the observed results and why when studied by Zahrtmann 
BMIM+ gave better results than other cations.  
==PAGE:56==
Page 56 of 79 
 
As mentioned the conversion for experiments with LiI could not be established by either 
HPLC or GC. However, it was still possible to conduct 1H-NMR measurements for these 
experiments. The experiments with LiI showed DPU but noticeably other aromatic systems 
were observed in the 1H-NMR spectra, meaning that the selectivity of the experiments has been 
influenced by the LiI salt. A possible reason for change in selectivity observed with LiI 
compared to LiCl and LiBr could be caused by the redox potential of I- compared to Pd2+, Cl- 
and Br-. The redox potential for Pd2+, Cl-, Br- and I- from the handbook of chemistry and 
physics80 can be seen below.  
 
Pd2+ + 2 e- → Pd  
 
E0 = 0.951 V 
Cl2 + 2 e- → 2 Cl-  
 
E0 = 1.358 V 
Br2 + 2 e- → 2 Br-  
 
E0 = 1.066 V 
I2 + 2 e- → 2 I-  
 
E0 = 0.536 V 
As can be seen the values for the reduction of Cl2 and Br2 are higher than the value of Pd2+ 
whereas the value for I2 is lower than the value of Pd2+. This means that the oxidation of I- is 
more favorable than the oxidation of Pd to Pd2+. The catalytic cycle requires the reoxidation 
of Pd to Pd2+ and the high concentration of I- compared to Pd could thus be influencing the  
redox environment of the reaction in a way that alters the selectivity. This could then give an 
indication as to why when BMIMI was used by Zahrtmann et al a 0 % conversion was 
observed.    
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
Page 57 of 79 
 
6. Conclusions 
Computational chemistry has in recent years become a powerful tool to gain insight into the 
mechanistic details of homogenous catalytic processes. Understanding the detailed reaction 
mechanism for homogenous catalytic process is of great importance and many homogenous 
catalytic systems have in recent years been studied computationally57. Throughout this thesis 
knowledge of the mechanistic details of the carbonylation of aniline to DPU using 
computational and experimental studies in combination has been gained. 
The main observations are the following: 1) CCSD(T) calculated BDEs compared to 
experimental BDEs shows that CCSD(T) can predict the BDE for Pd-L bonds with decent 
accuracy (MSE and MAE of 2 and 14 kJ/mol respectively) excluding the Pd-C bond which 
CCSD(T) fails dramatically to describe with errors in the magnitude of 200 kJ/mol. 2) For 
describing Pd-L bonds the optimal choice of DFT functional was found to be the customized 
B3LYP-30 when compared to a CCSD(T) benchmark. with an MSE of 4 kJ/mol and MAE of 
20 kJ/mol. 3)  Based on the mechanism proposed by Hiwatari et al.3 (Figure 1), structure 
optimizations and literature studies helped formulate a complete reaction mechanism of the 
carbonylation of aniline to DPU, summarized in Figure 10. 4) Gibbs free energies calculated 
for the catalytic cycle in Figure 10 showed that the RDS for the catalytic cycle is proposed to 
be the dissociation of Cl- from the trans-PdCl2(PPh3)2 catalyst. 5) The beneficial effect of 
BMIMCl and BMIMBr on the reaction observed by Zahrtmann et al.2 has with the help of the 
computations postulated to be caused in part by the presence of BMIM+, lowering the energy 
of dissociation of Cl- from the catalytic species by 187 kJ/mol. 6) Experiments conducted with 
the catalyst trans-PdCl2(PPh3)2 in toluene and THF showed a conversion of aniline of 44 and 
56 % respectively and in a biphasic system of BMIMCl and toluene a conversion of 55 % was 
achieved. 7) Experiments conducted with the addition of 25 mol % base, gave 0-15 % 
conversion and thus was found to hinder the catalytic reaction, although how is still unknown. 
==PAGE:58==
Page 58 of 79 
 
This low conversion did however give indirect proof of the hypothesis that the RDS is the 
dissociation of Cl- from the catalytic species. 8) Experiments with the salts LiCl and LiBr gave 
a conversion of 41 and 9 % respectively, these results support the hypothesis that the beneficial 
effect observed for reaction conducted with BMIMCl and BMIMBr is in part caused by the 
presence of the positive BMIM+. 9) Experiments with LiI were shown using 1H-NMR  to affect 
the selectivity of the reaction. This was postulated to be caused by I- altering the redox 
environment of the reaction, which in turn might explain why previously 0 % conversion was 
achieved by Zahrtmann et al.2 with the use of BMIMI. 
Hopefully these conclusions can be used in subsequent work on the carbonylation of 
primary amines to urea’s. The performance of additional experiments to verify the dissociation 
Cl- to be the RDS would be of much scientific interest.  As proposed this could be achieved by 
performing experiments with in situ IR measurement. This would allow for the in-situ 
observation of the coordinated CO frequency giving knowledge to the nature of the catalyst in 
solution. In situ 31P-NMR measurements would allow for the observation of the change in the 
chemical shift and might also give more knowledge of the catalytic species present during 
reaction and thus the reaction mechanism. It would also be of interest to test experimentally if 
the catalytic species PdBr2(PPh3)2 and PdI2(PPh3)2 studied computational are catalytically 
active  as predicted by the computations, since this could give further merit to the computations 
and the conclusion drawn thereof.  
  
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
Page 59 of 79 
 
7. References 
(1)  
Zahrtmann, N. Pd-Catalysed Carbonylations of Anilines in Ionic Liquids Doctoral 
Thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2017. 
(2)  
Zahrtmann, N.; Claver, C.; Godard, C.; Riisager, A.; Garcia‐Suarez, E. J. Selective 
Oxidative Carbonylation of Aniline to Diphenylurea with Ionic Liquids. ChemCatChem 
2018, 10 (11), 2450–2457. 
(3)  
Hiwatari, K.; Kayaki, Y.; Okita, K.; Ukai, T.; Shimizu, I.; Yamamoto, A. Selective 
Oxidative Carbonylation of Amines to Oxamides and Ureas Catalyzed by Palladium 
Complexes. Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 2004, 77 (12), 2237–2250. 
(4)  
Thomas, J. M. The Enduring Relevance and Academic Fascination of Catalysis. Nat. 
Catal. 2018, 1 (1), 2–5. 
(5)  
Mizuno, N.; Misono, M. Heterogeneous Catalysis. Chem. Rev. 1998, 98 (1), 199–218. 
(6)  
Cole-Hamilton, D. J. Homogeneous Catalysis--New Approaches to Catalyst Separation, 
Recovery, and Recycling. Science (80-. ). 2003, 299 (5613), 1702–1706. 
(7)  
Hagen, J. Industrial Catalysis A Practical Approach, Third Comp.; Wiley-VCH, 2015. 
(8)  
Gadge, S. T.; Bhanage, B. M. Recent Developments in Palladium Catalysed 
Carbonylation Reactions. RSC Adv. 2014, 4 (20), 10367–10389. 
(9)  
Anandan, S.-K.; Webb, H. K.; Do, Z. N.; Gless, R. D. Unsymmetrical Non-Adamantyl 
N,N′-Diaryl Urea and Amide Inhibitors of Soluble Expoxide Hydrolase. Bioorg. Med. 
Chem. Lett. 2009, 19 (15), 4259–4263. 
(10)  Shahabuddin, M. S.; Nambiar, M.; Choudhary, B.; Advirao, G. M.; Raghavan, S. C. A 
Novel DNA Intercalator, Butylamino-Pyrimido[4′,5′:4,5]Selenolo(2,3-b)Quinoline, 
==PAGE:60==
Page 60 of 79 
 
Induces Cell Cycle Arrest and Apoptosis in Leukemic Cells. Invest. New Drugs 2010, 
28 (1), 35–48. 
(11)  Nitschke, C.; Scherr, G. Urea Derivatives. In Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial 
Chemistry; Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 2000. 
(12)  Sperger, T.; Fisher, H. C.; Schoenebeck, F. Computationally Deciphering Palladium-
Catalyzed Reaction Mechanisms. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Comput. Mol. Sci. 2016, 6 (3), 
226–242. 
(13)  Holder, J. C.; Zou, L.; Marziale, A. N.; Liu, P.; Lan, Y.; Gatti, M.; Kikushima, K.; Houk, 
K. N.; Stoltz, B. M. Mechanism and Enantioselectivity in Palladium-Catalyzed 
Conjugate Addition of Arylboronic Acids to β-Substituted Cyclic Enones: Insights from 
Computation and Experiment. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135 (40), 14996–15007. 
(14)  Polo, V.; Al-Saadi, A. A.; Oro, L. A. Theoretical Studies on the Mechanism of Iridium-
Catalyzed Alkene Hydrogenation by the Cationic Complex [IrH2(NCMe)3(PiPr3)]+. 
Organometallics 2014, 33 (19), 5156–5163. 
(15)  Schrödinger, E. Quantisierung Als Eigenwertproblem. Ann. Phys. 1926, 385 (13), 437–
490. 
(16)  Szabo, A.; Ostlund, N. s. Modern Quantum Chemistry: Introduction to Advanced 
Electronic Structure Theory, 1st ed.; Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc.: New York, 1982. 
(17)  Mardirossian, N.; Head-Gordon, M. Thirty Years of Density Functional Theory in 
Computational Chemistry: An Overview and Extensive Assessment of 200 Density 
Functionals. Mol. Phys. 2017, 115 (19), 2315–2372. 
(18)  Pauli, W. Über Den Zusammenhang Des Abschlusses Der Elektronengruppen Im Atom 
Mit Der Komplexstruktur Der Spektren. Zeitschrift für Phys. 1925, 31 (1), 765–783. 
==PAGE:61==
Page 61 of 79 
 
(19)  Bartlett, R. J. Coupled-Cluster Approach to Molecular Structure and Spectra: A Step 
toward Predictive Quantum Chemistry. J. Phys. Chem. 1989, 93 (5), 1697–1708. 
(20)  Ramabhadran, R. O.; Raghavachari, K. Extrapolation to the Gold-Standard in Quantum 
Chemistry: Computationally Efficient and Accurate CCSD(T) Energies for Large 
Molecules Using an Automated Thermochemical Hierarchy. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2013, 9 (9), 3986–3994. 
(21)  Harrison, 
N. 
M. 
An 
Introduction 
to 
Density 
Functional 
Theory 
http://www.ch.imperial.ac.uk/harrison/Teaching/DFT_NATO.pdf (accessed Feb 19, 
2018). 
(22)  Hohenberg, P.; Kohn, W. Inhomogeneous Electron Gas. Phys. Rev. 1964, 136 (3B), 
B864--B871. 
(23)  Kohn, W.; Sham, L. J. Self-Consistent Equations Including Exchange and Correlation 
Effects. Phys. Rev. 1965, 140 (4A), A1133--A1138. 
(24)  Perdew, J. P.; Schmidt, K. Jacob’s Ladder of Density Functional Approximations for 
the Exchange-Correlation Energy. AIP Conf. Proc. 2001, 577 (1), 1–20. 
(25)  Jensen, K.; Ryde, U. Theoretical Prediction of the Co-C Bond Strength in Cobalamins. 
J. Phys. Chem. A 2003, 155, 7539–7545. 
(26)  Salomon, O.; Reiher, M.; Hess, B. A. Assertion and Validation of the Performance of 
the B3LYP⋆ Functional for the First Transition Metal Row and the G2 Test Set. J. Chem. 
Phys. 2002, 117 (10), 4729–4737. 
(27)  Becke, A. D. Density‐functional Thermochemistry. III. The Role of Exact Exchange. J. 
Chem. Phys. 1993, 98 (7), 5648–5652. 
(28)  Grossman, J. C.; Mitas, L.; Raghavachari, K. Structure and Stability of Molecular 
==PAGE:62==
Page 62 of 79 
 
Carbon: Importance of Electron Correlation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1995, 75 (21), 3870–3873. 
(29)  Shi, F.; Peng, J.; Deng, Y. Highly Efficient Ionic Liquid-Mediated Palladium Complex 
Catalyst System for the Oxidative Carbonylation of Amines. J. Catal. 2003, 219 (2), 
372–375. 
(30)  Díaz, J. D.; Darko, K. A.; McElwee‐White, L. Transition Metal‐Catalyzed Oxidative 
Carbonylation of Amines to Ureas. European J. Org. Chem. 2007, No. 27, 4453–4465. 
(31)  Shi, F.; He, Y.; Li, D.; Ma, Y.; Zhang, Q.; Deng, Y. Developing Effective Catalyst 
System for Reductive Carbonylation of Nitrobenzene Based on the Diversity of Ionic 
Liquids. J. Mol. Catal. A Chem. 2006, 244 (1), 64–67. 
(32)  Olivier-Bourbigou, H.; Magna, L.; Morvan, D. Ionic Liquids and Catalysis: Recent 
Progress from Knowledge to Applications. Appl. Catal. A Gen. 2010, 373 (1), 1–56. 
(33)  Morais, A. R. C.; da Costa Lopes, A. M.; Bogel-Łukasik, E.; Bogel-Łukasik, R. Ionic 
Liquids’ Cation and Anion Influence on Aromatic Amine Solubility. Ind. Eng. Chem. 
Res. 2013, 52 (41), 14722–14726. 
(34)  Gabriele, B.; Salerno, G.; Mancuso, R.; Costa, M. Efficient Synthesis of Ureas by Direct 
Palladium-Catalyzed Oxidative Carbonylation of Amines. J. Org. Chem. 2004, 69 (14), 
4741–4750. 
(35)  Peng, X.; Li, F.; Hu, X.; Xia, C.; Sandoval, C. A. A Pd(OAc)2/[Mmim]I Catalyst System 
for Oxidative Carbonylation of Amines to Carbamates, Ureas, and 2-Oxazolidinones. 
Chinese J. Catal. 2008, 29 (7), 638–642. 
(36)  Gabriele, B.; Mancuso, R.; Salerno, G.; Costa, M. A Novel and Efficient Method for the 
Pd-Catalysed 
Oxidative 
Carbonylation 
of 
Amines 
to 
Symmetrically 
and 
Unsymmetrically Substituted Ureas. Chem. Commun. 2003, No. 4, 486–487. 
==PAGE:63==
Page 63 of 79 
 
(37)  Ca’, N. Della; Bottarelli, P.; Dibenedetto, A.; Aresta, M.; Gabriele, B.; Salerno, G.; 
Costa, M. Palladium-Catalyzed Synthesis of Symmetrical Urea Derivatives by 
Oxidative Carbonylation of Primary Amines in Carbon Dioxide Medium. J. Catal. 2011, 
282 (1), 120–127. 
(38)  Didgikar, M. R.; Joshi, S. S.; Gupte, S. P.; Diwakar, M. M.; Deshpande, R. M.; 
Chaudhari, R. V. Oxidative Carbonylation of Amine Using Water-Soluble Palladium 
Catalysts in Biphasic Media. J. Mol. Catal. A Chem. 2011, 334 (1–2), 20–28. 
(39)  Giannoccaro, P.; Ferragina, C.; Gargano, M.; Quaranta, E. Pd-Catalysed Oxidative 
Carbonylation of Amino Alcohols to N,N′-Bis(Hydroxyalkyl)Ureas under Mild 
Conditions Using Molecular Oxygen as the Oxidant. Appl. Catal. A Gen. 2010, 375 (1), 
78–84. 
(40)  Turbomole V7.0 2011, a Development of University of Karlsruhe and 
Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe GmbH, 1989-2007, TURBOMOLE GmbH, since 2007; 
Available from Http://Www.Turbomole.Com. 2012. 
(41)  Perdew, J. Density-Functional Approximation for the Correlation Energy of the 
Inhomogenous Electron Gas. Phys. Rev. B 1986, 33 (12), 8822–8824. 
(42)  Becke, A. D. Density-Functional Exchange-Energy Approximation with Correct 
Asymptotic-Behavior. Phys. Rev. A 1988, 38 (6), 3098–3100. 
(43)  Weigend, F.; Ahlrichs, R. Balanced Basis Sets of Split Valence, Triple Zeta Valence 
and Quadruple Zeta Valence Quality for H to Rn: Design and Assessment of Accuracy. 
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2005, 7 (18), 3297–3305. 
(44)  Bühl, M.; Kabrede, H. Geometries of Transition-Metal Complexes from Density-
Functional Theory. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2006, 2 (5), 1282–1290. 
==PAGE:64==
Page 64 of 79 
 
(45)  Feng, X.; Gu, J.; Xie, Y.; King, R. B.; Schaefer, H. F. Homoleptic Carbonyls of the 
Second-Row Transition Metals: Evaluation of Hartree−Fock and Density Functional 
Theory Methods. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2007, 3 (4), 1580–1587. 
(46)  Jensen, K. P.; Roos, B. O.; Ryde, U. Performance of Density Functionals for First Row 
Transition Metal Systems. J. Chem. Phys. 2007, 126, 014103. 
(47)  Hay, P. J.; Wadt, W. R. Ab Initio Effective Core Potentials for Molecular Calculations. 
Potentials for K to Au Including the Outermost Core Orbitals. J. Chem. Phys. 1985, 82 
(1), 299–310. 
(48)  Jensen, K. P. Metal - Ligand Bonds of Second- and Third-Row d-Block Metals 
Characterized by Density Functional Theory. J. Phys. Chem. A 2009, 113, 10133–
10141. 
(49)  Dolg, M.; Cao, X. Relativistic Pseudopotentials: Their Development and Scope of 
Applications. Chem. Rev. 2012, 112 (1), 403–480. 
(50)  Klamt, A.; Schüürmann, G. COSMO: A New Approach to Dielectric Screening in 
Solvents with Explicit Expressions for the Screening Energy and Its Gradient. J. Chem. 
Soc., Perkin Trans. 2 1993, No. 5, 799–805. 
(51)  Schäfer, A.; Klamt, A.; Sattel, D.; Lohrenz, J. C. W.; Eckert, F. COSMO Implementation 
in TURBOMOLE: Extension of an Efficient Quantum Chemical Code towards Liquid 
Systems. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2000, 2 (10), 2187–2193. 
(52)  Mardolca, U. V.; Castrob, C. a. N. De; Santosb, F. J. V. Dielectric Benzene 
Measurements of Toluene The Measurements. Fluid Phase Equilib. 1992, 79, 255–264. 
(53)  Jensen, K. P.; Ooi, B.-L.; Christensen, H. E. M. Accurate Computation of Reduction 
Potentials of 4Fe-4S Clusters Indicates a Carboxylate Shift in Pyrococcus Furiosus 
==PAGE:65==
Page 65 of 79 
 
Ferredoxin. Inorg. Chem. 2007, 46 (21), 8710–8716. 
(54)  Jensen, K. P. Computational Studies of Modified [Fe3S4] Clusters: Why Iron Is 
Optimal. J. Inorg. Biochem. 2008, 102, 87–100. 
(55)  Jensen, K. P.; Rykær, M. The Building Blocks of Metallothioneins: Heterometallic Zn2+ 
and Cd2+ Clusters from First-Principles Calculations. Dalt. Trans. 2010, 39, 9684. 
(56)  Grimme, S.; Antony, J.; Ehrlich, S.; Krieg, H. A Consistent and Accurate Ab Initio 
Parametrization of Density Functional Dispersion Correction (DFT-D) for the 94 
Elements H-Pu. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 132 (15). 
(57)  Sperger, T.; Sanhueza, I. A.; Kalvet, I.; Schoenebeck, F. Computational Studies of 
Synthetically Relevant Homogeneous Organometallic Catalysis Involving Ni , Pd , Ir , 
and Rh : An Overview of Commonly Employed DFT Methods and Mechanistic Insights. 
Chem. Phys. Lett. 2015. 
(58)  Peterson, K. A.; Woon, D. E.; Dunning, T. H. Benchmark Calculations with Correlated 
Molecular Wave Functions. IV. The Classical Barrier Height of the H+H2→H2+H 
Reaction. J. Chem. Phys. 1994, 100 (10), 7410–7415. 
(59)  Swart, 
M.; 
Bickelhaupt, 
F. 
M.; 
Duran, 
M. 
DFT 
2016 
poll 
http://www.marcelswart.eu/dft-poll/news2016.pdf. 
(60)  Ekström, U.; Visscher, L.; Bast, R.; Thorvaldsen, A. J.; Ruud, K. Arbitrary-Order 
Density Functional Response Theory from Automatic Differentiation. J. Chem. Theory 
Comput. 2010, 6 (7), 1971–1980. 
(61)  Perdew, J. P. Density-Functional Approximation for the Correlation Energy of the 
Inhomogeneous Electron Gas. Phys. Rev. B 1986, 33 (12), 8822–8824. 
(62)  Perdew, J. P. J.; Burke, K.; Ernzerhof, M. Generalized Gradient Approximation Made 
==PAGE:66==
Page 66 of 79 
 
Simple. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996, 77 (18), 3865–3868. 
(63)  Handy, N. C.; Cohen, A. J. Left-Right Correlation Energy. Mol. Phys. 2001, 99 (5), 403–
412. 
(64)  Lee, C.; Yang, W.; Parr, R. G. Development of the Colle-Salvetti Correlation-Energy 
Formula into a Functional of the Electron Density. Phys. Rev. B 1988, 37 (2), 785–789. 
(65)  Cohen, A. J.; Handy, N. C. Assessment of Exchange Correlation Functionals. Chem. 
Phys. Lett. 2000, 316 (1), 160–166. 
(66)  Hammer, B.; Hansen, L. B.; Nørskov, J. K. Improved Adsorption Energetics within 
Density-Functional Theory Using Revised Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof Functionals. Phys. 
Rev. B 1999, 59 (11), 7413–7421. 
(67)  Stephens, P. J.; Devlin, F. J.; Chabalowski, C. F.; Frisch, M. J. Ab Initio Calculation of 
Vibrational Absorption and Circular Dichroism Spectra Using Density Functional Force 
Fields. J. Phys. Chem. 1994, 98 (45), 11623–11627. 
(68)  Adamo, C.; Barone, V. Toward Reliable Density Functional Methods without 
Adjustable Parameters: The PBE0 Model. J. Chem. Phys. 1999, 110 (13), 6158–6170. 
(69)  Staroverov, V. N. Comparative Assessment of a New Nonempirical Density Functional: 
Molecules and Hydrogen-Bonded Complexes. J. Chem. Phys. 2003, 119 (23). 
(70)  Zhao, Y.; Truhlar, D. G. The M06 Suite of Density Functionals for Main Group 
Thermochemistry, Thermochemical Kinetics, Noncovalent Interactions, Excited States, 
and Transition Elements: Two New Functionals and Systematic Testing of Four M06-
Class Functionals and 12 Other Function. Theor. Chem. Acc. 2008, 120 (1), 215–241. 
(71)  Yanai, T.; Tew, D. P.; Handy, N. C. A New Hybrid Exchange–correlation Functional 
Using the Coulomb-Attenuating Method (CAM-B3LYP). Chem. Phys. Lett. 2004, 393 
==PAGE:67==
Page 67 of 79 
 
(1), 51–57. 
(72)  Harvey, J. N. On the Accuracy of Density Functional Theory in Transition Metal 
Chemistry. Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem. Sect. C Phys. Chem. 2006, 102 (0), 203–226. 
(73)  Moltved, K. A.; Kepp, K. P. Chemical Bond Energies of 3d Transition Metals Studied 
by Density Functional Theory. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2018, 14 (7), 3479–3492. 
(74)  Xian‐Ying, S.; Ke‐Yan, L.; Juan, F.; Xue‐Fen, D.; Jun‐Fa, W.; Chao‐Jun, L. A 
Convenient Synthesis of N‐Aryl Benzamides by Rhodium‐Catalyzed Ortho‐Amidation 
and Decarboxylation of Benzoic Acids. Chem. – A Eur. J. 2014, 21 (5), 1900–1903. 
(75)  SDBS-1H NMR SDBS No. 1193 HSP-04-003 http://sdbs.db.aist.go.jp/sdbs/cgi-
bin/direct_frame_disp.cgi?sdbsno=1193 (accessed Jul 16, 2018). 
(76)  Fulmer, G. R.; Miller, A. J. M.; Sherden, N. H.; Gottlieb, H. E.; Nudelman, A.; Stoltz, 
B. M.; Bercaw, J. E.; Goldberg, K. I. NMR Chemical Shifts of Trace Impurities: 
Common Laboratory Solvents, Organics, and Gases in Deuterated Solvents Relevant to 
the Organometallic Chemist. Organometallics 2010, 29 (9), 2176–2179. 
(77)  Ozawa, F.; Soyama, H.; Yanagihara, H.; Aoyama, I.; Takino, H.; Izawa, K.; Yamamoto, 
T.; Yamamoto, A. Palladium-Catalyzed Double Carbonylation of Aryl Halides to Give 
.Alpha.-Keto Amides. Mechanistic Studies. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1985, 107 (11), 3235–
3245. 
(78)  Ragaini, F. Away from Phosgene: Reductive Carbonylation of Nitroarenes and 
Oxidative Carbonylation of Amines, Understanding the Mechanism to Improve 
Performance. Dalt. Trans. 2009, No. 32, 6251–6266. 
(79)  Yamamoto, A.; Ozawa, F.; Osakada, K.; Huang, L.; Son, T.; Kawasaki, N.; M.-K., D. 
Mechanisms of Double and Single Carbonylation Reactions Catalyzed by Palladium 
==PAGE:68==
Page 68 of 79 
 
Complexes. Pure and Applied Chemistry. 1991, p 687. 
(80)  Rumble, J. R. CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 98th Edition; CRC Handbook 
of Chemistry and Physics; CRC Press LLC, 2017. 
(81)  Yamamoto, A.; Ozawa, F.; Osakada, K.; Huang, L.; Son, T.; Kawasaki, N.; Doh, M.-K. 
Mechanisms of Double and Single Carbonylation Reactions Catalyzed by Palladium 
Complexes. Pure and Applied Chemistry. 1991, p 687. 
(82)  Weller, M.; Overton, T.; Rourke, J.; Armstrong, F. Inorganic Chemistry, 6th ed.; Oxford 
University Press: Oxford, 2014. 
(83)  Barnard, C. F. J. Palladium-Catalyzed Carbonylations - A Reaction Come of Age. 
Organometallics 2008, 27 (7), 5402–5422. 
(84)  Garrou, P. E.; Heck, R. F. The Mechanism of Carbonylation of Halo(Bis 
Ligand)Organoplatinum(II), -Palladium(II), and -Nickel(II) Complexes. J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 1976, 98 (14), 4115–4127. 
(85)  Frisch, M. J.; Trucks, G. W.; Schlegel, H. B.; Scuseria, G. E.; Robb, M. A.; Cheeseman, 
J. R.; Scalmani, G.; Barone, V.; Petersson, G. A.; Nakatsuji, H.; et al. Gaussian 16 
Revision A.03. Gaussian, Inc.: Wallingford CT 2016. 
(86)  Stambuli, J. P.; Incarvito, C. D.; Bühl, M.; Hartwig, J. F. Synthesis, Structure, 
Theoretical Studies, and Ligand Exchange Reactions of Monomeric, T-Shaped 
Arylpalladium(II) Halide Complexes with an Additional, Weak Agostic Interaction. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126 (4), 1184–1194. 
(87)  Jin, L. Q.; Lei, A. W. Mechanistic Aspects of Oxidation of Palladium with O2. Sci. 
China Chem. 2012, 55 (10), 2027–2035. 
(88)  Stahl, S. Palladium Oxidase Catalysis: Selective Oxidation of Organic Chemicals by 
==PAGE:69==
Page 69 of 79 
 
Direct Dioxygen‐Coupled Turnover. Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 2004, 43 (26), 3400–3420. 
(89)  Konnick, M. M.; Guzei, I. A.; Stahl, S. S. Characterization of Peroxo and Hydroperoxo 
Intermediates in the Aerobic Oxidation of N-Heterocyclic-Carbene-Coordinated 
Palladium(0). J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126 (33), 10212–10213. 
(90)  Stahl, S. S.; Thorman, J. L.; Nelson, R. C.; Kozee, M. A. Oxygenation of Nitrogen-
Coordinated Palladium(0): Synthetic, Structural, and Mechanistic Studies and 
Implications for Aerobic Oxidation Catalysis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2001, 123 (29), 7188–
7189. 
(91)  Adamo, C.; Amatore, C.; Ciofini, I.; Jutand, A.; Lakmini, H. Mechanism of the 
Palladium-Catalyzed Homocoupling of Arylboronic Acids:  Key Involvement of a 
Palladium Peroxo Complex. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2006, 128 (21), 6829–6836. 
(92)  Amatore, C.; Azzabi, M.; Jutand, A. Role and Effects of Halide Ions on the Rates and 
Mechanisms of Oxidative Addition of Iodobenzene to Low-Ligated Zerovalent 
Palladium Complexes Pd0 (PPh3) 2. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1991, 113 (22), 8375–8384. 
(93)  Yoshida, T.; Tatsumi, K.; Matsumoto, M.; Nakatsu, K.; Nakamura, A.; Fueno, T.; 
Otsuka, S. Reversible Dioxygen Palladium Complex, PdO2 [PPh(T-BU)2]2 and 
Iriversible Platinum Analog, PTO2 [PPH(T-BU)2]2. Crystal and Molecular-Structures 
and the Inter-Ligand Angel Effect. Nouv. J. Chim. J. Chem. 1979, 3 (12), 761–774. 
(94)  Ziegler, T. Approximate Density Functional Theory as a Practical Tool in Molecular 
Energetics and Dynamics. Chem. Rev. 1991, 91 (5), 651–667. 
(95)  Shorter, J. Correlation Analysis in Organic Chemistry: An Introduction to Linear Free-
Energy Relationships; Clarendon Press: the University of California, 1973. 
(96)  Michaelides, A.; Liu, Z.-P.; Zhang, C. J.; Alavi, A.; King, D. A.; Hu, P. Identification 
==PAGE:70==
Page 70 of 79 
 
of General Linear Relationships between Activation Energies and Enthalpy Changes for 
Dissociation Reactions at Surfaces. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2003, 125 (13), 3704–3705. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
Page 71 of 79 
 
8. Appendix 
 
Figure A1. Result of COSMO benchmark on the species 𝑃𝑃ℎ3 (P) Tran-𝑃𝑑𝐶𝑙2(𝑃𝑃ℎ3)2 (Pd 4 
coord) and Tran-𝑃𝑑𝐶𝑙 (𝑃𝑃ℎ3)2 (Pd 3 coord) with 𝜖 of 2.4 and 20. The energy displayed is the 
energy relative to the energy of the energy calculated at the smallest radius of solvation. 
==PAGE:72==
Page 72 of 79 
 
 
Figure A2. 31P-NMR spectrum of Tran-𝑃𝑑𝐶𝑙2(𝑃𝑃ℎ3)2 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:73==
Page 73 of 79 
 
 
Figure A3.  GC calibration curve with the aniline to mesitylene (internal standard) area 
observed as function of the aniline concentration in M.  
 
 
y = 10.876x + 0.0234
R² = 0.9954
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
Aniline area/Internal standard area
Aniline concentration (M) 
==PAGE:74==
Page 74 of 79 
 
 
Figure A4. HPLC calibration curve with the aniline to mesitylene (internal standard) area 
observed as function of the aniline concentration in mg/mL. 
 
 
y = 0.7827x + 0.0965
R² = 0.9839
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Aniline area/Internal standard area 
Aniline concentration (mg/mL)
==PAGE:75==
Page 75 of 79 
 
 
Figure A5. 1H-NMR spectrum of DPU observed for experiment 4 from solid precipitate 
dissolved in DMSO. Each peak assigned as seen by the numbers next to the appropriate H and 
at the bottom of the spectra. For remaining experiments DPU was observed by identical spectra.  
 
==PAGE:76==
Page 76 of 79 
 
 
Figure A6. Energies of reaction estimated using equation 6 (excluding the 𝐸𝐺𝑖𝑏𝑏𝑠 term) and 8 
for the cycle in Figure 10 with X = Cl-, Br- and I-. 
-200.0
-100.0
0.0
100.0
200.0
300.0
400.0
500.0
1A
1B
2
3
4A
4B
5
6
7
kJ/mol
Reaction number
Cl-
Br-
I-
==PAGE:77==
Page 77 of 79 
 
 
Figure A7. Energies of reaction estimated using equation 6 and 8 with T = 140 ℃ and P = 10 
bar for the cycle in Figure 10 with X = Cl-, Br- and I-. 
 
 
-200.0
-100.0
0.0
100.0
200.0
300.0
400.0
1A
1B
2
3
4A
4B
5
6
7
kJ/mol
Reaction number
Cl-
Br-
I-
==PAGE:78==
Page 78 of 79 
 
Table A1.   Experimental BDEs  in kJ/mol from The handbook of chemistry and physics80. 
Complex 
PdC 
Pd+C 
Pd+C2H2 
Pd+CH3 
Pd+CH4 
Pd+CS 
BDE 
436 
528 
29 
258 
171 
200 
Complex 
PdH 
Pd+H 
PdO 
Pd+O 
PdOH 
 
BDE 
234 
208 
238 
145 
213 
 
Table A2.  BDEs calculated using equation 4 in kJ/mol 
Complex 
PdC 
Pd+C 
Pd+C2H2 
Pd+CH3 
Pd+CH4 
Pd+CS 
BDE 
315 
326 
176 
240 
89 
278 
Complex 
PdH 
Pd+H 
PdO 
Pd+O 
PdOH 
 
BDE 
238 
220 
233 
125 
233 
 
Table A3. Tabulated values of Figure 3 
Functional 
MSE 
STD of SE 
MAE 
STD of AE 
B3LYP-30 
4 
24 
20 
14 
CAMB3LYP 
31 
27 
35 
22 
B3LYP 
38 
29 
47 
10 
PBE0 
49 
25 
51 
20 
TPSSh 
53 
22 
53 
22 
CAMB3LYP-
49 
36 
58 
18 
B3LYP* 
55 
32 
60 
21 
TPSS 
74 
26 
74 
26 
rPBE 
77 
37 
78 
35 
BLYP 
77 
39 
80 
33 
M06 
69 
47 
80 
23 
OLYP 
77 
46 
85 
29 
OPBE 
95 
45 
96 
42 
PBE 
107 
39 
107 
39 
Table A4. Solubility of inorganic salts used in mg/ml at 25 ℃ 
Salt 
Solubility in THF 
Solubility in Toluene 
LiCl 
2.78 
Not dissolvable 
LiBr 
47.0 
Not dissolvable 
LiI 
13.6 
Not dissolvable 
 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
Page 79 of 79 
 
Table A5. Tabulated values of Figure 12 
Reaction 
Cl- 
Br- 
I- 
1A 
263.3 
247.4 
236.2 
1B 
76.5 
63.3 
56.9 
2 
44.0 
44.4 
51.2 
3 
52.3 
47.8 
43.6 
4A 
360.2 
340.9 
324.3 
4B 
64.8 
77.8 
80.5 
5 
27.6 
27.6 
27.6 
6 
-59.4 
-81.0 
-90.8 
7 
-120.2 
-139.8 
-153.8 
 
Table A6. Tabulated values of Figure 13 
Reaction 
Cl- 
Br- 
I- 
1A 
255.8 
240.0 
230.1 
1B 
60.6 
49.3 
45.2 
2 
34.7 
34.8 
40.8 
3 
52.0 
47.5 
43.9 
4A 
384.4 
365.0 
348.9 
4B 
79.2 
92.2 
97.2 
5 
-1.1 
-1.1 
-1.1 
6 
-58.3 
-79.5 
-89.9 
7 
-107.0 
-126.8 
-141.9 
 
 
