==PAGE:1==
Head-tracked real-time auralization with
individualized HRTFs
Guido Baldovino
MSc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering Acoustics
Kongens Lyngby, July 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Ørsteds Plads,
Building 352
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby.Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 38 00
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This MSc thesis was prepared at the department of Electrical Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a
MSc degree in Engineering Acoustics.
Kongens Lyngby, July 22, 2018
Guido Baldovino
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Due to a continuous increase in the usage of headphones in everyday life situations, as
well as the interaction between users and devices and the development of virtual and
augmented reality experiences, the requirement of spatial audio delivered through
headphones is becoming bigger. With the help of head tracking and individualized
Head Related Transfer Function, the overall performances of 3D audio experiences
can be improved significantly. In this thesis, a head tracked real time auralization is
implemented in Matlab on a binaural headset with the use of individualized HRTFs.
All the hardware used and the processing algorithms can be considered an off-the-
shelf solution, opposite to all the expensive head tracking and HRTF individualization
methods implemented in laboratories and research environments. The system is val-
idated through a pilot test made of a localization test and a long duration speech
listening. No strong conclusions can be derived from this test due to the limited
number of subjects, nonetheless some differences appears in the results between the
two filtering conditions which leave possibilities for a bigger scale future validation.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Cheol-Ho Jeong, Marton Marschall, Finnur
Kári Pind Jörgensson and Ville Pulkki for the help and guidance given me during
this project. I also would like to thank the technical support given by the technicians
in the acoustic department of DTU. A special thank to Michele Geronazzo for all the
suggestions, the support and the inspiring discussions we have had. A final thank to
my friends and my family for always being present and ready to help when needed.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction, project description and objectives
1
2
Background theory
5
2.1
Spatial hearing and sound localization cues
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
HRTF and its individualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Motion tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Previous work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methods
15
3.1
Motion tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
HRTF selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Headphone compensation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Realtime dynamic binaural rendering in Matlab . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Pilot test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Results and discussion
29
5
Conclusion
35
5.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Bibliography
39
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction, project
description and
objectives
Naturally, in everyday life we are constantly surrounded by sounds. Thanks to two
exceptional sensors, our ears, we can classify specific characteristics of the sound
sources such as distance, direction, loudness. The spatial information are specifically
acquired by processing temporal and spectral features related to both the environ-
ment and the listener himself, and they can be reproduced with headphone using
binaural technologies [1, 2]. The frequently overused word ”3D audio” simply means
the natural binaural hearing we are used to in our life. When trying to reproduce
such audio through headphones, the localization performance and overall realism are
optimal when the cues used everyday in spatial hearing are reproduced as faithfully
as possible. Many applications can benefit from the reproduction of a realistic three
dimensional sound field through headphones, such as entertainment, music, virtual
and augmented reality, sensory substitution devices, teleconferencing, military oper-
ations and so on [3]. Although many applications are available, the requirements of
spatial audio delivered through headphones are becoming more demanding, and lots
of limitations and difficulties need to be overcome to provide a proper audio signal for
3D audio experiences. In order to create a realistic spatial audio experience in virtual
acoustic displays (VADs) one can exploit one or several of the following options:
1. motion tracking system which allows the user to move freely and listen to virtual
sources maintaining coherence between head orientation and source position [4,
5]
2. individualization of Head Related Transfer Function set so that the processing
of the sound sources corresponds to a certain degree to the listener’ s own body,
head, pinna [6, 7, 8]
3. add reverberation (e.g. in the form of early/late reflections) to enhance exter-
nalization and realism [9]
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction, project description and objectives
A precise study on the impact of these factors has been conducted from Begault and
Wenzel in [10]. The first option has often been implemented in laboratory and re-
search environments, most of the time with sophisticated systems which could rarely
be included into a consumer headset and be used in everyday life and mobile situ-
ations. The second option represents a hot research topic, but involves measuring
individual HRTFs in expensive facilities and long time procedures, which in turn is a
difficult process.
However, thanks to the fast development of micro-electro-mechanical (mem) sensors
and high efficiency micro processors, there is now the opportunity of using Inertial
Measurement Unit solutions (IMUs) which are becoming low cost and small enough
to be used in many different applications, even mobile ones. Moreover, the individ-
ualization of HRTFs, in this thesis often referred as filters, can be easier if either a
synthesis process is implemented from a numerical model, or, even easier, a HRTF
set similar to the individual one is selected from a database containing different ones.
Based on this interesting possibilities, this thesis aims to implement a simple but ef-
ficient IMU-based head tracked binaural headset with individualized audio based on
Head Related Transfer Function dynamic convolution in Matlab and tries to investi-
gate the final performance of a system made of inexpensive ”off the shelf” hardware
and light processing algorithms, with focus on the differences between the individual-
ized HRTFs with respect to the generic ones. This approach offers the advantages of
being low cost, easy to build, and the software implementation allows fast and easy
modifications and adaptations. Such a system would be ideal for demonstration of
binaural audio technologies, as well as creating the base for future implementation of
spatial audio in virtual and augmented reality, didactic, teleconferences, and others.
After the designing and developing phase, a subjective listening test is planned and
executed. This is decided to be a Pilot test with a small set of subjects and a short
execution time. The evaluation is done in two different parts: in the first one the
subject performs an elevation localization test with two different sets of filters (the
generic and the individualized one), in the second one the subject listens a long du-
ration speech stimulus with the two HRTF conditions and then answer to questions
regarding the perceived externalization, responsiveness of the system, naturalness of
the reproduction and perceived elevation.
This thesis is structured so that in chapter 2 the useful background theory is briefly
presented, chapter 3 describes all the single parts which have been studied and im-
plemented in the system, including hardware and software, and the description of the
subjective test. Chapter 4 presents and discuss its results and chapter 5 draws the
conclusions and describe the future works of the project. For the sake of clarity and
conciseness, the research objectives are also listed below:
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction, project description and objectives
3
1. implement a head tracked binaural headset based on ”off-the-shelf” components.
2. develop a a signal processing work flow (in Arduino and Matlab) to interface
the headset with a computer and create a real time auralization of a virtual
source.
3. test a HRTF individualization procedure based on selection from a database.
4. test the system with a subjective evaluation.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Background theory
In this chapter some useful background theory is presented, starting from the mech-
anism of spatial hearing and the role of the Head Related Transfer Function, then
motion tracking is briefly described. Lastly, a review of the previous work is pre-
sented.
2.1
Spatial hearing and sound localization cues
The ability to determine the position of a sound source is called sound localization.
Specific attributes of the source are used to determine its position in space. The
coordinate system assumed in this thesis is the one presented in Figure 2.1, where a
sound source in the horizontal plane is represented by the azimuth angle, and one in
the median plane is represented by the elevation angle. According to this vertical-
polar coordinate system, a source in front of the listener is defined with 0 degree of
azimuth and elevation.
Figure 2.1: a) Head-related coordinate system, (b) vertical-polar coordinate system.
Image is taken from [11].
This coordinate system can be used to define the perceived and the actual position
of a real or virtual source. For lateral localization, the two most important cues are
the interaural time difference (ITD) and the interaural level difference (ILD). Vertical
localization is instead mostly based on spectral cues [12].
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Background theory
For example, assuming a source with azimuth different from 0 or 180 degree, one side
of the listener will be closer to the source, so will be his/her ear. This leads to a
different sound path between the two sides, and a time difference which is defined as:
ITD = D
2c(ϕ + sin ϕ)
(2.1)
where D is the diameter of the head approximated with a sphere, c is the speed of
sound and ϕ is the azimuth expressed in radians. Moreover, it is assumed that the
source distance is enough so that the sound wave can be approximated by a plane
wave. The source elevation in Eq. 2.1 is assumed to be 0 degree; if one wants to
include non zero elevation angles δ, the factor cos δ should be added to the numerator
in Eq. 2.1 [13].
When stationary and continuous sounds are considered, where their time envelope is
not changing quickly, the associated phase difference is used (IPD) instead of a simple
time difference. Thus, when the fundamental frequency of the source is high and the
the phase difference is small, this cue is too ambiguous for our brain and no longer
useful for localization. The transition zone between low and high frequency for the
localization cues is extending from approximately 800 Hz up to 1600 Hz, and in this
region the localization performances are the worst [14].
With a lateral source (ϕ ̸= 0°, 180°) approaching the listener, the head is contributing
to shadow the contralateral ear (the ear on the opposite side of the sound source)
more than the ipsilateral one (the ear on the same side of the sound), causing a
difference in sound pressure between the two. This effect is known as Interaural Level
Difference (ILD) and it is small for low frequency contents, where the head dimensions
are smaller than the actual wavelength [12].
In this frequency region, indeed, the head becomes acoustically transparent and its
shadowing effect decreases, so does the ILD [11]. The importance of ITD and ILD,
also kown as interaural cues, was firstly explained in the Duplex theory from Lord
Rayleigh [15]. The mechanism of ITD and ILD is shown in figure 2.2.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Spatial hearing and sound localization cues
7
Figure 2.2: Interaural cues for sound localization showing differences in sound in-
tensity and time of arrival. In this case the azimuth angle is expressed
with θ. Image taken from [16].
Interaural cues have a great role in the horizontal localization, but only marginal
one in the vertical localization or in front-back differentiation. This is due to the
ambiguity created from the so called cone of confusion [11], shown in figure 2.3. All
the sources within this cone produce the same interaural cues, thus other cues are
needed for their precise localization.
Figure 2.3: Concept of the cone of confusion, where the actual sound source and its
mirrored image on the cone produce the same interaural cues. Image
taken from [16].
The other cues are known as monoaural cues as they do not depend on both ears.
These are also known as spectral cues, because they reflect spectral changes of the
approaching sound. They are result of the shadowing, scattering, absorption and
reflection effects of the head, pinna and shoulders [17, 18].
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Background theory
Even the characteristics of the hair may affect the spectral cues [19]. Specifically,
the effect of the human torso is crucial in the frequency range from 2 to 3 kHz [20],
whereas pinna effects are more predominant from 3-4 kHz and above [21]. The combi-
nation of all the peaks and notches created from the spectral cues serves as elevation
cue [22]. In order to have a precise vertical localization, a stimulus with enough high
frequency energy is required. Some kind of knowledge about the source is also of
importance, since a familiarity with the source spectrum will help to discriminate if a
particular spectral feature is produced from the interaction with the listener’ s pinna
or if it was already present in the source spectrum.
The perception of distance in far field condition is base on different factors, primarily
the perceived intensity (intensity increases as the sound is closer to the listener) and
reverberation in non anechoic condition, specifically the ratio between direct to rever-
berant sound. Indeed, as the distance to a source increases, this ratio decreases. In
anechoic conditions, a good estimation of the distance is therefore impossible. Other
cues useful in the far field are also the air absorption and the overall familiarity with
the sound source, helping the listener to make an estimation.
For sources in near field condition, one additional distance cue is available. When
the azimuth approaches 90° or -90°, the ILD can increase quickly up to 30 dB if the
source is close enough [23], due to higher head shadowing. As the azimuth gets closer
to 0° or 180°, this increment gets smaller. ITD is almost unaffected from the source
distance. In addition, it is relevant to state the Just Noticeable Difference (JND)
for ITD and ILD, which in anechoic condition is about 20 µs for ITD and 0.6 dB
for ILD [24]. In non anechoic condition these values can increase up to eight times
for ITD and two times for ILD, suggesting that this is less affected from reverberant
environment than the ITD. However, these values seem to depend also on the time
envelope of the signal, especially on its transient.
2.2
HRTF and its individualization
Both binaural and monoaural cues are properties of each individual and reflect all
the unique anatomic features. All these personal features are included in the pattern
of the transfer function from the sound source to the listener eardrums, the so called
Head Related Transfer Function (HRTF). Thus, for a given position in space, a pair of
such function exists for each ear of a listener and will uniquely represent that source
location. These function are widely different in the high frequency range (5-10 kHz)
where the pinna exhibits its largest effect and are different across individuals, since
they represent the cues that each human learns during his/her lifetime [6].
==PAGE:19==
2.2 HRTF and its individualization
9
Therefore, if a set of HRTFs is to be used for an auralization process, the localiza-
tion performances of the listener as well as other parameters of the Virtual Auditory
Displays (VADs) will benefit from HRTFs similar to the one of the listener.
However, not all the details of an individual HRTF need to be captured and repro-
duced in order to maintain the original location of the source. Studies included in
[25] have demonstrated that HRTFs can be spectrally smoothed significantly and still
produce a coherent perceived source location. It has been claimed in [26] that a good
localization in virtual spaces can be achieved by maintaining the fundamental fre-
quencies of the Pinna Related Transfer Function (PRTF), i.e. preserving the position
of peaks and notches of the spectrum, rather than their amplitude.
Another important cue in localization is the movement of the head, also known as
dynamic cue. Little movements of the head are naturally used to localize sounds since
they change dynamically the other localization cues and help to judge the actual po-
sition without ambiguities [12]. For example, head movements typically resolve the
front-back and back-front confusion [27]. Many studies reported that the listeners
who are exposed to stimuli with at least 800ms duration are likely to move the head
to focus on the direction of the perceived sound [28, 29], and head movements reduce
localization errors. Therefore, a signal made of a train of pulses leads to better lo-
calization performances than a single pulse one [30]. As previously mentioned, the
use of HRTFs in the auralization of virtual sources creates the need of some degree of
individualization of the filters, if localization and overall realism are of importance.
Nevertheless, previous studies have pointed out that individualization is less impor-
tant when head tracking is implemented [29]. In any case, the spatial audio experience
will benefit on every side from the inclusion of head tracking and individualization
together.
An individual set of HRTFs can be measured in anechoic conditions by placing small
measurements microphones inside the user’ s ear canals. This include placing the
subject in an anechoic chamber which is equipped with a movable chair or an array
of speakers, so to play a measurement signal from many different positions around
the user. Obviously, the measurement system needs to be adequately calibrated and
compensated to remove the contribution of sources and receivers. This procedure
presents very high cost and difficulties, nonetheless is the only procedure which can
provide an individual set of filters for an arbitrary number of positions. Afterwards,
a virtual source can be auralized by filtering it with the measured HRTFs. When
no HRTF is available for the desired position, interpolation can be added to obtain
HRTFs from nearby positions. Different approaches have been proposed for interpo-
lation in azimuth and elevation [31], and an interesting approach has been proposed
for the interpolation in 3D, i.e. including the rendering of distance [32]; for which a
Matlab implementation is also ready to use1. The distance dependency of the HRTFs
1https://se.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/43809-3-d-hrtf-interpolation
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Background theory
is effective below 1m distance, and this region is defined as near-field, as opposed to
the far-field [33]. Only recently, databases have been proposed with measurements of
HRTFs at different distances, for example the one presented in [34], where a special
spark gap has been used as a source in the measurements to solve the requirement
of simulating an acoustic point source, for which normal loudspeaker are sometimes
not suitable due to their dimensions. To account for the distance dependency in the
estimation of HRTFs from single-distance measurements, some methods have been
proposed in [35].
A different approach from the measurement of individual responses in anechoic con-
dition is the use of generic HRTFs, as the ones which can be derived from a dummy
head, where the most common one is the Knowles Electronics Mannequin for Acoustic
Research (KEMAR) analyzed in [36], whose picture is presented below.
Figure 2.4: Image of the new version of the KEMAR head and torso simulator from
GRAS Audio 1. The first one was introduced from Knowles Electronic2
back in 1972. Image is taken from GRAS official website.
Dummy head HRTFs represent a good approximation to a generic subject re-
sponse, when no form of individualization is feasible. Many databases are available
nowadays from which it is possible to obtain some HRTFs, either from a dummy head
or from a set of subjects. Many of these are also available in the convenient SOFA
format3.
1https://www.gras.dk
2http://www.knowles.com
3https://www.sofaconventions.org
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Motion tracking
11
Having the access to different sets of subjects’ measurements opens the possibility to
choose the HRTFs which is the closest to a target one. This procedure can be based
on a match calculation between subjects collected in the database and an external
one (i.e. the target). This approach, known as HRTF selection, presents the benefit
that a user can be guided to a selection of the best HRTF set (for example through
a listening test) without the need of special equipment or knowledge.
A higher computational method is the synthesis of HRTF or HRIR (their version
in time domain) through numerical methods such as the Finite Element Method or
Boundary Element Method, as described in [37, 38, 39, 40]. This option include the
creation of a numerical model of the user and the synthesis of his/her HRTFs; the
model can be simplified as the one described in [41] or more accurate like the one
in [42] capable to model all the peaks and notches in the high frequency range of
the HRTF. These models can also implement a Principal Component Analysis [43] to
precisely tune the HRTF to a specific subject. The synthesis of HRTFs represents a
more expensive procedure than the selection from a database in terms of computation
and time, and requires accurate 3D meshes to obtain accuracy in high frequencies.
A mixed approach is the one recently proposed in [44], where HRTFs are obtained
starting from pictures of the subject and fitting them into statistical models of ear
and HRTFs obtained from a processed database of 3D ear models and equivalent
HRTFs. The output of this process is a new HRTF set personalized on the user’ s
data retrieved from the pictures. The approach used in this thesis is also based on
individual images and exploits a selection procedure which will be described in details
in section 3.2.
2.3
Motion tracking
As anticipated in the introduction of this thesis, one of the methods to enhance
the overall performance of every kind of Virtual Auditory Displays is to include the
head tracking of the listener and process the audio accordingly. The main purpose
is to preserve the dynamic cues used for localization provided by the listeners head
motion. Shortly, a stationary virtual source should remain in a constant position
with respect to the listener’ s relative orientation, virtually located in a point lying
on a sphere around him/her, and not following the movement of the head during the
headphone reproduction. As already mentioned, a binaural head tracked reproduction
will benefit of no front-back confusion, more externalization, better localization and
higher overall realism [45, 46, 47]. There are different options to choose from for head
tracking: a common tool is the IMU (Inertial Measurement Unit) made of a set of
sensor mounted on a chip (typically gyroscope, magnetometer and accelerometer).
Another option includes the use of ultrasonic signal sent from different transmitters
placed on the head into receivers which are then computing the phase difference to
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Background theory
determine the head orientation. A more used solution involves cameras to detect
specific facial features during every frame, track and then map them. Other solutions
can use a magnetic tracking system, estimating the orientation from differences in a
magnetic field [48] or also using acoustic tracking of audible sound waves like in [49,
50].
2.4
Previous work
Despite the lack of real life head tracked spatial audio solutions, lot of research has
been conducted in this field, especially in the last 10 years. Nevertheless some prod-
ucts which combine head tracking in headphone reproduction are already on the
market; for example the Nx Tracker from Waves2 is used to mix audio tracks while
having head tracking, Dysonics RondoMotion3 allows to add head tracking to any
audio play back engine on a computer or mobile device. 3D Sound Labs 4 produces
a wireless headset with embedded motion tracking for entertainment applications, as
well as a standalone motion tracking module to attach to other headphones. The
Intelligent Headset from Jabra5 offered a wireless headset with motion tracking and
even a GPS sensor to experience some mobile augmented reality experiences with
spatial audio; unfortunately this project did not have the deserved success. All these
solutions involved IMUs and DSP algorithms to create the desired audio.
Some spatial audio processing platforms are also available online, like the latest re-
leased ”Spatial Audio Real-time Applications (SPARTA)” from Aalto University6
which implements many different plugins included a binaural renderer on which the
user can combine a head tracker. A similar solution has been implemented in the
Technical University of Berlin, where many different rendering modules are available,
and a cheap head tracking solution can be added, based on a IMU similar to the one
used in this thesis [51].
These last two projects implement very efficient real time algorithms, the Sound Scape
Renderer (SSR) offers also the possibility of running some plugins on mobile android
platforms. On the other hand, some plugins from SPARTA open the possibility of
loading individual SOFA-format HRTFs to be used in the play back. Despite this,
individual measurements are a difficult task, as already mentioned, and none of the
solution listed so far include any easy way of using individualized filters.
Recently, head tracked binaural synthesis has been used in [52] and [53] for aural-
ization of virtual reality scenarios which involve a dynamic acoustic experience of
2https://www.waves.com/hardware/nx-head-tracker
3https://dysonics.com/rondomotion
4http://www.3dsoundlabs.com
5https://www.jabra.com/supportpages/jabra-intelligent-headset
6http://research.spa.aalto.fi/projects/sparta_vsts
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Previous work
13
real spaces. These projects are based on B-format Impulse Responses obtained from
acoustic simulations, and input/output rotational matrix to dynamically process the
audio according to the head tracking data, which in these cases was implemented with
an Oculus Rift virtual reality headset. Even if these approaches allow for a recreation
of complex spaces taking into account the effect of the Room Impulse Response dy-
namically, the localization cues may be affected from some missing individualization
of the dynamic filters; moreover, as of now they are restricted to indoor applications
and Oculus Rift which is a wired headset.
Few studies, like the one presented in [54], investigated the effect of generating fake
small head movements using a random process in contrast of having a head tracking
device, in order to increase spaciousness and front/back discrimination.
A different approach called ”Motion tracked Binaural” (MTB) has been used in a re-
search project from the CIPIC laboratory in the University of California [55], where
a new method was presented to record and reproduce spatial sound scenes. A micro-
phone array was used for the recording, and an head tracker was used to determine
which virtual microphone capsule was the closest to the position of the listener’ s ears
on a spherical model of the head. Different interpolation techniques were also tested
for the final headphone reproduction.
A project included in [56] presents similar process and final goals as the one of this
thesis, but do not include individualization, and the head tracking is preformed via
webcam, therefore not suitable for mobile and outdoor applications. In this case, the
processing is performed with external processors and ad-hoc programming routines.
In [57] an interesting virtual reality experience was created using a 3D audio playback
engine [58] which can play a 3D audio track with unlimited simultaneous sources com-
bined with a software for the graphics. This project included a head tracker interfaced
via the Virtual Reality Peripherical Network (VPRN) [59]. Within this project, the
authors discussed the computational and processing difficulties that such a real time
approach can present, and pointed out the limits of standard desktop computers.
Wenzel investigated in [60] the effect of system latency in localization performances
with head tracked virtual stimuli. She claimed that localization was generally accu-
rate even with a latency of 500 ms. Azimuth discrimination was less affected than
elevation one, and mean latency ratings indicated that an overall latency of 250.4 ms
was noticeable to all the subjects.
Lastly, a project presented in [61] studied a synthesis technique to produce head-
tracked virtual sounds that seem comparable with real sounds in terms of localiza-
tion performances. This technique includes an in-situ individual HRTF measurement
procedure. The results of this study have shown the possibility of reaching the same
localization performances with real or virtual sources of short and long duration.
==PAGE:24==
14
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
In this chapter, all the single parts needed to form the final system (hardware and
software) are presented, starting from the IMU device, then describing the HRTF in-
dividualization tool and the headphone compensation method. Finally, a descriptive
overview of the Matlab work flow is presented, with the idea that a general descrip-
tion of the steps and methods is more efficient than presenting the whole code.
The final system is composed of Sennheiser HD6001 and a 9DoF Inertial Measure-
ments Unit based on MEM sensors, the Sparkfun Razor M02. This headset has been
interfaced with a desk computer3 where Matlab4 and Arduino IDE5 were running.
In addition, a Focusrite6 sound card is coupled with the computer. A picture of the
headset can be seen in Figure 3.1.
1https://en-uk.sennheiser.com/best-audio-headphones-high-end-stereo-hifi-hd-600
2https://www.sparkfun.com/products/14001
3DellOptiPlex9020SFF,Inteli53.3GHzCPU,8GBRAM,256GBSSD
4https://se.mathworks.com/products/new_products/latest_features.html
5https://www.arduino.cc/en/Main/Donate
6http://us.focusrite.com/usb-audio-interfaces/scarlett-2i2
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Methods
Figure 3.1: Headset used in the project, made of Sennheiser HD600 and Sparkfun
Razor M0, on a bruel & kjaer dummy head.
3.1
Motion tracking
The option chosen for this project was to use an IMU. The reasons for this choice
are multiple, in general IMUs are a good compromise between cost and quality, even
if they don’ t promise the same accuracy, stability and reliability of more expensive
solution like the ones listed in 2.3. The specific product used in the project is the
Sparkfun Razor M0 presented in the following picture.
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Motion tracking
17
Figure 3.2: Top view of the Sparkfun Razor M0 board. It is possible to observe
an SD card slot, a connector for an additional lipo battery for wireless
solutions and the micro USB connector for interfacing with a computer.
This small (approximately 2x2 cm) device includes three 3-axis sensors for a total
of 9 degrees of freedom: accelerometer, gyroscope and magnetometer. Moreover, it
contains a built-in microprocessor, the Atmel SAMD21 which is Arduino-compatible,
allowing the user to easily flash new code directly into the board through an Arduino
IDE software and a USB cable. The sensors are respectively:
• 3 DoF accelerometer measuring acceleration along the three axis
(programmable full scale range of ±2g, ±4g, ±8g, ±16g and integrated 16 bit
ADCs)
• 3 DoF gyroscope measuring angular velocity along the three axis
(programmable full scale range of ±250, ±500, ±1000 and ±2000 degree/sec and
integrated 16 bit ADCs)
• 3 DoF magnetometer measuring the magnetic field intensity along the three
axis (output data resolution of 14 bit (0.6µT/LSB) or 16 bit (15µT/LSB) and
full scale measurement range of ±4800 µT)
The values of interest to define the actual orientation of the head are referred as the
Euler angles: Roll (X-axis), Pitch (Y-axis) and Yaw (Z-axis), where yaw is equal to
the azimuth of the sound source and pitch to its elevation, as presented in figure 3.3.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Methods
Figure 3.3: Graphical convention used from Euler angles, where source azimuth is
yaw and elevation is equal to pitch.
The three Euler angles are computed from the device firmware, deriving them
from the pre-calculated Quaternions, and they are streamed with a two deicimals
accuracy.
A Quaternion is a generalization of complex numbers which have been
introduced in 1843 from William R. Hamilton [62], and they have been widely used
to describe three-dimensional rotations and orientations. A Quaternion number is
represented in the form a + bi + cj + dk, where a, b, c and d are real numbers, and
i, j and k are the basis elements, satisfying the equation: i2 = j2 = k2 = ijk = −1.
The set of Quaternions is defined within a four-dimensional vector space, in which
every element in it has a unique representation based on a linear combination of the
element basis i, j, k.
Sparkfun Razor M0 comes with an example firmware which immediately allows to
stream the Euler angles on a serial monitor in the Arduino IDE, setting up a specific
update rate value between 10Hz and 100Hz. Once the device starts to stream the
output, the communication with the main script in Matlab is implemented via a RS-
232 serial communication7 over USB, which represents the best solution in terms of
practicality, having to connect only one cable to the computer through a standard
USB port. Moreover, the baud rate (i.e. symbols per second) specifies how fast data
is sent through the serial line, set to 9600 for both the IMU and the main script in
Matlab.
One fact which requires to be highlighted, is that the IMU board presented an azimuth
(yaw) drift issue derived from the calculation of the Quaternions, as observed from
the data streaming. Specifically, two over four of them presented a continuous drift
which is then reflected into one of the Euler angles. The issue was attributed to be
an internal bug of the default firmware, after observing that the same was reported
7https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/serial-communication
==PAGE:29==
3.2 HRTF selection
19
in online resources and from the technical support of Sparkfun itself.
Moreover,
observing that the drift was not constant over time but depended on acceleration of
the device itself, a decision was taken to leave this issue uncompensated. This choice
was forced from the fact that a good correction and compensation of the non constant
drift implies changing the firmware code, which was not feasible in this project. Few
considerations on how this error might affect the test results are included in section
3.5.
3.2
HRTF selection
As it was previously claimed, HRTF selection represents a cheaper and easier solution
when individual measurements are not available.
The procedure adopted in this
thesis is the one included in [63] and in two upcoming publications [64, 65]. The
HRTF selection tool has been provided by its authors and will be officially released
soon. This image guided selection method is based on previous research on the strong
relation between pinna anthropometric features and HRTF notches [66]. Normally,
a HRTF selection algorithm relies either on a perceptual listening test with which
the subject can select the best match between all the available set of filters, or on
an research of the best matching HRTF in the anthropometric domain, i.e. the best
match in terms of external ear shape using anthropometric measurements available
in the database.
A different approach is used instead in the tool to be presented, based on the idea
of mapping anthropometric features into the HRTF frequency domain, thanks to a
ray-tracing model of the pinna acoustics [67, 68]. Specifically, the method consists in
drawing pinna contours on a image in the Matlab GUI provided, together with some
ear canal entrance points, and then compute the distances from the contour to the
ear canal entrance which define the reflections creating spectral notches in the HRTF.
In particular, a distance dc between a reflection point in the main pinna contour (the
helix border, as shown in figure 3.5) and the ear canal entrance is defined as:
dc(ϕ) = c · td(ϕ)
2
(3.1)
where, td(ϕ) is the temporal delay between the direct and the reflected wave, c is
the speed of sound. The corresponding notch frequency depends on the sign of the
reflection. If the reflection coefficient is assumed as positive, one notch is created in
all frequencies where the phase difference between the direct and the reflected wave
is equal to half a wavelength:
fn(ϕ) = 2n + 1
2td(ϕ) = c(2n + 1)
4dc(ϕ)
(3.2)
where n ∈N. Nonetheless, previous studies [68] on the CIPIC database (i.e. the
one used in this project) had proved that almost 80 percent of the subjects in the
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Methods
database presented a negative reflection in their HRIRs. Accordingly, notches in the
HRTF are found at full wavelength delays, i.e.:
fn(ϕ) = n + 1
2td(ϕ) = c(2n + 1)
2dc(ϕ)
(3.3)
and for n = 0
f0(ϕ) =
c
2dc(ϕ)
(3.4)
which is the frequency of the first notch in the HRTF associated with helix border,
also called C1. Starting from these findings, Geronazzo et al. proposed a mismatch
function between sets of notch frequencies belonging to pairs of HRTFs, providing a
measure of the distance between the two. Using the GUI presented in figure 3.4, one
can draw N estimates of the C1 contour and K of the entrance point, as shown in
the example presented in figure 3.5. Having a total of N × K combination of contour
and focus point to be processed, a mismatch function is defined as:
m(k,n) =
1
Nφ
∑
φ
f (k,n)
0
(φ) −F0(φ)
F0(φ)
(3.5)
where f (k,n)
0
are the frequencies obtained with Eq. 3.3 and F0 are the frequencies of
the notches extracted from the HRTF of the database with algorithms presented in
[69, 67, 70]. The couple (k,n) with (0≤k≤K) and (0≤n≤N) represents a couple of
pinna contour and ear canal entrance, φ covers all the discrete elevation angles of the
CIPIC database in the range [-45°, +45°] and Nφ is the number of elevation values for
which the sum is calculated. Based on this mismatch function, few ranking methods
exist and the one adopted in this project is defined as:
• Top-M appearance: for a given integer M, the CIPIC subjects are sorted
according to the number of times in which they appear in the first M positions
of the mismatch ranking over the NxK estimates, in decreasing order. M is set
to 3.
The image acquisition process was done by simply taking a picture of the left pinna
of the subject with a standard mobile phone, adding a measurement reference (e.g.
a ruler) in the picture, so to define the correct dimensions in the GUI (i.e. defining
a pixel-to-meter factor). The subject’ s head was kept pointing straight and perpen-
dicular to the phone camera. After obtaining a classification of the CIPIC HRTFs
closest to the target one (i.e. the one of the picture), the first one in the rank was
selected, having the precaution of exploiting the selection procedure different times
(at least two times per subject) in order to smooth the variability due to the hand
drawn contours and verifying that the results were always consistent.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 HRTF selection
21
Figure 3.4: Graphical User Interface of the described selection tool.
Figure 3.5: Example of C1 contour and ear canal entrance tracing.
The validation of this selection tool was done from the authors through a sub-
jective listening test in virtual reality and also through an auditory model for sound
localization in the mid-sagittal plane. Results are showing that, even though individ-
ual HRTFs still provide lower localization errors, the one selected from the database
with the proposed tool gives significantly better results than the generic KEMAR in
terms of local polar RMS error, with the advantage of offering a graphical intuitive
tool which needs only a 2D image of the pinna and can be used even by a non expert
operator.
Lastly, an alternative approach currently under investigation, estimates the first pinna
notch in the acoustical domain directly through a so called ”acoustic selfie” which
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Methods
roughly acquires HRTFs from a user with a smartphone as speaker and binaural
microphone as receivers [71].
3.3
Headphone compensation
Headphone compensation is crucial for an accurate reproduction of virtual sources
where the non flat frequency response measured at the ear canal entrance could
add unwanted coloration. For this reason, the Sennheiser HD600 were equalized by
inverting their averaged Headphone Transfer Function (HpTF) and creating a FIR
compensation filter with the method presented in [72] (the filter has been provided
from the same author of the HRTF selection tool). The filter spectrum is shown in
Figure 3.6, and it actually presents a boost in the low frequency below 90 Hz up to 15
dB. This fact could affect the reproduction of the stimulus used in the first part of the
pilot test, since it was a full range white noise. Nevertheless the average contribute of
the headphones is reduced after the compensation especially in the high frequencies
where the coloration is normally higher. The use of a high pass filter will be considered
for a future use of this specific filter. The measured Headphone Impulse Response
(HpIR) was taken from a repository of the Princeton University called PHOnA8
which includes lots of measurements of HpIRs of different headphones measured and
averaged over many human subjects; all the details of the measurements are included
in [73]. With this method the compensation filter was not created to match a specific
subject, therefore not individual, but shows an effective headphone equalization up
to 8-10 KHz on average, which is good for a generic scenario where individual HRTFs
and HpTFs are not available. Moreover, individual HpTFs measurements, similarly
to the HRTFs, present high costs. A summary of all the error sources introduced
from headphones as well as individual headphone compensation is included in [74].
Figure 3.6: Headphone compensation filter used for the compensation of Sennheiser
HD600.
8https://www.princeton.edu/3D3A/Phona.html
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Realtime dynamic binaural rendering in Matlab
23
3.4
Realtime dynamic binaural rendering in Matlab
Some scripts have been designed and tested in Matlab in order to achieve the goal of
reproducing a virtual sound source in a specific position around the user defined in
azimuth and elevation, and keep that position constant during the reproduction with
respect to the user’ s head orientation. Indeed, in order to achieve a good level of
externalization and realism of the virtual stimulus, the source has to keep the same
position and not follow the user headphones if he/she rotates the head.
In order to do this, the orientation of the user’ s head is monitored through the IMU
and the signal is processed accordingly, with the use of a dynamic HRTF rendering.
The specific HRTFs used in the script, will be either generic ones (KEMAR dummy
head measurements), or a specific database’ s subject who matches best with the
actual user’ s characteristics, so to achieve a good degree of individualization of the
HRTFs themselves. The database used in this thesis is the CIPIC database described
in [75].
The system composed of headphone and IMU is coupled with the computer described
previously, which represents an ”off-the-shelf” solution in terms of costs and perfor-
mances. This choice is due to the initial availability of the hardware but also for the
sake of testing an inexpensive solution and analyze how good the final performance
of the real-time implementation can be.
For real time applications a fast convolution based on scalar multiplication in the
frequency domain and a block-wise approach to process a continuous data stream is
the most suitable one. By doing so a circular convolution is actually implemented, so
zero-padding is added to accomplish a linear type convolution. Fast convolution can
be made with Overlap-Save (OS) or Overlap-Add (OA) methods. In this project, OS
method is applied, together with a windowed overlap approach in order to overcome
some audible artifacts of the dynamic HRTF update. All the processing steps are
shown in Figure 3.7, where the main rectangular boxes describe single steps of the al-
gorithm, and cursive comments are added on the side to for an easier understanding.
At first, a desired signal is convolved offline with the headphone compensation filter
described above. Secondly, a set of HRIR is loaded from the CIPIC database, ac-
cording to the desired condition, i.e. either the KEMAR filter, or one of the CIPIC
subjects obtained from the individualization tool of section 3.2. The objects 9 needed
for the real time processing are then initialized. Following, the serial communication
with the device is set, a first scan is done and the values are saved. The IMU output
streaming is read as a string of data containing three values corresponding to the
Euler angles. Actually, the two of interest in this project are only yaw (azimuth) and
pitch (elevation). This first read is needed in order to set the relative reference posi-
9https://se.mathworks.com/help/dsp/
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Methods
tion, i.e. the point corresponding to the entry (azimuth, elevation) equal to (0°, 0°).
After this, the real time loop starts, and the position of the user’ s head is read again.
At this time the script computes the actual position needed in that frame in order
to keep the virtual source position constant over time. The azimuth and elevation to
play are computed as difference between the reference position (i.e the one obtained
from the first scan), the actual position (i.e. the one obtained from the second scan)
and the target position, defined as the one belonging to the virtual source to play
back. Once this is computed, a search is done through the filters contained in the
IR set of the database to find the one corresponding to the position needed. This
operation is kept as fast as possible by looking for the index of the data structure (in
case of the CIPIC it is a multidimensional matrix) corresponding to the closest angle
to the one which is needed. Previous to the research, a conversion is computed so to
obtain the same angle coordinate system between IMU and CIPIC database.
At this point, the input signal is read and buffered with a Buffer size equal to the
length of each block, and 50% of overlap between each consecutive output block. The
overlap-save convolution is implemented by zero-padding the two signals, making a
scalar multiplication of their Fourier transform and inverting them to time domain
again. Then the first M-1 overlapping samples of each block are discarded from the
output of the convolution according to the OS rules, being M the length of the filter,
equal to 200 samples in this case. Afterwards, the output frame is windowed with
a Hann window object, and the first half of it is added to the second half of the
previous block, to form the final output frame. This is finally played back from the
AudioPlayer object.
It is important to highlight the fact that the processing delay of this approach is
determined by the block size (defined ”L”), not by the full length of the signal. This
parameter has been set to 512 samples; the ratio L/44100 = 11.6ms offers indeed a
rough value of the processing system latency, being 44100Hz the sampling rate of the
system. A more accurate latency test is needed to obtain a more precise value of the
total latency, which include the data computation latency of the IMU.
During the developing phase, many values of L have been tested with the constant
goal of reducing it as most as possible without having underrun samples (i.e when the
real time loop in Matlab does not supply samples at the same rate the sound card is
demanding them) and/or many audible audio processing artifacts. At its final stage,
and for the validation test, the value of L was set to 512, which was found to be a
lower bound for the system.
Another important parameter to set is the update rate of the IMU. As it was pointed
out in [76], the requirement for this parameter seems to depend on individuals, and
higher values give higher perceived quality and naturalness. Unfortunately, in the
case of this study, high values of update rate will result in faster drift of the yaw.
Therefore, the update rate for the pilot test was set to 90Hz, derived from the ob-
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Realtime dynamic binaural rendering in Matlab
25
servation that 44100/90 = 490 samples, which is enough to have an update from the
IMU on every frame, since the frame size has been set to L = 512.
For the sake of low latency, no interpolation is added to the HRTFs. Indeed, the
HRTFs used belong to the discrete values contained in the CIPIC, and the windowed
overlap process is solving the unwanted audible artifacts (heard as ”clicks” during the
reproduction) by fading in and out the result of the convolution with the new filter
thanks to the window, resulting in no audible artifacts while moving the head, and a
smooth dynamic update of the filters.
Figure 3.7: Flow chart showing all the single processing steps executed in Matlab.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Methods
3.5
Pilot test
This section describes the pilot test designed for the validation. Figure 3.8 shows the
setup ready for the test. The following two subsections describe respectively the two
parts of the test. The facility chosen is one of the isolation booth in the Acoustic
department of DTU. For the entire duration of the test (approximately 20 minutes)
the tester (i.e. author of this thesis) was sitting close to the subject in the booth
running the test scripts and guiding the subject through the different steps. The
test signal chosen for part is a train of 40ms Gaussian noise burst with 30ms silence
between each burst, repeated 3 times. The signal was then looped for other 5 times,
for a total duration of around 5 seconds. This type of signal has been proved to be
more effective than a standard 1x200 ms noise burst in terms of localization accuracy
in [77]. The volume of the stimuli was left to be adjusted at a certain comfort level
by the subjects themselves from the sound card and they were free to adjust it also
during the test. This choice has the disadvantage of testing the subjects with different
level of stimuli, but leave the freedom of finding a personal comfortable level avoiding
the risk of ear fatigue or damages (note that this test signal can become bothersome
after some time). The signal used in part two, instead, was a speech stimulus.
Figure 3.8: Test setup inside the iso-booth.
==PAGE:37==
3.5 Pilot test
27
For what regards the effect of the azimuth drift on the subjective test, few con-
siderations are essentials. In part one, subjects hear a fixed azimuth and random
elevation stimulus, therefore the azimuth drift was not affecting the results in any
way. Yet in part two, subjects chose an arbitrary position with azimuth and eleva-
tion, and the reproduction lasted for 1 minute totally. Some tests have revealed that
the IMU data can drift up to 18 degree during that amount of time. This is just
an approximate value, because, as already pointed out, the drift is not constant over
time but indeed depends on acceleration. As the subjects were almost constantly
moving during this part of the test, it is unlikely that the azimuth drift was perceived
in the reproduction. On the other hand, if this occurred, the only parameter which
could have been affected in the results of part two is question 3, asking about the
perceived naturalness. As it will be discussed in 4, this parameter did not represent
a value of big interest and/or interesting discussion.
3.5.1
Part one: localization test
The first part of the listening test aims to test the perceived vertical localization of a
virtual source. Therefore, a fixed azimuth and random elevation signal is presented
to the subjects and the perceived elevation is collected as response. The test signal
is the one previously described. After a clear explanation and a listening training
phase, the subject started the localization test: 6 positions with fixed azimuth were
randomized in elevation between [-45°, +45°] in the frontal plane and each position
was presented two times, the same position one after the other, asking the subject
to answer after each presentation of the stimulus, for a total of 12 answers. Each
time the stimulus was presented, its duration allowed the subject to move the head in
search of the correct origin of the sound. A random process run at the beginning of
the test indicated which of the two HRTF condition (KEMAR, individualized) was to
be tested first, without let the subject know. The individualized filter was obtained
from the selection tool described in 3.2 before the day of the test, in order to save
time. The response collection was implemented in three different ways:
• retrieving the head orientation from the IMU
• writing the perceived angle on a keyboard
• marking the perceived angle on a paper
Precisely, every time the stimulus stopped, the subject was asked to point the per-
ceived source position with his/her nose, and the tester was then saving the data
obtained from the IMU thanks to an additional script in Matlab. Right after, the
subject was instructed to enter the perceived angle within the range [-90°, +90°] di-
rectly on an keyboard connected to the test computer, so that the responses were
collected and saved directly from the test scripts. Lastly, the subject was marking
a point with a cross around a 180° 2D graphical arc, simulating all the elevations in
the required range, where -90° indicates a source directly below the subject and +90°
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Methods
one above, according to the coordinate system adopted.
After the first 6 positions were tested, the subject repeated the test with the second
HRTF condition, employing the same procedure. The motivation behind the choice
of collecting the results with different methods is to investigate the overall accuracy
of the single ones, as well as discuss their advantages and limitations. Moreover, the
convenient possibility of using only the IMU to retrieve the responses, which would
have lead to a faster test with the possibility of more observations, is limited from
the IMU accuracy and reliability, and from the fact that using the IMU for both the
auralization and the result collection was not recommended.
3.5.2
Part two: speech test
The second part of the test consisted in a listening test of a long duration (1 minute)
speech stimulus. At the beginning of the test, one of the two HRTF condition was
selected randomly as in the first part. Then the subject was free to choose a position
around him/her, writing on a dialog box (i.e. the one shown in Figure 3.7) a couple
(azimuth, elevation). The speech stimulus was then spatialized with the same real
time rendering procedure described in 3.4 and played in the chosen position. This
signal corresponded to a male english native speaker recorded in a standard room
(i.e. non anechoic condition) with no added equalization or reverberation. During
the reproduction, the subject was free to move the head and/or rotate the chair, in
order to ”explore” the virtual source dynamically. At end of the two HRTFs condition
testing, he/her was asked to answer some questions on a paper. The questionnaire is
the one presented below, similar to the one used in [65].
• Q1: Externalization: Was the sound perceived inside or outside the head?
(1 = Very internalized, 5 = Very externalized)
• Q2: Responsiveness: To what extent did you experience that there were delayed
reactions in the sound reproduction system?
(1 = Very delayed, 5 = Not delayed at all)
• Q3: Naturalness: How natural and realistic (close to real life) did you find the
sound reproduction?
(1 = Very natural, 5 = Not natural at all)
• Q4: Did you perceive elevation?
(Yes - No)
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Results and discussion
For what regards part one, data was processed for each subject (total of 4 subjects)
to compute elevation errors in degree, focusing on average values. The elevation error
Eφ is simply obtained as the difference between the actual played elevation φ and
the perceived one ˆφ.
The results of the test are presented in table 4.1 divided between the responses re-
trieved from the keyboard method (respKEY), and the ones obtained from the IMU
(respIMU). The results associated with the paper response are not presented because
a direct inspection of the results revealed that they are equal to the ones observed
from the keyboard method, therefore they did not add any useful information. In
the first column the number of subject and respective HRTF condition (KEMAR or
individualized) are listed. In the second column the average angular errors and their
standard deviation for the keyboard response method are listed, in the third column
the same values for the IMU response method are listed.
respKEY
respIMU
subj, cond
Eφ ± SD
Eφ ± SD
1 KEMAR
43.22 ± 42.28
25.35 ± 21.53
1 IND
13.43 ± 13.82
17.27 ± 14.96
2 KEMAR
47.5 ± 37.47
27.83 ± 24.00
2 IND
45.93 ± 30.76
27.43 ± 20.71
3 KEMAR
48.54 ± 34.81
24.62 ± 21.49
3 IND
17.29 ± 10.44
13.62 ± 6.45
4 KEMAR
28.12 ± 11.11
23.95 ± 13.27
4 IND
21.04 ± 11.73
25.79 ± 10.70
Table 4.1: Results of the first part of the listening test: average angular error.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Results and discussion
For an easier comparability, an average root mean square error, also referred to
as Polar Error for simplicity, is defined as:
PE = Eφ,rms =
√∑
i(φi −ˆφi)2
N
(4.1)
where i covers the elevation angles presented to each subject in the range [-45°,
+45°], for a total of N = 6. Figure 4.1 show the Eφ,rms for the generic KEMAR and
individualized condition, and for the two ways of response collection.
Figure 4.1: Average Polar Error (Eφ,rms) for both response collection methods, with
mean values and error bar showing the standard deviation.
Even if these results show a tendency of the mean error to decrease for individual-
ized filter condition, this difference is not supported from a statistical analysis of the
results themselves. Specifically, a one-way ANOVA and pair t-test were performed
in Matlab1,2 between the two HRTF conditions, showing respectively: p = 0.08 for
ANOVA and p = 0.10 for t-test with the respKEY results, and p = 0.39, p = 0.37
with the respIMU results. These values confirm that the differences observed have
no statistical significance.
The results of the questionnaire of part two are presented in table 4.2, with a re-
minder of the topic of the questions and the average of the responses for each of
them (excluding question four which is just a yes-no answer), divided between the
two HRTF conditions. As shown in 3.5.2, the answer range goes from 1 to 5 with
discrete integer steps.
1https://se.mathworks.com/help/stats/anova1
2html,https://se.mathworks.com/help/stats/ttest.htm
==PAGE:41==
4 Results and discussion
31
KEMAR
IND
Q1 Externalization
4 ± 0.81
3.75 ± 1.25
Q2 Responsiveness
3 ± 0.81
4 ± 0
Q3 Naturalness
2.75 ± 0.95
2.5 ± 0.57
Q4 Elevation
yes
yes
Table 4.2: Results of the second part of the listening test, as average and relative
standard deviation.
The result collection method for a localization experiment is not a trivial topic,
as it is well known how it can influence the overall accuracy of a subject’ s response.
Exocentric methods, which are based on a 2D or 3D reporting device are found to be
more accurate than verbal reporting; on the other hand, egocentric methods (based
on body-centered coordinate system) allow for higher accuracy than both [78, 79].
Despite this, no method is free from errors, which means that every approach will
affect the response accuracy to a certain degree.
In the case under study, the keyboard response is considered equal as a verbal re-
sponse, and the paper method as an exocentric one. As it was previously underlined,
these two were found to be totally equal across the the four subjects’ results, therefore
results are presented only for the keyboard method and the head pointing one, also
referred to as ”respKEY” and ”respIMU”.
With respect to the egocentric technique, the options are: head pointing [80] and
manual pointing [78, 80], which has been shown in [81] to give the advantage of be-
ing very intuitive and technically reliable. The head pointing method offers more
accuracy than any exocentric method, but in the case under study it suffered from a
mistake that could have affected the results. Specifically, some of the subjects forgot
to keep their head still after the playback of the stimulus, so they were instantly
warned from the tester to do it, but a bias error was introduced when they tried to
point the perceived position again, after the stimulus ended. This could be one of
the reasons why subject 4 in table 4.1 does not show a decrease in the individualized
condition of the IMU results as it does for the keyboard ones, and the mean is actually
slightly bigger than the KEMAR condition. In order to try to mitigate this bias (the
tester did not take note of the specific case when this mistake happened in order to
take it into consideration when analysing the results), the respIMU responses have
been averaged across the two repetitions of the stimulus.
Actually, the duration of the test signal was long enough (around 5s) to move the
head and try to localize it dynamically, but not enough to judge its elevation with
confidence after the first repetition, according to the subjects’ opinion. On the other
hand, longer duration has been tried in the designing phase of the test, but it has
been considered to become of annoyance and increase risk of ear fatigue or damages,
especially if the subject kept the volume on a high level. It is possible indeed that
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Results and discussion
the level of reproduction influenced the overall simplicity of localization, since with
higher volume it is easier and faster to perceive the spectrum variations which are
useful to discriminate the elevation.
Therefore, with a comfortable level and a short duration stimulus, the first repetition
answer was often less accurate than the second one, and the responses presented a big
inaccuracy on the first repetition, especially the respKEY ones, where the subjects’
tendency is to overestimate the elevation angle of the virtual source, especially with
KEMAR conditions and when its value exceed +30 degree. The keyboard results
are generally conditioned from a natural difficulty in the translation of the perceived
angle into a number, but they are in addition affected from a systematic error due
to the fact that the elevation used in the test present non integer values with a 5.625
degree step in the range [-45°, +45°], but the keyboard responses were always integer
values, most of the time given with 10 degree discretization. For these reasons bigger
angular errors are to expect in the respKEY responses, and the answer obtained from
the first repetition have been discarded from the average calculations, differently from
the respIMU. Indeed, as it is possible to observe in the results presented in Table 4.1
and in Figure 4.1, the average angular error obtained from the keyboard responses is
bigger than the IMU ones, for both HRTF conditions, suggesting the worse accuracy
of this method.
For what regards the comparison between the two conditions, there is a trend of the
individualized filters to always perform better than KEMAR on average PE, although
the results are affected from big standard deviations and no statistical significance,
mostly due to the few number of subjects. Results obtained with the keyboard method
are showing differences on the average angular error, at least for three subjects. As
presented in table 4.1, subject 1, 3, 4 present big angular error in the KEMAR con-
dition, which is then reduced using the individualized one. Subject 2 is the only not
performing very differently within the two conditions, showing a different trend than
the others.
This could be a result of different factors. Subject 2 presented a hearing threshold on
the border between normal hearing and hearing loss condition, i.e. 20 dBHL in the
high frequency bands (4 and 8 kHz) differently from the other subjects who all pre-
sented normal hearing condition, above 20 dBHL. Generally, asymmetrical and also
symmetrical hearing loss have been proved to decrease the localization performance
in the horizontal plane just slightly [82, 83]. For what regards the vertical plane, the
performance seems to depend more on the specific type of hearing loss (sensorinaural
vs conductive); but localization in this plane is barely affected by hearing losses, as
claimed in [84]. Therefore, the difference shown from subject 2 can not be attributed
to this reason.
It is known from the literature that elevation localization performance vary consider-
ably across individuals, more than horizontal localization [85]. Subject 2 is presenting
==PAGE:43==
4 Results and discussion
33
worse localization abilities than the others. An interesting approach has been tested
in [65], where a so called ”screening test” of the subjects has been performed in VR in
order to distinguish between good and bad localizers, finding that 50% belong to one
group and the remaining to the other. This result suggests that subject 2 could have
general elevation localization performances worse than the others, even if a precise
further test and analysis is missing.
One last possible reason regarding the poorer performances presented from subject
2 is related to the sign of the angles presented in the test. Five over six of the ele-
vations presented to subject 2 in condition 2 (i.e. individualized filter) had negative
sign, therefore simulating negative elevation sources. It is to expect that human are
more likely to localize virtual sources belonging to positive elevations, since this is
the most common scenario in everyday life situations. Therefore it is possible that
subject 2 performed worse than the others in condition 2 because of the unnaturalness
of localizing virtual sources in the negative part of the plane. This fact would need
a further analysis to be confirmed, as of now there is no evidence that the subjects
performed better in positive elevations rather than in negative ones. For this reason
this has to be considered just an option to explain the differences shown from subject
2.
Regarding the results relative to the second part of the test, one interesting fact to
highlight is the difference in perceived latency (also called responsiveness in the ques-
tionnaire) between the two conditions, where the subjects all graded it with 4 in the
individualized condition, and with an average of 3 in the KEMAR one. Although
these values are affected from big standard deviations, mostly due to the poor num-
ber of subjects, and the 1-to-5 integer scale is probably not the most appropriate in
this case, nonetheless a similar finding was introduced in [65], where good localizers
perceived a lower latency of the system with the individualized filters. This fact leaves
the space and curiosity for a further future investigation.
Other than this, the average results show very similar responses between the two
conditions, and naturalness has been judged worse than externalization. The former
is normally associated with a perception of the sound in a real life situation.
In
the case of this thesis, this could have probably been achieved with adding spatial
information (i.e. some form of reverberation) onto the virtual source, and probably
higher naturalness could have been perceived; this fact would also require further
investigations. The study in [10] claimed that reverberation added on speech stim-
uli increases the externalization and realism, with the drawback of compromising
localization performances, especially the elevation ones.
==PAGE:44==
34
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
The presented project involved the setting up of a head tracked binaural headset com-
bining circumaural headphones and IMU linked to a real time algorithm in Matlab.
An auralization process based on HRTF convolution was implemented so that a vir-
tual source can be played in a arbitrary position around the user, keeping its position
constant with respect to the user head movements. A selection process was used to
individualize the filters for the convolution, in contrast to the use of generic dummy
head ones. A pilot test was executed to test the final system. All the components,
including the software implementation, are to consider off-the-shelf solutions.
The results of the test show that there is no statistically significant difference be-
tween the mean values of the average angular error between the two HRTF condi-
tions. Nonetheless, there is a trend of the individualized condition to produce smaller
angular error in the localization of elevation. A future bigger scale test can investigate
this further. The results of the speech stimulus listening test show that on average a
good externalization, a good responsiveness of the system and the effect of non zero
elevation were perceived.
This system presents the advantages of being not computationally heavy and gives
the possibility of running the real time algorithm on a standard office computer with
the use of Matlab. The head tracking solution presents very cheap costs and gives the
possibility of changing the firmware code, expand it and/or customize it to specific
needs. Moreover, the HRTF selection procedure proposed by Geronazzo et al. allows
to choose an individualized set of filters from a database in few minutes, even from
non expert users.
5.1
Future work
This project sets some basis for future implementations of head tracked real time
auralization for different applications, augmented and virtual reality in first place.
IMU solutions open the possibility to include head tracking in consumer headphones,
and a mobile implementation of the algorithm could allow for mobile spatial audio
experiences. Regarding mobility, a wireless version of the system is already under
construction. This includes a bluetooth transmission of the IMU data, which can
eventually add additional latency to the system, therefore this has to be implemented
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Conclusion
with particular attention.
For the sake of low latency reproduction, many steps can be taken into account for a
future implementation of the system. As first, more efficient code should be written to
execute the processing faster; this include using a different convolution approach, for
instance partitioned convolution [86, 87] is a good way of reducing latency, especially
when convolving with long impulse responses in real time. From the code already
implemented in Matlab, some so called ”MEX functions1” can be written in order
to execute the code faster. These function are either C or C++ source files which
build the code into an executable file more efficient than the Matlab code originally
written.
The use of partitioned convolution and executable code, as well as a new implemen-
tation written on a more efficient programming language would reduce the latency
substantially, and delete the bottleneck created from the size of the single signal
block in the fast convolution approach. Once these approach are involved, one could
convolve a virtual source with a real Room Impulse Response for a better performing
auralization. On the other hand, speaker-based spatial audio approaches like am-
bisonics [88] are already capable of rendering complex sound fields maintaining their
spatial characteristics; their performances overcome the ones of simple binaural ren-
dering based on HRTF convolution when multiple sources and complex environments
are involved. In these cases, indeed, it is necessary to render the spatial information
(e.g. early/late reflections) for each source and listener positions, and the process
repeated for each of the sources, with the drawback of high computational costs.
Moreover, the azimuth drift of the IMU should be further investigated and compen-
sated. Although it is known that angles drift may occur in IMUs quite frequently,
their correction is not trivial.
Yaw drifting is often due to magnetic interference
from different factors including earth’ s field, indoor building fields, and internal chip
board fields, which might vary over time and position. A compensation of this errors
includes a first precise calibration of the sensors, an estimation of the drift error and
a gradual correction algorithm implemented with specific approaches such as com-
plementary filters, Kalman filters and Directional Cosine Matrix (DCM). In [89] the
authors presented the head tracking approach implemented in Oculus Rift and dis-
cussed their method for drift correction.
Another interesting option which require future investigation is the use of insert
headphones, also called earphones. Recently, few studies have been conducted on
the possibility of individual equalization with such devices [90] and a research has
been made regarding the localization performances of these with respect to circum-
aural headphones [91]. This study has revealed that localization performances do
not differ considerably when the above mentioned equalization method is exploited.
1https://se.mathworks.com/help/matlab/matlab_external/introducing-mex-files.html
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Future work
37
This research has finally lead to the implementation of a so called ”self calibrating”
earphone, firstly presented in [92] and later manufactured by Hefio2.
Lastly, a bigger future validation procedure needs to be implemented. More subjects
and more observations per subject will definitely lead to richer statistics and will
allow to collect a bigger amount of results less affected from errors.
2http://www.hefio.com/
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
Jens Blauert. Spatial hearing. MIT Press, Cambridge, 1983.
[2]
Henrik Moller. “Fundamentals of binaural technology”. In: Applied acoustics
36.3-4 (1992), pp. 171–218.
[3]
Jens Blauert. The technology of binaural listening. Springer, 2013.
[4]
Frederic L Wightman and Doris J Kistler. “Factors affecting the relative salience
of sound localization cues”. In: Binaural and spatial hearing in real and virtual
environments 1 (1997), pp. 1–23.
[5]
Frederic L Wightman and Doris J Kistler. “The importance of head movements
for localizing virtual auditory display objects”. In: Proceeding of International
Conference on Auditory Display at Georgia Institute of Technology (1994).
[6]
Elizabeth M Wenzel, Marianne Arruda, Doris J Kistler, and Frederic L Wight-
man. “Localization using non individualized head-related transfer functions”.
In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 94.1 (1993), pp. 111–123.
[7]
Frederic L Wightman, Doris J Kistler, and Mark E Perkins. “A new approach
to the study of human sound localization”. In: Directional hearing. Springer,
1987, pp. 26–48.
[8]
Henrik Moller, Michael Friis Sorensen, Clemen Boje Jensen, and Dorte Ham-
mershoi. “Binaural technique: Do we need individual recordings?” In: Journal
of the Audio Engineering Society 44.6 (1996), pp. 451–469.
[9]
Durand R Begault. “Perceptual effects of synthetic reverberation on three-
dimensional audio systems”. In: Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 40.11
(1992), pp. 895–904.
[10]
Durand R Begault, Elizabeth M Wenzel, and Mark R Anderson. “Direct com-
parison of the impact of head tracking, reverberation, and individualized head-
related transfer functions on the spatial perception of a virtual speech source”.
In: Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 49.10 (2001), pp. 904–916.
[11]
Hannes Gamper. “Enabling technologies for audio augmented reality systems”.
PhD thesis. Aalto University, 2014.
[12]
Jens Blauert. Spatial hearing: the psychophysics of human sound localization.
MIT press, 1997.
==PAGE:50==
40
Bibliography
[13]
Lauri Savioja, Jyri Huopaniemi, Tapio Lokki, and Ritta Väänänen. “Creating
interactive virtual acoustic environments”. In: Journal of the Audio Engineering
Society 47.9 (1999), pp. 675–705.
[14]
Stanley Smith Stevens and Edwin B Newman. “The localization of actual
sources of sound”. In: The American journal of psychology 48.2 (1936), pp. 297–
306.
[15]
Lord Rayleigh. “XII. On our perception of sound direction”. In: The London,
Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 13.74
(1907), pp. 214–232.
[16]
Tomasz R Letowski and Szymon T Letowski. Auditory spatial perception: Au-
ditory localization. Tech. rep. Army Research Lab Aberdeen Proving Ground
Md Human Research and Engineering Directorate, 2012.
[17]
Dwight W Batteau. “The role of the pinna in human localization”. In: Proc. R.
Soc. Lond. B 168.1011 (1967), pp. 158–180.
[18]
Mark B Gardner and Robert S Gardner. “Problem of localization in the median
plane: effect of pinnae cavity occlusion”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America 53.2 (1973), pp. 400–408.
[19]
Bradley E Treeby, Jie Pan, and Roshun M Paurobally. “The effect of hair on
auditory localization cues”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
122.6 (2007), pp. 3586–3597.
[20]
V Ralph Algazi, Carlos Avendano, and Richard O Duda. “Elevation localization
and head-related transfer function analysis at low frequencies”. In: The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America 109.3 (2001), pp. 1110–1122.
[21]
Suzanne K Roffler and Robert A Butler. “Factors that influence the localization
of sound in the vertical plane”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 43.6 (1968), pp. 1255–1259.
[22]
Dmitry N Zotkin, Ramani Duraiswami, and Larry S Davis. “Rendering localized
spatial audio in a virtual auditory space”. In: IEEE Transactions on multimedia
6.4 (2004), pp. 553–564.
[23]
Douglas S Brungart and William M Rabinowitz. “Auditory localization of nearby
sources. Head-related transfer functions”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical So-
ciety of America 106.3 (1999), pp. 1465–1479.
[24]
Stefan Klockgether and Steven van de Par. “Just noticeable differences of spatial
cues in echoic and anechoic acoustical environments”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 140.4 (2016), EL352–EL357.
[25]
Abhijit Kulkarni and H Steven Colburn. “Role of spectral detail in sound-source
localization”. In: Nature 396.6713 (1998), p. 747.
[26]
Ville Pulkki. “Localization of amplitude-panned virtual sources II: Two-and
three-dimensional panning”. In: Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 49.9
(2001), pp. 753–767.
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
41
[27]
Frederic L Wightman and Doris J Kistler. “Resolution of front–back ambiguity
in spatial hearing by listener and source movement”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 105.5 (1999), pp. 2841–2853.
[28]
Robert M Lambert. “Dynamic theory of sound-source localization”. In: The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 56.1 (1974), pp. 165–171.
[29]
Stephen Perrett and William Noble. “The effect of head rotations on vertical
plane sound localization”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
102.4 (1997), pp. 2325–2332.
[30]
John C Middlebrooks, Ewan A Macpherson, and Zekiye A Onsan. “Psychophys-
ical customization of directional transfer functions for virtual sound localiza-
tion”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 108.6 (2000), pp. 3088–
3091.
[31]
Klaus Hartung, Jonas Braasch, and Susanne J Sterbing. “Comparison of differ-
ent methods for the interpolation of head-related transfer functions”. In: Audio
Engineering Society Conference: 16th International Conference: Spatial Sound
Reproduction. Audio Engineering Society. 1999.
[32]
Hannes Gamper. “Head-related transfer function interpolation in azimuth, el-
evation, and distance”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
134.6 (2013), EL547–EL553.
[33]
Douglas S Brungart. “Near-field virtual audio displays”. In: Presence: Teleop-
erators & Virtual Environments 11.1 (2002), pp. 93–106.
[34]
Tianshu Qu, Zheng Xiao, Mei Gong, Ying Huang, Xiaodong Li, and Xihong
Wu. “Distance-dependent head-related transfer functions measured with high
spatial resolution using a spark gap”. In: IEEE transactions on audio, speech,
and language processing 17.6 (2009), pp. 1124–1132.
[35]
Dylan Menzies and Marwan Al-Akaidi. “Nearfield binaural synthesis and am-
bisonics”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 121.3 (2007),
pp. 1559–1563.
[36]
William G Gardner and Keith D Martin. “HRTF measurements of a KEMAR”.
In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 97.6 (1995), pp. 3907–3908.
[37]
Rozenn Nicol, Sylvain Busson, and Vincent Lemaire. Hrtf Individualization by
Finite Element Modeling Coupled with a Corrective Model. US Patent App.
12/084,249. Dec. 2008.
[38]
Brian FG Katz. “Boundary element method calculation of individual head-
related transfer function. I. Rigid model calculation”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 110.5 (2001), pp. 2440–2448.
[39]
Tomi Huttunen, Antti Vanne, Stine Harder, Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen, Sam
King, Lee Perry-Smith, and Leo Kärkkäinen. “Rapid generation of personal-
ized HRTFs”. In: Audio Engineering Society Conference: 55th International
Conference: Spatial Audio. Audio Engineering Society. 2014.
==PAGE:52==
42
Bibliography
[40]
Tomi Huttunen, Eira T Seppälä, Ole Kirkeby, Asta Kärkkäinen, and Leo Kärkkäi-
nen. “Simulation of the transfer function for a head-and-torso model over the
entire audible frequency range”. In: Journal of Computational Acoustics 15.04
(2007), pp. 429–448.
[41]
R Teranishi and EAG Shaw. “External-Ear Acoustic Models with Simple Ge-
ometry”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 44.1 (1968),
pp. 257–263.
[42]
Hironori Takemoto, Parham Mokhtari, Hiroaki Kato, Ryouichi Nishimura, and
Kazuhiro Iida. “A simple pinna model for generating head-related transfer func-
tions in the median plane”. In: Proc. 20th Int. Congr. Acoust.(ICA’10) (2010).
[43]
Doris J Kistler and Frederic L Wightman. “A model of head-related transfer
functions based on principal components analysis and minimum-phase recon-
struction”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 91.3 (1992),
pp. 1637–1647.
[44]
Slim Ghorbal, Renaud Séguier, and Xavier Bonjour. “Process of HRTF In-
dividualization by 3D Statistical Ear Model”. In: Audio Engineering Society
Convention 141. Audio Engineering Society. 2016.
[45]
W Owen Brimijoin, Alan W Boyd, and Michael A Akeroyd. “The contribution
of head movement to the externalization and internalization of sounds”. In: PloS
one 8.12 (2013), e83068.
[46]
Hirohito M Kondo, Daniel Pressnitzer, Iwaki Toshima, and Makio Kashino. “Ef-
fects of self-motion on auditory scene analysis”. In: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences (2012), p. 201112852.
[47]
Ludwig Wallmeier and Lutz Wiegrebe. “Self-motion facilitates echo-acoustic
orientation in humans”. In: Royal Society open science 1.3 (2014), p. 140185.
[48]
Greg Welch and Eric Foxlin. “Motion tracking: No silver bullet, but a re-
spectable arsenal”. In: IEEE Computer graphics and Applications 22.6 (2002),
pp. 24–38.
[49]
Yesenia Lacouture-Parodi and Emanuël AP Habets. “Application of particle
filtering to an interaural time difference based head tracker for crosstalk can-
cellation”. In: Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2013 IEEE
International Conference on. IEEE. 2013, pp. 291–295.
[50]
Hannes Gamper, Sakari Tervo, and Tapio Lokki. “Head orientation tracking
using binaural headset microphones”. In: Audio Engineering Society Convention
131. Audio Engineering Society. 2011.
[51]
Matthias Geier, Jens Ahrens, and Sascha Spors. “The SoundScape Renderer: A
unified spatial audio reproduction framework for arbitrary rendering methods”.
In: 124 th AES Conv. Citeseer. 2008.
[52]
Eric Ballestero, Philip Robinson, and Stephen Dance. “Head-tracked aurali-
sations for a dynamic audio experience in virtual reality sceneries”. In: 24th
International Congress on Sound and Vibration, London (2017).
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
43
[53]
Hermes Sampedro Llopis. “Acoustic Virtual Reality for Architectural Design”.
Master thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2018.
[54]
Christof Faller, Fritz Menzer, and Christophe Tournery. “Binaural audio with
relative and pseudo head tracking”. In: Audio Engineering Society Convention
138. Audio Engineering Society. 2015.
[55]
V Ralph Algazi, Richard O Duda, and Dennis M Thompson. “Motion-tracked
binaural sound”. In: Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 52.11 (2004),
pp. 1142–1156.
[56]
William Fitzpatrick, Mark Wickert, and Sudhanshu Semwal. “3D sound imag-
ing with head tracking”. In: Digital Signal Processing and Signal Processing
Education Meeting (DSP/SPE), 2013 IEEE. IEEE. 2013, pp. 216–221.
[57]
Craig Jin, Teewon Tan, Alan Kan, Dennis Lin, Andre van Schaik, Keir Smith,
and Matthew McGinity. “Real-time, head-tracked 3D audio with unlimited si-
multaneous sounds”. In: Proceedings of Georgia Institute of Technology (2005).
[58]
Craig Jin, Alan Kan, Dennis Lin, Matthew McGinity, Keir Smith, Teewoon Tan,
and Andre van Schaik. “3DApe: A Real-Time 3D Audio Playback Engine.” In:
Audio Engineering Society Convention 118. Audio Engineering Society. 2005.
[59]
Russell M Taylor II, Thomas C Hudson, Adam Seeger, Hans Weber, Jeffrey Ju-
liano, and Aron T Helser. “VRPN: a device-independent, network-transparent
VR peripheral system”. In: Proceedings of the ACM symposium on Virtual re-
ality software and technology. ACM. 2001, pp. 55–61.
[60]
Elizabeth M Wenzel. “Effect of increasing system latency on localization of
virtual sounds”. In: Audio Engineering Society Conference: 16th International
Conference: Spatial Sound Reproduction. Audio Engineering Society. 1999.
[61]
Griffin D Romigh, Douglas S Brungart, and Brian D Simpson. “Free-Field Lo-
calization Performance With a Head-Tracked Virtual Auditory Display”. In:
vol. 9. 5. IEEE, 2015, pp. 943–954.
[62]
William Rowan Hamilton. Lectures on Quaternions: Containing a Systematic
Statement of a New Mathematical Method; of which the Principles Were Com-
municated in 1843 to the Royal Irish Academy; and which Has Since Formed
the Subject of Successive Courses of Lectures, Delivered in 1848 and Sub Se-
quent Years, in the Halls of Trinity College, Dublin: Withnumerous Illustrative
Diagrams, and with Some Geometrical and Physical Applications. University
Press by MH, 1853.
[63]
Michele Geronazzo, Enrico Peruch, Fabio Prandoni, and Federico Avanzini. “Im-
proving elevation perception with a tool for image-guided head-related trans-
fer function selection”. In: Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Digital Audio Effects. 2017,
pp. 397–404.
==PAGE:54==
44
Bibliography
[64]
Fabio Prandoni Michele Geronazzo Enrico Peruch and Federico Avanzini. “Ap-
plying a Single-notch Metric to Image-guided Head Related Transfer Function
Selection for Improved Vertical Localization”. In: Proc. Journal of Audio Engi-
neering Society. submitted for review, 2018.
[65]
Michele Geronazzo, Erik Sikstöm, J. Kleimola, Federico Avanzini, Amalia De
Götzen, and Stefania Serafin. “The impact of an accurate vertical localization
with HRTFs on short explorations of immersive virtual reality scenarios”. En-
glish. In: Proc. 17th IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented
Reality (ISMAR). United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, June 2018,
pp. 1–8.
[66]
Michele Geronazzo, Simone Spagnol, Alberto Bedin, and Federico Avanzini.
“Enhancing vertical localization with image-guided selection of non-individual
head-related transfer functions”. In: Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2014 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE. 2014, pp. 4463–
4467.
[67]
Vikas C Raykar, Ramani Duraiswami, and B Yegnanarayana. “Extracting the
frequencies of the pinna spectral notches in measured head related impulse
responses”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 118.1 (2005),
pp. 364–374.
[68]
Simone Spagnol, Michele Geronazzo, and Federico Avanzini. “On the relation
between pinna reflection patterns and head-related transfer function features”.
In: IEEE transactions on audio, speech, and language processing 21.3 (2013),
pp. 508–519.
[69]
Kazuhiro Iida, Yohji Ishii, and Shinsuke Nishioka. “Personalization of head-
related transfer functions in the median plane based on the anthropometry of
the listener’s pinnae”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 136.1
(2014), pp. 317–333.
[70]
Michele Geronazzo, Simone Spagnol, and Federico Avanzini. “Estimation and
modeling of pinna-related transfer functions”. In: Proc. of the 13th Int. Confer-
ence on Digital Audio Effects (DAFx-10). 2010, pp. 6–10.
[71]
Michele Geronazzo, Jacopo Fantin, Giacomo Sorato, Guido Baldovino, and Fed-
erico Avanzini. “Acoustic selfies for extraction of external ear features in mobile
audio augmented reality”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Vir-
tual Reality Software and Technology. ACM. 2016, pp. 23–26.
[72]
Alexander Lindau and Fabian Brinkmann. “Perceptual evaluation of headphone
compensation in binaural synthesis based on non-individual recordings”. In:
Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 60.1/2 (2012), pp. 54–62.
[73]
Braxton B Boren, Michele Geronazzo, Piotr Majdak, and Edgar Choueiri. “PHOnA:
a public dataset of measured headphone transfer functions”. In: Audio Engineer-
ing Society Convention 137. Audio Engineering Society. 2014.
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
45
[74]
Fabian Brinkmann, Alexander Lindau, and Stefan Weinzierl. “On the authentic-
ity of individual dynamic binaural synthesis”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 142.4 (2017), pp. 1784–1795.
[75]
V Ralph Algazi, Richard O Duda, Dennis M Thompson, and Carlos Avendano.
“The cipic hrtf database”. In: Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and
Acoustics, 2001 IEEE Workshop on the. IEEE. 2001, pp. 99–102.
[76]
Mikko-Ville Laitinen, Tapani Pihlajamäki, Stefan Lösler, and Ville Pulkki. “In-
fluence of resolution of head tracking in synthesis of binaural audio”. In: Audio
Engineering Society Convention 132. Audio Engineering Society. 2012.
[77]
Florian Dramas, Brian F Katz, and Christophe Jouffrais. “Auditory-guided
reaching movements in the peripersonal frontal space”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 123.5 (2008), pp. 3723–3723.
[78]
Jean-Marie Pernaux, Marc Emerit, and Rozenn Nicol. “Perceptual evaluation of
binaural sound synthesis: the problem of reporting localization judgments”. In:
Audio Engineering Society Convention 114. Audio Engineering Society. 2003.
[79]
Robert H Gilkey, Michael D Good, Mark A Ericson, John Brinkman, and John
M Stewart. “A pointing technique for rapidly collecting localization responses in
auditory research”. In: Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers
27.1 (1995), pp. 1–11.
[80]
Piotr Majdak, Matthew J Goupell, and Bernhard Laback. “3-D localization
of virtual sound sources: effects of visual environment, pointing method, and
training”. In: Attention, perception, & psychophysics 72.2 (2010), pp. 454–469.
[81]
Matthias Frank, Ludwig Mohr, Alois Sontacchi, and Franz Zotter. “Flexible and
intuitive pointing method for 3-d auditory localization experiments”. In: Audio
Engineering Society conference: 38th international conference: sound quality
evaluation. Audio Engineering Society. 2010.
[82]
Valerie E Newton and FS Hickson. “Sound localization: Part II: A clinical pro-
cedure”. In: The Journal of Laryngology & Otology 95.1 (1981), pp. 41–48.
[83]
Richard Viehweg and Richard A Campbell. “XLIX Localization Difficulty in
Monaurally Impaired Listeners”. In: Annals of Otology, Rhinology & Laryngology
69.2 (1960), pp. 622–634.
[84]
James Rowland Angell and Warner Fite. “From the Psychological Laboratory
of the University of Chicago: The monaural localization of sound.” In: Psycho-
logical Review 8.3 (1901), p. 225.
[85]
Piotr Majdak, Robert Baumgartner, and Bernhard Laback. “Acoustic and non-
acoustic factors in modeling listener-specific performance of sagittal-plane sound
localization”. In: Frontiers in psychology 5 (2014), p. 319.
[86]
Enrico Armelloni, Christian Giottoli, and Angelo Farina. “Implementation of
real-time partitioned convolution on a DSP board”. In: Applications of Sig-
nal Processing to Audio and Acoustics, 2003 IEEE Workshop on. IEEE. 2003,
pp. 71–74.
==PAGE:56==
46
Bibliography
[87]
Eric Battenberg and Rimas Avizienis. “Implementing real-time partitioned con-
volution algorithms on conventional operating systems”. In: Proceedings of the
14th International Conference on Digital Audio Effects. Paris, France. 2011.
[88]
Michael A Gerzon. “Ambisonics in multichannel broadcasting and video”. In:
Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 33.11 (1985), pp. 859–871.
[89]
Steven M LaValle, Anna Yershova, Max Katsev, and Michael Antonov. “Head
tracking for the Oculus Rift”. In: Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2014 IEEE
International Conference on. IEEE. 2014, pp. 187–194.
[90]
Marko Hiipakka. “Estimating pressure and volume velocity in the ear canal
for insert headphones”. In: Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
2011 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE. 2011, pp. 289–292.
[91]
Marko Hiipakka, Marko Takanen, Symeon Delikaris-Manias, Archontis Poli-
tis, and Ville Pulkki. “Localization in binaural reproduction with insert head-
phones”. In: Audio Engineering Society Convention 132. Audio Engineering
Society. 2012.
[92]
Juha Backman, Tom Campbell, Jari Kleimola, and Marko Hiipakka. “A Self-
Calibrating Earphone”. In: Audio Engineering Society Convention 142. Audio
Engineering Society. 2017.
