==PAGE:1==
Reinforcement Learning and
Multi-Agent Systems
Miguel Suau de Castro
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
We start by presenting the Reinforcement Learning framework from a theoretical
point of view. We also study the performance of simple tabular methods of
which we outline their main advantages and limitations with some examples of
our own.
We then introduce function approximation as a solution for large problems.
We present two state-of-the-art deep reinforcement learning methods, PPO and
DQN, and compare their performance in more complicated scenarios.
In the last chapter, we explore how to adapt ordinary reinforcement learning
techniques to multi-agent systems and show how the game theory concepts of
cooperation and competition naturally emerge in these environments.
Inspired by recent work in multi-agent systems, we implement and analyze the
capabilities of two new algorithms that try to address the non-stationarity issues
in the MDP model, caused by the presence of multiple learning agents. The ﬁrst
method, MADQN, is based on a technique called alternating maximization,
while the second, MAPPO, uses a centralized critic to estimate the advantage
function.
After testing these algorithms, we discover that traditional methods are still
capable of solving the tasks while the time horizon in the generalized advantage
estimation is kept long enough. We also show how these perform worse than our
multi-agent methods, sometimes even failing to converge, the more the estimates
rely on the value function and not on the sample rewards received from the
environment.
==PAGE:4==
ii
We ﬁnally build a communication channel so as to encourage team collabora-
tion, and prove with two diﬀerent examples how it can help coordinate actions.
The agents learn to communicate with binary arrays that allow them to share
information and convey ideas.
All the environments are designed in the Unity Game Engine. Agents are trained
with the Unity ML-Agents plug-in, using both our own reinforcement learning
algorithms, implemented in Python and Tensorﬂow, and also the ones provided
with the tool.
The algorithms and the rest of source code can be found on GitHub1 and used
for training intelligent agents in Unity. We also produced demonstration videos2
to show the results of all our reinforcement learning examples.
1GitHub: https://github.com/miguelsuau/modified-ml-agents
2YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLbZouP4AED8BD90wYOffhAO-4UAo65iDy
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is submitted in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring
a Master’s degree in Mathematical Modeling and Computation at Technical
University of Denmark (DTU).
The thesis is prepared at DTU Compute and Unity Technologies, supervised
by Lars Kai Hansen, Professor, and Rasmus Larsen, PhD Student, Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, DTU Compute, Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark.
The work of the project was performed in the period from February 22, 2018
and July 22, 2018 and covers 35 ECTS.
Lyngby, 22-July-2018
Miguel Suau de Castro
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank all my colleagues of the Machine Learning team at Unity
for creating an amazing tool and making this project possible, and in particular
Arthur and Marwan, for their useful advice and technical support on Unity
ML-Agents.
I would also like to express my gratitude to my supervisors, Lars and Rasmus,
for their valuable guidance and brilliant insights throughout the thesis, but also
for their encouragement and inspiration to continue doing research and pursue
a PhD after graduating.
I am very grateful to my parents for raising me and giving me the opportunity
to be here.
Finally, I would especially like to thank Sofía for providing me with moral and
emotional support during these two years in Copenhagen.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Multi-Agent Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Unity Game Engine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Unity ML-Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Reinforcement Learning
5
2.1
Markov Decision Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Partial rewards and expected return
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Value functions and Bellman equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Static grid world . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Monte Carlo Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5.1
On-policy MC methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5.2
Oﬀ-policy MC methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
Temporal diﬀerence learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6.1
On-policy TD methods: Sarsa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6.2
Oﬀ-policy TD methods: Q-Learning . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6.3
Static Grid World with tabular methods . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Deep Reinforcement Learning
21
3.1
Value function approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.1
Loss function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.2
Stochastic gradient and semi-gradient descent . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3.2
Deep Q Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1
Experience Replay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.2
Independent target network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.3
Double Q-learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.4
Static Grid World with function approximation . . . . . .
26
3.3
Policy Gradient Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.1
Policy objective function and gradient . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.2
MC Policy Gradient: REINFORCE
. . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.3
TD Policy Gradient: Actor-Critic . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.4
Policy Gradient with Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.5
Proximal Policy Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3.6
Dynamic grid world 1: DQN and PPO . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.7
Dynamic grid world 2: DQN and PPO . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
45
4.1
Non-Stationary Markov Decision Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Markov Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Selecting collective goals and rewards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.4
Centralized and decentralized algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.5
Multi-Agent DQN: Alternating Maximization . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.5.1
Multi-Agent grid world: Competition
. . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.6
Multi-Agent PPO: Centralized Critic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.6.1
Multi-Agent grid world: Cooperation . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.6.2
Multi-Agent grid world: Learning to communicate . . . .
59
4.6.3
Multi-Agent grid world: Learning to collaborate
. . . . .
62
Conclusion and Discussion
67
Appendix
69
Bibliography
80
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The combination of dynamic programming algorithms together with supervised
learning models and the inspiration of behaviorist psychology have led to im-
portant breakthroughs in recent years in the ambit of optimal decision making
[1] [2]. Not surprisingly, many research institutions and important technological
companies are increasingly focusing more their attention on the ﬁeld.
Experts in Artiﬁcial Intelligence believe that we are now closer to be able to pro-
vide machines with the ability to learn, think and act like humans do. Yet, there
is a long way to be covered and although there is practical evidence of the ca-
pabilities, many questions such as, how to speed up the sometimes prohibitively
large learning process or how to accommodate these ideas to real scenarios with
multiple interacting agents still remain unanswered.
1.1
Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement Learning, RL, [3] has primarily been applied to control tasks
where an agent, which usually holds very little knowledge of the world, is re-
quired to learn an optimal strategy by interacting with its environment. This
strategy, normally referred as policy, is nothing else than a function that maps
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
the agent’s observations of the world with the actions to take in order to suc-
cessfully solve the task. Through out this thesis we will deﬁne how the problem
is addressed from the mathematical perspective and what the main advantages
and weaknesses of this framework are.
The intention is not to break with popular machine learning techniques that
have already demonstrated extensive capabilities, but to adapt them so that
intelligent agents can learn by themselves with no need for human supervision.
In fact, as in many other ﬁelds, the recent success in RL was prompt by the
use of artiﬁcial neural networks [4] and enhanced by the increase in computing
power. In this work we present some state-of-the-art deep RL methods and
explore them in detail using a variety of examples.
1.2
Multi-Agent Systems
The majority of the work in RL has been directed towards single agent envi-
ronments. Yet, practical applications usually involve multiple entities working
together or competing against each other. In the last part of this thesis we move
away from traditional RL methods, which are no longer valid in the multi-agent
setting, and present models that do recognize the inﬂuence of the other agents
in the environment.
Although, the problem of cooperation and competition has been addressed in
areas of research like game theory, it is only been applied to abstract sciences
such as economy [5] or politics [6]. We discuss how situations of defection or
collaboration can also emerge in simpler environments depending on how the
problem is formulated [7] [8].
Given that it is diﬃcult to think of a scenario in which the interaction of multiple
intelligent agents could negatively aﬀect the outcome of a particular task, this
thesis also explores how agents can eﬃciently share information to optimize team
performance [9].
Because communication over a shared network is normally
limited, the problem of deciding when and what information should be shared
is also given a lot of attention. We implement methods that allow agents to
share actions or policies during training but not during execution.
Finally, motivated by how humans convey their ideas and express themselves,
we study language as a potential communication method. In a reinforcement
leaning setting, language can be substituted by binary arrays representing con-
cepts. An agent can then send a signal to its peers who will process it together
with their state observation and act consistently [10] [11].
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Unity Game Engine
3
1.3
Unity Game Engine
Unity is a multi-platform game engine. Developers can use its graphical interface
and scripting functionality to design their 2D or 3D games. It also comes with
a built-in physics engine that can handle all kinds of physical interactions such
as collisions, gravity or accelerations. All these features make the Unity editor
very well suited for the design of complex reinforcement learning environments.
A free version of the software for non-commercial use is available for download
in Unity’s website1.
All the examples presented in this thesis are made with Unity and using C#
to deﬁne the dynamics. Scenes, objects and other graphical components in our
environments were downloaded from the Unity Asset Store and some of them
were modiﬁed with Photoshop.
1.4
Unity ML-Agents
ML-Agents is an open source Unity plugin that allows to create reinforcement
learning environments and train intelligent agents. It consists of a C# library
with a set of functions that can be used to deﬁne transitions, rewards, observa-
tions or episode termination conditions, and a bridge that connects Unity with
the Python API where training occurs.
An implementation of one of the state of the art methods in RL is provided and
can be used to train self-built environments. We also wrote three additional
algorithms using Tensorﬂow. These methods are described and assessed using
diﬀerent experiments in the following chapters.
Visit the ML-Agents GitHub repository 2 to ﬁnd documentation, source code,
examples and a installation guide.
1https://store.unity.com/download
2https://github.com/Unity-Technologies/ml-agents
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Reinforcement Learning
In contrast to other Machine Learning areas such as supervised learning, where
we use a labeled dataset to build a function that can map input and output, or
unsupervised learning, where the main goal is to ﬁnd correlations and patterns
in the data cloud itself, in reinforcement learning, very little prior information is
provided. The data consists of experiences that are continuously collected from
the agent-environment interaction. The nature of this process produces a time
series of events where samples are very correlated.
Although this sequential dataset can be used to ﬁnd an optimal solution, the
necessity of gathering more information that can better describe the environ-
ment makes it diﬃcult to make the common split between training and testing
and raises probably the greatest challenge in reinforcement learning, known as
exploration-exploitation dilemma.
In this chapter we will introduce the reinforcement learning framework, describe
some of the most popular techniques that intend to tackle the decision making
problem and show some examples so as to illustrate the advantages but also the
limitations of these methods.
The theoretical content of this chapter is based on [3]. The reader is referred
to chapters 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 in this book for a detailed explanation of all the
concepts introduced here.
==PAGE:16==
6
Reinforcement Learning
2.1
Markov Decision Process
In order to address the reinforcement learning problem from a mathematical
perspective the agent-environment interaction, ﬁgure 2.1, is represented as a
Markov decision process MDP. In every time step t = 0, 1, 2, ..., T , the agent,
using the information provided by the environment about the current state St,
selects an action At that will lead it with certain probability to the next state
St+1, and obtains a reward Rt+1 as outcome of the chosen action. Eventually,
if the process is ﬁnite, the agent will reach the terminal state and the sequence
will conclude. In a ﬁnite MDP, the time series of events from the initial state S0
to the terminal state ST is known as episode and must always occur as follows:
S0, A0, R1, S1, A1, R2, S2, A2..., RT , ST .
(2.1)
Because the problem is formulated as an MDP each state and reward in an
episode is only dependent on the immediately preceding state and action pair.
Therefore, in a non-deterministic environment the joint probability of a obtain-
ing a speciﬁc reward and ending in a particular state can be written as
p(s′, r|s, a) = Pr{St+1 = s′, Rt+1 = r|St = s, At = a},
(2.2)
where s, s′ and a are certain states and actions that lie within the complete set
of possible states S and actions A respectively. Besides, since initial state and
terminal state in the previous episode are completely uncorrelated, the ﬁrst one
follows its own independent distribution.
Figure 2.1: Agent-environment interaction [3]. In every step the agent selects
an action according to some state information coming from the
environment, and receives a reward signal as a consequence of the
action taken.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Partial rewards and expected return
7
2.2
Partial rewards and expected return
A reward is a a feedback signal that the agent receives at every time step as
an indicator of how beneﬁcial is to take a particular action. Negative rewards
are meant to penalize a decision, while positive ones encourage a particular
behavior. Although, these rewards can be given by the environment, e.g. score
in a video game, in certain applications they need to be carefully selected.
The overall objective in reinforcement learning is to maximize the expected
return, that is, the sum of expected rewards in a episode. Therefore partial
rewards must be well aligned with the ﬁnal goal of the agent. A more general
formulation which also considers the decaying importance of future rewards at
the current time step is given by
Gt = Rt+1 + γRt+2 + γ2Rt+3 + ... =
T
X
k=t+1
γk−t−1Rk.
(2.3)
The expression above is known as expected discounted return and the parameter
γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount rate. Thus, for γ close to 1 more weight is given to
future rewards, while when γ is small or 0 only proximal or immediate rewards
are considered. Note that equation 2.3 is also suitable for continuing tasks, that
is, when the process cannot be split into episodes, in that case T = ∞and γ < 1
for the expected return to be bounded.
2.3
Value functions and Bellman equation
A common strategy to solve the reinforcement learning problem is to learn a
value function, which maps every possible state in the environment with its
expected return when following a certain behavior.
This behavior, which is
known in the literature as policy and is denoted by π, represents the agent’s
probability of selecting a particular action when in a certain state, π(a|s). Using
this concept we can write the state-value function under policy π as
vπ(s) = Eπ [Gt | St = s] = Eπ
"
T
X
k=t+1
γk−t−1Rk
 St = s
#
.
(2.4)
The action-value function 2.5, on the other hand, not only evaluates the value of
==PAGE:18==
8
Reinforcement Learning
being in a state but also the eﬀect of choosing a particular action and following
a given policy π from that point onwards:
qπ(s, a) = Eπ [Gt | St = s, At = a] = Eπ
"
T
X
k=t+1
γk−t−1Rk
 St = s, At = a
#
.
(2.5)
Equation 2.4 can be expressed recursively in terms of subsequent states by
exploiting some of the properties of MDPs:
vπ(s) = Eπ [Gt | St = s]
= Eπ [Rt+1 + γGt+1 | St = s]
=
X
a
π(a|s)
X
s′
X
r
p(s′, r|s, a) [r + γEπ [Gt+1|St+1 = s′]]
=
X
a
π(a|s)
X
s′
X
r
p(s′, r|s, a) [r + γvπ(s′)] .
(2.6)
As mentioned before, the goal of the agent is to maximize the expected return
over a sequence of steps. Assuming that the true action-value function is known
for every state an action, the problem could be easily solved by consistently
selecting the action that maximizes the expected return in every state. In that
case we say the agent is following the optimal policy. Consequently, the return
of any other policy must be always smaller or equal to that of the optimal policy:
v∗(s) = max
π
vπ(s)
(2.7)
and the optimal action-value function
q∗(s, a) = max
π
qπ(s, a).
(2.8)
Therefore, considering that our policy is being selected so that the return is
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Value functions and Bellman equation
9
maximized the following condition must always hold:
v∗(s) = max
a
q∗(s, a)
= max
a
E∗[Gt|St = s, At = a]
= max
a
E∗[Rt+1 + γGt+1|St = s, At = a]
= max
a
E∗[Rt+1 + γv∗(St+1)|St = s, At = a]
= max
a
X
s′,r
p(s′, r|a, s) [r + γv∗(s′)]
(2.9)
which is known as Bellman optimality equation for the state-value function.
Analogously we can write the optimality equation for the action-value function
as
q∗(s, a) = E∗
h
Rt+1 + γ max
a′ q∗(St+1, a′)
St = s, At = a
i
=
X
s′,r
p(s′, r|a, s)
h
r + γ max
a′ q∗(s′, a′)
i
.
(2.10)
The exact solution of the above expressions can be found if the state space is
ﬁnite and the dynamics of the environment known. Thereupon, the best policy
can be found by acting greedily in every state from the beginning until the end
of the episode. Note that the greedy action in every state is not necessarily the
one that maximizes the immediate reward but the ﬁnal return, which is given
at every state by the Bellman optimality equation.
There exist eﬃcient dynamic programming algorithms that can be used to ﬁnd
the optimal policy of a ﬁnite state-space environment where the dynamics are
known. Although all these methods ensure convergence they are computation-
ally very demanding and only work well in practice when the total number of
possible states is small. A more detailed description of these methods can be
found in [12] and [3].
==PAGE:20==
10
Reinforcement Learning
2.4
Static grid world
In this section we are going to introduce one of the sample environments that
will be used throughout this thesis to explain the theory and evaluate the per-
formance of our reinforcement learning algorithms.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: 4 × 4 static grid world. The blue agent, which can take four dif-
ferent actions, moving north, south, east or west, must collect the
gold nugget and avoid colliding with the asteroid (a). State-value
function of deterministic grid world when following an optimal
policy. Q-learning ﬁnds the exact value of equations 2.4 at every
state-action pair when following the optimal policy and setting
γ = 0.99 (b)
The blue agent located at the center of the 4 × 4 grid in ﬁgure 2.2 (a) is an
UFO that is traveling around the space collecting gold nuggets and avoiding a
collision with the asteroids. The UFO must decide in every step between four
diﬀerent actions: moving north, south, east or west. In our ﬁrst example, the
location of the objects, asteroid and gold nugget, is ﬁxed, and thus, the entire
set of possible states S can be deﬁned only using the position of the UFO. The
agent receives a reward of +1 if the gold nugget is collected, a reward of -1 when
colliding with the Asteroid and a reward of -0.01 for every step until the episode
is over. An episode ﬁnishes when either the agent crashes into the asteroid or
the gold nugget is picked up.
We solved this problem using a technique called Q-learning that we describe in
section 2.6.2. However, since the dynamics of the environment are known and
the state space is ﬁnite, it can be solved using Bellman’s equation and a dynamic
programming method. The color map in ﬁgure 2.2 (b) shows the return at every
==PAGE:21==
2.5 Monte Carlo Methods
11
state when following the optimal policy.
2.5
Monte Carlo Methods
As mentioned before, dynamic programming algorithms require complete knowl-
edge of the environment and the probability distributions of its transitions. The
methods described in this section try to approximate the exact solution using
simulations. These follow an empiric strategy based on experiences gathered by
the agent when interacting with the environment.
The Monte Carlo algorithm (MC) for evaluating a given policy estimates the
value function at every state by averaging the sample returns over various tra-
jectories. In this method the value of all the states visited in the episode is
updated only at the end of the episode. Depending on whether only the ﬁrst
visit or all the visits to the same state during an episode are used to calculate
the average return, two algorithms with diﬀerent theoretical properties are ob-
tained. It can be proved that both methods converge to the optimal solution
as the number of visits to all the states goes to inﬁnity [13]. The pseudo-code
below corresponds to ﬁrst-visit MC.
Deﬁne: policy π to evaluate
Initialize value function: V
Allocate memory: states, rewards, returns
repeat
Sample initial state: s
while not done do
action ←choose an action following π
s, r, done ←take step
states, rewards ←append sr
end
for each diﬀerent s in states do
G ←sum rewards from ﬁrst instance of state to end of episode
returns(s) ←append G
V(s) ←average returns(s)
end
end
Algorithm 1: First visit MC method for policy evaluation
In this and the following algorithms we will use the boolean variable done to
indicate whether or not the episode has ended.
==PAGE:22==
12
Reinforcement Learning
The method can be easily modiﬁed to calculate qπ instead of vπ. However, these
methods can only be used to evaluate a certain policy but not to ﬁnd the optimal
one. One way to do so, would be to update the policy as new information about
the value of every state and action comes in. This method is known in dynamic
programing as generalized policy iteration (GPI).
The idea is to start with an arbitrary policy, ﬁnd the value function, select the
greedy policy that maximizes the current value function and repeat the process
again as shown in the diagram below 2.3. A policy can be updated after a few
iterations of policy evaluation even if the exact value function for the previous
policy has not been found yet. This strategy is meant to avoid the unnecessary
computations of evaluating a sub-optimal policy. In practice a policy can be
updated right after every episode, in this case it is common to use experiences
coming from diﬀerent policies to calculate the average return of every state. The
main drawback of this method is that even if the process went on forever we
could not assure that all states and actions would be explored inﬁnitely many
times to be able to guarantee convergence to the optimal policy.
Figure 2.3: Generalized Policy Iteration [3]: Starting from any random policy,
the optimal policy is obtained by repeatedly calculating the value
function and then selecting the greedy policy that maximizes the
return at every state, according to the current value estimates.
2.5.1
On-policy MC methods
On policy methods attempt to guarantee that all regions in the state-action
space are suﬃciently visited by initially deploying a more relaxed policy where
the probability of selecting any of the actions in a given state is greater than
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Monte Carlo Methods
13
0. One such policy is called ϵ-greedy and the parameter ϵ represents the chance
of selecting a random action instead of the greedy one. Hence, combining this
strategy with policy evaluation and policy improvement we obtain an algorithm
that can be shown to converge to the optimal solution.
Randomly Initialize: π
Initialize action value function: Q
Allocate memory: states, rewards, returns
repeat
Sample initial state: s
while not done do
amax ←maxa Q(s, a)
a ←choose amax or random a with probability ϵ and 1 −ϵ
s′, r, done ←take step
states, actions, rewards ←append s, a, r
s ←s′
end
for each diﬀerent s −a pair in states-actions do
G ←sum rewards from ﬁrst instance of state-action to end of
episode
returns(s, a) ←append G
Q(s, a) ←average returns(s, a)
end
end
Algorithm 2: On-policy ϵ-greedy MC method for control
2.5.2
Oﬀ-policy MC methods
Although in the previous section we introduced soft-policies to allow some en-
vironment exploration instead of acting greedily in every iteration, this had the
consequence of making the method learn from a policy that was not entirely
optimal. We will now present a diﬀerent approach where two policies are used
instead. The ﬁrst one, known as behavior policy, is meant to explore and add
new experiences, while the other, the target policy, uses the information pro-
vided by the ﬁrst one to make improvements until converging to an optimal
strategy.
A key concept in oﬀ-policy algorithms is importance sampling [14]. This is used
to correct for the fact that the data generated to update our target policy comes
from a diﬀerent distribution.
The probability of a sequence of events occurring when following a speciﬁc policy
==PAGE:24==
14
Reinforcement Learning
π can be calculated as
P(At, St+1, At+1, ..., ST |St, At:T −1 π) =
T −1
Y
k=t
π(Ak|Sk)p(Sk+1|Sk, Ak)
(2.11)
and the importance sampling ratio, which measures the relative probability that
a trajectory occurs when following target and behavior policies, is given by:
ρt:T −1 =
QT −1
k=t π(Ak|Sk)p(Sk+1|Sk, Ak)
QT −1
k=t b(Ak|Sk)p(Sk+1|Sk, Ak)
=
T −1
Y
k=t
π(Ak|Sk)
b(Ak|Sk) .
(2.12)
Note that transition probabilities in numerator and denominator cancel out as
they are equal and independent of the policy being followed.
The ratio in equation 2.12 can be interpret as a correction factor and used to
estimate the returns of the target policy by using samples obtained with the
behavior policy:
V (s) =
P
t∈T (s) ρt:T (t)−1Gt
|T (s)|
,
(2.13)
V (s) =
P
t∈T (s) ρt:T (t)−1Gt
P
t∈T (s) ρt:T (t)−1
,
(2.14)
with T (s) being the set of all time steps in which state s is visited. Equations
2.13 and 2.14 are the ordinary and weighted importance sampling estimators of
V (S) respectively. A detailed description of how these two equations relate to
each other can be found in [3].
Algorithm 1 can be then adapted to evaluate a target policy using a behavioral
==PAGE:25==
2.5 Monte Carlo Methods
15
policy to generate new experiences.
Initialize target policy π
Deﬁne behavioral soft policy b
Initialize action value function: Q
Set G = 0, W = 1
Allocate memory: states, rewards, returns
repeat
Sample initial state: s
while not done do
action ←choose an action following b
s′, r, done ←take step
states, actions, rewards ←append s, a, r
s ←s′
end
for each ⟨s, a, r⟩tuple from terminal to initial state do
G ←γG + r
C(s, a) ←C(s, a) + W
Q(s, a) ←Q(s, a) +
W
C(s,a)[G −Q(s, a)]
π(s) ←arg maxa∗∈A Q(s, a∗)
W ←W π(a|s)
b(a|s)
if W = 0 then
break
end
end
end
Algorithm 3: Oﬀ-policy MC control method.
Estimating optimal policy
π ≈π∗
Where W in 3 is a variable holding the importance sampling weights at every
step of the episode and C(St, At) is the cumulative sum of weights in each
particular state-action pair.
On the other hand, the expression used for the action-value function update,
Q(St, At) ←Q(St, At) +
W
C(St, At)[G −Q(St, At)],
(2.15)
is equivalent to equation 2.14 and allows to reestimate the expected return
incrementally as new information comes in.
==PAGE:26==
16
Reinforcement Learning
2.6
Temporal diﬀerence learning
Even though, as discussed in the previous section, Monte Carlo methods are
proved to converge to the optimal solution they make an inadequate use of the
information and can perform poorly in practice. The fact that we need to wait
until the end of an episode to make a change in our value function can have a
strong negative impact specially in situations where episodes are long or even
inﬁnite.
While MC methods use the true sample return obtained at the end of an episode
to update the value estimate of all the states and actions visited in that episode,
temporal diﬀerence learning methods, TD, base the updates on previous esti-
mations of the value function at subsequent states:
V (St) ←V (St) + α [Rt+1 + γV (St+1) −V (St)] ,
(2.16)
where Rt+1 + γV (St+1), instead of Gt, is used as the approximation of the
expected return at St. The TD learning alternative to algorithm 1 used for
policy evaluation is outlined below.
Deﬁne: policy π to evaluate
Initialize value function : V
repeat
Sample initial state: s
while not done do
a ←choose an action following π
s’, r, done ←take step
V (s) ←V (s) + α [r + γV (s′) −V (s)]
s ←s′
end
end
Algorithm 4: TD learning for policy evaluation
The technique applied in algorithm 4 is known as bootstrapping and it allows
to perform updates more frequently than MC methods while still converging
to the optimal solution. In practice, the eﬃcient use of data and memory in
TD learning methods, normally leads to faster learning. However, there is no
mathematical prove supporting this empirical fact at the moment [3].
Although the methods presented in this and the following sections are based
solely on the reward obtained after a single step, waiting a few more steps to
do the update normally leads to faster convergence. This is the idea used by
==PAGE:27==
2.6 Temporal diﬀerence learning
17
n-step TD methods which intend to combine the low bias high variance estimate
of MC methods with the high bias low variance 1-step TD update. The value
of St is updated after n steps using the intermediate rewards and the current
estimate of the return at St+n.
2.6.1
On-policy TD methods: Sarsa
The on-policy version of TD control algorithms is known as Sarsa. As in MC
we also apply Generalized Policy Iteration to evaluate and improve the action
choices but in this case the value function update is done online and not at the
end of every episode.
Again, the goal is to estimate the action value function Q(s, a) at every state-
action pair so as to be able to make decisions on what actions to take, by
comparing the expected returns in a particular state. Because this is an on-
policy method we need to deploy soft policies in order to allow some exploration
around the state-action space. Algorithm 5 presents the Sarsa TD method for
control with ϵ-greedy policy
Randomly Initialize policy: π
Initialize action value function: Q
repeat
Sample initial state: s
amax ←maxa Q(s, a)
a ←choose amax or random a with probability ϵ and 1 −ϵ
while not done do
s’, r, done ←take step
a′
max ←maxa′ Q(s′, a′)
a′ ←choose a′
max or random a′ with probability ϵ and 1 −ϵ
Q(s, a) ←Q(s, a) + α [r + γQ(s′, a′) −Q(s, a)]
s ←s′,
a ←a′
end
end
Algorithm 5: On-policy TD method for control: Sarsa
Algorithm 5 is guaranteed to converge to the optimal policy if all the state-
action pairs are visited inﬁnite times and the soft policy gradually becomes the
greedy policy.
==PAGE:28==
18
Reinforcement Learning
2.6.2
Oﬀ-policy TD methods: Q-Learning
Q-learning [15] appears as a simple but interesting oﬀ-policy variant of Sarsa. In
this method the value function is updated after a single step using the immediate
reward and the current estimate of the greedy action at the next state, that is
Q(St, At) ←Q(St, At) + α
h
Rt+1 + γ max
a
Q(st+1, a) −Q(St, At)
i
(2.17)
Randomly Initialize policy: π
Initialize action value function: Q
repeat
Sample initial state: s
while not done do
amax ←maxa Q(s, a)
a ←choose amax or random a with probability ϵ and 1 −ϵ
s′, r, done ←take step
Q(s, a) ←Q(s, a) + α [r + γ maxa′ Q(s′, a′) −Q(s, a)]
s ←s′
end
end
Algorithm 6: Oﬀ-policy TD method for control: Qlearning
Q-learning is considered an oﬀ-policy method because the policy being followed
is diﬀerent from the greedy policy used to update the action value function. Yet,
algorithm 6 varies from the oﬀ-policy methods described in 2.5.1 in the sense
that target and behavioral policies are the same and the update is performed
using the next state’s greedy action. Therefore, the policy must be soft to ensure
some exploration.
The method works very well in practice and has been proved to converge if all
state-action pairs are visited enough times. Another variant, called Expected
Sarsa, uses the expectation of the action value function at the next state to
make the update.
2.6.3
Static Grid World with tabular methods
Algorithm 6 is implemented in Python and tested on our grid world example.
The action-value function Q(s, a) consists of a lookup table where every row
represents a state and every column an action. Since the objects always remain
==PAGE:29==
2.6 Temporal diﬀerence learning
19
in the same position, states are completely determined by the position of the
UFO. Consequently, the size of the lookup table is 16 × 4 because there are 16
cells in the grid and 4 possible actions.
Since we assume no prior knowledge about the position of the objects all state-
action pairs are initialized to 0. To encourage the UFO to explore the environ-
ment we plan a linear decay for ϵ from 1, entirely random policy, to 0, greedy
policy. The results are shown in ﬁgure 2.4
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.4: Q learning with lookup table.
Figure a: The left vertical axis
shows the sum of rewards per episode averaged over 10 episodes.
Figure b: The left vertical axis shows the total number of steps
per episode averaged over 10 episodes. The right vertical axis in
both plots corresponds to the value of ϵ at every step. We have
applied exponential smoothing to the two blue curves in order to
attenuate the peaks. The light blue curves are the true values.
Figure (a) shows that, as the agent learns more about the value function and
the chance of random action decays, the UFO begins to consistently collect the
gold nugget and avoids colliding with the asteroid. We can see that after 4000
steps the agent starts to act always greedily. This has an obvious eﬀect on the
returns which from that point onwards lie always close to 1. The mean episode
length depicted in ﬁgure 2.4 plot (b) shows that the episodes are short at ﬁrst.
The UFO is moving randomly which means that it can easily either collide with
an asteroid or unintentionally collect the gold nugget. Around 1000 steps the
agent has learned to avoid the asteroids and thus, the episodes are longer. From
step 1500 onwards the agent tries to ﬁnd the optimal path so that it can solve
the task in the fewest possible number of moves.
Figure 2.5 shows the estimated action-value of every position after 10, 100, 500,
1000 steps. The values correspond to the action that maximizes the return at
each location.
==PAGE:30==
20
Reinforcement Learning
The color map demonstrates how after very few iterations the agent is able to
ﬁnd an accurate estimate of the action-value function and use it to improve its
policy. However, one can argue that the method works very well due to its over-
simplistic complexity and that using a table to represent the action-state space
is not always possible. In the next section we shall study methods with better
scaling properties that use functions instead of tables that allow the agents learn
in more complex environments.
(a) 10 steps
(b) 100 steps
(c) 500 steps
(d) 1000 steps
Figure 2.5: Action-value function estimation using Q-learning with tabular
methods. The values shown in the color map correspond to the
greedy action at every state.
The algorithm and rest of the source code are available on GitHub1. The tutorial
on RL with Tensorﬂow [16] was a valuable reference for the implementation of
this method.
1https://github.com/miguelsuau/modified-ml-agents
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Deep Reinforcement
Learning
As shown in the static grid world example, tabular methods are very useful for
solving simple tasks where the number of states and actions is relatively small.
Recall that in the example, there were only 16 diﬀerent states and 4 actions.
Nonetheless, if we think of any real control environment the number of possible
states and actions can be tremendously large or even inﬁnite. That is why, using
a table to represent states and actions is not always possible, because it does
not scale when moving to more complex settings.
In this chapter we will present a solution to this problem that implies a dra-
matic change in the way we apply and optimize our value function. Yet, the
reinforcement learning framework remains unchanged and all the algorithms we
already presented can still be applied.
3.1
Value function approximation
As opposed to tabular methods, the value function is approximated using a
parametric function instead of a matrix where the number of parameters is often
smaller than the number of state-action pairs. The function used to represent the
==PAGE:32==
22
Deep Reinforcement Learning
environment depends very much on its complexity. The range of possible options
go from a simple weighted linear combination of state-action space features, to
a nonlinear function obtained by training a neural network.
The idea sounds very much like a supervised learning problem. We can think of
past observations as samples in our training set that we use to ﬁnd a function
that can map state observations to action values. However, in this case the
training is done online, while the agent is exploring the environment.
This
raises the problem of samples being strongly correlated. Besides, while updating
a particular element in the state-action table had no eﬀect on the rest, changing
a single parameter in our function can aﬀect multiple states and actions.
3.1.1
Loss function
Finding a function that can eﬀectively map state-action pairs to action values
reduces to obtaining the set parameters that best approximate the action values
in all regions. However, since the end goal is to ﬁnd the optimal policy we might
want to be able to approximate some states and actions better than others. Thus
we need to decide on a suitable loss function than can help us asses performance.
Like in most regression problems the obvious choice is the Mean Squared Error
MSE, which can be weighted according to how much importance is given to each
particular state-action pair:
L(w) =
X
s∈S,a∈A
µ(s, a)[q∗
π(s, a) −ˆqw(s, a)]2,
(3.1)
with µ(s, a) proportional to the expected number of visits to a particular state
and action compared to the rest. We can estimate the time spent at each pair
as
η(s, a) = h(s) +
X
s′
η(s′, a)π(a|s′)p(s|s′, a),
(3.2)
where h(s) is the probability that s is the initial state, and thus
µ(s) =
η(s)
P
s η(s).
(3.3)
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Value function approximation
23
Hence if we knew the true action values for the optimal policy, the optimal set of
parameters could be easily obtained by solving an optimization problem using
equation 3.1 as objective function. However in a real scenario, since there is no
prior knowledge of q∗
π, an approximation must be used instead.
3.1.2
Stochastic gradient and semi-gradient descent
We have already discussed various ways of approximating the value function.
We could, for instance, substitute q∗
π by the MC estimate Gt in equation 3.1,
and then, using stochastic gradient descent (SGD), update the parameters of
our value function. Here we assume that µ(s, a) is the same for all state-action
pairs, so that we have
wt+1 = wt −1
2α∇[Gt −ˆqwt(St, At)]2
= wt + α [Gt −ˆqwt(St, At)] ∇ˆqwt(St, At),
(3.4)
where α is the step size and ∇ˆqwt(St, At) represents the gradient of ˆq with
respect to wt
Conversely, if we wanted to apply any of the TD methods described in section 2.6
we would have to use what is known in the literature as semi-gradient descent.
The reason for this is that now, although our target also depends on the value
function, it is not considered when calculating the gradient:
Ut = Rt+1 + ˆqwt(St+1, At+1)
(3.5)
wt+1 = wt + α [Ut −ˆqwt(St, At)] ∇ˆqwt(St, At)
(3.6)
Although possibly compromising convergence, the use of equation 3.6 is justiﬁed
in practice because it can notably speed up the learning process [3].
==PAGE:34==
24
Deep Reinforcement Learning
3.2
Deep Q Network
The algorithm presented in this section is in essence the same Q-learning method
that helped us solve the deterministic grid world example except that now we
use a neural network instead of a table to approximate the value function [4].
Randomly Initialize policy: π
Initialize value function parameters: w
repeat
Sample initial state: s
while not done do
amax ←maxa ˆqw(s, a)
a ←choose amax or random a with probability ϵ and 1 −ϵ
s′, r, done ←take step
w ←w + α [r + γ maxa′ ˆqw(s′, a′) −ˆqw(s, a)] ∇ˆqw(s, a)
s ←s′
end
end
Algorithm 7: Oﬀ-policy TD method for control: Qlearning
The pseudo-code shown in algorithm 7 corresponds to the standard Q-learning
algorithm with function approximation. A more complex version that incorpo-
rates a few additional elements, described below, was implemented in Python
using Tensorﬂow. The algorithm and rest of the source code are available on
GitHub1. The tutorial on RL with Tensorﬂow [16] was a valuable reference for
the implementation of this method.
3.2.1
Experience Replay
As we mentioned in chapter 2, one important diﬀerence between reinforcement
learning and supervised learning is that the samples we collect are not inde-
pendent. Updating the network parameters in every iteration as we obtain new
experiences can very much aﬀect the stability of our optimization method.
Experience replay [17] intends to decouple information and break up correla-
tions between successive samples by ﬁrst storing the information in a big replay
memory buﬀer and then sampling at random mini-batches of experiences in ev-
ery iteration to eﬀectively update the model. This has the eﬀect of not only
reducing variance and preventing instability issues, but also accelerating the
learning process because experiences can be used more than once.
1https://github.com/miguelsuau/modified-ml-agents
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Deep Q Network
25
3.2.2
Independent target network
We saw that when using the TD estimate as target to update our parameters
a full gradient step could not be taken because our target was also dependent
on the same parametric function. Although we saved this by using the so called
semi gradient (equation 3.6), the fact that the function being updated is also
present in our target means that they are both strongly correlated, which can
provoke dangerous oscillations and make the algorithm diverge. The solution
proposed in [4] consists of separating the two functions, the main network and
the target network, and clipping the parameters of the target network. While
the main network is updated in every iteration the weights of the target network
are only periodically moved toward the main network after a certain number of
iterations.
This two ideas, experience replay and the use of an independent target network,
helped DeepMind build a model that achieved, and in some cases excelled,
human level performance in a series of Atari video games [4].
3.2.3
Double Q-learning
Double Q-learning [18] aims to reduce the positive bias caused by the maximum
operator used in the Q-learning update formula (equation 2.17) for both action
selection and action evaluation. This eﬀect, also known as overoptimism, has
been shown to aﬀect convergence, specially if suboptimal policies are repeatedly
being favored.
The original paper [19], which is focused on tabular Q-learning, proposes storing
two diﬀerent tables, A and B, that learn the value function independently. The
update is then performed using one of the functions to select an action and the
other to estimate the value, so that
QA(St, At) = QA(St, At) + α

Rt+1 + γQB

St+1, arg max
a
QA(St+1, a)

(3.7)
and analogously for table B.
In every iteration, by random selection, only one of the two tables is updated
so that they learn from diﬀerent sets of experiences. The underlaying idea is to
decouple the estimate from the action selection to remove the positive bias.
==PAGE:36==
26
Deep Reinforcement Learning
The authors successfully applied this same method to DQN but used the target
network instead of a secondary function. This resulted in the following equation
for calculating the targets:
Ut = Rt+1 + γˆq

St+1, arg max
a
ˆq(St+1, a, wt), w′
t

,
(3.8)
where wt and w′t are the weights of the target and the main function respec-
tively.
Although the two functions are now dependent, the use of the target network is
justiﬁed because it only implies a minimal change in the algorithm. Besides, the
fact that target network is only updated every once in a while has been proven
enough to reduce bias and increase performance.
3.2.4
Static Grid World with function approximation
We showed that the tabular Q learning method could solve the static grid world
example in very few iterations because the number of states-action pairs is small
and the use of a parametric function is not necessary. Yet, we would like to test
how well DQN does in the same task. Even though in [4] they use images as
input and a convolutional neural network to encode observations, we will keep
it simple and use a one-hot encoded vector representing the UFO’s position at
every time step.
The function approximator consists of a single fully connected layer with four
nodes, each one corresponding to one of the four actions. This approach is only
valid in situations where the number of actions available is small. In continu-
ous control problems, for example, actions can be given as input to the neural
network and then the function is maximized to ﬁnd the greedy action. Another
option is to treat the action space as Gaussian so that the function outputs
mean and standard deviation for every state. The action is then sampled from
the resulting distribution.
The algorithm stores experiences in a replay buﬀer and samples from it to update
the function parameters.
To make the optimization process more robust we
added a secondary network to calculate the targets. Its weights are updated by
a small amount toward the main network in every iteration. This has the same
eﬀect as a full update every certain number of steps but it prevents potential
instability issues provoked by abrupt changes in the targets [16]. Finally, we
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Deep Q Network
27
also applied double Q-learning, as described in the previous section, to reduce
overoptimism.
The results of running DQN on the grid world example are shown in ﬁgure 3.1
Figure 3.1: Value function of the static grid world example obtained using
DQN. The values are equal to those obtained with tabular Q-
learning
As we can see, using this binary state space representation, the method is able
to match the values to the ones obtained with the tabular version. In fact, as
long as the number of parameters is larger than the number of possible states-
action pairs the neural network should be able to act like a regular table. In
our case, because we use exactly 64 parameters and no bias terms, the weight
values are equal to the 64 elements in the lookup table.
The above mentioned should be no surprise considering that our neural network
is nothing but a linear regression between the binary vector as input, and the
state-action values as output.
We could also feed our neural network with a more compact state representation.
For this example we used a state space vector of two dimensions that correspond
to the coordinates of the agent at each position. Figure 3.2 shows a contour plot
of the value function in a continuous state space. Even though our agent is only
allowed to occupy certain locations on the grid, the model can calculate the
action value at any point.
Now the function is not ﬂexible enough to reproduce the optimal value function
==PAGE:38==
28
Deep Reinforcement Learning
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2: State-value function estimation using DQN. The colors in the con-
tour plot (ﬁgure a) correspond to the estimated return of the
greedy action at every possible location in the continuous state
space. The values estimated by the neural network when feeding
the allowed locations only are depicted in ﬁgure (b).
and needs to ﬁnd a compromise solution. Yet, one can see that, although the
values are not the true ones, the policy obtained when acting greedily is indeed
the optimal policy. This example supports the use of a function approximator
in complex reinforcement learning settings. As long as the function is able to
describe the important elements in the environment it can very well be used
to obtain the optimal policy. Figure 3.3 shows how the value function in 3D
evolves during training, x and y axis are the coordinates in the grid while z
gives the value at each location.
3.3
Policy Gradient Methods
All methods described so far were focused on learning a value function that was
later used for selecting actions at every state. Considering that we are essentially
interested in ﬁnding the best strategy that will allow the agent to act optimally,
this was an oblique way of solving the control problem.
We present in this section a completely diﬀerent approach in which we deﬁne
a parametric function that can translate state observations into action proba-
bilities [20]. This function, which is in fact the agent’s policy, can be written
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Policy Gradient Methods
29
(a) 5e4 steps
(b) 2e5 steps
(c) 5e5 steps
Figure 3.3: State-value function estimation using DQN. The values shown in
the z axis of the 3D graph correspond to the estimated return of
the greedy action at every possible location in the continuous state
space.
==PAGE:40==
30
Deep Reinforcement Learning
as
π(a|s, θ) = Pr{At = a|St = s, θt = θ}
(3.9)
We saw in the static grid world example that policies tend to be simpler than
value functions and thus, easier to learn in practice. While before the value of
an action had to increase over the rest in a given state in order to be selected,
now any slight change to our parameters modiﬁes the distribution over the
actions, therefore aﬀecting directly to our policy.
Besides, policies are now
non-deterministic, in the sense that unless the probabilities become exactly 0
actions have always some chance of being selected, this can help solve certain
tasks where the optimal policy is a stochastic policy (e.g. the game of poker).
3.3.1
Policy objective function and gradient
As we did when we presented the function approximation methods, we need to
deﬁne a loss function that will help us evaluate the performance of a particular
policy:
J(θ) = Eπ
" T
X
t=0
Rt
#
=
X
a
πθ(S0, a)qπθ(S0, a).
(3.10)
Equation 3.10 is nothing else than the expected return from the initial state S0
when following policy πθ from that point onwards. As mentioned earlier, because
the policies are stochastic, updating our parametric function will slightly modify
the chance of selecting certain actions but it rarely causes dramatic changes
to our policy as it occurs with value based methods.
This means that the
objective function in 3.10 is smooth and thus, the method has better convergence
properties [3].
The idea to ﬁnd the optimal policy is to repeatedly adjust the parameters moving
them in the direction that maximizes equation 3.10.
A way to do so is by
following the gradient, which according to the policy gradient theorem, whose
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Policy Gradient Methods
31
prove is given in [20], is calculated as follows
∇θJ(θ) ∝
X
s
µ(s)
X
a
∇θπθ(s, a)qπθ(s, a)
= Eπθ
"X
a
πθ(St, a)∇θπθ(St, a)
πθ(St, a) qπθ(St, a)
#
= Eπθ [∇θ log πθ(St, At)qπθ(St, At)]
(3.11)
where µ(s) is the on-policy distribution over the state space under policy π as
deﬁned in equation 3.3.
The term ∇θ log πθ(s, a) is often called eligibility vector and it indicates the
direction along which a change in the network parameters will most increase
the chance of selecting a particular action. On the other hand, qπθ(s, a), gives
the expected return of a particular action given a state. Therefore, taking a step
in the gradient direction will increase the probability of selecting actions that
yield a high positive return while decreasing the probability of the ones whose
return is negative.
3.3.2
MC Policy Gradient: REINFORCE
The most simple version of policy gradient methods is called REINFORCE [21]
[22] and it uses an MC estimate of the action value to adjust the policy weights
by applying stochastic gradient ascent:
θt+1 = θt + α∇θ log πθ(St, At)Gt,
(3.12)
where qπθ(s, a) in equation 3.11 has been substituted by the sample return
Gt. We ﬁrst collect the experiences of an entire episode, and then update the
parameters at every state using the sum of rewards from the current state until
the end of the episode as an unbiased sample of the expected return. Algorithm
==PAGE:42==
32
Deep Reinforcement Learning
8 contains the pseudo-code describing the method.
Initialize policy parameters: θ
Allocate memory: states, actions, rewards
repeat
Sample initial state: s
G = 0
while not done do
a ←choose an action at random from πθ(s, a)
s′, r, done ←take step
states, actions, rewards ←append s, a, r
s ←s′
end
for each state-action pair, from terminal to initial state do
G ←γG + r
θ ←θ + α∇θ log πθ(a, s)G
end
end
Algorithm 8: MC policy gradient: REINFORCE
3.3.3
TD Policy Gradient: Actor-Critic
As in any MC method, REINFORCE only updates the parameters of the pol-
icy once the episode is over which can slow down a lot the learning process.
Besides, replacing the expected return with a sample estimate introduces high
variance. One-step actor-critic methods [20] use a value function approximator
as an estimate of the return after a single step. Hence, equation 3.12 becomes
θt+1 = θt + α∇θ log πθ(St, At)ˆqw(St, At).
(3.13)
The approach to obtain the action values is essentially the same as in value based
methods with the only diﬀerence that now we only need the function to evaluate
the actions and not to make decisions. Hence, we can distinguish between the
actor πθ, which deﬁnes our policy and therefore is the one inﬂuencing the agent’s
behavior, and the critic qw, whose only task is to approximate the expected
return.
The pseudo-code in algorithm 9 describes step by step how the one-step actor-
critic method works.
More sophisticated algorithms combine the properties
of TD learning and MC methods using eligibility traces to trade oﬀbias and
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Policy Gradient Methods
33
variance.
Randomly Initialize policy parameters: θ
Initialize value function parameters: w
repeat
Sample initial state: s
a ←sample an action at random from πθ(s, a)
while not done do
s′, r, done ←take step using a
a′ ←sample an action at random from πθ(s′, a′)
w ←w + α [r + γˆqw(s′, a′) −ˆqw(s, a)] ∇ˆqw(s, a)
θ ←θ + α∇θ log πθ(a, s)ˆqw(s, a)
s ←s′, a ←a′
end
end
Algorithm 9: TD policy gradient: one-step actor-critic
Although using a function approximator introduces some bias, it can also make
the algorithm converge faster. Moreover, since the updates are done online the
method is suitable for continuing control tasks.
3.3.4
Policy Gradient with Baseline
In order to reduce even more the variance of our estimates we deﬁne a baseline
function [22], B(S), and we subtract its value from the policy gradient. This
operation must have no eﬀect on the direction of the gradient and should only
change its scale:
∇J(θ) ∝
X
s
µ(s)
X
a
∇θπθ(s, a)(qπθ(s, a) −b(s))
(3.14)
and as long as the function does not vary with a
X
a
b(s)∇θπθ(s, a) = b(s)∇θ
X
a
πθ(s, a) = b(s)∇θ1 = 0.
(3.15)
Most methods use the state value function Vπ(s) for the baseline so that the
==PAGE:44==
34
Deep Reinforcement Learning
term (qπθ(s, a) −b(s)) in equation 3.14 becomes
Dπ(St, At) = Qπ(St, At) −Vπ(St).
(3.16)
Dπ(St, At) is known as advantage function and it measures the deviation of an
action value from the current state estimate. Although it is common in the
reinforcement learning literature to use Aπ to denote the advantage function,
note that this terminology would cause a name collision between our action
variable A and the new function.
Whereas before we were updating actions based on their value estimate and,
unless the estimated return was negative, we would adjust the parameters more
or less strongly along the positive direction, now we penalize actions that are
worse than the state value estimate no matter whether the outcome is positive
or negative. In other words, the idea of using a baseline is that, in states where
all actions have associated a positive return, we would like to discriminate be-
tween good and bad actions and increase or decrease their probabilities of being
selected accordingly. This pushes our all gradient values to be in a neighbor-
hood of 0 which is preferable to having gradients of very diﬀerent magnitude
depending on which state we are in.
One could then use this approach to reduce the variance of an actor-critic
method and consequently, accelerate its learning rate. We could, of course, in-
troduce a new function to approximate Vπ but a more reasonable choice would
be to use the critic. For the latter, we would modify the value function approx-
imator so that it computes the state-value instead of the action value and then
estimate the advantage at each time step using an approximation of the TD
error:
δw = Rt+1 + γˆvw(St+1) −ˆvw(St).
(3.17)
We can show that this is acceptable by substituting ˆvw with the the true value
function Vπ and then taking the expected value:
Eπ[δπ|St, At] = E[Rt+1 + γVπ(St+1) −Vπ(St)|St, At]
= Qπ(St, At) −Vπ(St)
= Dπ(St, At).
(3.18)
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Policy Gradient Methods
35
The objective function that we are trying to optimize is then
J(θ) = E[log πθ(St, At)Dπ(St, At)]
(3.19)
Algorithm 10 shows a variant of the Actor-Critic method that introduces a
baseline function.
Randomly Initialize policy parameters: θ
Initialize value function parameters: w
repeat
Sample initial state: s
a ←sample an action at random from πθ(s, a)
while not done do
s′, r, done ←take step using a
a′ ←sample an action at random from πθ(s′, a′)
δ ←r + γˆvw(s′) −ˆvw(s)
w ←w + αδ∇ˆqw(s, a)
θ ←θ + α∇θ log πθ(a, s)δ
s ←s′, a ←a′
end
end
Algorithm 10: TD policy gradient: one-step actor-critic with baseline
3.3.5
Proximal Policy Optimization
Adding a critic in place of the MC sample return and a baseline function to
scale the size of the objective gradient, certainly helped reducing the variance
of the policy gradient methods. But considering that one major complication in
reinforcement learning is the lack of a training set, performing a single parameter
update in every iteration after collecting one sample does not seem to be the
best way to use the limited amount of data that is available.
Because Q learning is an oﬀ-policy method when we implemented our Deep Q-
learning algorithm, we used a big replay buﬀer that we would sample from to
adjust the weights of our value function. This is not the case of policy gradient
methods where the policy being optimized is the same we use to make decisions.
Nonetheless, we can overcome this problem with importance sampling. This
technique, which we already presented in section 2.5.2, allows us to optimize our
parameters employing experiences obtained under a diﬀerent policy. Following
this idea Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [23] modiﬁes the loss function in
==PAGE:46==
36
Deep Reinforcement Learning
equation 3.19 as follows
J(θ) = E
 πθ(St, At)
πθold(St, At)Dπ(St, At)

,
(3.20)
where πθold(St, At) are the weights of our policy before the update. Substituting
the objective function in algorithm 10 by equation 3.20, and repeatedly update
our parameters using mini-batches of our experience buﬀer will, in most cases,
make our policy diverge. As long as the old and new policies are similar there
should no problem in using this new loss function, but as they become more
and more diﬀerent the magnitude of the gradient increases and so does the
step size of our updates. Taking excessively large steps could modify the policy
dramatically leading the agent to regions of the space from where it could be
very diﬃcult to recover.
To solve this issue PPO applies a variant of a numerical optimization technique
called trust region. This idea was ﬁrst introduced in [24] where the authors
added an inequality constraint to the optimization problem that prevents old
and new policies from diverging, by limiting their relative entropy (KL diver-
gence) [14]. It turns out that this arrangement complicated the algorithm sub-
stantially and made it incompatible with certain deep learning architectures.
Equation 3.21 is the objective function akin to trust region proposed in [23].
JCLIP(θ) = E [min(rt(θ)Dπ(St, At), clip(rt(θ), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ)Dπ(St, At))] ,
(3.21)
with
rt(θ) =
πθ(St, At)
πθold(St, At).
(3.22)
The clip operator acts like a boundary to the policy ratio. When the policies
are too far from each other, the formula replaces the value of rt by either 1 −ϵ
or 1+ϵ, depending on whether Dt is positive or negative. We can then compute
the gradient of equation 3.21 and use it to update our parameters multiple times
sampling from a big pool of experiences.
PPO is considered the state of the art method in RL. It has been successfully
applied to a wide range of diﬀerent problems. Due to its versatility PPO is
the method chosen by Unity ML-Agents. Since it is an open-source project the
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Policy Gradient Methods
37
algorithm implementation and all the necessary functions that allow to train
agents in the Unity engine are publicly available on GitHub2.
3.3.6
Dynamic grid world 1: DQN and PPO
In this section we will test and compare the performance of Unity’s PPO imple-
mentation with our own version of DQN on the grid world example. In order
to make it more challenging, we modify the environment so that the position of
the objects is randomly selected in every episode.
Just knowing its own location the agent would be incapable of solving the prob-
lem. That’s why, we also include among its state observations the position of
the asteroid and the gold nugget at every time step. Therefore, the state repre-
sentation consists of a 6 element vector containing the coordinates x and y for
each of the objects. It might seem that from the agent’s perspective the infor-
mation fully describes the environment and should be enough to quickly obtain
the optimal policy. However, since the vector of observations is continuous, the
function approximator not only needs to estimate action values or actions dis-
tributions for the few allowed coordinate locations in the grid, but also for the
inﬁnite number of positions in between. In other words, the algorithm has to
come up with a smooth and ﬂexible neural network that can suﬃciently describe
a continuous version of the environment.
The performance comparison between DQN and PPO is depicted in ﬁgure 3.4.
The plot on the right shows how the two methods are able to converge to a
near optimal solution in 5 × 105 steps. Although in the static version of the
environment we only penalized the agent with a negative reward of −0.01 per
time step. With this choice the agent quickly learned to reach the goal but not
always following the shortest path. It was only after more than 3×106 that both
algorithms found an optimal solution. In ﬁgure 2.2 we used a penalty of −0.05
instead. This makes the agent worry more about reaching the gold nugget in
fewer movements. Note that this change only decreases the value of the returns
after every episode but it does not aﬀect the optimal policy. The left plot in
ﬁgure 3.4 shows how as the number of steps increases the episodes get shorter
and shorter.
Since the best strategy in this environment is completely deterministic, in order
to reach the optimal policy, the network parameters in PPO need to be adjusted
so that the probability of selecting any of the suboptimal actions is exactly 0,
therefore making it diﬃcult for the method to ﬁnally converge, blue curve ﬁgure
2https://github.com/Unity-Technologies/ml-agents
==PAGE:48==
38
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Figure 3.4: Comparison between DQN and PPO algorithms on the dynamic
grid world environment. The thick lines are the mean cumulative
reward and the mean episode length per time step averaged over
10 runs. The light blue and orange shaded areas represent the
1 standard deviation conﬁdence interval of the mean values. For
the same number of iterations DQN seems to reach a higher mean
cumulative reward most likely because its policy is always deter-
ministic. The turn back in the orange curve at 50K steps can be
attributed to an abrupt change in the policy.
3.4. On the other hand, once the value estimates learned with DQN are close
enough to the true values and the policy becomes greedy, the agent will always
choose the action with the highest return and therefore act optimally, orange
curve ﬁgure 3.4.
It is also worth mentioning that, although both algorithms take a similar number
of steps to converge, PPO does so much faster in time. This is because in order
for DQN to work well we need to keep a considerably large buﬀer of experiences
which makes the code more demanding in terms of memory, and consequently
slower. One solution that we adopted to speed up the process, was to maintain
a ﬁxed size for our array of samples, throwing away the oldest experiences as
new ones came in. This worked well as long as the array was kept large enough,
but the method failed to converge when making the buﬀer smaller.
It is not clear, that the oldest experiences are less important than the others. In
fact, they are more susceptible to contain examples of bad action choices, which
can actually be useful to approximate our value function. With this in mind
we modiﬁed our code so that experiences are removed at random. However this
seems to yield worse results in this particular example. A more sophisticated
approach would be to smartly select which samples we want to remove. This is
somewhat similar to the method called Prioritized Experience Replay proposed
in [25]. The authors of this paper designed a framework where relevant experi-
ences more likely to be sampled from the buﬀer when the model is updated.
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Policy Gradient Methods
39
Figure 3.5: State-value function estimation using DQN. The values shown in
the heat map on the right correspond to the state-values estimated
by the neural network at each of the allowed locations when ﬁxing
the two objects position as shown in the screen shots. The values
might diﬀer from the true ones but they still lead to an optimal
policy when acting greedily. Note that, in order to improve per-
formance, the step penalty has been increased to −0.05, therefore
altering the expected return at every state.
==PAGE:50==
40
Deep Reinforcement Learning
As explained before, because in DQN we select the actions that maximize the
estimated return at every step, policies can experience abrupt changes even for
small learning rates when one of the action values increases and exceeds the
others, see turn back in orange curve at 50K steps in ﬁgure 3.4. In contrast,
adjusting the parameters in policy gradient methods only causes slight changes
in the distribution over actions. That is why the blue curve consistently moves
towards the optimal values.
Figure 3.6: State-value function estimation using DQN. The values shown in
the contours on the right correspond to the state-values estimated
by the neural network at each location in the continuous state
space when ﬁxing the objects position as shown in the screen shots
In ﬁgure 3.5 we plotted the state-value function for diﬀerent locations of the
agent while maintaining the asteroid and the gold nugget ﬁxed. Figure 3.7 on
the other hand shows the stochastic policy obtained with PPO for two diﬀerent
settings. The size of the arrows in each of the cells reveals how likely is an action
to be chosen, whereas the heatmap underneath shows the state value estimates.
Tables with the hyperparameters used for training and other details about this
experiment are provided in the appendix. Follow the link 3 to ﬁnd videos of the
3Dynamic Grid World 1: https://youtu.be/uQrNILVSy2I
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Policy Gradient Methods
41
Figure 3.7: Policy and state-value function estimation using PPO. The size of
the arrows in each of the cells reveals how likely is an action to be
chosen. Only actions with probability above 10% are displayed.
The heatmap underneath shows the state values estimates of the
critic neural network at each of the allowed locations when ﬁxing
the two objects position as shown in the screen shots
==PAGE:52==
42
Deep Reinforcement Learning
results of this experiment.
3.3.7
Dynamic grid world 2: DQN and PPO
We now test the two methods on a more complicated environment. We increased
the grid size an added an extra gold nugget and a second asteroid. The new
conﬁguration is depicted in ﬁgure 3.9. As in the previous example all the objects
have diﬀerent locations in every episode.
Apart from the increased complexity of having a larger grid and two extra
objects, the agent needs to know whether or not a gold nugget has already
been collected. To that end, we add an extra binary element to the vector of
observations. This new element takes the value of 1 if the object remains in the
grid and 0 if the agent already picked it up.
We again compare the performance of DQN and PPO in this new setting, ﬁgure
3.8. The turn back in the blue curve at 100K steps, probably caused by a sud-
den change in the policy, occurs when the agent learns to avoid the asteroids,
episodes also become longer on average because the agent is too afraid to crash
into them. In contrast, the orange curve, although showing some initial insta-
bilities, which might be smoothen out with a proper parameter search, seems
to learn more consistently and converge faster to the optimal policy.
Figure 3.8: Comparison between DQN and PPO algorithms on the dynamic
grid world environment. The thick lines are the mean cumulative
reward and the mean episode length per time step averaged over
10 runs. Note that the blue curve shows a turn back at 200K steps
which can be attributed to abrupt changes in the policies
In ﬁgure 3.9, we show the policy and the value estimates learned by PPO after
1M iterations. The screen shots on the right refer to two diﬀerent states in
the same episode. In the top one, we see how policy and value function give
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Policy Gradient Methods
43
more importance to the gold nugget on the lower left corner. After this one is
collected, the object is set inactive, the value estimates change, and the arrows
direct the agent towards the second goal.
Figure 3.9: Policy and state-value function estimation using PPO. The size
of the arrows in each of the cells reveals how likely is an action
to be chosen. Only actions with probability above 10% are dis-
played. The heatmap underneath shows the state values estimates
of the critic neural network at each of the allowed locations when
ﬁxing the objects position as shown in the screen shots. In the
top heatmap the two golden nuggets are active, when the golden
nugget located in (1, 1) is collected (bottom screenshot) the ob-
ject is set inactive, policy and value estimates change, and all the
arrows direct the agent towards the second goal.
Tables with the hyperparameters used for training and other details about this
experiment are provided in the appendix.
Follow the link4 to ﬁnd a video
showing the results of this experiment.
Note that the policy is not optimal
and the agent might not always select the shortest path to collect the two gold
nuggets or might choose longer trajectories to stay away from the asteroid.
4Dynamic Grid World 2: https://youtu.be/vFZ34RTzAsM
==PAGE:54==
44
Deep Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 4
Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning
In the second chapter we showed how the reinforcement learning framework can
be applied to teach independent agents to eﬀectively interact with the world
and accomplish certain goals. We then presented a set of algorithms that using
deep neural networks have been proven successful in solving very complicated
problems.
Nonetheless, the use of only one agent might not be suﬃcient in
scenarios that require team collaboration. Although we are used to see examples
of groups of robots and electronic devices working together in the same task,
these are often programmed to follow certain heuristic rules and they would
probably not perform well in other, more complicated, settings.
In this chapter we introduce the idea of Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning.
We start by explaining why the concept of MDP is no longer valid and why the
algorithms we used so far could fail when trying to coordinate multiple agents.
We then present the Markov Games model as an alternative to MDPs and deﬁne
some useful concepts from Game Theory. Finally, we outline the main features
of two new algorithms and provide some examples that reveal why these are
more suitable for multi-agent systems.
==PAGE:56==
46
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
4.1
Non-Stationary Markov Decision Process
Perhaps the main assumption we made when formulating the decision making
problem as an MDP was that the global dynamics of the environment remained
constant throughout the entire process and thus, each particular state and re-
ward in an episode were only dependent on the immediately preceding state and
action pair. In this context, the transition and reward functions were unalter-
able and the agent could only optimize its own policy in order to obtain the
maximum reward.
This assumption is not well-founded when bringing other agents into play. The
reason is that these new agents, who are also learning to interact with the
environment, might alter the transitions from the individual agent’s perspective,
making the process non-stationary [26]. Besides, a change in the policy of any
of the agents might have an eﬀect on each agent’s optimal policy making it
diﬃcult for the process to ever converge. Although in practice, traditional RL
algorithms such as Q-learning or Policy Gradient have been shown to work
well in certain multi-agent environments [9] their use is not justiﬁed from the
theoretical perspective since the actions of other agents can cause instabilities
in the learning dynamics of each individual agent [26].
4.2
Markov Games
The Markov Games (MG) framework, also known as Stochastic Games [27], can
be used to adapt the MDP view point to a multi-agent system and is deﬁned
as the tuple ⟨S, U, O, Ω, T, R⟩where S and U are the sets of possible states and
joint actions of all agents. Ωrepresents a mapping between the true states S
and the set of joint observations O. T deﬁnes the transitions between diﬀerent
states and R is the reward function. Because the transition and reward functions
associated to each agent are now dependent on all the agents’ actions the process
can be again considered stationary.
As in the single agent case, each of the agents learns its own policy by maximizing
the discounted sum of rewards
Gt =
T
X
k=t+1
γk−t−1Rk,
(4.1)
where γ is the discount rate and T the time horizon.
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Selecting collective goals and rewards
47
4.3
Selecting collective goals and rewards
It has already been mentioned that one of the biggest challenges in RL is choos-
ing a reward function that complies with the overall objective. Partial rewards
need to be selected so that the agent is unequivocally lead to solving the task.
This issue is even more dramatic when the need for team coordination is re-
quired.
In certain cases, a wrong selection might make the agents compete
instead of work together.
Applying concepts from the ﬁeld of game theory we deﬁne three possible sce-
narios depending on how partial rewards are selected.
A. Fully competitive or zero sum games: Agents have opposite reward func-
tions. In the most common setting two agents that are opponents compete
for a common goal. One agent’s success is translated into failure for the
other. Board games such as chess or backgammon can be treated as fully
competitive tasks and solved using techniques like the minimax-Q algo-
rithm [27]:
π∗
i (s) = arg max
a
min
o
Q∗(s, a, o),
(4.2)
where a is the action of the one agent whose policy is evaluated and o are
the actions of its opponents.
B. Fully cooperative games: The agents share the same reward function.
All team members are equally penalized when any of them makes a bad
choice but also rewarded when they act correctly.
Consequently, each
agent’s optimal policy is the one that maximizes the centralized action
value function
π∗
i (s) = arg max
ui
max
u∈U Q∗(s, u),
(4.3)
where u represents the actions of all agents and ui the action choice of
agent i.
C. Mixed or general sum games: Reward functions are neither equal nor
contrary. In this setting individual agents might make decisions that are
in conﬂict with the overall objective. Agents, acting according to their
own advantage, could compromise the outcome of the group task if that
brings them greater reward. Although this type of game is very common
in reality, ﬁnding an equilibrium point is particularly diﬃcult in practice.
In Game Theory, a situation where none of the players can beneﬁt from
==PAGE:58==
48
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
changing only their own strategy while the other players’ strategies remain
unchanged is known as Nash equilibrium and constitutes a solution to the
general sum games. A more formal deﬁnition of the Nash equilibrium can
be found in [28]
All the examples that we present in this thesis can be classiﬁed either as fully
cooperative or mixed games.
It is not always obvious when designing an environment how the agents will
react to the diﬀerent partial rewards that are imposed. In our case, the examples
had to be modiﬁed and trialled several times before the desired behavior was
obtained.
4.4
Centralized and decentralized algorithms
We now introduce diﬀerent techniques that present an alternative to applying
traditional RL methods to environments with more than one intelligent agent,
which do not follow the Markov property.
One could address the non-stationarity issues by introducing a global entity
that has access to all the agents observations and controls all the agents actions
in a completely centralized manner. The problem will be then equivalent to a
single agent control problem. Yet, this option, aside from not presenting any
extra challenge, could not be available in certain cases where the agents might
be required to act independently.
Following the stochastic games framework, agents can also learn independent
policies, which take as input both the current observation and the actions other
agents might take, and return the action that maximizes the centralized action
value function. To accomplish this, individual agents need to keep track of any
changes in the other agent’s policies.
This is the idea followed by the Nash Q-learning algorithm [29] where the agents
need to ﬁnd the optimal strategy according to their own model of the other
agents Q functions. In other words, in every step the agents make decisions
about what actions to take based on what they believe the other agents will do.
Nash Q convergence guarantees are limited to a reduced number of cases where
certain conditions need to be satisﬁed [30]. A more general method with better
convergence properties, called Friend or Foe Q-learning [31], maintains a single
==PAGE:59==
4.5 Multi-Agent DQN: Alternating Maximization
49
Q function which is updated using either an augmented version of the ordinary Q
learning, which maximizes over the joint action space, or the minimax equation
used for solving zero-sum Markov games, depending on whether the opponents
are considered friends or foes.
Decentralized Partially Observable MDP (Dec-POMDP) [32] is a popular model
that assumes transitions and rewards satisfy the markovian property and depend
only on the preceding true state and joint actions. However, each individual
agent’s policy has no access to this information. Similarly, agents can only base
their decisions on their own observations and not on the true states or the other
agent’s observations.
In the following sections we introduce two algorithms that despite requiring
other agent’s information to update or evaluate their policies during training,
the learned functions are completely decentralized and do not precise of any
knowledge of the other agents intentions during execution.
4.5
Multi-Agent DQN: Alternating Maximization
The algorithm presented here is based on a method normally referred as alter-
nating maximization, this concept was ﬁrst introduced in [33] and then adapted
to model free deep RL in [34]. The idea is to train one of the agents while
freezing the other agents’ policies. From the objective agent’s perspective the
other agents are part of the dynamics of the environment and have no inﬂuence
on the transition and reward distributions. After a certain number of iterations
the updated policy is shared with the other agents and the sequence starts again
until convergence.
Although the overall process is still non-stationary, the training happens in
multiple phases within which the transitions and rewards remain unchanged.
The pseudo-code of a simple multi-agent Q-learning method is outlined in al-
gorithm 7. Even though the network parameters of agent 1 are shared during
training, the policies learned are completely decentralized because the value
==PAGE:60==
50
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
function is only dependent in the current state and partial action of each agent.
Randomly Initialize policy parameters: θ1, θ2, ..., θn
Initialize value function parameters: w1, w2, ..., wn
repeat
repeat
Initialize: s
while not done do
a1 max, a2 max, ..., an max ←
maxa1,a2,...,a3{ˆqw1(s, a), ˆqw2(s, a)..., ˆqwn(s, a)}
a1, a2, ..., an ←choose a1 max, a2 max, ..., an max or random
a1, a2, ...an with probability ϵ and 1 −ϵ
s′, r, done ←take step
w1 ←w1 + α

r + γ maxa′
1 ˆqw1(s′, a′
1) −ˆqw1(s, a1)

∇ˆqw1(s, a1)
s ←s′
end
Copy parameters: w2, ..., wn ←w1
end
end
Algorithm 11: Multi-Agent Q-learning: alternating maximization
Our implementation applies the same DQN algorithm described in the previous
chapter to update the policy, with the only diﬀerence that the experience replay
buﬀer is emptied every time the other agent’s policies are updated. This ensures
that experiences corresponding to previous policies are not used for the updates.
The method assumes that the role each of the agents plays in the environment
is the same. Nonetheless, it can be easily adapted to a more general setting
by taking turns training the agents instead of copying the parameters from one
network to another.
The algorithm and rest of the source code are available on GitHub 1.
4.5.1
Multi-Agent grid world: Competition
In our ﬁrst multi-agent example we make our agents compete for the gold
nuggets. To do so, we modify our grid world environment so that it now in-
cludes an additional agent. The agents receive an individual reward of +1 when
collecting the pick up objects and they are penalized with -1 when crashing into
an asteroid. Note that the environment is not fully competitive, since the agents
do not have opposite reward functions, and therefore, it can not be classiﬁed
1https://github.com/miguelsuau/modified-ml-agents
==PAGE:61==
4.5 Multi-Agent DQN: Alternating Maximization
51
as a zero sum game. The screen-shots (a) and (b) in ﬁgure 4.1 show the two
diﬀerent settings that we use in this experiment.
Figure 4.1: Multi-Agent grid world example with 2 agents , 2 asteroids and 1
(a) or 2 gold nuggets (b). The position of all the objects changes
from one episode to another
The performance of the multi-agent DQN method is assessed by testing it
against our original DQN implementation.
Figure 4.2 shows how, although
the presence of a second agent makes the environment non-stationary from the
MDP perspective, agents trained with DQN are still able to ﬁnd an optimal
policy when competing for only one gold nugget. The method, however, has
more diﬃculties when having two goals. In this second case, MADQN agents
seem to reach higher returns and shorter episode lengths. It is important to
mention that the multi-agent method has not converged after 1M steps. This
can be easily seen in ﬁgures 4.2a and 4.2c, where there is still a gap at 1M steps
between the mean cumulative reward of the two agents, meaning that they have
not yet found the Nash equilibrium.
There is an extra parameter in the new Multi-Agent DQN algorithm that must
be carefully selected. This is the total number of steps between two updates of
the frozen policies. The parameter should be large enough so that the free agent
has time to learn about the new environment dynamics and develop its policy.
Tables with the hyperparameters used for training and other details about this
experiment are provided in the appendix. Follow the link2 to ﬁnd videos of the
results of this experiment. Note that because the agents need to reach the gold
nuggets before the other does, they are willing to take more risks and thus, they
are more likely to crash into an asteroid.
2Multi-Agent Competition 1: https://youtu.be/5rKOEfChKDM
Multi-Agent Competition 2: https://youtu.be/s-L2ECkeso0
==PAGE:62==
52
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
(a) 1 goal
(b) 1 goal
(c) 2 goals
(d) 2 goals
Figure 4.2: Competitive multi-Agent grid world. The thick lines are the mean
cumulative reward (a, c) and the mean episode length (b, d) per
time step averaged over 10 runs. The shaded areas represent the
one standard deviation conﬁdence interval of the mean values.
We used a random seed and the same hyperparameters for both
algorithms. Even though the presence of a second agent makes
the MDP non-stationary ordinary DQN can still ﬁnd a policy that
leads to a higher mean cumulative reward than the one obtained
when training the agents with MADQN in the single goal case.
Contrarily, MADQN seems to outperform DQN when there are
two gold nuggets in the environment.
==PAGE:63==
4.6 Multi-Agent PPO: Centralized Critic
53
4.6
Multi-Agent PPO: Centralized Critic
The following algorithm consists of a policy gradient method with a centralized
critic [10]. The algorithm learns a state value function for each agent, which
takes as input the current observation and the actions of all the other agents,
and uses it to evaluate each agent’s actions and update the policy network.
Following the policy gradient theorem, equation 3.11 becomes
∇θiJ(θi) = Eπθi [∇θ log πθi(St, At)Vi(St, Ut)] ,
(4.4)
where Ut are the actions chosen by the other agents at time t within the sets
of all possible actions {A2, A3, ..., An}. As we can see only the critic depends
on the joint set of actions while the individual policies rely exclusively on local
information.
Like in DQN we can use the mean squared error as loss function to update the
parameters of our neural network
L(wi) = E[(Vi(St, Ut) −y)2],
(4.5)
with y being the one step TD estimate
y = Rt+1 + γVi(St+1, Ut+1).
(4.6)
According to equation 4.6, it is required that the local policies are shared during
training so that each agent can obtain samples of Ut+1 in every update.
Algorithm 12 is a version of the one step policy gradient method that uses a
joint action value function as critic. In our case, we extended the critic network
in Unity’s PPO implementation to take the other agents’ actions as input apart
from the state information. In order to reduce bias in both the policy sample
gradient and the critic loss function the algorithm applies an n-step TD esti-
mate. Moreover, as in the original PPO algorithm it also incorporates a baseline
==PAGE:64==
54
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
function to reduce variance.
Initialize policy parameters: θ1, θ2, ..., θn
Initialize value function parameters: w1, w2, ..., wn
repeat
Sample initial state: s
a1, a2, ..., a3 ←sample actions at random from πθ1(s), πθ2(s), ..., πθn(s)
while not done do
s′, r, done ←take step using a1, a2, ..., an
a′
1, a′
2, ..., a′
3 ←sample actions at random from
πθ1(s′), πθ2(s′), ..., πθn(s′)
for agent i = 1 to n do
u = aj where j ∈1, 2...n and j ̸= i
wi ←wi + α [r + γˆvwi(s′, u′) −ˆvwi(s, u)] ∇ˆvwi(s, u)
θi ←θi + α∇log πθi(a, s)ˆvwi(s, u)
end
s ←s′
a1, a2, .., an ←a′
1, a′
2, ..., a′
n
end
end
Algorithm 12: MA Policy Gradient: Centralized Critic
Finally to make the code more eﬃcient, instead of using two separate functions
for actor and critic, we build a single network and append all the actions to the
output of the last hidden layer. We have then a softmax layer for our policy,
which only takes as input the state information, and a fully connected layer
that returns the state values. The loss function used to optimize the network is
therefore a combination of the policy loss and the value loss.
As opposed to [10] our method approximates the state-value function V (St, Ut)
instead of the action-value function Q(St, At, Ut) so that we can then apply
generalized advantage estimation GAE [35]. An exponentially weighted estima-
tor that combines the MC sample return and the TD estimate to approximate
the advantage function Dt:
ˆDt = δt + (γλ)δt+1 + ... + (γλ)T −t+1δT −1
(4.7)
with
δt = Rt + γV (St+1) −V (St)
(4.8)
==PAGE:65==
4.6 Multi-Agent PPO: Centralized Critic
55
where λ ∈[0, 1] in equation 4.7 intends to measure how much a particular action
is to blame for a speciﬁc long term reward. This is normally referred as credit
assignment problem [3].
On the other hand, as in the original PPO [23] algorithm the policy is updated
with mini-batches of experiences sampled from a replay buﬀer and adjusted
to refer to the current policy applying importance sampling. This allows to
perform multiple updates using past experiences and therefore make better use
of the information.
The authors of [10] propose having a separate network to calculate the target
which like in DQN is only updated every certain number of iterations. After
testing this approach on two diﬀerent environments we found out that it seems
to have very little, if any, eﬀect on our method.
The algorithm and rest of the source code are available on GitHub3.
4.6.1
Multi-Agent grid world: Cooperation
We now modify the previous multi-agent environments and make them fully
collaborative. To that end, we set the rewards to be equal for both agents. That
is, the two agents are rewarded when a gold nugget is collected and penalized
when any of them collides with an asteroid. As usual, they are also penalized
in every step.
One might argue that blaming the two agents when one of them steps on an
asteroid can only confuse the other agent and make the learning process more
diﬃcult. Nonetheless, if only the one making the bad choice receives a penalty,
they might learn to not take any risks and let the other collect the gold nuggets,
which will deﬁnitely aﬀect collaboration.
The above mentioned is actually what happens when training the agents with
MADQN, ﬁgure 4.5. The agent whose policy is being continuously optimized
quickly learns to collect the goals, but when the value function parameters are
copied at 200K steps, it realizes that it is safer to stay still and wait for the
other agent to pick up the gold nuggets. This causes a dramatic decrease in the
average episode returns at 400K steps, when the second agent acquires the new
policy. The thick lines are the mean cumulative reward (a, c, e) and the mean
episode length (b, d, f) per time step averaged over 10 runs. The light blue and
orange shaded areas represent the one standard deviation conﬁdence interval of
3https://github.com/miguelsuau/modified-ml-agents
==PAGE:66==
56
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
the mean values. We used a random seed and the same hyperparameters for
both algorithms.
In contrast, because the training occurs simultaneously in MAPPO, despite the
initial oscillations, which are most likely provoked by the same issue, the agents
recover and learn to work together and gather the pick up objects.
(a) 1 goal
(b) 1 goal
(c) 2 goals
(d) 2 goals
Figure 4.3: Cooperative multi-agent grid world. Agents trained with MADQN
for 1M steps are unable to work together. Even though the un-
frozen agent initially learns to collect the pick ups, when the pa-
rameters are copied at 200K steps, it realizes that it is safer to
wait for the other agent to do the work, which causes the large
drop at 400K steps, just when the information is transfered again.
On the other hand, despite the initial instabilities MAPPO agents
can successfully coordinate and collaborate to reach the goals.
In this particular case, we include the option to stand still in the set of actions
that are available to the agent. The idea is to see whether an agent can recognize
that the other is in a more favorable position and therefore remain static.
==PAGE:67==
4.6 Multi-Agent PPO: Centralized Critic
57
(a) T = 1
(b) T = 1
(c) T = 0
(d) T = 0
(e) T = 0, zoom
(f) T = 0, zoom
Figure 4.4: Cooperative multi-agent grid world. Agents trained with MADQN
for 1M steps are unable to work together. Even though the un-
frozen agent initially learns to collect the goals, when the param-
eters are copied at 200K steps, it realizes that it is safer to wait
for the other agent to do the work, which causes the large drop
at 400K steps, just when the information is transfered again. On
the other hand, despite the initial instabilities MAPPO agents
can successfully coordinate and collaborate to pick up the gold
nuggets.
==PAGE:68==
58
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
(a) T = 2
(b) T = 2
(c) T = 1
(d) T = 1
(e) T = 1, zoom
(f) T = 1, zoom
Figure 4.5: Cooperative multi-agent grid world. Agents trained with MADQN
for 1M steps are unable to work together. Even though the un-
frozen agent initially learns to collect the goals, when the param-
eters are copied at 200K steps, it realizes that it is safer to wait
for the other agent to do the work, which causes the large drop
at 400K steps, just when the information is transfered again. On
the other hand, despite the initial instabilities MAPPO agents
can successfully coordinate and collaborate to pick up the gold
nuggets.
==PAGE:69==
4.6 Multi-Agent PPO: Centralized Critic
59
Tables with the hyperparameters used for training and other details about this
experiment are provided in the appendix. Follow the link 4 to ﬁnd videos show-
ing the results of this experiment. Note that the agents sometimes wait for the
other to collect the gold so as to avoid a potential collision. In fact, in the ﬁrst
video with only one gold nugget, we can see how the red agent tends to stay
always at the initial position and only moves when it is clearly the closest to
the goal.
4.6.2
Multi-Agent grid world: Learning to communicate
In this new scenario, the agents are provided with a communication channel
which they can use to send messages to each other. This messages are nothing
else than binary vectors which the agents can then convert into more meaningful
concepts. This example is very similar to the one given in [10], although in this
case we use our MAPPO implementation to train our agents.
The environment is depicted in ﬁgure 4.6.
In each episode, the blue agent,
which is color blind, must collect either the yellow, the green or the red pickup.
The objective is indicated by the color of the frame which only the red agent
situated in the southeast corner can see. The red UFO, who plays the role of
speaker, can only send binary messages to the blue UFO, the listener. These
messages become part of the state information of the blue agent along with the
coordinates of the two pickup objects. Like in the other sample environments,
the blue agent can take 4 actions moving north, south, east or west.
The complexity of this environment relies on the fact that the two agents need
to understand each other and develop a language to communicate without any
prior knowledge. This involves that the speaker needs to learn to be consistent
on its messages so that the listener always receives the same state information
for each of the objectives.
It is important to mention that the communication is not simultaneous which
might lead in some occasions to a change in the blue UFO direction. The listener
receives the message sent by the speaker after one time step.
Figure 4.7 is a comparison between Unity’s PPO implementation and our multi-
agent version. The curves are the result of averaging mean cumulative reward
and mean episode length over 10 executions.
The top graphs, ﬁgures 4.7a and 4.7b, reveal that, contrary to what we ex-
4Multi-Agent Cooperation 1: https://youtu.be/v_c4fjqwtOg
Multi-Agent Cooperation 2: https://youtu.be/mJO2z8c_UiE
==PAGE:70==
60
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
(a) The goal is the yellow pickup
(b) The goal is the green pickup
Figure 4.6: Multi-Agent communication. Two agents, a speaker and a listener
need to develop a language in order to be able to reach a goal that
is diﬀerent in every episode. The goal can either be collecting the
yellow pickup, ﬁgure (a), collecting the green pickup, ﬁgure (b),
or collecting the red pickup, ﬁgure(c)
plained earlier, when we pointed out the potential issues of applying traditional
RL algorithms to multi-agent systems, PPO is able to converge and even reach a
higher cumulative reward than MAPPO when the time horizon T is suﬃciently
large. One reason might be that, as mentioned in section 4.6, GAE [35] approxi-
mates the advantage function based on a combination of the MC sample returns
and value function estimates. Although in PPO, the value function does take
into account the inﬂuence of the other agents, the rewards given at every step
are dependent on all the actions taken on the environment. Therefore, the more
the PPO estimates rely on the MC sample returns the less biased the advantage
function would be. This idea is supported by the ﬁgures 4.7c and 4.7d. When
the time horizon T = 1, PPO has more diﬃculty to converge and is outper-
formed by MAPPO, whose critic can handle the non-stationarity introduced by
having multiple agents, ﬁgures 4.7e and 4.7f
Tables with the hyperparameters used for training and other details about this
experiment are provided in the appendix.
Follow the link5 to ﬁnd a video
showing the results of this experiment. As mentioned, because communication
is not instantaneous, at the initial state of every episode, the listener receives a
message that belongs to the previous one, which causes sometimes a change in
its trajectory.
5Multi-Agent Communication: https://youtu.be/NWhmgi_liOc
==PAGE:71==
4.6 Multi-Agent PPO: Centralized Critic
61
(a) Time horizon = 3
(b) Time horizon = 3
(c) Time horizon = 1
(d) Time horizon = 1
(e) Time horizon = 1. Zoom
(f) Time horizon = 1. Zoom
Figure 4.7: Comparison between PPO and MAPPO algorithms on the multi-
agent communication environment with 2 goals. The thick lines
are the mean cumulative reward (a, c, e) and the mean episode
length (b, d, f) per time step averaged over 10 runs. The light
blue and orange shaded areas represent the one standard devi-
ation conﬁdence interval of the mean values. We used a random
seed and the same hyperparameters for both algorithms. MAPPO
outperforms PPO only for short time horizons.
==PAGE:72==
62
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
4.6.3
Multi-Agent grid world: Learning to collaborate
The ﬁnal example involves a predator-prey game. Three spaceships with limited
vision, the predators, are chasing a fourth one, the prey, which moves randomly
around the grid.
The predators are penalized in every step while the prey
remains alive. The predators receive a large reward when one of them captures
the prey. Similar to [36], the reward is greater depending on whether only one,
two or three of the spaceships are within the capture region. As in the previous
example, the predators are also equipped with a communication channel so as
to ease a collaborative strategy. They have therefore 6 actions available: stay
still, move north, move south, move east, move west or send a message. The
environment is depicted in ﬁgure 4.8 the prey is the orange spaceship facing
upwards and the predators are the green, blue and brown spaceships facing
downwards.
Figure 4.8: Multi-Agent cooperation. Three spaceships, the predators, with
limited vision, are chasing a fourth one, the prey, which is trying
to scape from them. The predators receive a greater reward if they
capture the prey collectively.
The state observation of a predator consists of the coordinates of the other
agents, their respective messages and the location of the prey if this is only 5
steps away from the predator. On the other hand, the capture region is limited
to a radius of 3 cells from the prey.
We again see in ﬁgures 4.9a and 4.9b that as long as the time horizon is kept
large enough PPO and MAPPO are equally good at training teams of multiple
agents. The problems arise when the sequence of partial rewards that is used in
the advantage function is not long enough to cover for the biased value estimates.
In that case and due to the intervention of the other agents, the non multi-agent
==PAGE:73==
4.6 Multi-Agent PPO: Centralized Critic
63
(a) Time horizon = 20
(b) Time horizon = 20
(c) Time horizon = 1
(d) Time horizon = 1
(e) Time horizon = 0
(f) Time horizon = 0
Figure 4.9: Multi-agent: predator-prey. The thick lines are the mean cumu-
lative reward (a, c, e) and the mean episode length (b, d, f) per
time step averaged over 5 runs. The light blue and orange shaded
areas represent the one standard deviation conﬁdence interval of
the mean values. We used a random seed and the same hyper-
parameters for both algorithms. MAPPO outperforms PPO only
for short time horizons where PPO is more instable and has more
diﬃculties to converge.
==PAGE:74==
64
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
methods are instable and seem to have more diﬃculties to converge. This is
shown in the ﬁgures 4.9c, 4.9d, 4.9e and 4.9f where the one standard deviation
conﬁdence intervals of the blue curves are wider, the average returns are lower,
and the episode lengths longer compared to the results obtained when training
with the multi-agent method.
Contrarily to the previous example, where sending messages was essential for the
agents to be able to solve the task, in this environment, there is no explicit need
for communication. To evaluate whether or not it is actually helping the agents
to coordinate and therefore ﬁnd better policies, we blocked the communication
channel and trained the agents again under the same conditions. The results are
shown in ﬁgure 4.10. Despite having longer episode lengths, after 1.5M steps
of training, the agents obtain higher returns on average. The reason being that
when a predator ﬁnds the prey, if communication is allowed, it can call the
others so that they can capture it together and receive a higher reward.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.10: Multi-agent predator-prey. The orange curves are the result of
training agents that cant communicate using MAPPO. The blue
curves are obtained training the agents, under the same condi-
tions as in the previous case, but allowing them to send messages
to each other. We see how communication helps coordination
among the agents which are able to obtain higher returns on
average.
One important limitation of RL is that the information is only available at
the current time step. In this scenario, a message it is only seen at the state
that comes immediately after the message is sent, meaning that the listeners
quickly forget about what the speaker just said. One option to overcome this
would be to have a memory slot and let the agents decide what information
to store at each time step [37].
At expenses of having a larger state space
and therefore requiring a bigger neural network the problem could be solved
==PAGE:75==
4.6 Multi-Agent PPO: Centralized Critic
65
by stacking various frames of observations. Finally, we could also make use of
recurrent neural networks [38]. The agent generates a hidden state that is fed
back into the system, therefore allowing it to keep track of what happened in
the past.
Tables with the hyperparameters used for training and other details about this
experiment are provided in the appendix.
Follow the link6 to ﬁnd a video
showing the results of this experiment.
Note how when a predator sees the
prey, it decides to alert the others so they can capture the prey together. The
message is often sent multiple times due to the lack of memory.
6Multi-Agent Predator-Prey: https://youtu.be/cZXliRB2Gz8
==PAGE:76==
66
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
==PAGE:77==
Conclusion and Discussion
We started by introducing the concepts of Markov Decision Processes and Re-
inforcement Learning. We covered a variety of algorithms based on dynamic
programming and policy iteration. We also showed that tabular methods work
very well when having a reduced number of states and actions but they do not
scale to large problems.
We demonstrated that tables can be substituted by parametric functions to
obtain models that can better generalize over the state-action space. We pre-
sented the two main branches in Deep RL models, value based and policy based
methods and compared the most successful algorithms in each family, DQN and
PPO, using our own examples.
We explored how to avoid the non-stationary issues in transition and reward
functions, when having more than one intelligent agent, by applying the Markov
Games framework. We explained why selecting the correct partial rewards is
crucial in multi-agent environments and how diﬀerent reward functions might
lead to situations of competitiveness or cooperation among agents.
We implemented two diﬀerent decentralized methods for multi-agent reinforce-
ment learning, MADQN and MAPPO, and compared them with the single agent
algorithms presented in the third chapter. We showed that while the time hori-
zon is long enough PPO can still learn a good policy but it starts to perform
worse than MAPPO, the more the advantage estimates rely on the value func-
tion.
Finally we provided the agents with the ability to send and receive messages
and showed in two diﬀerent experiments how they can develop their own lan-
==PAGE:78==
68
Conclusion and Discussion
guage and use this messages to convey ideas, communicate and coordinate their
actions.
The majority of the time and eﬀort dedicated to this thesis has been directed
towards implementing the RL algorithms, adapting Unity’s code to accommo-
date our new functions and designing all the experiments and new environments
in the editor.
In future work, alternatives to the multi-agent algorithms we implemented in
this thesis could also be explored. Considering that, under certain conditions,
agents might be allowed to share actions or observations during execution, we
could study how much better centralized methods do, compared to independent
policies.
On the other hand, a variant of the centralized critic method proposed in [39]
could also be discussed. The algorithm is called Counterfactual Multi-Agent
Policy Gradients (COMA) and it uses a baseline function that intends to mea-
sure how good the outcome of the chosen action is when compared to the others.
Because policies are stochastic, feeding one hot encoded vectors with the sim-
ulated actions of the other agents to the critic neural network can cause in-
stabilities, especially at the beginning when all actions are equally likely to be
chosen. We hypothesize that feeding the action probabilities instead might help
reducing the initial oscillations and make the process more robust.
A common approach to speed up learning consists of planning ahead before
taking an action using previous experiences. This is called model-based RL.
The agent deploys its own model of the environment to simulate the process
oﬀ-line and make more informed decisions on what actions to take [40]. One of
the most successful techniques is Monte Carlo Tree Search [41], which assesses
the value of unknown states in the tree by exploring random trajectories and
back-propagating the sample returns.
Hierarchical learning [42] studies the possibility of grouping together states and
actions with similar properties. These aggregations are called state and action
abstractions and are very useful when combined with planning methods because
they allow to reduce the tree size and thus ease simulations.
To substitute ϵ-greedy we could also incorporate other, more eﬃcient, methods
for exploration. In [43] they use Bayesian linear regression to distribute the
probability of selecting any of the suboptimal actions according to the mean
value estimate and the uncertainty.
==PAGE:79==
Appendix
We tested the performance of our methods on a set of diﬀerent environments.
Because, the curves are normally very noisy, we ran each of the algorithms
several times and took the mean value.
The hyperparameters were manually tuned in each example according to some
general heuristic rules. We are aware that a proper parameter search is more
appropriate when comparing diﬀerent methods. Nonetheless, this normally re-
quires a lot of time and computing power. Besides, the intention of this work
was never to evaluate how good or bad one algorithm performed with respect
to another but rather showing the advantages and limitations of each of them.
For the same reason, we didn’t test the performance of our methods on any
of the popular benchmark examples. Instead, we preferred to design our own
environments so as to be able to illustrate some of the theoretical concepts that
are addressed in this thesis.
The tables below contain the hyperparameters that we used for training the
agents and other details about our environments.
==PAGE:80==
70
Appendix
Static Grid World
Static Grid World
Number of agents
1
Number of golden nuggets
1
Number of asteroids
1
Maximum episode length
50
Reward for collecting golden nugget
+1
Reward for colliding with asteroid
−1
Reward per step
−0.01
Static Grid World, tabular Q-learning
Number of steps
5 × 103
Maximum number of training steps
gamma
0.99
Discount rate
ϵstart
1
Initial probability of random action
ϵend
0
Final probability of random action
ϵ decay steps
4 × 103
Number of steps of linear decay for ϵ
α
0.8
Learning rate
Dynamic Grid World 1
Dynamic Grid World 1
Number of agents
1
Number of golden nuggets
1
Number of asteroids
1
Maximum episode length
50
Reward for collecting golden nugget
+1
Reward for colliding with asteroid
−1
Reward per step
−0.05
==PAGE:81==
71
Dynamic Grid World 1, DQN
Number of steps
5 × 105
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Discount rate
ϵ start
1
Initial probability of random action
ϵ end
0
Final probability of random action
ϵ decay steps
3 × 105
Number of steps of linear decay for ϵ
α
3 × 10−3
Learning rate
Memory size
5 × 104
Replay memory maximum size
Pre-train steps
1 × 106
Steps random action before ﬁrst update
Batch size
32
Number of experiences in every update
Number of layers
2
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
32
Number of units in each hidden layer
Update frequency
4
Number of steps between model updates
τ
1 × 10−3
Update rate of target model
Dynamic Grid World 1, PPO
Number of steps
5 × 105
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Reward discount rate
λ
0.95
GAE discount rate
α
3 × 10−3
Learning rate
ϵ
0.2
Divergence between old and new policies
β
1 × 10−3
Strength of entropy regularization
Number of epoch
5
Passes through buﬀer per update
Batch size
32
Number of experiences in every update
Buﬀer size
2048
Size of the memory buﬀer before update
Number of layers
2
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
32
Number of units in each hidden layer
Time horizon
1
Number of steps GAE calculation
Dynamic Grid World 2
Dynamic Grid World 2
Number of agents
1
Number of golden nuggets
2
Number of asteroids
2
Maximum episode length
100
Reward for collecting golden nugget
+1
Reward for colliding with asteroid
−1
Reward per step
−0.05
==PAGE:82==
72
Appendix
Dynamic Grid World 2, DQN
Number of steps
5 × 105
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Discount rate
ϵ start
1
Initial probability of random action
ϵ end
0
Final probability of random action
ϵ decay steps
3 × 105
Number of steps of linear decay for ϵ
α
3 × 10−3
Learning rate
Memory size
5 × 104
Replay memory maximum size
Pre-train steps
1 × 104
Steps random action before ﬁrst update
Batch size
32
Number of experiences in every update
Number of layers
2
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
32
Number of units in each hidden layer
Update frequency
4
Number of steps between model updates
τ
1 × 10−3
Update rate of target model
Dynamic Grid World 2, PPO
Number of steps
5 × 105
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Reward discount rate
λ
0.95
GAE discount rate
α
3 × 10−3
Learning rate
ϵ
0.2
Divergence between old and new policies
β
1 × 10−3
Strength of entropy regularization
Number of epoch
5
Passes through buﬀer per update
Batch size
32
Number of experiences in every update
Buﬀer size
2048
Size of the memory buﬀer before update
Number of layers
2
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
32
Number of units in each hidden layer
Time horizon
1
Number of steps GAE calculation
Multi-Agent Competition 1
Multi-Agent Competition 1
Number of agents
2
Number of golden nuggets
1
Number of asteroids
2
Maximum episode length
100
Individual reward for collecting golden nugget
+1
Individual reward for colliding with asteroid
−1
Individual reward per step
−0.05
==PAGE:83==
73
Multi-Agent Competition 1, DQN
Number of steps
1 × 106
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Discount rate
ϵ start
1
Initial probability of random action
ϵ end
0
Final probability of random action
ϵ decay steps
3 × 105
Number of steps of linear decay for ϵ
α
2 × 10−3
Learning rate
Memory size
5 × 104
Replay memory maximum size
Pre-train steps
1 × 104
Steps random action before ﬁrst update
Batch size
128
Number of experiences in every update
Number of layers
3
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
64
Number of units in each hidden layer
Update frequency
4
Number of steps between model updates
τ
1 × 10−3
Update rate of target model
Multi-Agent Competition 1, MADQN
Number of steps
1 × 106
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Discount rate
ϵ start
1
Initial probability of random action
ϵ end
0
Final probability of random action
ϵ decay steps
3 × 105
Number of steps of linear decay for ϵ
α
2 × 10−3
Learning rate
Memory size
5 × 104
Replay memory maximum size
Pre-train steps
1 × 104
Steps random action before ﬁrst update
Batch size
128
Number of experiences in every update
Number of layers
3
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
64
Number of units in each hidden layer
Update frequency
4
Number of steps between model updates
τ
1 × 10−3
Update rate of target model
Update frozen frequency
2 × 105
Number of steps frozen agent updates
==PAGE:84==
74
Appendix
Multi-Agent Competition 2
Multi-Agent Competition 2
Number of agents
2
Number of golden nuggets
2
Number of asteroids
2
Maximum episode length
100
Individual reward for collecting golden nugget
+1
Individual reward for colliding with asteroid
−1
Individual reward per step
−0.05
Multi-Agent Competition 2, DQN
Number of steps
1 × 106
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Discount rate
ϵ start
1
Initial probability of random action
ϵ end
0
Final probability of random action
ϵ decay steps
3 × 105
Number of steps of linear decay for ϵ
α
2 × 10−3
Learning rate
Memory size
5 × 104
Replay memory maximum size
Pre-train steps
1 × 104
Steps of random action before ﬁrst update
Batch size
128
Number of experiences in every update
Number of layers
3
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
64
Number of units in each hidden layer
Update frequency
4
Number of steps between model updates
τ
1 × 10−3
Update rate of target model
Multi-Agent Competition 2, MADQN
Number of steps
1 × 106
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Discount rate
ϵ start
1
Initial probability of random action
ϵ end
0
Final probability of random action
ϵ decay steps
3 × 105
Number of steps of linear decay for ϵ
α
2 × 10−3
Learning rate
Memory size
5 × 104
Replay memory maximum size
Pre-train steps
1 × 104
Steps of random action before ﬁrst update
Batch size
128
Number of experiences in every update
Number of layers
3
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
64
Number of units in each hidden layer
Update frequency
4
Number of steps between model updates
τ
1 × 10−3
Update rate of target model
Update frozen frequency
2 × 105
Number of steps frozen agent updates
==PAGE:85==
75
Multi-Agent Cooperation 1
Multi-Agent Cooperation 1
Number of agents
2
Number of golden nuggets
1
Number of asteroids
2
Maximum episode length
100
Collective reward for collecting golden nugget
+1
Collective reward for colliding with asteroid
−1
Individual reward per step
−0.05
Multi-Agent Cooperation 1, MADQN
Number of steps
1 × 106
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Discount rate
ϵ start
1
Initial probability of random action
ϵ end
0
Final probability of random action
ϵ decay steps
3 × 105
Number of steps of linear decay for ϵ
α
2 × 10−3
Learning rate
Memory size
5 × 104
Replay memory maximum size
Pre-train steps
1 × 104
Steps random action before ﬁrst update
Batch size
128
Number of experiences in every update
Number of layers
3
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
64
Number of units in each hidden layer
Update frequency
4
Number of steps between model updates
τ
1 × 10−3
Update rate of target model
Update frozen frequency
2 × 105
Number of steps frozen agent updates
Multi-Agent Cooperation 1, PPO
Number of steps
1 × 106
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Reward discount rate
λ
0.95
GAE discount rate
α
2 × 10−3
Learning rate
ϵ
0.2
Divergence between old and new policies
β
1 × 10−3
Strength of entropy regularization
Number of epoch
5
Passes through buﬀer per update
Batch size
128
Number of experiences in every update
Buﬀer size
2048
Size of the memory buﬀer before update
Number of layers
3
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
64
Number of units in each hidden layer
Time horizon
1, 0
Number of steps GAE calculation
==PAGE:86==
76
Appendix
Multi-Agent Cooperation 1, MAPPO
Number of steps
1 × 106
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Reward discount rate
λ
0.95
GAE discount rate
α
2 × 10−3
Learning rate
ϵ
0.2
Divergence between old and new policies
β
1 × 10−3
Strength of entropy regularization
Number of epoch
5
Passes through buﬀer per update
Batch size
128
Number of experiences in every update
Buﬀer size
2048
Size of the memory buﬀer before update
Number of layers
3
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
64
Number of units in each hidden layer
Time horizon
1, 0
Number of steps GAE calculation
Multi-Agent Cooperation 2
Multi-Agent Cooperation 2
Number of agents
2
Number of golden nuggets
2
Number of asteroids
2
Maximum episode length
100
Collective reward for collecting golden nugget
+1
Collective reward for colliding with asteroid
−1
Individual reward per step
−0.05
Multi-Agent Cooperation 2, MADQN
Number of steps
1 × 106
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Discount rate
ϵ start
1
Initial probability of random action
ϵ end
0
Final probability of random action
ϵ decay steps
3 × 105
Number of steps of linear decay for ϵ
α
2 × 10−3
Learning rate
Memory size
5 × 104
Replay memory maximum size
Pre-train steps
1 × 104
Steps random action before ﬁrst update
Batch size
128
Number of experiences in every update
Number of layers
3
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
64
Number of units in each hidden layer
Update frequency
4
Number of steps between model updates
τ
1 × 10−3
Update rate of target model
Update frozen frequency
2 × 105
Number of steps frozen agent updates
==PAGE:87==
77
Multi-Agent Cooperation 2, PPO
Number of steps
1 × 106
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Reward discount rate
λ
0.95
GAE discount rate
α
2 × 10−3
Learning rate
ϵ
0.2
Divergence between old and new policies
β
1 × 10−3
Strength of entropy regularization
Number of epoch
5
Passes through buﬀer per update
Batch size
128
Number of experiences in every update
Buﬀer size
2048
Size of the memory buﬀer before update
Number of layers
3
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
64
Number of units in each hidden layer
Time horizon
2, 1
Number of steps GAE calculation
Multi-Agent Cooperation 2, MAPPO
Number of steps
1 × 106
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Reward discount rate
λ
0.95
GAE discount rate
α
2 × 10−3
Learning rate
ϵ
0.2
Divergence between old and new policies
β
1 × 10−3
Strength of entropy regularization
Number of epoch
5
Passes through buﬀer per update
Batch size
128
Number of experiences in every update
Buﬀer size
2048
Size of the memory buﬀer before update
Number of layers
3
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
64
Number of units in each hidden layer
Time horizon
2, 1
Number of steps GAE calculation
Multi-Agent Communication
Multi-Agent Communication
Number of agents
2
Number of golden nuggets
2
Number of asteroids
2
Maximum episode length
100
Collective reward for collecting golden nugget
+1
Individual reward for colliding with asteroid
−1
Individual reward per step
−0.05
==PAGE:88==
78
Appendix
Multi-Agent Communication, PPO
Number of steps
1 × 106
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Reward discount rate
λ
0.95
GAE discount rate
α
2 × 10−3
Learning rate
ϵ
0.2
Divergence between old and new policies
β
1 × 10−3
Strength of entropy regularization
Number of epoch
5
Passes through buﬀer per update
Batch size
128
Number of experiences in every update
Buﬀer size
2048
Size of the memory buﬀer before update
Number of layers
3
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
64
Number of units in each hidden layer
Time horizon
3, 1
Number of steps GAE calculation
Multi-Agent Communication, MAPPO
Number of steps
1 × 106
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Reward discount rate
λ
0.95
GAE discount rate
α
2 × 10−3
Learning rate
ϵ
0.2
Divergence between old and new policies
β
1 × 10−3
Strength of entropy regularization
Number of epoch
5
Passes through buﬀer per update
Batch size
128
Number of experiences in every update
Buﬀer size
2048
Size of the memory buﬀer before update
Number of layers
3
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
64
Number of units in each hidden layer
Time horizon
3, 1
Number of steps GAE calculation
Multi-Agent Predator-Prey
Multi-Agent Predator-Prey
Number of predators
3
Number of preys
1
Maximum episode length
200
Individual reward per step
−0.02
Collective reward for capturing the prey
1 agent within capture region
+0.5
2 agents within capture region
+1
3 agents within capture region
+1.5
==PAGE:89==
79
Multi-Agent Predator-Prey, PPO
Number of steps
1.5 × 106
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Reward discount rate
λ
0.95
GAE discount rate
α
3 × 10−3
Learning rate
ϵ
0.2
Divergence between old and new policies
β
2 × 10−3
Strength of entropy regularization
Number of epoch
5
Passes through buﬀer per update
Batch size
128
Number of experiences in every update
Buﬀer size
2048
Size of the memory buﬀer before update
Number of layers
3
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
64
Number of units in each hidden layer
Time horizon
20, 1, 0
Number of steps GAE calculation
Multi-Agent Predator-Prey, MAPPO
Number of steps
1.5 × 106
Maximum number of training steps
γ
0.99
Reward discount rate
λ
0.95
GAE discount rate
α
3 × 10−3
Learning rate
ϵ
0.2
Divergence between old and new policies
β
2 × 10−3
Strength of entropy regularization
Number of epoch
5
Passes through buﬀer per update
Batch size
128
Number of experiences in every update
Buﬀer size
2048
Size of the memory buﬀer before update
Number of layers
3
Number of hidden layers in the network
Number of units
64
Number of units in each hidden layer
Time horizon
20, 1, 0
Number of steps GAE calculation
==PAGE:90==
80
Bibliography
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wierstra,
and M. Riedmiller, “Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
[2] D. Silver, A. Huang, C. J. Maddison, A. Guez, L. Sifre, G. Van Den Driess-
che, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, V. Panneershelvam, M. Lanctot, et al.,
“Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search,” na-
ture, vol. 529, no. 7587, pp. 484–489, 2016.
[3] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: An introduction,
vol. 1. MIT press Cambridge, 1998.
[4] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G.
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski,
et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,” Nature,
vol. 518, no. 7540, p. 529, 2015.
[5] H. Gintis, Moral sentiments and material interests: The foundations of
cooperation in economic life, vol. 6. MIT press, 2005.
[6] S. J. Brams, Game theory and politics. Courier Corporation, 2011.
[7] T. Bansal, J. Pachocki, S. Sidor, I. Sutskever, and I. Mordatch, “Emergent
complexity via multi-agent competition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.03748,
2017.
[8] A. Tampuu, T. Matiisen, D. Kodelja, I. Kuzovkin, K. Korjus, J. Aru,
J. Aru, and R. Vicente, “Multiagent cooperation and competition with
deep reinforcement learning,” PloS one, vol. 12, no. 4, p. e0172395, 2017.
==PAGE:92==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] M. Tan, “Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Independent vs. cooperative
agents,” in Proceedings of the tenth international conference on machine
learning, pp. 330–337, 1993.
[10] R. Lowe, Y. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, O. P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch, “Multi-
agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments,” in Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 6382–6393, 2017.
[11] J. Foerster, I. A. Assael, N. de Freitas, and S. Whiteson, “Learning to
communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2137–2145, 2016.
[12] R. E. Bellman and S. E. Dreyfus, Applied dynamic programming, vol. 2050.
Princeton university press, 2015.
[13] S. P. Singh and R. S. Sutton, “Reinforcement learning with replacing eligi-
bility traces,” Machine learning, vol. 22, no. 1-3, pp. 123–158, 1996.
[14] C. Bishop, C. M. Bishop, et al., Neural networks for pattern recognition.
Oxford university press, 1995.
[15] C. J. Watkins and P. Dayan, “Q-learning,” Machine learning, vol. 8, no. 3-4,
pp. 279–292, 1992.
[16] A. Juliani, Simple Reinforcement Learning with Tensorﬂow, 2016 (accessed
July 22, 2018). https://medium.com/@awjuliani.
[17] L.-J. Lin, “Self-improving reactive agents based on reinforcement learning,
planning and teaching,” Machine learning, vol. 8, no. 3-4, pp. 293–321,
1992.
[18] H. Van Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver, “Deep reinforcement learning with
double q-learning.,” in AAAI, vol. 16, pp. 2094–2100, 2016.
[19] H. V. Hasselt, “Double q-learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, pp. 2613–2621, 2010.
[20] R. S. Sutton, D. A. McAllester, S. P. Singh, and Y. Mansour, “Policy
gradient methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation,”
in Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 1057–1063, 2000.
[21] A. G. Barto, R. S. Sutton, and C. W. Anderson, “Neuronlike adaptive ele-
ments that can solve diﬃcult learning control problems,” IEEE transactions
on systems, man, and cybernetics, no. 5, pp. 834–846, 1983.
[22] R. J. Williams, “Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for con-
nectionist reinforcement learning,” in Reinforcement Learning, pp. 5–32,
Springer, 1992.
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
83
[23] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Proximal
policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[24] J. Schulman, S. Levine, P. Abbeel, M. Jordan, and P. Moritz, “Trust region
policy optimization,” in International Conference on Machine Learning,
pp. 1889–1897, 2015.
[25] T. Schaul, J. Quan, I. Antonoglou, and D. Silver, “Prioritized experience
replay,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05952, 2015.
[26] L. Busoniu, R. Babuska, and B. De Schutter, “A comprehensive survey
of multiagent reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics, Part C, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 156–172, 2008.
[27] M. L. Littman, “Markov games as a framework for multi-agent reinforce-
ment learning,” in Machine Learning Proceedings 1994, pp. 157–163, Else-
vier, 1994.
[28] M. J. Osborne et al., An introduction to game theory, vol. 3. Oxford uni-
versity press New York, 2004.
[29] J. Hu and M. P. Wellman, “Nash q-learning for general-sum stochastic
games,” Journal of machine learning research, vol. 4, no. Nov, pp. 1039–
1069, 2003.
[30] M. Bowling, “Convergence problems of general-sum multiagent reinforce-
ment learning,” in ICML, pp. 89–94, 2000.
[31] M. L. Littman, “Friend-or-foe q-learning in general-sum games,” in ICML,
vol. 1, pp. 322–328, 2001.
[32] F. A. Oliehoek, “Decentralized pomdps,”
in Reinforcement Learning,
pp. 471–503, Springer, 2012.
[33] R. Nair, M. Tambe, M. Yokoo, D. Pynadath, and S. Marsella, “Taming
decentralized pomdps: Towards eﬃcient policy computation for multiagent
settings,” in IJCAI, vol. 3, pp. 705–711, 2003.
[34] M. Egorov, “Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning,” 2016.
[35] J. Schulman, P. Moritz, S. Levine, M. Jordan, and P. Abbeel, “High-
dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438, 2015.
[36] J. Z. Leibo, V. Zambaldi, M. Lanctot, J. Marecki, and T. Graepel, “Multi-
agent reinforcement learning in sequential social dilemmas,” in Proceedings
of the 16th Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems,
pp. 464–473, International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multi-
agent Systems, 2017.
==PAGE:94==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[37] I. Mordatch and P. Abbeel, “Emergence of grounded compositional lan-
guage in multi-agent populations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.04908, 2017.
[38] M. Hausknecht and P. Stone, “Deep recurrent q-learning for partially ob-
servable mdps,” CoRR, abs/1507.06527, vol. 7, no. 1, 2015.
[39] J. Foerster, G. Farquhar, T. Afouras, N. Nardelli, and S. Whiteson, “Coun-
terfactual multi-agent policy gradients,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.08926,
2017.
[40] R. S. Sutton, “Integrated architectures for learning, planning, and react-
ing based on approximating dynamic programming,” in Machine Learning
Proceedings 1990, pp. 216–224, Elsevier, 1990.
[41] R. Coulom, “Eﬃcient selectivity and backup operators in monte-carlo tree
search,” in International conference on computers and games, pp. 72–83,
Springer, 2006.
[42] L. P. Kaelbling, “Hierarchical learning in stochastic domains: Preliminary
results,” in Proceedings of the tenth international conference on machine
learning, vol. 951, pp. 167–173, 1993.
[43] K.
Azizzadenesheli,
E.
Brunskill,
and
A.
Anandkumar,
“Eﬃcient
exploration
through
bayesian
deep
q-networks,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1802.04412, 2018.
