==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Bio and Health Informatics 
Master’s Thesis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signal Peptide Independent Protein Secretion In Bacteria  
by Eirini Petsalaki (s161394) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supervised by: 
Henrik Nielsen, DTU Bioinformatics 
Ole Winther, DTU Compute 
 
 
August 2018 
 
==PAGE:2==
1 
 
Table of Contents 
Abstract 
2 
 
 
Chapter 1. Introduction 
3 
 
 
Chapter 2. Signal peptide independent secretion pathways of proteins in bacteria 
5 
 
 
          2.1. Signal peptide independent protein secretion in Gram-positive bacteria 
6 
 
 
          2.2. Signal peptide independent protein secretion in Gram-negative bacteria 
 
8 
 
 
Chapter 3. Protein sorting prediction methods 
10 
 
 
          3.1. Approaches to developing a protein sorting prediction method  
10 
 
 
          3.2. Algorithms used in protein sorting prediction methods 
11 
 
 
          3.3. Performance evaluation of prediction methods  
14 
 
 
Chapter 4. SecretomeP-2.0: The original method for predicting “non-classical” protein 
secretion in bacteria 
16 
 
 
Chapter 5. Prediction of signal peptide independent bacterial protein secretion using 
deep learning methods 
18 
 
 
         5.1 Dataset collection and preprocessing 
18 
 
 
          5.2 Model architecture 
20 
 
 
                    5.2.1. Model architecture summary 
21 
 
 
                    5.2.2. Analysis of model components 
21 
 
 
          5.3 Results 
26 
 
 
          5.4 Method Performance Comparison 
31 
 
 
Chapter 6. Conclusion 
35 
 
 
References 
36 
 
==PAGE:3==
2 
 
Abstract 
Motivation: Secreted proteins are very important for the survival and function of bacteria and as such, 
the study of their properties and secretory pathways has high scientific and commercial value. Bacterial 
proteins are, in general, secreted via signal peptide dependent mechanisms; but that is not always the 
case. SecretomeP-2.0 is a popular computational method that was developed for the prediction of signal 
peptide independent protein secretion in bacteria. However, due to the lack of sufficient experimentally 
verified data at the time, certain assumptions were required that made the method problematic. In this 
thesis, I tested the effectiveness of this method and updated it using state-of-the-art technologies and 
datasets to develop a reliable method for predicting signal peptide independent protein secretion.  
Results: In this report I present a method that uses deep neural networks for predicting signal peptide 
independent secretion of proteins in bacteria. Two models were developed using the same network 
architecture: one for Gram-positive and one for Gram-negative bacteria. The architecture used can be 
described as a Convolutional Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory neural network with an Attention 
Mechanism. The models were trained using a dataset of manually annotated sequences that was 
extracted from the latest UniProt release. The models were evaluated in terms of sensitivity and 
specificity, achieving ROC AUCs (Receiver Operating Curve Area Under the Curve) of 0.89 and 0.96 for the 
Gram-positive and the Gram-negative models respectively, thus outperforming both the current 
SecretomeP-2.0 method and other state-of-the-art non-dedicated protein sorting prediction methods, 
including homology-based methods.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
3 
 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank my supervisors Henrik Nielsen and Ole Winther for the opportunity to work on this 
project, as well as for their guidance throughout my thesis work. I would also like to thank Jose Juan 
Almagro Armenteros for his helpful feedback and suggestions during our discussions  
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
4 
 
Chapter 1. Introduction 
The study of pathogenic bacteria has revealed that secreted bacterial proteins are an essential 
component of many bacterial functions and their interactions with their environment. These 
include functions that promote bacterial virulence such as intoxicating host cells, facilitating 
bacterial motility, disrupting host functions and suppressing an inflammatory response. Non-
pathogenic bacteria also utilize secreted proteins in manners that are conducive to their survival, 
e.g. for environmental niche adaptation. As a result, studying these extracellular bacterial 
proteins and the secretory pathways they use can provide valuable insight both for therapeutic 
and for commercial applications [1, 2].  
Protein subcellular localization is an important determinant of protein function. Experimental 
methods that have been developed for this purpose use antibodies, which are prone to false 
assignments or are highly laborious, requiring tagging of the protein of interest with fluorescent 
molecules and imaging it. To address this, many computational methods have been developed 
that undertake the challenge of protein sorting prediction, i.e. the prediction of their subcellular 
location. In 1999 it was discovered that proteins have “intrinsic signals that govern their transport 
and localization in the cell” so the focus of many computational methods has been to determine 
the nature of these signals [3, 4].  
In the case of secreted bacterial proteins, most use secretory systems that recognize a signal 
peptide (SP) at the start (N-terminal) of the amino acid sequence of the protein to be secreted. 
These systems have been thoroughly studied and many computational methods that attempt to 
predict whether a protein is secreted are based on the recognition of these signal peptides. 
However, a number of proteins have been found to be secreted to the extracellular milieu 
without having an evident signal peptide. We now know that there are several different systems 
that are dedicated to the secretion of bacterial proteins and some of these function in a signal 
peptide independent manner (occasionally termed nonclassical secretion), though their 
mechanism is in most cases unclear [4, 5].   
One of the computational methods dedicated to the prediction of protein secretion in bacteria 
independent of signal peptides is the feature-based prediction method SecretomeP-2.0 [5] which 
was developed in 2005. At the time of this method’s development there were very few verified 
examples of bacterial proteins that were secreted in a signal peptide independent manner, so 
the authors had to work under certain assumptions regarding the nature of secreted proteins to 
develop their method [4] (see chapter 4). One of the aims of the current report is to test the 
veracity of these assumptions by determining the effectiveness of SecretomeP-2.0 in predicting 
signal peptide independent secretion with recently available data. I have found that this 
prediction method has very low sensitivity, meaning that it is unlikely to correctly predict a 
protein that is secreted in a signal-peptide independent manner as secreted.  
The availability nowadays of a much larger number of bacterial protein sequences that are 
verified to be secreted in a signal peptide independent way has allowed us to develop the new 
==PAGE:6==
5 
 
prediction method which is presented in this report and aims to update SecretomeP-2.0 without 
the need to make assumptions about any of the proteins’ features, while at the same time 
achieving higher sensitivity rates. Given the recent success of using deep learning methods for 
protein sorting prediction [6, 7], I applied such an approach for my own purpose of predicting 
signal peptide independent protein secretion in bacteria.  
In the following chapters of this report, I initially give short descriptions of signal peptide 
independent secretion pathways in bacteria (Chapter 2), and then I outline the basic components 
of protein sorting prediction methods (Chapter 3). Afterwards, I discuss the approach that the 
authors of SecretomeP-2.0 used for the development of their method (Chapter 4) and finally, I 
present my own method for predicting proteins that are secreted through signal peptide 
independent pathways (Chapter 5).  
 
 
==PAGE:7==
6 
 
Chapter 2. Signal peptide independent secretion pathways of proteins 
in bacteria 
In order to study the secretion pathways of bacterial proteins, an initial important distinction to 
make is between Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, a classification which is based on 
the different reaction these two types of cells have to a staining experiment originally developed 
by Danish pharmacologist Hans Christian Gram. This different reaction is due to their differences 
in cell-envelope organization (Figure 1). In Gram-positive bacteria the cell envelope consists of a 
single cell membrane surrounded by a cell wall. In Gram-negative bacteria the cell envelope 
consists of an inner membrane and an outer membrane, and the space in between is called the 
periplasmic space, in which there is also a much thinner cell wall. While some essential protein 
translocation mechanisms are shared between Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, the 
significant differences in their cell envelope have also led to the evolution of different protein 
translocation mechanisms [8].  
Due to the inconsistent use of bacterial secretion terminology in literature, another important 
issue is to determine which bacterial proteins are considered as secreted before describing their 
secretion pathways. In the context of this report, secreted proteins are defined as proteins that 
are “actively transported from the interior to the exterior of a cell” (Figure 1) [8]. This definition 
excludes transmembrane proteins as well as proteins that remain into the periplasmic area after 
their translocation there from the cytoplasm in the case of Gram-negative bacteria. It also 
excludes proteins that are released after cell lysis or transferred through a membrane vesicle [8, 
9], as they are not considered to be “actively transported”. 
 
Figure 1. Protein secretion in Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Ext: extracellular milieu, CW: cell wall, IWZ: inner wall 
zone, CM: cytoplasmic membrane, Cyto: cytoplasm, OM: outer membrane, Peri: periplasm, IM: inner membrane. [8] 
==PAGE:8==
7 
 
Bacterial protein secretion pathways in most cases are controlled by mechanisms that recognize 
a “tag” at the beginning of the protein sequence (the N-terminal), a specific sequence motif called 
a signal peptide [5].  These include, among others, the highly conserved Sec and Tat pathways in 
both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. In fact, the Sec translocon mechanism is so 
prevalent that it was initially thought to be involved in some manner in all protein secretion 
pathways. Note that in Gram-negative bacteria, these are not sufficient for protein secretion but 
rather require a second mechanism for their translocation from the periplasm to the extracellular 
milieu (Figure 3) [1, 8].  Later studies revealed a number of bacterial proteins that were secreted 
but lacked any apparent signal peptide [5] and we are now aware of a number of different 
pathways, both in Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, that are signal peptide 
independent. For many of these the exact mechanism is not known and pathways that are of 
special interest are ones that might in some way be based on the recognition of a pattern or 
motif that has not yet been determined anywhere along the protein sequence to be exported. 
For these pathways, to acquire additional insight on the nature of the sequence motifs we can 
study the attention weight distribution plots, which highlight positions of interest along an amino 
acid sequence. These are generated by the attention mechanism (see Chapter 5) that is utilized 
in the deep learning model that I developed and will describe later in this report.  
The following paragraphs contain short descriptions of bacterial protein secretion pathways that 
are signal peptide independent. Because the nomenclature for these is exceedingly inconsistent 
throughout the literature, I should clarify that this report follows the bacterial secretion 
nomenclature suggested by Desvaux et al [8].   
 
2.1. Signal peptide independent protein secretion in Gram-positive bacteria 
The studied pathways of signal peptide independent protein secretion in Gram-positive bacteria 
are the SecA2, FEA (flagella export apparatus), holin (hole forming) and Wss (WXG100 secretion 
system) pathways (Figure 2) [1, 8].  
SecA2 pathway: The signal peptide dependent general Sec pathway uses the ATPase (molecular 
motor) SecA along with the SecYEG channel (where the secretory signal peptide is intercepted) 
to transport proteins across the cell membrane. While this SecA protein is universally distributed 
among all life forms, some bacteria, including L. monocytogenes, Bacillus subtilis, Clostridium 
difficile, M. tuberculosis, and Corynbacteria glutamicum have two homologues of SecA proteins, 
SecA1 and SecA2. The SecA2 homologue, which is usually involved in stress responses and cell 
wall repair, is thought to work with the SecYEG channel, but its regulation is not in the same 
manner as in SecA, since the presence of a signal peptide is not necessary [1, 10]. 
Flagella export apparatus (FEA) pathway: The FEA is “ATPase dependent and uses a hollow 
organelle, the flagellum, that spans the cell envelope and extends from the outer membrane” to 
secrete proteins. It is a simpler but directly homologous version of the T3SS mechanism in Gram-
==PAGE:9==
8 
 
negative bacteria, which will be described in the next section of this chapter. This type of 
secretion in the case of Gram-positive bacteria has been observed for example in Bacillus subtilis 
[11]. 
Hole forming (holin) pathway: Holins are encoded primarily in bacteriophage genomes and their 
primary function is to form pores on the bacterial cell walls that eventually lead to cell lysis. 
However, they are also encoded in both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria (though in 
Gram-negative bacteria an additional mechanism is required for protein secretion) and serve a 
number of different functions. Among these are gene transfer facilitation, biofilm formation, aid 
for stress responses and release of toxins and proteins [12]. 
WXG100 secretion system (Wss): This system was initially observed in Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis as it was found to be used for the export of a highly immunogenic protein, ESAT-6. 
It was soon after identified in many Gram-positive bacteria, such as Staphylococcus aureus, 
Bacillus anthracis, Streptococcus agalactiae, Bacillus subtilis and others. It utilizes an ATPase 
driven secretion mechanism, the specifics of which are still unclear, though there are indications 
that it is in part based on the recognition of a highly conserved amino acid sequence motif at the 
end of the proteins (C-terminal) that are exported through this pathway [13].  
 
Figure 2. Secretion pathways for proteins in Gram-positive bacteria. Cyto: cytoplasm, CM: cytoplasmic membrane, CW: cell wall, 
OM: outer membrane, Ext: extracellular milieu. [8] 
==PAGE:10==
9 
 
2.2. Signal peptide independent protein secretion in Gram-negative bacteria 
Signal peptide independent protein secretion occurs at more significant rates in Gram-negative 
than in Gram-positive bacteria and has thus been studied more extensively. The nomenclature 
used to describe Gram-negative protein secretion pathways is numerical, except for the 
pathways that are commonly shared with other types of organisms, such as the Sec translocation 
pathway. So far, eight additional secretion systems have been discovered and out of these, the 
ones that are signal peptide independent are the Type 1, Type 3, Type 4 and Type 6 Secretion 
Systems (Figure 3) [8].   
 
Figure 3.  Secretion pathways for proteins in Gram-negative bacteria. Cyto: cytoplasm, CM: cytoplasmic membrane, CW: cell wall, 
OM: outer membrane, Ext: extracellular milieu. [8] 
Type 1 Secretion System (T1SS): The T1SS systems transport unfolded proteins and toxins in a 
one step process utilizing an ATP-based three-component protein that spans the entire cell 
envelope of Gram-negative bacteria. Proteins that are secreted by this pathway do not have a 
signal peptide, but they are divided into three categories based on other types of motifs on the 
N-terminal of their amino acid sequence, since different subtypes of the T1SS systems are utilized 
for each of these categories. Additionally, many of these also have a C-terminal signaling 
==PAGE:11==
10 
 
sequence.  Examples of Gram-negative bacteria where this type of protein secretion has been 
found are E. coli and V. cholerae [1].  
Type 3 Secretion System (T3SS): The T3SS systems belong to the category of “flagellar secretion 
systems” and are formed by the 9 highly conserved core proteins of these flagellar systems, as 
well as 10 to 20 additional proteins, depending on the subtype of the T3SS system. They are 
three-component systems that consist of the base that spans the cell envelope, the “needle” and 
the translocon, and are described as “needle-and-syringe-like” mechanisms which transport 
proteins in one step through the cell envelope and into a target eukaryotic cell. Examples of 
pathogenic Gram-negative bacteria that utilize this protein secretion system are Yersinia, 
Salmonella, and Shigella [1]. 
Type 4 Secretion System (T4SS): The T4SS systems are ancestrally related to bacterial DNA 
conjugation systems, which facilitate the transfer of genetic material between bacteria. The T4SS 
systems can transfer both proteins and other macromolecules like DNA through the cell envelope 
and directly into a eukaryotic host cell. Depending on the type of substrate they secrete, e.g. 
proteins or DNA/protein complexes, different evolutionarily related subtypes of the T4SS systems 
are used, which share certain main components but can vary both in function and structure. The 
exact mechanism for this type of secretion is still unclear. Examples of Gram-negative bacteria 
that use this type of system are Neisseria gonorrhoeae and L. pneumophila [1]. 
Type 6 Secretion System (T6SS): The T6SS systems are common among Gram-negative bacteria 
but were discovered relatively recently and are so the least studied. They are very large protein 
complexes, consisting of up to 21 proteins, 13 of which are conserved in all subtypes of T6SS 
systems. One of the most unusual functions of T6SS systems is the transfer of effector proteins 
that target bacterial cell wall components from one bacterium to another through contact. This 
promotes interspecies competition, since the effector proteins that utilize T6SS systems are 
usually encoded alongside genes that provide immunity to these proteins, thus avoiding self-
toxicity. The exact function of T6SS systems is not yet determined but this type of secretion has 
been observed in many Gram-negative pathogens such as P. aeruginosa, V. cholerae, and S. 
marcescens [1].  
 
 
==PAGE:12==
11 
 
Chapter 3. Protein sorting prediction methods 
Protein sorting refers to the cellular mechanisms by which proteins are identified as belonging to 
a specific cellular compartment, usually based on the recognition of sorting signals somewhere 
along their amino acid sequence, and then they are transported to that compartment [14]. The 
prediction of protein subcellular localization is one of the oldest challenges in computational 
biology and since the first efforts were made, a large variety of methods and algorithms have 
been developed for this purpose. These should be used in a complementary manner along with 
experimental methods that determine subcellular locations of proteins, which can occasionally 
be unreliable, so that we may achieve higher degrees of confidence regarding the assigned 
subcellular location [4]. 
 
3.1. Approaches to developing a protein sorting prediction method 
Protein sorting prediction methods generally approach the subject through one or more of three 
different routes. The first is based on the recognition of the actual sorting signal. This is a very 
straight-forward approach and has been used widely in many different methods. An example of 
this is the recognition of the secretory signal peptide by SignalP [15, 16]. The second approach is 
based on global properties of the proteins such as amino acid composition or hydrophobicity. An 
early example of this is the use of the amino acid composition by SubLoc [17]. Because a lot of 
sequence information is lost if only one global property is used, usually prediction methods that 
are based on global properties of the proteins use more than one property for the prediction. For 
example, for the prediction of protein secretion in Gram-negative bacteria, SecretomeP [5] uses 
four global properties/features: amino acid composition, arginine content, instability index, and 
predicted disorder. The third approach is based on sequence homology. This stems from the 
expectation that a protein would tend to remain in the same subcellular location in different 
organisms throughout evolution. A homology-based prediction can either infer the subcellular 
location directly from the first BLAST1 hit or, if it is not location-annotated, infer it from other 
types of annotation provided [4]. 
When comparing the three different approaches, homology-based prediction methods usually 
perform better than the others. However, this performance depends on the organism type that 
the query protein belongs to, since well-studied organisms will be better annotated. This means 
that for novel proteins, homology-based prediction methods might perform poorly. Also, both 
homology-based and feature-based properties have the advantage that if the sorting signal is not 
known, then they can still assign a subcellular location based on similar proteins. However, they 
                                                          
1 “The Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) program compares nucleotide or protein sequences to sequence 
databases and calculates the statistical significance of matches. BLAST can be used to infer functional and 
evolutionary relationships between sequences as well as help identify members of gene families.” [18] 
==PAGE:13==
12 
 
would not be able to distinguish between very similar proteins that are in different subcellular 
compartments, e.g. if the sorting signal of one of them has mutated [4].  
Combinations of the three different approaches into one method are common and, in that case, 
can take advantage of the benefits of all three. An example is PSORTb [19], which uses signal-
based, feature-based and homology-based predictions, and then assigns a subcellular location 
that depends on the predictions of all three methods [4].  
 
3.2. Algorithms used in protein sorting prediction methods 
There are many different algorithms that have been used for the development of methods to 
predict the subcellular localization of proteins based on their amino acid sequence. Depending 
on the type of algorithm selected, the input is either varied, in which case the entire amino acid 
sequence can be used, or it is fixed, in which case either a fixed number of values derived from 
sequence properties is used, or a series of short overlapping amino acid sequences which are 
derived from a “sliding fixed-length window” along the whole amino acid sequence of the 
protein. The output can either be qualitative, e.g. assigning directly a subcellular location in the 
case of homology-based predictions, or quantitative, assigning a numerical score (e.g. a 
probability) that corresponds to how likely it is that a protein is assigned to a specific subcellular 
location [4]. 
For signal recognition, the simplest method is the use of a regular expression/consensus 
sequence.  An example where this can be applied is the case of the twin-arginine translocation 
(Tat) signal peptide which is characterized by two arginines(R), followed by one amino acid of any 
kind, and then one amino acid out of the set FGAVML followed by one out of the set LITMVF. The 
regular expression used in this case would be: “RR.[FGAVML][LITMVF]”. When using this method, 
the input can be the whole sequence which is scanned for matches of the regular expression and 
the output is a value that corresponds to either “found” or “not found”. While this method is 
very simple, it has very strict requirements, it does not take under consideration that some amino 
acids are more likely than others, and it provides no additional information other than the binary 
(yes or no) output [4].  
Another signal recognition method that overcomes some of the limitations of the regular 
expression is the position weight matrix (PWM) [20] which assigns a probability for each amino 
acid at each position. It is a “statistical window” which is generated by using a set of examples 
where we have verified the presence of the signal as a training set, calculating the frequency of 
each amino acid at each position in the training set, and then assigning a weight that corresponds 
to that frequency. This PWM can then be used to assign a numerical value that corresponds to 
how likely it is that an input sequence window contains the signal of interest. A visual 
representation of the PWM is the sequence logo [21] (See for example Figure 4 for the sequence 
logo of the Tat signal) [4].  
==PAGE:14==
13 
 
 
Figure 4. Sequence logo of the Tat signal peptide centered around the two main arginines (R). The height of each letter corresponds 
to the probability of that amino acid being in that location [22] 
A limitation of the PWM is that it can only model signals/motifs of a specific length. This limitation 
can be overcome by using a sequence profile, which is similar to the PWM but allows for 
insertions or deletions in the sequence. A sequence profile can be generated based on a given 
training set of varying length using the “Hidden Markov Model” machine learning algorithm. This 
uses an iterative optimization process that gradually calculates for each position the probabilities 
of each amino acid being there, and of an insertion of each amino acid or a deletion at that 
position. The output from a new sequence using the method is the probability that this sequence 
could have been generated by the trained model [4, 23]. Because of their usefulness as prediction 
tools, there are several available databases, for example PROSITE [24] or Pfam [25], that 
specialize in these kinds of profiles.   
For the cases where the input is fixed, there are a few different machine learning algorithms that 
are frequently used. Among these, the simplest one is the Naïve Bayes classifier, which assumes 
that the input features are independent and calculates the probability of observing a feature 
within a specific numerical range for a given class (i.e. a specific subcellular location). This 
algorithm has been used for example in the method Yloc showing a very good performance 
[4,26].  
Another machine learning algorithm which is very commonly used is the Support Vector Machine 
(SVM) algorithm. It uses four basic concepts: (i) the separating hyperplane, which is the “line” 
that distinguishes classes, (ii) the maximum-margin hyperplane, which is defined by the distance 
between the separating hyperplane and the next “point” that belongs to another class, (iii) the 
soft margin, which is the error margin allowed around the separating hyperplane to allow for 
flexibility and (iv) the kernel function, which is a function selected in such a way that an additional 
dimension is added to the data and allows the data to be linearly separated based on the 
==PAGE:15==
14 
 
separating hyperplane [27]. Examples of protein sorting prediction methods that use SVMs are 
SecretP-2.0, T4EffPred, T4SEpre, SIEVE, MEMSAT-SVM, BOCTOPUS, PROSITE and many more [4]. 
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) are also frequently used in protein prediction methods. The 
most common type of ANN used is the feed-forward neural network. ANNs consist of units called 
neurons which are connected in a non-linear manner to other neurons by weighted connections. 
The neurons are organized in layers (input layer, output layer and hidden layers in between) with 
connections from one layer to the next (see Figure 5 for an example of a feed-forward neural 
network) [28]. Examples where ANNs are used in protein sorting prediction methods are, among 
others, SignalP, TatP, SecretomeP-2.0, MEMSAT3 and SPOCTOPUS [4]. 
 
Figure 5 Small feed-forward neural network that has 3 input units in the input layer, one hidden layer with 4 hidden units and 2 
output units in the output layer [28] 
Finally, the most recent algorithms used are Deep Neural Networks which are essentially 
extensions of the ANNs mentioned above, but have much increased levels of complexity, both 
in the number of hidden units, and in the type of connections between them. Deep learning has 
gained increasing popularity in the last few years, since it is a rapidly evolving scientific field and 
has shown very promising results in a wide array of applications, including the subject of 
protein sorting [7]. Apart from the good model performances reported, deep neural networks 
used in protein sorting also have two major advantages compared to classic ANNs; first, they 
can handle input of varying length which is ideal for protein sequences, and second, they have 
mechanisms that direct our attention to locations of high importance along the sequence, 
something that can be very helpful in deciphering sorting signals that are currently unknown. I 
will not go further into the subject of deep neural networks here, since it is the type of 
algorithm used for the development of my own prediction method and a lot more details are 
described in Chapter 5 of this report.  
 
==PAGE:16==
15 
 
3.3. Performance evaluation of prediction methods 
The performance of prediction methods is measured according to how well they generalize to 
data outside their training set. If they are very accurate in their predictions for data that belong 
to the training set but perform poorly on other data, then the model is considered overfitted. To 
avoid this, the data we have is usually split into 3 parts. The training set, the validation set and 
the test set. The model is trained on the training set using the performance on the validation set 
as a guideline and the test set is used at the end for the final performance evaluation.  
Overfitting can also be reduced by using cross-validation, where after the test (evaluation) set 
has been removed, the rest is divided into N parts/folds (which can be as many as the data points) 
and we train as many models as there are folds, using a different fold each time as the validation 
set. The predictions on the evaluation set are then averaged over the predictions of each of the 
different models trained.  
There are many different performance measures that can be reported in the performance 
evaluation of a prediction method. The most common is the accuracy, which is the percentage 
of correct predictions out of the total predictions made. However, if the distribution between the 
different classes is not even, i.e. if there is class-imbalance, then the accuracy measure can be 
misleading. For that reason, other measures are often used, which are based on four numbers: 
True Positive (TP); the number that were correctly predicted as positive, True Negative (TN); the 
number correctly predicted as negative, False Positive (FP); the number wrongly predicted as 
positive and False Negative (FN). These are based on a threshold that is between the minimum 
and the maximum output values possible. For example, if the output is between 0 and 1, the 
threshold is often selected to be 0.5, so predicted values that are over 0.5 are characterized as 
positive predictions and values less than 0.5 are characterized as negative predictions. The most 
important measures based on these numbers are the following:  
• Sensitivity (also Recall, True Positive Rate (TPR)), which is the fraction of positive examples 
that were correctly predicted as positive: 
Sensitivity =
TP
TP + FN 
• Specificity (also True Negative Rate (TNR)), the corresponding number for the negative 
examples: 
 
Specificity =
TN
TN + FP  
 
• Precision, the fraction of positive predictions that are true 
 
Precision =
TP
TP + FP 
==PAGE:17==
16 
 
Depending on the threshold selected, the above measures can vary significantly. Typically, 
lowering the threshold increases the sensitivity but decreases the specificity and precision. 
Thus, the selection of the right threshold is a case of optimizing these measures based on the 
needs of the prediction method (e.g. if very high sensitivity is preferred). The Receiving 
Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve is a visual representation of this trade off, which is a plot 
of the sensitivity (TPR) over the False Positive Rate for different values of the threshold. The 
area under the curve (AUC) is a very important measure that should be reported, as it is 
indicative of the discriminatory ability of the prediction method. Values close to 1 show 
excellent discriminatory ability, while values close to 0.5 show random classification (Figure 6) 
[4,28].  
 
Figure 6 The Area Under the Curve of the ROC curve is indicative of the discriminatory ability of the model.2 
 
 
                                                          
2 Image taken from http://jxieeducation.com/2016-09-27/Attractive-Mathematical-Properties-Of-The-ROC-Curve/  
==PAGE:18==
17 
 
Chapter 4. SecretomeP-2.0: The original method for predicting “non-
classical” protein secretion in bacteria  
SecretomeP-2.0 [5] is a feature-based method that was developed in 2005 at the Center for 
Biological Sequence Analysis (later renamed to Department of Bio and Health Informatics) of the 
Technical University of Denmark for the prediction of proteins in bacteria that are secreted 
through signal peptide independent pathways. In this chapter I will shortly describe the theory 
behind this original method’s3 development and discuss a few issues that can lead to misgivings 
about its true performance.    
An initial note is that the use of the term “non-classical” was used in an inconsistent manner 
throughout the SecretomeP-2.0 article, so the exact definition is unclear. To begin with, the term 
was defined as referring to all proteins that are secreted by using a signal peptide independent 
pathway. Later however, they included the known (at the time) secretion pathways types 1 to 5 
in the “classical” pathways, even though types 1, 3 and 4 are signal peptide independent, so they 
eventually ended up with only one example of a Gram-negative protein that was secreted 
through a signal peptide independent pathway. An additional note is that proteins secreted via 
vesicles that “pinched-off from the outer membrane” were also included in the “non-classical” 
secretion category, while in the current report (as mentioned in Chapter 2) I don’t include this 
type of secretion to the signal peptide independent category.  
At the time that SecretomeP-2.0 was developed there was an insufficient number of verified 
examples of proteins that were secreted through signal peptide independent pathways for 
training a new prediction method. To overcome this obstacle, they used proteins that were 
known to be secreted through the Sec-dependent secretion pathway where they had removed 
the signal peptide. They supported this decision by theorizing that all extracellular proteins 
should share some features, such as for example their amino acid composition, regardless of the 
pathway they use for their secretion. However, since there was insufficient data on proteins that 
were secreted in a signal peptide independent manner, the validity of this theory could not be 
tested. Another issue with using proteins that used the Sec-dependent secretion pathway is that 
in the case of Gram-negative bacteria, proteins that are targeted by the Sec translocon are 
exported to the periplasmic area (Figure 3). A number of these could eventually be secreted to 
the extracellular milieu through other mechanisms, but others would remain in the periplasmic 
area. 
After generating the dataset, the next step was to select features that could characterize both 
proteins that are secreted and proteins that remain in the cytoplasm. Then they used an iterative 
process to find the best combinations of these that could be used to clearly distinguish between 
the two categories. The features selected were either derived directly from the protein 
                                                          
3 SecretomeP-2.0 is the original method for bacterial proteins, since SecretomeP-1.0 [29] was developed only for 
mammalian proteins. 
==PAGE:19==
18 
 
sequences, or they were predicted values from external methods. For Gram-positive bacteria the 
features were amino acid composition, threonine content, hydrophobicity, transmembrane 
helices, secondary structure, and predicted disorder. For Gram-negative bacteria the features 
were amino acid composition, arginine content, instability index and predicted disorder.  
Having selected the features, they then used these to train ANNs. In the performance evaluation, 
they reported that on the test sets of their own generated datasets, the prediction was correct 9 
out of 10 times for both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. They also tested the 
performance on the dataset from the SignalP-3.0 [30] method and concluded that SecretomeP-
2.0 was also capable of distinguishing cytoplasmic proteins from secreted proteins that use the 
Sec pathway (without removing their signal peptide). The reported performance measures were 
89% sensitivity and 95% specificity for Gram-positive bacteria and 88% sensitivity and 96% 
specificity for Gram-negative bacteria. An objection for testing on this dataset is that it is likely 
that the dataset overlap would be very high, since SignalP-3.0 was developed only one year 
before SecretomeP-2.0. Even if the signal peptide is intact in SignalP-3.0, it is relatively short, so 
some of the protein global properties (e.g. amino acid composition or predicted disorder) are not 
expected to change significantly. Finally, they reported the SecretomeP-2.0 performance on the 
few proteins that were verified to be secreted via a signal peptide independent pathway. For 
Gram-positive bacteria, they reported that 13 out of 16 secreted proteins were predicted 
correctly. For Gram-negative bacteria they had only one example which was predicted 
incorrectly.  
Although this method was very innovative when first published and is now still widely used 
through the corresponding online web prediction service, our re-evaluation of the theory that it 
is based upon suggests a need for reassessment of its performance with a more recent and 
accurate dataset as well as the need to update the method.  
 
 
==PAGE:20==
19 
 
Chapter 5. Prediction of signal peptide independent bacterial protein 
secretion using deep learning methods. 
The successful use of deep learning methods for the generation of a model which predicts the 
subcellular location of eukaryotic proteins [7] prompted my own attempt for the generation of a 
model with a similar architecture for the prediction of signal peptide independent bacterial 
protein secretion. In addition, since the time that SecretomeP-2.0 [5] was developed more data 
has become available on this subject. As a result, it is feasible to train a model on this data alone 
and there is no need to adopt the assumptions of the original method on the common features 
of all secreted bacterial proteins (see Chapter 4). 
 
5.1 Dataset collection and preprocessing  
Two datasets were extracted from the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) database [31], one 
for Gram-positive (phyla Actinobacteria and Firmicutes) and one for Gram-negative bacteria (all 
Gram-negative excluding the phylum Tenericutes4). The secreted (positive) sub sets were 
manually reviewed entries with “Secreted” location annotation and lacking signal peptide 
annotation. The non-secreted (negative) sub sets were manually reviewed entries with 
“Cytoplasmic” location annotation and lacking “Secreted” location and signal peptide annotation. 
Additional filtering of these sets was done by excluding protein sequences predicted to have a 
signal peptide by the online prediction server SignalP-4.1 [16]. Furthermore, sequences that did 
not start with the amino acid methionine were removed, since it could not be verified that these 
did not initially have a signal peptide. The final numbers of protein sequences collected were 576 
secreted and 31683 cytoplasmic for the Gram-positive set, and 1044 secreted and 82821 
cytoplasmic for the Gram-negative set.  
Each of these two datasets was further divided into five partitions using homology partitioning. 
Four of the five partitions were used for the model training using 4-fold cross-validation and the 
last partition was kept separate for the model evaluation. The purpose of homology partitioning 
was to avoid the introduction of undesirable biases to the model due to redundancy [33] but at 
the same time retain the number of sequences in the dataset, especially for the secreted subsets 
which were significantly less numerous than the cytoplasmic. The first step to homology 
partitioning was to cluster sequences with similarity greater than 30% together using the 
program psi-cd-hit from the CD-HIT package [34], which is the program recommended by the 
package distributer when trying to cluster proteins together using a similarity threshold of less 
than 40%. The next step was to assign the protein sequences to a partition by making sure that 
sequences that were assigned to the same cluster were also assigned to the same partition, while 
at the same time attempting to maintain the ratio between secreted and cytoplasmic protein 
                                                          
4 Tenericutes differ from other Gram-negative bacteria in that they lack a cell wall. This affects both their cell shape 
and some of their secretion pathways [32]. 
==PAGE:21==
20 
 
sequences in each partition. In addition, the disparate distribution in cluster sizes for these 
clusters (Figure 7) presented the need to assign a weight (0 < w <= 1) to each protein sequence 
which was based on the number of sequences in each cluster. This was later incorporated into 
the input encoding so that underrepresented sequences would not be overlooked during the 
model training.  
 
Figure 7 Cluster size distribution for the Gram-negative and the Gram-positive dataset. While most clusters included fewer than 
50 sequences, some included hundreds. 
At this point it should be noted that for selecting the optimal model architecture and 
hyperparameters I used significantly reduced datasets due to the very large training times when 
using as input the complete datasets. These consisted of all the secreted protein sequences, but 
only the cluster representative sequences for the cytoplasmic subsets. As a result, the reduced 
numbers of protein sequences for the Gram-positive dataset were 576 secreted and 1022 
cytoplasmic and for the Gram-negative dataset they were 1044 secreted and 1974 cytoplasmic. 
These were distributed into five partitions in a similar manner as before, but in this case, it was 
important to group together into the partitions only the secreted proteins that belonged to the 
same cluster, and the cytoplasmic proteins were assigned randomly while still maintaining the 
secreted to cytoplasmic ratio. The cluster weights were not incorporated into the subsequent 
input encoding for these reduced datasets.  
After assigning the protein sequences to their respective partitions the next step was to encode 
the input for the model in such a way that each amino acid would have its own unique 
representation. For this purpose, I used Blosum62 encoding [35] where each amino acid was 
represented by a vector of 21 values, the Blosum62 scores of replacing that amino acid with each 
of the amino acids (including X for unknown) (Figure 8).  
==PAGE:22==
21 
 
 
Figure 8 Blosum62 Substitution matrix, taken from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database5. 
Note that the Blosum62 matrix used for this was row-normalized. For weighted input these 
values were multiplied by the cluster weight of the protein sequence encoded. Moreover, for 
input uniformity, sequences that were shorter than 1000 amino acids were padded with vectors 
of 21 zeros and sequences that were longer were “cropped” in the middle so that only the first 
and last 500 amino acids were included. Information on sequence lengths for the ones that were 
shorter than 1000 amino acids was retained using corresponding mask vectors of length 1000 
where the first n (n: sequence length) values were equal to 1 and the rest were 0. In summary, 
each input sequence was represented by a 1000x21 matrix of its Blosum62 encoded amino acids, 
along with a corresponding mask vector with shape 1000x1. The true label of the sequence was 
0/1 encoded, where 0 marked a cytoplasmic sequence and 1 marked a secreted sequence.  
 
5.2 Model architecture  
The deep neural network was implemented using the Tensorflow6 machine learning framework 
in Python 37. The same model architecture was used both for Gram-positive and Gram-negative. 
The models that were developed predict whether a protein can be secreted through a signal 
peptide independent pathway. They are of the form:  
𝑦= 𝑓𝜃(𝑿), 
                                                          
5 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Class/FieldGuide/BLOSUM62.txt  
6 https://www.tensorflow.org/  
7 https://www.python.org/  
==PAGE:23==
22 
 
where 𝑦 is the predicted output, 𝑓𝜃 is the model function that has 𝜃 trained parameters, and 𝑿 
is the matrix of the encoded sequence (size 1000x21). The design of the deep learning neural 
network used for 𝑓𝜃 was heavily influenced by the network used for the DeepLoc [7] method.  
5.2.1 Model architecture summary 
The network is characterized as a Convolutional Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory neural 
network with an Attention mechanism (Conv A-BLSTM) and can be summarized in the following 
way: The input to the first convolutional layer (CNN) is the encoded protein sequence (protein 
length x unique amino acids incl. unknown (1000x21)). The CNN uses 60 filters of different sizes 
(10 for each of the sizes: 1, 3, 5, 9, 15 and 21) and the output is concatenated into a 1000x60 
feature map. A second CNN layer follows which uses 20 filters of size 3 and returns a 1000x20 
feature map. This is input into the recurrent neural network (RNN), which uses 32 hidden LSTM 
units in both directions, resulting in output of shape 1000x64 which is directed into the attention 
mechanism. The next layer is a dense layer with a ReLu activation function which has 64 units 
and the final output layer uses the softmax activation function and includes a dropout layer for 
regularization purposes. The output has two units, one for each class (Figure 9). The parameters 
𝜃 of the network are optimized by minimizing the sparse softmax cross entropy between the 
predicted and the true labels. 
 
Figure 9 Diagram of neural network flow 
5.2.2 Analysis of model components 
Note on activation functions: As mentioned in chapter 3, neural networks consist of units called 
neurons which are connected in a non-linear manner to other neurons by weighted connections. 
The non-linear functions that are used for these connections are called activation functions.  
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) Layers: CNNs are specialized neural networks useful for 
processing data that have “grid-like topology”. This typically applies to 2-D images, where these 
types of networks have been used with very high success, but it can also apply to time-
series/sequential data, where the “grid” can be formed by taking samples at regular intervals. 
==PAGE:24==
23 
 
The name convolution refers to the use of a mathematical operation which uses a weighting 
function (kernel,filter) to provide an averaged estimate for each time/sequence point by using 
several measurements around that time and giving more weight to measurements close to it. 
The output is called a “feature map” [36]. There are two terms that should be clarified regarding 
CNNs. First, the stride by which we slide the filter is important because a stride greater than 1 
will produce smaller output. Second, the padding used at the edges of the feature map; if zero-
padding is not applied, then the input spatial size is not preserved, and the feature map becomes 
smaller [37]. In my case, I use a stride equal to 1 and zero-padding.  
For my own neural network, I use one-dimensional convolution. In Figure 10 you can see a simple 
example of how 1d convolution can be applied to a one-dimensional sequence.   
 
Figure 10 Simple example of 1d convolution (stride=1 and zero-padding) [38] 
If the input is 2-dimensional then the kernel is convolved, and, provided that the kernel has one 
channel, the output is still 1-dimensional (Figure 11). 
 
Figure 11 1d convolution (with stride=1 but no zero-padding) on 2d input8  
                                                          
8 Image taken from https://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/292751/is-a-1d-convolution-of-size-m-with-k-
channels-the-same-as-a-2d-convolution-o  
==PAGE:25==
24 
 
For my model I use two consecutive convolutional layers. In the first, I apply 10 filters (channels) 
of many different sizes (1, 3, 5, 9, 15 and 21) to an input sequence with dimensions 1000x21. So, 
for example for the filter of size 3, the weight matrix of the kernel would be 3x21, and since I use 
10 different filters, it would actually be 3x21x10. This filter is applied over the whole length of 
the sequence and the output has shape 1000x10. After the input has been convolved, then the 
activation function is applied to the convolved features in an elementwise manner. The function 
used for this is the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function, which is defined as: 𝑓(𝑥) =
max (0, 𝑥). The six different output matrices from the six different filters are concatenated and 
the resulting 1000x60 matrix is input into the next convolutional layer, which performs a 
convolution in the same manner as described above with 20 filters of size 3. The resulting output 
feature map has shape 1000x20. 
In the case of biological sequences, this type of one-dimensional convolution is used to identify 
patterns and extract motifs. Additionally, Sønderby et al. (2015) [6] showed that they can be 
interpreted as a position specific scoring matrix (PSSM, used for representation of biological 
motifs). The convolutional weights can be reshaped into a matrix with shape filter length x 21 
(number of features/encoding length), which can be further used to visualize position and amino 
acid importance (Figure 12). 
 
Figure 12. Examples of learned filters. Filter A captures proline or tryptophan stretches, B) and C) are sensitive to positively and 
negatively charged regions, respectively. Note that for C, negative amino acids seem to suppress the output. Lastly, we show a 
long filter which captures larger sequence motifs in the proteins [6] 
==PAGE:26==
25 
 
Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory Neural Network with an Attention Mechanism (A-BLSTM): 
This neural network is the central element of my network architecture.  Long short-term memory 
neural networks are a type of recurrent neural network (RNN). RNNs are designed for processing 
sequential data, which makes them uniquely suited to handle protein sequences, which can have 
a sequence length that varies from tens to thousands of amino acids. RNN networks apply a 
recurrent calculation at each sequence position 𝑡: 
ℎ𝑡= 𝑓𝐸(𝑥𝑡, ℎ𝑡−1), 𝑡= 1. . 𝐿,  
where 𝑓𝐸 is called the RNN encoder (here I use LSTM units, suitable for capturing long range 
dependencies), 𝑥𝑡 are the features of the input 𝑿 at sequence position 𝑡 and 𝒉= [ℎ1, … , ℎ𝐿] are 
the hidden states, where ℎ𝑡is a vector with length equal to the number hidden units of the RNN 
(in my case 32). Because the RNN can lose useful information along the sequence and in case of 
protein sequences sorting signals are usually at the beginning or at the end of a sequence (N or 
C terminals), I use a Bidirectional RNN, in which the above calculations are done in both directions 
(Figure 13). The last hidden states from the two RNNs are concatenated into a combined output 
for the next network layer so that the most information is retained on the C and N terminals. 
 
Figure 13 "Unrolled" Bidirectional RNN [39] 
Another mechanism that can also retain important information across a long sequence is the 
attentive decoder [40], which assigns an importance weight to each position of the protein 
sequence related to its classification output. This has the additional benefit that it helps us to 
identify regions of the protein that are relevant to its classification, such as for example protein 
sorting signals. [6, 7] Using this attention decoder for this network I was able to obtain a weight 
vector for each sequence with the assigned attention weights for each position, which I used to 
visualize locations of high importance (see section 5.3.). 
==PAGE:27==
26 
 
Softmax function: This is the activation function used at the output layer of the network. It is of 
the form: 
 𝜎(𝑧)𝑗=
𝑒𝑧𝑗
∑
𝑒𝑧𝑘
𝐾
𝑘=1
  , where z is the input vector of K dimensions 
Its function in the output layer of a neural network is to “squash” the output of each unit to be 
between 0 and 1 and make certain that the total sum of the outputs is equal to 1, so that we can 
interpret the output vector as the probability that any of the classes are true [41]. Note that for 
deep neural networks the output of a softmax layer cannot be reliably used as the true 
probabilities, as they tend to be overconfident.  
Parameter optimization: Every machine learning method involves optimizing the “learned” 
parameters by minimizing or maximizing a selected function, the training criterion. If the goal is 
to minimize that function, then we call it the cost or error or loss function. In general, to minimize 
or maximize a function, it is useful to calculate its derivative. Depending on the sign (+/-) of the 
derivative at each input point we can determine the slope of the function and make the 
appropriate changes at a preselected learning rate (through backpropagation). This technique is 
called gradient descent. All parameter optimization techniques developed for machine learning 
are extensions and improvements on this basic idea [36]. For my own network I used the highly 
recommended Adam optimizer9 to minimize the cross entropy loss between the true and the 
predicted labels.  
Regularization: Regularization is used in machine learning to reduce overfitting and improve the 
generalization performance of a trained model. Strategies developed for regularization aim to 
reduce the test error, often in the expense of an increased training error [36]. For my network I 
use early stopping and dropout regularization.  
Early stopping regularization is applied when the network overfits the task; after a few training 
epochs the training error continues to steadily decrease, but the validation error begins to 
increase again. It involves storing the model parameters each time the validation error improves 
and stopping early if it hasn’t improved for a predefined number of iterations [36]. 
In dropout regularization, at every iteration some of the nodes are effectively removed (with a 
preset probability, for my network I selected p=0.5) by multiplying their output with zero. It can 
be viewed as an ensemble technique (combination of different networks), since in each iteration 
a different set on nodes is removed and this results in a different set of outputs. (Figure 14) [36]. 
                                                          
9 Name derives from Adaptive Momentum estimation. I will not go into details on this optimizer here, since it 
involves a very large number of concepts that would sidetrack the purpose of this report. For details, see Chapter 8 
of the deep learning book at http://www.deeplearningbook.org/.  
==PAGE:28==
27 
 
 
Figure 14 Example of dropout regularization10 
 
5.3 Results 
Two models were trained for the prediction of signal peptide independent protein secretion in 
bacteria, one for Gram-positive and one for Gram-negative bacteria. As mentioned in section 5.2, 
the models were trained using 4-fold cross-validation (the 5th partitions were kept for evaluation 
purposes), which resulted in four different sets of trained parameters. The parameters that were 
kept for each fold were the ones for which the validation error was the smallest. The final output 
of the model is the average of the output from these four sets.  
Additionally, many different values for the hyperparameters of the model where tried for 
optimization of the model performance. The final values were:  
• Learning rate: 0.0005. Selected from values within range [0.0001-0.01]. 
• Batch size: 64. Selected between the values 16, 32, 64, and 128. 
• Filter number for the 1st CNN layer: 10. Selected between the values 10 and 20. 
• Number of hidden units of LSTM layer: 32. Selected from values within range [16-256] 
An important note on the batch iteration while the model was trained was that the positive set 
was oversampled for each batch, so that the input sequences were distributed evenly between 
the two classes. This was due to the very large imbalance between the secreted and the 
cytoplasmic class (around 1/55 ratio for the Gram-positive and 1/80 ratio for the Gram-negative 
set). Without oversampling, the model would end up predicting all sequences as cytoplasmic, 
since it would still achieve low validation losses.  
An additional observation was that during its training the model converged very quickly to its 
optimal parameters and then began to overfit. This can be seen from an example of plots of the 
training and validation accuracy and losses per epoch seen in Figures 15 and 16.  The fast 
                                                          
10Images taken from  https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2018/04/fundamentals-deep-learning-regularization-
techniques/  
==PAGE:29==
28 
 
convergence suggested that I could possibly simplify the model and still achieve low validation 
losses. Since the reported hyperparameters were selected through an optimization process, 
another approach was used to reduce the network components.  
 
Figure 15 Accuracy per training epoch for the training and validation sets of partition B of the Gram-negative set 
 
Figure 16 Loss per training epoch for the training and validation sets of partition B of the Gram-negative set 
==PAGE:30==
29 
 
I tried two additional model architectures, one for each of the basic components of the main 
model architecture. The first was a Convolutional neural network that had two CNN layers set up 
in a similar manner as described for the main model. The second was a Bidirectional Long Short-
term Memory neural network with an attention mechanism, again set up as in the main model. 
Due to very long training times (measured in days) of the full datasets, the comparison between 
the three different architectures was done using the reduced dataset mentioned in section 5.2, 
the training of which lasted about 2-3 hours per session. The measurement used to determine 
the discriminatory ability of each model was the Area Under the Curve (AUC) of the Receiving 
Operating Characteristic Curve (ROC) (see Chapter 3) which was generated based on the 
predictions of the models on the test sets. The results for the reduced dataset can be seen in 
Table 1. The Conv A-BLSTM model performed better than the others, with the A-BLSTM following 
closely and the Convolutional network performing the least well.  
Table 1 AUC scores for the different model architectures trained on the reduced data sets 
Model architecture 
Gram-positive model 
Gram-negative model 
Conv A-BLSTM 
0.81 
0.86 
Conv 
0.76 
0.80 
A-BLSTM 
0.79 
0.84 
 
I finally decided to keep the Conv A-BLSTM neural network architecture and trained my two 
models on the complete dataset. The ROC curves generated based on the predictions on the test 
sets can be seen in Figures 17 and 18.  
 
Figure 17 ROC curve for model trained on Gram-positive bacteria 
==PAGE:31==
30 
 
 
Figure 18 ROC curve for model trained on Gram-negative bacteria 
Based on these, one can select an optimum threshold that is balanced between a desired 
sensitivity (True Positive Rate) and a low False Positive rate. For example, if we desire an FPR no 
greater than 0.2 then the maximum possible sensitivity can be achieved by setting the threshold 
at 0.003 for the Gram-positive and at 0.017 for the Gram-negative model predictions. If stricter 
false positive rates are required, the threshold can be increased accordingly. See Tables 2 & 3 for 
performance measures calculated for different thresholds. The recommended thresholds are 
0.003 for Gram-positive bacteria and 0.051 for Gram-negative bacteria for an accuracy of around 
80% and 90% respectively. 
Table 2 Performance measures for Gram-positive and Gram-negative models, trained on large dataset, for FPR=0.2 
 
Gram-positive (threshold=0.003) 
Gram-negative (threshold=0.017) 
AUC 
0.893 
0.964 
Sensitivity (TPR) 
0.797 
0.945 
Specificity (TNR) 
0.789 
0.797 
 
Table 3 Performance measures for Gram-positive and Gram-negative models, trained on large dataset, for FPR=0.1 
 
Gram-positive (threshold=0.266) 
Gram-negative (threshold=0.051) 
AUC 
0.893 
0.964 
Sensitivity (TPR) 
0.501 
0.918 
Specificity (TNR) 
0.990 
0.900 
 
==PAGE:32==
31 
 
Now we can study the plots of the attention weights which were generated by the use of the 
Attention mechanism on the Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory neural network. Figures 19 
and 20 show the attention plots for Gram-positive and Gram-negative proteins respectively. At 
first glance, we can see that the network focuses on the N and C terminals of the sequences and 
that there are distinct differences between cytoplasmic (red) and secreted (grey) proteins, 
especially at the C-terminal. It could be interesting in the future to look more closely at the nature 
and location of the peptides that are highlighted, in case these provide insight for the discovery 
of novel sorting signals related to signal peptide independent secretion of proteins in bacteria.  
 
Figure 19 Attention plot for Gram-positive bacteria. Red: cytoplasmic, Grey: secreted. For visualization purposes, sequences 
shorter than 1000 amino acids are padded in the middle so that the N and the C terminal are aligned. 
==PAGE:33==
32 
 
 
Figure 20 Attention plot for Gram-negative bacteria. Red:cytoplasmic, Grey: secreted. For visualization purposes, sequences 
shorter than 1000 amino acids are padded in the middle so that the N and the C terminal are aligned. 
 
 
5.4 Method Performance Comparison  
The first aim of this thesis was to test the performance of the original method, SecretomeP-2.0 
[5], on my own dataset. A side by side comparison of performance measures of my own model 
and of SecretomeP-2.0 (TPR and TNR based on the recommended thresholds in both cases) can 
be seen in Table 4. 
==PAGE:34==
33 
 
Table 4 Comparison of performance measures between SecretomeP-2.0 and the new method described in this report. Thresholds 
used for TPR and TNR calculations were the recommended: for SecretomeP-2.0, thr=0.5 for both Gram-positive and Gram-negative 
bacteria. For the new method, thr=0.003 for Gram-positive and thr=0.051 for Gram-negative bacteria. 
 
SecretomeP-2.0 
New Method 
 
Gram-positive 
Gram-negative 
Gram-positive 
Gram-negative 
AUC 
0.624 
0.702 
0.893 
0.964 
Sensitivity (TPR) 
0.273 
0.333 
0.797 
0.918 
Specificity (TNR) 
0.939 
0.965 
0.789 
0.900 
 
The new method outperforms SecretomeP-2.0 in discriminatory ability. Additionally, 
SecretomeP-2.0 demonstrates very low sensitivity, so it would be unlikely to correctly predict a 
protein that is secreted through a signal peptide independent pathway as secreted. This casts 
doubt on the theory upon which the SecretomeP-2.0 method was developed, i.e. that all secreted 
proteins, regardless of the secretory pathway they use for their secretion, share some common 
features. At the very least, if there is some truth to this theory, the selected features that the 
SecretomeP-2.0 method was based upon were probably not the optimal features that would 
include proteins that are not secreted through the Sec pathway.  
Another method for the prediction of signal peptide independent protein secretion in bacteria is 
SecretP-2.0 [42]. This is a feature-based method that uses SVMs for its predictions. Like 
SecretomeP-2.0, there are issues regarding the dataset it was trained on. In this case, the authors 
extracted the positive (secreted) set from Uniprot as a set of proteins that were annotated to be 
secreted and also lacked signal peptide annotation. The major criticism about this is that the lack 
of signal peptide annotation could simply be due to an incomplete annotation and so the dataset 
is likely to also contain proteins that are secreted through the Sec pathway [4]. The authors report 
around 94% accuracy for proteins from both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. 
Unfortunately, I was not able to verify this with my own dataset, because the available online 
web server accepts only 1 sequence at a time, with a maximum of 50 submissions per day.  
Apart from the dedicated methods, there are also many methods that perform multiple 
subcellular location predictions, including secretion. I tested the performance of a few among 
these on my own dataset to see if they could also potentially be used for predicting signal peptide 
independent protein secretion in bacteria. In Table 5 you can see the resulting performance 
measures for the methods that were tested, including SecretomeP-2.0 and my own model’s 
performance for comparison. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
34 
 
Table 5 Comparison of performance between tested sorting prediction methods. My own method and SecretomeP-2.0 are 
methods dedicated to signal peptide independent secretion of proteins in bacteria, while the other four methods can predict 
multiple subcellular locations 
 
Gram-positive 
Gram-negative 
 
Sensitivity (TPR) 
Specificity (TNR) 
Sensitivity (TPR) Specificity (TNR) 
New Method 
0.797 
0.789 
0.918 
0.900 
SecretomeP-2.0 
0.273 
0.939 
0.333 
0.965 
PSORTb 
0.327 
0.898 
0.572 
0.862 
CELLO 
0.440 
0.981 
0.494 
1.00 
LocTree3 
0.673 
0.961 
0.667 
0.943 
iLoc-Gpos/Gneg 
0.723 
0.972 
0.920 
0.981 
 
First, a note on homology-based predictions; since I generated the dataset from a publicly 
available database of annotated sequences, methods that heavily rely on homology-based 
approaches would be likely to find the same sequence as their first hit (100% homology) and use 
the same annotation I used for classifying a sequence as secreted or cytoplasmic. For a more 
accurate comparison one would have to test on novel proteins.  
PSORTb [19] is currently the most popular method for predicting the subcellular location of 
bacterial proteins. Its approach is a combination of three different modules: The first is signal-
based and recognizes signal peptides, trans-membrane helices and a series of regular 
expressions. The second is a feature-based SVM predictor, and the third is a homology-based 
prediction that uses BLAST [18]. All the module predictions are combined into a Bayesian network 
for the final localization prediction. Regarding its performance on my own dataset, while in 
general it outperforms SecretomeP-2.0, it still appears to have a low sensitivity, at least for the 
task of predicting signal peptide independent secretion.  
CELLO (2006) [43] is a feature-based method that uses a two-layer SVM predictor. The first layer 
uses as input several sequence-derived properties and the second layer uses the output from the 
first for the final prediction. It is distinguished from most of the others multi-location prediction 
methods by the fact that it uses neither homology-based, nor signal-based predictions. The 
tested performances on my dataset are based on the output “Most-likely location” and again 
show a low sensitivity in distinguishing proteins that are secreted through a signal peptide 
independent pathway. However, CELLO also outputs the calculated score for each location. I used 
the output score for the extracellular location to generate a ROC curve, and the resulting AUC 
was equal to 0.86 for Gram-positive and 0.89 for Gram-negative bacteria. This shows that, while 
the final predicted location is probably not reliable in predicting signal peptide independent 
secretion, the “extra” score is a good indicator for differentiating between secreted and non-
secreted proteins.  
LocTree3 (2014) [44] uses a combination of homology-based and feature-based predictions.  First 
it searches for homologues using PSI-BLAST [18] and if there are no hits with sufficient homology 
==PAGE:36==
35 
 
then it uses profiles made by PSI-BLAST as input into LocTree2 [45], a feature-based SVM 
predictor. Looking at the performance of LocTree3 on my own dataset, although the measured 
sensitivity is still not very high, I would characterize this method as a relatively good predictor for 
signal peptide independent protein secretion in bacteria, especially if strict false positive rates 
are desired.   
 iLoc-Gpos (2012) [46] and iLoc-Gneg (2011) [47] are also methods that use a combination of 
homology-based and feature-based approaches for subcellular location predictions in Gram-
positive and Gram-negative bacterial proteins respectively. They mostly rely on the homology-
based approach, generating a prediction based on the Gene Ontology (GO) [48] terms of 
homologous proteins. If such proteins are not found, then a feature-based approach is applied 
for the prediction. Both iLoc-Gpos and iLoc-Gneg were found to outperform my own method on 
my dataset. As mentioned earlier, however,it cannot be verified that they didn’t use the 
sequences’ own annotation, instead of the annotation of similar -but not the same- sequences 
for the subcellular location prediction, since my whole dataset, including its annotations, is 
publicly available.  
Finally, I would like to have also tested a few other popular prediction methods, but either lack 
of access (unavailable online web servers), or time restraints, made this very difficult. Based on 
the performance measures I calculated, when comparing between methods that are not 
homology-based, my new method has significantly better performance. When including 
homology-based predictions, my method performs in a manner that is competitive with iLoc-
Gpos and iLoc-Gneg, especially considering my above-mentioned reservations regarding the 
performance measures I calculated for homology-based predictors, and outperforms the other 
methods.  
 
 
==PAGE:37==
36 
 
Chapter 6. Conclusion 
The mechanisms of the secretion of proteins in bacteria through signal peptide independent 
pathways are in most cases not clearly determined and their study is a very active field of 
research.  
To assist in this effort, SecretomeP-2.0 was developed in 2005 as a dedicated method for 
predicting this type of protein secretion. Due to lack of available data at the time, it assumed that 
all secreted proteins share certain features regardless of their secretory pathway. I generated an 
up-to-date dataset with proteins that were verified to be secreted through signal peptide 
independent pathways and performed a re-evaluation of the performance of SecretomeP-2.0. I 
found that it performed significantly worse than expected, with sensitivity rates at around 0.3 for 
both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria and concluded that the author’s assumption on 
the common features of all secreted proteins is most likely inaccurate.  
Aiming to update SecretomeP-2.0 with a more accurate method, I trained two deep neural 
network models for the prediction of signal peptide independent secretion of proteins in 
bacteria, one for Gram-positive and one for Gram-negative. The models share the same 
architecture, which can be described as a Convolutional Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory 
neural network with an Attention Mechanism. They were evaluated to have a good performance, 
with their AUC at 0.893 and 0.964 for Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial proteins 
respectively. At the recommended threshold, the corresponding sensitivities were around 80% 
and 92% and the specificities around 80% and 90%.  
I then compared the models’ performance with the performance of non-dedicated sorting 
prediction methods on the new generated dataset. I observed that they outperformed both non-
homology-based methods and some of the methods that had homology-based elements, and 
they performed competitively against the most accurate homology-based methods. As a result, 
I would recommend this method as one of the best available for predicting signal peptide 
independent protein secretion in bacteria, especially in the case of novel proteins.  
An additional and intriguing outcome of the method developed was the plots of the attention 
weights that were generated by the Attention mechanism in the neural network, i.e. the locations 
of each sequence where the network focused for its prediction. An initial overview suggested 
that there were distinct locations of interest close to the C-terminal of proteins that were 
secreted. These could potentially signify sorting signals that have yet to be determined. An 
interesting future endeavor would be to analyze the amino acid sequence and relative location 
of these highlighted parts of the sequence.  
Finally, the success of this method for predicting signal peptide independent secretion in bacteria 
is encouraging for the development of a corresponding method for eukaryotes, so that the 
SecretomeP online service can be fully updated. This is the next challenge that we will undertake. 
==PAGE:38==
37 
 
References 
1. Erin R. Green and Joan Mecsas (2016) Bacterial Secretion Systems - An overview. 
Microbiol Spectrum, 4(1): 10.1128/microbiolspec.VMBF-0012-2015 
2. Ian R. Henderson, Fernando Navarro-Garcia, Mickael Desvaux, Rachel C. Fernandez and 
Dlawer Ala’Aldeen (2004) Type V Protein Secretion Pathway: the Autotransporter Story. 
Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev., 68(4): 10.1128/MMBR.68.4.692–744.2004 
3. Olof Emanuelsson, Søren Brunak, Gunnar von Heijne & Henrik Nielsen (2007) Locating 
proteins in the cell using TargetP, SignalP and related tools. Nature Protocols, 2(4): 
10.1038/nprot.2007.131 
4. Henrik Nielsen (2017) Protein Sorting Prediction. In: Laure Journet and Eric Cascales (eds) 
Bacterial Protein Secretion Systems. Methods in Molecular Biology. Springer, Marseille, 
France 
5. Jannick D Bendtsen, Lars Kiemer, Anders Fausbøll and Søren Brunak (2005) Non-classical 
protein secretion in bacteria. BMC Microbiology, 5(58): 10.1186/1471-2180-5-58 
6. Søren Kaae Sønderby, Casper Kaae Sønderby, Henrik Nielsen, Ole Winther (2015) 
Convolutional LSTM Networks for Subcellular Localization of Proteins. Algorithms for 
Computational Biology, arXiv:1503.01919 [q-bio.QM] 
7. Jose Juan Almagro Armenteros, Casper Kaae Sønderby, Søren Kaae Sønderby, Henrik 
Nielsen and Ole Winther (2017) DeepLoc: prediction of protein subcellular localization 
using deep learning. Bioinformatics, 33(21), 3387–3395, 10.1093/bioinformatics/btx431 
8. Mickael Desvaux, Michel Hebraud, Regine Talon and Ian R. Henderson (2009) Secretion 
and subcellular localizations of bacterial proteins: a semantic awareness issue. Trends in 
Microbiology, 17(4): 10.1016/j.tim.2009.01.004 
9. Roland Lloubes, Alain Bernadac, Laetitia Houot, Stephanie Pommier (2013) Non classical 
secretion 
systems. 
Research 
in 
Microbiology, 
164, 
655-663, 
10.1016/j.resmic.2013.03.015 
10. Meghan E. Feltcher and Miriam Braunstein (2012) Emerging themes in SecA2-mediated 
protein export. Nature Reviews Microbiology, 10, 779-789, 10.1038/nrmicro2874 
11. Mickael Desvaux, Michel Hebraud, Ian R. Henderson and Mark J. Pallen (2006) Type III 
secretion: what’s in a name?  Trends in Microbiology, 14(4): 10.1016/j.tim.2006.02.009 
12. Milton H. Saier Jr and Bhaskara L. Reddy (2015) Holins in Bacteria, Eukaryotes, and 
Archaea: Multifunctional Xenologues with Potential Biotechnological and Biomedical 
Applications. Journal of Bacteriology, 197(1): 10.1128/JB.02046-14 
13. Meera Unnikrishnan, Chrystala Constantinidou, Tracy Palmer and Mark J. Pallen (2017) 
The Enigmatic Esx Proteins: Looking Beyond Mycobacteria. Trends in Microbiology, 25(3): 
10.1016/j.tim.2016.11.004 
14.  John Kim, Sidney V. Scott, and Daniel J. Klionsky (2000) Alternative Protein Sorting 
Pathways. 
International 
Review 
of 
Cytology, 
198, 
153-158, 
10.1016/S0074-
7696(00)98005-7 
==PAGE:39==
38 
 
15.  Nielsen H, Brunak S, Engelbrecht J, von Heijne G (1997) Identification of prokaryotic and 
eukaryotic signal peptides and prediction of their cleavage sites. Protein Engineering, 
10:1–6 
16. Petersen TN, Brunak S, von Heijne G, Nielsen H (2011) SignalP 4.0: discriminating signal 
peptides 
from 
transmembrane 
regions. 
Nature 
Methods, 
8:785–786, 
10.1038/nmeth.1701 
17. Chen H, Huang N, Sun Z. (2006) SubLoc: a server/client suite for protein subcellular 
location based on SOAP. Bioinformatics, 22(3):376-7, 10.1093/bioinformatics/bti822 
18. Altschul, S.F., Gish, W., Miller, W., Myers, E.W. & Lipman, D.J. (1990) Basic local alignment 
search tool. J. Mol. Biol. 215:403-410, 10.1016/S0022-2836(05)80360-2 
19. Nancy Y. Yu, James R. Wagner, Matthew R. Laird, Gabor Melli, Sébastien Rey, Raymond 
Lo, Phuong Dao, S. Cenk Sahinalp, Martin Ester, Leonard J. Foster, and Fiona S. L. Brinkman 
(2010) PSORTb 3.0: improved protein subcellular localization prediction with refined 
localization subcategories and predictive capabilities for all prokaryotes. Bioinformatics, 
26(13): 1608–1615, 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq249 
20. Stormo GD, Schneider TD, Gold L, Ehrenfeucht A (1982) Use of the “perceptron” algorithm 
to distinguish translational initiation sites in E. coli. Nucleic Acids Res, 10:2997–3011 
21. Schneider TD, Stephens RM (1990) Sequence logos: a new way to display consensus 
sequences. Nucleic Acids Res, 18:6097–6100 
22. Bendtsen Jannick Dyrløv, Nielsen Henrik, Widdick D., Palmer T., Brunak Søren (2005) 
Prediction of twin-arginine signal peptides. BMC Bioinformatics, 6(167): 10.1186/1471-
2105-6-167 
23. Anders Krogh, Michael Browny, Saira Mian, Kimmen Sjolander, David Haussler (1994) 
Hidden Markov Models in Computational Biology: Applications to Protein Modeling. 
J.Mol.Biol., 4;235(5):1501-31. 
24. Sigrist CJA, de Castro E, Cerutti L et al (2013) New and continuing developments at 
PROSITE. Nucleic Acids Res, 41: D344–D347 
25. Finn RD, Bateman A, Clements J et al (2014) Pfam: the protein families database. Nucleic 
Acids Res, 42: D222–D230 
26. Briesemeister S, Rahnenführer J, Kohlbacher O (2010) Going from where to why-
interpretable prediction of protein subcellular localization. Bioinformatics, 26:1232–1238 
27. Noble WS (2006) What is a support vector machine? Nat Biotechnol 24:1565–1567 
28. Tue Herlau, Mikkel N. Schmidt and Morten Morup (2017) Course Book for Introduction to 
Machine Learning and Data Mining course, Technical University of Denmark 
29. J. Dyrløv Bendtsen, L. Juhl Jensen, N. Blom, G. von Heijne and S. Brunak (2004) Feature 
based prediction of non-classical and leaderless protein secretion. Protein Eng. Des. Sel., 
17(4):349-356 
30. Jannick Dyrløv Bendtsen, Henrik Nielsen, Gunnar von Heijne and Søren Brunak (2004) 
Improved prediction of signal peptides: SignalP 3.0. J.Mol.Biol, 340:783-795 
31. The UniProt Consortium (2017) UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase. Nucleic 
Acids Res., 45: D158-D169 
==PAGE:40==
39 
 
32. Errington J. (2013) L-form bacteria, cell walls and the origins of life. Open Biol 3: 120143 
33. Kresimir Sikic, Oliviero Carugo (2010) Protein sequence redundancy reduction: 
comparison of various methods. Bioinformation, 5(6): 234 - 239 
34. Limin Fu, Beifang Niu, Zhengwei Zhu, Sitao Wu and Weizhong Li, CD-HIT: accelerated for 
clustering the next generation sequencing data. Bioinformatics, (2012), 28 (23): 3150-
3152. 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts565 
35. Henikoff, S.; Henikoff, J.G. (1992). Amino Acid Substitution Matrices from Protein Blocks. 
PNAS. 89 (22): 10915–10919. 
36. Ian Goodfellow and Yoshua Bengio and Aaron Courville (2016) Deep Learning. MIT Press, 
website: http://www.deeplearning.org  
37. Stanford CS class CS231n: Convolutional Neural Networks for Visual Recognition (2018) 
website: http://cs231n.github.io/convolutional-networks/  
38. Ping-Huan Kuo, Chiou-Jye Huang (2018) A Green Energy Application in Energy 
Management Systems by an Artificial Intelligence-Based Solar Radiation Forecasting 
Model. Energies, 11(4):819 
39. Alex Graves (2012) Supervised Sequence Labelling with Recurrent Neural Networks. 
Studies in Computational Intelligence, Springer 
40. Dzimitry Bahdanau, KyungHyun Cho, Yoshua Bengio (2016) Neural Machine Translation 
by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate. arXiv:1409.0473v7 [cs.CL]  
41. Bishop, Christopher M. (2006). Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer 
42. Lezheng Yu, YanzhiGuo, YizhouLi, GongbingLi, MenglongLi, JiesiLuo, WenjiaXiong, 
WenliQin (2010) SecretP: Identifying bacteria lsecreted proteins by fusing new features 
into Chou’s pseudo-amino acid composition. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 267:1–6 
43. Yu CS, Chen YC, Lu CH, Hwang JK (2006) Prediction of protein subcellular localization. 
Proteins, 64:643-651. 
44. Goldberg T, Hecht M, Hamp T et al (2014) LocTree3 prediction of localization. Nucleic 
Acids Res, 42: W350–W355  
45. Goldberg T, Hamp T, Rost B (2012) LocTree2 predicts localization for all domains of life. 
Bioinformatics, 28:i458–i465 
46. Wu Z-C, Xiao X, Chou K-C (2012) iLoc-Gpos:a multi-layer classifier for predicting the 
subcellular localization of singleplex and multiplex ram-positive bacterial proteins. 
ProteinPept Lett, 19:4–14 
47. Xiao X, Wu Z-C, Chou K-C (2011) A multi-label classifier for predicting the subcellular 
localization of gram-negative bacterial proteins with both single and multiple sites. 
PLoSOne, 6:e20592 
48. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA et al (2000) Gene ontology: tool for the unification of 
biology. Nat Genet, 25:25–29 
 
  
