==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Optimization of biotinylated polyclonal antibodies
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK 
Characterisation of critical antibody conjugates for 
release testing of novel biological pharmaceuticals: 
By Emina D. Kösger 
 
A thesis submitted for the master degree of Pharmaceutical Design and 
Engineering  
 
In the Department of Immuno BioAnalysis, CMC Development 
Novo Nordisk A/S 
 
 
29th of June 2018 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
I  
Preface 
 
This thesis “Characterisation of critical antibody conjugates for release testing of novel biological 
pharmaceuticals: Optimization of biotinylated polyclonal antibodies” is the final project for the 
master degree program in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering at the Technical University of 
Denmark (DTU). The thesis consists of 30 ECTS points, and is carried out in collaboration with 
Novo Nordisk A/S in Måløv, department 318, Immuno BioAnalysis. The thesis is performed by 
Emina Dzamastagic Kösger in the period from February 2018 to June 2018.  
 
I want to thank my supervisor at DTU, Peter M. H. Heegaard, for inspiring me to work with 
immunoassays and supervising me throughout the project. Also, thanks to the many scientists and 
laboratory technicians at the department 318, Immuno Bioanalysis, for their expert help and for 
sharing their valuable knowledge with me, and giving me an enjoyable time in both the office and 
the lab. Special thanks to the team leader at the department Sune Kobberup, for making it all 
possible and for all the good advices and support I got throughout the project. I also want to grant 
special thanks to my mentor at Novo Nordisk A/S, Karen Duus, who provided great motivation for 
me and was so supportive in both my writing and my experimental work.  
I am very grateful for everything.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kongens Lyngby, 29. June 2018 
 
 
_______________________________________ 
Emina D. Kösger 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
 
II  
Aim of the project 
 
Biotin-labelled antibodies are widely used in purity analysis at Novo Nordisk A/S, to ensure and 
document that impurities are sufficiently removed and that the final drug is pure. These analyses 
ensure that the quality and safety of the final drug is right. Therefore, it is important that the 
robustness of the underlying processes in these analyses is in control and to ensure that they are 
correct, which clarifies the importance of optimization.  
 
The aim of the project can be divided in two parts. The first part of the project is to develop an 
assay that can be used to relatively test the biotinylation degree. This is important for the 
comparison of the biotinylation degree throughout the project. In the second part, the robustness of 
the biotinylation used at the department and optimization possibilities is investigated. It involves 
adjusting parameters in the biotinylation process, which may or may not affect the biotinylation of 
the polyclonal antibodies.  
 
==PAGE:4==
 
V  
Abstract 
 
The interaction between avidin and biotin is an efficient detection system for polyclonal antibodies 
(pAb), and has become a standard procedure for many applications, such as Enzyme-Linked 
Immuno-Sorbent Assay (ELISA). Biotin-labelled antibodies are widely used in Novo Nordisk A/S 
to ensure and document impurities are sufficiently removed, and that the final product is pure. In 
this project, ELISA for a relative assessment of the biotinylation degree was developed, and the 
robustness and optimization possibilities were investigated for the biotinylation of pAb used at the 
department. The ELISA that was developed proved to be usable for its purpose. In addition, data 
suggests that the assay can be transferred to SPR analysis but further optimization is required. For 
the optimization of biotinylation, it was interestingly found that the same degree of biotinylation 
could be obtained using a water soluble NHS-ester biotin (Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin) instead of the 
water insoluble NHS-ester biotin (Biotin-X-NHS). The water soluble biotin was further evaluated 
on antigen ELISA, indicating that the biotinylation with a water soluble biotinylation reagent does 
not negatively affect the antigen binding properties of the antibodies. No significant optimization of 
the biotinylation degree was observed when varying the pH incubation conditions from the pH of 
7.4 to pH 6.4 and 8.0. Neither when varying the biotin:pAb molar ratios from the  ratio 83:1 to 
165:1, 124:1 and 41:1, indicating that the biotinylation is robust in regard to these conditions. 
Varying incubation time to 2h, 4h and 6h instead of overnight seems not to affect the biotinylation 
degree, whereas incubation temperature showed a significant increase in biotinylation degree when 
incubation at 4℃ where changed to room temperature (RT). These results suggests that the reaction 
time can be shortened in RT.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
 
VI  
Contents 
 
Preface 
I 
Aim of the project 
II 
Abstract 
V 
Contents 
VI 
Abbreviations 
VII 
List of figures & tables 
VIII 
1 
Introduction 
1 
1.1 
Enzyme Linked ImmunoSorbent Assay (ELISA) 
2 
1.1.1 
The steps in ELISA 
3 
1.2 
Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) 
7 
1.3 
Antibodies 
8 
1.3.1 
Structure of IgG 
8 
1.3.2 
Historical perspective 
10 
1.3.3 
Polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies 
10 
1.3.4 
Rabbit and mouse IgG 
12 
1.4 
Biotinylation 
14 
1.4.1 
The structure of biotin 
14 
1.4.2 
N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) esters for antibody labelling 
15 
2 
Materials and methods 
18 
2.1 
Reagents and biomolecules 
18 
2.2 
Instruments 
18 
2.3 
Software 
18 
2.4 
Buffers 
19 
2.5 
Methods 
19 
2.5.1 
Standard procedure of the developed ELISA to measure relative biotinylation degree 
19 
2.5.2 
Optimization of assay 
20 
2.5.3 
Procedure of biotinylation of antibodies 
20 
2.5.4 
Optimization of biotinylation 
22 
2.5.6 
Detection of biotinylation degree by biotin-avidin interaction using SPR 
23 
2.5.7 
Confirming that biotinylation does not affect antigen-recognition site using antigen ELISA 
23 
3 
Results and discussion 
24 
3.1 
Assay development 
24 
3.1.1 
Negative controls 
25 
3.1.2 
Dilution of antibodies 
27 
3.1.3 
Intra-plate variation 
29 
3.1.4 
Variation between biotinylation 
30 
3.1.5 
Coating stability 
31 
3.1.6 
Comparison of avidin, streptavidin and neutravidin 
32 
3.1.7 
Change of antibody pool 
34 
3.2 
Surface Plasmon Resonance analysis (SPR) 
37 
3.3 
Biotinylation optimization 
38 
3.3.1 
pH incubation conditions 
38 
3.3.2 
Biotin:Antibody ratio 
40 
3.3.3 
Incubation time and temperature 
42 
3.3.4 
Water soluble versus water insoluble NHS-ester biotin 
46 
3.4 
Confirming that biotinylation does not affect antigen-recognition site using antigen ELISA 
49 
4 
Conclusion 
51 
5 
Perspective 
52 
Bibliography 
54 
Appendix 
59 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
 
 
VII  
Abbreviations 
ABTS 
2,2’-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulphonic acid) 
AP 
Alkaline Phosphatase 
BSA 
Bovine Serum Albumin 
CH 
Constant domain 
CMC 
Chemistry, Manufacturing and Control  
CV 
Coefficient of Variation  
DMF 
N,N-Dimethylmethanamide 
DMSO 
Dimethyl sulfoxide 
ELISA 
Enzyme Linked ImmunoSorbent Assay 
Fab 
Fragment antigen-binding 
Fc 
Fragment crystallizable 
HCl 
Hydrogen Chloride 
HCP 
Host Cell Protein 
H-chain 
Heavy chain 
HEPES 
4-(2-Hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid 
HRP 
Horseradish Peroxide 
H2O2 
Hydrogen peroxide 
IBA 
Immuno BioAnalysis 
Ig 
Immunoglobulin 
kDa 
Kilo Dalton 
L-chain 
Light chain 
NaCl 
Sodium chloride 
NaH2PO4 
Sodium-Di-hydrogen-phosphate 
NaOH 
Sodium hydroxide   
Na2HPO4 
Di-sodium-hydrogen-phosphate 
NHS 
N-hydroxysuccinimide ester 
NHS-X-Biotin 
Succinimidyl-6-(biotinamido)hexanoate 
OD 
Optical Density 
ON 
Over Night 
OPD 
o-Phenylenediamine dihydrochloride peroxidase  
pAb 
Polyclonal Antibody 
PBS 
Phosphate-Buffered Saline 
pI 
Isoelectric Point 
RT 
Room Temperature 
RU 
Response Units 
R&D 
Research and Development  
SD 
Standard Deviation 
SPR 
Surface Plasmon Resonance  
SSE 
Sum of Squares Error 
Sulfo-LC-NHS-ester 
Sulfosuccinimidyl-6-(biotinamido)hexanoate 
TMB 
3,3’,5,5’-Tetramethylbenzidin 
Tris 
2-Amino-2-hydroxymethyl-propane-1,3-diol 
VH 
Variable domain 
4PL 
4-Parameter Logistic  
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
 
VIII  
List of figures & tables 
Figure 1. ELISA formats [7]. 
2 
Figure 2. Oxidation of TMB substrate with HRP -enzyme [16]. 
6 
Figure 3. Basic structure of SPR sensorgram [46]. 
7 
Figure 4. Detailed structure of IgG molecule [29]. 
9 
Figure 5. The main differences in polyclonal antibody production compared to monoclonal antibody production [26]. 12 
Figure 6. Basic structure of a biotinylation reagent [46]. 
14 
Figure 7. Reaction of NHS-ester with primary amines [46]. 
15 
Figure 8. Water insoluble and water soluble NHS-ester biotin with a medium (22.4 Å) linker length [46]. 
16 
Figure 9. Flowchart of the procedure in biotinylation. 
21 
Figure 10. Illustration of developed ELISA for determining relative biotinylation degree on pAb. 
25 
Figure 11. The graphs of negative controls in the developed ELISA. 
26 
Figure 12. The graphs of different dilutions of biotinylated pAb. 
27 
Figure 13. The half maximal binding values that were calculated for the biotinylated pAb made in different dilutions 
from fig. 12. 
28 
Figure 14. The graphs of the final chosen dilution of biotinylated pAb. 
28 
Figure 15. The graphs show the natural variation between duplicates – the intraplate variation. 
29 
Figure 16. The graps show the natural variation in biotinylation.  
30 
Figure 17. The half maximal binding that was calculated for the variation between three different batches of 
biotinylated pAb from fig. 16. 
31 
Figure 18. The graphs of the biotinylated pAbs after being in blocking buffer for one month – testing the stability of the 
coating. 
32 
Figure 19. The half maximal binding that was calculated from the coating stability test in fig. 18.  
32 
Figure 20. The graphs of the biotinylated pAbs using avidin, streptavidin and neutravidin. 
33 
Figure 21. The half maximal binding that was calculated for the curve patterns from fig. 20 when avidin, streptavidin 
and neutravidin were used in the assay. 
34 
Figure 22. The difference in the curve pattern of a new pool of antibodies for biotinylation compared to the previous 
used pool of antibodies for biotinylation. 
35 
Figure 23. The half maximal binding calculated from fig. 22, where a new pool of antibodies for biotinylation was 
compared with the previous used pool of antibodies.  
36 
Figure 24. Detection of different batches of biotinylated pAbs using SPR. 
37 
Figure 25. The graphs show the difference in biotinylation degree when pH incubation conditions is varied. 
39 
Figure 26. The half maximal binding calculated from the curves with different pH incubation conditions in fig. 25. 
40 
Figure 27. The graphs show the difference in biotinylation degree when the biotin:pAb molar ratio is varied. 
41 
Figure 28. The half maximal binding calculated from the curves with different biotin:pAb ratios in fig. 27. 
42 
Figure 29. The graphs show the difference in biotinylation degree when incubation time is varied. 
43 
Figure 30. The half maximal binding that was calculated when incubation time was varied in fig. 29.  
44 
Figure 31. The graphs show the difference in biotinylation degree when the incubation temperature is varied. 
45 
Figure 32. The half maximal binding that was calculated from the different incubation temperature in fig. 31.  
45 
Figure 33. Graphs and calculated half maximal binding of the  procedure with and without rotation in regard to the 
incubation. 
46 
Figure 34. The graphs show the difference in biotinylation degree for the water insoluble biotin (Biotin-X-NHS) versus 
water soluble biotin (Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin).  
47 
Figure 35. The half maximal binding that was calculated from the water soluble biotin (Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin) and the  
water insoluble biotin (NHS-X-Biotin) in fig. 34. 
47 
Figure 36. Graphs and calculated half maximal binding for the different batches of biotinylated pAbs with the water 
insoluble biotin (Biotin-X-NHS) and water soluble biotin (Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin). 
48 
Figure 37. The graphs show the difference between water soluble (Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin) and the insoluble biotin 
(NHS-X-Biotin) on antigen ELISA. 
50 
Figure 38. The half maximal binding calculated from the water soluble (Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin) and the  insoluble 
biotin (NHS-X-Biotin) on antigen ELISA in fig. 37 
50 
 
Table 1. Isotypes from different species [36].  
 
 
   
      13 
Table 2. Overview of buffers.  
19 
Table 3. ELISA procedure. 
20 
Table 4. Table of the incubation time and temperature. 
43 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
 
 
1 of 65 
1 
Introduction  
 
Novo Nordisk A/S is a global pharmaceutical company whose core values is to drive change and to 
develop life-saving treatments for patients with diabetes and other serious chronic conditions across 
the world. Chemistry, Manufacturing and Control (CMC) development is Part of Research and 
Development (R&D), and the primary task of CMC Development is to upscale and manufacture 
drug products for clinical trials, including analysis where impurities are identified and quantified. 
The supply of purified proteins is essential in order to deliver meaningful results in many analyses. 
Modification of proteins is important for the development of novel pharmaceutical drugs, but also 
important for control of production processes and to ensure the quality of the final product. 
Therefore, modified proteins play a critical role in pharmaceutical research and development, e.g. 
pharmaceutical companies have made use of antibodies labelled with biotin for various applications 
like Enzyme Linked ImmunoSorbent Assay (ELISA). These chemically labelled antibodies have 
become indispensable [1].  
 
Immuno assays are a very important part of the daily work at department 318, and most of their 
assays follow the principles of capture ELISA. In these assays, rabbit polyclonal antibodies are 
covalently coupled to detection molecule biotin, which allows for easy detection of the bound 
antibodies. Biotin-labelled antibodies are therefore widely used at this department in purification 
analysis, as they test samples from the drug purification process to ensure and document impurities 
are sufficiently removed and that the final drug is pure. Assay development and validation is also a 
very important part of this. Purity analysis ensures that the quality and safety of the final drug is 
correct. Therefore, it is important that the robustness of the underlying processes in these analyses is 
in control, to ensure that they are correct. This clarifies the importance of optimization. 
 
To ensure that the product is safe the department makes use of Host cell protein (HCP) assays to 
identify impurities, termed HCP’s, which derive from the biological systems used to express the 
final drugs [2]. Polyclonal antibodies are raised to the specific biological system and used in ELISA 
to detect the presence of HCP [3].   
==PAGE:9==
 
 
Introduction 
 
2 of 65 
1.1 
Enzyme Linked ImmunoSorbent Assay (ELISA)  
ELISA stands for Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay and is a plate-based technique commonly 
used for the detection and quantification of peptides and proteins [4]. In Novo Nordisk A/S, it is 
widely used for the measurement of process-related impurities to support process development [5]. 
ELISA has a higher specificity caused by interaction between an antibody and antigen and can be 
quite inexpensive to perform [4].  
 
Engvall and Perlmann were the first to describe the ELISA technique, which is a technique able to 
detect and quantify proteins attached or captured to a solid surface. It is based on the binding 
between antigens and enzyme-conjugated or labelled antibody. It is simple to perform and offers 
great sensitivity, and converts the enzyme into a measurable product when incubating with 
substrate. This color change quantifies the presence of antigen by the amount of antibody bound on 
the surface. Four different ELISA format exists which vary in their layers and number of layers; 
direct, indirect, sandwich and competitive (fig. 1) [6].  
 
Figure 1. ELISA formats [7]. Four different ELISA format exists: direct, indirect, sandwich and competitive. Direct ELISA has 
antigen immobilized on the solid surface followed by incubation with primary antibody conjugated to enzyme. Addition of substrate 
converts the enzyme into a measurable product, which is the case for all four ELISA methods. Indirect ELISA also immobilizes 
antigen onto the solid surface, but consists of a secondary antibody conjugated to enzyme. In contrast to direct and indirect ELISA, 
the sandwich ELISA immobilizes a capture antibody onto the solid surface and captures antigen in solution. This is followed by 
primary antibody and secondary antibody conjugated to enzyme. The last method also immobilizes antigen to surface and are based 
on the competition between a mixture of antibody-antigen and free antibody conjugated to enzyme. 
 
In an indirect ELISA, a primary antibody specific toward the immobilized antigen is incubated 
followed by incubation with an anti-species secondary antibody conjugated to an enzyme. A 
primary antibody coupled to biotin can also be used, followed by enzyme-conjugated avidin 
secondary antibody. Both methods generate a color change that can be measured for the presence of 
antigen or antibody. Indirect ELISA offers more sensitivity than direct ELISA because, the 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
Introduction 
 
3 of 65 
secondary antibody that binds with the primary antibody, amplifies the signal and are able to 
enhance the signal of the primary antibody, which a direct ELISA does not have. This however, 
produces more background noise and possibly a decreased overall net signal. The advantages of a 
direct ELISA are the reduced amount of time it needs, and the risk for cross-reactivity is very small 
compared to the other ELISA formats [6].  
 
In a sandwich ELISA, instead of immobilizing an antigen, capture antibody is immobilized and 
captures antigen in solution. Incubation is then performed with a second enzyme-conjugated 
antibody that recognizes a different epitope on the same antigen. A sandwich ELISA offers even 
more sensitivity compared to indirect ELISA, and is able to detect specific antigens in a complex 
mixture. A sandwich ELISA can also be divided into a direct and indirect. The direct represent 
direct binding to detector antibody that is conjugated to enzyme, whereas the indirect needs a third 
antibody that is conjugated to enzyme. The only requirements for a sandwich ELISA, is that two 
antibodies recognize and binds different epitopes on the same antigen. The detector antibody can 
also be conjugated to biotin and detected by avidin conjugated to enzyme. One of the advantages in 
a sandwich ELISA is that a sample doesn’t need to be purified before analysis, because the antigen 
will be captured during the capture phase. The fourth kind of ELISA format is a competitive 
ELISA, which immobilizes antigen to surface and are based on the competition between a mixture 
of antibody-antigen and free antibody [6].  
A capture ELISA consists of a capture step. A strategy for a capture of antibodies can be with an 
Fc-binding protein such as protein A or G. Both proteins bind to the Fc region of IgG molecules and 
are of bacterial origin. Protein G is a bacterial cell wall protein isolated from the G streptococci 
strain, while protein A is isolated from the cell walls of staphylococcus areaus [8]. 
 
1.1.1 
The steps in ELISA 
 
1.1.1.1 
Coating  
 
It is important to choose the right microplate when making absorbance measurements. The most 
common in many ELISA assays is the flat bottom plate of 96-wells or 384-well with a polystyrene 
surface which molecules can adsorb on [6]. The adsorption happens due to inter-molecular 
attraction forces and is based on hydrogen bonding and electric polarities, such as van der Waals 
forces and ionic bonds through stoichiometric charges of opposite signs [9]. There are different 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
Introduction 
 
4 of 65 
kinds of plates to consider, for example the Nunc MaxiSorp or PolySorp plates. A Nunc MaxiSorp 
plate has a high binding capacity of 400 ng protein/cm2 and binds mostly hydrophilic molecules. 
This is the plate to consider for IgG molecules, while Nunc PolySorp has medium binding capacity 
on 100 ng protein/cm2 [10] and binds mostly hydrophobic molecules such as lipid rich 
biomolecules [11].  
 
The first step in an ELISA is the coating. The advantages of making the reaction of antigen and 
antibody on this phase, is that the excess of reagents is much easier to separate. The ELISA can be 
made in many different ways, with different layers and different number of layers, as explained 
previously with a direct, indirect, sandwich or competitive ELISA format. The passive binding of 
the protein to the surfaces of the well is related to the hydrophobic interactions. A pH equal to or 
above the pH of the proteins isoelectric point (pI) is typically preferred for a coating buffer [10] to 
facilitate ionic interactions. The buffer must also maximize absorption and facilitate immobilization 
of protein, stabilize it and preserve its biological activity by preventing it from degradation and 
denaturation [12].  
 
1.1.1.2 
Washing  
 
Molecules that are weakly bound or not bound in an ELISA are removed during washes to achieve 
the best detection of the antibody [10]. This also helps to decrease background but can also decrease 
sensitivity if washed too much, as the antigen will start to dilute from the well. The most common 
buffers used for this purpose is a physiological buffer such as phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) or 
Tris-buffered saline (TBS). The salt content in these buffers inhibits ionic interactions. The 
detergent 0.05% Tween-20 is typically added to the buffer, which facilitates removal of 
nonspecifically bound material and inhibits hydrophobic interactions, but a diluted buffer with 
protein content, such as albumin or skim milk, can also be used to minimize background [4]. 
 
1.1.1.3 
Blocking  
 
After coating the ELISA plate, all unbound sites should be blocked in order to block and avoid 
unwanted reactions, such as antibodies or other proteins from adsorbing to the plate, and thereby 
cause wrong results. By adding a blocking buffer, the background signal will be reduced and 
sensitivity improved. This buffer is typically protein that are able to adsorb passively [4]. An 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
Introduction 
 
5 of 65 
example on a commonly used protein blocking agent is Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA), but Tween-
20 has also a blocking effect on the plate, which primary is used in the washing buffer. This is why 
buffers with tween-20 should be avoided for the coating buffer, as these adsorb to the polystyrene 
surface and block the molecules that has to be coated [10]. 
 
1.1.1.4 
Detection  
 
The final step of the ELISA produces a signal by addition of substrate, and can be directly 
proportional to the antigen or analyte that are bound [4]. The most used enzymes are Alkaline 
Phosphatase (AP) and Horseradish Peroxidase (HRP). HRP has a lower limit of detection and is 
often preferred in many ELISA’s [6], this enzyme is also the cheapest one. HRP works by 
converting the substrate to a detectable product and results in a blue color when oxidized [4]. This 
happens through transfer of hydrogen from a hydrogen donor (DH) to 𝐻2𝑂2 which acts as the 
electron acceptor [10]: 
2𝐷𝐻+ 𝐻2𝑂2  𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑜𝑥𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑠𝑒
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗    2𝐷𝑜𝑥+ 2𝐻2𝑂 
 
Enzymes can be conjugated directly to the primary antibody or to a secondary antibody. If the 
antibody is conjugated to biotin, then the enzyme can be introduced through a protein such as 
avidin, streptavidin or neutravidin [4]. 
 
Avidin: 
 
Avidin is a tetrameric glycoprotein originating from chicken eggs. It is extensively used for its high 
affinity to biotin, and has four identical binding sites for biotin binding [13]. Each subunit site 
contains 128 amino acids and binds biotin approximately 9 Å below the surface [14]. The molecule 
has a molecular weight of 68 kDa, and is not easily affected by pH, temperatures or chemical 
modifications, which makes avidin very useful in both detection of proteins and purifying biotin-
labelled molecules [15]. Avidin is a highly positively charged molecule with a basic pI on 10 [14]. 
 
Streptavidin 
 
Streptavidin is another protein which can be used for biotin-binding. This protein originates from 
the bacterium species Streptomyces avidinii. Streptavidin is also a tetrameric protein and has the 
same affinity to biotin as avidin and has a mass of approximately 75 kDa [15]. In contrast to avidin, 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
Introduction 
 
6 of 65 
the streptavidin protein has a mild acidic pI on 5, which makes it less prone to non-specific binding 
and usually preferred in many applications [13]. 
 
Neutravidin 
 
A third protein that can be used for biotin-binding is neutravidin, which is a deglycosylated, charge-
modified derivative of avidin [13]. Neutravidin is, like streptavidin, less prone to non-specific 
biding due to its almost neutral pI on 6.3, which makes neutravidin the protein with the lowest 
nonspecific binding. It has a mass of 60 kDa, and has the same shared affinity for biotin as avidin 
and streptavidin [15].  
 
1.1.1.5 
The substrate 
 
The chromogen 3,3’,5,5’-tetramethyl-benzidin (TMB) is commonly used for HRP detection 
systems, because it is neither mutagenic nor carcinogenic and has a high sensitivity, but 
orthopphenylene diamine (OPD) and 2,2’-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulponic acid (ABTS) 
can also be used. It develops an intense blue color with great sensitivity and the reaction is 
terminated by addition of phosphoric acid, which causes an extreme pH shift and converts the blue 
oxidation product to its yellow diamine form. This can be measured at 450 nm absorbance (fig. 2)  
[10], [16].    
 
Figure 2. Oxidation of TMB substrate with HRP-enzyme [16]. HRP converts the substrate to a detectable product, and a blue color 
is achieved when oxidized. The blue color happens through transfer of hydrogen from a hydrogen donor to hydrogen peroxide, which 
act as the electron acceptor. Extreme shift in pH destroys the enzyme and results in the yellow diamine form, which can be measured 
at 450 nm absorbance. 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
Introduction 
 
7 of 65 
1.2 
Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) 
 
SPR is a technique commonly used to monitor the interaction between biological molecules [17]. It 
works by immobilizing a ligand on a sensor chip coated with a gold layer or other metal. A solution 
of analyte is injected and resulting in binding to the immobilized ligand. The output of the 
interaction event is followed on a sensorgram, which provides with real time information about the 
entire interaction with high sensitivity and without the need of labels (fig. 3) [18]. The technique 
may determine specificity, affinity and kinetic parameters, and display the formation and 
dissociation of complexes. Injection with regeneration solution is used to remove bound ligand 
from the protein on the sensor surface [19]. The detection takes places due to the changes in 
refractive index at the surface of the SPR [20]. A shift in angle or reflection light intensity takes 
place [17], and the change in mass can be detected [21]. The shift in angles happens when a photon 
of incident light hits the metal surface and becomes a plasmon due to electron movements on the 
metal surface. Typically, the change in signal is described by response units (RU), and one RU is 
equal to a critical angle shift of 10-4 degree  [20].  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Basic structure of SPR sensorgram [46]. When the solution of analyte is injected, the association begins and the analyte 
binds to the immobilized ligand. When this is replaced with buffer, the analyte dissociates from the ligand (marked with dots). 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
Introduction 
 
8 of 65 
1.3 
Antibodies 
 
Antibodies are a class of proteins called immunoglobulins (Ig), which are glycoproteins [22] and 
are mainly found in the blood. They can be divided into different classes and subclasses with 
variation between species (table 1). When collected from animal source, the preparations are called 
antisera, and from human it is termed immunoglobulin preparations. The most abundant antibody 
type in mammals is IgG, which in human contribute to 80% of Igs in serum [22], [24]. 
 
1.3.1 
Structure of IgG 
 
With its molecular weight of approximately 150 kD [24], IgG was one of the first molecules pooled 
from rabbit that was investigated. Back to the late 1950s, Rodney Porter and Gerald Edelman 
proposed the very first information about the structure of the antibody molecule, the four-chain and 
Y-shaped structure of IgG [25]. The Fc (Fragment crystallisable) domain got its name from 
experiments with proteolytic cleavage of rabbit IgG by papain that resulted in three fragments, one 
of which crystallized and the other two showed to be identical and retained the ability to bind 
antigen – now known as Fab (fragments of antigen-binding) [26]. 
 
Immunoglobulins share over 90% homology in the amino acid sequence, but the heavy chain types 
vary for the different immunoglobulins, which further can be subdivided into isotypes. The IgG 
immunoglobulin molecule has four polypeptide chains, with two identical 50 kDa gamma heavy 
(H) chains and two identical 25 kDa kappa (k) or lambda (l) light (L) chains. The IgG molecules is 
connected by inter-chain disulphide bonds (fig. 4) [27]. Rabbits for example, has two k light chain 
types K1 and K2 [28]. The two heavy chains consist each of an N-terminal variable domain (VH) 
and three constant domains (CH1, CH2, CH3). Between CH1 and CH2 there is a flexible hinge 
region, which contains proline residues [27]. When treated with proteolytic enzymes, such as 
papain or pepsin, the immunoglobulins become cleaved. With papain, this cleavage happens at the 
hinge region, resulting in two Fab fragments and an Fc fragment. With pepsin, cleavage happens 
below the hinge region resulting in two intact inter-chain disulphide linkages and a Fab2 fragment. 
The Fab domain is formed by the light chains with a VH and CH1 domain [27].  
==PAGE:16==
 
 
Introduction 
 
9 of 65 
 
Figure 4. Detailed structure of IgG molecule [29]. IgG contains four chains and has a Y-shaped structure. The four polypeptide 
chains has two identical 50 kDa H-chains and two identical 25 kDa L-chains. Inter-chain disulphide bonds connect the chains and 
the molecule together. The flexible hinge region is placed between CH1 and CH2 on the heavy chains. At this region, the molecule 
can be divided to a Fab and Fc domain, where the Fab domain contains the antigen binding properties of the IgG molecule.  
 
Primary amines are abundant and distributed on the surface of the antibody. A typical IgG antibody 
molecule has approximately 90 lysine residues, which about 30 can be modified [30]. S.Makowski 
investigated the IgG molecule through computer molecular modelling, which showed the presence 
of 82 lysine residues distributed on the Fc and Fab fragments [31]. Sulfhydryls are also found on 
the antibody molecule but under reducing condition, they are primarily in oxidized form as 
disulphide bonds (cysteine), which connects the heavy and light chains and therefore, are important 
for the antibody function. Finally, glycosylation sites are predominantly found on the Fc part, and 
consists of carbohydrate moieties [32]. This part does not affect the antigen-binding capacity but are 
important for effector function, as it interacts with other part of the immune system [33].  
 
The different IgG subclasses vary in both their structural and functional properties such as their 
response profile to infectious diseases. There is a great sequence homology of more than 90% 
across the heavy chains of the IgG subclasses. However, the true difference lies within the surface-
exposed residues on the constant domains (CH1, CH2 and CH3) and the hinge region, which 
confers stability and flexibility to the molecule [33].  
 
 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
Introduction 
 
10 of 65 
1.3.2 
Historical perspective 
 
Pierre-Paul-Emile Roux and Alexandre Yersin were the first to recognize the important aspects of 
antibodies. This happened in the 1890s when they discovered an antitoxin against the enterotoxin 
produced by Diphtheria bacillus. Then, Emil von Behring discovered a similar antitoxin against 
tetanus and he found out that the immunity produced could be transferred between animals through 
serum. However, the immense potential of antibodies was first fully realized by Paul Ehrlich, the 
Nobel Prize winner in 1908 in medicine, when he postulated that antibodies were chemically 
combined with antigens, and that antibodies which he referred to as ‘magic bullets’ [34], could seek 
and destroy disease-causing organisms. Nonetheless, the production of antibodies by plasma cells 
and their protein nature was first truly understood in the 1950s, when Niels K. Jerne and Frank M. 
Burnet developed the theory of clonal selection and antibody repertoire, which with Erhlich’s 
antibodies has revolutionized in medicine and led the way for the development of antibodies as 
therapeutics in various forms and in passive immune therapy  [34]–[38]. 
 
1.3.3 
Polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies 
 
Polyclonal antibodies are antibodies that arise from different B cells recognizing different epitopes 
on an antigen. Monoclonal antibodies arise from a single clone of B cell and  contain a defined 
antigen-binding site, also known as a paratope that binds only one epitope and has a high specificity 
and affinity to this epitope [23]. The polyclonal antibodies are able to recognize multiple epitopes 
on the same antigen, which renders them with a higher overall binding capacity against antigen. 
Because of the ability to bind multiple epitopes, their binding capabilities are quite robust and will 
not be affected by proteins with variations in epitopes e.g. denaturation or conformational changes, 
and are therefore more suitable to couple with antibody labels. This stands in great contrast to 
monoclonal antibodies, which is not able to detect the target protein if there is the smallest variation 
in the epitope structure. They are therefore less robust for detection of proteins with an altered 
conformation or for labelling. Polyclonal antibodies has shown to exhibit higher sensitivity due to 
this broad recognition of epitopes, while monoclonal antibodies are monospecific as they recognize 
only a single epitope [39], [40].  
 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
Introduction 
 
11 of 65 
Polyclonal antibodies vary from batch to batch because each batch is raised from a different 
immunized animal and thus have different immune response among animals [40]. Therefore, they 
often have to be optimized and validated prior for testing when a new batch has to be used. 
Monoclonal antibodies can be produced in unlimited amounts and are very consistent. However, the 
production of the hybridized clone can be very time consuming and costly compared to polyclonal 
antibodies [41]. Polyclonal antibodies are commonly used as capture antibody in sandwich ELISA 
because of their broad capture ability to a target protein. Monoclonal antibodies however, offer 
batch to batch homogeneity and large quantities of identical and highly specific antibodies. 
Therefore, monoclonal antibodies will not have as high probability for cross reactivity as polyclonal 
antibodies [39], [42].  
 
Polyclonal antibody production: 
 
Polyclonal antibodies are produced by immunizing healthy animals with antigen, and collect blood 
samples in small amounts over several turns. To maintain the antibody levels, animals can be 
injected with repeat antigen boosters and the presence of the desired antibodies are analyzed 
commonly using ELISA-based immunoassays. The blood is collected into sterile containers and 
handled carefully by aseptic techniques. The blood will clot and the antisera containing antibodies 
are recovered by centrifugation and termed serum, but can also be collected with an anticoagulant, 
such as heparin, which after removal of the suspended cellular elements through centrifugation, will 
be termed plasma. For the purification of antibodies from the serum or plasma, a precipitation step 
is often involved using ethanol and/or ammonium sulphate. After this step, it will only be partially 
purified, and a high-resolution chromatographic fractionation is often followed, such as ion-
exchange chromatography or protein A or protein G affinity chromatography. Bioassays or 
immunoassays are then used to determine antibody titre, which is the amount of the presence of 
specific antibody in serum. Antibodies can last up to five years if stored at 2-8℃ [22], [23], [39].  
 
Monoclonal antibody production differs from polyclonal antibody production in that way, that they 
make use of hybridoma technology to fuse immortal myeloma cells with antibody-producing B 
lymphocytes, resulting in an inexhaustible source of monoclonal antibodies against any antigen 
[22]. In brief, mouse is immunized with antigen and sacrificed. The spleen is removed and full of B 
lymphocytes that recognize specific epitopes on antigen. Cells are then fused using hybridoma 
technology and separated from each other by dilution, followed by growth in culture (fig. 5). At 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
Introduction 
 
12 of 65 
last, appropriate clones are isolated and grown in larger amounts. The resulting product is a single 
immortalized B-lymphocyte that produces the desired epitope-specific antibodies in unlimited 
amounts [26], [34]. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. The main differences in polyclonal antibody production compared to monoclonal antibody production [26]. The animal 
is immunized with antigen, and the spleen is removed. For polyclonal antibody production, the antiserum can be obtained by tapping 
the blood from the animal. However, monoclonal antibody production fuses the spleen cells with cancer cells, which generates 
hybrid-myeloma cells. These are then separated by dilution followed by growth in culture. Clones are isolated and grown in larger 
amount.  
 
The main difference between the polyclonal and monoclonal antibody production is the resulting 
preparations, one being heterogeneous and the other homogeneous [23]. All in all, monoclonal 
antibodies are best fitted for applications that requires identical antibody in large volumes specific 
to an epitope [42].  
 
1.3.4 
Rabbit and mouse IgG 
 
Rabbit is typically the predominant choice of animal host for polyclonal production, because they 
first of all are small in size, but they also have a bigger phylogenetic distance from other research 
models and have well-developed antibody production protocols [28]. For monoclonal antibody 
production the animal host that has been mostly used is mouse. The main advantage of using mouse 
Polyclonal antibody production 
Monoclonal antibody production 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
Introduction 
 
13 of 65 
is that they are widely exploited and are therefore a more reliable model. They are also uniform and 
pure, and easily available inbred strains at low cost, which can be manipulated easily [23]. Mice are 
more inbred which affects the diversity of the immune responses [43]. 
 
Rabbits have in contrast to mice and humans, four isotypes called IgA, IgE, IgG and IgM (table 1). 
Humans and mice have an extra isotype named IgD. Mouse has five IgG subclasses IgG1, IgG2a, 
IgG2b, IgG2c and IgG3, whereas rabbit only has one, IgG. The molecular weight of the different 
isotypes and subclasses can vary due to the difference in the number of disulphide bonds and 
immunoglobulin domains in heavy chains [28].  
 
Table 1. Isotypes of immunoflobulins from different species [43].Overview of the various isotypes from different species, such as 
mouse, rat, human, rabbit, goat and chicken. 
Species 
Isotypes 
Mouse 
IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG1; IgG2a; IgG2b; IgG2c; IgG3, IgM 
Rat 
IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG1; IgG2a; IgG2b, IgG2c, IgM 
Human 
IgA1; IgA2, IgD, IgE, IgG1; IgG2; IgG3; IgG4, IgM 
Rabbit 
IgA1; IgA2; IgA3, IgE, IgG, IgM 
Goat 
IgA, IgE, IgG1; IgG2, IgE, IgM 
Chicken 
IgY 
 
Rabbits and mice are very distinct seen from an evolutionary perspective, as they belong to very 
distinct orders, rabbits to Lagomorpha and mice to Rodentia. However, it has been observed that 
antibodies from rabbits can elicit a stronger immune response against small molecules and haptens, 
which is not commonly seen in rodents. Rabbit strains are not as inbred as mouse strains, which can 
be the reason why these inbred mouse strains elicit less diverse immune responses and therefore 
cannot raise strong and diverse antibodies as easily as rabbits. Therefore, rabbit B cells consists of 
more distinctive antibody repertoires, binds with a higher diversity, affinity and specificity 
compared to mouse [23].  
 
 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
Introduction 
 
14 of 65 
1.4 
Biotinylation  
Biotinylation is the process of covalently binding biotin to a protein or other macromolecules.  
Biotin is a water-soluble B-vitamin also called B7 or vitamin H, and an essential nutrient naturally 
present in food in protein-bound form [13]. The nutritional implications of biotin has been known 
since 1920s, but it was first in the beginning of 1970s, that the high affinity and specificity between 
biotin and avidin got attention and became exploited as a research tool [13]. The avidin-biotin 
complex began to be investigated and since then, the process of biotinylation has been widely used 
in the pharmaceutical industry to detect target-bound antibody with labelled avidin [44], [45]. 
Avidin can be labelled by fluorochrome, radioisotope or enzyme [45].  
 
Biotinylation offers extremely high affinity for its interaction partner avidin, and is one of the 
reasons why it has become so important in the research area. This non-covalent interaction between 
a protein and a ligand, are the strongest known biological recognition with a dissociation constant 
of KD=10-15 M. The fast formed interaction is difficult to affect with changes in pH, temperatures, 
organic solvents and denaturing agents [13]. This extraordinary affinity allows molecules that 
contain biotin to be bound with avidin conjugates, and is thus a very useful and important tool in the 
detection systems [15].   
 
1.4.1 
The structure of biotin 
 
The structure of biotin is build up by a bicyclic ring system and a valeric acid side chain. This side 
chain makes it possible to attach different linkers to generate various reactive groups and different 
biotinylation reagents, which can be used to target different functional groups on proteins and other 
molecules (fig. 6). The targeted functional groups for antibodies are primary amines, sulfhydryl’s 
and carbohydrates [15].  
 
Figure 6. Basic structure of a biotinylation reagent [46]. The structure contains a valeric acid side chain of biotin and a bicyclic 
ring. This part is typically conjugated to a reactive moiety which can be made either directly or with an extended spacer arm 
(linker). 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
Introduction 
 
15 of 65 
 
The weight of biotin is 244 Dalton and hence, it is a quite small molecule. Several of biotin 
molecules conjugates to a protein, and the more biotin molecules available for avidin binding, the 
more will the sensitivity increase for many assay procedures [15]. However, even though biotin is 
small, it can still interfere with the normal biological function of a protein. It is important that the 
antigen binding site is not disrupted by amine coupling when they are biotinylated, to maintain the 
immunological reactivity of the antibodies. To avoid this, a strategy for modification and 
optimization can be determined, where the biotinylation degree can be varied or other biotinylation 
reagents can be tried.  
 
1.4.2 
N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) esters for antibody labelling 
 
Amine coupling of NHS esters with primary amines will be the main focus area of this project, but 
other biotinylation reagents that target different functional groups, such as sulfhydryl’s and 
carbonyls can also be used for biotinylation of antibodies, and will be mentioned briefly.  
 
When NHS-esters react with primary amines, they form a covalent amide bond and a NHS-leaving 
group (fig. 7) [47]. A nucleophile reaction takes place, and the primary amine is most reactive at pH 
value above 7. This is because the deprotonated form of the amine is the target for the ester [15].  
 
 
Figure 7. Reaction of NHS-ester with primary amines [46]. This is an NHS-ester reagent with a medium linker length of 22.4 Å – 
also called NHS-X-Biotin.  The reaction between primary amines and NHS-biotin is nucleophilic, resulting in a stable conjugate – an 
amide bond, and a NHS-leaving group.  The optimal conditions for the reaction are between pH 7-9, because the amine becomes 
deprotonated and targets the ester.   
 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
Introduction 
 
16 of 65 
The target for NHS-esters are primary amine groups, which are present on most of the proteins due 
to lysine side chains -amines and N-terminal -amines [15]. It is especially the lysine side chains 
-amines that react significantly with NHS esters [47]. Because it is a nucleophilic reaction, the rate 
of reaction will increase with increasing pH, and it has been reported that the typical pH range for 
the reaction is 7-9. However, this will also increase the rate of hydrolysis. Studies have shown that 
NHS-ester have a half-life of 4-5 hours at pH 7.0 at 0℃; and decreases to 1 hour when the pH 
increases to 8.0 at 25℃  [13]. At pH 8.6 and 4℃, the half-life becomes 10 minutes [48]. For both 
water-soluble and water-insoluble NHS-esters, storage for long time should be avoided.  
 
For NHS-ester reactions, buffers with primary amines or reducing agents should be avoided as these 
interfere with the NHS-ester reaction. Buffers that are typically used are phosphate, 
bicarbonate/carbonate, HEPES and borate buffers, but other buffers can also be used except of Tris, 
which contain primary amines. Tris (or glycine) can however be added at the end of a reaction to 
quench it [47].  
 
Amine-reactive biotinylation reagents can be divided in two groups – the water soluble and the 
water insoluble (fig. 8). The water insoluble has to be dissolved in an organic solvent, and the most 
used organic solvents for this are dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and dimethylformamide (DMF). It is 
the sulfonate group on the NHS-ring that is the reason for increased water solubility [13]. The 
mechanisms of NHS- and sulfonate NHS-esters are much alike. The formation of an amide bond 
results in a NHS or sulfo-NHS leaving group (fig. 7). 
 
 
Figure 8. Water insoluble and water soluble NHS-ester biotin with a medium (22.4 Å) linker length [46].This is an illustration of 
the water insoluble NHC-ester biotin – also called Biotin-X-NHS or NHS-LC-Biotin, and the water soluble Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin. 
Both biotinylation reagents have a medium linker length of 22.4 Å, the only difference is the sulfo group attached on the NHS-ester 
that contribute to increase the water solubility of the biotinylation reagent.  
==PAGE:24==
 
 
Introduction 
 
17 of 65 
Others: 
 
Other biotinylation reagents, such as Iodoacetyl biotin targets free sulfhydryl groups, which also are 
used targets in biological molecules for biotinylation [15]. Iodoacetyl biotin is a noncleavable 
reagent that reacts mainly with thiol groups. The mechanism is a nucleophilic substitution of iodine 
with a thiol group, which then generates a stable thioether bond. They derives from exposed 
cysteine on the protein surface or within a peptide [13].  For antibodies, a disulphide bond is present 
at the hinge region between the two heavy chains. This bond needs to be broken to generate free 
thiol groups, which then can react with a sulfhydryl-reactive biotinylation reagent. This bond can be 
broken by exposing the antibody to reducing agents under mild conditions. This creates a thiol 
group that can be used as a target for biotinylation. The advantage of using this group is because it 
can biotinylate at a site removed from the antigen-binding site, and thus preserve the biological 
activity when the active site has amines on it [15]. However, the labelling is more limited than with 
primary amines [49].  
  
The carbohydrate moiety on the Fc portion of the antibody is a third way to target for biotinylation, 
because these residues can be modified to aldehydes by mild oxidation using sodium periodate. The 
reactive aldehydes that results from this can then react with hydrazide derivative biotinylation 
reagents. The advantage of using this target for biotinylation is as previously described for 
sulfhydryl’s, that it can biotinylate at a site removed from the antigen-binding site [49].  
 
 
 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
 
18 of 65 
2 
Materials and methods 
 
2.1 
Reagents and biomolecules  
The following reagents were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Kamstrupvej 90, Roskilde, 
Denmark): ELISA F96 MaxiSorp Nunc Immuno plates, Biotin-EZ-link Sulfo-NHS-LC, 
Streptavidin-HRP Pierce and Neutravidin-HRP. Biotin-X-NHS and Dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO) 
were purchased from Sigma (Saint Louis, MO, USA). The following reagents were purchased from 
Merck 
(Darmstadt, 
Germany): 
NCD 
Natrium-di-hydrogenphosphat-Dihydrate, 
NCD 
di-
Natriumhydrogenphosphat-Dihydrat, Glycerol 99.5 %, 1 M NaOH and 3 M HCl. ELISA HRP 
substrate (TMB one) was purchased from ECO-TEK (Kuldyssen, Taastrup, Denmark). Phosphoric 
acid 2 M was purchased from Ampliqon (Stenhuggervej, Odense, Denmark). Avidin-HRP was 
purchased from Vector labs. Biacore GEH Sensor Chip Protein G was obtained from GE Healtcare 
(Uppsala, Sweden). Protein G, Recombinant, E.coli was obtained from Merck. Rabbit anti-E.coli 
HCP, protein A purified, was obtained from Novo Nordisk A/S (Måløv, department 1713).  
 
2.2 
Instruments  
Protein concentration measurements were made on NanoDrop Spectrophotometer ND-1000 from 
Fisher Scientific. Plates were shaked on Titramax 1000 Heidolph shake table. Absorbance 
measurements were made on Sunrise Tecan using Magellan. Measurements on pH were made with 
pH-meter Metrohm. The weight used throughout the project was Mettler Toledo. Analysis of SPR 
was made using a Biacore T200 system.   
 
2.3 
Software  
Analysis with SPR was made with Biacore T200 Control software, version 2.0. Absorbance values 
of ELISA were obtained using Magellan Tracker V 7.2 software. Interpretation and presentation of 
the ELISA results were made with the statistical program SAS JMP version 12.2. Software used for 
Nanodrop measurements was ND-1000 V3.8.1.   
 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
Materials and methods 
 
19 of 65 
2.4 
Buffers  
 
Table 2. Overview of buffers. Following buffers were used throughout the project. The table is divided in the four parts for the four 
methods that were performed.  
ELISA 
Washing/Assay buffer: 
0.010 M phosphate; 0.14 M NaCl; 0.0027 M KCl; 0.05 % v/v tween 20; pH 7.4. 
 
Coating buffer: 
0.05 M carbonate; pH 9.6. 
Blocking buffer: 
0.010 M phosphate; 0.14 M NaCl; 1.0 % BSA; 0.024 ± 0.001 % thiomersal; pH 
7.4. 
Surface Plasmon Resonance 
Assay buffer: 
0.1 M HEPES; 1.5 M NaCl; 0.03 M EDTA; 0.5 % v/v Surfactant P2; pH 7.4 when 
diluted. HPS-EP+ Buffer for Biacore were purchased from GE healthcare Bio-
Sciences AB (Uppsala, Sweden). 
Biotinylation 
Assay buffer: 
0.010 M phosphate; 0.14 M NaCl; pH 7.4. 
Stop buffer: 
Imidazol 0.5 M, glycerol; IGEPAL CA-630. Purchased from Ampliqon 
(Stenhuggersvej, Odense, Denmark). 
Antigen ELISA 
Buffer 
This method is confidential. 
 
 
2.5 
Methods 
2.5.1 
Standard procedure of the developed ELISA to measure relative 
biotinylation degree  
 
The development of ELISA to determine relative biotinylation degree is described here. Table 3 
provides with an overview of the procedure.  
 
To detect the degree of biotinylation on the antibodies using the biotin-avidin interaction, microtiter 
plates were first coated with protein G overnight (ON) at 4℃ (1 𝜇g/mL diluted in coating buffer, 
100 𝜇l/well). The wells were then blocked with blocking buffer (200 𝜇l/well), and the biotinylated 
antibodies were added in a 2-fold dilution series (11.6 ng/mL diluted in assay buffer, 100 𝜇l/well). 
Avidin conjugated to HRP (500 ng/mL diluted in blocking buffer, 100 𝜇l/well) was used and the 
presence of biotinylated antibodies were detected by incubation (~7 minutes) with HRP substrate 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
Materials and methods 
 
20 of 65 
(TMB one, 100 𝜇l/well). The reaction was terminated using 2 M phosphoric acid (100 𝜇l/well). 
Between each step and before adding the substrate, the wells were washed three times (~1 minute, 
200 𝜇l/well) with washing buffer. All ELISAs were carried out at room temperature (RT). The 
optical density (OD) of the substrate was measured using a plate reader. The absorbance was 
measured at 450 nm with background subtraction at 620 nm.  
 
Table 3. ELISA procedure. The following table is an overview of the standard procedure that was used for the developed assay.  
Step 
Description 
Volumen 
Temp. 
Time 
1: Coating 
Dilute 1 µg/mL protein G in coating buffer   
100 µl/well  
4◦C 
ON 
2: Washing 
3x with washing buffer  
200 µl/well 
RT 
~1 min 
3: Blocking 
Plates were blocked with blocking buffer  
200 µl/well 
RT+rotation 
30 min 
4: Washing 
3x with washing buffer 
200 µl/well 
RT 
~1 min 
5: Sample 
 
Biotinylated pAb diluted in assay buffer to 11.6 ng/mL in 2-fold 
100 µl/well 
RT+rotation 
1 h  
6: Washing 
3x with washing buffer 
200 µl/well 
RT 
~1 min 
7: Detection 
Avidin-HRP diluted 500 ng/mL in blocking buffer 
100 µl/well 
RT+rotation 
1 h 
8: Washing 
3x with washing buffer 
200 µl/well 
RT 
~1 min 
9: Substrate 
TMB one substrate were added to the plate 
100 µl/well 
RT 
~7 min 
10: Stop 
Phosphoric acid 2M were added 
100 µl/well 
RT 
 
11: Read 
450/620 nm 
 
 
 
 
2.5.2 
Optimization of assay 
 
During optimization of assay, the following tests were performed. Dilution series were determined 
using different dilutions of antibodies on 2900 ng/mL, 29 ng/mL, 2.9 ng/mL and 11.6 ng/mL, all 
diluted in assay buffer. The following negative controls were tested; uncoated plate using only 
coating buffer without protein G; no biotinylated antibodies using only assay buffer; and no avidin-
HRP using only blocking buffer. Furthermore, the coating stability was tested by blocking the plate 
for one month. Avidin, streptavidin and neutravidin were likewise tested on the assay at the same 
concentrations (500 ng/mL diluted in blocking buffer).  
 
2.5.3 
Procedure of biotinylation of antibodies  
 
For biotinylation of antibodies containing free amino groups, the following biotinylation procedure 
has proved to be effective (fig. 9, intern laboratory procedure).  
==PAGE:28==
 
 
Materials and methods 
 
21 of 65 
Biotinyl-N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (Biotin-X-NHS) dissolved in DMSO (1/10 of reaction 
volume, 20 𝜇l or 100 𝜇l; 3 mg/mL), was added slowly and dropwise to the antibody solution (200 
𝜇l or 1000 𝜇l; 1.2 mg/mL in PBS). These reaction conditions gave 83:1 biotin:PAb molar ratio. The 
solution was incubated overnight in 4℃ with rotation (16-24 h). After biotinylation, the reaction 
was terminated by incubating the solution with stop buffer in RT with rotation for 30 minutes (200 
𝜇l or 1000 𝜇l); excess of imidazole neutralizes excess of biotin reagents. The biotinylated 
antibodies were stored at -20℃ with 50% v/v Glycerol (Glycine 99.5%).  
 
  
Figure 9. Flowchart of the procedure in biotinylation. Intern lab. procedure. Minimum 10 mg of biotin was weighted 
and dissolved in DMSO to 3 mg/mL. The antibody solution was made by diluting the antibodies in PBS to 1,2 mg/mL. 
The reaction was initiated by transfering 100 or 20 𝜇l biotin solution to 1000 or 200 𝜇l antibody solution. The reaction 
was then incubated ON at 4℃. After incubation, stop buffer and 50% v/v glycerol is added and the biotinylated 
antibodies stored at -20℃.  
==PAGE:29==
 
 
Materials and methods 
 
22 of 65 
2.5.4 
Optimization of biotinylation  
 
During optimization of biotinylation, the following parameters were adjusted and performed.  
PH-conditions: Different incubation pH conditions were compared. Natrium-di-hydrogen-
phosphate (NaH2PO4: 0.240 gram), di-natrium-hydrogen-phosphate (Na2HPO4: 1.44 gram) and 
natrium chloride (NaCl: 8.00 gram) [50] were dissolved in 800 mL Milli-Q water. Afterwards, 200 
mL was transferred into three measuring cylinders of 250 mL.  The pH was adjusted with 3 M 
hydrochloric acid (HCl) and 1 M natriumhydroxide (NaOH) to respectively pH 6.4; 7.4 and 8.0; 
and miliQ water was added until reaching a volume of 250 mL. The resulting pH conditions had a 
final concentration on 0.010 M phosphate and 0.14 M NaCl. A fourth experiment was made with 
the assay buffer from the biotinylation procedure to compare with. All four experiments were made 
in parallel following the procedure, but replacing the assay buffer.  
Biotin:antibody ratio: Biotin-X-NHS was dissolved in DMSO (6 mg/mL) and aliquoted in three 
containers and further diluted in DMSO in concentrations of 1.50 mg/mL; 3.00 mg/mL and 4.50 
mg/mL, giving a total of four different concentrations. The procedure of biotinylation was 
continued. These reaction conditions gave a biotin:PAb molar ratio of 83:1 for the original 
concentration on 3 mg/mL, 165:1 for a concentration on 6.00 mg/mL, 41:1 for 1.50 mg/mL and 
124:1 for 4.50 mg/mL (cf. Appendix D). 
Incubation time and temperature: Incubation time, temperature and rotation were varied and the 
resulting biotinylated antibodies were tested on ELISA. The following times and temperatures were 
tested: 2h at RT, 2h at 4℃, 4h at 4℃, 6h at 4℃, ON at RT, ON at 4℃ without rotation and ON at 
4℃ with rotation as a control. Additionally, a second control of a previously biotinylated batch of 
pAb was used on all the plates. 
Sulfo-NHS-biotin versus NHS-biotin: Sulfo-NHS-LC-biotin (1/10 of reaction volume, 20 𝜇l or 100 
𝜇l; 3.67 mg/mL) was dissolved in PBS and the procedure of biotinylation was followed. In parallel, 
Biotin-X-NHS (1/10 of reaction volume, 20 𝜇l or 100 𝜇l; 3.00 mg/mL) was dissolved in DMSO and 
was likewise added to the antibody solution. These reaction conditions gave a biotin:PAb molar 
ratio on 83:1 for both reactions. Additionally, different antibody concentrations were tested for the 
water soluble and insoluble biotin at: 0.8 mg/mL, 1.0 mg/mL and following the procedure at 1.2 
mg/mL.  
The resulting antibody-biotin conjugates for all the tests were analysed with ELISA.  
 
 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
Materials and methods 
 
23 of 65 
2.5.6 
Detection of biotinylation degree by biotin-avidin interaction using 
SPR 
 
Biotinylated antibodies from three different batches were tested on a protein G coated chip. They 
were diluted in assay buffer (50 ng/mL). The biotinylated antibodies were injected onto the sensor 
chip with flow rate 20 𝜇l/min and a contact time on 600 seconds. This was made for each 
biotinylated antibody batch in an individual flow cell. Injection of avidin-HRP diluted in assay 
buffer (500 ng/mL) was followed, with a flow rate of 20 𝜇l/min, contact time on 360 seconds and 
dissociation time on 60 seconds. An injection of 1.5 M glycine was subsequently used as the 
regeneration buffer to break the binding between biotinylated pAb and protein G, and was injected 
with a flow rate of 20 𝜇l/min and contact time on 30 seconds.  
 
2.5.7 
Confirming that biotinylation does not affect antigen-recognition site 
using antigen ELISA 
 
The improved biotinylation degree was tested on antigen ELISA. This method is confidential.  
 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
 
 
24 of 65 
3 
Results and discussion 
 
3.1 
Assay development 
The assay that was developed to determine the biotinylation degree will be described in this part. 
The idea of the assay is to screen for potential improvements for the biotinylation process, and will 
contribute to the project by providing a relative assessment of the degree of incorporated biotin 
molecules. The assay is not dependent on antigen-recognition to allow comparison of different 
batches of biotinylated antibodies.  
 
Biotinylated rabbit anti-E.coli HCP antibodies, protein A purified, is used through the project. The 
plate is coated with protein G to allow binding on the Fc-region of the biotinylated antibodies. 
Protein G has high affinity against IgG molecules and showed promising results during the tests of 
the assay. The coating was, based on these results and on the high affinity against IgG molecules 
[51], only tested with protein G, but any other protein could also be used. Protein G has a pI on 4.5 
[52] and the buffer used for coating was carbonate with pH 9.6. This facilitates charged interactions 
but also a few hydrophobic/hydrophilic interactions to the solid surface of the microtiter plate. 
Biotinylated antibodies were diluted in PBS, which has a physiological pH on 7.4. The antibodies 
were bound by protein G. The interaction between protein G and the Fc part of IgG molecules is 
mainly based on salt links and hydrogen bonds. Charged and polar residues are therefore involved, 
but a few hydrophobic interactions have also been reported between the interface of protein G and 
Fc [53]. The washing buffer contains salt to avoid nonspecific ionic interactions and a detergent to 
disrupt nonspecific ionic and hydrophobic interactions. The choice of the washing buffer was 
therefore PBS with tween 20. Proteins and detergents are the most used classes for blocking 
reagents [54]. Blocking of the plate was performed with PBS and Tween 20, with addition of BSA. 
Other protein instead of BSA could be used, such as non-fat dry milk or casein. BSA has the ability 
to block the sites on the surface that is not occupied [54]. Detection with HRP-conjugated avidin 
was likewise done in blocking buffer to further reduce background. HRP-conjugated avidin 
interacts with the biotinylated antibodies; due to the high binding affinity and specificity that avidin 
has towards biotin. The presence of biotinylated antibodies was quantified using the HRP-enzyme 
and the TMB substrate, which will be converted into a product that can be measured at 450 nm. The 
setup of the ELISA can be seen in figure 10. 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
25 of 65 
The detection of biotinylated antibodies gave a strong signal in the developed assay. In order to 
evaluate on the obtained results from the assay, a four parameter logistic (4PL) curve fit was made, 
which is a quite useful model for immunoassay dose-response curves. The 4PL curve uses a 
weighted regression of SSE (Sum of Squares Error) to measure how well the curve model fits the 
data [55]. It consists of four parameters: the minimum and maximum asymptote (theoretical 
minimum/maximum value to be obtained), the point of inflection and the Hill’s slope of the curve. 
These parameters will be estimated in order to fit the curve and will generate an S-shaped curve, 
where the inflection point is the point halfway through the curve. The inflection point will be called 
the half maximal binding throughout the project.  
 
Figure 10. Illustration of developed ELISA for determining relative biotinylation degree on pAb. This is the setup of the ELISA 
procedure that was used to analyse the biotinylation degree of biotinylated antibodies. The plate is coated with protein G, followed 
by incubation with biotinylated antibodies. avidin-HRP is added, and the biotinylated antibodies are detected by incubation with 
TMB substrate. The reaction is terminated with phosphoric acid and the plate is read at the absorbance 450-620 nm.  
 
3.1.1 
Negative controls 
 
Antibodies were biotinylated and tested on the assay. The assay was further tested with a range of 
negative controls that was made on the same plate with biotinylated antibodies. The test provides 
knowledge on how the assay works with or without a specific step in the procedure, e.g. without 
coating, without sample and without avidin – the background absorbance values and the reliability 
of the assay was evaluated (fig. 11).  
 
The results showed a straight line close to zero for the negative controls (fig. part A-C), but gave a 
clear signal for the biotinylated pAbs that followed the procedure (fig. part A). For the test without 
coating, the blocking buffer showed to work successfully and blocked all the empty spots that were 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
26 of 65 
not coated with protein G. If the blocking was insufficient, the graph would show a signal, and the 
assay would result in non-specific binding and misleading values. The curve with no sample also 
showed no existence of the biotin-avidin complex, which is true and would otherwise generate a 
signal. The background is quite low at almost zero, and it can be assumed that the signal generated 
primarily is due to the specific interaction of the biotinylated antibodies. The curve without avidin 
also gives no signal and a low background absorbance. All in all, the results corresponded well to 
what was expected of the test, and indicates that the assay is quite reliable and consistent with low 
non-specific binding.  
 
 
 
Figure 11. The graphs of negative controls in the developed ELISA. The figure above shows the curves together. The figure below 
shows them individually. The axes are the same. The graph was made using absorbance values from one microtiter plate containing 
negative controls and a positive control. Biotinylated pAbs in figure part A demonstrates that a significant signal is produced. Figure 
part D shows that when no sample is added, no signal is produced. And no signal is produced in figure part C when the plate is 
uncoated due to the blocking buffer. Likewise, in figure part B no signal is produced without avidin-HRP.  
  
The half maximal binding were calculated by back calculating the log value to the initial 
concentration. The half maximal binding for the biotinylated antibodies in the test were 
approximately 1.25 ng/mL.  
𝐻𝑎𝑙𝑓 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑙 𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔= exp(0.2689) = 1.25 ng/mL 
 
A 
B
C 
D 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
27 of 65 
3.1.2 
Dilution of antibodies 
 
The purpose of this test is to find a dilution series that gives a full 4PL curve, and determine the 
concentration of antibodies that results in the best fitted curve and the strongest assessment of half 
maximal binding, as the fit changes.  
 
Different dilution series of respectively 2900 ng/mL, 29 ng/mL and 2.9 ng/mL were made for the 
biotinylated antibodies (fig. 12). The results show that a dilution of 2900 ng/mL gives too high 
absorbance values (figure part C) and an almost non-existing lower asymptote. This would also 
result in an incorrectly calculated half maximal binding value for figure part C. The figure part B 
with a dilution on 29 ng/mL and the figure part A with 2.9 ng/mL gives the best fits of the curves, 
where the figure part A is slightly better because of better OD values. The OD for negative controls 
has shown to be within the range of 0.006-0.021 for the experiments seen in fig. 11. Furthermore, 
Magellan is able to measure OD values for positive controls up to 4, but the precision and accuracy 
of the measurements decreases with increasing OD values [56]. An attempt to follow a range of 1.5-
2.5 will be favourably for this assay.  
 
 
Figure 12. The graphs of different dilutions of biotinylated pAb. The figure above shows the curves together. The figure below 
shows them individually. The axes are the same. The graph shows absorbance values produced from one microtiter plate. Different 
concentrations of the biotinylated pAbs were tested, respectively 2.9 ng/mL; 29 ng/mL and 2900 ng/mL. The figure part A shows 
biotinylated pAb with the lowest concentration on 2.9 ng/mL. Figure part B with a higher concentration on 29 ng/mL, and produces 
a better upper asymptote compared to figure part A. Figure part C has the highest concentration on 2900 ng/mL, which result in too 
high absorbance values and an almost non-existing lower asymptote. The half maximal binding for this part will not be calculated 
correctly.  
A 
B
C
==PAGE:35==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
28 of 65 
Dilutions on 29 and 2.9 ng/mL result in a half maximal binding on approximately 1 ng/mL (fig. 13), 
The small variation between the previous calculated half maximal binding for fig. 11 on 1.25 ng/mL 
and the current calculated half maximal binding on approximately 1 ng/mL, might be due to 
different environmental factors, such as temperature, pH, time etc that influences the result.  
 
Figure 13. The half maximal binding values that were calculated for the biotinylated pAb made in different dilutions from fig. 12. 
The half maximal binding was calculated for the two concentrations on 2.9 ng/mL (part A in fig. 12) and 29 ng/mL (part B in fig. 12). 
The values are close to each other at approximately 1 ng/mL.  
Even though the concentration on 2.9 ng/mL gave a better fit of the curve than the concentration on 
29 ng/mL, it was decided to use an antibody concentration of 11.6 ng/mL instead (fig. 14; part A), 
to mimic the curve of 2.9 ng/mL (fig. 14; part B) but with an improved upper asymptote. This 
resulted in improved s-shape of the curves.  
 
Figure 14. The graphs of the final chosen dilution of biotinylated pAb. The figure above shows the curves together. The figure 
below shows them individually. The axes are the same. The graph shows absorbance values produced from one microtiter plate. It 
was decided to continue with a concentration at 11.6 ng/mL, as it gave an improved upper asymptote at figure part A compared to 
figure part B.  
A
B
==PAGE:36==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
29 of 65 
3.1.3 
Intra-plate variation 
 
In order to express the assay variation of the test results, a true duplicate of biotinylated antibodies 
were made (diluted 11.6 ng/mL). The graph represents the variation that can be expected between 
duplicates on the plate – the intra plate variation (fig. 15).  
 
Figure 15. The graphs show the natural variation between duplicates – the intraplate variation. The figure above shows the curves 
together. The figure below shows them individually. The axes are the same. The graph shows absorbance values produced from one 
microtiter plate. A true duplicate was made of a batch of biotinylated pAbs. Figure part A shows the results from one of the 
duplicates and figure part B shows the results from the other duplicate. The results demonstrate that the variation between the 
duplicates is very small, with a calculated CV% of 5.3% over the whole range of the assay. See text for calculations.  
To confirm that the sample replicates (fig. part A and B) are precise, the CV% between the 
duplicates was calculated. This was done by dividing the standard deviation (SD) of a set of 
measurements with the mean of the set, in this context the measurements were made in duplicate. 
𝐶𝑉 % = ( 𝑆𝐷
𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛 ) ∙100 
 
A total of twelve CV% were calculated based on the absorbance values from the duplicates (cf. 
Appendix C for calculations), and an average coefficient of the percentage estimates were made, 
resulting in an average CV% of 5.3 % over the whole assay range. At the end of the assay range 
with the lowest absorbance, the CV% becomes very high. A CV% of 5.3% is evaluated to be 
acceptable for the assay. This can also be confirmed by a study, which stated that an acceptable 
range of CV% is ≤15% [57], but this range also depends on other things, such as the purpose of the 
assay.   
A
B
==PAGE:37==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
30 of 65 
3.1.4 
Variation between biotinylation 
 
Besides the variation within a microtiter plate, variation between biotinylation can also be expected. 
In this test, different batches of biotinylated pAbs were made and tested on the same plate (fig. 16). 
The batches were made at different times but followed the same procedure with the same antibody. 
The first batch was made 01-Feb-2017 by the department (fig. part A), the second and third batch 
was made 23-Feb-2018 (fig. part B) and 07-Mar-2018 (fig. part C) for this project.  
 
Figure 16. The graphs show the natural variation in biotinylation. The figure above shows the curves together. The figure below 
shows them individually. The axes are the same. The graph shows absorbance values produced from one microtiter plate. Samples 
from three different batches of biotinylated pAbs were used. The batches were made using the same procedure but made at different 
times. Figure part A shows the curve pattern for the first batch of biotinylated pAb made by the department 01-Feb-2017. Figure 
part B shows the curve pattern of the second batch of biotinylated pAb made 23-Feb-2018. Figure part C shows the third batch made 
07-Mar-2018. The graph demonstrates the variation that can be expected between the biotinylation. The assay was made using a 
dilution of pAb at 2.9 ng/mL, but this changed to 11.6 ng/mL for the other experiments as it improved the weak upper asymptote.  
 
The graph shows that there is a minor variation between batches of biotinylation. The calculated 
half maximal binding for all the curve patterns is approximately 1 ng/mL (fig. 17). The CV% was 
calculated for the variation obtained in half maximal binding. The standard deviations of the three 
values were divided with the mean of the values. This resulted in a CV% of 4.8% that can be 
expected in biotinylation (cf. Appendix C). Based on this the half maximal binding was concluded 
to be sufficiently reproducible.  
A
B
C
==PAGE:38==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
31 of 65 
 
Figure 17. The half maximal binding that was calculated for the variation between three different batches of biotinylated pAb 
from fig. 16. The bar chart shows the half maximal binding calculated from the curve patterns in figure 16. All three values are close 
to each other at approximately 1.00 ng/mL. There are only minor variations. The CV% was calculated for the three values and 
resulted in CV%  of 4.8 %. This is the variation that can be expected in biotinylation. First batch: 01-Feb-2017 made by the 
department.  Second batch made 23-Feb-2018. Third batch made 07-Mar-2018.  
To gain more knowledge of the assay, tests on the stability of the coating and the difference of 
using avidin, streptavidin and neutravidin for the detection of the biotinylated antibodies were 
performed.  
 
3.1.5 
Coating stability 
 
The stability of the coating was tested by leaving the plate in blocking buffer for a month instead of 
~30 minutes as the procedure implies. Two different batches of biotinylated pAbs (diluted 11.6 
ng/mL) were used for this test.  The second batch was made 23-Feb-2018 (fig. 18; part A) and the 
third batch was made 07-Mar-2018 (fig. 18; part B) for this project. The plate was first coated with 
protein G in carbonat buffer following the normal procedure, and placed in the refrigerator with 
blocking buffer for a month. After a month, the assay was continued as usual and the stability of the 
coating was evaluated.  
The graph demonstrates that the results do not differ significantly when blocking for a longer period 
(fig. 18). The good S-shape of the curve is still maintained, furthermore, the variation between the 
half maximal binding values is within the CV% previously calculated (fig. 19). The coating seems 
to be stable, and many plates can be coated and blocked and stored for longer time without affecting 
the results.  
 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
32 of 65 
 
Figure 18. The graphs of the biotinylated pAbs after being in blocking buffer for one month – testing the stability of the coating. 
The figure above shows the curves together. The figure below shows them individually. The axes are the same. The graph shows 
absorbance values produced from one microtiter plate. The stability of the coating was evaluated by coating and then blocking a 
microtiter plate. The plate was stored in the refrigerator at 4℃ for a month in blocking buffer. The assay was then continued as 
usual. Figure part A shows the curve pattern of the biotinylated pAb batch made 23-Feb-2017. Figure part B shows the batch made 
07-Mar-2018. The results seem not to be affected compared to previous test results, and plates can be stored for longer periods 
without difficulty.  
 
Figure 19. The half maximal binding that was calculated from the coating stability test in fig. 18. Half maximal binding were 
calculated for two batches of biotinylated pAbs made respectively 23-Feb-2018 and 07-Mar-2018. The half maximal binding showed 
to be comparable at approximately 1 ng/mL. This indicates that when blocking the plate for a month and store in the refrigerator at 
4℃, does not negatively affect the results.  
 
3.1.6 
Comparison of avidin, streptavidin and neutravidin 
 
The difference of using avidin, streptavidin and neutravidin in the detection step of the assay was 
tested (diluted 500 ng/mL). All three proteins are structural and functional analogues; they all 
compose of a tetrameric structure and have high binding affinity towards biotin. Streptavidin is 
nonglycosylated whereas neutravidin is a deglycosylated avidin analogue. Because streptavidin and 
neutravidin lack the carbohydrate moieties – the four mannose and three N-acetylglucosamine 
residues, their pI becomes more acidic compared to avidin. Avidin has a basic pI that generates a 
A
B
==PAGE:40==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
33 of 65 
high degree of non-specific adsorption, because it will generate a positive charge at physiological 
pH and thereby bind non-specifically to negatively charged molecules. Neutravidin has the lowest 
non-specific protein-protein interaction, because it has a nearly neutral charge. A study has reported 
that the three analogues affinity towards biotin is increasing from avidin, streptavidin to neutravidin 
– neutravidin having the highest affinity [58].   
 
A shift in the curve pattern of streptavidin can be seen (fig. 20; part C), compared to avidin (fig. 
part A) and neutravidin (fig. part B), which are very comparable. Streptavidin has an elevated half 
maximal binding compared to avidin and neutravidin (fig. 21). However, the HRP-conjugation 
degree of the proteins is not known and could influence the results. Based on the theory, neutravidin 
should have the highest specificity towards biotin and lowest non-specific binding, and avidin the 
opposite. Thus, the identical results for avidin and neutravidin demonstrate that there is a low non-
specific binding in the assay.   
 
 
Figure 20. The graphs of the biotinylated pAbs using avidin, streptavidin and neutravidin. The figure above shows the curves 
together. The figure below shows them individually. The axes are the same. The graph shows absorbance values produced from one 
microtiter plate. The following proteins, avidin, streptavidin and neutravidin (diluted 500 ng/mL) were compared on the assay. The 
figure part A shows the curve pattern with avidin, which is used in the standard procedure. Figure part B shows the curve pattern 
when neutravidin is used instead, and figure part C shows streptavidin. The curve patterns of avidin and neutravidin are very close, 
and based on theory neutravidin has the lowest nonspecific binding, due to its almost neutral isoelectric point. This may indicate that 
the assay has low non-specific binding. However, streptavidin is shifted a little bit in relation to avidin and neutravidin. This can also 
be due to difference in the degree of HRP-conjugation on the proteins.  
  
A
B
C
==PAGE:41==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
34 of 65 
 
Figure 21. The half maximal binding that was calculated for the curve patterns from fig. 20 when avidin, streptavidin and 
neutravidin were used in the assay. The bar chart shows the different calculated half maximal binding values for the different 
proteins. Streptavidin generates the highest value compared to avidin and neutravidin. This can be due to difference in the degree of 
HRP-conjugation on the proteins.  
 
3.1.7 
Change of antibody pool 
 
There were a limited amount of pAbs in stock; therefore, the pool was replaced with another pool of 
pAbs. This pool was available in bigger amounts, but came from different rabbits. Nanodrop 
measurements were performed on the new pool, to quantify the right concentrations for use in the 
biotinylation.  
 
Nanodrop measurements: 
The four tubes containing the new antibody pool from four different rabbits were measured with 
Nanodrop, and the concentration was calculated by dividing the measured absorbance with the 
assumed extinction coefficient for IgG molecules: 𝐴280 𝑛𝑚
0.1%
= 1.4 [59], [60], giving a total 
concentration on 7.1 mg/mL (cf. Appendix E) and a total volume of 8 mL when pooled together. 
The measured concentrations were compared with the concentrations that were written on the tubes, 
which were calculated to give a total concentration on 8.4 mg/mL. The individually measured 
concentration form the tubes giving a total concentration of 7.1 mg/mL if pooled together, and the 
concentrations from the tubes that were calculated to give 8.4 mg/mL if pooled together, differ a lot 
from each other. To decide which concentration is most correct, the preparation of four tubes 
pooled together with a total volume of 8 mL was measured four times on Nanodrop. The average 
concentration obtained from this was 7.0 mg/mL. This fits well with the concentrations that were 
measured individually from the four tubes on 7.1 mg/mL, and not the concentrations written on the 
tubes that gave 8.4 mg/mL. This drop in the concentration can be due to a variety of factors, which 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
35 of 65 
has influence on the aggregation rate of the IgG molecules. Aggregation can be due to native and/or 
denatured proteins, which can be caused by mechanical stress such as shaking and stirring of the 
tubes and freeze-thaw processes [61]. The following experiments were performed based on a 
concentration of 7.0 mg/mL.  
 
The previous pool of pAbs and the new pool were compared on the ELISA. The results show that 
the two antibodies are very comparable and results in almost the same OD values (fig. 22, part A 
and B). The minor difference that is observed by the graph and the half maximal binding (fig. 23) 
can be due to the natural variation that is found in biotinylation and within the plate, as seen in 
previous tests.   
 
 
Figure 22. The graphs that show the difference in the curve pattern of a new pool of antibodies for biotinylation compared to the 
previous used pool of antibodies for biotinylation. The figure above shows the curves together. The figure below shows them 
individually. The axes are the same. The graph shows absorbance values produced from one microtiter plate. Figure part A shows 
the new pool of antibodies for biotinylation, where part B shows the previously used pool of antibodies for biotinylation – more 
specifically a biotinylated batch made 23-Feb-2018. The figure above shows that the previous used pool and the new pool can be 
compared in the assay as they are very close. Only a minor variation is seen on the graph, which most probably is due to the 
expected natural variation seen within the plate or between biotinylation.  
 
A
B
==PAGE:43==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
36 of 65 
 
Figure 23. The half maximal binding calculated from fig. 22, where a new pool of antibodies for biotinylation was compared with 
the previous used pool of antibodies. The bar chart shows a little variation in the half maximal binding, but this does not exceed the 
expected natural variation, indicating that the previously used pool of antibodies for biotinylation (batch made 23-Feb-2018) can be 
compared and replaced by the new pool of antibodies.  
   
Overall, the results obtained from the negative controls corresponded well with what was expected 
and did not generate signal and gave a low background. It was decided that the most optimal 
antibody concentration was 11.6 ng/mL with a 2-fold dilution series, as it gave a good fit of the 
curve and an improved upper asymptote and S-shape, which resulted in a more reliable curve and 
calculated half maximal binding. The intra-plate variation that was tested resulted in a low CV% on 
5.3% determined from duplicates over the whole assay range. Furthermore, a low CV% was seen 
for the variation between different biotinylation batches that was made with the same procedure. 
The variation in biotinylation resulted in a low CV% on 4.8%, which were calculated using the half 
maximal binding values that the three standard curves generated. Based on these tests and the low 
CV%, the assay has proved to be sufficiently reproducible and can be used for its purpose.  
 
Additionally, the stability of the coating was evaluated and showed that it is possible to prolong the 
blocking step for a month instead of ~30 minutes, without negatively affecting the results. 
Furthermore, the use of avidin compared to streptavidin and neutravidin resulted in a shift in the 
curve pattern for streptavidin and a higher half maximal binding value. This can be due to variation 
in the degree of HRP-conjugation for the proteins, which was not known and could influence the 
results. However, the identical results for avidin and neutravidin indicate that the assay has low 
non-specific binding.  At last, the results with the previous used antibody pool and a new antibody 
pool confirmed that the antibodies is very comparable and can be replaced with the new pool.  
 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
37 of 65 
3.2 
Surface Plasmon Resonance analysis (SPR)  
 
The purpose of this analysis was to demonstrate, that the assay developed on ELISA can be 
transferred to SPR. The setup was therefore identical to the ELISA setup. The chip used for analysis 
was coated with protein G, and the biotinylated antibodies were injected followed by avidin-HRP.  
Three different batches of biotinylated pAbs were tested. Flow cell one is a blank and generates no 
binding. Flow cell two contains botinylated pAb batch 23-Feb-2018, flow cell three contains 
biotinylated pAb batch 07-Mar-2018 and flow cell 4 contains biotinylated pAb batch 01-Feb-2017 
made by the department (fig. 24). The results show an increase in response units (RU) when avidin-
HRP binds the biotinylated pAbs. This binding was also observed in the ELISA. However, there is 
a variation of the biotinylated pAb in flow cell 3 compared to the other two flow cells, which was 
not observed in the ELISA. This can be due to variation in concentration and capture level. More 
optimization is therefore required if the assay is intended to be used in SPR. However, these results 
confirm that the idea of implementing the assay on SPR is possible, and the validity of ELISA data 
can be confirmed. The small peaks at the end of the sensorgram are background noise from the 
pump.  
    
 
Figure 24. The detection of biotinylation degree of biotinylated pAbs using SPR. Samples from three different batches of 
biotinylated pAbs were used. The batches were made using the same procedure but made at different times. Flow cell 1: blank. Flow 
cell 2: 01-Feb-2017. Flow cell 3:23-Feb-2018. Flow cell 4: 07-Mar-2018 (see arrows).  The sensorgram shows that the response 
units (RU) increase when avidin-HRP binds the biotinylated pAb. A variation can be observed for flow cell 3, which was not seen in 
ELISA (fig. 16). This might be due to variation in concentration and capture level. The small peaks at the end of the curves are 
background noise. The idea of the assay can be confirmed but it needs more optimization.  
 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
38 of 65 
3.3 
Biotinylation optimization 
 
To investigate the biotinylation, it is first of all important to choose the right biotinylation reagent. 
If a reaction with a given group of molecules is wanted, then it is important to choose a 
biotinylation reagent that has the ability to react specifically to a particular functional group. In this 
project, the main choice for IgG molecules is NHS-esters, because the target is the epsilon amine of 
the lysine side chain on IgG molecules. The biotinylation is achieved with a molar excess of biotin 
molecules, resulting in a molar ratio of 83:1 of biotin:pAb. In the procedure, a medium-length and 
water insoluble biotin from ThermoFisher (Biotin-X-NHS) was used, which was dissolved in 
DMSO (3 mg/mL). DMF could also be used for this purpose. Antibodies were diluted in PBS 
buffer (1.2 mg/mL), but HEPES and borate could also be used. Tris should be avoided because it 
contains primary amines, which can interfere with NHS-ester reactions [13].  
   
The degrees of biotinylation were investigated by adjusting individual parameters of the 
biotinylation process, and compare them to the procedure. The biotinylation degree is best 
described by the interplay between loss of biological activity and high biotin incorporation, 
following a Gaussian (bell-shaped) distribution. This means that in a pool of proteins, some proteins 
will not have any biotin incorporated; most will have a medium incorporation and little a high 
incorporation. In many applications, this range can be very critical. High biotin incorporation – also 
called an overbiotinylation, can result in an inactivation of the protein. Little or no biotin 
incorporation after biotinylation can also be due to other things e.g. interfering amines in the 
reaction buffer, reducing agent; or if too little buffering capacity from the buffer, but it could also 
be improper storage conditions of the biotinylated antibodies [13]. 
 
 
3.3.1 
pH incubation conditions 
 
The interaction between biotin and primary amines is a nucleophilic substitution (fig. 7), and 
therefore, the rate of reaction will increase with increasing pH. It has been reported that the typical 
pH range for the NHS-reaction is between 7 and 9, and that proteins generally should be labelled at 
pH 7 [62]. More alkaline pH conditions will increase the reaction while an acidic pH conditions will 
decrease it [63]. The reason for this is because of the epsilon amine of lysine residues, which has a 
pKa of 10.5. If a buffer with a lower pH than 7 is used, it would cause the epsilon amines to 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
39 of 65 
protonate and result in a small amount of reactive amine groups. As mentioned in fig. 7, it is the 
deprotonated epsilon amine that is the active nucleophile. By raising the pH conditions too high the 
presence of hydroxyl ion might dominate, which also is a nucleophile, and would then compete 
with biotin for binding. Therefore, it can be important to find an optimal pH in order not to reduce 
the reactivity of biotin and to get the best incorporation of biotin molecules [62]. A higher pH 
would also increase the rate of hydrolysis [13].   
 
The present pH condition for the procedure is 7.4; which is the pH of the PBS buffer. In order not to 
expose the antibodies for extreme pH conditions, which may cause conformational changes of the 
protein and especially at the antigen binding sites [64], [65], the following pH conditions were 
tested: 6.4; 7.4; 8.0. To keep the rest of the procedure constant, the buffers were based on a PBS 
buffer made from scratch. The three buffers with different pH conditions were compared to the 
assay buffer.  
 
It was investigated how a slight difference in pH affects the biotinylation degree. The graph 
demonstrates that there is a minor variation but not of significant importance (fig. 25). The variation 
may also be due to intra-plate variation and variation seen in biotinylation.  
 
 
Figure 25. The graphs show the difference in biotinylation degree when pH incubation conditions are varied. The figure above 
shows the curves together. The figure below shows them individually. The axes are the same. The graph shows absorbance values 
produced from one microtiter plate. The pH incubation condition was varied for the biotinylation to pH 6.4 (figure part B) and 8.0 
(figure part D), compared to the procedure that uses an assay buffer with pH 7.4 (figure part A, named PBS buffer in the graph). 
Figure part C shows the curve for the buffer made to adjust pH to 6.4 and 8.0, and has the same pH as the assay buffer on 7.4. The 
results indicate that the biotinylation is robust in regard to pH conditions. 
 
A
B
C
D
==PAGE:47==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
40 of 65 
Previous graphs have demonstrated that a minor natural variation could be expected. When varying 
the pH conditions to 6.4 (fig. part B) and 8.0 (fig. part D), they show no significant variation 
compared to the pH condition on 7.4 (fig. part C).  Figure part A shows the assay buffer (named 
PBS buffer in the graph) that is originally used. Other pH conditions below 6.4 or above 8.0 could 
be tested; this would however break the buffer capacity of PBS, and could be the reason for too 
little or no biotin incorporation after biotinylation [13]. The reaction of the buffer generates a 
conjugate base and a weak acid, and with a little buffering capacity, small differences would cause 
extensive pH changes: 
𝑁𝑎2𝐻𝑃𝑂4 + 𝑁𝑎𝐻2𝑃𝑂4 →𝐻𝑃𝑂4
2− (𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑗𝑢𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒) + 𝐻2𝑃𝑂4
−(𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑘 𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑑) 
 
The half maximal binding of the different buffers resulted in a minor decrease and increase for the 
pH 6.4 and 8.0 (fig. 26). This could indicate that a higher pH incubation condition could increase 
the biotin incorporation. However, no significant variation was observed for the chosen pH 
conditions, indicating that the biotinylation is robust in regard to the pH conditions.   
 
 
Figure 26. The half maximal binding calculated from the curves with different pH incubation conditions in fig. 25. The bar chart 
shows that the pH on 8.0 and 6.4 only produces a minor variation compared to the buffer 7.4. The half maximal binding for pH 6.4 is 
slightly lower and slightly higher for pH 8.0. This could indicate that higher pH incubation conditions could result in a more 
significant variation in biotinylation degree.   
 
3.3.2 
Biotin:Antibody ratio 
 
The procedure uses an 83-fold molar excess of biotinylation reagents over IgG. A study have 
reported that a higher molar excess of biotinylation reagents results in better incorporation yields 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
41 of 65 
[46]. However, another study with N-succinimidyl S-acetylthioacetate (SATA) showed that with 
increasing molar ratio of SATA to IgG, the yield of modified lysine residues became lower. This 
can probably be explained by the relative accessibility of the lysine residues on antibodies – some 
residues are easily accessible and therefore easier modified with lower molar ratios than with higher 
[66]. A higher molar ratio of biotinylation reagent over IgG may give higher incorporation yields, 
but there is a limit. Too high molar ratios may also complicate the modification of lysine. 
Overbiotinylation can also result in an inactivation of the protein due to steric hindrances.  
 
Three different molar ratios were tested (fig. 27). The following biotin:PAb molar ratio were tested; 
165:1 for a concentration on 6.00 mg/mL (fig. part B), 124:1 for 4.50 mg/mL (fig. part A), 83:1 for 
the original concentration on 3 mg/mL (fig. part D) and 41:1 for 1.50 mg/mL (fig. part C). The 
calculations for the ratios are shown in appendix D.  
 
The result in the graph reveals that the different ratios do not significantly affect the level of biotin 
incorporation, as these variations may be caused by the natural variation seen within the plate and 
between biotinylations. 
 
 
Figure 27. The graphs show the difference in biotinylation degree when the biotin:pAb molar ratio is varied. The figure above 
shows the curves together. The figure below shows them individually. The axes are the same. The graph shows absorbance values 
produced from one microtiter plate. The molar ratios of biotin:pAb was varied, using a molar excess of 165:1 (figure part B), 124:1 
(figure part A) and 41:1 (figure part C) compared to the procedure that uses 83:1 (figure part D). The variation observed on the 
graph can be due to the natural variation within the plate or in biotinylation, and the results indicate that the biotinylation is robust 
in regard to the varied ratios. 
  
A
B
C
D
==PAGE:49==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
42 of 65 
The calculated half maximal binding also demonstrates, that the observed variation can be due to 
the natural variation (fig. 28). It seems that the biotinylation is robust in regard to the chosen ratios 
on 165:1, 124:1 and 41:1 compared to the on 83:1. Lower or higher ratios could be tested to see 
how it affects the results.  
 
Figure 28. The half maximal binding calculated from the curves with different biotin:pAb ratios in fig. 27. The half maximal 
binding values that were calculated shows minor variations, which could be due to the natural variation and thus are not significant. 
The biotinylation seems to be robust for the chosen range of molar ratios. 
 
3.3.3 
Incubation time and temperature 
 
In order to investigate the distribution of biotin, attention should also be given to the details of the 
reaction, such as the amount of biotinylation reagent and the reaction time [13]. The reaction time 
represents how long the incubation of the reaction between biotin and antibody takes. Following the 
procedure, the reaction happens at 4℃ ON with rotation. In order to test whether the incubation 
time influences the degree of biotinylation, incubations at 2h, 4h and 6h were performed (fig. 29). 
The incubation temperatures were also tested and changed to RT for incubation ON and incubation 
for 2h (fig. 31). One test for the procedure was made without rotation (fig. 33). The following table 
4 gives an overview of the parameters that were varied within the incubation. The experiments were 
performed on three microtiter plates as indicated in brackets in the table, and a positive control was 
included on all plates. The control contained a previous batch of biotinylated pAbs. 
 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
43 of 65 
Table 4.Table of the incubation time and temperature. The following changes were made for the biotinylation of pAb. The 
incubation time was changes from the incubation ON to 2h, 4h and 6h. Furthermore, the incubation temperature was changed from 
the temperature on 4◦C to RT. One experiment with no rotation was likewise tested.  
Experiment  
Incubation time 
Temperature 
Rotation 
1 (plate 1) 
2 (plate 1) 
2h 
2h 
RT 
4◦C 
Yes 
Yes 
3 (plate 1) 
4h 
4◦C  
Yes 
4 (plate 2) 
6h 
4◦C 
Yes 
5 (plate 2) 
Over night 
RT 
Yes 
6 (plate 2) 
Over night 
4◦C 
No 
7 (plate 3) 
Over night 
4◦C 
Yes 
 
The incubation time was varied and the incubation temperature was kept constant (fig. 29). It seems 
that the incubation time has a minor or no effect on the biotinylation degree of the pAbs, as the 
curve patterns of the experiments are very close to each other and does not differ significantly 
compared to the normal procedure seen in figure part G.  
 
 
Figure 29. The graphs show the difference in biotinylation degree when incubation time is varied. The figure above shows the 
curves together. The figure below shows them individually. The axes are the same. The data are obtained from three microtiter plates 
with their respectively positive control. The first plate contained: 2h at 4℃ (part A), 4h at 4℃ (part B) and control 1 (part D). The 
second plate contained: 6h at 4℃ (part C) and control 2 (part E). The third plate contained: ON at 4℃ (the normal procedure made 
in parallel with the other experiments, part G) and control 3 (part F). Only the incubation time is varied, and the biotinylation seems 
to be robust in the incubation time at 4℃.  
  
The calculated half maximal binding of the varied incubation times (fig. 30), showed no significant 
change in the half maximal binding. Control 2 reveals that the obtained signals for that plate is 
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
==PAGE:51==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
44 of 65 
higher compared to the other plates. This might explain why the half maximal binding value for the 
experiment at 6h is slightly elevated compared to the others.   
 
Figure 30. The half maximal binding that was calculated when incubation time was varied in fig. 29. Data obtained from three 
plates were used to calculate the half maximal binding. The controls 1-3 are therefore a positive control that was used on every 
plate, and shows that plate 2 generated higher signals compared to the other two plates, which can be the reason why the incubation 
time at 6h has a raised half maximal binding compared to the others that were performed on different plates. It seems that the 
incubation time of 2h, 4h and 6h has a minor or no effect on the biotinylation. 
 
The incubation ON at 4℃ was then changed to RT ON. Additionally, another experiment was 
performed with incubation for 2h at RT (fig. 31). The curves shows that incubation at RT for 2h 
(fig. part A) results in the same curve pattern with incubation ON at 4℃ (fig. part B). A shift in 
curve pattern is obtained when incubating ON at RT (fig. part C). The results shows that the 
reaction rate at RT increases compared to 4℃, and that the incubation time could be shortened with 
the same degree of biotinylation if executed at RT.   
==PAGE:52==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
45 of 65 
 
Figure 31.The graphs show the difference in biotinylation degree when the incubation temperature is varied. The figure above 
shows the curves together. The figure below shows them individually. The axes are the same. The data are obtained from three 
microtiter plates. The incubation temperature were changed to RT (fig. part C) instead of the incubation temperature on 4℃  (fig. 
part B). This resulted in a shift in the curve for incubation made at RT. The incubation time was then changed to 2h at RT (fig. part 
A), which resulted in almost same signals compared to the normal procedure (fig. part B). These tests indicates, that the reaction 
rate of the biotinylation increases with increasing temperature, and that the incubation time can be shortened to 2h without affecting 
the biotinylation degree.  
The calculated half maximal binding for the different incubation temperatures showed a significant 
increase when incubation was performed at RT. The variation in the half maximal binding exceeds 
the natural variation between biotinylation that was observed previously with a CV% of 4.8%. The 
significant increase in half maximal binding was observed for the incubation temperature at RT 
instead of 4℃, indicating that the biotinylation can be optimized if the incubation is performed at 
RT.  
 
Figure 32. The half maximal binding that was calculated from the different incubation temperature in fig. 31. The incubation ON 
at RT shows a significant increase in half maximal binding compared to the procedure ON at 4℃. Almost the same half maximal 
binding is reached when incubating at 2h in RT compared to the  procedure. Indicating that the incubation time can be shortened if 
the incubation temperature increases.  
 
A
B
C
==PAGE:53==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
46 of 65 
In addition, an experiment was performed where the incubation time and temperature was kept 
constant but was performed without rotation.  This showed to increase the half maximal binding of 
the biotinylated pAbs (fig. 33). Reaction without rotation may result in a part of antibodies having a 
more concentrated biotin solution and are therefore more biotinylated than other parts. 
 
Figure 33. Graphs and calculated half maximal binding of the procedure with and without rotation in the incubation. The figure 
to the left shows the curves together and individually. The figure to the right shows the half maximal binding calculated from the 
curves. The data are obtained from two microtiter plates. The following graph and half maximal binding values shows the difference 
when the incubation is performed with the procedure ON at 4℃ with rotation (figure part A) and without rotation (figure part B). It 
results in increased half maximal binding when the incubation is performed without rotation. The sign “%” stands for “minus”. 
 
3.3.4 
Water soluble versus water insoluble NHS-ester biotin 
 
The distribution of biotin can be affected by microenvironmental changes, such as 
hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity of the site and steric hindrances. Because of these effects, the choice 
of water soluble or water insoluble biotinylation reagents can be an important decision to make, 
likewise the choice of short chain, medium chain or long chain reagents or specific reactive groups. 
It is reported that the most preferred biotinylation reagents are the water soluble and the long chain 
linker, because they have shown a higher detectability and are easier to use [13]. The water soluble 
NHS-esters can be dissolved in water or in PBS, and toxic chemicals, such as DMF or DMSO are 
not needed. Therefore, these biotinylation reagents are easier to use and therefore more 
convenience. A water soluble biotinylation reagent (Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin) was compared with 
biotin from the procedure (NHS-X-Biotin), both having the same reaction conditions and molar 
ratios (cf. Appendix F for calculations).  
To obtain the same molar ratio of Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin as in the procedure, it is dissolved in PBS 
to a concentration of 3.674 mg/mL, whereas the  procedure uses DMSO at 3 mg/mL. This results in 
a molar excess of biotin:pAb of 83:1 for both cases. The results with the two biotinylation reagents 
A
B
==PAGE:54==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
47 of 65 
showed that Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin (fig. 34; part A) produced the same degree of biotin 
incorporation as the water insoluble biotin (fig. 34; part B).   
 
Figure 34. The graphs show the difference in biotinylation degree for the water insoluble biotin (Biotin-X-NHS) versus water 
soluble biotin (Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin). The figure above shows the curves together. The figure below shows them individually. The 
axes are the same. The graph shows absorbance values produced from one microtiter plate. The concentration in brackets is the 
concentration of antibody used in the biotinylation, and is used in the  procedure of biotinylation. The results show that the biotin 
(fig. part B) is very comparable with Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin (fig. part A).  
Furthermore, almost the same half maximal binding value was obtained. These results point out that 
the water soluble biotin dissolved in PBS can be used instead of water insoluble biotin dissolved in 
DMSO. The toxic chemical DMSO is not necessary as the water soluble biotin is able to achieve 
the same level of incorporated biotin.  
 
Figure 35. The half maximal binding that was calculated from the water soluble biotin (Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin) and the  water 
insoluble biotin (NHS-X-Biotin) in fig. 34 The results demonstrates that the same degree of biotinylation is achieved for the water 
soluble biotin compared to the biotin from the procedure that is water insoluble.  
In order to confirm these results, the biotinylation of both NHS-X-Biotin and Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin 
were repeated. They were made in bigger amounts; 100 𝜇l biotin solution instead of 20 𝜇l, and 1000 
A
B
==PAGE:55==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
48 of 65 
𝜇l antibody solution instead of 200 𝜇l. Furthermore, different antibody concentrations were tested 
to confirm the results; 0.8 mg/mL; 1.0 mg/mL and the concentration from the procedure of 1.2 
mg/mL (fig. 36). The same results were obtained and confirmed that the water soluble Sulfo-LC-
NHS-Biotin produces the same degree of biotinylation as the water insoluble biotin NHS-X-Biotin. 
These experiments show that the biotinylation process can be optimized by replacing the 
biotinylation reagent to a water soluble that is easier to handle and non-toxic. 
 
 
 
Figure 36. The graphs and calculated half maximal binding of the different batches of biotinylated pAbs with water insoluble 
biotin (Biotin-X-NHS) and water soluble biotin (Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin). The figures to the left show the curves together and 
individually for every concentration used. The concentration of the antibodies in biotinylation was changed to 0.8 ng/mL and 1.0 
ng/mL, and the concentration on 1.2 ng/mL was repeated. All the batches were made in bigger amounts compared to previously 
biotinylated pAbs. The figures to the right show the corresponding half maximal binding values that were calculated based on the 
curves. The results confirm previous result seen in fig. 34+35, that biotin (Biotin-X-NHS) is comparable with Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin.  
==PAGE:56==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
49 of 65 
 
Overall, the pH-conditions of 6.4; 7.4; 8.0 were made with a PBS buffer. These conditions were 
tested and compared to the procedure. Furthermore, the biotin:pAb molar ratios of 165:1, 124:1 and 
41:1 were compared with the  molar ratio of 83:1. The biotinylation showed no significant 
variations in regard to pH and molar ratios, indicating that the biotinylation is robust in regard to 
these conditions. The incubation time was likewise varied to 2h, 4h and 6h compared to the  
incubation ON. Based on these experiments, it seemed that the incubation time had no or minor 
influence on the biotinylation degree. The incubation temperature however, showed a higher degree 
of biotinylation when the temperature was changed to RT instead of 4℃. This indicates that the 
reaction rate increases at RT, and that it is possible to shorten the reaction time if incubation takes 
place at higher temperatures. The water insoluble NHS-ester biotin (NHS-X-biotin) was compared 
with a water soluble NHS-ester biotin (Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin) and resulted in no negatively affect 
on the biotinylation degree, indicating that biotin can be replaced with a water soluble biotin that 
required no toxic solvents, such as DMSO, and are easier to handle as it can be dissolved in water 
or PBS.   
 
3.4 
Confirming that biotinylation does not affect antigen-
recognition site using antigen ELISA 
 
When antibodies are biotinylated, there is a risk that the biotinylation affects the antigen binding 
property of the antibodies. In order to test this, the biotinylated pAbs was evaluated on an antigen 
ELISA. If the antigen binding properties is affected by the biotinylation, it will show on the assay 
by reduced or no signal.  
 
The purpose of this experiment was to take one of the samples with optimised biotinylation and test 
it on an antigen ELISA developed by the department. This was done with Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin 
and NHS-X-Biotin, to test whether the antigen binding property of the antibodies were affected 
when another biotinylation reagent was used (Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin). The results show a curve 
pattern that is close for the water soluble biotin (fig. 37; part A) and the  biotin from the procedure 
(fig. 37; part B). This indicates that the biotinylation with Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin does not 
negatively affect the antigen binding properties of the pAbs. This confirms that the water insoluble 
biotin advantageously can be replaced with a more water soluble biotin.  
==PAGE:57==
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
50 of 65 
 
Figure 37. The graphs show the difference between the water soluble (Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin) and insoluble biotin (NHS-X-
Biotin) on antigen ELISA. The biotinylated pAbs were tested on antigen ELISA to confirm that the biotinylation doesn’t influence 
the antigen binding site of the antibodies. A weak upper asymptote is observed for the curves, which may affect the calculated half 
maximal binding.  
The calculated half maximal binding of the curves in fig. 37 showed that the water soluble biotin 
had an increased half maximal binding compared to biotin from the normal procedure (fig. 38). This 
can be because of the weak upper asymptote, which may calculate the half maximal binding values 
incorrectly. Overall, the biotinylation with water soluble biotin (Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin) instead of 
the water soluble biotin (NHS-X-Biotin) from the procedure has proved to not negatively affect the 
antigen binding properties of the antibodies.   
 
Figure 38. The half maximal binding calculated from the water soluble (Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin) and the  insoluble biotin (NHS-X-
Biotin) on antigen ELISA in fig. 37. The half maximal binding is elevated for the water soluble biotin compared to biotin. This is 
most probably due to the weak upper asymptote seen in the curve pattern in fig. 37, which may result in wrong calculated half 
maximal binding.  
A
B
==PAGE:58==
 
 
 
 
51 of 65 
4 
Conclusion 
 
The assay developed for a relative assessment of biotinylation degree showed low background 
absorbance values and a low non-specific binding. The reliability of the assay was confirmed and 
the results seemed to be sufficiently reproducible, with a low CV% of 5.3% determined from 
duplicates over the whole assay range, and 4.8% between half maximal binding in different batches 
of biotinylation. It was found that the dilution of antibodies to 11.6 ng/mL in the assay resulted in 
improved S-shape of the curves. Furthermore, tests showed that the plates can be stored in blocking 
buffer for a month without negatively affecting the results, indicating that the coating of the assay is 
quite stable. The impact of avidin, streptavidin and neutravidin on the assay resulted in an increase 
in half maximal binding for streptavidin compared to avidin and neutravidin, which resulted in 
almost comparable values. Based on the theory, neutravidin has the lowest nonspecific binding and 
highest affinity towards biotin. Thus, the almost comparable result for avidin and neutravidin 
confirms that the assay has low non-specific binding. However, the HRP-conjugation degree of the 
proteins was not known and could influence the results. Overall, the ELISA proved to be usable for 
its purpose. In addition, data suggest that the developed assay can be transferred to SPR, but more 
optimization is needed.  
 
The optimization of biotinylation showed no significant optimization in biotinylation degree when 
varying the pH incubation conditions to 6.4 and 8.0 compared to the pH on 7.4. Experiments 
varying the biotin:pAb molar ratios to 165:1, 124:1 and 41:1 showed no significant optimization 
compared to the  ratio of 83:1. These experiments indicate that the biotinylation is robust in regard 
to the tested pH and molar ratio conditions. Furthermore, it was found that incubation at RT instead 
of 4℃ resulted in a significant increase in half maximal binding, which exceeded the expected 
natural variation. This suggests that the reaction time can be shortened if executed in RT. 
Interestingly, results on water soluble NHS-ester biotin (Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin) and water insoluble 
NHS-ester biotin (NHS-X-Biotin) revealed that almost the same degree of biotinylation could be 
obtained. This optimizes the biotinylation by removing the need for toxic solvents, such as DMSO, 
and makes biotin easier to handle as it can be dissolved in PBS or water instead. In addition to this, 
analysis on an antigen ELISA developed by the department using Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin and 
compared with NHS-X-Biotin, showed that the biotinylation did not negatively affect the antigen 
binding properties of the antibodies. 
==PAGE:59==
Perspective 
52 of 65 
5 
Perspective 
 
 
The assay that was developed for a relative assessment of biotinylation degree with biotinylated 
anti-E.coli pAb is also applicable for other kinds of pAbs. In general, the IgG molecule contains 
approximately 90 lysine resides [30], and it seems that these residues do not vary considerably 
between the pAbs. However, the different isotypes may influence the amount of lysine residues, and 
the assay can be directly translatable for pAbs with the same immunisation and purification 
protocol.   
 
The optimization of the biotinylation reagent, which interestingly proved to be replaceable with a 
water soluble reagent, removes the necessity of toxic solvent, such as DMSO and DMF. The water 
soluble biotin can be dissolve in PBS or water, which makes the biotinylation reagent easier to 
handle and improves the working environment, because it removes the work with toxic chemicals.  
 
Suggestion for further investigation of the biotinylation is the linker length of the biotinylation 
reagent, which was not reached in the allocated time. The linker length of the reagents can lead to 
improved protein detection and purification. The binding between avidin and biotinylated 
compounds can be quite affected by the length of this linker [46]. This is because avidin contains 
four binding sites for biotin and these pockets are about 9 Å deep [46]. The binding with biotin 
molecules can cause steric hindrances and make biotin unavailable for reporter-conjugated avidin 
binding, and result in a low detection of the biotinylated antibodies [49]. There are three different 
kinds of linker lengths for NHS-ester biotin, a short linker on 13.5 Å, medium linker on 22.4 Å and 
a long linker on 30.5 Å. The medium linker was used in this project, but it has been reported that a 
longer linker interacts more efficiently with avidin [46], and enhances the detection sensitivity of 
the target protein [13]. Additionally, the rate of binding also increases with increasing linker length, 
which can result in up to 5-fold increased rate of interaction with streptavidin [46].  
 
Another thing that could be interesting to test is the commercially available biotinylation kits using 
pre-prepared lyophilized mixtures of biotin label for antibody conjugation. The Bio-Rad LYNX 
rapid Biotin (Type 1) Antibody conjugation kit® [https://www.bio-rad-antibodies.com/kit/biotin-
type-1-conjugation-kit-lnk04.html?f=kit] offers a rapid conjugation with incubation of only 3 hours 
at RT. Even faster incubation time can be reached with the Bio-Rad LYNX rapid Plus Biotin (Type 
==PAGE:60==
Perspective 
53 of 65 
1) Antibody conjugation kit® [https://www.bio-rad-antibodies.com/kit/biotin-type-1-conjugation-
kit-lnk26.html?f=kit], which needs only 15 minutes of incubation time. These kits may save time 
and may be effective, but the content of them is classified, and it is not known what the antibodies 
are exposed of, which can be important information in some applications.  
 
Biotin is a very interesting molecule and is quite important in many other areas. They are important 
to label, purify and study proteins [67]. But the biotinylation process is also important for the post-
transalational modification in living organisms, and governs many important cellular processes 
[68]. The ability to detect and quantify changes caused by different conditions [69] has proved to be 
very useful for the discovery of biomarkers and various cancers types. Biotin has been used to 
detect a biomarker for the lethal cancer, Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, in urine [70], and the 
biomarker for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) called Glycoocholic acid (GCA) [41]. Biotin has 
also been exploited as a cancer-targeting ligand in drug delivery systems, by targeting “biotin 
transporter” –overexpressing tumors, such as rapidly proliferating malignant cancers [71]. 
Inhibition of protein biotinylation has also shown to be a new drug target for combatting 
tuberculosis (TB), and has demonstrated to kill the causative agent Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
(Mtb) [72].   
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
 
 
54 of 65 
Bibliography 
 
[1] 
A. Gautier and M. J. Hinner, “Site-Specific Protein Labeling: Methods and Protocols,” Site-
Specific Protein Labeling Methods Protoc., vol. 1266, pp. 1–267, 2015. 
[2] 
D. G. Bracewell, R. Francis, and C. M. Smales, “The future of host cell protein (HCP) 
identification during process development and manufacturing linked to a risk-based 
management for their control,” Biotechnol. Bioeng., vol. 112, no. 9, pp. 1727–1737, 2015. 
[3] 
Bio-Rad, “Host Cell Protein (HCP) Analysis,” 2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.bio-
rad.com/en-dk/applications-technologies/host-cell-protein-hcp-analysis?ID=NNWFX215. 
[Accessed: 28-Jun-2018]. 
[4] 
ThermoFisher Scientific, “Overview of ELISA.” 2018. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.thermofisher.com/dk/en/home/life-science/protein-biology/protein-biology-
learning-center/protein-biology-resource-library/pierce-protein-methods/overview-elisa.html 
 
[Accessed: 31-May-2018] 
[5] 
J. Zhu-Shimoni et al., “Host cell protein testing by ELISAs and the use of orthogonal 
methods,” Biotechnol. Bioeng., vol. 111, no. 12, pp. 2367–2379, 2014. 
[6] 
R. M. Hnasko, ELISA - Methods and Protocols, vol. 1318. 2015. 
[7] 
SBH Sciences, “ELISA,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.sbhsciences.com/elisa.asp. 
[Accessed: 31-May-2018]. 
[8] 
C. Oliver and M. Célia Jamur, Immunocytochemical Methods and Protocols, Third edt. 
Humana Press, 2010. 
[9] 
P. Esser, “Principles in Adsorption to Polystyrene,” no. 6, pp. 1–6, 2010. 
[10] H. Andersen, U. Brøchner Sørensen, and E. Thomsen, Immunkemiske metoder - teori og 
praksis, First edit. Nucleus Forlag ApS Biologisk faglitteratur, 1991. 
[11] Thermo Scientific, “Thermo Scientific Nunc 96-Well Immuno Plates for ELISA,” 2015. 
[12] Bio-Rad, “Helpful ELISA Hints,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.bio-rad-
antibodies.com/helpful-elisa-hints.html. [Accessed: 17-May-2018]. 
[13] T. Meier, F. Fahrenholz, and H. P. Saluz, “An introduction to Avidin-Biotin technology and 
option for biotinylation,” in A Laboratory Guide to Biotin-Labeling in Biomolecule Analysis, 
Birkhäuser, 1996, pp. 1–30. 
[14] K. K. W. Lo et al., “Luminescent transition metal complex biotin conjugates,” Coord. Chem. 
Rev., vol. 250, no. 13–14, pp. 1724–1736, 2006. 
[15] Thermo Scientific, “Avidin-Biotin Technical Handbook,” p. 51, 2009. 
[16] A. Frey, B. Meckelein, D. Externest, and M. A. Schmidt, “A stable and highly sensitive 
3,3´,5,5´-tetramethylbenzidine-based substrate reagent for enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assays,” J. Immunol. Methods, vol. 233, no. 1–2, pp. 47–56, 2000. 
[17] M. Kyo, K. Ohtsuka, E. Okamoto, and K. Inamori, “High-Throughput SPR Biosensor,” in 
Reverse chemical genetics: methods and protocols, H. Koga, Ed. Japan: Humana Press, 
2009, pp. 227–235. 
[18] X. Yu, N. Shneidehann-Marra, H.-Y. Hsu, J. Bachmann, and T. O Joos, “Protein 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
 
Bibliography 
55 of 65 
Microarrays: Effective Tools for the Study of Inflammatory Diseases,” in Reverse Chemical 
Genetics: Methods and Protocols, H. Koga, Ed. Japan: Humana Press, 2009, pp. 199–215. 
[19] Å. Frostell, L. Vinterbäck, and H. Sjöbom, “Protein-ligand interactions using SPR systems,” 
in Protein-Ligand Interactions. Methods and Applications, Second edit., M. A Williams and 
T. Daviter, Eds. United Kingdom: Humana Press, 2013, pp. 139–168. 
[20] H. H. Nguyen, J. Park, S. Kang, and M. Kim, “Surface plasmon resonance: A versatile 
technique for biosensor applications,” Sensors (Switzerland), vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 10481–
10510, 2015. 
[21] N. J. de Mol, “Affinity constants for small molecules from SPR competition experiments,” in 
Surface Plasmon Resonance: Methods and Protocols, M. J. E. Fischer, Ed. Humana Press, 
2010, pp. 101–113. 
[22] G. Walsh, “Antibodies, vaccines and adjuvants,” in Biopharmaceuticals - Biochemistry and 
biotechnology, Second edit., Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 1998, pp. 403–417. 
[23] J. Weber, H. Peng, and C. Rader, “From rabbit antibody repertoires to rabbit monoclonal 
antibodies,” Exp. Mol. Med., vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 1-12, 2017. 
[24] D. Reusch and M. L. Tejada, “Fc glycans of therapeutic antibodies as critical quality 
attributes,” Glycobiology, vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 1325–1334, 2015. 
[25] E. Girardi, M. D. Holdom, A. M. Davies, B. J. Sutton, and A. J. Beavil, “The crystal 
structure of rabbit IgG-Fc.,” Biochem. J., vol. 417, pp. 77–83, 2009. 
[26] R. Dominguez and K. C. Holmes, “Antibody structure and function,” Focus (Madison)., vol. 
40, no. 1, pp. 58–78, 2011. 
[27] G. Vidarsson, G. Dekkers, and T. Rispens, “IgG subclasses and allotypes: From structure to 
effector functions,” Front. Immunol., vol. 5, pp. 1–17, 2014. 
[28] M. Johnson, “Rabbit Antibody,” Mater. Methods, vol. 3, Feb. 2013. 
[29] G. T Hermanson, “Antibody Modification and Conjugation,” in Bioconjugate Techniques, 
Second., USA: Elsevier Inc., 2008, pp. 783–823. 
[30] ThermoFisher Scientific, “Introduction to Amine Modification—Section 1.1.” [Online]. 
Available: https://www.thermofisher.com/dk/en/home/references/molecular-probes-the-
handbook/fluorophores-and-their-amine-reactive-derivatives/introduction-to-amine-
modification.html. [Accessed: 31-May-2018] 
[31] G. S. Makowski, “Advances in Clinical Chemistry Volume 40,” in Advances in Clinical 
Chemistry, Elsevier Inc., 2005, pp. 182–184. 
[32] ThermoFisher Scientific, “Antibody Labeling and Immobilization Sites.”. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.thermofisher.com/dk/en/home/life-science/antibodies/antibodies-
learning-center/antibodies-resource-library/antibody-methods/antibody-labeling-
immobilization-sites.html. [Accessed: 10-Jun-2018] 
[33] V. Irani, A. J. Guy, D. Andrew, J. G. Beeson, P. A. Ramsland, and J. S. Richards, 
“Molecular properties of human IgG subclasses and their implications for designing 
therapeutic monoclonal antibodies against infectious diseases,” Mol. Immunol., vol. 67, no. 2, 
pp. 171–182, 2015. 
[34] J. S. Haurum, “Recombinant polyclonal antibodies: the next generation of antibody 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
 
Bibliography 
56 of 65 
therapeutics,” Drug Discov. Today, vol. 11, no. 13–14, pp. 655–660, 2006. 
[35] A. Burovski, Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Corynebacterium ulcerans and Corynebacterium 
pseudotuberculosis-General Aspects. Springer, 2014. 
[36] S. H. E. Kaufmann, “Remembering emil von behring: From tetanus treatment to antibody 
cooperation with phagocytes,” Am. Soc. Microbiol., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2017. 
[37] F. M. Burnet, “A Modification of Jerne’s Theory of Antibody Production using the Concept 
of Clonal Selection,” CA. Cancer J. Clin., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 119–121, 1976. 
[38] Nobelprize.org, “Paul Ehrlich - Biographical,” Nobel Media AB, 2014. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/1908/ehrlich-bio.html. 
[Accessed: 21-Jun-2018]. 
[39] S. Liu et al., “Purification of a polyclonal antibody against CD147 for ELISA using antigen-
immunoaffinity chromatography,” Mol. Med. Rep., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 4035–4040, 2017. 
[40] M. Busby et al., “Systematic comparison of monoclonal versus polyclonal antibodies for 
mapping histone modifications by ChIP-seq,” Epigenetics and Chromatin, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 
1–16, 2016. 
[41] X. Cui et al., “Biotinylated single-chain variable fragment-based enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay for glycocholic acid,” Analyst, vol. 143, no. 9, pp. 2057–2065, 2018. 
[42] Pacific Immunology, “Polyclonal vs Monoclonal Antibodies,” 2018. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.pacificimmunology.com/resources/antibody-introduction/polyclonal-vs-
monoclonal-antibodies/. [Accessed: 31-May-2018]. 
[43] M. Johnson, “Mouse Antibody,” Mater. Methods, vol. 3, Feb. 2013. 
[44] E. A Bayer and M. Wilchek, “The use of the Avidin-Biotin complex as a tool in molecular 
biology,” in Methods of Biochemical Analysis, vol. 26, D. Glick, Ed. John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc, 1980, pp. 1–42. 
[45] E. Alerts, “Biotinylation of monoclonal antibodies prevents their ability to activate the 
classical pathway of complement,” J. Immunol., vol. 151, no. 4, pp. 2124–2131, 1993. 
[46] G. T. Hermanson, “Biotinylation Reagents,” in Bioconjugate Techniques, 2008, pp. 506–545. 
[47] G. Mattson, E. Conklin, S. Desai, G. Nielander, M. D. Savage, and S. Morgensen, “A 
practical approach to crosslinking,” Mol. Biol. Rep., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 167–183, 1993. 
[48] G. T. Hermanson, “The Chemistry of Reactive Groups,” in Bioconjugate Techniques, 
Elsevier Inc., 2008, pp. 1–173. 
[49] ThermoFisher Scientific, “Biotinylation.”. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.thermofisher.com/dk/en/home/life-science/protein-biology/protein-labeling-
crosslinking/protein-labeling/biotinylation.html. [Accessed: 31-May-2018] 
[50] AAT Bioquest, “PBS (Phosphate Buffered Saline) (1X, pH 7.4) Preparation and Recipe,” 
2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.aatbio.com/resources/buffer-preparations-and-
recipes/pbs-phosphate-buffered-saline. [Accessed: 21-Jun-2018]. 
[51] B. Akerström, T. Brodin, K. Reis, and L. Björck, “Protein G: a powerful tool for binding and 
detection of monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies,” J. Immunol., vol. 135, no. 4, pp. 2589–
2592, 1985. 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
 
Bibliography 
57 of 65 
[52] Thermo Scientific, “Pierce Recombinant Protein G.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/21193. [Accessed: 10-Jun-2018]. 
[53] A. E. Sauer-eriksson, G. J. Kleywegt, M. Uhlen, and T. A. Jones, “Crystal Structure Of The 
C2 Fragment Of Streptococcal Protein G In Complex With The Fc Domain Of Human IgG,” 
Structure, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 265–278, 1995. 
[54] J. Gibbs, “Effective Blocking Procedures,” ELISA Tech. Bull. Corning Inc. Life Sci. 
Kennebunk, ME, no. 3, pp. 1–6, 2001. 
[55] D. Wild, The Immunoassay Handbook, 4th ed. United Kingdom: Elsevier, 2013. 
[56] Tecan, “Sunrise. Absorbance Microplate Reader,” 2016. 
[57] O. Thomsson, B. Ström-Holst, Y. Sjunnesson, and A. S. Bergqvist, “Validation of an 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay developed for measuring cortisol concentration in 
human saliva and serum for its applicability to analyze cortisol in pig saliva,” Acta Vet. 
Scand., vol. 56, pp. 2–5, 2014. 
[58] A. Jain, A. Barve, Z. Zhao, W. Jin, and K. Cheng, “Comparison of Avidin, Neutravidin, and 
Streptavidin as Nanocarriers for Efficient siRNA Delivery,” Mol. Pharm., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 
1517–1527, 2016. 
[59] Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, “Extinction coefficients,” 2013. 
[60] S. C. Gill and P. H. von Hippel, “Calculation of protein extinction coefficients from amino 
acid sequence data,” Anal. Biochem., vol. 182, no. 2, pp. 319–326, 1989. 
[61] S. Kiese, A. Pappenberger, W. Friess, and H. Mahler, “Shaken, not stirred: Mechanical stress 
testing of an IgG1 antibody,” J. Pharm. Sci., vol. 97, no. 10, pp. 4347–4366, 2008. 
[62] Molecular Devices, “Optimizing the labeling of proteins,” USA, 2010. 
[63] Sigma-Aldrich, “Biotin Protein Labeling Kit Protocol and Troubleshooting,” 2018. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/technical-
documents/protocols/biology/roche/biotin-protein-labeling-kit.html. [Accessed: 10-Jun-
2018]. 
[64] J. L. Winkelhake, T. J. Kunicki, B. M. Elcombe, and R. H. Aster, “Effects of pH treatments 
and deglycosylation of rabbit immunoglobulin G on the binding of C1q,” J. Biol. Chem., vol. 
255, no. 7, pp. 2822–2828, 1980. 
[65] J. Vlasak and R. Ionescu, “Fragmentation of monoclonal antibodies,” MAbs, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 
253–263, 2011. 
[66] G. T Hermanson, “Bioconjugate Chemistry,” in Bioconjugate Techniques, Elsevier Inc., 
2008, pp. 1–167. 
[67] J. E. Cronan Jr., “Biotination of Proteins in Vivo,” J. Biol. Chem., vol. 265, no. 18, pp. 
10327–10333, 1990. 
[68] L. M. Sternicki, K. L. Wegener, J. B. Bruning, G. W. Booker, and S. W. Polyak, 
“Mechanisms Governing Precise Protein Biotinylation,” Trends Biochem. Sci., vol. 42, no. 5, 
pp. 383–394, 2017. 
[69] D. Z. Bar, K. Atkatsh, U. Tavarez, M. R. Erdos, Y. Gruenbaum, and F. S. Collins, 
“Biotinylation by antibody recognition - a method for proximity labeling,” Nat. Methods, 
vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 127–133, 2018. 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
 
Bibliography 
58 of 65 
[70] P. Liu, X. Fang, H. Cao, M. Gu, J. Kong, and A. Deng, “Nano-biotinylated liposome-based 
immunoassay for the ultrasensitive detection of protein biomarker in urine,” Talanta, vol. 
179, no. November 2017, pp. 472–477, 2018. 
[71] Y. Lee, S. Lee, and S. Jon, “Biotinylated Bilirubin Nanoparticles as a Tumor 
Microenvironment-Responsive Drug Delivery System for Targeted Cancer Therapy,” Adv. 
Sci., vol. 1800017, pp. 1–8, 2018. 
[72] D. Tiwari et al., “Targeting protein biotinylation enhances tuberculosis chemotherapy.,” Sci. 
Transl. Med., vol. 10, pp. 1–10, 2018. 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
 
 
59 of 65 
Appendix 
A. 
Dilution of antibodies 
Example with antibody concentration on 2.01 mg/mL. Following the  procedure, a concentration on 
1.2 mg/mL of the antibodies is made. In order to get that concentration: 
 
𝐷𝑖𝑙𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟=
2.01 𝑚𝑔
𝑚𝐿
1.2 𝑚𝑔
𝑚𝐿
= 1.676 
The volume has to be 1100 µl if we want to use 1 mL of antibody solution later. 
 
1100 𝜇𝑙
1.676 ~660 𝜇𝑙 𝑑𝑖𝑙𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑏𝑜𝑑𝑦 𝑖𝑛 445 𝜇𝑙 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑎𝑦 𝑏𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 
 
The weight of the biotin has to be minimum 10 mg and is dissolved in DMSO at concentration 3 
mg/mL: 
𝑚𝑔 𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛
3.0 𝑚𝑔
𝑚𝐿
= 𝑋 𝑚𝐿 
 
To get it in µl multiply with 1000.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
 
Appendix 
60 of 65 
B. 
Calculating the concentration of biotinylated antibodies 
 
The final concentration of biotinylated antibodies is calculated using the following formula: 
 
𝐶𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙∙𝑉𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙= 𝐶𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙∙𝑉𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 
 
The initial concentration is known and the volume added throughout the procedure is known – 
starting with a concentration of antibody solution of 1.2 mg/mL using 1000 𝜇l or 200 𝜇l, followed 
by addition of biotin solution using 100 𝜇 or 20 𝜇l. The final concentration can then be calculated: 
 
𝐶𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙= 𝐶𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙
𝑉𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙
∙𝑉𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙=
1.2 𝑚𝑔
𝑚𝐿
1100 𝑚𝐿∙1.0 𝑚𝐿= 1.09 𝑚𝑔
𝑚𝐿 
 
Stop buffer is then added using 1000 𝜇l or 200 𝜇l: 
 
1.09 𝑚𝑔
𝑚𝐿
2100 𝑚𝐿∙1.100 𝑚𝐿= 0.571 𝑚𝑔/𝑚𝐿 
 
At last, glycerol is added using either 2100 𝜇l or 420 𝜇l: 
 
0.571 𝑚𝑔
𝑚𝐿
4200 𝑚𝐿∙2100 𝑚𝐿= 0.29 𝑚𝑔
𝑚𝐿 
 
Final concentration of pAbs is 0.29 mg/mL. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
 
Appendix 
61 of 65 
C. 
Calculating coefficient of variability (CV%) 
Intra-plate variation: 
Measurement 1 (Abs) 
Measurement 2 (Abs) 
CV% 
(SD/average)x100 
2.45 
2.438 
0.3471 
2.255 
2.229 
0.8200 
2.05 
1.86 
6.872 
1.439 
1.395 
2.195 
0.957 
0.909 
3.637 
0.534 
0.538 
0.5276 
0.302 
0.291 
2.623 
0.167 
0.159 
3.470 
0.092 
0.096 
3.008 
0.052 
0.059 
8.918 
0.037 
0.04 
5.509 
0.023 
0.033 
25.25 
CV% (average of all CV) ≅  5.3 
 
 
Variation between biotinylation: 
 
Halv maximal 
binding 1 
Halv maximal 
binding 2 
Halv maximal 
binding 3 
CV% 
0.9949 
1.032 
0.9370 
4.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
 
Appendix 
62 of 65 
D. 
Calculating Biotin:pAb molar ratio 
 
The mass of biotin and IgG for the used volumes (e.g. 100 𝜇l or 20 𝜇l for biotin solution diluted 3 
mg/mL, and 1000 𝜇l or 200 𝜇l for antibody solution diluted 1.2 mg/mL) is calculated. 
𝑚𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛= 𝑉𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛∙𝐶𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛= 0.020 𝑚𝐿∙3 𝑚𝑔
𝑚𝐿= 0.060 𝑚𝑔→0.00006 𝑔 
𝑚𝐼𝑔𝐺= 𝑉𝐼𝑔𝐺∙𝐶𝐼𝑔𝐺= 0.200 𝑚𝐿∙1.2 𝑚𝑔
𝑚𝐿= 0.2400 𝑚𝑔→0.00024 𝑔 
 
The mole of biotin and IgG is then calculated by dividing it with their respective molar masses: 
𝑛𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛= 𝑚𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛
𝑀𝑤𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛
=
0.00006 𝑔
454.542
𝑔
𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒
= 1.320 ∙10−7𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒 
𝑛𝐼𝑔𝐺= 𝑚𝐼𝑔𝐺
𝑀𝑤𝐼𝑔𝐺
=
0.00024 𝑔
150000
𝑔
𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒
= 1.600 ∙10−9𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒 
The ratio is simplified by dividing both values with the same number, giving a molar ratio of: 
𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛: 𝐼𝑔𝐺 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜= 83: 1  
The different ratios of Biotin:pAb is calculated by using the following concentrations of DMSO: 
1.50 mg/mL, 4.5 mg/mL and 6.0 mg/mL. The  procedure uses a DMSO concentration of 3.0 
mg/mL. The mass of biotin is calculated the same way as before, but with another concentration of 
biotin solution: 
𝑚𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛= 𝑉𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛∙𝐶𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛= 0.0200 𝑚𝐿∙6.00 𝑚𝑔
𝑚𝐿= 0.120 𝑚𝑔→0.000120 𝑔 
𝑚𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛= 𝑉𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛∙𝐶𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛= 0.0200 𝑚𝐿∙4.50 𝑚𝑔
𝑚𝐿= 0.0900 𝑚𝑔→0.00009 𝑔 
𝑚𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛= 𝑉𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛∙𝐶𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛= 0.0200 𝑚𝐿∙1.50 𝑚𝑔
𝑚𝐿= 0.0300 𝑚𝑔→0.0000300 𝑔 
 
The moles of the different concentrations are calculated and simplified as previously: 
𝑛𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛= 𝑚𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛
𝑀𝑤𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛
= 0.000120 𝑔
454.542 𝑔
𝑚𝑜𝑙
= 2.64 ∗10−7𝑚𝑜𝑙→165: 1 
𝑛𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛= 𝑚𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛
𝑀𝑤𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛
= 0.00009 𝑔
454.542 𝑔
𝑚𝑜𝑙
= 1.98 ∗10−7𝑚𝑜𝑙→142: 1 
𝑛𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛= 𝑚𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛
𝑀𝑤𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛
= 0.0000300 𝑔
454.542 𝑔
𝑚𝑜𝑙
= 6.60 ∗10−8𝑚𝑜𝑙→41: 1 
==PAGE:70==
 
 
 
Appendix 
63 of 65 
E.  
Nanodrop measurements and concentration calculations 
 
Protein concentration measurements: 
 
Udgangsmateriale 
Antistof pool 
Antistof 
Koncentration 
(mg/mL) 
oprindelig 
Koncentration 
(mg/mL) målt 
på Nanodrop1 
Udtaget mg 
(fra oprindelig 
koncentration) 
Udtaget mg 
(fra målt 
koncentration) 
Udtaget 
volumen. 
mL 
A 
7.4 
6.6 
14.8 
13.2 
2 
B 
10.5 
8.0 
21 
16 
2 
C 
7.2 
6.6 
14.4 
13.2 
2 
D 
8.5 
7.2 
17 
14.4 
2 
Totalt 
67.2 
56.8 
8 
Koncentration af antistof pool 
67.2 mg/8 mL 
= 8.4 mg/mL 
56.8 mg/8 mL 
 = 7.1 mg/mL 
Koncentration af antistof pool målt på 
Nanodrop 
 
9.82/1.4= 7.0 mg/mL 
9.83/1.4 = 7.0 mg/mL 
9.84/1.4= 7.0 mg/mL 
9.85/1.4= 7.0 mg/mL 
 
7.0 mg/mL 
1: 9.18/1.4 = 6.6; 11.25/1.4=8.0; 9.27/1.4=6.6; 10.05/1.4=7.2. 
 
Calculation: Abs/1.4=Concentration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
 
Appendix 
64 of 65 
Raw data from Nanodrop measurements: 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
 
 
 
Appendix 
65 of 65 
F.  
Calculations made for Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin 
 
The moles of NHS-ester biotin used in the procedure are 1.320 ∙10−7 (cf. Appendix D). In order to 
compare the two biotinylation reagents with each other, the same molar ratio is tested. The moles of 
biotin needed for the procedure is therefore multiplied with the molar mass of Sulfo-LC-NHS-
Biotin, giving the mass of Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin required achieving the same moles:  
𝑚𝑆𝑢𝑙𝑓𝑜−𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛= 𝑛𝐵𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛∙𝑀𝑤𝑆𝑢𝑙𝑓𝑜−𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛= 1.320 ∙10−7 𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒∙556.59
𝑔
𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒=  0.0000735 𝑔
→0.0735 𝑚𝑔 
 
To calculate the amount of PBS to dissolve Sulfo-LC-NHS-Biotin, the concentration is calculated 
by dividing the mass with the volume needed for the reaction:  
𝐶𝑆𝑢𝑙𝑓𝑜−𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛= 𝑚𝑆𝑢𝑙𝑓𝑜−𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛
𝑉𝑆𝑢𝑙𝑓𝑜−𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑛
= 0.0735 𝑚𝑔
0.020 𝑚𝐿= 3.674 𝑚𝑔
𝑚𝐿 
 
 
