==PAGE:1==
35 ECTS
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Design for Behaviour Change:
Speeding Reduction
Kirstine M. Villsborg (s133693),
Simon Dybdal (s123905)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 426
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4800
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Each year 1.3 million people are killed on the world’s roads.
Traffic accidents have
an estimated yearly socio-economic cost of 22 billion Danish kroner in Denmark alone.
As of yet no effective and feasible solution has been found. As such, this project sets
out to explore and evaluate the process of designing in-car nudges. The ABC behav-
ioral method is used as a framework for the exploration and evaluation of the proposed
nudge interventions. Three studies were made, the first being an associations brainstorm
session with 118 participants. The second and third study were driving simulator exper-
iments of the efficacy of the interventions. First testing them on their own and then the
best combined. Significant behavioral effects were found indicating that using the ABC
model combined with the nudge approach can be used to create significant behavioral
effects outside simulations as well.
Keywords: Nudging, behavior change, ABC model, traffic safety, driving simulator,
speed reduction, intervention
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of DTU Management Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a
Cand.polyt degree in Design & Innovation and Digital Media Engineering respectively.
Kongens Lyngby, July 22, 2018
Kirstine M. Villsborg (s133693), Simon Dybdal (s123905)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First of all we would like to extend a special thanks to our supervisors Laila Martinussen
and Philip Cash for their weekly guiding sessions and great advice. We would also like
to extend our gratitude to Liva Abele for her help and support regarding the driving
simulator. We would also like to say thanks to the 118 participants in our associations
study, and thanks to Yutaka Yoshinaka and Melanie Kreye for granting us the time
during their lectures. And finally we want to thank the 51 test drivers that tested our
interventions, and especially thank the 31 drivers that took the time to come back for a
second drive.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim of Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Theoretical Framework - the ABC Behavioral Model
. . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Research Question
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Methodological Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Report Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Internal Motivators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
External Motivators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Behavioral Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Design Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Combining Behavior and Design Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6
Conclusion of Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Methodology
17
3.1
Study Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Study 1
19
4.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Materials and Procedures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Results of Study 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.5
Discussion on Study 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Design of Nudges
29
5.1
Creation of Interventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Reviewing the Interventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.3
Refinement of the Chosen Interventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Study 2
35
6.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Materials and Procedures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.4
Results of Study 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.5
Discussion of Study 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7
Study 3
43
7.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2
Materials and Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.3
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.4
Results of Study 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.5
Discussion of Study 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8
The Next Design Steps
49
8.1
Call of Duty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8.2
Herbie . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.3
The Combined Concept
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
9
General Discussion
53
9.1
The Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
9.2
The Design Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
9.3
The Safety Concerns of ISA-Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
10 Conclusion
57
10.1 Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
10.2 Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A Traffic Nudges
61
B Study 1: Leaflet
65
C Cluster Rules
71
D The Potential Pyramid
73
E Herbie Sentences
75
E.1
Short Speeding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
E.2
Long Speeding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
F Experimental Order
77
G Study 2 Questionnaire
81
==PAGE:11==
Contents
ix
H Experimental Introduction
87
I
Project Time Plan
89
I.1
Time Plan (Expected)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
I.2
What Really Happened . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
Bibliography
93
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Aim of Project
Each year 1.3 million people are killed on the world’s roads (UN launches initiative to im-
prove road safety worldwide | UN News 2018). Traffic accidents have an estimated yearly
socio-economic cost of 22 billion Danish kroner in Denmark alone (National Strategisk
Analyse 2017). Speed is at the core of the problem, since speed increases both crash
risk and crash consequences (Peden et al. 2004, Speed and injury severity - European
Commission 2018). The vision of the project is, within the boundaries of a master the-
sis, to contribute to a decreased personal and material damage through increased speed
limit compliance. Nudging - a theory where small changes are made to an environment
to help people adapt a desired behavior (Thaler & Sunstein 2008) - has a proven ef-
fect on improving people’s behavior in general (Lourenço et al. 2016, Vallgårda 2012,
Costa & Kahn 2013), and in traffic (Aberg 2000, Cooper & Wright 2014, Várhelyi et al.
2004). Most of the traffic nudges are found outside the car (see appendix A). These
interventions, even though they increased speed limit compliance, are stationary and
geographical limited. Although some in-car initiatives exist there is a critical gap in
the literature examining their actual development and implementation. As such, this
project sets out to explore and evaluate the process of designing in-car nudges. The
findings will lay the groundwork for future speed reduction initiatives utilizing nudging.
1.2
Theoretical Framework - the ABC
Behavioral Model
The ABC behavioral model is widely accepted as a framework for analyzing behavior and
designing functional interventions (e.g. nudges) for behavior change (Miltenberger 2011).
The ABC model will therefore be adopted as the theoretical framework for this thesis.
The model consists of antecedents (cue or trigger), behavior (action) and consequence
(outcome or result) which all follow each other in sequence. Here a cue functions as the
antecedent, that triggers change in behavior.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
1.3
Research Question
With the goal of investigating the design process and potential of an in-car nudge the
following research question was formulated:
As an indicator for real life development and implementation: to which de-
gree can an in-car nudge be used to improve drivers’ compliance with the set
speed limit while driving in a simulator?
To be able to answer the research question the following subquestions were made:
RQ1: What is generally associated with driving safe and speeding? (Study 1)
RQ1: When translated into antecedents, how does these generalized associations
affect driving behavior? (Study 2)
RQ3: How is driving behavior affected by exposure to several antecedents at once?
(Study 3)
1.4
Methodological Framework
In order to answer the overall research question via the ABC model this thesis adopts a
5 part methodology:
Part 1 identifies and distils potential antecedents by identifying triggers of safe
driving behavior (Study 1).
Part 2 operationalizes these antecedents by translating them into prototypes
through design work.
Part 3 tests in a driving simulator the efficacy of individual antecedents (Study
2)
Part 4 tests in a driving simulator the combined effect of antecedents integrated
in a final prototype (Study 3).
Part 5 final design recommendations will be proposed based on the findings from
the previous parts.
1.5
Report Structure
This thesis consists of 10 chapters. The introduction (ch. 1) presents the aim, research
questions and structure of the project. The following chapter (ch. 2) is a thorough
literature review which is the scientific foundation for this thesis. The next chapter (ch.
==PAGE:15==
1.5 Report Structure
3
3) will go through the applied methods that were used to answer the research questions.
Then a chapter (ch. 4) to describe the design, execution and results of study 1, which
leads up to a chapter (ch.
5) about how the results of study 1 was translated into
nudging concepts. Then there will be two chapters on study 2 and 3, where the effect of
the nudges will be investigated individually (ch. 6) and combined (ch. 7). The results
of the studies will be combined into a final design implementation chapter (ch. 8) where
recommendations on how to proceed will be discussed. Second to last (ch. 9) a general
discussion on the findings of the whole project will be presented. The last chapter (ch.
10) will present the final conclusion with suggestions for future work.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
The literature review was made with the intention of researching the speeding issue,
both from an internal and external perspective. Research was also made into human
behavior and which design methods would be appropriate to use in order to create the
desired behavioral changes. The insight from the literature review was used through out
the creation and evaluation of the interventions proposed in the following chapters.
In this chapter the internal motivator will be presented first (2.1) followed by the external
motivators (2.2). Then a look in to behavioral theories (2.3) and design theories (2.4)
will be examined. And lastly the pontential of combining behavioral and design theories
will be examined (2.5).
2.1
Internal Motivators
In the introduction it was concluded that speeding is a widespread problem and speeding
is causing an increase of both the frequency and severity of traffic accidents. However,
why do people speed? In this section a range of common reasons for speeding will briefly
be described.
2.1.1
Gender and Age
Statistically young males are the primary group involved in car accidents (SUPREME
2005, Elvik et al. 2009). In a traffic accident analysis, investigating 33 danish accidents
where the speed limit was exceeded with more than 30 %, it was found that only 3 of the
drivers were female and 25 of the drivers were below the age of 25 (National Strategisk
Analyse 2017). This tendency is mostly due to young males being more prone to the
factors explained in the subsequent sections with an emphasis on the perceived danger,
ego-gratification and thrill seeking (Peden et al. 2004). Furthermore, young people are
usually less experienced which also affects the statistics (Harms et al. 2008).
2.1.2
Perceived Control
Drivers can have an unrealistic perception of their own risks of getting involved in a
traffic accident. This is primarily due to two main concepts: optimism bias and the
illusion of control (McKenna 1993, Stephens & Ohtsuka 2014, DeJoy 1989).
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Literature Review
• Optimism bias refers to a generalized expectancy for positive outcomes indepen-
dent of the source of the outcomes (McKenna 1993).
• Illusion of control locates the source of the expected outcome in terms of personal
control (McKenna 1993).
The two concepts are closely intertwined, and they both give an unrealistic risk
perception, which in return will reduce the motivation of engaging in actions reducing
the probability of collisions (e.g. avoiding to speed and close following) as well as actions
to decrease the consequences of possible accidents (e.g. avoiding to speed and wearing
a seat belt) (McKenna 1993, DeJoy 1989, Stephens & Ohtsuka 2014).
2.1.3
Ego Gratification and Thrill Seeking
Some drivers like to make themselves feel better, which for instance can be motivated
by the need of thrills and ego-gratification (Gabany et al. 1997, Porter 2011).
Ego-
gratification refers to a person’s motivation to feel superior to other people and in this
case it includes speeding to scare passengers, intentionally speed to feel above the law,
speed to impress others, etc.. Thrill refers to the excitement one gets out of speeding
and taking risks (Young et al. 2010, Tay et al. 2002a). More specifically it includes
speeding because it is more fun than driving slow, it gives a sense of power and control
to speed, and speeders don’t like to be passed by other cars, etc..
2.1.4
Time Pressure and Disdain of Driving
Sometimes people speed due to their need or wish to be somewhere else than driving
the car (Gabany et al. 1997, Porter 2011). This can either be due to the driver having
responsibilities elsewhere and is short on time, or the driver is disdaining the driving
experience in itself and therefore wants to get it over with as quickly as possible. Exam-
ples include: speeding because you are late for an appointment, there is an emergency,
you want to get home, time is money, etc..
2.1.5
Inattention to the Driving Activity
Inattention to the driving activity can cause the driver to speed without that person
being aware of it (Harms et al. 2008, Åberg & Warner 2008). The inattention can be
caused by many factors: being distracted by something, not paying attention to the
speed, just copying the speed of other vehicles etc. (Gabany et al. 1997).
2.1.6
Social Norms
Social norms are shared understandings of actions that are obligatory, permitted or for-
bidden, and social norms can therefore encourage (or discourage) actions (Ostrom 2000,
==PAGE:19==
2.2 External Motivators
7
Ajzen & Fishbein 1980). Unfortunately speeding is one of the most socially acceptable
deviating driving behaviors (Tay et al. 2002b, Pelsmacker & Janssens 2006), and speed-
ing is therefore by many seen as okay or in some cases encouraged. Furthermore, people
have a tendency to mimicking others in fear of sticking out socially. This is called the
conformity bias (Conformity Bias - Ethics Unwrapped n.d.).
2.1.7
Enforcement
Speeding enforcement is an ever present risk that every to-be-speeding driver has to con-
sider. However, since speeding is largely socially acceptable (see 2.1.6) it can be difficult
to justify speeding enforcement as anything else than governmental greed (Hoekstra &
Wegman 2011, Tay 2005). Furthermore, speeding can be a transient action and detec-
tion and subsequent penalties are therefore believed to be easily avoidable (Hoekstra &
Wegman 2011).
2.1.8
No Good Alternatives
When one tries to change people’s behavior for the better the easiest solution is often to
suggest an alternative (Wendel 2013). For instance, get some more exercise by taking the
bike to work instead of the bus, or choose whole grain instead of white bread. However,
the only alternative to speeding is... not to speed (Hoekstra & Wegman 2011). In con-
trast driving under influence (DUI) has plenty of good alternatives: having a designated
driver, hiring a cab, using public transport, sleeping it off etc. (Hoekstra & Wegman
2011).
2.1.9
On a Napkin
Speeding is complex, multifaceted problem as can be seen from the above sections. Sev-
eral internal motivators can play a role for the speeding in a given situation, and it might
be different motivators for the same person in different situations (Gabany et al. 1997).
With this logic, it is an advantage to address several of the internal speed motivators,
when designing a speed reduction initiative, to prevent the speeding in most scenarios.
The next section will address the external motivators that exist to prevent drivers from
speeding.
2.2
External Motivators
Since 1971 traffic safety in Denmark - measured by the number of people killed in traffic
annually - has continually been improving, however this trend has stagnated since 2012
(National Strategisk Analyse 2017). In the previous section the internal motivators that
are contributing to people speeding were presented. In this section the implemented
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Literature Review
external motivators, which try to convince people not to speed, will be discussed. The
section is divided into speed reduction initiatives situated outside and inside the car.
2.2.1
Outside-Car Initiatives
2.2.1.1
Horizontal and Vertical Deflections
Vertical speed control elements are speed humps, speed tables and speed cushions. All
of these are physical, limited alteration of the road’s height, which makes it extremely
unpleasant for the driver and passengers and sometimes damaging for the car to cross the
elements at high velocities. All vertical speed control elements efficiently reduce vehicle
speeds to a target speed (NACTO 2011). Furthermore, due to their design they are
primarily used in residential and low speed areas, where freight traffic is discouraged and
the wanted traffic-volume is low. Horizontal speed control elements are curb extensions,
chicanes, pinch points and more.
Much like the vertical speed control elements the
horizontal elements help decreasing the speed of traffic in areas of low speed limits
(NACTO 2011). Horizontal speed reducing elements force the driver to change path, be
more vigilant and/or give way for other road users, all of which makes the driver slow
down to stay in control.
Horizontal and vertical deflection strategies are one of the most efficient speed man-
agement schemes available (Mountain et al. 2005), however their use is limited to low
velocity areas (NACTO 2011) and their effects are localized in time and space (Várhelyi
et al. 2004). In fact, speed management schemes can make traffic, and thereby prob-
lematic driving behavior, migrate from roads with new established speed management
schemes to alternative routes (Mountain et al. 2005).
2.2.1.2
Campaigns
A traffic campaign is an often used tool to change undesirable traffic related behavior in
Denmark. While writing this the Council of Safe Traffic (Rådet for Sikker Trafik) has
8 running campaigns (Aktuelle kampagner | SIKKERTRAFIK.DK 2018). Traffic cam-
paigns have mixed levels of success and the campaign focus seems to matter significantly
for the level of success (Hoekstra & Wegman 2011, Tay 2005). Campaigns focusing on
DUI have a weighted average accident reduction of 18 %, while campaigns focusing on
speeding only have a 4 % reduction (Phillips et al. 2011). Tay (2005) argues that the
two problems (DUI and speeding) are fundamentally different, which is described in
more detail in section 2.1. This argument is consistent with the results of the Danish
Police’s Strategical Analysis. They have focused on three undesired driving behaviors:
not wearing seat belt, DUI and speeding. Of the three behaviors speeding has been the
most difficult to reduce (National Strategisk Analyse 2017, Madsen 2018).
==PAGE:21==
2.2 External Motivators
9
2.2.1.3
Policies and Legislation
Historically politicians have tweaked two parameters to change people’s attitude towards
speeding (Siren et al. 2012):
• Change the speed limit
• Change the punishment of breaking the speed limit
Generalized speed limits where first introduced in Denmark in 1903. They were then re-
pealed in 1953. From 1961-1965 speed limit experiments were conducted due to increase
in traffic accidents. The generalized speed limits were reintroduced in the seventies due
to the oil crises (and later traffic safety) and finally in the 1990s and the 2000s the
speed limit and the speeding sanctions were increased (Siren et al. 2012). The number
of casualties in Denmark topped in 1971 with 1.213 people. That number has declined
ever since, although stagnating from 2012 - and all of this is in spite of the traffic vol-
ume has continually been increasing (see figure 2.1) (National Strategisk Analyse 2017).
Combining this trend with the policy interventions no clear effect is distinctive, other
than around the reintroduction of then generalized speed limits (or the oil crisis).
Figure 2.1: The trend of traffic casualties and number of cars on the road. (Source:
National Strategisk Analyse 2017).
2.2.1.4
Enforcement
Speed cameras has become a very popular deterrent strategy against speeding and many
studies indicate they have a great reduction of speed, injuries and death (Hess 2004,
Christie et al. 2003, Mountain et al. 2005).
However, the findings of the review of
Pilkington & Kinra (2005) indicates that the level of evidence in these kind of studies
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Literature Review
are relatively poor and more and better studies needs to be conducted to support the
claims of the efficacy of the speed cameras.
2.2.2
In-Car Initiatives
Since the 1980s studies and experiments have been conducted on Intelligent Speed Adap-
tation (ISA), which is in-car systems designed to improve driver compliance with safe
speeds (Adell et al. 2008). These systems consists of two components: a speed limit
calculation and a system output (Eskandarian 2012). Here the speed limit calculation
can be fixed (e.g. maximum travelling speed for trucks) or dynamic in relation to the
given speed limit on a given road. Speed limit can be calculated using roadside beacons
or GPS receivers in combination with enriched digital maps (Eskandarian 2012). For the
system output two main classes of ISA exist: speed alerting and speed limiting systems
(Young & Regan 2002). The two output classes will be expanded upon in the following
sections.
2.2.2.1
Speed Alerting ISA
Speed alerting ISAs are systems that warn the driver - by auditory, visual or haptic cues
- if he or she is exceeding the posted speed limit in a given location (Young & Regan
2002). One of the most promising and most tested of these speed alerting ISAs is the
Active Accelerator Pedal (AAP) (Várhelyi et al. 2004). The AAP system activates a
counterforce to the accelerator pedal whenever the driver tries to exceed the speed limit.
It is possible for the driver to exceed the speed limit, however the driver then needs to
press much harder on the accelerator pedal to counter the counterforce (Várhelyi et al.
2004).
Multiple field studies and simulator experiments have shown positive effects
on speed level, speed variance and car following behavior (Almqvist & Nygård 1997,
Brookhuis & de Waard 1999, Carsten et al. 2000, Várhelyi & Mäkinen 2001, Färber
et al. 1991). Another common speed alerting ISA-system is a combination of visual and
auditory warnings (Young & Regan 2002). Here the auditory warning is either verbal or
non-verbal, and the visual warning is usually a small light indicating compliance with
the speed limit (Young & Regan 2002, Eskandarian 2012).
2.2.2.2
Speed Limiting ISA
Speed limiting ISAs are systems that makes it impossible to exceed the speed limit.
Speed limiting ISAs has showed much improved speed limit compliance (Almqvist &
Nygård 1997, Brookhuis & de Waard 1999, Varhelyi et al. 1998), and in general per-
forms better than the speed alerting ISAs (Young & Regan 2002, Eskandarian 2012).
However, the driver acceptance of speed limiting ISAs is usually quite low compared to
speed alerting ISAs (Eskandarian 2012, Várhelyi 2002). Furthermore, there are concerns
arising from mixed study results, where some show that ISAs have the unwanted side
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Behavioral Theories
11
effects of hypovigilance, driver distraction, driver overloading and negative behavioral
adaptations (Eskandarian 2012).
2.2.3
On a Napkin
The main problem of interventions situated outside the car, is that they are localized
in time and space, and sometimes makes problem behavior migrate instead of curing it.
ISAs on the contrary are very situational and intervene when needed. However, some
unwanted behavioral side effects from the ISAs might occur, and speed limiting ISAs
have low acceptance levels. The in-car ISAs have shown great results, and therefore
have great potential of changing people’s speeding behavior. But before being able to
change behavior, it is deemed necessary to better understand what a behavior is. That
will be the topic of the next section
2.3
Behavioral Theories
Before a designer can hope to create a design that changes people’s behavior, the first
step is to understand how people’s decisions are made and how they subsequently affect
their behavior (Wendel 2013).
Many have dedicated their careers to studying human behavior(Fogg 2009, Fazio
1990, Prochaska et al. 1995, Ajzen & Fishbein 1980). So far, no one have been able
to come up with one answer as to why humans behave as they do. Humans behavior
is complex and not easily explained. However many have tried. Fogg (2009), Fazio
(1990), Prochaska et al. (1995) and Ajzen & Fishbein (1980), have all created models
dedicated to describing the reason behind human behavior. However, The Theory of
Planned Behavior (TPB) by Ajzen (1991) has a more explicit focus on how behavior is
affected by others, which is important when explaining behavior in the traffic (Åberg
et al. 1997). TPB is therefore chosen as a model to describe human behavior in this
project. Furthermore the TPB is a well know and generally recognized model that have
been applied in many fields (Sheppard et al. 1988, Van Der Putte 1993, Fabrigar et al.
2005) including traffic related behavior (Åberg et al. 1997, Pelsmacker & Janssens 2006,
Gastil 2000).
The Theory of Planned Behavior is made up of five elements: Attitude, norms, perceived
control, intent and behavior.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Literature Review
Figure 2.2: Theory of Planned Behavior.
The attitude is related to whether a person have positive or negative feelings toward
performing the behavior (Ostrom 1969, Ajzen & Fishbein 1980, Fabrigar et al. 2005).
If the attitude is positive then the person is more likely to engage in the behavior and
the other way around, if the person have a negative attitude to a behavior then the
person is less likely to engage in that behavior. The norms are a person’s guideline
for acceptable behavior, this includes own perception and the perception of what other
people think about a specific behavior (Ostrom 2000, Allcott 2009, Ajzen & Fishbein
1980). If the people around a person is against a specific behavior then the person is
less likely to behave in that way (Ajzen & Fishbein 1980). The perceived control of a
situation is also a deciding factor in whether a behavior will take place or not. If the
person feels like he is in control of the situation and the factors around the situation,
then the behavior is more likely to occur (Ajzen 1985). The intent is a precursor for
the likelihood of whether an act will occur or not. The intent takes into consideration,
the action, target and time of the behavior and can be assumed to be an immediate
antecedent for a behavior (Ajzen & Fishbein 1980, Cushman 2015, Ouellette & Wood
1998). A behavior is made up of an action, a target, a time and lastly a context. If the
context is not right the behavior will not take place (Ajzen & Fishbein 1980, Fogg 1998).
For an intent to become a behavior the attitude, norm and perceived control all have to
be in more or less favor for the behavior. However, if the perceived control is prominent
enough it can on its own be a precursor for behavior - completely bypassing the other
three factors (Ajzen 1985).
Over the almost 35 years since the TPB was introduced a lot of research have gone in
to the effect of the different elements in the model in many different situations (Van den
Branden et al. 2015, Manstead & Parker 1995, Mathieson 1991). What can be concluded
from the previous studies is that the effect varies based on the situation and that attitude,
norms, perceived control and intent is not the sole influencers on a behavior, however
combined they predict many situations with relative accuracy (Sheppard et al. 1988,
Van Der Putte 1993, Åberg et al. 1997, Pelsmacker & Janssens 2006, Gastil 2000).
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Design Theories
13
2.4
Design Theories
2.4.1
Designing Behavior Change
Wendel (2013) formulated a plan on how to best achieve behavior change through design,
and that is by making the design simple and easy. He emphasizes four elements a designer
should focus in order to help facilitate a behavior change:
1. Simple to understand how
2. Easy to do and easy to know if done wrong,
3. Easy to see progress
4. Meaningful enough that the person feel a sense of reward after doing it
However, what one person finds easy does not mean others will find the same thing
easy (Fogg 2009). This is why it is crucial, that the designer understands the problem
from the perspective of the target group before the solution design begins (Wendel
2013, Gossling et al. 2005). However the four simple guidelines is not much to go on
when starting a design process and design theories that embrace this simplicity have
therefore been looked into. The theory found to be the best fit was nudging, as it works
by making small, simple and often inexpensive changes to the environment in which
choices are made (de Rider 2014, Lourenço et al. 2016).
2.4.2
Nudging
Nudging has in the later years become a hot topic (Reisch &
2016, de Rider 2014,
Hausman & Welch 2010) and some hope that through nudging choice architects can
achieve a better effect when doing behavior changing design (de Rider 2014). A choice
architect is any person that creates the context in which a person is to make a choice
(Thaler & Sunstein 2008). However being a choice architect do not necessarily make
your work a nudge (Thaler & Sunstein 2008).
”A nudge is any aspect of the choice architecture that alters people’s behavior
in a predictable way without forbidding any options or significantly changing
their economic incentives” (Thaler & Sunstein 2008)
The nudge concept was first introduced by Thaler & Sunstein (2008) in their book
Nudge. As the definition of a nudge it quite open Thaler & Sunstein (2008) describe,
that a nudge should seek to influence people in a positive direction, by making their life
simpler, easier, and safer. This is added in an attempt to safeguard against nudging
being used for manipulation. The choice a nudge presents should be easy and simple for
a person to make. However, what easy is depends on that person (Thaler & Sunstein
2008, Fogg 2009). It can be easy for some people to follow a nudge that requires money,
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Literature Review
if one has money. However, if a person do not have money then it is not easy to follow
the nudge (Fogg 2009). Meaning that one nudge might work on one person but not on
another. In order to facilitate an easy choice nudging targets the automatic response
system and only in some cases target the conscious response system (Hansen & Jespersen
2013). However because of nudges targeting a person’s automatic response system it is
important for the nudge to be transparent in order to make is simple and easy for the
nudged to make a different choice (Sunstein 2015).
2.4.3
Nudging Against a Person’s Intent
The definition of Thaler & Sunstein (2008) is still open for discussion and critics of
the open definition argue that a nudge should not seek to change a person’s incentives
but help the person realize their own incentives (Hansen & Jespersen 2013, Selinger &
Whyte 2011). For instance most people can agree that exercising is healthy and it is
something one should do regularly. However, many fail to do this even though they have
this understanding because their incentives do not align (Serdula et al. 1999). Here a
nudge could be helpful in changing the person’s behavior, without interfering or altering
with that person’s incentives. Hansen & Jespersen (2013) claim that a nudge should
not change a person’s incentive. The problem with that is people do not only have one
incentive, but many sometimes conflicting incentives. This is a conflict that Hansen &
Jespersen (2013) do not cover. However, many argue if a nudge seek to promote “the
greater good”, then it is okay if the nudge changes some people’s incentives (Thaler
& Sunstein 2008, Hausman & Welch 2010, Jung & Mellers 2016). And since a nudge
should leave an opt out option, people with a strong conflicting incentive can still avoid
the influence of the nudge (Thaler & Sunstein 2008, Hausman & Welch 2010). Thaler
& Sunstein (2008) describe how nudges should be used “for the better” or as we say
the greater good. However, what the greater good is depends on the perspective of the
individual and it is a fact that not all will be able to agree (Vallgårda 2012). In the
debate of what the greater good is, nudges are often divided in two: the greater good for
the individual and the greater good for the society (Hagman et al. 2015). Bovens (2009)
questions whether a nudge becomes manipulation if it goes against a person’s beliefs
and incentives, which nudges for the greater good undoubtedly will do to some of the
nudgees. However can a nudge be manipulation when nudges preserve the freedom of
choice and the people whose beliefs and incentives goes against the nudge at any time
can choose different from the nudge? Thaler & Sunstein (2008) argue that nudging is not
manipulation precisely because people always have the option to choose to deviate from
the nudge as a nudge always leaves that option open. Hansen & Jespersen (2013) argue
that only nudges that facilitates choices, like information and reminders are ethically
defensible, while Hausman & Welch (2010) states that when justified (like making life
safer for all) then mild nudges is unproblematic. Jung & Mellers (2016) find that the
majority of the participants in their survey support nudges within health and safety. It
is therefore our opinion that a minor change in incentive is justifiable when the nudge
seeks to promote what the majority agree upon being for the greater good.
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Combining Behavior and Design Theories
15
2.5
Combining Behavior and Design Theories
TPB and Nudging are from two different fields: psychology and behavioral economics
respectively (Thaler & Sunstein 2008, Ajzen & Fishbein 1980). As this project aims to
use both approaches side by side it was deemed necessary to find a framework that can
be used to analyze and explain behavior as well as facilitate design for behavior change.
For this the acknowledged ABC model was chosen (Miltenberger 2011).
The model
consists of antecedents (cue or trigger), behavior (action) and consequence (outcome or
result) which all follow each other in sequence. Here a cue functions as the antecedent,
that triggers change in behavior. What this project aims to do, is to design a nudge
that functions as the antecedent to change the behavior of speeding.
Figure 2.3: The ABC model.
The ABC model is designed to be used as analyzing tool for problem behavior, and
the insights learned from the analysis can then be used to design functional interventions
(Miltenberger 2011). These functional intervention (nudges in the context of this project)
should aim to alter the antecedents and the consequences of the problem behavior, to
achieve a change of the problem behavior. The ABC has the advantage, that it can
both be used as an analysis tool as well as a constructive design tool, which is what was
needed to combine the Nudge and TPB approaches.
2.6
Conclusion of Literature Review
As mentioned in the introduction (ch. 1), traffic accidents have a huge socioeconomic
cost, and speeding is at the core of this. Speeding is a complex, multilateral, behavioral
problem (section 2.1) - a problem decision makers have tried to solve for years (section
2.2). However, the solutions implemented so far have not been able to tackle the speeding
problem to a level of satisfaction (National Strategisk Analyse 2017).
Most current speeding interventions are situated outside the car (see section 2.2).
And due to their effects being localised in time and space, they are not able to intervene
in every speeding situation (Várhelyi et al. 2004). A few contextual, in-car interventions
called ISAs have been tested (Young & Regan 2002). These interventions are arguably
nudges, however a critical scarcity exists of studies on the development and implementa-
tion of these interventions. As such, this project sets out to design, operationalize and
test the effect of in-car nudges.
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Literature Review
To achieve this the ABC model has been adopted as a research and design framework,
to enable the creation of functional interventions (e.g. nudges) to change the problem
behavior of speeding. With this model as the foundation, appropriate antecedents will
be identified, distilled and translated into nudge interventions. The efficacy of these
nudge interventions, and their inherent antecedents, will be measured by the resulting
behaviors. This procedure will be elaborated in the following chapter.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
As was concluded from the literature review a critical scarcity of studies on the de-
velopment and efficacy of in-car nudge initiatives exists. Therefore the project wants
to explore the process of identifying antecedents that are capable of changing people’s
speeding behaviors for the better. However, how to measure an improvement in speeding
behavior? There are two dimensions of speeding: 1) how much faster than the speed
limit a person is driving and 2) for how much time said person is driving above the speed
limit. Therefore, the metric for determining the magnitude of speeding was chosen to
be speeded distance, which is the integral of the speed above the speed limit.
With this in mind the following hypotheses are presented.
H0: It is not possible to reduce the speeded distance of drivers by exposing
them to the right antecedents.
H1: It is possible to reduce the speeded distance of drivers by exposing them
to the right antecedents.
3.1
Study Approaches
3.1.1
Study 1
Study 1 was conducted to answer the first research subquestion (RQ1). The study was
an explorative brainstorm session with 118 DTU students as participants. The students
were told the project was concerning traffic safety - partly disguising the focus of speed.
This sought to avoid priming the participants, to ensure immediate associations more fit
for being antecedents. The participants were asked first to brainstorm over the sentence
“driving safe” and second “speeding”.
All the associations were then analyzed using
cluster analysis, to find inherent patterns, themes and concentrations from the data.
These findings were later used as foundation for the creation and as evaluation of the
nudge interventions used for study 2 and 3.
3.1.2
Study 2
Study 2 was a quantitative experiment conducted to answer RQ2. Since it was sought
to test the effect of 3 different antecedent interventions it was chosen to use a within-
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Methodology
subject experimental design. One of the advantages of within-subject design is that
fewer participants are needed. To combat carry over effects a randomized order of the
interventions was used. To test the interventions a driving simulator was used. The
driving simulator enabled the extraction of the current speed and speed limit with a
frequency of 20 Hz. Each intervention and a control trial were tested for 4 minutes
for each participants. This way it was possible to calculate and compare the speeded
distance for each intervention and each of the participants. A post-hoc pairwise compar-
ison was conducted to determine if the different interventions were statistically different
from each other. Each participant was asked to answer a short questionnaire both to
test if they noticed the interventions and to get their opinions on the interventions.
3.1.3
Study 3
Study 3 was conducted to answer research RQ3, or in other words to test if there is an
increased speed limit compliance if the antecedent interventions are combined. Study 3
was conducted the same way as study 2, with the only difference being 31 participants
undergoing a control trial and the intervention trial. No post-hoc test was made, since
only two scenarios where tested.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Study 1
The purpose of this study was to answer RQ1 (see section 1.3). It states: What is gen-
erally associated with driving safe and speeding? These generalized associations were
wanted as inputs to the design of nudge interventions. Following the ABC model, these
interventions are to be used as the antecedents for the target behavior of speed limit
compliance. As previously stated nudging works by triggering a person’s automatic re-
sponse system (see section 2.4.2). Correlating antecedents, behaviors and consequences
differs from person to person (Miltenberger 2011), but hopefully some more common
correlations exist. It is known, that whatever comes first to mind is likely to be the
influencing factor for the reaction the situation calls for, even if it is the wrong reac-
tion (Northcraft & Neale 1987, Kuran & Sunstein 1999). This is why the first study
was designed to discover the associations people have about driving safe and toward
speeding in general.
In this chapter you will be able to read about the first study from start until finish.
First is the method section (4.1) where the design of the study is described. Then in
the materials and procedures section (4.2) a detailed walk through of the procedure is
presented, followed by some information about the participants of the study. The next
section (4.3) is about how the data was analyzed. After this the result are presented
(4.4) and later discussed (4.5).
4.1
Method
The study was based on the method of Holm-Hansen & Olsen (2013), and was designed
to gather associations in a straightforward manner, while minimizing the influence of
external factors. The study was designed to discover what people associate with the
two phrases driving safe and speeding. The two phrases were chosen to highlight the
speeding problem from two different angles making for a better understanding of the
problem. The choice to use the driving safe phrase instead of something like driving
within the speed limits was to discover a wider area of potential associations that might
have an effect on speeding. The speeding phrase had the goal of discovering what
associations might encourage people to speed and thereby gain the knowledge of what
associations not to use.
==PAGE:32==
20
4 Study 1
4.2
Materials and Procedures
4.2.1
Procedure
The participants were given a leaflet and asked not to turn the pages before they were
told to (see the leaflet in appendix B). While the leaflet was being handed out the rules
for the brainstorm session were described. Once that was done the participants were
asked to turn to the second page. The participants were then given three minutes per
brainstorm to write as many associations as possible. They were informed when there
were 30 seconds left. After the 2x3 min brainstorms they were asked to fill out the short
questionnaire about themselves.
Figure 4.1: The two brainstorming sessions.
4.2.2
The participants
A total of 118 engineering students of both bachelor and master level participated in
the study (45 in the first session and 73 students in the second session). Of the 118
participants 62 % were male and 38 % were female. The age of the participants ranged
from 18 to 52 with the average being 23,4 years old. 67 % of the participants were
Danish while the last 33 % came from all over the world. As not all the participants
spoke Danish the brainstorm sessions were held in English. However, we did not want to
restrict the participants contributions by forcing them to write in English, and therefore
we told them that we would accept both Danish and English answers.
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Analysis
21
4.3
Analysis
Before the analysis could begin the words written in danish were translated to English.
In an effort to create an overview of the associations the first analysis were done with
an inductive approach. This resulted in a range of very concrete clusters detached from
our theory from the literature review. Because of the gap between the clusters and
the theory, the foundation of this second analysis was the findings from TPB (section
2.3) and the internal motivators (section 2.1) combined with the insights from the first
analysis.
4.3.1
First Analysis
The first clustering was done in order to get an overview of the gathered associations
as more than 1500 words/sentences were gathered for both brainstorm sessions. The
large amount of words can be challenging to work with before order have been made
of them. Because of this it was chosen to sort the words in the inductive patterns the
authors found simply by looking at the words as a first analysis. Furthermore as the
brainstorm themes were quit open most of the participants chose to write short sentences
in order to explain their association. Because of this, at first glance not many of the same
words were found. However, the meaning of several of the sentences were the same e.g.
late, late to something, rushing, hurrying, in a hurry etc. and were therefore clustered
together. In this first clustering no words were deleted as no rule for the clusters were
made before hand. As the first clusters were purely inductive, it was chosen to make a
second clustering based on the findings from the literature review. The results of the
first cluster can be found in the charts below (figure 4.2 4.3).
==PAGE:34==
22
4 Study 1
Figure 4.2: Original Clusters Driving Safe.
Figure 4.3: Original Clusters Speeding.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Analysis
23
As the clusters are from this initial inductive approach there is a gap between the
theory from the literature review and the clusters. Because of this it was decided to
make second analysis of the clusters in order to bridge the gap. From the clusters from
the first analysis we got a good knowledge of the words which was an advantage when
creating the new cluster headings with a stronger tie to the findings from the literature
review
4.3.2
Second Analysis
Based on the internal motivators and TPB sections (2.1 and 2.3) new headings were
made. In the clustering of the driving safe brainstorm 7 headings were made, where in
the speeding clustering 10 headings were made. For each of the cluster headings rules
were made for what words would go in to which cluster (see list of rules in appendix C).
Below the list of the headings can be found:
• Speeding consequences (Only speeding)
• Intent (Only speeding)
• Social norms (Only speeding)
• Perceived safety/danger
• Rules and enforcement
• Attitude
• Attention/inattention
• Physiology
• Behavior
• Discarded
After the initial analysis based on the cluster headings it was decided to make sub
clusters for most of the headings. This was done as clear tendencies for natural groupings
showed within the clusters as some of them became rather large. For example in driving
safe, rules and enforcement 372 associations was clustered together. From the large
cluster the subclusters lights and colors in/on car, lights and colors outside car, drugs
and alcohol, traffic rules and regulations were made. All clusters and subclusters can be
seen in the tables below (figure 4.4 and 4.5).
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Study 1
4.4
Results of Study 1
From the brainstorm sessions 1535 words/sentences were collected for driving safe and
1700 words/sentences for speeding. Making the average number of associations 13,7
words produced by each of the 118 participants. Of the in total 3235 associations 568
words were discarded for being to vague and undefinable, like the word child, on its own
it is impossible to know what the participant were thinking about. Below a complete
list of the clusters and subclusters can be found.
Figure 4.4: Clusters Driving Safe.
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Results of Study 1
25
Figure 4.5: Clusters Speeding.
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Study 1
When looking at the driving safe associations the biggest cluster is perceived safety
with 472 followed by rules and enforcement with 372 and in third place is attention/i-
nattention with 251 associations. For speeding the top three is speeding consequences
with 299, intent with 240 and social norms with 204 associations. When compared to
the three smallest clusters in both brainstorm there is a large difference to be found as
non of the smallest association clusters passes 100 associations.
4.5
Discussion on Study 1
When comparing the difference in the largest and smallest clusters in the two brainstorms
it is clear that the three largest clusters in each brainstorm have a stronger hold on
people than the smaller ones. Going forward the focus will be on creation interventions
that utilize the associations from the biggest clusters, in order to make the strongest
intervention possible. When comparing the speeding and driving safe associations
there are several interesting things that arise. One is that the cluster with the most words
in the two brainstorms is perceived safety for driving safe and speeding consequences
for speeding. It indicates that people know and think about how to be safe in traffic,
and that they know the potential consequences there might be if they drive to fast. That
the consequences of speeding is such a big factor when people thinks of speeding might
indicate that people will be susceptible to an intervention aiming at them not speeding.
Another interesting thing is the second biggest clusters in the two brainstorms. For
driving safe the second biggest cluster is rules and enforcement and for speeding it
is intent. These two also go hand in hand as the rules are there to keep us all safe
where intent is a deciding factor in going against the rules. A third interesting thing is
that attentions and inattention takes third place in the driving safe associations. This
might indicate that to be safe you need to attentive of the road. Furthermore, what is
interesting is that not one of the attention or inattention associations focus on speed
and being attentive to the speed. This might indicate that looking at the speedometer
is secondary to focusing on the road and what goes on outside of the car. It might also
indicate drivers need some help keeping the speed while they focus on the road.
4.5.1
Unintentional Priming
Shortly before the brainstorm session, the first class of participants had been discussing
the Hövding airbag bike helmet in their lecture. This came to show when looking at
the outcome of the brainstorm session: 17,5 % of the participants wrote helmet and 35
% wrote airbag. Because of the discussion beforehand it was uncertain if the relatively
large number of words related to the helmet were true associations based on driving
safe or if the discussions beforehand had in some way primed participants and thereby
changed the outcome of the brainstorm. Because of this it was decided to recreate the
brainstorm with another class. In the second class 5,1 % wrote helmet and 20 % wrote
airbag. From this it can be argued that some priming of the first class had occurred.
==PAGE:39==
4.5 Discussion on Study 1
27
However as 1535 words were produced in the two classes combined for the driving safe
brainstorm and the words helmet and airbag only account for 2,9 % of the words in the
brainstorm it was decided that no further action were to be made based on the relative
insignificance of the unintentional prime.
4.5.2
The Openness of the Brainstorm
Both of the brainstorms were made with words that were open and instructions that
were simple. This as can be seen in the tables 4.4 and 4.5 in the large diversity of words.
Upon first glance having the brainstorms be so open could be considered a mistake,
as e.g. a large collections of the associations were car parts. However, if one were to
interpret these associations then they made sense as car parts are a large part of driving
safe.
4.5.3
The Categorization of the Words
The clusters, in which the associations were placed, were made based on the judgment of
the authors. The cluster names were made based on the findings in the literature review
in an effort to create a cohearence between the two and it minimize the potential biases.
When sorting association into the clusters the authors followed the agreed upon rules
(see appendix C), however even though it was tried to make the rule set as objective as
possible, the call on which cluster an association were to be placed in was based on our
judgment, so a bias is to be expected. A known and recognised way of avoiding bias
when clustering is by having an intercoder reliability test (Krippendorff 2004). However
by the time the coding was done there were no time for an intercoder reliability test, as
by the time the results came in it would be too late to make any changes to the clustering.
Because of this is was accepted that the clustering was biased going forward, and should
this part of the research be recreated, we recommend having an intercoder reliability
test. From the clustering it was found that perceived safety, rules and enforcement and
attention was the three strongest associations for the driving safe associations. And
for speeding it was found that speeding consequences, intent and social norms were the
strongest associations people had.
==PAGE:40==
28
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Design of Nudges
There is no pre-described way of how to create a nudge intervention. In this chapter
a description of how the nudges for this project was made using the findings from the
literature review and study 1.
In this chapter the creation of the nudge interventions will be described. First will the
initial creation of the interventions (5.1), then the reviewing of the interventions (5.2)
and lastly the refinement of the chosen interventions (5.3) will be described
5.1
Creation of Interventions
When creating the interventions based on study 1 it was decided to use the brainstorm
method, as it is a fast way of generating many ideas (Curedale 2012), which is what
one want to do in the early design stage (Curedale 2018).
The brainstorm sessions
amounted to 71 ideas. In order to narrow down the ideas the concept sorting method
described in the book 101 design methods were used (Kumar 2012). The method is made
if of five steps: collecting, normalizing, sorting, refining and reviewing (see appendix D
for the rules). As the brainstorm was made of only two persons there were no need
for normalizing the ideas and we therefore skipped to sorting. For the first round of
sorting, the ideas were divided in groups with the headers from the six top association
clusters, from study 1. Then the six groups were all assessed using the three categories
of the potential pyramid (3P): poor, possible or promising (see appendix D for the rule
description).
Figure 5.1: The Potential Pyramid.
==PAGE:42==
30
5 Design of Nudges
After the sorting 13 ideas were in the promising pool. The ideas were:
1. Rumble lines
2. Light in car blinks
3. More noise in car
4. Radio loss
5. Alarm
6. Green to red barometer
7. Fans turns on/up
8. Car shaking
9. Car tell how little time you have saved
10. You need to actively accept that you want to speed
11. Light in car becomes brighter
12. The car scold you for speeding
13. It is harder to press down on the speeder when speeding
This number was deemed high enough so that it was not necessary to work further
with the ideas in the possible category. In the refinement stage the 13 ideas were analyzed
for similarities, with the goal of making fewer and stronger concepts. The goal with the
combination was also to alter the ideas that did not fit within the nudge ideology so that
they would be able to be considered nudges. Ideas 1, 3, 4, 5 and 7 all work with sound;
2, 6 and 11 all use light, 9 and 12 have the car talking, 10 and 13 work with the driver
actively choosing to speed and 8 alone works with shaking parts. Based on this analysis
of similarities five new ideas were made and detailed. The new ideas were named and
are described below:
Ambient sound: is background noise whenever the driver speeds. This noise
will increase with time and stop the instant the driver ceases to speed. The noise
will serve as an indicator, making the driver aware of the speeding. The noise will
increase the cognitive load, making the driver feel less in control while speeding,
and the relief felt when the noise finally stops will serve as reward whenever the
driver ceases to speed.
The Call of Duty effect: is a red light around the rim of the windshield that
turns on whenever the driver speeds. The light is clearly visible with the peripheral
sight, however it will not interfere with the rest of the driving. We are coded to
be aware when red light turns on, and the concept therefore toggles the sense of
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Reviewing the Interventions
31
control of the driver. When speeding occurs the driver is made aware of it by
the light turning on, and the driver is rewarded for the not speeding by the light
turning off. The light is furthermore visible for other people in and outside the car,
which makes the action of speeding public and non-hideable. Social norms can in
this situation force the driver to slow down.
The jock button: is a default speed limiter in the car regulated by the current
speed limit. To be able to exceed the speed limit, the driver has to stamp the
speeder to bypass the speed limiter. This way it is impossible to speed without
making an active choice about it. It is therefore impossible to speed because of
inattention.
Herbie: is the car letting the driver know whenever the speed limit is exceeded
through a voice message. This way the driver is made aware of the speeding, and
is rewarded when no longer speeding by the voice shutting up.
Jurassic park: is the the shaking of the steering wheel whenever the driver
exceeds the speed limit. This will both make the driver aware of the speeding as
well as toggle the sense of control intensivising the driver to slow down.
5.2
Reviewing the Interventions
For the reviewing of the intervention ideas the five nudges were then broken down and
evaluated on which associations they were using from study 1. Hereby allowing us to
better access the potential effect of the nudge based on the associations:
==PAGE:44==
32
5 Design of Nudges
Figure 5.2: Table showing correlations between study 1 and the designed nudges.
It was discovered that it was not possible to test the jurassic park or the jock button
intervention because of limitations of the driving simulator. That left three interventions,
and because of this number it was agreed that no further elimination of concepts were
to be made. The final three interventions going forward was:
• Call of Duty
• Ambient sound
• Herbie
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Refinement of the Chosen Interventions
33
5.3
Refinement of the Chosen Interventions
Before the programming of the simulation could begin the last refinement of the inter-
ventions had to be made. For the call of duty intervention research was done on the
choice of the color. What was uncovered was that the color red is often associated with
mistakes, danger and stopping (Mehta & Zhu 2009) this makes for a shorter average
reaction time compared to the color blue (Shibasaki & Masataka 2014). Furthermore
the color red makes people more detail oriented and risk averse (Mehta & Zhu 2009).
This knowledge combined with red being the most mentioned in study 1 is the reason
for using the color red in the call of duty intervention test. The ambient sound however
was refined with the aim of figuring out which sound would work best. To come up with
possible sounds the associations were revisited and the words the could be translated to
sounds were written down. The words were:
• Noise
• Music
• Children
• Bikes
• Pedestrians
• Phone
• Radio
• Ambulance
• Weather
• Highway noise
• Rumleriller
• Car breaks
• Blinkers
• Police
• Blitz
What most of these sounds had in common was that they naturally occur in traffic.
That can be a problem as there is a chance of the driver becoming deaf to the sound
the intervention makes over time (Semotan et al. 1969). However, the study shows that
most people would react to a cry for help (Semotan et al. 1969). Furthermore, listening
to a child voice makes most adults experience a protective reaction (Parsons et al. 2013).
==PAGE:46==
34
5 Design of Nudges
This is a reaction that could be interesting to try and utilize in the study which is why
the ambient sound intervention will use children sounds as the antecedent. As for Herbie
two things still needed to be decided, one: the sentence and the other the voice. It was
decided to use a child as narrator for the intervention based on the findings from the
research for the ambient sound intervention. As for the choice of the sentence many
sentences were created (see appendix E for a complete list). However, it was decided to
use a short but precise sentence to not lose the attention of the driver halfway through.
The final sentence was “vær sød ikke at køre for stærkt” (translation: please don’t speed).
Since the intervention is aimed at danish drivers, the sentence was formulated in danish.
This way we would also insure that all drivers understood the sentence.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 6
Study 2
In the previous chapter three nudge interventions were designed on the foundation of
the findings of study 1 and the literature review. What all three interventions have in
common is that they rely on the system being intelligent enough to know the speed
limits at any given time. This means that the interventions fall within the ISA cate-
gory. Furthermore as the nudge principles have been applied to the interventions and
it therefore is voluntary if the driver want to follow the ISA, all three interventions is
therefore under the speed alerting ISA category. The purpose of the second study was
to answer RQ2 and thereby be able to answer if the nudge interventions could work as
antecedents for increased speed limit compliance. This will be manifested by a decrease
in the speeded distance. For study 2 the following hypotheses were formulated:
H0: There is no change in speeded distance.
H1a: While exposed to the Call of Duty intervention drivers have a decreased
speeded distance.
H1b: While exposed to the Ambient Sound intervention drivers have a decreased
speeded distance.
H1c: While exposed to the Herbie intervention drivers have a decreased speeded
distance.
In this chapter the second study will be described. First the study method is de-
scribed (6.1), followed by a description of the materials and procedures (6.2). Then the
analysis (6.3) of the questionnaire (6.3.1) and simulator data (6.3.2). This is followed
by the results (6.4) of the questionnaire (6.4.1) and simulator data (6.4.2). Lastly is a
discussion of the study (6.5).
6.1
Method
The second study was designed as a behavioral experiment using a driving simulator.
The goal of using a simulator was to mimic the real driving experience, but staying in
a safe, controlled environment (Godley et al. 2002). Using a driving simulator allowed
for easy and efficient data collection, as behavioral data is provided by the simulator.
As mentioned in the previous chapter, three nudge interventions were chosen for test-
ing. These interventions together with a control trial made four scenarios in total. The
==PAGE:48==
36
6 Study 2
within-subject experimental design was chosen, since this reduces the number of partic-
ipants needed compared to its’ alternatives (between groups). This meant that every
participants would have to complete all four of the scenarios. To avoid carry-over ef-
fects, the order in which a participant was exposed to the scenarios was randomized
(Kirk 2007) (see appendix F for the experimental order).
A the start of the experiment the participant were be given a written introduction
to the experiment, to ensure consistency in the information given. After each scenario
the participants were asked to fill out a short questionnaire. The questionnaire was used
to check if the participant noted the intervention, and to probe for their reaction to the
intervention.
At the end of the experiment the participant was asked to fill out a final questionnaire
(see appendix G for the complete questionnaire).
This questionnaire collected basic
information about the participant. Furthermore, it asked if the participant wanted any
of the interventions in their own car. This question will be an indicator of the participants
attitude towards the interventions and thereby be an indicator of how likely they are to
engage with the wanted behavior (see section 2.3 about behavior).
6.2
Materials and Procedures
6.2.1
Programming of the Simulator
The experiment was conducted using a fixed-base driving simulator with a 180 degree
visual field with rear and side view mirrors. The simulator software used was ‘ScanEr
Studio’.
While programming the interventions small practical tweaks where deemed
necessary in order for the interventions to work in the simulator. The Call of Duty
intervention was straightforward to implement and no changes were made here. However,
for the Herbie intervention a small change was made. The best recording we got was
where the child said “vær sød ikke at køre stærkt” (translation: please don’t drive fast)
instead of “vær sød ikke at køre for stærkt” (translation: please don’t drive too fast).
Due to audio quality concerns and due to the deemed insignificance of the message
change, this was the chosen recording. The duration of the sound clip was 2 seconds,
and after some internal testing it was decided to repeat the message every 5 seconds.
The sound of the Ambient sound was revised once in the simulator. It was important
for the sound to be noticeable over the sound of the car while not being too shocking or
disturbing.
All of the interventions were set to trigger whenever the driver exceeded the speed
limit with 3 km/h and continue until the speed was below the tolerance again. The
tolerance was chosen to prevent the interventions from being too aggressive. This way
the interventions will not punish drivers aiming to drive just around the speed limit. A
timer was programmed to start whenever the participant started driving and to stop
the simulation after 4 minutes. This ensured that each participant had the exact same
driving time for each of the scenarios. Since the scope of the experiment was to explore
==PAGE:49==
6.2 Materials and Procedures
37
how drivers behave in speeding situations the scenarios were designed to provoke the
participants to speed. This was primarily done in three ways:
1. programming the other cars to drive above the speed limit
2. having stretches of road inviting for higher speeds than what the speed limit al-
lowed for
3. changing the speed limit often
The scenarios were set in an environment that both contained rural and city areas.
The environment was pre-made, but it was heavily adjusted to fit the needs of this
experiment.
6.2.2
Pilot Study
For the pilot study four people were invited to test the experimental setup and the four
scenarios. It was discovered, that the noise from the Ambient sound intervention faded
in too slowly, and it was therefore difficult to comprehend for the participants, since
the intervention were separated in time from the speeding behavior. It was therefore
corrected. Furthermore, small changes were made to the written introduction to the
experiment. The last two questions in the final questionnaire were switched around to
make a more logical question flow. And finally, since it took awhile for the participants
to get used to the simulator, it was chosen to make every participants drive past a certain
point in the map to ensure everyone could handle the car. Other than that, the pilot
test was a success and the data from the pilot was included in the final results of the
experiment.
6.2.3
Procedure
The experiment was conducted over a period of three weeks and was held at DTU, since
this was where the driving simulator was situated. The participants were told the ex-
periment would test new interventions to improve traffic safety. Before the experiment,
the participants were given a short written introduction (see appendix H). The intro-
duction ensured all participants got the same information the same way, and thereby
establishing a shared starting point. After reading the introduction, the participants
had a test drive to familiarize themselves with the the simulator. When familiar with
the simulator the participants completed the four scenarios while answering the written
questions in between. The order of the scenarios where randomized for each participant
(see appendix F for order). A the end of the experiment they were asked to fill out the
final questionnaire.
==PAGE:50==
38
6 Study 2
6.2.4
Participants
A total of 51 people participated in study 2. This number was chosen to stay well within
the standard of what other driving simulator studies have done (Varhelyi et al. 1998,
Carsten & Tate 2001, Martinussen et al. 2017). It proved difficult to draft participants
for the study, so this project sufficed with a convenience sample. Of the participants
82,4 % were male while 17,6 % were female. The average age was 28,1 years and the
average time in possession of a driver’s license was 9,2 years. One of the participants
got his license at 16 in the USA which is why the average age at which participants
got their license was 17,9 years. The participants were asked how far they drove each
week, and the average number is 135,5 km/week. The weekly mileage is mostly a rough
indicator since this was difficult for the participants to estimate. Furthermore, 22 of the
participants wrote that they drove 0-10 km/week.
6.3
Analysis
Two types of analyses were conducted. First is the answers from the questionnaires that
had the aim of checking if the participants noticed and understood the interventions.
The second type of analysis was data gathering from the simulator.
6.3.1
Questionnaires
The majority of the coding of the questionnaires was simply to sort through all the
answers gathered. In order to make the sorting easier the answers were typed into Google
Forms before the sorting. The answers were sorted in the three interventions and the
control and then further sorted into those who indicated they noticed the intervention
and those who did not. If they noticed the intervention, then they were sorted into
whether or not they understood the intervention and whether or not they found the
intervention stressful, irritating, distracting or annoying.
6.3.2
Simulator
The simulator was programmed to export driving speeds and corresponding speed limits
with a frequency of 20 Hz. The data was exported to a CSV-file, where a python script
converted the raw data into a speeded distance for each of the runs.
This enriched
data was then entered into the SPSS software where a Bonferroni post-hoc test were
conducted to compare the means of the scenarios.
==PAGE:51==
6.4 Results of Study 2
39
6.4
Results of Study 2
6.4.1
Questionnaires
The results of the questionnaires can be found in the table below (figure 6.1).
Figure 6.1: Results from the questionnaires.
When asked if they would like one or more of the interventions in their car, 70,6
% of the participants answered yes. Of those that answered yes, 50 % said that they
would like the red light (call of duty), 5,6 % liked the sound while no one indicated
that they wanted herbie. 60 % of the participants stating they did not want any of the
interventions in their car indicate it is because they found the interventions annoying,
distracting or stressful, while 2 stated they did not notice the interventions.
6.4.2
Simulator
In the table below (figure 6.2) the means and standard deviations for each of the scenarios
are presented. Call of Duty had the smallest mean followed by Herbie, Ambient Sound
and finally the control. Herbie had the smallest standard deviation. Call of Duty and
Herbie are both significantly smaller means than the control (with a Bonferroni corrected
significance level).
==PAGE:52==
40
6 Study 2
Figure 6.2: Results from the simulator.
Note: items in superscript indicate which
means are significantly different from each other at a Bonferroni corrected
level.
6.5
Discussion of Study 2
The null-hypothesis said there will be no significant difference in speeded distance be-
tween the four scenarios. The null-hypothesis is rejected, since Call of Duty and Herbie
both yielded significantly shorter speeded distances than the control. The results thereby
indicate, that it is possible to reduce the speeded distance by exposing the driver to the
antecedents.
The ambient sound did have a decreased mean compared to the control, however it
was not significantly different. From the results of the questionnaires it is also evident
that almost half of the participants had a hard time understanding the intervention and
its’ connection to speeding. This indicates that this intervention does not work as an
out-of-the-box antecedent for improved speed limit compliance. Nonetheless, from the
current study it is not possible to say how well the intervention would have worked if the
participants knew its’ connection to speeding. Furthermore, choosing the right sound
to play needs a full experiment on its’ own, even considering the groundwork done in
Study 1.
The questionnaires showed that 70 % were interested in having one or more of the
interventions in their own car, which indicates that the intervention can be adopted by
users. The participants clearly preferred the Call of Duty intervention. Many different
arguments for this were stated, however it mainly came down to the fact that it was less
intrusive than the other interventions. Several participants got annoyed at the Herbie
intervention since it always finished the sentence even though the driver already ceased to
speed. Multiple participants had difficulties understanding the noise from the Ambient
Sound intervention, and it is therefore no surprise that this was the intervention with
the worst performance. From the questionnaires it was evident, that not all participants
understood what was said by the Herbie intervention. The pilot test was conducted
to detect problems like this, however the problem did not show then. Nonetheless, the
intervention still had a very high efficacy, which indicates that it either were extremely
==PAGE:53==
6.5 Discussion of Study 2
41
effectful for the ones understanding the message or that a spoken message - no matter
if you get the meaning - can make you slow down.
Since the participants were a convenience sample, the results of this study might not
apply for all danish drivers. The majority of the participants were young males, which
might give more credit to the experiment. As mentioned in the literature review, young
males are the ones most prone to speed 2.1.1. That the interventions have had good
results on the very same target group is very promising for the speed limit compliance
efficacy of a real life implementation of these interventions.
==PAGE:54==
42
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 7
Study 3
This third study was conducted to investigate if the combination of two antecedents with
proven positive effects, could yield an even greater effect than the sum of its’ parts - this
way answering RQ3. To enable easy comparison this study will follow the composition
of study 2. This is why a hypothesis test will be performed again, however the main
focus of the current study will be to compare the results of the two studies. With this
said, here comes the hypotheses:
H0: There are no difference in mean of the speeded distance between the control
trial and the combined antecedents
H1: While exposed to the combined antecedents drivers will have a decreased
speeded distance.
In this chapter the third study will be described. First the study method is described
(7.1), followed by a description of the materials and procedures (7.2). Then the analysis
(7.3) of the questionnaire (7.3.1) and simulator data (7.3.2). This is followed by the
results (7.4) of the questionnaire (7.4.1) and simulator data (7.4.2). Lastly is a discussion
of the study (7.5) split into three, the questionnaire (7.5.1), the simulator (7.5.2) and
the experiment (7.5.3).
7.1
Method
As this study was made as an extension to the previous study, it was decided to use the
same method as described in study 2 (see section 6.1). The only difference between the
methods of study 2 and 3 was that in study 3 only two scenarios were tested: a control
and Call of Herbie. Call of Herbie is a combination of the two best interventions from
study 2: Call of Duty and Herbie. This resulted in a small change in the coding of the
simulator so that the two interventions would both intervene if the driver were to speed.
==PAGE:56==
44
7 Study 3
7.2
Materials and Procedure
7.2.1
Programming of the simulator
The simulator was programmed to have the two intervention at the same time. Other
than that, all was the same
7.2.2
Pilot Study
Since this study is pretty much the same as the previous, it was deemed unnecessary to
conduct yet another pilot study.
7.2.3
Procedure
The procedure was the same as in study 2 (see section 6.2.3) with the exception that the
drivers will only be exposed to two scenarios. The experiment took place over a period
of four days.
7.2.4
Participants
For the third study, 31 people participated.
All the participants in this study were
drafted from study 2. Based on the experience of gathering participants for the previous
study, it was chosen to reuse participants, as a concern to availability and time. Having
the the same participants drive again made it possible to complete the experiment over
a four day period and reduced the recruiting time significantly. The participants were
87 % male and 13 % female and had an average age of 28.9 years. They have had their
driver’s license for an average of 10,4 years and drove an average of 143,9 km/week.
7.3
Analysis
Since only two means were compared in this third study, a one-way ANOVA was carried
out, to see if the two means were significantly different.
Besides the analysis of variance a comparison between the results from study 2 and
study 3 was carried out. Due to the two studies being within-subject experiments and
study 3 reuses the participants from study 2, it has not been possible to conduct a
complete post hoc test for all the scenarios due to carry over effects (Cleophas 1993).
Therefore a simple comparison of the differences in means between the interventions and
their corresponding control trial was chosen.
==PAGE:57==
7.4 Results of Study 3
45
7.4
Results of Study 3
7.4.1
Questionnaire
Of the 31 drivers 67 % answered that they would like one or more of the interventions.
Of the 31 participants 29 indicated that they noticed the interventions. The two drivers,
who did not notice the interventions were not exposed to the interventions, since they
never sped during the experiment. Of the 29 that were exposed to the intervention, 26
answered that the intervention made them reduce their speed.
7.4.2
Simulator
A one-way ANOVA was conducted to compare effect of the combined antecedents on the
speeded distance. An analysis of variance showed that the effect of antecedents on the
speeded distance was significant, F(1, 30) = 18,874, p = 0.000. The descriptive statistics
can be seen in the table below (figure 7.1).
Figure 7.1: Descriptive statistics.
In the next table (figure 7.2) a comparison between the results of Study 2 and Study 3
i presented. In the table the difference between the interventions and their corresponding
control trial. As can be seen in the table Call of Herbie has the best improvement followed
by Call of Duty, Herbie and lastly Ambient Sound.
==PAGE:58==
46
7 Study 3
Figure 7.2: Comparison of study 2 and 3.
7.5
Discussion of Study 3
7.5.1
Questionnaire
From the questionnaire it is known that the drivers still preferred visual interventions
to sound interventions even when the two were combined. If compared to the results of
the test then the Call of Duty might have the biggest success should the interventions
be tested for a longer time in real cars at there seems to be a higher acceptance rate
for the intervention. When looking at the acceptance 67 % of the drivers said that they
would like an intervention helping them reduce their speed, where in study 2 the answer
were 70,6 %. That is an interesting finding as this shows that even when given the time
to think about the intervention the participants were still up for having interventions
helping them to reduce their speed.
7.5.2
Simulator
The mean speeded distance of Call of Herbie was significantly shorter than the control
trial, hence the null-hypothesis is rejected. This alone supports that to antecedents are
able to increase the speed limit compliance, however it does not conclude if the effect
of the combination of the two antecedents are significantly greater than the sum of
its’ parts. Though, when comparing the differences in means it is evident that Call of
Herbie has the greatest reduction, but it is closely followed by Call of Duty and Herbie.
Call of Herbie only had a small improvement compared to Call of Duty (4 meters),
which was not impressive considering the influence of carry-over effects (Cleophas 1993).
It was therefore not possible to show that combining antecedents is better than using
one. However as it was only possible to test immediate reaction to the interventions
it can not be ruled out that combining antecedents can have a bigger effect over time.
Furthermore for this study both antecedents were introduced at the same time and no
==PAGE:59==
7.5 Discussion of Study 3
47
data have therefore been gathered on the effect of combining the antecedents in other
ways.
7.5.3
The Experiment
As mentioned in the Participant section (7.2.4) it has been difficult to draft participants,
and it was therefore chosen to reuse participants from study 2. This have undoubtedly
affected the results of this last study, since the participants were more used to the
simulator and the test lap. They were probably also more aware of the real focus of the
experiments being speeding. An example of this discrepancy is that the means decreased
between the two control trials. It decreased to such a degree, that the mean of the second
control was almost the same as the mean of the ambient sound intervention in study 2.
These are the reasons why only a simple comparison of means were used for comparing
the two studies. This method is obviously not enough to definitively conclude much,
however it can be used as an indicator of how matters stand. And the indication is, that
there are no immediate, significant reward for combining the two antecedents as they
are. For better a comparison basis Call of Herbie should have been tested concurrent
with the other interventions - this way eliminating the aforementioned biases. However,
when designing study 2 it was not possible to know which interventions that made
sense to combine. Another option would have been to draft new, unspoiled participants,
however that was not an option for this project due to time constraints. So considering
the circumstances, it was decided to suffice with the given method and results.
==PAGE:60==
48
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 8
The Next Design Steps
Based on the results from the studies it cannot be definitely concluded, that a combi-
nations of the two interventions is better than one of the interventions alone. However,
the final experiment was only conducted with one permutation of the two original inter-
ventions. As the combined intervention was slightly better than the two interventions
on their own the authors of this thesis see a potential in further developing the Call
of Herbie intervention. The hope is to reach an even higher speed limit compliance by
finding the right permutation of the two sub-interventions. However, due to the limited
timeframe of this project one has to settle for recommendations on how to bring the
design forward. And design recommendations are exactly what will presented in this
chapter. First the next design steps for Call of Duty will be described (8.1) followed by
a description of the design steps to be made for Herbie (8.2). Lastly the design steps
needed to combine the two interventions will be described (8.3).
8.1
Call of Duty
Driving is a heavy legislated area, because of its’ high implication on people’s lives and
well being (Færdselsloven n.d.). Therefore it is crucial to be aware of which laws that
might interfere with these interventions, both to ensure the future of the interventions,
but more importantly to keep people safe in traffic. There are no direct laws on lighting
inside the car, however there are still a few legislations that might influence the Call
of Duty intervention. First of all, § 4 of Bekendtgørelsen om køretøjers indretning og
udstyr m.v. states that a car’s interior should be arranged so that the driver has a proper
view ahead and to the sides of the car. It furthermore states, that the arrangement of
the interior should not pose any unnecessary danger for the driver and the passengers
(Bekendtgørelse af færdselsloven n.d.). Lastly, Bekendtgørelsen for detailforskrifter for
køretøjers indretning og udstyr states that red light may not be directly visible from the
front of the car (Bekendtgørelse om detailforskrifter n.d.).
All of this come down to the intensity of the red light. The light should of course
be visible for the driver, however it should neither limit the vision or navigation of the
driver. This can easily be regulated by a light sensor, to ensure the light will never be
too intense or too weak. Using light sensors will also be able to ensure that the light is
visible in all types of weather and time of the day. The lack of a light has been found to
be a problem in other similar studies (van Loon & Duynstee 2001, Biding & Vägverket
2002). Other studies have experimented with only a small diode, which is definitely not
==PAGE:62==
50
8 The Next Design Steps
too intense, however easily overlooked (van Loon & Duynstee 2001, Biding & Vägverket
2002). It should therefore be tested if it is necessary to have light all the way around
the windshield, as tested in the experiments, or if less could yield equal effects and not
be overlooked.
Regarding the legislation of no red light should be directly visible from the front.
The red light is meant to be directed at the driver, which means the light could easily
be shielded in the direction of the driving. There will obviously be some lighting up of
the driver which might be visible from other cars in front, however there is no need to
make the red light brighter than it is easily visible of the driver. This will most likely
only be a problem when it is dark, and again a light sensor will be able to dim the light.
If this proves to be an unsolvable problem, then other colors could be considered and
tested. For instance, blue is associated with emergency vehicles and might also be a
strong enough antecedents to trigger speed limit compliance. This association was also
clear from the study 1.
8.2
Herbie
The Herbie concept needs more work on which message that works best and if this
message should change according to the circumstances. Should the message change if
the driver continue to speed, or should the message regularly change in general to make
the message more noticable? Several previous studies have found that people get annoyed
and tired of the sound over time (Adell et al. 2008, Biding & Vägverket 2002) which also
might indicate that a change in message might be beneficial. Furthermore, several of the
test participants in this study complained that the intervention kept talking when they
have already ceased to speed. Some testing of, if it would be better to simply cut the
message off, when the allowed speed is reached, should be conducted. Furthermore, more
work needs to be put into finding the right narrator for the message. This is in line with
the findings of the trial of Biding & Vägverket (2002) where participants complained
about the sound being to hard. This issue can potentially affect the acceptability of
the intervention and should therefore be considered an important issue to solve. So
far the child narrator still seems promising due to the findings from the literature and
study 1.
However it might be beneficial to test the effect of changing the age and
gender of the child, as discovered with Herbie having too young narrator can reduce the
comprehensibility of the message.
So far how other sounds in the car that might interfere with Herbie have not yet
been considered. Findings from the Swedish trial (Biding & Vägverket 2002) was that
it at times could be difficult to hear the message as other sounds like radio, motor noise,
phone conversations etc. intervened. To make a successful concept it is necessary to
ensure the message is capable of being heard, without being too intrusive or annoying
for the driver and the passengers of the car. Options could be to mute the radio when
the intervention is activated. Another possibility would be to measure the noise level
in the car. By measuring the noise level it will be possible to determine how loud the
==PAGE:63==
8.3 The Combined Concept
51
intervention will have to be played at in order to be heard.
8.3
The Combined Concept
Herbie, Call of Duty and Call of Herbie all had great results of increasing the speed limit
compliance, however the Call of Herbie intervention performed just a little bit better
than the other two. Since the Call of Herbie intervention had slightly better results it is
recommended to further develop this intervention. The hope is to achieve an even higher
speed limit compliance if the right permutation of the sub-interventions can found. With
this being said, it is important to note, that a majority of the participants prefered the
red light, saying the spoken message were annoying, distracting and stressful. This is a
tendency that was found in other ISA studies as well (Biding & Vägverket 2002, Adell
et al. 2008). So from a user experience point of view, it might be wise to tone down the
Herbie part of the concept. This can be done in a multiple of ways were one obvious
initiative would be to reduce the frequency of which the message is spoken. The best way
to find the right ratio between the two interventions will be rigorous testing. Another
initiative could be to only trigger Call of Duty and if the driver do not comply after
for example 10 sec then Herbie is triggered. Both of the interventions still need some
work before they can be introduced to real cars. However when the two interventions is
compared, then the Herbie intervention is the least mature of the two. The Call of Duty
intervention already has a clearly determined process of how and when to intervene.
Furthermore, the red light has been proven successful in many similar situations where
a person needs to be alert (e.g. traffic lights, brake lights, computer games (hence the
name of Call of Duty), etc.). Where for the Herbie intervention less research has been
conducted in regards to the effect of having the car talk to the driver.
==PAGE:64==
52
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 9
General Discussion
The discussion is split up into three parts, first a discussion of the results the studies
(9.1), second is a discussion of the design methods (9.2) and third is a discussion of the
safety concerns there can arise should the design be implemented in real cars (9.3).
9.1
The Results
From all but one of the non-control simulation scenarios significant results were found,
indicating that alerting drivers through visual and/or auditory cues about their speeding
will result in them reducing their speed. These findings are in line with the findings of
other similar studies that all but one found ISA-systems having a significant effect on
speeding (Harms et al. 2008, Adell et al. 2008, Biding & Vägverket 2002). However what
all these studies, including ours, have in common is that they use voluntary drivers i.e.
the drivers signed up to participate, meaning that they before the start of the trials had
a somewhat positive opinion of the concept (Agerholm et al. 2012). To the knowledge
of the authors only one study has been made using involuntary drivers. This study
was conducted in Aalborg, where the ISA-system was installed in 26 company cars and
used by 51 drivers (Agerholm et al. 2012). The study found the drivers that generally
avoided speeding had a positive results using the ISA-system. However the study found
the effect on the drivers that generally speeded was “slight to non-existing” (Agerholm
et al. 2012). This one finding might indicate that ISA interventions is not as positive
as the numerous studies have found. But a Swedish study, conducted a large scale ISA
study from 1999-2002 testing using approximately 5000 cars (Biding & Vägverket 2002).
4000 of those cars drove in the Swedish town Umeå. The cars in Umeå were all fitted
with a warning system (a diode and audio activated when speeding). An interesting
finding from Umeå was the trial being able to reduce the overall speed in the area
in the three year test period (Biding & Vägverket 2002). This finding combined with
the finding from the Aalborg study that found the most important reason for speeding
among voluntary and involuntary drivers were the wish to follow traffic (Agerholm et al.
2012). This indicating that even though the ISA-system might only be able to affect the
voluntary drivers, it might still be possible to affect the involuntary drivers in a positive
way if the number of ISA assisted drivers is large enough. This way changing the social
norms that is one of the big speed influencers (see section 2.1.6).
Another factor that is an important influence on the effect of the ISA-systems is the
acceptance of the technology (Eskandarian 2012). As discussed above, the effects of the
==PAGE:66==
54
9 General Discussion
ISA interventions are most likely less on involuntary drivers. The share of involuntary
drivers are unknown to the authors, and it is therefore not possible to determine the
extent of this issue. An indicator for this might be the acceptance level of the tested
ISA-systems. For this study the acceptance were measured by having the participants
answer if the would be interested in having one or more of the intervention in their cars.
In study 2 67 % yes and is study three 70 % answered yes. This indicates that there
is a high acceptance level. Studies in Sweden, Australia, the Netherlands and Denmark
all report the ISA-system having a high level, 60 % or above (Young & Regan 2002,
Biding & Vägverket 2002, Regan et al. 2006). Eskandarian (2012), Biding & Vägverket
(2002), of London (2009) all report the acceptance level to be highest for speed alerting
ISA-systems (which is what this thesis has tested) opposed to ISA-systems that limits
the driver’s speed. This indicates that should drivers buy a car with an ISA-system
they would be more likely to buy the speed alerting ones. Regan et al. (2006), Biding
& Vägverket (2002), of London (2009) have all asked drivers if they would be willing to
pay for an ISA-system. What they all found was that the price is a major barrier. The
three studies reported the majority of drivers being willing to spend between 0-1700 kr
for having an ISA-system installed. The opinion of the approximately 5000 drivers from
the Swedish study was ISA-systems should be standard equipment in all cars (Biding
& Vägverket 2002). These findings indicate that although the acceptance seems to be
high only small changers will be made using ISA as long as no government involvement
is present.
9.2
The Design Methods
This study has worked as a union between design (chapter 4, 5 and 8) and behavioral
experiments (chapter 6 and 7). The studies used for comparison have all had a focus on
the experimental approach (of London 2009, Biding & Vägverket 2002, Regan et al. 2006,
Eskandarian 2012, Agerholm et al. 2012). In these studies the design work that went
prior to the testing has been black boxed. When searching for ISA articles focusing
on the design phase, what was found were articles focused on mathematical design
(Wankhede et al. 2009), the technical development of the product (Akhlaq et al. 2012)
and testing of the best solution (Rook & Hogema 2005). What can be found by reading
these articles is, that there is a lack of focus on the user and user centered design. The
authors of this thesis see a potential in future studies having a focus on the design phase
before the experimental phase. What design can add to the future studies is a larger user
involvement, fast prototyping, that can be used to quickly test and evaluate the proposed
design features (Curedale 2012, Kaulio 1998). Having small user tests before the actual
experimental trial, might have helped for example, the Swedish trial discover that the
drivers found their auditory warnings to be to harsh (Biding & Vägverket 2002) and
thereby potentially have achieved a higher acceptance level if discovered and changed
before the road test. One danger with the design approach is that the results are less
precise compared to the experimental trials where statistical significance is measured.
==PAGE:67==
9.3 The Safety Concerns of ISA-Systems
55
And it is therefore important for designers and researchers to decide what the goal
is and if the design approach or the experimental trial is the best approach based on
time and importance (Walker et al. 2002). As of yet the authors have not found any
studies trying to propose a design framework for ISA-systems. In this study the ABC
model combined with nudging has been used. It is the authors believe that using the
ABC model when designing ISA-systems might help researchers focus on the user, who
ultimately has to respond to and use their solutions (Kaulio 1998). The ABC model is
simple (Miltenberger 2011) and does therefore not require a lot of time to understand,
which in the believe of the authors is the best way to start introducing user centered
design into the experimental world of ISA. For this study nudging has been used to
create the antecedent for the tested ISA’s. The thought behind nudging works perfectly
within the speed alerting branch of ISA’s, as nudging always have an opt out option
(Thaler & Sunstein 2008) (see section 2.4.2).
9.3
The Safety Concerns of ISA-Systems
The overall finding from all the mentioned ISA studies is that ISA-systems are safe
and makes for a safer travel, through increased speed limit compliance and lower speed
variance (Biding & Vägverket 2002, Young & Regan 2002, Eskandarian 2012). However,
what was discovered through the verbal and written feedback from study two and three
was the drivers started to use the interventions as a guide for the current speed limit.
Meaning that the drivers spend less time looking for the speed limit signs and on the
speedometer, because they trust the car instead. Other studies have also reported this
finding. One study described how one third of the users reported a reduction in attention
(van Loon & Duynstee 2001). Another study reported their test drivers self-reported
workload to be unchanged (Young et al. 2010).
A third study reported the drivers
becoming over reliant on the system van Loon & Duynstee (2001), Biding & Vägverket
(2002), Saad et al. (2008) all reported the drivers forgot to check speed limits when
driving in areas unsupported of the ISA-system, making for a potentially dangerous
situation. The authors of this thesis agree with the overall assumption that ISA is a
great initiative that will help improve road safety. However, it is necessary that future
ISA-systems implement countermeasures to drivers becoming over-reliant on the system.
This could be done by reminding the drivers that it is their responsibility to also look
for speed limit signs and to drive within the limit, or by informing drivers when the
ISA-system is active and when it is not. Either way the opinion of the authors is that
this problem needs to be addressed and a solution have to be found if future ISA-systems
are to become successful.
==PAGE:68==
56
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 10
Conclusion
High speed is one of the main contributors to casualties and injuries in traffic. Speed
limits have been put into place to ensure safer traveling speeds. As a contribution to
increased road safety, the aim of this project was to explore and evaluate the process of
designing in-car nudges. In order to investigate this aim the following research question
was formulated:
As an indicator for real life development and implementation: to which de-
gree can an in-car nudge be used to improve drivers’ compliance with the set
speed limit while driving in a simulator?
The results of this project showed it was possible to create in-car nudges that could
get drivers to better comply with the speed limit while driving in a simulator. The test
results therefore indicate that the nudges can have positive behavioral effects in real cars
as well, hence indicating that the design process used in this thesis can be applicable for
ISA development.
In this chapter possible implications (10.1) and the future work (10.2) will be con-
cluded.
10.1
Implications
This project is special due to the dualistic approach of combining design skills and
behavioral research. The findings and the process of this project is therefore applicable
both for design of behavioral change and further ISA research.
10.1.1
Implication for ISA Implementation
The immediate takeaway from this thesis is that even though ISA is a proven concept
it still needs more design refinement. Many previous studies also conclude this fact,
however how to do it is rarely discussed (Biding & Vägverket 2002, van Loon & Duynstee
2001, Várhelyi et al. 2004).
To achieve the best ISA solution a cross-collaboration
between academic and industry is needed (Bieder 2018). Researchers have done a great
job of testing and proving the merit of ISA, however they could benefit from the help of
designers to go from a proof of concept to a fully implemented ISA-system. Designers
can take this proof of concept and make sure, that it will function as wanted, in the
==PAGE:70==
58
10 Conclusion
wanted situation with the wanted users. Designers can through user-centered design
and user involving make sure that the researchers’ knowledge will be implemented a
reasonable way while ensuring high user acceptance.
10.1.2
Implication for Design Practice
We recommend aspiring behavior change designers to utilize the experience gained from
this project. The ABC model has been a great and simple tool for both analyzing and
designing behaviors. It worked great from a nudge standpoint, but there are no barriers
for using it from other standpoints as well (Miltenberger 2011). The ABC model does
not stand in the way of using other design methods, since it mostly gives a structured
understanding of what makes up a behavior.
It is this understanding that is then
translated into design proposals. These proposals can then quickly be tested and the
behavior analyzed - again using ABC model. The ABC model therefore also supports
and iterative design process.
10.2
Future Work
The next logical step would be to test the process on the future design stages. In order
to test this, the work done in this project should be continued as described in chapter 8.
The final improvements should then be tested for two reasons: One being to show that
the process work as a way to create effective behavior change designs and the other and
more important one being to test the acceptability and compliance of the design. The
acceptability and compliance test should be done in a way that will allow for comparison
with other ISA studies. With a comparison with the other ISA studies is will be possible
to see if better end results is achieved using the process and it therefore will be worth it
to consider the process as valuable and effective for future ISA development processed.
Another interesting comparison to make would be to compare the time and resources
spend on normal ISA developments and this one where the design process have been in
focus. This way it will be possible to also evaluate the proposed design process from a
monetary side. If the results is equally as good or better, than the other ISA studies
and the process is faster and and thereby cheaper there might be merit for using that
proposed design process as the researchers will have money to spend on bettering the
solution. In order to establish the proposed design process as being reliable and useful
for behavior change designs other researchers should repeat the design process in order
to be able to make a stronger argument for the process working and therefore should be
adopted by others.
As nudging has been proven to work as a behavior change strategy in many other
fields and the ABC model is original made as a evaluation method there is no reason to
believe that the proposed design process utilizing these two methods can only be applied
within ISA development. It would therefore be recommended that the process is tested
on other behaviours. The problem surrounding speeding is old and many things have
==PAGE:71==
10.2 Future Work
59
been tried to remedy the problem but no solution have completely solved the problem
yet. However, the results from this study and other ISA studies are promising in being
able to make a noticeable change. Based on this it could be interesting to test of the
proposed design process can make noticeable changes on other problem behaviors that
are equally to challenging to change, like smoking and overeating.
==PAGE:72==
60
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX A
Traffic Nudges
This section will look into nudges and nudge like initiatives in traffic aiming at making
drivers reduce speed. However, little have been done to evaluate the effect of most of
the initiatives. Because of that we will come with a short comment on what we see as
potential failures and successes and why.
Musical roads was first invented in Denmark in 1995 and have since then spread
to other countries. Top Gear had an episode were they tried the music road in
New Mexico. They described it as a local tourist attraction, which might indicate
the failure of the nudge. Christian Larsen writes in the comment section after the
clip that he lives nearby and found the road annoying after the novelty wore off
making for a nudge that is likely to not work on frequent travelers on the route.
Some GPSs have a function that alerts drivers with a sound when they are driving
too fast. This is a great idea as it is hard to judge speed and easy to unintentionally
drive over the speed limit. Getting a noise indication when that happens help
nudge motivated drivers (drivers that do not intentionally speed) to reduce their
speed. However, the effect on drivers that choose to speed are from own experience
slim to none.
In the UK they have started removing the center divider line on roads. What
that does it nudge the drives by reducing their feeling of confidence that the divider
==PAGE:74==
62
A Traffic Nudges
line falsely gives them. Transport for London study the effect of removing the
center divider line and discovered that the speed on the test roads decreased by
5,4 - 8,6 mph. The conclusion of the study was that removing the center divider
lines on roads in low speed areas was a successful way to reduce speed and thereby
accidents. However, they do not recommend removing the divider lines on high
speed roads (Copper and Wright, 2014). The great thing about this nudge is that
it is unintruding and the effect is less likely to ware off with the novelty effect.
Lines across the road coming in to a curve have been an effective tool to get
drivers to slow down. The distance between the lines becomes smaller the closer
the car gets to the curve tricking the driver into believing that they are speeding
up and thereby get them to slow down causing a decrease in accidents by 36 %.
Although it can be discussed whether this optical trick is a nudge or not, it is
effective and not likely to have a decrease in effect with time.
==PAGE:75==
A Traffic Nudges
63
Children on the road/potholes and 3D speed bumps/crosswalks are all effective
visual tricks that makes drivers slow down the first time a driver comes across
one of them.
However, once the novelty effect wears off the effect is likely to
decrease making for an unsustainable solution.
A traffic light wall have been proposed and have the potential to be effective
as it might make cars stop sooner instead of keeping driving when the light turns
yellow. In Australia they have made a wall like this in a tunnel that supposedly is
effective in stopping trucks that are to tall for the tunnel in passing.
==PAGE:76==
64
A Traffic Nudges
What can be said from these examples is that people are smart and will fast discover
when someone or something are trying to trick them or in other ways adopt a different
behavior and will soon ignore the attempt of tricking them making the “trick” have a
short success rate. The effect of the nudge after novelty effect wears off should also be
taken into account when designing a nudge.
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX B
Study 1: Leaflet
==PAGE:78==
Please do not turn the page before instructed to.
Traffic Brainstorm
The aim of this study is to explore what people associate with 
traffic safety. This is where you come in! We need you to 
brainstorm and come up with as many things as possible that 
you associate with driving safe. These can be anything 
(e.g. objects, elements, colors, themes, feelings, you name it!), 
Focus on quantity.
The brainstorm session will be 2 x 3 minutes.
Please write clearly so we are able to read it later.
==PAGE:79==
Please do not turn the page before instructed to.
You now have 3 minutes to come up with as many things as possible that you associate with:
Driving safe
1.	 _____________________________________
2.	 _____________________________________
3.	 _____________________________________
4.	 _____________________________________
5.	 _____________________________________
6.	 _____________________________________
7.	 _____________________________________
8.	 _____________________________________
9.	 _____________________________________
10.	_____________________________________
11.	 _____________________________________
12.	_____________________________________
13.	_____________________________________
14.	_____________________________________
15.	_____________________________________
16.	_____________________________________
17.	_____________________________________
18.	_____________________________________
19.	_____________________________________
20.	_____________________________________
21.	_____________________________________
22.	_____________________________________
23.	_____________________________________
24.	_____________________________________
25.	_____________________________________
26.	_____________________________________
27.	_____________________________________
28.	_____________________________________
29.	_____________________________________
30.	_____________________________________
31.	_____________________________________
32.	_____________________________________
33.	_____________________________________
34.	_____________________________________
35.	_____________________________________
36.	_____________________________________
37.	_____________________________________
38.	_____________________________________
39.	_____________________________________
40.	_____________________________________
41.	_____________________________________
42.	_____________________________________
43.	_____________________________________
44.	_____________________________________
45.	_____________________________________
46.	_____________________________________
47.	_____________________________________
48.	_____________________________________
49.	_____________________________________
50.	_____________________________________
==PAGE:80==
Please do not turn the page before instructed to.
You now have 3 minutes to come up with as many things as possible that you associate with:
Speeding
1.	 _____________________________________
2.	 _____________________________________
3.	 _____________________________________
4.	 _____________________________________
5.	 _____________________________________
6.	 _____________________________________
7.	 _____________________________________
8.	 _____________________________________
9.	 _____________________________________
10.	_____________________________________
11.	 _____________________________________
12.	_____________________________________
13.	_____________________________________
14.	_____________________________________
15.	_____________________________________
16.	_____________________________________
17.	_____________________________________
18.	_____________________________________
19.	_____________________________________
20.	_____________________________________
21.	_____________________________________
22.	_____________________________________
23.	_____________________________________
24.	_____________________________________
25.	_____________________________________
26.	_____________________________________
27.	_____________________________________
28.	_____________________________________
29.	_____________________________________
30.	_____________________________________
31.	_____________________________________
32.	_____________________________________
33.	_____________________________________
34.	_____________________________________
35.	_____________________________________
36.	_____________________________________
37.	_____________________________________
38.	_____________________________________
39.	_____________________________________
40.	_____________________________________
41.	_____________________________________
42.	_____________________________________
43.	_____________________________________
44.	_____________________________________
45.	_____________________________________
46.	_____________________________________
47.	_____________________________________
48.	_____________________________________
49.	_____________________________________
50.	_____________________________________
==PAGE:81==
Thank you for your help!
Male
Female
Other
Sex:
Age:
Nationality:
Line of study:
Driver’s license:
I don’t have a license
I have a license, and I have had it for _______ years 
Traffic accidents:
I have never been in an accident.
I have been in an accident, and I was (partly) the responsible party
I have been in an accident, and I was not the responsible party
Weekly km: 
(approximately)
Consequence of 
the accident:
Material damage only
Slight physical damage
Serious physical damage/death
Quick Questionnaire
Please use a moment to fill out this questionnaire. Just skip any section that does not apply to you.
==PAGE:82==
70
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX C
Cluster Rules
==PAGE:84==
72
C Cluster Rules
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX D
The Potential Pyramid
The text is copied from the book The ideas book by Kevin duncan, 2014:
• The Potential Pyramid is very useful for grouping a large number of ideas into
broad groups to get an initial feel for volume and potential.
• You can choose your own language, but for the purpose of this first step, I have
selected promising, possible and poor.
• Promising means that everyone agrees the idea has potential, albeit the details are
unlikely to be clear yet. This doesn’t matter.
• Possible means there are some reservations, but the view is that further investiga-
tion to prove/disprove would nevertheless be time well spent.
• Poor means there is significant doubt about whether to bother. Many ideas seem
great when first generated, but on reflection they don’t hold up under scrutiny.
• Write the number of ideas in each layer. If there is just one in the promising layer,
this may be enough. If there are non, then look to the possible layer and be more
specific about what to spend more time on.
• If there is enough potential in either of those, then drop everything in the bottom
layer
==PAGE:86==
74
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX E
Herbie Sentences
E.1
Short Speeding
This is the scenario where the driver speeds for a short period of time. These situations
are cases of where the driver for instance is overhauling or catching a light. In these
scenarios it is difficult and potential dangerous to intervene the driving with a message.
Therefore the message is delayed until after the driver is no longer speeding.
The task in this scenario is both to make the driver aware that they did bad and to
try persuade them not to do this in the future. The guidelines we use for this message is:
social proof, positive selfconcept, positive framed and affiliation. But most important is
encourage the good behavior (positive self-concept and positive framed). We don’t want
the messages to be too long since that will be too intruding for the driver.
Below is a list of potential sentences:
• Thank you.
• thank you for slowing down
• Thank you for not speeding (anymore)
• Thank you, now we are all safer
• Thank you for making the roads safer for everyone
E.2
Long Speeding
This is the scenario where the driver is speeding through a longer period of time, which
means this is not overhauling or catching a light, but more a general speed preference
that the driver is either aware or unaware of (they should be aware if this nudge is
coupled with one of the other nudges).
The task in this scenario is to try to persuade the driver to stop the current action of
speeding. Again we are using the same guidelines as above, however this time we cannot
compliment on them on stopping speeding.
Below is a list of potential sentences:
• You have been driving so well so far, so why do you need to speed now?
• (I think) everyone will appreciate it if you slow down
==PAGE:88==
76
E Herbie Sentences
• Don’t be hasty, young hobbit
• You are running less risks if you slow down
• You are not saving much time driving this fast
• You are better than this, slow down
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX F
Experimental Order
==PAGE:90==
Study 2 randomised test
Nr..
Time
Date
First run
Second run
Third run
Forth run
1
1-6-2018
2
4
1
3
2
1-6-2018
2
1
3
4
3
1-6-2018
3
2
4
1
4
1-6-2018
2
1
4
3
5
4-6-2018
1
2
3
4
6
4-6-2018
4
1
3
2
7
4-6-2018
4
1
2
3
8
4-6-2018
2
1
4
3
9
4-6-2018
2
4
3
1
10
4-6-2018
1
4
3
2
11
14.30
4-6-2018
4
1
2
3
12
15.00
4-6-2018
4
1
3
2
13
16.00
4-6-2018
4
1
2
3
14
17.00
4-6-2018
2
3
1
4
15
17.30
4-6-2018
4
3
1
2
16
10.30
6-6-2018
1
4
2
3
17
11.00
6-6-2018
1
3
4
2
18
11.30
6-6-2018
3
4
2
1
19
12.00
6-6-2018
4
2
1
3
20
13.00
6-6-2018
3
4
1
2
21
13.30
6-6-2018
2
1
4
3
22
14.00
6-6-2018
3
1
4
2
23
14.30
6-6-2018
2
4
3
1
24
15.00
6-6-2018
3
1
4
2
25
15.30
6-6-2018
3
4
1
2
26
16.00
6-6-2018
1
2
4
3
27
17.30
6-6-2018
3
1
4
2
28
18.30
6-6-2018
3
2
1
4
29
08.30
7-6-2018
2
4
1
3
30
11.00
7-6-2018
3
4
2
1
31
11.30
7-6-2018
2
4
1
3
32
12.00
7-6-2018
3
2
1
4
33
13.00
7-6-2018
1
4
2
3
34
13.30
7-6-2018
2
3
1
4
35
14.00
7-6-2018
3
2
4
1
36
16.00
7-6-2018
4
2
1
3
37
09.00
11-6-2018
3
4
1
2
38
10.00
11-6-2018
2
3
4
1
39
10.30
11-6-2018
3
2
4
1
40
11.30
11-6-2018
1
2
4
3
41
13.30
11-6-2018
1
3
4
2
42
14.00
11-6-2018
1
3
2
4
43
14.30
11-6-2018
4
3
2
1
44
15:00
11-6-2018
1
2
3
4
45
15.30
11-6-2018
3
4
2
1
46
16.00
11-6-2018
3
1
4
2
47
16.30
11-6-2018
3
1
2
4
==PAGE:91==
48
17:30
11-6-2018
3
1
4
2
49
11.00
13-6-2018
3
2
4
1
50
12.00
13-6-2018
1
3
2
4
51
Sent
13-6-2018
4
2
3
1
==PAGE:92==
80
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX G
Study 2 Questionnaire
==PAGE:94==
 
Forsøgsperson nr. ______ 
1. køretur 
Udover de oplagte forskelle mellem virkelighed og simulation, lagde du da mærke til noget
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
du ikke er vant til? 
 
Ja   
 
Nej  
 
 
Hvis ja hvad?​                                                                                                                            ​. 
 
Hvordan påvirkede det din kørsel?​                                                                                           ​. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                  ​. 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
2. køretur 
Udover de oplagte forskelle mellem virkelighed og simulation, lagde du da mærke til noget
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
du ikke er vant til? 
 
Ja   
 
Nej  
 
 
Hvis ja hvad?​                                                                                                                            ​. 
 
Hvordan påvirkede det din kørsel?​                                                                                           ​. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                  ​. 
==PAGE:96==
3. køretur 
Udover de oplagte forskelle mellem virkelighed og simulation, lagde du da mærke til noget
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
du ikke er vant til? 
 
Ja   
 
Nej  
 
 
Hvis ja hvad?​                                                                                                                            ​. 
 
Hvordan påvirkede det din kørsel?​                                                                                           ​. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                  ​. 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
4. køretur 
Udover de oplagte forskelle mellem virkelighed og simulation, lagde du da mærke til noget
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
du ikke er vant til? 
 
Ja   
 
Nej  
 
 
Hvis ja hvad?​                                                                                                                            ​. 
 
Hvordan påvirkede det din kørsel?​                                                                                           ​. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                  ​. 
==PAGE:98==
Køn 
Mand  
 
Kvinde  
 
Andet  
  
 
 
Alder​                ​. 
 
 
Hvor mange år har du haft dit kørekort?​                                                                                  ​ . 
 
Hvor mange kilometer køre du ca. om ugen?​                                                                          ​. 
 
 
 
Ville du være interesseret i at have en eller flere af de nye teknologier i din egen bil? 
 
Ja  
 
Nej  
 
 
Hvorfor/hvorfor ikke? 
 
.​                                                                                                                                         ​. 
 
 
Det vil være værdifuldt for vores projekt, hvis du gad komme ind til et kortere, opfølgende
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
forsøg. Vil du være interesseret i at komme og køre en kort tur igen i slut juni? 
 
Ja    
 
Nej   
 
 
 
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX H
Experimental Introduction
Tak fordi du vil deltage i vores forsøg.
Forsøget vil foregå i en kørselssimulator. Målet med forsøget er at teste ny teknologi, for
at se om det påvirker din kørsel. I simulatoren skal du forsøge at køre, som du normalt
ville gøre.
Til at starte med vil du køre en testrunde, så du kan vende dig til at køre i simulatoren.
Når du er tryg ved at køre, så starter vi forsøget. Forsøget består af 4 runder af hver 4
minutter. Efter hver runde vil vi beder dig om at trække håndbremsen og svare på et
kort spørgeskema. Spørgeskemaet er på 1 side og ligger på bordet til højre for dig. Hele
forsøget varer ca. 30 minutter.
Da forsøget foregår i en simulator, og ikke i en rigtig bil, kan en tilvænningsperiode
forekomme. Hvis du på noget tidspunkt får det dårligt, bedes du med det samme sige
det til instruktøren, så forsøget kan stoppes. Ubehag plejer at aftage efter en kort pause
fra simulatoren.
Endnu engang tak fordi du vil hjælpe os med forsøget!
==PAGE:100==
88
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX I
Project Time Plan
I.1
Time Plan (Expected)
We have chosen to split our project up into 5 phases. The project is build around 3
experimental phases where we will first test and refine priming and nudging principles.
Secondly, we will create, test and single out practical implementations/concepts based
on these principles. Lastly, we will refine and test of our final concept. All of this will be
wrapped up in the post phase with our final prototype, our design suggestions, a report
and a final presentation. But in order to do all this an extensive literature review will
be carried out in order to equip ourselves for the design challenge at hand. Below is an
overview of the plan:
• Pre-phase
– Length: 6 weeks
– Output: Literature review and initial design principles
• 1st experimental phase
– Length: 3 weeks
– Output: tested and refined design principles
• 2nd experimental phase
– Length: 6 weeks
– Output: Selection of the most promising design concepts
• 3rd experimental phase
– Length: 6 weeks
– Output: Selection of the final concept
• Post-phase
– Length: 6 weeks (to hand-in deadline) + 3 weeks (presentation preparation)
– Output: refined prototype of the final concept, finished report and a final
presentation
==PAGE:102==
90
I Project Time Plan
We would like to include as many users as possible through the design process to
increase our chances of designing something capable of changing people’s behavior. This
is why we are doing 3 rounds of experiments.
We are generous with the amount of time we are granting ourselves in the post phase,
but this is seen as a buffer. If we manage to complete everything in time then perfect!
We will then have plenty of time to finish up the report and the presentation. Otherwise,
if the experimental phases end up taking more time, then we will have some time to give
from.
I.2
What Really Happened
Throughout the project the five phases were kept, however the length of the phases
changed a lot, and as should be expected the phases had a lot of overlap. The third
experimental phase also changed from investigating of a final prototype to further proof
the concepts created.
• Pre-phase
– Length: 6 10 weeks
– Output: Literature review and initial design principles
• 1st experimental phase
– Length: 3 6 weeks
– Output: tested and refined design principles
• 2nd experimental phase
– Length: 6 weeks
– Output: Selection of the most promising design concepts
• 3rd experimental phase
– Length: 6 2 weeks
– Output: Selection of the final concept
• Post-phase
– Length: 6 weeks (to hand-in deadline) + 3 weeks (presentation preparation)
– Output: recommendation of further design work for final concept, finished
report and a final presentation
==PAGE:103==
I.2 What Really Happened
91
The pre-phase ended up being longer than expected due to an underestimation of
the extend of work needed to be put into a literature review.
For the first experiment brainstorms from 118 participants were collected. As it was
the first time we were to work with that amount of data mistakes were made and research
had to be done into how best to work with the data (should the study be repeated it
should take considerably shorter as we now have a better understanding of that to do).
The second experimental phase was done within six weeks as planned. The third
experimental phase was done in only two weeks. This is four weeks shorter than expected.
This cut in time was do to the time running out, but also the fact that the study were
a repeat of the second study, and almost no time had to be used on preparing for the
study or no the results as that procedure were made automatic with a python code in
study 2 and it was therefore quick to run the data through and get the results.
The post phase ended up being half as long as expected. Writing had been done
throughout the six months of the thesis. However many small changes had to be made
in the end as new insights were gained continuously.
==PAGE:104==
92
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
Aberg, L. (2000), Motivation to participate in a large scale isa-project, in ‘Proceedings
of the 13th ICTCT Workshop’, pp. 5–6.
Åberg, L. & Warner, H. W. (2008), ‘Speeding–deliberate violation or involuntary mis-
take?’, Revue Europeenne de Psychologie Appliquee/European Review of Applied Psy-
chology 58(1), 23–30.
Adell, E., Várhelyi, A. & Hjälmdahl, M. (2008), ‘Auditory and haptic systems for in-
car speed management–a comparative real life study’, Transportation research part F:
traffic psychology and behaviour 11(6), 445–458.
Agerholm, N., Tradisauskas, N., Juhl, J., Berthelsen, K. & Lahrmann, H. (2012), Intelli-
gent speed adaptation for involuntary drivers–final results, in ‘the Proceedings of the
19 th ITS World Congress, Vienna, Austria’.
Ajzen, I. (1985), From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior, in ‘Action
control’, Springer, pp. 11–39.
Ajzen, I. (1991), ‘The theory of planned behavior’, Organizational behavior and human
decision processes 50(2), 179–211.
Ajzen, I. & Fishbein, M. (1980), Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior
/ Icek Ajzen, Martin Fishbein, Prentice-Hall Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Akhlaq, M., Sheltami, T. R., Helgeson, B. & Shakshuki, E. M. (2012), ‘Designing an
integrated driver assistance system using image sensors’, Journal of Intelligent Man-
ufacturing 23(6), 2109–2132.
Aktuelle kampagner | SIKKERTRAFIK.DK (2018).
URL: https://www.sikkertrafik.dk/kampagner
Allcott, H. (2009), ‘Social norms and energy conservation’.
Almqvist, S. & Nygård, M. (1997), ‘Dynamic speed adaptation: a field trial with auto-
matic speed adaptation in an urban area’, 3131/3000 .
Bekendtgørelse af færdselsloven (n.d.).
URL: https://www.retsinformation.dk/forms/R0710.aspx?id=185819
==PAGE:106==
94
Bibliography
Bekendtgørelse om detailforskrifter (n.d.).
URL: https://www.retsinformation.dk/Forms/R0710.aspx?id=22554
Biding, T. & Vägverket, I. S. A. (2002), Results of large-scale trials in borlänge, lidköping,
lund and umeå during the period 1999-2002, Technical report, Technical Report.
Bieder, C. (2018), Beyond safety training :
embedding safety in professional skills,
Springer Open, Cham, Switzerland.
Bovens, L. (2009), ‘The ethics of nudge’, heory and Decision Library 42.
Brookhuis, K. & de Waard, D. (1999), ‘Limiting speed, towards an intelligent speed
adapter (isa)’, Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour
2(2), 81–90.
Carsten, O., Fowkes, M. & Tate, F. (2000), Implementing intelligent speed adaptation
in the uk: Recommendations of the evsc project, in ‘Proceedings of the 7th World
Congress on Intelligent Transport Systems, ITS Congress Association, Brussels’.
Carsten, O. & Tate, F. (2001), Intelligent speed adaptation: The best collision avoidance
system, in ‘Proceedings of the 17th International Technological Conference on the
Enhanced Safety of Vehicles’, pp. 1–10.
Christie, S., Lyons, R. A., Dunstan, F. D. & Jones, S. J. (2003), ‘Are mobile speed
cameras effective? a controlled before and after study’, Injury Prevention 9(4), 302–
306.
Cleophas, T. J. (1993), ‘Carryover bias in clinical investigations’, The Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology 33(9), 799–804.
Conformity Bias - Ethics Unwrapped (n.d.).
URL: http://ethicsunwrapped.utexas.edu/glossary/conformity-bias
Cooper, R. & Wright, S. (2014), ‘Centreline removal trial’.
Costa, D. L. & Kahn, M. E. (2013), ‘Energy conservation “nudges” and environmentalist
ideology: Evidence from a randomized residential electricity field experiment’, Journal
of the European Economic Association 11(3), 680–702.
Curedale, R. (2012), Design methods 1: 200 ways to apply design thinking, Design
Community College Incorporated.
Curedale, R. (2018), Design Thinking: Process & Methods Guide, Design Community
College Incorporated.
Cushman, F. (2015), ‘Deconstructing intent to reconstruct morality’, Current Opinion
in Psychology 6, 97–103.
de Rider, D. (2014), ‘Nudging for beginners’, The European health psychologist 16.
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
95
DeJoy, D. M. (1989), ‘The optimism bias and traffic accident risk perception’, Accident
Analysis and Prevention 21(4), 333–340.
Elvik, R., Vaa, T., Hoye, A. & Sorensen, M. (2009), The handbook of road safety measures,
Emerald Group Publishing.
Eskandarian, A. (2012), Handbook of intelligent vehicles, Vol. 2, Springer.
Fabrigar, L. R., MacDonald, T. K. & Wegener, D. T. (2005), The structure of attitudes
from: The handbook of attitudes Routledge, Routledge.
Färber, B., Schumann, J., Godthelp, H. & Faerber, B. (1991), State of the art and
recommendations for characteristics of speed and steering support systems.
Fazio, R. H. (1990), ‘Multiple processes by which attitudes guide behavior: The mode
model as an integrative framework’, ADVANCES IN Experimental SOCIAL Psychol-
ogy 23.
Fogg, B. J. (1998), ‘Persuasive computers: Perspectives and research directions’, Con-
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings pp. 225–232.
Fogg, B. J. (2009), ‘A behavior model for persuasive design’, p. 7.
URL: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1541948.1541999
Færdselsloven (n.d.).
URL: https://www.retsinformation.dk/forms/R0710.aspx?id=143400Kap2
Gabany, S. G., Plummer, P. & Grigg, P. (1997), ‘Why drivers speed: The speeding
perception inventory’, Journal of Safety Research 28(1), 29–35.
Gastil, J. (2000), ‘Thinking, drinking, and driving: Application of the theory of reasoned
action to dwi prevention’, Journal of Applied Social Psychology 30(11), 2217–2232.
Godley, S. T., Triggs, T. J. & Fildes, B. N. (2002), ‘Driving simulator validation for
speed research’, Accident analysis & prevention 34(5), 589–600.
Gossling, S., Kunkel, T., Schumacher, K., Heck, N., Birkemeyer, J., Froese, J., Naber,
N. & Schliermann, E. (2005), ‘A target group-specific approach to ”green” power
retailing: students as consumers of renewable energy’, Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews 9(1), 69–83.
Hagman, W., Andersson, D., Västfjäll, D. & Tinghög, G. (2015), ‘Public views on
policies involving nudges’, Review of Philosophy and Psychology 6(3), 439–453.
Hansen, P. & Jespersen, A. (2013), ‘Nudge and the manipulation of choice: A framework
for the responsible use of the nudge approach to behaviour change in public policy’,
European Journal of Risk Regulation pp. 3–28.
==PAGE:108==
96
Bibliography
Harms, L., Klarborg, B., Lahrmann, H., Agerholm, N., Jensen, E. & Tradisauskas, N.
(2008), ‘Controlled study of isa effects: comparing speed attitudes between young
volunteers and external controls, and the effect of different isa treatments on the
speeding of volunteers’, IET Intelligent Transport Systems 2(2), 154–160.
Hausman, D. M. & Welch, B. (2010), ‘Debate: To nudge or not to nudge*’, Journal of
Political Philosophy 18(1), 123–136.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9760.2009.00351.x
Hess, S. (2004), ‘Analysis of the effects of speed limit enforcement cameras: Differenti-
ation by road type and catchment area’, Transportation Research Record: Journal of
the Transportation Research Board (1865), 28–34.
Hoekstra, T. & Wegman, F. (2011), ‘Improving the effectiveness of road safety cam-
paigns: Current and new practices’, IATSS research 34(2), 80–86.
Holm-Hansen, C. & Olsen, S. B. (2013), ‘Nudging for a better world: A study of the
effects of subconscious stimuli on sustainable behaviour’.
Jung, J. Y. & Mellers, B. A. (2016), ‘American attitudes toward nudges’, Judgment and
Decision Making 11(1), 62–74.
Kaulio, M. A. (1998), ‘Customer, consumer and user involvement in product develop-
ment: A framework and a review of selected methods’, Total Quality Management
9(1), 141–149.
Kirk, R. E. (2007), ‘Experimental design’, The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology .
Krippendorff, K. (2004), Content Analysis: An Introduction to its Methodology, Sage
Publications.
Kumar, V. (2012), 101 design methods: A structured approach for driving innovation in
your organization, John Wiley & Sons.
Kuran, T. & Sunstein, C. (1999), ‘Availability cascades and risk regulation’, Stanford
Law Review 51(4), 683–768.
Lourenço, J. S., Ciriolo, E., Almeida, S. R. & Troussard, X. (2016), ‘Behavioural insights
applied to policy: European report 2016’, p. 56.
Madsen, P. L. (2018), ‘Hjernekassen på p1: Trafiksikkerhed | p1 | dr’.
URL: https://www.dr.dk/radio/p1/hjernekassen-pa-p1/hjernekassen-pa-p1-2018-02-
05
Manstead, A. S. & Parker, D. (1995), ‘Evaluating and extending the theory of planned
behaviour’, European review of social psychology 6(1), 69–95.
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
97
Martinussen, L. M., Møller, M. & Prato, C. G. (2017), ‘Accuracy of young male drivers’
self-assessments of driving skill’, Transportation research part F: traffic psychology and
behaviour 46, 228–235.
Mathieson, K. (1991), ‘Predicting user intentions: comparing the technology acceptance
model with the theory of planned behavior’, Information systems research 2(3), 173–
191.
McKenna, F. P. (1993), ‘It won’t happen to me: Unrealistic optimism or illusion of
control?’, British Journal of Psychology 84(1), 39–50.
Mehta, R. & Zhu, R. J. (2009), ‘Blue or red? exploring the effect of color on cognitive
task performances’, Science 323(5918), 1226–1229.
Miltenberger, R. G. (2011), Behavior modification: Principles and procedures, Cengage
Learning.
Mountain, L., Hirst, W. & Maher, M. (2005), ‘Are speed enforcement cameras more
effective than other speed management measures?: The impact of speed management
schemes on 30 mph roads’, Accident Analysis Prevention 37(4), 742–754.
NACTO (2011), ‘Urban street design guide’, New York 8.
National Strategisk Analyse (2017).
URL:
https://www.politi.dk/NR/rdonlyres/60D84675-DFA7-46FE-BDEC-
6FE6545FC8AF/0/Rapport_NSA17_enkeltsider.pdf
Northcraft, G. & Neale, M. (1987), ‘Experts, amateurs, and real-estate - an anchoring-
and-adjustment perspective on property pricing decisions’, Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes 39(1), 84–97.
of London, T. (2009), ‘Intelligent speed adaption design’.
Ostrom, E. (2000), ‘Collective action and the evolution of social norms’, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 14(3).
Ostrom, T. M. (1969), ‘The relationship between the affective, behavioral, and cognitive
components of attitude’, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 5(1), 12–30.
Ouellette, J. & Wood, W. (1998), ‘Habit and intention in everyday life: The multiple
processes by which past behavior predicts future behavior’, Psychological Bulletin
124(1), 54–74.
Parsons, C. E., Young, K. S., Joensson, M., Brattico, E., Hyam, J. A., Stein, A., Green,
A. L., Aziz, T. Z. & Kringelbach, M. L. (2013), ‘Ready for action: a role for the
human midbrain in responding to infant vocalizations’, Social cognitive and affective
neuroscience 9(7), 977–984.
==PAGE:110==
98
Bibliography
Peden, M., Scurfield, R., Sleet, D., Mohan, D., Hyder, A. A., Jarawan, E., Mathers,
C. D. et al. (2004), ‘World report on road traffic injury prevention’.
Pelsmacker, P. D. & Janssens, W. (2006), ‘The effect of norms, attitudes and habits on
speeding behavior: Scale development and model building and estimation’, Accident
Analysis Prevention 39(1), 6–15.
Phillips, R. O., Ulleberg, P. & Vaa, T. (2011), ‘Meta-analysis of the effect of road safety
campaigns on accidents’, Accident Analysis Prevention 43(3), 1204–1218.
Pilkington, P. & Kinra, S. (2005), ‘Effectiveness of speed cameras in preventing road
traffic collisions and related casualties: systematic review’, Bmj 330(7487), 331–334.
Porter, B. E. (2011), Handbook of traffic psychology, Academic Press.
Prochaska, J. O., Norcross, J. C. & DiClemente, C. O. (1995), Changing for Good: A
Revolutionary Six-Stage Program for Overcoming Bad Habits and Moving Your Life
Positively Forward, Harper Collins.
Regan, M. A., Triggs, T. J., Young, K. L., Tomasevic, N., Mitsopoulos, E., Stephan,
K. & Tingvall, C. (2006), ‘On-road evaluation of intelligent speed adaptation, follow-
ing distance warning and seatbelt reminder systems: Final results of the tag safecar
project’, Monash University Accident Research Centre Reports 253, 270.
Reisch, L. & , S. C. (2016), ‘Do europeans like nudges?’, Judgment and Decision Making
11(4), 310–325.
Rook, A. & Hogema, J. (2005), ‘Effects of human-machine interface design for intelli-
gent speed adaptation on driving behavior and acceptance’, Transportation Research
Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board (1937), 79–86.
Saad, F., Hjälmdahl, M., Cañas, J., Alonso, M., Garayo, P., Macchi, L., Nathan, F.,
Papakostopoulos, L. O. V., Panou, M. & Bekiaris, E. (2008), ‘Behavioural effects and
dve modelling’.
Selinger, E. & Whyte, K. (2011), ‘Is there a right way to nudge? the practice and ethics
of choice architecture’, Sociology Compass 5(10), 923–935.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-9020.2011.00413.x
Semotan, J., Semotanova, M. & Oldwa, M. (1969), ‘Startle and other human responses
to noise’, Journal of Sound and Vibration 10(3), 480–488.
Serdula, M., Mokdad, A., Williamson, D., Galuska, D., Mendlein, J. & Heath, G. (1999),
‘Prevalence of attempting weight loss and strategies for controlling weight’, Jama-
journal of the American Medical Association 282(14), 1353–1358.
Sheppard, B. H., Hartwick, J. & Warshaw, P. R. (1988), ‘The theory of reasoned action:
A meta-analysis of past research with recommendations for modifications and future
research’, Journal of Consumer Research 15(3), 325.
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
99
Shibasaki, M. & Masataka, N. (2014), ‘The color red distorts time perception for men,
but not for women’, Scientific reports 4, 5899.
Siren, A., Sørensen, C. H. & Vinsteen, I. (2012), Vejhastighedens politiske historie, in
‘Trafikdage på Aalborg Universitet 2012’.
Speed and injury severity - European Commission (2018).
URL: https://ec.europa.eu/
Stephens, A. N. & Ohtsuka, K. (2014), ‘Cognitive biases in aggressive drivers: does
illusion of control drive us off the road?’, Personality and individual differences 68, 124–
129.
Sunstein, C. R. (2015), ‘Which nudges do people like? a national survey’.
SUPREME (2005), ‘Best practices in road safety - handbook for measures at the euro-
pean level’, pp. 1–49.
Tay, R. (2005), ‘The effectiveness of enforcement and publicity campaigns on serious
crashes involving young male drivers: Are drink driving and speeding similar?’, Acci-
dent Analysis Prevention 37(5), 922–929.
Tay, R., Watson, B. & Hart, S. (2002a), Personal and social influences of speeding, in
‘Traffic and Transportation Studies (2002)’, pp. 1140–1147.
Tay, R., Watson, B. & Hart, S. (2002b), ‘Personal and social influences of speeding’,
International Conference on Traffic and Transportation Studies pp. 1140–1147.
Thaler, R. H. & Sunstein, C. R. (2008), Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth,
and happiness, Yale University Press.
UN launches initiative to improve road safety worldwide | UN News (2018).
URL: https://news.un.org/en/story/2018/04/1007151
Vallgårda, S. (2012), ‘Nudge—a new and better way to improve health?’, Health Policy
104(2), 200–203.
Van den Branden, S., Van den Broucke, S., Leroy, R., Declerck, D. & Hoppenbrouwers,
K. (2015), ‘Predicting oral health-related behaviour in the parents of preschool chil-
dren: An application of the theory of planned behaviour’, Health Education Journal
74(2), 221–230.
Van Der Putte, B. (1993), On the theory of reasoned action, Universiteit van Amsterdam.
van Loon, A. & Duynstee, L. (2001), Intelligent speed adaptation (isa): a successful test
in the netherlands, in ‘Proceedings of the Canadian Multidisciplinary Road Safety
Conference XII, Ontario, Canada’.
==PAGE:112==
100
Bibliography
Várhelyi, A. (2002), ‘Speed management via in-car devices: effects, implications, per-
spectives’, Transportation 29(3), 237–252.
Varhelyi, A., Comte, S. & Mäkinen, T. (1998), ‘Evaluation of in-car speed limiters:
Final report’, Final report, Managing Speeds of Traffic on European Roads (MASTER
project) .
Várhelyi, A., Hjälmdahl, M., Hydén, C. & Draskóczy, M. (2004), ‘Effects of an active
accelerator pedal on driver behaviour and traffic safety after long-term use in urban
areas’, Accident Analysis & Prevention 36(5), 729–737.
Várhelyi, A. & Mäkinen, T. (2001), ‘The effects of in-car speed limiters: field studies’,
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 9(3), 191–211.
Walker, M., Takayama, L. & Landay, J. A. (2002), High-fidelity or low-fidelity, paper or
computer? choosing attributes when testing web prototypes, in ‘Proceedings of the
human factors and ergonomics society annual meeting’, Vol. 46, SAGE Publications
Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA, pp. 661–665.
Wankhede, S. S., Khanapurkar, M., Rathee, V. & Bajaj, P. R. (2009), A design approach
for intelligent speed adaptation system using hybrid controller, in ‘Emerging Trends
in Engineering and Technology (ICETET), 2009 2nd International Conference on’,
IEEE, pp. 593–597.
Wendel, S. (2013), Designing for behavior change, O’Reilly Media.
Young, K. L., Regan, M. A., Triggs, T. J., Jontof-Hutter, K. & Newstead, S. (2010),
‘Intelligent speed adaptation—effects and acceptance by young inexperienced drivers’,
Accident Analysis & Prevention 42(3), 935–943.
Young, K. & Regan, M. A. (2002), Intelligent speed adaptation: A review, in ‘Proceed-
ings of RS Conference’, pp. 445–450.
Åberg, L., Larsen, L., Glad, A. & Beilinsson, L. (1997), ‘Observed vehicle speed
and drivers’ perceived speed of others’, Applied Psychology-an International Review-
psychologie Appliquee-revue Internationale 46(3), 287–302.
