==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Real-time networking
A time-predictable TTEthernet node
Maja Lund (s134877)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis concerns the implementation of a deterministic network protocol, TTEth-
ernet, on the time-predictable processor of Patmos. Implementation was done through
extension of the existing Ethernet controller on the processor, and tested on a small
TTEthernet system with one switch. Results showed that the implementation was
able to interact with the system as a synchronization client, by synchronizing its local
clock to the system clock in a stable manner. Further testing showed the controllers
ability to send time triggered messages with a bounded latency and a small jitter of
approximately 4.5us. All in all, this has enabled Patmos to communicate with other
nodes in a deterministic way, and thus extending the possible uses of Patmos.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering.
I would like to thank my supervisors Martin Schoeberl and Jens Sparsø for help
and guidance throughout the project. Furthermore I would like to thank Paul Pop
for his help during the initial phase of the project. Finally I want to thank Martin
Obel Thomsen for moral and academic support.
Kongens Lyngby, July 20, 2018
Maja Lund (s134877)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
List of Acronyms
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Related work
3
2.1
Real time network protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
TTEthernet implementations and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Background
5
3.1
Clock drift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Patmos Ethernet controller
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
TTEthernet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Materials and Methods
13
4.1
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Implementation
19
5.1
Overall implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Initialization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Receiving and clock synchronization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.4
Sending . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.5
Modifications to enable WCET analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.6
Implementation without polling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.7
User program example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.8
Theoretical limits of implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6
Results
31
6.1
Clock synchronization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
6.2
Latency and Jitter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.3
Worst Case Execution Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7
Discussion
41
7.1
Future extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
8
Conclusion
43
A Code overview
45
Bibliography
47
==PAGE:9==
List of Acronyms
CAN Control Area Network.
CT critical traffic.
MII Media-Independant Interface.
OCP Open Core Protocol.
PCF protocol control frame.
ppm parts per million.
RGMII Reduced Giga-bit Media-Independant Interface.
RX/TX receive/transmit.
SD switch delay.
TSN Time Sensitive Networking.
TT time triggered.
TTCAN Time Triggered CAN.
VL virtual link.
WB WishBone.
WCET worst case execution time.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Real time systems are hardware and software systems which need to meet certain
timing constraints in order to be correct. In other words, the correctness of a com-
putation depends on both the logical correctness, and if the result is produced at
the correct time. An example could be an airbag system. If the system correctly
identified that an airbag should inflate, and inflated in the correct manner except a
couple of seconds too late, it wouldn’t be considered a functional airbag system.
Some real time systems consist of several separate units which need to commu-
nicate. Although Ethernet networks have been a successful and flexible solution for
many application areas, they are not suitable for real time systems where missing
a deadline could lead to big consequences. This is because the end-to-end latency
depends on unpredictable factors such as network load, which makes an Ethernet
network unable to guarantee with 100% certainty that a message will arrive before
its deadline. TTEthernet is an extension of Ethernet which promises known max-
imum end-to-end latency and small bounded jitter in order to solve this problem.
[1]
Patmos is a time-predictable processor intended for use in embedded real time
systems. It allows for static estimates of worst case execution times (WCETs), and
supports standard Ethernet, but no form of deterministic network. [2] This thesis
seeks to enable the Patmos processor to communicate through a deterministic network
protocol. It will be done by extending the existing Ethernet controller in software, to
allow for TTEthernet compatibility. The performance of the controller will be tested,
and compared to implementations on other platforms.
The thesis is organized in the following way. Chapter 2 presents research related
to this thesis. Chapter 3 introduces background information that this thesis relies
on. Chapter 4 presents materials used during testing and implementation. Chapter
5 describes the implementation in detail.
Chapter 6 presents results of tests and
experiments which are discussed in chapter 7.
The last chapter will provide the
conclusion. The appendix provides an overview of code and configuration files, which
are handed in separately. The code is furthermore available as a fork of Patmos on
[3].
==PAGE:12==
2
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Related work
2.1
Real time network protocols
Deterministic networks are an integral part of many distributed real time systems. A
widely used solution is the Control Area Network (CAN) bus, which is a serial bus able
to send small prioritizes messages with bounded latency [4]. It was extended with time
triggered capabilities in Time Triggered CAN (TTCAN), restricting nodes to only
transmit messages in certain time-slots, and thus increasing the determinism of the
bus [5]. The main limitations of both CAN and TTCAN are a maximum bandwidth
of 1Mbit/s, and limited cable length which depends on the bandwidth of the bus
[4]. FlexRay is a time triggered protocol which was designed to be faster and more
reliable than CAN. It operates with a predefined communication cycle, which consists
of a static segment reserved for deterministic traffic, and a dynamic segment for other
traffic. The maximum bandwidth is 10Mbit/s, but the cost is typically higher than
for CAN [6]. As the demand for higher bandwidth increases, the industry has started
looking towards Ethernet based real time protocols. Several different standards and
protocols such as EtherCAT, Ethernet Powerlink, and TTEthernet were developed,
some of which have been compared in [7]. One of the newer developments is Time
Sensitive Networking (TSN), which is an upcoming standardization by the IEEE 802.1
working group, for time-sensitive data transmission over Ethernet networks [8]. TSN
is similar to other time triggered approaches in that determinism is guaranteed by
transmitting high priority messages in predefined time-slots, but provides complete
backward compatibility with standard Ethernet solutions.
2.2
TTEthernet implementations and analysis
A software based TTEthernet end system has previously been developed for AU-
TOSAR, which is a standardized software architecture for control units in cars [9].
The implemented AUTOSAR system acts as synchronization client (explained in sec-
tion 3.3), and uses existing Ethernet controller hardware capabilities to time stamp
incoming clock synchronization frames. Precise end-to-end latency of the system is
unclear due to a non-deterministic receive function, but a jitter of approximately 32us
was observed.
Latency and jitter through a single TTEthernet switch have been measured in [10].
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Related work
The relation between delays in the TTEthernet switch and latency were investigated,
as well as latency of time triggered messages during high levels of network load. The
measured jitter for the system was dependant on message size, and was observed as
10us for frames smaller than 128 bytes, and 30us for larger frames.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 3
Background
3.1
Clock drift
Every node in a distributed system has its own local clock built on an oscillator. These
clocks are not perfect, and might have small variations in frequency. This means that
even if all clocks in a distributed system was perfectly synchronized to begin with,
they would eventually drift apart [11]. It’s called clock drift, and is illustrated on
Figure 3.1 on the left. The difference in value between two clocks at a certain point
in time is called clock skew. An example is the dotted line on the figure. Oscillators
usually advertise a maximum clock drift in parts per million (ppm). For example,
an oscillator with 20ppm would indicates that after a million ns, the maximum clock
skew from the initial value is 20ns.
Figure 3.1: Example of a fast and slow clock drifting away from a perfect clock over
time. The dotted line is the clock skew at time t.
==PAGE:16==
6
3 Background
3.2
Patmos Ethernet controller
Figure 3.2: Overview of the Patmos Ethernet controller, adapted from [12]. It is
connected to Patmos through OCP signals, and to a physical PHY chip
through MII.
The existing Ethernet controller in Patmos [12] is based on the EthMac block from
OpenCore [13, 14]. The architecture can be seen in Figure 3.2. To enable the con-
nection to Patmos, the Open Core Protocol (OCP) signals used by Patmos are con-
verted to the WishBone (WB) signals used by the IP block. This is done through the
Demux/Bridge for configuration signals and through the receive/transmit (RX/TX)
buffer otherwise. The EthMac block connects to a PHY chip through the Media-
Independant Interface (MII). Configuration of the EthMac block and access to the
RX/TX buffers are available from Patmos through specific addresses in local mem-
ory dedicated to the IO device. Receiving and transmitting from the EthMac block
happens with the use of so called buffer descriptors. They are stored in the EthMac
block, and contain an address to an associated buffer in the RX/TX buffer, as well as
the length and status of the buffer. Buffer descriptors work a bit like linked lists (one
for receiving one for transmitting). Each descriptor passes control to the next in line
when it is unavailable. The last buffer descriptor links back to the first, creating a
ring. This is illustrated in figure 3.3. The EthMac block receives frames when there
is at least one empty receive buffer available, otherwise they are lost. After reception
the receive status is written to the associated buffer descriptor, and an interrupt is
generated if enabled. The buffer will stay unavailable until the buffer descriptor is
again marked empty. Interrupts from the EthMac core do not trigger interrupts in
Patmos, but makes it possible to see if a new frame has been received by polling the
interrupt source register. Frames are transmitted from a transmit buffer as soon as
the associated buffer descriptor is marked as ready. After successful or unsuccessful
transmission the buffer descriptor is automatically reset to not ready. The controller
includes a C library (ethlib) with functions for using and configuring the controller.
==PAGE:17==
3.3 TTEthernet
7
Figure 3.3: Example of possible setup of receive buffer descriptors. Each contains
information regarding a buffer at a specific address in the RX/TX buffer.
3.3
TTEthernet
TTEthernet is a deterministic extension of Ethernet, which operates at the Data
Link layer of the OSI model. A TTEthernet system generally consists of a set of
nodes communicating through one or more switches. It allows regular Ethernet traf-
fic (best-effort traffic), and introduces two classes of critical traffic (CT) with various
deterministic properties. This section will go over the basics of TTEthernet. Addi-
tional information can be found in [1], which is the primary source for this section.
3.3.1
Virtual links
CT is sent and received using the concept of virtual links (VLs). A VL is a relation
between a sender and one or more receivers, and is identified by a unique ID. Switches
need to know the VL definitions, and nodes need to know definitions of VLs they can
send on. CT follows the standard format for Ethernet frames, but is distinguished
from best-effort traffic by having a predefined constant in the first 4 bytes of the
destination MAC address (the CT marker). The remaining two bytes are used to
identify which virtual link the frame is sent on. This is illustrated in Figure 3.4.
Since the switches know about the VLs, they know which ports to forward the frame
to.
Figure 3.4: Ethernet II frame. Critical traffic identifies a destination using a CT
marker and VL ID instead of a MAC address.
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Background
3.3.2
Rate-constrained traffic
The first class of CT is rate-constrained traffic.
It extends the VL definitions to
include a maximum frame size and a minimum delay between two frames. A switch
receiving frames on the link will drop any frames that violate the limits. This doesn’t
ensure any specific timing or jitter, but ensures that the network is not overloaded. In
systems with both rate-constrained traffic and best-effort traffic, the rate-constrained
traffic has higher priority.
3.3.3
Time triggered traffic
The other CT class is time triggered (TT) traffic. For TT traffic, a VL definition
includes a receive window in which the switch will accept messages from the sender,
and send windows where the switch will pass them on to the receivers. Packages re-
ceived outside of the defined window will be ignored by the switch, which guarantees a
certain end-to-end latency and minimal jitter. The latency will largely depend on the
delay between receive and send window in the switch, which we will call switch delay
(SD). Assuming sending always starts at the beginning of the send window, the pos-
sible minimum and maximum delays of an outgoing message are illustrated in figure
3.5. The actual delay would be somewhere in between. The latency will furthermore
Figure 3.5: Switch delay.
depend on the transmission time, defined as frame size divided by bandwidth, and
the propagation delay, defined as cable distance divided by propagation speed. For
a system with short wires the propagation delay is in the range of nanoseconds. The
expected minimum and maximum latency for a VL in a given TTEthernet system
can thus be calculated using Equation 3.1, where 64 and 1518 are the minimum and
maximum possible Ethernet II frame sizes.
Lmin = SDmin(s) +
64 bytes · 8 bit
byte
bandwidth( bit
s ) + dcable(m)
scable( m
s )
Lmax = SDmax(s) +
1518 bytes · 8 bit
byte
bandwidth( bit
s )
+ dcable(m)
scable( m
s )
(3.1)
==PAGE:19==
3.3 TTEthernet
9
In systems with multiple traffic types, TT traffic is always the highest priority, since
delays in sending might violate the timing guarantees.
3.3.4
Integration and cluster cycle
All nodes and switches need a global notion of time in order to send packages at the
correct points in time. This is achieved through periodic clock synchronization. The
time between each synchronization is called an integration cycle, and has a period
which is typically in the range of 1 to 10 milliseconds. The schedule for TT traffic
is periodic as well, and repeats every cluster cycle, which is defined as an integer
multiple of integration cycles. An example of some TT traffic in a system with an
integration period of 10ms and two integration cycles per cluster cycle can be seen
in Figure 3.6. TT traffic is often defined by its period, and the offset from the start
of the cluster cycle. For example, TTE3 in the figure has a period of 20ms and an
offset of 10ms.
Figure 3.6: Example of integration and cluster cycles.
3.3.5
Protocol Control Frames
Clock synchronization is achieved through the exchange of protocol control frames
(PCFs). These are small TT frames with their own type definition (0x891D), and a
specific data layout which can be seen in Figure 3.7. The integration cycle field is
used to differentiate PCFs sent at different points in the cluster cycle. This ensures
that a node can begin synchronization at any point in the cluster cycle. Membership
contains information about how many nodes have been involved in the synchroniza-
tion. Synchronization priority can be used to settle disputes in networks with multiple
switches. A synchronization domain consists of all nodes and switches that synchro-
nize to the same global time. There are three types of PCF. Integration frame(0x2),
cold-start frame(0x4), and cold-start acknowledge frame(0x8), although the last two
are used exclusively during start-up. The last field, transparent clock, keeps track of
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Background
Figure 3.7: Data layout of protocol control frame, adapted from [1].
the actual transmission time for a frame. The transparent clock is initially set to the
send delay of the device originally sending the PCF. Any device relaying the frame
will add their send and receive delay to the transparent clock, and the final device
will add receive delay as well.
3.3.6
Permanence
PCFs are not considered for synchronization until they become permanent, which
is calculated as the transparent clock subtracted from the maximum possible trans-
mission delay of any frame in the system (max_delay). Assuming the transparent
clock accurately depicts the transmission time, this is equivalent to the frame being
permanent max_delay after it is sent. Seen in Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: Illustration of permanence.
3.3.7
Clock synchronization
Three roles are involved in the exchange of PCFs. Synchronization masters, synchro-
nization clients, and compression masters. Typically the switches act as compression
masters, and nodes are either synchronization masters or clients. Nodes are allowed
==PAGE:21==
3.3 TTEthernet
11
to not be involved in the synchronization domain at all, but it restricts them to only
communicate with Best-effort traffic.
Each node in the synchronization domain keeps track of when they believe the
integration cycle has started, which is when synchronization masters send out in-
tegration frames. Compression masters use the permanence times of these frames
to decide on the correct clock, and send integration frames to all synchronization
masters and clients.
A returning integration frame is expected to be permanent
2·max_delay+comp_delay after the beginning of the integration cycle. Comp_delay
is the time it takes a compression master to evaluate the frames. An acceptance win-
dow around this expected permanence point defines whether or not the node should
accept the PCF as correct. The acceptance window has a width of twice the expected
precision of the system, defined as the maximum difference between two correct local
clocks. If the PCF is accepted, the difference between the expected and actual per-
manence time is used to correct the clock. Correction is typically delayed until it is
ensured that the corrected clock won’t fall back within the acceptance window. Seen
in Figure 3.9. If the system has more than one compression master, the synchroniza-
tion masters and clients will receive multiple PCFs in the acceptance window. In this
case, the clock correction will use a fault tolerant average of the differences between
expected and actual permanence time.
Figure 3.9: Overview of clock synchronization, adapted from [1].
==PAGE:22==
12
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 4
Materials and
Methods
4.1
Software
4.1.1
Wireshark
Wireshark is a freely available network protocol analyzer. It is open source, and runs
on most platforms.[15] It can capture all Ethernet traffic received on a device, and
display it. Filters for the TTEthernet protocol are included, which makes it easy to
identify and inspect TT traffic. The program was used to monitor the TTEthernet
system during testing, to ensure that messages arrived as expected.
4.1.2
TTE tools
TTE tools are a TTTech development suite for configuring TTEthernet systems.
They include a GUI editor based on Eclipse.[16] The typical process for generating
Figure 4.1: Typical process using TTE tools.
configuration files for all devices in a TTEthernet system can be seen in Figure 4.1.
First step is to create a Network description file (XML). It contains information
about: senders, receivers, physical links, virtual links, synchronization domain, and
similar network information. TTE Plan can then use this file to generate a Network
configuration file (XML). This is essentially the schedule for the entire network. If a
specific schedule is desired, the Network configuration file can be edited manually as
well. From the network description and network configuration TTE build generates
device specific binary images.
==PAGE:24==
14
4 Materials and Methods
4.2
Hardware
4.2.1
TTEthernet Chronos switch
A TTEthernet Chronos switch was used during the project. It has 24 ports, 6 of which
support Gigabit Ethernet, while the remaining 18 support fast Ethernet (10/100
Mbit/s). Configuration of the switch is done by converting and uploading a device
specific binary image generated from TTE tools. A script was provided with the
switch for this task, but was initially faulty. The build revision number used by the
script did not match the build revision number found in the event log of the switch,
which made any uploaded configurations unable to be activated. This was rectified in
order to use the switch in this project. A second switch was stuck in an error state,
and never successfully configured, which limited test configurations to networks with
a single switch.
Figure 4.2: TTEthernet Chronos Switch.
4.2.2
Ubuntu end nodes
Four Dell precision T1700 PCs running Ubuntu were used as end nodes for the TTEth-
ernet system. Each are equipped with a TTE PCIe Network card, which is specifically
designed for distributed control systems. The network card has 2 SFP ports which
support connections with 100/1000 Mbit/s.
The PC’s include a TTEthernet driver and API, as well as various test programs,
all of which require a device specific binary image, generated from TTE tools.
==PAGE:25==
4.2 Hardware
15
4.2.3
Altera DE2-115 board
The default FPGA board for the Patmos processor is the Altera DE2-115, which
can be seen in Figure 4.3. It was the target board for the existing Patmos Ethernet
controller, and thus an obvious choice for this project. It is equipped with an Altera
Cyclone IV FPGA, and a wide variety of available components. Table 4.1 will present
some of these and their relevance for this thesis. [17]
Table 4.1: Relevant Altera DE2-115 components.
Component
Connection to project
Built-in USB Blaster
Used for configuring the FPGA
50Mhz oscillator
Supplies the Patmos clock
2 Gigabit Ethernet PHY chips
Connects the board to the TTEthernet system
RS-232 transceiver and 9-pin connector
Used by Patmos to transmit text output
Figure 4.3: Altera DE2-115 board.
4.2.3.1
Patmos configuration
The Patmos platform can be configured for different boards and with different IO
components. This is done by synthesizing the platform with a different configuration
file than the default. Since the Patmos Ethernet controller is not included in the
default configuration, ”altde2-all” was chosen instead. It is similar to the default
configuration, except it disables dual issue instructions, and includes the Ethernet
controller and a second UART. The configuration was modified slightly to include an
interrupt signal which was added to the Ethernet controller during the project.
==PAGE:26==
16
4 Materials and Methods
4.2.3.2
Physical board configuration
The Altera board supports two different standards for communication between the
FPGA and PHY chip. MII or Reduced Giga-bit Media-Independant Interface (RGMII),
where RGMII is the default. Since the Patmos Ethernet controller only supports MII,
the board needs to be configured for MII by physically moving a jumper. Correct
jumper placement for configuring the Ethernet0 port to MII can be seen in Figure
4.4.
Figure 4.4: Jumper placement on the Altera DE2-115 board.
4.2.4
General platform
Figure 4.5: Illustration of components and VLs in the system. Red nodes are syn-
chronization masters, purple nodes are synchronization clients.
Throughout most of the implementation and testing, the star network configura-
tion seen in Figure 4.5 was used. It is based on a demo configuration which came
with the TTEthernet system, and consists of a TTE switch, four Ubuntu end nodes
==PAGE:27==
4.2 Hardware
17
(AS,AC,VS and VC), a Windows computer(Monitor) and the Altera board. Three of
the Ubuntu end nodes (AS,AC and VC) act as synchronization masters, the fourth
Ubuntu node (VS) and both board and monitor are synchronization clients. The
monitor does not contain any TTEthernet hardware, and is mostly used to run TTE
tools, configure the switch, and monitor all VLs with Wireshark. While the schedule
of VLs have been varied slightly, the links shown in Figure 4.5 have remained mostly
constant throughout implementation and testing. The network has been tested at
different integration periods and cluster cycles, although mostly with an integration
period of 10ms and a cluster cycle of 20ms. The maximum possible transmission
delay of any frame in the system was calculated by TTE tools and configured as
135,600ns. The compression delay was configured as 50,000ns in the system, but the
configuration of the board incorrectly used 10,500ns for this value while collecting the
results in section 6. This doesn’t affect the results in any way, because the board is
a synchronization client. Precision was calculated by TTE tools, and configured as
10,375ns
==PAGE:28==
18
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
The implemented TTEthernet controller makes use of the existing Ethernet controller
described in section 3.2. No changes were made to the existing Ethernet controller
in order to physically send and receive TT traffic, but it was configured differently.
To avoid filtering out traffic on mac-addresses, the EthMac core was configured in
promiscuous mode. Additionally, it was configured as full-duplex, to avoid sending
and receiving blocking each other. The functionality of the implemented controller
lies mostly in a C library (tte.c) which makes use of, and builds on parts of the existing
Patmos ethlib. This is illustrated in figure 5.1. Two slightly different versions of the
controller were implemented. One where received messages are discovered through
polling, like in the existing Ethernet controller, and another where EthMac interrupts
trigger actual Patmos interrupts whenever a frame is received. The following sections
will describe the implementation based on the version with polling, and section 5.6
will describe how the version without polling differs.
Figure 5.1: Overview of most relevant C files.
==PAGE:30==
20
5 Implementation
5.1
Overall implementation
To cut down on complexity, the controller is able to act only as synchronization client,
and assumes that it is connected to a single switch. The controller consists of three
main parts: initialization, receiving, and sending, which will be described further in
the following three sections. An overview of the intended flow of programs using the
controller can be seen in Figure 5.2. The controller is initially initialized with static
information regarding the system, VLs and the schedule. After initialization, the
Ethernet controller is continuously polled to see if any new messages have arrived.
This is necessary in order to ensure that the receive time of integration frames is
recorded as precisely as possible to avoid incorrect clock synchronization. The re-
ceived message should then be passed through the tte receive function, which will
synchronize the local clock in case of an integration frame, and otherwise return a
value indicating the message type. The rest of the body depends on the intention of
the program, and the program flow returns to receiving the message. Outgoing TT
messages can be scheduled anywhere in the program body, and will be sent accord-
ing to the system schedule through timer interrupts. An example of a general user
program following this structure can be seen in section 5.7. To avoid big fluctuations
in clock synchronization, the system schedule and the WCET of the program body
should follow the limits described in section 5.8.
Figure 5.2: Intended flow of user programs. The controller is first initialized with
all constants of the system. Remaining functionality happens in a loop
where the program continually waits until a frame is received, calls the
tte receive function, and then reacts to the reply.
==PAGE:31==
5.2 Initialization
21
5.2
Initialization
Several parts of the controller needs initialization before a program loop can com-
mence, an overview can be seen in Figure 5.3. The controller needs to be initialized
with the constants of the particular system it is running. Namely the integration
cycle, the cluster cycle, how many VLs the node can send on, maximum transmission
delay, the compression delay of the switch, and the system precision. Furthermore,
the permitted send time for each VL needs to be known, so each VL gets initialized
with an id, offset and period. There is no need to store any information about VLs
the controller can receive TT traffic on. The switch will ensure that only relevant and
correctly timed TT messages are passed on to the controller, and the messages can be
received like any other. The next step is to generate the send schedule and register the
timer interrupt function. The timer will begin when the first PCF has been received
by the tte receive function. The last step is to clear the receive bit in the interrupt
source register of the EthMac controller, and set up receive buffers. Multiple buffers
are needed to ensure that messages aren’t lost while the latest message is used, but
the precise number depends on the system and schedule. Receive buffers are set up
by writing to the receive buffer descriptors. Each buffer descriptor needs an address
in the RX/TX buffer, and should be configured to generate interrupts. Active buffers
should be marked empty, and the last buffer in the line should be marked as such.
Figure 5.3: Overview of initialization. First the controller and all system constants
are initialized. Then id, period and offset of each VL is stored. This
is followed by generating the schedule and registering timer interrupts.
Finally receive buffers are set up so execution can commence.
5.2.1
Generating send schedule
We know the amount of VLs, their period and offset. From this, the possible send
times for each VL can be computed by repeatedly adding the period to the offset.
These need to be combined into a single schedule. This can be done with a small
algorithm, which will be explained through the example in figure 5.4. To make it
easier for the timer interrupt function to schedule the next interrupt, each entry in
the schedule is stored as the time until next interrupt. To avoid decimal numbers,
time is stored in tenths of ms. The first event for each VL is at their offset, so the
very first event in the schedule can be found by finding the smallest offset. This
starting offset is stored in a global variable ”startTick”, and the VL it belongs to is
stored in the first place in the schedule. For all VLs a temporary variable named
==PAGE:32==
22
5 Implementation
Figure 5.4: Example of schedule generation. Two VLs with the offset and period
shown in the top left will generate the schedule in the bottom right
when the cluster cycle is 8ms. The top right shows the next send time
of each VL at different steps in the algorithm.
current is set to the offset of the VL. The VL which had the starting offset adds its
period to this value. This is the VL.current values when i is 0 on the figure. The
schedule time when i is 0 is calculated as the minimum current value (here 26) with
the last current value (here 10) subtracted from it. The VL with the smallest current
value is stored in the next place in the schedule (when i is 1), and its current value is
incremented by its period. These steps are repeated until the smallest current value
is larger than the cluster-cycle (8ms on the figure). It may seem strange that the VL
is stored one place further in the schedule than the time. This is because the chosen
order is easier when the values need to be read. For example, the first time a timer
interrupt happens (i=0) VL 1 will be allowed to send, and the next interrupt will be
scheduled for 1.6ms later.
5.3
Receiving and clock synchronization
As previously mentioned, receiving any message is done by continuously polling the
interrupt source register until it sets the bit signifying that a frame has been received
in a receive buffer.
This is done with a function called ”tte_wait_for_message”,
which is also responsible for recording the receive time by reading the current cycle
count. In order to avoid a problem which is further described in section 6.1.1, the
current cycle count is repeatedly read during polling.
After a message has been received and the receive time is stored, the next buffer
should be marked as empty, and the interrupt source register cleared.
This can
be done by calling tte_clear_free_rx_buffer. Afterwards the tte receive function
==PAGE:33==
5.3 Receiving and clock synchronization
23
described below should be called, with the address of the received frame and the
recorded receive time.
5.3.1
TTE receive function
Figure 5.5: Overview of clock synchronization. The permanence point is calculated
based on receive time and transparent clock. The start time is initialized
if relevant, and used to calculate the scheduled receive point. If the
permanence point is outside the acceptance window synchronization has
failed. Otherwise the start time is synchronized, and timer interrupts
are started if relevant.
The tte receive function initially checks the type of the message. If it’s a PCF and
an integration frame it will be used to synchronize the clock, otherwise the function
returns. Clock synchronization is mostly done according to the description in section
3.3.7, but an overview of the function can be seen in figure 5.5. Transparent clock and
integration cycle is read from the appropriate fields in the PCF. The receive point is
given in clock cycles, but the transparent clock is given in a more precise format. Since
the controller is unable to correct the local clock with anything more precise than a
clock cycle, the transparent clock is converted to clock cycles. The permanence point
in time is calculated by adding the maximum delay, and subtracting the transparent
clock. For keeping track of when the controller expects synchronization masters to
have sent the PCFs, a variable called start_time is used. It is initially zero, but
on receiving the very first PCF, it is set to permanence time −(2 · max_delay +
comp_delay). Start_time is used to calculate the scheduled receive point, which is
==PAGE:34==
24
5 Implementation
used to calculate the acceptance window.
If the permanence point is outside the
acceptance window, the start_time is reset to zero, and the function returns zero.
This way the user program can immediately see that an error has occurred somewhere,
but the controller will start normally if it once again receives correctly timed PCFs.
Otherwise, if the permanence point is within the acceptance window, the difference
between permanence point and scheduled receive point is added to the start_time,
effectively synchronizing the local clock. The controller does not need to wait until
after the acceptance window to synchronize, because the implementation only assumes
one switch in the network, and thus only one PCF per integration cycle. This makes
it irrelevant whether or not the local clock goes back within the acceptance window.
If it is the first integration frame in the cluster cycle, a timer is armed for the first
entry in the send schedule. The first interrupt is scheduled for start_time plus the
startTick converted to cycles. Lastly, the integration period is added to start_time,
making it the expected send point of the next integration frame, and the function
returns 1.
5.4
Sending
As previously mentioned, time triggered messages must be sent according to a pre-
defined schedule. This requires some kind of queuing mechanism, as the program
should not be expected to calculate the exact send times itself.
The ethlib send
function expects outgoing frames to be stored somewhere in the RX/TX buffer, and
requires the specific address and size of the frame. The send queues therefore holds
addresses and sizes of frames scheduled to be sent. One send queue is created per
VL during initialization, and is allowed to hold the maximum amount of frames that
the VL is able to send in one cluster cycle, calculated as clustercycle
V Lperiod . This limits the
maximum delay of a scheduled frame to one cluster cycle. Each queue operates in
a FIFO manner, keeping track of the head and tail through two variables. It is up
to the program to create frames in the RX/TX buffer according to its intended use,
but a function ”tte_prepare_header” is provided to help create the header of a tte
message. Frames are scheduled through a specific function, ”tte_schedule_send”,
which takes the address and size of the frame, and which VL it should be scheduled
for. The function then checks the queue of the VL, and returns 0 if it’s full, and 1
if the frame was successfully scheduled. It is up to the program to ensure that the
address space is not overwritten before the frame has been sent.
5.4.1
Schedule interrupts
A schedule interrupt is illustrated in figure 5.6. As previously mentioned, the first
interrupt each cluster cycle is scheduled by the tte receive function upon process-
ing the first PCF. All remaining interrupts are scheduled by the previous interrupt,
which means the last interrupt in the cluster cycle does not schedule any interrupt.
Interrupts are scheduled by adding the time until next interrupt (from the schedule)
==PAGE:35==
5.5 Modifications to enable WCET analysis
25
Figure 5.6: Schedule interrupt. First the time for the next interrupt and the VL
scheduled to send are found. If it’s the last interrupt in the cluster cycle
no interrupts are scheduled. If the next interrupt is a PCF, the timer
time is set to start time. If there’s data on the queue of the scheduled
VL it is sent.
to a variable which holds the timer time in cycles for the current interrupt. The timer
time should be as synchronized with the local clock as possible, so an additional VL
representing the expected send times of PCFs is automatically added to the system
during initialization. It is an active part of the schedule with its own VL id, but is
scheduled by setting the timer time to start_time instead of the usual calculation.
Without it, the timer time would only be synchronized with the local clock once every
cluster cycle, which could cause issues in systems with long cluster cycles. Interrupts
are generated for each possible send point for each VL regardless of whether or not
any frames are scheduled. Each interrupt will check the queue of the scheduled VL,
and use the ethlib send function to send the first frame in the queue, if it isn’t empty.
5.5
Modifications to enable WCET analysis
To enable the solution to run the WCET analysis tool from the Patmos platform, some
small modifications were made. The function which converts the transparent clock
from the format used in PCFs to clock cycles initially performed division on a unsigned
long. According to the analysis tool, the division function contained an unbounded
loop.
To make the original function analyzable, the division was replaced by an
==PAGE:36==
26
5 Implementation
almost equivalent series of multiplication and bit-shifting.
Additionally, pragmas
containining loopbounds were added to all loops in the code, in order to aid the
analysis tool.
5.6
Implementation without polling
The EthMac core supports the generation of interrupts on various events. The inter-
rupt output signal from the EthMac was originally ignored in the Patmos Ethernet
controller. By relaying this output signal to the top level of the Ethernet controller,
it was possible to configure it as an actual interrupt signal in Patmos. This can be
seen in Figure 5.7. Since the EthMac core already needs to be configured to gener-
ate interrupts on receiving a frame, it gives an alternative to the continuous polling
otherwise needed by applications using the TTEthernet controller. User programs
using this version of the implementation no longer need to follow the program flow
depicted in figure 5.2. Instead the tte-receive function can be called by an interrupt
handler. To enable this, the desired receive interrupt handler must be written in the
user program and passed to the controller with a pointer during initialization (specif-
ically, the ”tte_start_ticking” function). To ensure that interrupts from receiving a
message has priority over the interrupts generated by the timer for sending, a new
configuration of Patmos was created for the interrupt implementation. It is almost
identical to the configuration described in section 4.2.3.1, except all interrupt num-
bers are increased by 1 so the Ethernet controller can have interrupt number 0. Both
versions of the implementation are tested in section 6.
Figure 5.7: The new signal for interrupt enabling runs from the EthMac block to
Patmos, bypassing the bridge.
==PAGE:37==
5.7 User program example
27
5.7
User program example
This section will provide a simple example of a general user program using the imple-
mented controller. The example can be seen in Listing 5.1. It shows the initialization
of a controller and 2 VLs. Integration period, cluster cycle and period and offset of
VLs are specified in 10ths of ms, while max_delay, compression delay and precision
are specified in clock cycles.
When all VLs have been specified, ”tte_start_ticking” is called, which generates
the system schedule and sets up interrupt functions. In this example it is called with
three zeroes, first zero means the send times should not be logged, and the next two
zeroes signify that there is no interrupt function for receiving messages. Setting up
buffer descriptors has been left out to keep the example short, but it is assumed that
two buffers are used, current and extra, each with a buffer descriptor, current_BD
and extra_BD.
The program loops begins by waiting until a message has been receive in current.
It then marks the extra buffer empty and calls the tte receive function with the current
buffer and the receive point. Reply can now be used to program different responses to
different types of received messages. Line 25 uses ”tte_prepare_test_data” to build
a TT message in address 0x2000 of the buffer. The message is made to be sent on
VL0, has a length of 1514, and the data portion of it consists of 0xBA repeated over
and over. The test message is scheduled to be sent on VL0 in line 26. Lastly, the
current and extra buffers are swapped, and the loop resumes. The loop runs for 2000
iterations, then stops the controller and terminates.
1 int main(){
2
static unsigned long long receive_point;
3
unsigned char CT[] = {0xAB,0xAD,0xBA,0xBE};
4
unsigned char VL0[] = {0x0F,0xA1};
5
unsigned char reply;
6
7
//int_period , cluster cycle, CT, 2 VLs, max_delay, comp_delay , precision
8
tte_initialize(100,200,CT,2,0x2A60,0xFA0,0x33E);
9
tte_init_VL(0, 8,40); //first VL starts at 0.8ms and has a period of 4ms
10
tte_init_VL(1, 10,20); //second VL starts at 1ms and has a period of 2ms
11
tte_start_ticking(0,0,0); //no logging, no receive interrupts
12
13
eth_iowr(0x04, 0x00000004); //clear receive frame bit in int_source
14
//set up 2 receive buffers, current and extra
15
16
for (int i =0; i<2000;){
17
tte_wait_for_message(&receive_point);
18
19
tte_clear_free_rx_buffer(extra_BD); //start receiving in other buffer
20
21
reply=tte_receive(current,receive_point);
22
23
//do something with reply
24
25
tte_prepare_test_data(0x2000,VL0,0xBA,1514);
26
tte_schedule_send(0x2000 ,1514,0);
==PAGE:38==
28
5 Implementation
27
28
// swap current and extra
29
}
30
tte_stop_ticking();
31
return 0;
32 }
Listing 5.1: Example of how to use the developed TTEthernet library.
The
controller is initialized with an integration period of 10ms, a cluster
cycle of 20ms, a max_delay of 135,600ns, a compression delay of
50,000ns and a precision of 10,375ns.
5.8
Theoretical limits of implementation
Because of the single-threaded nature of the implementation, the controller has certain
limits, which will be further described in the following three subsections. The first
limit is relevant in both the implementations with and without polling. The following
two limits are not as important in the implementation without polling, since an
interrupt will be generated on receiving a message regardless of whether the controller
is busy computing other things.
5.8.1
Earliest outgoing TT message
The first send-tick every cluster cycle is scheduled by the PCF handle function right
after the clock has been corrected.
Since the start of the cycle is defined as the
point were the PCF message is sent by synchronization masters, scheduling a VL to
send at 0ms would cause the function to schedule a timer-tick in the past, causing
unpredictable behaviour. The precise receive times of PCFs are not known at compile
time, but assuming a PCF is permanent within the acceptance window, the latest
possible receive time would be the same as the latest possible permanence time. This
is unlikely, but technically possible if the actual delay is equal to the maximum delay.
Since the acceptance window is twice as wide as the precision, the latest receive time
can be calculated with Equation 5.1.
reclatest = 2 · max_delay + comp_delay + precision
(5.1)
To ensure that the first outgoing TT message is never scheduled too soon, it should
be scheduled no earlier than the latest possible receive time plus the WCET of the
tte_receive function. This is illustrated in Figure 5.8.
5.8.2
Maximum execution time after TT message
If the program has a long execution time, the reception of PCFs might be delayed,
negatively impacting the clock synchronization. Part of this could arise from the code
==PAGE:39==
5.8 Theoretical limits of implementation
29
Figure 5.8: The earliest possible receive time is max_delay before the start of the
acceptance window. The latest possible receive time is at the end of
the acceptance window. The first TT message should be scheduled no
earlier than the WCET of tte_receive after the latest possible receive
time.
executed after receiving a TT message. The maximum allowed execution time after
a TT message depends on the TT message scheduled with the smallest gap to the
next integration frame. In our one switch implementation, the send_window defined
in the switch also dictates the latest possible receive time in the node. The earliest
possible receive time of a PCF (assuming it is in schedule), would be if the actual
transmission time was 0, and the frame was permanent as early as possible in the
acceptance window. This is equivalent to max_delay before the acceptance window,
as seen in Figure 5.8. All in all, the maximum execution time of the code executed on
receiving a TT message can be calculated with Equation 5.2, as illustrated in Figure
5.9.
maxtt = start_time −ttreclatest + max_delay + comp_delay −precision
(5.2)
The problem can be avoided either by scheduling the closest TT message further away
from the PCF, or by decreasing the execution time of the relevant code.
Figure 5.9: The code executed after receiving a TT message should take no longer
than from the latest TT receive time until the earliest receive time of
the next PCF.
==PAGE:40==
30
5 Implementation
5.8.3
Maximum execution time during integration cycle
Even if code executed upon receiving TT messages follow the limits described above,
the reception of PCFs could still be delayed if the combined execution times of ev-
erything executed during an integration cycle exceeds the integration period. This
limit can be expressed with Equation 5.3, where inctt is the number of received TT
messages.
int_period > WCETint + inctt · WCETtt + send_ticks · WCETsend
(5.3)
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 6
Results
6.1
Clock synchronization
The clock error was measured as the difference between the scheduled receive point
in time, and the actual permanence point in time at each received integration frame.
The error was stored in an array, which slightly increases the size of the function, but
shouldn’t affect the accuracy of the measurements. Figure 6.1 depicts some of these
measurements. In this case, with an integration period of 10ms, and no additional
sending or receiving of frames other than the integration frames. While 2000 data
points were captured, only the first 500 are shown on the figure.
On the results
in Figure 6.1 the clock error ranges between 2787ns and 3225ns, and averages at
2990ns. Assuming the entire error is caused by clock drift in the Altera board, this is
approximately 300 ppm as seen in Equation 6.1. Typical values are between 10 and
100ppm, so the error is higher than expected.
3000ns
10ms =
300ns
1.000.000ns = 300ppm
(6.1)
Figure 6.1: Clock error, regular implementation, no additional sending or receiving.
==PAGE:42==
32
6 Results
6.1.1
Clock delay problem
An issue discovered during testing of the implementation was that the measured
receive points of PCFs in the controller was always multiples of 21. This caused a
peculiar pattern in the clock error, which can be seen in Figure 6.2. It depicts the
regular solution with an integration period of 10ms, and no additional sending and
receiving. Here the clock error ranges between 2762ns and 3350ns, which is a slightly
bigger gap than in figure 6.1. The issue existed in both the regular solution and the
version with interrupts. Furthermore, sending or receiving messages greatly affected
Figure 6.2: Clock delay problem, regular implementation, no additional sending or
receiving.
the clock precision in some schedules. Initially this was thought to be caused in part
by violating the limits described in section 5.8, but it was eventually ruled out. An
example of this in the interrupt solution can be seen in Figure 6.3. In this figure,
the program sends 10 TT messages on one VL each cluster cycle. Additionally, every
time a TT message is received, the program schedules another TT message on a
second VL. The incoming TT messages had a period of 4ms. The results show a
single spike during startup, and then no spikes until the controller starts receiving
TT messages. They have been cut off to show the rest of the data better, but go from
approximately -10.000 to 16.000ns. Similar spikes was observed in some schedules for
the regular solution as well, but with smaller spikes (approximately -1.000 to 7.000ns).
The issue is expected to be caused by cache misses for the function that reads the
local clock cycles, or the variable storing the receive point. When the program sends
or receives messages it might alter the processor state, and fill up the caches with
other variables and methods. In the regular implementation it was easily remedied
by continuously measuring the receive point while waiting for a message to arrive.
This ensures that any cache misses are dealt with before the actual receive point gets
==PAGE:43==
6.1 Clock synchronization
33
Figure 6.3: Clock delay problem, interrupt implementation, with sending and re-
ceiving.
measured. The clock error while sending and receiving after the fix can be seen in
Figure 6.4, where the clock error is between 2862ns and 3175ns. This fix can’t be
applied to the interrupt implementation, since it doesn’t perform any polling.
Figure 6.4: Clock error, regular implementation, with sending and receiving.
==PAGE:44==
34
6 Results
6.1.2
Clock error at different integration periods
To investigate the clock error further, measurements were taken with varying inte-
gration periods. No additional sending or receiving was performed during these tests.
The average clock error for each experiment was plotted against the integration pe-
riod, and can be seen in Figure 6.5. If all of the clock error was caused by the drift
of the oscillator on the Altera board, we would expect a curve with a slope of around
3000ns per ms. The trend-lines give 7.14ns of error per ms for the regular implemen-
tation and 6.92ns error per ms for the implementation with interrupts. Since 1 ms
is 1 million ns, this corresponds directly to a oscillator drift of around 7ppm. This
value doesn’t necessarily tell us the actual drift rate of the oscillator in the board,
but rather how much it drifts away from the TTEthernet system, which might itself
drift slightly one way or the other. These results points towards around 2.9us of the
clock error coming from a static component. To rule out a faulty oscillator on the
Altera board, the test was repeated on a second board, with similar results.
Figure 6.5: Average clock error as a function of integration period.
The results
show a strong correlation, with approximately 7ns additional clock error
when the integration period is increased by 1ms. Approximately 2930ns
of error is unaffected by changing the integration period.
6.1.3
PCF receive times in monitor
To investigate whether the static error comes from the TTEthernet controller or
the test system, the monitor was used to measure the time difference between each
==PAGE:45==
6.2 Latency and Jitter
35
received integration frame with various integration periods. The measurements were
done using Wireshark. While they are expected to vary due to differences in send
time and precision, the average should approximately be the integration period. These
time differences were compared to the integration period, to get an ”error” similar
to the ones measured by the board. The result can be seen in Figure 6.6. While the
correlation is not as strong as the measurements from the controller, the results still
suggest that a small part of the error is due to oscillator drift, and a larger part is
due to some static component.
Figure 6.6: Difference between integration period and average time difference be-
tween integration frames as a function of integration periods. The cor-
relation is not incredibly strong, but hints at a relatively large static
error component.
6.2
Latency and Jitter
To precisely measure latency and jitter of TT messages from the implemented con-
troller, a physical setup similar to the one described in [10] was set up. The setup
is illustrated in figure 6.7. It makes use of the fact that the Altera board has two
available Ethernet ports, and sets up a schedule with a VL from one port to the other.
Both ports are considered to be their own device by the schedule, and are both syn-
chronization clients. The configuration of Patmos described in section 4.2.3.1, only
enables one of these ports, so a new configuration was created with two Ethernet con-
trollers. The second controller is accessed like the first, but uses a different address
==PAGE:46==
36
6 Results
Figure 6.7: Physical setup for latency tests.
The board now uses two Ethernet
controllers, sending on one and receiving on the other.
in local memory. This wasn’t supported by the original ethlib, and was accommo-
dated by duplicating several ethlib IO functions. A single VL with a period of 10ms
and an offset of 8.2ms was used. This simplifies the test program, since one message
can be sent and received each integration cycle. Because of the sometimes irregular
behaviour of the interrupt implementation, latency was only measured on the regular
implementation. The test program follows the form described in 5.2 with the first
controller receiving messages in the overall loop. After a successful synchronization
message, a TT message is scheduled, and the program waits until the message is re-
ceived by the second controller before proceeding. This enables the program to collect
both the schedule and receive points of messages as the current clock cycle count. A
slightly modified version of the sending interrupt function was used to measure the
send point as current clock cycle count, making it possible to calculate latency and
jitter. Both receive and send window in the switch was 263us wide.
Figure 6.8 shows latency measured as the average difference in send and receive
time over 2000 measurements for 3 different frame sizes with various minimum switch
delays. Lmin and Lmax have been calculated using equation 3.1, disregarding prop-
agation delay, and plotted alongside the values. It is clear that all measured values
are inside the expected minimum and maximum values. The expected transmission
times for frames of the measured sizes are 5.12us, 32us and 121.12us respectively,
which means that the actual switch delay for these experiments must be approxi-
mately 200us higher than the minimum, judging by the trend-lines. This indicates
that the switch receives the messages approximately 63us into the receive window in
these tests. The jitter, measured as the smallest latency subtracted from the highest,
did not vary significantly as a function of switch delay, but stayed between 4.5us and
4.6us throughout all experiments.
==PAGE:47==
6.3 Worst Case Execution Time
37
Figure 6.8: Latency for various frame sizes as a function of minimum switch delay.
The correlation is very strong, and well within expected minimum and
maximum values.
6.3
Worst Case Execution Time
WCET analysis was performed on significant parts of the controller using the platin
WCET tool. For the analysis, the board configuration was assumed to be the de-
fault for DE2_115, although the actual configuration in this implementation has
differed slightly.
This shouldn’t affect the result significantly, since there are no
differences in memory and cache configurations.
The analysis tool should be run
with a program that calls the analyzed functions in a way that resembles actual us-
age as closely as possible. To demonstrate, this WCET analysis has been run on
a program resembling the demo program used with the regular implementation in
section 6.1.
In order to easier verify that the program and schedule satisfies the
limits in section 5.8, parts of the program have been moved into separate func-
tions. Additionally, in order to analyze the timer interrupt function, it had to be
explicitly called. The tool requires that analyzed functions have the attribute ”noin-
line”, to prevent inlining.
These measures might make the analysis slightly more
pessimistic than necessary. The results can be seen in 6.1, where all functions are
part of the implemented tte.c library, except the final two, which are part of the tested
demo program. ”tte_clear_free_rx_buffer” and ”tte_receive” are mentioned in sec-
tion 5.3. ”tte_receive_log” is the tte receive function with logging enabled. ”han-
dle_integration_frame” and ”handle_integration_frame_log” are called by a tte re-
ceive function if the message is an integration frame. ”tte_prepare_test_data” cre-
ates a TT message where the data part repeats a specified byte until the message has
a certain length. ”tte_schedule_send” is described in section 5.4. ”tte_clock_tick”
==PAGE:48==
38
6 Results
and ”tte_clock_tick_log” are the timer interrupt functions with and without log-
ging, and call ”tte_send_data” when actually sending a message. tte_code_int is
executed after each successfully received integration frame, and tte_code_tt is exe-
cuted after each received TT message. It is clear that the addition of logging adds
about 200cycles to the WCET.
Table 6.1: Worst case execution time of certain functions.
function
cycles
tte_clear_free_rx_buffer
10
tte_receive
3028
tte_receive_log
3216
handle_integration_frame
2573
hande_integration_frame_log
2732
tte_prepare_test_data
39138
tte_schedule_send
244
tte_send_data
289
tte_clock_tick
1641
tte_clock_tick_log
1824
tte_code_int
392419
tte_code_tt
40156
6.3.1
Verifying theoretical limits on demo
With this example program and schedule, it is possible to verify that it satisfies the
theoretical limits. The earliest outgoing TT message in this example has an offset of
0.8ms. The equations in section 5.8.1, the system constants and the WCET of the
tte_receive function (the log version) are used to calculate the earliest allowed TT
message in equation 6.2. Since 332.3us is approximately 0.33ms, the example follows
this limit.
ttout = 2 · max_delay + comp_delay + precision + WCETtte_receive
ttout = 2 · 135.6us + 10.5us + 10.4us + 3216cycles ·
12.5
ns
cycle
1000 ns
us
= 332.3us
(6.2)
The TT message which arrives closest to a pcf in this example arrives between 18.6ms
and 18.863ms. Using this information, equation 5.2 and the system constants, the
maximum allowed execution time after TT messages are calculated in equation 6.3.
The WCET of tte_code_tt in this example can be seen in table 6.1. Since it’s much
==PAGE:49==
6.3 Worst Case Execution Time
39
less than the 101,816 calculated cycles, the example program follows this limit.
maxtt = sched_send −ttreclatest + max_delay + comp_delay −precision
maxtt = 20, 000us −18, 863us + 135.6us + 10.5us −10.4us = 1272.7us
maxtt = 1272.7us · 1000 ns
us
12.5
ns
cycle
= 101, 816cycles
(6.3)
The example schedule has a maximum of 3 incoming TT messages in a single integra-
tion cycle. One of the VLs can send a maximum of 3 outgoing TT messages, and the
other a maximum of 5. An integration period of 10ms is assumed, which is equivalent
to 800,000 cycles. This information, equation 5.3 and the WCETs in table 6.1 are
used to verify the final limit in equation 6.4.
int_period > WCETint + inctt · WCETtt + send_ticks · WCETsend
800, 000cycles > 392, 419 + 3 · 40, 156 + 8 · 1824
800, 000cycles > 527, 479cycles
(6.4)
==PAGE:50==
40
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
Two variations of the implementation were tested. An issue which could cause great
instability in clock synchronization was found in both implementations, and a solution
was found for the implementation with polling. This shows that the implementation
without polling is not very suitable for real time systems, due to its non-deterministic
behaviour.
The controller with polling however, proved able to synchronize in a
stable and predictable manner, even while receiving and sending TT messages. While
the clock error was higher than expected, the minimum and maximum clock error
were only around 0.44us apart, which means the system synchronizes its clock in a
somewhat precise and deterministic manner. Measuring the clock error at various
integration periods pointed towards only a small part of the error being caused by
clock drift, and a larger part caused by some static component. Seeing a similar
result in the monitor indicates that the static error originated somewhere in the used
TTEthernet test system.
The latency and jitter of TT messages sent from the controller was measured. As
expected, the latency depends linearly on how long the switch delays the message,
and stayed well within the calculated maximum values. This corroborates the results
seen in [10]. The measured jitter did not depend on frame size or switch delay, but
stayed between 4.5us and 4.6us. This is lower than the 10-30us measured in [10], and
the 32us measured in [9], which could be due to the time predictable nature of the
Patmos processor. It is also possible that a higher jitter in the cited articles stem from
differences in the testing method. The results show that the implemented controller
is capable of providing predictable latency and small bounded jitter as promised by
the TTEthernet protocol.
The results further demonstrate that the WCET analysis provided by the Patmos
platform can be used to ensure that a given program and schedule won’t break the
limits of the implemented controller.
7.1
Future extensions
Looking forward, it could be interesting to extend the implementation with the ability
to act as synchronization master as well. This would make it possible to see how a
TTEthernet system consisting only of Patmos nodes would behave. The extension
might require hardware support in order to precisely add the send delay of the frame
to the transparent clock right before transmission.
==PAGE:52==
42
7 Discussion
To increase precision of the controller and possibly solve the clock delay problem
in a better way, hardware support for recording the receive time of frames could be
added as well. Another extension could be a version that is able to receive PCFs from
multiple switches. This would require a slightly different approach, since it requires
synchronization to happen at the end of an observation window, rather than after
every received integration frame.
Finally, it could be interesting to test the implementation on the time predictable
multi-core platform of T-crest.
One core would be responsible for clock synchro-
nization and sending TT messages at the correct times, possibly removing some of
the issues that stem from implementing a single-thread solution. Such an extension
would require extensive changes to the existing Ethernet controller in order to allow
multiple cores access to the buffers.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This thesis has investigated the deterministic Ethernet protocol TTEthernet, and
whether it is a suitable addition to the time-predictable processor Patmos. The pro-
tocol was researched, and two versions of a TTEthernet controller was implemented
on the platform. Both controllers are limited to networks with a single switch, and
act exclusively as synchronization clients. The version which used interrupts to signal
the reception of incoming frames proved too unstable in its clock synchronization to
be useful as a deterministic Ethernet controller. The solution with polling however,
was found to synchronize to the system clock in a stable manner. End-to-end latency
of transmitted TT messages was found to be predictable, and well within the expected
maximums. Jitter was found to be relatively small, and did not vary significantly in
the tested scenarios. Certain schedule and program combinations might cause prob-
lems in the controller, but these can be predicted before system start-up by utilizing
the WCET analysis tools in Patmos. Overall, this project has provided a solution for
deterministic communication in the Patmos platform.
==PAGE:54==
44
==PAGE:55==
APPENDIX A
Code overview
Bold files were added in this project, the remaining files were modified.
patmos
c
ethlib
tte.c
tte.h
eth_patmos_io.c
eth_patmos_io.h
ethlib_tte_demo.c
ethlib_tte_demo_interrupts.c
ethlib_tte_demo_latency.c
ethlib_tte_wcet.c
hardware
config
altde2-all.xml
altde2-latency.xml
altde2-interrupt.xml
default-no-timer.xml
ethmac
eth_controller_top.vhdl
eth_controller_top2.vhdl
cont.
hardware (cont.)
quartus
altde2-latency
patmos.qpf
patmos.qsf
patmos.sdc
altde2-interrupt
patmos.qpf
patmos.qsf
patmos.sdc
src/main/scala/io
EthMac.scala
EthMac2.scala
vhdl
patmos_de2-latency.vhdl
patmos_de2-interrupt.vhdl
wcet
analyse_wcet.sh
config_de2_115.pml
==PAGE:56==
46
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Roman Obermaisser. time-triggered communication. eng. CRC press, 2012. Chap-
ter 8 - Time-triggered Ethernet.
[2]
Martin Schoeberl et al. Patmos Reference Handbook. 2018. url: http : / /
patmos.compute.dtu.dk/patmos_handbook.pdf (visited on July 18, 2018).
[3]
url: https://github.com/MajaLund/patmos.
[4]
William Buchanan. “21 - CAN bus”. eng. In: Computer Busses (2000), pages 333–
343. doi: 10.1016/B978-034074076-7/50021-3,10.1016/B978-0-340-
74076-7.X5000-7.
[5]
G Leen and D Heffernan. “TTCAN: a new time-triggered controller area net-
work”. eng. In: Microprocessors and Microsystems 26.2 (2002), pages 77–94.
issn: 18729436, 01419331. doi: 10.1016/S0141-9331(01)00148-X.
[6]
Weiying Zeng, Mohammed Khalid, and Sazzadur Chowdhury. “A Qualitative
Comparison of FlexRay and Ethernet in Vehicle Networks”. eng. In: Conference
Proceedings - Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering
(2015), pages 571–576. issn: 08407789.
[7]
Peter Danielis et al. “Survey on real-time communication via ethernet in in-
dustrial automation environments”. eng. In: 19th Ieee International Conference
on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, Etfa 2014 (2014). doi:
10.1109/ETFA.2014.7005074.
[8]
Michael D. Johas Teener et al. “Heterogeneous Networks for Audio and Video:
Using IEEE 802.1 Audio Video Bridging”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Ieee 101.11
(2013), pages 2339–2354. issn: 15582256, 00189219.
[9]
Thomas Fruhwirth, Wilfried Steiner, and Bernhard Stangl. “TTEthernet SW-
based end system for AUTOSAR”. eng. In: 2015 10th Ieee International Sympo-
sium on Industrial Embedded Systems, Sies 2015 - Proceedings (2015), pages 21–
28. doi: 10.1109/SIES.2015.7185037.
[10]
Florian Bartols et al. “Performance analysis of time-triggered ether-networks
using off-the-shelf-components”. eng. In: Proceedings - 2011 14th Ieee Interna-
tional Symposium on Object/component/service-oriented Real-time Distributed
Computing Workshops, Isorcw 2011 (2011), pages 49–56. doi: 10.1109/ISORCW.
2011.16.
==PAGE:58==
48
Bibliography
[11]
George Coulouris et al. Distributed Systems: Concepts and Design. 5th. USA:
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 2011. isbn: 0132143011, 9780132143011.
[12]
Luca Pezzarossa et al. Implementation of an Ethernet-Based Communication
Channel for the Patmos Processor. eng. 2015.
[13]
Igor Mohor. Ethernet IP core specification. eng. 2002. url: http://opencores.
org/project,ethmac (visited on February 7, 2018).
[14]
Igor Mohor. Ethernet IP core design document. eng. 2002. url: http : / /
opencores.org/project,ethmac (visited on February 7, 2018).
[15]
url: https://www.wireshark.org/ (visited on July 18, 2018).
[16]
TTTech. TTETools – TTEthernet Development Tools v4.4. url: https://www.
tttech.com/products/aerospace/development- test- vv/development-
tools/tte-plan/ (visited on July 5, 2018).
[17]
Altera. DE2-115 User manual. 2012. url: https://www.altera.com/solutions/
partners / partner - profile / terasic - inc - /board / altera - de2 - 115 -
development-and-education-board.html (visited on July 18, 2018).
