==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Investigate EBSD methods to establish relation between 
texture and magnetic properties of end of life and 
recycled rare earth – iron – boron permanent magnets 
 
 
     Martin Alexander Eder 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0241 
July 2018 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Title: Investigate EBSD methods to establish relation between texture 
and magnetic properties of end of life and recycled rare earth – iron – 
boron permanent magnets 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0241 
July 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project Period:  
February - July 2018 
 
ECTS: 35 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisors: 
Asger Bech Abrahamsen 
DTU Wind Energy 
Christian R. H. Bahl 
DTU Energy 
Oleg Mishin 
DTU Mechanical Engineering 
 
Jonas Pagh Jensen 
Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy 
 
 
     
     
 
 
    
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Recycling of end-of-life high energy permanent magnets for the purpose of mitigating
the dependency of Europe on the import of rare earth elements from China becomes
an ever increasing necessity. In this respect the availability of efficient characterisa-
tion techniques are an indispensable part of the recycling process in order to measure
and predict the magnetic properties for the purpose of process optimisation. The aim
of this project is to investigate the suitability of the electron backscatter diffraction
(EBSD) characterisation method to measure the alignment of the crystals i.e. the
texture in permanent magnets. This texture characterisation among other properties
represents an important indicator of the magnetisation capabilities. The development
and further honing of this technique in order to conduct EBSD texture measurements
in a preferably efficient, accurate and reliable manner was the driving force for this
work. The first part of this work is concerned with the characterisation of two dif-
ferent industrial end-of-life, high-energy Nd-iron-boron magnets by means of light
optical microscopy (LOM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive
spectroscopy (EDS) and EBSD. Vibrating-sample-magnetometer measurements are
performed to characterize the magnetic properties of the same material for the purpose
of correlating these with grain alignment, chemical composition and the texture dis-
tribution. In the second part the characterisation technique validated in the first part
was eventually applied to recycled sintered permanent magnets using the Hydrogen
Decrepitation Press Less Process (HD-PLP). Two different types of recycled samples
were investigated: An isotropic sample with a random texture and an anisotropic
sample with fibre texture. The latter was obtained by applying an external magnetic
field to the powder in the graphite crucible prior to sintering.
EBSD orientation
measurements proved to be a rather efficient and accurate means to characterise the
degree of texture and with it the expected remanence of a Nd2Fe14B sintered PM.
It was further found that grain size measurements on LOM micrographs can be used
to assess the coercivity of the permanent magnets. Investigation of the properties of
the recycled magnets shows that process optimisation in term sof suppressed grain
growth and improved particle alignment can lead to recycled magnets with commer-
cially attractive properties. The characterisation methods have been validated in this
work and will through their efficiency become useful in aiding the optimisation of the
HD-PLP recycling process.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I am very grateful for the support and advice provided by Ebtisam Abdellahi concern-
ing the development of advanced sample surface preparation techniques of a somewhat
peculiar material. Moreover, I would like to particularly express my gratitude towards
my main supervisor Asger B. Abrahamsen for his dedication, support, guidance, pa-
tience and fruitful discussions and scientific debates (not uncommonly taking place
in the very late afternoon in front of a densely covered white board). I would further-
more like to thank Oleg V. Mishin and Jonas Pagh Jensen for their valuable input and
support. Furthermore, I am grateful towards Peter Hauge Madsen, Thomas Buhl,
Mathias Stolpe and Ignacio Marti for firstly enabling the pursuit of an MSc degree
and secondly for mitigating the pressure during critical periods. Regarding the lat-
ter I would like to particularly thank Liv Henriette Warring Nørgaard for her support.
Finally, I am mostly and deeply grateful towards my parents Marita and Wolfgang
for having always believed in my ambitions, for taking care of me during the dark
times and for sharing the bright ones.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Summary
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
Glossary
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
5
2.1
An brief introduction into magnetism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Rare earth iron-boron permanent magnets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Texture analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4
Production and recycling of PMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Methodology
31
3.1
As received end-of-life and recycled magnet material . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Light optical microscopy (LOM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4
Scanning electron microscope (SEM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.5
Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.6
Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.7
Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.8
Degree of texture (DOT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4
Results
59
4.1
Hardness Vickers and LOM characterisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.2
SEM characterisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.3
Magnetisation characterisation (VSM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5
Analysis
85
5.1
Average grain size
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
5.2
Prediction of magnetic properties from ODFs and grain size . . . . . .
86
5.3
Classification of PM-A, PM-B and PM-G0 according to standard . . .
90
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
5.4
Particle alignment during compaction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
6
Discussion
101
6.1
PM-A versus PM-B
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
6.2
PM-G0 versus PM-GA and PM-GI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
6.3
PM classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
6.4
EDS and EBSD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
6.5
The degree of texture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
6.6
Particle alignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
6.7
A general concluding remark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
7
Conclusion
111
8
Future Work
113
A Appendix
117
A.1 The Bohr Magneton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
A.2 The demagnetising field in a sphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
A.3 The Ising model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
Bibliography
129
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Glossary
Abbreviation
Description
PM
Permanent magnet
PM-A
End-of-life permanent magnet type −A (proprietary)
PM-B
End-of-life permanent magnet type −B (proprietary)
PM-G0
Commercial grade permanent magnet produced by ARNOLD
Magnetic Technologies
PM-GI
Recycled isotropic permanent magnet from PM-G0 material
PM-GA
Recycled anisotropic permanent magnet from PM-G0 material
HD
Hydrogen Decrepitation
HD-PLP
Hydrogen Decrepitation Press Less Process
EBSD
Electron Back Scatter Diffraction
SEM
Scanning Electron Microscope (microscopy)
LOM
Light Optical Microscope (microscopy)
VSM
Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (magnetometry)
EDS
Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy
ICP-OES
Inductively Coupled Plasma - Optical Emission Spectromenty
OD
Orientation distribution
ODF
Orientation distribution function
PF
Pole figure
IPF
Inverse pole figure
MUD
Multiples of random
HV
Hardness Vickers
REE
Rare earth element
LRE
Light rare earth element
HRE
Heavy rare earth element
DOT
Degree of texture
FWHM
Full width half maximum
SE
Secondary electron
BSE
Back scattered electron
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The European effort to shift towards a more sustainable energy production in con-
junction with a policy for more efficient use of energy with low carbon emission causes
a continuously increasing demand for permanent magnets (PMs).
PMs have got a vast field of application: To name two prominent applications, PMs
are for instance required in generators of wind turbines or in motors for electric cars.
High energy magnets are preferably used instead of electromagnets because of their
ability to maintain a permanent magnetic field without the additional generation of
heat during operation. Moreover, electro motors and - vice versa - power generators
based on high energy permanent magnets offer the advantage of reduced space and
mass requirements.
The production of high energy PMs however, necessitates the use of rare earth
elements (REE) the recovery of which proves itself both costly (i.e. high energy de-
mand) and potentially environmentally harmful.
According to [US 13] China is the worlds main producer of REEs and consequently
continuously improves its capabilities to produce high quality PEs with a major pro-
portion destined for export. McLellan et al. [McL+14] pointed out that China es-
tablished export quotas in order to secure its own demand. These export limitations
caused a shock wave impacting the economy of Japan, USA and Europe which en-
tailed a soaring price increase of PMs. It was soon to be realised by the international
community that the REE supply became overly centralised in China.
The European Union issued a report [Eur14] which identifies REEs within the
most critical group of raw materials bearing the highest supply risk (see Fig.1.1). In
this respect neodymium (Nd), europium (Eu), terbium (Tb), dysprosium (Dy) and
yttrium (Y) can be categorised among the five most critical REEs. According to eco-
nomical forecasts it can be expected that the price for PMs primarily from Chinese
production will increase over time owing to costs associated with environmental and
social issues as well as due to an increase of cost of labour.
One way to mitigate the supply risk of REEs and to reduce the critical dependency
on China’s production of PMs is to explore novel ways to either re-use or recycle end-
of-life PMs. Re-using refers to extracting end-of-life PMs from machinery/ equipment
and re-employing them after cleaning and re-shaping by post decommissioning cut-
ting and machining processes. Re-cycling refers to a complete disintegration of the
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: Supply risk versus economic importance of different raw materials with
the red box indicating the critical material group taken from [Eur14].
end-of-life PM material by means of mechanical and/or thermo-chemical processes
prior to further processing. One possibility is to directly extract the REEs by dis-
solution in acid. However, Nlebedim and King [NK18] are emphasising the issue of
generating large amounts of acidic waste water. Moreover, such extraction processes
are energy demanding. The second possibility and probably more pertinent recycling
alternative is represented by the Hydrogenation Decomposition Desorption Recombi-
nation (HDDR) process during which the PM material is effectively disintegrated by
application of pressurised hydrogen gas under controlled conditions. Thereafter, the
obtained powder is further refined by ball- and jet milling and heat treated before
being typically mixed with a polymeric binder to form a recycled bonded magnet.
However, such magnets are not suited for application in high-end motors and power
generators which still requires sintered PMs.
Another, modified version of HDDR was proposed by Xia et al. [Xia+17] which
they called Hydrogen-Decrepitation Press Less Process (HD-PLP) recycling method
for sintered permanent magnets. This process was especially developed to omit the
additional jet-milling step as well as the pressing process of the powder inherent to the
standard manufacturing method of Nd-iron-boron PMs. Instead, the method relies
on the fact that the quality of the grain structure and crystallographic texture inside
the macro particles is retained during hydrogen decrepitation. Therefore, it is conjec-
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
3
tured that a press-less alignment of the macro particles placed in a graphite crucible
and in an external magnetic field prior to sintering can yield recycled magnets with
a serviceable magnetic energy content.
However, whether PMs are re-used or re-cycled in either case the characterisation
of the magnetic properties is an essential and indispensable part of this process. It is
clear that the magnetic properties of re-used magnets can be altered during service
and particularly during the decommissioning procedure where the material is typi-
cally heat treated for demagnetisation purposes. Depending on the decommissioning
processes applied, the variations of temperature and time during such procedures can
be substantial. By the same token it is obvious that the favourable magnetic prop-
erties of the original magnet are diminished during any PM recycling process owing
to the introduction of oxides, hydroxides, other impurities and less optimal grain size
and particle alignment among other factors.
The increased demand for re-using or recycling PMs obviously entails a strong
desire driven by industry to employ and develop characterisation techniques for PMs
which are reliable and cost/ time efficient. This work aims at contributing to the lat-
ter by exploring the application of different complimentary characterisation methods
as depicted in Fig. 1.2. While magnetic hysteresis measurements done in a vibrating
sample magnetometer (VSM) exhibit all key magnetic properties, additional charac-
terisation methods are required to distinguish the causes for the effects seen in the
hysteretic response. Since the micro structure and chemical composition with energy
dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) can nowadays conveniently be characterised in a scan-
ning electron microscope, the application of electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD)
to also characterise the important texture property of the magnet lends itself.
Figure 1.2: Complimentary characterisation methods employed to characterise the
key properties of Nd-iron-boron magnets.
The work presented in this thesis can be divided into two phases: In the first phase
an in-house preparation method for PM materials suitable for EBSD examinations
was developed. Thereafter, the EBSD method was applied to two different types of
industrial high energy end-of-life Nd-iron-boron PMs. The obtained texture was used
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
to predict the remanence of the PMs using an approach proposed by Sawatzki et al.
[Saw+15]. The predicted remanence was compared to magnetic measurements per-
formed on the same material using VSM. Furthermore, the microstructures, chemical
compositions obtained with EDS were related to the VSM measurements and com-
pared to literature.
With confidence in the texture characterisation gained in the first phase the focus
in the second phase was finally put on the characterisation of HD-PLP recycled PMs.
Therefore, in the second phase a commercial grade base PM manufactured by Arnold
Magnetic Technologies was benchmarked against the PMs investigated in the first
phase. Subsequently, a so called isotropic and anisotropic PM both recycled from
the base material were characterised and compared with the properties of the base
material.
It could be shown that the microstructure of the recycled isotropic magnet was similar
to the base material where 90% of the original coercivity was regained [Xia+17]. It
could also be shown that the application of an external magnetic field in HD-PLP
induced a fibre texture in the recycled anisotropic magnet.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
In this chapter a condensed introduction into the basic theoretical aspects of mag-
netism is given. Later on, focus is put on the crystallographic structure of Nd-Fe-B
magnets, the different phases present in the microstructure and the effect of REEs
on the magnetic properties. The concept of fibre texture and its influence on the
remanence is briefly introduced. The chapter concludes with an overview of the man-
ufacturing and recycling process of Nd-iron-boron permanent magnets.
2.1
An brief introduction into magnetism
2.1.1
Magnetic field in vacuum
Blundell [Blu03] describes the magnetic moment as fundamental object of magnetism.
In order to shed more light on the magnetic moment in vacuum, Fig. 2.1 (a) can be
used to depict the concept of the induction of an infinitesimal magnetic moment dµ
by a current I with the unit (A) flowing around an infinitesimally small closed loop.
Figure 2.1: (a) generation of an elementary magnetic moment induced by an ele-
mentary current passing through a loop and (b) definition of magnetic
field, magnetic moment and torque.
Such an infinitesimal magnetic moment can be expressed by Eq.2.1 where dS denotes
an infinitesimal loop arc length.
dµ = IdS
(2.1)
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Theory
Integration of Eq.2.1 shows that the total magnetic moment according to Eq.2.2 is
proportional to the length of the loop.
µ = I
ˆ
dS
(2.2)
By replacing the conceptional loop with a physical wire as shown in Fig. 2.1 (b), an
additional magnetic field H is generated. The magnitude of H with the unit (A m−1)
for several loops forming a coil is given by Ampère’s law [ASC14] as follows
H = nI
L
(2.3)
where n is the number of loops, L is the wire length.
Next, another important measure the so called magnetic induction or magnetic
flux density B can be introduced using the following expression
B = µ0 H
(2.4)
where µ0 = 4π × 10−7 H m−1 denotes the permeability of vacuum.
Equation 2.3 shows that a current creates a magnetic field. A moving magnetic
field induces a voltage following the law of induction. This principle is fundamental for
converting torque into electric energy in power generators. The law of induction is also
the underlying principle of the vibrating magnetic sample measurements discussed in
Section 3.7.
2.1.2
Magnetic field in solid materials
Equation 2.4 no longer holds if the space enclosed by the loop (grey hatched area)
shown in Fig.2.1 is occupied by condensed matter in which case the atoms inside the
domain are responding to the external magnetic field by forming individual dipoles.
Figure 2.2 is an attempt to depict the origin of atomic dipoles where in this case
both an electron orbiting the nucleus and the electron spin itself induce a magnetic
moment µ. Please note the conceptional analog of the orbiting electron and Fig.2.1
(a).
The total magnetic moment of an atom is the vector sum of the individual contri-
butions of the electrons. It occurs that in the case of an even number of electrons
all magnetic moments cancel and therefore, the net magnetic moment is zero. Con-
versely, in the case of unpaired electrons occupying different shells, a permanent
magnetic moment prevails - which forms the basis for permanent magnets.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 An brief introduction into magnetism
7
Figure 2.2: Simplified model for the creation of a magnetic moment due to an elec-
tron orbiting around the core (nucleus) of an atom (a hydrogen atom
depicted for simplicity) and a magnetic moment induced by the spin of
the electron itself.
The magnitude of the magnetic moment induced by a single unpaired electron is
defined as a Bohr magneton which in SI-units is µB = 9.274 009 994(57) × 10−24 J T−1.
The Bohr magneton is given by Eq.2.5 and its derivation is provided in Appendix A.
µB = e ℏ
2me
(2.5)
where e is the elementary charge, ℏis the reduced Planck constant and me is the
electron rest mass.
In case of such an unpaired electron configuration the enclosed material itself
obtains a net dipole moment on a macroscopic level. This dipole moment is denoted
as magnetisation density M which is an intrinsic magnetic property whose unit is
A m−1. In order to take account for this additional magnetic dipole moment, the
constitutive relation for the flux density in vacuum given by Eq. 2.4 needs to be
extended into the following form:
B = µ0 (H + M)
(2.6)
It is important to mention that M can be a strong non-linear function of H which
represents a fully coupled situation. As a thought model one can think of the dipoles
as tiny compass needles sitting in some array free to swivel.
Now, if approached
with a bar magnet the response of the needles will not only depend on the external
magnetic field but also being influenced by the response of the neighbouring compass
needles. In order to add more complexity, even under the absence of an external
field, a demagnetisation field exists inside of the magnetic domain. An illustrative
example for such a case is given in Appendix A. The distribution and magnitude
of the demagnetisation field depends on the shape/geometry of the magnet. When
compared to M such fields are substantial in the case of thin films/strips and negligible
for long and slender rods.
Considering the described effects the magnetic flux density can be written in its
most general form as follows:
B = µ0 (Ha −Hd + M(Hi))
(2.7)
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theory
where Ha is the applied magnetic field, Hd denotes the demagnetisation field and the
internal field is Hi = Ha −Hd.
In some cases it can be useful to introduce the relative permeability µR and to
rewrite Eq. 2.6 into the following form [ASC14]:
B = µ0 µR H
(2.8)
It follows that the magnetisation is given by Eq.2.9 where χ is denoted as the magnetic
susceptibility.
M = (µR −1) H = χH
(2.9)
The parameters µR and χ are dependent on both the material type and the magni-
tude of H.
2.1.3
Different types of magnetism
The response of a material to an externally applied magnetic field can be split into
five different categories namely:
• Diamagnetism
• Paramagnetism
• Ferromagnetism
• Antiferromagnetism
• Ferrimagnetism
In the case of diamagnetism the relative permeability is slightly smaller than one with
a very small negative magnetic susceptibility. From this it can be inferred that dia-
magnetic materials are weakly repelled by an external magnetic field. Representatives
of such elements are Bi, Si, Cu, N2 and H2O. Similarly, in the case of paramagnetism
the relative permeability is slightly greater than one with a very small positive mag-
netic susceptibility. It follows that paramagnetic materials are weakly attracted by
an external magnetic field provided that the field lines are sufficiently curved in order
to create a net Lorentz force. Paramagnetic materials possess unpaired electron con-
figurations albeit the interaction of neighbouring dipoles is rather weak. This means
that the dipoles (see Fig.2.2) align with the external field but resume a random dis-
tribution of the dipole vector directions upon removal of the external field. That
is, the thermal energy at ambient temperature suffices to randomise the majority of
the initially aligned orientations - such materials are said to possess a low magnetic
anisotropy. Two representatives of such elements are Al and diatomic oxygen. It
is noteworthy to mention that the magnetic force in many paramagnetic materials
is significantly lower than that induced by the self weight which makes it difficult
==PAGE:19==
2.1 An brief introduction into magnetism
9
to observe the effect of paramagnetism. However, it appears that the magnetic sus-
ceptibility of liquid oxygen is three orders of magnitude higher than that of gaseous
oxygen due to the increased density. Therefore, it can be shown that liquid oxygen
can indeed be held by a strong magnetic field.
In the case of ferromagnetism - with which this work is exclusively concerned
with - the magnetic susceptibility is several orders of magnitude higher than that of
dia- and paramagnetism in the range of 1 × 102 to 1 × 106 [CR11]. In which case
χ =≈1 as for paramagnetic and diamagnetic materials becomes negligibly small in
comparison and one can assume µR ≃χ. The typical feature of ferromagnetic mate-
rials manifests itself in the possession of a strong permanent magnetic moment in the
absence of an external magnetic field. In ferromagnetic materials the contribution
by orbital spins is small compared to that induced by the electron spins themselves.
In ferromagnetic materials the magnetic dipoles induced by unpaired electron spins
are aligned in parallel over relatively large areas commonly referred to as domains.
The coupling between dipoles in the vicinity of one-another is rather strong which
causes a spontaneous alignment of the magnetic dipoles without the necessity of an
external magnetic field. According to [Deg14] the spontaneous alignment is related
to the Pauli exclusion principle. Depending on the electron structure of the material
the valence electrons between neighbouring atoms overlap where electrons can swap
places between atoms. This swapping entails an inter-atomic exchange of the spin
information which gives rise to the electron spin alignment itself related to the so
called exchange interaction energy. Figure 2.3 shows that the exchange interaction is
sensitive towards the ratio between the inter-atomic spacing and the diameter of the
unfilled sub-shells. High exchange energies are indicating a strong tendency for self
Figure 2.3: Bethe-Slater curve showing the exchange interaction energy as a func-
tion of the interatomic spacing normalised with the spacial extent of
the magnetic 3d sub-orbital with the positions of prominent elements
Mn, Fe, Co and Ni taken from [MWL99].
alignment. Positive exchange interactions indicate ferromagnetic elements whereas
negative interactions indicate antiferromagnetic elements (as subsequently discussed).
Ferromagnetism is exhibited by transition metals such as Fe (α −iron), Co, Ni and
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theory
some REE. It is at this point convenient to introduce the concept of saturation mag-
netisation Ms which represents an upper bound posed by the hypothetical situation
of complete dipole alignment with the external field in a material. The correspond-
ing saturation flux density is denoted as Bs. The saturation magnetisation Ms of
a volume element of magnetic material is the product of the net magnetic moment
per atom (typically measured in units of Bohr magneton) and the amount of atoms
occupying the volume.
In the case of antiferromagnetism the coupling inherent in ferromagnetic materials
leads to an antiparallel alignment of the dipoles. In this case the magnetic moments
are cancelling one-another which consequently leads to zero magnetic net moment.
The magnetic susceptibility of antiferromagnetic materials is small and greater than
zero. Examples for such materials include Mn (see Fig.2.3), Cr and manganese oxide
ceramic. In the case of ferrimagnetism spontaneous magnetisation exists on a macro-
scopic level rather similar to ferromagnetism. The main difference however is that
not all dipoles are aligned which results in mixed parallel and antiparallel magnetic
moment alignment. The magnetic moments are not fully cancelling one-another and
the magnetic susceptibility is high even though the saturation magnetisation is lower
than that of ferromagnetic materials. Ferrimagnetic behaviour is exhibited by ce-
ramic materials including Fe3O4 (lodestone), NiFe2O4, PbFe12O19 and SrFe12O19
to name a few [CR11; Deg14].
Temperature has a significant influence on the magnetic properties of a material.
The exchange interaction effect is rather sensitive towards thermal vibrations which
counteract the coupling forces between neighbouring dipoles. That is, an increase of
temperature increases the probability of previously aligned dipoles to flip and random-
ize their directions with the consequence of a decreasing magnetic net moment. The
consequences of this effect are shown in Fig. 2.4 (a). This curve in this work denoted
as T-scan shows that Ms takes the highest value at zero Kelvin which progressively
decreases with increasing temperature until it rapidly drops to zero which signifies
the so called Curie temperature Tc. At Tc the spin coupling forces between adjacent
atoms vanish and the material turns into a paramagnetic material. The Curie tem-
perature and the demagnetisation response depend on the magnetic material alloy
and represents an important parameter for the high temperature applicability in ma-
chinery. For instance a magnet with high magnetic anisotropy maintains high Ms
values over a wide temperature range. On the other hand heating up a ferromagnet
above the Curie temperature TC can be used to demagnetise permanent magnetic
materials for decommissioning purposes.
Figure 2.4 (b) shows the hysteretic response of a ferromagnetic material subject to
an externally applied magnetic field. The hysteresis is an important means to char-
acterise a permanent magnetic material with three important key parameters: The
saturation magnetisation MS represented by the maximum achievable magnetisation,
the remanence MR represented by the remaining magnetisation at the absence of the
external field and the coercivity HC representing the level of applied magnetic field
==PAGE:21==
2.1 An brief introduction into magnetism
11
Figure 2.4: (a) Qualitative T-scan curve showing magnetisation dependence of an
initially fully magnetised sample on temperature with Curie tempera-
ture defined as the point where the order parameter reached zero and
(b) Hysteresis loop of hard magnetic material where Hc denotes the
coercivity (G, D), MR denotes the remanence (C, F) and Ms is the
saturation magnetisation (B, E); magnetisation M on the ordinate and
magnetic field strength on the abscissa.
strength at which the magnetisation changes its sign.
Figure 2.4 (a) and (b) are
correlated where the former indicates how the hysteresis will shrink with increas-
ing temperature. The hysteresis is usually divided into quadrants where the second
quadrant (HC < 0, MR > 0) is of particular importance and commonly known as the
intrinsic demagnetisation curve.
2.1.4
Anisotropy
In magnetic materials three different forms of anisotropy can be encountered, notably:
• Magnetocrystalline anisotropy
• Shape anisotropy
• Magnetoelastic anisotropy or magnetostriction/ magnetostrictive
Referring to the preceding section, Magnetocrystalline anisotropy becomes apparent
in ferromagnetic crystals which typically possess a so called easy axis and a hard
axis. Both the easy and the hard axis are closely related to crystallographic lattice
directions which are linked to the electron orbitals. The easy axis denotes the crys-
tallographic direction at which the crystal obtains saturation magnetisation at the
lowest level of applied magnetic field strength. As will be elaborated on later in more
detail the easy axis corresponds to the c-axis (see Fig.2.7) in the Nd-iron-boron mate-
rial treated in this work. In contrast, the hard axis is defined as the crystallographic
direction at which the highest level of magnetic field strength is required to obtain
saturation. This directional dependency of the magnetic field required to reach Ms
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theory
motivated the designation anisotropy.
According to Gentzlaff [Get08] the anisotropic energy E for tetragonal and hexagonal
crystalline unit cells can be written as a sum of sine series:
E = K0 + K1 sin θ2 + K2 sin θ4 + ...
(2.10)
where K0, K1 and K2 are anisotropy constants representing energy densities mea-
sured in J/m3 and θ is the angle between the magnetisation direction and the c-axis.
For orientation, typical magnitudes for E are ranging between 10 × 103 J/m3 to
10 × 108 J/m3. Inspection of Eq.2.10 shows that the lowest energy level is obtained
for θ = 0 which represents the easy axis of the material. The highest energy levels are
obviously obtained for θ = 90◦in the hard direction. It is abundantly clear that for a
magnetic dipole to flip it needs to overcome the energy barrier in the hard direction.
If a hard permanent magnet is to be efficiently used in machinery which operates
at elevated temperatures, this energy barrier and therefore the magnetocrystalline
anisotropy should be as large as possible in order to make it difficult for thermal
vibrations and/or externally applied magnetic fields to flip the dipoles.
Shape anisotropy refers to a non-uniform distribution of the applied magnetic
field in sample geometries different to spherical shapes (see Subsection3.7.3). Shape
anisotropy creates an additional directional dependence where e.g. in prismatic bod-
ies usually the longer axis is easier to magnetise compared to the other directions.
Gentzlaff [Get08] points out that Eq.2.6 only holds for infinitely large systems and
that samples of finite size exhibit poles leading to external stray fields. The latter
results in a demagnetising field inside the system (see Eq.2.7).
The term magnetostriction refers to the fact that the lattice constants are subject
to length changes and distortion under the influence of applied magnetic fields. That
is, magnetic properties are altering the elastic constants of a material. The opposite
effect denotes as magnetostrictive concerns the change of magnetic properties e.g. the
susceptibility as a function of applied mechanical (residual) stress or strain [Get08;
Deg14].
2.1.5
Magnetic domains
A crucial aspect in ferromagnetic materials is the concept of magnetic domains them-
selves separated by domain walls. Although assumed for the calculation of Ms, the
dipoles even in a single crystal of a ferromagentic material usually do not resume a
state of complete alignment which merely represents a theoretical upper bound limit.
Instead, within a single crystal material several domains will form whose moments
are aligned within individual domains albeit with misaligned directions among the
different domains. These magnetic domains appear in appealing patterns and can be
visualised by means of magneto-optic Kerr-microscopy which utilises the polarisation
==PAGE:23==
2.1 An brief introduction into magnetism
13
of visible light as e.g. shown by Degri [Deg14].
The underlying principle of this behaviour is rooted in a trade-off between two
competing mechanisms both of which seeking to minimise their energy following the
principle of minimum energy within the realm of thermodynamics. The first mech-
anism is commonly referred to as domain wall energy in the literature. Referring to
the aforementioned exchange interaction energy between adjacent dipoles in ferro-
magnetic materials, the magnetic moments seek to consistently align into the same
direction. In other words two spins at an angle with respect to one-another are pro-
ducing an energy cost. From this it can be inferred that the domain wall energy
favours a pure state of alignment where the creation of a domain wall bordering an-
other domain with a different direction requires energy.
The second mechanism is associated with the magnetostatic field energy, demag-
netisation energy or dipolar energy. Figure 2.5 (a) shows that a strong B-field with
a high level of demagnetisation energy is associated with a perfectly uniform dipole
alignment. It becomes clear from Fig.2.5 (a) through (c) that the demagnetisation
energy strives to minimise by subdivision into smaller domains with opposite magneti-
sation orientations. In other words it is energetically favourable for the demagnetisa-
tion field to increase the number of domains. The domain wall energy is proportional
Figure 2.5: Generic representation of magnetostatic field lines of a square ferromag-
netic material sample with (a) all dipoles uniformly aligned and (b) two
domains with single 180◦Bloch domain wall and (c) simplified multiple
closed domains with 90◦Néel domain wall (top and bottom edge).
to the square of the characteristic domain size whereas the magnetostatic field energy
is proportional to the cube of the characteristic domain size. This shows that an
equilibrium (steady) state can be attained when the creation of additional domains
in order to minimise the magnetostatic energy is equal to the energy required to
create additional domain walls. It is noteworthy to point out that this equilibrium
can easily be perturbed by application or variation of an external field upon which
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Theory
existing domains can grow and new domains can nucleate.
Blundell [Blu03] points out that the domain wall thickness δ is indeed finite as indi-
cated in Fig.2.6 and derived an expression for the estimation of its thickness given by
Eq. 2.11.
δ = π
√
A
K
(2.11)
where A is the exchange constant in J m−1 and K is the anisotropy constant in J/m3.
Equation 2.11 shows that a magnetic anisotropy given by K prefers thin walls
whereas the exchange energy represented by A favours thick walls.
Figure 2.6: Gradual transition of the magnetic dipole orientation between two ad-
jacent domains in a volume element; the distance measured between the
dashed line denotes the domain wall thickness in which the transition
takes place taken from [CR11].
The domain size can range from 10 × 10−4 m to 100 × 10−6 m. The amount of do-
mains present in a ferromagnetic material is a function of the geometrical properties
and its intrinsic magnetic properties where typically a single grain contains several
domains.
2.1.6
Hysteretic behaviour of hard magnetic materials
With more prerequisites put in place the hysteretic behaviour will now be re-visited.
Figure 2.4 (b) shows that the magnetisation density M does not linearly depend on
the applied magnetic field strength H. The dashed path shown in Fig. 2.4 (b) shows
the virgin response of an initially demagnetised ferromagnetic material subject to
an external field. The initially low gradient (the slope represents the permeability)
rapidly increases with increasing H until it decreases to almost zero at which point
==PAGE:25==
2.1 An brief introduction into magnetism
15
it reaches MS and becomes independent of any further increase of H.
The non-linear behaviour in the B−H-diagram is owed to an interplay of different
processes taking place in the system [CR11; Blu03]: In the first process namely do-
main wall motion domains which are favourably aligned with the external field grow
at the expense of domains whose magnetic directions are less favourably aligned.
With increasing field strength a second process namely domain rotation occurs which
is governed by a spontaneous alignment of the domain along the easy axis in those
crystals exhibiting low misalignment to the external field.
If the field strength is
further increased all domains eventually align with the external field independently
of the easy axis orientation at which point magnetic saturation is obtained.
If the magnetic field is reversed from clockwise to counter clockwise Fig. 2.4 (b)
shows that a hysteretic effect is induced in the sense that B lags behind H. If H is
completely removed is appears that B retains a non-zero value referred to as rema-
nence MR which in hard magnets is only slightly less than MS. As will be shown later
in this work, the difference between MS and MR is closely related to the alignment
of the crystals in the hard magnetic phase. Ideally this difference should be as small
as possible and decreases with increasing crystal alignment i.e. texture dependent.
If H applied in the reverse direction is further increased a peculiar situation will be
obtained at which the magnetic moment is zero under a non-zero applied field. This
point is denoted as coercivity HC. The coercivity should ideally be large and is closely
related to the magnetocrystalline anisotropy itself dependent on the micro structure
and the elemental composition.
For power generators and electric motors it is desirable to maximise the area en-
closed by the hysteresis loop which is a measure of the magnet’s energy product. Mag-
netic materials qualifying for the classification as high energy magnets are those pro-
viding maximum energy products of > 10 Mega-GaussØrsted (MGOe). The meaning
of the maximum energy product is explained in Section 5.3. Two such commercially
available high energy magnetic materials are samarium-cobalt and neodymium-iron-
born where this work is concerned with the latter. According to [CR11] high energy
magnets or hard magnets have the following properties:
• High coercivity, remanence and saturation flux
• High hysteretic energy loss
• Low initial permeability
Hard magnets or high energy magnets for that matter, feature steep almost vertical
slopes at the coercivity points G and D and quasi horizontal slopes at the saturation
points B and E shown in Figure 2.4 (b). An effective means to increase the coercivity
is to restrict domain wall motion. Concerning the remanence the highest possible
values are theoretically achieved in single crystalline materials where however, such
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Theory
an ideal situation is hardly feasible in practice due to the inability to efficiently restrict
domain wall nucleation and domain wall motion in single crystals. For this reason
single phase single crystal permanent magnets cannot exist and instead a multi-phase
and polycrystalline material is required [LWH02] as shall ensuingly be discussed.
2.2
Rare earth iron-boron permanent magnets
Sagawa et al. [Sag+84] managed (simultaneously with former General Motors in the
United States of America) to create a breakthrough by finding that a ternary com-
pound comprising of Nd, Fe and B yielded a permanent magnetic material with out-
standing magnetic properties. By developing a powder metallurgical process Sagawa
et al. managed to obtain a high energy permanent magnet material. In their initial
publication [Sag+84] specimens with a composition of Nd15B8Fe77 of the main phase
(i.e. the hard magnetic phase) were investigated. X-ray diffraction revealed that the
c-axis of the tetragonal crystal structure was aligned with the magnetic field. More-
over, their investigation revealed that their samples had a high magnetic uniaxial
anisotropy which turns out to be the crucial property of REE iron-boron permanent
magnets.
Microstructure investigation of their samples showed that the hard magnetic phase
was embedded in a paramagnetic Nd-rich phase with a low melting point close to the
Nd-Fe eutectic at 910 K (see Fig.2.13). It was concluded that this second Nd-phase
acts as a sintering aide which simultaneously prevents grain growth of the hard mag-
netic phase during sintering. Moreover it was conjectured that the Nd-rich phase
enhances the coercivity.
Later Hirosawa et al. [Hir+86] found that a phase with a different composition
- Nd2Fe14B - possesses an even larger magnetic moment whilst maintaining a dis-
tinct uniaxial anisotropy. Herbst et al. [Her+84] used neutron-diffraction on powders
made from single crystals of the Nd2Fe14B phase in order to determine the crystal
structure. Figure 2.7 shows that the unit cell of Nd2Fe14B is tetragonal which is
occupied by 68 atoms in total where 56 of which are iron atoms. It can clearly be
seen in Fig. 2.7 that all Nd and B atoms are situated in the (001) planes at z=0
and z=0.5 respectively. Despite of four Fe atoms in the z=0 plane the remaining Fe
atoms representing the majority are located between these planes and are forming
fully connected hexagonal nets. The crystal structure shows a 90◦rotational sym-
metry meaning that the atomic arrangement in the z=0 and z=0.5 planes can be
reproduced by a rotation of 90◦around the [001] direction. As mentioned before,
the unit cell is predominantly composed of iron atoms which provide a large ferro-
magnetic moment where a comparatively low amount of REE provides the magnetic
anisotropy by modifying the electron orbitals. The element boron makes up for only
2 vol.% and serves the purpose of stabilising the tetragonality of the unit cell.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Rare earth iron-boron permanent magnets
17
Figure 2.7: Primitive tetragonal unit cell of Nd2Fe14B with lattice constants a =
8.80 Å and c = 12.19 Å showing a sandwich structure of predominantly
Fe atoms embedded between layers of Nd; the c/a ratio is not to scale
in order to emphasise the lattice structure; taken from [Her+84]; .
Herbst et al. [Her+84] are pointing out that the magnetic moment arrangement
of Nd2Fe14B is ferromagnetic with all magnetic moment vectors of the Nd and Fe
atoms aligned with the c-axis. They suggested that most of the intrinsic magnetic
anisotropy is owed to crystal-field splitting of the REE 4f levels where the distinct
magnetic anisotropy might be associated with the Fe sublattice.
Hirosawa et al. [Hir+86] are reporting the saturation magnetisation for Nd2Fe14B
in units of Bohr magneton per formula unit i.e. the average magnetic moment per
atom in the unit cell as 37.7µB/FU at 4 K and as 32.5µB/FU at 300 K.
Coey
[Coe89, Tab.1] reports a saturation magnetisation of 36.4µB/FU which corresponds
to µ0Ms = 1.6 T.
The strong directionality of the magnetic dipole moments of atomic spins in Nd-
Fe-B magnets and the fact that magnetic spins cannot take arbitrary values agrees
well with the assumptions made by Ising [Isi25] to solve the 1D problem given to him
by his supervisor W. Lenz which is now known as the Ising model. Consequently
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Theory
Nd-Fe-B magnets are called Ising magnets. A closer look onto the Ising model and its
important role in modelling the demagnetisation behaviour of ferromagnets is given
in the Appendix A.3.
In their work Hirosawa et al. [Hir+86] investigated ways to improve the ther-
mal stability of the PM material by adding REE which they discovered to enhance
the magnetocrystalline anisotropy. Thermal stability refers to the capability of the
material to maintain the magnetisation at high temperatures. Hirosawa et al. con-
ducted VSM (see Section 3.7 for details) measurements in order to determine the
magnetisation dependence of R2Fe14B magnetic phases, where R is indicating any
of the REEs. Figure 2.8 and Fig. 2.9 are showing the temperature dependence of the
magnetisation density for selected REEs as schematically depicted in Fig.2.4 (a) for
the light REEs (LRE) and the heavy REEs (HRE).
Figure 2.8: Magnetisation of R2Fe14B as a function of temperature for LRE metals
Y, Ce, Pr, Nd and Sm measured on single crystals under a magnetic
field of 800 kA m−1 data reproduced from [Hir+86].
It shows that with the addition of light rare earth elements (LREs) in general and
Nd (blue squares) in particular approx. twice as high magnetisation levels can be
achieved compared to heavy rare earth elements (HRE). Interestingly, in contrast
to the behaviour of LRE permanent magnets the magnetisation in HRE permanent
magnets is increasing with increasing temperatures before it rapidly drops close to
TC.
Figure 2.10 shows the field corresponding to K1 in Eq.2.10 as a function of tem-
perature for additions of LREs and HREs. It shows that Dy significantly increases the
anisotropy when compared to Nd. Woodcock and Gutfleisch [WG11] later confirmed
the findings of [Hir+86] by pointing out that substitutions of Nd with Dy leads to
increased levels of coercivity at elevated temperatures. Furthermore, they associated
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Rare earth iron-boron permanent magnets
19
Figure 2.9: Magnetisation of R2Fe14B as a function of temperature for HRE met-
als Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er and Tm measured on single crystals under a
magnetic field of 800 kA m−1 data reproduced from [Hir+86].
Figure 2.10: Magnetocrystalline anisotropy as a function of temperature for Pr, Tb,
Dy, Ho and Nd measured under a max. magnetic field magnitude of
1.5 Tesla data reproduced from [Hir+86].
the observed decrease of the magnetisation through Dy substitutes with antiparallel
coupling between Dy and Fe in the hard magnetic phase. Therefore, partial substi-
tution of Nd with Dy is required in order to optimise the coercivity at the expense of
the energy product BHmax.
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Theory
On the other hand, despite its effectiveness in stabilising anisotropy Dy is costly
as its abundancy is 10 times less than Nd which is why research focussed on methods
to avoid Dy doping in permanent magnets. It is deemed that this was one of the
motivations of Woodcock and Gutfleisch [WG11] to investigate the phases present in
commercially available Dy free magnets. By using EBSD (see Section 3.6) in com-
bination with other complimentary characterisation methods they found that grains
containing the main magnetic phase Nd2Fe14B may also comprise of Nd1.11Fe4B4
and α-iron. Furthermore, [WG11] are pointing out that the grains are embedded in
a Nd-rich phase with a layer thickness in the order of 1 nm. Larger grains of the
Nd-rich phase are typically growing in the triple points of the magnetic phase during
the sintering process. The Nd-rich phase consists mostly of Nd with a lower content
of oxygen and iron where the oxygen is introduced during the sintering process. Mo
et al. [Mo+08] investigated the crystal structure of the Nd-rich phase in Nd-Fe-B ma-
terial as a function of the oxygen content. They state that the Nd-rich phase resumes
a double hexagonal closed packed lattice structure (dhcp) if O < 9 at%, resumes a fcc
structure if 11 at% < O < 43 at% and was found to be hcp if O > 55 at%.
The investigation of Woodcock and Gutfleisch [WG11] revealed that the Nd-rich
phase can be distinguished into a haxagonal/rhombohedral lattice structure and into
a cubic structure. This to some extent contradicts the findings of Mo et al.. Woodcock
and Gutfleisch concluded that the Nd-rich phases are mainly paramagnetic Nd-oxides
such as NdO and Nd2O3. In addition α-Nd can be present and in case of other REEs
mixed phases of the form (Nd, Pr, Dy)2O3 can occur. More exotic phases such as
NdCl can also be found.
Khlopkov et al. [Khl+04] confirmed the conjecture made by Sagawa et al. [Sag+84]
insofar the distribution of the Nd-rich phases surrounding the main phase has a sig-
nificant effect on the coercivity. Khlopkov et al. are pointing out that the coating of
the hard magnetic grains is necessary to isolate and decouple the individual grains
in order to break the nucleation by restricting and pinning the movement of domain
walls. It is hereby important that the isolating phase is not ferromagnetic such that
the domain walls cannot cross-over the boundary into neighbouring grains. Wood-
cock and Gutfleisch [WG11] found that the defect density in the Nd2Fe14B phase is
low. A low defect density is required to prevent the demagnetising field to cause the
nucleation of reverse anti parallel domains which decrease the magnetisation and the
coercivity. Conversely, the Nd-rich phase had a high defect density. The high defect
density in the Nd-rich phase utilises the pinning mechanism where domain walls can
be pinned which represents an additional barrier.
From these findings it can be inferred that grain size reduction represents a cost
efficient alternative to Dy doping. The concept behind grain size reduction is called
single crystalline domain and concerns the situation at which the size of individual
grains is small enough as to accommodate a single domain only. In such a situation
the magnetisation direction of a grain can only be changed by rotation from one easy
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Texture analysis
21
direction via the hard axis into the reverse easy axis direction which is an energeti-
cally demanding process.
Ramesh and Srikrishna [RTM88] and Ramesh et al. [RS88] developed a probability
based model based on the assumption that the intrinsic coercivity in a Nd2Fe14B
magnet is controlled by the defect density at the grain boundaries. They found that
the intrinsic coercivity when plotted against the natural logarithm of the squared
average grain size ln D2 follows a straight line with negative slope which can be
written as follows:
Hc = A −B ln D2
(2.12)
where Hc is the intrinsic coercivity in kOe, D is the average grain size in µm and A
and B denote empirical constants.
Li et al. [Li+09] used a curve fitting procedure to determine the constants accord-
ing to A = 24 and B = 2.6. They further state that the coercivity reaches a maximum
of 17 kOe at a grain size of 4.5 µm upon which any further grain size reduction entails
a decrease of the coercivity.
Chen et al. [Che+17] used complimentary characterisation methods such as LOM,
SEM, EBSD, atomic force microscopy and magnetic force microscopy in order to
measure the grain size in Nd-Fe-B magnets. The different characterisation methods
gave a fairly consistent size range of 4.54 µm to 4.97 µm which points towards the
optimal grain size according to [Li+09]. In addition, it needs to be mentioned that
such a small grain size sets high demands on the jet-milling process in order to prevent
oxidisation and with it the safety precautions required to handle such a highly reactive
powder.
2.3
Texture analysis
This section deals with the experimental characterisation of fibre texture and its role
in predicting the remanence of PMs.
2.3.1
Fibre texture and the orientation distribution function (ODF)
In order to maximise the energy of a permanent magnet ideally the easy axes i.e. the
c-axes of all crystals in the grains of the hard phase should be aligned. Nevertheless,
current manufacturing processes render such a perfect orientation unfeasible and re-
search focuses intensely on honing the powder pressing techniques in order to reach
the ideal distribution as closely as possible. In Nd-Fe-B magnets the single crystal
c-axis orientations follow a very characteristic orientation distribution (OD). It seems
therefore obvious that the OD can be used to asses the quality of a PM in terms of
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Theory
its ability to reach a remanence close to saturation.
The OD can be defined in different spaces such as Rodriguez vectors, unit quater-
nions, Bunge angles and Euler angles (see Section 3.6).
The latter is commonly
established in the literature due to its convenient use in conjunction with spherical
harmonics as will be elaborated on later. The OD per definition takes values greater
than zero and defines the frequency of occurrence of a single texture component or a
specific orientation as a function of the respective Euler angle.
It is custom to convert the OD into a probability density through normalisation
with respect to multiples of random (MUD or MRD) in which case a random fibre
distribution takes the value 1 in the OD. A magnet with such a random fibre distri-
bution is said to be isotropic. It needs to be stressed that the term ’isotropy’ is not
related to magnetocrystalline anisotropy or shape anisotropy.
Now, among the many different existing texture types such as rolling texture or
biaxial texture, the texture type in NdFeB materials is called fibre texture. Fibre tex-
ture brings along a highly appreciated simplification of the usually highly complex OD
through radial (axial) symmetry. Figure 2.11 schematically depicts the axisymmetric
nature of typical pole figures (PFs) with respect to the sample’s Z-axis obtained from
e.g. EBSD orientation measurements.
Figure 2.11: Two typical fibre texture appearances in the (001) PF and the cor-
responding (100) PF; in case of perfect fibre texture i.e.
degree of
texture equals one, the (001) PF features a single dot in the centre.
However, such an ideal situation is hardly feasible in practice where
instead the fibres are distributed along quasi-concentric rings depicted
as blue dots on the projection plane.
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Texture analysis
23
In fact, the main interest concerns the misorientation angle between the Z-axis
and the individual crystal c-axes. Owing to axial symmetry the misorientation angle
conveniently corresponds to the second Euler angle.
In order to prove that it is
pertinent to introduce the three rotation matrices for the three Euler angles Φ, θ and
Ψ as follows
RΦ =


cos Φ
−sin Φ
0
sin Φ
cos Φ
0
0
0
1


(2.13)
Rθ =


1
0
0
0
cos θ
−sin θ
0
sin θ
cos θ


(2.14)
RΨ =


cos Ψ
−sin Ψ
0
sin Ψ
cos Ψ
0
0
0
1


(2.15)
(2.16)
Applying the three sequential rotations as stipulated in Fig.3.13, Eq.2.17 can be used
to express the local crystal c-axis orientation [001]T in global sample coordinates.


X
Y
Z

= RΨ Rθ RΦ


0
0
1

=


sin Ψ sin θ
−cos Ψ sin θ
cos θ


(2.17)
Now, the misorientation angle denoted as ¯θ can be obtained by the dot product
between the sample Z-direction (outward normal) [001]T and the c-axis direction in
sample coordinates [XY Z]T as follows
cos ¯θ =


0
0
1

·


sin Ψ sin θ
−cos Ψ sin θ
cos θ


(2.18)
One can immediately see from Eq.2.18 that the misorientation angle ¯θ is indeed the
second Euler angle θ. Utilising this fact the OD dependency can be reduced to the
second Euler angle. Moreover, utilising the texture symmetry of the c-axis in the posi-
tive and negative direction the OD can be depicted in the range between 0 ≤θ ≤π/2.
In other words, if θ > π/2 then θeq = π −θ
The OD is obtained by stochastic sampling of a set of individual EBSD mea-
surements and therefore point wise discontinuous. In order to be able to perform
mathematical manipulations it is useful to approximate the OD with a continuous
orientation distribution function (ODF). Although many different approximations ex-
ist the adoption of spherical harmonics has been firmly established in the literature.
Bunge [Bun69] and Roe [Roe65] were trailblazing in formulating a framework for
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Theory
ODFs based on spherical harmonics. Spherical harmonics are an important class of
orthogonal functions which are C2 and solutions of the Laplace equation and thus - per
definition - makes them harmonic functions. Spherical harmonics are renowned for
its use in the calculation of atom electron orbitals in conjunction with Schrödinger’s
equation.
Spherical harmonics can be thought of an infinite set of different wave
forms on a spherical surface defined in Euler space. Despite its broad application in
quantum mechanics they lend themselves to approximate any given OD in the 3D
Euler space 1. In the case of fibre texture the Euler angles are closely related to
the polar angle θ and azimuthal angle ϕ in spherical coordinates and the OD can be
approximated by an ODF denoted as f(θ, ϕ) as follows [Bun69]:
f(θ, ϕ) =
∞
∑
l=0
l
∑
m=−l
Cm
l Y m
l (θ, ϕ)
(2.19)
where Clm are the spherical harmonic coefficients, Y m
l (θ, ϕ) is the spherical harmonic
function and l, m are the spherical harmonic degree and order.
The spherical harmonic function Y m
l (θ, ϕ) is notably
Y m
l (θ, ϕ) = sm N |m|
l
P |m|
l
(cos θ) eimϕ
(2.20)
where sm is the phase (-1 for positive and odd m, 1 otherwise), N |m|
l
is a normalisa-
tion factor and P |m|
l
(cos θ) is the associated Legendre polynomial/ function (a series
expansion for these exist but are available in tabulated form e.g. in [Bun69]).
Equation 2.19 shows that the ODF f(θ, ϕ) is a series expansion similarly to that
of a Fourier series. That is, fascinatingly enough with a linear combination of up to
infinitely many different spherical harmonics any arbitrary OD can be approximated
to any degree of desired accuracy. It turns out that spherical harmonics are best
suited for mild to moderate degrees of texture where a few harmonics usually suffice
to approximate the OD to a satisfactory degree. They are less suited for sharp/strong
textures though as e.g. typically exhibited in single crystals. It is noteworthy to
mention that a PF is a projection of an OD from where one point in a PF can
be associated with several points in the ODF such that several PFs are necessary to
uniquely define an ODF. A crucial property of f(θ, ϕ) is that it represents a probability
density function.
This is achieved by the normalising factor N |m|
l
such that the
following holds:
‹
S(V )
f(θ, ϕ) sin θ dθ dϕ = 4π
(2.21)
1Spherical harmonics are in a more general way applicable in Hilbert space which includes the
3D Euler space
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Texture analysis
25
It can be seen from Eq. 2.21 that with 4π being the surface area of a unit sphere
the ODF value of a random distribution renders a value of unity as it must be. The
only component left concerns the computation of the coefficients Cm
l
which can be
written in an implicit form as follows
Cm
l
= 1
4π
‹
S(V )
f(θ, ϕ) Y m
l (θ, ϕ) sin θ dθ dϕ
(2.22)
Equation 2.22 is implicit insofar the ODF needs to be known in order to be able to
compute the constants. As pointed out by Bunge [Bun69] different methods exist
to compute the coefficients from orientation measurements. Modern texture analysis
such as Mtex software provides iterative methods to converge towards the coefficients
starting from an initial guess.
2.3.2
Texture and microstructure characterisation in the literature
Two prominent complimentary characterisation methods for texture characterisation
are X-ray diffraction (XRD) rocking curves [Len12] and EBSD (see Section 3.6).
The striking advantage of the latter is its superior resolution in the order of a few
nanometers compared to XRD. On the other hand the information depth of EBSD
with approx. 50 nanometer is less than that of XRD. As a consequence surface prepa-
ration for EBSD becomes salient where any surface deformation layer e.g. introduced
by mechanical sample preparation can cause measurement difficulties.
Among the first to use EBSD for fibre texture characterisation of PMs with a
scanning area of 100x100 µm and a step size of 1 µm in Nd-Fe-B materials were Lil-
lywhite et al. [LWH02]. Later Khlopkov et al. [Khl+04] used EBSD with a scanning
area of 120x100 µm and a step size of 0.2 µm to characterise the local texture in
high energy Nd-Fe-B magnets. They state that the quantification of the texture with
a parameter called degree of texture (DOT) makes sense for spatially homogeneous
and rotationally symmetric situations encountered in PMs. They concluded that the
achievment of high energy density requires bulk crystallographic grain alignment with
a narrow grain size distribution as well as a near stoichiometric composition with min-
imised dilution due to the Nd-rich phase. They produced an in-house magnet with
optimised process parameters they denoted as ’world record’ with an energy density
of 451 kJ/m3 which they compared with commercially available PMs. The authors
claim that these world record PMs achieved remanences close to saturation. It was
found that the commercial magnets contained more Nd-rich phase as compared to
their own magnet. The average grain size was approx. 4.6 µm which is consistent
with [Che+17].
Woodcock and Gutfleisch [WG11] employed multi-phase EBSD mapping with a
step size of 0.4 µm and local texture analysis to characterise all phases in Nd-Fe-B
magnets. They concluded that the intra-grain misorientation angle in the Nd-Fe-B
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Theory
phase as well as in the NdO phase did not exceed the experimental noise of 2◦from
which they inferred that these phases have a low defect density. Conversely the Nd-
rich FCC and Nd2O3 grains had an intra-grain misorientation angle of approx. 14◦
which they demonstrated was due to defects. Moreover, in contrast to the hard phase
the Nd-rich phase had no or little texture which is reasonable since the soft phase is
paramagnetic and will hardly align (see next section).
Sawatzki et al. [Saw+15] used XRD and EBSD to calculate the remanence of
Nd-Fe-B magnets based on rocking curves and orientation maps. They proposed a
simple model based on the ODF obtained from EBSD measurements to compute a
DOT factor. Subsequently the DOT was used by Sawatzki et al. to predict the ratio
of saturation-to-remanence obtained from VSM measurements. The predictions were
in close agreement within 3%-7% relative error.
This method was adopted to characterise the remanence of the end-of-life and
recycled PMs in this work due to the simplicity and accuracy. A detailed description
of this method is given in Section 3.8.
Sawatzki et al. found that the Dy content which they varied between 2.5wt.%
and 11wt.% has an influence on the DOT where the highest DOT was obtained
with 5.5wt.%Dy. They also compared the effects of EBSD step size on the ODF by
comparing a small scanning area of 250x250 µm with a step size 0.2 µm with a large
scanning area of 9000x500 µm and a step size 10 µm. Sawatzki et al. are pointing out
that a small step size leads to multiple indexing of the big grains which increases the
noise level in the histograms. Conversely, if the step size is larger than the average
grain size multiple indexing can be avoided which leads to a smooth EBSD histogram.
2.4
Production and recycling of PMs
2.4.1
Production of sintered Nd-Fe-B magnets
The Nd-Fe-B system suitable for sintered magnets comprises of three different equilib-
rium phases namely the hard phase Nd2Fe14B denoted as T1, the boride Nd1+ϵFe4B4
denoted as T2 and the Nd-rich phase. The red lines shown in Fig.2.12 denote the
cooling path from T1 to the ternary eutectic E2.
Figure 2.13 shows that rapid quenching from the melt is required to retain the de-
sired composition at T1 by avoiding phase transformations during equilibrium cool-
ing. Moreover, rapid quenching hinders grain growth and produces the small grains
required for obtaining a high coercivity.
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Production and recycling of PMs
27
Figure 2.12: Liquidus projection of the ternary Nd-Fe-B system taken from
[Mat+13].
Figure 2.13: Isopleth of ternary system along the red path shown in Fig.2.12.
The production of Nd-Fe-B magnets consists of eight main steps as shown in
Fig.2.14. In the first step the melt with a Nd-rich starting composition is strip cast
onto a chilled rotating wheel with a cooling rate in the order of 1 × 104 K s−1. The
such obtained flakes are subsequently milled in a second step into a fine powder by
means of ball-milling (in the old days) and nowadays on industrial scale by jet-milling
processes which has a higher yield.
==PAGE:38==
28
2 Theory
Figure 2.14: Basic manufacturing steps for neodymium-iron-boron permanent mag-
nets taken from Vacuumschmelze [Vac18].
These milling processes are critical in terms of obtaining a sufficiently small par-
ticle size with a narrow size distribution and in terms of minimising the exposure to
oxygen by using high purity helium or nitrogen gas. In a third step the such obtained
powder is pressed into so called green compacts by means of either uniaxial pressing
or alternatively through iso-static pressing in a rubber mould (note that rubber is
incompressible). All pressing is conducted under a protective atmosphere e.g. argon
or helium. An external magnetic field (typically pulsating) is applied during pressing
in order to ideally obtain a sharp fibre texture. Usually a narrower ODF peak can
be achieved under iso-static pressing. In a fourth step the green compact is sintered
in a vacuum furnace between 980-1040◦C. Owing to its lower melting temperature
the Nd-rich phase is wetting/coating the grains and reducing the porosity by filling
the triple junctions. In a fifth through eighth step the magnet is annealed (optional),
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Production and recycling of PMs
29
cut/machined, passivated/coated and magnetised through application of a strong ex-
ternal magnetic field pulse by means of an electromagnet (also commonly referred
to as ’shooting’ where the magnetised magnet is called ’hot magnet’ referring to the
safety hazard it poses).
2.4.2
Hydrogen Decrepitation Press Less Process (HDPLP)
The Press Less Process was first introduced by Sagawa as a method to produce sin-
tered Nd2Fe14B magnets with a very small grain size. The main idea of the Press
Less Process is that a fine Nd2Fe14B powder of only a few micrometer size is pro-
duced by jet milling the Nd2Fe14B flakes. The powder is then aligned and sintered
in graphite crucible to create magnets with near ready shape and size. With the
emphasis put on press less process (PLP) this process aims at avoiding the pressing
step mentioned in the previous section. The idea behind HDPLP is that the already
’ideal’ micro structure of the end-of-life PM remains to a great extent retained in
rather large macro particles which are compacted to a comparatively low degree and
subsequently re-sintered.
Xia et al. [Xia+17] have used the HD-PLP to recycle a commercial grade Nd-Fe-B
PM manufactured by Arnold Magnetic Technologies. The Raw material used for the
HDPLP will be referred to as PM-G0 in the remainder of this thesis. The HDPLP
recycling presented in the paper by Xia et al. [Xia+17] was done using the following
steps:
1. Hydrogen decrepitation (HD) of PM-G0 in a sealed stainless steel container into
a coarse powder
2. Ball milling of the HD powder in a sealed container in argon
3. Manual sieving of the ball milled powder into fractions of 28µm, 50µm and
100µm in argon (glove box)
4. Packing of desired powder fractions in a graphite crucible to a density of 3 g/cm3
in argon (glove box) using a metal rod; an external magnetic field can be applied
during packing in order to produce an anisotropic magnet
5. Re-sintering of the compacted powder in the crucible in a vacuum furnace at
1100◦C for 2h
6. Recovery of the magnet from the crucible after slow cooling where it shrinks
==PAGE:40==
30
2 Theory
The recycling of end-of-life Nd-Fe-B PMs can be greatly facilitated by HD (step
1) which considerably reduces the required ball-milling process steps.
During HD the end-of-life magnets are placed in a sealed pressure vessel and subject
to hydrogen gas at 1 bar to 2 bar over-pressure. The H2 gas diffuses into the material
and exothermically reacts with it by changing the thermodynamic phase equilibrium
mainly leading to the formation of Nd2Fe14BHx. The HD reaction is attended by a
volume expansion which induces internal tensile stresses in the bulk material which
causes it to decrepitate mainly along the grain boundaries. Güth et al. [Gue+11]
are pointing out that at an early stage of the HD process an intermediate tetragonal
Fe3B phase is formed together with fcc neodymium hydroxide (NdHx ) and bcc
α −Fe. Takizawa et al. [Tak+17] found that the Nd2Fe14B phase is decomposed
into fibrous NdH2, α −Fe and Fe2B by hydrogenation.
Now, the such decrepitated hard phase can be recovered by a desorption and
recombination (DR) step. The whole process has therefore be termed Hydrogena-
tion Decomposition Desorption Recombination (HDDR) as described by Ragg et al.
[Rag+97]. Despite the ability to recover the hard Nd2Fe14B phase itself the even
more astonishing part of HD is the recovery of the preferential crystal orientation of
the hard phase. Güth et al. [Gue+11] found that all the grains within one particle
exhibited a distinct preferential orientation which they associated with the texture
memory effect (TME). Following the TME the orientation of a parent particle is
transferred to the grains via the textured intermediate phase Fe2B which largely
retains the crystal structure of the magnetic phase. Güth et al. [Gue+11] state that
an increase of the hydrogen pressure during HD provokes a higher reaction rate which
occurs further away from the thermodynamic phase equilibrium. This decreases the
effectivity of the TME to transfer the orientation of the parent particle over the in-
termediate phase. Moreover, they remark that the hydrogen absorption process is
highly exothermic which can cause excessive heat leading to random nucleation and
grain growth.
It needs to be emphasised that the HDPLP process used by Xia et al. [Xia+17]
for recycling is different to the HDDR process where the only common step is low
temperature HD which is different to the high temperature HD described by Güth
et al. [Gue+11]. In this work two different recycled magnets by Xia et al. were
investigated. The first one herein denoted as PM-GI is an isotropic magnet with
a particle fraction of 28µm to 50µm where no external magnetic field was applied
during packing (step 4). The second one herein denoted as PM-GA is an anisotropic
magnet directly produced from the hydrate powder where ball milling and sieving
(step 2,3) were omitted. For the anisotropic magnet the packed powder contained in
the crucible was loaded into a zip-bag filled with argon. Subsequently the zip-bag was
taken outside the glove box and a constant magnetic field with a strength of approx.
1.7 T was applied. After alignment the bag with the crucible was loaded into the
glove box and from there into the furnace for re-sintering.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
This chapter contains a detailed description of the different sample preparation and
characterisation methods used in this work.
The aim of this chapter was also to
compare the pros and cons of the different methods with a description of the adopted
setup. This chapter also contains a thorough description of the different post-processing
and analysis methods used in conjunction with the employed characterisation meth-
ods.
3.1
As received end-of-life and recycled magnet
material
Two different batches of Nd-Fe-B samples were scrutinised. The first batch comprised
of two different types of already demagnetised end-of-life grade N35H PMs herein de-
noted as PM-A and PM-B. Both, the origin and the purpose of the first batch of the
as-received end-of-life magnet material is proprietary. The approximate size of PM-
A was 100 mm × 70 mm × 15 mm and that of PM-B was 100 mm × 100 mm × 25 mm
(see Fig.3.1 (a,b)). The magnetic flux direction coinciding with the fibre orientation
was given by the through-thickness direction. The surface of the as-received PMs
of the first batch was partially covered with a dark grey/ochre coloured corrosion
product. If left in an unprotected environment even under in-door ambient climate
conditions, the material would continuously oxidise and decrepitate into a powder.
The magnets are therefore stored in an air tight container at room temperature. The
colour and surface appearance of the intact surfaces suggest the application of phos-
phate conversion coating on the original magnets.
The second batch of as-received material comprised of three different PM types
as produced and described in the work of Xia et al. [Xia+17]: The first type with
the designation PM-G0 was a demagnetised grade N48M PM produced by ARNOLD
Magnetic technologies and provided by Grundfos. The approximate size of PM-G0
was 50 mm × 40 mm × 10 mm with a phosphate conversion coating (see Fig.3.1 (c)).
The magnetic flux direction coinciding with the fibre orientation was given by the
through-thickness direction.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Methodology
Figure 3.1: As received permanent magnet material with (a) designated as end-of-
life sintered magnet PM-A (b) designated as end-of-life sintered magnet
PM-B and (c) designated as initial material for HD-PLP recycling PM-
G0 and (d) representative for HD-PLP recycled re-sintered isotropic
magnets PM-GI and recycled re-sintered anisotropic PM-GA made from
PM-G0; the units on the scale bar are given in cm.
The second type denoted as PM-GI was an isotropic recycled magnet from the
PM-G0 material. The third type denoted as PM-GA was an anisotropic recycled
magnet from the PM-G0 material. Both, PM-GI and PM-GA had a cylindrical shape
with a height of 8 mm and a diameter of 6 mm (see Fig.3.1 (d)). The magnetisation
direction of of PM-GA was given along the height of the cylinder. Both as-received
samples PM-GI and PM-GA were covered with a loose dark grey oxide layer.
3.2
Sample preparation
All samples shown in Fig.3.1 were cut with a liquid cooled Struers Accutom-5 disc
cutter.
A cutting disc type 40A15 was used with a feed of 0.015 mm s−1 where
higher feed rates are not recommended if fracture shall be avoided.
The sample
dimensions of PM-A and PM-B used for SEM and EBSD characterisation measured
approximately 5 mm × 3 mm × 2 mm. The sample dimensions of PM-A and PM-B
used for VSM characterisation are listed in Section 4.3. The size of sample PM-G0
measured approximately 5 mm × 5 mm × 2 mm. For PM-GI and PM-GA discs with
a height of 2 mm were cut from the original magnet.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Sample preparation
33
3.2.1
Standard metallographic preparation
The metallographic preparation of the samples used for SEM and LOM roughly fol-
lowed the recommendations given by the Struers Metalog Guide [Get92] using cate-
gory E (7) for hard and brittle materials. In all cases the fibre texture axis plane of
the samples identified by the geometry of the end-of-life magnets were prepared for
texture analysis. The samples were adhesively bonded to purpose made dia. 30 mm
stainless steel mounts using hot wax on a hot plate and heated to approx. 105 ◦C.
After the samples were placed in the holders, they were left to cool to ambient tem-
perature for further processing. In contrast to epoxy mounting, the wax adhesion
method allowed a gentle extraction of the samples from their mounts without the
necessity to break the mount avoiding damage of the sample surface.
Table 3.1 lists the different preparation steps used for SEM and LOM characteri-
sation adopted due to its time efficiency (high surface quality was only prepared for
EBSD). The procedure was carried out in a Struers Rotopol-22/ Rotoforce-4 polish-
ing machine under co-rotation. Please note that the polishing time was adjusted for
optimal surface finish.
Table 3.1: Four different sample surface preparation steps in chronological order
according to [Get92].
Step
Grinding 1
Grinding 2
Polishing 1
Polishing 2
Surface
MD-Piano 220
MD-Piano 1200
MD-Allegro
MD-Dur
Abrasive
Diamond
Diamond
DiaPro
DiaPro Dur
Grit/ particle size
220
1200
9µm
1µm
Lubricant
water
water
diam. susp.
diam. susp.
Rotation speed (rpm)
300
300
150
150
Force (N)
15
15
15
10
Time (min)
5
5
6
4
In a final step the samples were polished on a MD-Chem disc using a neutral Al2O3
suspension with a particle size of 0.004µm at 150 rpm and 10 N force for 10 min.
The samples were rinsed with water and thoroughly cleaned with micro organic soap
(high-purity cleaning solution). In a next step the samples were removed from the
steel mounts using the hot plate where the wax residuals were dissolved in pure
acetone. Thereafter, the samples were cleaned again with micro organic soap and
distilled water. Eventually, the samples were cleaned in pure ethanol in an ultrasonic
bath for 5 min.
3.2.2
Metallographic preparation for EBSD
The preparation of Nd-iron-boron material for EBSD is not a trivial task. Specific
guidelines are hardly available in the literature and thus a trial and error procedure
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Methodology
was used to develop a special preparation method different from the standard metal-
lographic method given in Tab.3.1. It was found that any acidic agent is unsuitable
for EBSD preparation of the Nd-iron-boron material which consequently includes
electro-polishing and acidic alumina suspension.
Polishing of the EBSD samples was carried out with a Multiprep Hi Tech Allied
rotation polisher starting from Step-2 given in Tab.3.1, after removal from the steel
mount.
Table 3.2 lists the different rotation polishing steps.
Distilled water was
used as lubricant on aluminium-oxide discs with polymeric binder in all steps. The
polishing process can be considered as mildly intrusive as the compressive traction
force of the sample onto the disc can be applied at a very low level. Therefore, the
thickness of the detrimental surface deformation layer can be reduced.
Table 3.2: Five different sample surface preparation steps in chronological order
used for EBSD samples.
Step
Grit
Rotation
Time
-
µm
(rpm)
(min)
1
30
70
9
2
12
70
6
3
3
50
3
4
1
50
3
5
0.3
50
3
After completion of Step-5, the samples were placed in a DACE technologies vibratory
polisher on a MD Dur disc at a frequency of 180 Hz. Final polishing was carried out
for 1 h with 0.1µm diamond suspension followed by 1 h with 0.004µm neutral Al2O3
suspension. Sample cleaning followed the same procedure as mentioned before. Due
to the susceptibility of the material to oxidisation, the samples were stored in a
vacuum chamber.
3.3
Light optical microscopy (LOM)
The grain structure and porosities were investigated with an Olympus GX41 bright
field reflective light optical microscope. Images were acquired with a cooled CCD
camera where monochrome pictures were used for determining the porosity and colour
pictures were used for grain size measurement.
For porosity measurement binary
images were taken prior to etching in order to avoid influence from grain boundary
lines. The porosity was computed using the commercially available a multi-paradigm
numerical computing environment Matlab [14b] by the ratio of black to white pixels.
The etchant used to enhance the grain boundaries was 5% citric acid according to a
recommendation given by Degri [Deg14]. For the etching process the sample was fully
immersed for 5 min in the etchant using a magnetic stirrer in order to avoid reaction
gas bubbles sticking to the sample surface.
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Scanning electron microscope (SEM)
35
Degri [Deg14] mentions Keller’s agent based on picric acid as an alternative
etchant for this material.
Good results were achieved with citric acid being the
etchant of choice in this work due to its lower toxicity.
3.4
Scanning electron microscope (SEM)
SEM characterisation was carried out with a Zeiss Supra high resolution scanning
electron microscope equipped with a field emission electron gun. The high resolution
is achieved by a high current density provided by the field emission gun together with
the high quality electron optics in the column. For the microstructural investigation
of the topology an in-lens secondary electron (SE) detector and for mass contrast a
back scattered electron (BSE) detector was used. In Nd-iron-boron materials the mass
contrast proved itself particularly useful to distinguish the hard magnetic phase from
the paramagnetic Nd-rich phase. The acceleration voltage for topology investigation
was set to 20 kV whereas the acceleration voltage was increased to 30 kV for EDS. For
a more detailed description of the SEM technique, the reader is referred to [Len12].
3.5
Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS)
EDS was carried out in the Zeiss Supra SEM which is a non-destructive character-
isation method for quantitative chemical composition analysis. In addition to spot
measurements, the EDS setup in the SEM allowed the generation of an elemental
composition map over a user-defined scanning area which provided useful insight into
the distribution of the different REEs in the phases.
The basic principle of EDS relies on the emission of characteristic X-rays due to
inelastic scattering of electrons inside the interaction volume provided by the incoming
electron beam of the probe. Charateristic X-rays are generated when the electrons
of the probe are kicking out an electron in one of the K, L or M shells of the sample
atoms. The likelihood of electrons being kicked out of the K, L or M shell increases in
the same order with the atomic number. During such an inelastic scattering event the
atom instantaneously seeks to reestablish its energetic equilibrium in such a way that
an electron from a higher shell falls down to fill the incurred electron gap. During
this ’jump’ the electron needs to release the excessive excitation energy it possesses.
It does this by emitting a highly energetic photon with a characteristic wavelength
- the characteristic X-ray (see Fig.3.2).
Such ’jumps’ are not arbitrarily allowed
though but rather obey specific rules determined by quantum mechanics. In that
sense, depending from which shell the electron originates, characteristic X-rays with
different wave lengths or energy levels can be emitted from the same element.
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Methodology
Figure 3.2: Schematics showing the generation of a characteristic X-ray through
inelastic scattering of an electron. An electron is removed from the K
shell upon which an electron from the 2p3/2 sub-shell jumps down and
emits a characteristic gamma-ray or X-ray.
Figure 3.3 shows the area in which characteristic X-rays are primarily generated
depends on the elemental sample properties. The characteristic X-rays represent a
Figure 3.3: Interaction volume caused by the electron probe interacting with the
electrons of the sample material taken from [Uni18]; The size of the
interaction volume depends on the atomic number Z of the elements
involved. In this respect it is important to consider the information
depth associated with the particular sample.
unique fingerprint which can be used to identify the different elements present in the
sample. For this purpose an EDS detector (in the Zeiss Supra it is a liquid nitrogen
cooled SI(Li) or cold finger) closely located to the pole magnet of the SEM is used to
measure the counts at a specific X-ray energy level (see Fig.3.4). The output of an
EDS measurement is commonly referred to as spectrum where the counts i.e number
of X-ray emissions are plotted against the X-ray energy level. In such a spectrum the
different elements appear as distinct peaks which can be identified by matching both
the measured peak intensities and the peak energy levels with those provided by a
database.
==PAGE:47==
3.5 Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS)
37
Figure 3.4: Schematic representation of a cold finger EDS detector located in vicin-
ity of the sample. The incoming electron beam causes excitation events
whose characteristic X-rays escape the sample. The characteristic en-
ergy and the associated counts are consequently measured by the de-
tector (taken from [Ass18]).
As mentioned before, one and the same element typically produces several peaks
with different intensities in the spectrum which in the EDS measurement output file
are denoted as K, L and M.
It is important to mention that EDS is not suitable for quantitative analysis of
light elements such as boron which is present in the hard magnetic phase. This cir-
cumstance arises from the probability of emission of characteristic X-rays being a
function of the atomic number which is low for atomic numbers below 15.
Figure 3.5 shows that the X-ray yield per shell vacancy for light elements such as
B and O is insignificantly low. The red graph shown in Fig. 3.5 illustrates that as
opposed to EDS, Auger electron spectroscopy represents a more suitable characteri-
sation method for light elements such as boron due to its higher electron yield.
Yet another measurement method suitable for light elements is Glow Discharge Op-
tical Emission Spectroscopy (GDOES). On the other hand, difficulties in accurate
calibration of GDOES against reference samples with known composition can be a
challenge. Moreover, the sampling area GDOES is large (approx. 5 mm in diameter)
compared to the spot analysis capabilities of EDS which makes it less suitable to
distinguish the composition of different phases.
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Methodology
Figure 3.5: Auger electron yield and X-ray yield as a function of the atomic number;
The X-ray yield is sufficiently high for Fe and even higher for REE
rendering EDS suitable for the quantitative characterisation of Fe, Nd,
Dy and Pr..
In EDS the chemical composition in a sample is obtained by comparing the mea-
sured intensity of element A against a reference intensity following kA = Isample
A
/Iref
A .
Despite its time efficiency and straight forward applicability one of the drawbacks is
the high level of background radiation or Bremsstrahlung which needs to be sub-
tracted from the measured intensities. The background radiation is unfortunately
not constant and its intensity decreases with increasing energy.
This means that
different peaks must be corrected for different levels of Bremsstrahlung.
At this point it is worth mentioning that a more accurate alternative composi-
tion analysis method which is not affected by background radiation is Wave Length
Dispersive Spectroscopy (WDS). In WDS a crystal is used to obtain monochromatic
X-rays used for spectroscopy and hence avoiding the issue of Bremsstrahlung.
However, when using EDS, the concentration in the sample cA needs to be cor-
rected for three well-known factors namely the atomic number Z, absorption A and
fluorescence F according to cA = kA Z A F. The effects of the different factors will
subsequently briefly mentioned for completeness.
In EDS the atomic number affects both, the back-scatter factor and the stopping
power. The first refers to the effect of a decreasing electron range with increasing Z
whereas the latter refers to the gradual energy loss of the electrons when penetrating
the sample. Absorption refers to the effect that depending on the composition the
Kα radiation of a species can be absorbed by another species present in the sample
==PAGE:49==
3.6 Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD)
39
such as e.g. Al Kα is strongly absorbed by Cu. The absorption depends on the emit-
ted X-ray path length itself depending on the depth of its excitation and the angle
between the sample surface and the detector position i.e. the take off angle.
Arguably the most important effect in EDS characterisation is X-ray fluorescence.
Fluorescence is caused by a secondary event affecting different elements closely lo-
cated to one-another in the periodic system. In the case of Nd-iron-boron magnets
such candidates are neodymium and praseodymium. That is, during fluorescence the
characteristic X-ray emitted from an Nd-atom during a primary excitation event kicks
out an electron of a Pr-atom itself emitting a fluorescent X-ray during a secondary
excitation event. In such a situation the detector counts a false characteristic X-ray
radiation stemming from a secondary event which consequently causes bias of the
quantitative measurement.
As a concluding remark it is fair to say that the accuracy of the elemental compo-
sition analysis in EDS to a great deal depends on the quality of the ZAF corrections.
Despite the availability of more advanced correction methods e.g. for the atomic num-
ber by Monte-Carlo simulations, such advanced methods are usually not conducted
during standard measurement sessions. Therefore, caution should be exercised when
interpreting quantitative EDS composition data.
3.6
Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD)
3.6.1
General description
Electron backscatter diffraction is a non-destructive characterisation method used to
determine specific properties of crystalline materials such as metals and ceramics.
EBSD is especially useful for the characterisation of polycrystalline materials, where
it enables the determination of individual grain orientations, grain size distributions
as well as the identification of different phases [Len12].
EBSD measurements are typically carried out in a SEM with an acceleration
voltage range of 10 keV to 30 keV and a high beam current [Len12]. In EBSD the
sample surface is tilted by an opening angle of 70◦or equivalently at an angle of
20◦with respect to the incident electron probe. The tilting angle serves the purpose
to provide a large field of view towards the detector and secondly to increase the
backscatter electron intensity.
The information depth in EBSD ranges from 5 nm to 50 nm which indicates that this
method is surface sensitive. This imposes high demands on sample preparation which
proved particularly true for permanent magnets. The EBSD detector is located in
close vicinity to the sample surface at approx. 20 mm at an angle of approx. 90◦
towards the incident beam. Also the working distance between the sample and the
electro-magnetic lens is rather close at approx. 20 mm (see Fig.3.6).
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Methodology
The detector itself consists of a phosphor screen and a CCD camera located be-
hind the screen.
Figure 3.6: CCTV image of the Zeiss Supra SEM chamber showing the EBSD setup
with the PM-GI sample investigated in this work.
An incoming electron incident beam can generate three different types of electrons
namely secondary electrons (SE), Auger electrons (AE) and backscattered electrons
(BSE). The latter are generated by elastic scattering of the electron around the nuclei
of atoms in the sample and are signified by a small energy loss. In contrast to SE
and AE, BSE originate and escape from deeper areas inside the interaction volume
(see Fig.3.3) between 50 nm to 300 nm typically providing a low electron yield at high
energy levels. As a side note the author would like to emphasise that in the following
description the property of an electron is continuously interchanged between wave
character and particle character for convenience.
The principle of EBSD is based on the formation of a so called Backscatter
Kikuchi pattern (BKP) and perhaps more commonly referred to as Electron Backscat-
ter Diffraction Pattern (EBSP). EBSPs are generated by elastic scattering of elec-
trons while simultaneously bearing in mind that the scattering events involved are
complex in nature and require advanced models as pointed out by Winkelmann et
al. [Win+16]. Unlike in transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and disregarding
the novel transmission EBSD method, in the classic EBSD method the sample is
thick (i.e. no transmission taking place) which provokes elastic scattering followed by
inelastic scattering events.
Although the scattered electrons are emitted in all directions in space, the statistical
distribution of the scattering events has a peak in the forward direction towards the
detector. The diffuse scattering in a material point can be thought of an electron
point source which generates electrons being radially emitted with varying angular
distribution in all directions. It thus occurs that some electron waves are satisfying
Braggs condition for constructive diffraction nλ = 2d sin θ of the lattice planes in the
crystalline sample in close vicinity to the point source.
==PAGE:51==
3.6 Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD)
41
In the well-known equation λ denotes the wave length, d denotes the interplanar
spacing and θ is the diffraction angle.
It needs to be stressed that the diffraction is dynamic and involves multiple highly
complex scattering and absorption events as discussed by [Win+16]. Advanced quan-
tum mechanics based models used to describe the dynamic scattering events during
EBSD exist but are far from trivial and beyond the scope of this work.
In the most basic (naïve) interpretation - the geometrical model - it can be imag-
ined that the constructively diffracted diffuse electrons are forming so called Kossel
cones in 3D space (see Fig.3.7). As a matter of fact, these rather flat electron diffrac-
tion double-cone shells with semi opening angles of close to 90◦are intersecting with
the phosphor screen. These appear owing to fluorescence reactions in the form of
hyperbola segments according to conic sections. The angle of the Kossel cones is typ-
ically rather wide which results in hyperbola segments which appear almost straight
on the phosphor screen. These hyperbola segments are named after their discoverer
Kikuchi Bands. The appearance of circular so called Higher order Laue Zones is also
possible but less frequently observed. The contrast of the Kikuchi bands on the phos-
phor screen is produced by electrons whose energy loss remains below 3% indicating
that the process is governed by elastic scattering events. On the other hand from this
loss it can be inferred that the wave-length of the electron is not constant which in
turn adds complexity to the diffraction events occurring in EBSD.
Figure 3.7: Generation of two flat Kossel cones (with cone angle 180−2θ) by diffrac-
tion on lattice planes and their intersection with the phosphorous screen
on which they appear as hyperbola segments referred to as Kikuchi
bands. The curvature of the hyperbolas was exaggerated for illustra-
tion purposes.
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Methodology
It is important to mention that according to the geometrical model and similarly
to what is seen in a transmission electron microscope actually a pair of Kossel cones
is generated owing to constructive diffraction events occurring between two lattice
planes. In TEM these Kossel cones are forming the excessive- and deficit line. How-
ever, in EBSD so called Kikuchi bands are formed in contrast to the Kikuchi lines
observed in TEM since the electron beam is not transmitted.
Depending on the
proximity to the Bragg angle θ these bands can exhibit a higher or lower intensity
compared to the background intensity. To be more precise, the intensity gradient
across the band is high at the edges and flattens out towards the centre line. Never-
theless, the Kikuchi bands in EBSD typically exhibit a higher intensity compared to
the background intensity. The contrast level of these bands is crucial for the indexing
of crystal planes as discussed in the preceding section.
3.6.2
Indexing of crystal planes in EBSD
According to Britton et al. [Bri+16] the EBSD indexing procedure follows four dif-
ferent main steps as follows:
1. Capture of an EBSP with sufficient quality.
2. Transformation of the EBSP into Hough space.
3. Indexing of the EBSP using the zone axes.
4. Data acquisition and data quality assessment.
These main steps can subsequently only be briefly touched upon for the sake of
brevity. The beauty of EBSD is that every Kikuchi band represents the gnomonic
projection 1 of two parallel crystal planes in the sample onto the detector screen as
schematically depicted in Fig. 3.8. With hindsight of Fig.3.7 the gnomonic projection
of a pair of lattice planes as shown in Fig. 3.8 becomes more apparent by realising
that the axis of the Kossel cones must be perpendicular to the lattice planes since θ
is the same in every direction. From this it can be inferred that any arbitrary plane
defined by any circle along the cone generatrix is in fact parallel to the lattice planes
the cone was created from. With Kossel cone angles only slightly less than 180◦it
follows that the centre-line of the Kikuchi band represents the trace of the lattice
plane on the detector plane. To be more specific, the centre-line represents the trace
of a virtual plane located exactly in between the two lattice planes belonging to the
same family.
Following the geometrical model the bandwidth is proportional to twice the diffraction
angle θ as indicated in Fig.3.7(a). According to Braggs law the bandwidth is therefore
a measure for the interplanar spacing d.
1The expression gnomon is Greek and denotes the indicator of a sundial which casts the shadow.
==PAGE:53==
3.6 Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD)
43
Figure 3.8: Gnomonic projection principle of a crystallographic plane hatched in
grey with its outward normal ⃗n onto the detector plane.
Due to the point source character of the electrons being multi-directionally scat-
tered in the material, the Bragg law for several crystal plane families is typically
satisfied which eventually leads to the observed EBSP or BKP. A digital image of the
EBSP can be taken by the CCD camera located behind the phosphor screen which is
subsequently loaded into the EBSP indexing program for post processing. An EBSP
image of a Nd2Fe14B phase is shown in Fig.3.11 (a).
The intersection points between Kikuchi bands 2 are of particular importance for
the indexing procedure. These intersections represent the zone axes of crystal plane
families in the direction of the outward normal of the detector plane. Figure 3.9 (a-d)
show the {100}, {011}, {110}, {111} and the {211} plane in a cubic unit cell. Figure
3.9 (e) shows the gnomonic projections of these plane families onto a {100} (detector)
plane. However, only the {100}, {011} and {110} planes share a zone axis in the [100]
direction.
In order to facilitate the automatic detection of the zone axes from EBSP images, the
Cartesian image coordinates are transformed into Hough space (in polar coordinates)
where points appear as trigonometric functions whose intersection denotes a set of
collinear points. In this way the software is able to identify and associate a line with
every Kikuchi band as shown in Fig.3.11(b).
2These intersection points are closely related to the diffraction spots in a TEM.
==PAGE:54==
44
3 Methodology
Figure 3.9: Different lattice plane families in a cubic system represented in (a,b,c,d)
and their gnomonic projections seen in (e) in principle resembling a
Kikuchi pattern; planes are intersecting in the zone axis which for cases
(a,b) is the (100) direction.
Figure 3.10 depicts the approach to identify the Kikuchi lines in an EBSP by
Hough space transformation.
Interplanar angles in gnomonic projections are pre-
served for plane families whose zone axis coincide with the outward normal of the
detector plane.
Therefore, the angle measured between two Kikuchi bands corre-
sponds to the interplanar angle between two crystal planes. After calculating the
angles between the Kikuchi bands it is possible to index the zone axes in the EBSP
by exploitation of symmetries of the crystal planes. This is predominantly done by
comparing the interplanar angles (among other parameters mentioned below) of the
measured crystal structure with a selected number of candidate reflecting planes in a
reference structure of the phase(s) predefined by the user. To this end the expected
crystal structure of the phases present in the sample must be known beforehand. The
software tries to match the measurement data with a set of possible crystallographic
planes - the match unit - searching for similar characteristics and consequently ranks
the retrieved solutions in order to find the best match. It is noteworthy that the
speed of match attempts defined in patterns per second can have a significant influ-
ence on the indexing rate and obviously on the computation time. That is to say,
low indexing speeds increase the indexing rate but on the other hand increase the
computation time.
==PAGE:55==
3.6 Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD)
45
Figure 3.10: (a) three points in image space with circular markers representing the
collinear solution and square markers are biased with random noise (b)
parametrised points shown in Hough space; circular marker indicates
collinear line and square marker indicates fitted line.
Figure 3.11: (a) Kikuchi band (EBSP) of Nd2Fe14B hard magnetic phase of PM-A
and (b) indexed Kikuchi bands shown in red; each band is produced
by diffraction of a family of planes and the intersections denote the
zone axes; the angles enclosed by the bands correspond to interplanar
angles and the band width is proportional to the lattice spacing..
The match unit of the specific crystal structure is basically a numerical simulation
of the expected EBSP using the kinematical electron diffraction model [Win+16]. The
match unit is used to simulate the crystallographic indices of the Bragg planes i.e.
the reflectors, the lattice plane spacing, the outward lattice plane vectors and the
reflector intensity.
==PAGE:56==
46
3 Methodology
The quality of the match is eventually assessed by means of the following param-
eters:
• The number of indexed lines with a minimum of eight (desirably high).
• The angular deviation between the simulated and the measured EBSP (desir-
ably low).
• The band contrast referring to the average band intensity relative to the back-
ground intensity (desirably high).
• The band slope referring to the maximum intensity gradient at the edges across
a Kikuchi band (desirably high).
3.6.3
Crystal orientation measurement in EBSD
At least three indexed Kikuchi lines are necessary to compute the crystal orientation in
the sample but additional lines are required in order to decrease uncertainty. Britton
et al. [Bri+16] are pointing out that orientation measurements using EBSD involves
the interlinking of different reference coordinate systems (CSYS) notably
• The 2D gnomonic projection system
• The detector system (CSYS in the phosphorus screen)
• The sample CSYS with the outward normal Z-direction
• The Cartesian standard frame of the crystal unit cell
• The Bravais crystal lattice linked to the unit cell CSYS
The general output format of crystal orientations in EBSD are a set of Cartesian
coordinates in the sample CSYS of the measurement point and with it associated
the three Euler orientation angles in this work sequentially designated as Φ, θ and
Ψ. The orientation accuracy in EBSD depending on the quality of the SEM ranges
between ±0.5◦and ±2◦. The measurement points are usually obtained in a square
grid pattern with a user defined step size within a user defined sampling area.
For a detailed treatise about the transformations required to obtain the Euler angles
in EBSD the reader is referred to [Bri+16].
Figure 3.12 shows how the sequential application of Euler angles can be used to
uniquely define the orientation of e.g. a tetragonal unit-cell in the sample coordinate
system.
==PAGE:57==
3.6 Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD)
47
Figure 3.12: The three Euler angles ϕ, θ, ψ used to describe relative orientation of
crystal CSYS relative to the sample CSYS with a rotation around z
followed by a rotation around the new x-axis denoted as x′ and finally
a rotation around the new z-axis denoted as z′′.
Figure 3.13 depicts the orientation of a crystallographic plane (depicted as hori-
zontal disc) relative to the sample surface plane after application of the three Euler
angles. Note that the sample plane in Fig. 3.13 is tilted as to represent its orientation
in the EBSD. Since orientation measurements in this work are mainly concerned with
fibre texture, the second Euler angle shown in red deserves particular attention.
Figure 3.13: The definition of the Euler angles in the 3D Eulerspace showing that
the angle between the old and the new Z-axis is given by the second
Euler angle θ which is invariant towards ϕ and ψ.
If the quality threshold criteria in an EBSD measurement point are not met, a so
called zero solution is produced i.e. the Euler angle entries in the output data file are
populated with zeros which indicates that the software was unable to index the crystal
structure in this particular point. An important parameter indicating the statistical
significance is the so called indexing rate which designates the ratio between the sat-
==PAGE:58==
48
3 Methodology
isfactory solutions found and the total number of measurement attempts/points.
3.6.4
EBSD setup
In this work only the Nd2Fe14B phase was considered for the purpose of texture
analysis and the Nd-rich phase was omitted. Because of the omission of the second
phase and additionally due to the porosity indexing rates less than 100% must be
expected. Indexing rates with 100% are only achieved in single crystal materials.
The setup of the SEM was optimised in such a way as to achieve an indexing rate
>70% considered to be a minimum requirement for sufficient statistical significance.
The acceleration voltage chosen was 21 kV with an aperture of 120µm. The adopted
step size was 10µm in order to avoid multiple indexing of the same grain [Saw+15].
The sampling area was roughly 1000x1000µm considered to be a reasonable repre-
sentation of the bulk. Dynamic focussing was used to correct for deviations from
plane-parallel sample geometries which increased the contrast of the EBSP. Calibra-
tion of the match unit was conducted at some randomly chosen points prior to the
EBSD measurement campaign. It was found that the pattern matching speed needed
to be decreased to an unusually low level of 10-20 images per measurement point
compared to acquisition speeds on more simple crystal structures such as aluminium
or steel samples. The average scanning time per sample was 1.5 h.
3.7
Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM)
3.7.1
Working principle
The magnetic measurements were carried out in a Cryogen Free Magnet (CFM) Sys-
tem Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM) from Cryogenic Limited [14a]. A VSM is
used to to experimentally determine the magnetic moment m of a magnetised sample
by measuring the induced AC voltage produced by its oscillation in a pair of pick-up
coils (see yellow boxes in Fig.3.14).
To this end, the sample needs to be either permanently magnetic or being magne-
tised in response to an externally applied magnetic field. In the VSM the sample is
accommodated in a small dia. 8 mm cylindrical ceramic crucible itself mounted at
the lower end of a slender rigid rod. The sample is placed in the centre of two pick-up
(measurement) coils were it is oscillated via the upper end of the rod through an
electro-mechanical oscillator similarly to the working principle of a loudspeaker (see
Fig.3.15 (a)). Typical values for the vibration amplitude are ranging from 0.1 mm
to 1.5 mm. The frequency of the oscillator in the current setup was 20.4 Hz which is
intentionally chosen far away from the 50 Hz of the electric grid in order to suppress
any influence of external magnetic fields.
==PAGE:59==
3.7 Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM)
49
Figure 3.14: Schematic diagram of the VSM system with the components as de-
scribed. The sample shown in red is vibrating inside a pair of pick-up
coils. Not all sensors are shown for the sake of clarity.
Figure 3.15: (a) Rod mounted onto vibration coil device itself mounted on a rig
which can be swept vertically with a stepper motor gear; rod fully en-
gaged in cryostat ready for testing and (b) rod retracted from cryostat
with ceramic crucible screw connected to the tip of the internal tubular
rod; the ceramic crucible is used for high temperature measurements
up to T = 400◦C.
==PAGE:60==
50
3 Methodology
The measurement principle utilises the fact that the magnetic moment of the sam-
ple is proportional to the amplitude of the induced voltage signal. The analysis of the
induced magnetic field is based on considerations of an infinitely small point source
where it is assumed that the sample is a magnetic dipole and that the sample volume
is considerably smaller than the volume enclosed by the pick-up coils. Theoretically
speaking the entire magnetic field produced by the sample should be integrated which
is practically unfeasible. However, as can be seen in the Appendix A.2 the external
field strength decreases with an inverse cubic power law which means that the far field
cutting off error can be neglected provided that the sample size is small compared to
the coil dimensions. Lindemuth and Krause [LKD01] are elaborating on the influence
of the sample size relative to the pick-up coil dimensions. Following their recommen-
dations, the characteristic sample size in this work was chosen in magnitude similar
to the calibration magnet size of the system which is 1 mm.
The two pick-up coils consist of equal wire length, albeit with opposite winding
directions. In this way, and this is crucial for the measurement principle, any ex-
ternally applied magnetic field induces equal voltage signals of opposite sign which
are cancelling one-another. During measurements the sample is placed in the centre
of the pick-up coils where during a linear upward translation the flux in the upper
coil increases whereas the flux in the lower coil decreases. The reverse holds during a
linear downward translation. Hence, the induced net voltage during sample vibration
is proportional to the magnetic moment m of the sample. The optimal mean sample
location i.e. the position around which oscillation takes place in the pick up coils is
obtained by finding the strongest pick-up coil signal while sweeping the oscillating
sample up and down at a slow rate by means of stepper-motors (rig seen in Fig.3.15
(a)). The measurement signal in the pick-up coil during sweeping should ideally si-
nusoidal where any deviation indicates an excessive sample volume.
An external magnetic field B = µ0Ha of varying field strength with a maximum
of 16 T can be applied to the specimen by a superconducting coil located around the
sample-pick-up-coil arrangement (see green boxes in Fig.3.14). The magnetic field of
the superconducting coil is measured in close vicinity to the sample by means of a
Hall probe. In order to measure the magnetic hysteresis loop, the sample is contin-
uously vibrated inside the pick-up coils while the strength of the externally applied
magnetic field is varied within a user specified range. The temporal variation of the
external magnetic field in this work was chosen to be 0.5 T min−1. The change in the
induced voltage in the pick-up coils is then sampled at a rate of 1.0 Hz and converted
into a magnetic moment m. The hysteresis is consequently generated by plotting the
individually measured magnetic moments versus the applied field.
Both, the pick-up coils and the superconducting coil or main coil are placed in
a liquid helium cooled cryostat. The cooling unit attached to the cryostat allows
samples to be tested down to 2 K. Conversely, a sample heating unit enables mea-
surements to be taken at elevated temperatures of up to 750 K. With such a cooling
==PAGE:61==
3.7 Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM)
51
and heating setup it is possible to investigate the hysteretic response e.g. the sat-
uration magnetisation, remanence and coercivity of a magnetic sample over a wide
temperature range.
3.7.2
VSM settings
In order to prevent sample rotation during the application of the magnetic field the
sample was wrapped in paramagnetic aluminium foil and then tightly packed into the
crucible before mounting it to the tip of the rod (see Fig.3.15 (b)). The demagnetised
sample was then loaded into the cryostat at 20 ◦C and zero applied field. In this work
the applied field range was chosen from −10 T to 10 T in order to reach magnetisa-
tion close to saturation. During measurements the magnetic field was ramped up and
down at a constant rate of 0.5 T min−1. The sample was measured with the applied
field parallel to the easy axis as well as in the perpendicular direction i.e. the hard
axis. The easy axis of the sample is stipulated as the through thickness direction
of the as-received magnets which corresponds to the 001 fibre texture direction as
discussed in Section 3.8.
Hysteresis loops were obtained at the following temperatures held constant during
measurements: 0 ◦C, 20 ◦C, 40 ◦C, 60 ◦C, 80 ◦C, 100 ◦C, 120 ◦C, 150 ◦C, 200 ◦C and
250 ◦C. Additionally, remanence T-scan curves of the fully magnetised sample were
obtained by continuously heating the sample from 0 ◦C to 350 ◦C under zero applied
field.
3.7.3
Scaling of the hysteresis
It is sensible to depict the magnetic hysteresis in the µ0(Ha −Hd) vs. M space
which requires the VSM measurements to be converted for the purpose of making
the hysteresis independent from sample size as well as sample shape. This re-scaling
conveniently facilitates the comparison of the hysteretic response of different samples.
As previously mentioned in Subsection 3.7.1 the entity measured by the pick up
coils is:
m =
ˆ
V
MdV
(3.1)
where M is the magnetisation density in [A/m] and the resulting moment is in the
units of [Am2].
Under the assumption of homogeneous magnetisation of the sample, M becomes
a constant and can be moved outside the integral. Accepting this assumption, the
ordinate of the hysteresis can be scaled by simply dividing the integrated measurement
value m by the sample volume according to:
M = m/V
(3.2)
==PAGE:62==
52
3 Methodology
Scaling of the abscissa requires a short excursus in order to shed some light on the
rationale. Based on the example of a spherical dipole re-derived in Appendix A it
is clear that the magnetic flux density can be written as B = µ0(Ha + Hd + M).
Inferring from Fig.A.1 it can be seen that under a uniform magnetisation under
saturation (as stipulated), the internal demagnetisation field Hd is also uniform i.e.
vectors exhibiting both the same length and direction. In fact, it can be shown that
this special and useful property not only holds for spheres but indeed also holds in a
more general form for any ellipsoidal body [Blu03]. Now, the striking advantage of a
constant Hd field manifests itself in the exploitation of a demagnetisation factor Dz
(a scalar) which allows the demagnetisation field to be expressed according to:
Hd = −DzM
(3.3)
As seen in the example given in the Appendix the demagnetisation factor for a sphere
is Dz = 1/3 (see Eq.A.27). In such a situation the abscissa of the VSM measurements
can be scaled with little effort by expressing the demagnetisation field in terms of the
already obtained M and by subsequent subtraction of Hd from the externally applied
field whereby the internal field Hi is defined according to:
Hi = (Ha −DzM)
(3.4)
However, Josef and Schlömann [JS65] showed that the Hd field in non-ellipsoidal
bodies is not uniform but rather a function of the space coordinates inside the sample.
This causes a dilemma insofar for reasons of practicality the manufacture of spherical
or ellipsoidal samples of such a brittle material maybe cumbersome as is the magneto-
static finite element analysis of prismatic sample shapes which deviate from ideal
geometries. For these obvious reasons research focussed on ways to somewhat rescue
the concept of analytically obtained demagnetisation factors. Aharoni [Aha98] has
done this by imposing a constant Hd onto a tetragonal solid and derived an expression
==PAGE:63==
3.7 Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM)
53
for the demagnetisation factor given as follows:
πDz = b2 −c2
2 b c
ln
(√
a2 + b2 + c2 −a
√
a2 + b2 + c2 + a
)
+ a2 −c2
2ac
ln
(√
a2 + b2 + c2 −b
√
a2 + b2 + c2 + b
)
+ b
2 c ln
(√
a2 + b2 + c2 + a
√
a2 + b2 + c2 −a
)
+ a
2 c ln
(√
a2 + b2 + c2 + b
√
a2 + b2 + c2 −b
)
+ c
2 a ln
(√
a2 + b2 + c2 −b
√
a2 + b2 + c2 + b
)
+ c
2 b ln
(√
a2 + b2 + c2 −a
√
a2 + b2 + c2 + a
)
+ 2 arctan
(
ab
c
√
a2 + b2 + c2
)
+ a3 + b3 −2c3
3 a b c
+ a2 + b2 −2c2
3 a b c
√
a2 + b2 + c2 + c
a b
(√
a2 + c2 +
√
b2 + c2
)
−
(
a2 + b2)3/2 +
(
b2 + c2)3/2 +
(
c2 + a2)3/2
3 a b c
(3.5)
where a, b and c are the width ( ∥to the x-axis), the thickness (∥to the y-axis) and the
height (∥to the z-axis and the applied field Ha) of the magnetic specimen respectively.
Aharoni [Aha98] is pointing out that the error caused by his assumption is ac-
ceptably small for practical purposes.
Interestingly enough, it turns out that the
demagnetisation factor for a cube obtained for the condition a = b = c renders that
of a sphere. Equation 3.5 proves itself rather useful for non-spherical magnetic sam-
ples such as those used in this work which are easier extracted in a tetragonal shape.
3.7.4
Sample volume
The volume of the sample required to calculate the magnetic dipole moment per
unit volume was obtained in two different ways. In the direct way the volume was
obtained by using the external sample dimensions according to Vgeom = a b c under
the assumption of a perfect tetragonal shape. The measurements were taken with
a micrometer screw. In the indirect way the volume was determined by using the
measured sample mass in conjunction with the phase densities and phase/pore volume
fractions according to the following expression
Vmass =
M
ρh (1 −νp −νs) + ρsνs
(3.6)
where ρh, ρs are the mass densities of the hard and soft phase respectively and νp
and νs are the volume fractions of the pores and the soft phase respectively.
==PAGE:64==
54
3 Methodology
The mass of the sample was measured with a digital high precision laboratory
scale. The mass densities of the hard Nd2Fe14B phase was adopted as ρh = 7.59 g/cm3
and that of the soft Nd-rich phase as ρs = 7.24 g/cm3 assuming Nd-trioxide. The
volume fractions were estimated based on the BSE SEM images using a small script
written in Matlab [14b]. In this script the image was converted into a binary image
where different grey thresholds were used to identify the bright Nd-rich phase and
the pores respectively. The volume fraction of the soft phase was calculated by the
ratio of the soft phase pixels counted ns divided by the total number of pixels νtot
according to νs = ns/ntot. The volume fraction of the pores was obtained in a similar
fashion. In this approach it is assumed that the micro structure in every direction of
the bulk is sufficiently represented on average by the SEM image taken.
3.8
Degree of texture (DOT)
This section deals with the characterisation of the DOT from EBSD measurements
and the way it is used to predict the remanence of the magnet in this work.
3.8.1
The orientation distribution function (ODF)
Exploiting the radial symmetry of the fibre texture it might at first glance seem
straight forward to adopt a histogram of the misorientation angle in order to ob-
tain the ODF. It needs to be borne in mind that the bin size used in histograms for
statistical sampling is limited to the angular accuracy of the EBSD system ranging
between 0.5◦and 2◦(depending on the microscope quality). However, for purposes of
mathematical operations a continuous function would be desired. Figure 4.19 shows
an illustrative example of the rather coarse resolution of a histogram for the second
Euler angle i.e. the misorientation angle. More importantly as can be seen in Fig.
4.19 the counts decrease rapidly for small angles θ →0. This decrease is caused by
the constant bin size in histograms which neglects the dependence of the infinitesimal
surface element on sin θ. As a consequence counts for small θ-angles in histograms
will be underestimated (see point density variation in [Bun69, Fig. 2.25]). It is there-
fore not sensible to create an ODF by e.g. directly fitting a Gaussian distribution to
such a histogram with its peak shifted.
In order to circumvent aforementioned shortcomings the ODF in this work was
calculated with the open source toolbox MTEX [Too18] which runs on Matlab [14b].
==PAGE:65==
3.8 Degree of texture (DOT)
55
According to Hielscher [Hie13] MTEX uses the Kernel density estimation method
given by Eq. 3.7 to compute the ODF from EBSD measurement data which can be
executed with the MTEX command calcODF.
f(x) = 1
N
N
∑
n=1
Kh(X−1
n x)
(3.7)
where f(x) is the kernel density estimator of the Euler angle triplet at a specific
direction, x is the Euler triplet at the evaluation point, K is the kernel function, N
is the total number of measurements within the half width h, Xn is the set of local
neighbour observation points within h.
One of the main purposes of applying a kernel density estimation is to smoothen
the course resolution of EBSD orientation measurement histograms providing a much
higher angular resolution. The kernel in Eq.3.7 is a distribution function which de-
fines the weight of the neighbouring observation points depending on their proximity
to the evaluation point. In MTEX the ODF is computed by superposition of ker-
nels whose centres are located at the individual EBSD orientation measurements.
Different Kernel functions are available but the default de la Vallée Poussin ker-
nel was used as recommended in [Too18]. The de la Vallée Poussin kernel is based
on a radially symmetric finite harmonic series [Sch99] and has the advantage that
it does not suffer from a truncation error in Fourier space as for a given half-width
the density can exactly be described by a finite number of Fourier coefficients [Hie13].
As already mentioned in Section 2.3 the ODF must satisfy the condition given by
Eq.3.8 [Bun69].
1
8π2
ˆ
V
f(Φ, θ, Ψ) sin θ dθ dΦ dΨ = 1
(3.8)
It can be seen from Eq.3.8 that dV is a function of the polar angle where this nor-
malisation condition eventually removes the drop of intensity when θ →0.
Despite its praised independence from the truncation error it is fair to say that
the kernel density estimation does not provide a free lunch insofar it requires the half
width h.
This user defined parameter specifies the half width of the kernels used to predict the
local density. It should be remarked that this half width is obviously different to the
half width of the ODF. The choice of h is arbitrary albeit proves to have a significant
effect on the ODF e.g. intensity and peak width. That is, small half widths lead
to undersmoothing (i.e. noise) whereas large values lead to oversmoothing (i.e. loss
of information). The recommended value or rather widely used half width is 5◦but
this value should rather be taken with a grain of salt. A worrying issue is that this
h-dependence can impede the comparison of ODFs between different sources in the
literature in particular when the adopted half widths are not specified.
MTEX provides a tool (MTEX command calcKernel) which calculates an ’optimal’
==PAGE:66==
56
3 Methodology
half width which in this work was found to be h = 10◦. MTEX optimises the ODF
in an iterative procedure in which the initially predicted ODF is used to calculate PF
data which is subsequently compared with the measurement data. This procedure is
repeated for different half-widths with the objective to minimise the error between
the predicted and measured PF data.
Finally, the required f(θ) was obtained by evaluating the ODF along the polar
angle at intervals of 1◦and taking the average of different azimuthal directions using
the MTEX command odf.eval.
Additional symmetry considerations of the c-axis
orientations in the northern and southern hemisphere allow the condensation of the
polar angle to 0◦−90◦.
3.8.2
Prediction of the remanence
Now with the ODF f(θ) in place it is expedient to introduce a method proposed
by Sawatzki et al. [Saw+15] which can be used to calculate the degree of texture
and consequently the remanence from ODFs. Rotational symmetry demands that
max f(θ) = f(0) where its distribution can well be approximated with the Gaussian
normal distribution with zero mean (see e.g. [Saw+15; WG11; Che+17; Khl+04]).
Although not necessary from a theoretical point of view, Eq. 3.9 was used to fit
the MTEX ODF data.
f(θ) = a e
−θ2
b2
(3.9)
where a and b are curve fitting constants. This was done in order to obtain a suf-
ficiently fine resolution required for numerical integration without the necessity to
repeatedly conduct time demanding computations in MTEX. The Gaussian fit was
done with the readily available curve fitting toolbox in Matlab using the least square
method.
It is useful to adopt a spherical coordinate system with the well-known transfor-
mation from Cartesian sample coordinates into spherical coordinates as follows:
x = r sin θ cos ϕ
(3.10)
y = r sin θ sin ϕ
(3.11)
z = r cos θ
(3.12)
where x, y are stipulated as the hard axes and z is stipulated as the texture axis or
easy axis.
In order to enable a semi-analytical formulation of the remanence prediction
[Saw+15] points out that the following simplifications are necessary: The magne-
tostatic couplings between the grains as well as the nucleation of reversed magnetic
==PAGE:67==
3.8 Degree of texture (DOT)
57
domains are neglected. It can then be assumed that an infinitesimal element whose
hard axis is aligned with the radial direction contributes to the sample remanence in
the easy direction according to dJe
r = dJs cos θ where Js is the saturation magneti-
sation.
Figure 3.16 is a schematic illustration of an infinitesimal magnetic volume element
misaligned with the texture axis.
The element is assumed to be homogeneously
magnetised with its magnetisation vector denoted by Js. The remanence in the easy
Figure 3.16: Spherical coordinate system and projections of Js (aligned with the
c-axis of the crystal depicted as grey box) onto the easy z-axis (texture
axis) and onto the hard x-axis.
direction can consequently be written with dA = R2 sin θ dθ dϕ as follows
Je
r = Js c
ˆ π/2
0
ˆ π/2
0
f(θ) cos θ sin θ dθ dϕ = Js c π
2
ˆ π/2
0
f(θ) cos θ sin θ dθ
(3.13)
where Js is the saturation magnetisation and c is a constant.
Conversely, Eq.3.10 shows that the contribution of an infinitesimal element to the
remanence in the hard direction is dJh
r = dJs sin θ cos ϕ. Integration over the surface
gives the remanence in the hard direction as follows
Jh
r = Js c
ˆ π/2
0
ˆ π/2
0
f(θ) sin θ2 cos ϕ dθ dϕ = Js c
ˆ π/2
0
f(θ) sin θ2 dθ
(3.14)
where c is a normalisation factor given by Eq.3.15.
c =
2
π
´ π/2
0
f(θ) sin θ dθ
(3.15)
==PAGE:68==
58
3 Methodology
An analytical solution for the integrals in Equations 3.13, 3.14 and 3.15 is quite
unfortunately not available. It can however, be evaluated numerically with a suf-
ficiently small ∆which in this work was done with the trapezoidal rule (Matlab
command trapz).
The degree of texture can be defined in several different ways.
Müller et al.
[Mül+94] suggested a DOT factor λ given by Eq.3.16 which takes the λ = 0 for
an isotropic magnet and λ = 1 for a perfectly anisotropic magnet. Fernengel et al.
[Fer+96] proposed an effective misorientation angle ˆθ given by Eq.3.17 from which
[Saw+15] derived a DOT factor γ ≃Jr/Js given by Eq.3.18.
λ = Je
r
Jh
r
(3.16)
tan ˆθ = 2Jh
r
Jer
(3.17)
γ = cos ˆθ =
1
√
1 +
(2Jh
r
Jer
)2
(3.18)
It is noteworthy to mention that both λ and γ do not depend on the normalisation
constant c and the computation of the latter can be omitted.
The DOT factors
are governed by the peak width-to-intensity ratio rather than the absolute value of
the intensity. Both parameters λ and γ yield unity for a fully textured (perfectly
anisotropic) state. In the authors opinion the texture factor γ is more sensible as it
describes the slope of the hysteresis loop from BR to MS and takes values γ > 0 for
an isotropic magnet.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 4
Results
In this chapter the post processed results obtained with the complimentary charac-
terisation methods are presented. The different results are consequently interpreted
and compared but on purpose not discussed in this chapter. Regarding the latter the
reader is referred to Chapter 6. Furthermore, please note that Chapter 3 is considered
a prerequisite for this chapter.
4.1
Hardness Vickers and LOM characterisation
The macro Vickers hardness (HV) of the as-received PM-A and PM-B material was
measured with a Wolpert testing apparatus using a load of 10.0 kg and a dwelling
time of 5 s. The measured values gave an average hardness of 588 HV for PM-A and
557 HV for PM-B. The micro HV was measured using a Future Tech FM-700 tester
with a load of 10.0 g and a dwelling time of 5 s which gave an average hardness of 964
HV for PM-A and 984 HV for PM-B. Inferring from the high HV values measured
and based on the fact that some indents showed chipping during indentation, the
as-received material can be described as hard and brittle.
Figure 4.1 shows an equiaxed grain structure of PM-A with the hard ferromagnetic
magnetic phase where the large dark areas represent pores. The pores are undesired
and originate from the sintering process of the compacted magnet where the grains
of the hard phase remain below their liquidus temperature. During etching especially
the Nd-rich phase reacts with the etchant. Hence, not all dark areas are in fact pores
but might be triple points formerly filled with the Nd-rich phase.
It is therefore
difficult to identify the Nd-rich phase in micrographs with LOM.
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Results
Figure 4.1: Micrograph (etched) of end-of-life PM-A at 500X magnification
(greyscale).
Figure 4.2 shows an equiaxed grain structure of PM-B with a coarser microstruc-
ture compared to PM-A. The small dark spots inside the grains are caused by over-
etching.
The sample PM-G0 shown in Fig. 4.3 has a smaller average grain size and a more
homogeneous microstructure compared to PM-A.
==PAGE:71==
4.1 Hardness Vickers and LOM characterisation
61
Figure 4.2: Micrograph (etched) of end-of-life PM-B
at 500X magnification
(greyscale).
Figure 4.3: Micrograph
(etched)
of
initial
PM-G0
at
500X
magnification
(greyscale).
Comparison of Fig. 4.3 with Fig. 4.4 shows that the grain size of PM-GI is larger
==PAGE:72==
62
4 Results
than that of the base material PM-G0. This increase of the grain size is associated
with the high re-sintering temperature during recycling.
Figure 4.4: Micrograph (etched) of HD-PLP recycled PM-GI at 500X magnification
(greyscale).
4.2
SEM characterisation
4.2.1
Micrographs
The micrograph of PM-A in Fig.4.5 shows the presence of pores and microcracks
along grain boundaries.
The Nd-rich phase triple points can be identified as the
bright areas due to the mass contrast of the Nd-rich phase. The atomic number of
Nd is 60 whereas that of Fe is 26. For this reason the probability of elastic electron
scattering events taking place in the Nd-rich phase is higher than in the hard phase
for which reason the latter appears darker in the BSE image.
Some untypical round and partially seemingly hollow features with a similar appear-
ance like barnacles with a typical diameter of 5 µm appear uniformly distributed
on the sample surface. The size of this features is in the order of the average grain
size. After further investigation it can be ruled out that these features are caused
by surface contamination especially as the size of which is far away from the particle
size used in the polishing agents. The bright appearance of these features in Fig.4.6
suggests that these belong to the Nd-rich phase.
==PAGE:73==
4.2 SEM characterisation
63
Note that SEM is hardly suitable to characterise the grain size at low magnification
in Nd-Fe-B magnets.
Figure 4.5: Secondary electron image of sample PM-A obtained with in-lens detec-
tor at 20 keV.
Figure 4.6: Back scatter electron image of sample PM-A at 20 keV.
==PAGE:74==
64
4 Results
Figure 4.7 shows an equiaxed grain structure with some pores in sample PM-B.
On the left hand side of Fig. 4.7 the Nd-rich coating appears as bright line along the
grain boundary which is quite rare to see in a SEM micrograph because its thickness
remains usually below the resolution.
Figure 4.7: Secondary electron image of sample PM-B obtained with in-lens detec-
tor at 20 keV.
Figure 4.8 shows the distribution of the Nd-rich phase in PM-B which appears to be
rather typical when compared to micrographs available in the literature.
Comparison of Fig.4.9 with Fig.4.10 shows that the microstructure of the recycled
isotropic magnet looks similar to the commercial grade with a comparable level of
porosity. From this it can be inferred that even with the press-less process a good
compaction of the powder can be achieved.
==PAGE:75==
4.2 SEM characterisation
65
Figure 4.8: Back scatter electron image of sample PM-B at 20 keV.
Figure 4.9: Secondary electron image of sample of initial PM-G0 at 25 keV.
In contrast Fig.4.11 shows a high level of porosity of approx. 25% in PM-GA.
As reference the porosity level of PM-GO was approx.
3%.
From this it can be
inferred that the omission of ball-milling hinders a good compaction of the powder
and consequently leads to excessive porosity.
==PAGE:76==
66
4 Results
Figure 4.10: Secondary electron image of HD-PLP recycled sample PM-GI at 25
keV.
Figure 4.11: Secondary electron image of HD-PLP recycled sample PM-GA aligned
in external field at 25 keV.
Comparison of the micrographs of PM-G0 and PM-GI at higher magnification
shown in Fig.4.12 with Fig.4.13 indicates that the Nd-rich phase is more homoge-
neously distributed in PM-G0. Although the working distance is different, the two
==PAGE:77==
4.2 SEM characterisation
67
micrographs are still comparable. To be more precise it seems that the fraction of
the Nd-rich phase in PM-GI diminished during the recycling process.
Figure 4.12: Secondary electron image of initial sample PM-G0 at 25 keV.
Figure 4.13: Secondary electron image of HD-PLP recycled sample PM-GI at 25
keV.
==PAGE:78==
68
4 Results
4.2.2
Chemical composition (EDS)
Table 4.1 lists the chemical composition of PM-A measured prior to operation where
the source of this data set remains proprietary. The characterisation method used was
Inductively Coupled Plasma - Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES) for which
samples were generated by dissolving drilling chips in a mixture of hydrochloric-
and nitric acid. The composition given in Tab. 4.1 therefore represents the aver-
age bulk composition of both phases. Table 4.2 shows the composition of the hard
Table 4.1: Chemical composition of two different batches of the original magnetic
material of samples PM-A as received from the manufacturer; trace ele-
ments below 0.01 wt% are excluded.
Element
PM-A (Lot 1)
PM-A (Lot 2)
-
wt%
wt%
B
1.18
1.18
Cr
0.02
0.01
Cu
0.07
0.07
Dy
4.23
4.18
Fe
66.83
66.53
Nd
27.52
27.90
Ni
0.015
0.01
Pr
0.14
0.11
phase and the soft phase of PM-A where the elements B, O and C were disregarded.
Praseodymium was detected whose quantity however is not trustworthy.
Table 4.2: Chemical spot EDS analysis of the hard phase and below the soft phase
for sample PM-A disregarding B, O, C and trace elements.
Element
Element wt%
Error wt%
Atom %
Error %
Fe
67
±0.8
84.2
±1.1
Pr
0.4
±0.4
0.2
±0.2
Nd
27
±1.1
13.1
±0.6
Dy
5.6
±1.0
2.4
±0.4
(C
6.7
±0.6
34
±2.8)
(O
7.2
±0.3
27
±1.3)
Fe
3
±0.2
3.3
±0.3
Pr
0.8
±0.6
0.3
±0.3
Nd
77.1
±1.3
32.7
±0.6
Dy
5.2
±0.6
1.9
±0.2
Table 4.3 shows an expectedly high error on boron in the hard phase which after
its removal renders the following corrected composition Fe83.5%, Pr2.7%, Nd9.6%,
Dy4.1% (in atomic percent).
No boron was detected in the soft phase of PM-B
whereas iron was also detected in the soft phase. Comparison of Tab.4.2 with Tab.4.3
shows that as expected the Fe content in the hard phase is distinctly higher than in
the soft phase where the opposite is obviously true for Nd. Qualitatively speaking
the content of Dy was higher in PM-B compared to PM-A which is highly plausible.
On the other hand the quantity of Dy seems to be unrealistically high in comparison
to Tab.4.1 and cannot be trusted.
==PAGE:79==
4.2 SEM characterisation
69
Table 4.3: Chemical spot EDS analysis of the hard phase and below the soft phase
for sample PM-B disregarding B, O, C and trace elements.
Element
Element wt%
Error wt%
Atom %
Error %
(B
1.8
±1.8
10.6
±49.7)
Fe
64.5
±0.7
74.6
±0.8
Pr
5.3
±0.5
2.4
±0.2
Nd
19.2
±1.0
8.6
±0.5
Dy
9.2
±1.3
3.7
±0.5
Fe
6.8
±0.6
15.9
±1.4
Pr
16.7
±1.5
15.5
±1.4
Nd
72.4
±1.9
65.3
±1.7
Dy
4.1
±0.8
3.3
±0.7
The EDS map shown in Fig.4.14 indicates that the round features seen in Fig.4.5 and
4.6 are not a surface contamination since the levels of the candidate elements Al and
C used in the polishing agents are not elevated in this region.
Figure 4.14: EDS map of sample PM-A for elements B, Fe, Nd, Pr and Dy defined
as definitely present whereas other elements such as As and Al were
automatically detected. The presence of As and Al was not expected
and could be caused by surface contamination (polishing agent AlO)
and by trace elements present in the alloy composition.
==PAGE:80==
70
4 Results
The distribution of Fe and Nd follows closely the mass contrast of the two phases
seen in the SEM image as expected. Interestingly the concentration of Pr is also
higher in the Nd-rich phase where it presumably also forms oxides as they are chem-
ically similar. Dysprosium on the other hand is mainly present in the hard phase.
Figure 4.15 shows an EDS map of sample PM-B where the elements B, C and
O should be disregarded as firstly they are too light to be quantitatively measured
and secondly may be present due to surface contamination. However, qualitatively
Figure 4.15: EDS map of sample PM-B for elements B, Fe, Nd, Pr and Dy defined
as definitely present whereas other elements such as As and Al were
automatically detected. The presence of As and Al was not expected
and could be caused by surface contamination (polishing agent AlO)
and by trace elements present in the alloy composition.
speaking the Nd and O density in the Nd-rich phase particle appear to have a higher
concentration which is consistent with the expected phase to be of NdOx type. Iron
has expectedly a higher concentration in the hard phase. The concentration of Pr is
also higher in the Nd-rich phase and the concentration of Dy is higher in the hard
phase which is consistent with PM-A.
==PAGE:81==
4.2 SEM characterisation
71
4.2.3
Texture characterisation and ODF (EBSD)
For EBSD characterisation of PM-A and PM-B an indexing yield of 71% was achieved.
The indexing rate of PM-G0, PM-GI and PM-GA was 68%, 73% and 38% respec-
tively. The low indexing rate of the latter is attributed to the excessive porosity of
the sample. In all cases an area of 262150 µm2 was covered with a step size of 10 µm.
In order to facilitate comparison between the ODFs a kernel half width of 10◦was
consistently adopted.
Figure 4.16 shows a distinct fibre texture as would be expected for anisotropic
magnets. It can immediately be concluded that PM-B is more textured than PM-A
since the points in the latter are spread over a larger area.
Figure 4.16: (a, b) (100) and (001) PFs of PM-A and (c, d) (100) and (001) PFs
of PM-B depicted with 3 × 103 randomly chosen EBSD measurement
points.
==PAGE:82==
72
4 Results
The PF data shown in Fig. 4.16 was manually rotated inside MTEX in such a
way that the point cloud in (001) was centred. The original measurement data can be
off-centre due to inaccuracies in cutting the sample exactly in the through thickness
direction. Moreover the sample surfaces might not always be perfectly plane-parallel
which can lead to a measurement offset.
Figure 4.17 shows the ODF contours which correspond to Fig. 4.16 clearly indi-
cating the radial symmetric nature of the fibre texture. It shows that the azimuthal
orientation distribution is random whereas the polar angle distribution is not. Com-
parison of Fig.
4.17 (c) and (d) shows that the intensity in PM-B is higher and
the distribution narrower from which it can be inferred that PM-B exhibits a better
alignment of the Nd-Fe-B crystals.
Figure 4.17: (a, b) (100) and (001) PFs of PM-A and (c, d) (100) and (001) PFs of
PM-B showing a contour plot of the ODF in MUD.
==PAGE:83==
4.2 SEM characterisation
73
Figure 4.18 (a,b) shows that the distinct texture of the commercial grade magnet
PM-G0 is slightly stronger than the texture exhibited by PM-B Fig. 4.17 (c,d). The
recycled anisotropic magnet PM-GA depicted in Fig. 4.18 (c,d) shows a mild fibre
texture which appears less axially symmetric than PM-GO. Figure 4.18 (e,f) shows
some directional bias but overall can be considered as quasi-isotropic.
Figure 4.18: (a, b) (100) and (001) PFs of PM-G0 and (c, d) (100) and (001) PFs
of PM-GA and (e, f) (100) and (001) PFs of PM-GI showing a contour
plot of the ODF in MUD.
==PAGE:84==
74
4 Results
Figure 4.19 shows the histogram as it is obtained by direct counting without angu-
lar correction where the frequency rapidly decreases for small angles. For this reason
the peaks in the counts appear to be considerably shifted with a low number of crys-
tals being aligned which does not agree with the ODF expected in fibre texture cases.
Figure 4.19: Histogram of the second Euler angle with a bin size of 1◦for PM-A
and PM-B.
The ODFs shown in Fig. 4.20 can be thought of radial cross-sections through the PF
contour plots shown in Fig.4.17. Comparison of PM-A with PM-B shows that the full
width-half maximum (FWHM) of PM-B is 24% smaller inferring to a sharper texture.
Comparison of the three different ODFs shown in Fig. 4.21 reveals that expect-
edly sample PM-G0 shows the strongest texture. The FWHM of PM-G0 is 2◦smaller
than that exhibited by PM-B.
The ODF of PM-GA is rather mild but is shows that the application of a magnetic
field during compaction prior to sintering clearly affects the texture. The FWHM of
PM-GA is about twice as much of PM-G0. The ODF of PM-GI is as expected closely
represented by the random orientation with a FWHM close to 180◦.
==PAGE:85==
4.2 SEM characterisation
75
Figure 4.20: ODF as a function of the misorientation angle θ for PM-A and PM-B
with isotropic line obtained with MTEX (see Section 3.8).
Figure 4.21: ODF as a function of the misorientation angle θ for PM-G0, PM-GA
and PM-GI with isotropic line with MTEX (see Section 3.8).
==PAGE:86==
76
4 Results
4.3
Magnetisation characterisation (VSM)
4.3.1
PM-A and PM-B
Table 4.4 lists the sample properties of PM-A and PM-B used to scale the hystere-
sis. The c-dimension denotes the direction of the soft axis. Table 4.4 shows that
the sample volume predicted by the SEM images agrees well with that obtained by
the external dimensions. Figure 4.22 shows the effect on the hysteresis loop after
Table 4.4: External dimensions and differently estimated volumes of the samples
used for VSM characterisation where a, b, c are the external dimensions,
M denotes the total mass, νs and νp are the volume fractions of the soft
phase and the pores and ϵrel is the relative error between the calculated
volumes.
Sample
a
b
c
M
νs
νp
Vgeom
Vmass
ϵrel
-
mm
mm
mm
g
-
-
mm3
mm3
%
PM-A-VSM
1.927
2.066
3.145
0.0925
0.102
0.053
12.521
12.93
3.2
PM-B-VSM
2.112
2.018
3.137
0.0943
0.014
0.031
13.367
12.618
5.6
making the VSM measurements independent of the sample geometry as described in
Subsection 3.7.3. It can be seen that subtracting the demagnetisation field leads to
steeper slopes with a more rectangular loop shape.
Figure 4.22: Comparison of as-measured VSM hysteresis loop and the ’corrected’
hysteretic response of PM-A at T = 20◦.
==PAGE:87==
4.3 Magnetisation characterisation (VSM)
77
Figure 4.22 shows that this ’correction’ effect is predominant for small applied field
strengths whereas the difference between the two responses becomes small close to
saturation i.e. Hd ≪Ha.
Comparison of Fig. 4.23 with Fig. 4.24 shows that the almost rectangular hys-
teresis shape is archetypal for a hard magnet where the size of the loop shrinks with
increasing temperature as expected.
Figure 4.23: Magnetization density of PM-A as function of applied fields along the
easy direction for different temperatures; the internal field Hi = Ha −
Dz M was obtained using a demagnetization factor of Dz = 0.2398.
The area of the hysteresis loop of PM-B is smaller than that of PM-A which shows
that the latter inherits a higher energy product. Both, Fig. 4.23 and Fig. 4.24 show a
step like increase of the magnetisation close to zero applied field whose size decreases
with increasing temperature. The step seems to be more pronounced in PM-A than
in PM-B. An interpretation of this effect is discussed in Section 6.
==PAGE:88==
78
4 Results
Figure 4.24: Magnetization density of PM-B as function of applied fields along the
easy direction for different temperatures; the internal field Hi = Ha −
Dz M was obtained using a demagnetization factor of Dz = 0.2467.
Figure 4.25 shows the typical hysteretic behaviour of a PM with the external
field applied along the hard axis and a significantly reduced energy product. The
projection of the magnetic moments of the single crystals in the hard direction is a
sine function of the misorientation angle. Since the misorientation angle is small i.e.
a narrow ODF it follows that the magnetisation in the hard direction becomes small.
Moreover, a high external field is necessary to reach saturation. In fact full saturation
would only be reached if the magnetic moments in the crystals would flip by 90◦from
the c-axis to the a,b axis which requires high energy levels.
The VSM results of PM-B in the hard direction were biased by sample rotation in
the crucible during measurements which is why these have been excluded from this
work.
==PAGE:89==
4.3 Magnetisation characterisation (VSM)
79
Figure 4.25: Scaled hysteretic response in the hard direction of PM-A at different
temperatures.
A temperature scan at which the fully magnetised PM-A sample was constantly
heated under zero applied field resulted in Tc = 593K which is in good agreement
with literature. A temperature scan of PM-B was omitted.
Figure 4.26 was produced by collecting the magnetisation levels in the easy di-
rection at the highest applied field strength for every temperature interval. These
levels are denoted as saturation magnetisation as the slope at these points was quasi-
horizontal. It is clear that these levels do not correspond to the real saturation mag-
netisation whose measurement would require a higher applied field strength. However,
the level at 10T can be considered close enough for the purpose of investigating the
effect of texture on the remanence.
Figure 4.26 shows that Ms decreases with increasing temperature as a consequence
of Brownian motion increasingly randomising the dipole directions in the material.
It becomes evident that PM-A exhibits a higher Ms than PM-B where however the
measurement data suggests that those two curves are shifted by a constant. Figure
4.27 was produced in a similar fashion and shows that the remanence decreases with
increasing temperature quite similar to MR.
==PAGE:90==
80
4 Results
Figure 4.26: Saturation magnetisation versus temperature for PM-A and PM-B.
Figure 4.27: Remanence versus temperature for PM-A and PM-B.
==PAGE:91==
4.3 Magnetisation characterisation (VSM)
81
The magnitude of MR was only slightly but still higher for PM-A compared to
PM-B. This is insofar interesting as the FWHM of the ODF of PM-A was higher
than that of PM-B (see Fig.4.20) where one could expect a higher MR for PM-B.
Inspection of Fig.4.26 shows that Ms of PM-A was higher which eventually compen-
sated for the loss due to texture. It is plausible that the higher Ms of PM-A is caused
by the lower Dy content which is known to lower the magnetisation when used as a
substitute of Nd.
A significant difference becomes apparent when comparing HC in Fig.4.28 which
shows that PM-A outperforms PM-B. The higher coercivity of PM-A can be at-
tributed to the smaller grain size it exhibits as seen in Fig.4.1.
Similarly to the
saturation magnetisation the relative difference of the coercivity between PM-A and
PM-B seems to be independent of the temperature up to 150◦C.
Figure 4.28: Coercivity versus temperature for PM-A and PM-B.
Table 4.5 lists the numerical values for coercivity, remanence and saturation at three
different important temperatures relevant for practical applications.
==PAGE:92==
82
4 Results
Table 4.5: Magnetic properties obtained from VSM at three different characteristic
temperatures for PM-A and below PM-B.
Property
0◦C
20◦C
120◦C
PM-A HC (T)
2.51
2.26
1.23
PM-A BR (T)
1.19
1.17
1.08
PM-A Ms (T)
1.32
1.31
1.22
PM-B HC (T)
2.22
1.98
0.93
PM-B BR (T)
1.17
1.16
1.05
PM-B Ms (T)
1.26
1.24
1.14
4.3.2
PM-G0, PM-GI and PM-GA
The VSM data presented in this subsection was conducted in a different research
project and has partially been published by Xia et al. [Xia+17]. The data is repro-
duced herein for the purpose of predicting the remanence and for further analysis
with the permission of A.B. Abrahamsen.
Figure 4.29 shows the classic quasi-rectangular loop shape of a high energy magnet.
Figure 4.29: Magnetization density of PM-G0 as function of applied fields along
the easy direction for different temperatures; the internal field Hi =
Ha −Dz M was obtained using a demagnetization factor of Dz =
0.6417.
==PAGE:93==
4.3 Magnetisation characterisation (VSM)
83
Figure 4.30 shows that the slopes of the recycled isotropic magnet at zero magneti-
sation are less steep as compared to PM-G0 depicted in Figure 4.29. Moreover, while
the applied field strength of 6T sufficed to saturate PM-G0, the low curvature and
steep end-tangent suggest that PM-GI was far from saturation. The area enclosed
by the hysteresis loop of PM-GI was therefore lower than that enclosed by PM-G0
which shows a greatly diminished energy product of the recycled magnet.
Figure 4.30: Scaled hysteretic response in the easy direction of PM-GI at different
temperatures (Dz = 0.6271).
Figure 4.31 shows that the slopes of the recycled anisotropic magnet are steeper
as compared to PM-GI depicted in Figure 4.30.
The curvature of the hysteretic
response from remanence to maximum applied field is significantly higher and the
end-tangents are less steep.
This improved magnetisation behaviour can be asso-
ciated with the stronger fibre texture of PM-GA compared to the flat texture of
PM-GI. Nevertheless, the coercivity of PM-GA is significantly diminished due to the
detrimental microstructure seen in Fig.4.11.
==PAGE:94==
84
4 Results
Figure 4.31: Scaled hysteretic response in the easy direction of PM-GA at different
temperatures (Dz = 0.6990).
Table 4.6 lists the numerical values for coercivity, remanence and saturation at
different temperatures.
It shows the blatant difference between the isotropic and
anisotropic magnet: PM-GI reached about 84% of the original coercivity of PM-G0.
On the other hand PM-GA reached approx. 75% of the original remanence and 96%
of the saturation of PM-G0.
Table 4.6: Magnetic properties obtained from VSM at three different characteristic
temperatures for PM-G0, PM-GI and PM-GA; the values in brackets
means that Ms was not reached.
Property
0◦C
20◦C
120◦C
PM-G0 HC (T)
1.67
1.44
0.67
PM-G0 BR (T)
1.29
1.26
1.15
PM-G0 Ms (T)
1.35
1.33
1.21
PM-GI HC (T)
n/a
1.21
0.35
PM-GI BR (T)
n/a
0.71
0.58
PM-GI Ms (T)
n/a
(1.19)
(1.17)
PM-GA HC (T)
n/a
0.24
0.1
PM-GA BR (T)
n/a
0.94
0.78
PM-GA Ms (T)
n/a
1.28
1.22
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 5
Analysis
This chapter deals with the application of different analysis methods on the results
presented in Chapter 4. The analysis methods presented in this chapter concern the
quantitative prediction of the coercivity as well as remanence. Moreover, a classifica-
tion of PM-A, PM-B and PM-G0 is presented in order to determine whether the mag-
netic properties were deteriorated during decommissioning. The chapter concludes
with a qualitative analysis of particle alignment with the intention to shed some light
on the manufacturing parameters affecting the remanence of recycled magnets.
5.1
Average grain size
As pointed out in Section 2.2 the grain size is an important parameter which affects
the coercivity. Therefore, the average grain size of the etched micrographs shown in
Fig.4.1 through 4.4 was estimated using the grain chord length method or textitline
intercept method. For this purpose 13 lines were arbitrarily drawn across each mi-
crograph. Subsequently, the length of the line L between the first intersection and
the last intersection with a grain boundary was measured. By counting the number
of grain boundary intersections with each line, the average grain size can then be
determined as follows:
Dmean = L/(n −1)
(5.1)
Table 5.1 shows that PM-G0 has the smallest grain size followed by PM-A.
Table 5.1: Number of intersection points per micrograph ntot, average grain size
Dmean, rounded standard deviation (for sample STDV ) and rounded
relative standard deviation (RSD) of PM-A, PM-B, PM-G0 and PM-
GI.
Sample
ntot
Dmean
STDV
RSD
-
-
µm
µm
%
PM-A
309
6
±1
±11
PM-B
260
8
±1
±10
PM-G0
312
5
±1
±9
PM-GI
157
11
±2
±13
==PAGE:96==
86
5 Analysis
The RSD of PM-A is larger than that of PM-G0 from which it can be inferred
that the microstructure of the latter is more homogeneous. PM-B has a larger grain
size than PM-A but a comparable distribution. The grain size of the recycled magnet
PM-GI is about twice the size of PM-G0. The high RSD value of PM-GI points
towards a more heterogeneous microstructure. The average grain size of PM-GI is
still smaller than the particle fraction of the ball milled precursor powder of 28−50 µm.
Assuming that the grain size in the particles of the HD powder of PM-G0 prior to
re-sintering was about 5 µm it can be inferred that the original grain structure could
not be retained during recycling. For information, LOM characterisation of PM-GA
was omitted due to its excessive porosity and low integrity of the material rendering
it unsuitable for etching. The grain size estimation will be used in the next section
to estimate the coercivity.
5.2
Prediction of magnetic properties from ODFs and
grain size
Before applying the remanence prediction method to the measured ODFs it was con-
sidered necessary to validate the procedure described in Section 3.8.
For this purpose the results presented by [Saw+15, Fig. 8(b)] were reproduced
with the Matlab script written by the author. Figure 5.1 shows reasonable agreement
between the reproduced data (continuous red and blue graphs) and the original data
of [Saw+15].
The deviation between the results is deemed to be caused by the adopted numerical
integration method which is different to that suggested by [Saw+15].
Moreover,
some error might have been introduced in the digitizing process of the data from the
graphs since numerical values were not available. Overall, it was concluded that the
implementation can be considered as validated and was consequently applied to the
measurement data.
==PAGE:97==
5.2 Prediction of magnetic properties from ODFs and grain size
87
Figure 5.1: Comparison between original data for texture factors from [Saw+15]
and reproduced data.
The continuous lines in Fig. 5.2 were obtained by using the hysteresis results in
Fig.4.23 and 4.24 to compute the ratio γ ≃Jr/Js for different temperatures. Figure
5.2 shows that the measured γ-factor decreases with increasing temperature meaning
that at some point the remanence decreases faster than the saturation magnetisation.
The γ-factor however, is fairly constant within a range from 0 ◦C to 100 ◦C which can
be considered within the bounds of many practical applications.
The dash-dot lines are the predicted γ-factors according to Eq.3.18 described in
Subsection 3.8.2. The predicted γ-factors computed from texture characterisation are
constant as these disregard temperature effects. Howbeit, the agreement with PM-A
and PM-B VSM measurement data is good. Figure 5.2 shows that the DOT of PM-B
with the stronger texture is better predicted. The DOT for PM-A is under-predicted
whereas that of PM-B is over-predicted.
==PAGE:98==
88
5 Analysis
Figure 5.2: DOT γ-factor for PM-A and PM-B obtained from VSM according to
γ ≃Jr/Js using the values listed in Tab.4.5 versus predictions from
texture analysis using Eq. 3.13, 3.14 and 3.18.
Table 5.2 shows that the predicted γ-factor is quite accurate for those samples
with an inherently strong fibre texture. The largest deviation was found to occur for
the isotropic magnet which will be elaborated on in Chapter 6.
Table 5.2: Comparison of DOT factor obtained from VSM versus predicted by tex-
ture ODF for all samples at 20 ◦C.
Sample
γ V SM
γ ODF
Rel.Error
PM-A
0.9
0.88
2%
PM-B
0.93
0.93
0.4%
PM-G0
0.95
0.94
1.1%
PM-GI
0.53
0.46
13%
PM-GA
0.71
0.73
2.7%
Table 5.3 compares the measured remanence of samples PM-A, PM-B, PM-G0 and
PM-GI with those predicted by EBSD using known values of the saturation mag-
netisation. Comparison shows that with knowledge of the saturation magnetisation
of the material the remanence can be predicted by Eq.
3.13 and 3.14 with good
accuracy. Just for orientation, the saturation magnetisation of PM-G0 in the easy
direction Ms = 1.33T (see second column of Tab.4.6) was also adopted for PM-GI
and PM-GA.
==PAGE:99==
5.2 Prediction of magnetic properties from ODFs and grain size
89
Table 5.3: Comparison of predictions of key magnetic properties in (T) at 20 ◦C
where Hc, Hc, Be
R, Be
R, Bh
R and Bh
R denotes the measured and predicted
coercivity, the measured and predicted remanence in the easy direction
and the measured and predicted remanence in the hard direction respec-
tively.
Sample
Hc
Hc
Be
R
Be
R
Bh
R
Bh
R
PM-A (T)
2.26
1.47
1.17
1.18
0.28
0.32
PM-B (T)
1.98
1.32
1.16
1.17
-
-
PM-G0 (T)
1.44
1.56
1.26
1.26
-
-
PM-GI (T)
1.21
1.15
0.71
0.69
-
-
PM-GA (T)
-
-
0.94
1.01
-
-
The relative error of the predicted remanence in the easy direction of PM-A and
PM-B was approx. 1%.
The relative error of PM-A in the hard direction was 12%. The relative error of
the predicted remanence in the easy direction of PM-G0, PM-GI and PM-GA was
0.1%, 3% and 7% respectively.
The second and third column of Tab. 5.3 compares the measured coercivity ob-
tained from hysteresis data with that predicted with Eq.2.12 (see Section 2.2) using
the average grain size listed in Tab.5.1. The coercivity of PM-GA was not predicted
as grain size measurement was omitted.
The deviation of the predicted coercivity of PM-A and PM-B is 35% and 33% re-
spectively which appears to be excessive. On the other hand, good agreement is found
when comparing the measured relative decrease of coercivity HP M−B
c
/HP M−A
c
=
0.88 with the predicted relative decrease HP M−B
c
/HP M−A
c
= 0.9.
From the fact
that the relative decrease of the coercivity of PM-A and PM-B is quite accurately
predicted with Eq.2.12 it can be inferred that the slope and therefore the constant
B is valid in this case. Since the coercivity of PM-A and PM-B is higher than those
provided by the PMs investigated by Li et al. [Li+09] it might be that a curve shift
by adjusting constant A is necessary.
The deviation of the predicted coercivity of PM-G0 and PM-GI with the mea-
sured values is 8% and 5% respectively. The good agreement is further corroborating
Eq.2.12 which might be attributed to the similar coercivity of PM-G0 and the PMs
investigated by Li et al. [Li+09].
==PAGE:100==
90
5 Analysis
5.3
Classification of PM-A, PM-B and PM-G0
according to standard
In this section the VSM measurement data presented in Section 4.3 for PM-A, PM-B
and PM-G0 is used to classify the samples in the commercial grade scale. Comparison
with the grades provided for PM-A and PM-B can be used to indicate any deterio-
ration during decommissioning.
The grade of commercially available permanent magnet is defined by a letter-
number code which for neodymium magnets always begins with N. This is followed
by a two digit number which designates the maximum energy product BH(max) in
Mega-Gauss Ørsted (MGOe). This unit was firmly established mainly for historical
reasons where the applied field was measured in Gauss and the magnetisation was
measured in Ørsted. For information 1 MGOe equals 79.58 kJ/m3 (SI units). Today’s
commercially available magnets are ranging between (24) 27 and 52 MGOe.
The code ends with a single or pair of suffix letters which relates to the intrinsic co-
ercivity of the magnet which is associated with the anisotropy or temperature rating
of the permanent magnet.
Figure 5.3 shows the second quadrant of the hysteresis loops shown in Fig. 4.23,
4.24 and 4.29 (Section 4.3). It shows that PM-G0 has the lowest coercivity but the
highest remanence with a step-like increase at approx. −0.6 × 106 A m−1. In contrast
PM-A has the highest coercivity but a low magnetisation density over a wide range.
Only close to the remanence point at −0.25 × 106 A m−1 a step-like increase brings
it up to the value of PM-B. The demagnetisation curve of PM-B shows a lower
coercivity compared to PM-A but exhibits a much more uniform recoil slope with a
much smoother step. Possible root causes for this step-like behaviour in hysteresis
loops are discussed in Chapter 6.
==PAGE:101==
5.3 Classification of PM-A, PM-B and PM-G0 according to standard
91
Figure 5.3: Demagnetisation (or recoil) curves of PM-A, PM-B and PM-G0 at T =
20◦C.
The green graphs shown in Fig. 5.4 through 5.6 represent the intrinsic magneti-
sation. The intrinsic magnetisation curves are equivalent to those separately shown
in Fig. 4.23, 4.24 and 4.29. As previously pointed out in Section 3.7.3 (Eq. 3.4)
the green intrinsic curve is obtained by subtracting the demagnetisation from the the
applied field. The curve shows the polarisation or change of the internal magnetic
field in response to an applied field i.e. the field contributed by the magnet.
The blue curve shows the induction or change of the B-field in response to an
applied field. When designing magnets for e.g. power generators the induction or
working curve i.e. the blue graph is the relevant design driver rather than the intrin-
sic response.
The blue graphs shown in Fig.
5.4 through 5.6 show that by subtracting the
applied field from the intrinsic curve leads to a rotation of the hysteresis loop. If the
recoil slope of the green curve would be horizontal (ideal situation), the slope of the
normal curve would be 45◦. Since the slope of the intrinsic recoil curve is not zero it
follows that the slope of the blue working curve is typically > 45◦.
==PAGE:102==
92
5 Analysis
Figure 5.4: Hysteresis (green) and working curve (blue) of PM-A at 20◦C.
Figure 5.5: Hysteresis (green) and working curve (blue) of PM-B at 20◦C.
==PAGE:103==
5.3 Classification of PM-A, PM-B and PM-G0 according to standard
93
Figure 5.6: Hysteresis (green) and working curve (blue) of PM-G0 at 20◦C.
Figures 5.7 through 5.9 are showing the intrinsic demagnetisation curve (black)
and the flux density of normal curve (blue) in the second quadrant. It becomes appar-
ent from Fig. 5.7 through 5.9 that the extrinsic coercivity HCe i.e. the intersection of
the working curve with the abscissa is lower than the intrinsic coercivity HCi. More-
over, the working curve exhibits a quasi-linear response in the second quadrant where
the knee of the extrinsic curve is shifted down into the third quadrant. When design-
ing a magnet for applications in machinery the maximum energy product BH(max)
of the working curve is the key property used to classify the magnet grade.
The
maximum energy product BH(max) is defined as the maximum of the area enclosed
by the black rectangle below the working curve shown in Fig. 5.7 through 5.9.
==PAGE:104==
94
5 Analysis
Figure 5.7: Demagnetisation curve (black) and flux density (blue) of PM-A at 20◦C.
Figure 5.8: Demagnetisation curve (black) and flux density (blue) of PM-B at 20◦C.
==PAGE:105==
5.3 Classification of PM-A, PM-B and PM-G0 according to standard
95
Figure 5.9: Demagnetisation curve (black) and flux density (blue) of PM-G0 at
20◦C.
If the working curve is a straight line (with reasonable approximation in many
cases) the maximum energy product can be written as follows
BH(max) = BR HCe
4
(5.2)
If the intrinsic curve shows a non-smooth distribution such as steps (see Fig.5.7)
it is however not advisable to use Eq.
5.2 as this can entail a considerable devi-
ation.
Instead it is recommended to numerically find the maximum of the single
energy products along the normal curve. It can be seen from Fig.5.7 that indeed the
sides of the BH(max) rectangle are not located at the bisecting points of HCi and BR.
Eventually, the last two letters of the magnet grade can be determined by the
reversible temperature coefficient of induction α (%/◦C) and reversible temperature
coefficient of coercivity β (%/◦C) coercivity.
==PAGE:106==
96
5 Analysis
These factors represent the relative change of the remanence and the intrinsic
coercivity per unit of temperature which can be obtained according to the following
equations [Tec18]:
α = BR(20) −BR(100)
BR(20) ∆T
100
(5.3)
β = HCi(20) −HCi(100)
BR(20) ∆T
100
(5.4)
where BR(20) is the remanence at T = 20◦C, BR(100) is the remanence at T =
100◦C, HCi(20) is the intrinsic coercivity at T = 20◦C, HCi(100) is the intrinsic
coercivity at T = 100◦C and ∆T = 100 −20 = 80◦C.
Table 5.4 shows that despite its highest coercivity PM-A shows the lowest BH(max).
In comparison PM-B possesses a 8% higher maximum energy product than PM-A al-
though its intrinsic coercivity is lower. The highest energy product is exhibited by
PM-G0 even though its intrinsic coercivity was lower compared to PM-A and PM-B.
In comparison PM-G0 possesses a 24% higher BH(max) compared to PM-A and a
17% higher BH(max) compared to PM-B.
Table 5.4: Intrinsic coercivity HCi, extrinsic coercivity HCe, remanence BR, maxi-
mum energy product BH(max), reversible temperature coefficient of in-
duction α, reversible temperature coefficient of coercivity β and the cor-
responding commercial grade.
Sample
HCi(20)
HCe(20)
BR(20)
BH(max)
α
β
Grade
-
A m−1
A m−1
T
kJ/m3
%/◦C
%/◦C
-
PM-A
1.80 × 106
7.76 × 105
1.17
219
-0.078
-0.46
(N30/33H)
PM-B
1.58 × 106
8.35 × 105
1.16
237
-0.083
-0.54
(N30/33H)
PM-G0
1.14 × 106
8.52 × 105
1.26
287
-0.095
-0.54
(N35/38M)
In order to avoid confusion it is noteworthy to mention that the term intrinsic
coercivity HCi is equivalent to the term coercivity used in all previous chapters. It
was necessary to introduce this new term in this section in order to distinguish the
properties of intrinsic curve from those of the normal curve.
The advantage of the high intrinsic coercivity of PM-A manifests itself in the re-
versible temperature coefficient. While the difference of α between PM-A and PM-B
is small, the β coefficient of PM-A is 15% lower which indicates a higher resilience
towards elevated temperature applications. In comparison to the other samples, PM-
G0 shows the highest degradation rates for both remanence and coercivity.
The commercial grade given in Tab. 5.4 are estimated according to the data sheet
[Tec18] which can be found in the Appendix. Due to the poor agreement between
the characteristic values in Tab. 5.4 and the specifications of the data sheet a range
==PAGE:107==
5.4 Particle alignment during compaction
97
of possible candidates is given. The use of brackets indicates that the classification
of the commercial grades is an estimation according to the best fit.
5.4
Particle alignment during compaction
In this section a strongly simplified model is presented which can be used to explain
some of the effects encountered during the alignment of the particles during pressing.
In this model the coupled interaction of neighbouring particles in the applied mag-
netic field are neglected.
Figure 5.10 (a) shows a magnetised spherical particle (grey) with an average mag-
netisation µ surrounded by neighbouring particles.
During pressing a hydrostatic
pressure p is applied to the powder where consequently the neighbouring particles
are exerting a contact pressure onto the grey particle. Aforementioned normal sur-
Figure 5.10: (a) thought model of a single spherical particle (grey) packed between
neighbouring particles subject to hydrostatic pressure and (b) uni-
formly magnetised isolated sphere subject to an external B-field and
shear tractions on the surface.
face traction evokes a shear traction due to
Mohr-Coulomb’s law assuming that movements are quasi static. Figure 5.10 (b) shows
a free-body cut of the single particle under consideration where the shear traction is
assumed to be uniformly distributed over the particle surface.
Figure 5.10 (b) shows that an externally applied magnetic field pointing in the z-
direction induces a torque τ with a magnetic moment vector µ which can be expressed
by Eq.5.5.
τ = ⃗µ × ⃗B = M0 V


sin θ sin ϕ
sin θ cos ϕ
cos θ

×


0
0
B

= 4π
3 M0BR3


sin θ cos ϕ
sin θ sin ϕ
0


(5.5)
where M0 is the magnetisation, V is the volume, R is the particle radius, B is the
externally applied field the particle feels in the powder and θ, ϕ are the angular spher-
==PAGE:108==
98
5 Analysis
ical coordinates as previously defined.
Since the inertial coordinate system of that problem can always be aligned with
the azimuthal angle it is convenient to set ϕ = 0 upon which Eq.5.5 simplified to
τ = 4π
3 M0BR3 sin θ
(5.6)
Equation 5.6 is the torque induced into the particle (actio) around the x-axis. This
torque is resisted by a frictional torque τ (reactio). Figure 5.11 shows that the spher-
ical particle can be approximated by infinitely many concentric cylinders of height
h = 2R/n with n being any arbitrary positive natural number. Simple trigonometry
Figure 5.11: Reaction torque created on the surface of the particle approximated by
infinitesimally small cylinders of height h with radius ri and cylinder
slice position xi.
shows that the individual radii of these cylinders can be written as r2
i = R2 −x2
i . It
follows from Fig. 5.11 that the reaction torque τi created by friction onto a cylinder
slice can be written as
τ i = 2riπh p η ri = 2
(
R2 −x2
i
)
πh p η
(5.7)
where η is the coefficient of static friction, p is the hydrostatic pressure.
Consequently the total frictional torque is τ = ∑n
i=1 τ i where a limit consideration
by letting n →∞gives the following expression
τ = 2 π p η
ˆ R
−R
R2 −x2 dx = 8π
3 R3 p η
(5.8)
Note that the frictional torque is τ = 2 V p η. Now, the condition for the particle to
rotate is τ ≥τ which can be written as follows
4π
3 M0BR3 sin θ ≥8π
3 R3 p η
(5.9)
==PAGE:109==
5.4 Particle alignment during compaction
99
It is straight forward to define a critical applied field Bcrit which is required to rotate
a particle in a pressurized powder which is notably
Bcrit =
2 p η
M0 sin θ
(5.10)
It is maybe counter-intuitive to realise that Eq.5.10 is independent of the particle size
insofar the surface area increases relative to the volume with decreasing particle size.
Something else is interesting: The solution for the spherical problem is equivalent to
the 2D problem where instead of a sphere a disc with uniform thickness is considered.
Since the sphere can be discretised with a series of discs it appears that the factor 2
holds for any arbitrary disc.
==PAGE:110==
100
==PAGE:111==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
This chapter is dedicated to a review and in-depth discussion of the results presented
in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5 with an attempt to tie -as much as possible- the obser-
vations to the theoretical aspects presented in Chapter 2. Owing to the complexity
of the topic some of the observations remain subject to conjecture.
The chapter
concludes with a critical review of the characterisation- and analysis methods used.
6.1
PM-A versus PM-B
The microstructure seen in the SEM micrographs of PM-A and PM-B in Fig.4.5
through 4.8 is quite typical. The mass contrast effect makes the hard phase appear
dark.
Conversely, the Nd-rich phase filling the triple points appears bright.
The
Nd-rich coating of the grains remains usually below the resolution of the SEM. The
micrographs of PM-A and PM-B are also showing some cracks and voids where both
of which are originating from the sintering process. That is, the voids and cracks are
preferably occurring along former particle boundaries as the grains of the hard phase
within the particles remain below the liquidus temperature. Some atypical round
features were found in the micrographs of PM-A (see Fig. 4.6) which are deemed to
belong to the Nd-rich phase. These features appear to be small cavities although this
is hard to distinguish with certainty in SEM images. The origin of theses features
could not be traced back and their significance remains unknown.
The higher coercivity of PM-A compared to PM-B which becomes apparent in
the hysteresis loops can directly be linked to the differences in the grain size mea-
sured with LOM. The average grain size of PM-A is 2µm smaller than that of PM-B
(8 µm) which increases the effectiveness to pin the domain walls (see Tab. 5.1). The
predicted coercivity using Eq.2.12 together with the average grain size of 6µm for
PM-A and 8µm for PM-B was grossly overestimating the measured coercivities (see
Tab. 5.3). On the other hand, The relative decrease of the coercivity between PM-A
and PM-B was accurately predicted by Eq.2.12.
EDS analysis shows that PM-B contains more Dy compared to PM-A (see tab.
4.2 and 4.3). A higher content of Dysprosium was added in ’first generation’ PMs
because of its ability to enhance the coercivity. However, substitution of Nd with
Dy sacrifices remanence due to antiparallel alignment of the magnetic moments. The
==PAGE:112==
102
6 Discussion
latter would explain the lower saturation magnetisation of PM-B compared to PM-A
(see Tab.4.5). Sawawatzki et al. [Saw+15] found that the Dy content affects the
texture. That is, an increasing Dy content decreases the FWHM of the ODF and
produces a stronger texture. This is consistent with the stronger fibre texture mea-
sured in PM-B compared to PM-A as shown in Fig.4.20.
However, mining and extraction of Dy is costly and poses a high supply risk which
is why the Dy content of ’second generation’ PMs was reduced and instead more ef-
fort was put into improving the jet-milling process in order to decrease the number
of grains (i.e. domains) per particle. It was therefore possible to increase the coer-
civity through a finer grain structure without sacrificing the saturation magnetisation.
Chemical composition analysis with EDS showed the presence of praseodymium
in both PM-A and PM-B which is usually co-mined with Nd (see Figs. 4.14 and
4.15). The separation of Pr from Nd is difficult and requires a considerable effort
which is why the Pr content can be considered as impurity. It is difficult to compare
the EDS measurements with the ICP-OES measurements insofar the latter represents
an average value of the bulk which includes both the hard and the soft phase and
those measured by EDS are spot values which are associated with either the hard
or the soft phase. However, the measured amount of Dy in the hard phase with 5.6
wt% in PM-A and 9.2 wt% in PM-B (see Tab. 4.2 and 4.3) seems to overestimate
the more realistic value of 4 wt% obtained with ICP-OES (see Tab.4.1). Moreover,
the measured amount of Pr in PM-B with 5.3% seems to be grossly overestimated
probably due to X-ray fluorescence. As a rule of thumb the total amount of REEs in
Nd-iron-boron magnets is approx. 31 wt% which agrees well with the values obtained
by ICP-OES. The amount of REEs in the hard phase of PM-A and PM-B are 34 wt%
and 33 wt% respectively which is higher than the expected content.
The Curie temperature of PM-A obtained with a VSM temperature scan gave a
value of Tc = 593K which agrees well with Tc = 586K reported by Hirosawa et al.
[Hir+86] and with Tc = 593K reported by Coey [Coe89]. The MS values of PM-A
and PM-B at T = 20◦C were 1.31 T and 1.24 T respectively which is less than the
values reported by Hirosawa et al. [Hir+86] with 1.43 T at T = 300K b= 27◦C. This
could indicate that the external field applied to PM-A and PM-B was not strong
enough as to reach the true saturation level.
A common characteristic feature of all measured hysteresis loops and mostly pro-
nounced in the case of PM-A was a sudden step like increase of the magnetisation
(see Fig.4.23, 4.24 and 4.29). Owing to the complexity of magnetic systems without
further investigation the root cause for the steps observed in the hysteretic responses
of PM-A and PM-B remains uncertain. However, it is deemed that this behaviour
has been described in the literature as step effect. Roberts et al. [RCV95, Fig.3]
describes a wasp-waisted hysteresis behaviour which results from the superposition
of two different hysteresis loops with contrasting coercivities. That is, two different
==PAGE:113==
6.1 PM-A versus PM-B
103
phases with contrasting coercivities might exhibit a coupling effect in which the field
changes caused by field reversals of one phase initiates the magnetic field reversal of
the second phase. Wang et al. [Wan+06] have simulated this effect by combining a
ferromagnetic material with an anti-ferromagnetic material in an Ising square lattice
(see Appendix A). They found that this effect occurs at low temperatures which is
somewhat consistent with the observation that the effect vanished with increasing
temperatures. De Lima Alves et al. [Lim+17] mention that the step effect occurs
close to zero applied field which is also consistent with the measurement data. They
further point out that the step effect can also be associated with differences in the
grain size of the hard magnetic phase. The hysteretic responses shown in Fig.[Lim+17,
Fig.9,10] resembles closely the behaviour observed in both PM-A and PM-B. Ramesh
et al. [RTM88, Fig.13] are pointing out that the presence of a heterogeneous grain
distribution can produce kinks (steps) in the second quadrant of the hysteresis loop.
It is therefore, most reasonable to conclude that the step seen in the hysteresis origi-
nates from the variance in the grain size distribution.
Temperature scan curves shown in Fig.4.26 shows that PM-A maintained a higher
MS compared to PM-B whereas Fig.4.27 shows that PM-A had only a slightly higher
remanence than PM-B. The γ-factor which basically represents the loss between sat-
uration and remanence decreases with increasing temperature (see Fig.5.2).
This
means that the remanence drops faster than the saturation magnetisation with in-
creasing temperature. It is however fairly constant in the range T = 20 −100◦C.
The predicted γ-factor using EBSD agrees well with measurements made for PM-
A and reasonably well with PM-B within a temperature range of T = 20 −100◦C.
Table 5.3 shows that the remanence of PM-A and PM-B could be predicted with good
accuracy with known values of the saturation magnetisation. The predicted rema-
nence was based on measured values at max. applied field which was considered close
to saturation magnetisation. On the other hand, as mentioned above, comparison
of the measured magnetisation at max. applied field shows that MS of PM-A is 8%
lower and that of PM-B is 13% lower than the saturation magnetisation reported in
the literature. The deviation however between the predicted and the measured rema-
nence was only 1%. Relying on the validity of the measured ODF one could therefore
argue that due to the accurate prediction of the remanence the measured saturation
magnetisation for PM-A and PM-B was indeed lower than the values reported in the
literature.
It is interesting that although the FWHM of the ODF of PM-A was higher than
that of PM-B (i.e. the fibre texture was stronger in PM-B) both PMs ended up with
about the same remanence (actually PM-A had even a slightly higher remanence).
The reason is that the saturation magnetisation of PM-A was higher than PM-B
which compensated for the higher loss due to the lower DOT.
==PAGE:114==
104
6 Discussion
6.2
PM-G0 versus PM-GA and PM-GI
LOM characterisation of the commercial grade PM-G0 revealed an average grain size
of 5µm and a rather narrow grain size distribution (RSD) which explains the high
coercivity compared to PM-GI and PM-GA (see Tab. 5.1). Comparison of the mi-
crostructure of PM-G0 and PM-GI (see Fig.4.3 and 4.4) shows that with ball milling
and an optimal selection of the particle size fraction a compact microstructure can
be achieved with a porosity comparable to the original magnet.
Comparison of the SEM micrographs of PM-G0 and PM-GA (see Fig. 4.9 and 4.11)
shows that directly using the hydride powder particles without milling leads to ex-
cessive porosity which significantly diminished the coercivity.
Despite a comparable porosity, the average grain size in the recycled isotropic
magnet PM-GI was twice the average size of PM-G0. Predictions of the coercivities
of PM-G0 and PM-GI based on the measured grain size were in good agreement with
VSM measurements (see Tab.5.3). From this it can be inferred that the lower coer-
civity of PM-GI can indeed at least to a large degree be attributed to a larger grain
size. It is understood from Xia et al. [Xia+17] that the intention during recycling
was to retain the already favourable grain structure from the original material in the
powder particles which would make the costly jet-re-milling step obsolete.
The reasons for the increased grain size remain - at this stage - speculative and require
further investigation which is beyond the scope of this work. However, depending on
the dislocation density induced into the grains of the powder particles by ball milling
two different mechanisms namely recrystallisation or grain growth during sintering at
1100 ◦C could be possible candidates. Just for comparison the sintering temperature
of green compacts usually takes place between 980 ◦C to 1040 ◦C which is lower than
the adopted re-sintering temperature.
Comparison of the SEM micrographs of PM-G0 and PM-GI (see Fig. 4.12 and
4.13) shows that the Nd-rich phase in the latter seems to be diminished.
Again,
without further investigation any reasoning remains speculative. Nevertheless, it is
possible that oxidation during re-sintering led to a transformation of the Nd-rich
phase into a different oxide. Furthermore, it is possible but yet speculative that car-
bon diffusion originating from the graphite crucible used for re-sintering of PM-GI
formed Nd-carbides which have been found to lower the coercivity [Sas+15].
Comparison of the remanence measured for PM-G0 with that of PM-GI shows
that the isotropic magnet had about half the value of the benchmark magnet (see
Tab.4.6). Inspection of the ODF of PM-GI (Fig. 4.21) shows a close proximity to
the isotropic line as expected. It seems therefore legitimate to substitute f(θ) = 1
into Eq.3.13 which consequently renders Je
r = Js/2 explaining the 50% knock-down of
the isotropic magnet. This value was independently calculated by Xia et al. [Xia+17].
Comparison of the remanence measured for PM-GI with that of PM-GA shows
==PAGE:115==
6.3 PM classification
105
that the application of an external field during packing significantly improved the
remanence. The required external field to align a particle given by Eq.5.10 shows
that it is easier for particles with high misorientation angles to align. This could
explain the fact that even with the relatively weak external magnetic field applied, a
fibre texture distincly different from an isotropic distribution was induced in PM-GA
(see Fig. 4.21). During this process particles with high misorientation angles say
θ > 45◦were ’moved’ from the right part of Fig. 4.21 into the peak. Nevertheless,
the applied field strength was obviously not sufficiently strong in order to reach the
ODF of the commercial grade PM-G0.
The predicted γ-factor using EBSD agrees well with measurements made for PM-
G0 and PM-GA (see Tab.5.2). A higher deviation can be seen in the case of the
isotropic magnet which is quite likely associated with a conceptual flaw in Eq.3.18
rather than related to a measurement error. More light is shed on the root cause for
this deviation in Section 6.5.
6.3
PM classification
First off: The classification of the commercial grades of PM-A, PM-B and PM-G0
(see Tab.5.4) with the measurement data obtained by VSM from small samples is not
accurate. It is therefore hardly possible to state with sufficient statistical significance
whether the magnets investigated in this work have degraded during decommission-
ing.
The designated grade of PM-A is N35H or N38H whereas the designated grade
of PM-G0 is N48M (see data sheet in the Appendix). Now, as for PM-A inspec-
tion of Fig.5.7 shows that the step in the demagnetisation curve is quite pronounced.
This means that bluntly speaking PM-A is actually ’cheating’ as the magnetisation
level (black curve) is actually low over a wide range and only increases close to the
remanence point.
It follows that the working curve (blue curve) is shifted down
leading to a rather low HCe. From this it follows that the measured energy prod-
uct of PM-A BH(max) = 219 kJ/m3 is much lower than the designated value of
BH(max) = 283 kJ/m3 to 307 kJ/m3 (see Tab.5.4). The energy product of PM-B is a
bit higher due to a smaller step size (see Fig.5.8) with BH(max) = 237 kJ/m3 which
would actually fall into the category N30H.
The energy product of PM-G0 BH(max) = 287 kJ/m3 (see Tab.5.4) vastly ex-
ceeds the designated value of BH(max) = 378 kJ/m3. Based on the measurements
PM-G0 would actually fall into the category N38M.
Both, the remanence of PM-A with BR = 1.17 T and PM-B with BR = 1.16 T
corresponds to the grade N33H with BR = 1.175 T. The remanence of PM-G0 with
BR = 1.26 T agrees well with grade N38M with BR = 1.26 T.
Both, intrinsic coercivity of PM-A with HCi = 1.8 × 103 kA m−1 and PM-B with
==PAGE:116==
106
6 Discussion
HCi = 1.58 × 103 kA m−1 exceeds that of N38H stipulated with HCi = 1.35 × 103 kA m−1.
It is therefore not possible to match PM-A and PM-B with the designated grade in
the data sheet.
The measured reversible temperature coefficient of induction of PM-A with α =
−0.078 was the lowest of all investigated samples due to its high intrinsic coercivity.
However, it appears that all measured reversible temperature coefficients of induc-
tion fall below the designated value of α = −0.12.
The same holds true for the
predicted reversible temperature coefficient of coercivity. Both, β = −0.46 for PM-A
and β = −0.54 for PM-B fall below the nominal value of β = −0.605. Also β = −0.54
measured for PM-G0 is considerably lower than the nominal value of β = −0.675.
The accuracy of the calculation of α and β is arguably low. The only conclusion
that might be drawn is that PM-A possesses a higher temperature resistance com-
pared to the remainder. Comparison of the demagnetisation curves of PM-A, PM-B
and PM-G0 in Fig.5.3 with typical commercial demagnetisation curves e.g. provided
by Arnold [Tec18] shows that the latter are smooth and do not exhibit any steps.
Therefore, it is likely that the observed deviations are associated with the steps in
the hysteretic responses. That is, the energy products would increase to more rea-
sonable magnitudes if the demagnetisation curve would continue to follow a smooth
path from the initial recoil slope. Moreover, since the step size seems to be a function
of the temperature (see Fig.4.23 and 4.23) it follows that such a dependency will have
a considerable impact on the reversible temperature coefficients. This dependency
might be the reason for the deviations of the measured α-values and β-values from
their designated values.
6.4
EDS and EBSD
EBSD is a surface sensitive method which in case of Nd2Fe14B material poses a chal-
lenge in terms of surface preparation and also means that the information depth is
shallow. Since the two are coupled, it was found that the EBSP quality improved by
using gentle polishing techniques which produce a thinner surface deformation layer.
It is possible that ion-milling would have resulted in an even higher indexing rate
by removing the surface deformation layer. On the other hand such more advanced
preparation methods are time consuming and require skilled operators.
It was found that the EBSP contrast in the Nd-rich phase was distinctly better than
that of the hard phase. It is deemed that this is related to the simpler cubic crys-
tal structure of the soft phase. Furthermore, it was found that many zero solutions
were caused by overlapping EBSPs which typically occur at measurement points lo-
cated at grain boundaries i.e. at the interface between the hard and the soft phase.
That is, the indexing rate typically decreased with decreasing grain size where the
grain boundary length becomes large compared to the grain size. It is noteworthy to
mention that XRD-rocking curves provide a complimentary and less surface sensitive
==PAGE:117==
6.5 The degree of texture
107
means of determining the fibre texture even though the resolution is lower compared
to EBSD.
The quantitative chemical composition analysis with EDS exhibits a considerable
measurement error. Compared to complimentary composition analysis data and typ-
ical values provided in the literature it can be concluded that the Dy content was
largely overestimated. Moreover, without the application of more sophisticated cor-
rections for X-ray fluorescence, the quantification of Pr and with it Nd bears a high
level of uncertainty. For qualitative comparison however, and with particular empha-
sis on the elemental distribution maps, EDS proved to be a rather efficient and useful
tool to understand the concentration of the REEs in the different phases.
6.5
The degree of texture
The γ-factor proposed by Sawatzki et al. seems to work well for reasonably strong
textures and offers the advantage that the saturation magnetisation is not required to
estimate the slope in the hysteresis. However, Eq.3.18 does not hold for the isotropic
case where - for the sake of the argument - upon substitution of Je
r = Jh
r a DOT factor
of γiso = 0.45 is obtained which is underestimating the correct value of γiso = 0.5.
The source of the deviation is deemed to be rooted by an approximation error in the
expression tan θ = 2Jh
r /Je
r whose derivation given in [Fer+96] is ambiguous. It seems
as if the error is a function of the FWHM value of the ODF which decreases with
increasing fibre texture.
In the authors opinion it is more accurate to predict the remanence based on
ODFs with known values of the saturation magnetisation which is not affected by
aforementioned approximation error.
In general it can be concluded that EBSD
based ODFs are well suited to associate the remanence with the texture properties of
the PM material.
Concerning the ODF it is important to stress that the choice of the kernel half width
can have a significant effect on the peak characteristics. Caution should therefore be
taken when comparing ODF (MUD) contour plots between different sources in the
literature.
6.6
Particle alignment
The particle alignment model presented in Section 5.4 is a rudimentary attempt to
study some effects that are believed to influence the particle alignment during com-
paction.
==PAGE:118==
108
6 Discussion
The situation of a discrete macro particle system subject to an external field is
rather complex. In fact, such a system actually is a dynamic problem: Let us consider
for instance a single particle with a magnetic moment µ in free space subject to a
B-field. Such a particle when released from a misoriented state while seeking the
lowest energy by aligning itself with the external field direction will start to oscillate
(for small oscillations) with an angular frequency of
ω =
√
µ B
I
(6.1)
where I is the moment of inertia of the particle.
Now, in case of a particle system it is abundantly clear that the friction created be-
tween the individual particles induces a frictional damping or Coulomb damping term
which adds to the complexity. Note that Coulomb damping unlike viscous damping
is non-linear and therefore hard to handle analytically. Moreover, the particle rota-
tions involved during alignment from an isotropic state are not small which leads to
solutions involving elliptical integrals whose solutions are not available analytically.
More so, the particles will exert magnetic forces onto one another which are deemed to
mutually hinder the particles from aligning. These forces are a function of the relative
orientation of the particle which clearly varies over time during the alignment process.
However, despite of aforementioned shortcomings of the model, Eq.5.10 shows
that the sin θ term in the denominator lets the required B-field increase with decreas-
ing misorientation angle. That is, due to the fact that Bcrit(θ) < Bcrit(θ + dθ) a
relatively small field is required to reach fibre texture from an isotropic (i.e. random
orientation) situation albeit the field strength required to improve an already strong
fibre texture increases rapidly.
In other words, in terms of fibre texture it was comparably easy to go from γ = 0.5
of PM-GI to γ = 0.73 of PM-GA but a significantly higher effort is expected in order
to reach γ = 0.93 exhibited by PM-G0.
6.7
A general concluding remark
The number of complimentary characterisation methods used was sufficient to as-
sess the magnetic key properties and eventually the quality of a PM. Since many of
these characterisation methods can be directly applied in a SEM makes the adopted
procedure appealing for characterising the HD-PLP recycled magnets. Now with the
established surface preparation procedure the time required for sample preparation
has been optimised and significantly reduced. During the most recent EBSD mea-
surements up to three samples could be placed on the stage holder simultaneously.
This means that based on a conservative estimation up to three samples can be ex-
amined in a SEM per working day. In contrast this is still considerably faster than
==PAGE:119==
6.7 A general concluding remark
109
VSM measurements which depending on the amount of hysteresis loops can take be-
tween one and two days per sample. The SEM based characterisation methods are of
course not meant as a replacement of VSM measurements but with confidence gained
through this study the number of the latter can be reduced.
Especially the EBSD orientation measurements are an essential and reliable means
to predict the remanence properties of the PM. In conjunction with LOM character-
isation which follows standard metallographic preparation it is possible to obtain
time-efficient and rather accurate estimations of the coercivity.
The learnings of the characterisation methods in this work will support the con-
duction of the parametric studies required to optimise the process parameters of
HD-PLP. Following the recommended research activities mentioned above it can be
expected that such parametric studies involve a considerable amount of samples which
requires efficient characterisation methods.
==PAGE:120==
110
==PAGE:121==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The following conclusions can be drawn from the results obtained in this work:
i The surface preparation technique required to reach a sufficiently high EBSD
indexing rate of Nd2Fe14B should be as gentle as possible in order to minimise
the surface deformation layer. A final vibration based polishing step was found
to give satisfactory results. Any acid-based polishing agents and techniques were
found to be unsuitable for EBSD sample preparation.
ii EBSD orientation measurements proved to be a rather efficient and accurate
means to characterise the DOT and with it the expected remanence of a Nd2Fe14B
sintered PM.
iii Despite its convenience and time efficiency the quantitative chemical composition
analysis of sintered Nd2Fe14B PMs using EDS was found to be insufficiently
accurate. That is, the order of the measurement error of the REEs was similar to
the quantity to be measured. For qualitative comparison, EDS composition maps
are useful to characterise the distribution of the elements in the phases.
iv It was found that grain boundaries of the Nd2Fe14B PM were hard to be identified
in SEM micrographs at low magnification required for statistically representative
average grain size measurements. Therefore, LOM characterisation was found to
be an efficient method to characterise the grain size and porosity.
v SEM-BSE micrographs proved particularly useful to distinguish the hard and soft
magnetic phase in PMs.
vi VSM measurements provide all key magnetic properties such as remanence, co-
ercivity, saturation magnetisation, energy product and reversible temperature
coefficients. However, it requires the application of complimentary characterisa-
tion methods such as EBSD, EDS, SEM and LOM micrographs to characterise
the origin of the magnetic properties.
vii PM-A has a lower DOT compared to PM-B indicating that the quality in terms
of crystal alignment was lower. Nevertheless, although the loss of magnetisation
from saturation to the remanence point of PM-A was higher its higher saturation
magnetisation compensated for this loss and eventually led to a remanence similar
to PM-B.
==PAGE:122==
112
7 Conclusion
viii PM-A has a higher coercivity than PM-B although the Dy content of PM-A is
relatively lower. The higher coercivity of PM-A can be attributed to a smaller
grain size which was further corroborated through analytical predictions using the
measured average grain size.
ix PM-G0 has a higher remanence than PM-A which can be shown to be mainly
attributed to a higher DOT i.e. better crystal alignment.
x The remanence of the isotropic recycled magnet PM-GI was about 50% of the
remanence measured for PM-G0 which agrees well with theory. The coercivity of
PM-GI was about 16% lower than PM-G0 which can consistently be explained by
an increased grain size of PM-GI after re-sintering.
xi The remanence of the anisotropic recycled magnet PM-GA was about 75% of the
remanence of PM-G0. The higher remanence compared to the isotropic magnet
is associated with a higher DOT.
xii The distribution of the Nd-rich phase appears to be different in the recycled
isotropic magnet compared to the commercial grade PM-G0.
xiii The classification of PM-A, PM-B and PM-G0 according to the commercial grade
scale was facing considerable difficulties. It appears that a step like behaviour
measured in the hysteretic responses led to energy products which underestimated
the designated magnitudes. Moreover, the step-like behaviour causes ambiguity of
how to evaluate the remanence and with it the reversible temperature coefficients
of induction.
xiv The characterisation of PM-A compared to PM-B shows that the use of Dy can
be avoided without compromising on magnetic properties which reduces costs and
mitigates the supply risk.
xv Characterisation of PM-G0, PM-GI and PM-GA shows that HDPLP recycled
magnets with good properties can be obtained by controlling the increase of grain
size during re-sintering and by improving the particle alignment during packing.
==PAGE:123==
CHAPTER 8
Future Work
With hindsight of the lessons learned in this research project this chapter aims at
give recommendations that might stir future research work with particular emphasis
on improving the HDPLP.
In order to improve the coercivity of the recycled magnets future research should
focus on ways to suppress grain growth as much as possible. First, an EBSD grain
map of the recycled magnets should be made in order to corroborate the grain size
determined in the LOM micrographs of PM-GI. Secondly, it would be interesting to
identify whether the governing mechanism of the suspected increase of grain size was
recrystallization or grain growth. Therefore, it could be useful to investigate the de-
gree of cold working in the ball milled hydrate particles for the purpose of estimating
the dislocation density. This could be done by investigating the shape of the particles
in order to get an idea of the amount of plastic strain induced during the milling pro-
cess. Furthermore, it could prove useful to investigate the powder i.e. single particles
with LOM in order to firstly study the particle shape (for reasons stated below) and
more importantly the grain size after HD. It has been reported in the literature that
the exothermal heat released during HD can lead to grain growth and it would be
beneficial to compare the average grain size prior and after HD. Characterisation of
single particles in the SEM could provide insights into the phase distribution of the
hydrate using mass contrast in BSE images. It is of course a challenge to characterise
the hydrate powder as it is highly reactive with oxygen and methods would need to
be devised to avoid oxidisation during examination. Additional investigations of the
adopted re-sintering temperatures and durations could be helpful to mitigate grain
growth in the recycling process.
Another task recommended for future work concerns the investigation of the po-
tential differences in the Nd-rich phase seen in SEM micrographs of PM-G0 and
PM-GI. The importance of the Nd-rich coating in enhancing the coercivity is well-
known and an investigation whether oxidisation during re-sintering had an effect on
this phase can be considered as rather important. Moreover, the author would like
to raise the question whether carbon diffusing from the graphite crucible into the
material during re-sintering could have affected the Nd-rich phase by forming Nd-
carbides. In order to improve the remanence of the recycled magnets future research
should focus on improving the particle alignment during the press-less packing of the
==PAGE:124==
114
8 Future Work
hydride powder in the crucible. It could be interesting to investigate the effect of
different externally applied magnetic field strengths during packing on the texture
of the re-sintered magnet. In this respect, another research question concerns the
effectiveness of strong pulsating magnetic fields in comparison to the static field ap-
plied to the recycled magnets by Xia et al. [Xia+17]. The particle alignment model
introduced in this work shows that the coefficient of friction has a significant effect
on the ability of a particle to align. The determination of this frictional coefficient
is crucial for accurate predictions provided by the model. Here the aforementioned
LOM characterisation can help to shed some light on the particle surface topology
i.e. the surface roughness. The coefficient of friction could also be obtained in an
indirect way by using the analytical model together with the ODF prior (isotriopic)
and after re-sintering to back-calculate its characteristic value. The second parame-
ter affecting the particle alignment clearly is the particle contact pressure. It would
be beneficial to determine the effective pressure between particles during press-less
packing and its magnitude compared to the pressure induced by gravitational loading.
However, a potentially efficient means to temporarily decrease the pressure and
therefore enable the particle to align incrementally is to apply a cyclic acceleration e.g.
by means of a vibrating plate. It would be interesting to conduct a parametric study
on the effectiveness of vibrations to improve particle alignment and hence the fibre
texture of the re-sintered magnet. This investigation should include considerations
of the so called particle segregation effect as e.g. discussed by Ahmad and Smalley
[AS73]. The particle segregation effect is a phenomenon which describes the fact that
in a powder comprising of different particle size fractions subject to vibrations, larger
particle fractions will separate from smaller particle fractions. In other words the
study should include parameters that define particle acceleration, frequency, particle
size and duration in order to arrest particle segregation.
A parallel track which should be pursued concurrently to the experimental re-
search is the development of a more advanced particle model. Such a model be it
analytical or numerical can significantly aid the experimental parametric study and
in many cases make predictions which prove themselves utterly useful. The particle
alignment model proposed herein in its rudimentary form disregards the interacting
magnetic forces between the particles when subject to an external magnetic field.
These interactions can affect the net torque on the average particle where it is at
this stage not clear under which circumstances the particles are fighting or assisting
each other during alignment. Moreover, the particles when subject to a magnetic field
are experiencing a repulsive or attractive inter-particle force which might affect the
packing density of the powder and consequently the porosity of the PM.
The peculiar step-like behaviour gave rise to heavy debates among experts which
shows that there exists a research demand to scrutinise the origin of this effect in
further studies. It is recommended to repeat the magnetisation measurements on
several samples say at least five with varying geometry which are extracted from the
==PAGE:125==
8 Future Work
115
same magnet. Subsequently, the measured magnetisation of the small samples could
be used to either analytically or numerically predict the surface magnetic field of the
original large magnet. The latter could be re-magnetised and the measured surface
magnetic field strength (e.g. with a Hall probe) compared with the predictions made.
As a concluding remark in the author’s opinion, there is no apparent reason,
which appears to prevent the creation of an HD-PLP recycled PM with commercially
attractive properties. It is merely a matter of optimising the process parameters. It
is however, at this stage still hard to say whether PM-A or PM-B are more suitable
for HD-PLP recycling. From an economical point of view recycling of PM-A would
sustain the endeavour to produce PMs with low Dy content.
On the other hand
this potentially requires the milling and handling of fine powder fractions in order to
enhance the coercivity to levels which are commercially attractive.
==PAGE:126==
116
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
The Bohr Magneton
The Bohr magneton is defined on the basis of an hydrogen atom.
The following
derivation considers the electron as a particle and uses classical mechanics.
The
Coulomb force (electric force) between the attraction of an electron and a proton in
a hydrogen atom can be equated with the centrifugal force of the orbiting electron as
follows
e2
4πϵ0R2 = mev2
R
(A.1)
where e = 1.602 × 10−19 C is the elementary charge of the electron,
me ≈9.109 × 10−31 kg is the rest-mass of the electron, R = 5.29 × 10−11 m is the
Bohr radius and ϵ0 = 8.85 × 10−12 C2/Nm2 is the permittivity constant of free space.
The velocity of the electron orbiting the proton can consequently be obtained by
rearranging Eq.A.1 as follows
v =
√
e2
4πϵ0meR = 2.188 × 106 m s−1
(A.2)
Expression A.2 shows that the orbiting speed of the electron is astoundingly high
with a period of T = 2πR/v = 1.519 × 10−16 s.
Per definition the current can now be obtained as I = e/T = 1.05 × 10−3 A. This
shows that the single electron induces already an impressive current of one milliamp.
Eventually the Bohr magneton can be computed accordingly µB = IA = IR2π =
9.273 × 10−24 J T−1.
A.2
The demagnetising field in a sphere
The solution for the sphere was re-derived from Yosida [Yos91] however, herein with
the provision of all intermediate calculation steps. Basis is a uniformly magnetised
sphere in the north-south direction which consequently has azimuthal symmetry. The
==PAGE:128==
118
A Appendix
adoption of a spherical coordinate system lends itself where the magnetisation rep-
resents the projection of the magnitude of the magnetisation M0 onto the z-axis as
follows
M = Moiz = M0(cos θir −sin θiθ)
(A.3)
where θ is the latitude (or polar angle) [0,π] and r is the radius.
Equation A.3 can easily be derived by noting that the unit vectors ir and iθ are
members of the same plane and by building the vector sum of their z-components.
Using the constitutive relation Eq. 2.6 and utilising the fact that no external field is
applied the following holds
∇· B = µ0∇· H + µ0∇· M = 0
(A.4)
Since in a magnetostatic situation the current is zero i.e. ∇× H = J = 0 and since
H has no curl we may express the magnetic field as scalar function as follows
H = −∇ψ
(A.5)
which upon substitution into Eq.A.4 gives the following inhomogeneous second order
PDE which can be recognised as a Poisson equation
∇2ψ = ∇· M
(A.6)
Due to the uniform magnetisation of the sample the gradient is zero and serendipi-
tously the source term ∇· M = 0. Therefore, Eq.A.6 turns into the Laplace equation
which can be written as follows
∇2ψ(r, θ) = 0
(A.7)
At this point it can already be concluded that the solution to that problem must
be harmonic. Using spherical coordinates and neglecting the azimuthal angle (the
problem is axisymmetric), Eq.A.7 can be rewritten into the following form [Sal16,
Appendix]
1
r2
∂
∂r
(
r2 ∂ψ
∂r
)
+
1
r2 sin θ
∂
∂θ
(
sin θ∂ψ
∂θ
)
= 0
(A.8)
Anticipation of homogeneous boundary conditions justifies the adoption of separation
of variables with the Ansatz ψ(r, θ) = R(r) P(θ), Eq.A.8 becomes
P d
dr
(
r2 dR
dr
)
+
1
sin θ
d
dθ
(
sin θdP
dθ
)
R = 0
(A.9)
After division by PR, separation of variables and equating both sides to a common
constant l(l + 1) the PDE was recast into a set of ODEs which can be written as
follows
1
R
d
dr
(
r2 dR
dr
)
= −
1
sin θP
d
dθ
(
sin θdP
dθ
)
R = l(l + 1)
(A.10)
==PAGE:129==
A.2 The demagnetising field in a sphere
119
The peculiar common constant chosen is a trick which facilitates the solution as will
be demonstrated later. The first ODE given by Eq.A.11 can be solved by performing
a variable transformation with µ = cos θ and dµ = −sin θdθ.
1
sin θ
d
dθ
(
sin θdP
dθ
)
R + l(l + 1)P = 0
(A.11)
where l = 0, 1, 2, 3... ∈N. The steps of the transformation are as follows
−d
dµ
(
sin θ2 dP
dµ
)
+ l(l + 1)P = 0
(A.12)
d
dµ
((
1 −cos θ2) dP
dµ
)
+ l(l + 1)P = 0
(A.13)
d
dµ
((
1 −µ2) dP
dµ
)
+ l(l + 1)P = 0
(A.14)
The solutions to the ODE A.14 are given by the Legendre Polynomials denoted as
Pl(θ) = Pl(µ) or Pl(θ) = Pl(cos θ).
The first two polynomials are P0(cos θ) = 1 and P1(cos θ) = cos θ where it can with
little effort be shown through substitution that these indeed solve Eq.A.11.
The
second ODE given by Eq.A.15 can be solved with a power series of the form R ∼rn
which upon substitution yields Eq.A.17.
1
R
d
dr
(
r2 dR
dr
)
= l(l + 1)
(A.15)
2nrn + n(n −1)rn −l(l + 1)rn = 0
(A.16)
(
n + 1
2
)2
=
(
l + 1
2
)2
(A.17)
Equation A.17 holds if n = l or if n = −(l + 1) where combining these two cases
for the assumption R ∼rn gives the solution R(r) = Arl + Br−(l+1). With the two
solutions in place and recalling the initial Ansatz, the total solution for Eq.A.8 can
eventually be written as an infinite series:
ψ(r, θ) =
∞
∑
l=0
(
Al rl + Bl r−(l+1))
Pl(cos θ)
for r ≥0 ∈R and θ ∈R[0, π]
(A.18)
Inspection of the two terms of Eq.A.18 inside the brackets shows that limr→∞Al rl =
∞and limr→∞Bl r−(l+1) = 0. It can be expected that the field strength decays with
increasing r from which it can be inferred that Bl is associated with the external
field. Consequently Al must be associated with the solution inside the open sphere
bounded with radius R. Furthermore, it turns out that a Fourier series expansion
is not required since the solution for the sphere in the present example is exact and
==PAGE:130==
120
A Appendix
given by the first term of the sum which can be written as follows
ψ(r, θ) = A1 r cos θ
for
0 ≤r ≤R
(A.19)
ψ(r, θ) = B1
r2 cos θ
for
r > R
(A.20)
The gradient of ψ(r, θ) in spherical coordinates neglecting the azimuthal angle is given
by
∇ψ = ∂ψ
∂r ir + 1
r
∂ψ
∂θ iθ
(A.21)
Application of Eq.A.5 to Eqs.A.19 and A.20 using Eq.A.21 gives the internal and
external demagnetisation field as follows
H = A1
[−cos θ ir
sin θ iθ
]
for
0 ≤r ≤R
(A.22)
H = B1
r3
[2 cos θ ir
sin θ iθ
]
for
r > R
(A.23)
The two unknown constants A1 and B1 are determined by a set of boundary conditions
derived from a set of continuity conditions. The first equation is given by realising
that the surface current in the given example is zero which can be written with the
surface outward normal n = ir and with r = R in the following form
ir × (H|r=R+ −H|r=R−) =
[1
0
]
×


cos θ
(2B1
R3 + A1
)
ir
sin θ
(B1
R3 −A1
)
iθ

= 0
(A.24)
The second equation is defined by the fact that the normal flux density infinitesimally
inside the sphere and infinitesimally outside the sphere must be equal such that
ir · (B|r=R+ −B|r=R−) = 0 holds. Substitution of Eq.A.4 into this condition and
utilisation of M|r=R+ = 0 gives the following expression
ir · (H|r=R+ −H|r=R−) = ir · M|r=R−
(A.25)
which can be written with Eq.A.3 in the following form
[1
0
]
·


cos θ
(2B1
R3 + A1
)
ir
sin θ
(B1
R3 −A1
)
iθ

= M0
[1
0
]
·
[ cos θ ir
−sin θ iθ
]
(A.26)
Solving Eq.A.24 and Eq.A.26 for the two unknown constants eventually gives the
magnetic field distribution inside and outside the spherical domain as follows
H = −M0
3 (cos θ ir −sin θ iθ)
for
0 ≤r ≤R
(A.27)
H = M0
3
(R
r
)3
(2 cos θ ir + sin θ iθ)
for
r > R
(A.28)
==PAGE:131==
A.2 The demagnetising field in a sphere
121
Equations A.29 and A.30 can be used to transform the solutions given by Eqs. A.27
and A.28 from spherical into Cartesian coordinates.
ir =
[sin θix
cos θiz
]
(A.29)
iθ =
[ cos θix
−sin θiz
]
(A.30)
Figure A.1 shows the H vector field given by Eq. A.27 and Eq. A.28. It is interesting
to see that a homogeneously magnetised solid evokes a demagnetisation field even
though the external magnetic field is zero. Moreover, in Fig.A.1 it can be seen that
the internal H-field (black) is also aligned with the z-direction but in the opposite
direction of the M-field given by Eq.A.3. From this it can be inferred that the mag-
netisation strength is decreased by one third through the demagnetisation field.
Figure A.1: Internal (black) and external (red) vector demagnetisation H-field with
streamlines in blue shown for the upper hemisphere of the dipole; note
that the field lines of the B-field would be closed if the M-field is added.
It becomes therefore abundantly clear that the demagnetisation field is a strong func-
tion of the geometry of the magnetic body.
==PAGE:132==
122
A Appendix
A.3
The Ising model
In the authors opinion the Ising model [Isi25] is of such fundamental relevance to
describe the temperature dependence of ferromagnetic behaviour that a derivation of
it is given in this thesis. The model can be derived in many ways and exact solutions
exist whose complexity go far beyond the scope of this work. However, the derivation
of an approximate solution as presented by Susskind in his lecture [Sus13] is repro-
duced here in a concise fashion.
A.3.1
A single system
The energy of a dipole can be written as E = µ B σ = −Jσ where σ represents the
spin which in the Ising model can either be 1 (up) or -1 (down). Spin directions
different from up or down are not allowed in the Ising model. The minus in front
is merely a convention in order for the energy to obtain its lowest level if the spin is up.
First a single sub system is considered which is assumed to be in thermal equi-
librium with a heat bath.
The system can resume two configurations where the
partition function is then given with the Boltzmann distribution by Eq.A.31 (the two
exponential functions have simply been re-written into the hyperbolic function)
Z =
∑
eβ J σ = eβ J + e−β J = 2 cosh β J
(A.31)
where β = 1/(kBT) basically depends on the inverse temperature with kB being the
Boltzmann constant.
The Boltzmann distribution describes the probability of a certain state a system
resumes as a function of the state temperature (energy). The energy of this single
sub-system is the derivative of the partition function given by Eq.A.31 which can be
written as follows
E = −1
Z
∂Z
∂β = −sinh β J
cosh β J = −J tanh β J
(A.32)
The average spin or average magnetisation of this single system as a function of the
temperature then takes the form ⟨σ⟩= tanh β J. The tanh function shows that at low
temperatures when β is large all spins will be up with a probability close to one. In the
case of J < 0 all spins will point down other than that such a situation is equivalent
to all spins up. Conversely, at high temperatures when β →0 the probability of a
directional bias in the system is basically zero. This is already essentially describing
the beauty of the Ising model.
==PAGE:133==
A.3 The Ising model
123
A.3.2
The one-dimensional Ising model
Considering an infinitely large one-dimensional array (lattice) of aforementioned sin-
gle systems with the absence of any external magnetic field the energy of the whole
array can be written as follows
E = −J
∑
σi σi+1
(A.33)
where σi is the spin of an arbitrary site in the lattice.
Equation A.33 shows that parallel spin alignment is favourable as it gives the
lowest energy level. The partition function follows along the lines of Eq.A.31 and can
be written as
Z =
∑
e−Jβ ∑
σi σi+1
(A.34)
Equation A.34 looks rather nasty at first glance but Ising managed to solve it with
a trick by focusing on the links or ’bonds’ between the spins rather than the spins
themselves. He therefore introduced a correlation function which, supposing the spin
is known at one particular site describes the probability of other spins further down
the chain to have the same spin. In other words, this correlation function describes the
so-called memory effect which determines how the bias of a single spin in the chain
propagates throughout the system.
Ising introduced a variable µ (not to confuse
with the magnetic moment) which describes the relatonship between two spins which
takes the value µ = 1 if two neighbouring spins are aligned and µ = −1 if they are
anti-aligned. Now the correlation function acts as follows
σ1σ2 = µ1
σ2σ3 = µ2
σ3σ4 = µ3
...
σiσi+1 = µi
This means that if all µ’s are known also all spins are known without having any
redundancy or other sacrifices. In other words, the information carried by ⟨σ⟩and
⟨µ⟩is equivalent. Ising realised that the terms in the energy function given by Eq.A.34
look quite alike the correlation function which can be re-written as follows
E = −J
∑
µi
(A.35)
Using combinatorics (omitted here) to account for the interactions within the entire
1-D lattice Susskind [Sus13] gives the partition function as follows
Z = 2
n−1
∑
i=1
e−∑n−1
i=1 Jβµi = (2 cosh βJ)n−1
(A.36)
==PAGE:134==
124
A Appendix
where n denotes the number of lattice sites in the chain.
The interactions of all lattice sites are reflected by the power exponent n −1 in
Eq.A.36. With the partition function in place the average µ in the system can then
be written as follows
⟨σ1σ2
|{z}
µ1
σ2σ3
|{z}
µ2
· · · σiσi+1
| {z }
µi
· · · σn−1σn
| {z }
µn−1
⟩= ⟨µ⟩= (tanh βJ)n−1
(A.37)
Equation A.37 is the solution for the 1D Ising model which shows that there exists a
bias for the spin with a net tendency for the spins to be aligned with a certainty of 1
at T=0. However, it was realised by Ising himself that the 1D model does not show
the so-called phase transition which takes place at the Curie temperature Tc.
A.3.3
An approximation to the higher dimensional Ising model
Susskind is pointing out that the bias of the magnetic spin depends strongly on
how well spin information is preserved in the system.
He states that increasing
the dimension increases the probability to propagate the information of one spin
throughout the entire lattice. Figure A.2 shows that in the 1D model the amount of
broken links remains two irrespective of the amount of flipped neighbours.
Figure A.2: (a) the 1D Ising lattice in its ground state and (b) two broken links
with one spin flip and (c) two broken links with two neighbouring spin
flips where (+) denotes spin-up and (-) denotes spin-down and (//)
denotes a broken link.
Figure A.3 shows that the amount of broken links increases from four, to six, to eight
for one, two and three flipped spins, respectively. Since it costs energy to break those
links comparison of Fig.
A.2 with Fig.
A.3 shows that increasing the dimension
increases the strength of the bias propagated through the system.
==PAGE:135==
A.3 The Ising model
125
Figure A.3: (a) the 2D Ising lattice and (b) four broken links with one spin flip and
(c) six broken links with two neighbouring spin flips where (+) denotes
spin-up and (-) denotes spin-down and (//) denotes a broken link.
An exact extension of the Ising model to higher dimensions is mathematically de-
manding. However, instead a so called mean field approximation can be used which
assumes that the fluctuations of a spin in a lattice surrounded by its nearest neigh-
bours is smaller than its average value. The fidelity of this self consistent approxi-
mation improves with increasing amount of nearest neighbours i.e. with increasing
dimensionality.
Following the mean field approximation the energy can be written as follows
E = −J¯¯σ
∑
σ
| {z }
neighbours
= −2dJ¯¯σ¯σ
(A.38)
where d is the dimensionality (2d is the number of nearest neighbours), ¯¯σ is a partic-
ular spin and ¯σ is the average spin of its nearest neighbours.
Using the same partition function as already given by Eq.A.31 for a single system
and substituting J with 2dJ¯σ the average value of the particular spin is notably
¯¯σ = tanh 2βdJ¯σ
(A.39)
¯σ = tanh 2βdJ¯σ
(A.40)
Because the mean field approximation is self consistent, the particular spin ¯¯σ and
the average spin of its neighbours ¯σ are in fact the same and hence Eq.A.39 yields
Eq.A.40.
The latter is an implicit equation which can be solved numerically (e.g
regula falsi) or graphically. By conducting a change of variable with y = 2βdJ¯σ and
recalling β = 1/(kBT) Eq.A.40 can be rewritten as follows
kBTy
2dJ
= tanh y
(A.41)
==PAGE:136==
126
A Appendix
Figure A.4 shows that the left hand side of Eq.A.41 represents a line whereas the
right hand side is depicted by the black graph.
Figure A.4: Average spin σ as a function of the argument of the tanh function. The
intersection of the tanh y (black) with Ty/Tc represents a solution of
the implicit equation.
Inspection of Eq.A.41 shows that the solution is zero if kBT/2dJ = 1 from which
the critical Curie temperature can be inferred to be Tc = 2dJ/kB. This situation
signifies the point of phase transition and is shown by the green graph in Figure A.4
having the same slope of the tanh at the origin. In fact the solution will be zero for
all T > Tc as it should be.
In other words, if T ≥Tc the noise in the system overrules the ability to propagate
a specific spin bias throughout the lattice. This can be compared to the game Chinese
whispers where a message e.g. ’up’ is passed on from one player to another. If the
background noise level is excessive the probability of propagating this message with-
out error is practically zero e.g. talking to ones nearest neighbours during a heavy
metal concert.
Conversely, if the lattice cools and T ≤Tc (i.e. the background noise level is
decreased) then additional solutions are found at the intersection points. Since the
solutions are approached from above, the maximum of the solution couple should be
considered.
==PAGE:137==
A.3 The Ising model
127
The demagnetisation curve of a ferromagnet shown in Fig.A.5 can then be ob-
tained by plotting the maximum of the solutions of Eq.A.4 as a function of the
average spin and the normalised temperature T/Tc.
Figure A.5: Normalised magnetic moment as a function of the normalised temper-
ature showing the demagnetisation behaviour of a ferromagnet; black
graph represents the Ising model and red graph represents measure-
ment data taken from [Hir+86].
The normalised theoretical demagnetisation response and the normalised measure-
ment data of a Nd2Fe14B magnet shown in Fig.A.5 is in astonishingly good agree-
ment (please also see Fig.2.8). It is noteworthy that only the 1D Ising model fails
to predict the phase transition and already an extension into a 2D lattice suffices to
predict the phase transformation observed in experiments.
A.3.4
ARNOLD Magnetic Technologies data sheet
The attached sheet below is taken from ARNOLD Magnetic Technologies [Tec18] and
was used to classify the grade of samples PM-A, PM-B and PM-G0.
==PAGE:138==
Properties
Tw
Grade**
Typical
Typical
min
min
min
min
Typical
Typical
Į(Br)
Į(HcJ)
max
mT
gauss
kA/m
oersted
kA/m
oersted
kJ/m3
MGOe
%/°C
%/°C
°C
N30
1105
11050
796
10000
955
12000
235
30
-0.12
-0.750
80
N33
1150
11500
836
10500
955
12000
259
33
-0.12
-0.750
80
N35
1210
12100
860
10800
955
12000
283
35
-0.12
-0.750
80
N38
1260
12600
860
10800
955
12000
306
38
-0.12
-0.750
80
N40
1285
12850
923
11600
955
12000
318
40
-0.12
-0.750
80
N42
1315
13150
860
10800
955
12000
334
42
-0.12
-0.750
80
N45
1350
13500
860
10800
955
12000
350
44
-0.12
-0.750
80
N48
1400
14000
836
10500
955
12000
374
47
-0.12
-0.750
80
N50
1425
14250
836
10500
955
12000
390
49
-0.12
-0.750
80
N52
1450
14500
836
10500
876
11000
406
51
-0.12
-0.750
60
N55
1490
14900
716
9000
876
11000
430
54
-0.12
-0.750
60
N33M
1175
11750
836
10500
1114
14000
267
34
-0.12
-0.675
100
N35M
1210
12100
868
10900
1114
14000
283
35
-0.12
-0.675
100
N38M
1260
12600
899
11300
1114
14000
307
39
-0.12
-0.675
100
N40M
1285
12850
923
11600
1114
14000
322
40
-0.12
-0.675
100
N42M
1315
13150
955
12000
1114
14000
338
42
-0.12
-0.675
100
N45M
1350
13500
971
12200
1114
14000
354
44
-0.12
-0.675
100
N48M
1395
13950
995
12500
1114
14000
378
48
-0.12
-0.675
100
N50M
1415
14150
1035
13000
1114
14000
390
49
-0.12
-0.675
100
N52M
1445
14450
995
12500
1035
13000
406
51
-0.12
-0.675
100
N30H
1105
11050
796
10000
1353
17000
235
30
-0.12
-0.605
120
N33H
1175
11750
836
10500
1353
17000
267
34
-0.12
-0.605
120
N35H
1210
12100
868
10900
1353
17000
283
35
-0.12
-0.605
120
N38H
1260
12600
899
11300
1353
17000
307
39
-0.12
-0.605
120
N40H
1285
12850
923
11600
1353
17000
322
40
-0.12
-0.605
120
N42H
1300
13000
955
12000
1353
17000
330
41
-0.12
-0.605
120
N45H
1350
13500
971
12200
1353
17000
354
44
-0.12
-0.605
120
N48H
1390
13900
1011
12700
1353
17000
378
48
-0.12
-0.605
120
N50H
1415
14150
1035
13000
1274
16000
390
49
-0.12
-0.605
120
N30SH
1125
11250
811
10200
1592
20000
243
31
-0.12
-0.535
150
N33SH
1175
11750
844
10600
1592
20000
267
34
-0.12
-0.535
150
N35SH
1210
12100
876
11000
1592
20000
283
35
-0.12
-0.535
150
N38SH
1260
12600
907
11400
1592
20000
307
39
-0.12
-0.535
150
N40SH
1285
12850
939
11800
1592
20000
322
40
-0.12
-0.535
150
N42SH
1310
13100
955
12000
1592
20000
330
41
-0.12
-0.535
150
N45SH
1350
13500
979
12300
1592
20000
354
44
-0.12
-0.535
150
N48SH
1390
13900
995
12500
1512
19000
374
47
-0.12
-0.535
150
N28UH
1075
10750
764
9600
1990
25000
227
29
-0.12
-0.465
180
N30UH
1125
11250
812
10200
1990
25000
243
31
-0.12
-0.465
180
N33UH
1175
11750
852
10700
1990
25000
267
34
-0.12
-0.465
180
Neodymium-Iron-Boron Magnet Grades
Summary Product List & Reference Guide
Basic Grades
Br
HcB
HcJ
(BH)max
Temp. Coef.
Rev. 151021a
© Arnold Magnetic Technologies Corp.
770 Linden Avenue, Rochester, NY 14625
Ph: (+1) 585-385-9010
E-mail: info@arnoldmagnetics.com 
www.arnoldmagnetics.com
==PAGE:139==
Bibliography
[14a]
Cryogen Free Magnet (CFM) System, User’s manual. Cryogenic Limited,
London, UK. 2014.
[14b]
MATLAB and Statistics Toolbox Release 2015a. The MathWorks, Inc.,
Natick, Massachusetts, United States. 2014.
[Aha98]
A Aharoni. “Demagnetizing factors for rectangular ferromagnetic prisms”.
In: Journal of Applied Physics 83.6 (1998), pages 3432–3434.
[AS73]
Khan Ahmad and I. J. Smalley. “Observation of particle segregation in
vibrated granular systems”. In: Powder Technol 8.1 (1973), pages 69–75.
[ASC14]
Mike Ashby, Hugh Shercliff, and David Cebon. Materials : engineering,
science, processing and design. Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, 2014,
637 p. isbn: 9780080977737.
[Ass18]
McSwiggen & Associates. Tech Notes WDS vs. EDS. http : / / www .
mcswiggen.com/TechNotes/WDSvsEDS.htm. [Online; accessed 09-April-
2018]. 2018.
[Blu03]
Stephen. Blundell. Magnetism in condensed matter. Oxford University
Press, 2003, xii, 238 s. : isbn: 0198505914.
[Bri+16]
T. B. Britton et al. “Tutorial: Crystal orientations and EBSD - Or which
way is up?” In: Materials Characterization 117 (2016), pages 113–126.
[Bun69]
H. J. Bunge. Texture Analysis in Materials Science. Butterworth-Heinemann,
1969.
[Che+17]
Hansheng Chen et al. “Grain size quantification by optical microscopy,
electron backscatter diffraction, and magnetic force microscopy”. In: Mi-
cron 101 (2017), pages 41–47.
[Coe89]
J.M.D. Coey. “Comparison of the Intrinsic Magnetic Properties of R2Fe14B
and R(Fe11Ti); R = Rare Earth”. In: Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic
Materials 80 (1989), pages 9–13.
[CR11]
William D. Callister and David G. Rethwisch. Materials science and en-
gineering. Wiley, 2011, xxiii, 122 s. :
[Deg14]
Malik John Jamaji Degri. “The Processing and Characterisation of Re-
cycled NdFeB-type Sintered Magnets”. PhD thesis. School of Metallurgy
and Materials, UK: University of Birmingham, August 2014.
==PAGE:140==
130
Bibliography
[Eur14]
European Commission. REPORT ON CRITICAL RAW MATERIALS
FOR THE EU. Technical report. European Commission, May 2014.
[Fer+96]
W Fernengel et al. “Examination of the degree of alignment in sintered
Nd-Fe-B magnets by measurements of the remanent polarizations”. In:
Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 157 (1996), pages 19–20.
[Get08]
Mathias Getzlaff. Fundamentals of Magnetism. Springer, 2008, page 387.
isbn: 978-3-540-31150-8.
[Get92]
Mathias Getzlaff. Struers Tech A/S Metalog Guide. dan. Rolf Petersen
A/s, Copenhagen, 1992. isbn: 87-982864-5-5.
[Gue+11]
K. Gueth et al. “Comparison of local and global texture in HDDR pro-
cessed Nd-Fe-B magnets”. In: Acta Materialia 59.5 (2011), pages 2029–
2034. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2010.12.002.
[Her+84]
J. F. Herbst et al. “Relationships between crystal structure and magnetic
properties in Nd2Fe14B”. In: Physical Review B (condensed Matter) 29.7
(1984), pages 4176–8, 4176–4178. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.29.4176.
[Hie13]
Ralf Hielscher. “Kernel density estimation on the rotation group and its
application to crystallographic texture analysis”. In: Journal of Multi-
variate Analysis 119 (2013), pages 119–143.
[Hir+86]
S Hirosawa et al. “Magnetization and magnetic anisotropy of R2FE14B
measured on single crystals”. In: Journal of Applied Physics 59.3 (1986),
pages 873–879. doi: 10.1063/1.336611.
[Isi25]
Ernst Ising. “Beitrag zur Theorie des Ferromagnetismus”. ger. In: Zeitschrift
Für Physik 31.1 (1925), pages 253–258.
[JS65]
R. I. Joseph and E. Schlömann. “Demagnetizing Field in Nonellipsoidal
Bodies”. In: Journal of Applied Physics 36.5 (1965), pages 1579–1593.
issn: 10897550, 00218979. doi: 10.1063/1.1703091.
[Khl+04]
K Khlopkov et al. “Local texture in Nd-Fe-B sintered magnets with max-
imised energy density”. In: Journal of Alloys and Compounds 365.1-2
(2004), pages 259–265. doi: 10.1016/S0925-8388(03)00636-4.
[Len12]
Yang Leng. Materials Characterization : Introduction to Microscopic and
Spectroscopic Methods. Wiley-VCH, 2012. isbn: 978-3-527-33148-2.
[Li+09]
W. F. Li et al. “The origin of coercivity decrease in fine grained Nd-Fe-
B sintered magnets”. In: Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials
321.8 (2009), pages 1100–1105.
[Lim+17]
Tiberio Magno de Lima Alves et al. “Wasp-waisted behavior in mag-
netic hysteresis curves of CoFe2O4 nanopowder at a low temperature:
experimental evidence and theoretical approach”. In: Rsc Advances 7.36
(2017).
==PAGE:141==
Bibliography
131
[LKD01]
J Lindemuth, J Krause, and B Dodrill. “Finite sample size effects on the
calibration of vibrating sample magnetometer”. In: Ieee Transactions on
Magnetics 37.4 (2001), pages 2752–2754.
[LWH02]
S. J. Lillywhite, A. J. Williams, and I. R. Harris. “Magnetic alignment
and crystallographic texture relationships in permanent NdFeB magnets”.
In: Materials Science Forum 408-412.II (2002), pages 1061–1066.
[Mat+13]
Yutaka Matsuura et al. “Recoil curve properties and coercive force de-
crease ratio in NdFeB sintered magnets”. In: Journal of Magnetism and
Magnetic Materials 346 (2013), pages 113–117.
[McL+14]
B. C. McLellan et al. “Sustainability of the Rare Earths Industry”. In:
Procedia Environmental Sciences 20 (2014), pages 280–287.
[Mo+08]
Wenjian Mo et al. “Dependence of the crystal structure of the Nd-rich
phase on oxygen content in an Nd-Fe-B sintered magnet”. In: Scripta
Materialia 59.2 (2008), pages 179–182.
[Mül+94]
K.-H Müller et al. “Description of Texture for Permanent-Magnets”. In:
Ieee Transactions on Magnetics 30.2 (1994), pages 586–588.
[MWL99]
ME McHenry, MA Willard, and DE Laughlin. “Amorphous and nanocrys-
talline materials for applications as soft magnets”. In: Progress in Mate-
rials Science 44.4 (1999), pages 291–433.
[NK18]
I. C. Nlebedim and A. H. King. “Addressing Criticality in Rare Earth Ele-
ments via Permanent Magnets Recycling”. In: Jom 70.2 (2018), pages 115–
123.
[Rag+97]
OM Ragg et al. “The HD and HDDR processes in the production of Nd-
Fe-B permanent magnets”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy
22.2-3 (1997), pages 333–342.
[RCV95]
A. P. Roberts, Yulong Cui, and K. L. Verosub. “Wasp-waisted hysteresis
loops: mineral magnetic characteristics and discrimination of components
in mixed magnetic systems”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research 100.B9
(1995).
[Roe65]
Ryong‐Joon Roe. “Description of Crystallite Orientation in Polycrys-
talline Materials. III. General Solution to Pole Figure Inversion”. In:
Journal of Applied Physics 36.6 (1965), pages 2024–2031.
[RS88]
R. Ramesh and K. Srikrishna. “Magnetization reversal in nucleation con-
trolled magnets. I. Theory”. In: Journal of Applied Physics 64.11 (1988),
pages 6406–15.
[RTM88]
R. Ramesh, G. Thomas, and B. M. Ma. “Magnetization reversal in nucle-
ation controlled magnets. II. Effect of grain size and size distribution on
intrinsic coercivity of Fe-Nd-B magnets”. In: Journal of Applied Physics
64.11 (1988), pages 6416–23.
==PAGE:142==
132
Bibliography
[Sag+84]
M. Sagawa et al. “New material for permanent magnets on a base of Nd
and Fe”. In: Journal of Applied Physics 55.6 (1984), pages 2083–7, 2083–
2087. doi: 10.1063/1.333572.
[Sal16]
Sandro Salsa. Partial differential equations in action : Springer, 2016,
686 s.
[Sas+15]
T. T. Sasaki et al. “Effect of carbon on the coercivity and microstructure
in fine-grained Nd-Fe-B sintered magnet”. In: Acta Materialia 84 (2015),
pages 506–514.
[Saw+15]
Simon Sawatzki et al. “Calculation of remanence and degree of texture
from EBSD orientation histograms and XRD rocking curves in Nd-Fe-B
sintered magnets”. In: Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 382
(2015), pages 219–224.
[Sch99]
H. Schaeben. “The de la Vallée Poussin Standard Orientation Density
Function”. In: Textures and Microstructures 33.1-4 (1999), pages 365–
373.
[Sus13]
L. Susskind. Stanford University: Statistical Mechanics Lecture 9. https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=AT4_S9vQJgc. [Accessed: 2018-05-06].
2013.
[Tak+17]
Rina Takizawa et al. “Crystallographic orientation analysis in HDDR pro-
cess of anisotropic Nd-Fe-B magnet powders”. In: Journal of Magnetism
and Magnetic Materials 433 (2017), pages 187–194. doi: 10.1016/j.
jmmm.2017.03.014.
[Tec18]
Arnold Magnetic Technologies. Neodymium Iron Boron Magnets. http:
//www.arnoldmagnetics.com/products/neodymium- iron- boron-
magnets/. [Online; accessed 05-Jul-2018]. 2018.
[Too18]
MTEX Toolboxs. Free Matlab toolbox for analyzing and modeling crystal-
lographic textures by means of EBSD or pole figure data. http://mtex-
toolbox.github.io/. [Accessed: 2018-29-05]. 2018.
[Uni18]
Northern Arizona University. ELECTRON MICROANALYSIS CORE
FACILITY. https://nau.edu/cefns/labs/electron-microprobe/
glg-510-class-notes/signals/. [Online; accessed 17-Feb-2018]. 2018.
[US 13]
US Department of the Interior. Mineral Commoditiy Summaries 2013.
Technical report. USGS Science for a changing world, January 2013.
[Vac18]
Vacuumschmelze. Production. https://www.vacuumschmelze.de/. [On-
line; accessed 06-Jul-2018]. 2018.
[Wan+06]
J. Wang et al. “The step effect of hysteresis loop in FM/AFM mixed
magnetic system”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 29 (2006),
pages 65–68.
==PAGE:143==
Bibliography
133
[WG11]
T. G. Woodcock and O. Gutfleisch. “Multi-phase EBSD mapping and
local texture analysis in NdFeB sintered magnets”. In: Acta Materialia
59.3 (2011), pages 1026–1036. doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2010.10.033.
[Win+16]
A. Winkelmann et al. “Physics-based simulation models for EBSD: ad-
vances and challenges”. In: Iop Conference Series: Materials Science and
Engineering 109.1 (2016), page 012018.
[Xia+17]
M. Xia et al. “Hydrogen Decrepitation Press-Less Process recycling of
NdFeB sintered magnets”. In: Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Ma-
terials 441 (2017), pages 55–61.
[Yos91]
Kei Yosida. Theory of Magnetism. Springer, 1991.
==PAGE:144==
