==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Investigation of 3D Printing of Nanofi ller 
Reinforced Polymeric Composites
Iñaki Arrieta Azanza
July 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Mekanik
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 427
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Additive Manufacturing (AM) has opened new opportunities regarding the
production of parts with complex geometries. But suitable material choices
limit their application on functional components. The ability of tailoring ma-
terial properties of parts made by Digital Light Processing (DLP) technology
with carbon-based nano-fillers may widen the applications of the technology
by fulfilling specific functional requirements. The addition of carbon-based
reinforcements offer large amount of tailoring possibilities thanks to the out-
standing mechanical, electrical and thermal properties of some of its allotropes.
Although distribution and dispersion of them within photopolymer resins uti-
lized in the DLP technology is found as a general challenge.
Solutions of
different filler size and loadings were prepared with the aim of finding an op-
timized production method and subsequent optimally reinforced composites,
with special focus on the effect of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs).
Methodological material preparation and part printing with an in-house build
DLP printer were carried out. Subsequent characterization of the composi-
tions was done by hardness and tensile testings. The MWCNT containing
solutions obtained a highly increased viscosity that challenged the DLP print-
ing of parts. Successfully printed nanocomposites showed a general behaviour
of decreased UTS and increased strain at break. For instance, resin/MWCNT
0,1%wt samples obtained ∼20% increased stiffness and strain at break, with al-
most 12% decreased UTS. Comparative experiments conducted with MWCNT
and carbon fiber (CF) composites showed ∼35% higher UTS and ∼50% higher
stiffness on the resin/MWCNT composites, with the composites containing
lower loadings showing greater mechanical properties. Observations and set-
backs that make the 3D printing of nano-composites challenging, although
promising, were identified. Proper dispersion of the nano-fillers was crucial
to achieve a reinforced matrix, as agglomerates highly weakened the material.
Optimization of the investigated parameters and filler content could allow the
seeked material tailoring and further application to the industry.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This 30ECTS thesis was prepared at the department of Mechanical Engineer-
ing at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a master degree in Materials and Manufacturing
Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, July 22, 2018
Inaki Arrieta Azanza (s161071)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the people who made the project possible despite the
unexpected setbacks.
First, Aminul Islam and Saeed Doagou Rad for the
main supervision and guidance during the project. Macarena Mendez Ribo,
Thomas Hofstätter, Anna Danielak and David Bue Pedersen from the AM Lab,
for the help with the manufacturing process and the Friday beverages. Jon
Trifol for the enthusiastic advises and the chemical approach on the project,
always ready to help. Rodolphe Marie, Rujing Zhang and Jon Ashley from
Nanotech, for the stirring and sonication equipments. Troels V. Kristensen
and Christian Berggreen from the Structural Lab, for the help with the ten-
sile test equipment. Berit Wenzell and Thomas Smitshuysen from DTU Cen,
for the help with the SEM equipment. Yang Zhang for the durometer and
patience.
Of course, my friends from M&Ms and the project room, for always bring-
ing smiles and ice cream despite the grey days. My family, for giving me the
opportunity of being where I am and backing me on my decisions. Marina
Puentes, for the daily unconditional support. Saber Haratian, Max Zwickler
and Diana Abad for the technical assistance. The teaquilas, and all the in-
credible people that I have met during these two years, amazing years, full of
experiences that will always remain in my heart.
Eskerrikasko!
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
ϵ: Strain at break
AM: Additive Manufacturing
CB: Carbon Black
CF: Carbon Fiber
DLP: Digital Light Processing
E: Stiffness
IBblack: Industrial Blend black resin
IBblack05: Industrial Blend black resin with MWCNT 0,5%wt
IBblack02: Industrial Blend black resin with MWCNT 0,2%wt
IBtrans: Industrial Blend unpigmented resin
IBtrans02: Industrial Blend unpigmented resin with MWCNT 0,2%wt
IBtrans01: Industrial Blend unpigmented resin with MWCNT 0,1%wt
IBtransCF5: Industrial Blend unpigmented resin with CF 5%wt
IBtransCF2: Industrial Blend unpigmented resin with CF 2%wt
IBtransCNTCF: Industrial Blend unpigmented resin with MWCNT 0,05%wt
and CF 2,5%wt
==PAGE:10==
viii
Nomenclature
LOM: Light Optical Microscopy
MWCNT: Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotube
SEM: Scanning Electron Microscopy
UTS: Ultimate Tensile Strength
UV : Ultra Violet
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Nomenclature
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
Background & Literature Review
5
2.1
Carbon-based nano-fillers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Distribution and Dispersion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Nano-filler Orientation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
DLP vs Injection Moulding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Materials and Instruments
17
3.1
Raw Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Material Preparation Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Part Production Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Part Mechanical Testing Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
Part Analysis Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Methods and Processing
29
4.1
Material Preparation Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Part Production Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Part Testing Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Part Analysis Phase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
5
Results and Discussion
41
5.1
Distribution and Dispersion Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Printing Process Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3
Effect of Filler Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6
Conclusion
85
7
Future Work
89
Bibliography
91
Appendix
95
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The use of polymeric materials has been extended over the years, reaching a
production scale of 335 million tones in 2016 [1]. And along with the increas-
ing use of these materials, their production processes have been evolving as
well. The pursue of product improvement have led to the evolution of smaller
and stronger high-end devices in fields such as the hearing aid industry or the
bio-medical industry.
Micro features on the plastic parts are, therefore, essential to fulfill func-
tional requirements. For most of these products, injection moulding is the
main manufacturing method, capable of producing big product batches in
short lead time [2]. And although micro injection moulding evolved incredibly
far, it has many limitations that prevent it from going even further. Complex
mould manufacturing, moving cores or mould filling are some of them.
Additive Manufacturing (AM), defined as the process of building three
dimensional objects from a digital model adding layer by layer, has been ex-
plored since the mid-1980 [3] and is increasing as industrial production method
[4]. Some AM techniques, such as the Digital Light Processing (DLP), have
proved to be at a very close accuracy level to micro injection moulding. This
precise technologies are based on the curing of resins, capable of producing
features with resolution of 1µm in the Z axis and resolution of 5µm in the X–
Y axis [5]. And, of course, the geometrical freedom that this manufacturing
approach offers is definitely an advantage over any other. The main disadvan-
tage of the DLP technology is the narrow material choice, which comes down
to photopolymers only.
This materials are composed by acrylates and/or
epoxys, which are polymers with limited mechanical properties.
The properties of such polymers, however, can be tuned with the use of
filler reinforcements, creating composite materials.
A wide range of fillers
have been studied with the aim of tailoring material properties, although only
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
the micro and nano scaled ones offer the capability of manufacturing micro-
features on polymeric parts. Thus, polymeric nano-composites have attracted
attention of researchers, with several studies on the field [6] [7].
Carbon-based nano-fillers are probably among the most investigated type
of reinforcements [8][9]. Thanks to the properties of carbon and the differ-
ent structures it forms, numerous possibilities can be obtained in regards to
material property tailoring. Therefore, these fillers make it possible to target
a functionality and tailor the material properties to make it suitable for the
task. Highlighting the high strength and electrical and thermal conductivities
[7], the opportunities that these nano-fillers offer are immense.
During this master thesis, the effect of carbon-based nano-fillers on the
properties of photopolymers was studied. Special focus was done on the man-
ufacturing process, dividing the project in three phases: material preparation,
part manufacturing and material characterization.
Figure 1.1: Flow chart of the steps followed in the project.
In the material preparation phase, the matrix and nanofiller solutions were
mixed. Compositions of different concentrations were prepared to study the
effect of the nano-fillers on the material properties. The nano-fillers had to be
distributed and dispersed withing the matrix. Therefore, the solutions went
through a stirring process and subsequent ultrasonication process. In order to
determine an optimal technique for distribution and dispersion, the parame-
==PAGE:15==
1 Introduction
3
ters of both processes were studied as well.
On the following manufacturing phase the non-filled resin was investigated
first, so its printing process was optimized. This included the study of many
factors, such as the build plate design or the part attachment to it. Special
focus was done on the the curing UV intensities and its effect on the final
properties of the material. Once the printing parameters for the non-filled
resin were analyzed, same study was conducted for the nano-composites of
different concentrations. These parmeters were changed due to the UV light
absorbing capacity of carbon [10], thus, changing the curing behaviour of the
resin matrix.
Final phase of the project consisted on the testing and characterization
of the manufactured samples. Mechanical tests of hardness and tensile tests
were conducted, and the samples were analyzed with light optical microscope
and scanning electron microscope.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Background &
Literature Review
Several manufacturing methods have been developed using the AM layer by
layer approach, which can be differentiated in seven groups depending on the
way the layers are built [3].
For each technology the materials used must
be compatible with the process characteristics, so the applications and possi-
bilities of each method are restricted. For instance, selective laser sintering
(SLS) have been used to manufacture polymer/ceramic composites, like Nylon-
11/Al2O3, to increase Nylon’s stiffness [11]. The use of metal nano-particles
(NPs) of silver for Binder Jetting have shown big improvements on the sin-
tering process, decreasing part distortion and shrinkage [12]. Metal particles
have also been used to create soft polymeric materials with ABS/Stainless-
steel composites with good magnetic properties, utilized for magnetic sensors
[13].
For the development of this project the AM method used was the Digital
Light Processing (DLP). This technology is one of the Vat Polymerization
(VP) processes, based on photosensitive liquid resins, also referred to as pho-
topolymers. The properties of photopolymers change from their initial liq-
uidus state when they are exposed to ultraviolet (UV) light radiation. UV
light enhances the cross-linking between monomers within the resin to create
polymeric chains and, therefore, restricting the movement of the structure.
This polymerization process is commonly referred as curing, which results in
a hardened polymer.
In the DLP technology context, a light source is used to polymerize the
desired geometry on the surface of the liquid.
The polymerized layers are
attached to a build plate, which moves vertically to enable the building of
subsequent layers. The are two approaches to this technology: DLP bottom-
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Background & Literature Review
up and DLP top-down. Both are based on the same polymerization principle,
being the main difference the direction the parts are built on. The bottom-
up approach has the printed part attached on the bottom of the build plate,
and it moves upwards along the process. While the top-down has the part
attached on top of the build plate, with its movement being downwards. A
representation of both methods can be seen in figure 2.1.
Various parameters come into play in a DLP process, like light intensity, ex-
posure time per layer, layer thickness, light beam alignment with the platform
or light focus. The proper management of the parameters is key to optimize
the results of a DLP-made part. With properly managed parameters, an out-
standing characteristic of the DLP method is its high resolution and accuracy.
Some research machines have built features of down to 100x100µm, with res-
olution of 1µm in the Z axis (layer thickness) and resolution of 5µm in the
X–Y axis [5]. Even though commercially available machines might not get
close to that range, their still high accuracy makes it an appropriate method
to manufacture micro-parts.
Figure 2.1: DLP approaches (a) bottom-up and (b) top-down comparison
schema. Retrieved from Pluto Kickstarter.com.
The surface finish quality obtained with the DLP is also a highlight of
this method. Specially when observing the area of a layer, being the surface
quality of a part constrained by the side layer morphology. This might not
be as good as the obtained with injection moulding, but thanks to the thin
layer thicknesses of the method the surface finish of the DLP is relatively good,
specially compared to other AM processes like the ones using powder as raw
material [3]. In terms of time, VP processes can be considered fast processes.
Specially the DLP method, which can build each layer with a direct projec-
tion of its pattern instead of tracing along the whole layer [14], so the process
time is constrained by the height of a part instead of its volume. VP can also
manufacture comparably large pieces, depending on the machine set-up. The
Objet 1000 from Stratasys, for instance, has a build size of 1000x800x500mm
==PAGE:19==
2 Background & Literature Review
7
and maximum model weight of 135kg.
On the other hand, the DLP method is expensive compared to other AM
methods. And even though the printing itself is fast, in most cases a post-
processing of pieces is needed to complete the part’s curing and optimize its
mechanical properties [10].
Being the DLP-made parts manufactured in a
liquid medium they might also need support structures depending on the ge-
ometry of each part, unlike other AM processes like the Binder Jetting in
which the raw powder itself acts as a support. Even though the removal of
support structures is easy, it can affect the finish of the printed parts.
But the biggest limitation of the DLP method is the suitable material
choice, which is restricted to photopolymer resins. This materials can be com-
posed by acrylates and/or epoxys, which are polymers with limited mechanical
properties. And with their limited properties, their applications on functional
parts are also limited.
These properties can be tuned with the use of a reinforcing phase within it,
creating what is commonly known as a composite material. In the continuous
search for more advanced materials that fulfill the necessities of the evolving
technologies, composite materials are combinations of two or more material
phases taking advantage of the properties of each [15]. In the general case of
two-phase composites, they are built with a reinforcing phase into a matrix
phase [15]. Any type of material can be applied for both phases, as long as
their differentiation can be detected. This results in combinations of materi-
als from all families (polymers, metals or ceramics) or even applying the same
material for both matrix and reinforcement, such as polyethylene fibers in a
polyethylene matrix [16].
In order not to affect the accurate manufacturing capabilities of DLP pro-
cesses, the reinforcing phases must be carefully chosen. Micro or nano-scaled
reinforcements have previously being used on AM processes [10] [8] with the
goal of improving and optimizing the properties of printed parts. Hence, a re-
search on nano-composite manufacturing with carbon-based nano-fillers was
done.
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Background & Literature Review
2.1
Carbon-based nano-fillers
The use of carbon as a reinforcing material is not new. It has been used as
continuous fibers in fields like the wind or mountain-bike industries. Inde-
pendently from the scale, the carbon phase in composites usually increases
mechanical properties such as strength and stiffness, but it also reduces duc-
tility of the material due to the small elongation at break of carbon structures
[17].
Focusing on micro-devices, carbon-based nano-fillers can be found in many
morphologies, like tubes or platelets. Their shape is of great importance, as
it will determine the properties of the interface behaviour between matrix
and reinforcement. A way of characterizing their shape is the aspect ratio,
defined as the length of one element divided by its width (l/d). The following
morphologies can be distinguished as the main carbon-based nano-fillers:
Figure 2.2: Six of the different allotropes of carbon in the atomic level, re-
trieved from uillandpad.com.
• Graphene
Graphite is the base of the widely known carbon fibers. The structure
of graphite is based on covalent carbon bonds that form hexagon-patterned
layers (graphene) stacked on each other, forming the mentioned graphine
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Carbon-based nano-fillers
9
[18]. This structure is highly anisotropic when comparing the in-plane and
perpendicular-to-plane directions, which have stiffness values of 1060GPa and
36GPa, respectively [15]. Therefore, the graphene structure is of great inter-
est, which can be used as nano-filler in the shape of nano-platelets (GNPs) or
nano-ribbons (GNRs), having the GNRs greater aspect ratio than the GNPs.
Within the graphene plane, two perpendicular main directions are defined as
armchair and zig-zag depending on the orientation of the hexagonal bonds
[19], as shown in figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Armchair (left) and zig-zag (right) structure directions.
As an example, and due to the properties of carbon, graphene has been
used to enhance electrical properties of polymers in the morphology of GNPs
manufactured with robocasting [20]. And as a variant, single-layer graphene
oxide (SLGO) has also been used in stereolithography (SLA) to increase both
tensile strength and ductility of a photopolymer by 62,2% and 12,8%, respec-
tively [21].
• Carbon nanotubes (CNTs)
The structure of the CNTs is based on rolled planes of graphene. The same
distinction as in the previous can be made depending on the direction of the
structure, with armchair, zig-zag and also chiral, where the graphene plane
is rolled in a tilted way [17], as shown in figure 2.4. Apart of the structure
orientation, CNTs can also be found in two different morphologies depend-
ing on the number of walls or tubes that compose one single unit. Firstly,
single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) which consists of a single rolled
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Background & Literature Review
graphene plane, with average diameters of 0, 6 −2, 5 nm [22]. And secondly,
multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) which consists of various rolled
graphene planes, taking the shape of tubes inside tubes. Therefore, the diam-
eter of MWCNTs dependent on the number of tubes per nano-filler unit.
Within the structure of MWCNTs, the strength of the in-tube bonds (cova-
lent bonds) is much higher than the strength of the tube-tube bonds (Van der
Waals forces), fact that must be considered while designing nano-composites.
As the length and diameter of CNTs varies, specially with varying number
of walls, their aspect ratio is usually in the wide range of 300 −1000, where
the extremes of CNTs can be open or capped by fullerene-like semi-spheres
[7]. Due to the local strain of the tube morphology, CNTs are more reactive
than the flat graphene morphology, easing the covalent bonding of chemicals
to CNTs and therefore increasing the load transfer capability [7].
Figure 2.4: Zig-zag (left), armchair (middle) and chiral (right) structures,
retrieved form Bioleeds.wordpress.com.
MWCNTs with concentration of 0.1% (w/v) have resulted in the increase
of the tensile strength and fracture stress of a photopolymer by 7,5% and 33%
respectively, but with a decrease of the elongation at break by a 28% [8]. The
use of MWCNTs have not only shown to overall improve these mechanical
properties, but also to improve the elasticity of resins at high temperatures,
as the nano-fillers were attributed to evenly dissipate the heat through the
whole composite [10].
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Carbon-based nano-fillers
11
• Carbon black (CB)
The CB is a comparably cheap nano-filler consisting mostly of an amor-
phous carbon structure forming particles in the wide range of 10 −500nm
depending on the manufacturing process [23][REF better]. As CB particles
have no outstanding long direction, their aspect ratio can be estimated to be
around l/d = 1.
Figure 2.5: CB of different types in the shape of powder or pellets, retrieved
from Thefluo.com.
CB is commonly added to rubber to improve its mechanical properties, but
the addition of CB has also shown big improvements in electric conductivity
of polymers. In the case of Nylon-12/CB nano-composite, the electrical con-
ductivity was increased by five orders of magnitude up to 1 · 10−4S/cm with
4%wt of CB, although it also reduced the flexural modulus from 1.750MPa to
1.450MPa [9].
• Diamond nano-particles
Diamond is the hardest material known to date, based on carbon bondings
forming a face-centered cubic (FCC) structure [24]. Nano-diamonds share the
same structure in their cores, although the surface of them is more similar
to graphite [25], with sizes in the range of 2 −250nm. In the same way as
CB, nano-diamonds have an aspect ratio that can be estimated to be around
l/d = 1.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Background & Literature Review
Figure 2.6: Nano-diamond structure (left), retrieved from Pcimag.com, and
nano-diamond powder (right), retrieved from Sustainable-nano.com.
The use of diamond particles is very extended in polishing applications
[26]. It has also been used to tune thermal properties of a photopolymer man-
ufactured with SLA, in which the addition of 30%(w/v) of micro-diamonds to
the photopolymer increased the heat transfer rates for an application on heat
sinks [27].
2.2
Distribution and Dispersion
As already mentioned, carbon-based nano-fillers highly improve many prop-
erties of polymeric matrices even with small loading percentages within the
nano-composite. It is logical to think that higher loadings could improve the
properties even more, such as in bigger scaled composites where usually the
fibre loading is close to 60% in volume fraction [15]. But in the case of nano-
composites, an excess of the reinforcing phase easily leads to the formation of
agglomerations or precipitates within the matrix. This formations drastically
decrease the properties of the nano-composites, the opposite effect as wanted.
Intensive investigations have been done on the avoidance of agglomerates
and improvement of the distribution and dispersion [21] [28]. On one hand,
the distribution can be defined as how the fillers cover the matrix volume.
On the other hand, the dispersion can be defined as how the filler units are
evenly separated from each other. A solution result with good distribution
and dispersion ensures homogeneous properties through out all the material.
Figure 2.7 shows a simple example. While the distribution can be improved
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Distribution and Dispersion
13
with a proper mixing, obtaining a good dispersion is where the real challenge
is.
Figure 2.7: Distribution and dispersion examples,s being b the optimal state
wanted.
Currently, the most common method to improve the dispersion of nano-
filler is the ultrasonication (or sonication)[29]. This mechanical method con-
sists on applying ultrasounds frequencies to a liquid state material to break
agglomerations and disperse the particles contained in it. Some studies have
also shown good dispersion efficacy with the use of more dense matrices or
with non-localized ultrasonic dispersion [10]. But then again, even though big
agglomerates are avoided, nano-fillers are still attracted to each other, what
makes the dispersed nano-fillers in the matrix a non-stable state [10].
Another method used to keep or improve mechanical properties is the
functionalization of the fillers.
Different functional groups can be applied
to nano-fillers depending on the properties pursued, like better dispersion or
stronger interface bonding, usually giving up one property for another [30].
In the case of enhancing interface strength, the functional group usually
has one part with strong linking to the nano-filler and another part with
strong linking to the matrix. Although these functional groups do not avoid
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Background & Literature Review
the nano-filler attraction, leading to formation of agglomerates. On the other
hand, the enhanced dispersion is obtained by the repulsion between functional
groups surrounding the nano-fillers. Repelled nano-fillers achieve a maximized
interface area with the matrix and, therefore, a maximized load transfer area
as well. Although the functional groups can affect the interface bonding and,
thus, the mechanical properties.
Experimental results with functionalized SWCNTs within PDMS matrix
showed an increase in the tensile modulus of several orders of magnitude from
the unfilled polymer to the PDMS/SWCNT nano-composite, with almost no
change in the elongation at break [30]. Optimization of the functionalization
and a proper dispersion of nano-fillers within a photopolymer lead to a max-
imized interface area. This translates to higher stress transfer efficiency and,
thus, resulting in bigger improvement of the mechanical properties [7].
2.3
Nano-filler Orientation
Another factor affecting the properties of a nano-composite is the orientation
of the nano-filler. In the case of nano-fillers with small aspect ratio, like CB
or nano-diamonds, their orientation is insignificant.
But when considering
morphologies of larger aspect ratios like GNRs of CNTs, the properties of
the nano-composite can be altered from a randomly oriented distribution to
an aligned distribution. Some studies have shown different methods to align
CNTs in polymeric matrices for Vat Polymerization manufacturing methods,
as with the use of an external magnetic field that affects the alignment degree
of CNTs, achieving highly uni-directional composites [31].
2.4
DLP vs Injection Moulding
With the capability of tailoring the properties of photopolymers the main
question behind this project is, why to choose DLP nano-composites over
micro-injection moulding?
Injection moulding is one of the most popular polymer manufacturing
methods at the moment. It can produce big batches, with cheap prices, it is
==PAGE:27==
2.4 DLP vs Injection Moulding
15
compatible with any thermoplastic and the surface of the final part can be
tuned according to the requirements. But even though cores and multi-axial
mechanisms can be used in this method, the more elements a mould has, the
higher probability of defects it will have as well. Complex geometries are still
difficult to produce with injection moulding, and those difficulties are specially
increased when the final part has micro-features. Dealing with micro-scaled
mould geometries, injection systems or shrinkage have been on the spotlight
for many years [2]. And even though this method has evolved a lot, the men-
tioned factors might limit the capabilities of this manufacturing technology.
It is in this case scenario, with micro-featured parts, where the DLP can
challenge the functionality of injection moulding. The materials utilized in this
method are not cheap, such as the photopolymer FunToDo Industrial Blend
(55€/l). Other components like the nano-fillers or machine’s light projector
are not cheap either. But the AM approach together with the high accuracy
of the DLP brings a wide spectrum of geometrical options. This advantages
specially stand out when the production batch is rather small (generally below
500 for not complex geometries) or when custom pieces are needed [32]. So
even though injection moulding will not be replaced by AM, there is definitely
a place for DLP in the manufacturing of final functional parts.
==PAGE:28==
16
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Materials and
Instruments
3.1
Raw Materials
In the experimental part of the project, two different photopolymer resins
were used along with two different reinforcement fillers. For both cases, indus-
trially available materials were preferred instead of special research materials.
This way, the application of the technology in the industry could be easily
transferred.
3.1.1
Polymer Matrix
Industrial Blend (IB) resins were retrieved from the company FunToDo (Nether-
lands). The two types were Black and Unpigmented (or transparent) models,
referred to their colors. These IB resins have acrylate-based compositions to
which photo-initiators are added [33] to enhance the polymerization. And in
the case of the black colored version, CB is also added to the mix to achieve the
dark appearance. The processing parameters for resins containing colorants
are usually different from each other. The ones containing carbon are harder
to cure due to the fact that carbon structures absorb UV light [8], hence tak-
ing a proportion of the projected UV light that the liquid needs to polymerize.
3.1.2
Carbon-Based Reinforcement
Two types of carbonic fillers were used in the experiments: multi-walled carbon
nanotubes (MWCNT) and micro carbon fibers (CF). The main reinforcement
fillers studied were the MWCNTs, being the NC7000 from Nanocyl (Belgium)
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Materials and Instruments
the chosen ones for the project. They were produced via the Catalytic Chem-
ical Vapor Deposition (CCVD) process and, according to the manufacturer,
they have an average length of 1, 5 µm and an average diameter of 9, 5nm
[34]. It is, therefore, a nano-structure with a high aspect ratio of around 160.
Other general properties of MWCNTs were previously explained in section 2.1.
The use of CNTs is not as common in the industry as other carbon-based
fillers. For instance, CB or CFs are common choices as reinforcing phases in
composites. Thus, CFs were also tested with the aim of comparing their ef-
fect with the MWCNTs. The utilized CFs were PX35 from Zoltek (Germany).
These fibers were manufactured via milling of polyacrylonitrile (PAN) based
fibers and, according to the supplier, they have an average length of 1, 5 µm
and an average diameter of 9, 5nm. Thus, an aspect ratio around 14.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.1: (a) IB resin, (b) MWCNTs and (c) CFs used in the project.
The structure of CFs is based on stacked layers of graphene forming
graphite, as already mentioned in section 2.1 together with its properties.
These CFs could be identified when looking under the microscope, thus, they
are comparably much bigger than the MWCNTs, as indicated in table 3.1.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Material Preparation Equipment
19
Table 3.1: Carbon-based reinforcement fillers in the project.
3.2
Material Preparation Equipment
3.2.1
Measurement and Mixing
All the materials used in the experiments were measured on a CPA-623S bal-
ance from Sartorius, with a weighing capacity up to 620 g and a precision of
0, 001 g (figure 3.2).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.2: (a) Balance in UV-protected room, (b) calibrated balance before
measurements and (c) magnetic stirrer and stirring magnets.
Then, the stirring process was carried out on a RH Digital magnetic stirrer
from IKA, with adjustable parameters of stirring speed and temperature. The
stirring speed has an adjustable range of 100−2000 rpm with steps of 50 rpm.
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Materials and Instruments
Regarding the temperature, it can be used with no additional heating (room
temperature) or heating range of 50 −320 ◦C. The stirring magnets used had
a cylindrical shape (as shown in 3.2) with a length of 50 mm.
3.2.2
Ultrasonication
The ultrasonication to break MWCNT agglomerates was carried out with a
Q700 sonicator from Qsonica (USA) with a standard 1/2 ” solid tip from
the same company. According to the manufacturer, this setup can sonicate
volumes in the range of 20 −250 mL per process. The setup permits an ad-
justable pulse on/off time between 1 s and 24 h during the process. It works
with a frequency of 20 kHz and allows sonication amplitudes of up to 120 µm,
although the parameter values used were far from their maximums.
3.2.3
Shaking
The Vortex Genius 3 shaker from IKA (Germany) was used to remove possi-
ble trapped bubbles within the solutions, with an adjustable speed range of
500 −2500 rpm.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.3: (a) Ultrasonication control equipment, (b) sonication solid tip and
(c) shaker while processing a resin bottle.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Part Production Equipment
21
3.3
Part Production Equipment
The equipment used to print all the parts in the project was a DLP Top-Down
printer built in-house [35]. The machine is analyzed in terms of sorftware and
hardware.
3.3.1
DLP Software
The printer uses the Creation Workshop DLP printing software to gener-
ate the G-codes and the DLP LightCrafter 4500 v3.1.0 software to control
a LightCrafter 4500 projector. The mentioned projector was used in the blue
light configuration with adjustable intensity in the range of 0-255 according
to the 8bit scale, with a minimum projection intensity of 22. This range can
be translated to intensity measured in mW/dm2 following the graph in figure
3.5 [35], although intensity values in this report will be referred in the 8bit
scale, as those were the values to work with.
Figure 3.4: DLP Top-Down printer and control computer setup used during
the project.
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Materials and Instruments
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5: (a) DLP Top-Down projector and (b) light intensity 8bit scale VS
mW/dm2 [35].
3.3.2
DLP Hardware
In terms of hardware, the already mentioned LightCrafter 4500 projector
(USA) was used to create each whole layer at a time (figure 3.5), with no
need of tracing. The focus of this projector was not altered during the whole
project, being the optimal focus point found 8mm below the programmed
Home position of the machine (initial focus height), with a margin of ±1 mm
in which the focus still looked sharp to the human eye. The vat used to con-
tain the liquid material (resin or resin/MWCNT) was a previously in-house
designed plastic vat with a total volume of 0, 6 mL which, in order to keep the
prepared solution volumes as low as possible, was lifted 35 mm upwards until
the descending build plate’s setup allowed the print of parts up to 15 mm in
height. With this specifications, the minimum necessary material volume to
print was 400 mL.
Lastly, the build plate on which the parts were printed and must be stuck
to was also a critical feature.
During a DLP top-down print, good liquid
flow-out is needed not to distort the parts being printed (more details in the
following chapter 4), but a flat area is needed too, so the base of the printed
parts have enough support and not get loose. With those factors in mind, the
three build plate designs tested are shown in figure 3.7.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Part Production Equipment
23
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.6: (a) Previous vat setup, (b) vat with 35 mm height spacer and (c)
elevated vat setup during a print.
The three build plates had a total area of 70 × 50 mm2 with an usable
area of 60 × 40 mm2. They were made out of steel so they were fixed to the
printer’s lifting system via two magnets. First build plate had a uniform 4
mm hole pattern all along its area. Second build plate had a uniform pattern
of 3, 5 mm holes on the outer area and 2 mm holes on the central area. And
third build plate had a flat surface with no holes on it.
Figure 3.7: The three steel build plate designs tested in the project.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Materials and Instruments
3.3.3
Post-production
The cleaning of the printed parts was done using the Elmasonic P bath son-
icator from Elma (Germany), which permits adjustments of the frequency,
process temperature and process time.
After printing and cleaning, a post-curing of the parts was done in an UV
box built in-house. The box has a volume of 30 × 30 × 30 cm3, with six led
lights on the inner top surface to generate the UV radiation. The only ad-
justable parameter of the UV box is the radiation time, with steps of 15 s in
a range of 3 s to 19.884 h.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.8: (a) Bath sonicator for part cleaning and (b, c) UV box for post-
curing.
3.4
Part Mechanical Testing Equipment
3.4.1
Hardness test equipment
Hardness tests were conducted with a LD0551 durometer from TQC (Nether-
lands) designed for soft materials like ABS, nylon, acryl or wood. The indenter
used was type D, therefore hardness was measured in Shore D scale, with a
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Part Mechanical Testing Equipment
25
range of 0 −100 shoreD and an accuracy of 1 shoreD. The durometer works
manually pressing the steel indenter vertically against the sample until the
base of the metal cylinder is in full contact with the surface of the sample.
This method permitted the comparison of samples made with different print-
ing parameters and/or different composition. The device also introduces a
human error on the results, but this durometer was chosen for availability
reasons.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.9: (a) Durometer device, (b) type D indenter detail and (c) device
specifications from TQC.
3.4.2
Tensile test equipment
The second mechanical testing equipment used was the tensile test machine
MTS 858 (USA) controlled with the Station Manager software. The equip-
ment is intended for samples from plastics to aluminums. It has a force range
of 5 −25 kN provided by a hydraulic system, and a load cell of 5 kN was
mounted on it. The machine can perform tension, compression, bend and
fatigue tests, although only tensile tests were conducted in this project. The
crosshead, which holds the upper clamp, has 789 mm of adjustable height for
different specimen sizes. The clamping of the specimens is done with indepen-
dent dials for upper and lower clamps, with different wedge options too.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Materials and Instruments
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.10: (a) Control unit and (b) tensile test machine.
3.5
Part Analysis Equipment
3.5.1
Light Optical Microscope
Optical analysis of the samples was done using a light optical microscope
(LOM) Stemi SV6 from Carl Zeiss (Germany) with lenses from the same com-
pany.
Image augmentation and focus can be adjusted via two dials, with
augmentations in the range of ×8 −×50.
Pictures were then taken with the digital camera Canon PoweShot G3
(Japan) mounted on the top of the LOM setup (as pictured in figure 3.11)
with no need of a dedicated software. This digital camera offers optical zoom
augmentations of up to ×4. The external light source KL 1500 Electronic
from Schott (Germany) was also used to improve the visualization and image
quality of the samples.
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Part Analysis Equipment
27
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.11: LOM and image acquisition setup.
3.5.2
Scanning Electron Microscope
To further analyze the structure of the nano-composites Scanning Electron Mi-
croscope (SEM) technique was also used. This was done with a Quanta FEG
200 equipment from FEI Company (USA), which offers an image resolution
down to 2 nm. The SEM equipment has 3 pressure operation modes: high
vacuum, low vacuum and environmental pressure. These could be combined
with an acceleration voltage range of 500V −30 kV to adjust the information
that the detectors receive.
The visualization quality can be regulated by changing the dwell time, and
the images can also be adjusted in contrast, brightness and enhance options.
The equipment’s stage can hold up to 6 samples, having each of them its own
aluminum holder. The samples must be conductive so the equipment can de-
tect the material. In case they are not conductive, carbon or gold coatings
can be applied on the surface to be analyzed.
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Materials and Instruments
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.12: Quanta FEG 200 equipment setup.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Methods and
Processing
Combinations of the previously mentioned materials were studied with vary-
ing process parameters. The manufacturing process of the parts was separated
in two phases: material preparation and part production. The parameters
varied depending on the material composition used. After preparation and
production, the results were characterized and the parameters were adjusted
accordingly. After the preparation and production phases, two more phases
of testing and analysis were conducted. So properties of the different material
and parameter combinations were contrasted.
4.1
Material Preparation Phase
4.1.1
Non-filled photopolymer preparation
The non-filled resin had the shortest material preparation phase among all
the solutions tested. This preparation consisted only on ensuring a good mix
of the IB resins, so possible component separation or sedimentations were
avoided. Hence, the IB photopolymers were hand-shacked in their respective
bottles for around 1 min.
The bottles were then placed on the shaking platform for another 1 min,
so the trapped bubbles from the hand-shaking were brought to the surface.
This procedure avoided porosities in the final manufactured parts. After this
step, the preparation phase of the non-filled resin was completed and could
be used in the printing process.
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Methods and Processing
4.1.2
Resin/MWCNT photopolymer preparation
The resin/MWCNT had a much longer and challenging preparation phase
compared to the non-filled resin. Due to several additional steps (such as stir-
ring or ultrasonication) the preparation phase consisted of around the 80% of
the total manufacturing process time, depending on the parameters. Although
long, these steps were key to improve the dispersion and distribution of the
MWCNTs within the resin matrix. Figure 4.1 shows an schema of the whole
process that the resin/MWCNT solutions went through.
Figure 4.1: Flow chart of the resin/MWCNT preparation phase.
• Measurement and mixing
Batches of around 0, 5 L were prepared with different MWCNT contents of
0,5%wt, 0,2%wt and 0,1%wt. The resin weight was first measured on the bal-
ance, and the corresponding MWCNT mass was added to it using the same
device. In this way, the quantities showed in table 4.1 were followed to make
the solution batches.
Table 4.1: Studied resin/MWCNT solutions with varying resin color and filler
concentrations.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Material Preparation Phase
31
The measured components were put together in glass bottles of 0,5 L and
hand shacked for 30 s. Some samples were then brought directly to the next
step (ultrasonication process), while others went previously under a magnetic
stirring step. The magnetic stirring process was carried out at 2000 rpm at
room temperature with varying stirring times in the range of 0,5 h to 72 h.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.2: (a) Balance in UV-protected room, (b) calibrated balance before
measurements and (c) magnetic stirring of covered resin/MWCNT mix.
• Ultrasonication
Last processing of the resin/MWCNT solutions before the printing phase was
the ultrasonication. During the process, pulsed ultrasound waves are applied
to the solutions [28] , which are basically vibrations at high frequencies that
decomposes the agglomerates.
Poor ultrasonications are not able to overcome the Van der Waals forces
that keep the MWCNTs together and, thus, cannot achieve a proper filler
dispersion. But too strong processes can led to a burned resin or to break
the MWCNTs. Breaking the MWCNTs drastically reduces their aspect ratio,
also reducing their reinforcing capability [9]. This was, thus, a crucial step
to break the filler agglomerations and improve the dispersion within the resin
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Methods and Processing
matrix.
Due to the device’s limitations specified by the manufacturer, volumes
in the range of 150 −200 mL were processed at a time.
And due to the
DLP printer setup, a minimum resin/MWCNT volume of 400 mL was needed.
Therefore, 2 to 3 ultrasonication processes were necessary for each printing
process.
With the amount of energy transferred into the resin/MWCNT it was
easy to get a burned batch because of the generated heat. Thus, a number of
solutions where introduced to the system:
– First, after the previous process the resin/MWCNT volume to be
sonicated was poured in a glass container and kept in an ice bed
during the whole ultrasonication process. This way the heat pro-
duced by the ultrasounds was counteracted and the resin was not
overheated and ruined. The ice level must also match the liquid
level. If not, the cold glass could get condensed water from air hu-
midity on its inner surface, which could go into the resin and ruin
the whole solution volume.
– Second, once the ultrasonication process started, the container was
sequentially displaced radially 3/8 of the perimeter every second of
ultrasounds applied (pattern shown in figure 3.3). The sequential
movement had to be done manually, to avoid the ultrasounds from
the tip to be concentrated in a small area, which could also lead to
locally burn and ruin the solution volume.
– And third, instead of using a continuous ultrasonication process,
two types of sequential pauses were introduced to ensure the non-
heating of the resin/MWCNT: (a) a pause of 1 s was done after
every 1 s of ultrasounds applied, and (b) a pause of 1 min was done
after every 1 min of ultrasounds applied.
Being the amplitude of an ultrasonication process with a deagglomera-
tion/dispersion objective in the range of 10 −30 µm [36], all the tests during
the project were done with 10, 15 or 20 µm amplitudes. Four different ultra-
sonication times were tested using these mentioned amplitude values: 5, 10, 15
and 20 min. When the necessary volume was already sonicated, two different
storage methods were tried until the whole necessary volume was processed:
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Material Preparation Phase
33
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.3: (a) Ultrasonication control equipment, (b) sonication solid tip and
(c) sequential displacement pattern of the ice-surrounded container.
storage of bottles in ice or in a bath sonication. Then, the preparation phase
of the resin/MWCNT was completed and the solution could be used in the
printing process. Prepared batches were used for 1 to up to 4 consecutive print-
ing processes. Although most of the time 2 printing processes were conducted.
4.1.3
Resin/CF photopolymer preparation
The resin/CF had a very short material preparation phase compared to the
resin/MWCNT. The components were measured in the same way as with the
resin/MWCNT, making to resin/CF solutions of 5%wt and 2%wt CF. The
container was hand-shaked for 10 min to ensure a good mixing of both phases.
The bottle was then placed on the shaker for 5 min, so the trapped bubbles
from the hand-shaking were brought to the surface. This procedure avoided
porosities in the final manufactured parts. After this step, the preparation
phase of the resin/CF was completed and the solution could be used in the
printing process.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Methods and Processing
4.1.4
Resin/MWCNT+CF photopolymer preparation
Additionally, a hybrid composite was also prepared in which both MWCNTs
and CFs were introduced in the resin matrix. The preparation of the hybrid
solution started by following the same steps as the resin/MWCNT solution
preparation with a solution of 0,1%wt MWCNT. The same preparation pro-
cedure as the resin/CF solutions was then conducted with a 5%wt CF solution.
Once both solutions were prepared, they were mixed and shaken again
during 5 min to ensuere a good distribution of fillers. Finally, the hybrid solu-
tion was placed on the shaker for 5 min to remove the trapped bubbles. One
single composition of this kind was prepared, in which the final filler loading
was 0,05%wt MWCNT and 2,5%wt CF.
4.2
Part Production Phase
4.2.1
Build Plate Design
The three build plate designs were tested with resin/MWCNT 0, 5 %wt solu-
tions, as these liquids had greater viscosities compared to the non-filled resins.
Therefore, what could work for the non-filled resins might not work for the
resin/MWCNT solutions. The testing was done by observing the behavior of
the liquid solution after submerging the build plate 10 mm into the liquid and
lifting it back to the surface, looking for a good solution flow-out that enabled
thin liquid layers on the build plate.
4.2.2
Part Printing
• Dog Bone Positioning
The great majority of the produced parts were dog bones based on the ASTM
standards [37], although some changes were done in order to improve their
printing process. This changes include a thinner profile and narrower heads,
as displayed in figure 4.4. The complete technical drawing can be found in
the appendix.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Part Production Phase
35
Figure 4.4: Dog bone design used during the project, all measures are in mm.
The production of dog bones was tested in horizontal and sideways po-
sitions on the build plate. The standing position was discarded due to the
influence of the layer orientation on further mechanical testing of the dog
bones. The three positions are shown in figure 4.5 as displayed by Creation
Workshop software.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.5: Horizontal, sideways and standing positions of a dog bone in
Creation Workshop software.
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Methods and Processing
• Initial Preparation
Before pouring the prepared material in the DLP printer’s vat, the build plate
was adjusted in height to the previously mentioned initial focus height (8 mm
below the Home setting). The prepared material was then poured into the
vat until the liquid level reached the top surface of the build plate, although
in most of the cases the viscosity of the liquid avoided the build plate surface
to get wet. Therefore, and before going ahead with the G-code settings, the
build plate was deepen 5 mm and raised back to the same height with the
purposes of both wetting the build plate surface and to check the liquid flow
on it. If small volume adjustments were necessary, a syringe was used to more
precisely add or remove material.
• Process Dynamics
Once the whole setup was prepared, the dynamics of the printing process were
a number of sequentially repeated steps in the following way:
– The build plate was on the initial focus height with a thin liquid
layer on it.
– The projector emitted a blue light pattern of a determined inten-
sity onto the build plate and polymerized the illuminated solution
liquid.
– The projector stopped emitting light.
– The build plate descended 5 mm.
– The build plate ascended 5 mm −LayerThickness, leaving a thin
liquid layer on the already solidified pattern, corresponding to the
specified layer thickness.
– A waiting time was programmed so the material flowed off the build
plate and settled before the projector emitted light again.
– Once this waiting time was over, the same steps were repeated until
the whole part was produced.
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Part Production Phase
37
• Process Parameters
Both non-filled resins were tested first to calibrate the optimum parameters
for each of them. With this purpose, calibration dog bones were produced
with special attention on light intensity and exposure time. The light inten-
sities tested had values in the range of 40 −80 for the IB black (tested first)
and 40 −50 for the IB unpigmented resin. The exposure time per layer was
3 s, kept constant for both resins. In order to ensure the part attachment to
the build plate, the first 10 printed layers (or bottom layers) had increased
exposure time of 10 s.
Process parameters with MWCNTs changed due to the UV light absorb-
ing capability of the carbon structures [8]. UV light intensity values increased
∼15%. This meant UV intensity in the range of 50 −90 for the IB black with
MWCNTs and 50−60 for the IB unpigmented with MWCNTs. The exposure
time per layer was not altered with the addition of the reinforcing phase, so
it remained in 3 s for all the compositions. For attachment to build plate
reasons, both the exposure time and the UV intensity on 15 bottom layers
were investigated. The exposure time effect was tested in the range of 10 −20
s, while the UV intensity values tested were ×1, ×1, 6 and ×2 higher than the
nominal printing value.
Due to a deviation in the projection, the pieces were distorted, so the opti-
mal parameters could not be found by comparing dimensional measurements
with the nominal CAD dimensions. Optimal parameters were pursued by an-
alyzing the sharpness of the edges on the produced samples. The non-filled
resin parts were used as the reference for the MWCNT reinforced ones. So
the parameters chosen for the composites were those for which the parts had
the least dimensional deviation possible to the non-filled parts.
4.2.3
Part Cleaning
Once the DLP printer finished the G-code process, the printed parts were
carefully separated from the build plate with a spatula not to damage them
and alter their properties. Most of the remaining liquid on the parts’ surface
was wiped away using isopropanol (or 2-propanol) and paper towels. After-
wards, the printed parts were deepen in isopropanol and cleaned with a bath
sonication to ensure the complete removal of the leftovers on the surface. This
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Methods and Processing
cleaning was done for 8 to 9 min with a frequency of 37 kHz and a process
temperature in the range of 45 −65 ◦C. Once the bath sonication was over,
the parts were carefully dried so no isopropanol remained on their surface.
4.2.4
Part Post-Curing
All the parts produced went finally through a post-curing process in the UV
box.
Being the radiation time the only controllable parameter, the parts
printed out of non-filled resin received radiation for 20 min on each side,
while the resin/MWCNT, resin/CF and resin/MWCNT+CF parts received
radiation for 25 min on each side. Once this step was completed, the man-
ufacturing of the parts was finished and they were ready for further use or
testing.
4.3
Part Testing Phase
The majority of the manufactured samples were dog bones as in figure 4.4,
which were subjected first to hardness test and then to tensile test. It was
possible to conduct the hardness test on some of the non successfully manu-
factured samples, although only the fully successful samples were brought to
the tensile test.
4.3.1
Hardness test
The hardness test was conducted first, so possible strain in the material after
the tensile test did not affect the results. For the same reason, the indenta-
tions were done on one head of each dog bone. This allowed the middle section
to remain unaltered so the results of the tensile test were unaltered as well.
The indentations were done pushing the device vertically on the sample
until full contact was made between surfaces, and then holding that position
for 5 s. Every sample had 1−3 indentations, always separated by a minimum
distance of 3 mm between each other, and being the three of them in different
heights with respect to the manufacturing direction of the parts. After each
indentation, the Shore D value was noted and the device was set back to 0
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Part Testing Phase
39
shoreD position.
As mentioned, non successfully manufactured samples were tested too,
but the location of the indentation must had been successfully manufactured.
Over-cured zones of a sample are prone to have different mechanical proper-
ties, so only successful zones within these samples were tested, as shown in
figure 4.6.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: Hardness indentation marks on successfully printed areas of dog
bones.
4.3.2
Tensile test
Dog bones were then subjected to tensile test. Only successfully printed sam-
ples were used for this tests, what excludes all the parts with uneven neck (or
middle section).
Due to the small dimensions of the dog bones, the crosshead was lowered
until the minimum distance between clamps was reached.
The dog bones
were then clamped with the lowest pressure allowed by the hydraulic system,
so the wedges did not break them, but still ensuring the grip against slippage.
Displacement controlled tests were conducted, were the displacement rate was
set as 0, 005 mm/s with data acquisition every 0, 001 s.
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Methods and Processing
4.4
Part Analysis Phase
4.4.1
Light Optical Microscope
LOM equipment was used for two analyses of the printed surfaces. First, the
surface of the printed samples was observed to check any sign of bad disper-
sion after the manufacturing. This was only used as a fast method to identify
poor preparation and manufacturing parameters. Second, the hardness test
indentation areas were analyzed to check their location, effect and geometry.
The samples were located on a base under a focused light. Once the height
of the optical system was adjusted, the digital camera provided a ×4 augmen-
tation, what was added to the microscope augmentations of ×8,×17, ×20 or
×35 to capture detailed images of the sample surfaces.
4.4.2
Scanning Electron Microscope
SEM equipment was used to look at the cross section of broken samples and an-
alyze their exposed structure. The samples were adhered to aluminum holders
with carbon tape and six of these holders were placed on the SEM stage. The
low pressure setup was used at 60 −80 Pa due to the matrix of the nanocom-
posite not being conductive. This low pressure allowed the humidity to act
as conductive medium to retrieve better images. The beam was used in high
voltage mode at 5 −20 kV with a spot size of 2 to 5. Then different augmen-
tations were used depending on the features to analyze, and the dwell time to
retrieve the images was 10 µs or 30 µs for improved image quality. The signal
received was enough to get images down to 3 × 3 µm where nanotube struc-
tures were clearly appreciable, so there was no need of carbon or gold coatings.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5
Results and Discussion
5.1
Distribution and Dispersion Results
In this section, the results on the effects of material preparation parameters
are discussed. This includes observations on stirring, ultrasonication, storage
method and effect of time.
5.1.1
Effect of Stirring
In order to investigate the influence of stirring on the filler dispersion, samples
with no stirring and with different stirring times were printed. The produced
samples were then characterized by the total agglomerate area that could be
found on the samples’ neck surface, being the neck the narrowest section of
a dog bone. The results demonstrated that samples that skipped the stirring
had too coarse agglomerates that could not be broken during the following
ultrasonication step. These results were independent from the shaking time
applied prior to the ultrasonication.
The samples with the shortest stirring times tested had similar results
as well. Results showed that stirring less than 1h led to coarse agglomerates
that could not be successfully broken even with aggressive ultrasonication pro-
cesses. As an example, figure 5.1 shows the surface of resin/MWCNT 0, 5%wt
with (a) no stirring and with (b) stirring time of 35 min. Agglomerates can
easily be identified in both samples, indicating that short stirring times had
the same poor dispersion outcome as no stirring.
The surface of the samples gave a quick glance of what to expect from the
internal structure of the samples. Therefore, the stirring time was contrasted
against the LOM-observable agglomerate areas on the samples’ surfaces. This
permitted a fast analysis of the process effect.
The agglomerate area was
quantified by the number of pixels corresponding to them on a LOM picture.
==PAGE:54==
42
5 Results and Discussion
Figure 5.2 represents the mentioned comparison of surface agglomerate area
over stirring time, observed on 0, 2%wt MWCNT samples.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1: Surface comparison of 0, 5%wt MWCNT samples with (a) no
stirring and (b) 35 min stirring (right).
It should be noted that one representative sample of each stirring time was
analyzed, thus no valid statistical analysis was done on it. As observed on the
four stirring time results, increasing the process duration had an exponential
relation from 0 h to 18 h stirring times. The size of the agglomerate highly
decreased in this range, hence improving the dispersion of the MWCNTs. Fur-
ther increasing the stirring time, however, did not improve the results. Instead,
the size of the agglomerates were found to slowly grow again.
The surfaces of the four samples compared in previous figure 5.2 are shown
in figure 5.3, corresponding to 0, 58, 3, 18 and 41 h of stirring time. The dif-
ferent agglomerate sizes can be observed in these pictures, where picture c
obtained the smallest agglomerate size and area.
After long stirring processes the resins were not heated up nor had opti-
cally appreciable damages. Thus, it was noted that excess stirring processes
did not harm the solutions, neither made them non usable. However, as it can
be observed in figure 5.2, stirring times over 18 h resulted in an increase of the
agglomerate area, rising it almost 80% after 25 h. It can be deduced that this
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Distribution and Dispersion Results
43
phenomenon derived from the centrifugal forces of the process. These forces
pushed the MWCNTs outwards while the solution was stirred at high speeds,
thus, worsening the distribution within the resin.
Figure 5.2: Tendency of the agglomerate presence (pixels) with increasing
stirring time (h) at 2000 rpm.
On the other hand, it was observed while transferring the solutions that
the amount of sedimented MWCNTs was highly reduced after stirring pro-
cesses. This precipitation phenomenon happened after agglomerates merged
and felt due to gravity when they were grown enough, reducing the effective
MWCNT %wt content. Knowing these two factors, it could be concluded that
different stirring speeds would alter the shape of the tendency from figure 5.2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.3: Surface comparison of 0, 2%wt MWCNT samples with (a) 0, 58,
(b) 3, (c) 18 and (d) 41 h.
==PAGE:56==
44
5 Results and Discussion
5.1.2
Effect of Ultrasonication
Process amplitude and time combinations were tested on the different %wt
MWCNT compositions in order to study their effect on the nano-filler disper-
sion. First experiments were conducted with parameters that stepped out of
the previously specified ones in chapter 4.1. This was done with the aim of
investigating the process thresholds on the resin/MWCNT solutions.
The consequences of increasing the amplitude above the ranges with de-
agglomeration purposes [36] were tested first, with a processing amplitude of
50 µm. It was quickly found that the mentioned amplitude burned the so-
lution within less than 3 min. Comparable results were obtained when the
sequential movement was not carried out, even though the amplitude was kept
below 30 µm.
Increased amount of dispersed MWCNTs also increased the viscosity of the
solution [10] [7]. More viscous solutions were more prone to being burned, as
the applied ultrasounds could not expand as much as in the less viscous state
of the liquid, concentrating the introduced energy in a small zone. Results
after applying high amplitudes and not following the sequential movement are
exemplarily shown in figure 5.4.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.4: Damaged resin/MWCNT solutions after (a) applying too big am-
plitudes and (b) not following the sequential movement.
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Distribution and Dispersion Results
45
• Ultrasonication on resin/MWCNT 0,5%wt
Resin/MWCNT 0,5 %wt solutions were the most challenging to process and
no samples of this concentration were close from achieving a proper filler dis-
persion. With such high amount of fillers, the average distance between them
was comparably smaller than in the 0,2%wt and 0,1% wt solutions [6]. More-
over, the reduced distance between them also incremented the effect of Van
der Waals forces [3], making it challenging to get a good dispersion on this
resin/MWCNT solution.
During the processes, the previously mentioned viscosity increase was
highly notable, what has previously being reported in other studies [7] [38].
Sonication processes with 10 µm of amplitude during 5 and 10 min were con-
ducted, being 10 min the longest process time which with dog bones were
manufactured. After stepping up to 15 µm of amplitude during 15 min the
resulting resin/MWCNT 0,5%wt solution was too viscous to be able to pro-
duce samples with the DLP top-down printer.
These parameters led to a highly viscous solution, consequence of the
highly increased interface area between fillers and matrix [10]. Due to the
increased viscosity, a large material build up was obtained in the following
printing phase. And even with the mentioned parameters, a noticeable amount
of agglomerates could be found in the produced samples, as seen in figure 5.5.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5: Agglomerates in a resin/MWCNT 0,5 %wt dog bone cross section.
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Results and Discussion
Figure 5.6 shows the comparison of solutions sonicated with 10 µm of am-
plitude during 5 min (oranges) and 10 min (blues). It can be concluded by
observing the figure that the mechanical properties of the longer sonicated
material were inferior to the material with shorter sonication process. Due
to the high viscosity achieved after 10 min, the reason behind the strength
loss might be derived from a burned resin. In a similar manner as the solu-
tion sonicated with 50 µm of amplitude, the greater viscosities probably did
not allow the ultrasound waves to expand through the whole solution volume.
Thus, the locally concentrated sonication led to a burned material.
Figure 5.6: Stress-strain curves of IB black resin/MWCNT 0,5 %wt sonicated
5 min (oranges) and 10 min (blues).
The 0,5%wt MWCNT samples with highest mechanical properties ob-
tained were then compared with the non filled resin. Figure 5.7 contrasts the
stress-strain curves of the non-filled black resin (blues) with the resin/MWCNT
0,5 %wt solution (oranges) processed with 10 µm of amplitude during 5 min.
In comparison with the non-filled resin, the average UTS value of the nanocom-
posites was only increased 1,30% and the strain at break increased 7,38%.
While the stiffness was decreased almost 20%.
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Distribution and Dispersion Results
47
Table 5.1: Variation of properties of non-filled IB black resin and IB black
resin/MWCNT 0,5%wt with the strongest ultrasonication process.
Even if agglomerates could be found within the nanocomposite samples,
the strength of the material still remained similar to the non-filled resin. This
effect might be caused by properly dispersed MWCNTs that counteracted the
effect of the agglomerates, actually reinforcing some parts of the resin.
The increased strain at break and decreased stiffness were the contrary
effect expected, as carbon-reinforced matrices usually get stiffer and more
brittle [15] [17]. A feasible reason for this variations could be related to the
MWCNTs absorbing UV light [8]. Therefore, the resin matrix did not get all
the UV radiation needed to properly polymerize and harden. This change in
the curing of the resin could extend the plastic phase of the material behaviour.
It could be concluded that the dispersion process carried out on the 0,5%wt
MWCNT solutions resulted unsuccessful, both because of the inferior mechan-
ical properties and for the remaining agglomerates after the process. Being
some of these remaining agglomerates over 200 µm in diameter, as seen in
figure 5.5. The material build up phenomenon was also remarkable, displayed
in figure 5.8. It can be appreciated that the layer curvature grew from right
to left, corresponding to the printing direction of the part. This phenomenon
was a consequence of the high viscosity of the solution, which prevented the
liquid from flowing off the build plate. More on this will be analyzed in the
following section 5.2.
==PAGE:60==
48
5 Results and Discussion
Figure 5.7:
Stress-strain curves of IB black resin (blue) and IB black
resin/MWCNT 0,5 %wt (orange).
Figure 5.8: Resin/MWCNT 0,5 %wt dog bone cross section with growing layer
curvature from right to left.
• Ultrasonication on resin/MWCNT 0,2%wt
The ultrasonication effects on 0, 2 %wt MWCNT solutions were only tested on
the IB black resin, as the 0, 5 %wt MWCNT solutions. The processes tested
with this composition were 10 min long with amplitudes of 15 and 20 µm,
with which the solution’s viscosity highly increased again. In fact, 20 µm of
amplitude during 10 min was found to be the threshold for this compositions,
with which the solution got too viscous to be usable for printing.
==PAGE:61==
5.1 Distribution and Dispersion Results
49
Although having better visual results, the 0, 2 %wt MWCNT solutions
showed a similar behaviour on the mechanical properties as the 0, 5 %wt
MWCNT ones. Figure 5.9 displays the comparison of the non-filled IB black
resin (blues) against the IB black resin/MWCNT 0,2%wt sonicated with 15
µm of amplitude during 10 min (oranges).
Figure 5.9:
Stress-strain curves of non-filled black resin (blue) and
resin/MWCNT 0,2 %wt (orange).
The average UTS was only decreased 0,59% with the addition of nano-
fillers, what was probably a consequence of the better dispersed MWCNTs
counteracting the weakening effect of the agglomerates. Thus keeping a simi-
lar strength to the non-filled resin again. However, the stiffness decreased 40%
and the elongation at break increased a unexpected 70,47%. This followed the
same effect as on the previous composition, but the difference with the non-
filled resin were augmented.
It could be thought that the better dispersion achieved in the 0,2%wt
enhanced more UV light absorption by the MWCNTs [8], leaving the resin
undercured on the surroundings of these nanofillers. Those undercured areas
were, thus, softer than the non-filled resin due to the lower amount of cross-
linking polymerization that happened during the printing process.
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Results and Discussion
Table 5.2: Variation of properties of non-filled IB black resin and IB black
resin/MWCNT 0,2%wt with the strongest ultrasonication process.
Although the dispersion of the 0,2%wt MWCNT solutions resulted less
challenging than the 0,5%wt, agglomerates could still be found within the
samples, demonstrating again that no successfull dispersion processes were
obtained for this solution. Again, the highly increased viscosity after the ul-
trasonication process affected the layered geometry, with growing curvatures
in the print direction. Both features can be seen in figure 5.10.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.10: Cross section of a a resin/MWCNT 0,2 %wt dog bone with
appreciable (a) material build up due to viscosity and (b) non dispersed ag-
glomerates.
==PAGE:63==
5.1 Distribution and Dispersion Results
51
• Ultrasonication on resin/MWCNT 0,1%wt
All the comparable samples of this composition went under a 5 min long ultra-
sonication process with an amplitude of 15 µm. The viscosity also increased
during the sonication of the 0,1%wt MWCNT, although the increment was
highly reduced with the reduction of the amount of MWCNTs within the ma-
trix.
Other ultrasonication processes up to 25 µm of amplitude during 10 min
were also carried out without burning the material or highly altering the vis-
cosity. Thus, no ultrasonication thresholds were reached for the lowest concen-
trations. Unfortunately, the samples processed with these parameters could
not be compared to the non-filled resin due to their storage method before the
printing phase, what will be discussed in the following section 5.1.4.
Proportionally, the variation on the mechanical properties was bigger on
the 0,1%wt composition than the previous ones, but note that the transpar-
ent resin was used for this investigation instead of the black one, what might
. Figure 5.11 compares the stress-strain curves of the non-filled resin samples
(blue) with resin/MWCNT 0,1%wt samples processed with 15 µm of ampli-
tude during 5 min. It can be appreciated that the properties of both the
non-filled unpigmented resin and the nano-composite surpass the properties
of the previous compositions. The whole results can also be seen in table 5.3.
Table 5.3: Variation of properties of non-filled IB unpigmented resin and
IB unpigmented resin/MWCNT 0,1%wt processed with 15 µm of amplitude
during 5 min.
==PAGE:64==
52
5 Results and Discussion
The sonication process was probably too weak to be able to better disperse
the nano-fillers, thus leaving evenly distributed agglomerates within the parts.
The size of these agglomerates found within the 0,1%wt MWCNT samples
were highly reduced compared to the previous concentrations, as can be ob-
served in figure 5.12. But these agglomerates might be one of the reasons why
the UTS was decreased over 10%. So even if their size was reduced in contrast
with the previous compositions, they still acted as stress concentration zones.
Another reason that might explain the decreased UTS is the previously
mentioned phenomenon of MWCNTs absorbing UV light. This did not only
decrease the UTS, but also increased the strain at break. As the nano-fillers
took part of the UV light that resin needed to be cross-linked and hardened.
Figure 5.11: Stress-strain curves of non-filled unpigmented resin (blue) and
resin/MWCNT 0,1 %wt (orange).
Increased stiffness and strain at break by 20% was an unexpected result
combination. The better distributed MWCNTs were most likely the reason
of the stiffness increase, while the undercured resin extended the plasticity of
the material.
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Distribution and Dispersion Results
53
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.12: Small agglomerates could still be found in the resin/MWCNT
0,1 %wt dog bone cross section.
Figure 5.13: Cross section of a resin/MWCNT 0,1 %wt dog bone with no
material build up.
Unfortunately, again, the samples compared above were made 3 h after
the solution was sonicated, what had a negative effect, as it is analyzed in the
following section 5.1.4. Thus, it could be thought that big room for improve-
==PAGE:66==
54
5 Results and Discussion
ment was left for the 0,1%wt solutions, specially knowing that the sonication
process could go further than the parameters contrasted in this section.
5.1.3
Effect of Time on Dispersion
The resin/MWCNT solution is a non-stable phase, meaning that it is a matter
of time that the attraction between MWCNTs create new agglomerations and,
with them, also precipitates [10]. Even if the previous preparation phase was
shortened to the minimum, the production time of a dog bone took an average
time of 1,5 h. Thus, the time slot between two prints was no shorter than 2
h. This waiting time was expected to have an impact on the samples’ proper-
ties, which was observed through two methods: tensile tests and geometrical
dimensions.
• Time on 0,5%wt solutions
The compared samples were made with a time difference of 2 h. Their stress-
strain curves are displayed in figure 5.14, with the first printed sample in blue
(UTS= 11, 28 MPa) and the ones made 2 h layer in orange (UTSmax = 12, 27
MPa). Note that the lack of successfully printed samples did not permit a
proper statistical evaluation of the effect.
Table 5.4: Variation of properties on IB black resin/MWCNT 0,5%wt samples
from different printing times.
It can be observed that both the strength and the stiffness increased over
time, as contrary to expectations. This phenomenon was most likely produced
==PAGE:67==
5.1 Distribution and Dispersion Results
55
by agglomerates that could not be broken during the sonication process. These
agglomerates grew over time until they precipitated and, hence, the biggest
MWCNT agglomerates from the solution were removed.
Then, with the reduced concentration of MWCNTs, the average distance
between the remaining fillers increased. This allowed a slight increase on the
mechanical properties, even though both were below the ones of the non-filled
resin.
Figure 5.14: Stress-strain curves of resin/MWCNT 0,5%wt dog bones made
in the first printing round (blue) and made 2 h layer (oranges).
• Time on 0,2%wt solutions
Two comparisons were made with this concentration. The first one compared
samples made out of black resin/MWCNT 0,2%wt with a time difference of 2
h, corresponding to first and second print rounds. And the second one com-
pared samples made out of unpigmented resin/MWCNT 0,2%wt with a time
difference of 6 h, corresponding to first and fourth print rounds.
The results over 2 h using IB black resin/MWCNT 0,2%wt can be observed
in figure 5.15. With a decrease around 10% of average UTS and stiffness values,
==PAGE:68==
56
5 Results and Discussion
it could be concluded that the MWCNTs gathered forming bigger agglomer-
ates. These agglomerates were not big enough to precipitate, as seen in the
previous composition. Instead, they acted as porosities and, thus, decreased
the mechanical properties of the material.
Table 5.5: Variation of properties on IB black resin/MWCNT 0,2%wt samples
from different printing times.
Figure 5.15: Stress-strain curves of black resin/MWCNT 0,2%wt dog bones
made in the first printing round (blues) and made 2 h layer (oranges).
Stress-strain curves of the second comparison are represented in figure 5.16,
corresponding the blue curves to the first made dog bones (UTSmax = 7, 55
MPa) and the orange curves the ones made 6 h later (UTSmax = 6, 32 MPa).
In this case, the variations on the mechanical properties were according to the
expected, with a decrease around 20% of average UTS and stiffness values.
==PAGE:69==
5.1 Distribution and Dispersion Results
57
Following the same explanation as before, the MWCNTs had more time to
gather, so their growth was bigger as well. Therefore, the bigger variations on
the mechanical properties are in accordance with the longer time difference
between the compared samples.
Table 5.6: Variation of properties on IB unpigmented resin/MWCNT 0,2%wt
samples from different printing times.
Figure 5.16: Stress-strain curves of unpigmented resin/MWCNT 0,2%wt dog
bones made in the first printing round (blues) and made 6 h layer (oranges).
• Time on 0,1%wt solutions
The compared samples of this compositions were made with 2 h of difference.
Figure 5.17 displays the comparison of stress-strain curves of the samples,
where the blue curves represent the samples made first (UTSmax = 14, 10
==PAGE:70==
58
5 Results and Discussion
MPa), and orange curves the ones made 2 h later (UTSmax = 11, 24 MPa).
The UTS and the stiffness had similar variations again, but their decrease was
found to be around 20%. This was the biggest drop out the three composi-
tions, and the double of the black resin/MWCNT 0,2%wt solution with the
same time margin.
Table 5.7: Variation of properties on IB unpigmented resin/MWCNT 0,1%wt
samples from different printing times.
As previously mentioned, the reduced concentration facilitated the disper-
sion of the MWCNTs. So 0,1%wt compositions presumably obtained a better
dispersion than the 0,2%wt and 0,5%wt ones. This relatively better dispersion
was most likely the causant of the larger decrease on the mechanical properties
between the parts manufactured with 2 h of difference. Whereas in composi-
tions with bad dispersion many of the MWCNTs were already agglomerated,
so further gathering did not alter the strength as much as in better dispersed
solutions, such as the 0,1%wt MWCNT.
The strength of the nanocomposites was clearly affected by time, decreased
on all the material combinations as a consequence of MWCNTs gathering back
together and, thus, reducing the effective interface area with the resin matrix.
As seen in section 2.2, reducing the interface area also reduces the load transfer
capability, thus, weakening the nanocomposites. The dispersion process had
an impact on the results as well, as not properly dispersed solutions suffered
lower decrease on the mechanical properties due to the previous existence of
agglomerates. Thus, it could be concluded that the higher the MWCNT wt%,
the lower the mechanical properties’ reduction was found to be.
==PAGE:71==
5.1 Distribution and Dispersion Results
59
Figure 5.17: Stress-strain curves of resin/MWCNT 0,1%wt dog bones made
in the first printing round (blues) and made 2 h layer (oranges).
• Geometrical Dimensions
The tensile test results successfully proved the effect of time on mechanical
properties of the nanocomposites. But its effect could also be observed through
a more rudimentary method by evaluating the geometrical dimensions of the
printed parts.
Well dispersed solutions got highly viscous due to the increased interface
area between the two phases during the ultrasonication [10]. This viscosity
decreased over time as MWCNTs attracted each other and their interface area
with the resin was reduced. The viscosity reduction led to parts with smaller
material build up (more in the following section 5.2). So first manufactured
parts showed a rounded top surface, while the samples manufactured in next
print process showed a more flat top surface. Figure 5.18 shows the explained
comparison on resin/MWCNT 0,2% wt samples. Sample a was printed first
and has a bigger curvature than sample b, printed 2 h later.
==PAGE:72==
60
5 Results and Discussion
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.18: Effect of time on top curvature of 0,2% wt MWCNT samples.
5.1.4
Effect of Storage Method
Even though minimum time passed between the preparation phase and the
part production phase, the effect of time was clearly an issue. The two storage
methods (section 4.1) were intended to retard the effect of time and keep the
MWCNTs dispersed within the time between the preparation and production
phases.
Both storage methods were tested with resin/MWCNT 0,1%wt solutions.
The storage in bath sonication was at first expected to achieve better results
than the storage in ice. But a direct comparison between the two methods
revealed that the outcome was the opposite. Figure 5.19 shows the stress-
strain curves of resin/MWCNT 0,1%wt dog bones stored in ice (blue) and
in a bath sonication (orange). With UTS results being decreased an average
of 45,22%, the storage in a bath sonication proved to be an ineffective method.
The ultrasound waves in the bath sonication are not a strong enough to
substitute the tip sonication in the task of breaking agglomerates and dispers-
ing the MWCNTs. But they were clearly too strong to just prevent these
fillers from gathering back together. The outcome was most likely damaged
components of the resin, reducing all mechanical properties of the samples.
==PAGE:73==
5.1 Distribution and Dispersion Results
61
Table 5.8: Variation of properties on resin/MWCNT 0,1%wt samples with
different storage methods.
Figure 5.19: Stress-strain curves of resin/MWCNT 0,1%wt samples stored in
ice (blues) and in a bath sonication (oranges).
==PAGE:74==
62
5 Results and Discussion
5.2
Printing Process Results
In this section, results on the different elements influencing the production of
the parts are analyzed. The topics discussed include the build plate design,
solution viscosity, part position and effect of UV light.
5.2.1
Build plate design
Solution viscosity increased with increased amount of MWCNTs dispersed in
the solution. Therefore, the three build plates designs were tested with the
0,5%wt MWCNT solution, as it was the composition with the highest viscos-
ity. Out of the three designs, no printing processes could be conducted with
the plain build plate. The liquid could not flow off the surface and a large
bump was generated on top of it. The high viscosity of the solution increased
the effect of the surface tension [10], making it impossible to attach the first
layers to the build plate. It was quickly demonstrated that holes on the build
plate surface were definitely needed to decrease this effect.
The build plate with 3, 5 mm holes on the outer area and 2 mm holes
on the central area offered the big advantage of easy part positioning. Due
to the larger flat distance between holes a support for printed parts was en-
sured. In this case, the liquid flow-out was good on the outer surface. But as
previously explained, the flow of the solution was not as good in the middle
part, being the 2 mm holes not big enough to let the viscous solution leave the
surface. Therefore, it was not possible to create thin layers on this build plate.
The build plate with uniform 4 mm hole pattern showed to have the best
flow-out of the three designs. But due to the narrow spacing between the
holes, the part positioning got more complicated than with the previous build
plate. This drawback may be acceptable for printing dog bones, but more
complex geometries (especially the ones needing support structures) would be
more challenging to be properly positioned. The flow-out factor was chosen
to be more important than the part positioning factor. Thus, the build plate
with even 4 mm holes was chosen for the part manufacturing.
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Printing Process Results
63
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.20: Behaviour of a resin/MWCNT solution on (a) flat plate, (b)
uneven 2-3,5 mm holes and (c) even 4 mm.
5.2.2
Effect of solution viscosity
Reminding the principles of the DLP top-down method, the chosen build plate
should be covered by a liquid layer as thin as the desired printing layer thick-
ness. The principle worked well for the non-filled resins, which have a similar
viscosity to olive oil [35]. But when MWCNTs were introduced, properly dis-
persed MWCNTs led to highly increased viscosities of the solutions due to
the highly increased interface area. This resulted in an increased effect of the
surface tension, with two direct consequences on the printing dynamics and
layer thickness:
Firstly, the resin/MWCNT solutions did not flow as fast as non-filled resins
did. This resulted in the necessity of increasing the printing sequence time, so
the resin could settle down before the next layer’s projection.
Secondly, part of the resin that should have flowed away from the build
plate actually stayed on top of it due to the effect of surface tension of the
liquid. In most cases, this increased the liquid layer thickness on the build
plate. In consequence:
• When the UV light could go through the liquid layer, the polymerized
thickness was bigger than the established value, resulting in an excess
material build up and part sticking out of the liquid.
• When the UV light could not go through the liquid layer, the latest
==PAGE:76==
64
5 Results and Discussion
polymerized layer could not get attached to the surface below, resulting
in layer detachment.
Increased printing layer thicknesses showed to reduce the material build
up, although the surface finish was then sacrificed instead. Figure 5.21 shows
the results after the UV light not being able to go through the liquid layer,
and the results of material build up.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.21: (a) Nanocomposite part with built up geometry and layer detach-
ment compared to a (b) non-filled part geometry.
5.2.3
Part position on build plate
Other than viscosity, the position of the samples on the build plate (horizontal
or sideways) directly affected their properties and attachment as well. Over
cured bottom layers and surface tension were detected as two key factors while
looking for the optimal position.
• Overcured bottom layers were needed in all cases to ensure the part
attachment. The altered properties of these layers affected the proper-
ties of dog bones produced in the horizontal position. Whereas in the
sideways orientation only a small part of the dog bone head was affected.
==PAGE:77==
5.2 Printing Process Results
65
• The surface tension had a direct relation with the area per layer, increas-
ing its effect with bigger areas. Thus, the horizontal position was more
affected by this factor than the sideways position.
Table 5.9 shows a quick comparison of the three dog bone positions and
how meaningful qualitative factors affect their results. Although the standing
position was discarded from the beginning (see section 4.2), it was added for
effect comparison as well.
Table 5.9: Effect comparison of dog bone orientation on the build plate.
Both positions were tested, but the horizontal position showed to be highly
affected by the surface tension. This, led to dog bones with build up material
and rounded top surfaces, as shown in figure 5.22. On the other hand, dog
bones made in the sideways position did not show signs of rounded layers.
Therefore, the sideways position was found to be the optimal one, although
it also presented various setbacks that will be analyzed in the following section.
5.2.4
Effect of UV light on part attachment to build
plate
The bottom layers were of great importance to avoid part detachment from
the build plate, what turned out to be one major problem while working with
the DLP top-down printer. Solution viscosity, build plate design and part po-
sition were identified to be the three main factors influencing it. Even though
the initial resin level was set as low as possible to achieve the thinnest possi-
ble first layer, when certain upper viscosity threshold was exceeded the prints
could not be conducted. The reason for this was that following liquid layers
were too thick for the UV light to cure due to the liquid being unable to flow-
out of the build plate.
==PAGE:78==
66
5 Results and Discussion
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.22: Trial dog bones in the horizontal position on the build plate.
The bridge-like feature on the selected position was not difficult to hold.
But the polymerization process created strong contraction forces in this zone,
represented in figure 5.23. While UV light was applied on a layer, cross-linking
polymerization was enhanced, therefore, higher UV intensities increased the
number of links during the polymerization.During the process, the material
tends to contract in order to be able to create more links. So when the torque
created by the contraction forces was bigger than the weakest of the attach-
ments, the dog bone would lift and led to a failed print.
Figure 5.23: Polymerization forces acting on a dog bone.
==PAGE:79==
5.2 Printing Process Results
67
This phenomenon was found to happen more often on resin/MWCNT
prints than on non-filled resin prints. The reason behind this phenomenon was
the UV light absorption capacity of the carbon within the matrix [8], what
decreased the amount of UV light that the resin received. The phenomenon
was even more accentuated when big agglomerates were located on the build
plate. This could be recognized as non-glowing spots while the projector was
emitting light. The area occupied by these agglomerates offered no attach-
ment at all, reducing the effective attachment area of the parts. Figure 5.24
shows the consequences of part lifting as well as an agglomerate-containing
base of a dog bone.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.24:
(a) Exemplary failed printed parts and (b) agglomerate-
containing base of a dog bone.
Being the nominal UV exposure time equal to 3 s for all the parts, increas-
ing it up to 10 s on the bottom layers resulted enough to get attached parts
made out of non-filled resin, although it was insufficient for many parts made
out of resin/MWCNT solutions. It was observed that increasing UV exposure
time for the bottom layers obtained stronger attachments to the build plate.
But even stronger attachments were obtained on samples with the same com-
position when the UV intensity was increased for the bottom layers. This
was specially notable when the parts were removed from the build plate once
printed. For instance, parts with bottom layers made with double the nominal
==PAGE:80==
68
5 Results and Discussion
UV intensity during exposure times of 15 and 20 s showed to have no failures.
It must be emphasized, however, that the attachment of the bottom layers
strongly depended on the liquid layer thickness on the build plate. Due to the
increased and varying viscosities of the resin/MWCNT solutions, no method
was found to achieve uniform bottom layer thicknesses for all of them. Thus,
a statistical comparison was not possible.
Additionally, a direct consequence of increasing UV exposure time and
intensity was a bigger growth of the bottom layers, driven by the further poly-
merization of the monomer chains. It was found that bottom layers made with
long exposure times had a wider base than the ones made with shorter expo-
sure times. While bottom layers made with greater UV intensities showed a
taller appearance with not such wide base.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.25: Polymerization behaviour of longer exposure time on bottom
layers, with nominal layer thickness of 0, 03 mm.
On one hand, figure 5.25 shows an example of bottom layers made with
increased exposure time up to 20 s with UV intensity equal to the nominal
intensity. It can be appreciated that these bottom layers grew further towards
the sides, maintaining a very similar layer thickness compared to the upper
part of the sample.
==PAGE:81==
5.2 Printing Process Results
69
On the other hand, figure 5.26 shows an example of bottom layers made
with increased exposure time of 15 s and increased UV intensity up to the
double of the nominal intensity. Even though a sideways growth can be ap-
preciated, it can be recognized that the main growing direction was directed
upwards (building direction), increasing the layer thickness compared to the
upper part of the sample.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.26: Polymerization behaviour of greater UV intensity on bottom
layers, with nominal layer thickness of 0, 03 mm.
This behaviour could explain why increased UV intensities obtained stronger
attachments than increased UV exposure time.
While increased exposure
times enhanced a wider polymerization area, greater UV intensities were able
to get deeper into the resin/MWCNT solution. Thus obtaining a stronger
attachment to the build plate.
5.2.5
Effect of UV light intensity on printed samples
As mentioned, varying UV light intensities further affect the cross-linking
polymerization of the resins. Thus, its effect on the mechanical properties of
the samples was analyzed.
==PAGE:82==
70
5 Results and Discussion
• Non-filled resin
Experiments were conducted with the non-filled resins first, as the reference for
the following resin/MWCNT samples. The IB unpigmented resin was tested
with UV light intensities of 40, 45 and 50. The three UV intensities delivered
extremely similar parts in regards to the geometry while analyzed with LOM.
Thus, optically the three parameters were considered valid. However, the me-
chanical properties did vary as displayed in table 5.10.
Figure 5.27: Inappreciable visual differences of samples made out of IB unpig-
mented resin with different UV intensities.
Table 5.10: Average results from the UV light intensities tested.
Hardness tests revealed that the 50 UV intensity created the hardest sam-
ples with an average value of 77,97 shoreD. While the intensities of 45 and 40
got lower average hardnesses of 76,40 and 76,17 shoreD, respectively. Thus,
being the hardness directly proportional to the UV light intensity.
==PAGE:83==
5.2 Printing Process Results
71
Same trend as the hardness was observed on stiffness. The average stiffness
values were E40 = 5, 95, E45 = 6, 18 and E50 = 6, 46 GPa. The increments
per step were then 3,87% and 4,57%, indicating a linear tendency on the
behaviour. Figure 5.28 displays both hardness and stiffness measurements,
where linearity of the trend can be observed.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.28: (a) Hardness and (b) stiffness measurements and averages for
varying UV light on IB unpigmented resin.
On the other hand, tensile test results surprised with outstanding strength
of some of the samples printed with 45 UV intensity.
With a maximum
UTS45 = 23, 78 MPa, it was over 20% higher than the maximum UTS values
of the samples made with 40 and 50 UV intensities. Although the obtained
average values were in a similar range, as shown in table 5.10.
The proportional relationship between UV intensity and stiffness was a
result from cross linking polymerization. Greater UV intensities provoked a
higher number of cross links during the curing. The more links between chains,
the more restricted movement the structure had. Thus, the lower mobility of
the material increased the stiffness. And because of the same reason, hardness
values also followed the same trend.
==PAGE:84==
72
5 Results and Discussion
Figure 5.29: Stress-strain curves of IB unpigmented resin printed with UV
intensities of 40 (greens), 45 (oranges) and 50 (blues).
With the mentioned effects on the non-filled resins, similar effects were
expected to happen with the resin/MWCNT solutions because of the ma-
trix being the same. But the effect of the printing parameters on them was
more difficult to analyze, as most of the times the results were affected by ag-
glomerates. Highlighting, once more, the big relevance of the dispersion step.
Also, the failed prints limited the comparison of the resin/MWCNT samples.
Among the successful samples, only the ones made in the same printing round
were compared.
• Resin/MWCNT 0,5%wt composites
Intensities of 60, 70, 80 and 90 were tested with the IB black resin/MWCNT
0,5 %wt. Although these samples were highly affected by the poor dispersion.
Note, as well, that the lack of samples was due to failed prints. Therefore, a
full comparison of parameters was not possible. Table 5.11 shows the results
obtained with the tested samples.
Average stiffness values for each UV intensity were E60 = 5, 82, E70 = 6, 01
and E90 = 4, 71 GPa. So contrary to the non-filled resin, no clear trend could
be recognized while modifying the UV intensity. The amount of agglomerates
found in this resin/MWCNT composition was most likely the reason behind
the big variability on the results, as well as the lack of successfully printed
==PAGE:85==
5.2 Printing Process Results
73
dog bones to test. And although no more tensile tests could be conducted
for strength comparisons, most of the failed prints could be used for hardness
tests.
Table 5.11: Average results from the UV light intensities tested with IB black
resin/MWCNT 0,5%wt.
The average hardness values were within a narrow range of 5 shoreD de-
spite of the big UV intensity variations. These values can be found in table
5.11. An overall increasing tendency on the hardness could be observed for
increasing UV intensities. But the measurements showed to be variable again,
with comparably high standard deviations on the measurements. So even if
the average values were similar, the standard deviation of these measurements
showed a high uncertainty regarding hardness.
As noticed on the strength of the samples, the agglomerates in the 0,5%wt
MWCNT dog bones were most likely the reason why the measurements were
so distorted. Agglomerates acted as stress concentration points, enhancing
the crack initiation under load.
==PAGE:86==
74
5 Results and Discussion
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.30: (a) Hardness and (b) stiffness measurements and averages for
varying UV light on IB black resin/MWCNT 0,5%wt.
Hardness values were distorted by the same reason. Agglomerates offered
low resistance against the tool indenter, as the agglomerated MWCNTs are
bonded by weak Van der Waals forces. Hence, indentations made on or close
to agglomerates encountered no resistance against its advance. In contrast,
indented parts with no agglomerates could oppose more resistance, as the poly-
meric chains together with properly dispersed nanotubes have stonger bond-
ings than the ones found on the agglomerates.
Unfortunately, it is highly
probable that all the indentations were affected by the mentioned effect, due
the dispersion of these solutions being non successful, as discussed in previous
section 5.1.2.
Because of the same reasons analyzed above, the UTS proved to be vari-
able as well. The behaviour of the nano-composite material did not follow
the same trend as the non-filled resins. Figure 5.31 displays the stress-strain
curves of the samples made with 60 (blue), 70 (orange) and 90 (green) UV
intensities. It can be easily seen that there was not a notable behaviour with
the variation of the UV intensity used for sample production.
==PAGE:87==
5.2 Printing Process Results
75
Figure 5.31: Stress-strain curves of IB black resin/MWCNT 0,5% wt printed
with UV intensities of 60 (blue), 70 (oranges) and 90 (green).
5.2.6
Residual UV light effect
After the experiments in which higher UV lights intensities were used (for
bottom layers or whole part) it was found that part of the solutions were poly-
merized in the holes of the build plate. This effect occurred due to the residual
light emitted by the projector, which never stopped emitting light during a
process. Both during the projection of a layer or during the lifting times, there
was always some UV light that hit the vat. This residual light was found to
be proportional to the set UV intensity values, as the polymerized resin in
the holes only happened with greater UV intensities, where the residual light
could be even seen.
Greater intensities were mainly used for the bottom layers. Thus covering
the projector during the lifting time proved to be an effective method to avoid
the residual light from curing unwanted resin. But even in that case, remain-
ing residual light during layer projections would always cure small parts of the
solutions.
==PAGE:88==
76
5 Results and Discussion
Figure 5.32: Unwanted polymerized structured due to residual UV light.
==PAGE:89==
5.3 Effect of Filler Content
77
5.3
Effect of Filler Content
In this section, the effects of fillers in terms of reinforcing ability are discussed.
With the IB unpigmented resin as common matrix, the different MWCNT
and CF compositions are first compared separately with the optimal param-
eters found during the project. Then, a final comparison of resin/MWCNT,
resin/CF and resin/MWCNT+CF is done.
5.3.1
Resin/MWCNT Composites
Only the 0,2%wt and 0,1%wt MWCNT nanocomposites investigated with the
IB unpigmented resin were compared. The 0,5%wt was excluded due to its
investigation being developed with the IB black resin.
The optimal parameters for the 0,2%wt MWCNT solutions were obtained
with 7 min of sonication with 15 µm of amplitude, to later be printed with
60 UV intensity. While the optimal parameters for the 0,1%wt solutions were
obtained with 5 min of sonication with 15 µm of amplitude, also printed with
60 UV intensity. This last combination obtained the strongest resin/MWCNT
nanocomposite, with average UTS= 13, 97 MPa.
Table 5.12: Comparation of average mechanical properties of 0,2%wt and
0,1%wt MWCNT nanocomposites.
Looking at the results in table 5.12, the differences on the properties be-
tween both compositions is notable. The common presence of agglomerates
in higher loading solutions might have weaken the material. But such large
differences on the mechanical properties probably indicated that the 0,2%wt
==PAGE:90==
78
5 Results and Discussion
solution was deteriorated during the preparation phase too. Hence, the in-
crease on the MWCNT content did not produce a subsequent increase on the
matrix reinforcement.
Figure 5.33: Stress-strain curves of IB unpigmented resin/MWCNT 0,2%wt
(blues) and 0,1%wt (oranges).
5.3.2
Resin/CF Composites
The composites of 2%wt and 5%wt CF were produced with 50 UV light inten-
sity, and both were stirred every 10 min during the non-projection times in
the printing process. Even if stirring was conducted, different darkness tones
could be appreciated on the 5%wt samples.
Hence the 5%wt composition
was most likely saturated and sedimentation of CFs led to a reduced effective
amount of fillers within the part.
Table 5.13 displays the comparison of the average mechanical properties
of both compositions. The increase on the CF content did not result on a in-
creased reinforcement of the matrix, though, what might be a consequence of
two phenomena. Firstly, and as already mentioned, the faster sedimentation
on the 5%wt composition most likely reduced the effective amount of fillers
even if stirring was conducted. Secondly, the higher amount of CFs on the
5%wt composition probably absorbed more UV light than in the 2%wt com-
position, resulting in a higher undercured resin. This could also explain the
==PAGE:91==
5.3 Effect of Filler Content
79
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.34: Dog bone heads of (a) 2%wt and (b) 5%wt CF composites, with
notable darkness change on the 5%wt.
almost 4% higher strain at break of the 5%wt CF samples, as it was explained
in previous sections.
Table 5.13: Average mechanical properties of 2%wt and 5%wt CF.
Note, as well, that CF composites were not investigated, but the geometri-
cal accuracy was highly improved over the resin/MWCNT. The improvement
was due to the lower viscosity of the solutions, despite the higher %wt con-
centrations. This effect was caused by the much lower surface area of the CFs
in comparison with the WMCNTs [10]. Thus, higher filler loadings did not
noticeably affect the viscosity of the solution.
==PAGE:92==
80
5 Results and Discussion
Figure 5.35: Stress-strain curves of IB unpigmented resin/CF 2%wt (blues)
and 5%wt (oranges).
It was also observed under the LOM that most of the CFs were oriented per-
pendicular to the load direction as seen in figure 5.36. Hence, the anisotropic
CFs samples were not optimized in terms of load transfer. The anisotropy
was most likely caused by the material build up during the print, where the
solution flow-out was oriented towards the sides of the dog bone. The liquid
flow subsequently oriented the micro CFs in the same direction of the flow-
out, which was perpendicular to the load direction applied during tensile tests.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.36: Broken resin/CF dog bone (a) cross section, (b) side view and
(c) perpendicular CFs to load direction.
==PAGE:93==
5.3 Effect of Filler Content
81
5.3.3
Resin/MWCNT, Resin/CF and Hybrid Composites
Results of the previously discussed compositions and hybrid composites were
contrasted together. It should be noted that the hybrid composite was man-
ufactured 4 h after the preparation of the resin/MWCNT solution, so its
mechanical properties could have been improved if the time was shortened.
It is quickly detected in figure 5.37 that the composites containing higher
carbon loadings are the ones with larger strain at break. This fact emphasized
the previously proposed explanation about the carbon-based fillers absorbing
UV light. Thus, the lower polymerization and consequent undercured resin
enhanced the plasticity of the composites.
Figure 5.37: Stress-strain curves of IB unpigmented resin non-filled (grey),
0,1%wt MWCNT (light blue), 2%wt CF (yellow), 5%wt CF (orange), 0,05%wt
MWCNT + 2,5%wt CF hybrid (green) and 0,2%wt MWCNT (dark blue).
Following the mentioned effect, the hybrid composites behaved in a similar
way to the resin/Cf composites, as an effect of the carbon loadings. Remark-
ing the non successful dispersions obtained in the resin/MWCNT solutions,
the hybrid composite suffered the same effects on mechanical properties, mak-
ing it deducible that agglomerates did probably lower its strength. Average
mechanical properties of the composites can be seen in table 5.14.
Out of all the combinations studied during the project, the resin/MWCNT
0,1%wt obtained the best results regarding mechanical properties. Although
==PAGE:94==
82
5 Results and Discussion
Table 5.14: Average mechanical properties of the different fillers used with IB
unpigmented resin.
none of the concentrations investigated did actually reinforce the polymeric
matrix.
It was, therefore, deducible that the addition of higher MWCNT
and/or CF loadings did not necessarily reinforce the matrix accordingly. In
fact, the relation between content and reinforcement ability seemed to be op-
posed for the investigated compositions.
It was also appreciated that the surface finish obtained with the different
fillers was highly different. As could be expected judging by the respective
size of each filler, the presence of CFs on the samples’ surface could easily be
detected. While MWCNTs, with the exception of agglomerates, were inap-
preciable even under the LOM. Thus, even if CF composites were highly less
challenging to manufacture, only the MWCNTs were able to achieve similar
surface quality results to the non-filled resins. Although it can be appreciated
in figure 5.38 that the addition of such nano-fillers resulted in the creation of
small cracks on the samples surface, suggesting that the results could still be
highly improved.
==PAGE:95==
5.3 Effect of Filler Content
83
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.38: Hardness indented surfaces of (a) non-filled IB unpigmented resin,
(b) resin/MWCNT nanocomposite and (c) resin/MWCNT+CF hybrid com-
posite.
==PAGE:96==
84
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In this project, carbon-based nano-fillers were investigated as a reinforce-
ment phase in photopolymer matrices. Their effect on mechanical properties
was analyzed by the preparation of solutions with different MWCNT load-
ings. Distribution and dispersion of the fillers was investigated through mag-
netic stirring and ultrasonication, where threshold parameters for the stud-
ied resin/MWCNT solutions were found. An in-house built DLP top-down
printer was utilized for the manufacturing of the nanocomposite samples. Be-
ing the first time this materials were produced in the mentioned machine,
production paramenters were investigated in order to optimize the properties
of resin/MWCNT nanocomposites. This included the effect of liquid flow dur-
ing the process, part attachment to build plate or UV light exposure time and
intensity calibration for nanocomposite printing. For the subsequent mechan-
ical testing of samples hardness and tensile tests were conducted, and results
were contrasted with resin/CF composites and resin/CNT+CF hybrid com-
posites.
The material preparation phase was the step with biggest impact on the
final result. Within it, the magnetic stirring conducted at 2000 rpm was only
half of the phase, but demonstrated to be of great influence. Outstanding
differences were found while comparing the resin/MWCNT dog bones that
went through the stirring step with the ones that skipped this process. Even
if stirring was not a powerful dispersing process, the mechanical movement
proved to be essential to achieve a good distribution and reduce the surface
agglomerate area over 80% from 0,35 h to 18 h. The reduction of agglomer-
ates was key to get a good outcome from the following ultrasonication, as this
process was unable of breaking agglomerates generated after just shaking or
shortly stirring the solutions. A limitation on the stirring process was found,
though, as solutions with stirring times over 18 h led to samples with slightly
increasing agglomerate area on their surfaces. This effect, most likely derived
from the centrifugal forces in the process pushing the MWCNTs outwards, set
==PAGE:98==
86
6 Conclusion
a threshold on the process for optimized sample production.
Ultrasonication of the resin/MWCNT solutions to break the filler agglom-
erates could be considered as the most important process within the whole
project. The process highly increased the viscosities of all the solutions, spe-
cially the 0,5%wt and 0,2%wt MWCNT batches. This was a result of the
increasing interface area between the resin and fillers, due to the extremely
large surface area of the MWCNTs [10]. Increased viscosity meant that more
fillers were in contact with the matrix instead of agglomerated, therefore, a
good dispersion was being achieved. But high viscosity solutions were also
more prone to get burned due to the ultrasound waves not being able to
expand through the liquid. This consequence limited the amplitude and/or
time of the applied ultrasonication, so process thresholds were found.
No
prints could be conducted above these thresholds, and even the resin could
get damaged. Even if w, not being able to break all the agglomerates within
the resin in any of the resin/MWCNT solutions studied.
Samples made in consecutive print rounds out of the same solution batch
showed to have different properties.
Thus, time had clearly an impact on
the mechanical properties of nanocomposites, being the solutions with better
dispersed MWCNTs the most affected ones. It was a direct consequence of
MWCNTs gathering back together due to Van der Waals forces attracting
them.
Thus, the decreased interface area between filler and matrix led to
decreased mechanical properties. Then, once big agglomerates were formed,
they would precipitate and reduce the effective filler content within a solution.
Even if no proper dispersion was achieved, resin/MWCNT 0,1%wt solu-
tions obtained the best dispersion results. In consequence, both strength and
stiffness of samples of this composition decreased over ∼20%. Samples con-
taining 0,2%wt MWCNT were less affected due to the previous existence of
agglomerates, with 10% decrease on strength and stiffness.
While 0,5%wt
samples, the ones with worse dispersion, were ∼6% stronger and ∼8% stiffer
due to the precipitation of agglomerates. Hence, better dispersed solutions we
found to be more prone to variations on the mechanical properties over time.
The increased viscosity of the solutions intensified the effect of surface
tension on the DLP printer build plate, making it challenging to obtain thin
layers on it and, thus, complicating the part attachment to it. Increased UV
light exposure time and intensities demonstrated to improve the bottom layer
==PAGE:99==
6 Conclusion
87
attachment, showing different polymerization behaviours. Longer exposure
times enhanced the curing growth on the horizontal plate (perpendicular to
light projection), obtaining wider bottom layers. While higher UV intensities
enhanced the curing of the photopolymer in the vertical direction (parallel to
light projection), increasing the thickness of the bottom layers.
The effect of increasing UV light intensities on the non-filled resin resulted
in increased stiffness and hardness, enhanced by cross-linking polymerization
and, hence, reduced mobility of the polymeric chains. But resin/MWCNT
composites did not follow the same behaviour, showing no specific tendency
on the variation of properties most probably affected by agglomerates within
the samples.
A very remarkable, yet unexpected, variation with the addition of carbon-
based fillers was the increased strain at break of the nanocomposites. One
would expected embrittlement of the material to happen, but the UV light
absorbtion ability of the MWCNTs altered the polymerization process of the
photopolymer. As the resin received lower amounts of UV light, it was left
undercured. Hence, the movement of the chains was not fully restricted and
plasticity of the material was enhanced.
The comparison of resin/MWCNT nanocomposites with resin/CF and
resin/MWCNT+CF showed that none of the reinforcement fillers did actu-
ally reinforce the matrix. All the loadings investigated were most likely above
the optimum resin/filler composition.
In fact, the composites with higher
amount of fillers were the ones that most lowered the strength of the matrix.
Showing that the addition of higher filler loadings did not necessarily mean a
higher reinforced matrix.
The composites containing CFs showed the largest strain at break among
all the composites, probably due to the higher amount of carbon in the sys-
tem that absorbed UV light and left an undercured matrix.
Whereas the
resin/MWCNT 0,1%wt was found to be the best material combiantion found
in terms of strength and stiffness.
Even if the material preparation of the resin/CF solutions was less chal-
lenging than the resin/MWCNT solutions, the surface finish and feature detail
were highly different. The filler size limited the quality of the sample surfaces,
being the MWCNTs inapreciable on the surfaces, with the exepcion of ag-
==PAGE:100==
88
6 Conclusion
glomerates. Thus, this suggested that only nano-scaled fillers, such as the
MWCNTs, could achieve a high surface finish and micro-feature accuracy on
final functional parts.
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 7
Future Work
It was clear that there is still room for improvement.
Optimal parameter
combinations are to be found and properly take advantage from both phases
within the nano-composite. Two possible paths could be investigated: lower
nano-filler content or pre-dispersion of fillers in a solvent.
Lower nano-filler content
After verifying that the loadings investigated were too large, lower nano-filler
concentrations down to 0, 05%wt or even lower should be tried. This could
help finally achieving a good dispersion within the resin, what should highly
improve the properties of the photopolymer as well. Although in case the resin
viscosity keeps being a limitation, a different and less viscous resin should be
utilized. This would entail a new phase of parameter calibration, but should
also make it less challenging to achieve a good dispersion of the MWCNTs.
Among improvements to be done in the material preparation phase, vari-
ous parallel ultrasonication devices should be used. In this manner, the whole
printing volume would be ready at the same time with no wasted time between
processes and, thus, improved mechanical properties of the nanocomposite
parts. Of course, the sequential movement to prevent local solution burning
should be done automatically, with programmed platforms for instance. The
addition of the mentioned platforms would allow a more efficient use of time.
Pre-dispersion of fillers in a solvent
It is a different approach that has previously being investigated with success-
ful results [21][39]. The dispersion of MWCNTs within a solvent is far less
challenging that doing so in a resin. The solvent/MWCNT solution is then
mixed with the resin and, finally, the solvent is removed from the system.
The challenge of this approach, though, would be the complete removal of the
solvent, leaving a well dispersed resin/MWCNT system ready to conduct the
part production.
==PAGE:102==
90
7 Future Work
Both approaches would end up with a resin/MWCNT solution of increased
viscosity again due to the increased interface area. Thus, the printing process
would face similar issues. Two new parameters could improve the manufactur-
ing of the parts: printing temperature and bath sonication. Firstly, properly
dispersed solutions get highly viscous, therefore applying heat to the solution
while printing might help reducing the viscosity and boost the MWCNT%wt
concentration used, what is also expected to improve the mechanical proper-
ties of the material. Secondly, a possible solution to fight against the effect of
time and re-agglomerations could be applying bath sonication to the solution
while printing, using the time slots in which the projector is not emitting light
to apply the ultrasounds to the solution. This could be easily done by placing
the solution containing vat into a big enough bath sonicator with a controlled
temperature. It would be of great importance, thought, to study the stability
of the solution’s surface during the process, so the solution film on top of the
previously cured layer could be precisely controlled.
In case the viscosity and/or material build-up are still an issue, DLP
bottom-up could also be tested. This technique restricts the Z-axis to the
curing growth, and has the added advantage of not having to deal with sur-
face tension related adversities. Whereas both factors were challenging to deal
with during the DLP top-down prints.
Ultimate parameters which with successfully dispersed MWCNTs are ob-
tained could be subjected to a wider spectrum of testing.
Thanks to the
multifunctionality of MWCNTs, thermal and electrical testing could be con-
ducted along with mechanical tests. This would allow an expansion of the
applications of nanocomposites to not only mechanical applications. Tailored
properties could then be used to produce fully functional parts that could be
tested in real applications.
A step further could be investigating the tailoring of nano-filler orientation
during a printing process. Previous studies have achieved highly unidirectional
nanocomposites with the use of electromagnetical fields [31]. Thus, controlling
the direction on the MWCNTs layer by layer would open new opportunities
to tune the reinforcement of micro-features, immitating the macro-scaled com-
posites in which layered fibers are oriented accordingly to the functionalities.
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
[1]
Plastics Europe. “Plastics - The Facts 2017”. In: Association of Plastics
Manufacturers (2017).
[2]
Guido Tosello et al. “Precision moulding of polymer micro components:
Optimization, Simulation, Tooling, Quality Control and Multi-Material
Application”. Awarded the ”Best PhD work at DTU 2008”. PhD thesis.
August 2008. isbn: 978-87-89502-77-9.
[3]
David Bourell et al. “Materials for additive manufacturing”. In: CIRP
Annals 66.2 (2017), pages 659–681. issn: 0007-8506.
[4]
Daniel R. Eyers and Andrew T. Potter. “Industrial Additive Manufactur-
ing: A manufacturing systems perspective”. In: Computers in Industry
92-93 (2017), pages 208–218. issn: 01663615.
[5]
David Bourell et al. “Evaluation of polymer micro parts produced by ad-
ditive manufacturing processes using vat photopolymerization method”.
In: CIRP Annals 66.2 (2017), pages 659–681. issn: 0007-8506.
[6]
Saeed Doagou Rad et al. “Interaction of nanofillers in injection-molded
graphene/carbon nanotube reinforced PA66 hybrid nanocomposites”. In:
Journal of Polymer Engineering (2018).
[7]
Mohammad Moniruzzaman and Karen I. Winey. “Polymer Nanocompos-
ites Containing Carbon Nanotubes”. In: Macromolecules 39.16 (2006),
pages 5194–5205.
[8]
J. Hector Sandoval and Ryan B. Wicker. “Functionalizing stereolithogra-
phy resins: Effects of dispersed multi-walled carbon nanotubes on phys-
ical properties”. In: Rapid Prototyping Journal 12.5 (2006), pages 292–
303. issn: 13552546.
==PAGE:104==
92
Bibliography
[9]
Siddharth Ram Athreya, Kyriaki Kalaitzidou, and Suman Das. “Process-
ing and characterization of a carbon black-filled electrically conductive
Nylon-12 nanocomposite produced by selective laser sintering”. In: Ma-
terials Science and Engineering: A 527.10 (2010), pages 2637–2642. issn:
0921-5093.
[10]
J. H. Sandoval et al. “Nanotailoring photocrosslinkable epoxy resins with
multi-walled carbon nanotubes for stereolithography layered manufac-
turing”. In: Journal of Materials Science 42.1 (January 2007), pages 156–
165. issn: 1573-4803.
[11]
H. Chung and S. Das. “Functionally Graded Nylon-11/Silica Nanocom-
posites Produced by Selective laser Sintering”. In: Mater. Sci. Eng. A
(2008), pages 251–257.
[12]
John G Bai, Kevin D Creehan, and Howard A Kuhn. “Inkjet printable
nanosilver suspensions for enhanced sintering quality in rapid manufac-
turing”. In: Nanotechnology 18.18 (), page 185701.
[13]
P. Ripka. “Sensors based on bulk soft magnetic materials: Advances and
challenges”. In: Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 320 (20
2008), pages 2466–2473.
[14]
“Vat Polymerization Pros and Cons - Additive Manufacturing”. In: Steemit.com
(2017).
[15]
Hans Lilholt Bo Madsen Bent F. Sørensen. “Composite Materials and
Fibres”. In: Course 46420 (2017).
[16]
A. WEINBERG S. RATNER and G. MAROM. “Morphology and Me-
chanical Properties of Crosslinked PE/PE Composite Materials”. In: 24.3
(2003), pages 422–427.
[17]
Olga Ivanova, Christopher Williams, and Thomas Campbell. “Additive
manufacturing (AM) and nanotechnology: promises and challenges”. In:
Rapid Prototyping Journal 19.5 (2013), pages 353–364.
[18]
Andrea C. Ferrari. “Raman spectroscopy of graphene and graphite: Dis-
order, electron-phonon coupling, doping and nonadiabatic effects”. In:
Solid State Communications 143.1-2 (2007), pages 47–57. issn: 00381098.
[19]
Alireza Tabarraei, Shohreh Shadalou, and Jeong Hoon Song. “Mechani-
cal properties of graphene nanoribbons with disordered edges”. In: Com-
putational Materials Science 96.PA (2015), pages 10–19. issn: 09270256.
[20]
Benito Román-Manso et al. Electrically conductive graphene/silicon car-
bide cellular composites. 2015.
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
93
[21]
Dong Lin et al. “3D stereolithography printing of graphene oxide rein-
forced complex architectures”. In: Nanotechnology 26.43 (2015), page 434003.
issn: 13616528.
[22]
A. Abouelsayed et al. “Ultraviolet and infrared studies of the single-
walled and multi-walled carbon nanotube films with different thickness”.
In: Physica B: Condensed Matter 483 (2016), pages 8–12. issn: 09214526.
[23]
“What is Carbon Black?” In: International Carbon Black Association
(2014).
[24]
Koji Kobashi. “Diamond Films”. In: 1 (2005).
[25]
Giulia Galli. Structure, Stability and Electronic Properties of Nanodia-
monds. May 2010.
[26]
Xuezhang Liu and Xiangyang Xu. “Ultra-fine polishing of glass-ceramics
by disaggregated and fractionated detonation nanodiamond”. In: Ceram-
ics International 43.8 (2017), pages 6063–6068. issn: 02728842.
[27]
U. Kalsoom et al. “A 3D printable diamond polymer composite: a novel
material for fabrication of low cost thermally conducting devices”. In:
RSC Adv. 6 (44 2016), pages 38140–38147.
[28]
Murari L Gupta et al. “The effect of mixing methods on the dispersion
of carbon nanotubes during the solvent-free processing of multiwalled
carbon nanotube/epoxy composites”. In: Journal of Polymer Science
Part B: Polymer Physics 51 (2013), pages 410–420.
[29]
Yanfeng Jiang, Hao Song, and Rui Xu. “Research on the dispersion of
carbon nanotubes by ultrasonic oscillation, surfactant and centrifuga-
tion respectively and fiscal policies for its industrial development”. In:
Ultrasonics Sonochemistry 48.May (2018), pages 30–38. issn: 18732828.
[30]
Christopher A. Dyke and James M. Tour. “Covalent Functionalization
of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes for Materials Applications”. In: The
Journal of Physical Chemistry A 108.51 (2004), pages 11151–11159. doi:
10.1021/jp046274g.
[31]
T. Kimura et al. “Polymer Composites of Carbon Nanotubes Aligned
by a Magnetic Field”. In: Advanced Materials 14.19 (2002), pages 1380–
1383. issn: 1521-4095.
[32]
Charisios Achillas, Dimitrios Tzetzis, and Maria Olga Raimondo. “Alter-
native production strategies based on the comparison of additive and tra-
ditional manufacturing technologies”. In: International Journal of Pro-
duction Research 55.12 (2017), pages 3497–3509. issn: 1366588X.
==PAGE:106==
94
Bibliography
[33]
FunToDo. “Industrial Blend - Safety Data Sheet”. In: (2014). url: www.
funtodo.net.
[34]
Nanocyl. “Technical Data Sheet: NC7000”. In: (2016). url: www.nanocyl.
com/product/nc7000/.
[35]
Thore Langholz. “Specification, construction and validation of a top-
down, DLP driven photopolymerization platform for continous High
Definition 3D printing”. In: (2015).
[36]
Thomas Hielscher. “Ultrasonic Production of Nano-Size Dispersions and
Emulsions”. In: Ens December (2005), pages 14–16.
[37]
ASTM. “Standard Test Method for Tensile Properties of Plastics by
Use of Microtensile Specimens”. In: American Society for Testing and
Materials 08.October (2014), pages 5–9.
[38]
Narendra Singh, Gaurav Chand, and S. Kanagaraj. “Investigation of
thermal conductivity and viscosity of carbon nanotubes-ethylene glycol
nanofluids”. In: Heat Transfer Engineering 33.9 (2012), pages 821–827.
issn: 01457632.
[39]
Sd Bergin et al. “Multicomponent solubility parameters for single-walled
carbon nanotube−solvent mixtures Cited by me”. In: Acs Nano 3.8
(2009), pages 2340–2350. issn: 1936-0851.
==PAGE:107==
Appendix
• Technical drawing: Dog Bone.
• Technical drawing: Build plate - even.
• Technical drawing: Build plate - uneven.
• Technical drawing: Build plate - flat.
==PAGE:108==
SHEET
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED, 
APPROVED
DATE
1 of 1
WEIGHT
DRAWN
SIZE
_
A4
A4
Iñaki Arrieta Azanza
1
1:1
DOG BONE
FIRST ANGLE PROJECTION
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REMOVE BURRS
BREAK ALL SHARP EDGES AND 
CHECKED
REV.
DWG NO.
SIGNATURE
NAME
FINISHED
SURFACE FINISH
SCALE
TITLE
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
MATERIAL
6.67
9.67
1.00
21.33
6.67
14.67
R3.33
3.00
==PAGE:109==
R2.00
5.00
0.20 X 45º
70.00
50.00
DRAWN
WEIGHT
BUILD PLATE - EVEN
SHEET
NAME
CHECKED
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED, 
MATERIAL
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
DATE
FINISHED
SURFACE FINISH
APPROVED
SCALE
SIGNATURE
DWG NO.
REV.
_
BREAK ALL SHARP EDGES AND 
REMOVE BURRS
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
FIRST ANGLE PROJECTION
1:1
Iñaki Arrieta Azanza
A4
A4
TITLE
1 of 1
SIZE
3
==PAGE:110==
5.00
R2.00
70.00
0.10 x 45º
0.50 x 45º
50.00
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED, 
REV.
SHEET
DATE
CHECKED
WEIGHT
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
MATERIAL
APPROVED
4
SURFACE FINISH
SCALE
FINISHED
NAME
SIGNATURE
DWG NO.
SIZE
TITLE
BREAK ALL SHARP EDGES AND 
REMOVE BURRS
A4
FIRST ANGLE PROJECTION
1:1
Iñaki Arrieta Azanza
A4
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
_
1 of 1
DRAWN
BUILD PLATE - UNEVEN 
==PAGE:111==
70.00
50.00
R2.00
5.00
Iñaki Arrieta Azanza
1:1
_
REMOVE BURRS
A4
BREAK ALL SHARP EDGES AND 
CHECKED
REV.
DWG NO.
SIGNATURE
SURFACE FINISH
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
FINISHED
SCALE
TITLE
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
MATERIAL
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED, 
WEIGHT
SHEET
DATE
APPROVED
SIZE
DRAWN
2
NAME
FIRST ANGLE PROJECTION
A4
1 of 1
BUILD PLATE - FLAT
