==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida
KT2440 Strain
Exploration of the redox balance in the metabolic network
Xiaochen Lyu (S161431)
Supervisors:
Mikael Rørdam Andersen (DTU BIOENGINEERING)
Nikolaus Sonnenschein (DTU BIOSUSTAIN)
Moritz Emanuel Beber (DTU BIOSUSTAIN)
Experimental collaborators:
Pablo Ivan Nikel (DTU BIOSUSTAIN)
Daniel Christoph Volke (DTU BIOSUSTAIN)
Kongens Lyngby 2800, 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Biosustain
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability
DTU Bioengineering
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
Technical University of Denmark
Kemitorvet
Building 220
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 8000
www.biosustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
PREFACE
This M.Sc thesis entitled "Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
- Exploration of the redox balance in the metabolic network" was prepared at The Novo Nordisk
Foundation Center for Biosustainability at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the
requirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark.
Kongens Lyngby, July 13, 2018
Xiaochen Lyu (S161431)
i
==PAGE:4==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page ii
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:5==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Several persons have contributed academically and piratically to this thesis. I would like ﬁrstly thank
my supervisor Nikolaus Sonnenschein for the ideas and comments and involving me into this project,
and many thanks to Moritz Emanuel Beber for the all the teaching, guiding, helping and supporting
throughout the project. I would like to thank Pablo Ivan Nikel and Daniel Christoph Volke as our
collaborators have offered much useful information for me during the project. And a special thanks
to Mikael Rørdam Andersen for being my main supervisor of this project. Next, I would like to thank
all the friends who have made my life much easier and saved my life during the writing of the thesis.
Lastly, I would like to express the most appreciation for my parents for all the understanding and
supporting for my two-year staying in Danmark.
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The soil bacterium Pseudomonas putida KT2440 encompasses a complex glucose consumption
network with three branches for glycolysis. Glucose can either be directly phosphorylated or oxi-
dized into gluconate and/or 2-ketogluconate and enter central carbon metabolism as the intermediate
6-Phosphogluconate (6PG) exclusively via Enter-Doudoroff (ED) pathway. Remarkably, it operates a
particular cyclic metabolic architecture in gluconeogenic fashion recycling 10% of triose phosphates
back to hexose phosphate. The cycle is termed EDEMP cycle merging the components from ED, Pen-
tose Phosephate (PP) and incomplete Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas (EMP) pathways. The redox balance
in P. putida is characterized by a slight catabolic overproduction of NADPH which contributes to the
robustness of its metabolic network to cope with the various environmental stress in its natural habi-
tats. A genome-scale metabolic network model (GEMis a powerful tool in studying the metabolic
properties of the target organisms. In this project, the most comprehensive and complete reconstruc-
tion for the strain P. putida KT2240 built to date, namely iJN1411, in combined with previously
measured ﬂux data is used for the in silico studying pf the redox balance in the P. putida metabolic
network. The predictions performed including: i) systematic predictions of the gene essentiality in
glucose and citrate medium, ii) phenotypic cellular growth, quantitative ﬂux distributions and the
redox net formation rate on mutants undergoing redox production perturbations, and iii) comparing
a comprehensive analysis of redox balance strategies under genetic perturbations in Escheichia coli
strain K-12 substrain MG1655 and P. putida strain KT2440.
79 in silico conditional essential genes in glucose medium has been proposed, of which 58 genes
are validated against the experimental identiﬁcation. The predictions of the redox challenging mu-
tants have demonstrated that the EDEMP cycle is of importance for the redox balance in the metabolic
network of P. putida. As it is always active in the mutants and with a narrow ﬂux ﬂexibility. The car-
bons recycled through EDEMP cycle to produce the intermediate Glucose-6-P (G6P). It may act as
a reservoir of NADPH through the catalysis of Zwf enzyme. In combination with the redox bal-
ance strategies analysis, several favored reactions have been predicted to be activated under redox
perturbations, indicating the robust metabolic network of P. putida.
v
==PAGE:8==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page vi
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
i
Abstract
v
List of abbreviations
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background, aims and objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Backgrounds
5
2.1
Pseudomonas putida KT2440 strain - an attractive synthetic biology chasses . . . . .
5
2.1.1
The versatile metabolic abilities of Pseudomonas putida . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
The atypical central metabolism - cyclic glycolsis in P. putida KT2240
. . .
7
2.1.3
Growth on different carbon sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.4
The redox balance inside P.putida KT2440
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.5
Insight of the present project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
The genome-scale metabolic model (GEMs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
The Genome-scale reconstructions (GENREs)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
The Constrained-based model (CBM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
Constraint-Based phenotype prediction and Constraint-based reconstruction
and analysis (COBRA) method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.4
The applications of a GEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
iJN1411 - a detailed genome-scaled metabolic reconstruction of P.putida KT2440 . .
23
2.3.1
Strain-speciﬁc reconstruction of iJN1411 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3.2
Expanded growth performance of iJN1411
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3.3
Highly accurate gene essentiality prediction of iJN1411
. . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4
Computational tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.4.1
COBRApy package: COnstraint-Based Reconstruction and Analysis (CO-
BRA) for Python . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.4.2
Memote - The genome-scale metabolic model test suit . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
vii
==PAGE:10==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page viii
2.4.3
Escher: a web application for building, sharing, and embedding data-rich
visualizations of Biological pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
Experimental methodologies
31
3.1
In silico studies for P. putida KT2440 using iJN1411
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.1
iJN1411 test on Memote . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.2
Integration with the experimentally measured 13C ﬂux data with iJN1411 . .
31
3.1.3
Single-gene deletion study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.1.4
Exploration of wild-type on four kinds of carbon sources: glucose, gluconate,
2-ketogluconate and citrate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.1.5
Investigation for speciﬁc mutants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.1.6
The redox balance comparison between E.coli and P. putida organisms using
systematical single-gene deletion method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Results
41
4.1
Comparison results of different genome-scale metabolic models of P.putida KT2440
41
4.2
Integration of the experimental data with iJN1411 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Analysis and comparison of single-gene knockout study results . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4
Four different carbon feedings for wild-type strain: glucose, gluconate, 2-ketogluconate
and citrate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4.1
Mass yield calculation for the four carbon sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4.2
The growth predictions of wild-type on four carbon sources
. . . . . . . . .
49
4.5
Speciﬁc mutant investigation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.5.1
Investigation on zwf knockout mutant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.5.2
The investigation results of four kinds of glucose consumption pathways
. .
54
4.5.3
Single knock-out of gnd, maeB and icd investigation result . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.5.4
The mutant assuming Zwf enzyme as an NAD dehydrogenase . . . . . . . .
69
4.5.5
Double knock-outs of gcd and zwf on gluconate medium . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.6
The redox balance strategies analysis in E.coli and P. putida organisms using system-
atical single-gene deletion method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5
Discussion
77
6
Conclusion
83
7
Future perspectives
85
References
87
Appendixes
92
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:11==
Glossary
2-KGT 2-Ketoglutarate. 7
6PG 6-Phosphogluconate. v, 7
Acetyl-CoA Acetyl-Coenzyme A. 7
BOF Biomass objective function. 41
CBM Constrained-based model. vii, 12
CCM Central Carbon Metabolism. 48
COBRA COnstraint-Based Reconstruction and Analysis. vii, 2, 3, 11, 12, 27
CRISPR Clusterd Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats. 2
DHAP Dihydroxyacetone-P. 7
E4P Erythrose-4-P. 7
ED Enter-Doudoroff. v, 3
EMP Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas. v, 4
F6P Fructose-6-P. 7
FBP Fructose-1,6-P2. 7
G3P Glyceraldehyde-3-P. 7
G6P Glucose-6-P. v, 7
GEM genome-scale metabolic network model. 2, 12
GENREs Genome-scale reconstructions. vii, 2, 11, 12, 24, 25
KDPG 2-Keto-3-Deoxy-6-Phosphogluconate. 7
ix
==PAGE:12==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page x
ME Metabolic engineering. 1
Memote Metabolic Model Tests. 28
NGS Next-generation Sequencing. 2
OAA Oxaloacetate. 7
PEP Phosphoenolpyruvate. 7
PHA polyhydroxyalkanoate. 24
Pi Inorganic phosphate. 7
PP Pentose Phosephate. v, 4
PRCC Pseudomonas Reference Culture Collection. 25
R5P Ribose-5-P. 7
Ri5P Ribulose-5-P. 7
S7P Sedoheptulose-7-P. 7
TCA Tricarboxylic Acid. 46
X5P Xylulose-5-P. 7
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
During the 21st century, one of the milestone of the industry ﬁeld is the shifting from chemical to bio-
logical production processes [1]. To produce a wide range of chemicals via biotechnological methods
plays an importance role in bio-based economies due to the economical factors and its biosustainabil-
ity. An efﬁcient and tailored cell factory is an ideal way aiming to optimize the overproduction of a
target product from the renewable feedstocks (Figure 1.1). For this purpose, a rational design of the
cell factory through a mathematical model and in combination with strain design algorithms in silico
is a promising way helping to consruct an ideal cell factory.
Figure 1.1: Converting of nature products into chemicals using biological catalysis [2].
Metabolic engineering (ME) has been deﬁned as the usage of genetic manipulation to redirect the
organisms’ enzymes, transporters and metabolic pathways to achieve the target cell activities [3]. The
term “metabolic engineering” has been proposed in 1991, the goal of which is to design and create an
ideal biological factory to produce the target products based on current known knowledge and existing
technologies. Nowadays, metabolic engineering has been playing a key role in the biosustainable
production of fuels, chemicals and pharmaceutical proteinx, and the discovery of drug target [3].
In the early 1970s, it has started the usage of biotechnologies to produce chemicals, of which
1
==PAGE:14==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 2
the development was deeply interacting with the advancement of several technologies: Recombinant
DNA technique [4], the Sanger sequencing technique [7] [8] and the chemical synthesis of DNA
technique [5] [6].
Recombinant DNA technology allows the manipulation of the DNA sequences, and Sanger se-
quencing technique provides rich information of the DNA sequences. The combination of these
technologies allows the possibility to manipulate the cell activities to comply with the industrial ob-
jectives, which bears the near-optimal yields of the target substrate. At the beginning stage, the
manipulation of the metabolic pathways to achieve the target behaviours is mostly through the usage
of the mating, hybridization, mutagenesis, and the strain selection techniques, for example the pro-
duction of amino acids, vitamins and antibiotics. These traditional ways are hard to satisfying the
industrial requirements, therefore, more rational approaches to design the cell factories via modifying
speciﬁc genes, enzymes are becoming necessary. Synthetically created DNA has played a key role
in the development of metabolic engineering, as it offers the DNA manipulation tools and practical
strategies to validate the designs and predictions being made [9]
In 2005, the era of the Next-generation Sequencing (NGS) technology has came, which has rapidly
boosted the development of the ME ﬁeld [10]. The next-generation sequencing technology allows
the fast and full genome information sequencing, which has provides deep insight of the genotype-
phenotype relationship [1]. Another key technology is the Clusterd Regularly Interspaced Short Palin-
dromic Repeats (CRISPR)-Cas9 genome editing technology [11], which is the most rapidly develop-
ing platform technology so far, which, unlike the recombinant DNA technology which only study the
DNA taken out from the organisms, allows to directly edit and manipulate the DNA sequences almost
in any organisms, enabling the speciﬁc targeted-editing of the genome.
Using the NGS technique, a bulk of comprehensive genome sequencing and annotation have been
done crossing all the species in the past decade, and with the vast of full-genome information, it
allows the reconstruction of a comprehensive metabolic network of a target organism, called the
Genome-scale reconstructions (GENREs). Using the COnstraint-Based Reconstruction and Analysis
(COBRA) methods, the GENREs can be transferred into an genome-scale metabolic network model
(GEM) to systematically study and predict the metabolic activities of the target organism in silico.
The combination with the in silico predictions has widely extended metabolic strategies in the rational
design of an organism toward the ideal cell factory recent years.
It is not allowed to construct an ideal cell factory by completely synthetic methods due to the
limitation of the available technologies, and there is no naturally host bacterium that satisfy all the
desired properties for an ideal factory so far. Thus, much effort have been made toward the manip-
ulation of the selected natural organisms, where the selection of a host microorganism relies on the
actual application situation. An sound understanding of the target organisms is of importance dur-
ing the manipulation process [12] and several well studied microorganisms have been widely used in
the metabolic engineering ﬁeld so far, such as E.coli, Bacillus, Corynebacterium, Streptomyces and
yeast [13] [14] [12]. However, theses microorganisms are suffering from undesired sensitivity to the
by-product (e.g. ethanol), thus, new organisms that can endure these metabolic burdens are in need.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:15==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 3
The soil bacteria are attracting much interest because of its versatile and robust metabolic system,
which can survive particularly in the polluted soil and degrade a wide range of chemicals, especially
the xenobiotic compounds present in the soil, e.g. tolunene, xylenes and phenol [15]. The Pseu-
domonas putida KT2440 stain, as one best characterized laboratory strain in the clade Pseudomonas,
has been considered as an valuable bacterium satisfying many requirements needed to be manipu-
lated as an ideal cell factory and ongoing efforts being made to understand its metabolic mechanism
responding to the environmental stress [12] [13].
Knowledge and a sound understanding of the relationship of the microbial behaviours and its
metabolic network allows the retinal design of effective factories [16]. In this project, the latest con-
structed GENRE for the Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain, namely iJN1411 [17], will be used to
interrogate its extraordinary metabolic robustness in silico by using the COnstraint-Based Reconstruc-
tion and Analysis (COBRA) methods to analyze the intracellular metabolite ﬂow process. For this
purpose, we will use experimentally measured data provided by the collaborators at the Novo Nordisk
Foundation Center for Biosustainability together with in silico studies ﬁnally intend to provide a deep
understanding of the metabolism mechanism of P. putida KT2440, which paves the way for the design
of the ideal cell factories and the searching for possible drug target in the robust pathogens.
1.1
Background, aims and objectives
Background A:The GEM is the mathematical model of the genome-scale metabolic reconstruction,
which can facilitate in silico studies on the metabolic behavior of the microbial strains by providing
detailed and quantitative predictions of the metabolic behavior. A high-quality and detailed GEM is
a very useful tool to study the systematic metabolism of a target organism in silico. iJN1411, a re-
cently constructed high-quality GEM for P. putida with high metabolic coverage and strain-speciﬁcity,
shows high accuracy in carbon ﬂuxes prediction, nutrients growth prediction and gene essentiality
prediction [17].
Aim: To validate the genome-scaled metabolic reconstruction and to evaluate its prediction perfor-
mance.
Objectives:
• To perform single-gene knockout studies using different method and explain the assumptions
and their effects on the outcomes.
• To identify the best way to integrate existing experimental data sets with the GEM and explain
discrepancies between experimental data and predicted ﬂuxes.
• Perform grow predictions for speciﬁc mutants using different method and explain the effects on
the outcomes.
Background B: Pseudomonas putida KT2440 is characterized by a slight catabolic overproduction
of NADPH [44], and its central carbon metabolism encompasses the Enter-Doudoroff (ED) pathway,
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:16==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 4
the incomplete Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas (EMP) pathway and the Pentose Phosephate (PP) pathway,
which form a metabolic cycle, called EDEMP cycle, able to recycle a small fraction of triose phos-
phates back into hexose phosphates, which is believed related to the redox balance inside P. putida.
Aim A: To investigate redox balance and the metabolic properties of Pseudomonas putida KT2440
strain.
Objectives:
• To investigate how the metabolic network responses to redox production perturbations.
• To investigate the net formation rate of NADPH.
• Discuss potential system’s level strategies and biological mechanism for the maintenance of the
redox balance.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Backgrounds
2.1
Pseudomonas putida KT2440 strain - an attractive synthetic
biology chasses
2.1.1
The versatile metabolic abilities of Pseudomonas putida
Bacteria are usually with versatile metabolic abilities to adapt themselves to the various living sur-
roundings, even in some extreme conditions, such as oxidative stress. Due to the complex physico-
chemical stresses prevailing in the niches of soil, the soil environmental bacteria have a remarkable
adaptable metabolism that contains a wide range of transporters and enzymes to utilize different car-
bon sources and a group of metabolic ﬂexible pathways to quickly adjust themselves to the changing
living conditions [13].
Pseudomonas putida is a ubiquitous Gram-negative, saprophytic rhizosphere soil bacterium, and
fuzzily belongs to the group of the ﬂuorescent Pseudomonas [13]. Within the Pseudomonas group,
the P. putida KT2440 strain is the most thoroughly characterized laboratory pseudomonad, the whole
genome of the which is ﬁrstly sequenced in 2002, and has been revisited in 2016, which have con-
ﬁrmed its lack of virulence factors [48] [50]. Thus, being considered as a non-pathogenic, GRAS-
certiﬁed (Generally Recognized as Safe) bacterium, in addition to the susceptibility to the genetic
modiﬁcations by the plenty of available synthetically biological tools [17], P. putida KT2440 strain
has attract much attention with the metabolic engineering effort toward its metabolism manipulating
into an ideal microbial platform [44].
The P. putida KT2440 is equipped with a remarkable versatile metabolism and physiological ro-
bustness, which can survive in different conditions with the low nutrient source demand and rapid
growth, degrade a wide range of chemicals, such as the xenobiotic compounds and aromatic com-
pounds, and resistant to the oxidative and other environmental stress [15]. The revisited genome
annotation has also demonstrated that it can use a wide rage of nutrients, including the new identiﬁ-
5
==PAGE:18==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 6
cation of the pathways for 32 carbon sources, 28 nitrogen sources and 29 phosphorus sources [43].
Due to the versatile metabolism, P. putida KT2440 strain is a highly-valued model organism,
which is useful in the dispose of a wide range of organic pollutants in the soil, the promotion of the
plant growth and prevention of the plant diseases [50]. In addition, it is with big potential for the
industrial applications, as with a robust metabolic system, it is tolerant to the industrial chemicals,
such as the organic solvents [46], e.g. benzene, and some by-product which are inhibitory to other
microbial hosts, e.g. ethanol. It has been demonstrated that it can act as a host to produce ethanol
with the resistance to the stress from its products [12].
P. putida could satisfy many requirements needed to work as an ideal synthetic biology chasses for
industrial biocatalysis (Figure 2.1). Shifting from the original manipulation of individual pathways
and single metabolic nodes, a functional chasses aiming to manipulate the whole cell’s metabolism
[43]. The term chasses refer as a live platform able to host the herterologous genetic plug-in and
plug-out constructions and express the purposefully designed DNA. An optimal chasses is desired
with the minimal gene information able to grow and achieve the basic biological functions and, at
the same time, able to run the metabolisms resistant to the possible adverse conditions. The concept
minimal genome is to minimize the genome complements of a cell only containing the strictly neces-
sary functions for replication, maintenance and resistance to stress. However, the necessary functions
may depend on the different growth conditions. Such a organism with the minimal genome has many
advantages, such as easier to control and predict the biological functions, and the reduced unex-
pected properties or phenotypes. It is also expected chasses are equipped with a robust metabolism,
amenable to the genetic modiﬁcation and with a low spontaneous gene variability. It is hard to cre-
ate an completely artiﬁcial and ideal cell due to the technological limitations so far, thus choosing a
nature organism to modify is the preferable way, of which P.putida is of great interest.
The versatile metabolic properties and the adaptability to proliferate in diverse environmental
niches are due to the complex environments in the soil, especially some stressful physicochemical
surroundings [13], which has been embodied not only in its peripheral pathways but also the distinct
architecture of the central metabolism [13].
Figure 2.1: Using P. putida as an functional biocatalysis chasses [43].
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:19==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 7
2.1.2
The atypical central metabolism - cyclic glycolsis in P. putida KT2240
Glycolysis is the metabolic activities to consume glucose and/or other monosaccharides into pyru-
vate with the releasing of ATP and reducing power NAD(P)H for various cell activities [45]. The
classic glycolysis pathways usually include the Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas (EMP) pathway, Pentose
Phosephate (PP) pathway and citric acid cycle depends on the ecological niches the organisms live
[16], however, the glycolysis structure of P. putida is quite different.
According to the genome of the strain P.putida KT2240, it contains the three dominant glucose
metabolism pathways: the Enter-Doudoroff (ED) pathway, the EMP pathway and the PP pathway, as
shown in Figure 2.2. Unlike the classic glycolysis EMP pathway such as in E. coli, the EMP pathway
presented in P.putida is with the absence of the glycolytic enzyme 6-phosphofructo-1-kinase (Pkf),
which is a ATP-depend enzyme to convert fructose-6-p (F6P) into fructose-1,6-P2 (FBP) [44]. The
lack of Pkf enzyme directly prevents the glucose consumption ﬂux ﬂowing through the EMP pathway
resulting in the ﬂux exclusively through ED pathway [44].
P.putida encompasses a complex glucose consumption network, where: i) in the periplasm, glu-
cose is directly phosphorylated into into glucose-6-P (G6P) by Glucokinase (Glk), and in the periplasm,
it is ﬁrstly oxidized into gluconate by the Glucose dehydrogenase (Gcd) or further into () by Glu-
conate 2-dehydrogenase. These three branches are further converging at the intermediate 6-phosphogluconate
(6PG): i) the G6P from phosphorylation pathway is catalyzed by G6P 1-dehydrogenase (Zwf) and
6-phosphogluconolactonase (Pgl), ii) gluconate is phosphorylated by glucokinase (GnuK), and iii)
the 2-KG is catalyzed by two enzymes, 2-KG kinase (KguK) and 2-keto-6-phosphogluconate reduc-
tase (KguD) (Figure 2.2), and the abbreviations are as follows: Glucose-6-P (G6P), Fructose-6-P
(F6P), Fructose-1,6-P2 (FBP), Dihydroxyacetone-P (DHAP), 6-Phosphogluconate (6PG), 2-Keto-3-
Deoxy-6-Phosphogluconate (KDPG), Ribulose-5-P (Ri5P), Ribose-5-P (R5P), Xylulose-5-P (X5P),
Sedoheptulose-7-P (S7P), Erythrose-4-P (E4P), Erythrose-4-P (E4P), Glyceraldehyde-3-P (G3P), (),
Phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), Acetyl-Coenzyme A (Acetyl-CoA), Oxaloacetate (OAA), 2-Ketoglutarate
(2-KGT), Inorganic phosphate (Pi).
The activated glucose consumption reactions and the corresponding ﬂuxes through them have
been measured under certain controlled environmental conditions in the previous [44], it shows that
10% of the uptaken glucose is fueled into the phosphorylation pathway, and 90% fueled into the
oxidation pathway, of which 12% is further oxidized into 2-KG.
Afterwards, 6PG is mostly (91%) fueled into the ED pathway and convert into two products:
pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3-P (G3P) [13]. There is only a small fraction 6PG enters the PP path-
way [44]. The ED pathway contains two enzymes: the Edd and Eda enzymes: Edd converts 6PG into
2-keto-3-deoxy-6-phosphogluconate (KDPG), which is then converted by Eda into pyruvate and G3P.
The growth experiment of the P. putida mutants shows that edd and eda genes are essential for the
cell to grow on glucose, indicating the importance of ED pathway in glycolysis [44].
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:20==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 8
Figure 2.2: The central carbon metabolic pathways, reactions and encoding genes of P.putida KT2240
[44].
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:21==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 9
The lack of pkf gene disable the EMP pathway degrading the hexose and only allows unidirec-
tional conversion from the FBP to F6P. Due to the unidirection, the ED and incomplete EMP pathways
form a metabolic cycle, called EDEMP cycle, which can recycle a small fraction of triose phosphates
back into hexose phosphates [44]. In addition, Fda and Fdp enzymes are highly active when grow
on glucose medium, which indicates the importance of the recycle during the glucose consumption
process.
2.1.3
Growth on different carbon sources
Due to the complex glucose degradation pathways, gluconate, 2-KG can also act as the carbon input
for the glycolysis process, and it has been shown that gluconate is the most preferable medium for
growth with the the shortest cell doubling time (Figure 2.3) [44]. And during the glucose culture
process, the gluconate and 2-KG accumulation has been observed. Except for using glucose as the
carbon source, P. putida has proved able to grow on succinate medium, and the growth rate of P.
putida is faster under the gliconeogenic conditions
Under the glycolysis and gluconeogenic conditions, the activity of several key enzymes are shown
to be different. The ED pathway enzymes (Edd and Eda) and EMP pathway enzymes (Fbp, Fda and
TpiA) shows higher activity on the glycolysis process, in contrast, the enzyme activity of Edd and
Eda are extremely low under gluconeogenic conditions (Figure 2.4).
Figure 2.3: The growth doubling time of P. putida
on different carbon sources [44]).
Figure 2.4: The speciﬁc enzyme activities in P.
putida under glycolysis and gluconeogenic con-
ditions [44]).
2.1.4
The redox balance inside P.putida KT2440
This atypical cyclic glycolysis, i.e. the EDEMP cycle as an important role in producing NADPH,
which facilitate the cell to cope with the various environmental stress, such as oxidative stress [15].To
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:22==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 10
investigate the redox balance inside P. putida, the activity of several key dehydrogenases, i.e. Gap,
Gnd, MaeB, KguD, Mdh, Icd, Gnd and Zwf, within the central metabolism pathways have been
tested under different conditions [44] (Figure 2.5 and 2.7). Except for the Gap and Mdh enzymes
has a speciﬁcity on NAD+ cofactor, the others have a speciﬁcity of using NADP+ cofactor. With
the enzymes’ activity, the overall NADPH production and consumption rate have been calculated,
and it shows that there is a catabolic overproduction of NADPH within the network under quasi in
vivo conditions (Figure 2.6) [44]. Interestingly, the introduction of the heterogeneous enzyme Pkf
into P.putida is detrimental for its growth with the decreased production of ATP and redox inside the
mutant [45].
Figure 2.5:
The enzyme activity measurement
of speciﬁc dehydrogenases, Gap, Gnd, MaeB,
KguD, Mdh, Icd, Gnd and Zwf, on NAD+ and
NADP+ cofactors under non-saturing quasi in
vivo condition [44]).
Figure 2.6: The NADPH production and con-
sumption rate in P. putida under quasi in vivo
condition [44].
Figure 2.7: The enzyme names of measured dehydrogenases [44].
2.1.5
Insight of the present project
Based on the redox balance characterization in P. putida by a slight catabolic overproduction of
NADPH in [44], we are then next interested in how its atypical metabolic network would response to
the different carbon sources and the redox perturbations.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:23==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 11
The enzyme Zwf is of great interest as it is considered as the main source of the NADPH produc-
tion in P. putida, as Zwf is with the highest ﬂux ﬂowing through among the tested dehydranases [44].
There are three isozymes of Zwf: Zwf (PP_1022), Zwf-2 (PP_4042) and Zwf-3 (PP_5351), which
may also indicates its importance for P. putida. Through a linear ED pathway, with one molecule
G6P enter after catalyzed by Zwf enzyme, one NADPH molecule can be produced. However, in the
EDEMP cycle, due to a faction of recycling from G3P in to G6P, there is a slight overproduction of
NADPH by Zwf depending on the extent of the recycling [44]. However, the recycling extent of the
EDEMP cycle mainly depends on the growth conditions as the glucose consumption inside the cell is
complex with three oxidation and phosphorylation branches.
The KguD enzyme, involved in the catalysis of 2-KG into 6PG, consumes one NADPH molecule
during the process, and it is noticed that the ratio of GnuK/KguD is realated to the overall NADPH
balance in P. putida, of which KguD converts gluconate into 6PG. Thus, there is a possibility that the
complex glucose degradation pathways is quite ﬂexible, which allows the cell to adjust itself to keep
the overall redox balance depending on the different environmental conditions. At the same time,
such a complex glucose-degradation pathways also offers the possibility to implement the metabolic
engineering methods by manipulating the ratio of the oxidation and phosphorylation pathways.
Therefore, to have a deep understanding the metabolic mechanism of Pseudomonas putida KT2440
is the ﬁrst step towards aiding the rational design of an ideal cell factory. Within this project, several
experiments regarding to the investigation of the redox balance inside P. putida have been set up and
will be investigated by the latest stain-speciﬁc metabolic reconstruction for P. putida KT2440 stain,
namely iJN1411, being constrained with the experimental 13C ﬂux data together with the COnstraint-
Based Reconstruction and Analysis (COBRA) methods.
2.2
The genome-scale metabolic model (GEMs)
2.2.1
The Genome-scale reconstructions (GENREs)
With the advancement of the next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology, it is available that a large
amount the full genome information for the microorganisms and also a great amount of publications
describing the speciﬁc molecular features and the annotated genome sequences, which allows the
reconstruction of the genome-scale metabolic network of microorganisms.
The Genome-scale reconstructions (GENREs) is a systematical bottom-up approaches that based
on the know metabolic genes and metabolic reactions of a target organism, which provides a compre-
hensive metabolic network integrating all known reactions, metabolites and enzyme. The GENREs of
the target organisms contain all know metabolic information for one target organism including genes,
enzymes, reactions and metabolites within the metabolic network [21]
The basic elements of a reconstruction network are the metabolic reactions, which are catalyzed
by a series of metabolic enzymes. For linking the reactions together, several aspects need to be con-
sidered, which are the reversibility of the reactions, the stoichiometric coefﬁcient of each metabolites,
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:24==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 12
the catalytic enzymes, and the genes encoding them. The gene-protein-reaction (GPR) relationship
is the linkage between the gene-encoding protein (catalytic enzymes) and the metabolic reactions.
All these metabolic information of a target organism are assembled together to construct a metabolic
network, of which the information is from a wide range of the databases, high-throughput data sets
and publications. The biochemical reactions inside the network of the target organism include a set of
chemical equations, and then linked together as different pathways, sectors and ﬁnally the genome-
scale networks. Such a large network makes some properties possibly traceable, such as the optimal
growth, ﬂux changes to deal with different environmental conditions and the enzyme dispensability
[63]. An manual protocol to construct a high-quality GENREs has been published [19], where the
detailed reconstruction process and conversion to a mathematical model has been described.
2.2.2
The Constrained-based model (CBM)
The genome-scale metabolic network model (GEM), also called Constrained-based model (CBM) or
COnstraint-Based Reconstruction and Analysis (COBRA) model, is the mathematical model of the
genome-scale network, which can facilitate in silico studies of the metabolic behaviours, and provide
detailed and quantitative predictions of the metabolic behavior of the microbial strains. The ﬁrst GEM
was published in 1999 for the Haemophilus inﬂuenze [31], after which over hundreds of GEMs have
been publish to date and applied to the prediction of cellar properties such as growth status and gene
essentiality [?].
To convert the the genome-scale network into a mathematical model, several steps must be taken
to make it able to be mathematically represented. Firstly, all the reactions and metabolites are repre-
sented by a numerical matrix (Figure 2.8) containing the stoichiometric coefﬁcient of each reaction, of
which the columns and rows represent the coefﬁcients of reactions and metabolites respectively. The
negative coefﬁcients are of the reaction substrates, and the positive ones are of the reaction products.
Figure 2.8: The metabolic network is represented as a stoichiometric coefﬁcient matrix with m rows
and n columns, where m and n are the amount of reactions and metabolites [20].
The cellular functions are complicated, which is under the control of a series of mechanisms, such
as the metabolism, environmental factors and transcriptional regulation. However, it is difﬁcult to
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:25==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 13
measure some dynamic parameters and kinetic data. Thus, certain realistic assumption is made to
analyze the metabolic networks instead, and avoid the dynamic parameters.
The assumption adopted is the "pseudo steady-state" inside cell, which means the model is mass-
balanced, that is the compounds being produced are equal to the ones being consumed and there is no
compound accumulation inside the cell [24]. It is because that the metabolic transients are faster than
the environmental changes and biological changes inside the cell [1]. This consumption is represented
as the equation follows:
S·v = 0
where S is the stoichiometric coefﬁcient matrix, v is the reaction ﬂux vector.
For each reaction ﬂux, an upper and an lower bound are given to all the reactions to deﬁne the
ﬂux range and direction of each reaction. However, within a GEM, the reactions are usually much
more than the metabolites, thus, there are a series of solutions that satisfy these constraints. Thus, a
ﬂux spaces is deﬁned, representing an undetermined system under the mass-balance and reaction’s
bound constraints (Figure 2.9 A). Given that the internal ﬂuxes of the cell are hard to experimentally
measured, the usual way to solve such a undetermined problem is to transfer it into an optimization
problem based on the understandings of the bio-organism system (Figure 2.9 B). For the optimization
purpose, several biological assumption has been employed to deﬁne an objective function. More
constraints commonly being imposed, such as the experimental reaction ﬂuxes, to further narrow
down the solution space (Figure 2.9 C).
Figure 2.9: A. The admissible ﬂux space is deﬁned by the mass-balance and reactions’ reversibility
constraints. B. The problem is solved as an optimization problem with one objective being imposed.
C. More constraints are imposed to reduce the ﬂux cone. [1].
Once the mathematical model has been formed, the input and the output of the model must be
deﬁned. An extracellular environment is added, where the compounds can enter or exit via the ex-
change reactions. The compound transport between the GEM and the extracellular environment is via
the transport reactions (Figure 2.10).
Next step, the objective function of this model need to be deﬁned. Usually the model is to predict
the grow of the cells, that is the objective function is the biomass production. Other typical objective
functions are also used, such as the ATP production and nutrient utilization. Biomass production is
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:26==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 14
the rate at which the model can produce necessary biomass precursors, which includes nucleic acids,
proteins and lipids needed for the biomass of a new cell (Figure 2.11). The objective function (i.e. the
biomass production) is mathematically represented as a "biomass reaction" as an extra column of the
stoichiometric matrix. The determination of biomass reaction is based on the experimental measure-
ment of the composition. The biomass synthesis in a cell needs 60 - 70 different components being
removed simultaneously, and such biomass components are manually measured from the experiments
and scaled calculation is performed to represent the growth rate by the biomass reaction ﬂux.
Figure 2.10: The extracellular environment is
added, and the compounds can enter or exit via
exchange reactions. The transport reactions fa-
cilitate the compounds’ transport between extra-
and intro-cellular environment [21].
Figure 2.11: The biomass reaction contains all
the compounds needed to create a new cell, in-
cluding DNA, amino acids, lipids and polysac-
charides [21].
The gene-protein-reaction relationships are also included in the model, which are represented us-
ing the Boolean logic and modeled as logical "and/or" operations. These rule describe the association
between the genes and their encoding proteins which are responsible the chemical reactions. The
"AND" relation between proteins represents the form of an enzyme complex, and the "OR" repre-
sents the isoenzymes existing in the network. Afterwards, it allows the model to predict if reactions
are activated/deactivated after speciﬁc gene perturbations. However, this kind of approach is only a
functional representation and not quantitative that provide information about the transcripts and the
metabolic ﬂuxes. It is still poorly understand that the relationship between the proteins and mRNA,
and enzyme amounts and ﬂux values [21].
2.2.3
Constraint-Based phenotype prediction and Constraint-based reconstruc-
tion and analysis (COBRA) method
Once on CBM has been constructed, it can be used to predict many phenotype behaviors of the target
organism. As if treating the model as a pure mathematical model, the applied constraints, including
the steady-state consumption, reactions’ reversibility and nutrient availability, deﬁne a hyper-cone so-
lution space of the ﬂux distribution without any biological understanding. The model is usually treated
as an optimization problem based on that the organisms are evolutionarily shaping their metabolic sys-
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:27==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 15
tems towards a favorable objective. Under the nature conditions (i.e. wild-type), it is wildly accepted
the cells operate their metabolism to maximize the growth, however it is debatable for the cells after
genetic perturbations [1]. Prediction the lethality and growth phenotype of the mutant under genetic
perturbations is another task for CBMs and more chanllenging [29]. For these purpose, several al-
gorithms have been developed with the extra constraints added to the model and aims to ﬁnd the
biologically reasonable solutions.
The ﬂux balance analysis (FBA) analysis method
The ﬂux balance analysis (FBA) is an old Constraint-based reconstruction and analysis (COBRA)
method used to quantitatively predict growth phenotype [25]. It predict the maximal growth rate of a
metabolic model able to achieve by maximizing the biomass reaction under the given environment.
The underlying assumption of FBA method is that the bacteria are thrived to reach the maximum
growth rate by optimizing and driving their metabolic system toward the principle mixmizing the
biomass production [25], that is the cells favor the metabolic operation for growing as fast as pos-
sible within the limited nutrient sources. This consumption has been conﬁrmed by evolution of the
metabolic system towards the maximum biomass production in E.coli although under some conditions
[26].
With the linear objective function (i.e. biomass production) and linear constraints, the problem is
solved as a linear programming (LP) problem by maximizing the biomass reaction ﬂux:
Maximize:
∑υbiomass
(2.1)
Subject to:
M
∑
j
Si j ·υj = 0,
∀i ∈N
(2.2)
υj ≥0,
∀j ∈M
(2.3)
where Si j is the stoichiometric coefﬁcient matrix, υj is the reaction ﬂux vector, M and N are the
numbers of reactions and metabolites.
With the advantages of simplicity and extensibility, FBA has wide range of applications, such
as analysis of GEMs, in silico gene deletion prediction and metabolic gaps reﬁnement [26]. It only
requires a few constraints, such as the information of the stoichiometry and the mass balance of
the reactions and metabolites. All the genome-scale models are incomplete due to the biological
knowledge gaps, therefore, there are still some reactions are missing in the model. In this case, FBA
is the basis of many algorithms to predict the missing reactions by comparing the in silico growth
simulation to the experimental results [24].
However, FBA has limitations, as basic consumption of "seudo-steady" state of the cell, it only
suits to predict ﬂuxes at steady state. In addition, it can not predict the concentrations of the metabo-
lites as the lack of the kinetic parameters. The basic FBA method dose not account for the regulatory
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:28==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 16
effects of the cell, such as the gene expressions [24]. Therefore, the prediction using FBA is not
always accurate [24].
Parsimonious enzyme usage FBA (pFBA) method
For the previous FBA method, there is one limitation that it only provides one solution and one
optimal value for the objective function, however, it may not be the only solution existing, i.e., many
ﬂuxes distributions may lead to the same optimal value under the given constraints.
To address this issue, the parsimonious enzyme usage FBA (pFBA) method has been developed
[27]. The pFBA method assumes that the strain favors the lowest overall ﬂuxes through the metabolic
network, which is to minimize the total necessary enzymes of the network to achieve the maximum
growth. In another way, pFBA ﬁnds the most efﬁcient usage of a subsets of the genes and enzymes
under the speciﬁc conditions. This assumption add another constraint to the normal FBA, which
transform the LP problem into a mixed-integer linear problem (MILP) problem:
Minimize:
M
∑
j=1
υi j
(2.4)
Subject to:
Maximize:
∑υbiomass
(2.5)
Subject to:
M
∑
j=1
Si j ·υj = 0,
∀i ∈N
(2.6)
υj ≥0,
∀j ∈M
(2.7)
where Si j is the stoichiometric coefﬁcient matrix, υj is the reaction ﬂux vector, M and N are the
numbers of reactions and metabolites.
It has been shown a small improvement over FBA method and the studied E.coli omics data
supports this assumption [27]. However, it should be noted that it may not be suitable for all the
conditions and all the organisms.
The minimization of metabolic adjustment (MOMA) method
For the wild-type strains, it is wildly accepted that the cells are evotinaty election for the maximal
growth rate, however, it is not always the case especially when the cells are under genetic perturba-
tions, for example the engineered mutant, which has not been through the nature evolutionary. Thus,
some methods were put forward to predict the growth phenotype of the engineered mutant, one of
which is the minimization of metabolic adjustment (MOMA) method [28]. MOMA method is based
on the consumption that the engineered mutant tend to adapt the metabolic system as closely as pos-
sible to the wild-type metabolism.Unlike the FBA method, which maximize the production by maxi-
mizing the biomass reaction ﬂux, MOMA method, using the wild type ﬂux distribution as reference,
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:29==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 17
ﬁnds a ﬂux distribution which has the minimum sum of the squared differences with the references,
thus deﬁning a quadratic objective and transferring the problem into a quadratic programming (QP)
problem [1]:
Minimize:
v
u
u
t
M
∑
j
 µj −υj
2
(2.8)
Subject to:
M
∑
j=1
Si j · µj = 0,
∀i ∈N
(2.9)
µj = 0,
j ∈A
(2.10)
µj ≥0,
∀j ∈M
(2.11)
where Si j is the stoichiometric coefﬁcient matrix, µj is the reaction ﬂux of rection j, υj is the
reference ﬂux distributions, M and N are the numbers of reactions and metabolites, A is the set of
reactions encoded by deleted genes. .
The MOMA methoc has also been evaluated by the experimental ﬂux data of E. coli mutants that
it has a higher correlation regarding to the ﬂux distribution than FBA and higher accuracy regarding
to the essential genes prediction [28].
The regulatory on/off minimization (ROOM) method
The regulatory on/off minimization (ROOM) method [29] is another method developed to predict
the ﬂux distribution for the organisms after certain genetic perturbation, which is also based on the
assumption that the mutant tend to operate the metabolism as closely as the wild type.
Unlike MOMA, which minimize the sum of the ﬂux changes with numerous small reaction ﬂux
changes, ROOM minimizes the total number of signiﬁcantly changed reaction ﬂuxes comparing with
the given wild-type ﬂux distribution after the gene perturbations. It is motivated by assumptions that
cells tend to choose alternative pathways and minimize the regulatory cost. ROOM method introduces
binary variables, which converts the original LP problem into a MILP problem: Minimize:
m
∑
j=1
yj
(2.12)
Subject to:
M
∑
j=1
Si j ·υj = 0,
∀i ∈N
(2.13)
υj = 0,
i ∈A
(2.14)
υj −yj
 υmax,j −ωu
j

≤ωu
j ,
1 ≤j ≤M
(2.15)
υj −yj
 υmin,j −ωu
j

≥ωl
j,
1 ≤j ≤M
(2.16)
yj ∈{0,1}
(2.17)
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:30==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 18
ωu
j = ωj +δ
ω j
+ε
(2.18)
ωl
j = ωj −δ
ω j
−ε
(2.19)
where Si j is the stoichiometric coefﬁcient matrix, υj is the reaction ﬂux of rection j, yj = 1 if for
a signiﬁcant signiﬁcant change of reaction j, yj = 0 is for the no signiﬁcant change of reaction j, ωu
and ωl are the thresholds to determine the signiﬁcance of ﬂux changes with δ and ε specifying the
relative and absolute ranges of tolerance, respectively, |ωj is the wild-type ﬂux is the reference ﬂux
distributions, M is numbers of reactions and metabolites, A is the set of reactions encoded by deleted
genes.
For both MOMA and ROOM methods, they are developed based on the assumption that the or-
ganisms’ metabolic system favors to adjust itself into a new steady state close to the wild type after the
genetic perturbations, instead of only maximizing the growth rate. However, it turns out that ROOM
implicitly favors a high growth-rate solution, as it keeps the ﬂux linerty by minimizing the signiﬁcant
ﬂux changes, where the ﬂuxes toward all precursors tend to maintain the high-rate production [29].
ROOM method have been supported by the study that:i) cells have been through the evolutionary
pressure to minimize the gene expression, and ii) in most case the isoenzymes are not expressed to
minimize the gene expression cost [29]. The comparison of ﬂux distributions for ﬁve mutants of E.
coli shows that better prediction preformance than MOMA and FBA methods [29], however, MOMA
is more suitable for the prediction of transient postperturbation states of the cell [29].
Flux varibility anaysis (FVA)
The FBA-based methods usually predict one optimal objective value and the ﬂux distribution state
subject to the imposed constraints. However, with one optimal growth rate, there are many possible
ﬂux distribution states that can achieve the same optimum via different ﬂux dixtribution patterns [30].
The biological basis of these alternate optima is considered as the redundant metabolic pathways
existing in the metabolic network [30]. Out of this reason, ﬂux varibility anaysis (FVA) is devoloped
aiming to analyze the ﬂexibility of reaction ﬂuxes inside the metabolic network, i.e., the possible
viariation range of the reactions, under the given constraints.
The FVA method determines the lower and upper bounds for each reaction ﬂux that can lead to
the same growth rate as the original objective function. In another word, FVA method sets the growth
rate as ﬁxed, and the maximize and minimize the ﬂux of each reaction ﬁnding the variation range of
all reactions, solving the problem as a LP problem:
Maximize:
υj
(2.20)
Subject to:
M
∑
j=1
Si j ·υj = 0,
∀i ∈N
(2.21)
υj ≥0,
∀j ∈M
(2.22)
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:31==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 19
υj = Biomassmax,
j ∈A
(2.23)
where Si j is the stoichiometric coefﬁcient matrix, υj is the reaction ﬂux of reaction j, M is numbers
of reactions and metabolites, A is the biomass reaction.
For some reactions, the ﬂux maximum is equal to the minimum, which means the reactions are
with a ﬁxed ﬂux value. The narrower the range is, the more inreplaceable the reaction. For the
reactions with wide ranges, it indicates that there may be other alternative pathways to use inside
the network. FVA method has been used to evaluate its effects on both FBA- and MOMA- based
solutions [30]. For the FBA solutions analysis, it can be used to check a reaction’s ﬂux ﬂexibility
under the the optimal or sub-optimal solutions. For the analysis on MOMA solutions, it reveals that
there are signiﬁcant variabilities for reactions, indicating that the choice of the reference solution for
MOMA method is of great importance [30]. In addition, it also can be used to assess the robustness
of a solution in the mutant strains [1].
2.2.4
The applications of a GEM
Quanlitative prediction: gene essentiality prediction
Once one model has been constructed, the prediction accuracy and the consistency with available
information of the target organism is the key aspects to ensure a high-quality GEM. Since the model is
the assembling of all the known knowledge of the target organism, the predictions made by the model
are used to test the accuracy combined witht experimental datasets and leading to the understanding
of the system metabolism of the target organism [21].
Inside the GEMs, the various environmental conditions and genetic parameters can be changed
to simulate the environmental changes and genetic perturbations. The environmental conditions are
changed by modifying the media composition (nutrition input) and the genetic perturbations are sim-
ulated by the gene-editing tools. Thus, it is possible to computationally predict the cells’ growth
states and metabolic activities (model outputs) after certain environmental or genetic perturbations
(Figure 2.12), such as the prediction of essential genes in different medium, of which the predictions
are useful to assess the model’s prediction accuracy and for the biological discoveries. Since the
ﬁrst GEM was constructed for E. coli in 2000 [31], there are increasing number of models that were
constructed for all kinds of interested organisms, and a variety of predictions, such as the systematic
gene essentiality prediction and the speciﬁc mutants’ ﬂux distributions, have been made for the target
organisms.
As for the gene essentiality predictions, all the genes included in the model are systematically
removed from the GEM, after which the corresponding cell metabolic status and ﬂuxes are computed
using different method, such as MOMA and ROOM. If there is no feasible solution exixting for the
cell to grow normally in silico without speciﬁc gene, it is predicted as a essential one. The scale of
such gene essentiality prediction has extensively increased from 100 predictions in the ﬁrst model for
E. coli [31] to more than 100,000 predictions in 2014 [32].
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:32==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 20
Figure 2.12: The alteration of the nutrition availability and gene removements in silico allows to
predict the potential cell growth rate and metabolic activities using the genome-scale model [21].
The computational predictions of the gene essentiality fall into four categories (Figure 2.13): true
positives, true negatives, false positives and false negatives. The true positives and true negatives are
the predictions corresponding to the laboratory experimental results, and inversly false positives and
false negatives are the predictions not in consistency with the experiments.
For the single-, double- or multiple-gene knockouts, true-positive and true-negative results in-
dicate the true genotype-phenotype interactions of the model, however, the false results indicate the
psibilities of missing pathways of GEM or the gap knowledge of the target organisms. Thus, the failed
predictions may be more signiﬁcant than the successful ones, as it is where to expand the knowledge
about the cells and improve the model quality. An false positive is the situation where the cell can
grow in silico, however not in the experiments. It occurs maybe because the enzymes are transcrip-
tionally repressed or the enzymes can not catalyze reactions due to the low activity in the cell, which
is however not represented in the model. These results indicate that there is possible errors in avail-
able information and or some regulation process is missing. Based on this, the false positives has
been used to discover the speciﬁc regulatory interactions [21]. In addition, the adaptive laboratory
evolution should be considered, which means the false positives may be not false, it is because that
the cells need the evolutionary pressure to achieve the model-predicted optimal status [21].
The false negative is also the keys for biological discoveries. The computational algorithms are
developed to analyze the reasons of the failures, and lead to the target experiments setting up and new
biological assumption exploring. Due to the fast development of the high-throughput technologies,
such as microarrays and automatic instruments, it allows the fast screening of the cells’ phenotypes,
which yield huge amount of omic datasets, such as the systematical gene-knockout mutants screening,
which are used validate the gene essentiality predictions of GEMs, leading to an iterative improvement
and reﬁnement of the model (Figure 2.13).
There are many "dead-end" metabolites in the model, of which the linked reactions are all blocked
to keep the mass balance inside the model, where are also the error causes. The false negative results
can help to correct and expand the metabolic knowledge by bridging these gaps. To discover the new
metabolic reactions between the blocked metabolites, target experiments are set up, and an approach
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:33==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 21
using the universal database of metabolic reactions to ﬁnd the fewest reactions ﬁll the link the "dead-
ends" is developed, called the gapﬁlling approach (Figure 2.14).
Figure 2.13: The false computational predic-
tions can lead to the new experimental setup
and biological discoveries, which is then incor-
porated into the model, leading to an iterative
improvement of the GEM [21].
Figure 2.14: Gap-ﬁlling approach is using the
universal database of metabolic reactions to
ﬁnd the fewest reactions ﬁll the link the "dead-
ends", and it is used for three organism: human,
E. coli and yeast [21].
Quantitative predictions using GEMs
The qualitative predictions are related to the overall understanding the knowledge of the GEM and
target organisms. The quantitative predictions using GEMs are more challenging, which is based on
the optimal principles of the evolutionary consumption that the metabolism cells favor one biological
function, allowing to predict the phenotype with constrained-optimization methods [21]. Quantitative
phenotype predictions are useful tools for the bioengineering applications, such as designing the
engineered strains and predicting the speciﬁc ﬂux distributions of speciﬁc engneered mutants.
The workﬂow of the quantitative prediction is quite similar to the qualitative gene essentiality pre-
diction, which performed the single-, double- or mutiple gene knockouts in the model, using several
methods, such as FBA, pFBA, MOMA and ROOM, to predict the quantitative ﬂux distribution after
the gene perturbations.
The quantitative predictions are broadly applied to several aspects (Figure 2.15), such as the nu-
trient utilization, central metabolism and abundance and nutrient exchange of the stain community.
Maximizing the growth rate, the model can predict the optimal ratio of the nutrient utilization, such as
the oxygen uptake rate for an speciﬁc carbon source. Regarding to the prediction of metabolic ﬂuxes,
several algorithms have been developed to predict the cell’s metabolic states, and these predictions
are in combination with the experimental measurements of the reaction ﬂuxes, using the 13C carbon
labeling experiments. From the predictions of single cell, the models can be linked together to pre-
dict the metabolic activities of the multiple strains. The models are linked together by the nutrient
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:34==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 22
exchanges, where the secretion of from one model limits the uptake rate of the other one, thus, the
optimal nutrient exchange and the species’ ratio can be predict.
Figure 2.15: The usage of GEM for quantitative predictions, such as nutrient utilization, carbon ﬂux
distribution and strain community’s properties [21].
These predictions are also compared with the experimental datasets, similar to the qualitative
prediction. However, different from the failed qualitative prediction relating to the incomplete knowl-
edge, the failed quantitative predictions are related to incomplete constraints or the incorrect or par-
tially correct bio-objectives being imposed to GEM [21].
The discrepancies between the predictions and the experimental measurements can lead to the
discovery of the new biological constraints and objectives. Most of the ﬂuxes’ discrepancies can be
explained by the biomass objective function [21], results in the reconsideration of the bioprecursor
compositions and the new biological assumptions, such as the new biological objectives of the mutants
favoring the maintenance of the wild-type metabolism (Figure 2.16).
The accurate prediction of the model is the basis of to design the target biological functions in
metabolic engineering, where the environmental and genetic modiﬁcation have been introduced to
the model to predict the performance of a target compound production, such as chemicals and fuels.
There are also several algorithms developed to aid the target strain design. Since this project is not
going into the strain-design step, more information would not be included here.
Figure 2.16: The discrepancies between the predictions and the experimental measurements lead to
the new biological discoveries [21].
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:35==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 23
Integration the muti-omic data with GEM
With a huge amount of numerous omic datasets available, there is a need to integrated the muti-omic
datasets with the GEMs, which can result in further understanding of the metabolic systems (Figure
2.17). The phenotypic datasets, such as the cellular growth rate, nutrition uptake rates, are integrated
into the GEM as new constraints, which deﬁnes a condition- and strain- speciﬁc situation. It allows
to quantify the uncertainty degree of the metabolic ﬂuxes. By integrating with different datasets, the
solution space can be narrowed down to more acurately predict the true biological states.
Figure 2.17: There are numerous data types that can be integrated with the model, including the
quantitative datasets, such as the intracellular reaction ﬂuxes and physiological parameters, and the
qualitative dataset, suchas transctripomic dataset [21].
To integrate the numerous data types, they need to be converted constraints to add to the GEM
(Figure 2.17). Some data types can be directly processed as variables adding to the model, such as the
physicochemical parameters growth rate and biomass compositions. The isotopomer distributions,
being transferring into the intracellular reaction ﬂuxes, are being integrated by constraining the reac-
tions’ bounds of the GEM. Other types of datasets, such as the transcriptomic and proteomic datasets,
are integrated into the model more qualitatively. It is because the quantitative integration of these data
requires the dynamic parameters which are hard to measure. They are being used to determine the
gene product or a enzymes’ presence or absence, thus qualitatively determining if the corresponding
reactions can carry ﬂuxes.
2.3
iJN1411 - a detailed genome-scaled metabolic reconstruction
of P.putida KT2440
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:36==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 24
2.3.1
Strain-speciﬁc reconstruction of iJN1411
The GENREs are the representation of the stain-speciﬁc metabolism and, with the conversion to a
GEM, it is powerful tool to predict the systematic metabolic activities of the target organisms. An ex-
haustive and validated reconstruction has been presented lately for the Pseudomonas putida KT2440
strain,namely iJN1411 [17], which has been demonstrated that it greatly expanded the coverage of
the metabolic network over other reconstructions. The P. putida is of great interests because of its re-
markable versatile metabolites, thus, leading to the network reconstruction efforts towards this strain.
Four main models have been built previously, namely iJN746 [33], iJP850 [34], PpuMBEL1071 [35]
and iJP962 [36], and they have been used to study the metabolism of P.putida in some researches
[?] [65]. Later, two other models, called iEB1050 [38] and PpuQY1140 [39], have been constructed
based on the genome reannotation. However, these models fall into the pits that lacks the experi-
mentally validation and the known strain-speciﬁc metabolisms, which considered to be the models of
primary metabolism [17].
In contrast, the reconstruction iJN1411 has collected the complete available metabolic knowledge
of P. putida KT2440 strain, which has been demonstrated being useful to high-quality metabolic pre-
diction and gain deep understanding of the metabolism of KT2440 strain [17]. Its reconstruction has
been done by following the tri-step iterative process, i.e., genome reannotation, biochemical legacy
knowledge and phenotypic experimental validation [17]. This GEM iJN1411 includes 1412 genes,
2826 reactions and 2087 metabolites distributed over 90 speciﬁc subsystems and three cellular com-
partments, i.e., extracellular, periplasm and cytoplasm.
The major improvement of iJN1411 over other models for P. putida KT2440 is that it is more
strain-speciﬁc as the inclusion of the strain-speciﬁc metabolism (Figure 2.18). In addition, the model
has also expended the coverage in the subsystems and fatty acids’ metabolism. Especially the poly-
hydroxyalkanoate (PHA) synthesis pathways, which is the most prominent biological capabilities of
P. putida and were only covered in iJN746 and PpuMBEL1071 before, are modeled in iJN1411 [17].
Afterwards, one strain-speciﬁc biomass functions (BOF), called BOF_WT (BiomassKT2440_WT3),
is formulated and a new value for non-associated growth maintenance (NGAM) is added to the
model based on the existing experimental data [65]. In addition, a core BOF, called BOF_core
(BiomassKT2440_Core2) is newly formulated based on the minimal biosynthetic precursors needed
for the cell to grow by analyzing the mutants in PRCC [40], which includes all the completely es-
sential metabolites for the cellular growth [17]. The details for the two BOF composition are can be
found in [17]. Overall, iJN1411 has been shown as a highly strain-speciﬁc reconstruction to be used
as a promising computational tool for further prediction and studies for P. putida KT2440 strain.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:37==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 25
Figure 2.18: The comparison of metabolism composition coverage for iJN1411 [17], iEB1050 and
iJN746 [33].
2.3.2
Expanded growth performance of iJN1411
To assess the ability of iJN1411 to predict the growth phenotypes, the in silico growth experiments
were performed in different carbon, nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorus and iron sources. The gained results
show that the model is able to grow on 140 new carbon sources and 71 nitrogen sources, with the high
accuracy of 80% and 82% respectively [17]. Notably, it was mentioned that the predicted growth rate
of KT2440 is a bit faster than the experimental value on glucose, however, if the secretion rates of
the gluconate and 2-ketogluconate are constrained in the model, the results are in consistence [17].
In addition, the predicted ﬂux distribution on glucose were compared to the experimental data [58], it
shows a good correlation and higher than iEB1050 and PpuQY1140 models [17]. Overall, iJN1411
is a promising model with a wide range the growth performance to the in silico study for P. putida
KT2440 with the high accurate growth states and ﬂux distributions abilities.
2.3.3
Highly accurate gene essentiality prediction of iJN1411
Performing the gene essentiality prediction using GEMs is a powerful way to validate GENREs,
improve the prediction accuracy, and study the knock-out mutants contextually at the genome-scale
[21]. Firstly, the in silico LB (iLB) medium is deﬁned on the basis of the commercial rich medium,
after which iJN1411 is used to predict the gene essentiality in iLB medium. The predicted results were
mapped with the available knock-out mutants in Pseudomonas Reference Culture Collection (PRCC).
The model predicted 126 essential genes for the rich medium, however, nine of which are found not
essential in PRCC, which is a collection of mutant strains attained for P. putida KT2440 attained by
the random insertion of miniTn5 elements [40]. In total 118 true essential genes are predicted, which
also indicates a high accuracy of gene essentiality prediction of iJN1411.
Further, other gene essentiality predictions are performed on glucose minimal medium with two
biomass functions, i.e. BOF_core and BOF_WT3, and the MOMA method as used to simulate the
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:38==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 26
grow state of the mutants. The in silico glucose medium is deﬁned based on the glucose M9 medium.
Totally 207 genes were predicted as essential for the biomass function BOF_core, of which 81 genes
are conditinally essential on glucose when excluding the 126 essential ones in iLB media (Figure
2.19). Among the 81 conditional genes, the authors took validated 54 genes from the published
experimental essential report [59] to validate the predictions of 4 GEMs: iJN1411, iJN746, iEB1050,
and PpuQY1140, which shows iJN1411 has the highest accuracy with 89%, compared to others’ 57%,
65% and 63% respectively (Figure 2.20). Interestingly, it was mentioned that iJN1411 is the only
model that can predict edd and eda as essential genes, which encodes the important ED pathways
in KT2440. Overall, it have been demonstrated that iJN1411 is a high-quality model in predicting
essential genes.
Figure 2.19: 81 conditionally essential genes are predicted excluding 126 essential genes in iLB
medium from 207 essential genes on glucose medium [17].
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:39==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 27
Figure 2.20: Predictions from 4 GEMs are against 54 experimentally essential genes [17].
2.4
Computational tools
2.4.1
COBRApy package: COnstraint-Based Reconstruction and Analysis (CO-
BRA) for Python
COBRA models have been widely used in the microbial metabolic engineering for the simulation,
analysis and prediction of the metabolism of target organisms using GEMs [54]. Numerous CO-
BRA methods,such as FBA [24], pFBA [27], MOMA [28] and ROOM [29], have been developed
and successfully used in a great many of researches over the past decades. The popularity of the
COBRA methods is due to its simplicity that does not need a bunch of parameters, and it constrains
the model using physicochemical, biological parameters to enumerate all feasible solutions under the
given conditions. The constraints mainly include mass balance, reaction reversibility and compart-
mentalization. To implement COBRA methods for the in silico studies, earlier the COBRA Toolbox
[53] is released for MATLAB software in 2007. However, it is with the disadvantages such as lack
of the capture the complexity of the biological networks and ability to integrate the GEM the the
omic datasets [53]. Hence, the COBRApy [54] package based on python language was released to
overcome these shortcomings, which provides the a user-friendly, extendable and accessible interface
with core COBRA modeling capabilities. It is designed to accommodate the biological complex mod-
els and provides the convenient analysis for basic COBRA methods, such as FBA, pFBA, MOMA,
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:40==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 28
ROOM and FVA methods. Other functions, such as the simulation of gene deletions and formulating
new objectives are also implemented. In addition, taking the advantage of using Python programming
language, it allows the convenient integration of a great many of high-throughput datasets with the
model. The software and the documentation are available at http://opencobra.sourceforge.net.
2.4.2
Memote - The genome-scale metabolic model test suit
At the beginning of this project, several GEMs are as the candidates to be chosen for the further
studying of metabolism and biological properties of P. putida KT2440 strain. These models are
tested using the Metabolic Model Tests (Memote) - a genome-scale metabolic model test suit [56] to
compare and benchmark the present GEMs for P. putida KT2440 strain.
GEM, as a fundamental and trusted tool, has been widely used for the in silico studies of metabolism
for a great many of interested organisms. A high-quality and detailed GEM is a key tool to study the
systematic metabolism for a successful project. After the ﬁrst GEM for the Haemophilus inﬂuenze
being published in 1999 [31], over hundreds of GEMs have been publish to date and applied to the
prediction of cellar properties such as growth status and gene essentiality [?]. However, there are
always inconsistency between the predictions made by different groups. It has been shown that there
is not a universal standard for the formal representation and the functional requirements of GEMs to
date [56]. Thus, without the consistent standard, it is hard to guarantee the reproducibility and con-
sistency between the different projects using the same GEM. Memote [56] aims to solve this problem
as proving a uniﬁed testing standard for the GEMs.
Memote is an open-source software provides a set of standard tests on multidimensional aspects
for GEMs. These tests include four areas including basic elements test, biomass function test, con-
sistency test and annotation test, which enforces a standard model format. Basic element test check
the correctness of the GEM, such as the formula and charge of the metabolites, gene-protein-reaction
rules, reactions and the metabolic coverage information. Biomass function test focuses on testing the
model’s ability to produce precursors and biomass consistency. Consistency test intend to test energy
and mass balance of stoichimetric matrix, tryingto ﬁnd unbalanced reactions and unbalanced energy
producing. The annotation test the formation of the gene annotations.
Except for benchmarking one single GEM, Memote can also act as a version-control tool for
the continuous GEM reconstruction during the iterative improvement process. An corresponding
report is generated for the direct visualization of model’s performance parameters, driving the error
detection and model improvement. Overall, Memote is a useful tool for capturing the property and
basic information of one GEM, which facilitates the choose of a good model for one project. The
more information is available at https://memote.readthedocs.io.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:41==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 29
2.4.3
Escher: a web application for building, sharing, and embedding data-
rich visualizations of Biological pathways
The visualization of the metabolic pathways is a powerful way to capture the changes of the metabolic
activities and to gain insights of the networks. Some tools also enable the loading and visualization of
the complex omics datasets within the speciﬁc networks, which makes it easier to identify the changes
related to the biological processes. Several tools have been developed so far, and here the Escher [57]
software has been used as a visualization tool for the biological pathways and ﬂux distributions in this
project.
Escher is a web-based application developed to visualize the metabolic pathways of GEMs, using
two-dimensional pathway with several key features making it a outstanding visualization tool. Firstly,
it can build a pathway map fast and easily guided by the reaction suggestions, with one COBRA
model loaded. The user can also design and customize their own maps. Secondly, it not only shows
the connections between metabolites, enzymes and reactions, but also connects the gene-reaction-
rules with the enzymes, hence, it can be used to visualize the metabolic ﬂux data and transcriptomic
data. Thirdly, it is integrated into COBRApy package, which allows the data visualization during the
investigation process. Escher can be accessed at https://escher.github.io.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:42==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 30
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 3
Experimental methodologies
3.1
In silico studies for P. putida KT2440 using iJN1411
3.1.1
iJN1411 test on Memote
To benchmark the comprehensive information of the GEM iJN1411 being used in this project, it
is tested using Memote model-test suit [56], together with some other published GEMs of KT2440
for the comparison, including iJN746 [33], PpuQY1140 [39], iEB1050 [38], and iJP962 [36]. Ac-
cordingly, to have a overview of the size-scale of the iJN1411, several models crossing the different
species are chosed and compared, which are the models: iJN746 [33] and PpuQY1140 [39] for P.
putida KT2440 strain, for other species, iJO1366 [60] and iML1515 [37] for E. coli, iMM904 [61]
for yeast and RECON1 [62] for human. The comparison performed crossing the different species is
the gene information coverage ratio, that is the ratio of gene number of the model against the whole
genome size.
3.1.2
Integration with the experimentally measured 13C ﬂux data with iJN1411
The experimental datasets are very useful to integrated into the model as new constraints to pro-
vide more biologically meaningful and condition-speciﬁc predictions. The activated glucose con-
sumption pathways under the speciﬁc and controlled conditions are explored in the previous research
[44], together with the measurement of the carbon ﬂuxes and the physicochemical parameters of the
cells, i.e. glucose uptake-rate and growth rate. The reaction ﬂuxes through the activated central car-
bon metabolism reactions are measured by the 13C-tracer experiments, the scaled ﬂuxes percentage
through each reaction can be seen Figure 3.1. These reaction ﬂuxes datasets here are integrated with
iJN1411 to further reﬁne and constrain the model to produce more contextual predictions for KT2440
strain. The details of measured reactions and ﬂuxes can be found in [44].
31
==PAGE:44==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 32
Figure 3.1: Experimentally measured ﬂux distribution in central metabolism of P. putiaon glucose M9
medium [44]).
To integrate the experimental measured ﬂuxes, ﬁrstly, the measured reactions are mapped with the
reaction IDs within iJN1411, which are the BiGG IDs retrieved from the database [64]. For the detail
gene names and PP numbers of the mapped reactions can be seen in Appendix I, and for the ﬂuxes of
the measured reactions can be found in Appendix III. Afterwards, the glucose minimal medium is
formulated in silico based to this experiment conditions, which contains the components ammonium
sulfate, potassium dihydrogen phosphate, magnesium dichloride, sodium chloride and glucose. The
change of model medium is manipulated through the model.reactions.bounds function in COBRApy
package. (The formulated in silico glucose M9 medium are depicted in Appendix II.) Based on
the mapped reaction IDs, the central metabolism map has been constructed using Escher [57], which
facilitates the visualization of reaction pathways and further reaction ﬂuxes loading for the convenient
analysis of ﬂuxes ﬂowing through the central metabolic network.
As one of the feature of the COBRA models, to achieve the maximum growth rate, there are a
series of mathematically feasible solution (ﬂux distributions) existing [21]. The principle of the inte-
gration method is to ﬁnd the solution with the closest distance between the solution and the measured
ﬂuxes. In detail, the old objective of the model, namely the growth rate, is treated as another observed
reaction ﬂux and constrained with the measured growth rate. By the minimization the value difference
between each reaction ﬂux, an new a new quadratic objective is formulated and set as the objective
function, after which and the problem is solved as a QP problem:
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:45==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 33
Minimize:
v
u
u
t
M
∑
j
 υj
 −υj,exp
2
(3.1)
Subject to:
M
∑
j=1
Si j ·υj = 0,
∀i ∈N
(3.2)
υj ≥0,
∀j ∈M
(3.3)
where Si j is the stoichiometric coefﬁcient matrix, υj represents the reaction ﬂuxes, υj,exp repre-
sents experiment reaction ﬂuxes, M and N are the numbers of reactions and metabolites.
With the optimization, the desired ﬂux distribution which has the minimum distance with the
experimental ﬂuxes has been found. The adjusted ﬂuxes being found here is representing the ﬂux
distribution in the wile-type of P. putida, which will be used as the reference solution for the MOMA
and ROOM method to predict the mutants’ growth status on glycolysis regime for the following
predictions. The adjustment to the experimental ﬂuxes has been done for both biomass reactions,
BOF_core and BOF_WT3.
3.1.3
Single-gene deletion study
The single-gene deletion study is a system biological method to assess the effect of genes on the
cell’s metabolic activities. By the systematically prediction of each gene-knockout mutant, it allows
to identify and direct the study of the interesting mutants and the further experiment analysis, which
has reduced the laboratory workload to a large extent [63]. This high through-put method also allows
the quantiﬁed prediction of all the reactions ﬂuxes after the gene deletions, in addition, the prediction
of essential genes of the model is a powerful model to validate the GENREs, which can assess and
improve the prediction accuracy [17].
In this project, we have performed several gene-essentiality prediction experiments on different
medium and using different computational methods. The gene-essentiality prediction is to system-
atically knock out each gene of the GEM and the growth states of each mutant is predicted. In this
project, a gene is considered as essential if its deletion mutants’ growth rate is below 10% of the wild
type, as the same manner used in [17]. The motivation of this study is biologically to have system-
atical overview of the essential genes in P.putida on different carbon sources, and computationally
to have a deep understanding of the model and the effect of using different method on the predicted
results.
Previously, three gene-essentiality prediction experiments have been performed in [17], two of
which are on glucose medium, using MOMA method simulating the mutants’ growth with the two
BOFs respectively, and the other one is in iLB medium, using MOMA method with the BOF_core
objective.
Including the repetition the 3 experiments [17], we have performed totally 16 experiments here us-
ing the single_gene_deletion function in COBRApy, with 2 different biomass functions (BOF_WT3
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:46==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 34
and BOF_CORE) in iJN1411, using 3 prediction methods (pFBA, MOMA and ROOM) and on 3 dif-
ferent carbon sources (glucose, citrate and the iLB medium), the experiments setup is shown in (Fig-
ure 3.2). All the gene-deletion results are saves in a SQL database, the detail of the experiments setup
and the gene-deletion database is available at the Github repository https://github.com/biosustain/putida-
redox/tree/master/src/analyses. The iLB medium is formulated for the GEM is based on the formu-
lation in [17], where it was deﬁned on the basis of commercial LB medium and in combination with
analysis of the complete essential metabolites, which were attained by mapping mutants available at
Pseudomonas Reference Culture Collection (PRCC) [40]. The citrate minimal medium is formulated
based on the in silico glucose medium, which closed the glucose exchange reaction and opened the
citrate exchange reaction.
Afterwards, the control variate method is employed to compare the results between experiments,
which is to compare one parameter by controlling the other variables as the same. There are three
variables within the 16 experiments, namely the different BOFs, media and simulation methods, ac-
cordingly, the experiments are divided into 3 main groups to proceed the comparisons, and all the
comparison performed are as shown in Figure 3.3, 3.4, 3.5.
Figure 3.2:
The setup of the single gene-
knockout experiments
Figure 3.3: The comparisons performed to com-
pare the experiments with different BOF, the
same medium and simulation method.
Figure 3.4: The comparisons performed to com-
pare the experiments with different medium, the
same BOF and simulation method.
Figure 3.5: The comparisons performed to com-
pare the experiments with different method, the
same BOF and medium.
3.1.4
Exploration of wild-type on four kinds of carbon sources: glucose, glu-
conate, 2-ketogluconate and citrate
Four kinds of carbon sources are of interest for the investigation of the ﬂux distribution and the
ﬂux range ﬂexibility under the glycolysis and gluconeogenesis regimes, where the glycolysis carbon
includes glucose, gluconate and 2-KG, and gluconeogenesis carbon is citrate. P. putida is able to
grow on all of these carbon sources.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:47==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 35
Firstly, pFBA method is used to simulate the growth status on these carbon sources and the carbon
and mass yield was calculated according to the predictions respectively. In addition, the FVA analysis
is performed to investigate the reactions’ ﬂux ﬂexibility for each carbon source consumption regime.
The carbon and mass yield was calculated by ﬁrstly adjusting the uptake rate of each carbon
uptake-rate as 1.0 to directly get the ﬂux yield, afterwards, the mass yield for each carbon source is
calculated using the formula as follows:
Mass_yield = Flux_yield/MW(carbon_source)
Where the unit of mass yield is gDW/g and of ﬂux yield is gDW/mmol, MW is the molecule
weight of the carbon source.
3.1.5
Investigation for speciﬁc mutants
In this part of experiments, several mutants have been constructed in silico based on the interesting
questions intend to exploring how the atypical metabolic network of P. putida would response to the
different carbon sources and the redox perturbations.
All the in silico gene deletions are using the function Gene.knock_out of COBROpy package. A
series of following investigations are performed to the speciﬁc mutants. Firstly, for the simulation of
the growth states, three COBRA methods available in COBROpy package, namely pFBA, MOMA,
ROOM are used to predict the growth status for all the mutants. As for MOMA and ROOM methods
usage, there are three extra constraints being added to the model. Firstly, the previous adjusted ﬂuxes
to experimental measured 13C data are used as the reference solution on the simulations on glucose
medium. In addition, there are two more constraints added to MOMA and ROOM methods. Firstly
the transhydrogenase is blocked from the model, which catalyzes the reaction that transfers NADH
into NADPH. The other constraint is that the glucosidase in the periplasm is also blocked from the
model, which catalyze the reaction cellobiose forming glucose.
Afterwards, the NAD(P)H network formation rate is calculated for each mutant. As one of the
basic constraints of the GEM is mass-balance within the network, it is impossible for the prediction of
the overproduction of NADPH. Thus, the term NAD(P)H network formation rate is used to represent-
ing the total ﬂux towards NAD(P)H formation, namely the sum of the ﬂuxes through all the activated
NAD(P)H-producing reactions. In addition, ﬂuxes through all the NADPH-producing reactions are
explored and compared with the wild-type.
Next, FVA analysis is performed for each to investigate the possible ﬂux range for each reaction
under the certain conditions. The FVA solution is attained using the ﬂux_variability_analysis function
in COBRApy. As the FVA solution is a series of reactions with their maximum and minimum ﬂuxes,
to directly visualize it, we used a mathematical representation to enable the FVA solution loading
on the previously constructed central metabolism map. The used mathematical representation is to
calculate the relative range for each reaction as follows :
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:48==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 36
Intervalj = υj/(υj +
Max j −Min j
)
where υj is the reaction ﬂux in mutant’s ﬂux distribution, Maxj/ and Min j is the reaction’s maxi-
mum and minimum ﬂux of the FVA solution.
For the reaction of which the minimum is equal to minimum, the calculated interval, i.e. the
relative ﬂux range, is 1, which means the ﬂux through this reaction is ﬁxed. In contrast, the more ﬂux
ﬂexibility one reaction has, i.e., the bigger the difference value of the maximum and minimum is, the
smaller the relative range is than 1.
All the predictions in combination with FVA analysis are loaded on the built central metabolism
map for visualization and comparison of the ﬂux ﬂow. Different colors are used to represent these
range values, where the degree of the blue represents the maximal, mean and minimal value of relative
ranges respectively. The opacity and transparency are used to represent the ﬂux range, where the more
opaque the reactions is, the lower ﬂexibility it has.
All the following investigations are all performed for iJN1411 with both BOFs, BOF_WT3 and
BOF_core. As the difference were observed between the solutions when using different BOFs for
iJN1411, the results presenting here are all simulated for the BOF_WT3 objective function, and
all the exploratory notebooks are available at https://github.com/biosustain/putida-redox/tree/glucose-
f/notebooks.
Zwf knock-out mutant investigation
The P.putida KT2440 strain growing on glucose medium is characterized by a slight overproduction
of the redox NADPH and the redox balance inside the cell was investigated by assessing the key de-
hydrogenates’ activity within the central carbon metabolic network, among which there is the highest
ﬂux through zwf encoded reaction (Figure 2.5) and it is considered as the main source for production
of NADPH. To investigate the functionality of Zwf enzyme within the central metabolism and its
effect on the redox balance, the mutants with zwf knocked out within iJN1411 are studied in silico.
There are three isozymes of Zwf: Zwf-1 (PP_1022), Zwf-2 (PP_4042) and Zwf-3 (PP_5351), hence,
these genes are knocked out individually for the grow prediction, and then tri-knockout mutant is in-
vestigated. It should be noted that, within iJN1411, the reaction encoded by zwf is split into branches,
with the reaction IDs G6PDH2 and G6PBDH.
The investigation of four kinds of glucose consumption pathways
P.putida KT2240 stains harbor a complex glucose consumption network with three consumption
branches converging into the metabolite 6PG. As a consequence, KT2440 can also grow on gluconate
and 2-KG medium with the different doubling time being detected in [44].
However, the contribution and inﬂuence of these three branches on the metabolism of P.putida
have not been elucidated so far. Based on the query, four kinks of glucose consumption pathways
have been investigated in this project: i) 100 % through the phosphorylation (Glk) pathway, ii) 100
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:49==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 37
% being oxidized into gluconate (100 %through Gcd, GnuK catalysis), iii) 100 % being oxidized into
2-KG (100 %through Gcd, KguK and KguD catalysis), and iv) 50 % being oxidized into gluconate,
50 % being oxidized into 2-gluconate.
For the ﬁrst pathway, where glucose are all fueling into phosphorylation pathway through Glk
and further catalyzed by Zwf into 6PG, the mutant is constructed by knocking out gcd to prevent
glucose from being oxidized into gluconate. For the second scenario, where glucose is oxidized only
into gluconate and catalyzed by GnuK into 6PG, the mutant is achieved by knocking out glk and
the enzyme converting gluconate into 2-ketogluconate, which is encoded by ﬁve genes in iJN1411:
PP_3382, PP_3383, PP_3384, PP_3623 and PP_4232. Four the third scenario, where all glucose
is oxidized into 2-KG and catalyzed by KguK and KguD into 6PG, the mutant is constructed by
knocking out gnuK and glk genes. As for the last scenario, where half of gluconate is further oxidized
into 2-KG, the mutant is achieved by knocking out glk and adding another layer constraint to the
model, which is the ﬂuxes through GnuK and KguD enzymes are equal.
Single knock out of gnd, maeB and icd investigation
the activity of seven key dehydrogenases related to the redox balance inside the cell are being tested
in [44]: Gap, Gnd, MaeB, KguD, Mdh, Icd, Gnd and Zwf, among which except for Gap shows a high
speciﬁcity on NAD+ cofactor and Mdh is not active, others are all highly NADP+ favored catalyzing.
To investigate the function of each dehydrogenases for the metabolic network and the redox balance,
the mutants with single-knockout of gnd, maeB and icd are constructed in silico for the investigation.
Assuming Zwf as an NAD dehydrogenase
Zwf is with the highest activity and a high speciﬁcity for NADPH production on glucose medium
[44]. To investigate the effect of the enzymes’ cofactor speciﬁcity, the mutant assuming Zwf as an
NAD- depend instead of NADP- dehydrogenase is constructed in silico and investigated. The mutant
is constructed ﬁrstly knocking out the three genes of zwf, and two new NADH production are added
to the model to replace the zwf encoding reactions by using the AddReaction function in COBRApy.
Double knockouts of gcd and zwf on gluconate medium
As the main NADPH production enzyme Zwf is within the EDEMP cycle converting the recycled
G6P into 6PG, it is considered the phosphorylation pathway should be the preferable way for the
cell to degraded the glucose. However, in the experimentally measured ﬂux distribution, the main
glucose consumption pathway of glucose is the oxidation pathway through Gcd into gluconate and
further converted to 6PG. In addition, gluconate is the most favored carbon source of P. putida with
the shortest doubling time under the glycolysis situation [44].
The motivation of the construction this mutant is to exploration the functionality of the metabolic
network without the EDEMP cycle. Thus, the strategy here adopted to block the the possibility of the
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:50==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 38
activation of EDEMP cycle is by the double knockouts of gcd and zwf, which prevents the conversion
between glucose and gluconate and deactivate the Zwf enzymes. Afterwards, the mutant is fed with
gluconate.
3.1.6
The redox balance comparison between E.coli and P. putida organisms
using systematical single-gene deletion method
After the several in silico studies on the interested redox challenging mutants, we are inquiring if
there is a system mechanism of P. putida regulating the redox balance in the metabolic network under
redox perturbations, and if the present model can capture these properties of the metabolism. Out of
the query, we have set up another set single-gene deletion study to systematically investigate the redox
balance strategies in P. putida undergoing redox challenging. To look into the exceptional underlying
patterns to regulate the redox balance in the metabolic P.putida, it is compared to the strain E.coli K-
12 MG1655, by using the most recent GEM iML1515 reconstruction [37] for the strain E.coli K-12
MG1655. It is employed for the comparison of the redox balance regulation mechanism with P. putida
network. An comprehensive analysis of the redox balance strategies under genetic perturbations have
been performed om both P. putida and E. coli organisms.
The experiment methods are similar to the gene-essentiality prediction experiments by individu-
ally knocking out the genes of iJN1411 and iML1515 from the GEMs, and the corresponding pre-
dicted ﬂux distributions of each gene knockout mutant are saved in the database, available at the
Github repository https://github.com/biosustain/putida-redox.
Totally 4 experiments are performed in two different carbon sources (glucose and citrate) using
pFBA method. The core biomass function of each model is set as the objective for iJN1411 and
iML1515 respectively, and it is because the model iML1515 available at the database BiGG
is not able to grow when using its wild-type biomass objective. The glucose uptake rates are 6.3 and 10
mmol/(gDW · h) for iJN1411 and iML1515 respectively and the citrate uptake rate is 8 mmol/(gDW·
h) in both models. The biomass objective used is the BIOMASS_Ec_iML1515_core_75p37M for
iML1515 and BiomassKT2440_Core2 for iJN1411 respectively.
As for the redox balance investigation, we commenced on calculating the redox net formation rate
of all the mutants ﬁrstly. The net formation rate is calculated by the summation of ﬂuxes through
NAD- or NADH- producing reactions respectively. Next, we intend to ﬁnd the genes that have
the large effect on the redox inﬂux production. For this purpose, an parameter termed normalized-
imbalance is introduced for the comparison of the relative changing degree of the redox formation
rate in mutants, which is calculated as follows:
N_im = (WT_in −MT_in)/WT_in
(3.4)
where the N_im is the normalized-imbalance, WT_in is the redox formation rated in wild-type
and MT_in is the inﬂux in the mutant. The calculation has been performed for NADH and NADPH
respectively.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:51==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 39
The following analysis process can be roughly divided into three main steps. At the ﬁrst step, after
the calculation of both NADH and NADPH formation rate for totally (2*1412+2*1515) mutants, they
are sorted by the NADPH normalized-imbalance. After wards, the top 30 genes, whose deletion has
caused a signiﬁcant change of the NADPH formation rate, are chosen for the further analysis, i.e.
4*30 mutants being chosen from this step.
At the second step, for all the chosen genes, whose encoding reactions have been found from the
model. Totally, four sets of reactions are attained from the four experiments. Afterwards, experiments
are divided into two groups for the analysis according to growing medium. The two sets reactions
from different organisms but predicted in the same carbon source are compared, i.e. two comparisons
are performed in this step. The common reactions existing in both organisms and whose deletion
would cause a signiﬁcant NADPH formation rate change are identiﬁed. If these common reactions
get affected, they would cause drastic NADPH formation rate changes in both P. putida and E. coli
organisms.
Furthermore, the encoding genes of these common reactions are identiﬁed in the corresponding
model, so far four sets of gene mutants have been found. With these four sets of mutants, the redox
formation rate and the redox-producing reactions of these mutants are compared crossing the P. putida
and E. coli organisms respectively. Ultimately, through these comparisons, we are expecting to ﬁnd a
strategic pattern regulating the redox balance in the metabolic network of P. putida.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:52==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 40
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4
Results
4.1
Comparison results of different genome-scale metabolic mod-
els of P.putida KT2440
To benchmark the basic information of the GEM iJN1411 being used in this project, it is tested us-
ing Memote model-test suit [56], together with some other pulished GEMs including iJN746 [33],
PpuQY1140 [39], iEB1050, iJP815, iJP962 and PpuMBEL1071. There are 1412 genes, 2826 reac-
tions and 2087 metabolites included in iJN1411, and two BOF were formulated, termed BOF_core
(BiomassKT2440_Core2) and BOF_WT (BiomassKT2440_WT3). The corresponding reports of the
models being tested on Memote can be found in Github repository https://github.com/biosustain/putida-
redox/tree/master/reports/memote_reports.
To have a overview of the size-scale of the iJN1411, several published GEMs have been chosen
to compare with it, i.e., iJN746 [33] and PpuQY1140 [39] for P. putida KT2440 strain, for other
species, iJO1366 [60] and iML1515 [37] for E. coli, iMM904 [61] for yeast and RECON1 [62]
for human. Considering the gene coverage of the available whole genome, that is the ratio of gene
number of the model against the whole genome size, iJN1411, even compared to the will-studied
microorganism E. coli model iML1515 [37], is one of he best detailed and exhausted reconstructions
for the target organisms, and when comparing with other GEMs for P. putida KT2440, iJN1411 has the
most genes, reactions and metabolites, indicating its comprehensive and strain-speciﬁc information
coverage (Figure 4.1).
According to Memote tests, iJN1411 is a correct, mass-balanced and consistent GEM with de-
tailed gene annotation. Considering it is the newest model being reconstructed, with the most updated
gene information and the good prediction performance, iJN141 is chosen to be used for this project
to study the metabolism and analyzing the redox-balance inside P.putida KT2440 insilico.
41
==PAGE:54==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 42
Figure 4.1: The comparison of the model size for different models crossing different species.
4.2
Integration of the experimental data with iJN1411
The ﬂux distribution of the wile-type deﬁned in iJN1411 was simulated by pFBA method without
any extra constraints, and the solution is loaded on the constructed central metabolism map. When
using pFBA for the unconstrained model, glucose is predicted to be all oxidized into gluconate and
converted into 6PG, with the predicted growth rate 0.615 h−1 (Figure 4.2).
Figure 4.2: The ﬂux distribution of the wile-type deﬁned in iJN1411 without the experiment con-
straints. (The shade represents the amount of the ﬂux ﬂowing through. The darker color represents
the more ﬂux ﬂowing through this reaction, reversely, the lighter color represents the less ﬂux.)
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:55==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 43
Figure 4.3: The measured reactions mapped with the BiGG IDs in iJN1411.
However, the ﬂux distribution predixted by pFBA method in the unconstrained model is not the
case in the experimental conditions according to the ﬂux measurements in [44]. As pFBA is always
predicting the optimal growth status of the cell, which may be achieved by the cells under the evolu-
tionary stress [63]. To capture the actual ﬂux distribution of the laboratory wild type, the experimental
measurements are formulated as new constraints being added to the model. The integration method
has been described in the previous section 3.1.2. After the model being constrained, the corresponding
reaction ﬂuxes are adjusted and in consistent with the experimental ﬂux data (Figure 4.4).
There are two sets of adjusted ﬂuxes to the corresponding measured reactions being found, with
iJN1411 using both biomass functions, BOF_WT and BOF_core, as depicted in Appendix IV. The
adjusted ﬂuxes, representing the ﬂux distribution in the wile-type of P. putida, will be used as the ref-
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:56==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 44
erence solution for the MOMA and ROOM method to predict the mutants’ growth status on glycolysis
regime for the following predictions.
Figure 4.4: The central metabolism pathway map loaded with the adjusted experimental ﬂuxes for
biomass function BOF_WT3. (The darker color represents the more ﬂux ﬂowing through this pathway,
reversely, the lighter color represents the less ﬂux.)
4.3
Analysis and comparison of single-gene knockout study re-
sults
Comparison results of the predictions
For the ﬁrst set of single-gene study here, totally 12 experiments have been performed with 2 biomass
functions (BOF_WT3 and BOF_core), 2 prediction methods (pFBA, MOMA) and 3 medium (glu-
cose, citrate and the iLB medium). The predicted essential gene numbers for each condition together
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:57==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 45
with the predictions in [17] are shown in Figure 4.5.The in silico citrate, iLB medium components
can be seen in Appendix V. Totally three groups of comparisons are performed to compare the three
variables: simulation method, biomass function and carbon source.
Figure 4.5: The single-gene knock-out study experiments with the predicted essential gene numbers,
the reference numbers are the gene numbers predicted in previous research [17].
The ﬁrst group of comparisons are between the experiments with different BOFs as the model
objective. In conclusion, there are more genes essential for the objective BOF_WT3 however not
for BOF_core, where the numbers are 74 and 60 on the minimal medium (citrate and glucose) and
iLB complex medium respectively (Figure 4.6 and 4.7). In contrast, in all of three medium, there is
only one gene (PP_5317) that is essential for the BOF_core not for BOF_WT. This gene encoding the
enzyme split chorismate into pyruvate and hydroxybenzoate.
Figure 4.6: There are more 74 essential genes
for BOF_WT not BOF_core, and one more es-
sential gene for BOF_core and BOF_WT on cit-
rate and glucose medium.
Figure 4.7: There are more 60 essential genes
for BOF_WT3 not BOF_core, and one more es-
sential gene for BOF_core and BOF_WT3 on
iLB complex medium.
For the comparisons between the experiments on different medium, citrate and glucose, the com-
parison results shows that when using the pFBA method, there are always more essential genes on cit-
rate than medium, however, when using pFBA method, there are two more essential genes: PP_4960
(fda) and PP_5040 (fbp)) (Figure 4.8), and for MOMA method, there are six more essental genes:
PP_4960 (fba), PP_5040 (fbp) and PP_4190-PP_4193 (Figure 4.9).
The last comparison is between the experiments predicted by the different methods, however with
the same BOF and carbon source. In summary, the MOMA method predicted more essential genes
than pFBA method, which are 9 genes and 13 genes on glucose and citrate medium respectively
(Figure 4.10 and 4.11).
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:58==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 46
In summary, four genes are predicted essential on citrate not glucose: PP_4190, PP_4191, PP_4192
and PP_4193 (sucDC), encoding the reaction SUCDi in iJN1411. SUCDi is the reaction that succinate
are catalyzed into fumarate in the Tricarboxylic Acid (TCA) cycle.
Through the comparison of our predictions to the reference predictions in [17], the predictions
made are not exactly the same (Figure 4.5). In iLB medium, The predicted essential genes are the
same, however, in glucose, 2 previously predicted genes are missing in our prediction, which are the
eEdd and eda genes encoding enzymes in the ED pathway catalyzing 6PG into pyruvate.
Figure 4.8: There are 2 more essential genes for
citrate not glucose medium when using pFBA
method.
Figure 4.9: There are 6 more essential genes
citrate not glucose medium when using MOMA
method.
Figure 4.10: There are 9 more essential genes
for MOMA not pFBA method on glucose
medium.
Figure 4.11:
There are 13 more essential
genes for MOMA not pFBA method on citrate
medium.
Validation of the predicted essential genes by experimental mutant
To evaluate the prediction performance in gene essentiality of iJN1411, some genes previously exper-
imentally validated in [59] have been found to compare with our prediction. 79 genes are predicted as
conditionally essential genes on glucose M9 medium by excluding the essential genes in iLB complex
medium (Figure 4.12), of which 58 genes existed in the model that could be validated. Taking these
58 genes, we also validated the prediction made in [17]. The validated genes are divided into four
groups: true-positives, true-negatives, false-positives and false negatives. where the true-positives
and -negatives are the predicted essential- and nonessential genes in consistent with the experiments,
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:59==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 47
and inversely false positives and false negatives are the predictions not in consistence with the exper-
iments.
Figure 4.12: The 79 conditionally essential genes are calculated by subtracting the essential ones in
iLB complex medium from those on glucose.
Figure 4.13: The predicted conditionally essential genes of our prediction and the ones taken from
[17] are validated against experimental datasets in, and the accuracy is 83% and 86% respectively.
The calculated accuracy for our prediction is 83%, against 86% of the prediction in [17]. There
are two discrepancies, where the two genes edd and eda, as two essential genes being predicted in
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:60==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 48
[17] successfully and validated in [59], however, are failed to be recognized here (Figure 4.13). The
proposed 79 conditionally essential genes are depicted in Appendix VI.
4.4
Four different carbon feedings for wild-type strain: glucose,
gluconate, 2-ketogluconate and citrate
Within the Central Carbon Metabolism (CCM) in P. putida, there are three branches to process the
carbon sources under the glycolysis regime, namely via glucose, gluconate and 2-KG, which are
located at the upper part of CCM. In addition, it can also process a wide range of carbon sources
under the gluconeogenesis regime, citrate is chosen as it input the carbons from the lower part of
CCM.
To investigate the how the the ﬂuxes ﬂowing through the CCM to respond to the different the usage
of different C sources which are processed by different pathways, four kinds of carbon sources are of
interest for the investigation of the ﬂux distribution under the glycolysis and gluconeogenesis regimes.
The glycolysis carbon sources includes glucose, gluconate and 2-KG, and the gluconeogenesis carbon
course is citrate.
4.4.1
Mass yield calculation for the four carbon sources
Firstly, the mass yield on each carbon sources is calculated, among which the mass yield on glucose
medium is the highest and has been proved to be in consistence with the experimental measured value
in [44], as shown in Figure 4.14.
The carbon and mass yield was calculated by adjusting the uptake rate of each carbon uptake-rate
as 1.0 to directly get the ﬂux yield, afterwards, the mass yield for each carbon source is calculated
using the formula as follows:
Mass_yield = Flux_yield/MW(carbon_source)
Where the unit of mass yield is gDW/g and of ﬂux yield is gDW/mmol, MW is the molecule
weight of the carbon source.
Figure 4.14: The calculated ﬂux and mass yield for glucose, gluconate, 2-KG and citrate medium
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:61==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 49
4.4.2
The growth predictions of wild-type on four carbon sources
For the simulation of wild-type under glycolysis regimes, MOMA and pFBA methods are applied for
the prediction, and the uptake of glucose, gluconate and 2-KG are all constrained as 6.3 mmol/(gDW·h).
The ﬂux distribution maps of the wild-type grows in gluconate and 2-ketogluconate medium can be
seen in Appendix VII.
Figure 4.15: The predicted ﬂux distribution of wild-type in citrate medium by pFBA method. (The
color shade represents the amount of the ﬂuxes, and the opacity and transparency represent the ﬂux
ﬂexibility. The more transparent the reaction is, the wider ﬂux changing range is has. The reaction
names highlighted are the ones previously measured in glucose medium.)
For the growth simulation on citrate, the uptake rate is constrained as 8 mmol/(gDW·h). As no
experimental ﬂuxes available for using as the reference, the ﬂux distribution is predicted only by
pFBA method. The growth rate on different carbon sources are shown in Figure 4.16.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:62==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 50
Figure 4.16: The predicted growth rate of wild-type on different medium by pFBA method.
The ﬂux distribution on citrate medium is loaded on the central metabolism map in combination
with the FVA analysis, as shown in Figrue 4.15. According to the FVA analysis, the TPI (tpi), FBA
(fda) and FBP (fbp) reactions at the lower part of the EDEMP cycle are still active and are with a high
opacity, indicating it is with a narrow ﬂux ﬂexibility.
According to prediction here, FBA and FBP reactions, operating the recycling of the carbons,
are playing important roles in the growth of P. putida in citrate medium. It has also been previously
predicted by the single-gene deletion study, fbp (PP_5040) and fda (PP_4960) genes are essential in
citrate however not glucose medium. It is not surprising the ﬂux through TCA cycle is quite ﬁxed to
consume citrate, as it is the input location of citrate. The ME2 (maeB), OAADC (oadA and accC-2),
and PDH reactions are with high ﬂuxes ﬂowing through but with wide ﬂux changing ranges.
4.5
Speciﬁc mutant investigation results
In summary, during the process exploration of the net NADPH formation rate, when the redox balance
get affected by the gene deletions, there are always some preferable reactions being activated to keep
the overall redox balance in the metabolic network. For the information of these reactions is shown
in Figure 4.17.
Figure 4.17: The chemical equations and PP numbers of the newly activated reactions after gene
perturbations.
4.5.1
Investigation on zwf knockout mutant
There are three Zwf isozymes in P. putida encoded by three genes: zwf (PP_1022), zwf-2 (PP_4042)
and zwf-3 (PP_5351). Within iJN1411, the reaction encoded by zwf genes is split into branches, with
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:63==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 51
the reaction IDs G6PDH2 and G6PBDH.
Firstly, these three genes are knocked out from the model individually. As the predictions indicate
the single-knockout mutants are not effected by one of the Zwf isozymes being knocked out and
are with the same ﬂux distribution and growth rate with the wide-type. Not surprisingly, if one of the
isozymes being knocked out, the model would use the other existing isozymes to catalyze the reaction
without the differentiation of the gene expression level.
Next, all of the three zwf genes are knocked out from the model, and the mutant’s growth status are
predicted by using pFBA, MOMA and ROOM methods respectively. According to the predictions,
the growth rate of the mutants did not get affected with the absence of zwf genes. The predicted
growth rate by pFBA method is 0.615, and by MOMA and ROOM methods are 0.54 (Figure 4.18).
As pFBA method is predicting the most optimal status of the cell, it is possible for the cells to achieve
such high growth under the evolutionary stress. Regarding to the imediate response to the genetic
distributions, only the MOMA and ROOM solutions are shown here for the comparisons (Figure 4.19
and 4.20).
As seen in the MOMA prediction, when zwf is knocked out, there is no glucose being consumed
through the phosphorylation pathway, however, the ROOM solution suggests the phosphorylation
pathway ﬂux remains the same as the wild-type. Within MOMA solutions, the PGI (pgi) reaction is
still active recycling F6P back into G6P, and there is a mall fraction ﬂux through TPI (tpi) reaction
for the producing of DHAP. However, in the ROOM solution, it is interesting to see the direction of
the two reactions are reversed.
According to the FVA analysis, the pathways that glucose being oxidized into gluconate, ﬂowing
through ED pathway and the PDH reaction entering TCA cycle are with low ﬂux ﬂexibility. Both
MOMA and ROOM solutions indicates that the total NADH formation rate dose not get affected
when Zwf enzymes are knocked out, but there the NADPH formation rate tends to decrease and new
NADPH-producing reactions would be activated (Figure 4.22). It is not surprising when Zwf, as
the main NADPH source, is absence from the network, the metabolic system would ﬁnd alternative
reactions for the production of NADPH. The predicted newly activated reactions are different within
these two solutions, where the reaction G3PD2 (PP_4169) and FMNR2r (PP_1638) are activated of
MOMA solution, and FMNR2r is activated for ROOM method (Figure 4.22).
Figure 4.18: The growth rate of the zwf knockout mutant predicted by three methods.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:64==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 52
Figure 4.19: The ﬂux distribution of zwf knockout mutant predicted by MOMA method. (The darker
colors represents the more ﬂux ﬂowing trough, and the opacity and transparency represent the ﬂux
ﬂexibility of FVA analysis. The reaction names highlighted are the ones have been experimentally
measured in glucose medium.)
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:65==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 53
Figure 4.20: The ﬂux distribution of zwf knockout mutant predicted by ROOM method.
Figure 4.21:
The redox formation rate of the
MOMA, ROOM solutions and wild-type.
Figure 4.22: The NADPH-producing reactions of
the MOMA and ROOM solutions comparing to
wild-type.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:66==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 54
4.5.2
The investigation results of four kinds of glucose consumption pathways
Gcd knockout - forcing glucose consumption 100% through the phosphorylation pathway
To force the glucose only being consumed through the phosphorylation pathway, the gcd gene (PP_1444)
is knocked out to prevent the oxidation. Afterwards, the mutant’s growth state is simulated using
pFBA, MOMA and ROOM methods respectively. When glucose are all phosphorylated in to G6P,
the predicted ﬂux distributions by MOMA and ROOM methods are very similar, and the FVA anal-
ysis also suggests that most reactions are with low ﬂux ﬂexibility (Figure 4.26). However, the pre-
dicted growth rate by three methods are quite different (Figure 4.26). Comparing the growth rate of
pFBA solution to the unconstrained wild-type and of MOMA solution to the constrained solution, the
growth rate of the mutant is expecting to decrease. However, ROOM solution suggests the growth
rate wouldn’t get affected.
The redox formation rate comparison shows that the NADPH formation rate has increased in
mutant when using both MOMA and ROOM methods, however, an increased NADH formation is
seen when using ROOM method while no increase observed in MOMA solution (Figure 4.24). Taking
a close look at the speciﬁc ﬂux changes of the NADPH-producing reactions, the ﬂux through the Zwf
encoding reaction G6PDH2 has increased signiﬁcantly (Figure 4.25).
Figure 4.23: The growth rate of Gcd knockout mutant using pFBA, MOMA and ROOM methods as
the simulation method.
Figure 4.24: The redox formation rate compari-
son of wild-type and Gcd-knockout mutant using
MOMA and ROOM methods for growth simula-
tion.
Figure 4.25: The comparison of the NADPH pro-
duction reactions between wild-type and Gcd-
knockout mutant simulated by MOMA and ROOM
methods.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:67==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 55
Figure 4.26: The ﬂux distribution of Gcd knockout mutant using MOMA as the smulation method.
Forcing glucose 100% being oxidized into gluconate
The second desired mutant consumes all glucose oxidized into gluconate, and further being catalyzed
by gnuK (PP_3416) into 6PG. This mutant is constructed by knocking out glk and kguD genes, after
which it is simulated by MOMA and ROOM methods.
In this scenario, all solutions indicate the growth rate is not affected by the knockouts. In both
MOMA and ROOM solutions, the EDEMP cycle is activated and there is recycled G6P being cat-
alyzed through the Zwf enzymes with the generation of NADPH. However, it shows there is more
G6P being recycled in the ROOM solution (Figure 4.29). Another difference is seen in the ﬂux
through the PP pathways, of which there is less ﬂux entering the PP pathways through GND gnd re-
action in MOMA solution (Figure 4.28). According to the FVA analysis (the opacity of the reactions),
it shows the EDEMP cycle and PP pathways, although with small fraction of ﬂuxes, are with narrow
ﬂux ranges.
The NAD(P)H net formation rate of the mutant is investigated and compared with wild-type, as
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:68==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 56
shown in Figure 4.30. In the MOMA solution, the NADPH formation rate is slightly decreased and
the NADH formation is not effected, while in ROOM solution, the NADPH formation rate has no
drastic change but the NADH inﬂux is slightly increased. After taking a deep look at the ﬂux of
NADPH-producing reactions, the decrease of NADPH inﬂux is due to the the reduced ﬂux trough
G6PDH2 in MOMA solution. And both solution predicted there is a newly activated reaction G3PD2
with a small fraction of NADPH production in mutant.
Figure 4.27: The growth rate of Glk and KguD double-knockout mutant using pFBA, MOMA and
ROOM methods as the simulation method.
Figure 4.28: The MOMA solution of the glk and gnuK double-knockout mutant.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:69==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 57
Figure 4.29: The ROOM solution of the glk and gnuK double-knockout mutant.
Figure 4.30:
The redox formation rate com-
parison of wild-type and glk and kguD double-
knockout mutant using MOMA and ROOM meth-
ods for growth simulation.
Figure 4.31:
The comparison of the NADPH
production reactions between wild-type and glk
and kguD double-knockout mutant simulated by
MOMA and ROOM methods.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:70==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 58
Forcing glucose 100% being oxidized into 2-ketogluconate
The third glucose consumption pathway of interest is forcing all glucose being oxidized into 2-KG
and further catalyzed by KguK and KguD enzymes into 6PG. The mutant is constructed in silico
by the gnuK and glk double-knockout. In the same manner, three methods are used to simulate the
mutant growth with the experimental ﬂuxes as reference, and the predicted growth rate are shown in
Figure 4.34. The optimization growth rate predicted by the unconstrained wild-type is 0.615/h by the
pFBA method, comparing the growth rate of pFBA solution here, the growth rate of the mutant has
decreased. As well as suggested by the MOMA solution, the growth rate is expecting to decrease
comparing to the constrained wild-type. However, the growth rate predicted by ROOM methods is
not affected.
Figure 4.32: The MOMA solution of the Glk and GnuK double-knockout mutant.
Regarding the the ﬂux distribution predicted by MOMA and ROOM methods, there is more ﬂux
entering the PP pathways through the GND reaction, thus more F6P being recycled into G6P within
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:71==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 59
the ROOM solution, (Figure 4.32 and Figure 4.33). Another difference is seen that there is more
ﬂux trough OAADC reaction to produce pyruvate and through the TPI reaction to produce DHAP in
MOMA solution. According to the FVA analysis, the PDH, OAADC, ME2 and some reactions in
TCA cycle are all with a relative low ﬂux ﬂexibility.
Regarding to the redox formation rate comparison, it is shown that in both MOMA and ROOM
solutions, NADH formation rate remains steady, however, the NADPH inﬂuxes have drastically in-
creased (Figure 4.35). Further comparing the ﬂuxes NADPH-producing reactions of the MOMA
solution to the wild-type, the ﬂux through reaction G6PDH2 (zwf) has reduced almost half of the
original ﬂux, while ﬂux reactions ME2 and GND are all increased, as shown in Figure 4.36. Within
the ROOM solution, the ﬂux trough the ICDHyr has reduced a bit, while the ﬂux through GND re-
action increased, and the FMNR2r reaction has been predicted as an new main NADPH-producing
reaction.
Figure 4.33: The ROOM solution of the Glk and GnuK double-knockout mutant.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:72==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 60
Figure 4.34: The growth rate of Glk and GnuK double-knockout mutant using pFBA, MOMA and
ROOM methods as the simulation method.
Figure 4.35: The redox net formation rate com-
parison of wild-type and the gnuK and glk double-
knockout mutant simulated by MOMA and ROOM
methods.
Figure 4.36:
The comparison of the NADPH
formation reactions between wild-type and glk
and gnuK double-knockout mutant simulated by
MOMA and ROOM methods.
Glucose being oxidized into 50% gluconate and 50% 2-KG
The last situation of glucose consumption pathways being explored is the oxidation of glucose into
50% gluconate and 50% 2-KG. The mutant is constructed by Glk knock-out in silico in combination
with a new constraint added to the model, which is the ﬂuxes trough the enzyemes GnuK and KnuK
reactions are the same. Afterwards, the mutant’s growth state is predicted using all methods, the
solutions being shown in Figure 4.38 and 4.39. Within this scenario, the predicted growth rate of both
solutions are with slight change comparing to the wild-type, as shown in Figure 4.38.
The difference between the MOMA and ROOM solutions here are in a similar manner to the
previous scenarios, where the ROOM solution indicates more ﬂux through the PP pathways, thus more
F6P being recycled into G6P. While in the MOMA solution, the predicted ﬂuxes through OAADC
and ME2 reactions to produce pyruvate and through TPI reaction to produce DHAP are more than in
ROOM solution. According to the FVA solution, the ﬂuxes though ED pathways are highly ﬁxed.
Regarding to the redox net formation rate comparison, the NADPH ﬂux in both solutions have
slightly increased, while the rate of NADH formation are stable (Figure ??). When looking at the
NADPH-producing reactions, the situation is quite similar to the Glk and GnuK double-knockout
mutant. The ﬂux through G6PDH2 reaction has reduced in the MOMA solution, which the ﬂux
through GND reaction has increased in both solutions. In addition, the GLUDy and G3PD2 reactions
are newly activated in MOMA solution, while FRDO5r and G3PD2 in ROOM solution.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:73==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 61
Figure 4.37: The growth rate of the mutant consuming glucose as 50% gluconate and 50% 2-KG
predicted by pFBA, MOMA and ROOM methods.
Figure 4.38: The MOMA solution of the mutant consuming glucose as 50% gluconate and 50% 2-KG.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:74==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 62
Figure 4.39: The ROOM solution of the mutant consuming glucose as 50% gluconate and 50% 2-KG.
Figure 4.40: The redox formation rate compar-
ison between the wild-type, MOMA and ROOM
solutions of the mutant consuming glucose as
50% gluconate and 50% 2-KG.
Figure 4.41: The comparison of the NADPH-
producing reactions between wild-type and the
MOMA and ROOM solutions of the mutant con-
suming glucose as 50% gluconate and 50% 2-KG.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:75==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 63
4.5.3
Single knock-out of gnd, maeB and icd investigation result
To assess the potential effect of key dehydrogenases on the metabolic network, Gnd, MaeB and Icd
are knocked out respectively, and three methods are used to simulate the growth status of these three
mutants.
Gnd-knouckout mutant
As measured in the experiments, there is only a small fraction of ﬂux ﬂowing through the PP pathways
from the gnd encoding reaction. Thus, when gnd is knocked out, it is not surprising that the growth
rate is not affected (Figure 4.43). Regarding to the ﬂux distribution in the mutant, the predicted
solutions by both MOMA and ROOM methods are not with big differences comparing to the wild-
type. Only the MOMA solution is shown as in Figure 4.49 and the ROOM solution of gnd knockout
mutant can be found in Appendix VII.
Figure 4.42: The MOMA solution of the gnd knockout mutant.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:76==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 64
As the same the redox formation rate, both of NADH and NADPH remain stable in the mutant
(Figure 4.44). As for the NADPH production, the ﬂux through G6PDH2 (zwf) reaction has decreased,
and three new reactions are activated in MOMA solution. While in ROOM solution, only one new
reaction is activated (Figure 4.45).
Figure 4.43: The growth rate of gnd knockout mutant using pFBA, MOMA and ROOM methods as
the simulation method.
Figure 4.44: The redox formation rate compari-
son of wild-type and the gnd-knockout mutant us-
ing MOMA and ROOM methods for growth simu-
lation.
Figure 4.45: The comparison of the NADPH pro-
duction reactions between wild-type and the gnd-
knockout mutant simulated by MOMA and ROOM
methods.
Mutant with maeB knockout
The gene maeB encodes the reaction ME2 in the model, which is one of the main NADPH-producing
reaction with a large portion ﬂux ﬂowing through. When maeB is knocked out, the growth rate is not
affected of all solutions, among which the predicted solutions by MOMA and ROOM methods are
quite similar, and Only the MOMA solution is shown as in Figure 4.46, and the ROOM solution of
maeB-mutant can be found in Appendix VII. It may indicate the important role of the ME2 reaction
in producing NADPH within the model. However, the calculated NADPH formation is not affected
in mutant, while the NADH formation rate has slightly increased as predicted by both MOMA and
ROOM methods (Figure 4.47). As for the NADPH-producing reactions, different reactions are pre-
dicted to be activated in mutant by different methods: FRDO4r and G3PD2 reactions by MOMA and
FMNR2r reaction by ROOM.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:77==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 65
Figure 4.46: The MOMA solution of the maeB knockout mutant.
Figure 4.47: The redox formation rate compari-
son of wild-type and the MaeB-knockout mutant
using MOMA and ROOM methods for growth
simulation.
Figure 4.48:
The comparison of the NADPH
production reactions between wild-type and the
MaeB-knockout mutant simulated by MOMA and
ROOM methods.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:78==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 66
Figure 4.49: The growth rate of maeB knockout mutant using pFBA, MOMA and ROOM methods as
the simulation method.
Icd-knockout mutant
There are two genes, PP_4011 and PP_4012, encoding the enzyme Icd within the model, which are
both knocked out to construct the icd knockout mutant. The icd encoding reaction ICDHyr, as one
of the reaction within the TCA cycle, is producing the most NADPH with the highest ﬂuxes ﬂowing
through among all the NADPH-producing reactions. When icd is knocked out from the model, the
predicted growth rate has decreased in the pFBA and MOMA solutions, however not get affected in
the ROOM solution (Figure 4.50).
Figure 4.50: The growth rate of Icd-knockout by using pFBA, MOMA and ROOM methods as the
simulation method.
The difference of the predicted solutions by MOMA and ROOM method lies in the ﬂux through
the AKGDH (PP_4189 and PP_4188 and PP_4187) reaction within the TCA cycle, through which
there is no ﬂux in MOMA solution while a large fraction ﬂux observed in ROOM solution (Figure
4.51 and 4.52). Another difference is seen on the ﬂux through the reaction MDH, however, the FVA
analysis indicates this reaction is quite ﬂexible. Look at the upper part of the network, all the reactions
being shown with the high opacity, it indicates the ﬁxed ﬂuxes through this mutant and proves the
importance of Icd enzyme within the network.
When comparing the redox formation rate of the predictions to the wild-type, the overall redox
balance is not affected in the MOMA solution, while in ROOM solution, the NADPH formation
rate has slightly decreased and the NADH formation rate has signiﬁcantly increased (Figure 4.53).
When looking at the NADPH-producing reactions, the ﬂux trough ME2 reaction has signiﬁcantly
increased to balance the lost NADPH produced by ICDHyr reaction in MOMA solution. While in
ROOM solution, instead of increasing the ﬂux through the already activated reactions, a new reaction
FRDO5r is activated to produce NADPH.
GND (gnd), ME2 (maeB) and ICDHyr (icd) are all important NADPH-producing reactions within
the wild-type. When they are get affected, the predictions usually tend to adopt two strategies to bal-
ance the NADPH inﬂux: increasing the ﬂux through the already activated reactions and/or activating
new reactions. The predictions being made by MOMA and ROOM methods are different in most case,
which is due to the intrinsic assumptions adopted by these methods. It is hard to evaluate the accuracy
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:79==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 67
of the different methods, thus, the experimental validations are of great importance to contextually
explain the discrepancies.
Figure 4.51: The MOMA solution of the icd knockout mutant.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:80==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 68
Figure 4.52: The ROOM solution of the icd knockout mutant.
Figure 4.53: The redox formation rate compari-
son of wild-type and the icd knockout mutant us-
ing MOMA and ROOM methods for growth simu-
lation.
Figure 4.54: The comparison of the NADPH pro-
duction reactions between wild-type and the icd
knockout mutant simulated by MOMA and ROOM
methods.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:81==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 69
4.5.4
The mutant assuming Zwf enzyme as an NAD dehydrogenase
The Zwf enzyme shows a high activity and speciﬁcity to NADPH catalysis among the dehydrogenase
as tested in [44]. The mutant assuming Zwf as an NAD dehydrogenase is constructed in silico by
blocking the two reactions: G6PDH2 and G6PBDH, and two new reactions were added to the model,
which form NADH instead of NADPH.
Three methods are used to predict the ﬂux distribution of the mutant, and all the solutions indicate
the growth rate is not affected (Figure 4.56). The two ﬂux distributions predicted by MOMA and
ROOM methods are extremely similar within the scope of the central metabolic network, and all the
glucose degradation pathways and the EDEMP cycle are all with narrow ﬂux ranges.
Figure 4.55: The MOMA solution of the mutant assuming Zwf as an NAD dehydrogenase.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:82==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 70
Figure 4.56: The growth rate of the mutant assuming Zwf as an NAD dehydrogenase predicted by
pFBA, MOMA and ROOM methods.
Take a close look at the redox formation rate of the two solutions, without the main NADPH
production reactions encoded by zwf, the NADPH net formation rate of the MOMA solution shows
no big change, but of the ROOM solution has signiﬁcantly increased. As for the NADH formation
rate, both solutions show a slight increase (Figure 4.57). As the for the comparison the the NADPH-
producing reactions, the reaction FMNR2r is activated in both solutions to compensate the NADPH
production, through which there is even a bit more ﬂux than the wild-type.
Figure 4.57: The redox formation rate compar-
ison of wild-type and the mutant assuming Zwf
as an NAD-depend dehydrogenase using MOMA
and ROOM methods for growth simulation.
Figure 4.58: The comparison of the NADPH pro-
duction reactions between wild-type and the mu-
tant assuming Zwf as an NAD-depend dehydroge-
nase simulated by MOMA and ROOM methods.
4.5.5
Double knock-outs of gcd and zwf on gluconate medium
The present mutant in this section is with gcd and zwf double-knockout and feeding on gluconate
medium in order to query the response of metabolic network without the EDEMP cycle. As the same
manner, all three methods are used to simulated the mutant’s growth status, the growth rate is shown in
Figure 4.60, and the predicted ﬂux distributions are very close only with slight ﬂux variances. The fed
gluconate is exclusively through ED pathways and entering TCA cycle trough PDH reaction. Even
with the zwf being knocked out, there is still fraction ﬂux through metabolite F6P and recycled back
to G6P, with the FBA and FBP reactions active. In addition, although there is only a small fraction of
ﬂux through the EDEMP cycle, it shows a low ﬂux ﬂexibility.
On the other hand, MOMA and ROOM have predicted two very similar ﬂux distributions within
the scope of central metabolic network, it indicates a very narrow solution space under the constraints
being imposed here, which also means the gene modiﬁcations being made here are quite harsh for the
cell to grow. It can be concluded from the predictions being made for this mutant that the EDEMP
cycle is playing a important role for the maintain such robust metabolic network within P. putida.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:83==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 71
Figure 4.59: The MOMA solution in the mutant with double knock-outs of Gcd and Zwf on gluconate
medium.
Figure 4.60: The growth rate of the mutant with double knock-outs of Gcd and Zwf on gluconate
medium by using pFBA, MOMA and ROOM methods as the simulation method.
Within the mutant, the NADPH formation rate is predicted to be reduced by both methods, and
NADH formation rate is stable in the MOMA solution however increased in the ROOM solution
(Figure 4.59). Looking at the NADPH-producing reactions, there is no reaction being activated in
the MOMA solution, thus causing the reduced formation rate and growth rate. In the ROOM solu-
tion, it shows the one of the main NADPH-producing reaction ME2 is deactivated, and although two
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:84==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 72
new reactions FRDO4r and FRDO5r are activated, the NADPH formation rate has still drastically
decreased.
Figure 4.61: The redox formation rate compar-
ison of wild-type and the mutant with double
knock-outs of Gcd and Zwf on gluconate medium
using MOMA and ROOM methods for growth
simulation.
Figure 4.62:
The comparison of the NADPH
production reactions between wild-type and the
mutant with double knock-outs of Gcd and Zwf
on gluconate medium simulated by MOMA and
ROOM methods.
4.6
The redox balance strategies analysis in E.coli and P. putida
organisms using systematical single-gene deletion method
Four single-gene deletion experiments have been preformed for the systematic analysis of the redox
balance strategies in E. coli K-12 MG1655 and P. putdia KT2440. The model used for the simulation
of E. coli is iML1515 [37], and the growth status ob both organisms are predcted by pFBA method in
citrate and glucose medium respectively
The following analysis process can be roughly divided into three main steps. At the ﬁrst step,
the reaction ﬂuxes are retrieved from the database and the net formation rate and the normalized-
imbalance rateof all the mutants have been calculated for NADH and NADPH respectively. Normalized-
imbalance is intriduced for representing the realtive redox changing rate in the mutant. After the cal-
culation, the mutants are sorted by the NADPH normalized-imbalance, and the top 30 mutants with
the highest NADPH normalized-imbalance absolute values are chosen from each experiment. The
chosen genes from each experiment are shown in Figure 4.65 and 4.67.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:85==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 73
Figure 4.63: The top 30 gene-deletion mutants
of E. coli and P.putida with the highest NADPH
normalized-imbalance are chosen from the exper-
iments performed in glucose medium.
Figure 4.64: The top 30 gene-deletion mutants
of E. coli and P.putida with the highest NADPH
normalized-imbalance are chosen from the exper-
iments performed in citrate medium.
At the second step, the reactions of encoded by the chosen genes are extract from the correspond-
ing model. Afterwards, the experiments are divided into to groups for comparisons. In the ﬁrst group,
which are the organisms grow in glucose medium, there are two common reactions identiﬁed that
existing in both organisms (Figure 4.65). The disturbing of these reactions would signiﬁcantly affect
the NADPH formation rate in both E. coli and P. putida organisms growing in glucose medium. The
identiﬁed key reactions for the organisms in glucose medium are the PDH and SUCDi, and the gene-
reaction-rules shows that these reactions are catalyzed by the enzyme complexes formed by many
proteins (Figure 4.66).
Figure 4.65: The top 30 gene-deletion mutants of E. coli and P.putida with the highest redox changing
rate chosen from the experiments performed in glucose medium.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:86==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 74
Figure 4.66: The two reactions identiﬁed in glucose medium that cause signiﬁcant NADPH formation
rate changes in both P. putida and E.coli.
The second group are the experiments that organisms grow in citrate medium, and two common re-
actions are identiﬁed existing in both organisms (Figure 4.67). The disturbing of these reactions would
signiﬁcantly affect the NADPH formation rate when both organisms growing in citrate medium. The
BiGG IDs of the identiﬁed reactions are ATPS4rpp and NADH16pp, as the gene-reaction-rules in the
model and the chemical equations shown in (Figure 4.68). It can be seen that these two reactions are
also catalyzed by the enzyme complex formed by many proteins.
Figure 4.67: The top 30 gene-deletion mutants of E. coli and P.putida with the highest redox changing
rate chosen from the experiments performed in citrate medium.
Figure 4.68: The two reactions identiﬁed that cause signiﬁcant redox changing rate in both P. putida
and E.coli in citrate medium.
The last step, the genes encoding these common reactions are identiﬁed in both organisms. The
NAD(P)H formation rate and the NADPH-producing reactions of these mutants, are compared to
acrossing the different organisms.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:87==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 75
The ﬁrst comparison is between the two experiments that E. coli and P. putida grow in glucose
medium. It has been found that, in the chosen E. coli mutants, when cells undergo redox perturba-
tions, both NADH and NADPH formation rate have increased and are with large variances among the
mutants (Figure 4.69). And no new reactions are activated for the NADPH formation within all the
E. coli mutants. The increased NADPH is due to the increasing ﬂuxes through the already activated
formation reactions.
In the P.putida mutants, the NAD(P)H formation rate of most mutatants have also increased, but
tend to increase to a same level in most mutants (Figure 4.70). And it has been found that the zwf
encoding reaction G6PDH2 in iJN1411 is activated in mutants to compensate the redox balance.
Figure 4.69: The redox formation rate of the E. coli mutants and the wild-type in glucose medium.
Figure 4.70: The redox formation rate of the P. putida mutants and the wild-type in glucose medium.
As for in citrate medium, when E. coli undergoes the redox pertubations, the NAD(P)H formation
rate has signiﬁcantly increased in most of the mutants, however, the formation rate is various (Figure
4.71). The ME2 reaction has been activated in these E. coli mutants for the NADPH formation. When
P. putida grows in citrate medium undergoing redox perturbations, NAD(P)H formation rate have both
increased as well, and the increased formation rate is keeping in a same level (Figure 4.72). As the
NADPH-producing reactions, the reactions G3PD2 and ME2 get affected in P. putida organism, and
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:88==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 76
the reaction LSERDHr is activated instead. (The information of reactions G3PD2 and LSERDHr
can be found in Figure 4.17. In combination with the predictions made previously for the redox
challenging mutants, it seems that there are always specif reactions being activated after the genetic
perturbations in P. putida.
Figure 4.71: The redox formation rate of the E. coli mutants and the wild-type in citrate medium.
Figure 4.72: The redox formation rate of the P. putida mutants and the wild-type in citrate medium.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 5
Discussion
A high-quality and stain-speciﬁc GEM is a key tool to study the systematic metabolism of a target
organism in silico [1]. However, there are discrepancies observed between the predictions made by
the different research group using the same model [23], which is due to the lack of the universal model
standard. Thus, at the beginning of this project, the model iJN1411 used was benchmarked by the
Memote [56] model test suit.
After comparing several GEMs available for P. putida, the iJN1411 has demonstrated a signiﬁ-
cantly expanded metabolic knowledge coverage, being as one of the most complete and high-quality
GEM with high accuracy and strain-speciﬁcity. It is proved with high accuracy in carbon ﬂuxes pre-
diction, nutrients growth prediction and gene essentiality prediction [17]. In contrast, other GEMs all
shows similar prediction abilities to iJN746 lack the strain-speciﬁc metabolism, such as the unique
PAH metabolism [69]. Thus, iJN1411 as a stain-speciﬁc model is useful tool to study and capture the
metabolic properties of the strain P. putida 2440.
During the application of iJN1411 in this project, it is in combined with the previously measured
13C ﬂux data as new constraints to provide more biologically meaningful and condition-speciﬁc pre-
dictions [63]. As the COBRA methods are enumerating all the possible solutions that satisﬁes the
imposed constraints, the integration of the ﬂux data would reduce the solution space and provide
the condition-speciﬁc predictions . However, it should be noticed that the usage of the ﬂux data to
constrain the model only represents the ﬂux distribution of the cells undergo glycolysis in glucose
minimal medium. The choice of reference for MOMA and ROOM methods is of importance, as it
has profound on the prediction and the consideration of the reference contextualization is needed [28].
Thus, the adjusted ﬂux set used as the reference solution for MOMA and ROOM methods predicts
only the growth status under glycolysis regime.
In addition, two extra constraints are added, which are the the block of transhydrogenase and
glucosidase. Transhydrogenase catalyzes the reaction that transfers NADH into NADPH, and the
glucosidase in the periplasm is also blocked from the model, which catalyze the reaction cellobiose
forming glucose. The adding of these two constraints are an iterative process when preforming the
77
==PAGE:90==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 78
predictions. When cells undergo the genetic or redox perturbations, the model tends to ﬁnd the most
ecological way to solve the unbalanced NADPH formation, thus, it always use the transhydrogenase.
However, in the reality, the expression level of this enzyme is not high enough to act as the main
redox balance reaction [71]. It has been demonstrated that transhydrogenases is active when the
biodegradation reactions are ungoing in the metabolic network to degrade the unusual carbon sources
[70], however not in the customary carbon sources (eg., citrate and glucose). As for the block of
glucosidase, it is always predicted to be active when there is not enough glucose input for the cell to
achieve the optimal growth rate. However, there is a narrow range of bacteria capable of processing
cellobiose in soil [72], therefore, this reaction is manually blocked.
Two biomass objective function existing in the model, all the results present in this report are using
BOF_core as model objective. There are around 20 more components in the BOF_WT objective. It is
more strict for the model to grow with BOF_WT objective. As the BOF_core objective is formulated
based on the minimal biosynthetic precursors needed for the cell to grow by analyzing the mutants
in PRCC [40], which includes all the completely essential metabolites for the cellular growth [17].
Except for the last redox formation rate comparison with E. coli, all the investigation have been done
with both BOF objectives, but only trivial difference observed in the reaction ﬂuxes.
Commencing on validation of the model, several single-gene deletion studies have been per-
formed using different BOF objectives, prediction methods in different medium. It is reasonable
there more genes need for the synthesis of BOF_WT, where there are more precursors formulated.
As for the comparison between predictions in different mediums, the essential genes fbp and fda in
citrate medium has been precisely predicted, and the ﬂux distribution predicted indicates they operate
the recycling of the triose phosphate back into hexose phosphate.
At the time of these experiments performed, the ROOM method was not available at COBRApy
package yet, thus only pFBA and MOMA method were compared. From the algorithm aspect, it
is not surprising that MOMA method has predicted more essential genes. As to ﬁnd the Manhattan
distance between the desired solution and the wild-type solution, the solution space is quite narrow,
unlike there are several alternative pathways to choose when pFBA method looking for one solution.
From the biological aspect, the pFBA method predicts the optimal growth status, which cells are
tending to achieve during the long term evolutionary selection process. While the MOMA methods are
more suitable for the situation that cells operate itself immediately after the genetic or environmental
perturbations and not necessary with a optimal growth status [28].
79 conditional genes in glucose are proposed in our predictions, however, when comparing to the
predictions made in [17], there are some discrepancies, of which the two genes eda and edd encoding
the important ED pathways are failed to predict as essential in our prediction. As mentioned in the
beginning, the discrepancies are usually observed between the research groups even using the same
model [23]. The model used in this project have one more gene and four more metabolites than the
old model used in [17], and other unnoticed changes could be made. On the other hand, it is also a
remind that the predictions need the experimental validation to further reﬁne and improve the model.
As for the predictions of wild-type grow in the three glycolysis carbon sources: glucose, gluconate
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:91==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 79
and 2-KG, and the gluconeogenesis carbon source citrate, the model has successfully predicted the
mass yield in glucose medium, which is in consistent with the experimental values in [44]. How-
ever, there is no experimental measured value of the uptake rate of gluconate and 2-KG available, it
was constrained as the same with glucose uptake rate, which indicates the need to add experimental
measured physicochemical constraints [1]. The ﬂux distribution in citrate medium has accurately pre-
dicted the importance of fba and fbp genes in gluconeogenesis, which has recycled a fraction triose
phosphate back into the hexose phosphate and the ﬂux ﬂowing through it is with a narrow ﬂexibility.
As for the four kinds of glucose consumption pathways, it has been demonstrated gluconate is
the most favored glycolysis carbon source for P. putida. There is one explanation as follows. The
phosphorylation pathway of glucose through Glk is coupled with two ATP molecules consumption,
because of which the cell tend to increase the redox to counteract the energy expenditure. The redi-
rection of glucose from the phosphorylation via the oxidation pathways, i.e. gluconate and 2-KG
involved, can generate two electrons, which can be possibly used to the ATP synthesis. In the case
of 2-KG being catalyzed into 6PG, it cost one NADPH. As the most economic pathway, gluconate is
favored by P. putida. The ﬂux through the 2-KG consumption has increased the ﬂux channeled into
GND (gnd) reaction, which caused the increased NADPH formation rate. There are observation of
the extracellular gluconate and 2-KG accumulation when the cell is under NADH oxidase stress [?],
which may also indicate the preferable oxidation pathways for the cell going through when facing the
redox challenges and for the long tern evolution direction.
For the several in silico predictions for these certain amount of the mutants, only the growth rate
of pFBA solutions are mentioned, however the ﬂux distributions are not discussed. For the engineered
mutants, they have not been exposed to the evolutionary stress. Under the situation that how the cells
affect by the genetic perturbations, it is more interesting to compare the MOMA and ROOM methods.
As widely known, ED pathway is playing an important role in channelling the intermediate 6PG into
the central metabolism [44], it has also been demonstrated in the predictions of all the mutants. The
ﬂux distributions indicate that the ED pathway is with the ﬁxed and large proportion of ﬂux ﬂowing
through. In most of the redox challenging mutants, the EDEMP cycle is activated recycling the
carbons back to hexose. The EDEMP pathways are all with a low ﬂux ﬂexibility, indicating it is
important to keep the redox balance under redox perturbations by the small fraction of recycling.
There is one interesting ﬂux distribution observed in the ROOM solution of the zwf knockout
mutant (4.20). The G6P is converted into F6P by the PGI (pgi) reaction in an reversed direction and
further degraded into triose phosphate through the PP pathway, which is opposite to the recycling
direction back to G6P. This unusual ﬂux distribution could also be one the the options for P. putdia to
cope with the redox challenging.
As for the comparison between MOMA and ROOM methods, an interesting phenomena observed
in gcd-knockout, icd-knockout mutant and the mutant with zwf and gcd double-knockout growing
in gluconate medium, of which the predicted NADPH formation rate by both MOMA and ROOM
methods are with small variance, however, the predicted NADH formation rate by these two meth-
ods are very different, as seen in Figure 4.24, 4.53 and 4.61. In these three mutants, the MOMA
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:92==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 80
method predicted the NADH formation rate as stable, whereas the ROOM method has predicted an
increased NADH formation rate. One explanation could be due to the different assumption of these
two methods. MOMA aims to minimize the difference of the ﬂux values [28], whereas ROOM aims
to minimize the number of the signiﬁcant ﬂux changes (on/off regulation) with respect to the wild-
type [29]. Thus, when the one of the main NADPH formation reaction is challenged, MOMA method
would prefer the solution to use the existing isozymes to catalyze the same reaction, while the ROOM
method prefer the use of the short alternative pathways. Thus, it is expected to see several small in-
creased ﬂux ﬂowing through reactions in ROOM solutions, and it is indeed observed in these ROOM
solutions that several NADH-producing reactions are with small ﬂux passing through. Additionally,
ROOM solutions have kept a good linearity ﬂow in the mutant, thus implicitly keeping the growth
rate [29], as indeed observed in the predictions.
It is wildly known that isozymes are common in the microorganisms, of which there is usually a
main isozyme that catalyze the reactions in most cases, and there are some minor isozymes with low
activity or not being expressed [74]. The isoenzymes existing in the organism are indeed included in
the model, and when one of the isozymes knocked out from the model, the solution would use use
alternative proteins. However, one shortcoming of the GEM is the in silico metabolic model cannot
differentiate the major and minor isozymes, which means they have the same catalytic efﬁciency for
the reactions within the GEM. Thus, it is expected that the integration with the several kinds omics
data, eg. gene expression data, could improve the prediction performance of the GEMs. The previ-
ously added two extra constraints to block the transhydrogenase and glucosidase can be considered
as an integration of the gene expression data in small scale.
After the comprehensive analysis of the redox balance strategies in both E. coli and P. putida
organisms, it seems P. putida has a quite robust network that activating the several speciﬁc reactions
to keep the redox balance and satisfy the growth need in the metabolic network. Taken together
with the mutants previously investigated, there was always the several speciﬁc reaction activated after
the genetic perturbations. However, E.coli growing the glucose medium was not able to active new
reactions. The activation of the speciﬁc reactions may be due to the robust metabolic network of P.
putida to reroute the metabolic ﬂux for the catabolic and anabolic needs [17]. It need to mention
due to the lack of time, the number of the experiments performed for the comparisons crossing the
organisms is limited, a solid conclusion can not be drawn from here. But it can act as an inspiring
for the more systematic experiments set up for more comprehensive analysis of the redox balance
strategies crossing the different organisms.
As a result of our predictions, the ability of the cell to utilize diverse carbon sources stems from
its metabolism, and this metabolism is with a high robustness to keep the homeostasis within the
network, which prevents the dramatic changes under environmental and nutritional perturbations.
The functional change of the metabolism according to the overall physiological conditions allows the
cell to balance the energy expenditure and precursors production [68]. The two reactions FBA and
FBP are predicted both active in the glycolysis and gluconeogenesis operating an gluconeogenesis
fashion recycling the carbons back to hexose. They are always with a narrow ﬂux ﬂexibility, even
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:93==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 81
there is only a small fraction of ﬂux ﬂowing through. It may be the proof of the importance of the
operation of EDEMP cycle to produce G6P, which may act as a reservoir of NADPH, through the
catalysis of Zwf.
NADPH is an essential anabolic reducing agent and involved in a wide range of metabolic reac-
tions in all organisms. It plays a key role for the organisms in defensing oxidative stress by fuelling
the activities of many enzymes, such as catalase, superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase,
which are of importance for the organisms surviving aerobic environment [66]. The increasing ATP
demand and the NAD(P)H are the two main problems that the microorganisms are facing during the
biocatalysis process [51]. In addition, the substrates and products of biocatalysis reaction, and the
solvents used during the puriﬁcation process are usually toxic to the cell, as they can interact with the
cell membrane and perturb the cells’ integrity. The cells tend to react to these stress by increasing the
energy and redox expenditure to sustain both cellular and biocatalytic activities, such as the energy
costing efﬂux pumps [51].
As being concluded previously, there are three types of response that cells use to address the envi-
ronmental stress: the metabolic programs, that is the cells regulate enzymes at both transcription and
activity levels for the rerouting of the metabolic pathways for satisfying the catabolism and anabolism,
the stress-response programs for adaptation to the suboptimal growth conditions and the morphology
of the cells, namely the shape, transports and the surface chemistry of the cell [67]. These programs
are tightly connected together to regulate the cells’ metabolism to address the adverse conditions.
In the case of P. putida, it has been characterized with the a high NADH regeneration capacity [51],
a favorable overproduction of NADPH [44] and a low cellular energy demand for growth [51]. The
complex glycolysis pathways, exclusively using ED pathway and atypical EDEMP carbon recycling
cycle have formed a robust central carbon metabolism in P. putida, which may favor it adjusting and
rerouting the metabolic pathways to cope with the environmental and genetic stress.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:94==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 82
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:95==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
With the aim of using stain-speciﬁc GEM iJN1411 to investigate the redox balance and the
metabolic properties of the strain Psudomonas putida KT2440, three main investigations have been
performed.
The single gene study has validated the newly constructed GEM iJN1411 and the prediction
performance on gene essentiality has been evaluated by the experimental identiﬁed essential and
nonessential genes with the accuracy of 83 %. However, there are discrepancies found between the
predictions previously made by the same model, which indicates the further need to reﬁne and im-
prove the present model. The growth status of the wild-type growing the glycolytic and gluconeogenic
carbon sources have been predicted by pFBA method. The phenotypic and quantitative predictions
have been performed for several mutants undergoing redox perturbations by three COBRA methods
in combination with the FVA analysis. It reveals the important role of EDEMP cycle recycling car-
bons to produce the intermediate G6P, which may act as a reservoir of NADPH through the catalysis
of Zwf enzyme. This operation favors the cell adjusting and rerouting the metabolic pathways to cope
with the environmental and genetic stress. The comparisons of redox formation rate and NADPH
formation reactions in several redox challenging mutants, in combination with the analysis of redox
balance strategies in both E. coli and P. putida organisms, have found that several favored reactions
tend to be activated by the metabolic network under the redox perturbations.
In conclusion, the GEM iJN1411 in combined with the ﬂux data is able to capture the metabolic
properties of the strain P. putida KT2440 and used for the studies of the metabolic behaviours and
provide detailed and quantitative predictions of the metabolic behavior of the strain.
83
==PAGE:96==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 84
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 7
Future perspectives
This project is the ﬁrst step of the in silico studies in combination with experimental validation,
aiming to provide a high-quality GEM for the further rational design of P. putida as an functional
chassis. The mutants investigated in this project are being cultured experimentally so far, the ﬂux
data and physicochemical parameters will be provided. With these experimental data, the predictions
have been made here could be validated, and based on the discrepancies the present model would be
further reﬁned and improved. It is expecting to integrate the transcriptomic data with the model for
the improvement of the prediction accuracy. In addition, once the predictions have been validated by
the experimental mutants, one interesting question is to investigate the gene expression level of each
mutant and to elucidate the metabolic regulation mechanism after the gene deletion perturbations.
Lastly, more experiments for the comprehensive analysis of redox balance strategies in both E. coli
and P. putida organisms would be set up by using the different COBRA methods and BOFs.
85
==PAGE:98==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 86
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
[1] Maia, Paulo, Miguel Rocha, and Isabel Rocha. "In silico constraint-based strain optimization methods: the
quest for optimal cell factories." Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 80.1 (2016): 45-67.
[2] Sau, Jay D., et al. "Generic new platform for topological quantum computation using semiconductor het-
erostructures." Physical review letters 104.4 (2010): 040502.
[3] Khosla, Chaitan, and Jay D. Keasling. "Metabolic engineering for drug discovery and development." Na-
ture Reviews Drug Discovery 2.12 (2003): 1019.
[4] Jackson, David A., Robert H. Symons, and Paul Berg. "Biochemical method for inserting new genetic
information into DNA of Simian Virus 40: circular SV40 DNA molecules containing lambda phage genes
and the galactose operon of Escherichia coli." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 69.10
(1972): 2904-2909.
[5] Milligan, John F., et al. "Oligoribonucleotide synthesis using T7 RNA polymerase and synthetic DNA
templates." Nucleic acids research 15.21 (1987): 8783-8798.
[6] Caruthers, M. H., et al. "[15] Chemical synthesis of deoxyoligonucleotides by the phosphoramidite
method." Methods in enzymology. Vol. 154. Academic Press, 1987. 287-313.
[7] Sanger, Fred, and Alan R. Coulson. "A rapid method for determining sequences in DNA by primed syn-
thesis with DNA polymerase." Journal of molecular biology 94.3 (1975): 441-448.
[8] Sanger, Frederick, Steven Nicklen, and Alan R. Coulson. "DNA sequencing with chain-terminating in-
hibitors." Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 74.12 (1977): 5463-5467.
[9] Stephanopoulos, Gregory. "Synthetic biology and metabolic engineering." ACS synthetic biology 1.11
(2012): 514-525.
[10] Margulies, Marcel, et al. "Genome sequencing in microfabricated high-density picolitre reactors." Nature
437.7057 (2005): 376.
[11] Hsu, Patrick D., Eric S. Lander, and Feng Zhang. "Development and applications of CRISPR-Cas9 for
genome engineering." Cell 157.6 (2014): 1262-1278.
[12] Nikel, Pablo I., and Víctor de Lorenzo. "Robustness of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 as a host for ethanol
biosynthesis." New biotechnology 31.6 (2014): 562-571.
[13] Nikel, Pablo I., et al. "From dirt to industrial applications: Pseudomonas putida as a synthetic biology
chassis for hosting harsh biochemical reactions." Current opinion in chemical biology 34 (2016): 20-29.
[14] Papp, Balázs, Csaba Pál, and Laurence D. Hurst. "Metabolic network analysis of the causes and evolution
of enzyme dispensability in yeast." Nature 429.6992 (2004): 661.
87
==PAGE:100==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 88
[15] Kim, Jisun, and Woojun Park. "Oxidative stress response in Pseudomonas putida." Applied microbiology
and biotechnology 98.16 (2014): 6933-6946.
[16] Sudarsan, Suresh, et al. "The functional structure of central carbon metabolism in Pseudomonas putida
KT2440." Applied and Environmental Microbiology (2014): AEM-01643.
[17] Nogales, Juan, et al. "Expanding The Computable Reactome In Pseudomonas putida Reveals Metabolic
Cycles Providing Robustness." bioRxiv (2017): 139121.
[18] Blank, Lars M., Lars Kuepfer, and Uwe Sauer. "Large-scale 13 C-ﬂux analysis reveals mechanistic prin-
ciples of metabolic network robustness to null mutations in yeast." Genome biology 6.6 (2005): R49.
[19] Thiele, Ines, and Bernhard Ø. Palsson. "A protocol for generating a high-quality genome-scale metabolic
reconstruction." Nature protocols 5.1 (2010): 93.
[20] Bordbar, Aarash, et al. "Constraint-based models predict metabolic and associated cellular functions."
Nature Reviews Genetics 15.2 (2014): 107.
[21] O’Brien, Edward J., Jonathan M. Monk, and Bernhard O. Palsson. "Using genome-scale models to predict
biological capabilities." Cell 161.5 (2015): 971-987.
[22] Edwards, Jeremy S., and Bernhard O. Palsson. "Systems properties of the Haemophilus inﬂuenzaeRd
metabolic genotype." Journal of Biological Chemistry 274.25 (1999): 17410-17416.
[23] Yuan, Qianqian, et al. "Pathway-consensus approach to metabolic network reconstruction for Pseu-
domonas putida KT2440 by systematic comparison of published models." PloS one 12.1 (2017):
e0169437.
[24] Orth, Jeffrey D., Ines Thiele, and Bernhard Ø. Palsson. "What is ﬂux balance analysis?." Nature biotech-
nology 28.3 (2010): 245.
[25] Durot, Maxime, Pierre-Yves Bourguignon, and Vincent Schachter. "Genome-scale models of bacterial
metabolism: reconstruction and applications." FEMS microbiology reviews 33.1 (2008): 164-190.
[26] Raman, Karthik, and Nagasuma Chandra. "Flux balance analysis of biological systems: applications and
challenges." Brieﬁngs in bioinformatics 10.4 (2009): 435-449.
[27] Lewis, Nathan E., et al. "Omic data from evolved E. coli are consistent with computed optimal growth
from genome-scale models." Molecular systems biology 6.1 (2010): 390.
[28] Segre, Daniel, Dennis Vitkup, and George M. Church. "Analysis of optimality in natural and perturbed
metabolic networks." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99.23 (2002): 15112-15117.
[29] Shlomi, Tomer, Omer Berkman, and Eytan Ruppin. "Regulatory on/off minimization of metabolic ﬂux
changes after genetic perturbations." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 102.21 (2005): 7695-7700.
[30] The effects of alternate optimal solutions in constraint-based genome-scale metabolic models. Metab Eng
5:264–276.
[31] Edwards, J. S., and B. O. Palsson. "The Escherichia coli MG1655 in silico metabolic genotype: its deﬁ-
nition, characteristics, and capabilities." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 97.10 (2000):
5528-5533.
[32] Monk, Jonathan, and Bernhard O. Palsson. "Predicting microbial growth." Science 344.6191 (2014):
1448-1449.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:101==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 89
[33] Nogales, Juan, Bernhard Ø. Palsson, and Ines Thiele. "A genomic scale metabolic reconstruction of Pseu-
domonas putida KT2440: in JN746 as a cell factory." BMC systems biology 2.1 (2008): 79.
[34] Puchałka, Jacek, et al. "Genome-scale reconstruction and analysis of the Pseudomonas putida KT2440
metabolic network facilitates applications in biotechnology." PLoS computational biology 4.10 (2008):
e1000210.
[35] Sohn, Seung Bum, et al. "In silico genome-scale metabolic analysis of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 for
polyhydroxyalkanoate synthesis, degradation of aromatics and anaerobic survival." Biotechnology journal
5.7 (2010): 739-750.
[36] Oberhardt, Matthew A., et al. "Reconciliation of genome-scale metabolic reconstructions for comparative
systems analysis." PLoS computational biology 7.3 (2011): e1001116.
[37] Monk, Jonathan M., et al. "iML1515, a knowledgebase that computes Escherichia coli traits." Nature
biotechnology 35.10 (2017): 904.
[38] Jiménez, J. I., et al. "A genomic view of the catabolism of aromatic compounds in Pseudomonas." Hand-
book of hydrocarbon and lipid microbiology. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010. 1297-1325.
[39] Yuan, Qianqian, et al. "Pathway-consensus approach to metabolic network reconstruction for Pseu-
domonas putida KT2440 by systematic comparison of published models." PloS one 12.1 (2017):
e0169437.
[40] Duque, Estrella, et al. "Towards a genome-wide mutant library of Pseudomonas putida strain KT2440."
Pseudomonas. Springer, Dordrecht, 2007. 227-251.
[41] Dvoˇrák, Pavel, and Víctor de Lorenzo. "Refactoring the upper sugar metabolism of Pseudomonas putida
for co-utilization of cellobiose, xylose, and glucose." Metabolic engineering (2018).
[42] Calero, Patricia, and Pablo I. Nikel. "Chasing bacterial chassis for metabolic engineering: a perspective
review from classical to non-traditional microorganisms." Microbial Biotechnology (2018).
[43] Nikel, Pablo I., and Víctor de Lorenzo. "Pseudomonas putida as a functional chassis for industrial bio-
catalysis: From native biochemistry to trans-metabolism." Metabolic engineering (2018).
[44] Nikel, Pablo I., et al. "Pseudomonas putida KT2440 strain metabolizes glucose through a cycle formed by
enzymes of the Entner-Doudoroff, Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas, and pentose phosphate pathways." Journal
of Biological Chemistry 290.43 (2015): 25920-25932.
[45] Chavarría, Max, et al. "The Entner–Doudoroff pathway empowers Pseudomonas putida KT2440 with a
high tolerance to oxidative stress." Environmental microbiology 15.6 (2013): 1772-1785.
[46] Ramos, Juan-Luis, et al. "Mechanisms of solvent resistance mediated by interplay of cellular factors in
Pseudomonas putida." FEMS microbiology reviews 39.4 (2015): 555-566.
[47] Nikel, Pablo I., Esteban Martínez-García, and Víctor De Lorenzo. "Biotechnological domestication of
pseudomonads using synthetic biology." Nature Reviews Microbiology 12.5 (2014): 368.
[48] Nelson, K. E., et al. "Complete genome sequence and comparative analysis of the metabolically versatile
Pseudomonas putida KT2440." Environmental microbiology 4.12 (2002): 799-808.
[49] Regenhardt, D., et al. "Pedigree and taxonomic credentials of Pseudomonas putida strain KT2440." Envi-
ronmental microbiology 4.12 (2002): 912-915.
[50] Belda, Eugeni, et al. "The revisited genome of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 enlightens its value as a
robust metabolic chassis." Environmental microbiology 18.10 (2016): 3403-3424.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:102==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 90
[51] Ebert, Birgitta E., et al. "Response of P. putida KT2440 to increased NADH and ATP demand." Applied
and environmental microbiology (2011): AEM-05588.
[52] Isken, Sonja, et al. "Effect of organic solvents on the yield of solvent-tolerant Pseudomonas putida S12."
Applied and Environmental Microbiology 65.6 (1999): 2631-2635.
[53] Schellenberger, Jan, et al. "Quantitative prediction of cellular metabolism with constraint-based models:
the COBRA Toolbox v2. 0." Nature protocols 6.9 (2011): 1290.
[54] Ebrahim, Ali, et al. "COBRApy: constraints-based reconstruction and analysis for python." BMC systems
biology 7.1 (2013): 74.
[55] Hucka, Michael, et al. "Evolving a lingua franca and associated software infrastructure for computational
systems biology: the Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) project." Systems biology 1.1 (2004):
41-53.
[56] Lieven, Christian, Moritz Emanuel Beber, and Nikolaus Sonnenschein. "Memote-The genome-scale
metabolic model test suite." Sustain 2017. Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 2017.
[57] King, Zachary A., et al. "Escher: a web application for building, sharing, and embedding data-rich visu-
alizations of biological pathways." PLoS computational biology 11.8 (2015): e1004321.
[58] Blank, Lars M., et al. "Metabolic response of Pseudomonas putida during redox biocatalysis in the pres-
ence of a second octanol phase." The FEBS journal 275.20 (2008): 5173-5190.
[59] Molina-Henares, M. Antonia, et al. "Identiﬁcation of conditionally essential genes for growth of Pseu-
domonas putida KT2440 on minimal medium through the screening of a genomic-wide mutant library."
Environmental Microbiology 12.6 (2010): 1468-1485.
[60] Orth,
Jeffrey D.,
et al. "A comprehensive genome-scale reconstruction of Escherichia coli
metabolism—2011." Molecular systems biology 7.1 (2011): 535.
[61] Herrgård, Markus J., et al. "A consensus yeast metabolic network reconstruction obtained from a commu-
nity approach to systems biology." Nature biotechnology 26.10 (2008): 1155.
[62] Sigurdsson, Martin I., et al. "A detailed genome-wide reconstruction of mouse metabolism based on
human Recon 1." BMC systems biology 4.1 (2010): 140.
[63] Blank, Lars M., Lars Kuepfer, and Uwe Sauer. "Large-scale 13 C-ﬂux analysis reveals mechanistic prin-
ciples of metabolic network robustness to null mutations in yeast." Genome biology 6.6 (2005): R49.
[37] Monk, Jonathan M., et al. "iML1515, a knowledgebase that computes Escherichia coli traits." Nature
biotechnology 35.10 (2017): 904.
[64] King ZA, Lu JS, Dräger A, Miller PC, Federowicz S, Lerman JA, Ebrahim A, Palsson BO, and Lewis
NE. BiGG Models: A platform for integrating, standardizing, and sharing genome-scale models (2016)
Nucleic Acids Research 44(D1):D515-D522. doi:10.1093/nar/gkv1049
[65] van Duuren, Jozef BJH, et al. "Reconciling in vivo and in silico key biological parameters of Pseu-
domonas putida KT2440 during growth on glucose under carbon-limited condition." BMC biotechnology
13.1 (2013): 93.
[66] Singh, Ranji, et al. "A novel strategy involved anti-oxidative defense: the conversion of NADH into
NADPH by a metabolic network." PLoS One 3.7 (2008): e2682.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:103==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 91
[67] Domínguez-Cuevas, Patricia, et al. "Transcriptional tradeoff between metabolic and stress-response pro-
grams in Pseudomonas putida KT2440 cells exposed to toluene." Journal of Biological Chemistry 281.17
(2006): 11981-11991.
[68] Nikel, Pablo I., Danilo Pérez-Pantoja, and Víctor de Lorenzo. "Why are chlorinated pollutants so dif-
ﬁcult to degrade aerobically? Redox stress limits 1, 3-dichloprop-1-ene metabolism by Pseudomonas
pavonaceae." Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 368.1616 (2013): 20120377.
[69] Nitschke, Marcia, Siddhartha GVAO Costa, and Jonas Contiero. "Rhamnolipids and PHAs: Recent reports
on Pseudomonas-derived molecules of increasing industrial interest." Process Biochemistry 46.3 (2011):
621-630.
[70] Nikel, Pablo I., Danilo Pérez-Pantoja, and Víctor de Lorenzo. "Pyridine nucleotide transhydrogenases en-
able redox balance of Pseudomonas putida during biodegradation of aromatic compounds." Environmental
microbiology 18.10 (2016): 3565-3582.
[71] Kim, Juhyun, et al. "Transcriptomic ﬁngerprinting of P seudomonas putida under alternative physiological
regimes." Environmental microbiology reports 5.6 (2013): 883-891.
[72] Cañizares, Rosa, Emilio Benitez, and Oladele A. Ogunseitan. "Molecular analyses of -glucosidase diver-
sity and function in soil." European Journal of Soil Biology 47.1 (2011): 1-8.
[73] Black, Paul E. "Manhattan distance." Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures 18 (2006): 2012.
[74] King, Zachary A., et al. "Literature mining supports a next-generation modeling approach to predict
cellular byproduct secretion." Metabolic engineering 39 (2017): 220-227.
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:104==
Constraint-Based Modeling for Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Strain
Page 92
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:105==
Appendixes
93
==PAGE:106==
____________________________________________________________________________ 
Appendix I   
Mapped Reaction IDs 
Functional 
block 
Code 
Reaction 
Enzyme(s) 
Name(s) and 
PP 
number(s)b 
BiGG ID 
Peripheral pathways 
1 
Glucose + Ubiquinone  
Gluconate + Ubiquinol 
Glucose 
dehydrogenase 
Gcd 
(PP1444) 
GLCDpp 
2 
Gluconate + Ubiquinone  
2-Ketogluconate + Ubiquinol 
Gluconate 
2-
dehydrogenase 
PP3382 
PP3383 
PP3384 
PP3623 
PP4232 
GAD2ktpp 
4 
Gluconate + ATP  
6-Phosphogluconate + ADP + H+ 
Gluconate 
kinase 
GnuK 
(PP3416) 
GNK 
5 
2-Ketogluconate + ATP  
2-Ketogluconate-6-P + ADP + H+ 
2-
Ketogluconate 
kinase 
KguK 
(PP3378) 
2DHGLCK 
6 
2-Ketogluconate-6-P + NADPH + H+ 
 
6-Phosphogluconate + NADP+ 
2-
Ketogluconate-
6-P reductase 
KguD 
(PP3376) 
PGLCNDH 
Pentose phosphate pathway 
7 
Glucose-6-P + NADP+  
6-Phosphoglucono-1,5-lactone  
+ NADPH + H+ 
Glucose-6-P 
1-
dehydrogenase 
Zwf-1 
(PP1022) 
Zwf-2 
(PP4042) 
Zwf-3 
(PP5351) 
G6PDH2 
6-Phosphoglucono-1,5-lactone + H2O 
 
6-Phosphogluconate + H+ 
6-Phospho-
gluconolactona
se 
Pgl 
(PP1023) 
PGL 
10 
6-Phosphogluconate + NADP+  
Ribulose-5-P + NADPH + CO2 
6-Phospho-
gluconate 
dehydrogenase 
Gnd 
(PP4043) 
GND 
11 
Ribulose-5-P  Xylulose-5-P 
Ribulose-5-P 
3-epimerase 
Rpe 
(PP0415) 
RPE 
12 
Ribulose-5-P  Ribose-5-P 
Ribose-5-P 
isomerase 
RpiA 
(PP5150) 
RPI 
13 
Xylulose-5-P + Ribose-5-P  
Sedoheptulose-7-P + 
Glyceraldehyde-3-P Transketolase 
TktA 
(PP4965) 
TKT1 
14 
Xylulose-5-P + erythrose-4-P  
Glyceraldehyde-3-P + Fructose-6-P 
TKT2 
15 
Sedoheptulose-7-P + 
Glyceraldehyde-3-P 
 Erythrose-4-P + Fructose-6-P 
Transaldolase 
B 
Tal 
(PP2168) 
TALA 
Entner-
Doudoroff 
pathway 
8 
6-Phosphogluconate  
2-Keto-3-deoxy-6-phosphogluconate 
+ H2O 
6-Phospho-
gluconate 
dehydratase 
Edd 
(PP1010) 
EDD 
9 
2-Keto-3-deoxy-6-phosphogluconate 
Glyceraldehyde-3-P + Pyruvate 
2-Keto-3-
deoxy-6-conate 
aldolase 
Eda 
(PP1024) 
EDA 
==PAGE:107==
____________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway 
3 
Glucose + ATP   
Glucose-6-P + ADP + H+ Glucokinase 
Glk 
(PP1011) 
HEX1 
16 
Glucose-6-P  Fructose-6-P 
Glucose-6-P 
isomerase 
Pgi-1 
(PP1808) 
Pgi-2 
(PP4701) 
PGI 
17 
Fructose-1,6-P2 + H2O + ADP   
Fructose-6-P + ATP 
Fructose-1,6-
bisphosphatase 
Fbp 
(PP5040) 
FBP 
18 
Dihydroxyacetone-P +  
Glyceraldehyde-3-P 
 Fructose-1,6-P2 
Fructose-1,6-P2 
aldolase 
Fda 
(PP4960) 
PP1791 
PP2871 
PP3224 
FBA 
19 
Glyceraldehyde-3-P   
Dihydroxyacetone-P 
Triose 
phosphate 
isomerase 
TpiA 
(PP4715) 
TPI 
20 
Glyceraldehyde-3-P + NAD+ + Pic  
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate + NADH + 
H+ 
Glyceraldehyde
- 
3-P 
dehydrogenase 
Gap-1 
(PP1009) 
Gap-2 
(PP2149) 
PP0665 
PP3443 
GAPD 
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate + ADP  
Glycerate-3-P + ATP 
Phosphoglycer
ate kinase 
Pgk 
(PP4963) 
PGK 
21 
Glycerate-3-P  Glycerate-2-P 
Phosphoglycer
ate mutase 
Pgm 
(PP5056) 
PP2243 
PP3923 
PP4450 
PGM 
Glycerate-2-P   
Phosphoenolpyruvate + H2O 
Phosphopyruva
te hydratase 
Eno 
(PP1612) 
ENO 
22 
Phosphoenolpyruvate + ADP + H+  
Pyruvate + ATP Pyruvate kinase 
PykA 
(PP1362) 
PykF 
(PP4301) 
PYK 
Tricarboxylic acid cycle / Glyoxylate shunt 
23 
Pyruvate + NAD+ + Coenzyme A  
Acetyl-Coenzyme A + NADH + CO2 
Pyruvate 
dehydrogenase 
AcoA 
(PP0555) 
AceF 
(PP0338) 
AceE 
(PP0339) 
Lpd3 
(PP5366) 
LdpG 
(PP4187) 
LpdV 
(PP4404) 
PDH 
24 
Oxaloacetate + Acetyl-Coenzyme A + 
H2O 
 Citrate + Coenzyme A + H+ 
Citrate 
synthase 
GltA 
(PP4194) 
CS 
==PAGE:108==
____________________________________________________________________________ 
Tricarboxylic acid cycle / Glyoxylate shunt 
25 Citrate  D-threo-Isocitrate 
Aconitate 
hydratase 
AcnA 
(PP2112) 
AcnB 
(PP2339) 
PP2336 
ACONTa 
26 D-threo-Isocitrate + NADP+  
2-Ketoglutarate + CO2 + NADPH + H+ 
Isocitrate 
dehydrogenase 
Icd 
(PP4011) 
PP4012 
ACONTb 
27 
2-Ketoglutarate + Coenzyme A + NAD+  
Succinyl-Coenzyme A + NADH +  
H+ + CO2 
2-Ketoglutarate 
dehydrogenase 
LpdG 
(PP4187) 
KgdB 
(PP4188) 
SucA 
(PP4189) 
PP2652 
PP3662 
ICDHyr 
Succinyl-Coenzyme A + ADP + Pic  
Succinate + Coenzyme A + ATP 
Succinyl-
coenzyme A 
synthetase 
SucD 
(PP4185) 
SucC 
(PP4186) 
AKGDH 
28 Succinate + Ubiquinone  
Fumarate + Ubiquinol 
Succinate 
dehydrogenase 
SdhA 
(PP4191) 
SdhB 
(PP4190) 
SdhC 
(PP4193) 
SdhD 
(PP4192) 
SUCOAS 
29 Fumarate + H2O  (S)-Malate 
Fumarate 
hydratase 
FumC -1 
(PP0944) 
FumC-2 
(PP1755) 
PP0897 
SUCDi 
30 (S)-Malate + NAD+  
Oxaloacetate + NADH + H+ 
Malate 
dehydrogenase / 
Malate:quinone 
oxidoreductase 
Mdh 
(PP0654) 
PP3591 
Mqo-1 
(PP0751) 
Mqo-2 
(PP1251) 
Mqo-3 
(PP2925) 
FUM 
31 
D-threo-Isocitrate  
Succinate + Glyoxylate Isocitrate lyase 
AceA 
(PP4116) 
MDH 
Glyoxylate + Acetyl-Coenzyme A  
+ H2O  
(S)-Malate + Coenzyme A + H+ 
Malate synthase 
GlcB 
(PP0356) 
ICL 
 
 
 
32 Pyruvate + CO2  Oxaloacetate + H+ 
Pyruvate 
carboxylase 
OadA 
(PP5346) 
OAADC 
==PAGE:109==
____________________________________________________________________________ 
Anaplerosis / 
Gluconeoge
nesis 
AccC-2 
(PP5347) 
33 Oxaloacetate + Pic   
Phosphoenolpyruvate + CO2 
Phosphoenol- 
pyruvate 
carboxylased 
Ppc 
(PP1505) 
PPC 
34 (S)-Malate + NADP+  
Pyruvate + CO2 + NADPH Malic enzyme 
MaeB 
(PP5085) 
ME2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:110==
____________________________________________________________________________ 
REFERENCES 
 
1. 
Winsor, G. L., Lam, D. K. W., Fleming, L., Lo, R., Whiteside, M. D., Yu, N. Y., Hancock, R. E. W., and 
Brinkman, F. S. L. (2011) Pseudomonas Genome Database: improved comparative analysis and 
population genomics capability for Pseudomonas genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, D596-D600 
2. 
Caspi, R., Altman, T., Dreher, K., Fulcher, C. A., Subhraveti, P., Keseler, I. M., Kothari, A., 
Krummenacker, M., Latendresse, M., Mueller, L. A., Ong, Q., Paley, S., Pujar, A., Shearer, A. G., 
Travers, M., Weerasinghe, D., Zhang, P., and Karp, P. D. (2012) The MetaCyc database of metabolic 
pathways and enzymes and the BioCyc collection of pathway/genome databases. Nucleic Acids Res. 
40, D742-D753 
3. 
Blank, L. M., Ionidis, G., Ebert, B. E., Bü hler, B., and Schmid, A. (2008) Metabolic response of 
Pseudomonas putida during redox biocatalysis in the presence of a second octanol phase. FEBS J. 275, 
5173-5190 
4. 
Chavarría, M., Kleijn, R. J., Sauer, U., Pflü ger-Grau, K., and de Lorenzo, V. (2012) Regulatory tasks of 
the phosphoenolpyruvate-phosphotransferase system of Pseudomonas putida in central carbon 
metabolism. MBio 3, e00028-00012 
5. 
Chavarría, M., Nikel, P. I., Pé rez-Pantoja, D., and de Lorenzo, V. (2013) The Entner-Doudoroff pathway 
empowers Pseudomonas putida KT2440 with a high tolerance to oxidative stress. Environ. Microbiol. 
15, 1772-1785 
6. 
del Castillo, T., Ramos, J. L., Rodríguez-Herva, J. J., Fuhrer, T., Sauer, U., and Duque, E. (2007) 
Convergent peripheral pathways catalyze initial glucose catabolism in Pseudomonas putida: genomic 
and flux analysis. J. Bacteriol. 189, 5142-5152 
7. 
Sudarsan, S., Dethlefsen, S., Blank, L. M., Siemann-Herzberg, M., and Schmid, A. (2014) The functional 
structure of central carbon metabolism in Pseudomonas putida KT2440. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 80, 
5292-5303 
8. 
Nelson, K. E., Weinel, C., Paulsen, I. T., Dodson, R. J., Hilbert, H., Martins dos Santos, V. A. P., Fouts, 
D. E., Gill, S. R., Pop, M., Holmes, M., Brinkac, L., Beanan, M., DeBoy, R. T., Daugherty, S., Kolonay, 
J., Madupu, R., Nelson, W., White, O., Peterson, J., Khouri, H., Hance, I., Chris Lee, P., Holtzapple, E., 
Scanlan, D., Tran, K., Moazzez, A., Utterback, T., Rizzo, M., Lee, K., Kosack, D., Moestl, D., Wedler, 
H., Lauber, J., Stjepandic, D., Hoheisel, J., Straetz, M., Heim, S., Kiewitz, C., Eisen, J. A., Timmis, K. 
N., Dü sterhö ft, A., Tü mmler, B., and Fraser, C. M. (2002) Complete genome sequence and comparative 
analysis of the metabolically versatile Pseudomonas putida KT2440. Environ. Microbiol. 4, 799-808 
 
==PAGE:111==
A
ppendix I
Glucose minimal medium Mapped Reaction IDs
 
 
6 g l-1 Na2HPO4 
3 g l-1 KH2PO4 
1.4 g l-1 (NH4)2SO4 
0.5 g l-1 NaCl 
0.2 g l-1 MgSO4·7H2O 
0.01 g l-1 CaCl2 
Carbon Source 
20 mM glucose 
Trace Elements Solution 
ZnCl2 
MnCl2 
BO3H3 
CoCl2 
CuCl2 
NiSO4 
MoO4Na2 
ammonium Fe(III) citrate 
 
The corresponding lower bound of exchange reactions are constrained as follows: 
‘EX_ca2_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_cl_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_co2_e_': -100.0, 
 'EX_cobalt2_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_cu2_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_fe2_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_glc_e_': -6.3, 
 'EX_h2o_e_': -100.0, 
 'EX_h_e_': -100.0, 
 'EX_hco3_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_k_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_mg2_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_mn2_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_mobd_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_na1_e_': -10.0, 
==PAGE:112==
 'EX_nh4_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_ni2_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_o2_e_': -30.0, 
 'EX_pi_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_sel_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_so4_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_tungs_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_zn2_e_': -10.0. 
==PAGE:113==
A
ppendix I
 unctional block 
Reaction code  
Flux value (mmol gCDW
-1 h
-1) ± SE
b 
Peripheral  
pathways 
1 
5.51 ± 0.04 
2 
0.72 ± 0.06 
4 
4.79 ± 0.07 
5 
0.72 ± 0.06 
6 
0.72 ± 0.06 
Pentose phosphate  
pathway 
7 
1.17 ± 0.07 
10 
0.59 ± 0.03 
11 
0.15 ± 0.59 
12 
0.44 ± 0.59 
13 
0.15 ± 0.01 
14 
0.01 ± 0.01 
Entner-Doudoroff  
pathway 
8 
6.11 ± 0.04 
9 
6.11 ± 0.04 
Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas 
pathway 
3 
0.63 ± 0.04 
15 
0.15 ± 0.01 
16 
0.57 ± 0.04 
17 
0.46 ± 0.03 
18 
0.46 ± 0.03 
19 
0.46 ± 0.03 
20 
5.11 ± 0.04 
21 
4.36 ± 0.07 
Tricarboxylic acid cycle / 
Glyoxylate shunt 
22 
3.89 ± 0.08 
23 
6.67 ± 0.18 
24 
5.44 ± 0.21 
25 
5.44 ± 0.21 
26 
5.44 ± 0.21 
27 
4.71 ± 0.22 
28 
4.71 ± 0.22 
29 
4.71 ± 0.22 
30 
2.01 ± 0.11 
31 
0.00 ± 0.00 
Anaplerosis / Gluconeogenesis 
32 
4.44 ± 0.15 
33 
0.15 ± 0.13 
34 
2.69 ± 0.18 
 
==PAGE:114==
A
ppendix I
Adjusted reaction fluxes with the experimental measurementMapped Reaction IDs
 
BiGG IDs 
Flux (BOF_WT3) 
Flux (BOF_CORE) 
2DHGLCK 
0.72 
0.72 
ACONTb 
5.379295 
5.377363 
AKGDH 
4.71 
4.71 
CS 
5.379295 
5.377363 
EDA 
6.11 
6.125742 
EDD 
6.11 
6.125742 
FBA 
-0.55566 
-0.55443 
FBP 
0.555662 
0.554428 
FUM 
5.292495 
5.291291 
G6PDH2 
1.17 
1.17 
GAD2ktpp 
0.72 
0.72 
GAPD 
5.065165 
5.082141 
GLCDpp 
5.51 
5.51 
GND 
0.746182 
0.744258 
GNK 
4.79 
4.79 
HEX1 
0.79 
0.79 
ICDHyr 
5.014933 
5.377363 
ICL 
0.364363 
0 
MDH 
2.01 
2.01 
ME2 
2.71242 
2.69 
OAADC 
4.470847 
4.44 
PDH 
6.485833 
6.153959 
PGI 
-0.57497 
-0.57 
PGLCNDH 
0.72 
0.72 
PGM 
-4.36 
-4.36 
PPC 
0.15 
0.15 
PYK 
3.904431 
3.89 
RPE 
0.071428 
0.068134 
RPI 
-0.66464 
-0.66308 
SUCDi 
4.71 
4.71 
TALA 
0.140608 
0.137434 
TKT1 
0.15 
0.15 
TKT2 
-0.07857 
-0.08187 
TPI 
-0.46 
-0.46 
  
==PAGE:115==
A
ppendix I
Citrate minimal medium Mapped Reaction IDs
 
 
6 g l-1 Na2HPO4 
3 g l-1 KH2PO4 
1.4 g l-1 (NH4)2SO4 
0.5 g l-1 NaCl 
0.2 g l-1 MgSO4·7H2O 
0.01 g l-1 CaCl2 
Carbon Source 
Citrate 
Trace Elements Solution 
ZnCl2 
MnCl2 
BO3H3 
CoCl2 
CuCl2 
NiSO4 
MoO4Na2 
ammonium Fe(III) citrate 
 
The corresponding lower bound of exchange reactions are constrained as follows: 
‘EX_ca2_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_cl_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_co2_e_': -100.0, 
 'EX_cobalt2_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_cu2_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_fe2_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_glc_e_': -6.3, 
 'EX_h2o_e_': -100.0, 
 'EX_h_e_': -100.0, 
 'EX_hco3_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_k_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_mg2_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_mn2_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_mobd_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_na1_e_': -10.0, 
==PAGE:116==
 'EX_nh4_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_ni2_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_o2_e_': -30.0, 
 'EX_pi_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_sel_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_so4_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_tungs_e_': -10.0, 
 'EX_zn2_e_': -10.0. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Definition of in silico Luria Broth (LB) medium 
 
Carbon source: Glucose 
 
'EX_26dap_M_e_': 0.1, 
 'EX_adn_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_ala_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_arg_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_aso4_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_asp_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_btn_e_': 0.1, 
 'EX_ca2_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_cbl1_e_': 0.1, 
 'EX_cd2_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_chor_e_': 0.1, 
 'EX_cl_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_cobalt2_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_cu2_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_cys_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_fe2_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_fe3_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_glc_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_glu_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_gly_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_hg2_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_his_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_hxan_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_ile_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_ins_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_k_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_leu_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_lys_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_met_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_mg2_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_mn2_e_': 100.0, 
==PAGE:117==
 'EX_mobd_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_na1_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_nac_e_': 0.1, 
 'EX_ni2_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_o2_e_': 21.5, 
 'EX_pb2_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_phe_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_pi_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_pnto_R_e_': 0.1, 
 'EX_pro_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_sel_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_ser_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_sheme_e_': 0.1, 
 'EX_so4_e_': 100.0, 
 'EX_thr_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_trp_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_tyr_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_ura_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_uri_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_val_L_e_': 5.0, 
 'EX_zn2_e_': 100.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:118==
A
ppendix I
Conditional essential genes in glucoseMapped Reaction IDs
 
 
 
 PP_0362 
PP_1303 
PP_4822 
 PP_0363 
PP_1304 
PP_4823 
 PP_0364 
PP_1426 
PP_4890 
 PP_0365 
PP_1525 
PP_4909 
 PP_0366 
PP_1530 
PP_4984 
 PP_0787 
PP_1602 
PP_4998 
PP_0082 
PP_1665 
PP_4999 
PP_0083 
PP_1769 
PP_5014 
PP_0184 
PP_1770 
PP_5015 
PP_0289 
PP_1815 
PP_5078 
PP_0290 
PP_1830 
PP_5079 
PP_0292 
PP_1985 
PP_5097 
PP_0293 
PP_1986 
PP_5098 
PP_0417 
PP_1988 
PP_5128 
PP_0420 
PP_1989 
PP_5150 
PP_0421 
PP_1995 
PP_5155 
PP_0422 
PP_2000 
PP_5185 
PP_0860 
PP_2095 
PP_5289 
PP_0965 
PP_2328 
PP_5291 
PP_0966 
PP_2371 
PP_5335 
PP_0967 
PP_3999 
PP_5336 
PP_1025 
PP_4473 
 
PP_1037 
PP_4481 
 
PP_1079 
PP_4678 
 
PP_1086 
PP_4679 
 
PP_1088 
PP_4680 
 
PP_1231 
PP_4699 
 
PP_1237 
PP_4700 
 
PP_1240 
PP_4725 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:119==
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:120==
A
ppendix I
Flux distribution mapsMapped Reaction IDs
 
 
 
The flux distribution of the wild-type in gluconate medium predicted by pFBA method. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:121==
 
 
 
The flux distribution of the wild-type in 2-ketogluconate medium predicted by pFBA method. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:122==
 
 
 
The flux distribution of the gnd knockout mutant predicted by ROOM method. 
 
 
==PAGE:123==
 
 
The flux distribution of the maeB knockout mutant predicted by ROOM method. 
 
