==PAGE:1==
Lars David Aktor - s134062
Jesper Martin Christensen - s130580
Sensor Based Navigation for
Autonomous Car
Master Thesis, July 2018
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Sensorbaseret navigation til autonom bil
Report written by:
Jesper Martin Christensen
Lars David Aktor
Advisors:
Nils Axel Andersen
Ole Ravn
Henning Si Høj
Jesper Schramm
DTU Electrical Engineering
Automation and Control
Elektrovej
Building 326
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel : 4525 3576
studieadministration@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
12 February 2018 - 31 July 2018
ECTS:
30
Education:
MSc
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁlment
of the requirements for graduation in the above education
at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
© Jesper Martin Christensen & Lars David Aktor, 2018
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this project the goal is to develop an autonomous system for a car that based on
sensor input, can calculate the optimal route and use this route as reference signal, to
control steering angle, speed and brake power by simple controllers.
A series of design requirements posed to steering precision, speed, brake control and
algorithm execution time have been stated and a navigational system is proposed, imple-
mented and veriﬁed to solve these requirements.
By participating in the Shell Eco Marathon Autonomous Urban Concept competition in
London 2018, the system is demonstrated to work and successfully fulﬁll the requirements
set in this thesis.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Reading guide
v
1
Glossary
1
2
Introduction
1
3
Problem formulation
7
4
Software
11
5
Hardware
13
6
Navigational Algorithm
21
7
Post-processing
31
8
Steering Control
37
9
Program structure
47
10 Testing
51
11 Results
69
12 Discussion
105
13 Future work
109
14 Conclusion
111
Appendices
115
A
Datasheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117
A.1
The Ecocar
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117
A.2
Velodyne LiDAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
118
A.3
Brake actuator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
121
A.4
Steering actuator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
130
A.5
Camera data sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
132
==PAGE:8==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
B
Vehicle Scrutineering sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
135
iv
==PAGE:9==
Reading Guide
Here the content of the diﬀerent chapters is outlined.
1. Glossary
An introduction to the terms used in this thesis.
2. Introduction
An introduction of the thesis.
3. Problem Formulation
Here the thesis problem is stated. 4. Software
A brief description of the software architecture used.
5. Hardware
A brief description of the hardware available on the car.
6. Navigational Algorithm
A description of how to ﬁnd the middle line from LiDAR measurements.
7. Post-Processing
A description of how to convert middle line into controller reference signals.
8. Steering Control
Here, the choice of controller used for steering and how to tune it, is explained.
9. Program Structure
An overview of the software architecture in the autonomous system.
10. Testing
An overview of how the autonomous system has been tested.
11. Results
A presentation of the results achieved by this system.
12. Discussion
Here the approach and results are critically evaluated.
13. Future Work
Propositions for future work are presented.
14. Conclusion
A conclusion is made to answer the thesis problem.
Source code
Source code and a kinematic model can be found on the CD included with the report, or
online.
v
==PAGE:10==
1
Glossary
The following is a list of the abbreviations used in this report.
SEM is the Shell Eco Marathon, an annual competition for student teams to bring
their student made special cars to an event site and compete in diﬀerent categories.
AUC is the Autonomous Competition, a part of SEM which runs parallel to the
mileage competition.
Wiki The SEM AUC rules are described in the oﬃcial rules, chapter 4.
Ecocar is DTU Roadrunners’ mileage car. This year it is ﬁtted with an autonomous
system as well.
LiDAR is a portable laser scanner. The lidar used in this project is a 3-dimensional
Velodyne puck VLP-16.
ROS is the Robot Operating System. Although not an actual operating system it
is an open framework used in robotics applications. Programs called nodes are used to
publish and receive messages.
Publishing is communication between nodes in ROS. The published entity is called
a message.
Gazebo is the used simulation environment.
Autonomous is when a robot or machine is programmed to react to an input ”by
itself” as opposed to being human controlled.
Autonomous system is the set of programs made in this project to drive the car
autonomously.
Burn is running the car engine.
Speed control is the part of the autonomous system which controls the car’s speed
according to the navigation. Burning can be done to accelerate the car, braking can be
done to decelerate the car.
Minspeed and Maxspeed are the names for upper and lower boundaries in a speed
1
==PAGE:11==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
interval, with minspeed <= maxspeed. The speed control burns the engine if the speed
of the car falls below minspeed, and stops burning when the car has accelerated above
maxspeed.
Slow and fast are two separate sets of maxspeed and minspeed.
On-line in this report refers to something done in real time, as opposed to something
pre-planned beforehand.
Controllers are devices which based on a system signal, can control an input to the
system to achieve the desired performance. P, PI and PID are abbreviations which
explains if the controller has proportionality, integration and/or derivative control.
BOOST is a C++ code-library with additional functions to use in C++.
Brake control in this project means a program which sends commands to the actual
brake control node, which is made by other students in parallel with this project.
Brake power or brake pressure refers to the hydraulic pressure level in the brake
circuit.
Computation time notations, that shows the time correlation between measure-
ments and program execution time, (unitless). O(n2) means an algorithms worst-case
computation time is dependent on n2. i.e. if 1 observations of n result in the execution
time being 1·x seconds, then 10 observations takes 102·x seconds. Similarly, O(n·log2(n)
means 10 observations would take 10 · log2(10) · x seconds.
In this project, n is the number of LiDAR measurements.
2
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
Shell Eco Marathon
The Shell Eco Marathon is an annual international mileage competition for students with
self-made cars. Teams compete in diﬀerent categories based on one of two types of car,
the Prototype or the UrbanConcept, as well as the type of fuel used. This year a new
competition is introduced: the autonomous competition, which consists of a set of ﬁve
challenges a car must complete autonomously without being controlled by a driver. For
safety reasons a driver must still be present in the car and able to disable the autonomous
system in case of accidents, however if the driver intervenes in the steering of the car dur-
ing autonomous driving the attempt is invalidated.
The goal of the competition is to mimic the challenges in making real-life autonomous
cars and to encourage students to develop solutions to these challenges. In the com-
petition points are given according to performance, with 100 points to each completed
challenge and an additional 50 bonus points available depending on the speciﬁc challenge.
The competition is divided into two parts: one in Paris and one in London. In order to
qualify for the competition in London the car had to complete the qualiﬁcation challenges
in Paris. The oﬃcial rulebook for the competition is the Shell Eco Marathon Autonomous
Competition rulebook, also called the SEM AUC rules chapter 4.
The ﬁve challenges
The ﬁve challenges are deﬁned by Shell Eco Marathon to the following:
1. Autonomous lap
2. Complex track
3. Parking challenge
4. Obstacle avoidance (also known as the gate challenge)
5. Multiple parking spots
All challenges are conﬁned to a unique, closed track walled with barriers. They dif-
fer in the speciﬁc layout of the track as well as goal of the challenge. Common for all
challenges is that the car must not touch any of the barriers, or the attempt will be
invalidated. From the SEM AUC rules it is known that the track will always be fenced
1
==PAGE:13==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
by barriers no less than 50cm high, and that the track width will never be smaller than
5m. The on-track barriers’ dimensions are described in article 419, and the parking end-
barrier as well as the parking spot dimensions are described in article 418. Track length
is known beforehand for all challenges. This is all the information needed to make a car
that drives autonomously in the SEM AUC. Moreover there is only allowed one car on
the track at a time, so there are no moving obstacles for this competition.
Each team has two attempts at each challenge.
In the London competition only challenges 1, 3 and 4 were used and challenges 2 and
5 were discarded.
Autonomous lap
The autonomous lap is a simple race track which the car must drive. The car must then
drive to the ﬁnish line, with bonus points given to the car closest to the ideal time. In
Paris the track length was 180m, and in London the track length was 970m with an ideal
speed of 18kmh which equals an ideal time of 194 seconds. The maximum average speed
allowed is 25 kmh, and the minimum speed is 9 kmh. If the car stops for longer than 3
seconds the attempt will end. The track contains elevation, and the width of the track
varies but is no smaller than 5m. The oﬃcial track layout description can be seen in
ﬁgure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Oﬃcial track description of challenge 1 (from the SEM AUC rules, article
416).
It should be noted that while the ﬁnal track layout is available (see ﬁgure 2.2) the
exact turn radii on the track are not. The oﬃcial elevation map speciﬁes the maximum
elevation diﬀerence to be less than 2m.
2
==PAGE:14==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 2.2: Oﬃcial challenge 1 track layout, from the SEM AUC rules
Complex track
The complex track is a stretch of track with large, square obstacles on the road. The car
must then avoid touching the obstacles while driving to the ﬁnish line. Bonus points will
be given to the fastest car. This challenge was completed in Paris, but was not selected to
be in the ﬁnal competition in London and did thus not grant points. The oﬃcial layout
of this challenge can be seen in ﬁgure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Oﬃcial track description of challenge 2 (from the SEM AUC rules, article
417).
Parking
In the parking challenge the car must drive down a straight stretch of track, detect a
ﬁxed parking spot and park within the spot and before an end barrier. The track will be
3
==PAGE:15==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
between 30 and 50m long. The parking spot is a rectangle marked with black and yellow
striped tape with the inner dimensions 4m long and 3m wide. At the end of the spot is
the end barrier, which is 3m wide and 50cm tall. When parked all four wheels of the car
must be within the rectangle. Bonus points are given to the car that is closest to the end
barrier. The oﬃcial layout can be seen in ﬁgure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Oﬃcial track description of challenge 3 (from the SEM AUC rules, article
418).
Obstacle avoidance (the gate challenge)
In the obstacle avoidance the car must drive slalom through three ﬁxed gates on a straight
track with length between 30 and 50m. The gates are made of pairs of cylindrical barri-
ers, each measuring 60cm in diameter and 120cm tall, with varying gate width between
the cylinders. The length between the gates is 10m. The width of the ﬁrst gate is 3.5m
by the closest point, the width of the second gate 3.0m and the width of the last gate 2.5m.
All three gates must be cleared before crossing the ﬁnish line. Bonus points are given
if the car touches certain ﬁxed bonus markers (30x30cm) on the ground. The oﬃcial
layout can be seen in ﬁgure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Oﬃcial track description of challenge 4 (from the SEM AUC rules, article
419).
Multiple parking spots
In this challenge the car must drive a straight stretch of track with four identical parking
spot rectangles, without end barriers, only diﬀerentiated by a number written within the
rectangle. The car must park within the beforehand designated spot.
4
==PAGE:16==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
This challenge was not selected to be in the ﬁnal competition in London. The oﬃcial
layout can be seen in ﬁgure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Oﬃcial track description of challenge 5 (from the SEM AUC rules, article
420).
Practical Considerations
To be eligible to participate in the autonomous category, certain oﬃcial requirements
must be met which include:
• There must be no external communication with the autonomous system, such as
wireless communication.
• Sensors and actuators must not obstruct the driver’s view nor the driver’s ability
to enter or exit the car
• Actuators and sensors must be isolated and shielded, so as not to risk the driver’s
health
Generally, teams must take care to make the car safe and the driving system must be
completely autonomous with only pre-planning allowed. Furthermore, before the car is
allowed to drive it has to pass a technical inspection which includes demonstrating the
brakes, the engine, that the driver can exit the car in less than 10 seconds and more. The
autonomous part of the inspection is summarised in the vehicle scrutineering sheet. The
full list of requirements that the car must meet can be found in appendix B.
Autonomous driving
In order to drive autonomously, a vehicle needs sensors to measure its surroundings map
obstacles, road and other relevant inputs such as parking spots, road signs etc. The sensor
measurements can be converted into a momentary map or even permanent map if the
information is needed more than once. A navigation algorithm can then be made, which
couples the map with the knowledge about barriers, track width, distance and desired
behaviour to plan a route for the vehicle to drive. The vehicle then needs actuators for
steering and a motor for propulsion, as well as a brake actuator to stop or slow down.
The algorithms must be suﬃciently fast in order to map, plan and control a vehicle in
real-time, since reactions must be taken faster according to the speed of the vehicle.
5
==PAGE:17==
==PAGE:18==
3
Problem formulation
A system must be made that reliably overcomes the challenges laid out by the SEM AUC
rules and win the SEM autonomous category, as described in the Introduction chapter.
It is believed that this problem can be solved in a satisfying manner by combining control
theory, robotics and software design.
Therefore, the aim of this project is to create a combination of navigation algorithm and
control that can achieve the following:
• Speed goal: It is desired that the car completes the 970m autonomous lap as close
as possible to the ideal time of 194s, which corresponds to average time of 18km/h
(5m/s).
• Parking goal: It is desired to park the car as close as possible to the end barrier
without physical contact, with all four wheels inside the parking spot rectangle
• Gates goal: It is desired drive slalom through every gate in the gates challenge
without physical contact
General design
Common for all these goals is that they require steering, braking and engine control.
Aside from the parking goal, necessary information for navigation are found by using a
LiDAR. The parking goal requires additional camera recognition to see the parking spot,
and the gate goal is implemented by recognizing the shapes of the gates with a LiDAR.
Speed control
The desired goal speed is deﬁned as 18km/h as this is the speciﬁed ideal speed for chal-
lenge 1. This requires speed control which keeps the car moving as close as possible to
18km/h (average). Due to the car also participating in the SEM Urban Concept, the
car engine is limited to run by using a ”burn and coast” method, within a given speed
interval. Because the engine is not suited for precise control such as can be done with a
PID-controller, the speed control will be done by hysteresis. Since the track in challenge
1 is 970m, the ideal time to complete the lap is 194s. For the remaining challenges speed
is not a goal in itself, but instead a slower speed is desired, in order to have very precise
control of the car.
7
==PAGE:19==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Steering control
In the gates challenge the car is expected to go through gates that are 3m oﬀset to left
and right, while only having a distance of 10m in the driving direction. The steering
controller must be tuned speciﬁcally to the accommodate these kinds of reference inputs,
at low speeds. As such the steering controller must be able to handle a 3m oﬀset-error
orthogonal to the driving direction within 10m of driving to complete this challenge. In
the parking challenge, as long as the car can do as stated above, the navigation should
be achievable as the camera software implemented on the Ecocar can detect parking spot
from further than 10m distances.
Brake control
The brake must be able to reliably make a full stop when parking, before hitting the end
obstacle at the parking spot, as the car can not reverse. Furthermore, the car should be
able decelerate by using the brake. This is necessary to eﬀectively control the speed of
the car.
Computation speed
Computation speed is crucial when moving a vehicle at 25km/h, calculating the correct
result in a low time frame is often as important as calculating the correct result[10]. If
a vehicle drives with 25km/h or 7m/s and the road-width is 6m, using more than even
100ms, corresponding to a delay of 0.7m, from measurement to reaction can result in
disaster. Especially when factoring in sensor update rates, communication delay, mea-
surement processing time, actuator step-times and -limits.
Computation time O(n2) or less is therefore a requirement, where n is the amount of
LiDAR measurement points received.
Simplicity and integration
This is the ﬁrst year for autonomous driving on the DTU-Roadrunners team and since
students from the university are able to build upon the work in this project, it is a priority
to build a solid foundation. A simple system is required that is easy to understand for
new students and integrate with their own work.
8
==PAGE:20==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Middle line
Because of limitations to hardware and steering wheel speeds, there is a desire to position
the car as ready as possible for new unknown input. The middle of the road is deﬁned
as the optimal position. Staying in the middle of the road maximizes the critical time
available for an unknown input as well as minimizes the risk of crashing into the sides of
the road.
Speciﬁc requirements
After summarizing the system design. A list of speciﬁc requirements can be made.
The requirements for a functioning solution to this problem are:
• Make the car able to perform a 3m step to the side within 10m in the driving
direction
• Perform turns with a turn radius of 8m
• Perform speed control, that can achieve an average speed of 18km/h
• Drive autonomously for 1000m
• Be able to drive in the middle of the road at all times by using LiDAR data
• Park by using camera data
• Steering control that does not oscillate, and provides a smooth experience for the
driver.
• To brake and stop the car within 2m of the end barrier in the parking spot
• To have a program run time of less than 100ms
Proposed solution
A solution is proposed, which solves the problems by making an algorithm with the
following key points:
• Receive LiDAR data points and camera detected parking spots
• Determine left and right side of the road
• Calculate middle path with voronoi diagram
• Transform middle path into reference signals for speed and steering
• Implement controller for steering angle
• Implement control for speed
• Options for driving according to middle line or according to parking spot detection
or gate detection.
9
==PAGE:21==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Timeplan
The preliminary time plan for the project can be seen in ﬁgure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Proposed time table for the project
10
==PAGE:22==
4
Software
In this chapter the software used is described.
ROS C++
The biggest software tool used in this project is ROS C++ running on Linux. ROS is
an open framework consisting of libraries and programs used to making applications for
robotics [2]. It is suited for student projects and several people working in parallel as it
is easy to make programs modular. Much software architecture was already implemented
in ROS and as such it is decided to continue using ROS.
How ROS works
In the ROS framework a program is called a node. Nodes communicate with each other
by publishing and subscribing to messages on named topics with the message type and
ﬁelds are deﬁned by the user. This makes it easy to use diﬀerent nodes with diﬀerent
purposes [3]. Each node is given a ﬁxed update time.
Simulating in Gazebo
A simulation environment is very useful in designing robot programs. It enables the user
to easily try and verify diﬀerent programs with risking harm to the robot, or in this case,
car. Gazebo is a ROS-compatible simulation environment. In it it is possible to use the
same aerodynamics and rolling resistance as the real car, making it a useful tool to verify
the diﬀerent programs, particularly in the early stages of this project. It is also possible
to create tracks similar to those in the ﬁnal challenge [4]. In ﬁgure 4.1 the simulation
model of the car can be seen.
Rviz
Rviz is ROS’ visualization tool used to display data points in 3D. In this project it is
used to display lidar data points as well as sorted points and the drive route from the
11
==PAGE:23==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
voronoi node [5].
Figure 4.1: The car in Gazebo
12
==PAGE:24==
5
Hardware
In this chapter, the available hardware on the car is described.
The hardware on the car consists of actuators, sensors and switches.
The dimensions of the car can be found in Appendix A.1.
The steering and brake actuators can be seen in ﬁgure 5.1. Figure 5.2 shows the
actuators from the driver’s seat.
Figure 5.1: Overview of the brake system of the car
13
==PAGE:25==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 5.2: Steering wheel, auto-pilot button and emergency button
Steering actuator
The steering actuator is a stepper motor connected to a slip gear [1]. The slip gear makes
it possible for the driver to overtake control of the wheel against the stepper motor.
Figure 5.3: Overview of the steering stepper motor, slip gear and steering potentiometer
In ﬁgure 5.4 a step response of the stepper motor can be seen. The stepper takes 0.9s
to from 0 to one extremum. Furthermore the wheels are limited to turning
14
==PAGE:26==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
within ± 15 degrees.
Figure 5.4: Step response of the steering stepper motor, taken from ﬁnal challenge 1
Brake actuator
The brake system consists of two hydraulic circuits, one for the front wheels and one for
the rear wheels. The brake actuator used is a hydraulic prismatic motor which extends
or retracts its arm along 1 dimension. On the car it is partially ﬁxed to the brake pedal,
meaning that either the driver or the actuator can press the brake, as can be seen in
ﬁgure 5.5.
(a) Before activating brake
(b) Brake activated
Figure 5.5: Brake activated manually with the actuator constant at resting position
The actuator has its own black-box controller which unfortunately does not have feed-
15
==PAGE:27==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
back. It is made for elevating desktops with a manual ”up/down” switch. As such it is
ﬁtted with a custom made controller which reads the feedback from the hydraulic brake
circuit and commands the actuator to extend or retract, using a brake encoder sensor
and hydraulic circuit sensor as input to the black box. This means that the home made
controller has knowledge of the position of the actuator arm and the corresponding brake
pressure level in the circuit.
The actuator itself is powerful enough to press the brake and keep it stable, however
unfortunately the black box controller possesses several shortcomings.
1. It has generally been found to show irregular rise rime until the London competition
where the system used was switched from closed loop to open loop
2. Furthermore, it is inaccurate. The black box controller has its own threshold of
how large a step must be before the controller will activate the brake, meaning that
each step must return to resting position before another step can be commanded
3. The brake also overshoots every step. Since the relationship between the physical
position of the brake pedal and the actual brake pressure is non-linear the overshoot
presses the brake signiﬁcantly higher than commanded. This can be seen in ﬁgure
5.6, where the desired brake pressure is 5.8 bar but the brake overshoots to 11.68
bar, only to drop to 2.5 bar, as the relationship between the brake encoder (green)
and the hydraulic brake pressure (red).
Figure 5.6: An on-line step response of the brake, taken from the ﬁnal run in challenge 1
(t=127 to 129s)
16
==PAGE:28==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Another complication is that if the relationship between hydraulic pressure in the
front and rear brake circuit is changed the brake controller must be re-calibrated. As the
pressure changes so too does the brake pedal position at which the braking starts and
the pedal resistance becomes hard.
Car engine
The engine is a single cylinder modiﬁed moped engine and is the propulsion of the car.
On a normal car the throttle is controlled by controlling the air intake. On the ecocar the
engine can only burn at a ﬁxed air intake, and the ratio of fuel to air is pre-determined
manually. This means that the engine works in one way only: coast and burn. When
turned the engine ”burns” to accelerate. When turned oﬀthe car coasts until burning
again.
The engine uses a starter motor that connects with a bendix drive. This bendix drive
is particularly sensitive. If a burn is initiated and stopped too soon the bendix drive will
not necessarily connect and if the engine burned sporadically, the mechanical components
can be damaged. Therefore it is not possible to PID control the speed for this engine.
The engine can be seen in ﬁgure 5.7.
Figure 5.7: Overview of the engine
17
==PAGE:29==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Computer boards
The computing unit used is the Intel NUC which is a 64-bit mini PC with i7-8650U pro-
cessor with a stated processing power of 1.9Ghz and 8Gb RAM. It is suited for running
ROS on Linux and has ample processing power. Software run time is of great concern
in this project as the entire autonomous path planning runs exclusively on software, and
fast operations are needed to navigate a car in real time. This is further ampliﬁed by the
desired top speed of 25kmh which is 7m/s. Even the right answer is wrong if it is found
too late, and if the car is travelling at 7m/s and the track is only 6m wide it does not
take long to crash the car.
Aside from the NUC several other, smaller processing units and boards are also used.
LiDAR and camera
The LiDAR is a Velodyne Puck Vlp-16, which is a 360 degree 3D LiDAR with the nom-
inal range of 100m.[6] The vertical ﬁeld of view is 30°. The rotation frequency can be set
to either 5, 10 or 20Hz, however higher frequency means lower accuracy. In this project
it is set to 10Hz as this is a good trade-oﬀbetween speed and accuracy. Featuring a low
energy consumption and low weight it is suited for this project.
The camera is not covered in this thesis but the datasheet[14] can be found in Ap-
pendix A.5.
Both the LiDAR and the camera are mounted on a 3D-printed mount which can be
seen in ﬁgure 5.8.
(a) Initial mount
(b) Final mount in Paris
(c) Final mount in London
Figure 5.8: The LiDAR on top of the mount, camera below
18
==PAGE:30==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Miscellaneous
An emergency switch which cuts oﬀthe power to the actuators is also installed, as can
be seen in ﬁgure 5.9. The ﬂip switch connects power to the entire autonomous system,
which is separate from the car’s normal power system. The emergency button disconnects
power to the actuators only, and removes autonomous control of the engine.
Figure 5.9: Emergency switch
The steering wheel, which can be seen in ﬁgure 5.2, posseses a number of buttons,
including the autopilot button which activates and deactivates the autonomous program.
When activated the lights on the steering wheel turn bright green and a small speaker
announces activation to the driver.
19
==PAGE:31==
==PAGE:32==
6
Navigational Algorithm
In this chapter the navigational algorithm, how to go from LiDAR measurements to
reference signals for steering and speed, is described.
Determining Left and Right Side
Considering the features of road width and barriers that are explained in the rules from
SEM, presented in the introductory chapter, determining left and right is possible and can
be done simply by using the LiDAR on the Ecocar. Using the left and right boundaries
of the road, should make it possible to determine the middle of the road.
In the beginning of every new mission driven on the Ecocar, a global coordinate
system is established. Every data point from the LiDAR is transformed from this global
coordinate system to a local coordinate system based at the middle of the rear-wheels.
By doing this we can make sure, that the robot is always pointing in the x-direction.
This is simply done by doing 2D-transformation as seen in equation 6.1:
xlocal = cos(−θodo) · (xmeas + xdisp −xodo)) −(sin(−θodo) · (ymeas −yp)
ylocal = sin(−θodo) · (xmeas + xdisp −xodo)) + (cos(−θodo) · (ymeas −yp)
(6.1)
This way the LiDAR measurements, which are given in global coordinates, (xmeas, ymeas)
transforms into (xlocal, ylocal) by using the current odometry of the robot (xodo, yodo, θodo).
Here, a xdisp = 0.75 is added to the x-coordinate because the LiDAR is displaced by
0.75m from the rear-wheels along the length of the car. Y-oﬀset is negligible.
By ensuring a ﬁxed coordinate system centered on the car, every data point with y > 0m
can be deﬁned as left to the car and everything y < 0m is to the right of car. If the
road crosses over, like in a turn, then there is no longer clearly deﬁned left and right.
However, for all data points that are directly to the side of the car, left and right sides
can be guaranteed, i.e. since the car is 2m from rear wheels to the furthest point on
the front, it is apparent that when data also fulﬁll x = [0; 2]m then it is guaranteed that
this data can be deﬁned as either to the left or right side according to the y-value. An
example can be seen on ﬁgure 6.1.
After deﬁning a ﬁx-point for right and left side, using the fact that there were little to
no gaps, gaps < 1m, between the barriers belonging to one side of the road, and knowing
the minimum distance between the two sides of the road is at least 5m, it is possible to
classify the entire left wall and right wall into their own groups, called clusters.
21
==PAGE:33==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 6.1: An example of determining left and right on a right turn, here it is seen that
a starting point for, left and right points are found, and a circle with a radius of 2m is
used to determine other points belong to the same cluster.
Figure 6.2: A few iterations into the left-right algorithm, the sides are getting clustered
securely.
By choosing to merge any data point, with a distance less than 2m from an existing
cluster, to said cluster, categorizing left and right data points can be done very eﬃciently.
This means that starting at a point certain to be left or right, a circle with radius = 2m
is made. Any point falling under this circle is also in the same category. This is then
done iteratively, until there are no more points that fall into either categories. See ﬁgure
22
==PAGE:34==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
6.1. After a few iterations the walls start to get deﬁned, see ﬁgure 6.2, until ﬁnally the
algorithm will have determined left and right wall like on ﬁgure 6.4. This way of merging
barriers together, typically results in around 10m−25m of left and right road, depending
on elevation.
Voronoi middle path
Another way to think about the middle path of the traversable terrain, is to think of
the line that is the furthest from any obstacle.
Luckily, something called a Voronoi
diagram can be calculated, which contains exactly the needed information. This diagram
partitions a 2D plane into cells by using euclidean distance between points. Looking at
ﬁgure 6.3, an example can be seen of how a set of points is divided into their own region
called a cell. These cells are found by calculating the euclidean distance from a point to
all other neighbouring points.
Figure 6.3: A Voronoi diagram of a random set of points.
Each point is contained
in a cell, distinguishable by color. The corners where 3 or more cells touch are called
vertices and the borders between cells that spans from one vertex to another are called
edges.(This picture is taken from https://da.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voronoi diagram.)
A voronoi diagram will in our case be calculated from 2d-points that contain the
position, (x, y), of walls and obstacles, and when calculated, holds information about all
the respective cells that belong to each point, their bounding edges, and the vertices that
make out the corners of the cells.
A satisfying implementation of Voronoi for C++ is available by using the BOOST
library[9].
This implementation uses a sweep line algorithm1 to construct a Voronoi
diagram in O(n · log2(n)) computation time[11].
To get an idea of how the voronoi diagram looks when applied to an organized set of
points. Let us consider the piece of road previously seen on ﬁgure 6.1, after it has been
processed with left and right it will look like ﬁgure 6.4. Here it is seen that there are two
clearly separated and perfectly clustered walls. On ﬁgure 6.5, it is seen what happens
1Visual example of sweep line algorithm: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k2P9yWSMaXE
23
==PAGE:35==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
when applying MATLABs voronoi() function to the wall points, there are now blue lines
indicating where the edges between the cells occur.
Figure 6.4: A turn is plotted with clearly separated and perfectly clustered walls
Figure 6.5: A turn is plotted with clearly separated and perfectly clustered walls. By
using MATLABs voronoi(), the edges between the individual points cells are now are
marked with blue lines. There is a middle path which can be extracted!
24
==PAGE:36==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Extracting middle line
There is a large amount of irrelevant information available in the voronoi diagram that
can be thrown away, since this information includes all edges and vertices between all
points detected by the LiDAR, as can also be understood from ﬁgure 6.5.
The voronoi diagram constructed from the BOOST algorithm is not sorted, but the
diagram contains information about which points, cells, vertices, and edges that belong
together. In order to extract only the middle line, which is the data of interest, the points
can be segregated into clusters. By clearly deﬁning each cluster as separate, i.e. left and
right wall, every cell will belong to one cluster. Every cell, around points on the left wall,
will belong to one cluster, and every cell around points on the right wall will belong to
another cluster. it is possible to search through all the edges and save only those, that
are boundary-lines between cells of two diﬀerent clusters. To discretize this information,
the vertices, (the end-points), of each edge is stored, corresponding to storing every (x,y)
information available about the middle line. The middle line of the traversable terrain
can now be extracted as seen on ﬁgure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Here the voronoi data of the turn shown on ﬁgure 6.5 is now ﬁltered by only
looking for what happens at the boundary between two clusters.
Because the information about which vertices connect to each other is kept, by starting
with the vertex that is closest to the car, it is possible to then go from vertex to vertex
and enumerate each point making an ordered list of waypoints which the car has to follow.
A real life example of the voronoi results can be seen on ﬁgure 6.7, where a LiDAR
scan from the London competition is shown, and the middle path is found. It is seen
that signiﬁcantly more points are selected than needed, which is ﬁne, as the algorithm
is only sensitive to too few points, and not too many, as long as the points are correctly
classiﬁed as left or right.
25
==PAGE:37==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 6.7: A LiDAR scan is made. The selected points for voronoi are colored purple,
while the ignored points are colored red. The middle path vertices are then calculated
and visualized as green points.
Multiple paths
Since it is originally proposed from Shell, that there could be complex track layouts such
as roundabouts or y-splits and similar situations on the road, it is necessary to include
a solution for these type of situations where the car has to take either a leftmost or
rightmost path.
The navigation described so far simply ﬁnds left and right sides, and calculates the voronoi
diagram from these datapoints. This is done by having categorized left and right walls as
belonging to their own clusters. Simply adding a third cluster called ”obstacles” would
solve the issue of having something in the middle of the road, that the voronoi diagram
also needs to calculate middle paths from. Looking at ﬁgure 6.8, a roundabout is seen.
Since there is already clearly deﬁned left and right, additional relevant data points can
be deﬁned as those, that are enclosed by the left and right wall, i.e. within a certain
distance of points belonging to both the left and right wall. Just like previously seen on
ﬁgure 6.1, where a circle with a radius of 2m, is used to cluster left and right wall points
together. In the same way, a circle corresponding to the width of the road2 from the left
and side is used to determine obstacles. Obstacle detection is done after determining left
2Approximate road width should be evaluated before using this method of obstacle detection.
26
==PAGE:38==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
and right, and the results can be seen on ﬁgure 6.9.
Figure 6.8: A roundabout is a more complex track layout, since there are obstacles in
the middle of the road that needs to be considered.
Figure 6.9: The roundabout is added to the voronoi diagram resulting in two paths.
In the program it is implemented that the car will either choose the leftmost or
rightmost route. This is done by evaluating the angle of the trajectories leading out of
the split by using the calculation seen in Equation 6.2. A split occurs at (x1, y1), and the
angle to the ﬁrst point of each trajectory (x2, y2) is evaluated. Since straight corresponds
to an angle of 0° in the local coordinate system, and since angles are positive when moving
counter-clockwise, it must be true that θleft > θright.
Angle = atan2(y2 −y1, x2 −x1)
(6.2)
Therefore, in case of a split in the road, it is possible to either follow the leftmost
or rightmost by simply choosing the highest or lowest angle at the vertex where a split
occurs.
27
==PAGE:39==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Advantages of using Voronoi Diagrams
Alternatives: An intuitive and popular way to store data about a local map, is by
making a 2D matrix called a grid map. One dimension is used for x-coords and the
other for y-coords. When obstacles are observed, they are simply placed in the matrix at
the corresponding position, and this information can be used to run diﬀerent algorithms
such as calculating heat maps or applying thinning algorithms to ﬁnd the ”safest” route,
”fastest” route or whichever optimality criterion has been deﬁned.
These alternative types of algorithms can also calculate the same results as voronoi, but
use comparatively heavy calculations and are based on grids or graphs. Assuming such as
in this case, that measurements are available in a 180° half circle at up to 50m distances,
it would probably be desired to make a grid map that contains 30m · 20m of grids/graph
nodes. It would be possible to look 10m to each side and 30m ahead. Now assuming
there is a desire for 10cm accuracy, 300·200 calculations are now required every time the
whole 2D-map should be updated.
Of course optimization can be made, however if 1cm accuracy is suddenly required, the
program execution time will increase dramatically.
Trade-oﬀs between run-time and
precision should not be required, and the calculation time of an algorithm should be
dependant on the amount of data available and not the predeﬁned grid or graph.
Why choose Voronoi: The voronoi diagram contains the necessary information to cal-
culate the middle path of the road, and since the optimal position has been determined to
be in the middle of the road, to solve the demands for this project, the output of Voronoi
matches the requirements for position perfectly.
It can be constructed in O(n · log2(n)) time, and it is incredibly important to keep ex-
ecution times fast, or even the most perfect calculation is unusable. When compared
to other algorithms, such as grid based algorithms like thinning or heat-maps, runtime
is signiﬁcantly better, as usually these other algorithms run in O(n2) speed and have
run-times based on the precision, that he map is deﬁned with. Voronoi diagram is based
on the distance between the points, and is therefore not bound to a map based structure.
For Voronoi the only requirement in order to gain excellent run-time and precision is
ﬁltering the irrelevant information away, by means of deﬁning left and right, or choosing
routes based on waypoints and algorithms such as ”dijkstra”, ”breadth ﬁrst search” or
similar path choosing algorithms.
Conclusion to the Navigation Algorithm
Entering a 90° turn with a speed of 4m/s on a road with a width of 6m, means that the
vehicle will crash into a wall in 1.5s. Taking into account that the steering stepper can
turn the wheels 20°/s to a maximum of 14°, this gives 0.6s less time to react. Remember-
ing it is desired to stay in the middle of the road gives further limitation to reaction time,
the authors have therefore deﬁned a maximum execution time of 100ms as a conservative
but realistic time limit for program execution.
By using a Voronoi diagram approach it is possible to calculate a path that is perfectly
in the middle by using a set of distance measurement, that has been categorized to be-
long to the left or right side of the road. This can be done in O(n2) time, and most of
the data processing, such as constructing the diagram, is done in O(n · log2(n)) running
time, with n being distance measurement data points. With the chosen parameters for
28
==PAGE:40==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
merging walls of left and right, the typical road visibility is around 10m−25m depending
on ﬂatness of surface and the execution time is less than 50ms on the Intel NUC placed
in the Ecocar, meaning even at top-speed of 7m/s, the car will have a new route after a
displacement of only 35cm. It is also possible to deal with more complex track layouts
such as roundabout or Y-splits, by choosing to go either left or right.
29
==PAGE:41==
==PAGE:42==
7
Post-processing
Driving the car autonomously consists of setting a reference angle to steer as well as set-
ting a reference speed, as an essential problem to autonomous driving is knowing when
to speed up or slow down. Calculating this decision on-line takes a certain processing
time. Furthermore, the actuators take time to change their physical values, as deﬁned by
the hardware limitations. It is thus desired to know the desired trajectory as far ahead
as possible. The speed of the car must be controlled according to the curvature of the
route; it is desired to slow down when approaching a turn and to speed up when driving
a straight stretch.
During this project the approach to regulate speed has been a simple switch between
a pair of normal ”slow” speeds and a pair of fast speeds. Due to the constraints of the
car engine already described in the Hardware chapter. The motor control used is a sim-
ple hysteresis loop to accelerate to a given speed (maxspeed) followed by turning oﬀthe
engine and coasting to a lower speed (minspeed). The slow maxspeed is deﬁned as at
the critical speed which is the maximum speed that car can safely complete a 90° turn
with a given turn radius. In practical use the max speed is slightly below the critical
speed as the engine has been found to overshoot with approximately 1kmph when burning.
The speed used in the London competition is found empirically, although it naturally
depends upon the radius of the turns on the particular track. For safety and comfort the
decision to switch between slow and fast pairs of speed is desired to be known as early as
possible in order to brake down in time. Post-processing of the Voronoi route provides a
solution to this problem.
It is desired that the car steers smoothly along a route, however after the middle path
has been found the route is ragged and twisted, and driving along this route is not com-
fortable due to steering ﬂuctuations. This problem can be solved by a processing of the
route to make it suited. Such a processing must eﬀectively reduce steering ﬂuctuations.
The processing can be done in diﬀerent ways, e.g. by viewing the problem as a geo-
metric problem and using certain mathematical operations.
In this project path planning is viewed as a 2D-geometrical problem. As such, the
method used is certain algorithms and formulas which geometrically soften the curvature
of the route in order to decrease steering ﬂuctuations along a given route. This has proven
a good idea due to being fast and eﬀective. In order, the process steps are:
• Statistically comparing the current route to a moving average low-pass ﬁlter
31
==PAGE:43==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
• Smoothing the route by ﬁtting it with a 5th degree polynomial
• ”Cutting” the route with a straight line.
Here the speed control input is also
determined
Post-processing data
In the following the above steps are explained in detail.
Statistically comparing current route with route bank
Prior to route smoothing a statistical comparison is made between the current route and
a bank of routes. The bank is a low-pass ﬁlter based on measurement averages of points
from the 4 previous routes. Every sample the current route is found from the Voronoi
graph, and each point in the current route is added to the route bank. To sort out dupli-
cate points the Euclidean point distance is used; if the point distance between a current
point and a bank point is smaller than 0.2m the two points are merged to the summed
average of the two.
The bank then contains both current and previous drive points from the last 4 sam-
ples. If a point in the bank is not merged with a current point in 4 consecutive samples
then the bank point is discarded. Since the algorithm is executed every 50ms a single
measurement is discarded within 250ms.
Curve smoothing and ﬁtting
After the bank comparison the route is still ragged and twisted. To smooth it, the points
are ﬁtted to a 5th degree polynomial using Gauss elimination[13].
This results in a smoother route while keeping the information of the curvature of
the route.
Any degree above 2 can be used, but a 5th degree polynomial is a good
approximation as lower degrees have shown to be too inaccurate, and values higher than
7 degrees can ”force” the curvature of the route into undesired shapes, and has been
found to not be necessary. In ﬁgure 7.1 the diﬀerence between no smoothing, 5th degree
smoothing and 11th degree smoothing can be seen. Another advantage of the polynomial
ﬁtting is that an equation of the route is acquired.
32
==PAGE:44==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
(a) No smoothing
(b) 5th degree smoothing
(c) 11th degree smoothing
Figure 7.1: Route with diﬀerent levels of smoothing (ﬁnal challenge 1 at t=29.81s)
Finding a line to drive after
After the curve smoothing it is desired to linearly straighten the curvature of the route
to further decrease steering ﬂuctuations. To do this a linear regression is made on the
points within 4m of the front of the car which can be seen in ﬁgure 7.2.
The result of the post-processing is a single (x, y, θ) value which is then sent to the
linedrive node. These three values are called a drive point, although a better name would
be a drive line. The point concists of two coordinates, x and y, with an angle θ. Together
they represent an inﬁnite line with direction θ relative to the car’s odometry.
33
==PAGE:45==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 7.2: The 5th degree smoothed curve in red, with the linregged curve in blue at
the start of the curve (ﬁnal challenge 1 t=23.39s).
Speed control
Aside from straightening the upcoming 4m, another linear regression is made on all
available points to determine whether the route is going straight forward or if a turn is
coming up. This simple calculation is the whole decision for whether fast speeds can be
used or not. When switching between fast and slow a small speaker announces the new
state to the driver.
Conclusion of the post-processing
The post-processing eﬀectively solves the problem of steering ﬂuctuations and jagged
routes. As can be seen in the video from the ﬁnal challenge 1, the steering is smooth.
Another advantage of the polynomial ﬁtting is that an equation of the route is acquired,
which can be used to detect turns more intelligently than the linear regression.
By post-processing the middle path, a line is constructed that can be used as reference
for a steering controller.
The speed control is a simple compromise to achieve the target average speed of
18kmph while still keeping safety a priority since the slow, critical speed is the fallback
speed in the program.
34
==PAGE:46==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
35
==PAGE:47==
==PAGE:48==
8
Steering Control
In this section it will be discussed how a controller can be implemented that dissolves a
line into two error signals and uses this error signal to calculate a steering signal for the
steering wheel.
Introduction to Control-problem
The Ecocar is rear-wheel driven, front-wheel Ackermann-steered, which means that di-
rectional control is done by setting a front wheel angle, and can be done separately from
propulsion (unlike vehicles with steering methods such as diﬀerential drive).
Also it
should be mentioned that there is no reverse driving in the car, which means there is no
need to consider anti-Ackermann steering.
According to the mechanical team, there should not be slippage at the relatively slow
speeds that are used autonomously, i.e. for maximum speeds of 7m/s.
The Ecocar is mounted with a step-motor to control the steering wheel, and another
student, has developed a PID-controller making it possible to set a setpoint in terms of
degrees, therefore, to make the car drive according to the lines that have been calculated
in the navigational algorithm, it is simply required to make a controller that can translate
features of a line, into a steering signal.
Construct Error Signals
Since the navigation result is parameterized as a line, the controller was based on the line-
drive controller, which is implemented on the SMR, that are used for teaching purposes
in the courses: 31385 - Autonomous Robot Systems, and 31388 - Advanced Autonomous
Robots at DTU. The line-drive controller dissolves a line into two error signals, position-
error and angle-error. Suppose that the line is parameterized as (xl, yl, θl), meaning that
the line goes through (xl, yl) with the angle θl and the car position is currently (xc, yc, θc),
meaning the car is currently placed in (xc, yc) pointing in direction θc then the two errors
can easily be calculated. Firstly the angle error is calculated as seen in equation 8.1, by
simply taking the diﬀerence between reference angle and current angle.
eangle = θl −θc
(8.1)
Secondly, for the position error, the normal vector to the line is found ﬁrst by using
37
==PAGE:49==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
the angle of the line to construct a normal vector, as seen in equation 8.2. Here.
vx = −sin(θl)
vy = cos(θl)
c = −(vx · xl + vy · yl)
(8.2)
After constructing the normal vector, it is easy to ﬁnd the shortest distance from the car
to the line by using equation 8.3.
edist = xc · vx + yc · vy + c
(8.3)
The controller is then implemented as a MISO (multiple input, single output) P-
controller, this means the controller will use both errors with each their own gain constant
Kangle and Kdist to output a setpoint steering angle, that can be sent to the steering wheel.
This was done by as seen in equation 8.4.
θsteer = Kangle · eangle −Kdist · edist
(8.4)
The signs in equation 8.4 are made such, that the controller will ﬁnd an equilibrium
between angle error and distance error. i.e. the car will drive unto the line if:
edist · Kdist > eangle · Kangle
(8.5)
Furthermore, edist was limited such, that if the reference line supplied was too far away,
the car does not just start circling around. It is necessary to include this limit, because
there is essentially no limit to how high values of edist, that can be supplied. At a certain
point, edist will completely dominate the controller, and the car will only drive in one
direction.
Choosing a P-controller
The reason for choosing a P-controller over a PI,PD or PID controller is primarily that
a derivative controller is sensitive to high frequency signals, meaning that even if a satis-
factory derivative, that could predict the trend of the error, could be calculated it would
amplify measurement noise, and integral controllers are primarily used in situations where
steady state errors are unacceptable or the system needs integration, because a too large
P-controller signal would be needed to minimize steady state error.
Even if a PI-controller or an even more complex controller can do a better job, after try-
ing a P-controller ﬁrst, it was decided that it was not currently worth the eﬀort and time
to make a more complex system, since the P-controller worked satisfactory and is easily
tuned and it is signiﬁcantly easier for other students to build upon a simple structure with
few inputs such as the line-controller, than a complex controller. It has to be remembered
that, when the mechanical parts to the car is changed every year, the dynamics of the
car will change, and the controller parameters will need to be tuned again.
38
==PAGE:50==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Kinematic model
To ﬁnd the correct values for the gains, a kinematic model of the car was developed for
MATLAB. By doing this, a step-solver for the controller could be used in conjunction
with the kinematic model, to give an estimate of the parameters for the controller.
The Ackermann steering of a car with four wheels can be simpliﬁed to a model of a
two-wheeled vehicle, such as a bicycle. If assuming constant speed, it is suddenly quite
simple to make a kinematic model. Suppose the sampling time of the controller is known
as ts, and a speed is known as v, then the distance travelled in between each sample from
the controller will be simply
d = ts · v
(8.6)
Now, according to Ackermann-steering theory[12] the vehicle will move in a circular path
as can be seen in ﬁgure 8.1, depending on the angle of the front wheel θw. The radius, r,
of this circle given by
r =
L
tan(|θw|)
(8.7)
where L is the distance between rear-wheel and front-wheel, which is in our case 1.516m.
Figure 8.1: The car is modelled as a two-wheeled vehicle, and it is seen, that when the
front wheel is positioned in angle θw [rad], a circle movement with radius r [m] is created.
This r is found with knowledge of the distance between the rear and front wheels, L [m].
With knowledge of the radius for the circular movement, it is then easy to calculate
the circumference, cf as
cf = r · 2π
(8.8)
and then get the amount of radians, rad, travelled along the circle as
rad = dist · 2π
cf
(8.9)
Now by looking at ﬁgure 8.2, it is apparent that since the car is moving along the
circle circumference, the changes to the local coordinate system are given as:
dx = sin(rad) · r
dy = signum(θw) · (1 −cos(rad)) · r
(8.10)
39
==PAGE:51==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 8.2: The car drives in a circle. The yellow path indicates the radians, that are
driven in the time ts, and the changes to x and y coordinate, can now be calculated with
knowledge of θw and the radius, r.
Lastly, by transforming the local-coordinate changes (dx, dy) into global-coordinate.
The new position, can be calculated with knowledge of the old position (xp1, yp1) →
(xp2, yp2) by using equation 8.11, a simple kinematic model of the car is complete, and it
is now possible to give a time, ts, a speed, v, and a wheel angle θw.
xp2 = cos(θp1 + θw) · dx −sin(θp1 + θw) · dy + xp1
yp2 = sin(θp1 + θw) · dx + cos(θp1 + θw) · dy + yp1
θp2 = θp1 + atan2(dy, dx)
(8.11)
Tuning Controller Gains
To tune the controller to work on the ecocar, what is tuned is the ratio: Kratio =
Kdist
Kangle,
and the absolute value of these controller gains as well. The general idea is that a high
Kratio, prioritizes to minimize the angle error to the reference line, while a low Kratio pri-
oritizes staying exactly on top of the reference line. By raising the absolute value of these
controller gains, the car will steer harder. Some risks to watch out for is that if the gains
are set too high, because the steering wheel can not instantly respond to commands, and
the calculation for reference steps are not instant, steering can become unstable, when
the car starts to move at increasing speeds. Especially if the road is bumpy, which can
lead to noisy measurement signals, or if similar disturbances are introduced.
A step-solver is set up as seen in ﬁgure 8.3, and the controller is saturated to only
have maximal angle limits of 14° and a maximum change of 20°/s. These values were
observed in a step response also mentioned in the Hardware chapter.
40
==PAGE:52==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 8.3: The step-solver is constructed by linking together a reference signal, the
controller, and the kinematic model.
Because of the limits to the actuator change rate, it is important to tune the controller
gains to the speed that is considered. E.g. if it is wanted to do precision driving, the best
results are achieved at low speeds, since the actuator can be pushed to its limits. On
ﬁgure 8.4, the diﬀerence can be seen between going 5m/s and 1.5m/s, for equal controller
gains.
Figure 8.4: Here the same controller parameters are tried for diﬀerent speeds. The system
is stepped with a parallel line, that has an oﬀset of y = 3m.
For higher speeds, it was then decided that the controller gains should be reduced,
to allow soft control, that does not reduce error as fast, but does not overshoot or start
oscillations, assuming that the road is continuous and the car has already found the
middle line, this should result in robust steering. It is suggested that a tune such as seen
on ﬁgure 8.5a is made, where the car can reach speeds without concern for oscillations.
The speed of the car can simply be reduced if the edist becomes too large. It is seen
on ﬁgure 8.6a that even for greater angle changes, the controller is able to follow the
reference angle.
41
==PAGE:53==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
(a) For higher speeds such as 7m/s, the controller gains should be relaxed. Here, the system is
stepped with a parallel line, that has an oﬀset of y = 3m. After driving 30m the gap is closed.
(b) The error signals, and controller output for a step with such as seen on 8.5a.
Figure 8.5: Tuning for speeds of 7m/s
42
==PAGE:54==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
(a) Here, the system is stepped with a line starting at (x, y) = (4, 0), with an angle of θ = −30°.
(b) The error signals, and controller output for a step with such as seen on 8.6a.
Figure 8.6: Tuning for speeds of 7m/s.
43
==PAGE:55==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Chosen parameters for competition
For the competition the values for controller parameters were chosen without the kine-
matic model, because a mistake was found in the model close to the competition. The
chosen parameters can be seen on table 8.1.
Kdist
KAngle
Speedlow
Speedhigh
0.2
0.5
0
10.5
0.025
0.4
10.5
14.5
0.01
0.2
14.5
20.5
0.005
0.1
20.5
No Upper limit
Table 8.1: A table containing the controller values used in on the car in London
The kinematic model has since been validated, by evaluating the log ﬁles from the
competition in London and it has been possible to correctly predict the behaviour of the
car when equipped with controller. On ﬁgure 8.7 the third run on the gate challenge is
seen. Here, a step of 3m in the y-direction is seen, and the actual trajectory of the car,
can be predicted with the simulation, using the same controller-gains. The references are
slightly diﬀerent because as can be seen on ﬁgure 8.7a, the gate center keeps changing,
which means the real system has many lines with slight diﬀerences, while the simulation
is only stepped with two of the given reference lines.
44
==PAGE:56==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
(a) A step of 3m oﬀset in the y-direction was given during the gate challenge in London.
(b) Simulated step-response vs logged odometry. when given the same references and controller
gains.
Figure 8.7: Validation of model.
45
==PAGE:57==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Conclusion to Steering Wheel Control
By using a simple P-controller, it is possible to set the steering angle for the Ecocar to be
precise and without oscillation even for speeds up to 7m/s , when using lines as references.
Because the controller accepts a simple input, it should be possible for any navigational
method to supply the needed (x, y, θ) reference. This results in easy integration with
parking spot and gate detection.
A kinematic model has been made and validated, to make the tuning of the P-controller
possible by simulation. The kinematic model can be used even for other robots or if
a new car is made, as long as the parameters: steering limits, steering rate limits or
distance between rear and front wheels are changed in the model accordingly. If these are
changed on the physical system, new controller gains should be found. The kinematic
model source code for MATLAB can be found in the included source code CD.
46
==PAGE:58==
9
Program structure
The following is an overview of how the software is structured. Figure 9.1 shows how the
navigation and driving is divided. The Voronoi node calculates the Voronoi graph and
performs the post-processing and outputs a single drive point (from the linear regression)
to the linedrive node which in turn calculates the steering error from the car’s odometry
to the drive point.
Special cases: Parking and Gates
During the gates challenge the gate classiﬁer node publishes the center coordinates of
the gates as drive points. During the parking challenge the the parking node receives
the center coordinate of the parking spot rectangle from the parking spot detection node
(which is not covered in this thesis) and publishes this coordinate as a single drive point.
The Voronoi node also receives this coordinate although only using it as an indicator to
stop publishing normal drive points.
The connection between these nodes can be seen in ﬁgure 9.1.
47
==PAGE:59==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 9.1: Overview of the program nodes, dotted boxes are not in the scope of this
thesis, but provide inputs that are used.
The motor node performs the speed control using only the current speed of the car.
If the speed is above the pre deﬁned maxspeed+1.5kmph then the brake is activated
until this no longer is the case. If the speed is below minspeed then the engine should
be burned until maxspeed is reached. If none of these conditions are met the car coasts.
This decision making process is illustrated in ﬁgure 9.2.
48
==PAGE:60==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 9.2: Flowchart for the speed control
49
==PAGE:61==
==PAGE:62==
10
Testing
Testing has been done two ways: program development by using Gazebo to validate
function of algorithms, and by testing in real life on a test track to validate practical
performance. This section describes how the autonomous system has been tested in real
life on the car. The testing has sought to imitate the challenge track layouts as close as
possible. Driving closed loop with lidar node, Voronoi node, linedrive node, brake node
and the motor node is the core of the autonomous program. When testing there is an
emphasis on turns and obstacles as these pose a greater challenge due to the limitations
of the car’s turning radius as well as the steering motor.
The following is the conclusion to the testing, followed by an in-depth analysis of each
test.
Conclusion of tests
After the tests have been completed the autonomous system has demonstrated ability to
drive and steer to complete challenge 1, both with regards to distance and speed in sharp
turns. The turn used in the speed test has a turn radius of 7.5m and the car completed
this with 25kmph.
For the parking challenge all the diﬀerent programs have been tested, and starting in
the qualiﬁcation in Paris the autonomous system has been tested closed loop where the
autonomous system successfully parked the car 0.4m inside the rectangle from the end
barrier. Furthermore, the system has before competition in London completed a 3m step
in 15m.
The gates challenge has been provisionally tested, in Paris using normal Voronoi node
but only brieﬂy tested before London using the gate classiﬁer approach.
In-depth analysis of tests
The following is an in-depth analysis of how each element of the design speciﬁcation has
been tested. Please note that the Y-axis of plots is often labeled ’Amplitude’: in this
context amplitude is meant as ’magnitude’. Moreover, the scaling performed to make
diﬀerent graphs ﬁt in the same plot is described in the legend as well as the unit for each
graph. Please also note that when the unit on the legend reads ”kmh” it is meant as
51
==PAGE:63==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
kmph, or km per hour.
From the SEM AUC wiki the competition barriers are known. A test track is made
using two diﬀerent types of barriers: plastic boxes similar to the ones being used by SEM,
and a smaller, wooden fence type of barrier. As only 80m of plastic barriers was available,
meaning 40m of track, the wooden barriers proved a necessary supplement. Both types
be seen in ﬁgure 10.1.
(a) Plastic barrier
(b) Wooden barrier
Figure 10.1: The diﬀerent types of barriers used when testing at DTU
Initial measurements
While the Voronoi algorithm was still underway an initial lidar test was made. The goal
of this test was to measure how eﬀectively the lidar mounted on top of the car could
detect the barriers. At this point the 3D-printed mount was not yet ready and the lidar
was mounted on a tripod instead, as can be seen in ﬁgure 10.2.
Figure 10.2: Initial lidar measurements
Autonomous driving
While still developing the program several tests were made on diﬀerent test tracks: a
straight, an S-shaped track and a jagged track. The straight and S-shaped tracks simu-
52
==PAGE:64==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
late the challenge 1 track layout. The jagged track is a stress test of the navigation and
steering elements of the program.
The plastic barriers were easy to move around. This was before the wooden barriers
were made; as such we were limited to 40m of stretch. In ﬁgure 10.3 the straight stretch
can be seen; in ﬁgure 10.4 the S-shape can be seen, and in ﬁgure 10.5 the jagged stretch
can be seen.
Figure 10.3: Testing Voronoi on a straight stretch
Figure 10.4: Testing Voronoi on a S-shaped stretch
53
==PAGE:65==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 10.5: Testing Voronoi on a jagged stretch
Challenge 1 requires the car to drive autonomously for 970m of track. While the car
was found to steer stable and smoothly at high speeds (see ﬁgures 10.15 and 10.16) it was
still a necessity to ensure that it would do so for at least 1,000m. It is always a good idea
to ensure that a system works for as long as is required, especially if there is a chance for
the software to cease working.
Simulating
First the autonomous system was tested in Gazebo (the simulation environment). A
digital track was made similar to the ﬁnal track in London, which can be seen in ﬁgure
10.6.However, the Gazebo model contains an error regarding to the car’s friction, making
it diﬃcult to test speeds in turns. Furthermore, the Gazebo environment is very slow
and the time factor is 0.05, meaning that it takes 20s to simulate 1s.
Figure 10.6: Digital representation of the 970m track in ﬁnal challenge 1
54
==PAGE:66==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Distance test
To test this distance in real life a circular track was made prior to departing for London.
For this reason 200m of wooden barriers were made, yielding over 100m of track. The
track had a small elevation (0.5m) to also test this aspect of the autonomous system since
the competition track has 2m height diﬀerence. While only 170m long the track served
its purpose as the car simply took 6 laps. In ﬁgures 10.7, 10.8, 10.9 and 10.10 this track
can be seen. In ﬁgure 10.13 the layout of the track made from laser measurements can
be seen.
Figure 10.7: Circular 170m track
Figure 10.8: Circular 170m track
55
==PAGE:67==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 10.9: Circular 170m track
Figure 10.10: Circular 170m track
In ﬁgure 10.11 the speed control for the distance test can be seen. Since the track
contained a paved ditch the slow speed is deﬁned as 6-8kmph. The fast speeds are deﬁned
as 10-12 kmph, however as can be seen the engine overshoots to 13kmph. In ﬁgure 10.12
the steering output can be seen, which shows the many right turns performed.
56
==PAGE:68==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 10.11: Circular 170m track
Figure 10.12: Circular 170m track
In ﬁgure 10.13 the layout of the track can be seen. Compared to ﬁgure 10.14 the
odometry drifting can be seen. Since the car does not drive on odometry but on contin-
uous laser measurements it as able to drive as many turns as needed without crashing
into the barrier.
57
==PAGE:69==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 10.13: Circular 170m track representation made from lidar data. The blue points
are obstacles, while the thin red line is the car’s odometric path, every square is 1m.
Figure 10.14: Car odometry from the distance test
Speed test
Aside from distance, speed was also tested thoroughly before London. The critical speed
of 14km/h was decided upon at the Paris qualiﬁcation, since this speed was used to suc-
cessfully complete challenge 1 at that time. Between Paris and London modiﬁcations
were made to the linedrive node controller values, resulting in a smooth drive even at
high speed. It was thus desired to know exactly how fast the car could safely complete a
58
==PAGE:70==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
turn.
A simple test track was made consisting of 100m of straight stretch and a 90 de-
gree turn with a turn radius of 7.5m. For each iteration the car accelerated to a higher
speed and kept the speed during the turn. A hard upper limit has been 25km/h since the
beginning of the project and so it was tested if the critical speed could be this upper limit.
As can be seen in ﬁgure 10.15 the speed is between 25 and 24 kmph during the turn.
The turn signal is given at t=22.8s and the smooth and stable steering output can be
seen in ﬁgure 10.16, showing the stable steering output throughout the turn. From this it
can be seen that it is possible for the car to clear a 90-degree turn with turn radius 7.5m
at 25kmph, however the high speed pushes the car right from the middle of the road and
closer to the right hand barrier. This can be a problem after the turn as the reason for
driving in the middle of the road is to have as much steering margin as possible.
Figure 10.15: Speed test: speed control
59
==PAGE:71==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 10.16: Speed test: steering
Figure 10.17: Speed test layout, as seen by the laser measurements and the car’s odometry
60
==PAGE:72==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Challenge 2: the complex track
The complex track layout was not considered a diﬃcult challenge due to the large size
of the obstacle boxes compared to how the car drove in the jagged test track. Therefore,
this challenge was only aﬀorded a digital test track, as can be seen in ﬁgure 10.18.
Figure 10.18: Digital representation of challenge 2
Challenge 3: parking
For the parking challenge a parking spot with end barrier has been used as test track.
At ﬁrst white tape was used until black and yellow striped tape was purchased. The end
barrier used was the red and white plastic barriers, as can be seen in ﬁgure 10.19.
Figure 10.19: Testing the parking code
61
==PAGE:73==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
The parking program relies on the camera detection program to detect the parking
spot and to extract the spot’s coordinates. The parking node then publishes this coor-
dinate to the linedrive node which steers the car into the spot’s angle. It is diﬃcult to
make the car stop at an exact distance from the end barrier as the system as a whole has
some delays, and due to the speed of the brake actuator the speed of the car inﬂuences
the braking distance greatly. The commanded braking pressure is currently a static value
and not dependant on the speed of the car. However, after attempting parking several
times it is possible to ﬁnd values which eﬀectively stop the car in front of the end barrier.
Parking in Paris
In Paris the parking program was ﬁne tuned to give yield the shortest possible distance
to the end barrier. This was done by changing the maxspeed and minspeed, along with
braking distance. In ﬁgure 10.20 the layout of the track can be seen, as seen from the
autonomous system.
Figure 10.20: Challenge 4 in Paris: layout of the track as seen by the car’s odometry and
the LiDAR measureents
In ﬁgure 10.21 the speed and braking control can be seen.
62
==PAGE:74==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 10.21: Challenge 4 in Paris: steering output
In ﬁgure 10.22 the steering output can be seen.
Figure 10.22: Challenge 4 in Paris: steering output
63
==PAGE:75==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Challenge 4: gates
In Paris the standard Voronoi algorithm was used to simply treat the gates as standard
obstacles, transforming the track to three Y-splits. This approach made use of the mul-
tiple path option described in the Navigational Algorithm chapter, and the program was
prepared oﬄine to take the correct left and right turns when facing these Y-splits. In
ﬁgure 10.23 the layout of the track and the splits can be seen.
Figure 10.23: Challenge 4 in Paris: layout of the track as seen by the car’s odometry and
the LiDAR measurements
In ﬁgure 10.24 the steering output can be seen.
64
==PAGE:76==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 10.24: Challenge 4 in Paris: steering output
For the ﬁnal challenge in London
In the competition in London a new node called the gate classiﬁer was used, which lo-
cates the center between the gates, instead of using voronoi to solve the gate problem.
This gate classiﬁer was only tested once before departing to London. Garbage bins were
used in the place of gates, which is far from ideal as they were not completely identical
nor cylindrical, as can be seen in ﬁgure 10.25.
65
==PAGE:77==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
(a) Using garbage bins as gates
(b) Track layout in London
Figure 10.25: Testing the gates challenge
Brake tests
The brakes are tested with a step response: the car is accelerated to the desired top
speed after which the brakes are activated with a constant pressure level until the desired
minimum speed is reached. The minimum speed could be 0 (standstill) or a lower speed
larger than 0, e.g. decelerating from 20 to 10 km/h. It is necessary to know how fast the
brake achieves the desired pressure, if it keeps the pressure stable and how heavily this
pressure decelerates the car. This test does not require barriers, only a stretch of track
with the desired length.
The procedure for the brake tests is deﬁned as follows:
1. Accelerate car to desired top speed
2. Activate brakes with desired pressure level, decelerating the car.
This is tstart,
starting time for the braking, and xstart, the starting x-position
3. When desired minimum speed is reached, release the brakes. This is tend and xend,
the end x-position.
4. Braking time is now found by tend −tstart and braking distance - or braking length
- is found by xend −xstart
Example: the fast top speed for used is 20km/h, and the slow top speed, which is
also the critical speed, is 14km/h. Thus, it is desired to test braking from 20 to 14km/h.
66
==PAGE:78==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
The car is then accelerated to 20 after which the brakes are activated, decelerating to 14
and releasing the brakes.
The deceleration rate depends on the brake pressure level, and braking distance de-
pends on brake pressure level as well as initial speed (the top speed right before activating
the brakes).
The result from these brake tests was used to determine a deceleration brake power
and a full stop brake power before going to London. This process was necessarily repeated
every time the relation between brake pressure and deceleration speed was changed. As
such no deﬁnite choice of brake power can be stated.
67
==PAGE:79==
==PAGE:80==
11
Results
In the following section the ﬁnal results from the competition in London are described.
Conclusion of the results
The autonomous system has completed the 1000m requirement and almost the 18km/h
requirement in London. The 3m step within 10m is also completed in London. The park-
ing requirement to stop within 2m of the end barrier is completed in Paris, as described
in the Testing chapter.
The competition in London
Throughout all challenges the steering worked well. During the ﬁrst challenge it became
evident that the fast-slow algorithm to set speed reference was not suited for the engine
on the car without additional work to this algorithm, since the control was too sporadic.
During parking the brake was activated too late to eﬀectively stop the car at the
designated spot.
During the gates challenge the steering proved eﬀective. In this challenge the biggest
weakness of the system was the controller values for the linedrive node, provided that the
gate classiﬁer node is working as intended.
In conclusion, the results are considered a success as they demonstrate that it was
possible to make an autonomous system that fulﬁlls the desired targets with regards to
all thesis requirements.
In-depth analysis of results
The following is an in-depth analysis of the results from the ﬁnal competition in London.
Please note that the Y-axis of plots is often labeled ’Amplitude’: in this context amplitude
is meant as ’magnitude’. Moreover, the scaling performed to make diﬀerent graphs ﬁt in
the same plot is described in the legend as well as the unit for each graph. Please also
note that when the unit on the legend reads ”kmh” it is meant as kmph, or km per hour.
69
==PAGE:81==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Challenge 1: Autonomous lap
On July 7th the autonomous lap was completed on ﬁrst try, traversing the 970m in 3
minutes 29 seconds. The car started close to the left hand barrier, after which the au-
tonomous system suﬀered an error which made the car drive toward the left barrier only
to stabilize and drive to the middle of the track. Apart from this initial trouble the engine
suﬀered a mechanical error at 181s. Following this the engine was unable to burn, leading
to the car coasting the last 28s. The ﬁnish line was passed with only 7km/h. Aside from
these two problems the run was considered a success.
In the following three aspects of the autonomous system will be shown: the speed
control, the steering and the braking.
Speed control
In ﬁgure 11.1 the speed control throughout the lap can be seen. The amplitudes of burn
and brake signals are ampliﬁed for visual purposes. Braking is only done when either
switching from fast to slow speeds, or if the car is coasting downhill and accelerating
above the maxspeed, whether fast or slow. It should be noted that throughout the lap
the speed measurements are seen to occasionally spike. These spikes take 200ms to settle.
Furthermore, at t=12s a switch from 1st to 2nd gear can be seen. In 2nd gear the car
accelerates signiﬁcantly slower.
Figure 11.1: Speed control (Challenge 1)
70
==PAGE:82==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
In ﬁgure 11.2 the commanded steering angle along with the potentiometer value can
be seen. The commanded signals are ampliﬁed and the potentiometer values oﬀset for
visual purposes. As can be seen, the autonomous system spends the ﬁrst 10s to steer the
car from the left into the middle of the track. After this the steering output is generally
steady. The diﬀerent turns are easily distinguished from driving straight.
An interesting phenomenon is the few spikes in extreme magnitude, found at t= 34.6s,
t=76.01s and t=107.8s. This is caused by the autonomous system temporarily detecting
a gap between the left hand barriers. The ﬁrst instance lasts 90ms, the second 150ms
and the third 100ms.
Figure 11.2: Steering control (Challenge 1)
The braking part of the speed control can be described as a step response in which
the brake node is commanded to brake with a certain amplitude. As seen in ﬁgure 5.6 the
brake overshoots. In ﬁgure 11.3 the brake signals of the whole run can be seen compared
to the measured pressure in the brake system. Generally speaking the overshoot varies,
as does rise time.
71
==PAGE:83==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.3: Brake control (Challenge 1)
In the following diﬀerent sections of the lap will be examined closer.
Start and the ﬁrst turn
In ﬁgure 11.4 a switch between slow and fast can be seen. The autonomous system burns
to above slow maxspeed and stops burning, switching to fast at t=11.5s and continues
burning. In ﬁgure 11.5 the ﬁrst turn can be seen. The burn to fast maxspeed from ﬁgure
11.4 ends right before t=16s followed by a series of switches between burning and braking,
taking place right before the turn. During the turn the car coasts in slow speed until
about t=22s after which the track goes slightly downhill, resulting in the acceleration
of the car which accelerates above slow maxspeed, requiring the speed control to brake
at t=28s. At t=33.5s the turn is cleared and a straight stretch detected, leaving the
autonomous system to accelerate up to fast speeds again.
72
==PAGE:84==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.4: Speed control at t=10 to t=12s (Challenge 1)
73
==PAGE:85==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.5: Speed control at t=14 to t=34s (Challenge 1)
In ﬁgure 11.6 the initial steering close to the left wall and then into the middle of the
track can be seen. This situation arose due to two things: the car started oﬀset to the
left of the middle of the track, and subsequently had problems detecting the right side of
the track due to this oﬀset as well as the extra wide track at the starting line. The cause
of this problem was later found to be a small variable in the LiDAR node. However,
once the autonomous system managed to detect the right hand barriers it steered into
the middle of the road.
74
==PAGE:86==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.6: Steering control at t=0s to t=14s (Challenge 1)
Steering for the ﬁrst turn can be seen in ﬁgure 11.7. As can be seen the steering
is consistent except for the last spike at t=34.6s which was caused by the autonomous
system brieﬂy detecting a gap in the left hand barriers.
75
==PAGE:87==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.7: Steering control at t=18s to t=36s (Challenge 1)
Until the second turn
Figure 11.8 shows the speed control when the car passes a small bump in the track as-
phalt. While travelling at high speed a series of short brakes and burns is initiated shortly
within each other, illustrating the inconsistency of the slow-fast algorithm.
In ﬁgure 11.1 an interesting situation can be seen at t=65s to t=95s, immediately
before the second turn. While driving in fast mode at just above minspeed (18kmph) the
burn doesn’t start. At this point the autonomous system expects the car to slowly coast
down below 18kmph, however due to the slight decline of the track just prior to the sec-
ond turn the car slowly accelerates without burning the engine. The autonomous system
then detects the turn coming up and switches to slow speed, resulting in activating the
brake.
76
==PAGE:88==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.8: Speed control at t=54s to t=64s (Challenge 1)
In ﬁgure 11.9 the second turn can be seen. While travelling at fast maxspeed the
autonomous system detects a turn and brakes down to slow speed. The inconsistent na-
ture of the fast-slow program causes the autonomous system to cancel braking at t=96s,
however following this the turn is again detected. The ﬁrst brake command is given at
t=95.28s and the second at t=95.91s. The car starts to decelerate at t=96.38s and stops
braking at t=99.07s. This means that from the brake was activated it took the car 2.69s
to decelerate 5.76kmph, from 20.73kmph to 14.97kmph. This yields a deceleration rate
of 2.14kmph/s, that is 2.14 kilometers-per-hour per second. Towards the end of the turn
another series of brakes and burns follow. The ﬁnal burn at t=114s is initiated when
below slow minspeed.
77
==PAGE:89==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.9: Speed control at t=95s to t=115s (Challenge 1)
Figure 11.8 illustrates how the autonomous system handles a small bump in the road.
While the speed control detects a false positive and brakes the steering has no problem.
Figure 11.10: Steering control at t=54s to t=64s (Challenge 1)
78
==PAGE:90==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
In ﬁgure 11.11 the narrowing of the track prior to the second turn can be seen. The
car steers smoothly and continues in the middle of the track. In ﬁgure 11.12 the second
turn can be seen. Once again, the autonomous system steers smoothly to the right. The
brief spike at t=107.9s is once again caused by a detected gap in the left hand barriers.
The turn radius of the second turn is found to be 30m which is easily completed by the
autonomous system.
Figure 11.11: Steering control at t=85 to t=89s (Challenge 1)
79
==PAGE:91==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.12: Steering control at t=100s to t=112s (Challenge 1)
In ﬁgure 11.13 the braking at the bump can be seen. The autonomous system de-
tects a false positive and brakes at approximately t=54.6s. The braking really starts
until approximately 0.5s after the command is given, however the brake is overshooting
signiﬁcantly in magnitude.
Figure 11.13 can be compared with 11.8 for information about burning.
80
==PAGE:92==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.13: Challenge 1: brake control at t=t54s to 64s
In ﬁgure 11.14 the braking before the second turn can be seen. Due to the sporadic
nature of the fast-slow algorithm the autonomous system has as a brief moment of doubt
after which it keeps braking until the turn is cleared.
81
==PAGE:93==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.14: Challenge 1: brake control at t=t95s to 100s
Uphill and the third turn
In ﬁgure 11.15 the third turn can be seen. The autonomous system detects the turn at
t=127.5s and decelerates to slow speed. The brake command is sent at t=127.3s and the
car starts decelerating at t=128.1s.
82
==PAGE:94==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.15: Speed control at t=122s to 132s (Challenge 1)
As can be seen in ﬁgure 11.16 the brake command is ceased at t=128.7s and the car
stops decelerating at t=128.9s. The deceleration time from 17.95kmph to 14.65kmph
takes 0.8s, yielding a deceleration rate of 4.12kmph/s. This is remarkably higher decel-
eration than during the second turn, although only measured over 0.8s it is mostly due
to the uphill stretch of the track and the overshoot of the brake.
83
==PAGE:95==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.16: Brake control at t=122s to 132s (Challenge 1)
It should also be noted that the autonomous system only brakes the car until the
speed is no longer larger than maxspeed+1.5kmph, although in practice it usually brakes
further as it takes time to move the brake extender. The motor node is updating every
10ms so delay from the speed control program is minimal.
Another thing to note is that at t=125s the electronic system switches to 2nd gear
while still driving uphill, resulting in the inability to accelerate up to 20kmph. In ﬁgure
11.17 the downhill stretch after the third turn can be seen. The autonomous system has
problems detecting the stretch to be straight and switches between burning and braking.
84
==PAGE:96==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.17: Speed control at t=142s and t=150s (Challenge 1)
In ﬁgure 11.18 steering control for the third turn can be seen. The track turns to the
right followed by a small turn to the left which the autonomous system handles without
problems. The radius of the third turn is found to be 15m.
85
==PAGE:97==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.18: Steering control at t=128s to t=150s (Challenge 1)
Until the ﬁnishing line
Figure 11.19 shows the speed control when the mechanical failure in the engine occurred.
A long, straight stretch meant the autonomous system intended to burn up to fast speed.
A switch from fast to slow and back to fast was too short, and the bendix drive in the
engine locked itself in place. The autonomous system kept burning which kept the starter
motor which pushes the bendix drive static, resulting in a stuck engine unable to start.
86
==PAGE:98==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.19: Speed control at t=175s to t=185s (Challenge 1)
The fourth turn at the bottom of the hill can be seen in ﬁgure 11.20 and the crossing
of the ﬁnish line in ﬁgure 11.21. These small turns are also handled without problems,
and only prove the eﬀectiveness of the steering control.
87
==PAGE:99==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.20: Steering control at t=169s to t=174s (Challenge 1)
Figure 11.21: Steering control at t=200s to t=215s (Challenge 1)
88
==PAGE:100==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
As for the braking control: in ﬁgure 11.22 two consecutive brake commands can be
seen. The second brake illustrates the behavior of the brake controller, complete with
overshoot and a low settle value. This brake is followed by a series of commands too
short for the brake to eﬀectively activate. This is yet another example of the need for an
improvement to the fast-slow algorithm.
Figure 11.22: brake t165-174
Summarizing the autonomous system for the autonomous lap
The fast-slow algorithm was a partial success; it yielded in a faster lap time than without,
however it was unstable on straight stretches of the track. When the track made small
turns or when crossing small bumps in the road it switched back to slow. Moreover, the
switch between slow and fast states was not always consistent as can be seen by switching
back and forth in a few seconds. This problem led to the mechanical engine failure at
3:01, or 181s, when the burn was turned on and oﬀtoo fast, leading to the bendix drive
not connecting the starter motor to the motor. The lap time was 3:29 minutes or 209s,
15s slower than the ideal 194s.
The steering control worked satisfactory. The Voronoi program with post-processing
sending points to the linedrive program proved an eﬀective pair of steering the car through
the lap, both straight stretches, turns, bumps, uphill and downhill. The weak point of
this system is if the LiDAR node has fault measurements since the LiDAR is the main
sensor used for navigation.
89
==PAGE:101==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Challenge 1 was not limited to 2 attempts. Following the successful completion two
more attempts were made. On both additional attempts the initial problem with path
ﬁnding caused the car to steer into the left hand barrier. On these two attempts the
speeds were supposed to be higher, namely 14-16kmph for slow and 20-25kmph for fast,
however the car did not clear the starting line.
Challenge 3: Parking
On July 8th the parking challenge was attempted. The challenge was limited to two
attempts and both failed. On the ﬁrst attempt the speed control brake signal interfered
with the parking spot brake signal, which made the car crash into the end barrier. On
the second attempt speed control was ignored and only the parking spot brake was used.
Unfortunately the car brake activated too late and once again drove into the end barrier.
First attempt
In the ﬁrst attempt it was attempted to use the brake to both control the speed as well as
to brake before the end barrier. Since both braking commands could be activated at the
same time the end-brake command needed a signiﬁcantly larger amplitude than the slow
down-command due to the nature of the black-box brake controller, as described in the
hardware chapter. However, this approach with two diﬀerent brake commands proved
a problem as the two nodes were not suﬃciently integrated, causing the two nodes to
overrule the other’s commands. As can be seen in ﬁgure 11.23 this lead to the desired
brake power alternating between 0 and 10 bar. Notice the high frequency ﬂuctuations
in the brake commands caused by the conﬂicting brake programs. Moreover, the simple
brake function in the Voronoi node mistakenly identiﬁed the right hand barrier as the end
barrier while steering into the parking spot trajectory as seen in ﬁgure 11.23 at t=16.2s.
The autonomous system was instructed to activate the brake 4.8m before the end
barrier and the signal was sent at 4.99m before the barrier. The commands was sent at
t=25.2s which is 2.25s before touching the barrier. While travelling at 4.9kmph (1.4m/s)
the car must have been approximately 3.15m away from the barrier. However, due to the
conﬂicting brake commands the brake simply did not activate at all, resulting in the car
crashing into the end barrier as only the speed control could eﬀectively activate the brake.
90
==PAGE:102==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.23: Parking challenge 1st attempt: burning and braking
In ﬁgure 11.24 the false positive detection of the right hand barrier can be seen
at t=16.25s. At t=16.7s the speed has accelerated to 6.5kmph, which is the required
1.5kmph above maxspeed (5kmph) for the speed control to activate the brake. The two
conﬂicting programs work in the sense that the commanded brake power alternates be-
tween the full stop brake power and the deceleration brake power level. As such the brake
only truly activates when the speed control determines to decelerate.
This lead to the brake simply not being activated when detecting the end barrier, as
can be seen in ﬁgure 11.25.
91
==PAGE:103==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.24: Parking challenge 1st attempt: burning and braking at t=15s to t=20s
92
==PAGE:104==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.25: Parking challenge 1st attempt: burning and braking at t=24s to t=27s
Figure 11.26: Parking challenge 1st attempt: steering signals and output
93
==PAGE:105==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
In ﬁgure 11.26 the smooth steering output can be seen as the autonomous system
drives normal Voronoi until detecting the parking spot at t=13.7s after which a step to
the right is commanded. Figure 11.27 shows the layout of the track as seen by the au-
tonomous system. Comparing ﬁgures 11.26 and 11.27 shows that it takes several seconds
from the autonomous system commanding a steering output until the car has actually
steered.
Figure 11.27: Parking challenge 1st attempt: odometry of the car in the detected track
layout
Second attempt
In the second attempt the speed control braking was disabled. This poised a problem
as the track was slightly declining. As such the car would slowly accelerate above the
desired maxspeed. The distance from which the Voronoi node would brake before the
end barrier was also increased to 5.2m. However, this time the autonomous system did
not detect to right hand barrier as the end barrier.
As can be seen in ﬁgure 11.28 and ﬁgure 11.29 the brake command was sent at t=21.5s
when the car was 5.28m from the end barrier. Since the speed decreases from 8kmph
to 4kmph at t=23.25s the deceleration rate is found to be 4kmph/s, resulting in the
car touching the barrier with 3.5kmph (0.97m/s). However, due to the increased speed
resulting from slowly accelerating downhill without speed control the car simply did not
stop in time before touching the barrier.
94
==PAGE:106==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.28: Parking challenge 2nd attempt: burning and braking
95
==PAGE:107==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.29: Parking challenge 2nd attempt: burning and braking at t=21s to t=23s
96
==PAGE:108==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.30: Parking challenge 2nd attempt: steering signals and output
97
==PAGE:109==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.31: Parking challenge 2nd attempt: the car’s odometry in the detected track
layout
Summarizing the autonomous system for parking
The parking challenge was not completed in London. As can be seen in ﬁgures 11.25 and
11.29 the car simply did not brake in time, partly due to the brake being activated too
late, and to the relatively high speed.
However, considering that the autonomous system has previously completed this chal-
lenge during practice as well as the Paris qualiﬁcation event, it must be hypothesized that
it was possible for the autonomous system to work with a tweaks to break further in ad-
vance.
Challenge 4: Obstacle avoidance (gates)
On July 8th the gates challenge was attempted and completed. The challenge was limited
to two attempts only. The ﬁrst two attempts did fail, the ﬁrst time due to an error in the
new gate classiﬁer program, and the second time by touching the left cylinder in the last
- and narrowest - gate. Fortunately, however, the dimensions of the track layout were
inspected and found to be faulty - the distance between the second and third pairs of
gates was only 9m and not 10m, and the third gate width was only 2.3m and not the spec-
98
==PAGE:110==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
iﬁed 2.5m. Thus, a third attempt was granted and this time the challenge was completed.
In this challenge the Voronoi node was deactivated, leading the car to simply drive
straight ahead until the gates were detected by the gate classiﬁer node.
First attempt
In the ﬁrst attempt the new gate classiﬁer program was tried, however due to a small
error in the software the autonomous system did not publish the drive points to the
linedrive node, resulting in the car simply driving straight (with a drive point of (0,0,0))
as can be seen in ﬁgure 11.32.
Figure 11.32: Gates challenge 1st attempt: car odometry in the detected track layout
along with detected gates
Second attempt
The cause of failure in the ﬁrst attempt was localized to a small error the new gate classi-
ﬁer program which was ﬁxed in the second attempt which can be seen in ﬁgure 11.33. The
autonomous system eﬀectively detected all three gates, however the steering controller
values in the linedrive node did not allow the car to clear the 3rd gate without touching
the left hand cylinder, however immediately after it was discovered that the dimensions
of the track did not live up to the dimensions speciﬁed in the rules. The distance between
gate 2 and 3 was only 9m as opposed to the speciﬁed 10m, and the width of the 3rd gate
was found to be 2.3m as opposed to the speciﬁed 2.5m. As such a third attempt was
99
==PAGE:111==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
granted.
Figure 11.33: Gates challenge 2nd attempt: car odometry in the detected track layout
along with detected gates
In ﬁgure 11.34 the steering output can be seen. The left step to the 2nd gate is com-
manded at t=13.5s and the right step to the 3rd gate at t=22.9s.
100
==PAGE:112==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.34: Gates challenge 2nd attempt: steering signals and output
Third attempt
In the third attempt the car successfully cleared all three gates as can be seen in ﬁgure
11.35.
101
==PAGE:113==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.35: Gates challenge 3rd attempt: car odometry in the detected track layout
along with detected gates
In ﬁgure 11.36 the steering output can be seen. The left step to the 2nd gate is sent
at t=14s, and the right step to the 3rd gate is sent at t=22.7s.
102
==PAGE:114==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Figure 11.36: Gates challenge 3rd attempt: steering signals and output
Summarizing the autonomous system for gates
The gate classiﬁer method proved eﬀective in detecting gates and their coordinates, and
integration with controller was successful. The ﬁrst attempt was failed due to a simple
error in the software. The second attempt failed as the autonomous system did not step
the 3m within 9m. In the third attempt the distances were increased suﬃciently for the
near-optimal parameter values to yield a success. Steering generally worked well, how-
ever this challenge highlights the importance of proper tuning parameters for the linedrive
node.
It should be noted that the precision of the steering depend on the speed of the car
because of the steering wheel actuators stepping time, hence why 4 −6km/h was used
as speed reference. Furthermore, this track did not pose any elevation which might have
caused acceleration, however since no parking brake was necessary it must be hypothe-
sized that the speed control brake could have eﬀectively kept the speed at the desired level.
103
==PAGE:115==
==PAGE:116==
12
Discussion
Approach
In this project, the goal was to develop an autonomous system that based on sensor
input, can calculate the optimal route and use this route as reference signal, to control
steering angle, and speed and brake power by simple controllers in order to participate
and hopefully win the SEM AUC competition.
As a result of the considerable scope of project, it was proposed to solve the autonomous
problem with simple and eﬀective solutions to ensure a working system at the competi-
tion.
The system design is based around driving in the middle of the road by calculating, left
side, right side and middle with use of a voronoi diagram. By doing this it is possible to
feed the middle line to a controller and steer the car. Additional calculations based on
the shape of the middle road are used to set speed and brake power references.
A simulation environment was used in the design process of the the project to develop
and integrate the diﬀerent algorithms. However, as soon as possible, testing was moved
from simulation to the real car as this gave a better insight into the speciﬁc needs of the
system. Furthermore, the simulation run time was exceptionally slow (factor 0.05) and
so it was mostly used as a way to conﬁrm algorithm designs before testing on the Ecocar.
Results
The design of the system resulted in achievement of the project requirements.
The car was able to drive 1000m autonomously without any external interference, at an
average speed of 16.5km/h. The car steered to stay in the middle of the road as intended
and the kinematic model can eﬀectively predict the car steering outputs.
For precision, the car was able to redeem a 3m oﬀset in side-direction within 10m of
travelling in the direction. Furthermore, the car is able to turn with a radius of 8m when
driving 7m/s.
Parking and slalom type tracks were completable but braking was not suﬃciently robust.
The collective system has a runtime of less than 100ms, when used on a Intel NUC i7-
8650u.
This means the project requirements were fulﬁlled.
105
==PAGE:117==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Critical evaluation
Steering control
Calculating a middle line and using this result to steer with a simple controller proved
to be a simple but eﬀective way to solve the basic navigation problem of the challenges
presented from SEM AUC.
Neither mileage nor racing eﬃciency lines were considered, since they are not awarded
additional points at the SEM AUC competition, therefore, a safer navigation was a better
solution.
We recognize that diﬀerent approaches can be used to solve the problem, but as can be
seen from the results, this method fulﬁlled the requirements.
Speed control
Using hysteresis control on the current engine installed in the Ecocar is still considered
the optimal solution since PID-control would not be compatible, as it would damage
mechanical components of the engine.
The ”fast-slow” algorithm that sets the desired speed reference based on the slope and
oﬀset of the steering-line reference had issues with high frequency noise. It was only used
for challenge one, and resulted in a faster lap-time as was the purpose.
However, the speed reference algorithm for was not robust enough to deal with the high
frequency noise. If the authors were to participate in the competition again, they would
choose to omit this ”fast-slow” algorithm from the system, as an issue occurred which
caused a mechanical error in challenge 1. The beneﬁt of gaining a faster time does not
outweigh the risk involved. It is instead proposed to run the whole track with a singular
speed optimal for the goal average speed, or develop a new and better speed reference
control.
The car has managed to eﬀectively clear a 90-degree turn with turn radius 7.5m while
driving 25km/h, and since the turn radii on the ﬁnal track were signiﬁcantly larger than
what has been tested. The third turn on the track has a radius of 15m, twice the radius
that was tested and completed in the speed test. Because of this it theorized that the car
could have completed the track with higher speeds, achieving the average 18km/h goal.
Brake control
The Ecocar had a brake implemented with a PID-controller.
As such, the brake was used by simply setting a reference signal. Generally the brake
overshoots the desired brake reference signal and has an irregular step-time, making it
diﬃcult to do tasks such as precision parking as too many factors are uncontrollable.
The authors could have implemented brake control that depended on the current speed
of the car.
Algorithm Design
The system designed in this projected had a target program run time of 100ms. This
was achieved by implementing the Voronoi algorithm using O(n · log(n)) time, and the
106
==PAGE:118==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Voronoi node using O(n2) time. Aside from this the signals between nodes were kept
simple. It was managed to create a system with a simple structure which other students
can add to.
Competition
Challenge 1: autonomous Lap
The reason for choosing the speed reference intervals as 12 −14km/h and 18 −20km/h
was to have risk-free turning and then compensate by going faster on the straight pieces
of road. 12 −14km/h was deﬁned as a critical speed for the ﬁrst lap, to ensure that the
driver would have time to intervene with the system, if an accident was to occur in a
turn.
Challenge 3: parking
In the ﬁrst attempt the autonomous system sent the end brake command while 4.99m
from the barrier although the hard-coded value in the autonomous system was 4.8m. In
the second attempt the brake command was sent while 5.28m from the barrier although
the hard coded value was 5.2m. This diﬀerence may have been caused by delay in the
system caused by program run times.
Unfortunately the parking challenge was not completed in London. It is speculated
that the challenge went wrong because it contained many unknown variables that could
have been dealt with, with another brake system and more testing.
Challenge 4: gates
The gate challenge was diﬃcult due to the step requirements of 3m step to either side
cleared within 10m. Figure 8.7 shows that the live steering closely matches the simulated
steering using the same controller values. This is a good validation for the steering control
model. As can also be seen in ﬁgure 8.7 it must have been possible for the autonomous
system to have completed even the wrongly dimensioned track in the second attempt if
the controller values chosen for the third attempt were used in the second.
Another thing to note is that in the autonomous system the car can only start step-
ping towards the next gate when the rear wheels (origo of the car) have passed the gate
center coordinate. However, the diﬀerence in length between the rear wheels and the
front tip of the car is 2m. It can be hypothesized that a possible improvement for the
autonomous system is to let the car turn sooner, either 1 or 2m before the rear wheels
pass the gate coordinate. With such a change it might have been possible for the au-
tonomous system to complete the wrongly dimensioned track experienced in the second
attempt even without tuning the controller.
107
==PAGE:119==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Additional comments
The system was designed in order to complete the kind of challenges presented at the
SEM AUC competition and by placing ﬁrst at competition it has been seen that the
design has lived up to its premise.
108
==PAGE:120==
13
Future work
In this section future work for the project is suggested.
Design of navigation
The following is suggested improvements pertaining speciﬁcally to the navigation algo-
rithm.
Follow wall
When a situation occurs where the car can not detect a left and right side barrier the
system could issue a simple instruction of following one wall at a pre-determined distance
in order to avoid crashing into barriers on one side.
Safety braking
From a safety perspective an algorithm could be implemented that evaluates whether the
car with the current speed and angle is able to steer away from barriers, and if not, to
activate an emergency brake.
Using camera for path ﬁnding
It could be possible to use a fusion of the LiDAR and camera vision to detect the barriers
along the track, which may increase robustness in the distances where the LiDAR has
detected false gaps between the barriers.
Steering
The kinematic model derived unfortunately contained a small error during the project
which meant it was not used to tune the parameters for the live challenge. Instead, values
determined empirically were used. However, since the London event the model has been
made to work and could be used to improve the driving values. This same model can
also be used to calculate the desired speed for diﬀerent turn radii in challenge 1.
A more robust fast-slow algorithm could be made using the 5th degree polynomial ﬁt
instead of a linear regression. The ﬁt contains the information of the curvature of the
109
==PAGE:121==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
route ahead. The desired speeds could become a function of the turn radius of upcoming
turns coupled with a lookup table from the kinematic model. The values for speed, kdist
and kangle could thus be dynamically calculated on-line based on the polynomial ﬁt.
Speed
The fast-slow algorithm can be made more robust to noise, e.g. by using a low pass ﬁl-
ter and making minimum delays for how quickly the algorithm can switch between states.
Parking
It could be possible to improve the parking program with two diﬀerent but properly in-
tegrated brake pressure levels, so as to brake with one level prematurely and then brake
with a higher level when approaching the end barrier. The parking brake program could
generally beneﬁt from some validation. The brake could be PID controlled.
An improvement for the program could be to increase the braking distance and in-
clude the car odometry angle relative to the parking spot angle. This would prevent false
positives from the side barriers while braking the car before touching the end barrier.
Alternatively, the target brake pressure could be increased although this would mean a
more abrupt braking, including a higher risk of breaking the brake pedal on the car.
Hardware changes
If the brake is changed to an electronic brake, it would be easy to make a PID-controller
based on the feedback from the velocity, allowing the brake control setpoint to be a
deceleration rate instead of brake pressure reference.
110
==PAGE:122==
14
Conclusion
By using a Voronoi diagram approach it is possible to calculate a path that is perfectly in
the middle by using a set of distance measurement, that has been categorized to belong
to the left or right side of the road. This can be done in O(n2) time, and most of the
data processing, such as constructing the diagram, is done in O(n·log2(n)) running time,
with n being LiDAR measurement data points.
With the chosen parameters for merging walls of left and right, the typical road visibility
is around 10m−25m depending on ﬂatness of surface and the execution time is less than
50ms on the Intel i7-8650U processor, meaning even at top-speed of 7m/s, the car will
have a new route after a displacement of only 35cm. It is also possible to deal with more
complex track layouts such as roundabout or Y-splits, by having the option to go either
left or right.
The resulting middle line from the voronoi diagram can be processed to provide a reliable
reference signal for a controller and the information about the route can be represented
as a polynomial ﬁt to predict the speed which should be set on the vehicle, based on the
curvature of the road.
By using a simple P-controller, it is possible to have precise control of the steering an-
gle for the Ecocar without oscillation even for speeds up to 7m/s , when using lines as
references. Because the controller accepts a simple input, it should be possible for any
navigational method to supply the needed (x, y, θ) reference. This results in easy inte-
gration with parking spot and gate detection which was demonstrated at the SEM AUC
competition.
A kinematic model has been made and validated for the car, to allow tuning of the p-
controller by simulation. The kinematic model can be used even for other robots or if a
new car is made, as long as the parameters: steering wheel limits, steering wheel turn-rate
limits or distance between rear and front wheels are changed accordingly in the model.
The car was able to:
• Perform a 3m step to the side within 10m in the driving direction. Demonstrated
at challenge 4 at SEM London
• Perform turns with a turn radius of 8m. This was completed in the speed tests
where the car cleared a turn with radius 7.5m at DTU
• Drive up to 25km/h while still running in the middle of the road
• Perform speed control, that achieved an average speed of 16.5km/h at challenge 1
at SEM London 1.5km/h less than goal time
111
==PAGE:123==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
• Drive autonomously for 1000m. This was completed both at the distance test and
during challenge 1 at SEM London
• Drive in the middle of the road at all times at challenges 1,3,4 in London by using
LiDAR data
• Park by using camera software developed by other students. Demonstrated at DTU,
in front of HRH Prince Joachim, and at SEM qualiﬁcations in France.
Where
braking down before obstacle collision was also demonstrated
• Control steering without oscillations, and providing a smooth experience for the
driver
• Run the algorithms in less than 100ms.
This was achieved as the navigational
algorithm execution times were found to be no larger than 40ms when run on the
intel NUC, i7-8650u
The Ecocar team, DTU-Roadrunners were able to win 1st prize in the SEM
AUC competition by using the navigational algorithm, steering controller,
speed controller and brake script described in this project, by combining this
project with work from the rest of the Roadrunners Team.
112
==PAGE:124==
Bibliography
[1] The Phidget steering stepper motor, Datasheet partially on the webiste, partially in
mechanical drawing,
Website: https://www.phidgets.com/?tier=3&catid=24&pcid=21&prodid=352,
Visited July 2018
[2] ROS.org, About ROS,
Website: https://http://www.ros.org/about-ros/,
Visited July 2018
[3] ROS.org, ROS topics,
Website: http://wiki.ros.org/Topics,
Visited July 2018
[4] gazebosim.org, Gazebo website,
Website: http://gazebosim.org/,
Visited July 2018
[5] ROS.org, ROS rviz site,
Website: http://wiki.ros.org/rviz,
Visited July 2018
[6] Velodyne Vlp-16 puck, Vlp-16 datasheet,
Website: http://velodyneLiDAR.com/vlp-16.html,
Visited July 2018
[7] Henning Si Høj, Platform Integration for Autonomous Self-Driving Vehicles,
Technical University of Denmark, June 2017
[8] Oliver Lynggaard Topp, Situation Awareness for an Autonomous Vehicle,
Technical University of Denmark, April 2018
[9] BOOST:Voronoi,
Website: https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1 67 0/libs/polygon/doc/voronoi main.htm,
Visited July 2018
[10] Andersen N.; Ravn O., Autonomous Robot Systems Programming, Slides, page 6,
Technical University of Denmark, 2016
[11] Benchmark values for BOOST:Voronoi,
Website: https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1 53 0/libs/polygon/doc/voronoi benchmark.htm,
Visited July 2018
113
==PAGE:125==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
[12] Nikolaus Correll, Introduction to Autonomous Robots, v1.7
Ackermann steering, pages 55-57
Magellan Scientiﬁc, October 6, 2016
[13] Manas Sharma, Polynomial ﬁt, Website:
https://www.bragitoﬀ.com/2015/09/c-
program-for-polynomial-ﬁt-least-squares/,
Visited July 2018
[14] Camera Datasheet,
Website:
http://www.elpcctv.com/8mp-highdeﬁnition-usb-camera-module-usb20-
sony-imx179-color-cmos-sensor-75degree-lens-p-223.html,
114
==PAGE:126==
Appendices
115
==PAGE:127==
==PAGE:128==
A
Datasheets
A.1
The Ecocar
The speciﬁcations of the Ecocar can be seen in ﬁgure A.1.
Figure A.1: The dimensions of the Ecocar
==PAGE:129==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
A.2
Velodyne LiDAR
118
==PAGE:130==
www.velodynelidar.com
Velodyne LiDAR PUCK™
Velodyne's Puck (VLP-16) is the smallest, cost-optimized product in 
Velodyne’s 3D LiDAR product range. Developed with mass production in 
mind, the Puck is far more cost-eﬀective than comparable sensors, and 
it retains the key features of Velodyne’s breakthroughs in LiDAR: 
Real-time, 360°, 3D distance and calibrated reﬂectivity measurements.
Real-Time 3D LiDAR
The VLP-16 has a range of 100 m, and the sensor's low power 
consumption, light weight, compact footprint and dual return capability 
make it ideal not only for autonomous vehicles but also for robotics, 
terrestrial 3D mapping and many other applications.
Velodyne’s LiDAR Puck supports 16 channels, ~300,000 points/second, 
360° horizontal ﬁeld of view and a 30° vertical ﬁeld of view, with ±15° up 
and down. The Puck does not have visible rotating parts, and is highly 
resilient in challenging environments while operating over a wide 
temperature range.
VLP-16
DIMENSIONS
M12 CONNECTOR OPTION
2X    .16 FEATURES
FOR 5/32in. PINS
7/32in.   5.5mm
88.9mm
3.50in.
0°
90°
1/4-20 MOUNT       
9/32in.  7.1mm
12.7mm MAX
0.50in. MAX
12.7mm MAX
0.50in. MAX
103.3mm
   4.07in.
∅
∅  
OPTICAL 
CENTER
37.8mm
1.49in.
18.8mm
0.74in.
12.7mm MAX
0.50in. MAX
71.7mm
2.82in. 
38.1mm
1.50in. 
ACTIVE AREA
FULL 360°
www.velodynelidar.com
Security
Industrial
Robotics
PHOENIX CONTACT P/N: SACC-M12FS-8CON-PG 9-SH
Automotive
Mapping
UAV
(Subject to change)
Puck
TM
REAL-TIME 3D LiDAR SENSOR
ca. 56
M12
ø20
18
For other connector options contact 
Velodyne Sales (sales@velodyne.com)  
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
119
==PAGE:131==
VLP-16
Copyright ©2018 Velodyne LiDAR, Inc. Speciﬁcations are subject to change. Other trademarks or registered trademarks are property of their respective owners. 
Sensor:
Laser:
Mechanical/
Electrical/
Operational
Output:
 
   
• 16 Channels
• Measurement Range: 100 m
• Range Accuracy: Up to ±3 cm (Typical)1
• Field of View (Vertical): +15.0° to -15.0° (30°)
• Angular Resolution (Vertical): 2.0°
• Field of View (Horizontal): 360°
• Angular Resolution (Horizontal/Azimuth): 0.1° – 0.4°    
• Rotation Rate: 5 Hz – 20 Hz
• Integrated Web Server for Easy Monitoring and Conﬁguration
• Laser Product Classiﬁcation: Class 1 Eye-safe per IEC 60825-1:2007 & 2014
• Wavelength: 903 nm
• Power Consumption: 8 W (Typical)2
• Operating Voltage: 9 V – 18 V (with Interface Box and Regulated Power Supply)
• Weight: ~830 g (without Cabling and Interface Box)
• Dimensions: See diagram on previous page
• Environmental Protection: IP67
• Operating Temperature: -10°C to +60°C3
• Storage Temperature: -40°C to +105°C
• 3D LiDAR Data Points Generated:
 
-    Single Return Mode:     ~300,000 points per second
 
-    Dual Return Mode:       ~600,000 points per second
• 100 Mbps Ethernet Connection
• UDP Packets Contain:
 
- Time of Flight Distance Measurement
 
- Calibrated Reﬂectivity Measurement
 
- Rotation Angles
 
- Synchronized Time Stamps (µs resolution)
• GPS: $GPRMC and $GPGGA NMEA Sentences from GPS Receiver (GPS not included)
Speciﬁcations:
|    www.velodynelidar.com
Real-Time 3D LiDAR Sensor
The VLP-16 provides high deﬁnition 3-dimensional information about the surrounding environment.
CLASS 1 LASER PRODUCT
Velodyne LiDAR, Inc.  345 Digital Drive, Morgan Hill, CA 95037   /   lidar@velodyne.com   /   408.465.2800
63-9229 Rev-H
For more details and ordering information, contact Velodyne Sales (sales@velodyne.com)
1. Typical accuracy refers to ambient wall test performance across most channels and may vary based on factors including but not limited to range, temperature and target reﬂectivity.
2. Operating power may be aﬀected by factors including but not limited to range, reﬂectivity and environmental conditions.
3. Operating temperature may be aﬀected by factors including but not limited to air ﬂow and sun load.
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
120
==PAGE:132==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
A.3
Brake actuator
121
==PAGE:133==
Actuator LA30
Data sheet
LINAK.COM/TECHLINE 
LINAK.COM/MEDLINE-CARELINE
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
122
==PAGE:134==
LA30
LA30 is a powerful actuator yet small enough to fit most 
applications. The actuator can be supplied with options such 
as built-in potentiometer for servo operation or an extra 
powerful motor for increased speed and strength (S-motor). 
In addition to industrial and agricultural applications, the 
actuator is also ideal for positioning satellite dishes.
Features and options:
• 12/24V DC permanent magnet motor
• Max. thrust up to 6000 N (LA30LK)
• Stainless steel piston rod
• Elegant and compact construction with small installation
 dimensions
• Protection Class: IPX0/66
• Colour: Black
• Speed max. 65 mm/s (LA30 S-motor with 12 mm pitch)
• Low noise level
• Steel construction for all bearing parts
• Acme thread spindle for optimum efficiency
• Extra powerful motor (S-motor)
• L-motor for system actuator
• IP66 (by ordering LA30 with plastic housing)
• Double-acting brake - increased self-locking ability
 (LA30 with 6 or 9 mm pitch + LA30 S-motor with 6 or 9 mm
 pitch and LA30L) which ensures that all these types are fully
 self-locking
• Potentiometer for positioning the actuator 0-1 K ohm,
 0-5 K ohm or 0-10 K ohm
• Reed switch (only LA30 L-motor versions): 8 pulses pr.
 spindle revolution
• Mechanical spline function. Safety feature by using the
 mechanical spline, the actuator can only push
• Safety nut (only in push)
• Terminal cover (only LA30 L-motor versions)
• Ball screw (K) (only LA30 L-motor versions)
• Ball screw and safety nut (KAS) (only LA30 L-motor versions)
• Ball screw, safety nut and splines (KSM) (only LA30 
 L-motor versions)
Usage:
• Duty cycle: 10%, 2 minutes continuous use followed
 by 18 minutes not in use 
• Ambient temperature +5° to +40°C
• Storage temperature -40° to +70°C
• Compatible with control boxes CB8, CB12, 
• Should LA30 be used with a non LINAK control unit, please
 ask the nearest LINAK representative for further details
LINAK.COM/TECHLINE 
LINAK.COM/MEDLINE-CARELINE
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
123
==PAGE:135==
Technical specifications: 
The above measurements are made with the actuators connected to a stable power supply, LA30 L-motor versions with a CB12.
S = Strong motor; L = Slow motor; K = Ball screw; KAS = Ball screw, safety nut; KSM = Ball screw, safety nut, spline.
New type
Spindle pitch
(mm)
Thrust max. 
Push
(N)
Thrust max. 
Pull 
(N)
*Self-lock max. 
With/without 
brake (N)
Typical speed 
0/full load 
(mm/s)
Stroke length 
(mm)
Typical amp. 
at full load
12V    24V
307xx0-4xxxx0/5xx 
12 
1000 
1000 
1000/0 
48/24 
50 
100 
150 
200P 
250 
300 
350 
400P 
14 
7
303xx0-4xxxx0/5xx 
9 
1500 
1500 
1500/400 
42/20 
50 
100 
150P 
200 
250 
300P 
350 
400 
14 
7
302xx0-4xxxx0/5xx 
6 
2000 
2000 
2000/500 
18.5/14 
50 
100P 
150 
200P 
250 
300 
350 
400P 
14 
7
301xx0-xxxxx0/5xx 
3 
3000 
3000 
3000/3000 
16/9 
50P 
100P 
150 
200P 
250 
300 
350 
400 
14
6.4
307xx0-4xxxx1/2xx 
12 
1000 
1000 
1000/0 
65/35 
50 
100 
150 
200P 
250 
300 
350 
400P 
20 
10
303xx0-4xxxx1/2xx 
9 
1800 
1800 
1800/0 
52/25 
50 
100 
150P 
200 
250 
300P 
350 
400 
20 
10
302xx0-4xxxx2xx 
6 
2000 
2000 
2000/500 
34/20.3 
50 
100P 
150 
200P 
250 
300 
350 
400P 
18 
-
302xx0-4xxxx1xx 
6 
2400 
2400 
2400/500 
34/20.3 
50 
100P 
150 
200P 
250 
300 
350 
400P 
9
301xx0-xxxxx1/2xx 
3 
3500 
3000 
3500/3500 
17/9.5 
50P 
100P 
150 
200P 
250 
300 
350 
400 
18
9
307xx0-4xxxx4xx 
12 
1000 
1000 
1000/0 
26/20 
50 
100 
150 
200P 
250 
300 
350 
400P 
- 
2.5
303xx0-4xxxx4xx 
9 
2000 
2000 
2000/0 
20/13 
50 
100 
150P 
200 
250 
300P 
350 
400 
- 
4.4
302xx0-4xxxx4xx 
6 
3000 
3000 
3000/2000 
13.8/7 
50 
100P 
150 
200P 
250 
300 
350 
400P 
- 
4
301xx0-xxxxx4xx 
3 
4000 
3000 
4000/4000 
7/4.5 
50P 
100P 
150 
200P 
250 
300 
350 
400 
- 
5.5
30Kxx0-0xxxx4xx 
4 
6000 
3000 
6000/n/a 
8.7/5.5 
-
- 
150 
200 
250 
300 
350 
400
-
4.7
30Kxx0-1xxxx4xx 
4 
6000 
3000 
6000/n/a 
8.7/5.5 
-
-
150 
200
250
300
350
400
-
4.7
30Kxxo-3xxxx4xx 
4 
6000 
3000 
6000/n/a 
8.7/5.5 
-
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
350 
400 
-
4.7
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
124
==PAGE:136==
Cables:
0
30
1
1
0
0
2
1
5 0
0
0
-
0
Protection class:
Motor:
Stroke length:
Install. dim.:
Options:
Colour:
Options:
Back fixture:
0 = Standard
X = Other installation dimension
- = Black
0 = None
P = Potentiometer 1 kohm 
L = Potentiometer 5 Kohm 
only with motor 0, 1, 2, 4, 5
T = Potentiometer 10 Kohm
R = Reedswitch 
 
only with motor 4
0 = IPX0
2 = IP66 with plastic house
0 = 24V
1 = 24V S-motor  
4 = 24V L-motor for LINAK control boxes
2 = 12V S-motor  
5 = 12V motor 
XXX = mm  
Max. with 3 & 6 mm pitch 400 mm
 
Max. with 9 & 12 mm pitch 500 mm
 
Min. 50 mm
1 = Safety nut RECOMMENDED
0 = None   
4 = Brake (not optional with K spindle)
2 = Steel spline  
5 = Brake with safety nut (not optional with K spindle)
3 = Steel spline with safety nut
1 = Standard (01)
2 = Turned 90o (02)
Actuator type:
LA30 
Options:
0 = None
1 = LSD 
(Not IPX6 max. IPX4)
2 = LS  
(Not IPX6 max. IPX4)
Spindle type:
1 = 3 mm  
(1-thread)  
LA30.1
2 = 6 mm  
(2 thread)  
LA30.2
3 = 9 mm  
(3-thread)  
LA30.3
7 = 12 mm  
(4-thread)  
LA30.4
K = Ball spindle   
 
LA30K
(K spindle is always with brake)
Old type no. 
General tolerance +/- 70 mm
N = No cable when IPX0 (except reed)                 (no cable relief will be mounted)
0 = Straight with jack plug, 2.30 m with IP-housing and 2.45 m without IP-housing
1 = Straight with jack plug, 1.05 m with IP-housing and 1.20 m without IP-housing
2 = Coiled with jack plug 400 mm
3 = Coiled with jack plug 200 mm
4 = Straight without plug 500 mm (Potentiometer)
5 = Straight without plug 1200 mm (with IP66 housing)
X = Other cable / length
LA30
Ordering example:
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
125
==PAGE:137==
Installation dimension:
LA30 L-motor + LA30 + LA30 S-motor with 3 or 6 mm pitch 
S + 156 mm
LA30 with spline + LA30 S-motor with 9 mm pitch 
S + 167 mm
LA30 with brake + LA30 S-motor with 3 or 6 mm pitch with brake 
S + 189 mm
LA30 with ball screw and L-motor / LA30 ball screw and safety nut 
S + 194 mm
LA30 L-motor with brake + LA30 S-motor 9 or 12 mm pitch with brake 
S + 199 mm
LA30 L-motor with ball screw, safety nut and spline 
S + 251 mm
Dimensions:
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
126
==PAGE:138==
Plastic housing for LA30:
It is possible to order a LA30 with the protection class IP66. This option requires a plastic housing. 
See drawings below.
The LA30 actuator is mounted with a 1.2 m / 0.5 m cable without plug.
Dimensions:
LA30 with housing mounted with LSD (protection class IPX4):
01 Standard
02 turned 90o
01 Standard
02 turned 90o
Drawing no.: LA30LSD001B
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
127
==PAGE:139==
LA30 Standard:
Piston Rod eyes:
Drawing no.: LA30SNIT001B
Standard 
“Crimped” piston rod eye 
Piston rod without eye
(Piston rods without eyes are not tested) 
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
128
==PAGE:140==
Copyright © LINAK 2017.07  MA M9-02-050-U .  Chapter 5.7
Terms of use
The user is responsible for determining the suitability of LINAK products for specific application. LINAK takes great care in providing 
accurate and up-to-date information on its products. 
However, due to continuous development in order to improve its products, LINAK products are subject to frequent modifications and 
changes without prior notice. Therefore, LINAK cannot guarantee the correct and actual status of said information on its products. 
While LINAK uses its best efforts to fulfil orders, LINAK cannot, for the same reasons as mentioned above, guarantee the availability 
of any particular product. Therefore, LINAK reserves the right to discontinue the sale of any product displayed on its website or listed 
in its catalogues or other written material drawn up by LINAK.
All sales are subject to the Standard Terms of Sale and Delivery for LINAK. For a copy hereof, please contact LINAK.
F O R  M O U N T I N G  I N S T R U C T I O N S  A N D  G U I D A N C E  I N  U S A G E ,  P L E A S E  S E E  T H E  R E L E V A N T  U S E R ’ S  M A N U A L S
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
129
==PAGE:141==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
A.4
Steering actuator
A mechanical drawing. The technical speciﬁcations are found on their website ([1])
130
==PAGE:142==
Stepper Motor Specifications:
kg.cm
Holding
Torque
2
mH
V
A
Inductance
Resistance
Current
/Phase
/Phase
/Phase
Rated
Voltage
1.8
Deg/Step
Phase
Step
Angle
MODEL
Rotor
Inertia
57STH56-2804B
2.5
0.9
2.8
2.5
12.6
300
Number of gear trains
Gear Ratio
2
1:4.25
1
1:77
1:15
90
Max.permissible load in a short time(kg.cm)
Max.rated torque(kg.cm)
3
720
240
Gear Box Specifications:
Length
L (mm)
Ω
0DZ.244.001
270
g.cm
2
57X57
4-M5 EQS
56
UL1430 AWG22
φ45±0.3
300min
40°
REV
REV.
DESIGN
QTY.
No.
STD.
APPR.
CHECK
PROC.
SIG.
DATE
S
CLS. MAK
SCALE
DONGZHENG MOTOR
PAGE
OF
QTY
PLANET GEAR STEPPER MOTOR
0DZ.244.001
1:1
Zhu Guanghua
φ14.5±0.15
2-M1.6 through hole
*装编码器螺钉进入螺孔长度小于2.5mm
12
+0.7
-0.3
φ3.9
0
-0.015
56JXS300K/57STH56-2804B
Black
Green
4 Leads
Red
Blue
Wiring Diagram:
D
B
M
D
A
C
B
2
1
3
4
1
Step
CW
Direction
Rotation:
A
C
CW Direction,see from the shaft end.(Only Motor)
REV
Original content
Changed content
Reason of change
Name
Date
B
61
Zhu Guanghua
2013.11.13
2013.11.13
B
B
9.5
4
+0.05
0
28
2
18
φ56
150
450
48
61
72
48
φ12
0
-0.03
φ32
0
-0.1
Production need
L
PDF 文件使用 "pdfFactory Pro" 试用版本创建 www.fineprint.cn
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
131
==PAGE:143==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
A.5
Camera data sheet
132
==PAGE:144==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
133
==PAGE:145==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
134
==PAGE:146==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
B
Vehicle Scrutineering sheet
135
==PAGE:147==
Sensor Based Navigation for Autonomous Car
Appendix
136
