==PAGE:1==
Preface
This thesis is submitted in partial fulﬁlment of a dual international MSc in Innovative
Sustainable Energy Engineering in the study track Solar Cell Systems and Materials. It
was carried out in the spring semester of 2018 in the physics department of NTNU. The
body of work corresponds to 30 ECTS. It was supervised by Assoc. Prof. Justin Wells
from NTNU. The co-supervisor from the N5T partner university was Prof. Jens Wenzel
Andreasen at DTU.
Annika Richter
Trondheim, July 2018
i
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my NTNU supervisor Assoc. Prof. Justin Wells for his
far-reaching interpretation of that role. Thank you for taking me to Brazil for this project,
for always taking the time to discuss questions (despite having a very short mean free
path, as some people say), as well as all the chats and discussions unrelated to photoe-
mission. Secondly I want to thank Prof. Jens Wenzel Andreasen for agreeing to be my
DTU supervisor and for his kind support on all issues regarding the technicalities with
the DTU system.
It is mainly thanks to Dr. Leander Michels that I got involved in this project, which I am
very grateful for. Thank you for all the advice on XRD data analysis, peak ﬁtting and
the great tour guiding in Brazil. You rock and no nightshift on a beamline is boring when
you are around.
For the countless hours of work put into helping me out in the lab regardless of the
time of day, I owe a special thank you to both Dr. Alex Schenk and Dr. Rajesh Kumar
Chellappan. Without you, this simply would have been impossible.
A special thank you also goes to our collaborators in Brazil, most importantly Prof. Stefan
Michael Blawid, Dr. Luciano Leal and Vilany Santana for the warm welcome in Brasília
and the great working atmosphere at LNLS. Additionally I want to thank Vilany for
the kind permission to include some of her UV-Vis measurements in this thesis. For his
support at the beamline I would like to thank Dr. Antonio Gasperini.
I want to thank Prof. Ursula Gibson and Dr. Mustafa Balcı for the kind permission to
use the UV-Vis instrument and for the assistance with the measurements.
Dr. Kristin Høydalsvik Wells I would like to thank for the help with the XRD data analysis
in Topas.
A very special thank you goes to Frode Sneve Strand for the careful proofreading, many
useful discussions and for forcing me out of the lab to take breaks. And for introducing
me to the joys of motorbiking of course.
I would also like to seize this opportunity to thank people without which I wouldn’t be
where I am today. To the MSISEE Solar Crew, Carolyn, Johanna, Kevin and Ruby, we’ve
been a great team through the last 2 years. Keep on making the world a sunnier place!
To my wonderful friends who inspire me across oceans, I can’t wait to see what grown-up
life holds for us.
To Pablo, thank you for choosing to be a constant in my life. You remain the best teacher
I’ve ever had.
Finally I want to thank my family – My brothers and role models Martin and Stefan, as
well as Minna and Annick, who make up for my non-existing sisters. My parents, who
have always supported (and funded) all of my endeavours – I’ve been beyond privileged
to be your daughter. And little Ben, who without knowing it has contributed to this work
by putting a big smile on my face even in the most stressful of times.
iii
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Natural dyes strongly absorbing light in the visible spectrum are appealing ma-
terials for the use in organic solar cells, due to their direct availability from nature.
An especially interesting potential application arises from a reported reduction in
charge carrier trapping in organic semiconductors blended with large-band gap com-
pounds. On this account, an optical, electronic and structural characterisation of
the natural yellow and red dyes curcumin and bixin was performed, to create a basis
for future investigations of their applicability in organic solar cells.
Optical absorption spectra measured by UV-Visible Spectroscopy (UV-Vis) on ther-
mally evaporated ﬁlms revealed that bixin undergoes chemical degradation upon
evaporation, while curcumin appears to remain unaﬀected. Cheap availability of
high purity curcumin and easy processability allowed for reliable determination of
its band gap, both from the absorption spectrum, as well as combined Ultravi-
olet Photoemission Spectroscopy (UPS) and Inverse Photoemission Spectroscopy
(IPES). The obtained values of 2.3 eV and 2.4 eV, respectively, are in good agree-
ment with each other. The band gap of bixin was found to be larger than expected
(2.5 eV and 2.8 eV, respectively), most likely as a result of the degradation of the
molecule and an insuﬃcient ﬁlm thickness for photoemission measurements free of
contributions from substrate contaminants. UPS and IPES spectra furthermore re-
vealed that both curcumin and bixin are hole-conducting materials.
X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) measurements on powder performed at the Brazilian Syn-
chrotron Light Laboratory (LNLS) in Campinas, Brazil, revealed a higher crys-
talline order in curcumin than bixin. A Pawley unit cell reﬁnement using the ob-
tained diﬀraction pattern on curcumin yields the reﬁned lattice parameters a =
12.7419(3) Å, b = 7.2202(3) Å, c = 20.0530(9) Å and β = 94.9801(1)◦, which are in
good agreement with those found in literature. After annealing the curcumin powder
at 200◦C, the signal intensity is found to be decreased, which could be interpreted
as an increase in crystalline order with the majority of crystallites oriented such
that their reﬂections cannot be detected with the used geometry of the setup. A
diﬀraction pattern on bixin powder was successfully measured. In future work this
could, in combination with computational density functional theory (DFT) calcula-
tions, reveal the crystal structure of bixin for the ﬁrst time. Evaporated as well as
solution-cast samples of both dyes proved to be too thin to produce a useful signal
in the XRD measurement.
The results show that curcumin has several advantages over bixin in terms of pro-
cessability, stability and crystalline order, which are favourable properties for or-
ganic solar cell applications. Curcumin can therefore be considered a promising
candidate material. A meaningful analysis of bixin allowing for a clear conclusion
is complicated by diﬃculties forming suﬃciently thick ﬁlms, as a result of the lack
of cheaply available high purity bixin. The observed decomposition of the molecule
upon evaporation does not rule it out as a candidate material, but adds to the need
for studying solution-processed ﬁlms made from a cheaper (potentially less pure)
form of it.
v
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Organic Solar Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Organic semiconductors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Working principle of an organic solar cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Active layer materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.4
Optical absorption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Basic principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Features of an XPS spectrum
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.3
Inverse Photoelectron Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.4
Surface sensitivity of PES
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
X-ray Diﬀraction (XRD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.1
X-ray sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.2
The X-ray tube . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.3
Synchrotron radiation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Experimental
21
3.1
Sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Ultraviolet–Visible spectroscopy (UV-Vis)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.1
Vacuum System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.2
Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy (UPS) . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.3
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.4
Inverse Photoemission Spectroscopy (IPES)
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.5
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
X-ray Diﬀraction (XRD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Results and Discussion
30
4.1
Absorption Spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Electronic Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.1
Film growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.2
Core levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2.3
Valence band
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.4
Band gap
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2.5
Beam damage testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Crystal structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Conclusion and Outlook
54
vii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
1
1. Introduction
1
Introduction
Conventional silicon solar cells have been facing increased competition from quickly de-
veloping new generations of solar cell technologies. Especially organic solar cells have
attracted a steadily growing academic interest due to their lightness, mechanical ﬂexibil-
ity, and inexpensive processing. The ﬁrst experiments marking the beginning of organic
photovoltaics (OPV) sandwiched organic dyes between metal electrodes with a large work
function oﬀset [1–3], inspired by the photosynthesis of plants transforming sunlight into
chemical energy. Ever since, the search for organic semiconductors suitable for eﬃcient
photovoltaic energy conversion has been going on. With cells based on synthesised poly-
mers currently marking the standard in OPV, there is still a lot of work to be done in
uncovering the potential of natural materials. In this thesis, natural dyes are investigated
to create a basis on which to evaluate their applicability in OPV. The main factors of
interest to this eﬀect are the size of the band gap, crystalline order, as well as process-
ability, and stability under heat.
The molecules investigated are curcumin (C21H20O6) and bixin (C25H30O4), shown in
Fig. 1. Curcumin is a pigment of turmeric and has been used as a home-remedy against
diﬀerent ailments in India for centuries. It has attracted high scientiﬁc attention since
the 1990s, mainly due to its reported chemopreventive eﬀect [4, 5]. Bixin is the main
carotenoid found in the seeds of the annatto tree, that is native to South America. Given
its strong red colour it is commonly used as a dye in textiles, cosmetics and food among
other things [6, 7]. As both dyes absorb strongly in the visible spectrum, eﬀorts to use
them in dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSC) have already been made [8–10].
Figure 1: The two molecules investigated in this thesis are the organic dyes curcumin and
bixin.
Whether they could be candidates for active layer materials in solid-state organic solar
cells to this day remains unstudied. An especially interesting application of large band
gap semiconductors like curcumin and bixin could be in blends with conjugated poly-
mers. Such diluted semiconductors have been reported by Abbaszadeh et al. [11] to have
==PAGE:10==
1. Introduction
2
a signiﬁcantly reduced amount of trapping sites, which leads to increased charge carrier
lifetimes.
Using natural materials in organic photovoltaics, as opposed to synthetic polymers is ap-
pealing considering that the processing of the latter often requires hazardous halogenated
solvents [12]. On top of that, the direct harvesting of useful materials from nature could
prove cost-eﬀective.
In the present work, ﬁlms of curcumin and bixin are prepared by thermal evaporation
in vacuum and by solution processing. These ﬁlms are subjected to a thorough elec-
tronic characterisation using diﬀerent photoemission spectroscopy (PES) techniques. For
structural analysis of the ﬁlms, X-ray diﬀraction experiments are carried out at the Brazil-
ian Synchrotron Light Laboratory (LNLS) in Campinas, Brazil. Additionally, UV-Visible
Spectroscopy (UV-Vis) is performed to check the optical absorption characteristics of the
thermally evaporated ﬁlms. Most measurements are to the author’s best knowledge the
ﬁrst of their kind to be performed on bixin, as up to this day very little literature has
been published about this compound.
In Chapter 2, underlying theoretical concepts relevant to this work will be presented.
These include basics on organic semiconductors and photovoltaic devices, and the theory
behind photoemission spectroscopy and X-ray diﬀraction, which are the main experimen-
tal techniques used in the work. Chapter 3 will present details on the diﬀerent methods of
sample preparation, the vacuum system used for the photoemission experiments and the
setup of the individual experiments. It also presents the photospectrometry setup used for
measuring absorption spectra and the experimental setup at the beamline at LNLS. In
Chapter 4, main results of all experiments are presented and discussed. Chapter 5 gives
a conclusion of the most important results as well as an outlook to future investigations.
==PAGE:11==
3
2. Theory
2
Theory
In this section the key concepts underlying the presented work will be introduced. The
ﬁrst part gives a short overview of organic solar cell materials and working principles. It
is followed by a presentation of the theory behind the main experimental techniques used
in this work – photoemission spectroscopy and X-ray diﬀraction.
2.1
Organic Solar Cells1
2.1.1
Organic semiconductors
An organic semiconductor is a carbon-based material with semiconductor properties, i.e. a
band gap. This band gap arises from a structure of alternating single and double bonds of
sp2-hybridised carbon atoms, forming a so-called conjugated system. The sp2 hybridised
orbitals form strong σ bonds between neighbouring carbon atoms. As only three of the
four valence electrons of the carbon atoms hybridise in the sp2 conﬁguration, the remain-
ing unhybridised p orbitals form delocalised π bonds. In the energetically favoured, and
therefore stable state, the density of the π electrons is concentrated between neighbouring
carbon atoms in the bonding (π) conﬁguration, leaving the antibonding (π*) orbital un-
occupied (see Fig. 2). The π orbital is therefore the Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital
(HOMO), while the π* orbital in this conﬁguration is the Lowest Unoccupied Molecular
Orbital (LUMO).
Figure 2: Molecular orbital diagram of an alkene. The left side shows the electron conﬁg-
uration in the ground state. When energy is absorbed, electrons can be transferred from
the π orbital to the π* orbital, leaving the molecule in an excited state, shown on the
right side. Based on reference [18].
The HOMO and the LUMO correspond to the valence band and the conduction band in an
inorganic semiconductor and can be treated similarly on a macroscopic level. The energy
diﬀerence between the HOMO and the LUMO is the band gap Eg. When the molecule is
excited by a suﬃciently energetic photon, electrons can be transferred from the bonding
π band to the antibonding π* band. As opposed to an inorganic semiconductor, where
this transition is an actual excitation of a free electron from the valence band to the
conduction band, here the molecule itself is excited to a more energetic state.
1This section is based on references [13–17].
==PAGE:12==
2. Theory
4
2.1.2
Working principle of an organic solar cell
An organic solar cell (OSC) is a solar cell made of organic semiconductors. As described
above, the absorption of a photon in an organic semiconductor can excite electrons from
the HOMO to the LUMO. The resulting electron-hole pair in organic photovoltaics is
called an exciton. This term acknowledges the strong Coulombic attraction between the
electron-hole pairs in organic semiconductors as opposed to those in inorganic semicon-
ductors. The binding energy of such a pair is around 0.1–1.4 eV [19].
The separation of electron-hole pairs to generate electricity in an OSC occurs in the so-
called active layer, which is formed by a heterojunction of two materials with a suitable
band alignment. Fig. 3 illustrates the working principle of the active layer. First, an exci-
ton is generated in one of the materials (Fig. 3.1). When the diﬀerence between the HOMO
of the ﬁrst material and the LUMO of the second material is smaller than the potential
diﬀerence between the bound electron–hole pair, an exciton that is generated in the ﬁrst
material moves towards the junction (Fig. 3.2), where it is energetically favourable for
the electron of the exciton to transfer to the LUMO of the second material (Fig. 3.3).
Because of this charge transfer the two materials are referred to as donor and acceptor.
Finally, the holes are transported to an anode electrode and the electrons to a cathode
electrode through a potential gradient established by the choice of electrode or transport
layer materials (Fig. 3.4). This gradient can for example be established by choosing a high
work function material for the anode and a low work function material for the cathode.
Figure 3: Principle of charge separation in an organic solar cell. (1) An exciton is generated
by photon absorption. (2) The exciton diﬀuses to the donor/acceptor heterojunction. (3)
The exciton dissociates at the junction. (4) The carriers are transported and extracted at
the electrodes. Based on reference [13].
A typical structure of an organic solar cell is shown in Fig. 4. The individual layers are
normally stacked on top of each other onto a substrate by printing and coating methods.
The charge generation and separation happens in the active layer, which is surrounded by
two transport layers allowing only a certain carrier type to pass, and ﬁnally the electrodes
to extract the current from the solar cell.
==PAGE:13==
5
2. Theory
Figure 4: Structure of an organic solar cell. Adapted from reference [18].
2.1.3
Active layer materials
The active layer forms the key part of the organic solar cell, as this is where the charge
generation and separation occurs. Therefore a large part of the research in organic pho-
tovoltaics is focused on the materials used in the active layer. The most important char-
acteristic of an organic semiconductor for the use in solar cells is its band gap, deﬁned as
the energy gap between the HOMO and the LUMO:
Eg = ELUMO −EHOMO.
(1)
For a photon to be absorbed by the semiconductor its energy must be greater than or
equal to Eg:
Ephoton = hν = hc
λ ≥Eg,
(2)
where h is Planck’s constant, ν is the frequency of the photon, c is the speed of light and
λ is the wavelength of photon. When the photon energy exceeds the band gap, the excess
energy is lost as heat. From Eq. 2, one can establish the optimal size of the band gap for
a single junction solar cell, given the spectrum of solar irradiance inside the atmosphere.
This was ﬁrst done by Shockley and Queisser, who in 1960 published a paper [20], in which
they introduced the now famous curve seen in Fig. 5 (black line). It shows the maximum
theoretical power conversion eﬃciency of a single junction solar cell as a function of its
band gap (assuming AM 1.5 solar spectrum and unconcentrated sunlight). The maximum
value of around 33.7% occurs at a band gap of 1.34 eV.
The active layer materials used in organic photovoltaics are small molecules or polymers
with conjugated π-bonds, as discussed in section 2.1.1. Their band gap is typically in
the range of 1 to 3eV [22] and depends, among other things, on the conjugation length
(i.e. the length of undisturbed conjugations); a shorter conjugation length resulting in a
larger band gap [23]. This allows for tuning the band gap to a desired size by synthetic
modiﬁcation.
The current record eﬃciency reported for an organic solar cell of 11.2% [24] is still far from
reaching the theoretical limit of maximum eﬃciency. A major challenge in the design of
organic solar cells is the very short diﬀusion length of excitons of around 5–20 nm [25–27],
==PAGE:14==
2. Theory
6
Figure 5: Theoretical Shockley-Queisser power conversion eﬃciency limit as a function of
band gap (black line) and 75% and 50% of the limit (grey lines). The markers show record
eﬃciencies reported for diﬀerent materials (from 2016). Adapted from reference [21].
before they recombine. This places constraints on the morphology of the active layer and
creates a need to minimise recombination sources.
2.1.4
Optical absorption
When studying solar cell materials, optical absorption properties play a central role.
A characteristic of all semiconductors is the sudden increase in absorption (a so-called
absorption edge) when the condition in Eq. 2 is met. For photon energies below the band
gap, the semiconductor is transparent.
Absorption attenuates the intensity of a light beam as it propagates through the material.
This is mathematically described by the Beer-Lambert law. It states that the intensity of
light I at a depth x in the materials is given by
I(λ, x) = I0(λ)e−α(λ)x,
(3)
where I0 is the incident intensity at x = 0 and α is the optical absorption coeﬃcient, which
is an important parameter for describing solar cell materials. Organic semiconductors
have been found to possess very high absorption coeﬃcients (> 105 cm-1), which is a key
prerequisite for thin active layers [13].
The transmittance of the material is then described by
T = I
I0
.
(4)
This is a quantity that can easily be determined experimentally by passing a beam through
a sample and measuring the intensity before and after. Another commonly used quantity
is the absorbance A, which is related to the transmittance via
A = −ln(T) = α(λ)x.
(5)
As the absorbance is directly proportional to the path length, it can be used to determine
the absorption coeﬃcient of the material, when the sample thickness is known.
==PAGE:15==
7
2. Theory
2.2
Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)2
2.2.1
Basic principles
Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES), also called Photoemission Spectroscopy, is an ex-
perimental method to study the electronic structure and chemical state of atoms and
molecules. It is based on analysing the energy of electrons emitted from a solid after ex-
citation with energetic photons. The process is commonly described using the so-called
three-step model, in which it is separated into three individual processes, which are illus-
trated in Fig. 6. In the ﬁrst step, an electron is excited in the solid by absorbing a photon.
In the second step, the photoelectron travels through the solid towards the surface. In the
third and ﬁnal step, the electron is then emitted into the vacuum where it is detected.
Figure 6: Schematic representation of photoemission as a three-step process: (1) photoex-
citation of an electron, (2) transport of the electron to the surface, (3) penetration through
the surface. Based on reference [29].
The resulting photoemission intensity or photoemission current measured by the detector,
which is a function of the kinetic energy of the photoelectron in vacuum Ekin and the
photon energy hν, is then proportional to the product of the probabilities associated with
each individual step. If these probabilities are described by P(Ekin,hν), T(Ekin,hν) and
D(Ekin) respectively, for the photoemission intensity I we have
I ∼P(Ekin, hν)T(Ekin, hν)D(Ekin).
(6)
For electron energies Ekin > 100 eV it can be assumed that the probabilities of step two
and three are independent of Ekin, in which case the resulting photoemission spectrum
directly reﬂects P(Ekin,hν). This is the parameter that contains the information on the
electronic states of the solid in the initial state. T(Ekin,hν), representing the probability
that a photoelectron is transported to the surface without being seriously aﬀected by
inelastic scattering, is dependent on the absorption coeﬃcient for the incident photon en-
ergy and the electron inelastic mean free path (IMFP) that is discussed in section 2.2.4.
D(Ekin) depends gently on Ekin and on the work function of the material.
A schematic of a typical PES setup is shown in Fig. 7a. The main parts of the system are
the photon source and the electron energy analyser that determines the kinetic energy of
the ejected photoelectrons. Due to the very small mean free path of the photoelectrons,
the system needs to be situated in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) environment (c.f. section
2This section is based on references [28, 29].
==PAGE:16==
2. Theory
8
2.2.4).
From the measured kinetic energy Ekin of the electrons, their binding energy EB can then
be determined according to
EB = hν −Ekin −φS,
(7)
where hν is the energy of the incoming photons and φS is the work function of the sam-
ple. This is valid in a solid where EB is typically deﬁned with respect to the Fermi level
EF. The binding energy spectrum is characteristic of the analysed material, which is the
reason why PES can be used for determining elemental composition.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7: (a) Schematic of a photoemission spectroscopy system setup (b) Photoelectrons
leave the sample with a kinetic energy of Ekin,S, but are recorded in the spectrometer with
an energy Ekin,A due to the diﬀerence in work functions of the sample and the analyser.
The analyser possesses a work function φA, that is diﬀerent from the work function of
the sample φS. When a conductive connection between the analyser and the sample is
established, their Fermi levels align. As a result of this, the kinetic energy measured by
the spectrometer Ekin,A diﬀers from the kinetic energy of the free photoelectrons Ekin,S by
the diﬀerence in work functions (φA −φS). This is illustrated in Fig. 7b. Consequently,
the binding energy can be determined without the need to know the work function of the
sample, after a one-time calibration of the analyser work function:
EB = hν −Ekin,A −φA.
(8)
In Fig. 8 the relation between the energy levels in a solid (in this case a metal) and the
energy distribution of photoemitted electrons is illustrated schematically.
Diﬀerent photon energies are used to probe diﬀerent parts of the spectrum. PES is gen-
erally divided into Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy (UPS) operating in the ultra-
violet regime from 5 to 100 eV and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) operating in
the X-ray regime of >100 eV. The most commonly used photon energies in UPS are the
HeI line (21.2 eV) and the HeII line (40.8 eV) emitted from gas discharge lamps. In XPS,
sources traditionally include X-ray tubes using the magnesium Kα line (1263.6 eV) and
==PAGE:17==
9
2. Theory
Figure 8: Schematic energy diagram illustrating the relation between energy levels in the
sample and the measured photoemission spectrum. Based on references [28] and [30].
the aluminium Kα line (1486.6 eV), as well as synchrotron radiation sources, ever since
they have become available. XPS allows for the investigation of core levels, which can be
used for chemical analysis of the samples. For studying the valence band, UPS however
provides higher accuracy.
2.2.2
Features of an XPS spectrum
In reality, an XPS spectrum does not look like the spectrum presented in Fig. 8. In
addition to photoemission peaks, a broad background signal is created from electrons
that are inelastically scattered before reaching the analyser. Furthermore, a number of
eﬀects create additional features in the spectrum, that shall be introduced in the following.
Auger peaks
At high photon energies the spectrum will exhibit peaks resulting from Auger electrons.
These are produced when a vacancy created by an incoming photon is ﬁlled by the decay
of an electron from a higher shell and an electron with an energy equal to the diﬀerence
between the involved states is emitted. Consequently, the kinetic energy of the Auger
==PAGE:18==
2. Theory
10
electrons is independent of the photon energy of the source. Fig. 9 illustrates the process
of Auger electron emission compared to photoelectron emission.
Figure 9: Schematic diagram illustrating the emission process of a photoelectron from a
core level into vacuum (left) and that of an Auger electron (right).
Chemical shifts
Core level photoelectron spectra do not only provide information on the elements present
in the sample but also on the local environment of the atoms, i.e. the conﬁguration of
chemical bonds. These give rise to shifts in binding energy, that are referred to as chemical
shifts.
The observed chemical shift in a spectrum is generally attributed to two factors. The ﬁrst
contribution is the initial state eﬀect that essentially consists of changes in electrostatic
screening of core orbitals, as caused by ionic bonding. This eﬀect is illustrated in Fig. 10
on the Li1s level in lithium metal and lithium oxide. In pure lithium metal, the binding
energy is lower due to increased screening of the nucleus by 2s conduction electrons (Fig.
10a). In lithium oxide (Li2O), the oxygen atom withdraws electron density from the 2s
orbital of the lithium atoms, whereby the binding energy increases (Fig. 10b). The result-
ing photoelectron spectrum of the Li1s level shows two separate peaks for lithium metal
and lithium oxide, shifted by a characteristic distance (Fig. 10c).
Figure 10: Schematic illustration of a) the electron conﬁguration in Li metal, b) in Li2O
and c) the corresponding Li1s PES spectrum (schematically drawn). The Li2O core elec-
tron is more tightly bound due to electron density withdrawal from the Li atoms by the
O atom in the outer valence shells. Based on reference [28].
==PAGE:19==
11
2. Theory
The second contribution to the chemical shift arises from diﬀerences in the relaxation
energy, when the hole left by a liberated core electron is ﬁlled by a more energetic electron.
This ﬁnal state contribution however is generally much smaller than the initial state one
and therefore often neglected.
Spin-orbit splitting
Another feature observed in XPS spectra results from shifts in the atomic energy levels
due to spin-orbit coupling. This is the interaction between the orbital angular momentum
l of electrons and the spin magnetic dipole s = 1
2, which leads to the splitting of energy
states that would otherwise be degenerate. For each shell, the total angular momentum
that is given by j = |l ± s| can take two diﬀerent values (except s orbitals, for which
l = 0). This splitting of states is reﬂected in the XPS spectrum in two separate peaks,
which are referred to as doublet pairs. The ratio of intensities of doublet peaks is given
by
r = 2(l + s) + 1
2(l −s) + 1.
(9)
So p orbital doublets with j equal to 1/2 and 3/2 would appear with relative intensities
1:2, for example; the lower binding energy component being the more intense.
Satellite and plasmon loss peaks
When not using synchrotron radiation, the exciting X-ray beam is often not perfectly
monochromatic but has so-called satellite peaks shifted in energy from the main spectral
line (an explanation for the origin of satellites in the X-ray source is given in section
2.3.2). These satellite peaks are reﬂected in the XPS spectrum, since the energy of the
photoelectrons depends on the photon energy (see Eq. 7). Satellite peaks are much lower
in intensity than the main line and can generally be easily identiﬁed.
Another mechanism that can cause additional peaks in the spectrum for some materials is
a loss of energy due to plasmon excitation. This can happen as the photohole is deexciting,
in which case intrinsic plasmons are created. Extrinsic plasmons are excited somewhere
else along the path of the photoelectron to the surface of the solid [28]. As these excitations
are quantised they can be separated from other loss mechanisms, which simply contribute
to the broad background of the photoemission spectrum. They will instead produce peaks
shifted to higher binding energies from the main photoelectron lines.
2.2.3
Inverse Photoelectron Spectroscopy
Photoemission spectroscopy provides us with an eﬀective tool to probe the occupied states
of a specimen. For probing the unoccupied states Inverse Photoemission Spectroscopy
(IPES) can be used. In IPES, the sample is not irradiated by photons, but by monochro-
matic electrons, which couple to the unoccupied states above the Fermi level. As they
relax to lower unoccupied energy levels, they emit photons, whose energy can be used to
determine the binding energy of the ﬁnal state via
Ei = Ef + hν,
(10)
==PAGE:20==
2. Theory
12
where Ei is the energy of the incoming electron and Ef is the ﬁnal unoccupied state it
relaxes to. The process is illustrated in Fig. 11 for a semiconductor, together with the
photoemission process. The main challenge of IPES is that the inverse photoemission
process has a very low yield. The ratio of the diﬀerential cross sections of the inverse
photoemission and the photoemission processes is given by
R =
 λe
λph
!2
,
(11)
where λe and λph are the wavelengths of the emitted electrons and photons, respectively.
In the UV range <100 eV, R ≈10−5 and on the order of 1000 eV (characteristic of XPS),
R ≈10−3 [31]. The low cross section creates a need for high sensitivity photon detectors.
Additionally, long measuring times may be unavoidable to obtain a strong enough signal.
Figure 11: Illustration of the principle of inverse photoemission compared to photoemission
on a semiconductor.
IPES can generally be measured in two diﬀerent modes. In isochromat mode, the detected
photon energy is kept constant and the energy of the electron beam is ramped. In spec-
trograph mode, the electron beam energy is ﬁxed and the emitted photons are analysed
with a grating spectrometer.
Combining photoemission and inverse photoemission spectroscopy measurements allows
for a complete study of the electronic structure of a sample. Since both the valence band
edge and the conduction band edge are known, it is thereby possible to determine the
band gap of a material.
==PAGE:21==
13
2. Theory
2.2.4
Surface sensitivity of PES
All PES based techniques are inherently surface sensitive as a result of the limited distance
electrons can propagate in matter undisturbed. The deeper in the solid a photoelectron
is created, the less likely it is to reach the surface and the detector. The key parameter
determining the sampling depth is the inelastic mean free path λ of the electron, which
is deﬁned as the average distance between two scattering processes. While λ does depend
on the material the electron is travelling in, it has been empirically found that it tends to
follow a so-called universal curve that is a function of the electron energy. In Fig. 12 this
curve is displayed over a relevant energy range, showing measured values for individual
elements and a line indicating the theoretical prediction. The reason for the universal
trend is that in this energy range the inelastic scattering is mostly due to excitations of
valence band electrons, and the electron density in the valence band is very similar for
most materials [32, 33]. The curve has a broad minimum at around 70 eV, where the mean
free path is on the order of only a few Å. This energy regime therefore allows for probing
only a few atomic layers. The dependency of λ on the electron energy can be exploited
when the photon source is tunable to a desired wavelength, which generally is only the
case at a synchrotron.
Figure 12: Electron mean free path as a function of electron energy for various elements.
Adapted from reference [33].
The intensity dI of detected photoelectrons created at a depth of z drops exponentially
according to [28]
dI ∼e(−z/λ cos θ)dz,
(12)
where θ is the emission angle with respect to the surface normal. From this, the informa-
tion depth is deﬁned as the depth from which a deﬁned percentage (e.g. 95% or 99%) of
the total signal originates [34]. For XPS, this depth is often quoted as ca. 3λ, which is on
==PAGE:22==
2. Theory
14
the order of a few nanometers.
The very short inelastic mean free path of electrons also creates the need to perform PES
experiments in ultra-high vacuum (UHV), i.e. in the range of 10−9 mbar and below. This
is to ensure that the sample surface is clean and remains contamination free throughout
the experiment, and to avoid additional collisions of photoelectrons with gas atoms on
their way to the detector.
==PAGE:23==
15
2. Theory
2.3
X-ray Diﬀraction (XRD)3
X-ray diﬀraction is one of the most widely used techniques for structural analysis of ma-
terials. Diﬀraction from crystals, i.e. structures that are periodic in space, is described by
Bragg’s law. It states the condition for constructive interference of waves with a wave-
length λ hitting a crystal, whose lattice planes are spaced at a distance d, under an angle
of incidence θ (see Fig. 13) as
2d sin θ = nλ,
(13)
where n is an integer. Bragg’s law can be used for chemical identiﬁcation, as it allows for
the determination of the crystal’s lattice parameters. The positions of the Bragg reﬂections
also contain information about possible macro-strain of the lattice and qualitative phase
analysis, when several phases are present in the sample [38].
Figure 13: Illustration of the principle of Bragg diﬀraction. Two incoming light beams scat-
tering oﬀtwo diﬀerent atoms in a crystal lattice, interfere constructively if the diﬀerence
in the path length they travel is an integer multiple of their wavelength.
Apart from the positions of the peaks in a diﬀraction pattern, their intensities also provide
information about the crystal. If the lattice vectors deﬁning the crystal lattice are denoted
by Rn and the positions of the atoms with respect to any given lattice site by rj, any
atom position in the crystal is given by Rn + rj. The intensity of the scattering for which
constructive interference occurs is then given by the so-called structure factor [35],
F(Q) =
X
j
fj(Q)eiQ· rj
|
{z
}
Unit cell structure factor
X
n
eiQ· Rn
|
{z
}
Lattice sum
,
(14)
where fj is the atomic scattering factor, which is the Fourier transform of the electron
density, and Q is the scattering vector, deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the wavevectors
of the incoming wave and the scattered wave. The ﬁrst term of the equation is the structure
factor stemming from the unit cell and the second term is a sum over all lattice sites in
the crystal. The observed intensity in an experimentally obtained diﬀraction pattern is
the modulus squared of the structure factor |F(Q)|2. This intensity can be used to ﬁnd
the positions of the atoms in the unit cell. In addition to that it carries information on
the occupancy of atomic sites, as well as the texture, i.e. the orientation of crystallites in
a poly-crystalline sample [38].
3This section is based on references [35–37].
==PAGE:24==
2. Theory
16
2.3.1
X-ray sources
Several diﬀerent factors determine the quality of an X-ray beam produced by a source:
the number of emitted photons per second, the collimation of the beam, the source area
and the photon energy range, that has been conventionally deﬁned as a ﬁxed relative
energy bandwidth (BW) often chosen to be 0.1%. To combine these aspects into one
single quantity that can be used to compare X-ray sources, the brilliance of a source has
been deﬁned as
B =
photons/second
(mrad2)(mm2 source area)(0.1%BW).
During the second half of the twentieth century, there has been an enormous increase in
brilliance of X-ray sources, as is illustrated in Fig. 14, showing the achieved relative peak
brilliance over time.
Figure 14: Plot showing the peak brilliance of X-ray sources relative to that of the ﬁrst
X-ray tube as a function of time since the discovery of X-rays in 1895. Adapted from
reference [39].
While the standard is currently still marked by 3rd generation synchrotron radiation, a
new generation of X-ray sources is on the rise with free electron lasers (FELs). These
are expected to boost peak brilliance by another 10 orders of magnitude. The latest FEL
facility, that was opened to user operation in September 2017, is the European X-ray free-
electron laser (XFEL) in Hamburg, with a peak brilliance of ∼1033 photons/s/mrad2/mm2
/0.1%BW [40].
==PAGE:25==
17
2. Theory
2.3.2
The X-ray tube
The X-ray tubes that are commonly used on a laboratory scale nowadays are still based
on the tube invented by W.D. Coolidge in 1912. The working principle is illustrated in
Fig. 15a. A ﬁlament is heated and emits electrons, that are then accelerated towards
a water-cooled anode in a high voltage ﬁeld. When the electrons hit the anode, both
bremsstrahlung and X-rays characteristic of the anode material are created (see Fig.
15b). Bremsstrahlung arises from the deceleration of the electrons as they are deﬂected
by other charged particles in the anode. It therefore forms a continuum with its maximum
energy corresponding to the high voltage applied to the tube. The characteristic sharp
lines in the spectrum arise from elastic interactions of the electrons with atoms in the
anode. When the incoming electrons transfer their energy to a core electron, they can
remove it from its shell thereby creating a vacancy. When the vacancy is subsequently
ﬁlled by relaxation of a higher energy electron, X-rays with a wavelength corresponding
to the diﬀerence of the energy levels involved in the transition are emitted (see Fig. 15c)).
Figure 15: a) Schematic diagram of the X-ray tube developed by Coolidge, b) The spec-
trum of an X-ray tube shows discrete spectral lines characteristic of the anode material
over a broad continuum of bremsstrahlung radiation. c) Schematic energy diagram illus-
trating the origin of the spectral lines. The Kα lines originate from transitions between
the L and the K shell, while Kβ lines originate from M to K shell transitions. Based on
reference [35].
To obtain a monochromatic beam, the Kα line, which in the Siegbahn notation denotes
the transitions from the L-shell to the K-shell, is most commonly utilised. Both the Kα
and the Kβ line (resulting from M to K transitions) however possess a number of satellite
peaks at slightly shifted energies, which originate from simultaneously ionised shells in
the atom. When a vacancy in the K-shell is ﬁlled while another vacancy is present in the
L-shell (a so-called spectator hole), the total energy of the shell is shifted, leading to a Kα
satellite [41]. Another eﬀect producing satellites is the radiative Auger eﬀect (RAE), where
the K hole is ﬁlled not under emission of a full energy X-ray photon or a full-energy Auger
electron, but simultaneous emission of a lower-energy photon and excitation of an electron
in an outer shell [42]. As a result, a simple X-ray tube without a monochromator does not
provide a perfectly monochromatic beam, even though the intensity of the satellite peaks
is much lower than that of the main spectral line.
Another major drawback of the X-ray tube is that the energy of the produced X-rays
is dependent on the anode materials and cannot be continuously tuned. This, and the
==PAGE:26==
2. Theory
18
limitations in brilliance are the reason why in many cases an X-ray tube is not suﬃcient
as a light source and synchrotron radiation is needed.
2.3.3
Synchrotron radiation
Synchrotron radiation facilities are the most common sources of high-brilliance X-rays
nowadays. A synchrotron consists of an evacuated storage ring, in which accelerated rel-
ativistic electrons are circulating at constant energy. The ring in fact consists of a num-
ber of straight sections interconnected by bending magnets that force the particles on
a curved path. Additionally, insertion devices such as wigglers or undulators are placed
in the straight sections of the storage ring, which consist of a lattice of magnets forcing
the particles to perform small oscillations and thereby emit radiation. A schematic of a
synchrotron source is shown in Fig. 16.
Figure 16: Schematic of a synchrotron source showing the key components. Electrons are
emitted by an e-gun and accelerated by a linear accelerator into a booster ring. After
further acceleration they pass on into the storage ring, where they are kept on a circular
trajectory by bending magnets. Insertion devices emit X-ray radiation tangential to the
storage ring forming the beamlines, where experiments are performed. A radio frequency
source replenishes the energy lost by the electrons after emitting radiation. Based on
reference [36].
A synchrotron possesses ﬁve key components which are:
1. The electron source, generating electrons by emission from a hot ﬁlament. A
constant supply of electrons needs to be guaranteed, as there are always losses in
the storage ring. A linear accelerator accelerates the electrons to ca. 100 MeV.
2. A booster ring that serves to accelerate the electrons to the energy of the electrons
in the storage ring. From there they are periodically injected into the storage ring.
==PAGE:27==
19
2. Theory
In modern facilities, the current is being topped up almost continuously with very
small time intervals between the injections, allowing the synchrotron to be operated
at essentially constant current.
3. The storage ring is where the electrons are travelling at highly relativistic speeds
on a closed path that they are forced on by magnetic ﬁelds. In-between the bending
magnets, there are straight sections in the structure of the ring where insertion de-
vices (undulators or wigglers) are placed, to produce radiation. The bending magnets
themselves can also be used to provide radiation, however with a smaller brilliance
than what is achieved with insertion devices.
4. A radio frequency cavity is used to supply energy back to the electrons after
they have emitted radiation, so that they do not deviate from their path and are
lost.
5. The beamlines that run tangential to the storage ring is where the radiation is used
for experiments in experimental hutches. Before reaching the experimental hutch the
beam runs through an optics hutch where it is focused and monochromated. The
so-called front end of the beam line has several functions like ﬁltering the spectrum
and separating the beamline vacuum from the storage ring vacuum.
Bending magnet radiation
A bending magnet is the simplest insertion device to produce X-rays in a synchrotron.
While bending magnet radiation is not as brilliant as that created by wigglers and undu-
lators it is still commonly used, such as for this thesis at the Brazilian Synchrotron Light
Laboratory (LNLS).
When super-relativistic electrons are deﬂected by a magnetic ﬁeld, they emit tightly colli-
mated cones of radiation tangential to the electron trajectory, as illustrated schematically
in Fig. 17a. The emitted radiation depends on two parameters, the angular frequency of
the electrons ω0 and their energy in the storage ring that is given by the Lorentz factor
in units of the rest mass energy:
γ =
E
mc2.
(15)
This determines the opening angle of the cone, which is proportional to 1/γ. The emitted
radiation covers a broad spectrum, but for photon energies higher than about γ3ω0, the
spectral intensity falls oﬀquickly. It is therefore useful to deﬁne the characteristic or
critical frequency ωc given by
ωc = 3
2γ3ω0.
(16)
In practical units the critical photon energy ℏωc, that depends on the electron energy E
and the magnetic ﬁeld B can then be expressed as
ℏωc[keV] = 0.665 · E2[GeV] · B[T].
(17)
The spectral distribution of the emitted radiation is shown in Fig. 17b. It is a universal
function of the ratio between the photon energy and the characteristic cut-oﬀenergy that
scales with E2 and the current I in the storage ring. At the beamline, a slit usually selects
a fan of the emitted radiation cone in the horizontal plane. The desired photon energy
==PAGE:28==
2. Theory
20
(a)
(b)
Figure 17: (a) Schematic diagram of a bending magnet in a synchrotron indicating the
electron trajectory (blue arrow) and the emitted cone of radiation (green). Based on
reference [43]. (b) Spectrum emitted from a bending magnet, normalised by the square
of the electron energy and the beam current. Based on reference [35].
is then selected from the spectrum using monochromators such as silicon, germanium or
diamond crystals.
==PAGE:29==
21
3. Experimental
3
Experimental
3.1
Sample preparation
In this project, diﬀerent techniques of sample preparation were applied in order to obtain
ﬁlms suitable for diﬀerent experiments. These techniques are described below. The dyes
used for all experiments were purchased in powder form from Sigma-Aldrich. Furthermore,
diﬀerent substrate materials were used to comply with the requirements of the speciﬁc
measurements. The used substrates as well as details on the speciﬁc sample preparation
are described in the corresponding section on the respective experimental method.
Solution processing
A simple and fast way of ﬁlm deposition is to dissolve the molecules in a solvent, drop it
onto a substrate and let the solvent dry oﬀor degas in vacuum. For this thesis, all solution-
cast samples were prepared using ethanol as the solvent. The solutions were prepared by
mixing 0.018 g curcumin and 0.0013 g bixin with 1 ml ethanol, respectively, and leaving
them in an ultrasonic bath for a few minutes.
Thermal evaporation
Thermally evaporated samples were prepared in the vacuum chamber using an in-house
built evaporator with an integrated thermopcouple to monitor the temperature. The evap-
orator has a tantalum pocket, which is ﬁlled with the powder to be evaporated. After ﬁlling
the evaporator and installing it on the vacuum system, it was slowly heated by passing
a current through it. Before the evaporation it is necessary to allow for the degassing of
water and other contaminants to obtain a pure deposition. The evaporator temperature
and pressure in the chamber were carefully monitored during the degassing, since the
exact boiling point of curcumin and bixin under vacuum conditions was not known. The
evaporator was placed as closely to the sample as possible to maximise the deposition
rate.
Thermal evaporation has many advantages compared to solution processing, like nanome-
ter control of the ﬁlm thickness and high uniformity. Additionally, it has the potential of
creating ﬁlms with a higher intermolecular degree of order [44]. However, many organic
molecules are known to degrade during the evaporation/sublimation process [45].
3.2
Ultraviolet–Visible spectroscopy (UV-Vis)
UV-Vis measurements were performed in order to measure the absorption spectra of the
deposited ﬁlms. The main motivation for these measurements was to check whether the
molecules change under thermal evaporation, i.e. if they polymerise. The spectrophotome-
ter used for these experiments was an Olis 14. The basic setup of such an instrument is
shown in Fig. 18. Two diﬀerent light sources are available, a deuterium lamp for UV light
and a tungsten lamp for visible and NIR light. Together, these span a measurable wave-
length range of 185-2600 nm. For the experiment, a desired wavelength range is selected,
across which the instrument scans the probe beam by using a ﬁlter and a monochromator.
The beam is split between the sample and a reference. Behind each, the photon intensity
is measured by a photomultiplier throughout the UV and visible region and by a lead
sulﬁde (PbS) detector throughout near-infrared (NIR). The signals are then processed to
==PAGE:30==
3. Experimental
22
produce the absorbance or transmittance of the sample over the selected wavelength range.
Figure 18: Schematic diagram of a UV-Vis spectrophotometer. Based on reference [46].
Before each measurement, a baseline scan was taken without any sample inserted in the
instrument. This baseline was subtracted from all subsequent measurements. The samples
were prepared by evaporating the dyes onto 1 mm thick quartz glass holders, as quartz
has very low absorbance in the wavelength range of interest (ca. 300 - 700 nm). To verify
this, a spectrum of a clean quartz glass holder was measured.
3.3
Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
3.3.1
Vacuum System4
A (simpliﬁed) schematic diagram of the vacuum system used in this thesis for photoemis-
sion measurements to study the electronic structure of the dyes is shown in Fig. 19. The
system consists of three chambers: a load lock, a preparation chamber, and the analysis or
main chamber. The load lock is a small chamber that can quickly be vented and pumped
down again to a medium-high vacuum to insert samples into the system. For this thesis,
a thermal evaporator for sample preparation was also mounted on the load lock. The
preparation chamber can be used for diﬀerent kinds of sample preparations, but was not
used in this thesis. The analysis chamber is where all photoemission experiments took
place.
To obtain ultra-high vacuum (lower than 1 × 10−9 mbar), which is required for photoe-
mission spectroscopy, the chambers are evacuated by a system of pumps.
Rotary vane pumps are used to establish a ”rough vacuum” on the order of 10−3 mbar,
which is why they are also referred to as roughing pumps. Creating a rough vacuum is
4This section is based on references [47, 48].
==PAGE:31==
23
3. Experimental
Figure 19: Simpliﬁed schematic diagram of the vacuum system used for photoemission
spectroscopy.
necessary for pumps operating in the higher vacuum regimes to run eﬃciently. Rotary
vane pumps are positive displacement pumps, which operate by repeatedly enclosing a
gas volume from the chamber and forcing it into the exhaust pipe. In the current setup,
one rotary pump is used to pump the load lock and the preparation chamber and another
one to pump the analysis chamber. An additional rotary pump is connected to the helium
lamp used in UPS (see section 3.3.2).
To obtain vacuum up to around 1 × 10−10 mbar, turbomolecular pumps are used. These
operate in the molecular ﬂow regime, where gas atoms are more likely to collide with
the chamber walls than with other gas atoms. They use a turbine with rapidly rotating
blades that transfer their momentum to the gas atoms forcing them in a desired direc-
tion. Turbomolecular pumps cannot operate in the laminar ﬂow range, where gas atoms
frequently collide with each other (typically > 10−3 mbar). This creates the need to back
them by an adequate roughing pump. The system uses three turbomolecular pumps, one
exclusively connected to the analysis chamber, one connected to the load lock, ion pump
and the manipulator of the analysis chamber, and the third one to the helium lamp.
Both the preparation chamber and the analysis chamber are additionally pumped by an
ion pump. This is a type of capture pump that does not exhaust the gas atoms but traps
them in itself. Using strong electric ﬁelds, the gas atoms are ionised and accelerated to-
wards a solid electrode where they are captured.
Another type of capture pump is the titanium sublimation pump, which is used for addi-
tional pumping in the analysis chamber, as this is where the highest vacuum is required.
This pump sublimates the chamber walls with titanium ions from a ﬁlament. As titanium
==PAGE:32==
3. Experimental
24
is very reactive, it forms solid compounds with gas atoms colliding with the wall, thereby
further reducing the pressure in the chamber.
For all photoemission experiments, samples were prepared on molybdenum disulﬁde (MoS2)
substrate. This substrate is chosen for several reasons. It is conductive, which is impor-
tant to avoid charging of the sample during the measurements. It does not easily oxidise
and, since it is a layered material, it can be cleaved whereby a clean surface can easily
be obtained. For minimum contamination this is done just before the sample is put into
vacuum.
The molybdenum disulﬁde was glued onto the sample holder using a conductive two-part
silver epoxy adhesive that hardens upon heating. After the molybdenum disulﬁde was
cleaved, the dyes were deposited either by drop-casting of solutions onto the substrate
and subsequent degassing of the solvent in the vacuum chamber, or by thermal evapora-
tion inside the vacuum chamber. Tab. 1 gives an overview of the process parameters of
the samples prepared for photoemission experiments. The high availability of curcumin
allowed for trying out variations in the duration and temperature of the thermal evapora-
tion. In the case of bixin on the other hand, the thermal evaporation was simply continued
until a drop in the chamber pressure indicated that all powder had evaporated from the
evaporator.
Table 1: Process parameters for the samples prepared for photoemission experiments. The
substrate material in all cases was molybdenum disulﬁde.
Curcumin
Bixin
Evaporated
Solution-cast
Evaporated
Solution-cast
15 min @ 170◦C
∼60 min @ 170◦C
ethanol
135 min @ 170◦C
60 min @ 220◦C
3.3.2
Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy (UPS)
UPS was performed using the UVS 10/35 UV discharge lamp from SPECS. While it can
be operated with a variety of gases, in this project only helium was used. Through a gas
inlet, a quartz capillary is ﬁlled with the gas, where a discharge is ignited. This creates a
plasma, which emits UV light at wavelengths characteristic of the operating gas. In the
case of helium these are most importantly the HeIα line at 21.22 eV and the HeIIα line at
40.82 eV. The light is guided through a beam guide capillary into the analysis chamber.
In order to directly connect the lamp to UHV on a windowless path, there are two stages
of diﬀerential pumping. The ﬁrst stage is evacuated by a rotary pump and the second
stage by a turbo pump. To prevent the lamp from overheating, it is cooled by a fan.
Since the HeIα radiation originates from unionised He atoms and the HeIIα radiation from
singly ionised ones, the lines can be selected by adjusting the gas pressure in the discharge
capillary. When the pressure is lower, electrons in the plasma have a longer mean free path
and can therefore be accelerated to higher speeds, thereby ionising more of the helium gas.
Therefore, the HeIIα portion increases with regards to HeIα as the pressure is reduced.
In this thesis, all measurements were done using the HeIα line, which was obtained by
operating the lamp at a stable pressure of 5 × 10−8 mbar.
==PAGE:33==
25
3. Experimental
The spot size of the UV lamp on the sample is ca. 2.2 mm. So, in order to probe a larger
area of the sample, several diﬀerent positions were measured. Furthermore, the sample is
connected to ground in order to replenish the emitted electrons and avoid charging, as
this can lead to shifts in the spectrum.
3.3.3
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS)
The XPS system uses an XR-50 gun from SPECS. It is an unmonochromated source with
a magnesium/aluminium twin anode. In this thesis, all measurements were done using the
magnesium anode, whose Kα1/2 radiation line lies at 1253.6 eV. Its line width, according
to the manufacturer, is 680 meV. Since the source is not monochromated it also produces
satellite lines, most importantly the MgKα3 shifted by 8.4 eV from the main line. An alu-
minium window is placed at the exit of the gun to attenuate the signal such that only the
most intense part of the spectrum is transmitted, thereby eliminating the bremsstrahlung
contribution.
For performing XPS, the X-ray gun is moved close to the sample. The titanium sublima-
tion pump is turned oﬀto maintain UHV at all times during the measurement. Like in
UPS, the sample in grounded to keep it from charging.
Initial widescans were performed on all samples. This is to obtain an overview over the
entire spectrum in order to be able to determine which elements are present in the sam-
ple. It also allows for checking if the sample is properly positioned such that the X-ray
beam exclusively hits the sample and not the sample holder. This is most easily done
by checking the spectrum for iron peaks. In addition to the widescans, high resolution
spectra of the C1s and the O1s core levels were measured, as the samples are composed of
carbon and oxygen. On some samples, high resolution scans of the Mo3d line stemming
from the molybdenum disulﬁde substrate were measured, since their intensity can be used
to estimate the ﬁlm thickness.
3.3.4
Inverse Photoemission Spectroscopy (IPES)
Isochromat IPES was performed using a system by PSP Vacuum Technology. The electron
beam in the gun is produced by thermionic emission from an indirectly heated barioum
oxide (BaO) cathode. Barium oxide has a low working temperature (between 1100 K to
1200 K), which is important to achieve a low energy spread (ca. 0.25 eV (FWHM)), which
ultimately determines the energy resolution of the system [49]. It also has a low work
function (ca. 2 eV), which is desirable in order to achieve a high electron emission to make
up for low counting rates of the photons [50]. The electron gun produces a low energy
electron beam in the range 5 to 50 eV.
The emitted photons are detected by a bandpass detector that is designed such that only
photons of a speciﬁc energy are detected (9.5±0.5 eV). This is achieved by making the
photons pass through a strontium ﬂuoride (SrF2) window, whose transmission has a sharp
cutoﬀabove the desired photon energy. The window thereby ﬁlters out the photons with
too high energy. They then hit a sodium chloride (NaCl) coated photocathode whose
photoionisation eﬃciency sets in just near the desired photon energy, ﬁltering out those
photons whose energy is too low. The absorption of photons in the sodium chloride layer
leads to the emission of electrons, which are multiplied in a channeltron.
==PAGE:34==
3. Experimental
26
3.3.5
Data Analysis
XPS peak ﬁtting
All XPS peaks were ﬁtted in Matlab with a Pseudo-Voigt function made up by the sum
of a Lorentzian and a Gaussian function [51],
Pseudo-Voigt = (1 −m)
s
4 ln(2)
πωG2 exp
"
−
 4 ln(2)
ωG2
!
x2
#
+ m
2π
ωL
ωL
2
2 + 4x2,
(18)
where x = (E−E0), ωG is the FWHM of the Gaussian, ωL is the FWHM of the Lorentzian
and m is a parameter controlling the relative weighting of the two functions. This con-
volution of lineshapes is necessary as there are a number of sources for peak broadening
that have diﬀerent proﬁles. The Lorentzian broadening originates partly from the ﬁnite
lifetime of the core hole state. Additionally, the broadening caused by the used X-ray
source is assumed to be Lorentzian (as opposed to a Gaussian broadening of synchrotron
sources). Since this broadening is much bigger than that originating from the core hole
lifetime, the eﬀect of the latter is negligible. The Gaussian broadening is caused by atomic
vibrations as well as electron scattering and detection in the spectrometer [52]. Therefore
both lineshapes have a contribution from the instrumentation as well as the sample.
The background originating from inelastically scattered electrons was ﬁtted with a Shirley
background that assumes a constant energy-loss function. Details can be found in refer-
ence [53].
Film thickness estimation
Due to its extremely high surface sensitivity, XPS can also be used for the measurement
of ﬁlm thickness. There are several diﬀerent methods for doing this, the simplest of which
makes use of the attenuation of the photoelectron intensity of the substrate that the ﬁlm is
deposited on [54]. The probability that an electron excited at a depth z leaves the sample
without being scattered, decreases exponentially with the distance l it has to travel to
reach the surface (see Fig. 20):
P(z) = e−l/λ = e−z/(λ cos(θ))
(19)
where θ is the emission angle with respect to the surface normal and λ is the inelastic
mean free path of the electron, which depends on its kinetic energy (c.f. Fig. 12).
In the used setup the sample is aligned such that the emission angle is normal to the
surface giving cos(90◦) = 1. The intensity IS of the photoemission signal considering only
the substrate without the ﬁlm can then be determined by integrating over P(z) [55]:
IS = sS
Z ∞
0
e(−z/λ)dz = sSλ,
(20)
where sS = σS · LS · NS · λS · cos(θ) · Q(ES) is an element and instrument speciﬁc sensi-
tivity factor. σS is the photoelectron cross-section in cm2, LS is the angular asymmetry
of the photoemission intensity for each atom, NS is the atomic density in atoms/nm3 and
Q(ES) is the intensity/energy response function of the spectrometer at the kinetic energy
==PAGE:35==
27
3. Experimental
Figure 20: Schematic illustrating considerations for ﬁlm thickness measurements by the
overlayer attenuation method. Based on reference [30].
of the photoelectrons of the considered line.
The corresponding expression for the intensity of the signal from the ﬁlm IF is given by
IF = sF
Z t
0 e(−z/λ)dz = sFλ

1 −e(−t/λ)
,
(21)
where t is the ﬁlm thickness. Considering the same element line in both materials, the
ﬁlm thickness is found from Eq. 20 and 21 to be
t = λ ln
 
1 + IF/sF
IS/sS
!
.
(22)
The equation can be further simpliﬁed by assuming sS = sF = s. This is clearly a crude
approximation, but in many cases provides a suﬃcient estimate of the ﬁlm thickness,
which is then given by
t = λ ln
IF
IS

.
(23)
In this thesis, the inelastic mean free path was calculated using the TPP-2M formula,
that was empirically derived by Tanuma et al. [56].
3.4
X-ray Diﬀraction (XRD)
The XRD measurements were performed at the Brazilian Synchrotron Light Laboratory
(Laboratório Nacional de Luz Síncrotron – LNLS) in Campinas, Brazil. The used beamline
(XRD2) is dedicated to X-ray diﬀraction in the hard X-ray regime (3 to 17 keV). A
schematic of the beamline setup is shown in Fig. 21. The entire length of the beamline
from the bending magnet to the sample covers 17.5 m. The front end of the beamline
isolating the storage ring vacuum from the beamline vacuum is located at 4.8 m from the
bending magnet. The X-ray beam ﬁrst enters the optical hutch, where it passes through
white beam slits, and is then collimated by a rhodium-coated vertical-focusing mirror and
monochromated by a silicon (111) double-crystal monochromator.
==PAGE:36==
3. Experimental
28
Figure 21: Schematic of the XRD2 beamline at LNLS.
Before hitting the sample, the beam passes through additional slits in the experimental
hutch. The sample sits on a goniometer that allows for careful adjustment of its position.
The signal is detected by a linear Mythen 1k detector by Dectris sitting at a distance of
91.6 cm from the sample. It has 1280 pixels with a pixel size of 50 µm and a frame rate of
2kHz.
Fig. 22 shows photographs of the beamline setup. The sample is placed on a copper sam-
ple holder with a hole (see Fig. 22a), as all measurements are performed in transmission
mode. A beamstop located right behind the sample blocks the direct beam so that it does
not damage the detector at small measuring angles. When the beam hits the sample, the
scattered signal is recorded by the detector scanning an angular range from 3◦to 30◦
in steps of 0.25◦(see Fig. 22b). The beam energy is 8.00 keV, which corresponds to a
wavelength of 1.55 Å.
Evaporated XRD samples were prepared on 1.5 µm thin aluminium foil that was spanned
across a steel washer and attached to it using silver epoxy. Solution-cast samples were de-
posited on mylar foil. The solvent used in this case was chloroform. For the measurements,
the samples where attached to the sample holder using clips. Additionally, measurements
were performed on the pure unprocessed dye powders. For these, the powder was directly
ﬁlled into the hole of the copper holder, which was closed on one side with 1.5 µm thin
aluminium foil.
Alongside determining the crystal structures of the dyes, one of the main interests of the
XRD experiment was to compare the degree of crystalline order of the diﬀerent deposi-
tion techniques. A high degree of crystalline order corresponds to a low amount of trap
sites where charge carriers recombine and is therefore favourable for solar cell materials.
In order to investigate the inﬂuence of heat on the crystalline structure, samples were
annealed on a hot plate and measured after cooling down.
==PAGE:37==
29
3. Experimental
(a)
(b)
Figure 22: (a) Close-up photograph of the sample stage at the beamline (b) Photograph
of the beamline indicating the trajectory of the X-ray beam and main components.
==PAGE:38==
4. Results and Discussion
30
4
Results and Discussion
In this section the main experimental results will be presented and discussed. First, ab-
sorption spectra from UV-Vis spectroscopy are presented, then the results of the diﬀerent
PES techniques, and ﬁnally, XRD patterns measured at LNLS in Campinas.
4.1
Absorption Spectra
Absorption spectra of evaporated curcumin and bixin were measured in order to investi-
gate if evaporation changes the structure of the molecules. If this is the case, the absorption
behaviour of the evaporated ﬁlms is expected to diﬀer from that of undamaged molecules.
The photograph in Fig. 23 shows the evaporated ﬁlms on quartz glass substrate that the
UV-Vis measurements were carried out on. Sample a) is the curcumin sample and sample
b) the bixin sample. The curcumin ﬁlm is visibly thicker, as only small amounts of bixin
were available. To the naked eye, the curcumin ﬁlm appears a similar shade of yellow as
the powder it was evaporated from. The evaporated bixin ﬁlm also appears rather yellow,
while the powder was dark red.
Figure 23: Photograph of thermally evaporated a) curcumin and b) bixin ﬁlms on quartz
glass used in UV-Vis measurements.
A clean quartz glass plate without any dye was measured to check whether its absorption
behaviour interferes with that of the dyes. The spectrum is shown in Fig. 24. As can be
seen, the absorbance of the plate sets in only in the UV range < 300 nm. At higher wave-
lengths it is almost constant and negligibly small (ca. 0.05) compared to the absorbance
measured on the dye ﬁlms. It is therefore assumed to only cause a small constant verti-
cal shift in the spectra measured on the dyes, which does not obstruct their interpretation.
The UV-Vis spectra measured on the two samples are presented in Fig. 25, together with
spectra measured in solution and on solution-cast samples by Vilany Santana from Uni-
versidade de Brasília [57], to serve as comparison. The solvent used in those measurements
was chloroform. The data was normalised in order to better compare spectral absorbance
independent of ﬁlm thickness. The AM 1.5 solar spectral irradiance is displayed in the
background (data from reference [58]).
It can be seen that the absorption spectrum of the evaporated curcumin sample is very
similar to that of the solution-cast sample with the peak position at 434 nm. This is in
relatively good agreement with absorbance spectra reported in the literature (measured
in methanolic-aqueous solution) [59, 60]. The peak of the in-solution spectrum is slightly
shifted to shorter wavelengths.
The bixin samples, on the other hand, all exhibit very diﬀerent absorption behaviour.
The evaporated sample absorbs only at less than ca. 470 nm, which is in agreement with
==PAGE:39==
31
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 24: Absorbance spectrum of the quartz glass plate used as a substrate for the
UV-Vis measurements.
its yellow colour as seen in Fig. 23. Absorption peaks at 429 nm, 457 nm and 487 nm re-
ported in references [61, 62] (measured in acetone solution) are not observed in either of
the spectra, however the agreement between the in-solution spectrum and the measure-
ment reported in reference [10] is very good.
The fact that the in-solution spectra for both curcumin and bixin are shifted to shorter
wavelengths with respect to the solution-cast spectra can likely be explained by the dis-
solution of dye aggregates in the solution. According to Scheibe et al. who ﬁrst observed
and explained this phenomenon, supramolecular polymerisation changes the absorption
spectrum relative to that of the monomer by the vicinity eﬀect of the adjacent molecules
[63]. In this case, this causes a shift to longer wavelengths, known as a hypsochromical
shift [64]. The shift strongly depends on the solvent, as explicitly illustrated for bixin in
reference [65], which explains the disagreement between the measurement and the cited
literature.
The absorption spectra of the molecules allow for estimation of their band gaps accord-
ing to Eq. 2. The size of the band gap is limited by the maximum wavelength that is
absorbed, as light of longer wavelength is less energetic. The maximum wavelength at
which the molecules absorb was determined by placing a linear ﬁt on the absorption edge
and ﬁnding the intersection with the x-axis. The obtained absorption edge wavelengths
together with the resulting band gaps are listed in Tab. 2. The strong shift of the ab-
sorption edge of the evaporated bixin ﬁlm towards shorter wavelengths corresponds to
an increased band gap as compared to the solution-cast and the in-solution sample. As a
larger band gap can generally be associated with a shorter conjugation length this could
be an indicator that the evaporation caused the long conjugated chain of the molecule
(see Fig. 1) to break apart.
==PAGE:40==
4. Results and Discussion
32
(a) Curcumin
(b) Bixin
Figure 25: Normalised absorbance spectra of curcumin and bixin measured by UV-Vis
displayed together with the normalised solar spectral irradiance. The diﬀerent curves
represent diﬀerent samples that were prepared by evaporation and solution-casting as
well as a sample that was measured in solution. The data of the latter two spectra was
provided by Vilany Santana from Universidade de Brasília.
It should be noted that the absorbance of the evaporated bixin sample was much lower
than that of the other samples due to the ﬁlm being very thin. For weakly absorbing sam-
==PAGE:41==
33
4. Results and Discussion
ples, the measurement error of the instrument is higher. Additionally, the fact that the
cut-oﬀof the absorption edge is less clear than on the other samples introduces a source
of uncertainty when performing the linear ﬁt. Hence, the error range of the obtained band
gap for the evaporated bixin sample is assumed to be larger than that of the other samples.
Table 2: Summary of the band gap estimation from UV-Vis absorption spectra of curcumin
and bixin.
Absorption edge [nm]
Band gap [eV]
Curcumin
Evaporated
529
2.3
Solution-cast
525
2.4
In solution
470
2.6
Bixin
Evaporated
488
2.5
Solution-cast
582
2.1
In solution
531
2.3
From these results it is concluded that curcumin ﬁlms can be prepared by thermal evap-
oration without chemical decomposition of the molecule. Bixin, on the other, hand seems
to be more sensitive to high temperature. While this may limit its processability, it should
be noted that in most applications solution-processing is generally preferred over ther-
mal evaporation, because of cost and time factors. This result does, however, impact the
interpretation of photoemission measurements performed on evaporated bixin ﬁlms (see
section 4.2).
==PAGE:42==
4. Results and Discussion
34
4.2
Electronic Structure
In this section, the results of the photoemission measurements will be presented and
discussed.
4.2.1
Film growth
Thermal evaporation
In a ﬁrst electronic characterisation of the ﬁlms, XPS widescans covering an energy range
of 0 to 1100 eV binding energy were performed to obtain an overview over the photoemis-
sion spectra of the samples. The results are shown in Fig. 26. The four diﬀerent curves
represent four diﬀerent samples: the freshly cleaved molybdenum disulﬁde substrate be-
fore evaporation (shown for comparison), the curcumin sample that was evaporated for
135 min at 170◦C, the curcumin sample evaporated for 60 min at 220◦C and the evapo-
rated bixin sample. The spectrum of the curcumin sample evaporated for 15 min at 170◦C
showed no diﬀerence to that of the sample evaporated for 135 min at the same temperature
and is therefore omitted here.
Figure 26: XPS widescans measured on cleaved molybdenum disulﬁde substrate, a thin
and a thick evaporated curcumin ﬁlm (evaporated for 135 min at 170◦C and 60 min at
220◦C, respectively) and a bixin ﬁlm. The spectra were shifted vertically for clarity. Pho-
toelectron and Auger lines of C, O, Mo and S are indicated.
The grey lines indicate the positions of photoelectron and Auger lines of all present el-
ements – carbon, oxygen, molybdenum and sulphur – taken from literature [66]. The
photoelectron lines are labelled according to the energy levels they arise from and the
==PAGE:43==
35
4. Results and Discussion
Auger lines according to the shells involved in the transition that produced them. The
small peaks at ca. 187 eV and 254 eV were identiﬁed as plasmon loss peaks of the Mo3d
and S2p lines.
The main photoelectron lines observed in all spectra are the C1s and O1s lines. Even on
the cleaved molybdenum disulﬁde these are present as a result of contamination. Addition-
ally, on the molybdenum disulﬁde sample and the curcumin sample evaporated at 170◦C
the lines of the Mo3d- and S2p-families can clearly be seen. This is an indication that
the curcumin sample evaporated at the lower temperature is very thin, despite a longer
duration of the evaporation. The ﬁlm on the other curcumin sample is thick enough to
eliminate XPS signal from the molybdenum disulﬁde substrate.
High resolution spectra of the Mo3d lines on the thin curcumin (135 min at 170◦C) and
bixin sample are seen in Fig. 27. Fig. 27b reveals that that there is still a small contribu-
tion from the substrate present on the bixin sample, which is not visible in the widescan.
The intensity diﬀerence between the Mo3d line at 230 eV measured on the samples before
and after evaporation was used to estimate the thickness of the ﬁlms according to Eq. 20.
For a rough estimation it is suﬃcient to determine the intensity as the number of counts
at the peak. The results are shown in Tab. 3 along with the inelastic mean free path used
in the calculation, which was very similar for both materials.
Table 3: Results of the ﬁlm thickness estimation on the thin curcumin (evaporated for
135 min at 170◦C) and the bixin ﬁlm.
IMFP λ [Å]
thickness t [nm]
Curcumin thin
29.3
0.8
Bixin
29.1
7.2
(a) Curcumin thin
(b) Bixin
Figure 27: XPS spectra of the Mo3d line of the thin evaporated curcumin ﬁlm and the
bixin ﬁlm that were used to calculate ﬁlm thicknesses.
The widescans in Fig. 26 also exhibit diﬀerences in the intensity of the C1s and the O1s
peaks between the dye ﬁlms and the substrate. These are investigated more closely in
==PAGE:44==
4. Results and Discussion
36
Fig. 28 (curcumin) and Fig. 29 (bixin), which show background-subtracted high reso-
lution spectra of the two photoelectron lines. In addition to the samples shown in the
widescan, the curcumin ﬁlm evaporated for 15 min at 170◦C is also included in Fig. 28.
A satellite peak arising from the Kα3 line of the magnesium anode of the X-ray source
can be seen at an energy shift of -8.4 eV. The photoemission lines are compared to those
measured on molybdenum disulﬁde before evaporation. All measurements were taken on
the same sample which was recleaved between evaporation at 170◦C and 220◦C.
The evolution of the C1s peak with increasing ﬁlm thickness shows a gradual shift towards
lower binding energies. A signiﬁcant change in intensity with respect to the bare molybde-
num disulﬁde is only observed for the thick curcumin sample evaporated at 220◦C. That
ﬁlm also exhibits a shoulder on the high binding energy side of the peak, indicating the
existence of diﬀerent components.
For the O1s line, no shift in peak position is observed as the curcumin ﬁlm is grown
onto the substrate, but a clear increase in peak intensity. It is also found that the peak
intensity is higher after recleaving the substrate than on the original bare substrate. An
explanation for this could be that the curcumin ﬁlm was not entirely removed when the
sample was recleaved. It can also be seen that the peak of the thick evaporated ﬁlm has
a soft shoulder on the low binding energy side around 532 eV that cannot be observed on
the thinner ﬁlms.
Figure 28: High resolution XPS spectra of the C1s and O1s line of curcumin showing the
evolution of peak position and intensity as the ﬁlm thickness increases.
The obtained results suggest that only the curcumin ﬁlm evaporated at 220◦is thick
enough to study the molecule without contributions from organic contaminants present
on the substrate. They also show that the deposition rate of the thermal evaporation is
much higher at higher temperatures.
The corresponding high resolution scans of the C1s and O1s line before and after evap-
oration of bixin are shown in Fig. 29. On the bixin ﬁlm the C1s peak shifts to lower
==PAGE:45==
37
4. Results and Discussion
binding energies and reveals an additional smaller peak near 290 eV. The O1s peak shows
no change in intensity, but appears to shift slightly towards higher binding energies and
reveal an additional component on the low binding energy side.
Figure 29: High resolution XPS spectra of the C1s and O1s line before and after evapo-
ration of bixin.
Since the PES signal scales with the amount of atoms in the sample that it stems from, the
ratio between the C1s and O1s intensities normalised by the corresponding photoionisation
cross-sections reﬂects the ratio of carbon and oxygen atoms in the ﬁlm. For determining
this ratio the intensities were calculated by integrating the area under the peaks. The
photoionisation cross-sections were taken from reference [67]. The results for each ﬁlm are
listed in Tab. 4. Comparing these ratios to the theoretically expected ones is a measure of
determining the impact of the organic contamination on the substrate on the measured
signal. It can be seen that the carbon-oxygen ratio of the thick curcumin ﬁlm (60 min at
220◦C) of 3.8 is closest to the expected ratio of 3.5 (21 carbon to 6 oxygen atoms). In
the cases of the other curcumin ﬁlms, the relative amount of oxygen is too small. In the
case of bixin, the expected ratio is 6.25 (25 carbon to 4 oxygen atoms). The ratio of 5.7
found from the spectra therefore indicates a small excess of oxygen. The disagreement
between the relative signal intensities and the expected ones can in both the case of
bixin and curcumin be ascribed to contributions from substrate contaminants. This result
underlines that the curcumin sample evaporated for 60 min at 220◦C is the only sample
that is thick enough to be studied independently of substrate contributions by PES. It
also further supports the ﬁnding of the UV-Vis measurement that the curcumin molecule
does not decompose during evaporation (see section 4.1).
==PAGE:46==
4. Results and Discussion
38
Table 4: Overview of the intensity ratios between the C1s and the O1s lines normalised
by photoionisation cross-section obtained on the evaporated curcumin and bixin ﬁlms.
Sample
Normalised C1s/O1s
intensity ratio
Curcumin
15min @ 170◦C
6.2
135min @ 170◦C
5.5
60min @ 220◦C
3.8
Bixin
60min @ 220◦C
5.7
Solution casting
The high resolution spectra of the C1s and O1s peaks measured on the solution-cast
ﬁlms were generally noisier than the ones measured on the evaporated ﬁlms (see Fig. 30
compared to Fig. 28 and 29). Possible explanations for this could be that the evaporated
ﬁlms are more ordered and/or more homogeneously deposited onto the substrate. Bixin
was found to not perfectly dissolve in ethanol even after a long time in the ultrasonic
bath, and to precipitate quickly as soon as it was left unstirred. This likely lead to a very
nonuniform ﬁlm. Furthermore the dye-solvent ratio was much lower for bixin than for
curcumin due to lower availability.
The peaks also showed a broader shape than those measured on the evaporated samples
(more closely discussed in section 4.2.2) which lead to the suspicion that the ethanol had
not fully evaporated and was contributing to the measured signals. To check for this,
the samples were subjected to a heat treatment that would allow for evaporation of the
remaining ethanol. Fig. 30 shows the C1s and O1s peaks at every step of the treatment
for the curcumin and the bixin sample. The grey curves show a reference spectrum from
a sample prepared only with pure ethanol and no dye. The curve labels indicate the
annealing time of each consecutive heating step and the current applied to the sample
holder. Since the temperature characteristics of the holder are not exactly known, the
current was slowly increased throughout the heat treatment, while the chamber pressure
was monitored. The increase in pressure indicated that material was being evaporated
from the sample during annealing.
When comparing the pure ethanol spectrum to that measured on bare molybdenum disul-
ﬁde (see Fig. 28 and 29), it can be seen that the main peaks are in the same position and
the ethanol spectrum has small additional peaks. These could be attributed to the chem-
ical shift of the C-O bond, while the rest of the spectrum stems from the same organic
contamination as measured on the bare substrate. This is an indicator that the spectrum
is dominated by the substrate contaminants.
Looking at curcumin (Fig. 30a), no signiﬁcant changes in peak position, shape or intensity
can be observed as the sample is annealed. The C1s peak lies at a slightly lower binding
energy than that measured on pure ethanol; the O1s peak however is rather similar to
that on pure ethanol. There is a slight increase in the intensity of the shoulder on the
low energy binding side at roughly the position where the ethanol spectrum has a peak.
After the ﬁnal heat treatment of 240 min this eﬀect however is undone again. The bixin
spectrum diﬀers more visibly from that measured on pure ethanol, especially the O1s
==PAGE:47==
39
4. Results and Discussion
peak. Most notably, it has a peak near 530 eV (that appears to become more pronounced
upon thermal annealing), which was not observed on the evaporated sample (see Fig. 29).
The main peak remains around 533.5 eV, like that of the pure ethanol sample.
Based on the comparison between the pure ethanol and the bare substrate discussed above,
the spectra of the solution-cast dyes are arguably more aﬀected by the contribution from
the substrate contaminants than the ethanol. What further supports this interpretation is
the fact that the spectra change very little upon heating, i.e. the evaporation of possible
ethanol remnants does not aﬀect them. The reason for the contribution from substrate
contaminants could be a consequence of the ﬁlms being very thin. In this case, a diﬀerent
solvent would possibly yield diﬀerent results, especially if it allowed for deposition of more
uniform and thicker ﬁlms. Another possible explanation is that contaminants from the
substrate mix with the solution before the solvent is dried oﬀ, such that they are spread
throughout the whole thickness of the ﬁlm.
==PAGE:48==
4. Results and Discussion
40
(a) Curcumin
(b) Bixin
Figure 30: High resolution XPS spectra of the C1s and O1s line measured on solution-
cast samples before annealing and after each annealing step. The grey line shows spectra
measured on a pure ethanol sample.
==PAGE:49==
41
4. Results and Discussion
4.2.2
Core levels
High resolution XPS spectra of the C1s and O1s state were recorded for a more careful
investigation of the chemical composition of the ﬁlms. Fig. 31 shows the measured and
ﬁtted C1s line of curcumin measured on an evaporated ﬁlm (Fig. 31a) and a solution-cast
ﬁlm (Fig. 31b). The ﬁtted Shirley background has been subtracted from the curves. Under
each graph the residue curve is shown, which is calculated as the diﬀerence between the
measured data and the ﬁt. For better comparability, it is normalised to the maximum
intensity of the corresponding spectrum.
Figure 31: Fitted C1s line of curcumin measured by XPS on a) an evaporated ﬁlm and
b) a solution-cast ﬁlm. The individual components of the ﬁt represent the diﬀerent types
of carbon bonds occurring in curcumin, which are illustrated in c).
The C1s main peak is located at 285.5 eV and a satellite peak arising from the Kα3 line of
the magnesium anode of the X-ray source can be seen at an energy shift of -8.4 eV. The
measured data is ﬁtted with three components corresponding to the C–C bonds, the C–O
bonds and the C=O bond, as illustrated in Fig. 31c. This is a simpliﬁcation, as the C–C
and C–O bonds in curcumin are not all the same; the energy resolution of the spectrum
however is quite limited by the instrumentation. A more detailed analysis would require
a synchrotron source. The largest considered component is therefore ascribed to the 13
C–C bonds of carbon bound to either two or three other carbon atoms. The second largest
component are the 7 C–O bonds, which are both carbon atoms bound to two other carbon
==PAGE:50==
4. Results and Discussion
42
atoms and one oxygen atom, as well as carbon atoms bound only to one oxygen atom.
As oxygen has a higher electronegativity than carbon, this component is shifted towards
higher binding energy. The C=O bond is shifted even further, as a result of the double
bond. Curcumin possesses only one such bond, which is why this component is the weakest.
In Fig. 32, the C1s spectra measured on bixin are shown. Like in the case of curcumin,
three components were considered here. In bixin, the C–C component stemming from 22
carbon atoms is even more dominant. It is followed by the C=O and the O–C=O carbons
which were ﬁtted as only one component, and ﬁnally the single C–O bond of the molecule.
For bixin, the agreement between the measured data and the ﬁt is much lower than for
curcumin. This can be a result of higher contribution from the substrate contaminants due
to the lower ﬁlm thickness and uniformity discussed before. In the case of the evaporated
sample, the degradation of the molecule discussed in section 4.1 certainly also plays a role.
Figure 32: Fitted C1s line of bixin measured by XPS on a) an evaporated ﬁlm and b)
a solution-cast ﬁlm. The individual components of the ﬁt represent the diﬀerent types of
carbon bonds occurring in bixin, which are illustrated in c).
For both curcumin and bixin, it can be seen that the main peak of the evaporated sample
is around 3-4 times as intense as that of the solution-cast sample. The spectra measured
on the solution-cast ﬁlms are also much noisier, as is reﬂected in the residue curves.
Furthermore, the spectra of the evaporated ﬁlms allow for a distinction of two diﬀerent
==PAGE:51==
43
4. Results and Discussion
components by eye, while the solution-cast spectra in both cases only show one broad
peak. This was initially assumed to be a result of contributions from ethanol still present
on the sample, which however seems unlikely given that no change in the peak shape was
observed upon annealing (see section 4.2.1). Substrate contaminant contributions there-
fore appear to be a more reasonable explanation. An alternative interpretation could be
that the evaporated ﬁlms have a higher degree of order, which can give rise to sharper
peaks in XPS spectra. This diﬀerence between the two deposition methods is also reﬂected
in the broadening of the ﬁtted peaks. The Lorentzian widths of the ﬁtted components in
the spectra of the solution-cast samples are much larger than those of the evaporated
samples. In both cases, however, the Lorentzian widths are too large to correspond to the
broadening caused by the X-ray source and the hole-lifetimes, and are therefore assumed
to be increased by the simpliﬁed consideration of only three components.
In the top part of Tab. 5 the binding energies of each ﬁtted component are listed alongside
values found in literature [68] for the corresponding bond. The diﬀerence from the litera-
ture values is indicated. For the curcumin samples it is found that the ﬁtted components
are shifted in binding energy from the literature values, but the relative chemical shift
is similar. The peak positions on the bixin sample are very far oﬀas a result of the low
quality of the data and the simpliﬁed ﬁt.
The area of each component’s peak corresponds to the intensity of the signal caused by
that bond. The ratio between the areas of the individual peaks should therefore reﬂect the
number ratio between the bonding types occurring in the molecule. In the bottom part
of Tab. 5 the component ratios of the ﬁtted data are compared to the expected ratios.
On all samples the ratios are found to deviate relatively strongly from the expected ones,
which is not surprising given the data quality and the simpliﬁcations made in the ﬁt.
Table 5: Overview of the binding energies and intensity ratios of the ﬁtted components in
the C1s peak on curcumin and bixin, alongside literature values from reference [68] and
theoretical expectations (grey cells).
Binding energy in eV
Curcumin
Bixin
Evap.
Diﬀ.
Sol.
Diﬀ.
Evap.
Diﬀ.
Sol.
Diﬀ.
C–C
284.8
285.4
0.6
285.6
0.8
284.8
285.5
0.7
285.9
1.1
C–O
286.3
287.1
0.8
287.1
0.8
286.3
286.9
0.6
288.2
1.9
C=O
287.8
288.5
0.7
288.7
0.9
287.8
289.6
1.8
290.3
2.5
Component intensity ratios
Curcumin
Bixin
Evap.
Sol.
Evap.
Sol.
1 : 2
1.86
1.4
3.1
22
20.6
22.9
1 : 3
13
15.1
13.3
11
15.0
12.1
2 : 3
7
10.8
4.3
0.5
0.7
0.7
==PAGE:52==
4. Results and Discussion
44
4.2.3
Valence band
The valence band spectra measured by UPS on evaporated and solution-cast curcumin
are shown in Fig. 33. In order to eliminate contributions from the substrate, the thickest
evaporated sample (60 min at 220◦C) was used for the UPS measurements. The diﬀerently
coloured curves represent diﬀerent positions on the sample. On the evaporated sample
(Fig. 33a), before the high resolution measurement at each position a quick scan was
performed, shown as a dashed line. The purpose of this was to check whether the exposure
to UV light leads to changes in the spectrum. It can be seen that the intensity of the quick
scans is higher than that of the corresponding long scans below -2 eV, but this diﬀerence is
on the same order as the ﬂuctuations between the individual positions. These ﬂuctuations
are stronger on the solution-cast sample (Fig. 33b) and continue above -2 eV, further
supporting the assumption that the solution-cast ﬁlm is less uniform.
(a) Evaporated
(b) Solution-cast
Figure 33: UPS measurement on (a) evaporated and (b) solution-cast curcumin ﬁlms
on molybdenum disulﬁde substrate. Diﬀerent colours represent diﬀerent positions on the
sample; the dashed lines in (a) show quick scans taken before the high resolution mea-
surements.
The corresponding results for bixin are shown in Fig. 34. In the case of the evaporated
sample (Fig. 34a), one position was measured at the beginning of the series and again in
the end after measuring all the other positions. There is quite a large discrepancy between
the signal strength of the two measurements, however the peak positions remain the same.
On both samples it is generally found that the signal strength varies quite strongly between
the individual positions, but the peak positions appear to be similar. The evaporated
sample shows peaks at around -3.6 eV and -2.4 eV, which are not observed in the solution
cast sample, and the signal drops to zero at ca. -1.5 eV. Given the very low thickness
of the ﬁlm, it is likely that the features observed on the evaporated sample stem from
the molybdenum disulﬁde substrate. The signal of the solution-cast sample, on the other
hand, may have a contribution from the solvent. In order to test for that, the sample was
annealed for 30 min and the measurement was repeated. The result of this can be seen in
Fig. 35a. The curves show no peaks anymore, but drop to zero around a similar value as
before the anneal.
==PAGE:53==
45
4. Results and Discussion
(a) Evaporated
(b) Solution-cast
Figure 34: UPS measurement of (a) evaporated and (b) solution-cast bixin ﬁlms on
molybdenum disulﬁde substrate. Diﬀerent colours represent diﬀerent positions on the
sample.
Additionally, a sample of only ethanol not containing any bixin was measured in order to
separate the signal from that of the bixin. The corresponding result is shown in Fig. 35b.
The curves at position 1 and, to a lesser degree, at position 2 show a peak at -2.8 eV, a
feature that appears to be reﬂected in the curves of the solution-cast sample (Fig. 34b).
However, the latter possesses another peak at ca. -1.6 eV, which is not observed on the
ethanol spectrum. Since this does not originate from molybdenum disulﬁde either, it is
likely to be a feature of bixin.
(a) Solution-cast after annealing
(b) Solvent only
Figure 35: UPS measurement on (a) the solution-cast bixin sample after annealing and
(b) a pure ethanol sample.
==PAGE:54==
4. Results and Discussion
46
4.2.4
Band gap
The band gaps of the molecules were determined from combined UPS and IPES spectra.
As a result of the considerations made in section 4.2.3, the calculation of the band gap was
based on the evaporated curcumin ﬁlm spectra, while for bixin those of the solution-cast
ﬁlm were taken. The graphs in Fig. 36 show the intensity normalised UPS spectra, which
were averaged over all positions, together with the IPES spectra. The latter were only
measured on evaporated ﬁlms. It should be noted that the signal obtained in the IPES
measurement was signiﬁcantly lower than that in the UPS measurement.
(a) Curcumin
(b) Bixin
Figure 36: Combined UPS and IPES spectra for curcumin and bixin.
In order to determine the valence and conduction band edges, linear ﬁts were applied to
the UPS and IPES data, respectively, and their intersection with the x-axis recorded. The
tail of the IPES data is a result of the gradual onset of photoionisation in the sodium
chloride coated photocathode in the detector (see section 3.3.4). It is therefore not con-
sidered to be actual signal from the sample. This is why the linear ﬁt is applied to the
straight section of the curve as shown in Fig. 37b. The intersection points of the linear
ﬁts with the x-axis mark the valence and the conduction band edge. The band gap was
then determined as the energy diﬀerence between the band edges. The results of this are
listed in Tab. 6, together with the values obtained from the UV-Vis absorption spectra
for comparison.
It is found that there is rather good agreement between the experimentally determined
band gap sizes of curcumin. The values found for bixin are in both cases larger than for
curcumin, which is contrary to the expectation (based on the colours of the dyes), but
likely explainable by the damaging of the molecule upon thermal evaporation (as discussed
in section 4.1). This could be the reason for the high conduction band edge found in the
IPES measurement on evaporated bixin, which is the main cause for the diﬀerence in band
gaps between the two molecules (see Fig. 37). In addition to that, neither the IPES nor
the UPS signal obtained on bixin is free from contributions from substrate contaminants,
which has been discussed in the previous sections. This is expected to introduce high
==PAGE:55==
47
4. Results and Discussion
(a) Curcumin
(b) Bixin
Figure 37: UPS (left) and IPES (right) spectra of curcumin and bixin with linear re-
gressions to determine the band edges. The dotted lines mark the obtained valence and
conduction band edges.
uncertainties in the determination of the band edges and thus the band gap. The obtained
value for the band gap of curcumin from UPS and IPES measurements taken on a thick
evaporated sample is therefore considered more reliable.
In both curcumin and bixin the valence band edge is found to be much closer to the
Fermi level than the conduction band edge. This means that the materials are p-type
==PAGE:56==
4. Results and Discussion
48
in character, i.e. that they are hole-conducting materials, as is the case for most organic
semiconductors [69]. p or n-type character is one of the basic requirements for an organic
solar cell material in order to allow for a junction to form [70].
Table 6: Comparison of the band gaps of curcumin and bixin obtained from absorption
spectroscopy and photoemission spectroscopy.
Band gap [eV]
Curcumin
Bixin
Obtained from UV-Vis
2.3
2.5
Obtained from PES
2.4
2.8
4.2.5
Beam damage testing
The exposure to energetic electromagnetic radiation as well as electron bombardment can
cause notable damage to sensitive samples (which is often the case with organic materi-
als) and thereby alter the results of the measurement. For precaution, the duration of the
beam exposure was minimised in all PES measurements.
In an attempt to monitor whether damage was caused, the IPES measurements were taken
as a sequence of many short scans to be averaged later. Fig. 38a shows such a sequence of 5
individual scans measured consecutively at the same position on the evaporated curcumin
sample. The signal becomes increasingly noisy towards higher binding energies, but no
systematic development can be observed between the scans. In Fig. 38b measurements
from diﬀerent positions on the curcumin sample are shown. After all positions were mea-
sured, the measurement on position 1 was repeated. The diﬀerence between those two
measurements is smaller than the ﬂuctuations seen between diﬀerent position and can
possibly be explained by a slight discrepancy between the actual sample positions.
(a)
(b)
Figure 38: Individual IPES spectra measured on the evaporated curcumin sample. (a) A
series of scans measured at the same position. (b) A series of measurements at diﬀerent
positions on the sample.
==PAGE:57==
49
4. Results and Discussion
The red curve is the average of the spectra, which was used for the determination of the
conduction band edge. On the bixin sample the same measuring procedure was applied
and showed the same result. The electron beam therefore apparently causes no damage
that would lead to an explicit change in the unoccupied energy states.
Another check for beam damage on the evaporated curcumin ﬁlm was done by comparing
high resolution XPS spectra of the C1s and the O1s line after IPES and UPS measurements
to the initial measurement. These are shown in Fig. 39. The spectra are identical apart
from a minimal shift of the peak position towards lower binding energies in both the
C1s and the O1s line. This indicates that the overall composition of the ﬁlm was not
signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the UPS and IPES measurements. Since the XPS signal stems
from a larger area than that of the other PES techniques, this does, however, not entirely
eliminate the possibility that damage was done very locally.
Figure 39: XPS spectra of the C1s and the O1s line measured on the thick curcumin
sample before and after UPS and IPES measurement to check for beam damage.
==PAGE:58==
4. Results and Discussion
50
4.3
Crystal structure
Powder diﬀraction was successfully performed on both curcumin and bixin. The diﬀraction
pattern measured on curcumin powder is shown in Fig. 40 (orange curve). It is presented
together with a simulated pattern resulting from unit cell reﬁnement using the Pawley
method [71] performed with the software Topas (black curve). The main peaks are indexed
with the corresponding reﬂection plane. It can be seen that the sample exhibits very sharp
and intense peaks, which is generally an indicator for a high degree of crystallinity. As
the starting point for the reﬁnement, experimentally determined lattice parameters from
reference [72], obtained in a similar experiment, were used. Comparing the two patterns
one can see that the positions of the peaks match very well, while the peak intensities
are quite oﬀ. There is a large discrepancy especially between the (202), the (020) and
the (010) reﬂections. There is a number of possible sources for these discrepancies, the
most important ones being a diﬀerence between the real atom positions and the simulated
ones, as well as the occupancy of atomic sites. Furthermore, the crystallites in the powder
could have a preferred orientation that is not accounted for in the simulation. In order to
extract this information, additional reﬁnements would have to be performed in the next
step.
Figure 40: Measured curcumin powder diﬀraction pattern (orange) and simulated pattern
after Pawley reﬁnement of the unit cell (black). The reﬁnement was performed with Topas
and the simulated diﬀraction pattern created by CrystalDiﬀract.
The reﬁned lattice parameters were found to be a = 12.7419(3) Å, b = 7.2202(3) Å,
c = 20.0530(9) Å and β = 94.9801(1)◦. These values are very close to the parameters
reported in [72].
==PAGE:59==
51
4. Results and Discussion
A model of the obtained curcumin unit cell created with CrystalMaker can be seen in
Fig. 41. It has a volume of 1837.914 Å3 with 188 sites per unit cell. The crystal structure
of curcumin is monoclinic and it belongs to the space group 2p/n.
Figure 41: Model of the reﬁned unit cell of curcumin created with CrystalMaker.
Another diﬀraction pattern was measured after annealing the curcumin powder at 200◦C,
whereby it melted and recrystallised. The result of that measurement is seen in Fig. 42.
The simulated pattern from Fig. 40 is shown again for comparison. It can be seen that
the peaks have shifted, some having moved in one direction and others in the other. The
relative peak intensities have also changed. The (002) reﬂection is now the most intense,
followed by the (202) reﬂection.
The signal strength of the annealed curcumin sample was found to be much lower than
that of the unannealed powder. A possible interpretation of this is that the crystallites in
the sample are not randomly oriented anymore and the crystal orientation with respect
to the beam is such that the main diﬀraction peaks cannot be observed in the range
scanned by the detector. Testing this hypothesis would have required being able to rotate
the sample, which was not possible with the given setup.
The background-subtracted diﬀraction pattern measured on bixin powder can be seen in
Fig. 43. Very little has been published about bixin, and, to the author’s knowledge, no
synchrotron XRD has ever been performed on bixin. Since the crystal structure and space
group are unknown, no reﬁnement was performed at this point. Theoretical density func-
tional theory (DFT) calculations are expected to provide a starting point for a thorough
analysis of the measured spectrum. Compared to the curcumin powder sample, the signal
==PAGE:60==
4. Results and Discussion
52
Figure 42: Measured diﬀraction pattern of curcumin powder after annealing at 200◦C
(yellow) and simulated pattern from Fig. 40 (black).
intensity measured on bixin powder was much weaker. This is an indicator that the degree
of crystallinity of the molecule in powder form is lower.
Unfortunately, none of the evaporated ﬁlms showed any signal in the XRD measurement.
While the thickness of those ﬁlms is not exactly known, it is likely <1 µm (based on
estimates of the deposition rate from thickness measurements, see section 4.2.1). For an
organic material consisting of only carbon and oxygen, such a thin ﬁlm apparently does
not have enough scattering power to give a measurable signal. The given setup of the
beamline did not allow for measuring the samples at grazing incidence, which increases
the signal strength by increasing the irradiated volume of the sample [73]. This is some-
thing that could be considered in future investigations. Diﬀraction patterns measured on
solution-cast ﬁlms on mylar substrate showed very little (curcumin) or no (bixin) signal,
which is most likely also a result of the ﬁlms being very thin. Additionally, measurements
on pure mylar substrate showed a broad diﬀraction peak in the considered range (around
16.3◦), which shows that it was not the most suitable substrate in this experiment. Mea-
surements on the pure aluminium foil on the other hand revealed no diﬀraction peaks at
all, suggesting this to be the substrate of choice in future investigations.
==PAGE:61==
53
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 43: Measured diﬀraction pattern of bixin powder.
==PAGE:62==
5. Conclusion and Outlook
54
5
Conclusion and Outlook
The aim of the presented work was to study semiconducting natural dyes to form a basis
on which their applicability in organic solar cells can be assessed. For this purpose, ﬁlms
were prepared using thermal evaporation and solution processing. The characterisation of
the ﬁlms included the investigation of optical absorption properties, as well as electronic
and crystalline structure.
In the preparation of the ﬁlms it became clear that curcumin is easier to handle than
bixin for several reasons. For the ﬁrst part, because there is a large discrepancy in prices
for the two molecules in high purity form, which is why curcumin was available in greater
quantities. This enabled the growth of ﬁlms by thermal evaporation, that resulted thick
enough to eliminate contributions from organic substrate contaminants in PES measure-
ments. Curcumin also displayed better solubility in ethanol, facilitating higher uniformity
of ﬁlms prepared by solution-casting. UV-Vis measurements on thermally evaporated ﬁlms
indicated that the curcumin molecule remained intact under the inﬂuence of heat. The
absorption spectrum of evaporated bixin, on the other hand, was found to shift to shorter
wavelengths, which was also visibly reﬂected in the ﬁlm’s yellow colour, indicating chem-
ical degradation of the molecule. The diﬃculty to obtain a suﬃciently thick bixin ﬁlm
complicated the interpretation of PES spectra, as substrate contributions had to be taken
into account.
High resolution XPS spectra of the C1s line on evaporated samples showed chemical shifts
resulting from diﬀerent chemical environments of the carbon atoms. On solution-cast ﬁlms,
the shifts were less clearly resolved, possibly as a result of organic contamination or a less
ordered ﬁlm structure. Given the limited resolution of the spectra attainable with the
used XPS system, the data was ﬁtted with three components, merging together chemical
bonds expected to cause similar shifts. For curcumin, relatively good agreement was found
between the ﬁt and the measured data, while for the bixin spectra no satisfactory ﬁt could
be made. This is probably a result of insuﬃcient ﬁlm thickness, as well as low uniformity
in the case of the solution-cast sample. In the case of the evaporated bixin sample, the
chemical degradation observed in the optical absorption spectrum likely renders the cho-
sen ﬁtting components inadequate.
From combined UPS and IPES measurements, the band gaps of the molecules were de-
termined. For curcumin, the obtained value of 2.4 eV was in good agreement with that
obtained from UV-Vis (2.3 eV). For bixin, PES and UV-Vis measurements resulted in
band gap sizes of 2.5 eV, and 2.8 eV, respectively; the reason for the discrepancy likely
being low data quality in both measurements as a result of the ﬁlms being very thin. The
position of the Fermi level with regards to the conduction and the valence band edges
revealed that both molecules have p-type character.
In terms of stability under exposure to energetic electromagnetic radiation and electrons
in the PES measurements, no strong indicators of damage were observed. Given the very
short exposure times during the experiment, this does however not rule out that degra-
dation can occur on longer time frames.
From XRD measurements on powder, a Pawley unit cell reﬁnement of curcumin was
performed, yielding the lattice parameters a = 12.7419(3) Å, b = 7.2202(3) Å, c =
20.0530(9) Å and β = 94.9801(1)◦Annealing of the curcumin sample was found to lead to
peak shifts in the diﬀraction pattern and a lower signal intensity, which could be a con-
sequence of a higher degree of crystalline order and a “wrong” orientation of the sample
with respect to the beam. Powder diﬀraction was also successfully performed on bixin,
==PAGE:63==
55
5. Conclusion and Outlook
displaying lower crystalline order than curcumin. XRD measurements on solution-cast
samples showed very weak signal and those on evaporated ﬁlms proved completely unsuc-
cessful, due to insuﬃcient thickness of the ﬁlms.
In summary, it has been found that curcumin is superior to bixin in terms of processabil-
ity, stability and crystalline order (in powder form). These properties are favourable for an
organic solar cell material, but further research, e.g. on the crystalline order of deposited
ﬁlms, is needed. Still, curcumin can be considered a promising candidate material. For
bixin, on the other hand, the experimental results were in many cases limited by the low
availability of the molecule, preventing the deposition of suﬃciently thick ﬁlms. Consider-
ing that solution-processing is generally cheaper and faster than thermal evaporation and
therefore the deposition method of choice in commercially processed organic solar cells,
the damaging of bixin upon evaporation does not necessarily obstruct its applicability in
OPV.
For future studies it could be considered to synthesise bixin from annatto (as described
in reference [74]), as the high price of high purity bixin represents an obstacle not only
for investigation but also application. This would presumably allow for the formation of
thicker ﬁlms, enabling a more meaningful analysis. Similarly, having studied the properties
of high purity curcumin, in a next step it could be interesting to look at less pure (and
therefore cheaper) forms, such as turmeric powder commonly used in the kitchen.
Since for solar cell materials stability under UV light is of great importance, looking into
the eﬀect of longer UV exposure on the molecules is necessary.
As for the XRD results, additional reﬁnement methods taking into account the relative
peak intensities are expected to reveal more information on the atomic positions in the
unit cell of curcumin, as well as preferred crystal orientations and changes in the crystalline
structure upon annealing. The diﬀraction pattern measured on bixin will, in combination
with computational DFT calculations, be used in the next step to determine the crystal
structure of bixin. Additionally, repeating the measurement on thicker evaporated ﬁlms
would allow for checking the hypothesis that ﬁlms deposited by thermal evaporation are
more ordered. A grazing-incidence geometry of the XRD setup could furthermore be used
to increase the signal strength on thin ﬁlms.
Future work should also look closely into whether the suggested eﬀect of reduced carrier
trapping in diluted semiconductors [11] can be observed in blends of the studied dyes with
polymeric host matrices, as this could be a very relevant manifest application.
==PAGE:64==
References
56
References
[1]
D. Kearns and M. Calvin. “Photovoltaic Eﬀect and Photoconductivity in Laminated
Organic Systems”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 29.4 (1958), pp. 950–951.
[2]
D.L. Morel, E.L. Stogryn, A.K. Ghosh, T. Feng, P.E. Purwin, R.F. Shaw, C. Fish-
man, G.R. Bird, and A.P. Piechowski. “Organic photovoltaic cells. Correlations
between cell performance and molecular structure”. In: The Journal of Physical
Chemistry 88.5 (1984), pp. 923–933.
[3]
C.W. Tang and A.C. Albrecht. “Photovoltaic eﬀects of metal–chlorophyll-a–metal
sandwich cells”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 62.6 (1975), pp. 2139–2149.
[4]
S. Singh and B.B. Aggarwal. “Activation of Transcription Factor NF-κB Is Sup-
pressed by Curcumin (Diferuloylmethane)”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry
270.42 (1995), pp. 24995–25000.
[5]
K. Priyadarsini. “The Chemistry of Curcumin: From Extraction to Therapeutic
Agent”. In: Molecules 19.12 (2014), pp. 20091–20112.
[6]
M.J. Scotter, L.A. Wilson, G.P. Appleton, and L. Castle. “Analysis of Annatto
(Bixa orellana) Food Coloring Formulations. 2. Determination of Aromatic Hydro-
carbon Thermal Degradation Products by Gas Chromatography”. In: Journal of
Agricultural and Food Chemistry 48.2 (1999), pp. 484–488.
[7]
D. Das and S. Chandra Bhattacharya. “Dyeing of wool and silk with Bixa orellana”.
In: Indian Journal of Fibre and Textile Research 32.3 (2007), pp. 366–372.
[8]
K.E. Jasim, S. Cassidy, F.Z. Henari, and A.A. Dakhel. “Curcumin Dye-Sensitized
Solar Cell”. In: Journal of Energy and Power Engineering 11.6 (2017), pp. 1–9.
[9]
A. Hiendro, F. Hadary, W. Rahmalia, and N. Wahyuni. “Enhanced performance
of bixin sensitized TiO2 solar cells with activated kaolinite”. In: 2012 Interna-
tional Conference on Enabling Science and Nanotechnology (ESciNano). IEEE,
2012, pp. 1–2.
[10]
N.M. Gómez-Ortíz, I.A. Vázquez-Maldonado, A.R. Pérez-Espadas, G.J. Mena-Rejón,
J.A. Azamar-Barrios, and G. Oskam. “Dye-sensitized solar cells with natural dyes
extracted from achiote seeds”. In: Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 94.1
(2010), pp. 40–44.
[11]
D. Abbaszadeh, A. Kunz, G.A.H. Wetzelaer, J.J. Michels, N.I. Crăciun, K. Koynov,
I. Lieberwirth, and P.W.M. Blom. “Elimination of charge carrier trapping in di-
luted semiconductors”. In: Nature Materials 15.6 (2016), pp. 628–633.
[12]
S. Zhang, L. Ye, H. Zhang, and J. Hou. “Green-solvent-processable organic solar
cells”. In: Materials Today 19.9 (2016), pp. 533–543.
[13]
W.C.H. Choy. Organic solar cells: materials and device physics. Green energy and
technology. London: Springer, 2014.
[14]
E.D. Głowacki, N.S. Sariciftci, and C.W. Tang. “Organic Solar Cells”. In: Solar
Energy. New York: Springer, 2013, pp. 97–128.
[15]
I. Kymissis. Organic Field Eﬀect Transistors : Theory, Fabrication and Character-
ization. Integrated Circuits and Systems. 2009.
[16]
G.J. Conibeer and A. Willoughby, eds. Solar cell materials: developing technologies.
Wiley series in materials for electronic and optoelectronic applications. 2014.
==PAGE:65==
57
References
[17]
A. Goetzberger, B. Voß, and J. Knobloch. Sonnenenergie: Photovoltaik: Physik und
Technologie der Solarzelle. Teubner, 1997.
[18]
http://plasticphotovoltaics.org. Accessed: 14.05.2018.
[19]
A.C. Mayer, S.R. Scully, B.E. Hardin, M.W. Rowell, and M.D. Mcgehee. “Polymer-
based solar cells”. In: Materials Today 10.11 (2007), pp. 28–33.
[20]
W. Shockley and H.J. Queisser. “Detailed Balance Limit of Eﬃciency of p-n Junc-
tion Solar Cells”. In: Journal of Applied Physics 32.3 (1961), pp. 510–519.
[21]
A. Polman, M. Knight, E.C. Garnett, B. Ehrler, and W.C. Sinke. “Photovoltaic
materials: Present eﬃciencies and future challenges”. In: Science 352.6283 (2016).
[22]
R. Farchioni and G. Grosso, eds. Organic electronic materials : conjugated polymers
and low molecular weight organic solids. Vol. 41. Springer series in materials science.
Berlin: Springer, 2001.
[23]
D.A. Stone, Y. Chang, and H.R. Allcock. “Control of the conjugation length and
solubility in electroluminescent polymers”. In: Journal of Polymer Science Part A:
Polymer Chemistry 44.1 (2005), pp. 69–76.
[24]
M.A. Green, E.D. Hishikawa Y.and Dunlop, D.H. Levi, J. Hohl-Ebinger, and A.W.Y.
Ho-Baillie. “Solar cell eﬃciency tables (version 52)”. In: Progress in Photovoltaics:
Research and Applications 26.7 (2018), pp. 427–436.
[25]
C.W. Tang, S.A. VanSlyke, and C.H. Chen. “Electroluminescence of doped organic
thin ﬁlms”. In: Journal of Applied Physics 65.9 (1989), pp. 3610–3616.
[26]
J.J.M. Halls, K. Pichler, R.H. Friend, S.C. Moratti, and A.B. Holmes. “Exciton
diﬀusion and dissociation in a poly(p-phenylenevinylene)/C60 heterojunction pho-
tovoltaic cell”. In: Applied Physics Letters 68.22 (1996), pp. 3120–3122.
[27]
A. Haugeneder, M. Neges, C. Kallinger, W. Spirkl, U. Lemmer, J. Feldmann, U.
Scherf, E. Harth, A. Gügel, and K. Müllen. “Exciton diﬀusion and dissociation in
conjugated polymer/fullerene blends and heterostructures”. In: Physical Review B
59.23 (1999), pp. 15346–15351.
[28]
S. Hüfner. Photoelectron spectroscopy : principles and applications. 3rd rev. and enl.
ed. Advanced texts in physics. Berlin: Springer, 2003.
[29]
S. Suga. Photoelectron Spectroscopy : Bulk and Surface Electronic Structures. Vol. 176.
Springer Series in Optical Sciences. 2014.
[30]
P. Strobel. Fullerene als alternative Akzeptoren bei der Transferdotierung von Dia-
mantoberﬂächen. 2008.
[31]
P.D. Johnson and J.W. Davenport. “Calculated inverse photoemission cross sections
from adsorbed molecules”. In: Physical Review B 31.12 (1985), pp. 7521–7525.
[32]
P. Hofmann. Surface Physics: An Introduction. 2013.
[33]
A. Zangwill. “Clean surfaces”. In: Physics at Surfaces. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1988, pp. 5–6.
[34]
A. Jablonski and C.J. Powell. “Information depth and the mean escape depth in
Auger electron spectroscopy and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy”. In: Journal
of Vacuum Science & Technology A: Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films 21.1 (2003),
pp. 274–283.
==PAGE:66==
References
58
[35]
J. Als-Nielsen. Elements of modern X-ray physics. 2nd ed. Chichester: Wiley, 2011.
[36]
P. Willmott. An introduction to synchrotron radiation : techniques and applications.
Chichester, 2011.
[37]
S. Mobilio. Synchrotron Radiation : Basics, Methods and Applications. 2015.
[38]
R.E. Dinnebier and S.J.L. Billinge, eds. Powder diﬀraction: theory and practice.
Cambridge: Royal Society of Chemistry, 2008.
[39]
A. Madsen. “Europe enters the extreme X-ray era”. In: CERN Courier 57.6 (2017),
pp. 19–23.
[40]
M. Altarelli et al., ed. XFEL: the European X-ray free-electron laser - technical
design report. http://xfel.desy.de/technical_information/tdr/tdr/.. 2006.
[41]
M.J. Druyvesteyn. “Das Röntgenspektrum zweiter Art”. In: Zeitschrift für Physik
43.9 (1927), pp. 707–725.
[42]
F. Bloch and P.A. Ross. “Radiative Auger Eﬀect”. In: Phys. Rev. 47 (11 1935),
pp. 884–885.
[43]
Australian Synchrotron. http://www.synchrotron.org.au.
[44]
J. Eccher, W. Zajaczkowski, G.C. Faria, H. Bock, H. von Seggern, W. Pisula, and
I.H. Bechtold. “Thermal Evaporation versus Spin-Coating: Electrical Performance
in Columnar Liquid Crystal OLEDs”. In: ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 7.30
(2015), pp. 16374–16381.
[45]
B. Nabet. Photodetectors : materials, devices and applications. 2016.
[46]
https://aavos.eu/glossary/uv-vis-spectrometry/. Accessed: 26.06.2018.
[47]
D. Hoﬀman. Handbook of vacuum science and technology. San Diego, CA, 1998.
[48]
N. Yoshimura. Vacuum Technology: Practice for Scientiﬁc Instruments. Berlin, Hei-
delberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008.
[49]
P.D. Johnson and S.L. Hulbert. “Inverse photoemission”. In: Review of Scientiﬁc
Instruments 61.9 (1998), pp. 2277–2288.
[50]
G. Dongping, Y. Yingguo, L. Shuhu, H. Caihao, and G. Xingyu. “An Eﬃcient
monochromatic Electron Source designed for Inverse Photoemission Spectroscopy”.
In: Chinese Physics C 38.11 (2014).
[51]
M. Schmid, H.-P. Steinrück, and J.M. Gottfried. “A new asymmetric Pseudo-Voigt
function for more eﬃcient ﬁtting of XPS lines”. In: Surface and Interface Analysis
46.8 (2014), pp. 505–511.
[52]
R. Hesse, P. Streubel, and R. Szargan. “Product or sum: comparative tests of Voigt,
and product or sum of Gaussian and Lorentzian functions in the ﬁtting of synthetic
Voigt-based X-ray photoelectron spectra”. In: Surface and Interface Analysis 39.5
(2007), pp. 381–391.
[53]
J. Végh. “The Shirley background revised”. In: Journal of Electron Spectroscopy and
Related Phenomena 151.3 (2006), pp. 159–164.
[54]
J. Walton, M.R. Alexander, N. Fairley, P. Roach, and A.G. Shard. “Film thickness
measurement and contamination layer correction for quantitative XPS”. In: Surface
and Interface Analysis 48.3 (2016), pp. 164–172.
==PAGE:67==
59
References
[55]
SPECS. Thickness determination of multi-layered systems. http://www.specs.
de/cms/upload/PDFs/ApplNotes/PHOIBOS/TNote-OverlayerThickness.pdf.
Accessed: 15.06.2018.
[56]
S. Tanuma, C.J. Powell, and D.R. Penn. “Calculations of electron inelastic mean free
paths. V. Data for 14 organic compounds over the 50-2000 eV range”. In: Surface
and Interface Analysis 21.3 (1994), pp. 165–176.
[57]
V. Santana. [UV-Vis measurements of curcumin and bixin on solution-cast ﬁlms
and in solution]. Unpublished raw data. 2018.
[58]
NREL. http://rredc.nrel.gov/solar/spectra/am1.5/. Accessed: 13.06.2018.
[59]
R. Waranyoupalin, S. Wongnawa, M. Wongnawa, C. Pakawatchai, P. Panichayu-
pakaranant, and P. Sherdshoopongse. “Studies on complex formation between cur-
cumin and Hg(II) ion by spectrophotometric method: A new approach to overcome
peak overlap”. In: Open Chemistry 7.3 (2009), p. 2433.
[60]
P. Thu Ha, T.M. Nguyet Tran, H.D. Pham, Q.H. Nguyen, and X.P. Nguyen. “The
synthesis of poly(lactide)-vitamin E TPGS (PLA-TPGS) copolymer and its uti-
lization to formulate a curcumin nanocarrier”. In: Advances in Natural Sciences:
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology 1.1 (2010).
[61]
W. Rahmalia, J.-F. Fabre, and Z. Mouloungui. “Eﬀects of Cyclohexane/Acetone
Ratio on Bixin Extraction Yield by Accelerated Solvent Extraction Method”. In:
Procedia Chemistry 14 (2015), pp. 455–464.
[62]
W. Rahmalia, J.-F. Fabre, T. Usman, and Z. Mouloungui. “Adsorption Charac-
teristics of Bixin on Acid- and Alkali-Treated Kaolinite in Aprotic Solvents”. In:
Bioinorganic Chemistry and Applications 3 (2018), pp. 1–9.
[63]
G Scheibe. “Über die Veränderlichkeit der Absorptionsspektren in Lösungen und
die Nebenvalenzen als ihre Ursache”. In: Angewandte Chemie 50.11 (Mar. 1937),
pp. 212–219.
[64]
F. Würthner, T.E. Kaiser, and C.R. Saha-Möller. “J-Aggregates: From Serendip-
itous Discovery to Supramolecular Engineering of Functional Dye Materials”. In:
Angewandte Chemie International Edition 50.15 (2011), pp. 3376–3410.
[65]
W. Rahmalia, J.-F. Fabre, T. Usman, and Z. Mouloungui. “Aprotic solvents eﬀect
on the UV–visible absorption spectra of bixin”. In: Spectrochimica Acta Part A:
Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy 131 (2014), pp. 455–460.
[66]
J.F. Moulder, W.F. Stickle, P.E. Sobol, and K.D. Bomben. Handbook of X-ray Pho-
toelectron Spectroscopy – A Reference Book of Standard Spectra for Identiﬁcation
and Interpretation of XPS Data. Eden Prairie, Minnesota: Perkin-Elmer Corpora-
tion, 1995, pp. v–v.
[67]
https://vuo.elettra.eu/services/elements/WebElements.html. Accessed:
17.07.2018.
[68]
P.G. Rouxhet and M.J. Genet. “XPS analysis of bio-organic systems”. In: Surface
and Interface Analysis 43.12 (2011), pp. 1453–1470.
[69]
H. Hoppe and N.S. Sariciftci. “Organic solar cells: An overview”. In: Journal of
Materials Research 19.07 (2004), pp. 1924–1945.
[70]
D. Wöhrle and D. Meissner. “Organic Solar Cells”. In: Advanced Materials 3.3
(1991), pp. 129–138.
==PAGE:68==
References
60
[71]
G.S. Pawley. “Unit-cell reﬁnement from powder diﬀraction scans”. In: Journal of
Applied Crystallography 14.6 (1981), pp. 357–361.
[72]
J.W. Reid, J.A. Kaduk, S.V. Garimella, and J.S. Tse. “Rietveld reﬁnement using
synchrotron powder diﬀraction data for curcumin, C21H20O6, and comparison with
density functional theory”. In: Powder Diﬀraction 30.01 (2014), pp. 67–75.
[73]
N. Widjonarko. “Introduction to Advanced X-ray Diﬀraction Techniques for Poly-
meric Thin Films”. In: Coatings 6.4 (2016).
[74]
A. Häberli and H. Pfander. “Synthesis of Bixin and Three Minor Carotenoids from
Annatto (Bixa orellana)”. In: Helvetica Chimica Acta 82.5 (1999), pp. 696–706.
