==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Cryptographic Access Control
Implementation of Cryptographic Access Control
in a Decentralized File-sharing System
Andrei Bogdan Varga s163106
Cristian Alexandru Onu s163116
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The project focuses on the research, design and implementation of a decentralized
file sharing system using cryptographic access control, based on the capability list
concept. Areas of research include access control mechanisms, file systems, as well as
the cryptography concepts such as key management, encryption schemes. Based on
the literature review, the design is developed, consisting of each component specifica-
tions together with the description of the communication between them. With a well
defined design, an implementation is carried out, represented by a client and server
prototype application.
The client is developed using the Dokan file system driver, allowing the interaction
with virtual files, which are processed as they are requested from the Web applica-
tion. The developed system makes use of key rings, holding the cryptographic keys
corresponding to the user’s access rights to the resource. The project concludes with
an evaluation of the previously defined requirements and a threat analysis using the
STRIDE model.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. degree in Engineering.
This thesis deals with decentralized secure file sharing and was done in the period of
February 1st 2018 to July 1st 2018. It was supervised by associate professor Christian
D. Jensen
Kongens Lyngby, July 1, 2018
Andrei Bogdan Varga s163106
Cristian Alexandru Onu s163116
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor, associate professor Christian D. Jensen for
guiding our initial idea towards a successfull process of research and implementation.
His advice and insights were very helpful.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Proposed solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Methodology
5
3
Investigation
7
3.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Cryptography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Access control models: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
Key management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Key Rings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.6
Client side file system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.7
Subconclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Analysis
23
4.1
Research review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
System Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Subconclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Design
33
5.1
System Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Client
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
File Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.5
Key Ring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.6
Use case realization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.7
Subconclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Implementation
43
6.1
Client
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.3
Client - Server Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.4
Running prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7
Evaluation
67
7.1
Requirements validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.2
Security Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.3
Subconclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
8
Discussion
75
8.1
Reflections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
8.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
8.3
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
9
Conclusion
79
A An Appendix
81
A.1 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
Bibliography
109
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Nowadays, user’s data is an important and valuable asset, with new regulations be-
ing adopted, making this a matter that service providers are required to adapt to.
Personal files are one of the most important pieces of data an user can have, besides
passwords or personal information. Moreover, content sharing is a very common ac-
tion done over the internet, such as sharing a picture or some thoughts on a social
platform, maybe even a file. There are multiple cases when file sharing comes in
handy, whether if you are at work, school etc.
It seems like a very straight forward action since there are so many available solu-
tions that facilitates this user need. Dropbox , Google Drive or Microsoft One Drive,
are only some of the well known alternatives for file sharing and storage. With techno-
logical enhancements, Internet has developed beyond being only a digital environment
that is filled with static content. Moreover, it provides many different services to its
consumers, some of them being in the form of file sharing. Some consider that even
these aforementioned solutions offer good services, there are some drawbacks such as
the fact that in order to use their services they require the user to create an account.
Furthermore, it is essential to point out the data types that identifies a person such
as name, address, date of birth and many more.
Additionally, considering the new GDPR1 which has its basis in the fact that the
user is in control of its own data, having an account in order to share files with a
partner seems redundant, somehow unnecessary and the owner of the data might
not always want to be identified. Thus, in order to have a management of digital
identity, there should be considered three different aspects: the user, the identity and
the service provider. These can be easily dealt with by having a cryptographic access
control in which the authentication of the user should not count, important being the
fact if he has or not the right to access or manipulate objects. Thus, there comes a
need for some users to share files without having a third party to handle operations
and actions that can be easily performed within user space.
1General Data Protection Regulation
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Problem field
The way the most important file sharing systems work in the moment of writing this
report, it can be safely stated that they are heavily centralized. The main server
handles most of the operations needed for a file to be shared with another party. An
alternative to this would be to have the file system developed in a decentralized way
so that an user can send a file directly to its partner, without as much control and
interaction coming from the main server. Thus, the problem of creating an account
to a third party system would be removed. As a consequence, if Alice wants to share
a file with Bob, she can send him a message or e-mail with an URI for instance
and in this way Bob should be able to see the file. When taking a closer look to
a decentralized model there comes the issue with how is designed the access control
scheme and how files and folders are handled. Being one of the key problems for the
scope of the thesis, an in depth research will be conducted on this topic in section
3.3. To conclude, the following questions is raised.
How can a system make use of the available cryptographic
access control mechanisms in order to design a secure de-
centralized solution for file sharing?
1.2
Proposed solution
This paper focuses to propose a solution in the form of a cryptographic access control
which is a mechanism that is easily scalable given the ease to delegate the right to
delegate and it eliminates as much as possible the user management issue that comes
with the common access control schemes such as ACL. The end goal of this project is
to answer to the problem statement presented earlier. Cryptographic access control is
a flexible solution that guarantees high data protection. As Isaac Newton said ” If I
have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of Giants”, it is highly important
to look for similar solutions that tried to answer to the same problem. A similar
one was proposed in the paper ”Cryptographic Access Control in a Distributed File
System” by Anthony Harrington and Christian D. Jensen. The basic cryptographic
access control mechanism is based on asymmetric cryptography, where the object are
encrypted with the private key and decrypted by someone who posses the public key.
These two keys act as capabilities where the decryption key corresponds to the read
right, and encryption to the write right.
This paper will focus on creating a similar solution to the one stated above using
asymmetric cryptography and capability list access control. Since the technologies
evolved and new ones appeared, we combined them in order to achieve the goals of this
report. Besides the research and the proposed design of such a system, there will be
an implementation of a prototype which will try to incorporate as many requirements
as possible, as can later be seen in section 4.2. The requirements have been prioritized
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Thesis outline
3
due to time and knowledge limitations, so by the end of this project, it can be stated
that roughly 70-80% of them have been fulfilled. Implementation consists of client
application together with an API 2 developed for the Windows platform.
1.3
Thesis outline
Under this section there will be listed the chapters this report contains and a brief
description of what each chapter will focus on.
Methodology:
Describes the steps that we went through during the process of de-
veloping the solution we intended to. Basically, if someone wants to reproduce or
further develop the solution, a look into this chapter would provide enough informa-
tion.
Investigation:
In this chapter is discussed and researched, briefly, the main security
concepts and the technologies which constitutes valid candidates for the problem this
thesis tries to solve. Topics such as cryptography, access control or file systems cover
most of this chapter.
Analysis:
Under this chapter there is an applied discussion of the above mentioned
topics to the cryptographic access control system we try to implement. From the the-
ory in the research chapter, are selected the most relevant technologies and solutions
and a list of requirements is defined based on them. The chapter ends with a list of
use cases.
Design:
Based on the analysis and requirements, a prototype design is made, de-
scribing how each of the system’s component interacts with each other and how such
system should be built. It incorporates UML diagrams in order to model the solution
in a more optimized way.
Implementation:
This chapter focuses on how the design decision have been car-
ried out into implementation, discussing the libraries that have been used, the func-
tionality of the system and showcase relevant code snippets.
Evaluation:
In this chapter the system just implemented is objectively analyzed
from a couple different angles. The first part consists of an evaluation of the imple-
mentation, by looking at the requirements that were specified in analysis, followed by
evaluating the application from a security point of view using STRIDE method.
2Application Programming Interface
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
Discussion:
In the discussion all the thoughts and limitations about the process
are presented in a more personal way, explaining what other alternatives could have
been considered , now that we know the system’s final shape. The chapter ends with
a section describing further improvements.
Conclusion:
In this chapter we take a look in the beginning of the report, more
specifically in the problem field section of the introduction and see if we managed to
answer to the question that we asked when started the process.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Methodology
As a limited time frame and fairly challenging project, the result that is the prototype
solution we have developed is not to be a finished product, but a partial one, that has
implemented the most relevant and important requirements. Thus, the goal of the
project was to have file sharing solution that uses capability list as an access control
mechanism.
We have tried to find a good engineering approach for the process of implement-
ing a cryptographic access control and the engineering method from the ”Software
engineering” book[Som] of Ian Sommerville seemed like a good fit.
Figure 2.1: A spiral view of the requirements engineering process[Som].
Presented in figure 2.1, it describes how can we optimize the process of gathering
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Methodology
and identifying requirements. Together with this, an agile method has been chosen
during the implementation phase. The very best advantage of these two methods is
the fact that they facilitate iterations, moving around the spiral whenever a change
is needed in a previous step. The spiral, as our research and analysis phase is split
into two categories: requirements elicitation and specification. In the requirements
elicitation phase it was gathered and established general knowledge about the area in
which our solution fits. Once there was a solid knowledge base to build on, we moved
to phase two which is requirements specification in which for each component of the
system, targeted requirements have been established.
Phase one and two are illustrated during chapter 3 and chapter 4. In these specific
chapters, we took a close look in the similar papers that tried to solve the same
problem as our paper is concerned with and tried to gather as much knowledge of their
approach as possible. It also gave us a really good overview of the limitations and how
can they be overcome. This helped us choose alternative tools or technologies which
might mitigate the issues that previous implementations or designs had. However, for
this phase of the process we looked into different technologies and standards that could
facilitate a better implementation of our prototype. Moving on to ”User requirement
elicitation”, based on the analysis from chapter 4, we identified different parts for the
system and for each we tried to come up as many functional requirements as possible
which would validate the use cases.
The last third of the project will focus on development. After been gathered all
the knowledge and requirements for such a system to be functional and perform, the
focus has been changed to design and prototyping the software solution . The use
cases from section 4.3 and the aforementioned requirements are used at a starting
point, but as stated earlier this process is prone to iterations if something happens
during development which is not according to the goals.
Once the development is over, in order to add value to the report and the software
as well, it has to be validated. We will go through the requirements again and see
which and how many of them have been implemented and how well the application
perform. Moreover, since it is a security report there will be made a threat analysis
and a checklist with the best practices in order to see if our system complies with the
standards and mitigates vulnerabilities.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Investigation
Having the problem formulation on the back of the mind and a possible solution that
would suit to this issue, the next step is to start researching the main concepts and
key words that put together can form the basis of a possible solution. Thus, further
in this chapter there will be researched areas such as cryptography: symmetric and
asymmetric cryptography, access control mechanisms, key rings, file system and previ-
ous papers that tried to find answers to this very similar topic which is cryptographic
access control.
3.1
Related Work
This section will focus on a state of the art investigation consisting of papers that
have been targeting cryptographic access control solutions. During the research there
were found two relevant documents which will be analyzed and the most important
elements and the limitations that were found will be pointed out.
3.1.1
Cryptographic Access Control in a Distributed File System
First paper written by Anthony Harrington and Christian D. Jensen[HJ] proposes a
solution very similar with the one that this paper focuses on. In the section 2.1 of the
paper, they propose the basic cryptographic access control mechanism which is based
on a asymmetric cryptography. However, ”a separate key pair may be associated with
every file and should only be distributed to principals who are allowed to access file’s
data”. The idea is that the keys act as capabilities and the decryption key is used for
read right, while the encryption key corresponds to the write right.
They propose a system architecture which is based on the client server model. The
data that will be stored on the server side will be encrypted on the client side before
transmission and will stay encrypted until the data arrives back to the client which
can decrypt it with the correct key. Thus, the client is responsible of ensuring the
authenticity and integrity of the data received. Moving to the server architecture,
whenever the client writes a block to the CNFS server, the block is validated by the
cryptographic access control mechanism. In case the operation is successful, the state
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Investigation
information in relation to file and client identity is maintained. Thus, the following
blocks of data can be buffered until all data is received by the client.
This paper adds great value to this report and to the future of implementation
by outlining some of the core aspects of designing such a solution and it points out
limitations as well which may be solved by newer libraries or technologies.
3.1.2
Implementation of Cryptographic Access Control Using
FUSE and MediaWiki
After the idea was presented to the supervisor, it was suggested that one way to
proceed with the project is to research the work of a fellow master student and in
case it fits the purpose of this thesis, one possibility is to continue his work and
develop an working prototype that fits the requirements stated in section 4.2. In
this section there will be literature review of the thesis stating the most relevant and
important findings and ideas, touching mostly the design. From the paper it can be
seen that it tries more or less the same approach as the paper ”Cryptographic Access
Control in a Distributed File System” previously mentioned, exception making the
technologies involved for the prototype. Client server model is the base architecture
of this system as well.
A very good start point for analysis is the system overview and how the system
components interact to each other, showcased in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Information Flow .
According to this figure there are three main components: MediaWiki Server,
client application and the file sharing program as it can be read in chapter 4, section
4.1 from the thesis[Eds17]. In the same section, the author refers to four functionality
components: file system operations, key ring, cryptography and client-server interac-
tion. All of these are to be considered in the design phase of the project. File system
operations have been designed to correspond to the FUSE interfaces since this is the
protocol chosen by the author during his research as the best fit. The key rings are
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Cryptography
9
”written in a mark up language and each file will have its entry with subsequent data
about keys and server information”. The last component to discuss is the client-server
interaction. The server side uses MediaWiki implementation for user management
as well as file storage. After a successful authentication the files are uploaded in an
encrypted state.
It can be certainly said that looking this paper and the Cryptographic Access Con-
trol in a Distributed File System, it should lead to better choices of the tools that are
necessary in order to implement a cryptographic access control solution.
3.2
Cryptography
Since the focus area of the report is security, the first topic that will be researched
is cryptography which makes sure the communication between two entities is safe. It
differentiates between symmetric and asymmetric cryptography. The most important
rule is the fact that security lies in the secrecy of the key.
This is according to
Kerckhoffs’s principle which stated that a cryptographic system should be secure even
if everything about the system, except the key, is public knowledge. Consequently,
the security of a cipher is direct proportional with the strength of the key, meaning
that longer the key, more secure the system is.
3.2.1
Symmetric Cryptography
Symmetric cryptography is based on the principle that the same key is used for both
encryption and decryption. There are few advantages using symmetric key encryption
such as the cost to produce a strong key for the ciphers.
Also, the keys tend to
be smaller for the level of protection they afford and the algorithms are relatively
inexpensive to process[IBMb]. There are two different types of ciphers used: stream
and block ciphers.
A stream cipher is an encryption method which encrypts 1 bit of plaintext at a time.
In order for a system that uses stream cipher implementation to be secure, is crucial
that its presudorandom generator is unpredictable and the key is unique. Stream
ciphers have the advantages when it comes to speed and simplicity of implementation.
On the other hand, block cipher is an encryption algorithm which encrypts a fixed
size of n-bits of data at a time. The most common blocks are 64, 128 and 256 bits.
Thus, the key is applied individually to each block resulting in a ciphertext of the
same size as the plaintext block. Some examples of block cipher encryption schemes
are DES, 3DES or AES. Block cipher only allow to encrypt entire blocks, so when
the message is longer or shorter than the block size, the concept called modes of
operations is used. Worth researching is the Advanced Encryption Standard, known
as AES which is widely used. AES can be used in five different modes of operations:
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Investigation
1. Electronic code book: the simplest mode of operation where the plaintext
is divided into N blocks of n bits. If the plaintext size is not multiple of the
block size, the text is padded to make the last block the same size other blocks,
and the same key is used to encrypt/decrypt each block[Dwo]. There are issues
with this mode since patterns are preserved and pattern repetitions cannot be
avoided.
2. Cipher block chaining: In this mode, each block of plaintext is XORed with
the previous cipher text block before being encrypted which makes each text
block dependent on all the plaintext blocks processed up to that point[Dwo].
The first block makes use of an initialization vector which makes each message
unique. Since every block is dependent on the previous ones, the encryption
cannot be done in parallel.
3. Cipher feedback mode: This mode is to some extent similar to the CBC,
the difference being the initialization vector which is encrypted and the XOR
operation is done with the plaintext. The encryption input for the next block
will be the cipher text resulted from the previous block. When decrypting the
cipher text is added after the decryption operation, sending the ciphertext as
well as input to the next block. This makes the blocks independent and parallel
decryption can be achieved[Dwo].
4. Output feedback mode: For this mode, the initialization vector is encrypted
with the key and is sent as input to the next block . The plaintext is afterwards
XORed resulting the ciphertext. The decryption follows the same procedure as
encryption.
5. Counter mode: In this mode, the initialization vector is replaced with a
nonce and a counter. These two variables will be encrypted and XORed with
the plaintext. Encryption and decryption follow the same procedure and the
operations can be done in parallel, improving the speed[Dwo].
AES performs its operations on a 4 by 4 matrix of bytes, called the state. The
block size is fixed to 128 bits and the keys can have 128, 192 or 256 bits with 10,
12 or 14 rounds respectively. For each round in AES there are 4 operations that are
happening to achieve diffusion.
SubBytes:
is the operation of substituting the bates in the State according to
S-box.
ShiftRows:
this step operates on the rows of the state. It shifts the bytes for every
row with given, different offset. The first row is not shifted while the second is shifted
with one position, the third with two positions and the last with three positions.
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Cryptography
11
MixColums:
the four bytes of each column are combined using linear transforma-
tion. This is the most expensive operation out of the 4 and during this operation
each column is transformed using a fixed matrix.
AddRoundKey:
in this step the subkey is XORed with the state. The subkeys
are derived from the main key using an algorithm called Rijndael’s key schedule.
3.2.2
Asymmetric Cryptography
Public key cryptography it is an alternative to the symmetric cryptography. Instead
of using one key to encrypt and decrypt, it makes use of two keys: public and private
key. The public key can be shared with everyone, while the private one is to be known
only by the owner. The general idea is that a message is encrypted with the public
key of the receiver and decrypted with the private key. It is widely used in many
protocols such as SSH, OpenPGP etc. for encryption and digital signature functions.
While it has a higher level of security, it comes at the expense of speed. The most
common implementations of the public key cryptography are based on RSA (Rivest,
Shamir, Adelman) algorithms.
This mechanism provides users with the possibility of encryption and decryption
which allows two different parties to disguise data that they share to each other.
Data transmitted over an insecure channel will not be visible from a third party since
it does not posses the decryption key. Moreover, it ensures non repudiation[IBMa]
which prevents the sender of the data from claiming at a later date that the data was
never sent. In the section below, it will be explained in more detailed how RSA works
and what are the main concepts and mathematical principals behind it. RSA gets its
security from the computational difficulty of factoring large integers that are product
of two large prime numbers[Rou]. The trick is the fact that even though multiplying
two large prime number is computationally easy, finding the two prime numbers out
of the final result can result in a very tedious and computationally hard operation.
This is why it is considered to be beyond the capabilities of most attackers.
RSA keys are typically 1048- or 2048-bits long, but the 1024-bit long was broken,
while the 2048-bit one is expected to be secure until 2030[Bar] as stated later in section
4.1.2. Thus, there is a list below with all the necessary steps for key generation using
RSA.
1. Two large distinct prime numbers p and q are chosen at random using primality
tests. This makes factoring harder.
2. Evaluate the modulus n as n = pq and then find ϕ(n)
3. Is chosen a public key (say ’e’) such that 1 < e < ϕ(n) and gcd(e, ϕ(n)) = 1 as
the public key exponent.
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Investigation
4. For the private key exponent, is found d such that d = e−1 mod ϕ(n).
5. In the end there is: The public key consisting of the modulus n and the public
(or encryption) exponent e. And the private key consists of the modulus n and
the private (or decryption) exponent d, which must be kept secret. p, q, and
ϕ(n) must also be kept secret because they can be used to calculate d.
3.2.2.1
Digital Signature
Digital signature is the technique used to validate the authenticity and integrity of a
message. They are based on public key cryptography and using the RSA algorithm
that was explained above, one can generate two keys that are mathematically linked
according to the NIST digital signature standard[Lab]. In order to create the signa-
ture, the signing software creates a one way hash function of the data which needs to
be signed. To encrypt the hash, it is used the private key, thus the encrypted hash
together with other information are forming the digital signature. The original file
along with its own digital signature can now be sent to the communication partner.
When these get to the receiving end, the application identifies that the message has
been signed and then the user can decrypt the digital signature with the sender’s
public key, calculate the hash of the the message and compare them and if there is a
difference it means that the message has been altered.
3.3
Access control models:
When researching this issue, it is relevant to take into consideration the access control
policies groups which are[SV]:
• Discretionary(DAC): (authorization-based) policies control access based on the
identity of the requester and on access rules stating what requesters are (or are
not) allowed to do. One of the characteristics of DAC is the fact that users can
be given the ability of passing on their privileges to other users. Granting and
revocation of privileges is regulated by an administrative policy. An example
of such policy is the Access Matrix model.
• Mandatory(MAC): policies control access which are based on mandated regula-
tions determined by a central authority.
• Role-Based(RBAC): policies control access that depend on the roles that users
have withing the system and on rules stating what accesses are allowed to users
in given roles.
The first discussed and most basic access control solution would be the access
control matrix which helps modelling system policies. According to a NIST document
[Vin], it represents ”a table in which each row represents a subject, each column
represents an object and each entry is the set of access rights for that subject to that
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Access control models:
13
object”. They enforce access control on the basis of the identity of the requesters,
and explicit access rules which defines who has the right to read, write or execute
commands on specific resources. The access control matrix provides an abstract way
of assigning attributes to subjects on each of the objects and resources present in the
system. For instance, in the image above there is a showcase table of how an access
control matrix can be implemented in a hospital use case.
Subjects
Patient Data
Medical Data
Insurance Data
Administrative staff
R/W
R/W
R/W
Doctors
-
R/W
R
Patients
R/W
R
R
Insurance Company
R
-
R
Changes to the state of a system is carried out through commands that can execute
primitive operations on the authorization state. Below there are some examples of
how commands can be implemented to create file, grant or revoke privileges .
Figure 3.2: Create, Confer and Revoke commands example[SV] .
The main advantage of basic AC matrix is the fact that it gives certain freedom
when deciding upon the security policies to fit the best with the needs of the system.
On the other hand, the disadvantage is the fact that it applies on small to medium size
systems since it is hard to scale with AC matrices getting too big. There are multiple
implementations of this model, depending on the system’s requirements. One of them
is authorization table which has three columns corresponding to subjects, actions, and
objects, respectively. Each tuple in the table corresponds to an authorization. The
second one is the access control list(ACL) where the matrix is stored by column.
Each object is associated with a list indicating, for each subject, the actions that the
subject can exercise on the object.
Last implementation is using capabilities.
For instance there are some systems
that lack support in information sharing and communications, protection and security.
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Investigation
Hank Levy in his book ”Capability-Based Computer Systems” addresses these issues
considering an alternative architectural structure that is capability based.
These
kind of systems support the object based approach to computing. By his definition,
a capability is a ”token, ticket or key that gives the possessor permission to access an
entity or object in a computer system”. It is implemented as a data structure which
has two important pieces of information: ”an unique object identifier and access
rights”. For the purpose of this report the identifier can be the name of a file in the
file server, while the access rights define the operations that can be performed on the
specific object, which can be, for example, read/write permissions for a file. Thus,
as a natural consequence, each user in such system has access to a list of capabilities
which identifies all of the objects that the user has access to. To maintain the integrity
of a capability based system, the list, according to H. Levy, ”is modified only by the
operating system or the hardware”.
As stated above, in his book, one of the discussion points is the protection of
information in computer systems. In section 1.1.3, it is made a brief comparison of
how ACL and capability lists deal with this challenge. The conventional approach
to maintain the protection of information is access control lists where ”the operating
system keeps an access list for each object in the system”. Thus, the list contains the
name of the users that are allowed to access the object and the privileges they have
over the specific object. Therefore, whenever an user tries to access an object the
system checks the access list corresponding to the targeted object in order to see if
the user is authorized to operate on the object. The figure 3.3 showcase this exact
process.
On the other hand, the capability system provides a solution where”the
operating system arranges protection information by user instead of by object”. Each
capability contains the name of the object in the system, in this case files, and the
user’s privileges for the specific object.
Figure 3.3: Capability List example[SV].
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Access control models:
15
The capabilities can be replaced with keys for instance, so that the server does
not need to be involved in any transactions once the key is distributed to the right
user, besides checking if the key correctly corresponds to the object that the user is
trying to access. This implies the fact that the keys have to have high security so
that forging or replicating keys is operational more expensive than the value of the
object. Bearing this in mind, one issue appears very quickly. How to distribute the
key in a safe way so that only the person entitled to access the object can have the
key considering that once the key has been distributed to another user it is difficult
to keep them from giving the key to someone else? A more in depth research about
key distribution can be found in section 3.4 later this chapter.
To conclude the discussion about capability list concept, is fair to say that it pro-
vides a different approach towards protection and sharing of objects. For instance,
one of the biggest advantage using such solution is the fact that is very easy to make
delegation. Sharing objects is made easier than using ACL so that an user can extend
the privilege to someone else. Moreover using capability list is straightforward to de-
termine the privileges of a subject, meanwhile getting all the accesses executable on
an object requires the examination of all the different capabilities. For such a system
in place, it is sufficient for a subject to reveal its capability in order to get access to
an object. In a distributed system case, the advantage of such solution is the fact
that it allows repeated authentication of a subject. The way it can be done is that
an user is authenticated at a host, getting in return the capabilities associated with
its entry and gain access to the objects is allowed to see. On the other hand, there
are some vulnerabilities coming along with this solution such as forgery. According
to the paper [SV], another problem using capability is the enforcement of revocation,
which refers to the the invalidation of the capabilities that have been released. The
revocation is a known and difficult challenge that comes with capability list approach.
The owner of the key can ask for it back but it is not possible to know whether
someone else who has the key as well already made a copy of it.
As mentioned above there are advantages and disadvantages for discretionary poli-
cies but with them come vulnerabilities as well. Discretionary policies do not differ-
entiate the subject from the user itself. All requests submitted by a process running
on behalf of some user are evaluated against the authorization of the user. They are
vulnerable from processes executing malicious programs exploiting the authorizations
of the user on behalf of whom they are executing. The last but not least, they do not
enforce any control on the flow of information once this information is acquired by a
process. An example of such vulnerability is the Trojan Horse.
Some of the issues addressed in the discretionary policies have been solved using
mandatory policies. They enforce access control on the basis of regulations mandated
by a central authority. The most common one is multilevel security policy which is
based on the classification of subjects and objects in the system. While objects are
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Investigation
passive entities that store information, the subjects are active entities which request
access to objects. One important difference between DAC and MAC is the fact that
MAC makes distinction between users and subjects. Users are human beings who
can access the system, while the subjects are processes operating on behalf of users.
This allows to control indirect accesses caused by the execution of processes[SV].
The classification consists of a security level and a category. The security level is a
hierarchically ordered set such as Top Secret (TS), Secret (S), Confidential (C), and
Unclassified (U), where TS > S > C > U. Below there is a security lattice example.
Figure 3.4: Security Lattice.
MAC policies control how the information flows within a system, either direct or
indirect in order to prevent information leakage to entities that are not supposed to
have access to that specific resource. In order to assure the confidentiality property
of a system, Bell and LaPadula in this paper[BL73] came up with two principles:
1. No-read-up A subject is allowed a read access to an object only if the access
class of the subject dominates the access class of the object.
2. No-write-down A subject is allowed a write access to an object only if the access
class of the subject is dominated by the access class of the object.
If these two principles are satisfied, it prevents information to flow from high level
subjects to lower levels. While mandatory policies guarantee better security than
discretionary policies, they may become too rigid since a lot of the systems nowadays
require allowing exceptions. There are situations when exceptions have to be made
to the restrictions. There are other limitations for the mandatory policies. While
they are a good fit for covert channels of information, they are vulnerable to covert
channels which are not intended for normal communication.
For instance, if the
system returns an error, it may expose itself to improper leakages.
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Key management
17
An analysis of the access control mechanism researched in this chapter will be done
in section 4.1.1, where the best fit for the sake of the project will be chosen.
3.4
Key management
It is a known fact that the security of a system lies in the secrecy of the key, rather
than the secrecy of the solution. In this section will be discussed key generation, key
exchange or key expiration. Key generation is one of the most common places for
attackers to find vulnerabilities.
An important point to discuss in this section is the key life cycle which takes into
consideration:
• Key generation
• Key exchange
• Key use
• Key expiration
After generating keys, the system needs to handle key distribution, so that only
parties which are entitled to own key have access to them .
Thus, there should
be procedures in place to prevent others from seeing the key or authenticate the
legitimate parties(sender and receiver).
Moreover, it needs the certainty that the
generated key is fresh and once it is distributed, a verification should be in place that
assures that the legitimate parties have received the key. In theory, there are multiple
techniques to exchange the key. There will be listed below some of the most common
ones[Knu]:
1. Generated by all parties working together (key agreement): all parties con-
tribute equally to the generation of a common key. An example of this model is
Diffie-Hellman key exchange and the main advantage is the fact that it prevents
third parties from tricking into accepting a key with certain properties. One of
the potential issues for such mechanism is whether one party is talking to the
right partner which allows man in the middle attacks. For such issue, there are
solutions in place that mitigates this security threat.
2. Generated by one party, then published in a public place (public key infrastruc-
ture, PKI)
3. Generated by one party, then sent to the other (key transport).
4. Generated by a trusted third party and sent to all parties
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Investigation
One approach for key distribution would be using GnuPG tool for secure commu-
nication. According to their manual[MW], GnuPG uses public key cryptography so
that users can communicate safely. Each user possesses a pair of keys consisting of
a private key that is kept secret and a public key which can be given to anyone the
user wants to communicate. It uses a more sophisticated scheme where an user has
a primary keypair and then zero or more additional subordinate keypairs. Ideally,
distribution of the key is done by personally giving it to the person you want to com-
municate, but in practice is common that the keys are distributed by email or other
mean of communication. Another issue rises when dealing with validation of the keys.
The user can personally check the fingerprint of the key in order to ensure authentic-
ity. On the other hand, this method is tedious when the user must validate a large
number of keys or communicate with people that he/she does not know personally.
GnuPG proposes an approach using a mechanism called web of trust. Thus, the
responsibility of validating the keys is delegated to people an user can trust.
In
a real life scenario, it can be arguable that trust is a subjective matter.
In this
documentation [MW] they consider a scenario where Bob’s key is valid to Alice (she
signed it), but Alice may not trust Bob to properly validate keys that he signs. This
case given, she would not take Charlie and Danny’s keys as valid based on Bob’s
signature only. According to the manual, the ”web of trust model accounts for this by
associating with each public key on your keyring an indication of how much you trust
the key’s owner”. It differentiates between 4 trust levels:
• Unknown: Nothing is known about the owner’s judgment in key signing.
• None: The owner is known to improperly sign other keys.
• Marginal: The owner understands the implications of key signing and properly
validates keys before signing them.
• Full: The owner has an excellent understanding of key signing, and his signature
on a key would be as good as your own.
Before a key was considered valid only if the user has signed it personally. An
enriched algorithm which is more flexible states that a key is considered valid if it
meets two conditions[MW]:
• It is signed by enough valid keys:
1. signed it personally by the user
2. it has been signed by one fully trusted key
3. it has been signed by three marginally trusted keys
• the path of signed keys leading from K back to the user key is five steps or
shorter
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Key Rings
19
In the figure below there is a scheme of an web of trust example inspired from the
GnuPG manual[MW].
Figure 3.5: Web of trust[MW].
As stated earlier, it is ideal to distribute the keys personally, but in real life this
might prove sometimes to be a tedious process. To solve this issue, GnuPG proposes
a solution where public key servers are used to collect and distribute public keys. A
key received by the server can be added to the database or merged with an already
existing key. A key server can be proven useful when many other users are signing
other users’ keys. Back to the example above, when Bob signs Alice’s key, he sends
the signed key to server which adds Bob’s signature to its copy of Alice’s key. Thus,
when an user is interested in updating their copy of Alice’s key, they make a request
to the key server to retrieve the updated key.
3.5
Key Rings
Another very important cryptography concept that needs to be researched is the key
ring. The reason why, is because when building a system that uses cryptographic
access control scheme, the key ring can act as capability list. The key ring is a simple
file on the server that stores the keys associated to one or multiple files. Thus, each
file on the server have a corresponding key ring file which contains references to the
local file as well as the file on the server. One of the advantages of this concept is the
fact that the parent key ring file can contain nested key rings as shown in the figure
3.6.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Investigation
Figure 3.6: Key Ring Example.
3.6
Client side file system
Another relevant part of this investigation is the client side technology required to
implement a virtual file system, such that the user can interact easily with the system.
When designing such a file system on Windows, different than the usual FAT or NTFS,
the development of a driver is required. One of the requirements of the driver is to be
compliant with the kernel interfaces of Windows, making it an extremely tremendous
task.
During the initial phase of this investigation, FUSE 1 seemed the popular choice
for this task, but it is designed for UNIX applications. As the scope of this project is
limited to the Windows platform, an alternative was found, Dokan - User Mode File
System [JC]. An open-source project, providing the functionality of mounting and
unmounting data as virtual files, full control over the access control model without
having to interact in kernel mode.
The figure 3.7 shows the basic architecture of an implementation of a virtual file
system.
1Filesystem in user space
==PAGE:31==
3.7 Subconclusion
21
Figure 3.7: Dokan Architecture.
As described by the contributors of the project, the solution consists of a usermode
DLL and a kernel mode file system driver. The second one requires a installation, but
the documentation describes both the development and production use of it. After
the installation, the developed application can mount file systems which would look
like regular file system from the user perspective. In order for the user programs
to perform normal operation on the mounted files, the Dokan application process
the requests ( eg. CreateFile, CloseFile, WriteFile ) as they are redirected from the
installed driver.
Therefore, the Dokan driver performs the function of a proxy between user pro-
grams and file system applications. The advantages of this solution is that it allows
a safer environment for both the developers debugging it, but also for the end users.
3.7
Subconclusion
To conclude this chapter, there were summarized and gathered valuable information
regarding which technologies and mechanisms should fit best to a cryptographic access
control. These will be used further in the analysis and design in order to answer the
problem field discussed in section 1.1. Input has been taken from multiple sources
such as academic papers describing the cryptography or access control mechanisms.
Besides, it has been done a mini state of the art investigation considering the two
available papers that proposed similar solutions to what this paper wants to achieve.
In order to develop a cryptographic access control solution, all these above men-
tioned concepts, ideas and protocols are taken as a stepping stone which will be used
later on in the analysis and design phase so that the problem field is answered. This
chapter allows a better understanding of what are the current practices when devel-
oping such product. In the following chapter the information and findings from the
research phase will be analysed in greater detail in order to come up with requirements
tailored specifically for the system we want to implement.
==PAGE:32==
22
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Analysis
In this chapter there will be a reflection on the problem field and how the research
and findings from the previous chapter can be applied to a file sharing system. The
process starts with an in depth discussion about the knowledge gathered previously
and how and which of them can be applied on the study case the report is based
on. Afterwards, once the reader will have a clear overview of which technologies and
security concepts will be used in the design of the system, a number of requirements
will be specified.
This chapter ends with a number of use cases that proves the
functionalitites of a cryptographic access control system.
4.1
Research review
In this section, based on the theory gathered, there will be analyzed the most impor-
tant points discussed earlier. The best solutions, the ones that fit the most to a file
sharing system will be chosen and further implemented in the prototype from chapter
6.
4.1.1
Access Control
In the literature review in chapter 3 have been listed multiple access control mech-
anism or encryption schemes for instance that can be solid candidates in a real life
implementation of a cryptographic access control in a decentralized file sharing sys-
tem . It can be fair to say that the theory presented in the previous chapter and the
problem formulation consist a strong enough ground to start making decisions about
which approach should be tackled in order to solve the challenge that is implementing
such system. First and foremost , it will be discussed the access control mechanism
that fits the best to the problem formulation.
As the title of the master thesis states, one of the key goals this solution is to
achieve having a decentralized system. As it can be seen in the theory research, there
are two main access control mechanism considered: access control list and capability
list. Below there will be made two tables for each approach with advantages and
disadvantages[Rya] that were found in section 3.3. Once the picture is complete, one
of them will be chosen as the preferred approach for the purpose of the report.
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Analysis
Advantages
Disadvantages
Easy to implement
Not
recommended
for
a
sys-
tem with large user base and/or
changes a lot
Suits for Discretionary Access
Control
where
resources
have
owners which set permissions
Does not support an easy way to
make delegation
Easy to check the authorizations
holding on an object
Revoking is done by deleting user
rather than deleting ACL entries
Table 4.1: Access Control List.
Advantages
Disadvantages
Supports delegation
Hard to track user’s activity.
Hard to figure out which users ac-
cess a file
Easy to determine the privileges
of a subject
Vulnerable to forgery
Avoids repeated authentication
of a subject
Challenging the enforcement of
revocation
No control over the transactions
made on the object
Table 4.2: Capability list.
As stated earlier, resource sharing should be supported by the access control
mechanism that the system will implement. Thus, out of these two proposed schemes,
the most suitable one for this particular file sharing system is capability list approach
for access control. In the introduction section it was stated that user management
is out of the scope of the report considering that the system is not making any use
of who is the user accessing the object, as long as he has the correct key ring that
grants him permissions over that specific object. Thus, considering that in a system
that implemented access control list the resources have owners allowed to perform
special kind of operations, user management is mandatory in order to check the
authorizations an object has. Moreover, considering its principles, capability list is
the perfect fit when an user wants to share a resource with another one. It is enough
to share with him the key ring and whenever he wants to access the resource, the
system will provide the requested objects as long as the key ring is correct.
4.1.2
Cryptography decisions
Another key point to analyze is which encryption scheme fits best for the sake of this
system. With theory being presented in the previous chapter there should be made
==PAGE:35==
4.2 System Requirements
25
some decisions about what algorithms should be used and how strong the encryption
keys would be.
These cryptographic choices should be also compatible with the
latest security standards.
This is why this document provided by NIST[Bar] was
investigated in order to find out which recommendations they propose. The chosen
algorithm for encryption and decryption is AES, being the NIST standard. They
foresee that a key length of 256 bits it will be safe enough until 2030. The third
action that requires cryptographic considerations is signature handling. As in the
case above, the NIST standard has been chosen, which is RSA with a key length of
2048. Since key revocation is not something this report will have a particular focus
on, longer keys have been chosen so there is no need for the user to revoke files in
order to create new keys. All of these are summarized in the table 4.3.
Action
Cipher
Key Length
File Encryption
AES
256bits
File Decryption
AES
256bits
Digital Signature
RSA
2048bits
Hashing algorithm
SHA
512
Table 4.3: Cipher algorithms and key lengths.
4.2
System Requirements
Considering that after the research made in chapter 3 and the analysis from section
4.1, there is enough knowledge and theory to create a series of requirements. Taking
into account as well that a Client File System has been well defined, both functional
and non functional requirements can be gathered. This section will dissect the system
in multiple components and for each one of them it will be assigned requirements. To
create an overview of the requirements, the end of the section will contain the use
cases.
4.2.1
System Requirements
The generally called system should have multiple components that communicate to
each other. First and foremost, the system should have a server which receives re-
quests from the client. The client should have an application to handle and execute
file system operations as well as communicating with the server. The server should
be connected as well to a file storage that handles documents and key rings. The
file server should store encrypted files. The system should also contain an web app.
Since it was decided in the analysis that capability list access control will be used,
there is no need for user management, thus the user does not need to register anyway
to the system in order to access resources. The web app should handle upload and
download. A database should be also part of the system and it should be able to
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Analysis
map the request made by the client to the correct path for the requested resource on
the file storage. Besides, the database should contain a field for author token which
can be use when revoking access to a file. Furthermore, the system should allow any
user with access to be able to mount and unmount file on own machine. The system
should allow the user, if a resource was modified, to be able to upload the resource
and update the resource version. To facilitate the user to be able to mount the re-
source on own machine, is important that Dokan file system driver is installed. As
stated earlier it is a user mode file system for Windows.
4.2.2
Application Requirements
Under this section each component will be considered individually, defining require-
ments for each of them.
4.2.2.1
Key
Another important component of the system for which requirements should be gath-
ered is the key ring. Below are listed some of the most relevant requirements which
are relevant to key management:
Key Management
The key ring should be stored as an XML file on both user’s machine
and on the file storage.
It should contain information regarding the keys associated to the
file and the path to the storage location
It should contain an author token for revocation
The key ring should have a symmetric key, a public and a private
key.
The symmetric key must be used for encryption and decryption
The private key must be used to create file’s digital signature
The public key must be used to verify the file’s signature
The keys should be created according to the standards and require-
ments mentioned in table 4.3
Table 4.4: Key management requirements.
Another component that needs requirements is the database. It should be able to
map the ID which comes from the user requests to the location of the file on the file
server.
4.2.2.2
File System
Since this is the biggest component and many requirements relate to it, in order to
have a better overview, the section will be split into smaller use cases, each of them
==PAGE:37==
4.2 System Requirements
27
having its specific requirements.
Create File/Folder
The system should allow an user to create an empty file or folder
The system should create new keys associated to the resource created
The system should update the key ring
The system should add author token in the key ring
Table 4.5: Create file requirements.
Read File
The system should be able to retrieve the latest version of the re-
source requested by the user
Table 4.6: Read file requirements.
Modify File
The system should allow an user to modify the file name
The key ring should modify according to the new file name
An user should be able to move a file to another folder only if he has
access to the both folders
Table 4.7: Modify file requirements.
Add File/Folder
The system should allow an user to add a file or folder already con-
taining information
New set of keys should be created and added to the key ring
Table 4.8: Add file requirements.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Analysis
Share File
The user should be able to select which files will be uploaded to the
server and set files permissions
The system should add an author token in the key ring if the user
created the file
The system should generate a key ring according to the provided
information
Depending the permissions over the file, the system should write the
corresponding keys: symmetric and public keys for read access and
symmetric, public and private for read/write access
Table 4.9: Share file requirements.
Download File
The system should be able to download the encrypted file content
The system should be able to decrypt the file
Table 4.10: Download file requirements.
Upload File
The file should be encrypted with the symmetric key
The system should provide feedback if the file was successfully up-
loaded or not
Table 4.11: Upload file requirements.
Revoke File Access
Only the author should be able to revoke access from a file
The file should be either obsoleted on the server or replaced with a
new file with new key ring
Table 4.12: Revoke file access requirements.
4.2.2.3
Cryptographic requirements
Since security is one of the key points of interest of such system, cryptographic re-
quirements should not be omitted. It is very straight forward that the first three
principles that will be taken into consideration are confidentiality, integrity and avail-
ability. Because this system works with files, there will be other principles that needs
strict specifications. Besides the main three stated above, there will be added a small
discussion about authenticity.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Use Cases
29
Confidentiality: It ensures that data is accessed only by the users that have the
right set of keys and are authorized to perform operations. This should be granted
by the encryption of the file on the client side. Until it gets to the receiving user
that has the right key ring to access the resource, the file is encrypted. Thus, even a
breach occurs on the server side, the files that can be stolen cannot be read without
the correct keys.
Integrity: It ensures that data can be trusted. This means that only the autho-
rized users can perform operation on the file such as read, write, upload etc. As
stated in the requirements above, this should be achieved by having digital signature
for the file using RSA algorithm. Thus, the system allows the files to be verified to
assure that an unauthorized party has not modified the resource.
Availability: It makes sure that the data is available whenever an user makes a
request to the server. Having mechanisms in place that guarantee this requirement
mitigates the threat that is denial of service.
Authenticity: It ensures that the actions or the exchange of information per-
formed in a system comes from the party that it claims to be from. Furthermore, it
involves proof of identity which can be verified through authentication. For instance
when sharing key rings, as stated in the previous chapter, it is ideal to distribute
them personally so they do not end in the hands of an unwanted user.
Once the basic threats and impacts of the previous main principles are understood,
the next step is to identify new requirements and set of controls which would prevent
these threats from occurring. Thus, in the later phase of the process, more specific
in implementation and design, special attention needs to be paid that these security
requirements are in place and they are correctly invoked in the right place.
4.3
Use Cases
In this section there will be presented the main scenarios identified during the analysis.
Afterwards, some of the most important and relevant ones will be discussed more in
depth in order to provide a better overview before designing the system .
Name: Share File
Description: An user wants to share one of his files with a group mate.
Actor: User.
Preconditions:
• The file is located on the user’s machine and is not corrupted.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Analysis
Main scenario:
1.The user wants to share a file with his group mate
2.The user chooses the desired file to share and alongside chooses the access
rights over the file
3.The client application generates the key ring which is attributed to that
specific file
4.The user is the presented with a invitation containing the keyring.
5.The user shares the keyring through a channel of his own choice.
6.Using the generated keyring in the client application, the group mates mounts
the shared files on his system.
Alternate scenario:
5a.The files are not correctly mounted on the user’s machine.
Name: Get File
Description: An user received the key ring from someone and wants to see the
file that was shared with him.
Actor: User.
Preconditions:
• The user has successfully received a key information corresponding to a file.
Main scenario:
1.The user receives key ring information
2.The user inputs the key ring in the application
3.The application validates the keyring and the respective files.
Alternate scenario:
3a.The validation of the key ring does not go as expected and the user cannot
access the resources.
Name: Add file
Description: An user wants to publish a new file or a revised version of a file.
Actor: User.
Preconditions:
• The application is installed and runs properly on the user’s machine.
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Subconclusion
31
Main scenario:
1.The user just finished to update a new version of a file or just wants to upload
a new file that he is author of.
2.The client application generates a new set of keys for the file.
3.The file is encrypted and is generated a signature.
4.The file is uploaded on the server
Name: Revocation of rights
Description: An user wants to revoke access to a file he is author of.
Actor: User.
Preconditions:
• The file requested by the user is stored on the server.
Main scenario:
1.The user wants to stop allowing access to user that has the key ring to that
specific file
2.The clients application requests the file from the server
3.The user has the option to revoke rights and the application checks the author
token.
4.The author token is checked and if is correct the user can revoke access
5.A new set of keys is generated and the key ring is updated.
4.4
Subconclusion
In this chapter there were analyzed different solutions for the research areas from
chapter 3. Thus, the reader has a clear overview of the choices that were made prior
to design. The priority was to find out which access control mechanism fits best to
the scope of a cryptographic access control. Due to the ease to share the rights to
delegate, it has been decided to use as an access control scheme the capability list
approach.
Afterwards, there were made cryptographic decisions in order to find out which
scheme fits best. In the end of this chapter, in order to ease the design, there were
specified a series of functional requirements specific for each important component of
the system such as key, file system or database. The chapter ends with a series of use
cases that depict the functionality of a cryptographic access control system and how
it was envisioned to perform. The next chapter will focus on taking into consideration
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Analysis
all these requirements and choices and put them all together to create the design of
the solution to the problem field.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Design
Having established the theory and proceeded to do a requirements elicitation in sec-
tion 4.2, this chapter will focus on putting together all the knowledge in order to
create a viable and rigorous design of a decentralized file sharing system. First there
will be made a component diagram to get a general overview of the different entities
that are part of the system, followed by explaining how the communication and ac-
tions between them should take place. The chapter will conclude with few sequence
diagrams for the use cases that were described in section 4.3 in order to validate the
flow of actions.
5.1
System Design
As it can be seen in figure 5.1, the proposed design of the file sharing system that
will be implemented has multiple components such as: client, server, file storage, web
app and a database. Each of them have a specific role to fulfill in the system.
Figure 5.1: System overview design .
In the following few sections, each of the component that can be seen in figure 5.1
will be dissected and given a closer look.
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Design
5.2
Server
The first one to discuss is the server. Alongside with the client it is one of the core
components of the designed system. Taking into consideration the fact that the back
bone idea is to provide a system as decentralized as possible, most of the logic will be
handled at the client side. Ideally, the file sharing solution would have the majority
of operations executed withing user space, thus the server should have no control over
it, accessing the content of files for instance.
All these considered, in the figure 5.2 showcased below is a component diagram
for the server which presents the interfaces or the other components it implements or
interacts with.
Figure 5.2: Component Diagram For Server .
Thus, the server implements the methods from the API class. This class is de-
signed according to the REST1 architectural style. It has a number of constraints
such as being stateless, having client/server relationship and an uniform interface[Spr].
It uses HTTP methods to map CRUD2 operations to HTTP requests. The API class
from the figure 5.2 implements methods such as:
• Get: retrieve information about a resource with a specific id.
• Post: used to create or update an entity. In this case when creating a new
resource it needs the public key, id and the author token.
• Put: makes a PUT request which is idempotent in order to create or update an
entity. It needs as parameters the signature and the payload.
• Delete: request that a resource should be removed.
1Representational State Transfer
2create,retrieve,update,delete
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Client
35
The second component the server is connected to is the database. It is a very
simple database containing only file’s ID, author token and public keys. The main
purpose of the ID is to make a correlation between the unique identifier of the file and
the file’s path on the server. The author token is used in case the user that created
the file wants to revoke access to this specific resource. He creates a new version of the
file with a new pair of keys. Because access revocation in a capability list approach
is a challenging process, it does not prevent access to older versions of the files, if one
already had valid access to an earlier version.
The last component connected to the server is the file storage. It contains all the
files that are in the system, encrypted so the only people that can read their content
are the owners of the right set of keys. Thus, the files on the file storage have two
parts, one for the signature and one for the actual payload of the file.
5.3
Client
Maybe the most important component of the cryptographic access control system is
the client. Following the same methodology as for the server, there will be presented
which components are connected to or implemented by the client. The figure 5.3
below is the overview of this section.
Figure 5.3: Component Diagram For Client .
The first interface that the client implements is the FileSystem. It contains all
the specific operations that the Dokan library comes with. According to their docu-
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Design
mentation [Dok], they support a wide variety of operations as seen in the figure 5.3.
Since most of the logic is handled by the client, under the FileSystem class are de-
fined methods such as: create, close, read, write file. Also, it can retrieve information
about the file, listing its propertiese etc.
The next interface the client should implement is the HTTPClient.
It handles
very specific actions such as upload the file to the server, download it, or get the
file. It should be connected with the API presented earlier when discussing about
the server. Key ring is another very important part that the client implements. It
should have two methods, one for parsing the key ring and another one to update the
key ring. A more in depth discussion about the key ring can be found in figure 5.1.
Last but not least, the part the client needs to implement is the one that takes care
of the cryptography. It defines all the specific methods like encrypt, decrypt, verify
signature and the generation of keys and signatures, by implementing the chosen
algorithms in section 4.1.2.
If all these four components will be successfully implemented in the system, it
should provide a very solid and well working client prototype that would fulfill most
of the requirements which were set in section 4.2.
5.4
File Storage
The file storage is the system component that is responsible for storing all the data
that enters or is part of the system. Basically it can store as seen in figure 5.4 either
documents, key rings or both.
Figure 5.4: File Storage Diagram .
==PAGE:47==
5.5 Key Ring
37
A very important point to state is the fact that the files are uploaded in an
encrypted form, prohibiting anyone other than the key ring owners to see the content
of the files. Later on in the sequences diagrams, it is a component in most of the
usecases and it can handle operations such as writing a new file to the storage or
returning the encrypted payload whenever a request for a specific file path is made.
5.5
Key Ring
The key rings are the system component that allows files to be shared from one user
to another. Hence, a good design of a key ring enhances the functionality of the
entire system. On the file storage they will be stored as a normal file. First and
foremost, it needs to be specified which information a key ring file will contain. As
stated before in section 4.2, a key ring should contain two or three keys, depending
on the action the user intends to do. Thus, for read only access, there should be a
field for symmetric key and one for the public one. For write access, it needs to have
the two keys aforementioned alongside with the private key.
Besides these, since the key ring is attributed to a file resource, it needs to have
fields for file id and file path. The database uses the file id in order to map the request
to the correct path of the file on the file storage. In order to deal with revocation, in
case there is a new file added to the server, the key ring should contain author token
which is used only when the creator of the file wants to remove access to the file for all
the users, or wants to replace the existing file with a new version, forbidding access
to all the previous versions.
One very important information to mention is the fact that a key ring can have
nested key rings. In the figure below it can be seen a design example of how such key
ring can look like.
1 <keyring>
2 <file path="path" iv="" public="" private="" id=""/>
3 <file path="path1" iv="" public="" private="" id="" authorToken="" />
4
5 </keyring>
Listing 5.1: Key ring design.
5.6
Use case realization
In this sections for some of the use cases described in section 4.3 there will be made
sequence diagrams to check if the design that was proposed earlier meets the require-
ments that were specified in the use cases. This will provide a good overview of how
the information flows, easing the implementations as well as spotting any point of
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Design
failure in the design. There were chosen four different use cases and for each of them
a sequence diagram is presented.
5.6.1
Create/Upload file
The first use case is concerned about creating or uploading a file to the system . The
use case is initiated by the user who wants to create a new file. Then a synchronous
invocation is made from the file system towards the client where the action Create-
File() is initiated. Having received this, the client now generates a set of keys for
the newly created file. Once this operation is finished, using the REST framework
presented earlier in section 5.2, is is done a POST request with public key, id and
author token as parameters to the server. Afterwards, it processes the request and
calls InsterFileInfo() to the database and if everything goes as planned, an HTTP
status code 200 that stands for OK is sent back to the client.
Once received, the client makes a PUT request to the server with files’s signature
and payload. After it got to the server, it starts communicating to the file storage
calling WriteFile() method. If the client receives another code 200, it assumes that
everything went accordingly and sends an end of file call to the file system. At this
point of the execution, it is safe to assume that the use case create/upload file was
successfull. In the figure 5.5 it is shown the sequence diagram corresponding to this
particular use case.
Figure 5.5: Sequence diagram for creating/uploading a file.
==PAGE:49==
5.6 Use case realization
39
5.6.2
Get File
The second use case that will be described in depth is get file. Again, the action is
started by the user, followed by the client which will send a GET request containing
the ID of the file to the server. Once the ID is received on the server side, it calls the
method GetFilePath() to the database which can process the ID that just came and
return the path of the file on the file storage. Having the path to the file now, the
server calls ReadFile(path) to the file storage which returns the payload to the server
which is forwarded to the client with the status code 200 if everything goes as planned.
On the client side, the next step is to check signature of the file and if it matches, the
payload is decrypted and the file can be now read after calling ReadFile() to the file
system. The sequence diagram below showcase all these steps.
Figure 5.6: Sequence diagram for getting a file.
5.6.3
Mount File
This use case can be seen a sub application of the get file one because it adds more
depth to the information flow. The previous use case was too complex to put every
small action into it, thus it felt necessary to have a smaller one that better explains
how mounting of the newly requested file works.
These being said, the sequence starts with the user that inputs the key ring. The file
system parses the key ring and makes a GetFile() request to the server which returns
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Design
the payload. Once the file system receives the return answer, it calls PopulateFS() to
the client and if the return is ok, the use case is successfully fulfilled.
Figure 5.7: Sequence diagram for mounting file.
5.6.4
Update File
It can be seen in the figure 5.7 that the sequence diagram stops with UpdateFile()
method, use case which will be further investigated under this section. Thus, it starts
with the user updating a file, followed by the file system which sends a write file
command to the client containing the payload. On the client side, it is generated the
signature for the updated file and it is sent a PUT request with the newly generated
signature and the payload to the server. It verifies the signature and if it is correct
it calls WriteFile() to the file storage which returns status code 200 if everything is
right. If the client receives another code 200, it sends an end of file call to the file
system to stop the process. These steps are showcased in the sequence diagram below
in figure 5.8.
==PAGE:51==
5.7 Subconclusion
41
Figure 5.8: Sequence diagram for update file.
5.7
Subconclusion
Design is maybe one of the most relevant chapters from the entire report since it grasps
every bit of information that has been established in the investigation and analysis,
chapters 3 and 4. It grasps all the knowledge and applies it on a file sharing use case.
Moreover, considering the requirements that were found in section 4.2, the process
reached a point where a system overview diagram was made which contained all
the necessary components, interconnected in a client server architecture can provide
a very sustainable example for a cryptographic access control. Use cases from the
analysis chapter were now developed with the help of UML diagrams, figures 5.5, 5.6,
5.7 and 5.8. Furthermore, for the two big components, server and client have been
made component diagrams showing the interfaces and classes that should be created
and connected in the next steps of the process.
It can be said that the design chapter provided the reader the first insight of how
the prototype for file sharing system using a cryptographic access control should look
like.
All the diagrams and the design decisions about cryptography are stepping
stones for what is to follow which is implementing all these discussed above in this
chapter.
Ideally, this specific system design, once implemented should provide a
system which proves that using capability list as an access control mechanism can be
a viable alternative to the classic access control list solutions.
==PAGE:52==
42
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6
Implementation
In this chapter there will be a step by step implementation guide of how each com-
ponent is integrated in the system and how the communication between components
takes place. Each functionality earlier presented in section 4.2 will be showcased with
code snippets, each snippet having the corresponding explanation and documentation.
There will not be presented entire classes in this chapter due to page limitations and
the fact that it may be too heavy and not interesting for the reader, but the complete
classes that are discussed in implementation can be found in appendix, while the
entire source code is attached as a .zip file together with the submission. First and
foremost will be an overview of the implementation process, followed by sections for
each component earlier mentioned together with the operations it is responsible for.
6.1
Client
The first component considered is the client-side implementation of a Windows Ap-
plication. Both the client and server side implementations have been written in C#.
In addition to the file system interfaces, the client required for HTTP requests and
the keyring operations, the data structure is described. At the root of the data model
is the FSItem, which holds all the references required by the modules previously
mentioned.
The initial usage of this type represents the in-memory object of a file throughout
this client implementation. As the basic attributes are the name, the path or the web
identifier, there are also references to the Resource type, which holds the signature and
and the encrypted payload of the file, as well as the FileAttributes. This attributes are
the result of signature verification, represented as file system permissions. As input
for the cryptographic module, there is a KeyStorage holding the information required
for encrypting, decrypting or generating new files. The following code snippet 6.1
represents the implementation of the FSItem type.
1
2
3 class FSItem : IDictionary <string, FSItem>
4 {
==PAGE:54==
44
6 Implementation
5
public ItemType Type;
6
public bool Listed;
7
public string Name;
8
public bool Locked;
9
public string Path;
10
public Resource payload;
11
public string WebID;
12
public Dictionary <string, string> EncDict=new Dictionary <string, string
>();
13
public string AuthT;
14
private Dictionary <string, FSItem> items;
15
16
public FSItem(string id,string priv,string iv, string pub, string symm,
string author,string name):this(
17
ItemType.File, name)
18
{
19
WebID = id;
20
AuthT = author;
21
EncDict["private"]= priv;
22
EncDict["public"]= pub;
23
EncDict["iv"]= iv;
24
EncDict["symm"] = symm;
25
}
26
27
public FSItem(ItemType type, string name)
28
{
29
payload = new Resource();
30
Type = type;
31
items = new Dictionary <string, FSItem >();
32
Name = name;
33
Path = Path + name;
34
switch (type)
35
{
36
case (ItemType.File): {
37
attributes = FileAttributes.Normal;
38
break;
39
}
40
case (ItemType.Folder): {
41
attributes = FileAttributes.Directory;
42
break;
43
}
44
}
45
46
}
Listing 6.1: FSItem class.
Based on the result of the cryptographic validation the attributes defined are as
it follows IsReadOnly, reflecting the Attributes holding the information for the Dokan
File Attributes type. In addition to these, the required lock object and the procedures
of locking/unlocking a file for writing is a requirement from the Windows I/O model.
1
2
public bool IsReadOnly => true;
3
public DateTime DateCreated { get; set; }
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Client
45
4
public DateTime LastUpdated { get; set; }
5
public DateTime LastAccessed { get; set; }
6
public FileAttributes Attributes { get; set; }
7
8
9
public readonly object WriteLock = new object();
10
11
private readonly object _locker = new object();
12
13
public bool TryLock()
14
{
15
bool result;
16
lock (_locker)
17
{
18
if (Locked)
19
{
20
result = false;
21
}
22
else
23
{
24
Locked = true;
25
result = true;
26
}
27
}
28
return result;
29
}
30
31
32
public void Unlock()
33
{
34
lock (_locker)
35
{
36
Locked = false;
37
}
38
}
Listing 6.2: FSItem File attributes.
In order to mount the items defined in the key ring, the VirtualFS object holds the
structure of the files and initializes the required folders for the file system interfaces.
Depending if it is a file or folder, new FSItem is linked to the belonging parent
reference, resulting in a tree structure of items. In the following code snippet there
is depicted the initialization of items with their attributes as they are parsed from
XML format.
1 public VirtualFS(XmlNodeList list) : this()
2
{
3
foreach (XmlNode node in list)
4
5
{
6
string path=node.Attributes["path"].InnerText;
7
string id = node.Attributes["id"].InnerText;
8
string priv= node.Attributes["private"].InnerText;
9
string iv= node.Attributes["iv"].InnerText;
==PAGE:56==
46
6 Implementation
10
string pub = node.Attributes["public"].InnerText;
11
string symm = node.Attributes["key"].InnerText;
12
string author = node.Attributes["author"].InnerText;
13
14
15
string fullPath = "\\";
16
foreach (string s in path.Split('/'))
17
{
18
if (!s.Contains("."))
19
{
20
21
if (Exists(s))
22
{
23
fullPath += s +"\\";
24
25
}
26
else
27
{
28
Lookup(fullPath)[s] = new FSItem(id,priv,iv,pub,symm
,author,s);
29
fullPath += s;
30
}
31
32
33
}
34
else
35
{
36
FSItem file = new FSItem(id, priv, iv, pub, symm, author
, s);
37
38
_client.DownloadFile(file);
39
Lookup(fullPath).Add(s, file);
40
}
41
}
42
43
44
}
45
}
Listing 6.3: Virtual File System.
6.1.1
Key Ring Operation
After mounting and having parsed an existing key ring, the requirements define the
functionality of updating the content of the key ring, as mentioned in section 4.2.2.
The listing 6.4 shows the two methods used when modifying the attributes of a new
file and when generating a new file.
1 public void ChangeAttr(FSItem item, string attr, string newvalue)
2
{
3
XmlDocument xmlDoc = new XmlDocument();
4
xmlDoc.Load(path);
==PAGE:57==
6.1 Client
47
5
foreach (XmlNode node in xmlDoc.GetElementsByTagName("file"))
6
{
7
if (node.Attributes["path"].InnerText == item.Path)
8
{
9
node.Attributes[attr].InnerText = newvalue;
10
}
11
}
12
xmlDoc.Save(path);
13
}
14
15 public void NewItem(FSItem item)
16
{
17
XmlDocument xmlDoc = new XmlDocument();
18
xmlDoc.Load(path);
19
XmlNode root = xmlDoc.DocumentElement;
20
21
//Create a new node.
22
XmlElement node = xmlDoc.CreateElement("file");
23
24
node.Attributes["path"].InnerText=item.Path;
25
node.Attributes["id"].InnerText=item.WebID;
26
node.Attributes["private"].InnerText=item.EncDict["priv"];
27
node.Attributes["iv"].InnerText=item.EncDict["iv"];
28
node.Attributes["public"].InnerText = item.EncDict["public"];
29
node.Attributes["key"].InnerText = item.EncDict["key"];
30
node.Attributes["author"].InnerText=item.AuthT;
31
32
root.AppendChild(node);
33
}
Listing 6.4: Key Ring Operations.
6.1.2
File System Operations
As mentioned in section 3.6, the Dokan library provides the set of interfaces required
by the OS and user programs to interact with virtual files. This section describes
briefly each of the implemented functions, as well as how it integrates in the client
side implementation.
Each of the following interfaces require a NTStatus return
type which corresponds to the result of the performed action, reflecting a range of
values, from PathNotFound, AccessDenied until a SharingViolation ( in the case of a
threading issue).
1 class CryptoIO : IDokanOperations
2 {
3
private VirtualFS fs;
4
private HTTP.Client client;
5
private ConsoleLogger logger = new ConsoleLogger("[CryptoFS] ");
6
private NtStatus Trace(string method, string fileName, DokanFileInfo
info, NtStatus result,
7
params object[] parameters)
8
{
9 #if TRACE
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Implementation
10
var extraParameters = parameters != null && parameters.Length > 0
11
? ", " + string.Join(", ", parameters.Select(x => string.Format(
DefaultFormatProvider , "{0}", x)))
12
: string.Empty;
13
14
logger.Debug(DokanFormat($"{method}('{fileName}', {info}{
extraParameters}) -> {result}"));
15 #endif
16
17
return result;
18
}
19
20
private NtStatus Trace(string method, string fileName, DokanFileInfo
info,
21
FileAccess access, FileShare share, FileMode mode, FileOptions
options, FileAttributes attributes ,
22
NtStatus result)
23
{
24 #if TRACE
25
logger.Debug(
26
DokanFormat(
27
$"{method}('{fileName}', {info}, [{access}], [{share}], [{
mode}], [{options}], [{attributes}]) -> {result}"));
28 #endif
29
30
return result;
31
}
32
public CryptoIO()
33
{
34
KeyRing.Parser p = new Parser();
35
client = new Client();
36
37
fs = new VirtualFS(p.loadFiles(), client);
38
string staticFile = @"C:\Users\Andrei\Desktop\redxd.txt";
39
40
FSItem file1 = new FSItem(ItemType.File, "file1");
41
file1.WebID = "1";
42
file1.payload.payload = File.ReadAllBytes(staticFile);
43
var r = client.Upload(file1).Result;
44
// fs=new VirtualFS("\\");\
45
FSItem parent = fs.Lookup("file1");
46
47
}
Listing 6.5: CryptoIO class - filesystem initialization.
As described in the library’s attached documentation, the Windows I/O model
will always try to create either the file or the folder before opening it, so the CreateFile
implementation has to handle this case. After handling the logic related to this matter,
if the permisions are validated, the new file is allocated.
1 public NtStatus CreateFile(string fileName, FileAccess access, FileShare
share, FileMode mode, FileOptions options,
2
FileAttributes attributes , DokanFileInfo info)
3
{
==PAGE:59==
6.1 Client
49
4
5
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
6
var pathExists = true;
7
var pathIsDirectory = false;
8
try
9
{
10
pathExists = (file.Name != "\\");
11
pathIsDirectory = file.Type == ItemType.Folder;
12
}
13
catch (Exception)
14
{
15
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info, access, share,
mode, options,
16
attributes , DokanResult.FileNotFound);
17
}
18
if (pathIsDirectory)
19
{
20
try
21
{
22
switch (mode)
23
{
24
case FileMode.Open:
25
if (file.Name == "\\")
26
{
27
try
28
{
29
if (file.Type != ItemType.Folder)
30
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile),
fileName, info, access, share, mode,
options,
31
attributes, NtStatus.NotADirectory);
32
}
33
catch (Exception)
34
{
35
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName,
info, access, share, mode, options,
36
attributes, DokanResult.FileNotFound);
37
}
38
//return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName,
info, access, share, mode, options,
attributes , DokanResult.PathNotFound);
39
}
40
41
42
break;
43
44
case FileMode.CreateNew:
45
if (file.Name != "\\")
46
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info,
access, share, mode, options,
47
attributes , DokanResult.FileExists);
48
49
try
50
{
51
if (file.Type == ItemType.Folder) return Trace(
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Implementation
nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info, access,
share, mode, options,
52
attributes , DokanResult.AlreadyExists);
53
}
54
catch (IOException)
55
{
56
}
57
58
fs.CreateDirectory(fileName);
59
break;
60
}
61
}
62
catch (UnauthorizedAccessException)
63
{
64
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info, access,
share, mode, options, attributes,
65
DokanResult.AccessDenied);
66
}
67
}
68
}
Listing 6.6: Create File Operation.
In this case, creating a new file only allocates the resources for the specified item, the
content of it only being added when the file is written. During the development has
been observed that there is a tendency for user applications to create temporary files
in the same place as the opened one. This would cause unnecessary new items to be
uploaded, as well as the file storage being updated with only temporary files.
1
2
var readWriteAttributes = (access & DataAccess) == 0;
3
var readAccess = (access & DataWriteAccess) == 0;
4
5
6
7
switch (mode)
8
{
9
case FileMode.Open:
10
11
if (pathExists)
12
{
13
// check if driver only wants to read attributes, security
info, or open directory
14
if (readWriteAttributes || pathIsDirectory)
15
{
16
if (pathIsDirectory && (access & FileAccess.Delete) ==
FileAccess.Delete
17
&& (access & FileAccess.Synchronize) != FileAccess.
Synchronize)
18
//It is a DeleteFile request on a directory
19
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info,
access, share, mode, options,
20
attributes, DokanResult.AccessDenied);
21
==PAGE:61==
6.1 Client
51
22
info.IsDirectory = pathIsDirectory;
23
info.Context = new object();
24
// must set it to someting if you return DokanError.
Success
25
26
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info, access,
share, mode, options,
27
attributes, DokanResult.Success);
28
}
29
}
30
else
31
{
32
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info, access,
share, mode, options, attributes ,
33
DokanResult.FileNotFound);
34
}
35
break;
36
37
case FileMode.CreateNew:
38
if (pathExists)
39
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info, access,
share, mode, options, attributes ,
40
DokanResult.FileExists);
41
break;
42
43
case FileMode.Truncate:
44
if (!pathExists)
45
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info, access,
share, mode, options, attributes ,
46
DokanResult.FileNotFound);
47
break;
48
}
49
50
info.Context = file.payload;
51
52
if (pathExists && (mode == FileMode.OpenOrCreate
53
|| mode == FileMode.Create))
54
result = DokanResult.AlreadyExists;
55
56
if (mode == FileMode.CreateNew || mode == FileMode.Create) //Files
are always created as Archive
57
attributes |= FileAttributes.Archive;
Listing 6.7: Create File Operation.
Whenever a program opens a file for reading the payload of the FSItem is returned as
well as the size of it. For the case of a folder, it requires a valid reference, otherwise
causing errors.
1
2
public NtStatus ReadFile(string fileName, byte[] buffer, out int
bytesRead, long offset, DokanFileInfo info)
3
{
4
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
5
if (file.Type == ItemType.Folder) // memory mapped read
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Implementation
6
{
7
8
buffer = new byte[1];
9
bytesRead = 0;
10
11
12
}
13
else // normal read
14
{
15
buffer = file.payload.payload;
16
bytesRead = file.payload.payload.Length;
17
}
18
return Trace(nameof(ReadFile), fileName, info, DokanResult.Success,
"out " + bytesRead.ToString(),
19
offset.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture));
20
}
Listing 6.8: Read File Operation.
After a file is closed, meaning that the user program has finished modifying it, the
newly modified content are uploaded. In the case of the temporary files their content
is stored in-memory, allowing the normal usage of the applications.
1
public NtStatus WriteFile(string fileName, byte[] buffer, out int
bytesWritten , long offset, DokanFileInfo info)
2
{
3
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
4
5
if (info.Context == null)
6
{
7
8
file.payload.payload = buffer;
9
bytesWritten = buffer.Length;
10
11
12
}
13
else
14
{
15
file.payload.payload = buffer;
16
bytesWritten = buffer.Length;
17
var res = client.Upload(file);
18
}
19
return Trace(nameof(WriteFile), fileName, info, DokanResult.Success,
"out " + bytesWritten.ToString(),
20
offset.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture));
21
}
Listing 6.9: Write File Operation.
The code presented in listing 6.10 shows the implementation of the retriving file
information, which depending on the item type allocates DirectoryInfo or the virtual
file attributes which holds the Read or Write attributes.
1
public NtStatus GetFileInformation(string fileName, out FileInformation
fileInfo, DokanFileInfo info)
==PAGE:63==
6.1 Client
53
2
{
3
// may be called with info.Context == null, but usually it isn't
4
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
5
FileSystemInfo finfo = new FileInfo(fileName);
6
if (file.Name == "\\")
7
finfo = new DirectoryInfo(fileName);
8
9
10
fileInfo = new FileInformation
11
{
12
FileName = fileName,
13
Attributes =file.Attributes,
14
CreationTime = finfo.CreationTime ,
15
LastAccessTime = finfo.LastAccessTime ,
16
LastWriteTime = finfo.LastWriteTime ,
17
Length = file.payload.Bytes().Length,
18
};
19
20
if (file.Type == ItemType.Folder)
21
{
22
fileInfo.Attributes = FileAttributes.Directory;
23
}
24
25
return Trace(nameof(GetFileInformation), fileName, info, DokanResult
.Success);
26
}
Listing 6.10: Get File Information.
At the time of listing a folder the Windows expects a list of files, this is queried
using the Select LINQ function, depending on if it is using a specific search pattern
or not.
1
public IList<FileInformation > FindFilesHelper(string fileName, string
searchPattern)
2
{
3
IList<FileInformation > files;
4
FSItem root = fs.Lookup(fileName);
5
if (searchPattern != "*")
6
{
7
root = fs.Lookup(searchPattern);
8
files = root
9
.Select(finfo => new FileInformation
10
{
11
Attributes = finfo.Value.attributes ,
12
CreationTime = finfo.Value.DateCreated ,
13
LastAccessTime = finfo.Value.LastAccessed ,
14
LastWriteTime = finfo.Value.LastUpdated ,
15
Length = finfo.Value.payload.payload.Length,
16
FileName = finfo.Value.Name
17
}).ToArray();
18
}
19
else
20
{
21
files = root
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Implementation
22
.Where(finfo => DokanHelper.DokanIsNameInExpression(
searchPattern , finfo.Value.Name, true))
23
.Select(finfo => new FileInformation
24
{
25
Attributes = finfo.Value.attributes ,
26
CreationTime = finfo.Value.DateCreated ,
27
LastAccessTime = finfo.Value.LastAccessed ,
28
LastWriteTime = finfo.Value.LastUpdated ,
29
Length = finfo.Value.payload.payload.Length,
30
FileName = finfo.Value.Name
31
}).ToArray();
32
}
33
34
return files;
35
}
36
public NtStatus FindFilesWithPattern(string fileName, string
searchPattern , out IList<FileInformation > files, DokanFileInfo info)
37
{
38
files = FindFilesHelper(fileName, searchPattern);
39
40
return Trace(nameof(FindFiles), fileName, info, DokanResult.Success)
;
41
}
Listing 6.11: Select LINQ function.
After a new file is initialed, the two functions defined in listing 6.12 are responsible
of allocating the memory for the future payload. Since this implementation is not
required to keep track of the physical location on the disk of the new file, both function
implement the same functionality.
1
2 public NtStatus SetEndOfFile(string fileName, long length, DokanFileInfo
info)
3 {
4
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
5
try
6
{
7
file.payload.payload = new byte[length];
8
return Trace(nameof(SetEndOfFile), fileName, info, DokanResult.
Success,
9
length.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture));
10
}
11
catch (IOException)
12
{
13
return Trace(nameof(SetEndOfFile), fileName, info, DokanResult.
DiskFull,
14
length.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture));
15
}
16 }
17
18 public NtStatus SetAllocationSize(string fileName, long length,
DokanFileInfo info)
19 {
20
...
==PAGE:65==
6.1 Client
55
21 }
Listing 6.12: Set End of File Operation and others.
As it ca be seen in listing 6.13, the methods required for lock and unlocking a file
for writing are implemented, the locking procedure having two possible results, suc-
cessful or not. The last two implementations, are required for having a valid Dokan
implementation, specifying details like disk or volume information.
1 public NtStatus LockFile(string fileName, long offset, long length,
DokanFileInfo info)
2 {
3
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
4
5
6
if (file.TryLock())
7
{
8
return Trace(nameof(LockFile), fileName, info, DokanResult.Success,
9
offset.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture), length.ToString(
CultureInfo.InvariantCulture));
10
11
}
12
13
return Trace(nameof(LockFile), fileName, info, DokanResult.AccessDenied ,
14
offset.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture), length.ToString(
CultureInfo.InvariantCulture));
15
16
17
18 }
19
20 public NtStatus UnlockFile(string fileName, long offset, long length,
DokanFileInfo info)
21 {
22
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
23
file.Unlock();
24
return Trace(nameof(UnlockFile), fileName, info, DokanResult.Success,
25
offset.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture), length.ToString(
CultureInfo.InvariantCulture));
26
27 }
28
29 public NtStatus GetDiskFreeSpace(out long freeBytesAvailable , out long
totalNumberOfBytes , out long totalNumberOfFreeBytes ,
30
DokanFileInfo info)
31 {
32
string path = @"C:\ ";
33
var dinfo = DriveInfo.GetDrives().Single(di => string.Equals(di.
RootDirectory.Name, Path.GetPathRoot(path + "\\"), StringComparison.
OrdinalIgnoreCase));
34
35
freeBytesAvailable = dinfo.TotalFreeSpace;
36
totalNumberOfBytes = dinfo.TotalSize;
37
totalNumberOfFreeBytes = dinfo.AvailableFreeSpace;
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Implementation
38
return Trace(nameof(GetDiskFreeSpace), null, info, DokanResult.Success,
"out " + freeBytesAvailable.ToString(),
39
"out " + totalNumberOfBytes.ToString(), "out " +
totalNumberOfFreeBytes.ToString());
40 }
41
42 public NtStatus GetVolumeInformation(out string volumeLabel , out
FileSystemFeatures features, out string fileSystemName ,
43
out uint maximumComponentLength , DokanFileInfo info)
44 {
45
volumeLabel = "DOKAN";
46
fileSystemName = "NTFS";
47
maximumComponentLength = 256;
48
49
features = FileSystemFeatures.CasePreservedNames | FileSystemFeatures.
CaseSensitiveSearch |
50
FileSystemFeatures.PersistentAcls | FileSystemFeatures.
SupportsRemoteStorage |
51
FileSystemFeatures.UnicodeOnDisk;
52
53
return Trace(nameof(GetVolumeInformation), null, info, DokanResult.
Success, "out " + volumeLabel ,
54
"out " + features.ToString(), "out " + fileSystemName);
55 }
Listing 6.13: Lock/Unlock and miscellaneous.
The following listing shows the file security allocation as well as the mounting/un-
mounting procedures.
1
public NtStatus GetFileSecurity(string fileName, out FileSystemSecurity
security, AccessControlSections sections,
2
DokanFileInfo info)
3
{
4
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
5
6
security = file.Attributes.FileSystemSecurity();
7
return Trace(nameof(GetFileSecurity), fileName, info, DokanResult.
Success, sections.ToString());
8
9
}
10
11
public NtStatus Mounted(DokanFileInfo info)
12
{
13
return Trace(nameof(Mounted), null, info, DokanResult.Success);
14
}
15
16
public NtStatus Unmounted(DokanFileInfo info)
17
{
18
19
return Trace(nameof(Unmounted), null, info, DokanResult.Success);
20
}
Listing 6.14: Get File Security Operation.
==PAGE:67==
6.1 Client
57
6.1.3
Cryptography
This section focuses on the cryptographic operations that are implemented in the
current solution . In the snippet below, figure 6.15, there are showcased methods as-
sociated with AES such as DecryptFromBytes_Aes and EncryptToBytes_Aes, both
methods overloaded since they are called with different parameters in various situa-
tions. It can be noticed that all the constraints and requirements for cryptography
from section 4.1.2 were implemented: key size is 256 bits, block size 128.
For encryption the CreateEncryptor method creates a symmetric encryptor object
taking as parameters the current key property and initialization vector. When de-
crypting it is implemented the reversed method CreateDecryptor which takes the
same parameters as stated above and creates a symmetric Rijndael decryptor object.
1 public static byte[] DoAES(ICryptoTransform cryptoTransform , byte[] data)
2
{
3
using (var memoryStream = new MemoryStream())
4
{
5
using (var cryptoStream = new CryptoStream(memoryStream ,
cryptoTransform , CryptoStreamMode.Write))
6
{
7
cryptoStream.Write(data, 0, data.Length);
8
return memoryStream.ToArray();
9
}
10
}
11
}
12
public static byte[] DecryptFromBytes_Aes(byte[] cipherText, string
Key, string IV)
13
{
14
15
return DecryptFromBytes_Aes(cipherText, Encoding.ASCII.GetBytes(
Key), Encoding.ASCII.GetBytes(IV));
16
}
17
18
public static byte[] DecryptFromBytes_Aes(byte[] cipherText, byte[]
Key, byte[] IV)
19
{
20
21
Aes aesAlg = Aes.Create();
22
aesAlg.KeySize = 256;
23
aesAlg.BlockSize= 128;
24
aesAlg.Padding = PaddingMode.Zeros;
25
aesAlg.Key = Key;
26
aesAlg.IV = IV;
27
28
using (var encryptor = aesAlg.CreateDecryptor(Key, IV))
29
{
30
return DoAES(encryptor, cipherText);
31
}
32
33
}
34
==PAGE:68==
58
6 Implementation
35
public static byte[] EncryptToBytes_Aes(byte[] original, string Key,
string IV)
36
{
37
return EncryptToBytes_Aes(original, Encoding.ASCII.GetBytes(Key)
, Encoding.ASCII.GetBytes(IV));
38
}
39
40
public static byte[] EncryptToBytes_Aes(byte[] original, byte[] Key,
byte[] IV)
41
{
42
Aes aesAlg = Aes.Create();
43
aesAlg.KeySize = 256;
44
aesAlg.BlockSize = 128;
45
aesAlg.Padding = PaddingMode.Zeros;
46
47
aesAlg.Key = Key;
48
aesAlg.IV = IV;
49
50
using (var encryptor = aesAlg.CreateEncryptor(Key, IV))
51
{
52
return DoAES(encryptor, original);
53
}
54
55
}
Listing 6.15: AES Operations.
As one of the most crucial requirements for this project, the functionality of digital
signatures represents the enforcement method, which is used when defining the secu-
rity properties when a file is mounted. The process of signing takes the content of the
future file, together with the PrivateKey and using the signing algorithm RSA-2048
with the hashing algorithm SHA512 calculates the signature of the content.
The
implementation of this process can be found under listing 6.16, together with the
verification of signature.
1 public static byte[] SignData(byte[] content, RSAParameters privateKey)
2 {
3
//// The array to store the signed content in bytes
4
byte[] signedBytes;
5
using (var rsa = new RSACryptoServiceProvider())
6
{
7
8
9
try
10
{
11
//// Import the private key used for signing the content
12
rsa.KeySize = 2048;
13
rsa.ImportParameters(privateKey);
14
15
//// Sign the data, using SHA512 as the hashing algorithm
16
signedBytes = rsa.SignData(content, CryptoConfig.MapNameToOID("
SHA512"));
17
}
18
catch (CryptographicException e)
==PAGE:69==
6.2 Server
59
19
{
20
Console.WriteLine(e.Message);
21
return null;
22
}
23
finally
24
{
25
//// Set the keycontainer to be cleared when rsa is garbage
collected.
26
rsa.PersistKeyInCsp = false;
27
}
28
}
29
//// Convert the a base64 string before returning
30
return signedBytes;
31 }
32
33 public static bool VerifyData(byte[] originalMessage , byte[] signedMessage ,
RSAParameters publicKey)
34 {
35
bool success = false;
36
using (var rsa = new RSACryptoServiceProvider())
37
{
38
try
39
{
40
rsa.KeySize = 2048;
41
rsa.ImportParameters(publicKey);
42
success = rsa.VerifyData(originalMessage , CryptoConfig.
MapNameToOID("SHA512"), signedMessage);
43
}
44
catch (CryptographicException e)
45
{
46
Console.WriteLine(e.Message);
47
}
48
finally
49
{
50
rsa.PersistKeyInCsp = false;
51
}
52
}
53
return success;
54 }
Listing 6.16: Digital signature implementation.
6.2
Server
The second part of this implementation is represented by the server side development.
This section is focused on the documentation of the web application, under the form
of a REST API, the data model used and the file storage.
==PAGE:70==
60
6 Implementation
6.2.1
Web application
The web application was developed using the .NET Core 2.0 framework [Mic], as an
extension of an ASP.NET Core MVC model. The major modules of this implementa-
tion are represented by a REST API and the data model required by the logic defined,
each described in the following sections. The use of the previously mentioned frame-
work, allows handling of requests and responses as already defined types, decreasing
the development time.
6.2.1.1
API definition
As defined in section 5.2, the method definitions for the REST API are implemented.
This is done by mapping the following routes to the File controller, each with the
specified routed and parameters, as listing 6.17 shows. Each request parameters is
parsed accordingly and passed to the defined action.
1 app.UseMvc(routes =>
2
{
3
routes.MapRoute(
4
5
name: "default",
6
template: "{controller=File}/{action=GetFile}/{Id?}");
7
routes.MapRoute(
8
9
10
name: "2",
11
template: "{controller=File}/{action=NewFile}/{Id?}");
12
routes.MapRoute(
13
14
15
name: "3",
16
template: "{controller=File}/{action=PutFile}/{Id?}");
17
});
Listing 6.17: API routes.
The implementation of each method is listed under 6.18. The Get method is returning
the encrypted content, previously uploaded using the Put method. When creating a
new file a Post method is invoked. It can be seen that the implementation is closely
following the design, more specific the sequence diagrams from section 5.6.
1
2
// GET api/values/5
3
[HttpGet("{Id}", Name = "GetFile")]
4
public IActionResult Get(long id)
5
{
6
7
8
var item = _context.Files.Find((long)id);
9
if (item == null) return NotFound();
10
return new PhysicalFileResult(_localPath+item.Id, "application/
binary");
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Server
61
11
12
}
13
14
// POST api/values
15
[HttpPost(Name = "NewFile")]
16
public void Post([FromForm]IFormCollection objCollection)
17
{
18
StringValues id;
19
objCollection.TryGetValue("id",out id);
20
_context.Files.Add(new FSFile("","","",id[0]));
21
_context.SaveChanges();
22
23
}
24
25
// PUT api/values/5
26
[HttpPut("{id}",Name="PutFile")]
27
public void Put(long id, [FromForm]IFormCollection objCollection)
28
{
29
_context.Files.Add(id,objCollecttion.ToDictionary());
30
_context.SaveChanges();
31
32
}
Listing 6.18: API methods.
6.2.1.2
Data Model
In order to have a persistent storage of the data and file information required by
the system, the Entity Framework, part of the .NET Core framework, it is used. It
allows different data sources (MySQL, SQLite, DBLocal etc.),as well as class models
compiled into schema definitions, migrations and entity management. The listing
6.19 shows how the configuration and how entities are mapped into tables.
1 public class FSFileContext : DbContext
2
{
3
public FSFileContext(DbContextOptions <FSFileContext > options):base(
options)
4
{
5
6
}
7
public DbSet<FSFile> Files{ get; set; }
8
9
protected override void OnConfiguring(DbContextOptionsBuilder
optionsBuilder)
10
{
11
12
13
}
14
protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder modelBuilder)
15
{
16
modelBuilder.Entity<FSFile >().ToTable("Files");
17
18
}
==PAGE:72==
62
6 Implementation
19
}
Listing 6.19: Data Model.
In order for the framework to define database schemas, the FSFile class definition is
used. Under listing 6.20, the storage path, the id ( used as a primary key ), as well
as the public key, associated to the file, are defined.
1
2 public class FSFile
3
{
4
public string Path { get; set; }
5
public long Id { get; set; }
6
public string PbK { get; set; }
7
public string Author { get; set; }
8
public string Name { get; set; }
9
public FSFile() : this("","","")
10
{
11
}
12
13
public FSFile(string path="",string pub="", string author="",string
name="")
14
{
15
Path = path;
16
PbK = pub;
17
Author = author;
18
Name = name;
19
}
20
21
}
Listing 6.20: FSFile properties.
6.3
Client - Server Communication
This section covers the client-server communication, as the HTTP client and the Web
Server hosting the application. The communication is done over HTTPS, using the
protocols methods GET, POST, PUT.
6.3.1
HTTP client
The HTTP client is using the System.Net.Http.Client, implementing methods as up-
load, download, as well encrypting and decrypting the payload of the requests/re-
sponses. In order for a new file to be uploaded on the server, the UploadNewFile
method is defined, which issues a POST request, followed by the Upload method,
issuing a PUT request with the encrypted payload. Both methods implementation
are found in listing 6.21
==PAGE:73==
6.3 Client - Server Communication
63
1
public async Task<String> Upload(FSItem file)
2
{
3
var data = file.payload.payload;
4
var sig = file.payload.Signature();
5
var encData = Utils.EncryptToBytes_Aes(data, file.EncDict["symm"],
file.EncDict["iv"]);
6
var requestContent = new MultipartFormDataContent();
7
8
var imageContent = new ByteArrayContent(encData);
9
imageContent.Headers.ContentType =
10
MediaTypeHeaderValue.Parse("application/binary");
11
var sigContent = new ByteArrayContent(sig);
12
sigContent.Headers.ContentType =
13
MediaTypeHeaderValue.Parse("application/binary");
14
requestContent.Add(imageContent , "file", "file.bin");
15
requestContent.Add(sigContent, "sig", "sig.bin");
16
var result= await httpClient.PutAsync(URL + _putFilePath + file.
WebID, requestContent);
17
18
return await result.Content.ReadAsStringAsync();
19
}
20
21
public async Task<String> UploadNewFile(FSItem file)
22
{
23
24
25
var content = new FormUrlEncodedContent(new[]
26
{
27
new KeyValuePair <string, string>("id", file.WebID)
28
});
29
var result = await httpClient.PostAsync(URL+_postFilePath , content);
30
return await result.Content.ReadAsStringAsync();
31
32
}
Listing 6.21: Upload Operation.
When the virtual file system is first initialized, a GET request is made for each file
in the key ring, followed by allocating the decrypted payload to the file. The code-
snippet in listing 6.23 shows the implementation.
1
public void DownloadFile(FSItem file)
2
{
3
4
byte[] c = GetFile(file).Result;
5
file.payload.payload=Crypto.Utils.DecryptFromBytes_Aes(c,file.
EncDict["symm"],file.EncDict["iv"]);
6
7
}
8
9
private async Task<byte[]> GetFile(FSItem item)
10
{
11
string uri = URL + _getBinFilePath + item.WebID;
12
var response = await httpClient.GetAsync(uri);
==PAGE:74==
64
6 Implementation
13
14
return await response.Content.ReadAsByteArrayAsync();
15
16
17
}
Listing 6.22: Download and Get File Operation.
6.3.2
HTTP Server
The web application described in section 6.2.1 is hosted using the following web-server
configuration. In this implementation the IIS 1 web server was used, as well a instance
of a LocalDB for data storage.
1
public static void Main(string[] args)
2
{
3
var host = new WebHostBuilder()
4
.UseKestrel()
5
.UseContentRoot(Directory.GetCurrentDirectory())
6
.UseIISIntegration()
7
.UseStartup <Startup >()
8
.UseApplicationInsights()
9
.Build();
10
11
host.Run();
12
}
13
public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services)
14
{
15
// Add framework services.\
16
services.AddDbContext <FSFileContext >(options =>
17
options.UseSqlServer(Configuration.GetConnectionString("
DefaultConnection")));
18
19
services.AddMvc();
20
}
Listing 6.23: Web server.
6.4
Running prototype
As it can be seen in figure 6.1, the implementation of both the side and server side
are running in development mode. In this instance, the user possess a key ring with
two files, one in a sub-folder, each with its attributes applied. On the right side of the
figure, it is presented the server side application, showing how the entity framework
defines the SQL queries based on the incoming requests, while the left side is presented
the client prototype, revealing the Dokan requests.
1Internet Information Services
==PAGE:75==
6.4 Running prototype
65
Figure 6.1: Client application (left side) Server application (right side).
==PAGE:76==
66
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 7
Evaluation
This chapter will focus on the results gathered after finishing the prototype that was
described in depth in the previous chapter. There will be made an evaluation of the
solution from two different angles: development and security. The requirements that
were found in section 4.2 will be reviewed and compared with what was achieved by
the current solution. Moreover, there will be done an assessment where will be stated
the most common vulnerabilities, the best practices and how the prototype prevents
them from happening or not.
7.1
Requirements validation
In order to evaluate the implementation it was very important to have clears goals
in mind. These have been earlier set in the analysis chapter, section 4.2, where there
were a series of requirements defined which state very clearly what the implementa-
tion is intended to do. All these being said, this first section of the evaluation is
focused mostly of how much the implementation covered and has its basis in chapter
4, pointing out how successfull the prototype is by enumerating the requirements
which are fulfilled.
Following the same methodology as done in section 4.2, each component will be
isolated and analyzed individually. The first component for which were found require-
ments for was the file system. Before going through each and every requirement, it
is very important to state which and how many of the use cases specific for the file
system have been implemented.
As it can be seen from the implementation chapter, where each big operation has
been carefully explained, the prototype supports most of the functionalities. Thus,
an user is able to create, read, modify, add, share , download and upload a file
using the implemented system. Basically, every fundamental functionality, besides the
revocation of access rights is handled by the application. A more in depth discussion
about the revocation can be found under section 8.2.
==PAGE:78==
68
7 Evaluation
File System Requirements
The system should allow an user to create an empty file or folder
The system should create new keys associated to the resource created

The system should update the key ring
The system should add author token in the key ring
The system should be able to retrieve the latest version of the re-source
requested by the user
The system should allow an user to modify the file name

The key ring should modify according to the new file properties
An user should be able to move a file to another folder only if he has
access to the both folders
The system should allow an user to add a file or folder already containing
information

New set of keys should be created and added to the key ring
The user should be able to select which files will be uploaded to the
server and set files permissions
The system should add an author token in the key ring if the user created
the file
The system should generate a key ring according to the provided infor-
mation
Depending the permissions over the file, the system should write the
corresponding keys: symmetric and public keys for read access and sym-
metric, public and private for read/write access
The system should be able to decrypt the file coming from the server
The file should be encrypted with the symmetric key

The system should provide feedback if the file was successfully uploaded
or not
Only the author should be able to revoke and delegate access to a file
The file should be either obsoleted on the server or replaced with a new
file with new key ring
In the table 7.1 it can be seen that 15 out 19 requirements that were set in
the analysis stage, before starting design and implementation have been fulfilled.
This is a very fulfilling figure and it should provide the user with a prototype that
satisfies the basic and fundamental functionalities. In the table below, figure 7.1 , the
requirements found when discussing about key management will be evaluated. 7 out
of 8 requirements are satisfied, which is a very satisfactory ratio.
==PAGE:79==
7.2 Security Evaluation
69
Key Management Requirements
The key ring should be stored as an XML file on both user’s machine
and on the file storage.
It should contain information regarding the keys associated to the file
and the path to the storage location
It should contain an author token for revocation
The key ring should have a symmetric key, a public and a private key.
The symmetric key must be used for encryption and decryption
The private key must be used to create file’s digital signature
The public key must be used to verify the file’s signature

The keys should be created according to the standards and requirements
mentioned in table
7.2
Security Evaluation
In this section it will be considered the most common attacks and threats a sys-
tem such as this deal with. Moreover, the analysis conducted will provide the best
practices that an actor part of the system should adopt, no matter the level: user,
developer, administrator etc. In a real life scenario where the system would be ex-
posed to an open environment, sooner rather than later attackers will look for an
weakness. Following the OWASP1 guide about application threat modeling, ”a threat
categorization such as STRIDE is useful in the identification of threats by classifying
attacker goals such as”:
1https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Application_Threat_Modeling
==PAGE:80==
70
7 Evaluation
Type
Examples
Security Control
Spoofing
Unauthorized access to another
user’s personal data
Authentication
Tampering
Maliciously
alter
data
in
database and the data while two
entities are communicating over
a network
Integrity
Repudiation
Perform illegal operations in a
system which lacks traceability
for prohibited operations
Non-Repudiation
Information disclosure
The operation to read informa-
tion that one was not granted to
Confidentiality
Denial of service
Deny access to system’s services
making them unavailable
Availability
Elevation of privilege
Gain access to resources in or-
der to get unauthorized access to
higher levels of the system
Authorization
Table 7.1: STRIDE Threat List.
The precondition of having an objective and well formulated threat analysis is to
have a very good understanding the probability that a threat agent is able to exploit
one or more vulnerabilities in the system which will make the application malfunction
or even get access to classified data. Thus, the implementation presented in chapter 6,
needs to have an identification of the threats to the system involving each component’s
functionality and architecture to classify potential weaknesses which may lead to
exploitable vulnerabilities.
One of the most common attacks is the man in the middle in which an attacker
situates over the communication between two parties. Considering that the communi-
cation is done over an untrusted channel, there is a high likelihood that the attacker
can intercept a message and perform specific attacks. There are plenty of attack vari-
ations that fit in the man in the middle category. One of them is eavesdropping where
the communications are intercepted by someone from outside. For instance the file
are sent over an insecure channel, but they are encrypted so as long as the attacker
does not posses the key to decrypt them, this attack is very unlikely to happen.
The table below, figure 7.2, has two columns, one for the threat type which are the
same as presented in figure 7.1, while the second column has the mitigation techniques
that are already implemented in the proposed solution.
==PAGE:81==
7.2 Security Evaluation
71
Threat Type
Mitigation Techniques
Spoofing
• Encryption
• Key ring validation
Tampering data
• Hashes
• Digital Signature
Repudiation
• Digital Signature
Information Disclosure
• Encryption
• Capability List Access Con-
trol
Denial of Service
•
Elevation of privileges
•
Table 7.2: STRIDE Threat and mitigation techniques.
Denial of Service(DoS) is a very common techniques nowadays to endanger the
availability of a system. In the case of this proposed system, one or multiple attackers
can flood the server with requests which will makes the server very busy handling
these requests. As a consequence, an user that tries to use the system in a fair way
will experience long waiting time until a response comes back. Considering that using
this architecture and technologies is already creating requests that take longer than
normally, DoS is a real threat that this system can face, having a medium likelihood
of happening once deploying in a real life environment.
In the table 7.2 it can be seen that for the Denial of Service and elevation of
privileges there are no items being specified, the reason being the fact that since it
is in a prototype state and not ready for real life deployment, these two threats were
not considered priorities, but they were acknowledged nonetheless in section 8.2.
==PAGE:82==
72
7 Evaluation
A very helpful technique in order to ensure that the solution deployed is meeting
the security standards is to have a specific list of requirements which will validate
or not the security of the newly deployed API. The table below will feature differ-
ent conditions for each cryptographic requirement described in section 4.2.2.3 and
other that were found relevant for the end product. The framework and some of the
requirements from the table below are inspired from this post[Shi].
Authentication
Use encryption on all sensitive data
Access

Limit requests (Throttling) to prevent DDoS / brute-force attacks
Use technologies to prevent MITM (Man In The Middle Attack).
Input
Use the proper HTTP method according to the operation: GET (read),
POST (create), PUT/PATCH (replace/update), and DELETE (to delete
a record), and respond with 405 Method Not Allowed if the requested
method isn’t appropriate for the requested resource.
Validate content-type on request Accept header (Content Negotiation)
to allow only your supported format (e.g. application/xml, application/j-
son, etc)
Validate content-type of posted data as you accept
Validate User input to avoid common vulnerabilities
Do not use any sensitive data (credentials, Passwords, security tokens,
or API keys) in the URL, but use standard Authorization header.
Confidentiality
Use encryption to encrypt data when transmitted over an insecure chan-
nel.
Integrity
Use digital signature technique to ensure the integrity
Authenticity
Use digital signature technique to ensure the integrity
Processing

Check if all the endpoints are protected behind authentication to avoid
broken authentication process.
If you are parsing XML files, make sure entity parsing is not enabled to
avoid XXE
If you are parsing XML files, make sure entity expansion is not enabled
to avoid Billion Laughs/XML bomb via exponential entity expansion
attack
If you are dealing with huge amount of data, use Workers and Queues
to process as much as possible in background and return response fast
to avoid HTTP Blocking.
==PAGE:83==
7.3 Subconclusion
73
CI & CD

Audit your design and implementation with unit/integration tests cov-
erage.

Use a code review process and disregard self-approval.
7.3
Subconclusion
This chapter focused a lot on what the implementation and the design have achieved.
Evaluation is split into two main parts, one that focuses on the functionalities of the
prototype, and the other one looks at the prototype from a security point of view.
After reading this chapter, the reader has the entire overview of the process that
stood behind this project. Starting from the research and analysis where knowledge
was gathered, moving to design and implementation in which the file sharing solution
took shape and finishing with an objective evaluation of how well the system performs
and what functionalities it has.
It can be seen that most of the goals and requirements have been met which shows
that the implementation was successfull to some extent, but there are still features
that are missing or functionalitites that are integrated but future work can improve
them. More about future development will be discussed in the next chapter.
==PAGE:84==
74
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
This chapter will wrap up the entire project, presenting topics of discussion regarding
areas that have not been properly or at all investigated.
They might have been
mentioned during the report, but because of time and scope constraints did not fit
the previous chapters.
Throughout this chapter there will be a section of reflections which will contain
authors’ personal views about the project and what could have been done better or
in a different way. Furthermore, this will be followed by a discussion about future
works and improvements where the unimplemented features will be more in depth
analyzed.
8.1
Reflections
Looking back on how the process was conducted, it is safe to say that there are things
that could have been handled in a different manner. Back to the methodology, chapter
2, it can be stated that the process this project has been following was appropriate
for the end goal that we have set. On the other hand, micro processes in various steps
took more time than we expected or were mismanaged causing delays or sometimes
failure, so we had to iterate over again. Having the two previous articles which were
described in detail in section 3.1, made the process of design a bit more efficient. It
was really helpful to have an idea of what worked or not for the others, or which
technologies did not fit for this specific type of architecture. All these small things
added up were a great boost in what we believe to be a very reliable prototype.
This project was a really great journey for us because in order to answer the
problem formulation from section 1.1, we had to go through many different areas
concerning system architecture and security. All these made working to this thesis a
tremendous learning experience.
8.2
Limitations
Even though, according to the evaluation that we made the prototype is fulfilling most
of the requirements that we set, there were some limitations that were preventing
us from having a better and more optimal implementation of the solution. At the
==PAGE:86==
76
8 Discussion
moment of delivering the project, the client application was lacking a proper user-
interface such that the end user is not able to interact with it. In the same corner,
one of the limitations for handling the XML-formatted Key rings, is that there is no
schema validation of the loaded files.
When it comes to the server-side implementation, the limitations are focused on
the infrastructure development, specifically reinforcement of security features of the
web server.
Since the scope of this project was not covering this part, the mini-
mum requirements are fulfilled by a simple SSL certificate provided by LetsEncrypt
1, allowing us to have a cloud hosted server implementation.
Besides all these above mentioned points, we feel that some ideas or points of
discussion have not been properly explained.
Few of them relate to the key ring.
Is important to state that the user cannot modify the key ring. Only the system
generates key rings and fills them with the corresponding fields. This principle is
according to Hank Levy and his book which states that the integrity of a capability
based system, the list ”is modified only by the operating system or the hardware”. As
a good practice, the users should not be able to modify files that are key rings.
8.2.1
Key revocation
One of the limitations of this solution is not enough discussion about key revocation.
It is a known fact that besides the advantages that capability list mechanism comes
with, one of the biggest drawbacks is dealing with the revocation of access rights.
The reason is that once an user delegates the rights to another one, it has no control
over anymore. Thus, if the file is deleted from the storage or the keys for the file are
updated, it is impossible to revoke access to the ones that already have a previous
version of the file. Not having authentication mechanisms, makes key revocation a
quite challenging issue. Another point that should have been made earlier in the
report when cryptography was discussed, it should have been to have or not an
expiration date for the key. Thus, after a specific amount of time, there should be
generated new pair of keys for the resources.
There is a revocation mechanism in the solution we proposed. As specified already
in the section 5.1, the key ring XML file contains a field for authorToken which allows
only the author of the file to revoke access to the resource. Since the project was
quite challenging in itself, finding an optimal solution for key revocation was not a
priority for design and implementation. But now, taking advantage of having this
chapter included in the report, the issue can be brought up again.
1https://letsencrypt.org/
==PAGE:87==
8.3 Future Work
77
Professor Fred B. Schneider from Cornell University, New York in his lecture [Sch]
, states that one solution would be to have the kernel track all the capabilities and in-
validate them when necessary from the database. An alternative would be to stipulate
that capabilities are not available after a specific amount of time. The question raised
with this solution is how do someone determine an expiration date for a resource.
As is could be seen in the table 7.2 which describes the mitigations for specific
threats that can be found in the current state of the system, mitigations techniques for
denial of service and elevation of privileges are missing. At the time of implementation
due to time and complexity reasons, these were chosen to be discussed at a latter time.
Not having any mechanisms in our solution to deal with denial of service which is a
very commonly used attack to affect the availability of the resources, is definitely a
limitation of this project.
8.3
Future Work
d In this section we will discuss few of the plans that add the most to the current
implementation state of the system.
8.3.1
Upgrade to a decentralized system
As mentioned before, there are still improvements and features that this prototype
can implement. For instance the way the architecture of this system is built, it can
achieve a truly decentralized model.
Right now, all the resources are saved on a
single central file storage. The ideal case would be to have multiple file storages that
distribute the payloads. Based on the framework that we developed, a parameter
can be added in the keyring which would specify the path of the storage where the
payload is located. An example of the updated key ring can be seen in snippet below.
1 <keyring>
2 <file path="path" iv="" public="" private="" id="" serverpath=""/>
3 <file path="path1" iv="" public="" private="" id="" serverpath=""
authorToken="" />
4
5 </keyring>
Listing 8.1: Key ring design.
Thus, the added field compared to the keyring XML from design section is server-
path=””. Furthermore, instead of sending requests to the server that will forward to
the central file storage, the client can forward it to the server path where the resource
is located. We consider that to be the next step of going forward with this solution
because it is very easy to implement with the current architecture of the system and
would add great value to it. The figure 8.1 is an interpretation of the component
diagram that can be found earlier in the system overview section in design.
==PAGE:88==
78
8 Discussion
Figure 8.1: Updated Component Diagram.
8.3.2
Development
Besides upgrading the system to a decentralized one aforementioned, another corner
where the solution could use improvements is in the development. By having a very
strong and reliable backbone, it fulfilled a very satisfying number of requirements,
but there are still some that can be implemented. Besides this, having new iterations
starting from analysis would improve the solution significantly. The advantages of
iterating again would be discovering new use cases or requirements which can enrich
the system . It might bring modifications to the design or pointing out weaknesses
or vulnerabilities in the system that were not observed in the first few iterations.
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
Building up from the initial objectives defined in the problem field and going through
step by step from investigation and analysis to implementation and evaluation, we
have ended up with a prototype for a file sharing system using cryptographic access
control which satisfies a large number of our expectations.
By managing to use
capability list approach for access control, we can say that it can be considered a
viable alternative to the classic access control list approach.
This project was challenging due to the fact that, in order to prove the theory, we
decided to build a prototype. Gathering theory and finding the best way how to apply
it for the solution we wanted to create was a tedious and time consuming process, but
essential in the same way. We had the opportunity to work with a topic that covered
most of the theory that has been taught throughout the master degree and there was
a feeling of satisfaction by being able to use all this knowledge and apply it in order
to create something practical, a solution for what we consider a very common action
nowadays which is file sharing.
Going back to the introduction chapter, there was section 1.1 which put forward a
problem formulation which reflected the issues that our solution tries to solve.
How can a system make use of the available cryptographic
access control mechanisms in order to design a secure de-
centralized solution for file sharing?
This statement has many different areas of concern, which naturally brings several
dimensions of research which had to be investigated.
We started by looking into
access control mechanisms, key management and file systems that can be integrated
into our solution. All these knowledge had to be grasped and understood in order to
optimally apply it. All these tedious but necessary work has paid off in the end by
coming up in the beginning with design and later on with implementation. It made
these last two steps easier and the system could be build in a more optimal way.
Reaching the end of the process, it is time to put together all these steps and see
if they helped us reaching our goal, which is answering to the problem formulation
stated above. There are some key words such as access control, secure, decentralized
or file sharing. The system we built incorporates and connects all these terms and
==PAGE:90==
80
9 Conclusion
principles to provide a file sharing solution. All of the areas concerned by the above
mentioned key words were thoroughly investigated and analysed.
However, the proposed solution is just a proof of concept and still has some flaws
and issues that need to be fixed, most of them were discussed in section 8.2 and 8.3.
To sum up, for the purpose and scope of this project, we can conclude that we have
delivered both a theoretical and practical answer which can be used as a starting
point for a decentralized file sharing system using cryptographic access control.
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
The appendix will contain the complete C# classes that were involved in the imple-
mentation chapter.
A.1
Code
In this appendix section there are added only the classes that implementation chapter
makes use of. The rest of the code can be found under the zip file in the delivery
folder.
A.1.1
Utils.cs
1 using System;
2 using System.Collections.Generic;
3 using System.IO;
4 using System.Linq;
5 using System.Security.Cryptography;
6 using System.Text;
7 using System.Threading.Tasks;
8
9 namespace CryptoClient.Crypto
10 {
11
static class Utils
12
{
13
public static byte[] DoAES(ICryptoTransform cryptoTransform , byte[]
data)
14
{
15
using (var memoryStream = new MemoryStream())
16
{
17
using (var cryptoStream = new CryptoStream(memoryStream ,
cryptoTransform , CryptoStreamMode.Write))
18
{
19
cryptoStream.Write(data, 0, data.Length);
20
return memoryStream.ToArray();
21
}
22
}
23
}
24
public static byte[] DecryptFromBytes_Aes(byte[] cipherText, string
Key, string IV)
==PAGE:92==
82
A An Appendix
25
{
26
27
return DecryptFromBytes_Aes(cipherText , Encoding.ASCII.GetBytes(
Key), Encoding.ASCII.GetBytes(IV));
28
}
29
30
public static byte[] DecryptFromBytes_Aes(byte[] cipherText, byte[]
Key, byte[] IV)
31
{
32
33
Aes aesAlg = Aes.Create();
34
aesAlg.KeySize = 256;
35
aesAlg.BlockSize= 128;
36
aesAlg.Padding = PaddingMode.Zeros;
37
aesAlg.Key = Key;
38
aesAlg.IV = IV;
39
40
using (var encryptor = aesAlg.CreateDecryptor(Key, IV))
41
{
42
return DoAES(encryptor, cipherText);
43
}
44
45
}
46
47
public static byte[] EncryptToBytes_Aes(byte[] original, string Key,
string IV)
48
{
49
return EncryptToBytes_Aes(original, Encoding.ASCII.GetBytes(Key)
, Encoding.ASCII.GetBytes(IV));
50
}
51
52
public static byte[] EncryptToBytes_Aes(byte[] original, byte[] Key,
byte[] IV)
53
{
54
Aes aesAlg = Aes.Create();
55
aesAlg.KeySize = 256;
56
aesAlg.BlockSize = 128;
57
aesAlg.Padding = PaddingMode.Zeros;
58
59
aesAlg.Key = Key;
60
aesAlg.IV = IV;
61
62
using (var encryptor = aesAlg.CreateEncryptor(Key, IV))
63
{
64
return DoAES(encryptor, original);
65
}
66
67
}
68
}
69 }
A.1.2
CryptoIO.cs
==PAGE:93==
A.1 Code
83
1 using System;
2 using System.Collections.Generic;
3 using System.Globalization;
4 using System.IO;
5 using System.Linq;
6 using System.Runtime.InteropServices;
7 using System.Security.AccessControl;
8 using System.Text;
9 using System.Threading.Tasks;
10 using CryptoClient.FileSystem;
11 using CryptoClient.HTTP;
12 using CryptoClient.KeyRing;
13 using DokanNet;
14 using DokanNet.Logging;
15 using static DokanNet.FormatProviders;
16 using FileAccess = DokanNet.FileAccess;
17
18 namespace CryptoClient.DiskOperations
19 {
20
public struct DAVSize
21
{
22
public ulong used;
23
public ulong total;
24
}
25
26
class CryptoIO : IDokanOperations
27
{
28
private VirtualFS fs;
29
private HTTP.Client client;
30
private Func<string, DAVSize> sizeFunc;
31
private ConsoleLogger logger = new ConsoleLogger("[CryptoFS] ");
32
private const FileAccess DataAccess = FileAccess.ReadData |
FileAccess.WriteData | FileAccess.AppendData |
33
FileAccess.Execute |
34
FileAccess.GenericExecute |
FileAccess.GenericWrite |
35
FileAccess.GenericRead;
36
37
private const FileAccess DataWriteAccess = FileAccess.WriteData |
FileAccess.AppendData |
38
FileAccess.Delete |
39
FileAccess.GenericWrite;
40
private NtStatus Trace(string method, string fileName, DokanFileInfo
info, NtStatus result,
41
params object[] parameters)
42
{
43 #if TRACE
44
var extraParameters = parameters != null && parameters.Length >
0
45
? ", " + string.Join(", ", parameters.Select(x => string.
Format(DefaultFormatProvider , "{0}", x)))
46
: string.Empty;
47
==PAGE:94==
84
A An Appendix
48
logger.Debug(DokanFormat($"{method}('{fileName}', {info}{
extraParameters}) -> {result}"));
49 #endif
50
51
return result;
52
}
53
54
private NtStatus Trace(string method, string fileName, DokanFileInfo
info,
55
FileAccess access, FileShare share, FileMode mode, FileOptions
options, FileAttributes attributes,
56
NtStatus result)
57
{
58 #if TRACE
59
logger.Debug(
60
DokanFormat(
61
$"{method}('{fileName}', {info}, [{access}], [{share}],
[{mode}], [{options}], [{attributes}]) -> {result}")
);
62 #endif
63
64
return result;
65
}
66
public CryptoIO()
67
{
68
KeyRing.Parser p = new Parser();
69
client = new Client();
70
71
fs = new VirtualFS(p.loadFiles(), client);
72
string staticFile = @"C:\Users\Andrei\Desktop\redxd.txt";
73
74
FSItem file1 = new FSItem(ItemType.File, "file1");
75
file1.WebID = "1";
76
file1.payload.payload = File.ReadAllBytes(staticFile);
77
var r = client.Upload(file1).Result;
78
// fs=new VirtualFS("\\");\
79
FSItem parent = fs.Lookup("file1");
80
81
82
//FillList();
83
}
84
85
private void FillList(string path = "\\")
86
{
87
88
FSItem parent = fs.Lookup(path);
89
List<FSItem> fileList = new List<FSItem >();
90
FSItem folder1 = new FSItem(ItemType.Folder, "folder1");
91
FSItem folder2 = new FSItem(ItemType.Folder, "folder2");
92
FSItem folder3 = new FSItem(ItemType.Folder, "folder3");
93
string staticFile = @"C:\Users\Andrei\Desktop\redxd.txt";
94
95
FSItem file1 = new FSItem(ItemType.File, "file1");
96
file1.payload.payload = File.ReadAllBytes(staticFile);
97
folder2.Add(file1.Name, file1);
==PAGE:95==
A.1 Code
85
98
folder2.Add(folder3.Name, folder3);
99
if (parent == null) parent = fs.root;
100
parent.Clear();
101
parent.Add(folder1.Name, folder1);
102
parent.Add(folder2.Name, folder2);
103
parent.Add(file1.Name, file1);
104
parent.Listed = true;
105
}
106
107
public NtStatus CreateFile(string fileName, FileAccess access,
FileShare share, FileMode mode, FileOptions options,
108
FileAttributes attributes, DokanFileInfo info)
109
{
110
111
var result = NtStatus.Success;
112
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
113
var pathExists = true;
114
var pathIsDirectory = false;
115
try
116
{
117
pathExists = (file.Name != "\\");
118
pathIsDirectory = file.Type == ItemType.Folder;
119
}
120
catch (Exception)
121
{
122
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info, access,
share, mode, options,
123
attributes, DokanResult.FileNotFound);
124
}
125
if (pathIsDirectory)
126
{
127
try
128
{
129
switch (mode)
130
{
131
case FileMode.Open:
132
if (file.Name == "\\")
133
{
134
try
135
{
136
if (file.Type != ItemType.Folder)
137
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile),
fileName, info, access, share,
mode, options,
138
attributes , NtStatus.
NotADirectory);
139
}
140
catch (Exception)
141
{
142
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile),
fileName, info, access, share, mode,
options,
143
attributes, DokanResult.FileNotFound
);
144
}
==PAGE:96==
86
A An Appendix
145
//return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName,
info, access, share, mode, options,
attributes , DokanResult.PathNotFound);
146
}
147
148
//new DirectoryInfo(filePath).
EnumerateFileSystemInfos().Any();
149
// you can't list the directory
150
151
break;
152
153
case FileMode.CreateNew:
154
if (file.Name != "\\")
155
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName,
info, access, share, mode, options,
156
attributes, DokanResult.FileExists);
157
158
try
159
{
160
if (file.Type == ItemType.Folder) return
Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info
, access, share, mode, options,
161
attributes, DokanResult.AlreadyExists
);
162
}
163
catch (IOException)
164
{
165
}
166
167
fs.CreateDirectory(fileName);
168
break;
169
}
170
}
171
catch (UnauthorizedAccessException)
172
{
173
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info, access,
share, mode, options, attributes ,
174
DokanResult.AccessDenied);
175
}
176
}
177
else
178
{
179
180
181
var readWriteAttributes = (access & DataAccess) == 0;
182
var readAccess = (access & DataWriteAccess) == 0;
183
184
185
186
switch (mode)
187
{
188
case FileMode.Open:
189
190
if (pathExists)
191
{
==PAGE:97==
A.1 Code
87
192
// check if driver only wants to read attributes
, security info, or open directory
193
if (readWriteAttributes || pathIsDirectory)
194
{
195
if (pathIsDirectory && (access & FileAccess.
Delete) == FileAccess.Delete
196
&& (access & FileAccess.Synchronize) !=
FileAccess.Synchronize)
197
//It is a DeleteFile request on a
directory
198
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile),
fileName, info, access, share, mode,
options,
199
attributes, DokanResult.AccessDenied
);
200
201
info.IsDirectory = pathIsDirectory;
202
info.Context = new object();
203
// must set it to someting if you return
DokanError.Success
204
205
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName,
info, access, share, mode, options,
206
attributes, DokanResult.Success);
207
}
208
}
209
else
210
{
211
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info,
access, share, mode, options, attributes ,
212
DokanResult.FileNotFound);
213
}
214
break;
215
216
case FileMode.CreateNew:
217
if (pathExists)
218
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info,
access, share, mode, options, attributes ,
219
DokanResult.FileExists);
220
break;
221
222
case FileMode.Truncate:
223
if (!pathExists)
224
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info,
access, share, mode, options, attributes ,
225
DokanResult.FileNotFound);
226
break;
227
}
228
229
try
230
{
231
info.Context = file.payload;
232
233
if (pathExists && (mode == FileMode.OpenOrCreate
234
|| mode == FileMode.Create))
==PAGE:98==
88
A An Appendix
235
result = DokanResult.AlreadyExists;
236
237
if (mode == FileMode.CreateNew || mode == FileMode.
Create) //Files are always created as Archive
238
attributes |= FileAttributes.Archive;
239
//File.SetAttributes(filePath, attributes);
240
}
241
catch (UnauthorizedAccessException) // don't have access
rights
242
{
243
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info, access,
share, mode, options, attributes ,
244
DokanResult.AccessDenied);
245
}
246
catch (DirectoryNotFoundException)
247
{
248
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info, access,
share, mode, options, attributes ,
249
DokanResult.PathNotFound);
250
}
251
catch (Exception ex)
252
{
253
var hr = (uint)Marshal.GetHRForException(ex);
254
switch (hr)
255
{
256
case 0x80070020: //Sharing violation
257
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info,
access, share, mode, options, attributes ,
258
DokanResult.SharingViolation);
259
default:
260
throw;
261
}
262
}
263
}
264
return Trace(nameof(CreateFile), fileName, info, access, share,
mode, options, attributes,
265
result);
266
}
267
268
public void Cleanup(string fileName, DokanFileInfo info)
269
{
270
return;
271
}
272
273
public void CloseFile(string fileName, DokanFileInfo info)
274
{
275
276 #if TRACE
277
if (info.Context != null)
278
Console.WriteLine(DokanFormat($"{nameof(CloseFile)}('{
fileName}', {info} - entering"));
279 #endif
280
281
//(info.Context as byte[])?.Dispose();
282
info.Context = null;
==PAGE:99==
A.1 Code
89
283
Trace(nameof(CloseFile), fileName, info, DokanResult.Success);
284
// could recreate cleanup code here but this is not called
sometimes
285
}
286
287
public NtStatus ReadFile(string fileName, byte[] buffer, out int
bytesRead, long offset, DokanFileInfo info)
288
{
289
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
290
if (file.Type == ItemType.Folder) // memory mapped read
291
{
292
293
buffer = new byte[1];
294
bytesRead = 0;
295
296
297
}
298
else // normal read
299
{
300
buffer = file.payload.payload;
301
bytesRead = file.payload.payload.Length;
302
}
303
return Trace(nameof(ReadFile), fileName, info, DokanResult.
Success, "out " + bytesRead.ToString(),
304
offset.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture));
305
}
306
307
public NtStatus WriteFile(string fileName, byte[] buffer, out int
bytesWritten , long offset, DokanFileInfo info)
308
{
309
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
310
311
if (info.Context == null)
312
{
313
314
file.payload.payload = buffer;
315
bytesWritten = buffer.Length;
316
var res = client.Upload(file).Result;
317
318
}
319
else
320
{
321
file.payload.payload = buffer;
322
bytesWritten = buffer.Length;
323
var res = client.Upload(file);
324
}
325
return Trace(nameof(WriteFile), fileName, info, DokanResult.
Success, "out " + bytesWritten.ToString(),
326
offset.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture));
327
}
328
329
public NtStatus FlushFileBuffers(string fileName, DokanFileInfo info
)
330
{
==PAGE:100==
90
A An Appendix
331
return Trace(nameof(FlushFileBuffers), fileName, info,
DokanResult.Success);
332
}
333
334
public NtStatus GetFileInformation(string fileName, out
FileInformation fileInfo, DokanFileInfo info)
335
{
336
// may be called with info.Context == null, but usually it isn't
337
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
338
FileSystemInfo finfo = new FileInfo(fileName);
339
if (file.Name == "\\")
340
finfo = new DirectoryInfo(fileName);
341
342
343
fileInfo = new FileInformation
344
{
345
FileName = fileName,
346
Attributes = FileAttributes.Normal,
347
CreationTime = finfo.CreationTime ,
348
LastAccessTime = finfo.LastAccessTime ,
349
LastWriteTime = finfo.LastWriteTime ,
350
Length = file.payload.Bytes().Length,
351
};
352
353
if (file.Type == ItemType.Folder)
354
{
355
fileInfo.Attributes = FileAttributes.Directory;
356
}
357
358
return Trace(nameof(GetFileInformation), fileName, info,
DokanResult.Success);
359
}
360
361
public NtStatus FindFiles(string fileName, out IList<FileInformation
> files, DokanFileInfo info)
362
{
363
files = FindFilesHelper(fileName, "*");
364
365
return Trace(nameof(FindFiles), fileName, info, DokanResult.
Success);
366
}
367
public IList<FileInformation > FindFilesHelper(string fileName,
string searchPattern)
368
{
369
IList<FileInformation > files;
370
FSItem root = fs.Lookup(fileName);
371
if (searchPattern != "*")
372
{
373
root = fs.Lookup(searchPattern);
374
files = root
375
.Select(finfo => new FileInformation
376
{
377
Attributes = finfo.Value.attributes ,
378
CreationTime = finfo.Value.DateCreated ,
379
LastAccessTime = finfo.Value.LastAccessed ,
==PAGE:101==
A.1 Code
91
380
LastWriteTime = finfo.Value.LastUpdated ,
381
Length = finfo.Value.payload.payload.Length,
382
FileName = finfo.Value.Name
383
}).ToArray();
384
}
385
else
386
{
387
files = root
388
.Where(finfo => DokanHelper.DokanIsNameInExpression(
searchPattern , finfo.Value.Name, true))
389
.Select(finfo => new FileInformation
390
{
391
Attributes = finfo.Value.attributes ,
392
CreationTime = finfo.Value.DateCreated ,
393
LastAccessTime = finfo.Value.LastAccessed ,
394
LastWriteTime = finfo.Value.LastUpdated ,
395
Length = finfo.Value.payload.payload.Length,
396
FileName = finfo.Value.Name
397
}).ToArray();
398
}
399
400
return files;
401
}
402
public NtStatus FindFilesWithPattern(string fileName, string
searchPattern , out IList<FileInformation > files, DokanFileInfo
info)
403
{
404
files = FindFilesHelper(fileName, searchPattern);
405
406
return Trace(nameof(FindFiles), fileName, info, DokanResult.
Success);
407
}
408
409
public NtStatus SetFileAttributes(string fileName, FileAttributes
attributes , DokanFileInfo info)
410
{
411
412
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
413
try
414
{
415
// MS-FSCC 2.6 File Attributes : There is no file attribute
with the value 0x00000000
416
// because a value of 0x00000000 in the FileAttributes field
means that the file attributes for this file MUST NOT
be changed when setting basic information for the file
417
if (attributes != 0)
418
file.Attributes = attributes;
419
return Trace(nameof(SetFileAttributes), fileName, info,
DokanResult.Success, attributes.ToString());
420
}
421
catch (UnauthorizedAccessException)
422
{
423
return Trace(nameof(SetFileAttributes), fileName, info,
DokanResult.AccessDenied , attributes.ToString());
424
}
==PAGE:102==
92
A An Appendix
425
catch (FileNotFoundException)
426
{
427
return Trace(nameof(SetFileAttributes), fileName, info,
DokanResult.FileNotFound , attributes.ToString());
428
}
429
catch (DirectoryNotFoundException)
430
{
431
return Trace(nameof(SetFileAttributes), fileName, info,
DokanResult.PathNotFound , attributes.ToString());
432
}
433
}
434
435
public NtStatus SetFileTime(string fileName, DateTime? creationTime ,
DateTime? lastAccessTime , DateTime? lastWriteTime ,
436
DokanFileInfo info)
437
{
438
throw new NotImplementedException();
439
}
440
441
public NtStatus DeleteFile(string fileName, DokanFileInfo info)
442
{
443
throw new NotImplementedException();
444
}
445
446
public NtStatus DeleteDirectory(string fileName, DokanFileInfo info)
447
{
448
throw new NotImplementedException();
449
}
450
451
public NtStatus MoveFile(string oldName, string newName, bool
replace, DokanFileInfo info)
452
{
453
throw new NotImplementedException();
454
}
455
456
public NtStatus SetEndOfFile(string fileName, long length,
DokanFileInfo info)
457
{
458
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
459
try
460
{
461
file.payload.payload = new byte[length];
462
return Trace(nameof(SetEndOfFile), fileName, info,
DokanResult.Success,
463
length.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture));
464
}
465
catch (IOException)
466
{
467
return Trace(nameof(SetEndOfFile), fileName, info,
DokanResult.DiskFull,
468
length.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture));
469
}
470
}
471
==PAGE:103==
A.1 Code
93
472
public NtStatus SetAllocationSize(string fileName, long length,
DokanFileInfo info)
473
{
474
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
475
try
476
{
477
file.payload.payload = new byte[length];
478
return Trace(nameof(SetEndOfFile), fileName, info,
DokanResult.Success,
479
length.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture));
480
}
481
catch (IOException)
482
{
483
return Trace(nameof(SetEndOfFile), fileName, info,
DokanResult.DiskFull,
484
length.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture));
485
}
486
}
487
488
public NtStatus LockFile(string fileName, long offset, long length,
DokanFileInfo info)
489
{
490
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
491
492
493
if (file.TryLock())
494
{
495
return Trace(nameof(LockFile), fileName, info, DokanResult.
Success,
496
offset.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture), length.
ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture));
497
498
}
499
500
return Trace(nameof(LockFile), fileName, info, DokanResult.
AccessDenied ,
501
offset.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture), length.
ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture));
502
503
504
505
}
506
507
public NtStatus UnlockFile(string fileName, long offset, long length
, DokanFileInfo info)
508
{
509
FSItem file = fs.Lookup(fileName);
510
file.Unlock();
511
return Trace(nameof(UnlockFile), fileName, info, DokanResult.
Success,
512
offset.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture), length.
ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture));
513
514
}
515
==PAGE:104==
94
A An Appendix
516
public NtStatus GetDiskFreeSpace(out long freeBytesAvailable , out
long totalNumberOfBytes , out long totalNumberOfFreeBytes ,
517
DokanFileInfo info)
518
{
519
string path = @"C:\ ";
520
var dinfo = DriveInfo.GetDrives().Single(di => string.Equals(di.
RootDirectory.Name, Path.GetPathRoot(path + "\\"),
StringComparison.OrdinalIgnoreCase));
521
522
freeBytesAvailable = dinfo.TotalFreeSpace;
523
totalNumberOfBytes = dinfo.TotalSize;
524
totalNumberOfFreeBytes = dinfo.AvailableFreeSpace;
525
return Trace(nameof(GetDiskFreeSpace), null, info, DokanResult.
Success, "out " + freeBytesAvailable.ToString(),
526
"out " + totalNumberOfBytes.ToString(), "out " +
totalNumberOfFreeBytes.ToString());
527
}
528
529
public NtStatus GetVolumeInformation(out string volumeLabel , out
FileSystemFeatures features, out string fileSystemName ,
530
out uint maximumComponentLength , DokanFileInfo info)
531
{
532
volumeLabel = "DOKAN";
533
fileSystemName = "NTFS";
534
maximumComponentLength = 256;
535
536
features = FileSystemFeatures.CasePreservedNames |
FileSystemFeatures.CaseSensitiveSearch |
537
FileSystemFeatures.PersistentAcls |
FileSystemFeatures.SupportsRemoteStorage |
538
FileSystemFeatures.UnicodeOnDisk;
539
540
return Trace(nameof(GetVolumeInformation), null, info,
DokanResult.Success, "out " + volumeLabel ,
541
"out " + features.ToString(), "out " + fileSystemName);
542
}
543
544
public NtStatus GetFileSecurity(string fileName, out
FileSystemSecurity security, AccessControlSections sections,
545
DokanFileInfo info)
546
{
547
security = new FileSecurity();
548
return Trace(nameof(GetFileSecurity), fileName, info,
DokanResult.Success, sections.ToString());
549
550
}
551
552
public NtStatus SetFileSecurity(string fileName, FileSystemSecurity
security, AccessControlSections sections,
553
DokanFileInfo info)
554
{
555
throw new NotImplementedException();
556
}
557
558
public NtStatus Mounted(DokanFileInfo info)
==PAGE:105==
A.1 Code
95
559
{
560
return Trace(nameof(Mounted), null, info, DokanResult.Success);
561
}
562
563
public NtStatus Unmounted(DokanFileInfo info)
564
{
565
566
return Trace(nameof(Unmounted), null, info, DokanResult.Success)
;
567
}
568
569
public NtStatus FindStreams(string fileName, out IList<
FileInformation > streams, DokanFileInfo info)
570
{
571
streams = new FileInformation[0];
572
return Trace(nameof(FindStreams), fileName, info, DokanResult.
NotImplemented);
573
}
574
}
575 }
A.1.3
VirtualFS.cs
1 using System;
2 using System.Collections.Generic;
3 using System.IO;
4 using System.Linq;
5 using System.Xml;
6 using CryptoClient.HTTP;
7 using FileAccess = DokanNet.FileAccess;
8
9 namespace CryptoClient.FileSystem
10 {
11
class VirtualFS
12
{
13
public FSItem root;
14
private string path;
15
private readonly object _locker=new object();
16
private Client _client=new Client();
17
public VirtualFS(XmlNodeList list, Client client) : this(list)
18
{
19
this._client = client;
20
}
21
22
public VirtualFS(XmlNodeList list) : this()
23
{
24
foreach (XmlNode node in list)
25
26
{
27
string path=node.Attributes["path"].InnerText;
28
string id = node.Attributes["id"].InnerText;
29
string priv= node.Attributes["private"].InnerText;
==PAGE:106==
96
A An Appendix
30
string iv= node.Attributes["iv"].InnerText;
31
string pub = node.Attributes["public"].InnerText;
32
string symm = node.Attributes["key"].InnerText;
33
string author = node.Attributes["author"].InnerText;
34
35
36
string fullPath = "\\";
37
foreach (string s in path.Split('/'))
38
{
39
if (!s.Contains("."))
40
{
41
42
if (Exists(s))
43
{
44
fullPath += s +"\\";
45
46
}
47
else
48
{
49
Lookup(fullPath)[s] = new FSItem(id,priv,iv,pub,
symm,author,s);
50
fullPath += s;
51
}
52
53
54
}
55
else
56
{
57
FSItem file = new FSItem(id, priv, iv, pub, symm,
author, s);
58
59
_client.DownloadFile(file);
60
//string staticFile = @"C:\Users\Andrei\Desktop\tw
\1";
61
62
//file.payload.payload = File.ReadAllBytes(
staticFile);
63
Lookup(fullPath).Add(s, file);
64
}
65
}
66
67
68
}
69
}
70
public VirtualFS():this("\\")
71
{
72
}
73
public VirtualFS(string path)
74
{
75
root=new FSItem(ItemType.Folder);
76
}
77
78
public bool Delete(string path)
79
{
80
string parent = Parent(path);
==PAGE:107==
A.1 Code
97
81
string filename = Filename(path);
82
83
84
if (!Exists(path))
85
{
86
return false;
87
}
88
89
FSItem parentNode = Lookup(parent);
90
FSItem node = parentNode[filename];
91
92
parentNode.Remove(filename);
93
node.Unlock();
94
// File.Delete(localFilename);
95
96
return true;
97
}
98
99
public FSItem CreateDirectory(string path)
100
{
101
string parent = Parent(path);
102
string filename = Filename(path);
103
104
FSItem parentNode = Lookup(parent);
105
FSItem childNode = new FSItem(ItemType.Folder);
106
107
childNode.DateCreated = DateTime.Now;
108
childNode.LastUpdated = DateTime.Now;
109
childNode.LastAccessed = DateTime.Now;
110
childNode.Type = ItemType.Folder;
111 //
childNode.Length = 0;
112
childNode.Path = path;
113
114
parentNode[filename] = childNode;
115
116
return childNode;
117
}
118
119
public void CopyFile(string sourcePath , string destinationPath)
120
{
121
string destinationParent = Parent(destinationPath);
122
string destinationFilename = Filename(destinationPath);
123
124
FSItem sourceNode = Lookup(sourcePath);
125
FSItem destinationNode = new FSItem();
126
FSItem destionationParent = Lookup(destinationParent);
127
128
destinationNode.Path = destinationPath;
129
destinationNode.Type = sourceNode.Type;
130
// destinationNode.LastAccessed = DateTime.Now;
131
//
destinationNode.LastUpdated = DateTime.Now;
132
//
destinationNode.DateCreated = DateTime.Now;
133
// destinationNode.Length = sourceNode.Length;
134
135
destionationParent[destinationFilename] = destinationNode;
==PAGE:108==
98
A An Appendix
136
}
137
138
public void MoveFile(string sourcePath , string destinationPath)
139
{
140
string sourceParent = Parent(sourcePath);
141
string sourceFilename = Filename(sourcePath);
142
string destinationParent = Parent(destinationPath);
143
string destinationFilename = Filename(destinationPath);
144
145
146
FSItem sourceParentNode = Lookup(sourceParent);
147
FSItem sourceNode = Lookup(sourcePath);
148
FSItem destinationNode = Lookup(destinationParent);
149
150
//
sourceNode.LastUpdated = DateTime.Now;
151
//
sourceNode.LastAccessed = DateTime.Now;
152
//
sourceNode.DateCreated = DateTime.Now;
153
154
sourceNode.Path = destinationPath;
155
156
destinationNode[destinationFilename] = sourceNode;
157
158
sourceParentNode.Remove(sourceFilename);
159
160 //if (File.Exists(sourceLocal))
161
//
{
162
//
File.Move(sourceLocal , destinationLocal);
163
//
}
164
165
}
166
167
public FSItem CreateFile(string path, int length = 0, bool remote =
true)
168
{
169
string parent = Parent(path);
170
string filename = Filename(path);
171
172
FSItem parentNode = Lookup(parent);
173
FSItem childNode = new FSItem();
174
175
//
childNode.DateCreated = DateTime.Now;
176
//
childNode.LastUpdated = DateTime.Now;
177
//
childNode.LastAccessed = DateTime.Now;
178
childNode.Type = ItemType.File;
179
//
childNode.Length = length;
180
childNode.Path = path;
181
182
parentNode[filename] = childNode;
183
184
return childNode;
185
}
186
187
public ICollection <FSItem> List(string path)
188
{
189
FSItem parent = Lookup(path);
==PAGE:109==
A.1 Code
99
190
191
if (parent.Type != ItemType.Folder)
192
{
193
throw new Exception("Cannot list a file");
194
}
195
196
return parent.Values;
197
}
198
199
public bool Exists(string path)
200
{
201
FSItem file;
202
203
try
204
{
205
file = Lookup(path);
206
}
207
catch
208
{
209
return false;
210
}
211
212
return file != null;
213
}
214
215
public string Parent(string path)
216
{
217
return path.Substring(0, path.LastIndexOf('/'));
218
}
219
220
public string Filename(string path)
221
{
222
return path.Substring(path.LastIndexOf('/') + 1);
223
}
224
225
public FSItem Lookup(string path)
226
{
227
228
229
FSItem helper = root;
230
string[] parts;
231
if(path.StartsWith("\\"))
232
{
233
path = path.Remove(0, 1);
234
}
235
parts = path.Split('\\');
236
if (path == "\\") return root;
237
foreach (string part in parts)
238
{
239
if (part.Length == 0)
240
{
241
continue;
242
}
243
if (!helper.ContainsKey(part))
244
{
==PAGE:110==
100
A An Appendix
245
return null;
246
}
247
helper = helper[part];
248
}
249
250
return helper;
251
}
252
253
public FSItem this[string key]
254
{
255
get
256
{
257
return Lookup(key);
258
}
259
260
}
261
262
public void WriteFile(string webFilename , byte[] buffer, ref uint
writtenBytes , long offset)
263
{
264
265
FSItem file;
266
267
file = Lookup(webFilename);
268
269
lock (_locker)
270
{
271
file.payload.payload = buffer;
272
writtenBytes = (uint)buffer.Length;
273
//
client.Upload(newBytes)
274
/*using (FileStream fs = File.Open(localFilename , FileMode.
OpenOrCreate , FileAccess.Write))
275
{
276
277
278
fs.Seek(offset, SeekOrigin.Begin);
279
fs.Write(buffer, 0, buffer.Length);
280
281
writtenBytes = (uint)buffer.Length;
282
283
file.Length = fs.Length;
284
file.LocallyModified = true;
285
}*/
286
}
287
}
288
289
public void ReadFile(string webFilename , byte[] buffer, ref uint
readBytes, long offset)
290
{
291
FSItem file;
292
293
file = Lookup(webFilename);
294
295
lock (_locker)
296
{
==PAGE:111==
A.1 Code
101
297
buffer=file.payload.Bytes();
298
readBytes=(uint)file.payload.Bytes().Length;
299
}
300
301
}
302
303
}
304 }
A.1.4
Client.cs
1 using System;
2 using System.Collections.Generic;
3 using System.IO;
4 using System.Linq;
5 using System.Net.Http;
6 using System.Net.Http.Headers;
7 using System.Security.Cryptography;
8 using System.Text;
9 using System.Threading.Tasks;
10 using CryptoClient.Crypto;
11 using CryptoClient.FileSystem;
12
13 namespace CryptoClient.HTTP
14 {
15
class Client
16
{
17
18
private HttpClient httpClient;
19
private string URL=HostInfo.URL();
20
private static string _getBinFilePath = "api/file/";
21
private static string _putFilePath = "api/file/";
22
private static string _postFilePath = "api/file/";
23
24
public Client():this(HostInfo.URL())
25
{
26
}
27
28
public Client(string url)
29
{
30
httpClient=new HttpClient();
31
this.URL = url;
32
}
33
34
35
public async Task<String> Upload(FSItem file)
36
{
37
var data = file.payload.payload;
38
var sig = file.payload.Signature();
39
var encData = Utils.EncryptToBytes_Aes(data, file.EncDict["symm"
], file.EncDict["iv"]);
40
var requestContent = new MultipartFormDataContent();
==PAGE:112==
102
A An Appendix
41
//
here you can specify boundary if you need---^
42
var imageContent = new ByteArrayContent(encData);
43
imageContent.Headers.ContentType =
44
MediaTypeHeaderValue.Parse("application/bianry");
45
var sigContent = new ByteArrayContent(sig);
46
sigContent.Headers.ContentType =
47
MediaTypeHeaderValue.Parse("application/bianry");
48
requestContent.Add(imageContent , "file", "file.bin");
49
requestContent.Add(sigContent, "sig", "file.bin");
50
var result= await httpClient.PutAsync(URL + _putFilePath + file.
WebID, requestContent);
51
52
return await result.Content.ReadAsStringAsync();
53
}
54
55
public async Task<String> UploadNewFile(FSItem file)
56
{
57
58
59
var content = new FormUrlEncodedContent(new[]
60
{
61
new KeyValuePair <string, string>("id", file.WebID)
62
});
63
var result = await httpClient.PostAsync(URL+_postFilePath ,
content);
64
return await result.Content.ReadAsStringAsync();
65
66
}
67
public void DownloadFile(FSItem file)
68
{
69
//string staticFile = @"C:\Users\Cristi\Desktop\1.txt";
70
byte[] c = GetFile(file).Result;
71
file.payload.payload=Crypto.Utils.DecryptFromBytes_Aes(c,file.
EncDict["symm"],file.EncDict["iv"]);
72
73
}
74
75
private async Task<byte[]> GetFile(FSItem item)
76
{
77
string uri = URL + _getBinFilePath + item.WebID;
78
var response = await httpClient.GetAsync(uri);
79
80
return await response.Content.ReadAsByteArrayAsync();
81
82
83
}
84
}
85
86 }
A.1.5
Parser.cs
==PAGE:113==
A.1 Code
103
1 using System;
2 using System.Collections.Generic;
3 using System.Diagnostics;
4 using System.IO;
5 using System.Linq;
6 using System.Text;
7 using System.Threading.Tasks;
8 using System.Xml;
9 using CryptoClient.FileSystem;
10
11 namespace CryptoClient.KeyRing
12 {
13
class Parser
14
{
15
private string path = @"C:\Users\Cristi\Source\Repos\MSCCrypto\
WebApplication1\CryptoClient\test1.xml";
16
17
public Parser()
18
{
19
20
}public Parser(string h)
21
{
22
path = h;
23
}
24
25
public XmlNodeList loadFiles()
26
{
27
XmlDocument xmlDoc = new XmlDocument();
28
xmlDoc.Load(path);
29
30
31
return xmlDoc.GetElementsByTagName("file");
32
}
33
}
34 }
A.1.6
CRFileController.cs
1 using System;
2 using System.Collections.Generic;
3 using System.Linq;
4 using System.Threading.Tasks;
5 using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http;
6 using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc;
7 using Microsoft.Extensions.Primitives;
8 using WebApp.Models;
9
10 namespace WebApp.Controllers
11 {
12
[Produces("application/json")]
13
[Route("api/file")]
14
public class CRFileController : ControllerBase
==PAGE:114==
104
A An Appendix
15
{
16
private string _localPath;
17
private readonly FSFileContext _context;
18
19
public CRFileController(FSFileContext context)
20
{
21
_localPath = @"C:\Users\Cristi\Desktop\tw\ ";
22
_context = context;
23
_context.Files.Add(new FSFile());
24
_context.SaveChanges();
25
26
if (_context.Files.Count() == 0)
27
{
28
_context.Files.Add(new FSFile());
29
_context.Files.Add(new FSFile());
30
_context.Files.Add(new FSFile());
31
_context.SaveChanges();
32
}
33
}
34
35
// GET api/values
36
[HttpGet]
37
public IActionResult GetAll()
38
{
39
return Ok(_context.Files.ToList());
40
}
41
42
// GET api/values/5
43
[HttpGet("{Id}", Name = "GetFile")]
44
public IActionResult Get(long id)
45
{
46
47
48
var item = _context.Files.Find((long)id);
49
if (item == null) return NotFound();
50
return new PhysicalFileResult(_localPath+item.Id, "application/
binary");
51
52
}
53
54
// POST api/values
55
[HttpPost(Name = "NewFile")]
56
public void Post([FromForm]IFormCollection objCollection)
57
{
58
StringValues id;
59
objCollection.TryGetValue("id",out id);
60
_context.Files.Add(new FSFile("","","",id[0]));
61
_context.SaveChanges();
62
63
}
64
65
// PUT api/values/5
66
[HttpPut("{id}",Name="PutFile")]
67
public void Put(long id, [FromForm]IFormCollection objCollection)
68
{
==PAGE:115==
A.1 Code
105
69
_context.Files.Add(new FSFile("", "", "", ""));
70
_context.SaveChanges();
71
72
}
73
74
// DELETE api/values/5
75
[HttpDelete("{id}")]
76
public void Delete(int id)
77
{
78
}
79
}
80 }
A.1.7
Startup.cs
1 using System;
2 using System.Collections.Generic;
3 using System.Linq;
4 using System.Threading.Tasks;
5 using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder;
6 using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc;
7 using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder;
8 using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Hosting;
9 using Microsoft.Extensions.Configuration;
10 using Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection;
11 using Microsoft.Extensions.Logging;
12 using Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore;
13
14 using WebApp.Models;
15 namespace WebApp
16 {
17
public class Startup
18
{
19
public Startup(IHostingEnvironment env)
20
{
21
var builder = new ConfigurationBuilder()
22
.SetBasePath(env.ContentRootPath)
23
.AddJsonFile("appsettings.json", optional: false,
reloadOnChange: true)
24
.AddJsonFile($"appsettings.{env.EnvironmentName}.json",
optional: true)
25
.AddEnvironmentVariables();
26
Configuration = builder.Build();
27
28
}
29
30
public IConfigurationRoot Configuration { get; }
31
32
// This method gets called by the runtime. Use this method to add
services to the container.
33
public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services)
34
{
==PAGE:116==
106
A An Appendix
35
// Add framework services.\
36
services.AddDbContext <FSFileContext >(options =>
37
options.UseSqlServer(Configuration.GetConnectionString("
DefaultConnection")));
38
39
services.AddMvc();
40
}
41
42
// This method gets called by the runtime. Use this method to
configure the HTTP request pipeline.
43
public void Configure(IApplicationBuilder app, IHostingEnvironment
env, ILoggerFactory loggerFactory)
44
{
45
loggerFactory.AddConsole(Configuration.GetSection("Logging"));
46
loggerFactory.AddDebug();
47
48
app.UseMvc(routes =>
49
{
50
routes.MapRoute(
51
52
53
name: "default",
54
template: "{controller=File}/{action=GetFile}/{Id?}");
55
routes.MapRoute(
56
57
58
name: "2",
59
template: "{controller=File}/{action=NewFile}/{Id?}");
60
routes.MapRoute(
61
62
63
name: "3",
64
template: "{controller=File}/{action=PutFile}/{Id?}");
65
});
66
}
67
}
68 }
A.1.8
DesignTimeDbContextFactory.cs
1 using System;
2 using System.Collections.Generic;
3 using System.IO;
4 using System.Linq;
5 using System.Threading.Tasks;
6 using Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore;
7 using Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Design;
8 using Microsoft.Extensions.Configuration;
9
10 namespace WebApp.Models
11 {
12
public class DesignTimeDbContextFactory : IDesignTimeDbContextFactory <
FSFileContext >
==PAGE:117==
A.1 Code
107
13
{
14
public FSFileContext CreateDbContext(string[] args)
15
{
16
IConfigurationRoot configuration = new ConfigurationBuilder()
17
.SetBasePath(Directory.GetCurrentDirectory())
18
.AddJsonFile("appsettings.json")
19
.Build();
20
21
var builder = new DbContextOptionsBuilder <FSFileContext >();
22
23
var connectionString = configuration.GetConnectionString("
DefaultConnection");
24
25
builder.UseSqlServer(connectionString);
26
27
return new FSFileContext(builder.Options);
28
}
29
}
30 }
==PAGE:118==
108
==PAGE:119==
Bibliography
[Bar]
Elaine Barker. Recommendation for Key Management Part 1: General. NIST.
url: https : / / nvlpubs . nist . gov / nistpubs / SpecialPublications /
NIST.SP.800-57pt1r4.pdf.
[BL73]
D.E. Bell and L.J. LaPadula. Secure computer systems: Mathematical foun-
dations. Technical Report ESD-TR-278, vol. 1. The Mitre Corp., 1973.
[Dok]
Dokan. PDOKAN_OPERATIONS Struct Reference. url: goo.gl/ftiRbR.
[Dwo]
Morris Dworkin. Recommendation for Block Cipher Modes of Operation.
NIST. url: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/legacy/sp/nistspecialpublicati
38a.pdf.
[Eds17]
Jonas Frejvald Edske. Implementation of Cryptographic Access Control Us-
ing FUSE and MediaWiki. DTU, 2017.
[HJ]
Anthony Harrington and Christian D. Jensen. Cryptographic Access Con-
trol in a Distributed File System. Trinity College Dublin. url: http://
citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.58.889&rep=
rep1&type=pdf.
[IBMa]
IBM. Public key cryptography. Internet Engineering Task Force. url: https:
//www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/en/SSB23S_1.1.0.13/
gtps7/s7pkey.html.
[IBMb]
IBM. Symmetric cryptography. url: https://www.ibm.com/support/
knowledgecenter/en/SSB23S_1.1.0.14/gtps7/s7symm.html.
[JC]
Adrien J. and Maxime C. Dokan - User Mode File System. url: http:
//dokan-dev.github.io/.
[Knu]
Lars Ramkilde Knudsen. Key Management - Part 1. DTU-Applied Cryptog-
raphy. url: https://cn.inside.dtu.dk/cnnet/filesharing/download/
98cc7b87-6bea-4803-9d14-eefbdb1d6547.
[Lab]
Information Technology Laboratory. Digital Signature Standard (DSS). NIST.
url: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.186-
4.pdf.
[Mic]
Microsoft. NET Core. Microsoft. url: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-
us/dotnet/core/.
==PAGE:120==
110
Bibliography
[MW]
Joergen Grahn Matthew Copeland and David A. Wheeler. The GNU Pri-
vacy Handbook. The Free Software Foundation. url: https://www.gnupg.
org/gph/en/manual.html#AEN57.
[Rou]
Margaret Rouse. Asymmetric cryptography (public key cryptography). Search-
Security. url: https://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/definition/
asymmetric-cryptography.
[Rya]
Mark Dermot Ryan. Access Control. University of Birmingham. url: https:
//www.cs.bham.ac.uk/~mdr/teaching/modules/security/lectures/
access-control.html.
[Sch]
Fred B. Schneider. Review and Revocation for Capabilities. url: http://
www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs513/2005fa/L10.html.
[Shi]
Shieldfy. API Security Checklist. url: https://github.com/shieldfy/
API-Security-Checklist.
[Som]
Ian Sommerville. SOFTWARE ENGINEERING. url: https://edisciplinas.
usp.br/pluginfile.php/2150022/mod_resource/content/1/1429431793.
203Software%5C%20Engineering%5C%20by%5C%20Somerville.pdf.
[Spr]
Spring. Understanding REST. url: https://spring.io/understanding/
REST.
[SV]
Pierangela Samarati and Sabrina De Capitani di Vimercati. Access Con-
trol: Policies, Models, and Mechanisms. Universita di Milano and Univer-
sita di Brescia. url: https://cn.inside.dtu.dk/cnnet/filesharing/
download/5ba4bf6b-9120-4c2f-b1fb-7217f466c0d1.
[Vin]
D. Rick Kuhn Vincent C. Hu David F. Ferraiolo. Assessment of Access
Control Systems. NIST. url: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/
legacy/ir/nistir7316.pdf.
