==PAGE:1==
MSc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Alternatives Assessment Applied on a
Practical Case Study
Simone Lene Hansen (s123166)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management Engineering
Division of Quantitative Sustainability Assessment
Technical University of Denmark
Bygningstorvet
Building 115-116B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4800
www.qsa.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Chemicals are used in a variety of every-day products and materials ranging from
consumer to industry. However, some chemicals used as ingredients to provide a spe-
cific function or performance in the product, such as plasticizes, flame retardants and
surfactants are known to be hazardous towards the environment and/or to humans.
Exposure towards these chemicals are of increasing interest to regulators, scientists
and consumers. Drivers for safer chemicals are therefore increasing around the world
in business and in government. While governments also strive to restrict chemicals
and even to remove chemicals of concern from commerce. The current tool; Alter-
natives Assessment is a framework which have been develop during the past decade,
with the focus of informed substitution, and is a process that involves identifying,
comparing and selecting safer alternative chemicals to the chemical of concern. Al-
ternatives Assessment strives to be comprehensive, however several gaps are found in
terms of lack of exposure data and is based on qualitatively characterization rather
than quantitative. Due to these gapss regrettable substitution is still occurring un-
til present day. The main goal of this project is therefore to identify methods that
can help moving Alternatives Assessment toward being a more comprehensive and
quantitative framework, while being strictly comparative and compatible with the
rapid-screening context of Alternatives Assessment. To achieve this goal a practical
case study on Di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) applied in medical appliances was
carried out, with the focus on a blood storage bag.
The alternative chemical for
DEHP was found through literature reviews, where DINCH was to most promising
and studied.
The result of the project revealed that Alternatives Assessment is based on what could
be included rather than what should be in terms of assessment categories and their
specific aspects. The study also revealed a more concerning missing aspect; lack of
exposure data, where DINCH had 84% and 94% less human and ecotoxicity data than
DEHP, respectively. The chemicals was quantitatively compared using the Product
intake Fraction (PiF) framework for comparing the exposure to the blood bag and
the USEtox model to characterize the ecotoxicological impacts from the chemicals.
The result of the PiF showed that DINCH overall had a lower impact towards hu-
mans and the ecosystem. However, limitations regarding product information for the
blood bag, assumptions and lack of exposure data resulted in DINCH and DEHP
only was comparable in two exposure routes. These results lead to a list of future im-
==PAGE:4==
ii
Abstract
provement potentials for Alternatives Assessment, the main ones being to implement
standardized protocols, mass-balance-models and to increase the amount of toxicity
data.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Msc. thesis was written in the period from the 2nd of January to the 15th of June
2018 at the Department of Management Engineering in the division for Quantitative
Sustainability Assessment (QSA). The main supervisor of the project was Associate
Professor Peter Fantke, together with the external co-supervisor Roland Weber. The
thesis accounts for 35 ECTS credits.
A special thanks to my supervisor Peter Fankte for providing me with this project
and to always be encouraging and helpful.
Thanks to Matias Flyckt-Nielsen and
Marie-Laura Wolfgang Charras for proofreading my thesis.
Simone Lene Hansen, s123166
Date
Kongens Lyngby, June 15, 2018
Simone Lene Hansen (s123166)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
List of Abbreviations
AA
Alternatives Assessment
ACR
Acute-to-Chronic Ratio
AF
Allometric Factor
BCF
Bioconcentration Factor
BOD5
Biological Oxygen Demand
BTHC
n-butyryl-tri-n-hexyl critrate
BW
Body Weight
CAA
Chemical Alternatives Assessment
CAA
Chemical Alternatives Assessment
CF
Characterization Factor
COD
Chemical Oxygen Demand
CRA
Comparative Risk Assessment
CTUe
Comparative Toxic Unit
DALY
Disability-Adjusted Life Years
DEHA
Diethylhydroxylamine
DEHP
Di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate
DF
Damage Factor
DINCH
Dicarboxylic acid diisononyl ester
DINP
Diisononylphthalat
DTSC
The Department of Toxic Substances Control
ED50
Effect Dose where 50% of the population is affected
EF
Effect Factor
EFeco
Ecotoxicological Effect Factor
FU
Functional Unit
GD
Gestation Day
HC50
Hazard Concentration where 50% of the population are exposed above
their EC50
HPV
High Production Volume
HSDB
Hazardous Substance Data Bank
INH
Human Inhalation Rate
IS
Impact Score
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
LCIA
Life Cycle Impact Assessment
LD50
Lethal Dose where 50% of the population dies
==PAGE:8==
vi
List of Abbreviations
LOEL
Lowest Observed Effect Level
LT
Life Time
MOCLA
Model for Organic Chemicals in Landfills
MTBE
Methyl tert-butyl ether
N
Number of days per year (365)
NOEL
No Observed Effect Level
PAF
Potentially Affected Fraction
PiF
Product intake Fraction
PND
Postnatal Day
PVC
Polyvinylchloride
QSAR
Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship
RA
Risk Assessment
RBC
Red Blood Cells
REACH
Registration, Evaluation and Authorization of Chemicals
SCP
Safer Consumer Product
TD
Tumorigenic dose-rate
TOTM
Trioctyl-trimellitate
2-cx-MMHP
Mono{[}2- (carboxymethyl)hexyl{]}
5-cx-MEHP
Mono(2-ethyl-5-carboxypentyl)
5OH-MEHP
Mono(2- ethyl-5-hydroxyhexyl)
5-oxo-
MEHP
Mono(2-ethyl-5-oxyhexyl) phthalate
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
List of Abbreviations
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Overview and State-of-the-Art of Alternatives Assessment . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Methodology
7
2.1
Assessing Scope and Considered Aspects in Alternatives Assessment .
7
2.2
Collection and Treatment of Quantitative Data . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
State-of-the-Science Exposure and Toxicity Characterization Models .
13
3
Practical Case Study
19
3.1
Overview of DEHP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Function and Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Identifying Alternatives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Data Overview for Chemicals and Product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Results and Discussion
31
4.1
Overview of Aspects Considered in Alternatives Assessment . . . . . .
31
4.2
Case Study Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Limitations and Future Improvement Potentials of Alternatives Assess-
ment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5
Conclusion
59
Bibliography
61
A Human toxicity
67
A.1 Extrapolation factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
B Ecotoxicity
69
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
B.1
Stepwise calculation of avglogHC50 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
C Applied Models
71
C.1 Blood Transfusion Calculus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
C.2 Calculation of Key Parameters for Article Interior
. . . . . . . . . . .
71
C.3 Output from Article Interior model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
C.4 Output from MOCLA Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
D Raw data
77
D.1 Data Availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
E USEtox Abbreviations
79
E.1
Abbreviations used for USEtox Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Chemicals are used in a variety of every-day products and materials ranging from
consumer to industry. A broad range of chemicals are commercially used as ingredi-
ents to provide a specific function or performance. Such chemicals are among others
plasticizes, flame retardants and surfactants. However, some of these chemicals are
known to be hazardous towards the environment and/or to humans (Fantke, Weber,
and Scheringer, 2015). The exposure of these chemicals are of increasing interest to
regulators, scientists and consumers. For that reason several new tools, initiatives
and frameworks for Alternatives Assessment (AA) have been developed in both the
United States and in Europe.
This is due to the growth in thearket and due to
the policy pressure for chemical substitution to avoid or reduce the use of hazardous
chemicals (Geiser et al., 2015). Tools on consumer-level, such as Kemiluppen pub-
lished by Forbrugerrådet Tænk Kemi, has also been developed. The purpose of the
tool is to help consumers avoid problematic chemicals in personal care products and
cosmetics (Søndergaard, 2017), choosing a safer alternative. Despite the advantages
of Alternatives Assessment, there are still several gaps in terms of e.g. exposure data.
Due to these gaps, regrettable substitution is still occurring until present day (Fantke,
Weber, and Scheringer, 2015).
1.1
Overview and State-of-the-Art of Alternatives
Assessment
The history of Alternatives Assessment originates in the Chemical Alternatives As-
sessment (CAA) developed by U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Design
for the Environment (DfE) Program in 2010. The methodology was developed to
manage chemical risk and to provide a foundation for comparing alternatives and
to inform information needed for the industry to choose a safer chemical (Lavoie et
al., 2010). Alternatives Assessment was later designed, built on existing tools being
Risk Assessment (RA) and Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), with the main objective to
reduce human and environmental risk by choosing a safer alternative. Geiser et al.
( (2015)) have reported the framework of Alternatives Assessment starting with defin-
ing the goal and scope, moving on to the assessment itself consisting of four steps;
1. Characterizing the chemical of concern through characterizing; hazard traits, en-
vironmental fate, functional use, costs, performance requirements and availability. 2.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Identify/prioritize alternatives, first by understanding and knowing the function of
the chemical of concern and then by pre-screening potential alternatives, 3. Assess
comparative hazards by evaluating a range for environmental endpoint and human
health, and finally to qualitatively rank the alternatives 4. Compare performance
and consider impacts through assessing performance, costs and availability, perfor-
mance assessment and final cost assessment. To step 4, optional sub-steps can be
considered in terms of Life Cycle Assessment and exposure assessment. The last step
encompasses selection and implementation, and consist of two steps; 1. select pre-
ferred alternative through decision making and 2. Implement adoption of the safer
alternative, in this step planning for the substitution starts.
Alternatives Assessment is based on the risk matrix from Risk Assessment and ben-
efits from the Life Cycle Assessment, though Alternatives Assessment is focusing on
informed substitution (J. A. Tickner et al., 2015). Alternatives Assessment has been
defined by Balkissoon et al. (2013) as ”a process for identifying, comparing and select-
ing safer alternatives to chemicals of concern (including those in materials, processes
or technologies) on the basis of their hazards, performance, and economic viability”.
Comparing Alternatives Assessment to Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) and Risk As-
sessment (RA), limitations of the scope of Alternatives Assessment shows. When
contrasting Life Cycle Assessment with Alternatives Assessment, the main limitation
is seen in the focus area. Alternatives Assessment is focusing on the chemical life cycle
with a producer or emitter perspective, rather than a full life cycle as Life Cycle As-
sessment does with the aspiration of quantifying all relevant environmental impacts,
while avoid burden shifting. In contrast, Alternatives Assessment primarily qualita-
tively characterizes the chemical of concern. During the 1960’s the development of
Life Cycle Assessment started to emerge and the first life cycle oriented method was
developed, asking the question ”how much does a product system potentially impact
the environment?”, whereas Alternatives Assessment asks ”is it necessary?”. Life Cy-
cle Assessment is primarily used to compare products and systems, but it can also be
seen as a tool to help identifying impacts correlated with chemical production, use
and disposal. In doing so, hot spots associated with chemicals and chemical processes
within the life cycle of a product or system, can be identified. Though, Life Cycle
Assessment do not disclose any alternative or risks associated with the chemicals in
the product or system, it solely focuses on the entire life cycle of the product or sys-
tem from a producer or emitter perspective. This is done by comparing the potential
impacts corresponding to each other across compared products and life cycle stages,
with the goal of limiting impacts considering different receptors (Fantke and A. Ern-
stoff, 2018).
Risk Assessment was, in 1983, outlined in four distinct steps in the NCR Red Book
being: hazard identification, dose-response assessment, exposure assessment and risk
characterization. Today these steps are still used in current Risk Assessments, where
risk is defined as the probability of suffering harm from a certain hazard. The purpose
of Risk Assessment is to answer the question ”is this chemical or product safe enough
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Overview and State-of-the-Art of Alternatives Assessment
3
for the intended use?” (Whittaker, 2015).
The perspective of Risk Assessment is
the receptor i.e. humans or species within the ecosystem, where the thresholds are
established in order to protect the specific receptors, considering all relevant sources
of a chemical, often with individual production processes or life cycle stages being
assessed separately (Fantke and A. Ernstoff, 2018). Hazard is referred to as the in-
herent capacity of a chemical or to the action that can cause harm. This is reflected
in the Risk Assessment, where the task is to estimate the severity and the likelihood
of harm towards the environment or the human health occurring from exposure to
e.g. a chemical or other potentially hazardous substances. Contrasting Risk Assess-
ment and Alternatives Assessment the main difference is seen in the question to be
answered and the way to answer it, where Alternatives Assessment asks ”are there
safer, feasible alternatives?”. The scope of Alternatives Assessment does not contain
Risk Assessment’s strength when it comes to assessing the likelihood of harms from
products, materials and contaminated sites, the outcome is different; it gives informa-
tion on less hazardous chemicals. Table 1.1 presents a summarized overview of the
main differences between the three assessment types described.
Table 1.1: The main differences between Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), Risk Assess-
ment (RA) and Alternatives Assessment (AA)
Assessment type
Indicator
Differences
LCA
Perspective
Producer, emitter
RA
Receptor
AA
Producer, emitter
LCA
Question to
answer
How much does a product system potentially
impact the environment
RA
Is this chemical or product safe enough for the
intended use
AA
Which chemical or product poses a lower hazard
LCA
Life Cycle
Perspective
Entire product or system
RA
Individual production processes or
life cycle stages (assessed separately)
AA
Chemical
LCA
Threshold-based
No
RA
Yes
AA
Yes
Illustration of the three different assessment frameworks are depicted in Figure 1.1 to
give an overview of the main differences. The framework of Alternatives Assessment
has been adopted by Geiser et al. ( (2015)) and is the state-of-the-art illustration.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1:
Illustration of the three frameworks; Life Cycle Assessment (M. Z.
Hauschild, 2018), Risk Assessment and state-of-the-art illustration of Alternatives
Assessment from Geiser et al. (2015).
The key goal of Alternatives Assessment is to avoid regrettable substitution, i.e. sub-
stituting with a chemical that pose a higher or equal risk to the chemical of concern
(G. J. Howard, 2014). An example is the replacement of lead with MTBE (Methyl
tert-butyl ether). MTBE was chosen by companies either to address air pollution
problems, or to ensure a cleaner burning of gasoline, especially in areas with smog
problems. However, due to the properties of MTBE, i.e. low sorption to soil and
highly solubility in water, the chemical migrated into the groundwater - polluting
the water. Hence, in the attempt of solving the air pollution problem, another en-
vironmental problem rose (SCP and DTSC, 2017). Since only a limited amount of
exposure data are available, the risk of increasing regrettable substitution is present
(G. J. Howard, 2014). This limitation, among others, has been identified by Jacobs
et al. ( (2016)) who carried out a substantial review of the existing literature for
Alternatives Assessment with the purpose of identifying differences and consistencies
among the frameworks published. More than 200 articles and reports were extracted,
though only 20 of these complied with the multi-step criteria that had been set. A
common reason for exclusion would be due to lack of essential components of the
Alternatives Assessment i.e. hazard assessment, economic- and technical feasibility.
Through the review, several challenges and issues within the different Alternatives
Assessment components were identified. These are listed below.
1. General challenges
It was found that the majority of the frameworks that were reviewed were not
prescriptive protocols, but developed as flexible guides for decision making. The
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Overview and State-of-the-Art of Alternatives Assessment
5
methods often describes procedures which could be used rather than should be
used.
2. Hazard assessment challenges
Most frameworks offered examples of publicly available resources for data col-
lecting, but did not suggest preferred sources or any hierarchy wherein certain
data types might be considered of higher value than others. Furthermore, very
few frameworks offered methods to address incomplete hazard data for the haz-
ard assessment, and 10 of the hazard assessments defined used a comparative
ranking or a categorization scheme to evaluate the different severity among the
endpoints.
However, no consistent method across the frameworks had been
applied.
3. Technical feasibility assessment challenges
The majority of the frameworks were lacking specificity’s regarding the methods
or the suggested data sources to address issues of technical feasibility.
4. Economic assessment challenges
Most of the frameworks included a more complex economic assessment (e.g.
holistic cost assessment encompassing a variety of direct and tangible indirect
production costs), rather than a simple comparison (e.g. comparing the chemi-
cal of concern with the alternative in terms of production costs). Several frame-
works did not include details on data sources for the economic assessment, even
though they did provide tables with cost considerations.
5. Exposure characterization challenges (focus of thesis)
Most of the frameworks used indirect measurements (e.g. dispersive potential)
to evaluate exposure, rather than using actual exposure data or models, i.e.
being qualitatively.
6. Life-cycle assessment/life-cycle thinking challenges (focus of thesis)
The majority of the frameworks included Life Cycle Assessment or Life Cycle
thinking. Both approaches are based on the same principles, however Life Cycle
thinking does not typically include a quantitative assessment. Even though the
frameworks state they have included Life Cycle thinking, some only focuses on
Life Cycle considerations.
7. Decision making challenges
Seven of the frameworks did not include any kind of decision-making method.
Nine of the frameworks did not consider weighting of the different attributes.
Four additional frameworks called for development of quantitative weight.
All these things considered, Alternatives Assessment is facing several challenges. The
primary one being no existing prescriptive protocols, implying there are several dif-
ferent methods available to carry out an Alternatives Assessment, resulting in the as-
sessment not being comprehensive. Furthermore, Alternatives Assessment is based on
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
qualitative characterization rather than quantitative. Implementation of Life Cycle
Assessment in Alternatives Assessment is currently only limited to Life Cycle think-
ing. However a full blown Life Cycle Assessment would not be feasible due to time
constraints and the fact that it would be too expensive. These aspects are currently
not considered in Alternatives Assessment, but are of high importance and should be
included in order for the Alternatives Assessment to be comparative and quantitative.
A starting point for improving the Alternatives Assessment would be to look into
exposure and Life Cycle Assessment due to significant progress in these two areas in
terms of comparing chemical exposures and quantitatively comprehensive character-
izing the assessment (Jolliet et al., 2015; M. Hauschild et al., 2013). These advances
should be introduced to Alternatives Assessment in order for it to become compre-
hensive and qualitatively, which leads to the objectives of the thesis seen in section
1.2.
1.2
Objectives of the Thesis
The main goal of the present project is to identify methods that help moving alter-
natives assessment toward being a more comprehensive and quantitative framework,
while being strictly comparative and compatible with the rapid-screening context
of Alternatives Assessment. The following objectives have been defined in order to
achieve this goal:
• To identify the scope and aspects considered in current Alternatives Assessment
practice and to provide an overview of current assessment gaps;
• To explore quantitative data and tools that can be consistently integrated in
Alternatives Assessment to address exposure and life cycle impacts;
• To test the quantitative data and tools identified above in a practical case
study on substituting a harmful plasticizer in medical appliances with focus on
exposure; and
• To provide a list of recommendations for further improving the current Alter-
natives Assessment framework.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Methodology
The forthcoming chapter encompasses Section 2.1 which assess the scope and the
considered aspects in Alternatives Assessment, followed by Section 2.2 describing
which and how quantitative data are collected for Alternatives Assessment.
The
final section, Section 2.3, describes the available state-of-the-art exposure and toxicity
characterization models that are suitable for integration into Alternatives Assessment.
2.1
Assessing Scope and Considered Aspects in
Alternatives Assessment
In October 2013 the Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC) Safer Con-
sumer Products (SCP) regulations became effective. The aim of the program was
to challenge responsible entities to either reduce or eliminate toxic chemicals in their
product which is bought and used by consumers. The program consists of four dif-
ferent steps; 1. Chemicals; DTSC identify potentially hazardous chemicals, called
the Candidate Chemicals, 2.
Products; DTSC evaluates and prioritizes product-
Candidate Chemical combinations to further develop a Priority Product list for which
safer alternatives should be applied, 3.
Alternative Analysis; responsible entities
should notify DTSC if their product is a Priority Product and carry out an Alter-
native Analysis and 4. Regulatory Responses; DTSC should pursue to expand the
use of alternatives of least concern. However, these alternatives should be technically
and economic feasible and functionally acceptable (SCP and DTSC, 2017).
In June 2017, SCP and DTSC Safer Products and Workplaces Program created and
collected a guidance document gathering approaches, methods, resources and tools
for Alternative Analysis. The guide is divided into two stages, a first and a second
stage, each dealing with different aspects, however, the first stage dealing with the
Alternatives Assessment. The guide are relating the Alternative Analysis to other
Alternatives Assessments, and outlines the differences and similarities between the
methods. The Commons Principles for Alternatives Assessment has been integrated
within DTSC’s guide, and encompasses the following: Reduce hazard, minimize ex-
posure, use best available information, require disclosure and transparency, resolve
trade-offs and take action (SCP and DTSC, 2017).
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Methodology
The DTSC guide has been chosen as a starting point in the forthcoming case study
(Section 3.1) due to its comprehensiveness and the fact that DTSC are currently the
leading department within Alternatives Assessment. Furthermore, the assessment is
meant to give an overview of all the aspects that ideally should be considered in an
Alternatives Assessment and when needed, the assessment has been complemented
with other available literature to accomplish a thorough assessment, e.g. with Ciroth
and Franze (2011) who have implemented the social justice aspect of the assessment.
Table 2.1 provides a full overview of the references considered in the case study to
complement to DTSC guide. Specific data was likewise added when pre-calculation
of certain values was needed as input for the models.
Table 2.1: Considered references throughout the case study
Reference
Complementing with
Malloy et al. (2013)
Physical chemical hazards
Adverse human impacts
Environmental concentrations
Adverse ecological impacts
Adverse soil quality impacts
Technical feasibility
Internal costs
Ciroth and Franze (2011)
Social justice
Rossi, J. Tickner, and Ken Geiser (2006)
Social justice
Own addition
Specific needed data for model calculations
2.2
Collection and Treatment of Quantitative Data
The following section outlines how the quantitative data for the Alternatives Assess-
ment has been retrieved and later on treated. The section identifies which quanti-
tative exposure data are necessary for further modelling in Section 2.3. The data
retrieved for analyzing the chemical impact on the ecosystems and the human pop-
ulation was extracted from databases including REACH (Registration, Evaluation,
Authorization of Chemicals) (ECHA, 2018b), HSDB (Hazardous Substances Data
Bank) (TOXNET, 2018b) and CCRIS (Chemical Carcinogenesis Research Informa-
tion System) (TOXNET, 2018a).
To assure that all extracted data was of same
quality, the studies had to comply with the list below.
1. The study had to be experimental
• To eliminate large uncertainties only studies conducted experimental was
included
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Collection and Treatment of Quantitative Data
9
2. The study had to have a reliability of 1 or 2 according to the Klimisch score
(H J Klimisch, Andreae, and Tillmann, 1997)
• Studies of reliability 3 or 4 are not considered reliable enough and would
introduce unnecessary uncertainties
3. The test species should be given
• If the test species is not reported, it is not possible to assess whether the
study is chronic or acute since it depends on the reproduction cycle of the
species, nor is it possible to extrapolate from test species to humans, due
differences in the allometric factor (see Section 2.2.1 or Appendix A.1).
4. The dose descriptor for ecotoxicity must be recorded either as EC50, LC50, IC50,
LOEC, NOEC and for human toxicity either as LD50, LD0, LOEL, NOEL.
• Dose descriptors must be given for later extrapolations to human exposure,
where EC50 is the Effect Concentration where 50 % of the population is
affected, LC50 is the Lethal Concentration where 50 % of the population
dies, NOEC is the No Observed Effect Concentration and LOEC is the
Lowest Observed Effect Concentration.
5. The exposure duration must be given *
• This must be given to assess whether the study is chronic or acute.
6. The effect concentration should be given in a mass-based unit e.g. mg/l, or if
given in ppm it should be stated if its mass- volume- or mole-based for further
conversion.
* A few studies was included despite of their lack of exposure duration. In these
cases the study was treated as an acute study to be conservative or as chronic if the
endpoint was LD50.
Before applying the data in any models the exposure studies extracted for human-
and ecotoxicity had to be extrapolated. The following sections 2.2.1 and 2.2.2 gives
an overview of how the data was treated.
2.2.1
Human Toxicological Effect Extrapolation
The required step for human toxicity data before applying them in any model is
calculating the Effect Factor (EFh) describing the disease cases/kgintake, based on
cancer and non-cancer toxicity data derived from laboratory studies carried out on
different animal species. The effect factor, Equation 2.1 is calculated at disease level,
i.e. one effect factor for carcinogenicity, one for developmental toxicity etc.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Methodology
EF h
x,p =
α
ED50hx,p
(2.1)
where α is set to 0.5, reflecting the response level corresponding to 50 % of the human
population being affected. x represent the dose-response slope factor of the exposure
route for inhalation and ingestion and p represents the dose-response slope factor of
the health endpoint for non-cancer and cancer.
To determine the EFh
x,p, the life time dose for humans related to the xth exposure
route and pth endpoint has to be estimated through Equation 2.2 applied on cancer
studies.
ED50h
x,cancer =
TD50s
x × LT h × BW h × d
yr
f s × fexposure × mg
kg
(2.2)
where TD50s
x represent the tumourigenic dose-rate for the sth species and is a ex-
pression for the amount of chemical in mg taken in per kg animal body weight over
the average lifetime of the animal species. Equation 2.3 was applied on non-cancer
studies with the dose descriptor given as either NOEL or LOEL.
ED50h
x,non-cancer =
NOELs × fNOEL-to-ED50 × LT h × BW h × d
yr
f s × fexposure × mg
kg
=
NOELs
z
}|
{
LOELs × fLOEL-to-NOEL ×fNOEL-to-ED50 × LT h × BW h × d
yr
f s × fexposure × mg
kg
(2.3)
where LTh is the average life time of a human i.e. 70 years and BWh is the average
human body weight i.e. 70 kg. fs (also referred to as the allometric factor) is an ex-
trapolation factor correcting for the different species studied to humans. The species
specific allometric factors can be found in Appendix A.1. Finally, mg/kg and d/yr
are unit conversions, correcting for mg per kg and days per year, respectively.
Studies with the dose descriptor LD50 has been extrapolated to human exposure
through Equation 2.4 and 2.5, derived by Rosenbaum, M. A. J. Huijbregts, et al. (2011)
for cancer and non-cancer studies, respectively.
ED50h
x,cancer = LD50
26
(2.4)
ED50h
x,non-cancer = LD50
129
(2.5)
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Collection and Treatment of Quantitative Data
11
Equation 2.2 and 2.3, and Equation 2.4 and 2.5 are applied on studies where the
chemical has been given oral or applied dermal to the test species. For inhalation
studies, Equation 2.6 has been applied for extrapolating to an human ED50h, inh.
ED50h,inh = ED50a,t,inh × INH × LT h × N
AFa × fexposure × 106
(2.6)
where INH represent the average human inhalation rate set to 13 m3/day, AFa is the
allometric factor and is set to 1 if the study has reported the dose as a concentration
in the air and N is the number of days per year (365 days/year) (M. Huijbregts et
al., 2010).
Determining which fexposure factor to apply for each study was done by evaluating
the exposure duration for the corresponding study. The exposure duration can fall
within three different categories; acute- (also referred to as subacute in literature),
subchronic- and chronic exposures. These categories are used to determine the ex-
trapolation factor (fexposure). The factor is correcting for the differences between the
exposure duration of the studies and chronic exposure. Eaton and Gallagher (2010)
have divided the three exposure categories as seen in Table 2.2, together with the
extrapolation factors developed by Vermeire et al. (2001).
Table 2.2: Duration and appertaining extrapolation factor for the exposure categories
Exposure category
Duration
Extrapolation factor
Acute
<1 month
5
Subchronic
1-3 months
2
Chronic
>3 months
1
When all the data have been extrapolated to human exposure data, the lowest esti-
mated ED50h
x,cancer, ED50h
x,non-cancer, ED50h,inh and ED50h,derm are used to calculate
the effect factor, EFh
x,p (Equation 2.1), making it possible to compare the effect fac-
tors across disease levels. The EF’s are later used to calculate the characterization
factor (CF), which is presented in Section 2.3.1, Equation 2.10.
2.2.1.1
Uncertainties Associated with the Studies
Assessing the studies gave rise to a list of issues which had to be handled before
further calculations. For some studies the exposure duration was not explicitly given
and therefore the best approximation was used. Some studies only gave information
about when during the pregnancy the chemical exposure had been given, e.g. from
gestation day (GD) 6 to postnatal day (PND) 21. When there was no information
about the exposure duration a conservative estimate was applied i.e. marking the
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Methodology
study as acute to conservative. Some studies had no test species reported, making it
impossible to extrapolate to human effect dose, in such cases the study was excluded.
Furthermore, some studies had a reported endpoint LD0.
In this case the study
would be treated as a NOEL-endpoint. If the exposure application was not stated
throughout the study, diet application was assumed.
2.2.2
Ecotoxicological Extrapolation
The data extracted for ecotoxicity includes data based on studies from aquatic-,
sediment- and terrestrial toxicity, having a dose descriptor of EC50, LC50, NOEC or
LOEC, with a mass-based unit e.g. mg/l. If the unit is given in ppm it is necessary
to know whether it is mass-, volume- or mole-based in order to harmonize the units,
if not stated the study would be excluded.
The data extracted was treated through several steps to harmonize all the extracted
data, starting with the following steps;
• Convert the exposure duration to same unit; days
• Convert the effect concentration to the same unit; mg/l
• Define the trophic level
• Define if the study is acute or chronic
• Calculate the avglogHC50
The Hazard Concentration where 50 % (HC50) of the population are exposed above
their EC50 are calculated as the geometric mean of the species-specific Effect Con-
centrations, EC50, seen in Equation 2.7 (M. Huijbregts et al., 2010).
logHC50 = 1
ns
×
∑
s
logEC50s
(2.7)
where ns is the number of species. The logHC50 are calculated per species why an
average logHC50 for the three toxicity levels are calculated. The lowest calculated
avglogHC50 are used as reference input in the USEtox model. The stepwise calcula-
tion of avglogHC50 can be seen in Appendix B.1.
In order to calculate the avglogHC50 all the units for each study had to be unified,
implying converting all effect concentrations to mg/l and all exposure duration’s
to days.
To define whether the study is acute or chronic, the trophic level and
exposure duration had to be defined. The trophic level is species dependent and is
classified from the taxonomy of the species. Table 2.3, derived by Müller et al. (2017),
encompasses an overview of when a trophic level is either defined as an acute or chronic
study depending on the exposure duration.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 State-of-the-Science Exposure and Toxicity Characterization Models
13
Table 2.3: Overview of the trophic level cut-off’s used for determining the duration
(Müller et al., 2017)
Trophic level
(UNEP-SETAC)
Trophic level
(ECHA)
Acute duration
<= days
Bacteria
Microoragnisms
1
Algae and cyanobacteria
Aquatic algae
and cyanobacteria
1
Invertebrates
(crustaceans)
Aquatic invertebrates
(crustaceans)
4
Aquatic plants other
than algae
Aquatic plants other
than algae
7
Fish
Fish
7
Invertebrates
(non-crustaceans)
Aquatic invertebrates
(non-crustaceans)
7
Vertebrates
Other aquatic organisms
7
The calculation of logHC50 is purely based on chronic studies. Rosenbaum, Bach-
mann, et al. (2008) created through regressions, an acute-to-chronic ratio (ACR) to
make it possible to extrapolate from acute to chronic data. The ACR was found to
be 2 and has been applied as seen in Equation 2.8.
HC50chronic = HC50acute
ACR
(2.8)
2.2.2.1
Uncertainties Associated with the Studies
Assessing the ecotoxicological data gave, like for the human toxicity, rise to a list of
issues which had to be handled. All the test species had to be aligned with their
scientific name. Some studies had reported the test species by their alternative name
and had to be renamed to the their scientific name, e.g. Sheepshead minnow would be
replaced with Cyprinodon variegatus. Studies that had reported the dose descriptor
with the unit ppm and did not state whether they were mass or mole based was
excluded for further calculations.
2.3
State-of-the-Science Exposure and Toxicity
Characterization Models
Based on evaluating current available models that follow both screening-level, com-
parative and mass-balance-based assessment, the following models was identified; the
MOCLA Landfill-, USEtox- and Article Interior model. These models are embedded
in the Product intake Fraction (PiF) framework, feeding the framework with data for
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Methodology
further modelling to quantify the chemical intake. The following sections 2.3.1 - 2.3.4
describes the identified models.
2.3.1
Product intake Fraction Framework
The Product intake Fraction (PiF) framework couples population and consumer expo-
sures to the chemicals in the consumer products (Fantke, A. S. Ernstoff, et al., 2016).
The framework is developed with the purpose of quantifying the transfer fractions and
the product intake fractions from near- and far-field sources, respectively distinguish-
ing users and population. The near-field compartment is defined as any indoor or
near-consumer location. Near-field compartments consist of indoor air and consumer
products. The far-field compartment is defined as any location or environment which
is distant from the use of a considered product. Far-field compartments consist of the
larger systems i.e. environmental medias (e.g. river, soil and ambient air), biota (e.g.
plants and animals) and technological systems (e.g. waste water treatment plants)
(Fantke, Jolliet, et al., 2017). The near- and far-field compartments are depicted in
Figure 2.1, together with the product intake fractions that the framework assess.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the matrix of cumulative mass transfer fractions (in near-
and far-field compartments), intake fractions (in human receptor compartments fol-
lowing emissions to near- or far-field compartments) and product intake fractions (in
human receptor compartments following application in product)
The model accounts for the transport and fate mechanisms, which results in cumu-
lative transfer of the chemicals between near- and far-field compartments, eventually
reaching the humans (Fantke, A. S. Ernstoff, et al., 2016). Jolliet et al. (2015) defines
==PAGE:25==
2.3 State-of-the-Science Exposure and Toxicity Characterization Models
15
the framework as ”..the chemical mass within a product eventually taken in by humans
via all possible exposure pathways per unit of chemical mass within that product (mc,p,
kgin product) at the end of the manufacturing process, that is, starting at exposure time
t=0”, resulting in Equation 2.3.1.
PiFc,p,x =
Cumulative mass of chemical c in product p
taken in by population via exposure pathway x
initial mass of chemical c in product p
(2.9)
=
∫∞
0
∂Ic,p,x/∂tdt [kgintake]
mc,p [kgin product]
The underlying models embedded in the framework are as mentioned the MOCLA-,
USEtox- and Article Interior models. The MOCLA model provides the framework
with the Landfill Transfer Fractions for the specific chemical (see Section 2.3.3). The
USEtox model provides the framework with rate constants from different compart-
ments (e.g. air (continental) to natural soil (continental)), exposure factors for adults
(and children) from a compartment which leads to an exposure pathway (e.g. fresh-
water (continental) to dairy products), far- and near-field transfer fractions (e.g. the
transfer fraction from indoor air to the respiratory tract in adult users), indoor air
to epidermis volumetric flow and indoor air to epidermis transfer rates. Finally, the
Article Interior model provides the framework with scenario-specific data i.e. direct
transfer fractions.
The specific framework settings for the epidermis exposure route is applied and fol-
lows; the epidermis volumetric flow [m3/h] is estimated based on a room volume of
277 m3, ventilation rate of 0.79 h−1, 2.44 for adults and 0.16 for children and the
number of adults is set to 1 and the number of children is set to 0.
The framework used in this case study is version 0.9b build by Fankte et al.
in
October 2017. The result from the PiF framework can been used to further estimate
the characterization factor in DALY per kg of chemical in product, where DALY is
Disability-Adjusted Life Years. The characterization factor is a measurement for the
human health impacts per mass of chemical within the product and is calculated by
multiplying the effect factor [cases/kg intake] with the PiF [kg intake/kg in product].
A Damage Factor (DF, also known as the Severity Factor) is multiplied with the effect
factor to adjust for the different severity’s between the disease cases; carcinogenic
effects and non-carcinogenic effects in terms of affected life years. In doing so, the
effect factor’s unit will be [DALY/kg intake].
Equation 2.10 (Jolliet et al., 2015)
present the approach. The applied damage factors’ has been presented by M. A. J.
Huijbregts et al. (2005) and is on average 11.5 and 2.7 years for cancer and non-cancer
effects, respectively.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Methodology
CF
[
DALY
kg in product
]
= PiF
[
kg intake
kg in product
]
×
(
EF
[
cases
kg intake
]
× DF
[DALY
case
])
(2.10)
2.3.1.1
Blood Transfusion as Exposure Route
Currently there is no exposure pathway accounting for the fraction of chemical trans-
ported from the blood bag and into the patient during blood transfusion. Al Salloum
et al. (2016) made a complete list of reasons to why the kinetics of DEHP migrations
is complex to study, and stated among others that different authors had shown that
DEHP diffusion in plasticized PVC would not always follow a Fick’s law of diffusion.
Furthermore, the diffusion coefficient would change with the plasticizer ratio, but
would also depend on which temperature the blood is stored at. Studies have found
values between 100 to 275 mg/L of DEHP detected in blood storage bags kept in stor-
age for one week and at 4 ◦C, whereas storage at ambient temperatures and for 3 days
showed values between 200 and 300 mg/L (Al Salloum et al., 2016). To overcome the
lack of a blood transfusion exposure route a rough assumptions of how to estimate
the migration rate from the blood bag and into the patient was done on the basis of
the already known data i.e.: chemical mass in the blood bag [mg chemical/bag], the
volume of blood in a blood bag [L blood in blood bag transferred], the concentration
of chemical in blood [mg chemical/L blood], chemical mass in human [mg chemical
transferred/bag]. From these information the product intake fraction was estimated
as following:
PiF blood = Massin blood bag
Massin human
= mg chemical transferred
mg in blood bag
(2.11)
A through calculation of the PiFblood can be found in Appendix C.1. The forthcoming
Sections 2.3.2 to 2.3.4 describes the embedded models within the PiF framework.
2.3.2
USEtox model
The USEtox model is an environmental model which characterize the human and
ecotoxicological impacts in comparative risk assessments (CRA) and in Life Cycle
Impact Assessments (LCIA). The purpose of the model is to describe fate, exposure
and effects of chemicals (M. Huijbregts et al., 2010). The model provides the PiF
framework, as mentioned with rate constants from different compartments (e.g. air
(continental) to natural soil (continental)), exposure factors for adults (and children),
far- and near-field transfer fractions, indoor air to epidermis volumetric flow and in-
door air to epidermis transfer rates.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 State-of-the-Science Exposure and Toxicity Characterization Models
17
USEtox itself can calculate the ecotoxicological effect factor (EFeco) from freshwa-
ter ecosystems to different environmental medias e.g.
Urban air and Continental
freshwater. EFeco is measured in PAF m3/kg, where PAF is the Potentially Affected
Fraction of species due to the changes in concentration. The EFeco can further be used
to calculate the characterization factor for freshwater aquatic ecotoxicity expressed
in Comparative Toxic Unit (CTUe), which is a measure of the PAF m3 d/kgemitted
(M. Huijbregts et al., 2010).
2.3.3
Model for Organic Chemicals in Landfills
The model for Organic Chemicals in Landfills (MOCLA) is developed by Kjeldsen
and Christensen (2001). The model is a simplified mathematical model, based on
the assumption that the conditions present at the landfill are fully mixed, implying
all concentrations are assumed constant. The model describes the distribution be-
tween leachate, gas and solid waste for organic chemicals. The model is also used
as a predictive tool for the fate of the chemicals when it comes to the degradation
and transformation of chemicals in the landfill, and also in terms of emissions with
leachate and landfill gas (Kjeldsen and Christensen, 2001).
The model is build up around the chemical properties molecular weight, vapour pres-
sure, solubility in water, the diffusion coefficient in air, degradation half-life and
degradation rate constant, and around the partitioning coefficients between air and
water (Kaw), octanol and water (logKow), organic carbon and water (Koc), and solid
waste and water (Kd). The default settings of the landfill properties and parameters
can be seen in Table 2.4.
Table 2.4: Default landfill properties and parameters in the MOCLA model
Landfill properties
Value
Unit
Bulk density (ρb)
0.6
tonne/m3
Volumetric water content in waste (ϵw)
0.4
-
Volumetric gas content in waste (ϵa)
0.1
-
Specific landfill gas production rate (qa)
4
m3 per m3 landfill
volume per year
Organic carbon fraction (foc)
0.2
-
Height (h)
10
m
Net precipitation (N)
0.5
m/yr
Landfill cover parameters
Thickness of cover (L)
1
m
Volumetric air content (ϵaSC)
0.11
-
Total porosity (ϵSC)
0.4
-
Simulation time frame (t)
6000
yr
The results from the MOCLA model is used to fill out the landfill transfer fractions
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Methodology
in the PiF framework. These fractions are then used to calculate the direct transfer
fractions from ambient air, freshwater and soil to the landfill.
2.3.4
Article Interior model
The Article Interior is a modified model which originates from a model build by Fantke
et al. The model has been restructured to this specific case study to be more generic
and customized to also asses plasticisers. The Article Interior contains information
about the chemicals properties and the properties of the products, i.e. thickness, ap-
plication area, sorption area, density and mass. Information regards to handling the
product is also assessed through defining the hand contact frequency and fraction of
ingested dust for both adults and children. Table 2.5 present the default settings of
the exposure factors in the model.
Table 2.5: Default exposure settings in the Article Interior model
Exposure Factors
Value
Unit
Enter time when exposure ends
set by user
day
Inhalation rate, 2-3yr old
8.90
m3/d
Inhalation rate, adults
16.00
m3/d
Body weight, 2-3yr old
13.80
kg
Body weight, adults
80.00
kg
Hand contact frequency, 2-3yr old
set by user
Hand contact frequency, adults
set by user
Hand area, 2-3yr old
0.028
m2
Hand area, adults
0.098
m2
Skin gaseous uptake area, 2-3yr old
0.244
m2
Skin gaseous uptake area, adults
0.8
m2
Dust ingestion rate, 2-3yr old
59.34
mg/d
Dust ingestion rate, adults
60
mg/d
Fraction of ingested dust from considered building material
set by user
Fraction of time spent at home, adults, US
0.644
Fraction of time spent at home, 2-3yr, US
0.772
The output that the model gives is the transfer fractions from the product.
The
output is used as input data for calculation of the direct transfer fractions from all
combined sources in the PiF framework.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Practical Case Study
The forthcoming chapter provides the reader with a full overview of the case study
applying data and quantitative exposure models to a real case of substituting a plasti-
cizer in a medical device. The chosen chemical is Di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP).
The study of DEHP will focus on the application in blood storage bags, due to the
chemical’s pros and cons associated with the use in this type of product, and also due
to the high usage. The exact models identified in Section 2.3 will be evaluated and
tested in the upcoming case study.
3.1
Overview of DEHP
Di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) (CAS NR. 117-81-7) (see Figure 3.1) is a high
molecular weight phthalate and is a commercially common used plasticizer for soft-
ening polyvinyl chloride (PVC). Within the PVC-field, DEHP is applied in e.g. floor-
ing, carpeting, roofing, packaging and toys. In the non-PVC-field DEHP is used in
consumer products such as shampoo, industrial solvents and detergents. DEHP is
commonly used in medical appliances such as dialysis equipment and blood storage
bags (Koch, Preuss, and J. Angerer, 2006). Apart from blood storage bags, DEHP is
also applied in other medical appliances such as anaesthetic and intensive care (e.g.
breathing balloons, flex tubes, aspiration catheters etc.), injection and infusion ma-
terials (e.g. gravity hoses and infusion unit) and nutritionsmaterial (e.g. connection
hoses, containers etc.) (Bird, 2003). Due to the widespread use, DEHP is listed as a
High Production Volume (HPV) chemical. In 1997 the amount of DEHP produced
was reported to be 595.000 tonnes/year in Europe, however this amount decreased to
340.000 tonnes/year in 2007 (ECHA, 2010).
Figure 3.1: Chemical structure of DEHP
DEHP is not bound chemically to the PVC polymer, entailing the possibility of the
chemical to leach, migrate or to volatilize to the surroundings. The human exposure
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Practical Case Study
pathway of DEHP is through inhalation, ingestion and dermal exposure (Heudorf,
Mersch-Sundermann, and Jürgen Angerer, 2007; Koch, Preuss, and J. Angerer, 2006).
Another, and important exposure route is blood transfusion. Patients with the highest
risk of being exposed to DEHP from blood bags are patients undergoing haemodial-
ysis treatment, due to the frequency of the treatment (3 times/week) and children
admitted to hospitals (Sjons and Wendin, 2017). The migration rate into the blood is
dependent on storage time, temperature and amount of DEHP present in the product
(Van Vliet et al., 2011).
DEHP is considered as one of the most common endocrine disrupting chemicals
present in the environment and has been observed in urine, blood and breast milk,
together with its metabolites (Sheikh et al., 2016). Observed consequences associ-
ated with DEHP exposure in animal studies have shown effects such as malformed
reproductive organs, decrease in pregnancy and fertility, and reduced weight of the
reproductive organs (Koch, Preuss, and J. Angerer, 2006), why the chemical also
has been classified as a category 1B - presumed to be toxic towards the human re-
productive system. DEHP has also been labeled the H360 statement towards the
reproductive system, implying that it ”may damage fertility or the unborn child”
(ECHA, 2018a). Additionally, epidemiological and experimental studies have demon-
strated that DEHP causes developmental effects. This adverse effect is of high con-
cern, since studies have shown that infants undergoing multiple medical procedures
in neonatal intensive care, may be exposed to DEHP levels two to three orders of
magnitude higher than the average daily exposure for an adult.
These exposures
are often associated with hourly or daily procedures with DEHP containing products
e.g. gavage tubing and intravenous hyperalimentation by the central venous route.
A resent study have further found that infusion systems for parenteral nutrition was
associated with an approximate 6-fold increase in the risk of cholestasis among in-
fants admitted in neonatal intensive care. The study further revealed that switching
to DEHP-free infusion systems decreased the hepatobilary dysfunction from 50-13%
(Van Vliet et al., 2011).
DEHP does not only cause an impact towards the human population, but also towards
the environment. DEHP is a omnipresent chemical in the environment implying that
it can be found in all compartments (Brooke et al., 1991).
Furthermore, DEHP
has a logKOW of 7.6, implying it is very lipophilic. This is further reflected in the
bioaccumulation factor, which has been found to be 588 lwater/kgfish.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Function and Performance
21
3.2
Function and Performance
The function of DEHP varies with the product it is being used in and is therefore
tailored by chemists to fulfill a desired function. The technical characteristics blood
storage bags should achieve are flexibility, temperature resistance, strength, safety,
compatibility and production feasibility. DEHP fulfill all these characteristics, how-
ever there is one more important feature to DEHP; it has the ability to stabilize red
blood cells membrane and enhance the in vivo recovery after transfusion.
DEHP
lowers the haemolysis rate of the red blood cells fourfold during storage, allowing the
red blood cell’s to be on storage for up to 42 days (Prowse et al., 2014; Lozano and
Cid, 2013). The mentioned characteristics should all be fulfilled by an alternative to
be functionally equivalent to DEHP, however, finding a chemical that can substitute
DEHP 1:1 without any additional additives can therefore be a challenge. The amount
of DEHP within the different products varies. As an example, DEHP constitutes up
to 5 % of a wide range of cosmetics and personal care products, whereas in blood
storage bags the amount is as high as 40 % (Huang et al., 2018; Prowse et al., 2014).
3.3
Identifying Alternatives
Depending on the type of product, there are a variety of alternatives to DEHP.
Alternatives such as trioctyl-trimellitate (TOTM), diethylhydroxylamine (DEHA),
n-butyryl-tri-n-hexyl critrate (BTHC), diisononylphthalat (DINP) and dicarboxylic
acid diisononyl ester (DINCH) has been investigated by June (2006) for medical de-
vices used for neonatal care. The Alternatives Assessment was carried out through
two categories ”performance and cost primary criteria” and ”environmental health
and safety criteria”. Within these two categories a set of indicators was established
to compare the chemicals. It was found that TOTM, DEHA, BTHC and DINCH
appared to be potential alternatives to DEHP. However, the cost of the alternatives,
except for DEHA, were higher (June, 2006).
The most studied alternatives for a
DEHP-free blood storage bag are TOTM, BTHC and DINCH, of which DINCH
shows the lowest developmental and reproductive toxicity (Bicalho et al., 2016). The
case study will therefore, for illustrative purpose only focus on DINCH as an alterna-
tive to DEHP.
DINCH (CAS NR. 166412-78-8) is the most resently developed alternative non-phthalate
plasticizer for sensitive applications and was introduced to the market in 2002 to
substitute DEHP (Van Vliet et al., 2011). Since the two chemicals have similar struc-
tures (see Figure 3.2), they also possess similar physical-chemical properties, though
DINCH show a lower toxicity than DEHP and has yet to be found as a reproductive
toxicant or endocrine disruptor. Due to similar viscosities there is no costly change in
the plasticizer content, when substituting DEHP with DINCH. Since the introduction
of DINCH in 2002 on the European market, there has been a growing demand. The
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Practical Case Study
production has increased from 25.000 tons per year in 2002 to 200.000 tons per year
in 2013 (UPB, 2018; Schütze et al., 2014; Van Vliet et al., 2011).
Figure 3.2: Chemical structure of DINCH
Due to time constrains and that the case study should not assess which alternatives are
available, but rather identify limitations and data gaps associated with Alternatives
Assessment, the focus of the case study will therefore be on exposure and toxicity
impacts in the use-stage, which is an often omitted stage in Alternatives Assessment.
Figure 3.3 illustrates a conceptual map of the different life cycle stages and their
respective exposure routes. The grey stages are added for illustrative purpose, and is
not assessed in this project.
Figure 3.3: Conceptual map of the different life cycle stages and their associated
exposure pathways. The grey stages have not been assessed in the current study;
only the use-stage
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Data Overview for Chemicals and Product
23
3.4
Data Overview for Chemicals and Product
Table 3.4 presents the extracted physico-chemical properties, environmental fate and
the adverse human impact data for DEHP and DINCH. Only one value has been
presented in the table, where the orange colored boxes present estimated data. For
a full overview of the accessibility of the two chemicals see Appendix D.1, where the
number of studies per specific assessment aspect has been filed, together with an illus-
tration of how much data are available for DINCH compared with DEHP. The ID’s
in the table are for later tracking in Section 4.1, which provides a full comprehensive
table with all available assessment categories.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Practical Case Study
Table 3.1
Data overview for DEHP and DINCH. The orange color represent estimated data
Assess
ment c
ategory
ID
Specific
assessment
aspect
Unit
DEHP (A)
DINCH
(B)
Source (A)
Source (B)
Substance properties and fate at chemical level
Physiochemical properties
A.1.a
Physical
state
Colorless liq-
uid
Colorless liq-
uid
(NIOSH, 2010)
(David, 2012)
A.1.b
Molecular
weight
g/mol
390.56
424.67
(O’Neil, 2013)
(David, 2012)
A.1.c
Density
g/cm3
0.98
1
(Rippen, 2000)
(David, 2012)
A.1.d
Vapor
pres-
sure
and
saturated va-
por pressure
mmHg
1.42 × 10−7
2.36 × 10−4
(Hinckley
and
al, 1990)
(David, 2012)
A.1.e
Melting
point
°C
-50
(Rippen, 2000)
A.1.f
Boiling point
°C
384
394
(Hayes, 2014)
(David, 2012)
A.1.g
Water
solu-
bility
mg/l
0.27
0.02
(Defoe
and
al, 1990)
(David, 2012)
A.1.i
Octanol-
water
partition
coefficient
(logKOW)
log l/l
7.453
9.82
(Ellington
and
Floyd, 1996)
(US EPA, 2011)
A.1.j
Octanol-air
partition
coefficient
(logKOA)
log l/l
12.557
12.36
(US EPA, 2011)
(US EPA, 2011)
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Data Overview for Chemicals and Product
25
Table 3.1
Data overview for DEHP and DINCH. The orange color represent estimated data
Assess
ment c
ategory
ID
Specific
assessment
aspect
Unit
DEHP (A)
DINCH
(B)
Source (A)
Source (B)
A.1.k
Organic-
carbon
partition
coefficient
(logKOC)
log l/kg
87096.4
330000
(Schuurmann and
al, 2006)
(Meyln
and
al, 1992)
A.1.m
Henry’s
law
constant,
KH
atm
×m3/mol
2.7 × 10−7
7.06 × 10−5
(US EPA, 2012)
(US EPA, 2011)
Environmental fate
A.1.s
Hydroxyl
radical
re-
action
rate
constant
cm3/molecule-
sec
21.96
×
10−12
3.07
×
10−11
(US EPA, 2011)
(US EPA, 2011)
A.2.a
Aerobic and
anaerobic
half-lives
Days
9 (soil - aner-
obic)
(Roslev
et
al., 1999)
Days
4.5 (river wa-
ter - aerobic)
(Wams, 1987)
A.2.b
Aquaeous hy-
drolysis half-
life
Years
2000
(Staples, 1997)
A.2.e
Biodegradation
(half-lives)
Hours
60-70
(in
groundwater-
Ae)
(Staples, 1997)
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Practical Case Study
Table 3.1
Data overview for DEHP and DINCH. The orange color represent estimated data
Assess
ment c
ategory
ID
Specific
assessment
aspect
Unit
DEHP (A)
DINCH
(B)
Source (A)
Source (B)
Aerobic - Ae
Days
0.8
(acti-
vated sludge-
Ae)
(Saeger
and
Tucker, 1976)
Days
23
(wastew-
ater
treat-
ment plants -
Ae)
(O’Grady,
P.
H.
Howard,
and
Werner, 1985)
Days
14.8
(river
sediment
-
Ae)
(Yuan
et
al., 2003)
Environmental fate
A.2.e
Biodegradation
(half-lives)
Days
198 (sludge -
An)
(Gavala
et
al., 2003)
Days
73
(sludge
acclimated
-
An)
(Gavala
et
al., 2003)
Days
31.5
(river
sediment
-
An)
(Chang,
Liao,
and Yuan, 2005)
A.2.h
Photode-
gradation
Days
2
(Cadogan
and
al, 1994)
A.2.i
Bioconcen-
tration factor
(BCF)
lwater/kgfish
588.84
139.96
(NITE
and
CHRIP, 2014)
(US EPA, 2012)
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Data Overview for Chemicals and Product
27
Table 3.1
Data overview for DEHP and DINCH. The orange color represent estimated data
Assess
ment c
ategory
ID
Specific
assessment
aspect
Unit
DEHP (A)
DINCH
(B)
Source (A)
Source (B)
A.2.j
Half-life
in
air
Days
0.488
0.4
(US EPA, 2012)
(US EPA, 2012)
A.2.k
Half-life
in
water
Days
15
37.5
(US EPA, 2012)
(US EPA, 2012)
A.2.l
Half-life
in
soil
Days
30
75
(US EPA, 2012)
(US EPA, 2012)
A.2.m
Half-life
in
sediment
Days
135
337.5
(US EPA, 2012)
(US EPA, 2012)
A.2.n
Anaerobic
sediment
half-life
Days
3240
(ANSES, 2016)
A.2.o
Biomagnifi-
cation factor
(BMF)
0.32
(Mackintosh
et al., 2004)
A.2.p
Air-Water partitioning coefficient
logKaw
-4.96
-2.54
(US EPA, 2012)
(US EPA, 2012)
A.2.r
Enthalpy of vaporization
KJ/mol
63.4
75.6
(US EPA, 2012)
(US EPA, 2012)
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Practical Case Study
Table 3.1
Data overview for DEHP and DINCH. The orange color represent estimated data
Assess
ment c
ategory
ID
Specific
assessment
aspect
Unit
DEHP (A)
DINCH
(B)
Source (A)
Source (B)
Adverse impacts at chemical level
A.4.a
Carcino-
genicity
mg/kg
bw/-
day
7 (LOAEL)
40 (NOEAL)
(Europeans
Chemicals
Bureau, 2003)
(ANSES, 2016)
A.4.b
Developmental
toxicity
mg/kg
bw/-
day
0.25
(LOAEL)
1000
(NOAEL)
(Wei et al., 2012)
(ANSES, 2016)
Adverse human impacts
(public health impacts)
A.4.c
Reproductive
toxicity
mg/kg
bw/-
day
1.215 (
100
(NOAEL)
(Andrade
et
al., 2006)
(ANSES, 2016)
A.4.f
Endocrine
toxicity
mg/kg
bw/-
day
1 (NOAEL)
(NTP/CERHR, 2006)
A.4.h
Genotoxicity
mg/kg
bw/-
day
60 (NOAEL)
(Europeans
Chemicals
Bureau, 2003)
A.4.j
Hepatotoxicity
and digestive
system toxicity
mg/kg
bw/-
day
37.6
(NOAEL)
(Europeans
Chemicals
Bureau, 2003)
A.4.m
Nephrotoxicity
and other
urinary system
toxicity
mg/kg
bw/-
day
318
(NOAEL)
(ANSES, 2016)
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Data Overview for Chemicals and Product
29
Table 3.1
Data overview for DEHP and DINCH. The orange color represent estimated data
Assess
ment c
ategory
ID
Specific
assessment
aspect
Unit
DEHP (A)
DINCH
(B)
Source (A)
Source (B)
A.4.o
Neurotoxicity
mg/kg
bw/-
day
1500
(NOAEL)
(Moser,
2003;
Moser, 1995)
A.4.s
Respiratory
toxicity
mg/l air
0.3
(NOAEC)
(Merkle,
H.
Klimisch,
and
Jäckh, n.d.)
A.4.u
Acute
toxic-
ity
mg/kg
bw/-
day
2000 (LD0)
2000 (LD50)
(Chu et al., 1981)
(ANSES, 2016)
A.4.v
Chronic toxi-
city
mg/kg
bw/-
day
40 (NOAEL)
(US
Con-
sumer
Product
Safety
Commis-
sion, 2010)
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Practical Case Study
The gathered product information regarding the blood bag is shown in Table 3.2.
Thickness, chemical content and density data was reported in literature. The dimen-
sions of the blood bag was only given as a volume based unit, which could not be
used for further calculations. Therefore it was assumed that the blood bag had the
dimension of 13 cm × 18 cm. The hand contact frequency with the blood bag for
adults are assumed to be 2 minutes per hour, i.e. 0.033 min/min. It is assumed that
only adults are handling the blood bag, why the hand contact frequency for children
is assumed to be 0. The dry weight of the blood bag is assumed to be 50 grams.
Table 3.2: Product information and assumptions for the blood storage bag
Information
Unit
Value
Source
Hand contact frequency (adults)
0.033
min/min
Assumption*
Hand contact frequency (children)
0
min/min
Assumption
Fraction of ingested dust (all)
0
min/min
Assumption
Chemical content in blood bag
40
%
(Prowse et al., 2014)
Dry weight for blood bag
50
g
Assumption
Dimensions
13 × 18
cm
Assumption
Thickness
0.000405
m
(Prowse et al., 2014)*
Application area
0.0468
m2
Calculated*
Density of soft plastic
1.1
g/cm3
(Sevenster, 2018)
Sorption area
0.0468
m2
Calculated*
Mass of chemical in blood bag
0.002
kg
Calculated*
*Calculations have been provided in Appendix C.2.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Results and Discussion
The forthcoming chapter presents and discusses all the results obtained in the project.
Section 4.1 presents the qualitative result i.e. specific assessment aspects gathered
from different sources, which could be used in an Alternatives Assessment. The second
Section 4.2 presents the quantitative results, i.e.
the outcome from the practical
case study. Finally, Section 4.3 discuss the limitations and provides a list of future
improvement potentials for Alternatives Assessment.
4.1
Overview of Aspects Considered in Alternatives
Assessment
The basis of the results on assessing the Alternatives Assessment scope and identifi-
cation of relevant assessment aspects have origin in the DTSC guide, presenting the
factors (hereafter referred to as aspects) which should be considered in an Alternatives
Assessment. The aspects have been added to Table 4.1 which presents the focus areas
of the project and to Table 4.2 which present the additional aspects to be considered
in an Alternatives Assessment, but since it is beyond the scope of the project they
have only been added for comprehensiveness. The tables have been supplemented
with additional aspects from various authors, including own additions. Table 4.1 has
been created containing rows of the following: an Assessment category, an ID to track
the different aspects, a Specific assessment aspect, Metric and data to identify which
data should be extracted and finally a row with a asterisk and a dagger (*/†) to indi-
cate whether the data was available for DEHP and DINCH (asterisk being available
for DEHP and dagger available for DINCH). If there is neither an asterisk or a dagger,
the data was not accessible for either of the chemicals. The orange color indicates if
the data was estimated and the plus/minus sign (+/-) indicates whether the authors
have stated the metric and data for the certain specific assessment aspect - (+) when
reported and (-) when it is not. The color coding of the ”specific assessment aspect”
is to distinguish between the different contributing authors; white color, DTSC guide;
blue, Malloy et al. (2013); green, Ciroth and Franze (2011); red, Rossi, J. Tickner,
and Ken Geiser (2006); grey, author of this project. The table have further been
divided into sections to indicate whether the assessment category belongs to chemical
or product level, and chemical or product life cycle level.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Results and Discussion
Table 4.1: Specific assessment aspects being in focus in this project. The colors represent the different contributing authors;
white, DTSC guide; blue, (Malloy et al., 2013); grey, author of this project. The asterisk (*) and the dagger (†) imply available
data for DEHP and DINCH, respectively. Furthermore, the plus (+), minus (-) sign is an expression for if metric and data is
given authors or not. The orange color represent estimated data.
Assessment cate-
gory
ID
Specific assessment aspect
Metric and data
(*/†),
(+/-)
Substance properties and fate at chemical level
Physiochemical properties
A.1.a
Physical state
Solid, liquid or gas
(*/†)
A.1.b
Molecular weight
Molecular weight, MW [g/mol]
(*/†), (-)
A.1.c
Density
Density, r, [g￿cm-3], [kg￿l-1]
(*/†), (-)
A.1.d
Vapor pressure and saturated va-
por pressure
Vapor pressure [Pa],
[mmHg],
[atm]
(*/†), (-)
A.1.e
Melting point
Melting point, m.p. [°C]
(*), (-)
A.1.f
Boiling point
Boling point, m.b. [°C]
(*/†), (-)
A.1.g
Water solubility
Water solubility, S [mg￿l-1]
(*/†),(-)
A.1.h
Lipid solubility
(-)
A.1.i
Octanol-water
partition
coeffi-
cient
Describes if the chemical would
rather be in water or octanol;
logKOW
(*/†),(-)
A.1.j
Octanol-air partition coefficient
Describes if the chemical would
rather
be
in
air
or
octanol;
logKOA
(*/†),(-)
A.1.k
Organic-carbon partition coeffi-
cient
Distribution between organic car-
bon and water, KOC [unitless]
*/( † ),(-)
A.1.l
Diffusivity in air and water
[m2/s]
(-)
A.1.m
Henry’s law constant
Determines the volatility of a
chemical, KH, [atm￿m3￿mol-1]
(*/†),(-)
A.1.n
Sorption coefficient for soil and
sediment
Partitioning coefficient between
solid phase and water, Kd, [l/kg]
(-)
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Overview of Aspects Considered in Alternatives Assessment
33
Table 4.1: Specific assessment aspects being in focus in this project. The colors represent the different contributing authors;
white, DTSC guide; blue, (Malloy et al., 2013); grey, author of this project. The asterisk (*) and the dagger (†) imply available
data for DEHP and DINCH, respectively. Furthermore, the plus (+), minus (-) sign is an expression for if metric and data is
given authors or not. The orange color represent estimated data.
Assessment cate-
gory
ID
Specific assessment aspect
Metric and data
(*/†),
(+/-)
A.1.o
Redox potential
Defines
whether
the
chemical
would rather be oxidized or re-
duced
(-)
A.1.p
Photolysis rates
A substance ability to absorb
sunlight, [DU]
(-)
A.1.q
Dissociation constants
pH dependent
(-)
A.1.r
Reactivity
including
elec-
trophilicity
(-)
A.1.s
Hydroxyl radical reaction rate
constant
[cm2/mole-sec]
(*/†), (-)
Environmental fate
A.2.a
Aerobic and anaerobic half-lives
A chemicals ability to degrade
under aerobic and anaerobic con-
ditions [d]
(-)
A.2.b
Aquaeous hydrolysis half-life
Describe the reaction between a
chemical and water
(*), (-)
A.2.c
Atmospheric oxidation rate
A chemicals ability to oxidize in
air
(-)
A.2.d
Bioaccumulation
Accumulation of chemical in or-
ganism. Uptake through several
routes e.g. ingestion and dermal
(-)
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Results and Discussion
Table 4.1: Specific assessment aspects being in focus in this project. The colors represent the different contributing authors;
white, DTSC guide; blue, (Malloy et al., 2013); grey, author of this project. The asterisk (*) and the dagger (†) imply available
data for DEHP and DINCH, respectively. Furthermore, the plus (+), minus (-) sign is an expression for if metric and data is
given authors or not. The orange color represent estimated data.
Assessment cate-
gory
ID
Specific assessment aspect
Metric and data
(*/†),
(+/-)
A.2.e
Biodegradation
Evaluates the biodegradability of
a chemical; can be measured us-
ing several methods; degradation
rate, half-lives, BOD5 and COD
relationship and degree of miner-
alization
(*/ † ),(-)
A.2.f
Mobility in environmental media
Could include run off potential,
leaching potential and long trans-
port
(-)
A.2.g
Persistence
Residence time, half-lives in dif-
ferent
environmental
compart-
ments
(-)
A.2.h
Photodegradation
Half-life in air, OH-radical re-
lated half-life in air
(*/ † ),(-)
Environmental fate
A.2.i
Bioconcentration factor (BCF)
Describes the concentration of
chemical taken up by water
(*/ † ),(-)
A.2.j
Half-life in air
[d]
(*/†), (-)
A.2.k
Half-life in water
[d]
(*/ † ),(-)
A.2.l
Half-life in soil
[d]
(*/ † ),(-)
A.2.m
Half-life in sediment
[d]
(*/ † ),(-)
A.2.n
Anaerobic sediment half-life
[d]
(*/ † ),(-)
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Overview of Aspects Considered in Alternatives Assessment
35
Table 4.1: Specific assessment aspects being in focus in this project. The colors represent the different contributing authors;
white, DTSC guide; blue, (Malloy et al., 2013); grey, author of this project. The asterisk (*) and the dagger (†) imply available
data for DEHP and DINCH, respectively. Furthermore, the plus (+), minus (-) sign is an expression for if metric and data is
given authors or not. The orange color represent estimated data.
Assessment cate-
gory
ID
Specific assessment aspect
Metric and data
(*/†),
(+/-)
A.2.o
Biomagnification factor (BMF)
Food chain accumulation
(*/ † ), (-
)
A.2.p
Air-Water partitioning coeffi-
cient
Henry’s
law
constant,
[atm.
m3/mole]
(*/†), (-)
A.2.r
Enthalpy of vaporization
[KJ/mol]
(*/†), (-)
Physical
chemical
hazards
A.3.a
Combustion facilitation
(-)
rse human impacts
c health impacts)*
A.3.b
Explosivity
A chemicals ability to explode
(-)
A.3.c
Flammability
A chemicals ability to sustain a
flame
(-)
A.3.d
Flashpoint
Occurs at the lowest tempera-
ture, where vapors above the
volatile chemical ignite in the air
when exposed to fire
(-)
A.3.e
Auto-ignitability temperature
At which temperature a chemical
is able to self-ignite
(-)
A.3.f
Oxidizing Properties
Might be the same as A.1.o
(-)
Adverse impacts at chemical level
A.4.a
Carcinogenicity
LD50, LOAEL, LOAEL [mg/kg
bw/day]
(*/†), (-)
A.4.b
Developmental toxicity
LD50, LOAEL, LOAEL [mg/kg
bw/day]
(*/†), (-)
A.4.c
Reproductive toxicity
LD50, LOAEL, LOAEL [mg/kg
bw/day]
(*/†), (-)
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Results and Discussion
Table 4.1: Specific assessment aspects being in focus in this project. The colors represent the different contributing authors;
white, DTSC guide; blue, (Malloy et al., 2013); grey, author of this project. The asterisk (*) and the dagger (†) imply available
data for DEHP and DINCH, respectively. Furthermore, the plus (+), minus (-) sign is an expression for if metric and data is
given authors or not. The orange color represent estimated data.
Assessment cate-
gory
ID
Specific assessment aspect
Metric and data
(*/†),
(+/-)
A.4.d
Cardiovascular toxicity
LD50, LOAEL, LOAEL [mg/kg
bw/day]
(-)
A.4.e
Dermatotoxicity
LD50,
LOEL,
NOEL
[mg/kg
bw/day]
(-)
A.4.f
Endocrine toxicity
LD50,
LOEL,
NOEL
[mg/kg
bw/day]
(*), (-)
Adverse human impacts
public health impacts)*
A.4.g
Epigenetic toxicity
LD50,
LOEL,
NOEL
[mg/kg
bw/day]
(-)
A.4.h
Genotoxicity
LD50,
LOEL,
NOEL
[mg/kg
bw/day]
(*), (-)
A.4.i
Hematotoxicity
LD50,
LOEL,
NOEL
[mg/kg
bw/day]
(-)
A.4.j
Hepatotoxicity and digestive sys-
tem toxicity
LD50,
LOEL,
NOEL
[mg/kg
bw/day]
(*), (-)
A.4.k
Immunotoxicity
LD50,
LOEL,
NOEL
[mg/kg
bw/day]
(-)
A.4.l
Musculoskeletal toxicity
LD50,
LOEL,
NOEL
[mg/kg
bw/day]
(-)
A.4.m
Nephrotoxicity and other urinary
system toxicity
LD50,
LOEL,
NOEL
[mg/kg
bw/day]
(†), (-)
A.4.n
Neurodevelopmental toxicity
LD50,
LOEL,
NOEL
[mg/kg
bw/day]
(-)
A.4.o
Neurotoxicity
LD50,
LOEL,
NOEL
[mg/kg
bw/day]
(*), (-)
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Overview of Aspects Considered in Alternatives Assessment
37
Table 4.1: Specific assessment aspects being in focus in this project. The colors represent the different contributing authors;
white, DTSC guide; blue, (Malloy et al., 2013); grey, author of this project. The asterisk (*) and the dagger (†) imply available
data for DEHP and DINCH, respectively. Furthermore, the plus (+), minus (-) sign is an expression for if metric and data is
given authors or not. The orange color represent estimated data.
Assessment cate-
gory
ID
Specific assessment aspect
Metric and data
(*/†),
(+/-)
A.4.p
Ocular toxicity
LD50,
LOEL,
NOEL
[mg/kg
bw/day]
(-)
A.4.q
Ototoxicity
LD50,
LOEL,
NOEL
[mg/kg
bw/day]
(-)
A.4.r
Reactivity in biological systems
LD50,
LOEL,
NOEL
[mg/kg
bw/day]
(-)
A.4.s
Respiratory toxicity
LD50,
LOEL,
NOEL
[mg/kg
bw/day]
(*), (-)
A.4.t
Exceedance of an enforceable reg-
ulatory standard relating to the
public health
(-)
A.4.u
Acute toxicity
LD50, LOEL, NOEL
(*/†), (-)
A.4.v
Chronic toxicity
LD50, LOEL, NOEL
(*/†), (-)
Adverse impacts at chemical life cycle level
A.5.a
Exceedance of regulatory stan-
dards for environmental concen-
trations
(-)
Environmental
concentrations
A.5.b
Carbon dioxide
[µg/cm3]
(-)
A.5.c
Hydrofluorocarbons
[µg/cm3]
(-)
A.5.d
Methane
[µg/cm3]
(-)
A.5.e
Nitrogen trifluoride
[µg/cm3]
(-)
A.5.f
Nitrous oxide
[µg/cm3]
(-)
A.5.g
Perfluorocarbons
[µg/cm3]
(-)
A.5.h
Sulfur hexafluoride
[µg/cm3]
(-)
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Results and Discussion
Table 4.1: Specific assessment aspects being in focus in this project. The colors represent the different contributing authors;
white, DTSC guide; blue, (Malloy et al., 2013); grey, author of this project. The asterisk (*) and the dagger (†) imply available
data for DEHP and DINCH, respectively. Furthermore, the plus (+), minus (-) sign is an expression for if metric and data is
given authors or not. The orange color represent estimated data.
Assessment cate-
gory
ID
Specific assessment aspect
Metric and data
(*/†),
(+/-)
A.5.i
Other global warming potential
gases
[µg/cm3]
(-)
A.5.j
Nitrogen oxides
[µg/cm3]
(-)
A.5.k
(Fine) Particulate matter
[µg/cm3]
(-)
A.5.l
Stratospheric
ozone
depletion
substances
[µg/cm3]
(-)
A.5.m
Sulfur oxides
[µg/cm3]
(-)
A.5.n
Tropospheric ozone forming com-
pounds
[µg/cm3]
(-)
A.5.o
Photochemically reactive com-
pounds
(-)
Adverse ecological
impacts
A.6.a
On aquatic, avian or terrestrial
animal plant or organisms, or mi-
crobes
EC50,
LC50,
IC50,
LOEC,
NOEC [µg/l], [mg/l], [g/l]
(-)
A.6.b
On aquatic and terrestrial ecosys-
tems
EC50,
LC50,
IC50,
LOEC,
NOEC [µg/l], [mg/l], [g/l]
(-)
A.6.c
Endangered
or
threatened
species
(-)
A.6.d
Environmentally sensitive habi-
tats
(-)
Adverse soil
quality
impacts
A.7.a
Compaction or other structure
changes
(-)
A.7.b
Erosion
(-)
A.7.c
Loss of organic matter
(-)
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Overview of Aspects Considered in Alternatives Assessment
39
Table 4.1: Specific assessment aspects being in focus in this project. The colors represent the different contributing authors;
white, DTSC guide; blue, (Malloy et al., 2013); grey, author of this project. The asterisk (*) and the dagger (†) imply available
data for DEHP and DINCH, respectively. Furthermore, the plus (+), minus (-) sign is an expression for if metric and data is
given authors or not. The orange color represent estimated data.
Assessment cate-
gory
ID
Specific assessment aspect
Metric and data
(*/†),
(+/-)
A.7.d
Soil sealing
(-)
A.7.e
Chemical contamination
(-)
A.7.f
Biological contamination
(-)
Adverse water
quality impacts
A.8.a
Increase in biological oxygen de-
mand
BOD,
(-)
A.8.b
Increase in chemical oxygen de-
mand
COD,
(-)
A.8.c
Increase in temperature
[°C], [K]
(-)
A.8.d
Increase in total dissolved solids
TDS [mg/l]
(-)
A.8.e
Introduction/Increase in Califor-
nia CWA priority pollutants
Country specific for the DTSC
guide
(-)
A.8.f
Introduction/Increase in Califor-
nia CWA pollutants
Country specific for the DTSC
guide
(-)
A.8.g
Introduction/Increase in chemi-
cals with MCLs
Maximum
contaminant
levels,
Country specific
(-)
A.8.h
Introduction/Increase in chemi-
cals with Notification Levels
(-)
A.8.i
Introduction/Increase in chemi-
cals with public health goals for
drinking water under California
Safe Drinking Water Sct
Country specific for the DTSC
guide
(-)
A.9.a
Volume or mass generated
Mass flow data from product sys-
tem model
(+)
A.9.b
Any special handling needed
Process knowledge
(+)
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Results and Discussion
Table 4.1: Specific assessment aspects being in focus in this project. The colors represent the different contributing authors;
white, DTSC guide; blue, (Malloy et al., 2013); grey, author of this project. The asterisk (*) and the dagger (†) imply available
data for DEHP and DINCH, respectively. Furthermore, the plus (+), minus (-) sign is an expression for if metric and data is
given authors or not. The orange color represent estimated data.
Assessment cate-
gory
ID
Specific assessment aspect
Metric and data
(*/†),
(+/-)
Adverse waste
and
end-of-life
effects
A.9.c
Effects
on
solid
waste
and
wastewater disposal and treat-
ment
Mass flow data from product sys-
tem model
(+)
A.9.d
Discharge to storm drains or
sewer adversely affecting wastew-
ater treatment facilities
Mass flow data from product sys-
tem model
(+)
A.9.e
Release into the environment
[mg/l]
(-)
Materials
and
resource
con-
sumption
impacts
A.10.a
Renewable
resources
consump-
tion
Water Use
(-)
A.10.b
Nonrenewable
resources
con-
sumption
Resource Depletion
(-)
Exposure at chemical/product life cycle level
Chem-
ical
quan-
tity
infor-
mation
A.11.a
Quantities necessary to manufac-
ture the Priority Product
Process knowledge
A.11.b
Volume/mass places into stream
(-)
Market
presence
of product
A.12.a
Sales by volume
(-)
A.11.b
Sales by number of units
(-)
A.12.c
Intended product uses,
types,
age group of targeted customer
base
(-)
A.13.a
Potential exposures from manu-
facturing
(-)
A.13.b
Potential exposures from use
[mg/kg bw/day], PiF
(-)
A.13.c
Potential exposures from storage
[mg/kg bw/day], PiF
(-)
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Overview of Aspects Considered in Alternatives Assessment
41
Table 4.1: Specific assessment aspects being in focus in this project. The colors represent the different contributing authors;
white, DTSC guide; blue, (Malloy et al., 2013); grey, author of this project. The asterisk (*) and the dagger (†) imply available
data for DEHP and DINCH, respectively. Furthermore, the plus (+), minus (-) sign is an expression for if metric and data is
given authors or not. The orange color represent estimated data.
Assessment cate-
gory
ID
Specific assessment aspect
Metric and data
(*/†),
(+/-)
A.13.d
Potential exposures from trans-
portation
[mg/kg bw/day], PiF
(-)
A.13.e
Potential exposures from waste
[mg/kg bw/day], PiF
(-)
A.13.f
Potential exposures from end-of-
life management practices
[mg/kg bw/day], PiF
(-)
A.13.g
Potential exposures from loca-
tions of practices
[mg/kg bw/day], PiF
(-)
A.13.h
Potential exposure from house-
holds and recreational use
[mg/kg bw/day], PiF
(-)
A.13.i
Potential exposure from use by
sensitive subpopulation
[mg/kg bw/day], PiF
(-)
Potential exposure to Candidate
Chemical(s) in the product during life cycle
A.13.j
Potential exposure from use by
workers
[mg/kg bw/day], PiF
(-)
A.13.k
Potential exposure from use by
clients and members of general
public in homes
[mg/kg bw/day], PiF
(-)
A.13.l
Potential exposure from use by
schools
[mg/kg bw/day], PiF
(-)
A.13.m
Potential exposure from use by
workplaces
[mg/kg bw/day], PiF
(-)
A.13.n
Potential exposure from use by
other places
[mg/kg bw/day], PiF
(-)
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Results and Discussion
Table 4.1: Specific assessment aspects being in focus in this project. The colors represent the different contributing authors;
white, DTSC guide; blue, (Malloy et al., 2013); grey, author of this project. The asterisk (*) and the dagger (†) imply available
data for DEHP and DINCH, respectively. Furthermore, the plus (+), minus (-) sign is an expression for if metric and data is
given authors or not. The orange color represent estimated data.
Assessment cate-
gory
ID
Specific assessment aspect
Metric and data
(*/†),
(+/-)
A.13.o
Frequency, extent, level and du-
ration of exposure potential for
each use and end-of-life scenario
[mg/kg bw/day], PiF
(-)
A.13.p
Containment
of
Candidate
Chemical(s) within the product
(-)
A.13.q
Engineering controls that reduce
exposure concerns
Monitoring
(-)
A.13.r
Administrative controls that re-
duce exposure concerns
(-)
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Overview of Aspects Considered in Alternatives Assessment
43
One important aspect to consider when considering the table, is that there are no
standardized protocols. There are only guidelines on how one could carry out an
Alternatives Assessment, implying no specific standards to what should be included,
only what could be included. This issue could lead to Alternatives Assessments being
carried out only on the basis of the very necessary for the industry, and maybe not
include all aspects, nor qualitatively carried out.
Table 4.1 presents, as mentioned the focus areas of this project; exposure and life
cycle impacts. The main part of the grey boxes were added on the basis of data avail-
ability for the models, i.e. they needed specific data inputs, which was not provided
by the Alternatives Assessment guide (e.g. enthalphy of vaporization). In general, it
was found that metrics was not explicitly or not at all given in the current guideline
nor in the complementing literature, hence extracting data for the chemicals was to
some degree a challenge. An example is the case for A.2.e - Biodegradation, this as-
pect can be measured through half-lives, degradation rates, the relationship between
BOD5 (Biological Oxygen Demand) and COD (Chemical Oxygen Demand), and the
degree of mineralization, implying that different data could be extracted. Further-
more, for the adverse human impacts no hierarchy of the dose descriptor was given,
hence own assumption of best estimates was provided with the following hierarchy
i.e LD50 > ED50 > LOAEL > NOAEL. Moreover, it should be considered which
data to extract while reasoning which aspects should be included in the Alternatives
Assessment. Not all of the aspects might be needed and it should be considered which
aspects are important to be evaluated for the certain product in order to minimize
the time and money spent on carrying out the assessment.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Results and Discussion
Table 4.2: Assessment categories that is beyond the scope of this project, however they have
been added to be comprehensive. The colors represent the different contributing authors;
white, DTSC guide; blue, (Malloy et al., 2013); green, (Ciroth and Franze, 2011); red (Rossi,
J. Tickner, and Ken Geiser, 2006).
Assessment category
ID
Specific assessment aspect
Life Cycle Impact at chemical/product life cycle level
Human health
A.14.a
Climate Change
A.14.b
Stratospheric ozone depletion
A.14.c
Human toxicity (cancer or non-cancer)
A.14.d
Particulate matter formation
A.14.e
Ionizing radiation
A.14.f
Photochemical ozone formation
A.14.g
Water use
A.14.h
Resource use (mineral, fossil, biotic)
Ecosystem quality
A.15.a
Climate Change
A.15.b
Stratospheric ozone depletion
A.15.c
Ionizing radiation
A.15.d
Photochemical ozone formation
A.15.e
Acidification (terrestrial, freshwater)
A.15.f
Eutrophication (terrestrial, freshwater, ma-
rine)
A.15.g
Ecotoxicity (terrestrial, freshwater, marine)
A.15.h
Land use
A.15.i
Water use
A.15.j
Resource use (mineral, fossil, biotic)
Natural
resources
A.16.a
Water use
A.16.b
Resource use (mineral, fossil, biotic)
A.16.c
Energy use
A.16.d
Land use
Technical feasibility
Product function
and performance
A.17.a
The principal manufacturer-intended use(s) or
applications for the Priority Product
A.17.b
The functional and performance attributes for
the Priority Product
A.17.c
The applicable legal requirements for the Pri-
ority Product
A.17.d
The useful life of the Priority Product, and
that of the alternatives under consideration
A.17.e
The function and performance of each alterna-
tive relative to the Priority Product and other
alternatives under consideration
A.17.f
Whether an alternative exists that is function-
ally acceptable
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Overview of Aspects Considered in Alternatives Assessment
45
Table 4.2: Assessment categories that is beyond the scope of this project, however they have
been added to be comprehensive. The colors represent the different contributing authors;
white, DTSC guide; blue, (Malloy et al., 2013); green, (Ciroth and Franze, 2011); red (Rossi,
J. Tickner, and Ken Geiser, 2006).
Assessment category
ID
Specific assessment aspect
A.17.g
Whether an alternative exists that is techni-
cally feasible
A.17.h
Whether an alternative exists that is economic
feasible
Technical
feasibility
A.18.a
Functionality
A.18.b
Reliability
A.18.c
Usability
A.18.d
Maintainability
A.18.e
Efficiency
Economic feasibility
External
costs
A.19.a
Public health and environmental costs
A.19.b
Costs to governmental agencies and non-profit
organizations that manage waste, oversee envi-
ronmental cleanup and restoration efforts, or
are changed with protecting natural resources,
water quality and wildlife
Internal costs
A.20.a
Internal cost impacts regard to manufacturing
A.20.b
Internal cost impacts regard to marketing
A.20.c
Internal cost impacts regard to materials
A.20.d
Internal cost impacts regard to equipment ac-
quisitions
A.20.e
Internal cost impacts regard to resource con-
sumption costs
A.20.f
Purchaser impact
A.20.g
Manufacturer impact
Social justice
Child
labor
A.21.a
Percentage of child labor in country/sec-
tor/organization
A.21.b
Description of kind of child labor in the com-
pany
Forced
labor
A.22.a
Frequency of forced labor in country/sec-
tor/enterprise
A.22.b
Description of kind of forced labor in the com-
pany
Fair salary
A.23.a
Specification of living wage and minimum
wage in the country
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Results and Discussion
Table 4.2: Assessment categories that is beyond the scope of this project, however they have
been added to be comprehensive. The colors represent the different contributing authors;
white, DTSC guide; blue, (Malloy et al., 2013); green, (Ciroth and Franze, 2011); red (Rossi,
J. Tickner, and Ken Geiser, 2006).
Assessment category
ID
Specific assessment aspect
A.23.b
Wage level of the worker with lowest income
and description of payment performance of the
sector/enterprise
Working time
A.24.a
Hours of work per employee and month in
average
A.24.b
Number of days without work per week
A.24.c
Description of how overtime is handled
Discrimination
A.25.a
Percentage of women in the labor force in the
sector
A.25.b
Country gender index ranking
A.25.c
Occurrence of discrimination in the country/-
sector/company
A.25.d
Presence of formal policies of equal opportu-
nities
A.25.e
Share of women and minorities of personnel
A.25.f
Ratio of salary of women to wages of men in
sector/company
A.25.g
Treatment of workers in general
Social benefits/
social security
A.26.a
Social security expenditures of the country/-
sector
A.26.b
List of social benefits provided to workers
A.26.c
Evidence of violations to laws and employ-
ment regulations
Contribution to
economic
development
(society)
A.27.a
Economic situation of the country/region and
relevance of the considered sector for the (lo-
cal) economy
A.27.b
Contribution of the product/sector/company
to economic development
Prevention and
mitigation
of conflicts
(society)
A.28.a
Presence of conflicts in the country/region
A.28.b
Risk of conflicts with regard to the sector
A.28.c
Description of the organization’s role in the
development of the conflicts
Technology
development
(society)
A.29.a
Sector efforts in technology development re-
garding eco-friendliness
A.29.b
Involvement of the company in technology
transfer projects
A.29.c
Presence of partnerships regarding research
and development
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Overview of Aspects Considered in Alternatives Assessment
47
Table 4.2: Assessment categories that is beyond the scope of this project, however they have
been added to be comprehensive. The colors represent the different contributing authors;
white, DTSC guide; blue, (Malloy et al., 2013); green, (Ciroth and Franze, 2011); red (Rossi,
J. Tickner, and Ken Geiser, 2006).
Assessment category
ID
Specific assessment aspect
A.29.d
Investments in technology development
Corruption (society)
A.30.a
Risk of corruption in country/sector
A.30.b
Presence of an anti-corruption program in the
company
A.30.c
Presence of co-operations with internal and
external controls to prevent corruption
A.30.d
Evidence of an active involvement of the en-
terprise in corruption and bribery
Supplier
relationships
(chain actors)
A.31.a
Interaction of the company with suppliers
(payment on time, sufficient lead time, rea-
sonable volume fluctuations, appropriate com-
munication, collaboration regarding quality is-
sues)
A.31.b
Fluctuation regarding suppliers
Respect
of
intellectual
property
rights
(chain
actors)
A.32.a
Violations of the company against intellectual
property rights
End of life
responsibility
(consumers)
A.33.a
Strength of national legislation covering prod-
uct disposal and recycling
A.33.b
Attention to and management of end-of-life
issues
Labour
practice
A.33.c
Structuring of the take back system including
consumer involvement
A.34.a
Labor practice and decent work (i.e.
“em-
ployment, labor/management relations health
and safety, training and education, and diver-
sity and opportunity”)
Human
rights
A.34.b
Human rights (i.e.
“strategy and man-
agement, non-discrimination, freedom of as-
sociation and collective bargaining, child la-
bor, forced and compulsory labor, disciplinary
practices, security practices, and indigenous
rights”)
Society
and Product
responsibility
A.34.c
Society (i.e. “community, bribery and corrup-
tion, political contributions, competition, and
pricing”)
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Results and Discussion
Table 4.2: Assessment categories that is beyond the scope of this project, however they have
been added to be comprehensive. The colors represent the different contributing authors;
white, DTSC guide; blue, (Malloy et al., 2013); green, (Ciroth and Franze, 2011); red (Rossi,
J. Tickner, and Ken Geiser, 2006).
Assessment category
ID
Specific assessment aspect
A.34.d
Product responsibility (i.e. “customer health
and safety, products and services, advertising,
and respect for privacy”)
Table 4.2 have been added for comprehensive purpose, but goes beyond the scope
for detailed analysis of the project and have only been briefly commented. A first
overview of the table reveals a significant gap in the social justice part, which has hot
been implemented in the current Alternatives Assessment guide at all. Social justice
covers among other things child labour, corruption, technological development and
end of life responsibility. Even though economic feasibility, technical feasibility and
social justice has not been assessed in this project, they are of high importance in
the Alternatives Assessment. If the alternative chemical have a higher production
cost than the chemical of concern, the company might not be as inclined to adopt
the chemical. On the other hand it should be technically feasible to implement the
alternative chemical in the production of the product. This could be technically prob-
lematic on several levels; e.g. if the alternative chemical does not fulfill the same
performance as the chemical of concern does, additional steps in the production line
might be needed - this could also be a economic issue.
4.2
Case Study Results
The purpose of this section is to present the case study results with focus on applying
the quantitative data and the models identified to be suitable for integration into
Alternatives Assessment, to assure that regrettable substitution does not occur. The
quantitative results can also help track which exposure routes are of importance. This
might, however, be different from product to product and should be evaluated by the
research group.
An important feature when implementing suitable tools for Alternatives Assessment
is to make sure that they fulfill all the requirements required by the Alternatives As-
sessment, this being: comparative, have the possibility to screen multiple chemicals
and products, and to be quantitative. A final feature is that the tool used should
be mass-balance-based, i.e. to track how much is leaving the product and to which
compartment or which exposure pathway would have the highest influence.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Case Study Results
49
Evaluating the two chemicals relying only on their chemical properties could end up
giving wrong conclusions.
An excerpt of the properties can be seen in Table 4.3.
As an example, to determine whether DINCH is more or less lipophilic than DEHP,
one would rely on the logKOW. As seen in the Table, DINCH has a factor of 1.2
larger logKOW than DEHP and a factor of 4.2 lower BCF (Bioconcentration factor)
than DEHP. Only looking at the BCF one would assume that DINCH had a lower
logKOW than DEHP implying lower lipophilicity. However, Arnot and Gobas (2006)
have proven that the BCF increases with increase in logKOW until a certain point
(until logKOW 8.2). This could be a part of the explanation to why DINCH have
a lower toxicity than DEHP. Arnot and Gobas (2006) further recommend that BCF
should not be used solely as a predictor of exposure estimates in assessments.
Table 4.3: Excerpt of the physical-chemical properties of DEHP and DINCH
Parameter
Unit
DEHP
DINCH
Chemical data
Molecular weight
g/mol
390.57
424.665
log Kow
log l/l
7.6
9.82
log Koa
log l/l
12.557
12.36
Half-life in water
d
15
37.50
Half-life in soil
d
30
75
Half-life in sediment
d
135
337.5
BCF fish
lwater/kgfish
588.84
139.96
The raw data extracted for the case study has been provided as Supporting Informa-
tion in an Excel work book containing the following sheets:
• Aggregated chemical overview: Brief overview of DEHP and DINCH in terms
of chemical properties, product information, scenario data, effect factors and
product intake fractions.
• Human impacts: All available data extracted from databases. Contain calcula-
tions on extrapolation from specie exposure to human exposure, together with
calculations of the effect factor.
• Ecotox: All available ecotoxicity data extracted from databases and harmoniza-
tion of the data.
Appendix C.3 and C.4 illustrates the output used in the case study from the Article
Interior model and the MOCLA model, respectively.
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Results and Discussion
4.2.1
Human Toxicological Results
Figure 4.1 presents a diagonal plot for DEHP for the different exposure routes. The
effect factor is plotted on the y-axis against the PiF on the x-axis.
The iso-lines
present the characterization factors, calculated by multiplying the EF with the PiF.
A first overview show that the respiratory tract ”adults and children at near- and
far-field” perspective have the highest effect factors, whereas the GI tract ”adults
and children at far-field” perspective have the lowest effect factors. Comparing the
respiratory tract ”adults and children” with epidermis ”adults and children”, both
at near-field perspective, the figure shows that the effect factor is approximately 600
times higher for the respiratory tract than for epidermis. Moreover, for both routes
the children have a lower PiF value than adults, approximately 3 orders of magnitude
lower for epidermis and 2 for respiratory tract.
The figure further reveals that for the exposure route GI track ”adults and children far-
field” leading to cancer effects, that the PiF is 1 order of magnitude lower for children
than for adults and the appurtenant characterization factors are approximately 1 ×
10−9 and 1 × 10−8, for children and adults, respectively. This implies that the potency
DEHP has is greater on adults than on children at far-field perspective. Comparing
these values with the same exposure route leading to non-cancer effects, it is seen that
the PiF remains the same, but the effect factor and characterization factor changes.
In this instance, the effect- and characterization factors are approximately 3 times
higher for non-cancer effects than for cancer effects.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Case Study Results
51
Figure 4.1: Diagonal plot for DEHP for the different exposure routes. The x-axis
present the effect factors, the y-axis the product intake fractions and the iso-lines the
characterization factors
Considering blood transfusion, it should be kept in mind that this exposure route
has not been assessed in the PiF framework, and therefore it is not a part of the
mass-balance including the other exposure routes. Though, through estimations it
has been found that the blood transfusion have the lowest effect factor depicted, with
an appurtenant high PiF. This results in the highest characterization factor of them
all being approximately 1 × 103, implying a relatively high potency of DEHP com-
pared to the other exposure routes. The low effect factor can be explained by the
fact that it might not be the blood itself which is being affected, but instead other
parts of the human body, e.g. the liver or the stomach. However, the effect factor
has been calculated on the basis of intravenous studies applied on rats. The high PiF
value can be explained by the high usage of blood storage bags and the relatively
short life time the bag has. However, the PiF introduce uncertainties on the basis
of the calculations (Section 2.3.1.1, Equation 2.11). Due to the fact that different
storage conditions, i.e. temperatures, are applied to the different parts of the blood
the chemical concentration found in the blood, in the blood bags varies. The depicted
point is calculated using an average chemical concentration found in platelets with
plasma at ambient temperature at 3 days of storage. It should furthermore be noted
that degradation of DEHP is not accounted for in this study.
Figure 4.2 depict a diagonal plot for DINCH for the different exposure routes. As
for Figure 4.1, the effect factor is plotted on the y-axis against the PiF on the x-
axis, and the iso-lines present the characterization factors. The figure only contains
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Results and Discussion
information related to non-cancer effects due to lack of available data for DINCH. The
figure shows that the exposure route for the respiratory tract for adults and children at
near- and far-field have the highest effect factors. The lowest effect factors are found
for epidermis for both adults and children. Comparing these two exposure routes
at near-field, it is seen that the effect factors for the respiratory tract at near-field
are approximately 30 times higher than the effect factors for epidermis at near-field.
Moreover, children have a lower effect factor in both exposure routes than adults being
1.5 and 1 order of magnitude lower for epidermis and respiratory tract, respectively.
In general, it is seen that near-field exposures have the higher PiF than far-field
exposures.
The highest PiF found is for epidermis adults, being approximately 1
order of magnitude higher than for the respiratory tract adults. Though, these two
exposure routes at the adult perspective have a difference in both PiF and effect
factor. However, they have the same characterization factor of 1 × 10−8, implying
that the exposure routes have the same impact on the human health. The appurtenant
characterization factors for the respiratory tract at all levels are all different, varying
from 1 × 10−8 to 1 × 10−13 implying that the potency of DINCH is different for each
population group affected, i.e. the human health impact per mass of chemical within
the product is different.
Figure 4.2: Diagonal plot for DINCH for the different exposure routes. The x-axis
present the effect factors, the y-axis the product intake fractions and the iso-lines the
characterization factors
Further evaulation of the chemicals can only be made for the exposure routes that
the chemicals have in common i.e. respiratory tract ”adults and children, near- and
far-field”, and epidermis ”adults and children, near-field”. Comparing DINCH and
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Case Study Results
53
DEHP for the same exposure routes, it is important to keep in mind that the amount
of chemical used in the blood storage bag is considered to be 1:1, implying that
amount of DINCH used is the same as for DEHP i.e. DINCH is as harmful as DEHP.
This assumption is also reflected in the PiF’s which is in the same order of magnitude
for all the depicted exposure routes, except for epidermis ”adults, near-field” which is
1 order of magnitude lower for DINCH. The respiratory tract ”adults, far-field” and
epidermis ”children, near-field” are both 1 order of magnitude lower for DEHP than
for DINCH. However, due to the significant differences in the effect factor, varying
4-5 orders of magnitude, the characterization factors are affected, resulting in 3 to
5 orders of magnitude higher characterization factors for DEHP than for DINCH.
These results should be taken into consideration, due to the 1:1 chemical content
extrapolation from DEHP to DINCH, which is not known to be a conservative or less
conservative solution.
The embedded model in the PiF framework introduce uncertainties in terms of lack of
data, data uncertainty and simplistic modelling. The MOLCA Model is as mentioned
a simple model, relying on the assumption that the conditions present at the landfill
are fully mixed, implying all concentrations are assumed constant. However, in real-
ity this is not always the case. The data that the models are fed with have manually
been extracted from databases and further sorted. During the sorting, some studies
were excluded if; the test species was missing, the dose descriptor was lacking, if the
unit was given in ppm without stating if it was mole, mass or volume based, or if the
duration of the test was missing - in some cases a conservative choice was made for
the human toxicity data, marking the study as acute, only if the dose descriptor was
given along with the disease level (cancer/non-cancer). These exclusions would not
have a large impact on the result for DEHP due to the rather large amount of studies,
however, it would affect the results for DINCH due to the already lack of available ex-
posure data. In total DEHP had 115 reliable human toxicity studies, whereas DINCH
only have 18. For ecotoxicity DEHP had 105 reliable studies, whereas DINCH had 6.
Considering the available exposure routes on the basis of the assumptions DINCH
do have en overall lower effect and characterization factors than DEHP. However, it
cannot be concluded solely on these results if DINCH should be recommended due to
the fact that DINCH has 84 % less available human exposure data and the fact that
DEHP has exposure data for several other diseases than DINCH, hence less compara-
ble exposure routes. A possible solution to overcome the lack of comparable exposure
routes would be to use the ingestion pathway as a proxy for the inhalation pathway
and vice versa. However, as with the solution were its assumed that DINCH is as
harmful as DEHP, it is not known whether it would be a conservative or a less con-
servative solution. A second possible solution would be to extrapolate exposure data
from DEHP to DINCH 1:1, for the exposure routes missing. This assumption would
be conservative, since DINCH would be assumed to be as harmful as DEHP. If this
solution had been applied to the case study, DINCH would be better off than DEHP
if the depicted routes in the figure had the dominating total exposure for DINCH.
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Results and Discussion
The case where the depicted exposure routes would be lower than the extrapolated
routes, DINCH would not be better off than DEHP.
For this specific case study it would also be interesting to investigate the amount of
DINCH migrated into the blood in the blood bag, to study the blood transfusion
exposure route, since the population group is both the one being exposed to the
highest amount of DEHP, and also often the weakest population group. For both
chemicals it applies that children were neglected when running the framework and
interestingly, it is seen that children are being exposed to both chemicals even though
they are not directly in contact with the product. This highlights the complexity of
the PiF framework and how important it is to evaluate the Alternatives Assessment
quantitatively, since population groups which have been assumed not to interact with
the product can be affected.
4.2.2
Ecotoxicological Results
So far, only the human toxicological part of the case study has been evaluated, hence
the following section gives an overview of the found results for the ecotoxicological
part.
Table 4.4 presents the calculated avglogHC50 together with the EFeco estimated in
USEtox. For aquatic toxicity DEHP has the lowest avglogHC50 of -0.143 log(mg/L)
implying that the aquatic ecosystem will be affected by a lower concentration of
DEHP than of DINCH. For terrestrial toxicity however, there is no significant differ-
ence between the two chemicals having a concentration of 388.2 and 500 mg/kgsoil
dw, for DEHP and DINCH respectively. The species in the sediment proved to be
the most robust, with a avglogHC50 value of 3.3 log(mg/kgsediment dw) for DEHP.
However, it was not possible to extract data for DINCH for this specific compartment,
hence no conclusion can be drawn upon whether DINCH or DEHP is less toxic.
The EFecos for DEHP and DINCH has been estimated for freshwater aquatic ecosys-
tems in USEtox at continental and global scale. Both EFeco’s for DEHP has been
estimated to be 249.6 PAF m3/kg and for DINCH the EFeco’s has been estimated to
be 36.6 PAF m3/kg. Hence, DEHP has approximately a factor of 7 larger effect on
the ecosystem than DINCH, implying that 7 times more species are potentially being
affected by DEHP, on both continental and global scale.
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Case Study Results
55
Table 4.4: Presentation of the ecotoxicological effect factors in freshwater at continen-
tal (C) and global (G) scale estimated by USEtox, together with the average logHC50
values
Unit
DEHP
DINCH
Aquatic toxicity (avglogHC50)
log(mg/L)
-0.143
1.136
Sediment toxicity (avglogHC50)
log(mg/kgsediment dw)
3.254
N.A.
Terrestrial toxicity (avglogHC50)
log(mg/kgsoil dw)
2.589
2.699
EFeco, fr.waterC
PAF m3/kg
249.626
36.557
EFeco, fr.waterG
PAF m3/kg
249.626
36.557
N.A. Not Available
The DEHP/DINCH ratio of the characterization factors are presented in Figure 4.3
a depicting which of the two chemicals are worse off. The bars indicate that when-
ever its > 1 DEHP is worse off and vice versa for DINCH. As seen, DINCH is worse
off in two out of 11 emission compartments. Figure 4.3 b is a detailed overview of
the characterization factors for the different emission compartments, illustrating the
potentially affected fraction of species m3 d/kgemitted estimated in USEtox for both
chemicals.
The largest characterization factors for both chemicals are found in the emission
compartment freshwater at continental and global scale, being 3.88 × 101 and 3.22
× 102 for DINCH and DEHP respectively, in both compartments. These compart-
ments reveals that the potential affected fraction of species per m3 d/kgemitted is
approximately 8 times higher for DEHP than for DINCH. The least affected emission
compartment is the ocean at global scale. In this compartment it is seen that DINCH
have the highest characterization factor being 4.39 × 10−4, compared with DEHP’s
being 6.59 × 10−5. Hence DINCH is worse off than DEHP with approximately a
factor of 6 for this compartment. The other compartment where DINCH is worse off,
is for seawater at continental scale. The characterization factors are 2.28 × 10−3 and
3.56 × 10−4 for DINCH and DEHP, respectively. Hence DINCH potentially affects
approximately 6 times more species per m3 d/kgemitted than DEHP.
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Results and Discussion
Figure 4.3: a) depicts the DEPH/DINCH characterization factor ratio, b) depicts the
potentially affected fraction of species per m3 d/kgemitted for freshwater ecosystems.
Abbreviations for emission compartments can be found in Appendix E.1
As depicted in Figure 4.3 a DEHP, however, has the highest characterization factor in
9 out of 11 emission compartments. Again it seems that DEHP is far worse off than
DINCH, but with 94 % less ecotoxicity data available for DINCH it would be a bold
statement to say that DINCH is better. However, if one were to say that DINCH
would be a suitable substitute to DEHP in terms of ecotoxicity and human toxicity
the uncertainties and assumptions should be taken into considered.
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Limitations and Future Improvement Potentials of Alternatives Assessment
57
4.3
Limitations and Future Improvement Potentials of
Alternatives Assessment
A limitation of the presented case study is the lack of available data for DINCH which
resulted in the chemicals only being comparable in two out of 11 exposure routes.
Extrapolating from respiratory tract (inhalation) to GI tract (ingestion) could be
considered, in order to have more exposure routes to compare. However, it is not
known whether this extrapolation would be a conservative or less conservative solu-
tion, why this has not been implemented in this case study. The assumption that the
amount of DINCH is 1:1 with DEHP in the blood storage bag is a limitation of the
case study and any changes in this setting would affect the PiF. This limitation is
due to the fact that it is not known whether additional ingredients should be added
to the product to fulfill the same function as DEHP, e.g. in terms of stabilizing the
red blood cells. However this is not known due to lack of available product informa-
tion regarding chemical content. Moreover, the PiF framework does not handle more
specific exposure routes such as the blood transfusion, which had to be calculated
manually, implying that the exposure route is not a part of the overall mass-balance
for the product. Another evident limitation of the study is that the degradation prod-
ucts of DEHP are not being assessed. DEHP is metabolized in the human body to
the primary metabolite mono-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (MEHP) through hydrolysis.
MEHP is then further metabolized under a set of oxidative reactions in the liver,
into secondary metabolites: mono(2-ethyl-5-hydroxyhexyl) phthalate (5OH-MEHP),
mono(2-ethyl-5-oxyhexyl) phthalate (5-oxo-MEHP), mono(2-ethyl-5-carboxypentyl)
phthalate (5-cx-MEHP) and mono[2-(carboxymethyl)hexyl] phthalate (2-cx-MMHP),
where the toxicity in the body is mainly attributed by the actions of the secondary
metabolites (Sheikh et al., 2016; Lozano and Cid, 2013). Due to the latter, further
research on assessing the degradation products separately would be of high interest.
The limitations lead to the following future improvement potentials listed below.
1. Implement standardized protocols which should be followed by any authorities
• this would make it possible for future comparisons across products and
chemicals
• this would eliminate any doubts about which data/aspect to include
• this would eliminate doubts about which dose descriptor to apply
• this would standardize how to overcome lack of available exposure data
2. Implement standardized mass-balance-based models
• this would quantify the outcome of the assessment
• this would allow easy screening and comparison of chemicals
• this would be a strong addition to support decision making
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Results and Discussion
3. Increase amount of available toxicity data
• this would make the chemicals more comparable
• this could be solved by extrapolation, however it should be investigated
whether this is a conservative or less conservative approach
4. Transparent information about the product
• this would allow for more correct and realistic results, when based on actual
data rather than assumptions, in terms of known chemical content in the
product, dimensions etc.
Despite the limitations of the study, introducing quantitative tools to Alternatives
Assessment leads to trade-offs in terms of increased credibility to the decision mak-
ing when choosing a substitute to a chemical of concern, potentially minimizing the
risk of regrettable substitution. Furthermore, utilizing the tools would help reveal if
unanticipated exposure routes are of concerns and identify which exposure routes are
of concern.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
This MSc. thesis provides an overview of the main gaps found in Alternatives Assess-
ment and have shown that quantitative results through mass-balance-based models
can support future decision making.
A predominant remark is that there is no standardized protocols for Alternatives
Assessment that the authorities should follow. Currently, only guidelines on how to
carry out an Alternatives Assessment exists. The DTSC guide used as a starting
point in this project is currently the most comprehensive guide available. However,
it is based on what could be included and considered, rather than what should be.
The overall main gaps found in the Alternatives Assessment were the lack of descrip-
tive information regarding which data to extract. This lack of information lead to
uncertainty when extracting toxicity data i.e. which dose descriptor to apply. This
further lead to apply a hierarchy (LD50 > ED50 > LOAEL > NOAEL) in order to
assure the use of the most reliable value. The lack of information also affected other
than the toxicity aspect. Biodegradation can e.g. be reported in several metrics e.g.
rates, half-lives and degree of mineralization. The overall lack of information in re-
gards to the data lead to time wasted going back and forth to assure the right data
was extracted. Additional gaps were identified when gathering toxicity data. This
specially applied for the chemical of substitution which had 84% and 94% less data
available than the chemical of concern for human- and ecotoxicity, respectively. This
main finding can affect the decision making, since conclusions will be drawn on little
evidence. Further implications of lack of data is that the chemicals are only com-
parable with the same accessible data i.e. only comparable with the same exposure
routes. A possible solution to this issue could be to extrapolate the data 1:1 from the
chemical of concern to the possible substitute, however one would not know if this
would be a conservative or less conservative solution.
Gaps were also found in the specific assessment aspects. This especially applied for
the input parameters for the models utilized in the case study. To comply with the
embedded models in the PiF framework additional aspects in terms of e.g. enthalpy of
vaporization and the hydroxyl radical reaction rate constant was added. These gaps
however are caused by the fact that no standardized protocols have been adopted. A
protocol that would encompass standardized models and specific lists to each model
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Conclusion
with the certain data to extract would be preferable. Other gaps in the assessment
aspects which, however were not investigated in this case study, was the distinct miss-
ing assessment aspect, Social Justice. This aspect consider among others child labor,
corruption, technological development and end of life responsibility. This aspect has
not been considered at all in the guide. It would be interesting to further investigate
among other things how to measure e.g. child labour and corruption.
Adopting quantitative models such as the Product intake Fraction framework into
the Alternatives Assessment would help support decision making and meanwhile iden-
tify which exposure routes are of concern and could reveal unanticipated exposure
routes for the product. The product intake fraction can also help identify which gaps
to be filled in, in order for the Alternatives Assessment to be more comprehensive.
For the practical case study carried out with DEHP in blood storage bags, the PiF
framework revealed that the alternative chemical, DINCH, for both respiratory tract
and epidermis exposure route, had lower effect factors and characterizations factors,
than of DEHP. Evaluating these two exposure routes, the conclusion would be that
DINCH seems to be a promising substitute to DEHP when it comes to human tox-
icity. Evaluating the ecotoxicological results, DINCH had a lower characterization
factor (PAF m3/kg emitted) in 9 out of 11 emission compartments compared with
DEHP. However, due to the significant lower data accessibility for DINCH, it would
be bold to conclude that DINCH is an overall better alternative to DEHP. These
results are meanwhile only valid based on the assumption that the amount of DINCH
in the product is the same as for DEHP and without any additional ingredients. This
assumptions is also an indication of the lack of accessible and transparent product
information available.
A limitation of this study is that it only assesses the gaps in regards to exposure and
toxicity impacts. A full Alternatives Assessment would also include life cycle impacts,
social justice, technical and economic feasibility. As mentioned, there is an indica-
tion that DINCH would be a recommended substitute to DEHP, however, it would
be interesting to study the other aspects of the Alternatives Assessment in order to
conclude on a full assessment.
The case study is a first illustrative demonstration of implementing and using quanti-
tative data and tools in Alternatives Assessment. It can help increase the credibility
and further support the decision making when choosing a substitute to a chemical of
concern, potentially minimizing the risk of regrettable substitution. The study gave
rise to a list of future improvement potentials which will help defining future research
needs in Alternatives Assessment.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
Al Salloum, H. et al. (2016). “Studying DEHP migration in plasticized PVC used
for blood bags by coupling Raman confocal microscopy to UV spectroscopy”. In:
Materials Science and Engineering C 61, pp. 56–62. issn: 09284931. doi: 10.1016/
j.msec.2015.12.008.
Andrade, AJ et al. (2006). “A dose response study following in utero and lactational
exposure to di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP): reproductive effects on adult
male offspring rats”. In: Toxicology 228(1), pp. 85–97.
ANSES (2016). “Analysis of the most appropriate risk management option (RMOA):
Formaldehyde”. In:
Arnot, Jon A and Frank APC Gobas (2006). “A review of bioconcentration factor
(BCF) and bioaccumulation factor (BAF) assessments for organic chemicals in
aquatic organisms”. In: Environmental Reviews 14(4), pp. 257–297. issn: 1208-
6053. doi: 10.1139/a06-005.
Balkissoon, Indira et al. (2013). The Commons Principles for Alternatives Assessment.
url: https://www.bizngo.org/static/ee_images/uploads/resources/
commons_principles_AA_2013_10_14.pdf (visited on 04/13/2018).
Bicalho, Beatriz et al. (2016). “Blood Bag Plasticizers Influence Red Blood Cell
Vesiculation Rate without Altering the Lipid Composition of the Vesicles”. In:
Transfusion Medicine and Hemotherapy 43(1), pp. 19–26. issn: 16603818. doi:
10.1159/000441639.
Bird, John (2003). “The Substitution List - for substitution of hazardous substances
in the health care sector”. In: Engineering Mathematics, pp. 430–433.
Brooke, D et al. (1991). “Environmental hazard assessment: DEHP”. In: p. 57.
Cadogan, DF and Et. al (1994). “No Title”. In: Progress in Rubber, Plastics Recycling
Technology 10, pp. 1–19.
Chang, Bv, Chien-Sen Liao, and Sarah Yuan (2005). “Anaerobic degradation of di-
ethyl phthalate, di-n-butyl phthalate, and di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate from river
sediment in Taiwan”. In: 58, pp. 1601–7.
Chu, I et al. (1981). “Sub-acute and sub-chronic toxicity of Mono-2-Ethylhexylphthalate
in the rat”. In: Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology( 10),
pp. 271–280.
Ciroth, Andreas and Juliane Franze (2011). LCA of an Ecolabeled Notebook - Consid-
eration of Social and Environmental Impacts Along the Entire Life Cycle. Berlin,
p. 409. isbn: 9781446600870.
==PAGE:72==
62
Bibliography
David, R.M. et al. (2012). Patty’s Toxicology. New York.
Defoe, D.L and Et. al (1990). “No Title”. In: Environmental Toxicology Chemistry 9,
pp. 623–36.
Eaton, D L and E P Gallagher (2010). “1.01 - General Overview of Toxicology”. In:
Comprehensive Toxicology (Second Edition), pp. 1–46. doi: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-08-046884-6.00101-9.
ECHA (2010). Evaluation of new scientific evidence concerning the restrictions con-
tained in annex xvii to regulation (EC) no 1907/2006 (reach). Tech. rep.
ECHA (2018a). Bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate. url: https://echa.europa.eu/registration-
dossier/-/registered-dossier/15358/2/1 (visited on 05/16/2018).
ECHA (2018b). ECHA. url: https://echa.europa.eu/.
Ellington, J.J. and T.L. Floyd (1996). “Octanol/Water partition coefficients for eight
phthalate esters”. In:
Europeans Chemicals Bureau (2003). European Union Risk Assessment Report, Bis(2-
ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) (117-81-7). Tech. rep., p. 345.
Fantke, Peter and Alexi Ernstoff (2018). “LCA of Chemicals and Chemical Products”.
In: Life Cycle Assessment: Theory and Practice. Ed. by Michael Z. Hauschild,
Ralph K. Rosenbaum, and Stig Irving Olsen. Springer International Publishing:
Dordrecht, The Netherlands. Chap. 31, pp. 783–815. isbn: 978-3-319-56474-6. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-56475-3.
Fantke, Peter, Alexi S. Ernstoff, et al. (2016). “Coupled near-field and far-field expo-
sure assessment framework for chemicals in consumer products”. In: Environment
International 94, pp. 508–518. issn: 18736750. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2016.06.
010.
Fantke, Peter, Olivier Jolliet, et al. (2017). PiF Model.
Fantke, Peter, Roland Weber, and Martin Scheringer (2015). “From incremental to
fundamental substitution in chemical alternatives assessment”. In: Sustainable
Chemistry and Pharmacy 1, pp. 1–8. issn: 23525541. doi: 10.1016/j.scp.2015.
08.001.
Gavala, HN et al. (2003). “Biodegradation of phthalate esters during the mesophilic
anaerobic digestion of sludge”. In: ( 52), pp. 673–82.
Geiser, K et al. (2015). “The Architecture of Chemical Alternatives Assessment”. In:
Risk Analysis 35(12), pp. 2152–2161. issn: 15396924. doi: 10.1111/risa.12507.
Hauschild, Michael Z. (2018). “Introduction to LCA Methodology”. In: Life Cycle
Assessment: Theory and Practice. Ed. by Michael Z. Hauschild, Ralph K. Rosen-
baum, and Stig Irving Olsen. Vol. 18. 3. Springer International Publishing: Dor-
drecht, The Netherlands, pp. 57–66. isbn: 978-3-319-56474-6. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-319-56475-3.
Hauschild, Michael et al. (2013). “Identifying best existing practice for characteri-
zation modeling in life cycle impact assessment”. In: Int J Life Cycle Assess 18,
pp. 683–697. doi: 10.1007/s11367-012-0489-5.
Hayes, W.M, ed. (2014). Chemistry and Physics. 95th ed., pp. 3–54.
Heudorf, Ursel, Volker Mersch-Sundermann, and Jürgen Angerer (2007). “Phthalates:
Toxicology and exposure”. In: International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
63
Health 210(5), pp. 623–634. issn: 1618131X. doi: 10.1016/j.ijheh.2007.07.
011.
Hinckley, D.A and Et. al (1990). “Determination of Vapor Pressures for Nonpolar
and Semipolar Organic Compounds from Gas Chromatographic Retention Data”.
In: Journal of Chemical Engineering Data.
Howard, Gregory J. (2014). “Chemical alternatives assessment: The case of flame
retardants”. In: Chemosphere 116(November 2013), pp. 112–117. issn: 18791298.
doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.02.034.
Huang, Po Chin et al. (2018). “Characterization of phthalates exposure and risk for
cosmetics and perfume sales clerks”. In: Environmental Pollution 233, pp. 577–587.
issn: 18736424. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2017.10.079.
Huijbregts, Mark A J et al. (2005). “Human-Toxicological Effect and Damage Fac-
tors of Carcinogenic and Noncarcinogenic Chemicals for Life Cycle Impact As-
sessment Human-Toxicological Effect and Damage Factors of Carcinogenic and
Noncarcinogenic Chemicals for Life Cycle Impact Assessment”. In: Integrated En-
vironmental Assessment and Management 1(3), pp. 181–244. issn: 1551-3777. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1897/2004-007R.1.
Huijbregts, Mark et al. (2010). “USEtox User manual”. In:
Jacobs, Molly M. et al. (2016). “Alternatives assessment frameworks: Research needs
for the informed substitution of hazardous chemicals”. In: Environmental Health
Perspectives 124(3), pp. 265–280. issn: 15529924. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1409581.
Jolliet, Olivier et al. (2015). “Defining Product Intake Fraction to Quantify and Com-
pare Exposure to Consumer Products”. In: Environmental Science and Technology
49(15), pp. 8924–8931. issn: 15205851. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.5b01083.
June, Massachusetts Lowell (2006). “Five Chemicals Alternatives Assessment Study
Prepared by The Massachusetts Toxics Use Reduction Institute University of Mas-
sachusetts Lowell”. In:
Kjeldsen, Peter and Thomas H. Christensen (2001). “A simple model for the distri-
bution and fate of organic chemicals in a landfill: MOCLA”. In: Waste Management
Research 19(3), pp. 201–216. issn: 0734-242X. doi: 10.1177/0734242X0101900303.
Klimisch, H J, M Andreae, and U Tillmann (1997). “A systematic approach for
evaluating the quality of experimental toxicological and ecotoxicological data.”
In: Regulatory toxicology and pharmacology 25(1), pp. 1–5. issn: 0273-2300. doi:
10.1006/rtph.1996.1076.
Koch, H. M., R. Preuss, and J. Angerer (2006). “Di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP):
Human metabolism and internal exposure - An update and latest results”. In:
International Journal of Andrology 29(1), pp. 155–165. issn: 01056263. doi: 10.
1111/j.1365-2605.2005.00607.x.
Lavoie, Emma T. et al. (2010). “Chemical alternatives assessment: Enabling sub-
stitution to safer chemicals”. In: Environmental Science and Technology 44(24),
pp. 9244–9249. issn: 0013936X. doi: 10.1021/es1015789.
Lozano, M. and J. Cid (2013). “DEHP plasticizer and blood bags: challenges ahead”.
In: ISBT Science Series 8(1), pp. 127–130. issn: 17512816. doi: 10.1111/voxs.
12027.
==PAGE:74==
64
Bibliography
Mackintosh, CE et al. (2004). “Distribution of phthalate esters in a marine aquatic
food web: comparison to polychlorinated biphenyls”. In: Environmental Science
Technology( 38).
Malloy, Timothy F et al. (2013). “Use of multi-criteria decision analysis in regulatory
alternatives analysis: A case study of lead free solder”. In: Integrated Environmental
Assessment and Management 9(4), pp. 652–664. issn: 15513777. doi: 10.1002/
ieam.1449.
Merkle, J, HJ Klimisch, and R Jäckh (n.d.). “Developmental toxicity in rats after
inhalation exposure of di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP)”. In: Toxicology Letters(
42), pp. 215–223.
Meyln, WM and Et. al (1992). “No Title”. In: Environmental Science Technology 26,
pp. 1560–67.
Moser, VC. et al. (1995). “A multidisciplinary approach to toxicological screening : III.
Neurobehavorial toxicity”. In: Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health(
45), pp. 173–210.
Moser, VC. et al. (2003). “Neurobehavioral evaluations of mixtures of trichloroethy-
lene, heptachlor, and di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate in a full-factorial design”. In: Tox-
icology( 188), pp. 125–137.
Müller, Nienke et al. (2017). “Exploring REACH as a potential data source for char-
acterizing ecotoxicity in life cycle assessment”. In: Environmental Toxicology and
Chemistry 36(2), pp. 492–500. issn: 15528618. doi: 10.1002/etc.3542.
NIOSH (2010). “National Institute for Occupational Safety Health (NIOSH) Pocket
Guide to Chemical Hazards”. In: DHHS (NIOSH) Publication( 168). doi: DHHS(NIOSH)
PublicationNo.2005-149.
NITE and CHRIP (2014). “Biodegradation and Bioconcentration”. In:
NTP/CERHR (2006). “Monograph on the Potential Human Reproductive and De-
velopmental Effects of Di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP)”. In:
O’Grady, Dean P, Philip H Howard, and A Frances Werner (1985). “Activated sludge
biodegradation of 12 commercial phthalate esters”. In: Applied and environmental
microbiology 49(2), pp. 443–445.
O’Neil, M. J. (2013). “The Merck Index - An Encyclopedia of Chemicals, Drugs, and
Biologicals”. In: Royal Society of Chemistry, p. 517.
Prowse, C. V. et al. (2014). “Commercially available blood storage containers”. In:
Vox Sanguinis 106(1), pp. 1–13. issn: 00429007. doi: 10.1111/vox.12084.
Rippen (2000). Handbuch Umwelt-Chemikalien.
Rosenbaum, Ralph K., Till M. Bachmann, et al. (2008). “USEtox—the UNEP-SETAC
toxicity model: recommended characterisation factors for human toxicity and fresh-
water ecotoxicity in life cycle impact assessment”. In: The International Journal of
Life Cycle Assessment 13(7), pp. 532–546. issn: 0948-3349. doi: 10.1007/s11367-
008-0038-4.
Rosenbaum, Ralph K., Mark A J Huijbregts, et al. (2011). “USEtox human exposure
and toxicity factors for comparative assessment of toxic emissions in life cycle
analysis: Sensitivity to key chemical properties”. In: International Journal of Life
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
65
Cycle Assessment 16(8), pp. 710–727. issn: 09483349. doi: 10.1007/s11367-011-
0316-4.
Roslev, Peter et al. (1999). “Degradation of Phthalate and Di-(2-Ethylhexyl)phthalate
by Indigenous and Inoculated Microorganisms in Sludge-Amended Soil”. In: 64,
pp. 4711–9.
Rossi, Mark, Joel Tickner, and Ken Geiser (2006). “Alternatives Assessment Frame-
work of the Lowell Center for Sustainable Production”. In: ( July), p. 24. url:
papers2://publication/uuid/E70800E7-DFE2-4B5A-96DC-D0873D278F24.
Saeger, VW and ES Tucker (1976). “No Title”. In: Applied and Environmental Micro-
biology 31, pp. 29–34.
Schütze, André et al. (2014). “Entering markets and bodies: Increasing levels of the
novel plasticizer Hexamoll®DINCH®in 24h urine samples from the German En-
vironmental Specimen Bank”. In: International Journal of Hygiene and Environ-
mental Health 217(2-3), pp. 421–426. issn: 14384639. doi: 10.1016/j.ijheh.
2013.08.004.
Schuurmann, G and Et. al (2006). “No Title”. In: Environmental Science Technology(
40), pp. 7005–11.
SCP and DTSC (2017). “Alternatives Analysis Guide”. In: 56(June), p. 22.
Sevenster, Arjen (2018). Specific gravity (density) - PVC. url: http://www.pvc.
org/en/p/specific-gravity-density (visited on 03/13/2018).
Sheikh, Ishfaq A. et al. (2016). “Endocrine disruption: In silico perspectives of inter-
actions of di-(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate and its five major metabolites with proges-
terone receptor”. In: BMC Structural Biology 16, pp. 1–10. issn: 14726807. doi:
10.1186/s12900-016-0066-4.
Sjons, Josefin and Marcus Wendin (2017). Pvcfreebloodbag - life cycle assessment.
Tech. rep. 93. Gothenburg: Miljögiraff, pp. 1–67.
Søndergaard, Niels (2017). Kemiluppen: Tjek din personlige pleje for uønsket kemi.
url: https : / / kemi . taenk . dk / bliv - groennere / kemiluppen - tjek - din -
personlige-pleje-uoensket-kemi (visited on 01/16/2018).
Staples, CA (1997). “No Title”. In: Chemosphere 35, pp. 667–715.
Tickner, Joel A. et al. (2015). “Advancing safer alternatives through functional sub-
stitution”. In: Environmental Science and Technology 49(2), pp. 742–749. issn:
15205851. doi: 10.1021/es503328m.
TOXNET (2018a). CCRIS. url: https://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/newtoxnet/ccris.
htm.
TOXNET (2018b). HSDB. url: https://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/cgi-bin/sis/
htmlgen?HSDB.
UPB (2018). Hexamoll DINCH. url: https://www.umweltprobenbank.de/en/
documents/profiles/analytes/25391 (visited on 05/29/2018).
US Consumer Product Safety Commission (2010). “Review of Exposure and Toxicity
Data for Phthalate substitutes Diisononyl hexahydrophthalate (166412-78-8)”. In:
p. 40.
US EPA (2011). EPISuite.
US EPA (2012). EPISuite.
==PAGE:76==
66
Bibliography
Van Vliet, E. D S et al. (2011). “A review of alternatives to di (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate-
containing medical devices in the neonatal intensive care unit”. In: Journal of
Perinatology 31(8), pp. 551–560. issn: 07438346. doi: 10.1038/jp.2010.208.
eprint: NIHMS150003.
Vermeire, T et al. (2001). “Probabilistic assessment factors for human health risk
assessment”. In: ( March), pp. 1–29.
Wams, T.J (1987). “Diethylhexylphthalate as an environmental contaminant–a re-
view”. In: Science of the Total Environment( 66), pp. 1–16.
Wei, Z et al. (2012). “Maternal exposure to di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate alters kidney
development through the renin-angiotensin system in offspring”. In: Toxicology
Letters.
Whittaker, Margaret H. (2015). “Risk Assessment and Alternatives Assessment: Com-
paring Two Methodologies”. In: Risk Analysis 35(12), pp. 2129–2136. issn: 15396924.
doi: 10.1111/risa.12549.
Yuan, Sarah et al. (2003). “Occurrence and microbial degradation of phthalate esters
in Taiwan river sediments”. In: 49, pp. 1295–9.
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A
Human toxicity
A.1
Extrapolation factors
Table A.1: Applied extrapolation factor (allometric factor), fs
Animal
Allometric factor
Human
1
Pig
1.1
Dog
1.5
Monkey
1.9
Cat
1.9
Rabbit
2.4
Hen
2.6
Mink
2.9
Guinea pig
3.1
Rat
4.1
Hamster
4.9
Gerbil
5.5
Mouse
7.3
==PAGE:78==
68
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX B
Ecotoxicity
B.1
Stepwise calculation of avglogHC50
The following calculations are for illustrative purpose.
The avglogHC50 are here
presented for aquatic toxicity for DINCH.
==PAGE:80==
70
B Ecotoxicity
Table B.1: avglogHC50 for aquatic toxicity for DINCH
Species
Endpoint
EC50[chem,spec,i]
mg/L
EC50chronic
[chem,spec,i] mg/L
HC50chronic
[chem,spec] mg/L
log(HC50chronic
[chem,spec])
log(mg/L)
avglog(HC50[chem])
log(mg/L)
Danio rerio
acute
100
50
50
1.699
1.136
Daphnia
acute
100
50
1.025
0.011
Daphnia
chronic
0.021
0.021
Scenedesmus
subspicatus
acute
100
50
50
1.699
Scenedesmus
subspicatus
acute
100
50
EC50chronic[chem,spec,i] mg/L is calculated by dividing EC50[chem,spec,i] mg/L with 2.
HC50chronic[chem,spec] mg/L is calculated by taking the geometric mean of EC50chronic[chem,spec,i] mg/L for all
available data for the same species, e.g. for Daphnia.
log(HC50chronic[chem,spec]) log(mg/L) is calculated by taking the logarithm of HC50chronic[chem,spec].
avglog(HC50[chem]) log(mg/L) is calculated by taking the average of log(HC50chronic[chem,spec]) log(mg/L) across
species.
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX C
Applied Models
C.1
Blood Transfusion Calculus
The following steps was made to calculate the PiF [mg chemical transferred/mg in
blood bag] of the blood being transferred to the human body.
Massin blood bag = 50 g
1000 × 40% = 20.000
[mg chemical
blood bag
]
(C.1)
It is assumed that the blood bag can contain 0.5 L of blood (Vblood and that the
average chemical concentration found in the blood in the blood bag is 250 mg/L
blood (Chuman) (Al Salloum et al., 2016).
Massin human = Vhuman × Chuman = 0.5 L × 250
mg
L blood
= 125
[mg chemical transferred
blood bag
]
(C.2)
The PiF for the blood transfusion exposure route is therefore;
PiF = Massin blood bag
Massin human
= 20.000
125
= 0.00625
[mg chemical transferred
mg in blood bag
]
(C.3)
C.2
Calculation of Key Parameters for Article Interior
The following Appendix contains the calculations of the Key Parameters applied in
the article interior model.
C.2.1
Hand Contact Frequency (adults)
The hand contact frequency is calculated, assuming that the person handling the
blood bag are touching the bag 2 minutes per hour.
Hand contact frequency = 2 minutes
60 minutes = 0.033
[min
min
]
(C.4)
==PAGE:82==
72
C Applied Models
C.2.2
Thickness
The thickness of the blood bag is assumed to be between 0.34 mm to 0.47 mm
(Prowse et al., 2014). An average of these values are therefore applied for this case
study, being 0.405 mm.
C.2.3
Application and Sorption Area
It was not possible to retrieve the dimension of a blood bag other than the volume,
hence it has been assumed that the blood bag has the dimension of 13 cm x 18 cm.
Since the person handling the blood bag can be exposed to the blood bag on both
sides, the area has been multiplied with 2, as seen in Equation C.5.
Application and Sorption Area = (0.13 m × 0.18 m) × 2 = 0.0468 m2
(C.5)
C.2.4
Mass
The chemical mass of the blood bag is calculated as seen in Equation C.6.
Mass = Thickness × ApplicationArea × ρ × 1000
= 0.000405 m × 0.0468 m2 × 1.1 g
cm3 × 1000
= 0.0208 kg
(C.6)
==PAGE:83==
C.3 Output from Article Interior model
73
C.3
Output from Article Interior model
The output from the Article Interior model are the transfer fractions which are then
feed into the PiF framework. Table C.1 and C.2 depict the results for DEHP and
DINCH, respectively.
Table C.1: Transfer fractions output from Article Interior model for DEHP
Article Interior
Fraction
Indoor air
2.77E-05
Ambient air
0
Freshwater
0
Soil
0
Wastewater treatment plant
0
Landfill
1.00E+00
Resp. tract Adults users near-field
0
Resp. tract Children users near-field
0
Resp. tract Adults pop. far-field
0
Resp. tract Children pop. far-field
0
GI tract Adult users near-field
0
GI tract Children users near-field
0
GI tract Adults pop. far-field
0
GI tract Children pop. far-field
0
Epidermis Adults users near-field
1.11E-05
Epidermis Children users near-field
0
==PAGE:84==
74
C Applied Models
Table C.2: Transfer fractions output from Article Interior model for DINCH
Article Interior
Fraction
Indoor air
5.26E-05
Ambient air
0
Freshwater
0
Soil
0
Wastewater treatment plant
0
Landfill
1.00E+00
Resp. tract Adults users near-field
0
Resp. tract Children users near-field
0
Resp. tract Adults pop. far-field
0
Resp. tract Children pop. far-field
0
GI tract Adult users near-field
0
GI tract Children users near-field
0
GI tract Adults pop. far-field
0
GI tract Children pop. far-field
0
Epidermis Adults users near-field
9.28E-07
Epidermis Children users near-field
0
C.4
Output from MOCLA Model
Table C.3 and C.4 depict the output from the MOLCA Model for DEHP and DINCH,
respectively. The highlighted output from the model are used in the PiF framework.
Table C.3: MOCLA Model output for DEHP
Phase Fractions
Value
Unit
Retardation factor (Ra)
9.96E+09
-
Fraction of total mass in air (fa)
1.00E-11
-
Fraction of total mass in water (leachate) phase (fw)
3.64E-06
-
Fraction of total mass in solid phase (fs)
1.00E+00
-
Fate routes (after specified time)
Value
Unit
Volume normalized diffusion equivalent gas flow (qD)
5.12E-02
yr−1
Concentration rate constant (k)
7.24E+04
-
Ctotal(t)/Ctotal(0)
6.46E-01
-
Fraction emitted to air (Fa)
1.98E-05
-
Fraction released to water (Fw)
2.21E-02
-
Fraction transformed (Flambda)
3.32E-01
-
==PAGE:85==
C.4 Output from MOCLA Model
75
Table C.4: MOCLA Landfill Model output for DINCH
Phase Fractions
Value
Unit
Retardation factor (Ra)
1.5E+09
-
Fraction of total mass in air (fa)
6.65E-11
-
Fraction of total mass in water (leachate) phase (fw)
9.17E-08
-
Fraction of total mass in solid phase (fs)
1.00E+00
-
Fate routes (after specified time)
Volume normalized diffusion equivalent gas flow (qD)
4.91E-02
yr−1
Concentration rate constant (k)
1.25E+02
-
Ctotal(t)/Ctotal(0)
9.95E-01
-
Fraction emitted to air (Fa)
1.61E-04
-
Fraction released to water (Fw)
6.86E-04
-
Fraction transformed (Flambda)
4.12E-03
-
==PAGE:86==
76
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX D
Raw data
D.1
Data Availability
Table D.1 illustrates the amount of data gathered, together with a comparison of data
availability for the chemicals.
Table D.1: Data accessibility for DEHP and DINCH. The percentages present how
much data DINCH is lacking
Data
DEHP
DINCH
%
Data
DEHP
DINCH
%
Physical state
3
3
0%
Carcinogenicity
10
2
80%
Molecular weight
1
2
-100%
Developmental toxicity
40
2
95%
Density
3
1
67%
Toxicity to reproduction
37
2
95%
Vapor pressure
11
2
82%
Nephrotoxicity
0
2
-100%
Melting point
6
0
100%
Endocrine toxicity
3
0
100%
Boling point
10
1
90%
Genotoxicity
1
0
100%
Water solubility
8
2
75%
Hepatotoxicity
2
0
100%
Octanol-water part
6
1
83%
Neurotoxicity
2
0
100%
Henry’s law constant
1
1
0%
Respirtory toxicity
5
0
100%
Aquaeous hydrolysis half-life
1
0
100%
Acute toxicity
5
4
20%
Atmospheric half-life
1
0
100%
Chronic toxicity
10
6
40%
Biomagnificationfactor (BMF)
2
0
100%
Total human toxicity
115
18
85%
Bioconcentration (BCF)
34
2
94%
Aquatic toxicity
81
5
94%
Aerobic half-life; soil
16
0
100%
Sediment toxicity
9
0
100%
Aerobic half-life; river water
2
1
50%
Terrestrial toxicity
15
1
93%
Aerobic half-life; groundwater
2
0
100%
Total ecotoxicity
105
6
94%
Screening tests; half-life sludge
13
0
100%
Aerobic half-life; activated sludge
1
0
100%
Aerobic half-life; watstewater
1
0
100%
Aerobic half-life; sewage sludge
9
0
100%
Aerobic half-life; river sediment
11
0
100%
Anaerobic half-life; slugde
2
0
100%
Anaerobic half-life; sediment
0
1
-100%
Anaerobic half-life; slugde acclimated
2
0
100%
Soil both anaerob, and aerob
32
1
97%
Octanol-carbon part [KOC]
13
2
85%
Photodegradation
1
0
100%
Mineralisation rates
2
0
100%
Photolysis
1
1
0%
Phototransformation in air
1
1
0%
Phototransformation in soil
1
0
100%
Hydroxyl radical reaction rate constant
1
1
0%
==PAGE:88==
78
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX E
USEtox Abbreviations
E.1
Abbreviations used for USEtox Results
Table E.1: List of abbreviations used for describing the emission compartments (M.
Huijbregts et al., 2010)
Abbreviation
Explanation
airU
Urban air at the continental scale
airC
Rural air at the continental scale
fr.waterC
Freshwater at the continental scale
seawaterC
Coastal sea water at the continental scale
nat.soilC
Natural soil at the continental scale
agr.soilC
Agricultural soil at the continental scale
airG
Rural air at the global scale
fr.waterG
Freshwater at the global scale
oceanG
Ocean at the global scale
nat.soilG
Natural soil at the global scale
agr.soilG
Agricultural soil at the global scale
==PAGE:90==
80
==PAGE:91==
==PAGE:92==
