==PAGE:1==
Numerical Modelling of Spudcan
Penetration for Offshore
Installations
Master’s Thesis, July 2018
Can MOLLAIBRAHIMOGLU
==PAGE:2==
CAN MOLLAIBRAHIMOGLU
Numerical Modelling of Spudcan
Penetration for Offshore Installations
Master’s Thesis, July 2018
Supervisors:
Varvara Zania, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
Lindita Kellezi, Phd. MSc. , GEO
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2018
==PAGE:3==
Numerical Modelling of Spudcan Penetration for Offshore Installations
This report was prepared by:
Can MOLLAIBRAHIMOGLU
Supervisor(s):
Varvara Zania, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
Lindita Kellezi, Phd. MSc. , GEO
DTU Civil Engineering
Geotechnical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period:
January 2018- July 2018
ECTS:
35
Education:
MSc
Field:
Off-shore Geotechnical Engineering
Class:
No conﬁdentiality
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for graduation
in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis, with the title "Numerical Modelling of Spudcan Penetration for Offshore Installations",
is a partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Civil Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark. The work of this thesis took place from January 2018 to July 2018 and
counts for 35 ECTS.
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor, Varvara Zania who guided me with her advice
during the weekly meetings. I am also grateful to my supervisor, Lindita Kellezi for inspiring me to pursue
this challenging thesis. In addition, thanks for giving me the opportunity to write my master thesis in
collaboration with GEO.
Furthermore, I would like to thank my team in Swire Blue Ocean to give me the opportunity to gain
experience and knowledge about site-speciﬁc assessments of Jack-up Vessels and meet with one of the
greatest Jack-up Vessel, Paciﬁc Orca.
I would like to acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of TEV-Garring Foundation throughout my master
study in DTU. I would not have this fascinating journey without their help. My sincere thanks also go to
my friends who have motivated me with their visits during my study in Copenhagen. Finally, I would like
to express my sincere appreciation for the continuous support and encouragement of my family. I would
like to dedicate this work to my beloved mother.
Kgs. Lyngby July 23, 2018
Can Mollaibrahimoglu- s161137
i
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
With an increase in the demand for the sustainable energy resources, offshore wind farm industry becomes
one of the most popular and efﬁcient alternative energy solutions. Since higher wind speeds are available
offshore compared to on land, investment on the offshore wind turbines (OWT) increases day by day. As
stated in Tillessen (2010), the projection for 2020 estimate an offshore wind farm capacity of 40 GW in
European waters, which would provide 4% European Union’s demand for electricity. However, a special
focus is needed to reduce the cost of design, installation, and maintenance of OWT. During installation and
maintenance phases, several major problems have been encountered related with jack-up vessels because of
the unfavorable soil conditions. Thus, ensuring economic and safe use of jack-up units is highly important
to reduce the overall cost of OWT.
A rapid penetration of the special footing of Jack-up unit, known as spudcan, may occur during opera-
tion in a ground condition where a sand layer is overlying soft clay layer. This phenomenon is called punch-
through failure. The punch-through failure is a major problem during the installation of the jack-up units.
53% of all accidents of jack-up units is caused by punch-through failure (Hu, 2015). Punch-through analy-
sis has to be carried out before the installation phase of jack-up units. Estimation of potential punch-through
hazards requires to employ a complex ﬁnite element model in which failure stress dependent model of soil
layers are well deﬁned. Previous studies indicate that it is not possible to describe the full load-penetration
resistance proﬁle of a mobile jack-up spudcan footing penetrating a sand over clay by employing a small
strain FE model. Further studies have been done by Tho et al. (2012), Qiu and Henke (2011), Qui and
Grabe (2012) and Hu et al. (2014) prove that Coupled Eulerian-Lagrangian (CEL) technique available
in the commercial FEM program ABAQUS/CAE can be used to simulate complete penetration resistance
proﬁle and capture the continuous ﬂow patterns of the soil layers. Numerical studies on CEL approach has
also been validated by performing several centrifuge tests. According to the study done by Hu et al. (2015)
the CEL results ﬁt well with the centrifuge test results. It should be also noted that different constitutive
models are suggested by different studies and the performance of the numerical model is highly dependent
on the prescribed soil models for sand and clay layers.
The bearing capacity of the jack-up unit footing in a double-layered soil can be also estimated by
following several conventional methods recommended by the ’Guidelines for the Site Speciﬁc Assessment
of Mobile Jack-Up Units’ (SNAME, 2008) and the International Standard Organization (ISO) 19905-1:
2016. However, it should be noted that those standards do not consider the contribution of a sand plug on
the penetration resistance. The recent studies done by Hu et al. (2014) and Lee et al. (2013) etc. indicate
that the bearing capacity factor Nc does not include the sand plug effect for sand overlying clay penetrations
thereby current guidelines (ISO and SNAME) underestimate the bearing capacity of a spudcan.
Along with this study, both a small strain analysis and large deformation analysis will be investigated by
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
employing two commercial FEM program (PLAXIS-2D and ABAQUS/CAE). Numerical studies are going
to be compared to the available conventional methods. There are several important factors which affect
the model such as bearing capacity factor Nc, thickness of the sand layer Hs, the sand plug height Hplug,
the undrained shear strength of the underlying clay cu, the stiffness of the upper sand layer, the backﬂow
of the sand layer and spudcan geometry. Inﬂuences of spudcan geometry on the continuous behaviour of
soil layers and penetration curve are going to be investigated by performing the large deformation analysis
in ABAQUS/Explicit. The robustness of the numerical methods and commercial FEM programs will be
determined along the study. Beside that, large penetration analysis of a circular footing will be carried out
to investigate the inﬂuence of the roughness factor and the bearing capacity factor of the clay.
==PAGE:7==
Table of Content
1
Introduction and hypothesis
1
1.1
Background and Problem Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives and Scope of Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Thesis Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Background on Spudcan Penetration
7
2.1
Conventional Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Numerical Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
Experimental Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3
Large Penetration Analysis in Homogeneous Soil
29
3.1
Numerical Model in ABAQUS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Penetration in Sand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Penetration in Clay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4
Spudcan Penetration Analysis Sand Overlying Clay
41
4.1
Introduction to the Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Application of Conventional Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
SSFE Analysis with Abaqus/Explicit Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4
LDFE analysis with CEL Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.5
Numerical Model in Plaxis 2D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
4.6
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
5
Comparison of Centrifuge Test with CEL
97
5.1
Centrifuge Test conducted for analysis of a circular footing penetrated into sand overlying
clay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
5.2
Numerical Modelling of the circular footing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
5.3
Conventional Analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
5.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
6
Conclusion and Recommendation for further Research
103
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
6.2
Summary of ﬁndings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
TABLE OF CONTENT
6.3
Recommendation for future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
108
Appendices
109
A Benchmark Study
111
A.1
Numerical Analysis of a Strip Footing in Ottawa Sand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
A.2
Numerical Analysis of a Strip Footing in Cohesive Soil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
121
Nomenclature
127
Bibliography
129
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction and hypothesis
1.1
Background and Problem Description
In the last two decades, the number of off-shore wind turbine (OWT) projects has rapidly increased due
to the high demand for renewable energy resources. Especially, countries in the northern part of Europe
(e.g. Denmark, the United Kingdom) invest more in off-shore wind energy and currently, they produce a
signiﬁcant amount of energy from OWFs. Installation and maintenance phase of the OWT requires mobile
jack-up units to build the OWT at a desired location safely (see Figure 1.1).
Figure 1.1: Jack-up Vessel, OWT installation process, Swire Blue Ocean 2010
Jack-up units are self-elevating mobile units commonly used in the offshore industry. These units are
capable of working in deep water and they consist of a buoyant hull and three to six movable legs. Each
leg is formed from a lattice of K-shaped trusses made of reinforced steel tubes or alternatively, it can be a
circular steel tube. The legs can be jacked up and down by using the jacking system with the self-weight of
the unit. The jack-up units are supported in the seabed with a special footing called spudcans. Spudcans are
broadly circular or polygonal shape with diameters between 10 to 25m (see Figure 1.2) but they can have
1
==PAGE:10==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND HYPOTHESIS
a rectangular shape as well. It should be note that the footing shape has a signiﬁcant effect on penetration
resistance and associated soil deformation mechanisms (Hu et al., 2015).
Figure 1.2: Different Spudcan Geometries, (ISO 2016)
In order to ensure that environmental loads (e.g. wave load) acting on the jack-up units do not cause
any stability problem during the operation phase, additional load is introduced to the spudcan foundation
by pumping the sea water into the ballast tanks during preloading phase. After the legs penetrate into the
seabed further, the ballast tank is emptied and a required air gap is introduced by raising the level of the
hull before the operation phase starts. In order to avoid potentially hazardous problems during installation,
operation and extraction phases of the jack-up units, a site-speciﬁc assessment (SSA) needs to be done.
As explained previously, preloading check is a part of SSA which is published in SNAME (2008) and
ISO 19905-1:2016. However, the guidelines do not include adequate information to analyze the bearing
capacity of a doubled layer or multi-layered soil.
There are several geotechnical challenges regarding the stability of the jack-up units. Existing guidance
(ISO and SNAME) contain information about analysis/assessment approach in regards issues such as punch
through, bearing failure and settlement, uneven seabed, scour, footprint, seaﬂoor instability, mudslide,
seabed slide, liquefaction, shallow gas and others. 53% of all incidents are caused by punch-through failure
and most of them occurred during preloading phase (MSL Engineering Limited 2004). Figure 1.3 indicates
the cause of incidents in percentage.
==PAGE:11==
1.1. BACKGROUND AND PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
3
Figure 1.3: The percentage of causes of jack-up incidents (MSL Engineering Limited 2004)
The phenomenon, called punch-through failure occurs when an immediate reduction in penetration
resistance of spudcans cause a large displacement of the leg and eventually, the jack-up units may collapse
or overturn. It basically happens when the preload exceeds the available soil bearing capacity. Punch-
through accidents may take place during the installation of jack-up units mostly in a site where the soil
stratigraphy consists of sand overlying clay. This is due to the fact that bearing capacity of the sand layer
suddenly drops because of the overlying relatively soft layer. Figure 1.4 shows a typical bearing capacity
proﬁle of a spudcan along penetration depth. Punch-through failure may occur during preloading or storm
overload which is higher than preloading.
Figure 1.4: A typical load-penetration proﬁle in sand-clay-sand soil. dpeak and dpunch, penetration depth
at peak bearing capacity and punch through depth, respectively (Hu et al., 2015a).
==PAGE:12==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND HYPOTHESIS
Besides the described scenarios, the movement of seabed soils by currents or waves (scour) may cause
punch-through failure as well. Especially, when the spudcan only penetrates into ﬁrst few meters of sand,
the risk of potential punch-through failure has increased because of the seabed scouring. Figure 1.5 indi-
cates the development of scour and punch through failure.
Figure 1.5: Punch-through failure caused by seabed scouring (RenewableUK 2013)
In order to avoid and assess the potential punch-through failure of the footings, the ultimate or peak
bearing capacity (qpeak) should be monitored precisely (Ullah and Yuxia Hu, 2017). In order to achieve the
full penetration proﬁle of a spudcan in a double-layered soil, an advanced FEM program needs to be used.
1.2
Objectives and Scope of Study
Main focus of this thesis is to investigate spudcan penetration behaviour in sand overlying clay and par-
ticular attention is given to the punch-through failure. By applying different conventional methods and
performing numerical analysis in the commercial FEM programs, the full penetration curve of the spudcan
is predicted.
The problem is approached step wise, ﬁrstly, the behaviour of the footing in homogeneous soil is an-
alyzed and then the double layered soil stratigraphy is taken into account. The objectives of the present
study can be speciﬁed as follows
• Discussing pros and cons of different conventional methods including: Projected Area Method,
Punching Shear Method, GEO (Geotechnical Consultant Company) In-house Method and Hu et al.
Method (2015)
• Investigating the robustness and efﬁciency of numerical methods and commercial FEM programs
• Inﬂuence of the spudcan geometry on the continuous ﬂow pattern of the soil layers and the bearing
capacity curve,
• Analyzing the effect of roughness factor between the spudcan and the sand on the bearing capacity
• Validating the bearing capacity factor for homogeneous clay layer
• Comparison between Wished-in Place Method and CEL method
• Veriﬁcation of the centrifuge test result with CEL and conventional methods
==PAGE:13==
1.3. THESIS OUTLINE
5
1.3
Thesis Outline
The thesis consists of 4 main parts: a literature review on spudcan penetration, large penetration analysis
in the homogeneous soil, spudcan penetration analysis on sand overlying clay and lastly a comparison of
centrifuge test with numerical and conventional analyses.
In Chapter 2, the bearing capacity theory is discussed for the homogeneous sand and clay layer and then
the methods derived for the bearing capacity of a spudcan on sand overlying clay have provided. Starting
from the basis of FEM analysis, SSFE and LDFE methods have been introduced in this chapter as well.
Furthermore, experimental studies including centrifuge tests have been mentioned and some parametric
study results are represented.
Chapter 3 starts with the basis of a commercial FEM program, Abaqus/CAE and then the capacity of a
circular footing in homogeneous soil is investigated by using one of the LDFE methods, called CEL. The
effect of roughness factor on the sand bearing capacity and the bearing capacity factor for clay are analyzed.
The ﬁndings from this study are compared with the results from previous researches and standards.
Chapter 4 presents a bearing capacity problem of a spudcan on sand overlying clay in which a rapid
leg penetration (punch-through failure) is a signiﬁcant problem. The problem is analyzed by applying the
conventional methods from standards, a previous research and in-house method from GEO. It should be
noted that the real spudcan geometry has a rectangular shape but it is simpliﬁed as a circular geometry in
the conventional methods. Pros and cons of the methods have been discussed in detail. Potential punch-
through failure has been also investigated by performing numerical analysis including SSFE, wished-in
place method and LDFE analysis method. In order to obtain the effect of the spudcan geometry on the soil
behaviour and the bearing capacity, three different spudcan geometry have been analyzed by performing
CEL method in Abaqus/Explicit. The continuous behaviour of the soil and failure mechanisms observed
from FEM results are summarized. Differences between the penetration curves have been assessed. Addi-
tionally, another commercial geotechnical FEM program, Plaxis 2D is used to determine the peak bearing
capacity of the spudcan. The option called ’Updated mesh’ is selected and the inﬂuence on the bearing
capacity has been checked and compared with the pure Lagrangian analysis in Abaqus/Explicit.
Chapter 5 contains a comparative study of a centrifuge test performed in DTU and numerical analysis
with CEL. In the test, a circular footing resting on sand overlying clay is analyzed and the bearing capacity
of the footing is obtained throughout the penetration. The test result is validated with the penetration curve
obtained from the numerical analysis and conventional methods.
Chapter 6 summarizes the main conclusions and ﬁndings from the study and provides further recom-
mendations for future study.
Lastly, the Appendix part contains two benchmark studies used for investigating the robustness of com-
mercial FEM program for the bearing capacity problem of a strip footing resting on homogeneous soil. The
outcomes from the study has been discussed and compared with the previous ﬁndings.
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Background on Spudcan Penetration
This chapter consists of a literature review on the bearing capacity problem of a spudcan in the homoge-
neous soil and double layer, sand overlying clay stratigraphy. The review details the conventional methods
and numerical modeling techniques to investigate the full penetration curve of a spudcan. In the last part of
the section, the ﬁndings from the centrifuge tests are mentioned.
2.1
Conventional Methods
In order to understand the idea behind the spudcan bearing capacity problems, ﬁrstly, the basis of the
bearing capacity theory is going be investigated in this section. In the following subsections, the bearing
capacity theories of a spudcan in a single layer and sand overlying clay layer will be discussed by focusing
on ISO 19905-1:2016 and previous studies. The last part of this chapter will provide a brief conclusion on
the different methods.
2.1.1
Bearing Capacity Theory
The classic bearing capacity theory was developed by Buisman, Caquot, and Terzaghi in 1943. General
shear failure mechanism of soil was described with three different regions and it is mainly valid for shallow
foundations. Figure A.3 illustrates the general shear failure mechanism of a strip footing. Based on the
Terzaghi’s assumption, bearing capacity of the shallow footing has been mainly created by a downward
impending motion from the triangular zone (DHE). When the radial shear zone (DHG and EHI) has
been pushed by triangular zone, eventually, the Rankine passive zones (DGC and EIF) create the soil
resistance by moving upward (Helwany, 2007).
7
==PAGE:16==
8
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND ON SPUDCAN PENETRATION
Figure 2.1: General Shear Failure Mechanism of a strip footing (Helwany, 2007)
One should also note that Terzaghi’s general bearing theory does not consider the soil shear resistance
above the foundation level. Considering the assumptions that are made, Terzaghi’s equation for the bearing
capacity is derived as (Terzaghi, 1943)
qu = c′Nc + qNq + 1
2γBNγ
(2.1)
The equation is mainly deﬁned for the strip footing of width B, an effective unit weight of γ, a friction
angle φ, and a cohesion c. q is basically overburden pressure acting upon the soil surface. Nc, Nq, and Nγ
are the bearing capacity factors are shown below
Nq = eπ tan(φ′) tan2(45 + φ′
2 )
(2.2)
Nc = (Nq −1) cot(φ′)
(2.3)
Nγ = 1.5(Nq −1) tan(φ′)
(2.4)
The bearing capacity factors depends on the shearing friction angle of soil, φ.
The bearing capacity theory was extending by applying 5 factors to the original equation (Hansen,
1970). These factors are shape factor s, depth factor d, inclination factor i, base inclination factors b,
ground inclination factor g. With considering the factors, the equation becomes as follows
qu = c′Ncscdcicbcgc + qNqsqdqiqbqgq + 1
2γBNγsγdγiγbγgγ
(2.5)
The ultimate bearing capacity theory stated by Hansen will be interpreted in the next chapter to inves-
tigate the bearing capacity of a spudcan in sand overlying clay layer. Because qu in sand overlying clay is
expected to be found between the bearing capacity in the sand, qsand and clay, qclay. (Teh, 2007).
2.1.2
Bearing Capacity in Clays
The ultimate vertical capacity of a foundation in a single clay layer of uniform shear strength is proposed
by Skempton,
QV
A = suNcscdc + p′
0
(2.6)
==PAGE:17==
2.1. CONVENTIONAL METHODS
9
where p′
0 is the effective overburden pressure at depth, D, and dc is the bearing capacity depth factor,
dc = 1 + 0.2( D
B ) ≤1.5. For circular footings, the product of the bearing capacity factor, Nc, shape factor
sc adn the depth factor, dc is suggested to be 6 as an initial value (ISO 2016). Since the bearing capacity
factor is signiﬁcantly affected by the gradient of shear strength, embedment ratio and roughness factor (the
ratio of the maximum shear stress that can be mobilized at the cone surface to undrained shear strength),
Nc sc dc has been provided by Houlsby and Martin (2003) for increasing shear strength with depth in
clay (ISO 2016). The total bearing capacity factors for rough spudcans has been suggested including the
assumptions that cone angles β between 60 and ﬂat plate of 180, embedment depths, D, between 0 and 2.5
diameters and values of shear strength gradients ρB/sum between 0 and 5, where ρ is the rate of increase
in undrained shear strength with depth. (G. Houlsby and Martin, 2003)
Table 2.1: Bearing Capacity Factors for a rough circular plate on homogeneous clay (G. Houlsby and
Martin, 2003)
Embedment Depth Ratio
Bearing Factor
D/B
Nc sc dc
0
6
0.1
6.3
0.25
6.6
0.5
7
1
7.7
≥2.5
9
As stated in ISO 2016, the Houlsby and Martin method provides a good lower bound load-penetration
prediction for deeper penetrations, on the other hand, the Hossain et al. method gives a better upper bound
load-penetration prediction. In Chapter 3, Nc factor developed by Houlsby and Martin will be validated by
carrying out a large deformation analysis in homogeneous clay.
2.1.3
Bearing Capacity in Sand
As it has been indicated previously, Brinch Hansen equation is suggested to be employed for the bear-
ing capacity calculations in sand (ISO 2016). Thereby, the gross ultimate bearing capacity of a circular
foundation in sand can be expressed as,
QV
A = 1
2γ′dγNγB + p′
0dqNq
(2.7)
where dγ indicates the depth factor on surcharge for drained soils, dγ = 1. The depth factor for the
drained soils, dq is provided as follows,
dq = 1 + 2tanφ′(1 −sinφ′)2arctan(D/B)
(2.8)
where D is penetration depth and B stands for the width of the foundation. Note that theoretical values
of Nγ and Nq are provided by Cassidy and Houlsby (2002)using the slip line method for circular footings.
Nγ and Nq can be calculated with considering the effect of cone apex angles (60 to 180), spudcan soil
interface roughness coefﬁcients (α = tanδ/tanφ′) from 0.6 to 1 and soil friction angles from 20 to 40.
The bearing capacity factors with various apex and friction angles and roughness factor can be obtained
from ISO 19905-1:2016 Annex E.2. It is important to mention that Nγ has a non-linear relationship with
the friction angle of a sand so that it can not be found by making linear interpolation.
==PAGE:18==
10
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND ON SPUDCAN PENETRATION
2.1.4
Bearing Capacity in Sand Overlying Clay
Prediction of the bearing capacity of a spudcan in sand overlying clay is directly related to failure mech-
anism of soil underneath the spudcan foundation. Three different foundation failure mechanisms can be
considered in layered soil. These are general shear, squeezing and punch through failure mechanisms.
General shear failure mechanism generally occurs when soil strength of subsequent layers do not change
signiﬁcantly. In the case that a soft clay is overlying a signiﬁcantly stronger layer, squeezing failure mecha-
nism can initiate. Lastly, punch-through occurs when spudcan penetrates into strong layer overlying a weak
layer in which a small additional penetration can result in a signiﬁcant reduction in the bearing capacity of
a spudcan. Punch through is being recognized as one of the most common hazards during spudcan instal-
lations and operation (Osborne and Paisley, 2002). Therefore, different simpliﬁed conceptual models have
been developed to obtain the bearing capacity of a spudcan on sand overlying clay. It is also important to
consider the effect of backﬁll during the penetration of a spudcan. Backﬂow basically describes the ﬂow of
soil from beneath the spudcan around the sides and onto the top. Regardless of the soil failure mechanisms,
backﬁll can increase penetration during preloading, on the other hand, it reduces the vertical capacity when
it occurs after preloading. The uplift resistance always increases with increasing the backﬁll. Backﬂow is
more likely to occur at deeper penetrations and in clays and it can barely take place when the soil layer is
consisting of stiff clay or granular materials.
Figure 2.2: Spudcan Bearing Failure Mechanisms (ISO 2016)
The most common methods to investigate bearing capacity of a spudcan on sand overlying clay are
the projected area method (Craig and Chua, 1990) and the punching shear method (Meyerhof and Hanna,
1980).
==PAGE:19==
2.1. CONVENTIONAL METHODS
11
2.1.4.1
Projected Area Method
The projected area method (load spread) is based on the assumption that the load is spreading through the
sand layer and therefore bearing capacity is calculated considering an enlarged ﬁctitious footing at the clay
boundary. The shear resistance mobilized in the sand layer is taken into account by enlarging the clay
bearing capacity. An equivalent diameter of the ﬁctitious footing is expressed,
B′ = B + 2H
ns
(2.9)
where ns is proposed to be a range between 3 and 5. According to ISO (2016), the contribution of the
weight between the base of ﬁctitious footing and actual footing should be taken into account and the weight
can be calculated,
W = 0.25π(B + 2H
ns
)2Hγ′
(2.10)
then the total capacity can be found as shown in Equation 2.11
QV = Qub −W
(2.11)
where Qub can be calculated by following Equation 2.6. Please note that in case of forming backﬁll
around the spudcan, a submerged weight of backﬁll needs to be extracted from the total capacity.
Figure 2.3: Projected Area Method (ISO 2016)
==PAGE:20==
12
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND ON SPUDCAN PENETRATION
2.1.4.2
Punching Shear Method
The punching shear method includes the shear resistance mobilized along a simpliﬁed vertical failure plane
in the sand layer and the bearing capacity of the underlying clay. The main difference from the projected
area method is that the friction resistance on the slip surface is directly considered in the punching shear
method. The current guideline, ISO 2016 also includes the punching method to assess punch-through in
sand overlying clay. As stated by Meyerhof (1980), the ultimate bearing capacity can be calculated as
follows
QV = Qu,b −AHγ′ + 2AH(Hγ′ + 2p′
0)Ks tan( φ
B )
(2.12)
where Qu,b refers to Equation 2.6 and the punching shear coefﬁcient, Ks varies with the ratio of the
strength of the clay layer to the sand layer and the shearing resistance angle of sand layer. The relation can
be found in Figure A.9.3-12 in ISO (2016). Ks value is basically increasing with increase in the strength
of the clay layer. Because of the limited range of Ks values, it is necessary to make interpolation or
extrapolation. Alternatively, a lower bound value of Kstanφ′ = 3su
Dγ′
s is recommended in SNAME (2008).
Figure 2.4: Punching Shear Method (Hu et al., 2014)
2.1.5
Other Prediction Methods
Besides the methods proposed by ISO (2016), several methods have been derived from different studies.
Some of them is going to be mentioned in this part of the thesis.
Okamura et al. (1998) proposed a limit equilibrium method to investigate the bearing capacity of a
footing in sand overlying clay. The basis of the method is based on the combination of the theories of
the load spread method and the punching shear method. The method is validated by conducting series of
centrifuge tests. However, the centrifuge model does not consider the stress level dependency of friction
angle since the effects from the footing size and the undrained shear strength of the underlying clay layer
are not corporate (Hu, 2015). It has been proved that the method overestimates the peak bearing capacity.
In the last decade, Teh (2007), Lee et al. (2013) and Hu (2015) has performed centrifuge tests and
numerical analyses to estimate full penetration resistance proﬁle of a spudcan on sand overlying clay. In
accordance with the results from numerical and experimental studies, different failure mechanisms and
penetration resistance prediction methods have been proposed.
==PAGE:21==
2.1. CONVENTIONAL METHODS
13
2.1.5.1
Teh Method (2007)
Teh (2007) analyze the bearing capacity of a spudcan on sand overlying clay into three phases: initial
penetration capacity, the peak bearing capacity in the sand layer and the bearing capacity in underlying
clay layer. The bearing capacity of the ﬁrst two phases is based on the strength of the upper sand layer and
underlying clay layer and the relative thickness of the sand layer to spudcan diameter. The bearing capacity
is inﬂuenced by the sand plug during the penetration into the underlying clay layer. Failure mechanisms for
the peak resistance and for underlying clay layer are illustrated in Figure 2.5 and 2.6 respectively.
Figure 2.5: Conceptual model for peak resistance
from Teh (2007)
Figure 2.6: Soil Capacity in underlying clay from Teh
(2007)
It should be noted that shearing is assumed to be along vertical plane until the full base is achieved
on the other hand logarithmic spiral failure surface is proposed for the peak resistance failure mechanism.
According to Teh (2007), peak bearing capacity can be obtained by following Equation 2.13
qpeak = Qs,peak + Qc,peak −Wpeak
A
(2.13)
where Qs,peak, Qc,peak and Wpeak represent the vertical component of the shear resistance developed
along the upper sand layer, clay bearing capacity and the weight of the sand wedge trapped between spudcan
level and sand-clay interface respectively. Those can be calculated as follows,
Qs,peak = πγ′
sKp sin φ2 −w
cos φ2 cos w
[(dpeak + 1
2Heff)DHeff + dpeak tan wH2
eff + 2
3 tan wH3
eff]
(2.14)
where Kp is the coefﬁcient of passive earth pressure, φ2 is the reduced operative friction angle taken as
an average between φ1 and φcv, Heff is the distance between the spudcan level and the sand-clay interface
and w, r and R are the geometric parameters of the failure planes given in the design charts in Teh (2007).
Qc,peak = π(Ncsum + Hsγ′
s)[R2 −
0.5
R −r(2
3R3 + 1
3r3 −R2r)]
(2.15)
Wpeak = 1
3πHeff[(D
2 )2 + RD
2 + R2]γ′
s
(2.16)
As indicated in Figure 2.6, the failure mechanism in underlying clay is proposed based on the assump-
tion that considers spudcan and sand plug as a composite foundation. That basically shifts the design depth
from the spudcan base to sand plug base. Eventually, the bearing capacity in the underlying clay layer
becomes as follows,
qclay = subNc + 4suaαside(Hplug + hf)
D
+ γ′
cVf
A
(2.17)
==PAGE:22==
14
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND ON SPUDCAN PENETRATION
where Hplug is the height of the trapped sand plug, sub is the clay strength at the base of the composite
foundation, hf is the thickness of the spudcan at its widest section, sua is the average value of the shear
strength from d −hf to d + Hplug, αside is the side adhesion factor and Vf is the volume of the spudcan
body. The bearing capacity factor, Nc is determined by the equation proposed by Hossain et al. (2006).
Nc = 10(1 + 0.075d + Hplug
D
)
(2.18)
2.1.5.2
Lee et al. Method (2009-2013)
Lee et al. (2013) also developed a method to predict the peak resistance. Based on the method, qpeak is
formed by frictional resistance along the sides of the sand frustum and the bearing capacity of the underlying
clay.
Figure 2.7: Conceptual model for peak resistance
from Lee et al. (2013a)
Figure 2.8: Soil Capacity in underlying clay from Lee
et al. (2013a)
The resulting equation for the peak bearing capacity is expressed as,
qpeak = (Nc0sum+q0)(1+ 2Hs
D tan ψ)E∗+
γ′
sD
2 tan ψ(E∗+ 1)[1−(1−2Hs
D E∗tan ψ)(1+ 2Hs
D tan ψ)E∗]
(2.19)
where ψ is a dispersion angle which is equal to the dilatation angle of the sand layer. Nc0 is the bearing
capacity factor of the clay at the foundation base for circular footing, which is derived by G. Houlsby and
Martin (2003),
Nc0 = 6.34 + 0.56k(D + 2Hs tan ψ)
sum
(2.20)
where sum, shear strength is increasing linearly with depth and k represents the gradient of the linear
increment. E∗is the term to simply the algebra,
E∗= 2[1 + DF (tanφ∗
tanψ −1)]
(2.21)
where DF is the distribution factor which empirical factor based on the centrifuge test results. The
factor is derived for ﬂat footing and spudcan. The equation for ﬂat footings,
DF = 0.726 −0.219Hs
D for(Hs
D ≤1.12)
(2.22)
the equation for spudcan (13o, conical underside),
==PAGE:23==
2.1. CONVENTIONAL METHODS
15
DF = 1.333 −0.889Hs
D for(Hs
D ≤0.9)
(2.23)
as it can be observed from the equation, the distribution factor in spudcan gives higher magnitude
compared to the ﬂat footing, it is because spudcan can invoke higher stress than ﬂat footing (Hu, 2015).
The reduced friction angle, φ′ can be obtained as follows,
tan φ′ =
sin φ′ cos ψ
1 −sin φ′ sin ψ
(2.24)
The bearing capacity in the underlying clay can be calculated using the following expression,
qclay = Ncsub + γ′
cHfdn
(2.25)
where Hfdn is the total height of the footing and the sand plug. Nc is deﬁned for both the shallow
and deep mechanisms. The bearing capacity factor for the deep mechanisms is described with following
expression,
Nc = [1 −
1
2κ Hfdn
D
1 + κ dbase
D
](18.2
r
Hfdn
D
+ 0.7 −2)asHfdn
D
≤1.12anddbase
D
≥Hfdn
D
+ 0.5
(2.26)
where κ is the dimensionless strength increasing parameter for the underlying clay and the bearing
capacity factor for the shallow mechanism,
Nc = 4dbase
D
+ 9asdbase
D
≥Hfdn
D
(2.27)
2.1.5.3
Hu et al. Method (2014-2015)
Hu et al. (2014) extend the Lee et al. (2013) method by accounting for the embedment depth in the
mobilization of qpeak and including the different spudcan geometries and sand densities in the bearing
capacity equations. However, it should be noted that the distribution factor DF was only calibrated for both
very dense sand and medium dense sand and footing conical angles from 0 degree to 21 degree (Hu et al.,
2014). As suggested in the previous methods, the depth of the peak bearing capacity is taken as 0.12 Hs
on top of the distance between the tip and full base of the spudcan according to the centrifuge test results
(Teh, 2007). The peak bearing capacity for the spudcan is expressed as it is indicated in Equation 2.28.
(2.28)
qpeak = (Nc0sum + q0 + 0.12γ′
sHs)(1 + 1.76Hs
D
tan ψ)E∗
+
γ′
sD
2 tan ψ(E∗+ 1)[1 −(1 −1.76Hs
D
E∗tan ψ)(1 + 1.76Hs
D
tan ψ)E∗]
where Nc0, bearing capacity factor of clay at the base level of a circular foundation is expressed as,
Nc0 = 6.34 + 0.56k(D + 1.76Hstan(ψ)
sum
(2.29)
The parameter for the simpliﬁed algebra, E∗is deﬁned the same as shown in Equation 2.21, whereas
the distribution factor DF is formulated as follows for footing conical angles from 0 degree to 21 degree.
DF = 0.642(Hs
D )−0.576for(0.16 ≤Hs
D ≤1.0)
(2.30)
DF = 0.623(Hs
D )−0.174for(0.21 ≤Hs
D ≤1.12)
(2.31)
==PAGE:24==
16
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND ON SPUDCAN PENETRATION
The equation of bearing capacity for the underlying clay includes the inﬂuence of the sand plug and
height of the sand plug is approximated as 0.9Hs, and the simpliﬁed Nc factor based on an expression back-
calculated from large deformation FE analyses of full penetration process. The second term of Equation
2.32 represents the submerged weight of the sand plug.
qclay = Ncsu0 + 0.9Hsγ′
c(0.16 ≤Hs
D ≤1.0)
(2.32)
where the bearing capacity factor, Nc estimated as follows,
Nc = 11Hs
D + 10.5(0.16 ≤Hs
D ≤1.12)
(2.33)
Conceptual models of soil failure mechanisms in the sand layer and the underlying clay layer, proposed
by Hu et al. 2015 is illustrated in Figure 2.9 and 2.10.
Figure 2.9: Conceptual model for peak resistance
from Hu et.al (2014)
Figure 2.10: Soil Capacity in underlying clay from
Hu et.al (2014)
2.1.6
Conclusion
The basis of different conventional methods and different failure mechanisms for the punch-through has
been discussed in the previous subsections. According to the laboratory and numerical studies have been
carried out in literature studies indicate that ISO methods signiﬁcantly underestimate the peak resistance in
the sand and the underlying clay. It is due to the fact that failure mechanism provided by the projected area
method and punching shear method are not fully representative and the methods do not consider the effect
of the sand plug which increases the bearing resistance in the underlying clay.
The method proposed by Hu et al. (2015) is basically modiﬁed from the method suggested by Lee et
al. (2013). The depth of the peak resistance is suggested to be 0.12Hs in Hu et al. and Teh method, on
the other hand, the peak resistance is achieved when the spudcan reaches the full base contact according
to the Lee et al method. Considering the Lee et al. method, the peak bearing capacity achieves when a
sand frustum with a dispersion angle is pushed into the underlying clay. The dispersion angle refers to
the mobilized dilatation angle of the sand. According to Teh method, the mechanism at the peak bearing
capacity is described such that the sand frustum is sheared along logarithmic spiral failure planes. It should
be also noted that contribution of the underlying clay to the peak bearing capacity is assumed to decrease
linearly until a minimum value of 0.5qclay.
The methods are using the different approaches to obtain the bearing capacity factor to calculate the
spudcan resistance in the underlying clay layer. ISO methods employed the approach proposed by G.
Houlsby and Martin (2003), the Teh method uses the method derived by Hossain et al. (2006), the Lee
et al. carried out small-strain FE analyses to obtain Nc values and Hu et al. use simpliﬁed Nc equation
==PAGE:25==
2.1. CONVENTIONAL METHODS
17
estimated from large deformation FE analyses. The contribution of the sand plug to bearing capacity of the
underlying clay layer is considered in the methods except the methods provided by ISO guideline. There
are different estimations for the sand plug height, Hplug. For instance, the sand plug height is assumed
to be in the range of 0.75Hs and 0.9Hs according to Teh method on the other hand, Lee et al. method is
estimated to be in between 0.6Hs and 0.9Hs and lastly, the centrifuge tests were done by Hu et al. (2014)
indicates that it is 0.9Hs.
The methods developed by Teh, Hu et al. and Lee et al. are based on the centrifuge experimental data
and need to be validated against ﬁeld observations. As mentioned by Bienen et al. (2015), the methods
proposed by Teh and Lee et al. were assessed against a database of 20 centrifuge test results from different
studies and " the ratio of predicted to measured peak resistance was found to be 0.97 for the Teh method
and 1.07 for the Lee et al. method ". On the other hand, considering the same database, the punching shear,
and projected area methods gives ratios of 0.45 and 0.63 (Bienen et al., 2015).
Moreover, the experimental study performed by Hu et al. (2015a) includes a comparison between
different methods to obtain punch-through proﬁles. Different Hs/D ratios and the relative densities of
sand layer are considered for the experimental study. One of the result for the values of Hs/D = 0.78 and
ID = 92% is illustrated in Figure 2.11
Figure 2.11: Comparison of experimentally measured punch-through proﬁles with different calculation
methods (Hu et al., 2015a)
The results show that ISO methods signiﬁcantly underestimate the peak bearing capacity and bearing
capacity in the underlying clay layer. As stated before, one of the reasons of underestimation of the bearing
capacity of the underlying clay layer is that the effect of the sand plug is ignored. The Hu et al. and Lee
et al. methods ﬁt well with the experimental result however it should be noted that Lee et al. method over-
estimates bearing capacity of the underlying clay layer which results in an underestimated punch through
distance.
All in all, the methods provided in literature studies show good ﬁts with the experimental results how-
ever, ISO methods are still the most commonly used methods in the offshore industry. The new methods
need further validations and checks based on the site observations. In this study, Hu et al. method will be
==PAGE:26==
18
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND ON SPUDCAN PENETRATION
applied and compared to the numerical results, and other conventional methods.
2.2
Numerical Methods
As discussed in the previous section, spudcan penetration curve can be estimated during the preloading
through conducting different conventional methods. However, the conventional methods have several limi-
tations and the penetration curves obtained from the methods are not accurate enough. Throughout the last
decade, different numerical approaches have been suggested to monitor a spudcan progressive penetration.
In this part of the thesis, different numerical approaches have been discussed. To be able understand the
working principles of ﬁnite element programs, it is important to having information about basic ﬁnite el-
ement methodology. Therefore, the section starts with an introduction to ﬁnite element methodology and
then the author will give information on small strain ﬁnite element analysis and large deformation analysis
respectively. There are two commonly used commercial ﬁnite element programs to perform a spudcan pen-
etration analysis: Plaxis 2D and Abaqus CAE. However, it should be noted that it is not possible to obtain
full penetration curve of a spudcan by performing an analysis in Plaxis (SSFE), therefore author mainly
focuses on the large deformation analyses which be conducted by Abaqus/Explicit, CEL method.
Two different benchmark studies have been done to be able to get familiarized with interfaces of FEM
programs. The benchmark studies include the bearing capacity problem of a strip footing both in Ottawa
Sand and Clay layer. The problem has been solved with conducting conventional method, Plaxis Model and
different Abaqus Models (Implicit, Explicit and CEL). The problem description and results interpretations
can be found in Appendix A.1.
2.2.1
Introduction to Finite Element Methodology
In geotechnical engineering, there are three simple methods to identify the solution of geotechnical prob-
lems. These method are Limit Equilibrium, Stress Field Analysis and Limit Analysis (Potts and
Zdravkovic, 1999). These methods mainly assume an arbitrary failure surface for the soil. The results from
different methods can vary in a signiﬁcant range because of their limitations. Therefore, they are mainly
appropriate for the initial estimation of the design parameters. In order to obtain more accurate and detail
results for geotechnical designs, it is essential to employ numerical analysis. Finite difference and ﬁnite
element analysis are two main numerical approaches have been applied. Especially, with an appropriate
constitutive model and algorithms, it is possible to predict complex soil behaviours by employing suitable
numerical analysis software.
One should be aware that it is crucial to understand the principles of theoretical solutions in order to be
capable of interpreting input and output parameters of FEM.
Getting a reliable theoretical solution to a geotechnical problem mainly depends on four conditions:
Equilibrium, Compatibility, Material Constitutive behaviour and Boundary Conditions.
Equilibrium Condition
Stress ﬁelds in a continuum media can vary in a way to indicate how the forces are transmitted. Stresses
on an element are composed of 9 components; three components of the stresses in the Cartesian coordinate
system and six tensor stresses. Figure 2.12 illustrates the stress on a typical element.
==PAGE:27==
2.2. NUMERICAL METHODS
19
Figure 2.12: Stresses on a element (Zania, 2017)
Stresses must satisfy the boundary conditions and equilibrium equations deﬁned by Timoshenko and
Goodier, 1951. Including self-weight of an element, stresses in soil mass must obey following equilibrium
equations, (Timoshenko, 1951).
∂σx
∂x + ∂τyx
∂y
+ ∂τzx
∂z
+ γ = 0
(2.34)
∂τxy
∂x + ∂σy
∂y + ∂τzy
∂z
= 0
(2.35)
∂τxz
∂x + ∂τyz
∂y + ∂σz
∂z = 0
(2.36)
where γ is self-weight of the element.
Compatibility Condition
Theoretical solution of a geotechnical problem must also satisfy compatibility rule. A model can’t
include any discontinues (such as overlapping of a material or holes) in accordance with the compatibility
rule. This rule is expressed by using the strains (Timoshenko, 1951).
εx = −∂u
∂x; εy = −∂v
∂y ; εz = −∂w
∂z
(2.37)
γxy = −∂v
∂x −∂u
∂y ; γyz = −∂w
∂y −∂v
∂z ; γxz = −∂w
∂x −∂u
∂z
(2.38)
where the deformations are deﬁned with functions of u, v, and z in the x, y and z directions.
In conclusion, considering the equilibrium and compatibility equations, there are 15 unknowns (6
stresses+ 6 strains+ 3 displacements) and 9 equations (3 equilibrium+ 6 compatibility). In order to get
6 required equations, constitutive behaviour should be employed.
Constitutive Behaviour
Constitutive behaviour basically describes the strain-stress behaviour of the soil. For linear elastic
material, the matrix, that expresses the constitutive behaviour, includes Young’s modulus, E and Poisson’s
ratio µ on the other hand, when the soil behaves in a nonlinear manner, the matrix would mainly depend on
the relationship between stress and strain. Constitutive matrix expresses as follows,
∆σ = [D]∆ε
(2.39)
==PAGE:28==
20
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND ON SPUDCAN PENETRATION
where [D] describes the constitutive behaviour of the soil. Expression 2.39 includes 6 equations that are
needed for the analytic solution. In conclusion, FEM model highly relies on the ability of the constitutive
model to represent real soil behaviour and boundary conditions of the model.
Finite Element Theory
In FEM, element boundaries are deﬁned by nodes and element equations can be basically described by
an equilibrium between the vector of incremental element nodal forces and multiplication of the element
stiffness matrix and incremental nodal displacement.
[KE]∆dE = ∆RE
(2.40)
where KE express the element stiffness matrix, ∆dE, is the vector of incremental element nodal dis-
placements and ∆RE is the vector of incremental nodal forces. By combining the element equations, global
equations can be derived as follows,
[KG]∆dG = ∆RG
(2.41)
The global equations can be modiﬁed by deﬁning the boundary conditions, for instance, the vector of
incremental nodal forces can be updated by introducing a loading or a displacement can change the vector
of nodal displacements. By employing Equation 2.41, the displacements at the nodal points can be obtained
and eventually, strains and stresses can be evaluated. Please note that sufﬁcient displacement conditions
must be introduced to obtain any rigid body modes of deformation otherwise the global stiffness matrix
would be singular and the equation can’t be solved (Potts and Zdravkovic, 1999). One should be also aware
that such large system of numerical equation can’t be solved easily so that iterative solution techniques
can be employed to ﬁnd nodal displacements. Once the nodal displacements determined, strains can be
evaluated by following Equations 2.42
∆ε = [B]∆dn
(2.42)
where the matrix B is the derivatives of the shape function and ∆d is the nodal displacements for a
single element. Combination of the constitutive matrix, [D] and the strains will give the stress.
∆σ = [D]∆ε
(2.43)
In order to solve the element stiffness matrix, a numerical integration method should be employed. One
of the integration schemes that is commonly used in FE analysis is Gaussian integration. The cost of an
analysis is mainly based on integration order which can be modiﬁed in accordance with the element types.
Generally, in nonlinear problems, the element stiffness matrix can be determined by using stresses and
strains which are determined at the previous increment (Potts and Zdravkovic, 1999).
In order to simplify the calculation steps of analysis, it is necessary to idealize the geometry and bound-
ary condition of the problem. Depends on the geometric characteristic of the problem, the constitutive
matrix can be simpliﬁed. For instance, strip footings, retaining walls have longer length compared to other
two dimensions so that these problems can be treated as plane strain problems. Besides of that, in some
cases, problems can include structural members with rotational symmetry such as monopiles, spudcans, cir-
cular footings. In those kinds of situations, displacement in circumferential displacement can be neglected
and the strains can be reduced as proven by (Timoshenko, 1951)
εr = −∂u
∂r ; εz = −∂v
∂z ; εθ = −u
r ; γrz = −∂v
∂r −∂u
∂z ; γrθ = γzθ = 0
(2.44)
==PAGE:29==
2.2. NUMERICAL METHODS
21
The accuracy of a Finite Element Analysis depends on element type and mesh design. Two element
types: triangular and quadrilateral elements can be adapted into geotechnical problems. Depends on the
boundary shapes and material interfaces, a number of nodes of the elements can be modiﬁed. Boundary
conditions, material properties and geometry of the problem need to be taken into account while designing
mesh.
2.2.2
Small Strain Finite Element Analysis
Several numerical analysis has been performed to investigate the full penetration curve of a spudcan on
sand overlying clay. The consequences of the analysis provide insight into failure mechanism of the soil.
However, since the punch-through failure analysis takes place at large penetration depth, traditional small
strain FE programs are not capable to capture the punch-through failure. It is due to the fact that the
elements on the corner of the spudcan become highly distorted under the signiﬁcant deformations and
material boundaries can’t be properly deﬁned in the SSFE models. The SSFE analysis is basically based
on the Lagrangian algorithm.
Plaxis has been used by Lee (2009) to derive the bearing capacity factor when spudcan penetrates into
the underlying clay layer and the range of the sand plug height is estimated. The failure mechanism of a
spudcan penetrating on sand overlying clay was also monitored by using Plaxis 2D and Lee (2009) indicated
the relationship between the inclination of the shear plane of the sand layer and the dilation angle, ψ.
Press Replace (PR) Method
The "Press-Replace" (PR) technique is a small strain geometry update procedure, introduced by Engin
et al. (2015). In the method, the material properties of the penetrated volume are updated at the beginning
of each stage which results in changing of the global stiffness matrix so that it is not necessary to update
the mesh. The analysis can be performed by creating the 2-D axisymmetric model in Plaxis. The method
can’t capture soil backﬂow, thereby the results from the model would not be reliable when the penetration
depth exceeds the critical cavity depth.
2.2.3
Numerical Modelling: Large Deformation FE Analysis
The geotechnical problems involving large deformations can be analyzed by 3 suggested methods: RITSS,
ALE, and CEL. Those methods are previously applied to the large deformation problems of a spudcan.
Element distortion problems encounter in SSFE analysis can be avoided in LDFE methods and the methods
can reﬂect the natural development of the failure mechanism of the soil. The bearing capacity of the soil
media can be also estimated throughout the penetration. The theoretical basis and implementation of the
methods are summarized in the following sections.
Remeshing and Interpolation Technique with Small Strain (RITSS) Method
The large deformation analysis can be carried out by following RITSS (Remeshing and Interpolation
Technique with Small Strain) method. The method is basically based on the traditional small strain analysis
and implicit time integration scheme, whereas the progressively heaved soil surface and the deformation of
the sand-clay layer interfaces can be captured by continuous remeshing and stress interpolation (Yu et al.,
2011). The method can be implemented in the locally developed program AFENA and Abaqus/CAE. 2D
or 3D application of models can be simulated through using RITSS method. Since the method requires
the implicit scheme and high-order elements, it is more appropriate to analyze for static or low-speed
problems, on the other hand, soil elements can be highly distorted in case of analyzing high-speed problems.
The accuracy of RITSS method is highly dependent on the mapping technique. Different interpolation
==PAGE:30==
22
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND ON SPUDCAN PENETRATION
techniques have been adopted in the method. Please notice that at least quadratic elements should be
employ in order to retain mapping accuracy (Wang et al., 2015).
Arbitrarly Lagrangian Eulerian (ALE) Method
ALE (Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian) adaptive meshing allows to maintain a high-quality mesh through-
out an analysis in a case that large deformation cause element distortion. Through decoupling nodal and
material coordinates, the tool allows the mesh to move independently of the material. It basically elimi-
nates the limitations associated with purely Lagrangian or Eulerian approaches (Y. Hu and Randolph, 1998).
However, it should be noted that since ALE method does not support the boundaries between different ma-
terials, it does not give reliable results for a deep penetration problem in multi-layered soil in which large
deformation mostly occurs at the material boundary regions. Furthermore, one of the main uncertainties of
the method is that the soil backﬂow can not capture during the penetration, as stated by Kellezi and Kudsk
(2009). ALE is available in Abaqus Explicit. It can be used to analyze Lagrangian problem where the
material does not leave the mesh. Adaptive meshing tool increases the accuracy of the result.
Coupled Eulerian Lagrangian (CEL) Method
The CEL approach is applied for continuous spudcan penetration problems in order to get the full
penetration curve and visualize the continuous ﬂowing mechanism of soil. Especially, during the last
decade, Eulerian formulation has been implemented by Qui and Grabe (2012), Tho et al. (2012), Khoa
(2013), Hu et al. (2014) and Zheng et al. (2015). The CEL method is only applicable with an explicit
integration scheme and the commercial package ABAQUS/Explicit provides users with Eulerian analysis
which can be coupled with traditional Lagrangian analysis. Contrary to the Lagrangian analysis, in Eulerian
analysis nodes are ﬁxed in space and material ﬂows through elements without having any deformation. The
Eulerian domain does not only include the soil but also include the void and by this way, the soil heave can
be visualized during the penetration. The spudcan foundation is discretized through the use of Lagrangian
elements, on the other hand, the soil and void have meshed with the Eulerian element. The Eulerian material
can interact with Lagrangian elements through ABAQUS/Explicit general contact algorithm. It should be
also noted that no need to deﬁne contact interaction between Eulerian materials. The contact roughness
factor for the clay spudcan interface can be described as follows,
α = au/su
(2.45)
where au is the maximum shear stress that can be mobilized at the cone surface and su is the local value
of the undrained shear strength (Qiu and Henke, 2011). The cone roughness factor for the sand spudcan
interface can be found with
α = tan δ/tan φ
(2.46)
where δ is the interface friction angle between the sand and spudcan.
The CEL method is only applicable in 3D-modelling space in ABAQUS/Explicit. Velocity boundary
conditions should be applied in a way that lateral deformations at the model side should be prevented and
the base of the model should be fully ﬁxed. In order to achieve to monitor the full penetration of a spudcan
without having any excitation problem, one should be aware that the most suitable penetration velocity
should be prescribed to the model. As discussed by Tho et al. (2012), different penetration rates should
be applied to the model in order to ﬁnd the most suitable penetration rate. It should be noted that the total
computational time is increasing with the decreasing of the spudcan penetration rates.
Different constitutive models have been applied to the CEL model in different studies. Khoa and Jostad
(2016) summarized the estimation of the full penetration curve of different material models including the
comparison of the centrifuge test result. Figure 2.14 illustrates the results. Numerical analysis is based
==PAGE:31==
2.2. NUMERICAL METHODS
23
on the centrifuge test has been done by Teh (2007). Through back analyzing the centrifuge test, Qui and
Grabe (2012) performed CEL method with the advanced visco-hypoplasticity constitutive model. The
model is accounting for the strain softening and strain rate effects during the penetration. Khoa (2013)
and Hu et al. (2014) employed the modiﬁed Mohr-Coulomb constitutive model in order to capture the
strain softening and strain rate effects. Both models captured the peak penetration resistance quite well
however the spudcan capacity is underestimated in clay layer. As addressed by Khoa and Jostad (2016), the
Modiﬁed Mohr-Coulomb Model is able to capture the hardening/softening soil behaviour and compared to
the visco-hypoplasticity model, it is easy to implement.
Figure 2.13: Comparison of numerical and experimental bearing pressures and failure mechanisms in the
case of dense sand over soft clay (Khoa and Jostad, 2016)
The classical Mohr-Coulomb material model has been also tested by different studies. As it is repre-
sented by Hu (2015), the penetration resistance is continuously increasing with the depth when only peak
friction angle and dilatation angle are employed (MC Model). It is due to the fact that the classical MC
model is not taken into account the strength degradation, therefore it is not possible to capture the post-peak
penetration resistance of the spudcan. On the other hand, as it is also proved by Hu (2015), the potential
punch-through distance can be predicted more precisely by implementing the MMC model.
==PAGE:32==
24
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND ON SPUDCAN PENETRATION
Figure 2.14: Performance of MMC and MC models comparison with centrifuge test Hu (2015)
There are also CEL studies that basically analyze the impact of different parameters on the punch-
through failure. The following chart is created based on the previous parametric studies have been carried
out by Zheng et al. (2013), Qui and Henke (2011), Liu et al. (2014). The chart shows the impact of the
parameters, shown on the right column, on to the peak penetration resistance at the sand, qsand, the post-
peak bearing capacity in the clay, qpost and the punch-through distance, dpunch. In the table, ↑↑symbolizes
the proportional relation and ↑↓or ↓↑indicate the inverse proportional relation between the parameters
used in parametric studies and qpeak, qpost or dpunch. The ﬁrst arrow represents the parameters used in the
parametric studies and the second one stands for the desired values which are critical for the punch-through
failure.
Table 2.2: Parametric results from the previous studies
Parameters
used
in
parametric studies
Relation to
/
qpeak
qpost
dpunch
Hs/D
↑↑
↑↑
φ′
↑↑
↑↓
su
↑↑
↑↑
↓↑
Id
↑↑
↑↓
γsand
↑↓
qsand/qclay
↓↑
↓↑
It can be concluded from the parametric study results that the peak penetration resistance is increasing
with increase in the ratio of the sand layer thickness to the diameter of spudcan Hs/D, the shearing resis-
tance of angle of sand φ′, undrained shear strength of underlying clay and the relative density of sand. The
post peak resistance qpost has a proportional relation with the undrained shear strength and contrarily has an
inverse proportional relation with the ratio of bearing capacity of sand to clay. Another important parameter
to assess the severity of a punch through failure is the punching distance dpunch. It can be obtained from
Table 2.2 that dpunch decreases with increasing in φ′, Id and γsand. On the other hand, dpunch can reach a
severe level when Hs/D increases and su decreases.
==PAGE:33==
2.3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
25
2.2.3.1
Conclusion
The Total Lagrangian and the Updated Lagrangian ﬁnite element approaches are most commonly used
methods in geomechanical engineering, however when the large deformation problems are involved, these
methods are not capable to give reliable outcomes because the numerical analysis faces with convergence
problems due to the highly distorted elements and complex behaviour between different material bound-
aries. In order to deal with those problems, the LDFE methods: RITSS, ALE, and CEL etc. have been de-
veloped. This study only focuses on CEL method among the LDFE methods and traditional SSFE method
will be also applied to the problem.
Table 2.3 illustrates the main differences between the LDFE methods. The main limitation of the ALE
method is that it does not support the boundaries between different materials that are considered to be
non-adaptive mesh (Lagrangian) boundaries. In other words, this method can’t handle a deep penetration
problem in layered soils where large deformations can take place at the material boundary regions (Khoa,
2013). The Eulerian analysis is capable to support multiple materials and void within a single element,
whereas ALE elements are always full of a single material (Dassault Systemes 2017). Therefore, CEL
formulation does not limit the deformation of the material in the model and does not require complex
contact interaction as ALE formulation. CEL model requires 3D-model so that the computational cost is
higher than the other methods, particularly the cost of Eulerian phase. Additionally, CEL method requires
explicit integration scheme, therefore it is only applicable for quasi-static and dynamic problems.
Table 2.3: Comparisons between different large deformation analysis approaches, Wang et al. (2015)
RITSS
ALE
CEL
Integration Scheme
Implicit
Implicit
Explicit
Elements
Quadratic
Quadratic, Quartic, Quintic
Linear
Implementation
2D,3D
2D
3D
Meshing
Periodic mesh regenera-
tion in global or local re-
gion
Mesh reﬁnement by adjusting the
location of nodal points
Mesh
ﬁxed
in
space
Mapping
of
ﬁeld
variables
Interpolation
ALE convection equation
First of second or-
der advection
Cost of Lagrangian
phase
Heavy
Heavy
Moderate
Cost
of
Eulerian
phase
Minimal
Minimal
Heavy
Application
Static,dynamic,consolidation Static, dynamic, consolidation, dy-
namic consolidation
Quasi-static,
dynamic
2.3
Experimental Methods
To understand failure mechanism of a spudcan penetrating into sand overlying clay and to develop a repre-
sentative conventional method requires a set of centrifuge tests. Generally, a half spudcan model against a
Perspex window with subsequent Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) analysis is conducted to investigate the
behaviour of the soils during the penetration.
Craig and Chua (1990) performed a series of centrifuge test to study the potential for punch through
failure mechanism of foundations on sand overlying clay. The ﬁndings of the study showed that the sand
plug height is approximately equal to the sand layer thickness, on the other hand, an inverted truncated-
==PAGE:34==
26
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND ON SPUDCAN PENETRATION
cone sand plug with an approximated height of 0.6 −0.9Hs was observed by Teh et al. (2008). The study
was done by Teh et al.(2008) also indicated that the failure mechanism of the spudcan penetrating sand
overlying clay is continuously varying along the penetration. The following ﬁgures illustrate the recorded
experimental results from Teh (2007) studies. Flowing mechanism of the sand and the clay is captured at
different penetration depths and the sand plug geometry and dimension are also visualized through PIV
analysis.
Figure 2.15: Spudcan failure mechanisms at different penetration depths obtained from the centrifuge tests
Teh (2007)
Figure 2.16: Spudcan failure mechanisms at the clay layer Teh (2007)
There are several failure stress dependent models derived based on the extensive series of centrifuge
tests. Teh et al. (2010) proposed a failure stress dependent model obtain the peak penetration resistance,
qpeak. 2 different conical angles (10 deg and 13 deg), various Hs/D ratios, speciﬁc unit weights, and
undrained shear strength have been tested. In addition to that, Lee et al. (2013) performed a series of tests
including a ﬂat base spudcan. Based on the experimental ﬁndings, Lee et al. (2013) also proposed a failure
==PAGE:35==
2.4. CONCLUSION
27
stress dependent model. The model includes a distribution factor, DF and which is only calibrated for very
dense sand overlying clay and for limited geometries of spudcans. Hu et al. (2014a) recalibrated the model,
derived by Lee et al. (2013), by performing extensive series of centrifuge tests and the recalibrated model
covers soil conditions incorporating both very dense sand and medium dense sand and spudcan conical
angles from 0 to 21 degree. The methods are explained in detail in Section 2.1.5. Moreover, the inﬂuence
of the upper sand layer thickness relative to the spudcan diameter (Hs/D), the relative density of the sand
layer (Id) and the undrained shear strength of the underlying clay layer (su) to the peak bearing capacity
have been investigated by Teh et al. (2010).
2.4
Conclusion
This chapter provided extensive overview of methodologies to investigate the bearing capacity problem of a
spudcan on homogeneous soil and sand overlying clay stratigraphy. Currently, the methods recommended
in ISO 2016 are commonly applied ones (Projected Area Method and Punching Shear Method), however
the mechanisms assumed in the methods do not resemble the true failure mechanism induced by spudcan
penetration. Alternative methods derived from centrifuge test observations (Teh (2007), Lee et al. (2013)
and Hu et al. (2014)) have been also summarized and pros and cons of the methods are discussed. Overall,
it can be concluded that performance of the derived methods requires further investigation and validation
because the parameters used in the methods basically derived from centrifuge test results which are only
carried out for dense sand and few footing shapes.
Section 2.2 reviews the numerical methods applied to estimate the penetration curve of a spudcan. At-
tention is particularly paid to incapability of SSFE method to capture the punch-through failure since it
requires large deformation analysis. LDFE methods are capable to monitor the continuous ﬂow mechanism
of the soil even though it is computationally expensive. Numerical methodology should be selected care-
fully based on the problem type because for instance, when the soil strata consists of multiple layers, ALE
method could not be the most robust way to analyze the problem. It is due to the fact that it does not support
the boundaries between different materials. Contrarily, performing a CEL analysis for a spudcan penetrat-
ing into a homogeneous soil would not be a good idea since it requires 3D model and explicit integration
scheme which means that it cost much higher compared to other LDFE methods.
Lastly, the importance of centrifuge test for determining the behaviour of the soils during penetration
has been emphasized. The PIV analysis from Teh (2007) study has been represented. It can be concluded
that validation of both numerical and conventional methods with centrifuge tests is important to come up
with a more representative solution to investigate the potential punch-through hazard.
==PAGE:36==
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
Large Penetration Analysis in
Homogeneous Soil
In this chapter, large penetration analysis of a circular footing into homogenous soil layer will be discussed
and the ﬁndings are compared with the previous studies and analytical methods. As previously stated, the
main focus is given to CEL method along the thesis and thereby the large deformation analysis will be
performed by implementing Eulerian formulation into Abaqus/CAE. Since CEL method is only applicable
with the explicit scheme, the chapter starts with the discussion on the difference between implicit and
explicit integration scheme in Abaqus/CAE.
3.1
Numerical Model in ABAQUS
The Abaqus ﬁnite element system includes several sub-programs and the new version of Abaqus has two
main different solvers: implicit and explicit.
Implicit version uses Newton iterative solution method to solve the static equilibrium. The incremental
displacements (δu) are updated at each iteration until convergence is achieved. It means that force and
moment equilibrium must be attained at every node and displacement corrections must be small compared
to incremental displacement. Figure 3.1 illustrates a basic idea of the convergence analysis based on Newton
Raphson Method.
29
==PAGE:38==
30
CHAPTER 3. LARGE PENETRATION ANALYSIS IN HOMOGENEOUS SOIL
Figure 3.1: Newton Raphson Method, convergence analysis (Haselbach, 2018)
In the explicit solver of Abaqus CAE basically solves the equation of motion by integrating the equation
through time.
M¨u = P −I
(3.1)
where P and I represent for external and internal forces respectively. In order to solve the acceleration,
the explicit dynamic integration rule (central difference rule) combining with elements that use a lumped
mass matrix need to be manipulated as shown in the following equation. Please also note that the lumped
mass matrix allows the program to calculate the nodal accelerations easily at any given time, t. (Dassault
Systemes 2017)
¨u |t= M−1 · (P −I) |t
(3.2)
One of the main difference from the implicit method is that iterations are not required in the equation
solver to update the accelerations, velocities, and displacements. The velocities and displacements are
evaluated as follows,
vt+ ∆t
2 = vt−∆t
2 + at∆tt
(3.3)
ut+∆t = ut + vt+ ∆t
2 · ∆tt+ ∆t
2
(3.4)
After ﬁnding the displacement increment ut+∆t, the geometry is updated by adding to the initial geom-
etry.
xt+∆t = x0 + ut+∆t
(3.5)
where x0 stands for initial geometry and ∆t represents the stable time increment size which can be
derived as follows,
∆t = Lmin
cd
(3.6)
==PAGE:39==
3.2. PENETRATION IN SAND
31
where Lmin is the smallest element dimension in the mesh and cd is the dilatation wave speed.
Even though an explicit analysis requires a large number of time increments, the analysis can be more
efﬁcient. It is simply due to the fact that the use of small increments is advantageous because it allows
the solution proceed without iterations and without requiring tangent stiffness matrices to be formed and
simpliﬁes the treatment of contact (Dassault Systemes 2017). Particularly, the explicit analysis is capable
to run the problems including mesh distortion due to large deformation and nonlinear boundary conditions
(frictional contact etc.), however, the implicit method can’t deal with such large deformation problems
because of the convergence problems. It is preferable to perform for the small strain problems.
Basically, bearing capacity problems involving large deformations are not possible to solve using small
strain ﬁnite element analysis, it is mainly because of large mesh distortions and contact problems. In or-
der to deal with these problems, deformation of a continuum should be deﬁned properly. The position of
the small volumetric element changes can be formulated as a function of time in Lagrangian and Eulerian
descriptions. In the Lagrangian formulation, the position of the continuum is updated with its initial co-
ordinates and time while in the Eulerian formulation, the movement of the continuum is described as a
function of its instantaneous position and time. Through employing eulerian formulation coupled with the
Lagrangian formulation, which is applicable in Abaqus/Explicit, element distortion problem can be easily
avoided; however, it should be noted that the interface between two different media can’t be described as
accurate as in Lagrangian formulation (Qiu and Henke, 2011).
Figure 3.2: Deformation of a continuum in a Lagrangian and an Eulerian analysis (Qui and Grabe, 2012)
Before implementing CEL approach to the sand overlying clay model, several benchmark studies have
been done in order to validate Abaqus Implicit, Explicit and CEL results. In Appendix A.1 and A.2, the
author represents validation results of a strip footing problem on one layer soil (clay and sand) and the
results are compared with the conventional methods.
Different parametric studies are performed for penetration in the single layer (sand and clay) and the
sand overlying clay. The purpose of the parametric study is basically to analyze the robustness of the CEL
method under different soil conditions and to compare with the studies have been done before. Single
layer parametric studies are also crucial to validate the conventional methods. In the following subsections,
penetration of a circular footing into the homogenous soil will be discussed and the ﬁnding will be validated
in comparison with previous studies and analytical solutions.
3.2
Penetration in Sand
It is known that it is problematic to obtain the footing capacity in a single sand layer using conventional
SSFE method. Particularly, when the large penetration is involved in the problem, numerical models en-
==PAGE:40==
32
CHAPTER 3. LARGE PENETRATION ANALYSIS IN HOMOGENEOUS SOIL
counter distortion problems. Thereby, it is crucial to implement a large deformation method to get reliable
outcomes. In this section, CEL method will be implemented into the model in which a circular ﬂat footing
penetrating into a single sand layer. Results from the analysis will be compared with Plaxis 2D result and
the conventional method derived by Brinch Hansen.
In CEL method, the footing is modeled with Lagrangian domain and the void and soil are modeled with
the Eulerian domain. The contact between the Eulerian domain (the sand) and the Lagrangian domain (the
circular footing) is described using the General Contact algorithm which is based on the penalty contact
method. The algorithm incorporating the ﬁnite sliding formulation, which allows arbitrary motion of the
surface (Dassault Systemes 2017). As a part of friction contact deﬁnition, the friction contact coefﬁcient
between spudcan and soil should be deﬁned. However, since there is no general consensus regarding the
friction coefﬁcient, different roughness factors have been implemented in previous studies. In this study,
the cone roughness factor, α = 0.67 and smooth contact will be adopted into the model. The effect of the
roughness factor on the bearing capacity curve will be discussed.
The mechanical and geometrical properties of the footing and the sand are shown in Table 3.1 and 3.2
respectively.
Table 3.1: Properties of the circular footing
Diameter, D
Unit Weight, γ′
E
Poisson’s ratio, µ
m
kN/m3
GPa
-
11.6
7.85
21
0.3
Table 3.2: Properties of the sand
Thickness of Layer
E
Poisson’s ratio, µ
γ′
φ′
ψ
m
MPa
-
kN/m3
deg
deg
22.5
80
0.3
9
34
4
Similar steps as described in Section 2.2.3 have been followed to create the CEL model. The model
is created in a way that boundary effect is avoided and the mesh size ﬁne enough to not affect the results.
Mesh conﬁguration of the model represented in Figure 3.3. The mesh size is arranged to be 0.025D beneath
and over the footing and it is getting courser to outer edges of the model. A quarter of the whole model is
created in order to save computational time.
Mohr-Coulomb constitutive model is used for simulating the behaviour of the sand. As shown in Table
3.2, the friction angle of sand, φ′ = 34o and the dilation angle ψ = 4o are adopted into the sand model.
==PAGE:41==
3.2. PENETRATION IN SAND
33
Figure 3.3: Mesh conﬁguration of the model
In several studies, it is emphasized that the numerical result of a spudcan penetrating into a single sand
layer can change based on the friction coefﬁcient between the spudcan and sand interface. The effect of
roughness factor is investigated by applying the roughness factor of 0.67 and smooth contact (α = 0).
The same model with the roughness factor of 0.67 is created in Plaxis 2D model in order to clarify the
incapability of the SSFE method. Moreover, the numerical result is compared with Brinch Hansen Method
in order to also justify GEO in-house method since the bearing capacity calculation of the sand part is
basically based on Brinch Hansen Method which will be explained in Section 4.2.1. The formulation for
calculating the bearing capacity for sand is given below,
qu = qNqsqdq + 1
2γBNγsγdγ
(3.7)
where the bearing capacity factors Nγ and Nq are calculated to be 28.96 and 29.44 respectively. The
bearing capacity curve obtained from Brinch Hansen Method is represented in Figure 3.4. It can be seen
from the plot that the conventional method considers the ultimate capacity of sand from the beginning and
thereby the capacity curve starts with 803kPa and it increases to 4500kPa considering the contribution of
overburden pressure.
Penetration curve of the Plaxis model is also added into Figure 3.4. Increase in the capacity can be
seen until the footing reaches the depth of 0.5m and then it is approximately converging to 1200kPa. This
basically proves the incapability of SSFE method for large deformation analysis. The capacity is expected
to increase further with the penetration because of the following reasons:
• Overburden pressure increasing with penetration depth
• Side friction of the circular footing
• Mobilization of the sand with higher strength
However, highly distorted elements located particularly around the corner of the footing signiﬁcantly
manipulate the results. As a result of it, the above-mentioned effects cannot be captured.
==PAGE:42==
34
CHAPTER 3. LARGE PENETRATION ANALYSIS IN HOMOGENEOUS SOIL
Contact pressure at the interface between the circular footing and the sand has been extracted from
Abaqus/CAE model. The penetration curve is formed as shown in Figure 3.4. The penetration curve is
divided into 4 stages including the penetration depth of 0.5m, 1m, 2m and 3m. The continuous behaviour
of the sand is analyzed at the depths of interest. It can be clearly observed from the plot that the difference
between fully smooth and 0.67rough is negligible until the penetration depth of 0.7m. However, the
difference is gradually increasing with subsequent penetration. When the penetration reached 3m depth,
the discrepancy between capacities becomes 35.21%. One of the reasons behind the large increase in
bearing capacity when α = 0.67, can be the contribution of friction between the side of the circular footing
and sand. The interaction can also result in mobilization of more sand with higher strength around the
footing, on the other hand, it is not the case when fully smooth contact is adopted into the model. Table 3.3
illustrates the capacities at different stages.
Figure 3.4: Bearing capacity of circular footing in homogeneous sand layer
==PAGE:43==
3.2. PENETRATION IN SAND
35
Table 3.3: Impact of roughness factor on bearing capacity
Stage
Depth [m]
Bearing Capacity [kPa]
Discrepancy [%]
Smooth
0.67 rough
1
0.5
1100
1200
9.1
2
1
1748
2336
33.6
3
2
2077
2973
43.14
4
3
2778
3756
35.21
A study was done by Qiu and Henke (2011) shows a similar ﬁnding found in this study. The model
with smooth contact gives a lower capacity than the one with rough contact. It is important to note that
with a friction coefﬁcient greater than 0.5 increase becomes less distinct (Qiu and Henke, 2011) as shown
in Figure 3.5. The discrepancy between the curves becomes distinct after the full base is achieved.
Figure 3.5: Bearing capacity of spudcan in homogenous sand considering different roughnesses (Qiu and
Henke, 2011)
Figure 3.4 also indicates that Brinch Hansen method gives relatively close results to the fully smooth
contact on the other hand when the roughness factor of α = 0.67 introduced the results start to deviate.
The bearing capacity curve shows the same capacity at Stage 1 (0.5m penetration). Since the conventional
method does not consider the continuous ﬂow mechanism, densiﬁcation and mobilization of the sand, the
bearing capacity curve obtained from the conventional method increases linearly with increase in the over-
burden pressure. Nonetheless, the curves from numerical analysis capture those effects with the penetration
that’s why the increase is not perfectly linear. Besides that, thickness of the footing is introduced to be
==PAGE:44==
36
CHAPTER 3. LARGE PENETRATION ANALYSIS IN HOMOGENEOUS SOIL
2.4m, thereby the effect of side friction cannot be negligible. In case of using rough contact, it will give
additional capacity to the footing. That is not considered either in the footing with smooth contact or in the
conventional analysis. It can be concluded that using Brinch Hansen formulation will give a conservative
result compared to the results from the numerical analysis. It should be also emphasized that the bearing
capacity factors used in the conventional method is constant and only vary with the shearing resistance
angle of the sand, however, it is not the case in numerical study.
In order to analyze failure mechanism and observe the continuous ﬂow mechanism of the sand, plastic
strain evolution and instantaneous velocity vectors at different stages are monitored for the model in which
the roughness factor is 0.67. In Figure 3.6, plastic strain formation at the left side and instantaneous velocity
vector on the right side are represented. The formation of curve shear bands and wedge-shaped active
Rankine zone can be observed and anti-clockwise movement of the sand around the corner of the footing
is detected. In Stage 2, the interaction between the footing and the sand is increasing and thereby, the
difference of penetration resistance between smooth and rough contact is expanding. Mobilization of the
sand at a deeper level give additional bearing capacity, observed at the right side of Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.6: Plastic strain formation at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at the right side at Stage 1
Figure 3.7: Plastic strain formation at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at the right side at Stage 2
In Figure 3.8, failure mechanism of the sand becomes more distinct and passive Rankine zone start to
appear. Wall failure occurs at this stage as well and the sand starts to ﬂow on top of the footing. Since
the amount of sand on the footing is not signiﬁcant, the capacity is not considerably decreased. Passive
==PAGE:45==
3.3. PENETRATION IN CLAY
37
Rankine zone becomes larger when penetration reaches to 3m and anti-clockwise movement of the sand
continues as shown in Figure 3.9.
Figure 3.8: Plastic strain formation at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at the right side at Stage 3
Figure 3.9: Plastic strain formation at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at the right side at Stage 4
3.3
Penetration in Clay
The bearing capacity factor for the clay has been discussed in previous studies and different methods have
been followed in different standards such as ISO 2012, 2016 and SNAME. In order to validate the methods,
CEL model is created in which a ﬂat base circular footing penetrates into a single clay layer. The bearing
capacity factor is derived from the model result and compared with different studies. The model is repre-
sented in Figure 3.10. The Model consists of a circular footing with the diameter of 11.6 penetrating in
homogenous clay layer. A submerged unit weight of 9kN/m3 with a constant undrained shear strength of
90kPa was used for the clay. The contact between spudcan and soil is assumed to be rough. As it is stated
by Qiu and Henke (2011), the roughness factor is not as crucial as penetration in the homogenous sand
layer. The ﬁne mesh is used below the circular footing and the prescribed velocity is applied slow enough
to not excite the result. The CEL model is represented in Figure 3.10. One-quarter of the model is created
to decrease the computational time.
==PAGE:46==
38
CHAPTER 3. LARGE PENETRATION ANALYSIS IN HOMOGENEOUS SOIL
Figure 3.10: Abaqus/CEL Model of the circular footing
Skempton (1951) and Hansen (1970) developed two semi-analytical methods to calculate the spudcan
penetration capacity of a single clay layer and those methods are recommended in the guidelines, SNAME
(2008) and ISO (2012). Further studies have been done by G. Houlsby and Martin (2003) and Hossain
et al. (2006) implied that G. Houlsby and Martin (2003) method approximates a good lower bound load
penetration estimation and Hossain et al. (2006) method estimates a good upper bound load-penetration
prediction (ISO 2016). The total bearing capacity factors for rough circular footing is represented in Table
2.1.
The following plot shows the normalized penetration depth to bearing capacity factor curve of the CEL
model with the results from previous literature studies. The method described by G. Houlsby and Martin
(2003) gives the most conservative values which are recommended in ISO (2016). The CEL results ﬁt
well with the G. Houlsby and Martin (2003) method, on the other hand, the methods developed by Hansen
(1970) and Skempton (1951) relatively give higher magnitudes such that the bearing capacity factors reach
9.38 and 10.33 considering the Skempton and Hansen method respectively when the normalized penetration
depth reaches 1.
==PAGE:47==
3.3. PENETRATION IN CLAY
39
Figure 3.11: Comparison between literature studies and this study
==PAGE:48==
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Spudcan Penetration Analysis Sand
Overlying Clay
4.1
Introduction to the Problem
Spudcan penetration into sand overlying clay has high potential to expose a rapid leg penetration (punch
through failure), it is mainly because of the signiﬁcant different soil characteristic between sand and clay.
Punch-through failures generally occur during the preloading phase of the installations. In order to inves-
tigate further of this phenomenon, a random location of OWF and a spudcan from random jack-up vessel
has been chosen.
As it expressed previously, in the offshore wind industry, spudcans have different geometries despite
the oil industry. In this problem, the spudcan geometry has a rectangular section with the dimension of
8.05x13.25m. For the conventional calculations, it is simpliﬁed as a circular geometry. Properties of the
spudcan are given in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Spudcan Parameters
Width [m]
Length [m]
Area[m2]
Equivalent Diameter [m]
E[GPa]
v[-]
13.25
8.05
106
11.6
21
0.3
Figure 4.1 illustrates the simpliﬁed geometry of the spudcan with the soil strata, sand overlying ﬁrm
clay with constant undrained shear strength. As it is shown, the diameter of the spudcan is 11.6m and
tip to full base contact is 1.5m. The ratio of sand thickness to the spudcan diameter can be found to be
Hs/D = 0.73.
Soil properties of the location have been obtained from a series of CPT (Cone Penetration Test) results.
CPT result includes cone tip resistance qt, sleeve friction fs and pore pressure u. Soil classiﬁcation and
effective unit weight of the soil layers have been obtained by following Robertson et. al. 1986. The sand
layer is assumed to be in drained condition and shearing resistance angle of the sand layer has been inves-
tigated by using four different methods: Schmertman (1976), Kulhawy and Mayne (1990), Jamilkowski et
al. (2003) and Eurocode-7 Part 2 and the lower bound value is estimated based on the results. The relative
density of the sand is estimated to be around 74% by following the equation derived by Jamiolkowski et
al.,2001. The clay layer is considered as undrained and the undrained shear resistance su value is calculated
by using two different cone factor Nkt (15 and 20) and a rigidity index of 300 is applied to obtain elasticity
modulus of the clay layer.
41
==PAGE:50==
42
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.1: Spudcan and soil layer geometries (dimensions in millimeter)
The soil parameter for the sand and clay layer are given in Table 4.2. The table includes upper and
lower bound values of the mechanical properties of the layers.
Table 4.2: Soil Parameters
E
[MPa]
µ
[-]
γ′
[kN/m3]
su
[kPa]
c’
[kPa]
φ
[deg]
ψ
[deg]
Sand
80
0.3
9
-
1
34/39
4/9
Clay
27/36
0.49
9
90/120
-
-
-
4.2
Application of Conventional Methods
In this part of the chapter, different conventional methods will be applied to obtain the full penetration
curve of the spudcan on sand overlying clay. As discussed in the previous chapter, different conventional
methods have been implemented in previous studies during the last decade. In Oil&Gas and Offshore
Wind Industries, the methods provided in the ISO guideline and SNAME are carried out to estimate the
full penetration curve of a spudcan. In order to investigate the most appropriate approach, the methods
from ISO guideline (Projected Area Method and Punching Shear Method) will be compared to the method
proposed by Hu et al. (2014) and modiﬁed Brinch-Hansen Method derived by GEO in-house program. In
the conclusion part, the results will be summarized with the numerical results.
Assessing punch-through failure of a spudcan for Jack-up vessel can be characterized by two impor-
tant terms: the peak resistance in the sand and the punch-through distance, in other words, the distance
between the peak resistance in the sand and the corresponding equivalent resistance in the clay layer. Those
parameters will be estimated based on the different conventional methods.
==PAGE:51==
4.2. APPLICATION OF CONVENTIONAL METHODS
43
The spudcan penetration analyses have been performed using the simpliﬁed circular geometry of the
spudcan, presented in Figure 4.1 and the soil parameters summarized in Table 4.2. Two penetration curves
have been found considering the lower and upper bound soil parameters. It is assumed a preloading of
9000tonnes for the Jack-up vessel.
4.2.1
GEO In-house Method
Hansen (1970) applied the 5 factors to the original bearing capacity equation derived by Terzaghi (1943).
As it is addressed previously, the modiﬁed bearing capacity equation becomes as shown in Equation 2.5.
However, it should be noted that the inclination factors are not relevant for the spudcan bearing capacity
problem so that only the shape factors (sγ, sq and sc) and the depth factors (dγ, dq and dc) are considered
and the equation becomes as follows,
qu = c′Ncscdc + qNqsqdq + 1
2γBNγsγdγ
(4.1)
As it is expressed by Teh (2007), the ultimate bearing capacity of a spudcan sand overlying clay is
expected to be between the bearing capacity in the sand, qsand and the bearing capacity in clay, qclay.
In this method, the bearing capacity of the single sand layer and the clay layer have been calculated and
the lower values are employed to create the penetration curve. Please also note that spudcan penetration
capacity is increased due to the sand plug effect around 0.8Hs below the sand layer thickness, Hs and
the full backﬂow is considered while estimating the bearing capacity for the lower bound values of the
underlying clay strata.
4.2.1.1
Penetration capacity in the sand layer
Penetration capacity of the spudcan in the sand layer basically consists of q −term and γ −term of Brinch
Hansen Equation. The bearing capacity factors for the sand layer expressed in Equation 4.2 and 4.3
Nq = eπ tan φ(tan 45 + φ/2)2
(4.2)
Nγ = 1.5(Nq −1) tan φ
(4.3)
The shape factors for the γ and q −terms can be calculated as indicated below,
sγ = 1 −0.4B
L
(4.4)
sq = 1 + sin φB
L
(4.5)
where B and L are the width and length of the footing respectively. The depth factor on a surcharge for
drained soils dγ is 1 and the depth factor drained soils,
dq = 1 + 2 tan φ(1 −sin φ)2 arctan D/B
(4.6)
where D stands for the penetration depth.
After having found the contribution of q −term and γ −term to the bearing capacity in pressure, the
total bearing capacity has been found in tonnes by multiplying with the corresponding area. Spudcan area
from tip to full base is divided into ten zones and the area is gradually increased during the penetration.
Basically, the full base area (106m2) reached at the depth of 1.5m. It is important to note that overburden
pressure does not exist until the full base reached.
==PAGE:52==
44
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
4.2.1.2
Penetration capacity in the clay layer
Spudcan bearing capacity is calculated by only taking into account the contribution of the clay layer and the
capacity is estimated by applying c −term of Equation 4.1. It is assumed that the load spread through the
sand layer and calculates the bearing capacity of an enlarged ﬁctitious footing at the clay layer boundary.
The load spreading factor is typically in the range of 3 to 5. In order to obtain a conservative solution, the
factor is assumed to be 3 and 5 for the upper and lower bound solutions respectively. In order to take into
account the soil backﬂow, q-term of the bearing capacity equation is neglected for lower bound calculations
of the clay layer.
For circular footings, the product Nc is taken as 5.14 and the shape factor is estimated to be 1.2 based
on the in-house experiences and the effect of depth factor does not take into account.
As mentioned previously, the sand plug effect is considered at the depth of Hs + 0.8Hs = 15m. The
capacity of the spudcan after that depth estimated by using the q −term and γ −term.
4.2.1.3
Result
Based on the load penetrations analysis results, there exists a risk of punch-through or rapid leg penetration
during the installation of the Jack-up Vessel at the speciﬁc location. It is important to conduct cautious
preloading at the location with hull as close as possible to the water level.
Considering the lower bound parameters, the maximum punch-through distance, dpunch is found to be
around 12m and the penetration range of 1.15m and 15.6m is observed considering the upper and lower
bound curves. Please note that Full backﬂow is considered for the lower bound calculation and backﬂow
is not taken into account for the upper bound curve in order to obtain a conservative range of penetration
depth.
The effect of the sand plug can be clearly observed at the depth of 15m which corresponds to 0.8Hs
below the clay layer boundary. The value of the sand plug height is based on the GEO in-house experience.
==PAGE:53==
4.2. APPLICATION OF CONVENTIONAL METHODS
45
Figure 4.2: Spudcan Penetration Analysis for a jack-up vessel by using GEO in-house method
4.2.2
Projected Area Method, ISO 2016
The method basically assumes the load spread through the sand layer and the bearing capacity is calcu-
lating by considering an enlarged ﬁctitious footing at the clay layer boundary. In other words, the shear
resistance mobilized in the sand layer is estimated through an increase in the clay bearing capacity. The
sand parameters are not considered other than the unit weight of the sand layer γsand. As it has done in
GEO in-house method, the penetration depth from tip to full base divided into 10 parts and the full base
penetration reached 1.5m. The weight of the sand between the base of the spudcan and the ﬁctitious footing
at the surface of the lower clay layer is subtracted from the total bearing capacity in order to ﬁnd the net
bearing capacity of the spudcan.
The load spreading factor, ns is taken to be 3 and 5 for upper and lower bound calculations, respectively.
The bearing capacity factors are found through interpolating suggested bearing factors to the corresponding
embedment ratios, expressed in Table 2.1. G. Houlsby and Martin (2003) method has been validated by
performing a CEL analysis and the comparison is represented in Section 3.3. Figure 3.11 indicates that the
bearing capacity factors derived by G. Houlsby and Martin (2003) match well with the CEL results. Please
note that the bearing capacity factor (Nc ∗sc ∗dc) basically includes the depth and shape factors.
Considering the given preloading range of 9000tons, risk of punch-through / rapid leg penetration is
expected. Expected penetration range is estimated to be between 1.35m and 15.5m. The punch-through
distance is found to be about 9m. Please note that neither the effect of backﬂow nor sand plug is considered
in the projected area method. The average of the upper and lower bound curves is also represented in Figure
4.3.
==PAGE:54==
46
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.3: Spudcan Penetration Analysis Results in accordance with the Project Area Method
4.2.3
Punching Shear Method, ISO 2016
An alternative to the projected area method, ISO (2016) suggested as the punching shear method which
is derived by Meyerhof and Hanna (1980). Based on the punching shear method, the bearing capacity
includes shear resistance mobilized along a simpliﬁed vertical failure plane in the sand layer and the bearing
capacity of the underlying clay layer. The contribution of the sand layer is introduced by the punching shear
coefﬁcient,Ks which varies with the strength ratio of the sand and clay layer. The Ks magnitude for this
problem is determined from the charts derived by Meyerhof and Hanna (1980). After the spudcan reached
the clay layer, the bearing capacity is calculated as it is done in the Projected Area and Equation 2.6 is
applied. The method does not consider the effect of backﬂow and sand plug as well.
As it is indicated in Figure 4.4, the rapid leg penetration is most likely to occur under the prescribed
preloading. The penetration range is estimated to be between 1.4m and 15.5m. The punch-through distance
is obtained as dpunch = 11m considering the lower bound curve. As it can be observed from the plot, the
capacity of the clay layer is found to be as same as the projected area method.
==PAGE:55==
4.2. APPLICATION OF CONVENTIONAL METHODS
47
Figure 4.4: Spudcan Penetration Analysis Results in accordance with the Punching Shear Method
4.2.4
Hu et al. Method, 2015
As previously described in Section 2.1.5.3, Hu et al. method is an extended version of the Lee et al. (2013).
The method additionally considers the embedment depth in the mobilization of the peak bearing capacity.
Besides that, different conical angles and very dense to medium dense sand have been taken into account
to validate the method. The penetration proﬁle derived from Hu et al. method is constructed such that the
peak resistance, qpeak, the post-peak resistance, qpost−peak, and the resistance proﬁle in the underlying clay
are joined.
The peak bearing capacities obtained from this method is signiﬁcantly higher than the other methods.
The main differences are described as follows
• Hu et al. Method considers the embedment depth of 0.12Hs for the peak bearing capacity calculation
• The method takes into account both the side friction and the clay resistance at the boundary and
please also notice that enlarged ﬁctitious footing with the dilation angle used to ﬁnd clay resistance
• The bearing capacity factor for clay at the base of the footing is comparatively higher than the other
methods, Nc0 = 6.34
• The algebraic term, ((1 + 1.76Hs
D
tan ψ)E∗) is multiplied with Nc0sum term which signiﬁcantly in-
creases the capacity
==PAGE:56==
48
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
The method does not only overestimate the capacity in the sand also in the clay since it is assumed
that the footing is incorporated the combined geometry of the spudcan and sand plug. As a result of this,
a new equation derived for the bearing capacity factor shown in Equation 2.33 which gives higher bearing
capacity factor than the other methods as well. Additionally, the method accounts for the buoyancy of the
sand plug which is the second term of Equation 2.32.
Figure 4.5 indicates the bearing capacity of the spudcan for lower and upper bound values. Considering
preloading of 9000tonnes, the expected penetration range would be between 0.5m and 1m and punch-
through failure is not expected.
Figure 4.5: Spudcan Penetration Analysis Results in accordance with Hu etal. Method (2015)
4.2.5
Conclusion
GEO in-house method gives similar peak bearing capacity as the ISO Projected Area Method, the reason
behind is that the contribution of the underlying clay to the peak capacity is calculated with using the same
spreading load factor (3-5). On the contrary to the ISO methods, in GEO in-house method, the effect of
the sand plug is considered for the underlying clay capacity by considering the sand bearing capacity at
the depth 0.8Hs below the clay boundary (15m). Therefore, the sudden increase in the penetration curve
can be observed in Figure 4.2. However, it should be noted that since the sand plug formation starts in
the earlier steps of the penetration, the underlying clay bearing capacity is expected to increase gradually.
In order to cover a possible backﬁll effect, GEO in-house method includes the full backﬂow for the lower
bound curve. In other words, the effect of overburden pressure is neglected. Another important difference
between GEO in-house method and the other methods is that the bearing capacity factor for the underlying
clay layer is assumed to be constant with the penetration, 5.14∗1.2. On the other hand, the bearing capacity
factors are based on the G. Houlsby and Martin (2003) approach used in the ISO Methods (Please note that
==PAGE:57==
4.2. APPLICATION OF CONVENTIONAL METHODS
49
the bearing capacity factor is checked with the numerical analysis in Section 3.3). As it can be observed
from Figure 3.11, the bearing capacity factor is progressively increasing with penetration depth.
According to the ﬁndings from the different methods, Hu et al. Method give higher peak resistance and
clay resistance compared to other methods. It is due to the fact that when Equation 2.28 is analyzed, one
can conclude that the contribution of the underlying clay layer is overestimated when the undrained shear
strength term Nc0 ∗sum multiplies with the additional algebraic term ((1+ 1.76Hs
D
tan ψ)E∗). Besides that,
shearing resistance along the sand layer is also included into the peak bearing capacity in Hu et al. Method,
however, ISO methods consider either the strength contribution from the sand by enlarging the projected
area of the spudcan or considering directly the shearing resistance of the sand layer. Furthermore, underly-
ing clay resistance (please check equation 2.32) includes the bearing capacity for a composite foundation
of spudcan, trapped sand plug in weightless soil and the buoyancy. Since the spudcan and the sand plug
are treated as a composite footing, the bearing capacity factor includes the contribution of the sand plug as
well on the other hand the bearing capacity factors in other methods do not include the sand plug effect.
It should be noted that the algebraic parameters used in the Hu et al. equations are derived based on the
centrifuge test results and the tests cover conical angle of spudcan, 7oto21o, the shearing resistance angle
of sand 31o and undrained shear strength of clay, 11.01to21.86kPa. Therefore, the method requires more
experimental and numerical analyses with the higher strength parameters of the sand and the clay.
Table 4.3: Results from the Conventional Methods
Conventional Methods
GEO In-house
Method
Projected
Area, ISO
2016
Punching
Shear,
ISO 2016
Hu
etal.,
2015
Sand Plug Effect
YES
NO
NO
YES
Soil Backﬂow
YES
NO
NO
NO
qpeak,LB [tonnes]
9738
9322
9309
20452
qpeak,UB [tonnes]
17673
15360
14700
33799
Penetration Range [m]
1.15-15.6
1.35-15.5
1.4-15.5
0.5-1
qpunch [m]
12
9
11
0
==PAGE:58==
50
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
4.3
SSFE Analysis with Abaqus/Explicit Model
2D axisymmetric ﬁnite element model is produced to derive the bearing capacity of the spudcan considering
the approximate rotational symmetry of the spudcan. Geometrical properties of the spudcan (simpliﬁed
circular geometry) and lower bound soil properties have been used for the model. The width and depth of
the model are created such that the boundary effect on the result is avoided. The Mohr-Coulomb constitutive
model is used for the sand layer and the undrained Tresca model (plasticity model) is employed for the clay
layer. The soil domain is restrained vertically at the base and horizontally at the sides. A 4-node bilinear
axisymmetric quadrilateral, reduced integration, hourglass control (CAX4R), the element is assigned for
both the spudcan and soil domain. The mesh size of 0.1m is used for the soil domain below the spudcan
and the mesh becomes coarser to the outer edge of the model.
As an initial condition, geostatic stresses are inserted throughout the soil domain such that the stresses
are in equilibrium with the self-weight stresses of the soil. In the following step, the rigid footing is
displaced vertically downwards with a prescribed velocity which is selected such that the model does not
excite. It is simply because excitation of the model can minimize the reliability of the results. Since the
model is created by using the explicit version of Abaqus/CAE, it is important to mention that non-linear
geometry option (NLGEOM) is automatically activated. When a large deformation problem is considered,
the elements of the model are expected to be largely stretched or squeezed during the analysis, because of
that it is beneﬁcial to use NLGEOM option to redeﬁne the shape function and the stiffness matrix. The
penalty contact method used to describe the interaction between the spudcan and the soil domain. Since the
spudcan is more rigid than the soil, the spudcan is selected to be master and soil is assigned to be a slave in
the interaction property.
It is important to mention that 2D- axisymmetric model of the spudcan fully consists of the Lagrangian
domain, therefore it is expected to have excitation problem, especially on the corner of the spudcan.
Thereby, the full penetration curve cannot be achieved without following any LDFE methods. The au-
thor analyzes the 2-D axisymmetric problem with two different models in order to observe the effect of the
distortion problem into the bearing capacity curve. In the ﬁrst model, the spudcan will be displaced 6m
vertically and in the second model, the wished-in place method will be applied by dividing the penetration
into 4 stages.
Model 1
Model 1 represents the continuous penetration of the spudcan into sand overlying clay model in Abaqus/Explicit.
The spudcan penetration rate of 0.2m/s is applied along 30 seconds which corresponds to 6m displace-
ment. The analysis starts with the tip contact of the spudcan as shown in Figure 4.6.
==PAGE:59==
4.3. SSFE ANALYSIS WITH ABAQUS/EXPLICIT MODEL
51
Figure 4.6: 2D-Axisymmetric FE Model of the spudcan on sand overlying clay
Plastic strain contours of the model are analyzed at 4 different stages, as shown in the following Figure.
With 1.5m penetration, the full base contact is reached in the second stage. The meshes around the tip of
the spudcan start to become distorted under high pressure. When the penetration depth reaches 3m, plastic
deformation begins to occur around the sand plug which has a shape of a truncated inverted cone. With the
subsequent penetration of the spudcan, the sand wedge becomes clear and also appears in the clay. The sand
plug has the height of 7.7m which corresponds to 0.9 times of the initial sand layer. Since the sand plug
does not have a clear cylindrical shape, the clear height would be less than 7.7m. It can be approximated
as between 0.8Hs and 0.9Hs. When the penetration depth reaches 5.4m, the elements on the corner of the
spudcan become highly distorted and which does not allow the model to run properly. Since the explicit
version of Abaqus/CAE has been used for the analysis, the model did not stop but the analysis would not
give reasonable result when the elements are highly distorted.
==PAGE:60==
52
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.7: Plastic Strain Formation with 4 stages, 2D-Axisymmetric FE Model of the spudcan on sand
overlying clay
One of the important output of the post-processing of such a model is the resultant velocity ﬁeld. The
soil movement is investigated with the direction of the velocity vectors. Stage 2,3 and 4 have been further
monitored with the resultant velocity result.
Figure 4.8: Instantaneous velocity vector plot for Stage 2 and 3
When the stage 2 and 3 are reached, Figure 4.8 recorded. In Stage 2, the soil movement resembles
the punching shear area method since the velocity ﬁelds straightly move towards to the clay boundary. In
Stage 3, velocity ﬁelds start to move outward direction and the shape of truncated inverted cone becomes
clear in this phase. It is also possible to observe that velocity ﬁelds near the corner of the spudcan follow
anti-clockwise direction and the soil falls on to the top of the spudcan. This movement of the soil is known
==PAGE:61==
4.3. SSFE ANALYSIS WITH ABAQUS/EXPLICIT MODEL
53
as the localized plastic ﬂow mechanism. This velocity ﬁeld behaviour agrees well with the numerical study
done by Tho et al. (2012).
Figure 4.9: Instantaneous velocity vector plot for Stage 4
In Figure 4.9, it can be clearly observed from the Figure that the soil movement resembles the projected
area method. The measurement indicates that the load spreading factor is about 3.8 which is in the limit
suggested by ISO 2016. The soil backﬁll is also observed in this stage which basically decreases the bearing
capacity of the spudcan.
As described previously, SSFE is limited to give reliable results when large deformation occurs. In this
case, the model run approximately 6m, however, it should be noted that because of the highly distorted
elements on the corner of the spudcan, the results are not fully reliable but the resistance of the soil can be
predicted before element distortion started. In order to get more accurate results, either a large deformation
analysis or the wished-in place method should be performed, but it should be noted that the complex
interaction between the sand and clay cannot be described in SSFE, thereby the wished-in place analysis
would not be as reliable as LDFE methods such as CEL.
Model 2
In order to minimize the distortion problem in SSFE analysis, the wished-in place method will be
implemented into the same problem. The penetration of the spudcan into sand overlying clay will be
investigated by dividing the penetration into 4 different stages. The stages will be at the penetration depths
of 1.5m, 3m, 5m and 10m. 4 different models have been created for different stages. The models are
illustrated in Figure 4.10. According to the previous studies, the sand plug height is approximated to be in
between 0.6 and 0.9 times of the initial sand layer thickness. In reality, it is known that the sand plug has
a shape of the truncated inverted cone, but in the model, the sand plug is simpliﬁed as a cylindrical shape
with the height of 0.8Hs. Full backﬂow of the soil is adopted into the model.
==PAGE:62==
54
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.10: SSFE analysis applied with Wished-in place method including 4 penetrations stages
The same material and spudcan properties have been used. The bearing capacities at the speciﬁed depths
have been found by taking the average value of the contact pressure at the elements below the spudcan. For
instance, Figure 4.11 indicates the contact pressure curves from the elements of the spudcan for the ﬁrst
stage. As it can be observed from the Figure that the stress (bearing capacity) start to converge when the
ultimate capacity of the soil achieved. For each stage, the convergent bearing capacity values are obtained
and the penetration curve is estimated.
Figure 4.11: Bearing capacity curves from the spudcan elements positioned at the boundary for the ﬁrst
stage
Figure 4.12 illustrates the plastic strain results for 4 penetration stages. In the ﬁrst stage, when the full
==PAGE:63==
4.3. SSFE ANALYSIS WITH ABAQUS/EXPLICIT MODEL
55
base contact reached, two shear bands start to appear and the area between the curves represent the Prandtl
fan zone. In the following stage, the shear band on the left-hand side clearly shows inward inclination. The
Prandtl failure zone becomes more clear in stage 3 and the outer shear band follows the sand plug boundary.
It should be noted the real behaviour of the soil would not be as clear as shown in stage 3 since the sand
plug does not have a clear cylindrical shape. When the full base reached the clay boundary, the failure line
only forms at the interface between the sand plug and the clay not in the sand plug itself.
Figure 4.12: Plastic Strain contours for each stage
Figure 4.13 shows instantaneous velocity ﬁelds for different penetration stages. In the ﬁrst stage, it can
be obviously observed the plastic ﬂow mechanism of the sand on the corner of the spudcan. The velocity
ﬁelds show outward inclination and moves towards the counterclockwise direction. In the following stage,
the subsequent penetration leads to increase in the bearing capacity when the bearing capacity curve is
checked. The reason for that can be the mobilization of the clay and the shear resistance around the sand
wedge. In stage 3, both increasing in the backﬂow and decreasing in the shear resistance of the sand result
in a reduction of the overall bearing capacity of the spudcan. The velocity ﬁelds follow a straight line
throughout the boundary of the sand plug. In the last stage, even though the full backﬂow is implemented
into the model, the overall bearing capacity is increased due to the interaction between the clay and the
sand plug. Furthermore, the velocity ﬁelds are not homogeneously distributed in the sand plug. Formation
of the vortices can be observed because of the resistance of the clay at the boundary between the sand plug
and clay. Localized movement of the clay towards the top of the spudcan has been also recorded during the
penetration.
==PAGE:64==
56
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.13: Instantaneous velocity vector plots for Stage 1,2,3 and 4
Conclusion
As previously stated, in Model 1, the spudcan penetration started with the tip base and 6m penetration
has been prescribed, on the other hand, the wished-in place method is adopted to Model 2. 4 stages have
been created for the penetration depths of 1.5m, 3m, 5m and 10m. The convergent bearing capacities from
4 stages and the penetration curve of Model 1 are represented in Figure 4.14. The bearing capacity curves
obtained in a way that the average of the contact pressure (Cpress) values on the spudcan base have been
calculated and the units converted to tons in order to compare with the applied preloading. The Model
1 does not represent the real peak penetration capacity. It is simply because of the excessively distorted
element around the tip of the spudcan and the corner of the full base. Formation of the plastic strains at
the tip and the corner of the spudcan basically manipulates the stiffness matrix and thereby the maximum
bearing capacity of the spudcan is underestimated in Model 1. On the other hand, when the model is
analyzed into 4 different penetration stages, the element distortion problem minimized and thereby, more
reliable values are achieved in Model 2. Results show that the peak capacity is found as 13700tons and the
post-peak capacity as 13273tons. Please notice that the full backﬂow is adopted into Stage 4, that why the
post bearing capacity can be underestimated at that depth.
==PAGE:65==
4.3. SSFE ANALYSIS WITH ABAQUS/EXPLICIT MODEL
57
Figure 4.14: Spudcan Penetration Analysis Result, 2D-Axisymmetric FE Model of the spudcan on sand
overlying clay
When the convergent capacities of the stages of Model 2 are combined, the penetration curve is formed
as shown in Figure 4.15. Based on the results, punch-through failure is not expected under the preloading
of 9000tons. The punch-through risk exists when the preloading is over 13000tons. Since the sand plug
and the soil backﬂow are manually adopted into the model, the values can vary.
==PAGE:66==
58
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.15: Penetration capacity curve of the spudcan according to the SSFE wished-in place method
All in all, although the wished in place method provides a good estimation of the spudcan bearing
capacity, the inﬂuence of the large deformation during the installation process was not taken into account
and thereby, the continuous ﬂow mechanism of the soil cannot be properly captured. In order to avoid
excessive distortion and capture the continuous ﬂowing mechanism of the soil, it is recommended to use
one of the LDFE methods in which independent movement of the material with respect to the mesh is
allowed by uncoupling of mesh and material.
4.4
LDFE analysis with CEL Model
In order to monitor full penetration curve, the back-ﬁll soil, sand plug geometry and soil failure mechanism
during the penetration of a spudcan, the Coupled Eulerian Lagrangian (CEL) approach in the commercial
package Abaqus/Explicit is adopted. In the model, Lagrangian domain is assigned for the spudcan, while
==PAGE:67==
4.4. LDFE ANALYSIS WITH CEL MODEL
59
the subsoil is modeled in the Eulerian domain. Since Eulerian analysis cannot be currently performed in
2D model, the whole model is created in 3D. In order to avoid high computational cost, only one-fourth of
the whole model is created. Different spudcan geometries have been investigated in CEL models in order
to understand the effect of spudcan geometries on the bearing capacity curve. Three models are created
in Abaqus/CAE. The ﬁrst model includes the ﬂat base circular footing, the second one with the simpliﬁed
spudcan geometry and the last model represents the real geometry of the spudcan which has a rectangular
shape on the plan view. It is important to note that the models are completely the same except the spudcan
geometries.
Since the spudcan is way stiffer than the subsoil, the spudcan is modeled as a discrete rigid body.
Despite the traditional Lagrangian analysis, in Eulerian analysis nodes are ﬁxed in space and material ﬂows
through elements that do not deform (Dassault Systemes 2017). The eulerian element is not necessarily full
of material, it can also contain void; therefore it is important to deﬁne EVF within the Eulerian element.
In the model, the Eulerian element contains the sand, the clay, and the void. When the EVF ratio is one, it
means that 100% of the element is ﬁlled with material on the other hand if it is zero, it means that element
is ﬁlled with "void" material. During the analysis, the material deforms based on the prescribed load and
the EVF is recalculated accordingly. It should be noted that by default, all eulerian elements are initially
ﬁlled with void. In the model, the void layer has been deﬁned in order to capture the soil heave.
The width of the model is set to be 4 times of the diameter of the spudcan so as to avoid boundary
effects. The boundary conditions in the model are arranged in a way that horizontal movement is restricted
on the sides and the bottom of the model is set to be fully ﬁxed. It is important to prescribe the boundary
conditions properly since the Eulerian material can ﬂow out of the Eulerian domain through the mesh
boundaries. The spudcan, rigid body, is only allowed to move vertically under the prescribed loading. In
the model, the prescribed velocity conditions on Eulerian nodes are used to control material ﬂow.
One should be aware that computational cost is increasing with decreasing penetration rate so that
a spudcan penetration rate needs to be selected carefully in order to not excite the model and as well
as avoid the high computational cost. In order to investigate the most suitable penetration rate for the
model, the spudcan penetration rates of 2.5m/s, 1m/s and 0.5m/s are applied. Figure 4.16 indicates
penetration curves with different spudcan penetration rates. It can be observed that the load penetration
curve corresponding to a penetration rate of 2.5m/s excited a lot compared to the other penetration rates.
The capacity curve does not move further with decreasing in the penetration rate so that the penetration rate
of 0.5m/s is used for the analysis.
The penetration velocity is applied along 23seconds for the analysis which corresponds to 11.5m dis-
placement.
==PAGE:68==
60
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.16: Load penetration curve for different spudcan penetration rates
Both sand and clay layers are treated as linearly elastic-perfectly plastic materials with Mohr-Coulomb
failure criterion for sand and Tresca failure criterion for clay. In other words, strain softening and hardening
behaviour are neglected in this study. The clay is assumed to be undrained whereas the sand is considered
as in drained condition. Material properties can be deﬁned in the same way as for Lagrangian analysis in
Abaqus/CAE. In Abaqus/CAE, Plasticity model is assigned to represent Tresca failure criterion.
The interaction between the Eulerian materials (soils and void) and the Lagrangian material (spudcan) is
described with a "general contact" algorithm which allows a user to deﬁne contact between all Lagrangian
bodies and all Eulerian materials. If it is necessary, it is also possible to exclude surface pairs but it is not
used for this study. The General contact algorithm prevents penetration of the Eulerian material through
the Lagrangian surfaces. It is also important to mention that no need to deﬁne any interaction proper-
ties between Eulerian materials since Eulerian material self-contact are automatically handled by Eulerian
formulation (Dassault Systemes 2017).
When the surfaces of instances are in contact, they transmit shear, as well as normal forces across their
interfaces and Abaqus, provides an extended version of the classical isotropic Coulomb friction model
(Dassault Systemes 2017). The Coulomb friction model basically assumes that when the equivalent fric-
tional stress, τeq is less than the critical stress, τcrit, relative motion does not occur. The critical stress
depends on the contact pressure and the friction coefﬁcient, µ. The cone roughness factor between sand
and spudcan is deﬁned by Cassidy and G. T. Houlsby (2002).
µ = tanδ
tanφ = 0.65
(4.7)
where δ is the interface friction angle between the sand and spudcan.
==PAGE:69==
4.4. LDFE ANALYSIS WITH CEL MODEL
61
Tangential behaviour is employed with the penalty friction formulation. Penalty algorithm basically
uses a stiffness method that allows some relative motion of the surfaces. The normal behaviour of the
contact property option is speciﬁed as "hard contact" as it minimizes the penetration of the slave surface
into the master surface and it restricts the transfer of tensile stress across the interface.
As the initial condition, geostatic stresses are deﬁned throughout the soil domain such that the stresses
are in equilibrium with the self-weight stresses of the soil. The gravity is deﬁned in the ﬁrst step of the
analysis. In the following step, the rigid footing is displaced vertically downwards with the prescribed
velocity.
In order to achieve adequate numerical accuracy, it is important for such a model to do convergence
analysis. Especially, the element size around the spudcan should be selected carefully. In different studies,
different element sizes are adopted such as 0.025D, 0.018D, 0.05D etc. In this study, element size is set to
be 0.025D according to the convergence analysis have made. The element size becomes coarser towards
the outer edge of the model.
The footing is discretized using Lagrangian mesh, whereas the sand, the clay, and the void are dis-
cretized using Eulerian mesh. The Lagrangian mesh is composed of an 8-node linear brick, reduced in-
tegration, hourglass control, C3D8R elements and the Eulerian mesh is composed of an eight-node linear
Eulerian brick, reduced integration, hourglass control element, EC3D8R. EC3D8R mesh type is currently
the only available mesh type for Eulerian analysis and it is used with reduced integration option which
basically allows explicit solver to use a lesser number of integration points on an element which saves the
cost of the computation time, robust under high distortion conditions. Linear and quadratic elements are
shown in Figure 4.18.
Figure 4.17: Linear and quadratic elements (Haselbach, 2018)
The reduced integration option is not prone to shear locking which can overestimate the result, on the
other hand, it can introduce an error in the integration of the governing equation and reduced integration
elements are more likely to have hour-glassing. The hour-glassing in the model can result in inaccurate
stress and strain in the model. In order to deal with that phenomenon in large deformation analysis, it is
recommended for activating the stiffness control option and reﬁning the element size. A sample of the
8-node element with and without reduced integration option is illustrated in Figure 4.18.
==PAGE:70==
62
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.18: Full integration and reduced integration elements (Haselbach, 2018)
4.4.1
Abaqus/CEL model results
In this subsection, the results from the CEL models with different spudcan geometries will be illustrated and
the effect of different spudcan geometries on the bearing capacity problem will be investigated. Based on
the post-processing of the CEL models, the plastic strain of the sand and the clay, the Eulerian volumetric
fraction (EVF), velocity ﬁeld along the penetration have been analyzed in order to understand the ﬂowing
mechanism of the sand and the clay.
Abaqus/CEL Model with the ﬂat base circular geometry:
The simpliﬁed full contact circular geometry in sand overlying clay model has been created. The analy-
sis has been started with the full base contact as shown in Figure 4.19. The equivalent diameter of 11.6m is
used for the ﬂat base spudcan. One-quarter of the model is created in order to save computational time. To
avoid excessive excitation of the model, a parametric study has been done by introducing different penetra-
tion rates to the spudcan. Three spudcan penetration rates of 0.5m/s, 1m/s and 2.5m/s, corresponding to
total penetration time of 20s, 10s and 4s respectively, are employed to investigate the optimum penetration
rate. As a result of the study, the penetration rate 0.5m/s is applied to the spudcan for 20seconds.
Figure 4.19: Schematic representation of quarter of the whole model with simpliﬁed ﬂat base spudcan
geometry
In order to make a comparison of inﬂuence of the different spudcan geometries on the soil behaviour, the
plastic strain evolution, velocity ﬁelds and Eulerian volumetric fraction for the sand are visualized with 5
==PAGE:71==
4.4. LDFE ANALYSIS WITH CEL MODEL
63
subsequent penetration stages: initial state, 1.5m, 3.5m, 7m, 8.5m. Please notice that in order to compare
the ﬂat base geometry with the simpliﬁed and rectangular geometries, the penetration depths should be
considered to be 1.5m higher in other geometries, because the full base is achieved at the penetration depth
of 1.5m considering the real geometry.
In the ﬁrst stage, plastic strain formation is initiated at the corner of the footing. Since the ﬂat base
footing is used for this analysis, the initial step is corresponding to the full base. The right side of Figure
4.20 illustrates plastic strain formation of the clay. Plastic strain magnitudes for the clay is very low at this
stage. Movement of the sand is shown through V, Resultant in Figure 4.21 and it is clear that the sand
around the corner of the footing moves sideways with penetration.
Figure 4.20: Plastic Strain of Sand and Clay at Stage 1 (Full Base Contact)
Figure 4.21: Eulerian Volume Fraction (EVF) of the Sand at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at
the right side, Stage 1 (Full base contact)
In Stage 2, a shear band with the inward inclination can be observed and it forms the wedge shape active
zone around the rigid sand wedge. The plastic strain magnitudes at the clay start to increase at this stage.
Figure 4.22 illustrates Eulerian Volumetric Fraction (EVF) of the Sand at the left side and instantaneous
velocity vectors on the right side. By following the velocity ﬁelds, it is shown that the pattern resembles the
projected area method provided in ISO 2016. The load spreading factor is measured as ns = 4.65. It can
be also seen that the clay start to mobilize to higher strength with the penetration of the rigid sand plug.
==PAGE:72==
64
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.22: Plastic Strain of Sand and Clay at Stage 2 ( 1.5m penetration)
Figure 4.23: Eulerian Volume Fraction (EVF) of the Sand at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at
the right side, Stage 2 ( 1.5m penetration)
When the penetration reached 3.5m, the wedge shaped active zone becomes more distinct. The sand at
right side of the footing starts to ﬂow on top of the footing. The similar movement can be observed from
the velocity ﬁelds illustrated in Figure 4.25. At this stage, the sand plug penetrated more into the clay.
Figure 4.24: Plastic Strain of Sand and Clay at Stage 3 (3.5m penetration)
==PAGE:73==
4.4. LDFE ANALYSIS WITH CEL MODEL
65
Figure 4.25: Eulerian Volume Fraction (EVF) of the Sand at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at
the right side, Stage 1 (3.5m penetration)
In Stage 4, the rigid soil plug with the side wall tapered inwards is punched into the clay further. The
plastic strain formation in the clay is also inﬂuenced by the sand wedge. The wall failure/ inﬁll can be
clearly observed in this stage as well. The amount of sand on top of the footing increases at this stage
which potentially decreases the bearing capacity of the spudcan. The sand plug height is found as 7.8m
from the bottom of the footing to the edge of the sand plug. It is approximately equal to 0.91 times of the
sand thickness, Hs.
Figure 4.26: Plastic Strain of Sand and Clay at Stage 4 (7m penetration)
==PAGE:74==
66
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.27: Eulerian Volume Fraction (EVF) of the Sand at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at
the right side, Stage 4 ( 7m penetration)
In the last phase, the ﬂat base reached the clay boundary and the sand plug is completely penetrated into
the clay. Due to the interaction between the rigid sand plug and the clay, the soil is expected to be mobilized
with higher strength. In Figure 4.28, it can be observed that the shear band is formed around the sand wedge
and following the inﬁll pattern. The plastic strains in the clay mostly form around the periphery of the sand
plug. It should be also noted that additional resistance should be considered due to the interaction between
the side of the footing and the soil, especially the velocity ﬁelds clearly indicate that interaction at this stage
in Figure 4.29.
Figure 4.28: Plastic Strain of Sand and Clay at Stage 1 (8.5m penetration)
==PAGE:75==
4.4. LDFE ANALYSIS WITH CEL MODEL
67
Figure 4.29: Eulerian Volume Fraction (EVF) of the Sand at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at
the right side, Stage 5 ( 8.5m penetration)
Abaqus/CEL Model with the simpliﬁed Spudcan Geometry:
The same design steps have been followed to create the sand overlying clay model with the simpliﬁed
spudcan geometry. The model has been run starting with the tip base contact and the full base contact is
achieved when the penetration depth reaches 1.5m. It is important to note that the spudcan has an inclined
surface between the tip base and the full base. It can be observed in Figure 4.30. The simpliﬁed spudcan
diameter, 11.6m is deﬁned for the analysis. Because of the irregular geometry, it is expected to have stress
variation on the interface between the spudcan and the soil.
Figure 4.30: Schematic representation of quarter of the whole model with simpliﬁed spudcan geometry
Mesh conﬁguration of the model is illustrated in Figure 4.31. The mesh size becomes coarser to the
outer edges of the model and ﬁner close to the spudcan. Model size is large enough to avoid boundary
effects. Since the model is symmetric in both axis, X-Y and Y-Z, only the results from Y-Z axis are
illustrated.
==PAGE:76==
68
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.31: Mesh conﬁguration of the model
Penetration of the spudcan into sand overlying clay layer is divided into 5 Stages: 1.5m, 3m, 5m, 8.5m
and 10m. In following ﬁgures, plastic strain evolution of sand and clay, EVF of sand and as well as the
motion of instantaneous velocity vectors are represented. Spudcan penetration started with the tip contact
and the full base is achieved at Stage 1. Sand around the tip begins to mobilize and velocity vectors show
downward movement towards the clay boundary which looks like the punching shear failure.
Figure 4.32: Plastic Strain of Sand and Clay at Stage 1 (Full Base Contact, 1.5m penetration)
==PAGE:77==
4.4. LDFE ANALYSIS WITH CEL MODEL
69
Figure 4.33: Eulerian Volume Fraction (EVF) of the Sand at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at
the right side, Stage 1 (Full base contact, 1.5m penetration)
In Stage 2, the spudcan is displaced 3m. In Figure 4.34, the plastic strain formation of sand becomes
more clear and the wedge-shaped active zone start to appear. A radial and counter-clockwise motion of the
sand can be observed from Figure 4.35. The soil movements resemble the projected area and the spreading
factor is measured as 4.8.
Figure 4.34: Plastic Strain of Sand and Clay at Stage 2 (3m penetration)
Figure 4.35: Eulerian Volume Fraction (EVF) of the Sand at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at
the right side, Stage 2 (3m penetration)
When penetration reached 5m, a shear band with inward inclination along the rigid sand wedge becomes
more distinct. The wall failure comes up in this stage, in other words, the sand starts to ﬂow on top of the
==PAGE:78==
70
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
spudcan. The movement of velocity vectors resemble the punching shear failure and besides of that as a
result of interaction between the rigid sand wedge and the clay, clay particles start to mobilize.
Figure 4.36: Plastic Strain of Sand and Clay at Stage 3 (5m penetration)
Figure 4.37: Eulerian Volume Fraction (EVF) of the Sand at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at
the right side, Stage 3 (5m penetration)
In Stage 4, the sand plug geometry becomes more clear and the shape looks like a truncated cone. The
width of the sand plug becomes narrower at the bottom part. The height of the sand plug measured to be
8m from the full base of spudcan to the bottom edge of the sand plug. This height corresponds to 0.93
times of the sand layer thickness. Plastic strain formation mostly occurs at the boundary between the sand
plug and the clay. Backﬁll of the sand continues at this stage as well.
==PAGE:79==
4.4. LDFE ANALYSIS WITH CEL MODEL
71
Figure 4.38: Plastic Strain of Sand and Clay at Stage 4 (8.5m penetration, at the clay boundary)
Figure 4.39: Eulerian Volume Fraction (EVF) of the Sand at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at
the right side, Stage 4 (At the clay boundary, 8.5m penetration)
At the last phase, the sand plug completely punches into the clay and the sand continues to ﬂow on to
the spudcan. The mobilization of the larger amount of clay particles creates additional bearing capacity at
this stage. The height of the sand plug is measured as same as in the previous stage. Formation of the soil
heave becomes more visible in Figure 4.41. It should be also noted that the passive Rankine zone cannot
be observed along the penetration, it is simply because of the inﬂuence of the underlying clay layer on the
failure mechanism.
Figure 4.40: Plastic Strain of Sand and Clay at Stage 5 (10m penetration)
==PAGE:80==
72
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.41: Eulerian Volume Fraction (EVF) of the Sand at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at
the right side, Stage 5 (10m penetration)
Abaqus/CEL Model with the real spudcan geometry:
As stated previously, the real spudcan geometry has a rectangular shape in the plan view. The real
geometrical properties can be found in Table 4.1. The width and length of the spudcan are 13.25m and
8.05m respectively. Considering the one-quarter of the spudcan geometry, the following model has been
created for this problem. In order to clarify the effect of spudcan geometry on the failure mechanism
and ﬂow of the soil layers, the plastic strain evolution and instantaneous velocity vectors of the model are
monitored within the 5 stages considering the X −Y and Y −Z sections. Please notice that the geometry
of the model is not fully symmetric, thereby the results are analyzed considering two sections: X-Y and
Y-Z shown at the bottom left corner of Figure 4.42.
Figure 4.42: Schematic representation of quarter of the whole model with real spudcan geometry
In the ﬁrst stage, the full base contact is reached and as shown in Figure 4.43, the larger shear strains
appear at the tip and corner of the spudcan considering X-Y section on the other hand in section Y-Z, shear
strains are evenly distributed along the bottom of the spudcan. The sand around the corner of the spudcan
moves along clockwise direction and the velocity vectors beneath the spudcan shows outward inclination
considering X-Y section. Contrarily, the velocity ﬁelds moves straightly to the clay boundary at Y-Z section.
==PAGE:81==
4.4. LDFE ANALYSIS WITH CEL MODEL
73
It resembles the punching shear failure mode. In Stage 2, the shear band patterns become more distinct and
compared to Y-Z section, shear bands are inclined inward direction at X-Y section. It can be because of the
inclination of the bottom surface of the spudcan. The wedge shaped active zone can be observed at both
of the sections. Considering the EVF contours, soil heave starts to appear. As it is shown in Figure 4.46,
EV F = 1 corresponds that Eulerian domain is fully ﬁlled with the sand and EVF is getting lower when
the sand start to disappear. Considering the velocity ﬁelds shown in the same ﬁgure, it can be observed
that the velocity vectors spread outwards but it is not as steep as in the simpliﬁed spudcan geometry. The
load spreading factor, ns is found to be 4.3. In accordance with those ﬁndings, it can be concluded that the
spudcan geometry has an inﬂuence on the failure mechanism of the soil.
In Stage 3, penetration depth of 5m is achieved. The plastic shear strains continue to follow the bound-
ary of the sand wedge and the shear bands at the clay are getting wider. As it can be seen from Figure 4.48,
the sand at sides of the spudcan starts to fall down into the cavity such that the wall collapses and reﬁlls
the cavity above the spudcan. In the subsequent stage, the tip of the spudcan reached the clay boundary.
The shear bands around the periphery of the sand wedge becomes wider, one of the reason could be the
contribution of the the Prandtl zone besides the sand plug. Shear bands also appear along the direction of
the inﬁll. Please also note that the bearing capacity of the clay is expected increase signiﬁcantly at this
stage and onwards because the sand plug and the spudcan mobilize soil with higher strength. At the last
stage, the sand plug completely gets into the clay layer and the height of the plug is determined to be 6.6m
from the tip and 8.1m from the full base. It is basically changing from 0.76Hs to 0.95Hs. Compared to
the sand plug geometry observed from the previous model with simpliﬁed spudcan geometry, the sand plug
has a wider length along Z direction than X direction. It is directly related to the rectangular geometry of
the spudcan.
Figure 4.43: Plastic Strain of Sand and Clay at Stage 1 (1.5m penetration)
==PAGE:82==
74
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.44: Eulerian Volume Fraction (EVF) of the Sand at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at
the right side, Stage 1 (1.5m penetration) including Section X-Y and Y-Z
Figure 4.45: Plastic Strain of Sand and Clay at Stage 2 (3m penetration)
==PAGE:83==
4.4. LDFE ANALYSIS WITH CEL MODEL
75
Figure 4.46: Eulerian Volume Fraction (EVF) of the Sand at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at
the right side, Stage 2 (3m penetration) including Section X-Y and Y-Z
Figure 4.47: Plastic Strain of Sand and Clay at Stage 3 (5m penetration)
==PAGE:84==
76
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.48: Eulerian Volume Fraction (EVF) of the Sand at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at
the right side, Stage 3 (5m penetration) including Section X-Y and Y-Z
Figure 4.49: Plastic Strain of Sand and Clay at Stage 4 (8.5m penetration)
==PAGE:85==
4.4. LDFE ANALYSIS WITH CEL MODEL
77
Figure 4.50: Eulerian Volume Fraction (EVF) of the Sand at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at
the right side, Stage 4 (8.5m penetration) including Section X-Y and Y-Z
Figure 4.51: Plastic Strain of Sand and Clay at Stage 5 (10m penetration)
==PAGE:86==
78
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.52: Eulerian Volume Fraction (EVF) of the Sand at the left and instantaneous velocity vector at
the right side, Stage 5 (10m penetration) including Section X-Y and Y-Z
Conclusion and Comparison of Penetration Curves
Penetration of different spudcan geometries into the sand overlying clay have been analyzed by moni-
toring the continuous soil movement and plastic strain evolution of the soils.
Generally, soil shows similar behaviour in all conditions, however, spudcan geometries create some
differences such as the sand plug geometries. Considering the ﬂat base geometry, the sand plug has a height
of 7.8m and its geometry resembles an inverted truncated cone shape. The sand plug height is varying from
the tip, 6.5m to the full base, 8m when the simpliﬁed geometry is taken into account, however, the geometry
is more or less the same as the one observed in the ﬂat base geometry model. The model with a rectangular
footprint shows different soil behaviour in two different sections due to the unsymmetrical geometry. The
sand plug height is also varying from the tip 6.6m to the full base, 8.1m.
Secondly, the ﬂat base circular spudcan started with a full base penetration thereby penetration curve
of that model starts from 1.5m depth (the full base) which is illustrated in Figure 4.53. Contrarily, the
base of the other spudcan have inclined surfaces, thereby contact pressures at the surface initiate before
the spudcans reached the full base. It can also be seen from the penetration curves that although the same
penetration velocities are introduced to the models, the penetration curve of the ﬂat base geometry does not
excite as much as the other ones due to the ﬂat base.
Thirdly, the interaction between the side of the circular ﬂat base footing and the sand has an inﬂuence
on the bearing capacity curve. Especially, one of the reasons behind the increase in capacity between Stage
3 and Stage 4 is the side friction. This effect is not that crucial in the other models. Furthermore, it should
be noted that the soil around the tip of the footing is activated before the full base reached in other models
thereby their curves have a different inclination compare to the ﬂat base circular geometry.
From stage 1 to 5 the resistance due to clay increases non-linearly, it is simply because of the increasing
contact area between the rigid sand plug and the clay. When the full base of the spudcan reaches the clay
boundary, the sand plug completely punches into the clay and it is clearly observed from the movement of
instantaneous velocity vectors that the clay is signiﬁcantly mobilized due to penetration of the sand plug.
==PAGE:87==
4.4. LDFE ANALYSIS WITH CEL MODEL
79
Inﬁll of the sand appears and ﬂows on top of the spudcan at Stage 3 (5m tip penetration). Spudcans
have an inclined top surface like the simpliﬁed and the real geometry are more likely to be subjected of
backﬁll and inﬁll. By comparing the velocity ﬁelds shown in Figure 4.25 and 4.37, it can be seen that it is
because of the side friction.
Failure mechanism of the sand follows a similar pattern in all conditions except minor differences. For
instance, plastic strains are initially forms at the corner of the footing considering the ﬁrst geometry, on
the other hand, plastic strains initiate around the tip when taking into account the other geometries. In the
subsequent stages, a shear band with the inward inclination can be clearly seen in all cases. The area inside
the shear band pattern basically represents the active Rankine zone. The Prandtl zone cannot be clearly
observed, it can be because of neglecting the hardening/softening behaviour of the sand. It should be also
noted that the passive Rankine zone cannot be observed from the numerical result. It is due to the fact the
sand moves downwards with the rigid soil plug instead of moving sideways and thereby, it can be concluded
that the sand plug is governing the failure mechanism of the soil.
It can be observed from Figure 4.33, 4.35 and 4.37 that the failure mechanism of the sand can not be
described only with the punching shear or the projected area method. The soil movement continuously
varying and thereby, while it resembles the punching shear method in Stage 1, it looks like the projected
area method in Stage 2. Please also notice that the load spreading factors found in the model is in the range
of 4 and 5 in all cases.
Figure 4.53: Comparison of penetration curves of different spudcan geometries
==PAGE:88==
80
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
4.5
Numerical Model in Plaxis 2D
PLAXIS 2D is used to carry out two-dimensional small strain analysis of the spudcan on sand overlying
clay. Even though it is not possible to obtain the full penetration curve of a spudcan in Plaxis 2D, the
peak penetration capacity will be checked and compared with the large deformation analysis. It should
be also noted that the Press-Replace (PR) technique (a small strain geometry update procedure) has been
introduced by Engin et al. (2015) which is capable to predict the full load penetration curve of a spudcan,
however the method has some limitations. For instance, it is not able to capture backﬂow mechanism and
signiﬁcantly underestimates the bearing capacity of a spudcan. The method is not included in this study.
The cross section area of the jack-up platforms for oil industry has mostly a circular shape and therefore,
axisymmetric model in Plaxis 2D ﬁts well with the circular spudcans. On the other hand, considering the
Jack-up Vessels for Offshore Wind Sector, spudcans can have a rectangular shape and therefore axisymmet-
ric models are not fully reliable. In order to investigate this problem, a plane strain model is also employed
considering with the real dimension of the spudcan geometry (8.05x13.25m). Example of a plane strain
and axisymmetric model is indicated in Figure 4.54.
Figure 4.54: Example of a plane strain and axisymmetric problem (PLAXIS 2017)
Despite of Abaqus/CAE, only two types of elements: 15-node triangular and 6-node triangular are
available in Plaxis 2D. The 15-node triangle element is employed for the series of analysis since it is a very
accurate element and gives high quality stress results for complicated geotechnical problems.
Figure 4.55: Position of nodes and stress points in soil elements (PLAXIS 2017)
In the Plaxis 2D models, the elastic-perfectly plastic Mohr-Coulomb model is employed to create upper
sand layer as a frictional material and the underlying clay is modelled using Mohr-Coulomb model with
the method of undrained B in which undrained shear strength, su is an input parameter. There is no need to
describe any boundary condition in Plaxis 2D, because it is automatically deﬁned as restrained in horizontal
movement at sides and ﬁxed boundary at the bottom.
==PAGE:89==
4.5. NUMERICAL MODEL IN PLAXIS 2D
81
In order to save calculation times and create a robust model, a proper mesh density is necessary to chose.
The Plaxis 2D allows for a fully automatic mesh generation of ﬁnite element meshes. Five different mesh
densities are ready to use in Plaxis changing from very coarse to very ﬁne. The mesh densities basically
varies with the relative element size factor, re, which is in the range of 2 to 0.5 and the number of elements
is inﬂuenced by the geometry and optional local reﬁnement settings (PLAXIS 2017). In this problem, ﬁner
mesh density has been assigned around the spudcan so as to increase accuracy of the result.
In Plaxis 2D, FE calculations can be separated into several sequential calculation phases. Each cal-
culation phases represents a particular loading or construction stage (PLAXIS 2017). In this problem, 3
construction stages have been deﬁned. Firstly, the soil geometry (sand overlying clay) without spudcan
geometry is selected and then spudcan geometry is activated in the following stage. The prescribed dis-
placement/loading is applied in the last stage.
The effect of updated mesh option on the model is investigated as well. The inﬂuence of geometry
change of the mesh on the equilibrium conditions can be neglected in small deformation analysis, on the
other hand, it is necessary to update ﬁnite element mesh while performing a large deformation analysis. It
should be highlighted that an updated mesh analysis can take more time and is less robust than a normal
calculation (PLAXIS 2017).
4.5.1
Plaxis 2D Axisymmetric Model
Considering the simpliﬁed circular geometry of the spudcan, the peak penetration capacity is determined
using the lower and upper bound values of the sand and the clay layer. The material properties can be found
in Table 4.2 and 4.1. Since the model is axisymmetric, only half of the geometry is created in Plaxis 2D.
The model is represented in Figure 4.56.
Figure 4.56: Axisymmetric model of the simpliﬁed geometry of the spudcan
As it can be seen in the Figure, the mesh size becomes ﬁner close the spudcan in order to enhance the
accuracy of the result. The peak bearing capacity of the spudcan has been checked by two different axisym-
metric model. 2m displacement is prescribed in one model and the corresponding pressure is introduced
==PAGE:90==
82
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
to the other model. The peak full-base resistances observed from the models ﬁt well with each other. The
comparison of the pressure and displacement induced capacity curves are shown in Figure 4.57.
Figure 4.57: Spudcan Penetration Analysis, Plaxis Axisymmetric Model including pressure and displace-
ment induced models
As described previously, the inﬂuence of geometry change is necessary to be taken into account while
performing a large deformation analysis. In this analysis, the spudcan is displaced 2m and two different
models for the lower and upper bound soil parameters have been conducted. In one of them, the updated
mesh option is selected and the inﬂuence of the option has been investigated. The results for the upper
and lower bound values are illustrated in Figure 4.58. It can be seen from Figure 4.58 that the vertical
bearing capacity of the spudcan is increasing with the depth when the updated mesh option is activated.
It is due to the fact that the stiffness matrix is updated at each load step. Furthermore, the contribution of
the side friction and the overburden pressure are partly captured. However, it should be highlighted that
both models have a distortion problem on the elements located at the corner of the spudcan, thereby, the
penetration curves are not fully representative. Besides that, the analysis started with the full base because
when the analysis run with the tip base contact, the model is not allowed to run due to highly distorted
elements at the spudcan tip boundary.
==PAGE:91==
4.5. NUMERICAL MODEL IN PLAXIS 2D
83
Figure 4.58: Spudcan Penetration Analysis, Plaxis Axisymmetric Model :Upper and Lower Bound Param-
eters with and without updated mesh
The peak bearing capacities obtained from the analyses are shown in Table 4.4. The discrepancies
between w/o updated and updated mesh models are calculated as 16% and 5% for the lower and upper
bound curves respectively.
Table 4.4: The peak bearing capacities
Peak Bearing Capacity [tonnes]
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
w/o upd. mesh
upd. mesh
w/o upd. mesh
upd. mesh
10000
11600
16600
17400
Total deviatoric strain, γs has been illustrated for the models w/o updated mesh considering the lower
and upper bound soil parameters in Figure 4.59 and 4.60 respectively. Considering the lower bound values,
soil fails around 9m depth, on the other hand soil fails around 11m depth when the upper bound values are
employed. The difference is simply because of increasing in the shearing resistance of the sand. The failure
pattern of the model is basically similar to Terzaghi’s failure pattern assumption as shown in Figure A.3.
The wedge shape active zone is formed below the base of the spudcan and a Prandtl zone can be observed
beside the wedge shape active zone. The Rankine passive zone appear beside the Prandtl zone, where the
==PAGE:92==
84
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
soil resistance is created by moving upward. It should be noted that the sand plug is not dominating the
failure behaviour and thereby, the sand is moving sideways instead of moving downwards. Basically, the
model can not capture the rigid sand wedge effect and that could be because of the distorted elements on
corner of the footing.
Figure 4.59: Total deviatoric strain of spudcan on sand overlying clay model with lower bound values
Figure 4.60: Total deviatoric strain of spudcan on sand overlying clay model with upper bound values
The inclination of the shear plane is deﬁned with the dilatation angle ψ and experimental studies per-
formed by Teh (2007) and numerical studies from Lee (2009) indicated that the spreading of the failure
surface on the clay boundary can be approximated by using the dilation angle of the sand. Figure 4.61
==PAGE:93==
4.5. NUMERICAL MODEL IN PLAXIS 2D
85
illustrates the similarities and differences between the studies (Lee, 2009). The failure surface from the
PIV test has a curved shape on the other hand it is approximated to have a linear inclination in the Plaxis
study. It is due to the strain softening behaviour of the sand. The plaxis model does not consider the strain
softening/hardening behaviour (Lee, 2009).
Figure 4.61: Comparison of incremental displacement between Plaxis result Lee (2009) and PIV results
Teh (2007)
In this study, the incremental displacement of the upper bound and lower bound soil models are mon-
itored in order to validate the prescribed assumption. The following ﬁgures show that the peak penetra-
tion resistance of the spudcan is achieved when a dispersion angle is approximately equal to the dilation
angle, ψ. However, it is important to note again that it does not represent the real case since the soft-
ening/hardening behaviour of the sand has not been considered in the Plaxis models. The incremental
displacement vectors are mainly concentrated on below the center of the spudcan and they basically follow
the failure surface of the soil model. It can also be seen from the ﬁgures that the displacement vectors are
following anti clockwise direction and this movement becomes denser at the corner of the spudcan in which
the soil heave start to form. Compared to the previous studies showed in Figure 4.61, in this study, it is
more obvious to observe the interaction between the sand and the side of the spudcan since thickness of the
full base is 0.5m. This interaction increases the peak bearing capacity of the soil.
==PAGE:94==
86
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.62: Deviatoric displacement ﬁeld of spudcan on sand overlying clay model with lower bound
values
Figure 4.63: Deviatoric displacement ﬁeld of spudcan on sand overlying clay model with upper bound
values
4.5.2
Plaxis 2D Plane Strain Model
In this part of the section, spudcan bearing capacity problem is treated as a plain strain problem in order
to investigate 3-d effect (shape factors) on the penetration capacity. It is speciﬁed previously that the real
spudcan geometry has a rectangular shape with the dimensions, 8.05x13.25m. Even though the out plane
dimension (z-direction) of the spudcan is not signiﬁcantly larger than the width of the spudcan, the problem
is modelled as a plane strain problem. The model is created sufﬁciently long enough to minimize the
boundary effects. A ﬁne mesh zone around the spudcan is created to achieve numerical accuracy. Capacity
of the spudcan has been investigated by prescribing displacement and loading in order to double check the
capacity.
==PAGE:95==
4.5. NUMERICAL MODEL IN PLAXIS 2D
87
Figure 4.64: Mesh conﬁguration of the Plane Strain Model considering with the real spudcan dimensions
Lower bound soil parameters are used for the plane strain model and the capacity of the plane strain
model has been compared with the axissymmetric model. It is found out that bearing capacity is signiﬁ-
cantly underestimated (63% of the capacity obtained from the axissymmetric model) when the plane strain
model is employed. It is simply because the capacity contribution from out-plane direction is disregarded
and displacements and strains in out plane direction (z-direction) are assumed to be zero in Plaxis 2D
(PLAXIS 2017).
Table 4.5: Bearing capacity comparisons between plane strain and axissymmetric model
Peak Bearing Capacity [tonnes]
Plaxis Model
Disp. Controlled
Load Controlled
Axissymmetric Model
10102
10185
Plane Strain Model
6459
6421
Discrepancies
0,36
0,3696
Hansen (1970) extended Terzaghi’s bearing capacity formulation by applying 5 factors and one of the
factor included in the formula is the shape factor, s as described in Chapter 2. Contribution of the shape
factor to the q-term (overburden pressure) can be calculated as follows,
sq = 1 + sin θB
L
(4.8)
When the plane strain problem is considered the effect of the shape factor is directly omitted as it is in
Terzaghi’s bearing capacity equation because it is assumed that the length of the footing is inﬁnitely larger
than the width of the footing. On the other hand, the bearing capacity is increasing when the shape factor
is taken into account in axissymmetric model.
As it is expected, a wider shear failure surface has been observed from the plane strain model since
movement of the soil is neglected along the out-plane direction. Failure surface can be seen in Figure 4.65.
==PAGE:96==
88
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.65: Total deviatoric strain of spudcan on sand overlying clay model with lower bound values
Figure 4.66 indicates the capacity difference between the plane strain and the axissymmetric model. It
is obvious that the plane strain model can not be used to get the peak capacity of a spudcan however, it
gives an idea about the contribution of the shape factor or 3-D effect.
Figure 4.66: Difference between the Plane Strain Model and Axisymmetric Model
==PAGE:97==
4.6. CONCLUSION
89
4.6
Conclusion
In Section 4, spudcan penetration analysis into sand overlying clay has been carried out by using 4 different
conventional methods and numerical methods including SSFE and LDFE analysis in commercial FEA pro-
grams: Plaxis 2D and Abaqus/Explicit. The spudcan has a rectangular shape with dimensions 13.25x8.05,
however, it is simpliﬁed as a circular shape with an equivalent diameter of 11.6m for the conventional
methods.
4.6.1
Conventional Methods
Penetration curves obtained from the different conventional methods are summarized in Figure 4.67. It
can be seen from the ﬁgure that the GEO in-house method and ISO methods give more or less similar
penetration capacities until the spudcan reaches the clay boundary. The reason for the difference in the clay
is basically because of the different bearing capacity factors used in the methods and inﬂuence of the sand
wedge. ISO methods do not consider either the sand plug effect or backﬂow, thereby it can be concluded that
the bearing capacity in the clay is underestimated, on the other hand, GEO method considers the inﬂuence
of the sand plug at the depth of 15m, however it is expected to start when the sand plug penetrates into
the clay boundary. Besides that GEO curve between 10m and 15m is almost constant because a constant
bearing capacity factor is used in the method. However, it is expected to increase with the depth as it is
proved in Figure 3.10. It should be noted that a simpliﬁed version of GEO in-house method is used in this
study and the extended version of the method covers those disregarded points.
Hu et al. method gives signiﬁcantly higher capacities compared to the other methods. It is simply
because of the following reasons
• The peak bearing capacity is obtained when the full base achieves the depth of 0.12Hs
• The contribution of the clay resistance (Nc0sum) is ampliﬁed with an algrebraic term
• Contrary to ISO methods and GEO in-house method, the method considers both the shear resis-
tance of the sand and the clay resistance at the clay boundary in which the enlarged ﬁctitious area is
employed
• By incorporating the combined geometry of the spudcan and sand plug, the resistance in the clay is
increased through deriving a new formula for the bearing capacity factor
• Buoyancy of the sand plug is also taken into account for the clay capacity
All in all, these differences create almost twice the capacity of the ones found in other methods.
==PAGE:98==
90
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.67: Penetration curve of the spudcan on sand overlying clay considering the lower bound param-
eters (left side) and upper bound parameters (right side)
4.6.2
Numerical Methods
In order to assess the accuracy of the provided conventional methods and visualize the continuous ﬂow
mechanism of the soil during spudcan penetration into sand overlying clay, numerical analyses have been
performed in commercial FEA programs. Numerical analysis of the problem include following purposes
as well
• Investigating the differences between SSFE and LDFE methods
• Robustness and efﬁciency of Wished-in Place method carried out in Abaqus/Explicit
• Comparison of Plaxis 2D/ Updated mesh with Abaqus/Explicit NLGEOM on
• Analyzing the inﬂuence of spudcan geometry on the penetration curve and soil behaviour
• Differences between Plaxis 2D Axisymmetric model and CEL Model
• Assessing the accuracy and robustness of the provided conventional methods by making a detail
analysis of failure mechanism observed in CEL analysis
• Inﬂuence of different spudcan geometries on sand plug geometry
In order to cover the aforementioned points, a simpliﬁed spudcan geometry with an equivalent diameter
of 11.6m, a ﬂat base circular footing with the same diameter and a rectangular spudcan geometry with
dimensions 13.25x8.05 have been modeled in Abaqus/CAE with using Coupled Eulerian Lagrangian ap-
proach. Wished-in place method is carried out in Abaqus/Explicit with creating 2D axisymmetric models.
Additionally, 2-D axisymmetric models have been constructed in Plaxis 2D with and without activating
==PAGE:99==
4.6. CONCLUSION
91
the updated mesh option. It should be emphasized that the simpliﬁed spudcan geometry is employed in
all 2-D models in order to be able to make a comparison of conventional methods and numerical methods.
It is important to note that elastic-perfectly plastic constitutive models, Mohr-Coulomb for the sand and
Tresca for the clay are employed, thereby hardening/softening behaviour of the soils are neglected in those
analyses.
Comparison of the Wished-in Place Method and the CEL method
In Figure 4.68, a widely used method in the industry called wished-in place method and a large de-
formation analysis technique, CEL method are compared. Both analyses have been performed in Abaqus,
Explicit version. The wished-in place method consists of 4 models which consider 4 penetration stages:
Fullbase, 3m, 5m, and 10m. The full back ﬂow is adopted into the models and a sand plug with a height
of 0.8Hs is created beneath the spudcan. By combining the converged penetration capacities at differ-
ent depths, the penetration curve is formed. It can be observed from Figure 4.68 that penetration curve
from CEL method and Wished-in place method generally has a good agreement. CEL method captures
the continuous behaviour of the soil along the penetration, but it is not the case in wished-in place method.
Therefore, the estimated "full back-ﬂow" and the sand plug height are completely not corresponding to the
real case. Beside that, in order to avoid element distortion problem, the wished in place analysis started
with full base contact, thereby activation of the element around the tip is disregarded which could give
additional mobilization of shear strength of the sand. Considering the plastic strain diagrams observed in
analysis (Figure 4.12 and 4.33, 4.35, 4.37, 4.39, 4.41), the sand plug is governing the failure mechanism in
both analysis. The geometry of the sand plug is created as a rectangular shape in wished in place method
but according to PE evolution shown in Figure 4.39 and 4.41, it has a truncated cone shape and the plug
height is varying from 0.76Hs to 0.94Hs. Besides that, the full back ﬂow is not the case as shown in the
same Figure as well. One can also claim that mobilization of the shear strength in the clay layer can not
be fully captured in Wished-in Place method and stress and strain states at the depth of interest won’t be
reliable due to the incapability of pure Lagrangian analysis. The reason of getting less capacity from the
Wished Place Method between Stage 3 and 5 (shown in Figure 4.68) can be disregarding the mobilization
of the clay and the sand and overestimated backﬂow and inﬁll of the sand. While assessing such large de-
formation problem, it is also important to save computational time. Therefore, one should take into account
that the CEL method requires a 3-D model and Eulerian formulation which is computationally expensive.
==PAGE:100==
92
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Figure 4.68: Comparison of SSFE- Wished-in Place and CEL method
Comparison of Plaxis 2D model and the CEL models
Plaxis 2D axisymmetric model started with the full base contact so as to avoid excessive distortion
caused by interaction between the tip of the spudcan and the sand. The peak bearing capacity converged
to a peak bearing magnitude of 10100tonnes. The converged value is achieved when the full base pene-
trated at depth of 0.5m. The bearing capacity curve obtained from the Plaxis model is not reliable when
the spudcan penetrates more than 0.5m due to the excessively distorted elements around the corner of the
spudcan. As it can be observed from Figure 4.69, CEL model gives the peak bearing capacity around
qpeak = 13400tonnes. It means that the capacity observed from CEL model is approximately 30% higher
than the one obtained from the Plaxis model. There are several reasons behind that. First of all, plaxis 2D
analysis is not a large deformation method and as it mentioned it has convergence and element distortion
problems under large deformations, on the other hand, CEL method allows material to move freely and
mesh is ﬁxed spatially therefore it does not have any distortion problem. Moreover, explicit analysis is
required for Eulerian analysis and which does not have convergence issue as it mentioned in Chapter 2.
Secondly, different failure mechanisms are obtained from the models as shown in Figure 4.59 and 4.34.
The failure mechanism observed from Plaxis model basically indicates a failure mechanism expected from
a homogeneous sand layer. It is simply because the model cannot capture the inﬂuence of the rigid sand
==PAGE:101==
4.6. CONCLUSION
93
wedge on the failure mechanism and as a result of this, the sand is moving sideways instead of moving
downwards. As it is shown in Figure 4.34, this inﬂuence is captured in CEL model. Thirdly, the bearing
capacity of spudcan is expected to increase further with penetration as found in CEL method due to over-
burden pressure and side friction. Those effects cannot be captured in Plaxis model. This is also proved in
Chapter 3 by performing a large deformation analysis of a circular footing into a homogeneous sand layer.
Figure 3.4 depicted that similar bearing capacities observed at the penetration depth of around 0.5m how-
ever, the bearing capacity is increased with subsequent penetration in CEL model because of the overburden
pressure and side friction. It should be also noted that the difference is increasing when a rough contact is
used in CEL model and which is the case for this problem. Fourthly, three dimensional (3D) linear brick
hexahedron elements with reduced integration (EC3D8R) are used to discretize the soil in CEL method, on
the other hand, 15-node triangle elements are employed in Plaxis Model. The quadratic mesh gives a better
result than triangular mesh because displacements are interpolated to a higher degree in quadratic than tri-
angular elements. Lastly, it is necessary to use non-linear geometry option while performing CEL analysis.
It is a beneﬁcial tool especially for the large deformation problems. It is simply because the elements are
expected to stretch under large deformations and the shape function and the stiffness matrix are updated by
employing this option. However, it is not considered in Plaxis 2D analysis thereby, the stiffness matrix is
not representative anymore when a large deformation occurs.
Figure 4.69: Comparison of Abaqus Model (Non-linear geometry-on) and Plaxis Model with updated mesh
==PAGE:102==
94
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Comparison of Plaxis 2D Model (Updated mesh on) and Abaqus/Explicit Model (NLGEOM on)
This study also investigates the inﬂuence of the updated mesh option provided in Plaxis 2D. Plaxis
axisymmetric model with using updated mesh option is compared with the 2-D axisymmetric model in
Abaqus/Explicit with NLGEOM on. Please notice that the analyses are pure Lagrangian and the models
have element distortion problems. As it is depicted in Figure 4.70, penetration curves are in good agreement
with each other and it can be concluded that the stiffness matrix can be redeﬁned by selecting the updated
mesh option. Furthermore, when the failure mechanisms of those models (shown in Figure 4.14 and 4.59)
are checked, one can observe that plastic strain diagrams are also in good agreement. In other words, none
of the models captures the effect of a rigid sand wedge on the failure mechanism and as a result of this, the
sand moves sideways. All in all, the bearing capacity of the spudcan is increased to 11700tonnes when
updated mesh option is applied and the same value has been found in Abaqus Lagrangian model.
Figure 4.70: Comparison of Abaqus Model (Non-linear geometry-on) and Plaxis Model with updated mesh
Comparison of different spudcan geometries
In addition to the aforementioned comments on the model results, it is important to emphasize that
spudcan geometry has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the sand plug geometry based on the CEL models. The
sand plug geometries can be clearly observed when the spudcan reaches the clay boundary. Considering
Figures 4.29 4.41 and 4.52, which corresponds to Stage 5 (the full base lying on the clay boundary), the
variation of the sand plug height can be observed. Especially, when the real geometry (rectangular footprint)
==PAGE:103==
4.6. CONCLUSION
95
and the simpliﬁed geometry are taken into account, the sand plug height is changing from tip to base of
the spudcan. Contrarily, it is more less constant for the ﬂat base geometry. It can be also concluded that
even though the dimensions of the sand plug show some variation, the geometry resembles an inverted
truncated cone shape. The spudcan geometry has also inﬂuence on the amount of sand deposited on top
of the spudcan. When the spudcan has a larger depth as it is in the ﬂat base geometry, the backﬁll of the
soil barely occurs since the soil is forced to take a longer route and exposed to larger side friction. When
other geometries are considered, the soil can ﬂow back on top of the spudcan easily. Besides that, wall
failure (inﬁll of the sand) is more likely to occur in the earlier penetration steps when the top surface of the
spudcan has an inclined shape. For instance, inﬁll of the sand occurred relatively quicker and easier in the
ﬂat base geometry than the other models.
Comparison of the CEL model and the conventional methods
Considering the penetration curves obtained from the conventional methods and the CEL method ap-
plied to the simpliﬁed spudcan geometry, it can be observed that the discrepancy is about 30% (check Table
4.6) which means ISO methods and GEO in-house method underestimate the peak bearing capacity of the
spudcan. It is due to the fact that the failure mechanism of the soils is continuously changing throughout the
penetration. Therefore, it won’t be fully reliable to use an enlarged ﬁctitious footing at the clay boundary
(as in the Projected Area/GEO in-house method) or the real area as used in Punching Shear Method. Figure
4.33 and 4.35 illustrate the variation of the failure mechanism. In the GEO method, the formation of the
sand plug is considered when the penetration depth reached 15m but it is clear that the sand plug starts to
mobilize the clay with higher shear strength in earlier stages. Moreover, GEO in-house method considers
Brinch Hansen bearing capacity equations for the sand part. Considering Figure 3.4, the capacity obtained
from Brinch Hansen method is equal to both the Plaxis 2D model and CEL model for the homogeneous
sand layer at the penetration depth of 0.5m. However, the difference between the capacities starts to ap-
pear with subsequent penetration. It is basically because the conventional bearing capacity equation cannot
consider the continuous ﬂow mechanism and as a result of this, mobilization of the soil cannot be captured.
Additionally, the frictional resistance on the interface between the footing and the soil is neglected in the
conventional methods. Because of those reasons, the conventional methods have limitations to estimate an
accurate penetration curve.
One can also realize that difference between Hu etal. Method and the CEL result is signiﬁcantly high.
Even though the failure mechanism estimated in the method resembles the one observed from the CEL
method, due to the algebraic term ((1 + 1.76Hs
D
tan ψ)E∗), which is used to amplify the contribution of
the underlying clay and overburden pressure, the bearing capacity is highly overestimated. It is due to the
fact that the term basically derived from the series of centrifuge tests in which limited soil and spudcan
parameters are used. The method will be validated further in the following chapter.
==PAGE:104==
96
CHAPTER 4. SPUDCAN PENETRATION ANALYSIS SAND OVERLYING CLAY
Table 4.6: Summary of the peak bearing capacities
Numerical and Conventional Methods used in the Study
Bearing Capacities [tonnes]
qpeak, LB
qpeak, UB
Conventional Methods
GEO in-house
9737
17672
Projected Area
9416
15400
Punching Shear
9050
14900
Hu etal. 2015
20425
33798
Abaqus/Explicit
CEL- 3D
13100
-
Wished-in Place- 2D
13700
-
Lagrangian Model
11700
17628
Plaxis 2D
Lag. Model
10100
16200
Lag. Model (Upd. Mesh)
11700
17100
==PAGE:105==
CHAPTER 5
Comparison of Centrifuge Test with CEL
Centrifuge modelling is a method of testing a small scale of soil model which is widely used method
to monitor the continuous behaviour of the soil under small and large deformation. It should be noted
that testing a small-scaled soil model wont be fully representative for the real soil behaviour because the
stress-strain behaviour of soil is highly non-linear in reality. The experimental centrifuge tests have been
performed in a geotechnical centrifuge located at Denmark Technical University (DTU) since 1976. The
geotechnical centrifuge in DTU can be seen in Figure 5.1. Søvsø (2017) conducted 4 different tests under
supervision of Assc. Prof. Zania. The main purpose of the tests was to determine the bearing capacity
of footing resting on layered soil proﬁle. One of the soil proﬁle was consisting of sand overlying clay
condition, that proﬁle will be further investigated by performing numerical analysis in Abaqus/CAE and
conventional analysis.
Figure 5.1: Geotechnical centrifuge located at DTU (Søvsø, 2017)
97
==PAGE:106==
98
CHAPTER 5. COMPARISON OF CENTRIFUGE TEST WITH CEL
5.1
Centrifuge Test conducted for analysis of a circular footing penetrated into
sand overlying clay
The soil sample prepared for the test is shown in 5.2. The soil proﬁle consists of a top layer of medium/dense
sand, UWA sand, which is overlying on the soft clay and the bottom layer is dense sand. Please notify
that the bottom sand layer does not affect the overall result. An acceleration of 50g has been applied to
the soil sample and before starting the testing, the soil sample was spined for approximately 6 hours for
consolidation.
Figure 5.2: Soil proﬁle tested in Centrifuge, all dimensions are in mm (Søvsø, 2017)
The soil properties have been estimated based on the CPT curves obtained from a small scaled CPT tool.
Since the results are not fully accurate, upper and lower bound estimations have been made and illustrated
in Table 5.1. Based on the summarized soil properties, the soil stratigraphy comprises a layer of medium
dense to dense sand overlying a soft clay.
Table 5.1: Soil Properties
Soil Type
γ′
φ′
su
E
µ
[kN/m3]
[deg]
[kPa]
[kPa]
[-]
Sand
8
35/30
-
35000
0.3
Clay
8
-
12/6
6000/3000
0.49
4 different circular footing models have been used for the tests. Since it is obtained a more clear
punch through depth with the largest diameter, the test with a diameter of 80mm is taken into account for
numerical/conventional analyses. Footing models are represented in Figure 5.3. Properties of the footing
are given in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Footing properties
γ
E
µ
Diameter, D
Thickness
[kN/m3]
[GPa]
[-]
[m]
[m]
Circular Footing
77
210
0.3
0.08
0.02
==PAGE:107==
5.1.
CENTRIFUGE TEST CONDUCTED FOR ANALYSIS OF A CIRCULAR FOOTING
PENETRATED INTO SAND OVERLYING CLAY
99
Figure 5.3: Model Footings when attaching in centrifuge (Søvsø, 2017)
The load displacement curve of the circular footing is observed as shown in Figure 5.4. Considering the
real footing geometry (D = 0.08 ∗50 = 4m), the peak penetration capacity is found to be 1110kN when
the normalized penetration depth reached to 0.135. After the peak strength is achieved, bearing capacity
is started to decrease because of the softening behaviour of the sand and then with mobilization of the
underlying clay layer around the sand wedge, the capacity start to increase again. It should be noted that
PIV analysis has not been performed for this test, therefore the continuous failure mechanism of the sand
and the clay can not be monitored.
Figure 5.4: Measured penetration capacity versus normalized penetration depth (Søvsø, 2017)
==PAGE:108==
100
CHAPTER 5. COMPARISON OF CENTRIFUGE TEST WITH CEL
5.2
Numerical Modelling of the circular footing
In this section, penetration of the circular footing on sand overlying clay is modeled in Abaqus/CAE. Since
the penetration reaches about 60% of the diameter of the footing, a large deformation analysis method, CEL
is applied to the problem. The footing is modeled with the Lagrangian domain while the soil and void are
created with the Eulerian domain. The dimensions of the model are set to be the same as the centrifuge test
in order to increase the accuracy of the result. As it has been done in the test, 50g is applied as the ﬁrst step
and the gravity is compensated with corresponding geo-static stresses introduced in the soil model. In the
second step, the footing is displaced with a velocity of 0.0025m/s along 20secs which is corresponding to
50mm penetration. The size of the model is large enough to avoid boundary effects. The mesh becomes
coarser from the footing to the outer edge as it is illustrated in Figure 5.5. Soil stratigraphy of the model
can be seen in Figure 5.5 as well.
Figure 5.5: Mesh conﬁguration and general view of the model
The surface of instances are in contact and general contact algorithm with penalty friction formulation
is used to deﬁne the contact between the footing and the soil. In order to be consistent with the experimental
setup, it is recommended to use smooth contact, thereby the roughness factor is 0. Results of the model are
illustrated and summarized in the conclusion section.
5.3
Conventional Analyses
Projected Area Method, GEO in-house method and Hu et al. Method, summarized in Chapter 2, will be
applied to this problem as well. It is important to note that the conventional methods have been used to
obtain the bearing capacity of the spudcan on medium dense/dense sand overlying stiff clay in the previous
chapter, on the other hand, a soft clay layer is comprised instead of a stiff clay layer in this problem.
Especially, Hu et al. method is expected to give a better result since the algebraic term in the method is
calibrated based on the centrifuge tests including a soft clay layer as well. Results of the conventional
methods are summarized in the following section.
==PAGE:109==
5.4. CONCLUSION
101
5.4
Conclusion
Considering the real footing dimensions (D = 0.08x50 = 4m), penetration capacity obtained from conven-
tional methods and numerical analyses are summarized in Figure 5.6. The Figure includes the penetration
curves for the estimated upper and lower bound values.
On the contrary to the analysis performed in Chapter 4, Hu et al. Method suits well with CEL analysis.
It can be due to the fact that the algebraic term in the method is calibrated based on the centrifuge tests
including medium dense/dense sand overlying soft clay. The peak bearing capacity from the centrifuge
result and CEL analysis are achieved around a penetration depth of 0.14Hs. which is close to observation
from the centrifuge tests performed by Teh (2007). Please notice that Hu et al. Method also addresses
0.12Hs penetration depth for the peak bearing capacity as well. The projected area and GEO in-house
methods achieved the peak capacity in the earlier penetration stage.
Figure 5.6: Comparison of the penetration curve obtained from centrifuge test and other methods
It can be observed from the centrifuge test result that after the footing reached the peak bearing capacity,
the capacity started to decrease due to the strain softening effect. However, it doesn’t capture from the CEL
analyses because the elastic-perfectly plastic material models are employed and strain hardening/softening
effects are neglected in the numerical analyses. Moreover, it can be also seen from the result that the curves
==PAGE:110==
102
CHAPTER 5. COMPARISON OF CENTRIFUGE TEST WITH CEL
of upper bound soil parameters give signiﬁcantly higher capacity compared to the centrifuge test result.
Lower bound curves of the CEL analysis and Hu et al method. show approximately 40% higher peak
capacity, on the other hand, other conventional methods (ISO and GEO in-house method) give about 18%
lower peak bearing capacity than the test. Based on those ﬁndings, it can be concluded that the actual soil
parameters have lower strength values than the estimated lower bound values in accordance with the CEL
analyses.
When Hu et al. method is compared to the other conventional methods, it can be clearly observed
that Hu et al. method gives relatively higher capacity. The similar relation has been previously observed
in Chapter 4. The reason behind this difference is basically the different failure mechanisms used in the
methods.
==PAGE:111==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion and Recommendation for
further Research
6.1
Introduction
The main purpose of this thesis is estimating full penetration curve of a spudcan to assess spudcan instal-
lation in sand overlying clay in which punch-through failure is most likely to occur. Assessing a potential
punch-through hazard is especially important for a safe operation of a jack-up vessel at the deep water
locations and extreme weather conditions due to the possibility of having limited leg and crane lengths.
Both conventional and numerical methods have been investigated and compared in order to understand
soil behaviour and critical parameters for the penetration capacity of a spudcan. Conventional methods
used in this study, consisting of the methods provided in ISO 2016, the simpliﬁed GEO in-house method
provided by GEO and Hu et al. method (2015), which is derived based on the ﬁndings from centrifuge tests
and numerical analyses. This study pays particular attention to the robustness and efﬁciency of Coupled
Eulerian-Lagrangian Method which is one of the LDFE methods. CEL analyses are performed in the
commercial FEM program, Abaqus/Explicit with using the Eulerian tool. Alternatively, 2D axisymmetric
models have been created in Abaqus/Explicit and Plaxis 2D. The Wished Place Method (widely used in
offshore industry) has been discussed and compared with CEL method. Similar and different ﬁndings
observed from Plaxis 2D and Abaqus/Explicit models have been reported as well. It is important to note
that only elastic-perfectly plastic material models have been adopted into the numerical models, thereby
hardening/softening behaviour of the soils are neglected.
This study does not only include ﬁndings from the sand overlying clay stratigraphy but also investigate
the penetration curve of a circular footing in a homogeneous soil. The ﬁndings are basically used as a basis
of penetration in sand overlying clay study. The inﬂuence of roughness factor on the bearing capacity has
been checked for the footing penetrating into the homogeneous sand layer and the bearing capacity factor
for the clay, Nc derived by G. Houlsby and Martin (2003) are validated by conducting a large deformation
analysis in a homogeneous clay.
In the last part of the thesis, one of the centrifuge test results, performed in DTU Centrifuge lab-
oratory, has been further investigated by applying different conventional methods and CEL method in
Abaqus/Explicit.
This part concludes the main ﬁndings from this study and followed by recommendation for future study.
103
==PAGE:112==
104
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION FOR FURTHER RESEARCH
6.2
Summary of ﬁndings
Main ﬁndings of the study are summarized in the following subsections.
6.2.1
Penetration Analyses in Homogeneous Soil
Penetration analyses in a homogeneous soil have been carried out both for a strip footing (see Appendix)
and a circular footing. The strip footing problem is performed in order to get familiarized to commercial
FEM programs. Analysis of a circular footing includes large deformation and thereby it is used as a basis
of the large deformation analysis in sand overlying clay.
The strip footing problem in the homogeneous sand and clay have been carried out as a benchmark
study. The sand layer is modeled with the CAP model in Abaqus/Implicit and Explicit. The implicit analysis
is terminated when the elements on the corner of the footing are highly distorted, on the other hand, the
explicit analysis could run without having any convergence problem. It is simply because iterations are not
required in the explicit analysis. The incremental displacement of an element can be updated by using the
velocity derived from the equation of motion. In the same model, the Mohr-Coulomb constitutive model is
adopted as well. The model results show that CEL method is not fully suitable for a strip footing problem
in the homogeneous sand. It is simply because of the fact that CEL method is only applicable for 3-D
models and the thickness of the model is a limit to get a proper result. Besides that, the pure Lagrangian
Abaqus Explicit model gives a similar capacity as it is obtained from the CAP model. Please also notice
that Implicit model could not run as much as the CAP model due to the lack of hardening effect.
In the second part of the benchmark study, the strip footing is analyzed when it is on the homogeneous
clay layer. It is obtained from the results that the CEL model is more robust and accurate than the pure
Lagrangian models. It is due to the fact that element distortion problem, especially on the corner of the
footing, can be avoided by allowing a material to ﬂow when the mesh is ﬁxed spatially at the background.
It should be noted that CEL analysis is computationally more expensive than the conventional Lagrangian
analysis since CEL method can be only applicable to 3-D models. The results are compared with the study
performed by Qiu and Henke (2011). It is observed from the CEL results that the rate of footing penetration
must be kept low enough to avoid the dynamic effects on the results.
Large deformation analyses of the circular footing in homogeneous soils have been carried out in Chap-
ter 3. Differences between Lagrangian analysis in Plaxis 2D and CEL analysis in Abaqus/Explicit as well
as the conventional method have been investigated. It is found out that the models suit well until a cer-
tain penetration, however, subsequent penetration created the difference between pure Lagrangian and CEL
analyses. The pure Lagrangian analysis cannot capture overburden pressure, which is increasing with depth,
as well as the side friction. Beside that the pure Lagrangian analysis does not include any updated mesh
option, the stiffness matrix would not be reliable when the elements are highly distorted. The model has
also used to perform a parametric study to investigate the inﬂuence of the roughness factor on the penetra-
tion curve. It is determined from the results that when a smooth contact is adopted to the interface between
the footing and the soil, penetration capacity signiﬁcantly decreases, on the other hand, it increases when a
rough contact is deﬁned. In other words, when the relative motion of the footing is restricted, the contact
pressure increases. Particularly, the inﬂuence of roughness increases when the footing is fully embedded.
It is also found out from the study that bearing capacity obtained from Brinch Hansen equation increasing
only with overburden pressure because the bearing capacity factors (Nq, Nγ) are constant with the depth,
thereby the bearing capacity is linearly increasing with the depth. Contrarily, coupled Eulerian-Lagrangian
approach can capture the continuous soil ﬂow mechanism during the penetration, therefore the bearing
capacity is increasing non-linearly with the mobilization of more sand with higher shear strength. Plas-
==PAGE:113==
6.2. SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
105
tic strain evolution and velocity ﬁeld of the sand indicate that the passive Rankine zone has progressively
appeared and the plastic strains are mostly concentrated on the corner of the footing.
In the same chapter, CEL method is applied to the model with homogeneous clay layer in order to
validate the bearing capacity factor derived from G. Houlsby and Martin (2003). It is observed from the
study that the bearing capacity factor is progressively increasing with the penetration and it agrees well
with G. Houlsby and Martin (2003) estimation. However, it is also proved that the Skempton Method and
Brinch Hansen Method are overestimating the bearing capacity factor for the clay.
6.2.2
Penetration Analyses of a spudcan in Sand overlying Clay
6.2.2.1
Conventional Methods
Based on the conventional analyses, ISO methods and GEO in-house method have a good agreement, on
the other hand, Hu et al. method gives signiﬁcantly higher capacity. The reasons behind obtaining a higher
peak bearing capacity can be as follows
• The peak bearing capacity is calculated when the full base achieves the penetration depth of 0.12Hs
• The method considers the contribution of the shear resistance of the sand and the clay resistance at
the clay boundary in which the enlarged ﬁctitious area is used
• In the peak bearing capacity equation, the clay resistance and the overburden pressure is ampliﬁed
with an algebraic term which is found based on the centrifuge test results considering limited soil and
spudcan parameters
The post-peak bearing capacity in the underlying clay is also signiﬁcantly higher compared to the other
methods and the reasons behind that can be attributed to the followings
• The combined geometry of the spudcan and the sandplug is considered as a composite foundation
and a new formula is derived for the clay bearing capacity factor (Nc,deep)
• Buoyancy of the sand plug is taken into account
In this study, the method is validated by two different problems. It is found out that when the stiff clay
layer is employed, the method gives signiﬁcantly higher capacity compared to the CEL result, on the other
hand, it gives a good estimation when a soft clay layer is used as an underlying layer. It can be due to
the algebraic terms which are calibrated based on the limited soil and spudcan parameters. Besides that,
similar failure mechanisms in the sand and the underlying clay are observed from the CEL analyses. It
should be noted that the failure lines are not perfectly linear, it looks more like a spiral failure surface as
observed in the centrifuge test performed by Teh (2007). All in all, the method needs further validations
and calibrations.
It can be also concluded from the observations that ISO methods signiﬁcantly underestimate the peak
and post bearing capacities. It is due to the fact that the sand plug geometry is not taken into account and
the full base is considered for the peak bearing capacity. However, it is observed from this study that the
spudcan reached the peak bearing capacity when the full base of the spudcan penetrates approximately
0.12 −0.13 times of the initial sand layer thickness. That basically conﬁrms the test results obtained from
Teh (2007). Besides that, it is validated that the load spreading factor is mostly varying in the range of 3
and 5, however, the velocity ﬁeld resembles the punching shear method at some stages. It is difﬁcult to
deﬁne the failure mechanism only with the punching shear or projected area method along the penetration.
==PAGE:114==
106
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION FOR FURTHER RESEARCH
GEO in-house method considers both the sand plug effect and soil backﬂow. The capacity ranges are
set such that the highest and lowest probable capacities are estimated. In other words, the soil backﬂow is
considered in the lower bound calculations and the lowest load spreading factor is used for the upper bound
calculations. It is important to emphasize that the method considers a constant bearing capacity factor for
the clay layer however it is validated with CEL model that it is increasing with depth. The extended version
of the method considers this effect but the one used in the study does not. It should be also noted that
the method considers the sand plug effect when the spudcan reached the penetration depth of Hs + 0.8Hs
however, regarding the numerical analysis, the sand plug start to appear in the earlier penetration stage.
6.2.2.2
Numerical Methods
Considering the numerical studies, the pure Lagrangian analyses, conducting in Abaqus/CAE and Plaxis
2D with updated mesh suit well. The main observations from the analyses are
• The stiffness matrix can be redeﬁned by activating the NLGEOM option in Abaqus and Updated
Mesh option in Plaxis 2D
• The models have element distortion problems, particularly on the corner of the spudcan
• Similar peak bearing capacities are obtained
• The failure mechanism of the models resemble a failure mechanism of a homogeneous sand layer
since the inﬂuence of the rigid sand wedge cannot be captured and the sand moves sideways
The main conclusion for this part is that the pure Lagrangian analysis is not a reliable way to ﬁnd the
peak bearing capacity of a spudcan.
In order to minimize the distortion problem and give a better estimation of the full curve, the wished-in
place method has been applied. It is observed that the curve resembles more or less the one obtained from
the CEL model. However, it should be noted that the method has some limitations and those are
• The sand plug geometry is manually adopted into the model so that it does not represent its real
geometry
• Backﬂow and inﬁll of the soil are deﬁned by the user
• Initial stress and strain state of the penetration stages is not reliable since the continuous ﬂowing
mechanism of the soil cannot be fully captured
The differences between the Wished in-place method and CEL method are basically appeared because
of the aforementioned reason. Nonetheless, one should keep in mind that the method is computationally
cheaper than CEL method, therefore, it is still one of the common method used in the offshore industry.
One of the large deformation ﬁnite element methods, Coupled Eulerian-Lagrangian method is used to
obtain full penetration curve and to visualize the continuous ﬂow mechanism of the soils. The method
basically allows the material to ﬂow when the mesh is ﬁxed spatially at the background and by this way,
element distortion problem is avoided. Since the explicit integration scheme has to be used in the model,
accuracy, and efﬁciency of the model is highly dependent on the penetration rate. A high penetration rate
can create the nonphysical dynamic effects and which decreases the reliability of the result. Furthermore,
sufﬁciently ﬁne mesh sizes need to be adapted into the model to enhance the accuracy of the result.
Penetration of 3 spudcan geometries (ﬂat base circular geometry, simpliﬁed geometry, and rectangular
geometry) are analyzed in Abaqus/Explicit with CEL method. According to the penetration curves, the
following conclusions are derived
==PAGE:115==
6.2. SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
107
• The ﬂat base geometry reached the peak bearing capacity in shorter penetration depth than the other
geometries because more sand is mobilized when the analysis starts with the full contact.
• Regarding all geometries, the peak bearing capacity is achieved when the full base approximately
reached a penetration depth of 0.12Hs
• The penetration curve of the ﬂat base geometry is less ﬂuctuated than the other geometries because
the other geometries have the inclined bottom surfaces which are more sensitive to dynamic effects
• Spudcan geometry has also inﬂuence on the sand plug geometry. The height of the sand plug is
signiﬁcantly varying from the tip to full base considering the rectangular and simpliﬁed geometries
• Geometry of the sand plug resembles an inverted truncated cone shape for all cases
• The backﬂow of the soil is dependent on the spudcan geometry. When the spudcan depth is larger as
in the ﬂat base geometry, the soil is forced to take a longer route to ﬂow on top of the spudcan and
exposed to higher friction which prevents the backﬂow
• The wall failure is more likely to occur when the spudcan has an inclined top surface
• The reason for observing relatively less capacity in the underlying clay layer for the rectangular
geometry can be attributed to the amount of soil deposited on top of the spudcan
• The soil movement during Stage 2 (3m penetration) resembles the projected area method with the
load spreading factor in the range of 4 and 5. However, it should be noted that the failure lines are
not perfectly linear. It looks more like a spiral failure surface.
This research also indicates the differences between the pure Lagrangian analysis in Plaxis 2D and CEL
analysis in Abaqus/Explicit. It is found out that CEL model and pure Lagrangian analysis gives similar
bearing capacities when the full base achieved 0.5m penetration. However, the bearing capacity from
LDFE analysis continues to increase, on the other hand, SSFE analysis stop increasing. Eventually, the
discrepancy of the peak bearing capacities is found to be about 30%. This can be attributed to the following
reasons
• Due to the element distortion problem the capacity stop increasing in the pure Lagrangian analysis
(Plaxis 2D model)
• Since the explicit integration scheme is used in CEL analysis, it does not have a convergence problem,
however, the Plaxis model has a convergence problem
• Regarding the CEL model, the capacity continues to increase because of the overburden pressure,
side friction of the spudcan
• Considering the CEL model mobilized shear strength of the clay is also captured during the interac-
tion between the sand wedge and the underlying clay
• The stiffness matrix is redeﬁned by using NLGEOM option in the CEL analysis but it is not updated
in the pure Lagrangian analysis
• Inﬂuence of the roughness factor is not captured in the pure Lagrangian model because of the element
distortion problem
All in all, it is reported in this thesis that the couple Eulerian-Lagrangian method is a powerful tool to
evaluate the punch-through risk of a spudcan footing on sand overlying clay and the behaviour of the soil
continuum can be predicted along the continuous penetration.
==PAGE:116==
108
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION FOR FURTHER RESEARCH
6.3
Recommendation for future research
The numerical analyses are carried out in this thesis considers the elastic-perfectly plastic material models
(Mohr-Coulomb Model for the sand and Tresca Model for the Clay). The inﬂuence of the different consti-
tutive models on the penetration curve of the spudcan can be further investigated and the decrease of the
capacity in the sand layer can be more clearly captured with the softening effect.
Additional numerical analysis can be performed with the ALE method to investigate differences from
CEL analysis. This study can be also extended to investigate the spudcan penetration analysis in the mul-
tilayered soil. Furthermore, this research was limited to the vertical bearing capacity of the spudcan but
further investigation can be done regarding detailed analysis of V-H-M yield surface (bearing capacity
envelope) as well.
The methods considered here can be also validated with the real site observations. During the preloading
of jack-up vessel, it is currently possible to monitor ﬂowing mechanism of the soil nearby the spudcan.
Therefore, scan analysis would be used for the comparison of the observation from CEL analysis. Moreover,
further research may be carried out in regards to leg extraction since it is one of the important issues for
jack-up vessels. Especially, when a spudcan is embedded in an undrained soil, a proper estimation of
extraction force is required for the maintenance of a spudcan after installation.
==PAGE:117==
Appendices
109
==PAGE:118==
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX A
Benchmark Study
A.1
Numerical Analysis of a Strip Footing in Ottawa Sand
In order to comprehend application of the numerical analysis on a bearing capacity problem and to compare
with a conventional approach, a strip footing is modeled in ABAQUS/CAE and PLAXIS 2D as a plane
strain model. Design parameters for this benchmark study are based on the study provided by Helwany
(2007).
The model has a 4.5m layer of Ottawa Sand and its width is 15m. The foundation composes of 0.6m
thick rigid and perfectly symmetry concrete plate. Please note that the model is assumed to be symmetric
model about a center plane. The idealization of the plane strain strip footing is represented in Figure A.14
Figure A.1: Dimension of the Strip Footing in Plane Strain Problem (Helwany, 2007)
As depicted in the ﬁgure, the base of the sand layer is ﬁxed in both horizontal and vertical direction, on
the other hand, the right and left boundaries of the model is only ﬁxed in horizontal direction. The nodal
points between the concrete footing and soil are assumed to be shared, in other words, the foundation is
perfectly in contact with the soil. Therefore, only one assembly is deﬁned in the FEM model.
Because of the high-stress concentration around the foundation, ﬁner mesh size is assigned for that
region. It is important to note that depth and width of the sand layer are selected in a way to minimize the
boundary effect on the model.
Concrete and soil parameters for Ottawa Sand can be found in Table A.1.
111
==PAGE:120==
112
APPENDIX A. BENCHMARK STUDY
Table A.1: Model Parameters
Elasticity Parameter
Elasticity Modulus, E[kPa]
Poisson’s Ratio, [-]
Unit Weight, γ [kN/m3]
Ottawa Sand
182000
0.3
19.23
Concrete
1435000
0.2
24
Mohr-Coulomb Plasticity and Modiﬁed Drucker Prager (Cap Model) are used to simulate the plastic
behaviour of the Ottawa Sand. In the following sections, the results from two different models are obtained
in ABAQUS CAE and only the result from the MC model represented in PLAXIS 2D.
Table A.2 and A.3 include soil parameter for the constitutive models.
Table A.2: Mohr-Coulomb Parameter
Shearing
Resistance
Angle [degree]
Dilatation
Angle
[degree]
Cohesion [kPa]
37
7
0
The Modiﬁed Drucker Prager or CAP model serves two main purposes: it provides an inelastic hard-
ening mechanism to represent plastic compaction since the CAP bounds the yield surface in hydrostatic
compression and it helps to control the volume dilatancy when the material yields in shear. (Dassault
Systemes 2017) Illustration of the yield surface of the CAP model is given in Figure A.2.
Figure A.2: Modiﬁed Drucker Prager/ CAP Model: yield model (Dassault Systemes 2017)
As illustrated, the yield surface has two main segments: a shear failure surface, providing dominantly
shearing ﬂow, and a "cap" intersects the equivalent pressure stress axis.
Table A.3 illustrates the parameters of a linear Drucker-Prager Model β and d are matched to the
Mohr Coulomb parameters. According to Abaqus CAE Manual (Dassault Systemes 2017) Mohr Coulomb
parameters (φ′ and c′) can be converted to DP parameter as follows,
tanβ =
6sinφ′
3 −sinφ′ ; d = 18c′cosφ′
3 −sinφ′
(A.1)
In Table A.3, R and α refer to the cap eccentricity parameter and transition surface parameter respec-
tively.
==PAGE:121==
A.1. NUMERICAL ANALYSIS OF A STRIP FOOTING IN OTTAWA SAND
113
Table A.3: Cap Model Parameter
d
β
R
α
K
0
44.56
0.4
0.1
1
It should be also noted that the cap hardening curve is built in accordance with the conﬁning pressure
and volumetric plastic strain results from isotropic consolidation test on Ottawa Sand shown in Table A.4.
Table A.4: Isotropic Consolidation Test Result for Ottawa Sand (Helwany, 2007)
Conﬁning Pressure [kPa]
35
70
105
1050
Volumetric Plastic Strain [-]
0
0.0017
0.0032
0.0464
A.1.1
Terzaghi’s Approach
General shear failure mechanism of a strip footing was created by Terzaghi in 1943. The failure mechanism
is mainly valid for a shallow foundation. Figure A.3 illustrates the general shear failure mechanism of a
strip footing.
Figure A.3: General Shear Failure Mechanism of a strip footing (Helwany, 2007)
Based on the Terzaghi’s assumption, bearing capacity of the shallow footing has been mainly created
by a downward impending motion from the triangular zone (DHE). When the radial shear zone (DHG
and EHI) has been pushed by triangular zone, eventually, the Rankine passive zones (DGC and EIF)
moves upward and it will create the soil resistance. It is important to mention that Terzaghi’s assumption
does not include the soil shear resistance above the foundation level.
Considering the assumptions that are made, Terzaghi’s equation for the bearing capacity is derived as
(Terzaghi, 1943),
qu = c′Nc + qNq + 1
2γBNγ
(A.2)
where Nc, Nq, and Nγ are the bearing capacity factors are shown below,
Nq = eπ tan(φ′) tan2(45 + φ′
2 )
(A.3)
Nc = (Nq −1) cot(φ′)
(A.4)
==PAGE:122==
114
APPENDIX A. BENCHMARK STUDY
Nγ = (Nq −1) tan(1.4φ′)
(A.5)
Terzaghi’s theory is performed to obtain the bearing capacity of the strip footing in Ottawa Sand.
It is important to clarify that the soil above the foundation level is replaced by an overburden pressure of
q = 6.89kPa in the FEM model in order to make a reasonable comparison with the conventional method
since Terzaghi’s approach does not consider the shear resistance of the soil above the foundation level.
The ultimate bearing capacity of the strip footing is obtained as follows by applying the all relevant
parameters.
qu = 0 + (6.89)(42.92) + 1
2(19.23)(0.6)(53.27) = 603kPa
(A.6)
A.1.2
Abaqus Model
In the last decade, the ﬁnite element method has been used as a main tool to deal with different types of
geomechanical problems. In this benchmark study, bearing capacity problem of a strip footing will be an-
alyzed in ABAQUS CAE by using implicit and explicit version. Abaqus/Implicit may have difﬁculty in
converging due to constitutive model complexities that may require a large number of iterations. Speciﬁ-
cally, in this case, the soil elements near the edge of the foundation can be severely distorted, because of
that the analysis can terminate. In order to clarify the difference between the explicit and implicit options,
the analysis is performed using two different versions of ABAQUS CAE.
Drucker Prager Cap and Mohr-Coulomb Plasticity models are introduced into the FEM Model to cap-
ture the soil failure mechanism of Ottawa Sand. The results from the model will be represented in the
following sections.
Reduced-integration bilinear plane strain quadrilateral elements are used for the Ottawa Sand and the
concrete foundation. The mesh conﬁguration is represented in Figure A.4.
Figure A.4: Mesh Conﬁguration
Two different steps are deﬁned in the model. In the ﬁrst step, gravity and overburden pressure are
implemented and as a second step, bearing capacity of the footing should be introduced to the model. The
bearing capacity of the footing can be applied using a concentrated load, vertical displacement or a constant
downward velocity boundary condition. In this study, a constant downward velocity of v = 1.5cm/s for a
==PAGE:123==
A.1. NUMERICAL ANALYSIS OF A STRIP FOOTING IN OTTAWA SAND
115
duration of 10sec is deﬁned as a boundary condition at the top surface of the foundation. That enables the
foundation to settle at a constant rate.
A.1.2.1
Abaqus Implicit Model
The following subsections include the results from ABAQUS Implicit and Explicit that illustrate the max-
imum in-plane principle strain of CAP model and MC model respectively. By using those ﬁgures, one
can determine the soil failure mechanism of the model and relate to the Terzaghi’s general shear failure
mechanism of a strip footing.
As it can be seen in Figure A.5, a triangular zone under the footing, a radial zone around it and a
Rankine zone below the surface can be observed. Basically, Figure A.5 validates the assumption that has
been made by Terzaghi.
CAP Model
Figure A.5: Dimension of the Strip Footing in Plane Strain Problem
Mohr-Coulomb Model
Figure A.6: Maximum In-Plane Principle Strain of Plasticity Mohr Coulomb Model
It can be obviously concluded that some soil elements on the corner of the foundation are severely
distorted.
This is because of the high pressure acting on the footing.
Eventually, element distortion
would cause a converging problem for the implicit model and the model is terminated when the ele-
ments are severely distorted. Since the model can not fully converge, the problem is also performed in
==PAGE:124==
116
APPENDIX A. BENCHMARK STUDY
ABAQUS/Explicit. The contour plots also indicate that the result from CAP model and Mohr-Coulomb
models deviates a lot since hardening behaviour is included in the CAP model so that failure plane can be
more clearly captured in the CAP model.
A.1.2.2
Abaqus Explicit Model
Terzaghi’s failure mechanism for the homogeneous sand can be observed from both Explicit CAP model
and Mohr-Coulomb model. One can obviously notice the concentration of the plastic strains on corner of
the footing in the MC model, on the other hand, it is not the case for the CAP model. It is due to the fact
that the hardening mechanism applied in the CAP model allows material to deform under applied loads as
opposed to elastic perfectly plastic material that doe not deform. As it describe previously that the explicit
integration scheme does not have a convergence problem thereby, the analyses continued until the end of
deformation stage. It should be also noted that because of the same reason, the explicit models are always
difﬁcult to control.
CAP Model
Figure A.7: Maximum In-Plane Principle Strain
Mohr-Coulomb Model
Figure A.8: Maximum In-Plane Principle Strain
==PAGE:125==
A.1. NUMERICAL ANALYSIS OF A STRIP FOOTING IN OTTAWA SAND
117
Comparison of CAP Model results from Implicit and Explicit Model in ABAQUS CAE
Vertical stress and displacement curves for the implicit and explicit analysis are illustrated in Figure
A.9. Implicit and explicit results ﬁt well until the vertical displacement reaches the magnitude of around
7cm. Afterward, the discrepancy between the data becomes larger and larger. This is due to the fact that
some soil elements on the corner of the foundation have severely distorted. When the soil element distorted,
the implicit analysis is terminated on the other hand it is possible to observe further behaviour by employing
the explicit analysis.
As it can be observed from Figure A.9, the bearing capacity of the footing is estimated to be 410kPa
in Implicit analysis and 470kPa in the Explicit analysis, on the other hand, it is found to be 603kPa by
employing Terzaghi’s equation. One can realize that the ABAQUS results are signiﬁcantly lower than the
conventional method. The main reason behind it is that the soil is considered as a rigid-perfectly plastic
material in Terzaghi’s approach so that soil fails when the bearing capacity of the soil reached, however,
the soil is modeled as an elastoplastic material with hardening in ABAQUS models. In other words, the
material is allowed to deform under applied loads and elements yield gradually.
Figure A.9: Load Displacement Curve for CAP Model
CEL Model
CEL method has been also performed to simulate the bearing capacity curve of the strip footing pene-
trating into the homogeneous sand. CEL method is applicable only in Abaqus/Explicit with the 3D mod-
eling space. The soil and the void are created as Eulerian domain and the strip footing is modeled as the
Lagrangian domain. The interaction between the footing and the soil is set as a rough contact. The footing
is displaced downwards with the penetration rate of 0.01m/s along 10sec.. Schematic representation of
the CEL model is shown in Figure A.10. Please notice that the Figure includes the EVF contour. When the
EVF void ratio is one, it means that the element is ﬁlled with void.
==PAGE:126==
118
APPENDIX A. BENCHMARK STUDY
Figure A.10: Schematic representation of the CEL model
The plastic strain of the model is depicted in Figure A.11. It can be observed from the Figure that
the plastic strain formation is concentrated at the corner of the footing. Even though the expected failure
mechanism can be seen from the Figure, the material ﬂowing mechanism is not correctly visualized until
the end of the analysis. It can be simply because of the model thickness which is deﬁned as 0.5m. It is
known the fact that the strip footing should be deﬁned inﬁnitely large in one plane, thereby the model won’t
be fully representative of this problem. It can be also concluded from the 2-D analyses, which have been
performed with the MC and CAP models, that CEL model could perform better with CAP model since the
material would be allowed to deform further. Penetration curve of the CEL analysis will be discussed in
the conclusion part.
Figure A.11: Plastic Strain Contour of the Sand
==PAGE:127==
A.1. NUMERICAL ANALYSIS OF A STRIP FOOTING IN OTTAWA SAND
119
A.1.3
Plaxis 2D Model
The strip footing problem has been also carried out in Plaxis 2D plane strain model. The footing is modeled
as a plate and the overburden pressure is described as a distributed load next to the footing. The model
dimensions are the same as in the Abaqus model. The 15 node triangle elements has been selected to get a
more accurate result. The mesh size is arrange to be ﬁner close the footing and it enlarges to the outer edge.
Mesh conﬁguration of the model can be found in Figure A.14. Mohr-Coulomb constitutive model is used
to model the Ottawa Sand. The parameters are taken from Table A.2. The strip footing is displaced 10cm
vertically. The model has been analyzed by employing the updated mesh option provided in Plaxis 2D.
Figure A.12: FE Mesh for the numerical simulation of the strip footing in Plaxis 2D
Total deviatoric strain of the model has been represented in Figure A.13. The failure mechanism in-
cludes the wedge shape active zone beneath the footing, the Prandtl zone around the active zone and the
Rankine Passive zone next to the Prandtl zone.
Figure A.13: Total Deviatoric Strain, Ottawa Sand Mohr Coulomb Model
==PAGE:128==
120
APPENDIX A. BENCHMARK STUDY
A.1.4
Results from Mohr Coulomb Model
In Figure A.14, penetration curves from different analyses are represented. It can be seen from the Figure
that Plaxis 2D models (with and without updated mesh option) follow the similar pattern until the penetra-
tion reaches 0.01m. While the model with updated mesh option is running further up to 10cm, the other
model terminated because of the element distortion problem. Please notice that the model with updated
mesh has an abrupt decrease in the capacity, this could be attributed to element distortion problem on the
corner of the footing. Abaqus/Explicit model gives also the same capacity as observed from the Plaxis Up-
dated Mesh model. Nevertheless, the capacity is progressively increasing this case. The Abaqus Implicit
model stops around 0.01m penetration, it is simply due to the converging issue. As it is described previ-
ously, the sand ﬂow cannot be correctly captured in the CEL model when the settlement passed 0.02m.
That could be because of the model thickness. As it is known, the strip footing has an inﬁnite length in one
plane however, this cannot be deﬁned in the 3D model and therefore, the ﬂowing mechanism of the sand
won’t reﬂect the real case. One can also notice from the analyses that the results from the Abaqus/Explicit
models are ﬂuctuating. It is basically because those are dynamic analysis including a penetration rate.
Terzaghi bearing capacity equation gives higher capacity compared to the numerical models since
Terzaghi’s method assumes that the soil fails abruptly when the bearing capacity of the soil reach. However,
the sand does not immediately fail in numerical models. In other words, the ultimate bearing capacity can
be obtained from Terzaghi’s equation.
Figure A.14: Load Displacement Curve for Mohr Coulomb Model including both ABAQUS CAE and
PLAXIS 2D Models
==PAGE:129==
A.2. NUMERICAL ANALYSIS OF A STRIP FOOTING IN COHESIVE SOIL
121
A.2
Numerical Analysis of a Strip Footing in Cohesive Soil
The strip footing is also analyzed in a cohesive soil by employing ABAQUS CAE Implicit, Explicit, CEL
and Plaxis 2D. The dimensions of the footing and soil layer are the same as shown in Figure A.14. The soil
parameter for conventional and numerical analysis is given in Table A.5.
Table A.5: Cohesive Soil Parameter
Elasticity Modulus,
E [kPa]
Poisson’s Ratio,
ν [-]
Unit Weight,
γ [kN/m^3]
Undrained Shear Strength,
su[kPa]
Clay
50000
0.49
19.23
100
A.2.1
Conventional Method
Prandtl’s theory is performed to obtain the bearing capacity of the strip footing in a cohesive soil. For
purely cohesive soils (φ = 0), it is assumed that the transition zone of the failure wedge of the soil becomes
circular and the bearing capacity has been formulated by (Prandtl, 1920) as follows,
qu = (2 + π)cu = 5.14cu = 514kPa
(A.7)
where cu represents the undrained shear strength of the cohesive soil.
The plane strain problem has been also solved by following Skempton’s analytical solution. A bearing
capacity factor is deﬁned by considering the ratio of the penetration depth and width of the strip foundation.
It can be calculated as shown below,
Nc = 5(1 + 0.2Df
B )
(A.8)
where Nc becomes 5.33 when the penetration depth reaches 10cm. With using the bearing capacity
factor, the capacity can be found as follows,
qu = Nc · cu = 533kPa
(A.9)
A.2.2
Abaqus CAE Model
The same steps as in the sand model are followed to create the cohesive soil model in Abaqus Implicit
and Explicit. Only, the overburden pressure is not applied to the model. The plasticity material model is
employed in the Abaqus CAE and when the material is rate independent, the yield condition can be deﬁned
by deviatoric stress which can be found as 2su for the undrained condition. The following ﬁgures indicate
the maximum in-plane principal plastic strain in the Implicit and Explicit Model. It can be basically found
out the expected failure mechanism for cohesive soil from the ﬁgures. It should be noted that even though
the elements on the corner of the strip footing is highly distorted, the implicit analysis of cohesive soil does
not have any convergence problem within 10cm prescribed displacement.
==PAGE:130==
122
APPENDIX A. BENCHMARK STUDY
Abaqus Implicit Model
Figure A.15: Maximum In-Plane Principle Strain
Abaqus Explicit Model
Figure A.16: Maximum In-Plane Principle Strain
CEL Model
The bearing capacity problem of the strip footing is also investigated by employing the eulerian tool
in Abaqus/Explicit. Normally, CEL method is efﬁcient for large deformation phenomenon, however, in
order to get familiar with the tool, CEL is applied to this problem as well. The benchmark study basically
will indicate the accuracy of the CEL model compares to the other approaches. As it mentioned in section
2.2, Large Deformation FE Analysis, 3D FEM model has to be created in the Explicit version of Abaqus in
order to make an analysis with a Eulerian domain. In the model, the footing is discretized through the use of
Lagrangian elements, whereas the soil and void domains are modeled with Eulerian elements. The footing
==PAGE:131==
A.2. NUMERICAL ANALYSIS OF A STRIP FOOTING IN COHESIVE SOIL
123
is modeled as a rigid body because it is signiﬁcantly stiffer than the soil. The void layer is created around
the footing, it is simply to capture the soil heave during the penetration. As it mentioned before, EVF is
one of the special output that basically indicate the soil movement in the spatially ﬁxed mesh. Figure A.17
and A.18 represent the EVF at the initial and last step of the analysis.
Figure A.17: EVF, initial step
Figure A.18: EVF, with 10cm settlement
The interaction between the strip footing and the soil is modeled through the use of general contact
algorithm and fully rough friction formulation has been assigned. As it is discussed by Qiu and Henke
(2011), the difference in the penetration resistance between fully smooth and rough contact found out to be
around 5% for a single clay layer but the following results include the fully rough contact. In order to save
computational time, the model is extruded only 0.5m along the out of plane (z-axis). It should be noted
that the mesh should be ﬁner around the footing and it is getting courser to the other edge. The optimum
mesh width of the strip footing is selected to be 0.015cm as a result of the mesh convergence analysis.
It should be also speciﬁed that since CEL model runs in the explicit version of Abaqus, the boundary
condition and loading has to be prescribed in velocity or acceleration, therefore one should be aware that
applying a velocity in a short time range can excite the model severely which would not give reliable results.
Considering that, the velocity is applied in long time steps to avoid excitation of the model. As it can be
==PAGE:132==
124
APPENDIX A. BENCHMARK STUDY
observed from Figure A.19, the expected failure mechanism is captured and the element distortion problem
does not occur due to the spatially ﬁxed mesh.
Figure A.19: Plastic Strain for Eulerian Domain
The bearing capacity curve is given in the conclusion part and the comparative analysis between im-
plicit, explicit and CEL model has been also done in that section.
A.2.3
Plaxis 2D Model
The same model is also performed in Plaxis 2D. The main differences between the model are the mesh size,
the element type, and the footing model. The footing is deﬁned as a plate element in Plaxis 2D, on the other
hand, the concrete footing is created as 2D plane strain instance in Abaqus models. That will basically
create the main difference between the results. As it can be seen from Figure A.20, the failure mechanism
is clearly captured in the Plaxis Model due to the well-distributed meshes.
In conventional ﬁnite element analysis, the effect of the change in the mesh geometry is neglected when
the deformation is considered to be relatively small. In case of dealing with large deformation problems, it
is necessary to employ additional terms in the stiffness matrix to consider the effect of large distortions on
the ﬁnite element equations. (PLAXIS 2017) It can be automatically done by selecting the updated mesh
option in Plaxis. However, it should be noted that an updated mesh analysis is less robust than the normal
analysis. In addition to the normal plaxis analysis, the updated mesh option is also selected to observe the
difference between the bearing capacity curves. The results are represented in the conclusion part.
==PAGE:133==
A.2. NUMERICAL ANALYSIS OF A STRIP FOOTING IN COHESIVE SOIL
125
Figure A.20: Total Deviatoric Strain, Undrained Clay, Mohr Coulomb Model
A.2.4
Conclusions
The comparative analysis between Abaqus Implicit, Explicit, CEL, Plaxis 2D Normal and Updated Mesh
analysis and conventional method are indicated in Figure A.21. Elastic perfectly plastic material model
(Tresca) is used for all analysis. It can be obviously observed that the initial slope of the curve, stiffness
values of the model are similar for different analysis. As it mentioned previously, the main difference
between Plaxis and Abaqus model is that the strip footing is modeled as plate element in Plaxis, whereas
it is created as a 2D solid instance in Abaqus model which has a depth of 0.3m. The second difference is
basically the different element types and mesh sizes which can directly affect the accuracy of the result.
The normal plaxis analysis matches well with the Prantl bearing capacity approach since the plaxis solves
the problem as in conventional ﬁnite element analysis and it does not consider the inﬂuence of the geometry
change of the mesh. Nevertheless, the updated mesh version of the plaxis analysis clearly indicates that
bearing capacity of the strip footing tends to increase with the increase in the depth that is mainly because
of the change in the stiffness matrix. The bearing capacity values in both Abaqus Explicit and Implicit
analysis gradually increase along the penetration, one of the reason can be excessively distorted elements
on the corner of the strip footing which can be observed in Figure A.15 and A.16. As stated by Qiu and
Henke (2011), an upward motion of the soil cannot be clearly captured in the implicit and explicit analysis.
The soil around the corner of the footing moves down and then moves sideways. However, the CEL result
shows a relatively constant bearing capacity after it reaches the peak since element distortion problem can
be solved by the CEL method and soil can directly move upward direction.
10cm displacement is prescribed in Plaxis Model and as well as in Abaqus Implicit model, as it can
be observed from A.21 a velocity magnitude is introduced into the explicit model which corresponds to
10cm displacement. In case of introducing further displacement, the implicit model can have convergence
problem due to the highly distorted element on the corner of footing however explicit model would continue
to run since the displacement increment of the geometry is updated with the velocities obtained from the
dynamic analysis which are not required any iterations.
==PAGE:134==
126
APPENDIX A. BENCHMARK STUDY
Figure A.21: Load Displacement Curve for Undrained Clay including ABAQUS Explicit and Implicit,
Plaxis and the conventional method results
Figure A.22 shows the bearing capacity factor for clay, Nc along the penetration of a strip footing. The
ﬁgure represents a comparison between the study done by Qiu and Henke (2011) and this study. Implicit
and Explicit results indicate more or less similar gradual increase in the bearing capacity factor. The CEL
method shows a discrepancy around 11 percentage, in other words, this study found out that the bearing
capacity factor is around 6, on the other hand, it was found to be around 5.4 in the study done by Qiu and
Henke (2011). This could be attributed to the density of the mesh around the footing. Besides of that, CEL
result from this study does not excite as much as the other study, it is simply because of the prescribed
velocity and the time step. A proper velocity should be carefully investigated in order to not excite the
model and not affect the results for this kind of models.
Figure A.22: Comparison between literature study Qiu and Henke (2011) and this study
==PAGE:135==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
ALE
Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian, page 22
CEL
Coupled Eulerian Lagrangian, page iii
CPT
Cone Penetration Test, page 41
DTU
Denmark Technical University, page 97
FEM
Finite Element Method, page 5
ISO
International Organization for Standardization, page 2
OWF
Offshore Wind Farm, page 41
OWT
Off-shore Wind Turbines, page iii
PIV
Particle Image Velocimetry, page 25
RITSS Remeshing and Interpolation Technique with Small Strain, page 21
SNAME Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers, page 2
FEM
Finite Element Method, page 4
SSA
Site Speciﬁc Assessment, page 2
UWA
University of Western Australia, page 98
127
==PAGE:136==
Bibliography
Bienen, B., Qiu, G., & Pucker, T.
(2015).
CPT correlation developed
from numerical analysis to predict jack-up foundation penetration into
sand overlying clay. Ocean Engineering, 108, 216–226. Retrieved from
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0029801815003959
doi: 10.1016/j.oceaneng.2015.08.009
Cassidy, M. J., & Houlsby, G. T. (2002, 11). Vertical bearing capacity factors
for conical footings on sand. Geotechnique, 52(9), 687–692. Retrieved from
http://www.icevirtuallibrary.com/doi/10.1680/geot.2002.52.9.687
doi: 10.1680/geot.2002.52.9.687
Craig, W., & Chua, K. (1990). Deep penetration of spudcan foundation on sand
and clay. Geotechnique(40), 541-556.
Dassault Systemes. (2017). Abaqus analysis user’s manual [Computer software
manual]. Province, RI, USA.
Engin, H., Khoa, N., Jostad, H., & Alm, T. (2015). Finite Element Analyses
of spudcan - subsea template interaction during jack-up rig installation.
Proc 3rd Int Symp Comput Geomech. doi: DOI10.1201/b18442-193
Guidelines for jack-up rigs with particular reference to foundation integrity
(Standard). (2004). Norwich, U.K: Health and Safety Executive.
Guidelines for the Selection and Operation of Jack-ups in the Marine Renewable
Energy Industry (Standard). (2013). U.K: UK, Renewable.
Hansen, J. (1970). A revised extended formula for bearing capacity. Copen-
hagen.
Haselbach, P. U. (2018). Advanced ﬁnite element simulations using abaqus,
lecture slides. DTU.
Helwany, S. (2007). Applied soil mechanics with abaqus applications.
Hossain, M., Randolph, M., Hu, Y., & White, D. (2006). Cavity Stability and
bearing capacity of spudcan foundation on clay. Proc., Oﬀshore Technol-
ogy Conf., Houston, OTC 17770(1).
Houlsby, G., & Martin, C. (2003). Undrained bearing capacity factors for conical
footings on clay. Geotechnique, 53(5), 513-520.
Hu, P. (2015). Predicting punch-through failure of a spudcan on sand overlying
clay.
Hu, P., Stanier, S., Cassidy, M., & Wang, D.
(2015a).
A compari-
son of full proﬁle prediction methods for a spudcan penetrating sand
overlying clay.
Geotechnique Letters 5, 131-139(5).
Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1680/geolett.15.00051
Hu,
P.,
Stanier,
S.,
Cassidy,
M.,
&
Wang,
D.
(2015b).
Eﬀect
of footing shape on penetration in sand overlying clay.
Interna-
tional Journal of Physical Modelling Geotechnics.
Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1680/jphmg.15.00013
Hu, P., Wang, D., Cassidy, M. J., & Stanier, S. A.
(2014).
Predicting
the resistance proﬁle of a spudcan penetrating sand overlying clay.
Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 51(10), 1151–1164.
Retrieved from
http://www.nrcresearchpress.com/doi/10.1139/cgj-2013-0374
doi: 10.1139/cgj-2013-0374
Hu,
P.,
Wang,
D.,
Stanier,
S.
A.,
&
Cassidy,
M.
J.
(2015,
8).
Assessing
the
punch-through
hazard
of
a
spudcan
on
sand
overlying
clay.
G´eotechnique,
1–14.
Retrieved
from
==PAGE:137==
http://www.icevirtuallibrary.com/content/article/10.1680/geot.14.P.097
doi: 10.1680/geot.14.P.097
Hu, Y., & Randolph, M. F. (1998, 5). A practical numerical approach for large
deformation problems in soil. International Journal for Numerical and
Analytical Methods in Geomechanics, 22(5), 327–350. Retrieved from
Kellezi, L., & Kudsk, G. (2009). Spudcan Penetration FE Simulation of Punch-
Through for Sand over Clay. International Jack-up Conference.
Khoa, D. V. H. (2013). Large Deformation Finite Element Analysis of Spudcan
Penetration in Layered Soils. Proc 3rd Int Symp Comput Geomech, 26,
570-585.
Khoa, D. V. H., & Jostad, H. P.
(2016, 9).
Application of Coupled
Eulerian-Lagrangian Method to Large Deformation Analyses of Oﬀ-
shore Foundations and Suction Anchors.
International Journal of
Oﬀshore and Polar Engineering,
26(3),
304–314.
Retrieved from
http://www.isope.org/publications/journals/journalSeptember16.htm
doi: 10.17736/ijope.2016.tm78
Lee, K. (2009). Investigation of potential spudcan punch-through failure on
sand overlying clay.
Lee, K. K., Cassidy, M. J., & Randolph, M. F. (2013). Bearing capacity on
sand overlying clay soils: experimental and ﬁniteelement investigation of
potential punch-through failure.
Geotechnique, 63(15), 1271-84, 1271-
1284. doi: 10.1680/geot.12.P175
Liu,
J.,
Yu,
L.,
Zhou,
H., & Kong,
X.-j.
(2014,
3).
Bearing ca-
pacity and critical punch-through depth of spudcan on sand over-
lying clay.
China Ocean Engineering, 28(1), 139–147.
Retrieved
from http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s13344-014-0011-x
doi:
10.1007/s13344-014-0011-x
Meyerhof, G., & Hanna, A. (1980). Ultimate bearing capacity of foundation on
layered soils under inclined loads. Proceedings of conference on oﬀshore
site investigation and geotechnics- diversity and sustainability(15), 565-
572.
Okamura, M., Takemura, J., & Kimura, T.
(1998).
Bearing Capacity
Predictions of Sand Overlying Clay Based on Limit Equilibrium Meth-
ods.
SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS, 38(1), 181–194.
Retrieved from
http://joi.jlc.jst.go.jp/JST.Journalarchive/sandf1995/38.181?from=CrossRef
doi: 10.3208/sandf.38.181
Osborne, J., & Paisley, J. (2002). Asia jack-up punch throughs: the way forward.
Proceedings of conference on oﬀshore site investigation and geotechnics-
diversity and sustainability, 301-306.
Petroleum and natural gas industries-Site-speciﬁc assessment of mobile oﬀshore
units (Standard). (2016). Geneva, Switzerland: ISO.
Plaxis Company. (2017). Plaxis manual [Computer software manual]. P.O. Box
572 2600 AN Delft The Netherlands.
Potts, D. M., & Zdravkovic, L. (1999). Finite element analysis in geotechnical
engineering theory.
Prandtl, L. (1920). Uber die eindringungsfestigkeit (harte) plastischer baustoﬀe
und die festigkeit von schneiden.
Qiu, G., & Grabe, J. (2012). Numerical investigation of bearing capacity due
to spudcan penetration in sand overlying clay. Marine Structures, 49(12),
1393-1407.
==PAGE:138==
Qiu,
G.,
&
Henke,
S.
(2011,
10).
Controlled
installa-
tion
of
spudcan
foundations
on
loose
sand
overlying
weak
clay.
Marine
Structures,
24(4),
528–550.
Retrieved
from
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0951833911000645
doi: 10.1016/j.marstruc.2011.06.005
Robertson. P.K., R. G. D., Campanella, & Greig. (1986). Use of Piezometer
Cone data In-Situ86 Use of In-situ testing in Geotechnical Engineering.
(6), 1263-1280.
SBO. (2014).
Retrieved from https://www.swireblueocean.com/en/media-room/photos/
Skempton, A. (1951). The bearing capacity of clays. Proc. Building Research
Congress, 140(1), 180-189.
Sovso, S. (2017). Behaviour of footings in layered soil. DTU.
Teh, K. (2007). Punch-through of spudcan foundation in sand overlying clay.
Terzaghi, K. (1943). Theoretical soil mechanics.
Tho, K., Leung, C., Chow, Y., & Swaddiwudhipong, S. (2012, 2). Eulerian
Finite-Element Technique for Analysis of Jack-Up Spudcan Penetration.
International Journal of Geomechanics, 12(1), 64–73.
Retrieved from
http://ascelibrary.org/doi/10.1061/%28ASCE%29GM.1943-5622.0000111
doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)GM.1943-5622.0000111
Tillessen, T. (2010). High demand for wind farm installation vessels. Hansa
International Maritime Journal, 147, 170-171.
Timoshenko, J., S. & Goodier. (1951). Theory of elasticity.
Ullah, S. N., & Hu, Y. (2017). Peak punch-through capacity of spudcan in sand
with interbedded clay: numerical and analytical modelling. Can. Geotech.
J.. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1139/cgj-2016-0597
Wang, D., Bienen, B., Nazem, M., Tian, Y., Zheng, J., Pucker, T., & Randolph,
M. F. (2015, 4). Large deformation ﬁnite element analyses in geotechni-
cal engineering. Computers and Geotechnics, 65, 104–114. Retrieved from
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0266352X1400233X
doi: 10.1016/j.compgeo.2014.12.005
Yu, L., Zhou, H., Gao, W., Liu, J., & Hu, Y.
(2011).
Spudcan Pen-
etration in Clay-Sand-Clay Soils.
In Volume 7:
Cfd and viv; oﬀ-
shore geotechnics (Vol. 7, pp. 855–860).
ASME.
Retrieved from
http://proceedings.asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/proceeding.aspx?articleid=1625523
doi: 10.1115/OMAE2011-49316
Zania, V. (2017). Advanced soil mechanics, lecture slides. DTU.
Zheng,
J.,
Hossain,
M.,
&
Wang,
D.
(2013).
3D
Large
De-
formation
FE
Analysis
of
Spudcan
Foundations
on
Layered
Clays
Using
CEL
Approach.
,
803–810.
Retrieved
from
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-642-32814-5105
doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-32814-5 105
Zheng, J., Hossain, M. S., & Wang, D.
(2015, 12).
Numerical Mod-
eling of Spudcan Deep Penetration in Three-Layer Clays.
Inter-
national Journal of Geomechanics, 15(6), 04014089.
Retrieved from
http://ascelibrary.org/doi/10.1061/%28ASCE%29GM.1943-5622.0000439
doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)GM.1943-5622.0000439
