==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Predicting and Visualising Emergency Room
Waiting Times
Adama Camara, Filip Gusak
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
The thesis, Predicting and Visualising Emergency Room Waiting Times, was
prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a
Masters degree in Digital Media Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, July 22, 2018
Adama Camara, Filip Gusak
s152187, s152180
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Writing a thesis is a time consuming and demanding process. We would therefore like
to thank a group of people who helped and guided us through this hard period.
We would like to thank our two professional supervisors, Per Bækgaard and Frank
Ulrich, for giving us the opportunity to work with this topic and project as our Mas-
ter’s Thesis. Likewise we would like to thank them for providing us with valuable and
insightful feedback throughout our meetings in order to keep improving the project.
We would as well like to thank the ED of Hvidovre Hospital, for the opportunity
to work with a project like this in close hands with real patients of the ED, so we
together can form a valuable product.
we would especially like to thank, Development Nurse -Ditte Gram Bek and
Leading Chief Physician Christan Rasmussen for their mutual cooperation in
order to help us develop a possible solution.
Furthermore we would like to thank all the patients who were willing to participate
and talk to us in order to help us proceed with our project.
We would as well like to thank our family and friends for their support and kind-
ness.
We could not have succeeded with this project, if it was not for you, and for that we
are truly thankful to each and everyone.
Thank you all.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Emergency Departments are usually associated with long waits and lack of informa-
tion. Sitting for hours without receiving any kind of information is an experience,
many patients have been through. Despite many solution attempts to solve the prob-
lems of the ED, the lack of information problem still persist. This thesis aims to solve
this problem. By exploring the literature of EDs, and then design a solution that,
will provide information to the patients.
This study presents a research on Emergency Departments (ED), where the focus
lies within Hvidovre ED. We used a literature search and performed a Literature Re-
view to explore the state-of-the-art of EDs.
The study is divided into three iterations, which uses the process of Lean UX to
iterate and validate the progress. The 1st iteration investigates the problem, ”the
lack of information of the waiting times” at the Hvidovre ED. Here we developed a
Semi-Structured interview to the patients, in order to see if our solution solves the
problem. The 2nd iteration investigates if a User-Centred Design (UCD) solution
can enhance the understanding of our solution. We test this using a Think-Aloud
test, where we have structured 4 user tasks, which we ask the participant to perform.
The 3rd iteration measures the effect of our solution through a defined empowerment
measurement tool. Here we want to measure if patients become more empowered
using our solution. This is measured through a questionnaire.
With the use of a Literature Review, 53 relevant articles were found. The literature
showed a knowledge-gap in the patient-centred solution field of EDs, thus creating the
scope of this study. From the first iteration, we acknowledged that our solution did
solve the problem with the lack of information in the ED, however results indicated
room for improvements. From the second iteration, we could conclude that using
a UCD approach, enhanced the understanding on the solution, thus indicating that
UCD has an impact of understanding. The results from third iteration showed a sta-
tistically significant difference of 1.92 in the mean for patients who saw our solution
compared to the patients who did not see it. Based on these findings we confirmed
that patients became more empowered seeing our solution, compared to patients who
did not see it.
==PAGE:6==
Resumé
Skadestuer er generalt associeret med lange ventetider, og manglende information.
At sidde og vente uden at have nogen form for information er noget mange patienter
har oplevet. På trods af der har været mange løsningsforslag på at løse problemer
forbundet til skadestuen, så er manglende information stadigvæk et problem. Dette
speciale har til formål om at løse denne problemstilling. Ved at udforske litteratur af
skadestuer, derefter udarbejde en designløsning, vil give den manglende information
til patienterne.
Dette speciale præsenterer research på skadestuer, hvor fokusset ligger på Hvidovre
skadestue. Vi har brugt en litteratursøgning og udarbejdet et litteraturstudie for at
udforske state-of-the-art.
Specialet er opdelt i tre iterationer, som benytter sig af processen, Lean UX, til at
iterere og validere fremskridtene. Den første iteration udforsker problemet, ”man-
glende information af ventetider” på Hvidovre skadestue. Vi fik udarbejdet et Semi-
Struktureret interview til patienterne, for at se om vores løsning løste det givne
problem. Den anden iteration udforsker hvorvidt Brugercentret Design har en effekt
på brugerforståelsen af vores løsning. Dette er testet via en Think-Aloud test, hvor
vi har struktureret 4 user-tasks, som de er blevet spurgt om at udføre. Den tredje
iteration måler effekten af vores løsning, via et defineret empowerment måleværktøj.
Her vil vi gerne måle om patienter bliver mere empowered ved brug af vores løsning.
Dette er målt via et spørgeskema.
Ved brug af et litteraturstudie, fandt vi 53 relevante artikler. Litteraturen viste en
videnforskel i patient-fokuseret løsninger, som dermed skabte fokusset for specialet
vores speciale fokus. Fra den første iteration erkendte vi, at vores løsning løste prob-
lemet, ”manglende information af ventetider”, men resultaterne viste dog at der var
plads til forbedringer. Fra den anden iteration kunne vi konkludere, at ved hjælp
af en Brugercentret tilgang blev forståelsen forbedret af løsningen. Dette indikerer
at Brugercentret Design har indflydelse på forståelsen. Resultaterne fra tredje iter-
ation viste en statistisk signifikant forskel på 1,92 i gennemsnittet for patienter der
så vores løsning, sammenlignet med de patienter, der ikke så den. Baseret på disse
fund bekræftede vi, at patienterne blev mere empowered når de så vores løsning
sammenlignet med patienter, som ikke så den.
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
ED
Emergency Department
ER
Emergency Room
UX
User Experience
UCD
User-Centred Design
SP
Sundhedsplatformen
LUP
Landsdækkende Undersøgelse for Patientoplevelser
DSRM
Design Science Research Methodology
MVP
Minimum-Viable-Product
IS
Information System
DEPT
Danish Emergency Process Triage
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Abstract
iii
Resumé
iv
Nomenclature
v
Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Project Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Project Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Research Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
6
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Literature search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Analysing the Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Patients Experiences - LUP 2017
18
4
Theory
21
4.1
Triage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Crowding Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Lean Method - User Experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Independent-samples T-test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.5
Gamification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:9==
Contents
vii
5
1st Iteration - Finding the problem
27
5.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Design & Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.5
Sub Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
2nd Iteration - User Centred-Design
37
6.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
User-Centred Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Design and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.6
Sub Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7
3nd Iteration - Patient Empowerment
49
7.1
Definition of Patient Empowerment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.2
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.3
Design and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.4
Measuring Patient Empowerment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.5
Survey Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.6
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.7
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.8
Sub Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
8
Discussion
63
8.1
Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
8.3
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
9
Conclusion
68
A
70
B
73
C
80
D
81
Bibliography
104
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Waiting at the emergency departments at the hospitals, can be frustrating at times,
sitting there and waiting for several hours, not knowing when it is your turn. As
expressed in (LUP 2018), many patients are unhappy and unsatisfied of the missing
information at the ED in Denmark.
We therefore want to develop a possible solution that can provide information to
the patients. We hope that our solution will provides value to the ED of Hvidovre
Hospital. More specifically, we hope that we can help to improve the quality of life
for the patients in distress. Since everyone could potentially be a patient at the ED,
then our solution can be great help to many people.
1.2
Problem Statement
Many patients feel neglected and overseen when they do not receive any information
about their current waiting time. This carries out many frustrations towards the
hospital staff, which has a negative effect on their working environment (Martin et al.
2017).
Hospitals have tried for a period of time to fix problems connected to the EDs. They
have used everything from research papers to different strategies from the business
world to solve the problems of the EDs (LLC 2017). In some situations, hospitals
have discarded entire processes, such as the traditional triage system to improve the
service quality for the patients. Other hospitals have begun using software to monitor
the waiting time of the EDs, and used the data to predict bottlenecks before they
even happen (LLC 2017).
According to (AHH 2017) more than 500.000 patients went through the ED of ”Re-
gion Hovedstaden”. Unfortunately, 71 % of the patients in Denmark are unsatisfied
with the lack of information about their waiting time (LUP 2018). Action is needed
if we want to improve the patients experience in Denmark.
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Project Goals
2
1.3
Project Goals
• Identify the problems of Hvidovre Hospital ED, through literature and through
the patients and staff.
• Develop a User-Centred-Design (UCD) solution with the focus on the patients
at the ED of Hvidovre Hospital. This is done, with the use of user experience
goals (Sharp et al. 2011) and values from the Value Pyramid (Almquist et al.
2016). The aim for this goal is to identify that UCD has an impact on the
patient’s understanding.
• Develop a measurement tool to measure the effect of the solution, based on our
empowerment features (Chamberlin 1997; Aujoulat et al. 2008). The aim for
this goal is to prove that the solution increases the empowerment score for the
patients in the ED, when used.
1.4
Project Structure
The structure of the thesis consists of 9 chapters, which are divided into 4 parts, as
illustrated in Figure 1.1 (Chapter 1 excluded).
Figure 1.1: Project Structure of the thesis
The Literature Approach consists of 3 chapters. Chapter 2, introduces the reader
with a Literature Review that provides an overview over the relevant literature of the
Emergency Departments. Chapter 3, presents the ”State-Of-The-Art” on the patients
experiences in the ED of Denmark. Chapter 4, provides the reader with the necessary
background knowledge in order to understand the used methods in the thesis.
==PAGE:12==
1.5 Research Design
3
Based on the findings in the Literature Review, our scope of the study was estab-
lished. This process made us aware of that there was a lack of research in patient-
centred solutions. This is explored in Chapter 5 & 6.
The Inductive & and Explorative Approach consists of 2 chapters in the form
of two iterations.
In Chapter 5, we investigate the problems at the ED of Hvidovre Hospital, where we
make our initial design in order to validate if it can solve the found problems, thus
ending up with a product. In Chapter 6 we implement a User-Centred Design (UCD)
to our product from the results in Chapter 5, in order to validate if a UCD approach
had an improved impact on the product.
Now with a product in hand, the next objective was to evaluate its effect on the
patients in the ED. Therefore a measurement tool is needed, in order to measure its
impact. This was done in Chapter 7.
The Deductive & Evaluation Approach consists of the 3rd and final iteration
of the thesis. Chapter 7 covers our definition of patient empowerment, redesigning
our product with patient empowerment features, the process behind the creation of
the patient empowerment measurement tool and the results from using it.
The Collective Summary consists of an overall discussion and conclusion of the
thesis, where we discuss and conclude various results, implications and limitations
throughout the previous chapters.
1.5
Research Design
Natural Science usually focus on problem understanding and explanation, while the
focus of Design Science Research is problem solving (Niehaves 2007). This process is
achieved with the use of artifacts that are human-made objects, which are used to
problem-solve experiences in practice (Johannesson et al. 2014).
From a methodological perspective, this thesis follows the principles of ”Design Sci-
ence Research Methodology” (DSRM). DSRM incorporates principles, practices and
procedures, which are required to carry out Design Science. It has the following three
objectives: consistency with prior literature, a nominal process model for doing design
research and a mental model for presenting and evaluating Design Science Research
in an information system (Peffers et al. 2007).
==PAGE:13==
1.5 Research Design
4
DSRM consists of 6 steps:
1. Problem identification and motivation
2. Definition of the objectives for a solution
3. Design and development
4. Demonstration
5. Evaluation
6. Communication
Inspired by (Peffers et al. 2007), we used the DSRM Process Model to demon-
strate and evaluate our methodology, which is illustrated in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: DSRM - Adopted from (Peffers et al. 2007)
Problem-Centred Approach
A Problem-Centred Approach was chosen as the entry point, based on the finding in
the Literature Review results. The results indicated that patient-centred solutions
had not been explored yet. The lack of patient-centred solutions could be the reason
behind unresolved problems of the emergency departments.
Problem Identification and Motivation
The results of Literature Review made it clear that the EDs throughout the world
faced various problems (Boyle et al. 2012; Hoot et al. 2008; Lederman et al. 2015;
Sivey 2017). As stated in Section 1.1, based on the survey made by (LUP 2018),
showed that the patients in Denmark are unhappy and unsatisfied in not receiving
any information at the ED. Furthermore, the problems were explored during the vis-
its at the ED of Hvidovre Hospital.
==PAGE:14==
1.5 Research Design
5
Objective of the Solution
The objective was to develop a visual waiting system to the Emergency Department
of Hvidovre Hospital. The purpose of this artifact was to provide information to the
patients, thus making it possible for the patients to determine the amount of time
it was required to wait, before seeing the doctor. The purpose of the visual waiting
system was to provide a rich environment that would enable an improvement of the
user experience for the patients, and improve the working environment for the staff
of the ED in Hvidovre Hospital.
Design and Development
We incorporated methods from UX Lean (Klein 2013) and UCD (Sharp et al. 2011)
in order to provide the best possible understanding of the design features. This was
an iterative process where the patients of Hvidovre ED were the central component.
Demonstration
After developing a Minimum-Viable-Product (MVP), the artifact was tested on the
patients of Hvidovre ED. The tests consisted of semi structured interviews, usability
tests and questionnaires.
Evaluation
Based on the test results from the visits at the ED, we realised that the artifact had
an impact on the problem. The problem lied within the lack of information, we then
realised that we could solve the problem with our solution, although the solution
could be improved further. Therefore, we iterated and validated to improve the effec-
tiveness of the artifact, until reaching satisfying results.
Communication
In the current state of the project, none of our findings have yet been published. If
the option appears, then our belief is that our research and findings would provide
value to researchers & practitioners both.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
The structure of our Literature Review has been inspired from the work of (Müller
et al. 2013).
The scope of this chapter is to establish an overview of the state-of-the-art of emer-
gency departments.
The first section is a short introduction to the subject, where we present the pur-
pose a short summary of the literature review.
The second section consists of a detailed description of the literature search process,
where we define our search parameter and its outcome.
In the third section we analyse our findings from the literature search, by imple-
menting a logical structure in the form of components.
In the last three sections we interpret the results, followed by a discussion and a
conclusion.
2.1
Introduction
It is common knowledge that EDs are notorious for their crowding, long waits, end-
less forms and inconsistent care (LLC 2017). This problematic situation often leads
to negative relationships between patients and caregivers (Martin et al. 2017). The
current queuing system of the EDs do not provide any information about the treat-
ment priority process, thus giving the patient the feeling of being neglected, if other
patients that arrived later receive treatment before them. The patients then take
their frustration out on the hospital staff, demanding an explanation of the situation,
which then forces the staff to make an attempt to explain the complex priority system
in simple terms. This situation is of course not ideal for the hospital staff, since there
are associations with staff sickness and burnout. This creates consequences in the
form of increased absence of the experienced staff, which forces the junior staff to
take over their work, thus delivering an inefficient service (Boyle et al. 2012).
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Literature search
7
Despite the importance of well working emergency departments and their issues,
no attempt has been made to create an overview over the state-of-the-art knowledge
of emergency departments. The purpose of this Literature Review is to fill the gap
of this missing information. We have reviewed the literature by searching through
various journal databases. Through this process we found 443 hits, and through an
exhaustive and systematic search, we identified 53 relevant articles.
Inspired by the work of (Webster et al. 2002) we categorised our findings into 5
key components. Compared to the literature, our literature review reveals a need for
more research on patient-centred solutions. Furthermore, the findings of the litera-
ture review helped us to scope the purpose of our thesis, which made it possible for
us to locate where the real problem was.
2.2
Literature search
The literature search was inspired by Webster. Webster advice was to first look into
the top journals (Webster et al. 2002), because their work usually have the biggest im-
pact on the field. To that end, a search was performed on different journal databases
like Scopus, ProQuest and Google Scholar. One of the search criteria was that only
peer reviewed publications were used. Figure 2.1 illustrates an overview of the search
and selection process. The reason behind using multiple search facilities was because
it would provide more results. The following search parameter was used:
”Hospital Emergency Department” AND ”Waiting time” AND (ESTIMATION OR
visualising OR Technology OR Patient)”.
This search resulted into a sum of 443 hits.
The second step consisted of going through all the hits from the search and man-
ually selecting the relevant articles. This was done by using a three-step check-list
for the article screening(Okoli et al. 2010). By following the guidelines of Okoli the
research keywords were grouped and categorised, thus making the filtering process
easier, hence Appendix A.1. This process gave a result of 52 relevant articles.
In the third step a forward and backward search was conducted on the 52 articles.
This process identified 29 more relevant articles, thus making it a total of 81 relevant
articles.
The purpose of step 4, which was the final step in the literature search, was to
determine that the found articles were relevant and to make sure that the articles did
not share the same research and results. If the content in a journal shared too many
similarities with another journal, it was removed. This manual selection process re-
moved 28 articles, cutting the remaining articles down to 53.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Literature search
8
Figure 2.1: Literature search and selection - Adapted from (Mullins et al. 2014)
==PAGE:18==
2.3 Analysing the Literature
9
2.3
Analysing the Literature
Before analysing the found literature it was required to structure the articles in a
logical and structural way. For this purpose a concept-centric approach was used, be-
cause concepts determine the organising framework of a review (Webster et al. 2002).
Webster recommend that before synthesising each component, you should take some
time to develop a logical approach to group and present the key concepts you have
uncovered. Therefore following the key concepts that were developed, can been seen
in Table 2.1.
The components are divided into 5 parts, which together cover all the found lit-
erature. The problem component consists of all the issues that the ED faces and
its consequences.
The Solution component is about the various solving attempts
that either improves or solves the ED problems. The Patient component, covers the
literature which emphasises on patient surveys, experiments and patient specific in-
formation. Finally there are the two last components, Geography and Triage. The
Geography component, consists of ”national level” literature and the Triage compo-
nent, covers knowledge like information and changes.
Keywords for each Component
Component
Theme
Keyword
Problem
The different issues and
consequences ER faces.
Crowding, consequence, issue,
waiting time.
Solution
Strategies and conditions to improve
or solve the issues ER faces.
Technology, management, staff,
estimation, visualising.
Patient
Conditions and surveys of patient
satisfaction.
Surveys, patient satisfaction
Geography
National perspective of ER(s).
International comparison of ER(s)
International, perspective, national.
Triage
Condition of triage system.
New strategies to improve it.
Process management, staff.
Table 2.1: Concepts and their keywords and themes
Each article was then analysed and sorted to its respectively concept. Table 2.2 is an
illustration of all the 53 articles categorized by components and references.
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Results
10
References for each Component
Component
Reference
Problem
(Sivey 2017; Lederman et al. 2015; Cremonesi et al. 2015; Di Somma et al. 2015; Hoot et al. 2008)
(Boyle et al. 2012; Krochmal et al. 1994; Bindman et al. 1991; Fayyaz et al. 2013; Asplin et al. 2003)
Solution
(Wang et al. 2015; Kuo et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2014; Romano et al. 2015; Churilov 2007; Huang et al. 2013)
(Romano et al. 2015; Cerrito et al. 2005; Chen et al. 2011a; Aroua et al. 2017; Bruballa et al. 2018; Wiler et al. 2010)
(Chen et al. 2011b; Olshaker 2009; Takakuwa et al. 2007; Kuo et al. 2016; Abdulwahid et al. 2016)
(Asha et al. 2013; Subash et al. 2004)
Patient
(Soares et al. 2015; McMillan et al. 1986; Thompson et al. 1996; Ozsahin et al. 2014; Hall et al. 1996)
(Goodacre et al. 2005; Zengin et al. 2012; Bichel-Findlay et al. 2009; Mohsin et al. 2007; Carrasquillo et al. 1999)
(Sun et al. 2013)
Geography
(Pines et al. 2011; Pitts et al. 2012; Mullins et al. 2014)
Triage
(Montefiori et al. 2017; Harding et al. 2011; Adeniji et al. 2016b; Clifford-Brown et al. 2010; Quitt et al. 2009)
Table 2.2: All the references categorised in components
2.4
Results
In our literature search we revealed 53 articles out of the initial search that produced
443 articles. Figure 2.2 shows the distribution of articles across the 6 components.
The majority, 38% (20 articles) fall within the Solution component, 23% (12 articles)
is from the Problem component, 23% is from the Patient component, whereas Triage
and Geography account for 10% (5 articles) and 6% (3 articles) respectively.
Figure 2.2: Distribution of components in percent
==PAGE:20==
2.4 Results
11
Problem
There has been a fair number of researchers that have explored the problems of the
ED. 23% (12) of the articles concerns about the problems Emergency Department
faces today. Research findings show that the problem ED faces, are still relevant
today and will only get worse in the future if the issues are not handled. (Boyle et al.
2012; Di Somma et al. 2015; Asplin et al. 2003)
One of the major problems, which the hospitals faces today, is crowding of their
ED (Verelst et al. 2015). It has been suggested that ED crowding is in the balance
state of the current health care system(McCain et al. 2011). Despite this balance,
the EDs still faces vital problems. Evidences show that patients are more likely to be
harmed in a crowded environment(Schull et al. 2004).
(Boyle et al. 2012) believes that ED crowding is one of the leading problems that
developed countries faces.
Said in other words, it has been proposed that emer-
gency department crowding is the equilibrium state of the current health care sys-
tem(Hamilton et al. 2006).
(Di Somma et al. 2015) has made a synopsis of the lectures on overcrowding problems
in the ED of the Third Italian GREAT Network Congress, hoping that it will provide
valuable contributions in the understanding of ED crowding solutions. Based on the
authors review, they concluded that ED overcrowding could be seen as a “local” man-
ifestation of a “systemic” disease. This is caused by a range of complex processes. An
example is the ED boarding, which research indicates decrease in patient satisfaction.
The boarding problem is one of the main factors for overcrowding, and it is a problem
that is too big for the ED to solve alone, help from the outside is therefore required
(Di Somma et al. 2015). There exists several crowding scales in the literature, but
unfortunately many of these scales are limited by being country specific, or lack a
gold standard in development, as well as not being validated correctly (Boyle et al.
2012)(Lee et al. 2017)
Another problem the ED faces today is the waiting time of their patients. Researchers
have focused on this particular problem and have been trying to explore the different
factors that plays a role with this issue (Cremonesi et al. 2015; Di Somma et al. 2015)
(Bindman et al. 1991; Fayyaz et al. 2013; Sivey 2017), have made research on re-
lationship between patient wait time and patient leaving without being seen by a
physician. All three articles agree that the main reason patient leaves the hospital is
an indication of overcrowding and that it has consequences for a patient health.
(Sivey 2017) examines the connection between waiting times and demands, by calcu-
lating the amount of treatments demands that are reduced by a higher waiting time.
To estimate this relationship, (Sivey 2017) use variation in waiting times for low-
urgency patients and resource-intensive high urgency patients. (Sivey 2017) results
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Results
12
show when waiting times are higher, more low-urgency patients are deterred from
treatment and leaves the hospital during their wait time.
(Sivey 2017) concludes
that based on these results, that waiting times play a big role in reducing demand
from low-urgency patients and that a bigger effort must be made to increase hospital
capacity to reduce emergency department waiting times.
Researchers has also explored the dangers of implementing technology into a hos-
pital. (Lederman et al. 2015) Describes the threats, errors and costs that can occur
when implementing a new hospital information system (IS). The authors examine
the case of an Australian hospital, Sir William McMahon. An brand new IS was
implemented into the hospital. Technically, the system worked flawlessly, but after
9 months the department suffered a catastrophic loss of patient revenue. (Lederman
et al. 2015) focus was to find out what made the situation go wrong and how one
could avoid it in the future. (Lederman et al. 2015) view hospitals as a hierarchical
organisations with financial and organisational goals that sometimes would conflict.
The researchers explored the organisation culture settings under a IS roll-out. The
results of the study, showed that medical professionals were accustomed to autonomy
of their work practices and were very opposed on activities they saw as interfering
with patient care. Furthermore (Lederman et al. 2015) highlights that training and
the culture of an organisation are vital factors one must keep in mind when imple-
menting large new systems.
Solution
Hospitals have tried for a period amount of time to fix problems connected to the
EDs. They have used everything from research papers to different strategies from the
business world to ease the pressure of the EDs (LLC 2017; Lauks et al. 2016; Wang
et al. 2015; Wiler et al. 2010). In some situations, some hospitals have even discarded
entire processes, such as the traditional triage system to improve the service quality
for the patients(LLC 2017). Other hospitals have begun using software to improve
or monitor ER wait time data to predict bottlenecks before they even happen(LLC
2017; Churilov 2007; Romano et al. 2015; Cerrito et al. 2005; Duguay et al. 2007).
The solution component is by far the most explored field. The majority of the found
articles reside in this section.
Most of the solutions comes in the form of simulations.
Quite a few researchers
have been trying to solve the problems of ED, by making solution simulations and
compare the results to the base state (Kuo et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2015). This solu-
tion has gotten more and more popular throughout recent years(Uriarte et al. 2015;
Almagooshi 2015).
(Kaushal et al. 2015) examines the simulation models in health care that have been
developed in the past two decades.
The authors reviewed various simulation sys-
tems, ranging from simulations of patient flow in emergency rooms, to simulations
of populations with specific chronic diseases. A literature review was conducted by
==PAGE:22==
2.4 Results
13
the (Kaushal et al. 2015) to examine the state of the various simulation models in
the market. Their focus was on the simulation platform, engineering process, data
collection GUIs’ and interaction modes of simulation models. (Kaushal et al. 2015)
conclude that the most evident simulation type that are used is the Discrete Event
Simulation (DES) and Agent-Based Simulation (ABS) (Kaushal et al. 2015). Further-
more, (Kaushal et al. 2015) concludes the study by pointing out that the evolution
of simulation modelling in health care over the past two decades, has been optimistic.
More scientists and researchers are working on making the modelling platforms more
advanced, thus more efficient, while developers try to adapt DES and ABS platforms
to the growing user communities in different disciplines (Wang et al. 2015).
Researchers has also explored solutions by changing the management process. (Takakuwa
et al. 2007) made a study to determine if the implementation of beside registration
would affect patient throughout their time spent in the ED. The study was conducted
over a 8 month period. A total of 58,225 patient encounters were analysed. Through
the results of the study (Takakuwa et al. 2007) concluded that the bedside registra-
tion decreased triage-to-room-time by 10 minutes. 10 minutes may sound as a small
result, but it quickly becomes significant when aggregate of thousands of patients
time is in context.
(Abdulwahid et al. 2016) has made another solution in the form staff management. In
the study (Abdulwahid et al. 2016) placed one senior doctor with the triage nurses vs.
the triage nurses alone, to see if there was an difference in the ED. For this purpose
a literature review was used. Of the 4506 articles that was identified, 25 relevant
studies was retrieved. The majority of studies revealed improvement in in the ED
favouring Senior Doctor Triage (SDT). (Abdulwahid et al. 2016) review conclude that
the SDT can be an effective measure to enhance ED performance, but a cost versus
benefit analysis is required.
(Huang et al. 2013) made a similar study, as he wanted to see if, by adding a clinical
assistants, would improve the waiting time in a crowded emergency department. The
researchers added one clinical assistant to each ED shift. The clinical assistants main
objective, was to manage the flow of incoming ED patients. The results showed a
significant decrease in the mean and median patient waiting time, and the number of
patients who left without being seen, was also reduced. From these results (Huang
et al. 2013) concludes that by introducing clinical assistants to a crowded ED effec-
tively, reduces patient waiting times and decreases the number of patients leaving
without being seen.
Patient
The patient component explores the patient perceptive of the ED. The articles con-
cerning patients, consists of 23% (12 articles) of the total literature. The majority of
these articles are about patient satisfaction and the key factors to improve satisfac-
tion level.
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Results
14
Various researchers have chosen to focus on patients satisfaction in the EDs (Soares
et al. 2015; Ozsahin et al. 2014; Hall et al. 1996). For example, (Soares et al. 2015)
made a study in order to understand satisfaction in a hospital emergency department.
The researchers provided a questionnaire to a sample of patients, followed by an anal-
ysis to assess their proposed hypotheses. The results of the the study indicated that
patients consider “technical quality of health care”, “interpersonal behaviour”, and
“waiting time” as the most important factors of the ED services. Especially the vari-
able “waiting-time”, has a significant impact on ED patients satisfaction. The two
variables “interpersonal behaviour” and “communication between clinicians and pa-
tients” have a positive influence on patient satisfaction. (Soares et al. 2015) concludes
that these results contribute to a clearer view of which factors that impact a patients
satisfaction, thus giving a better understanding of how to improve the health care
services in ED.
(Ozsahin et al. 2014) has made a similar study that focuses on the different fac-
tors that affect a patient’s satisfaction levels treated in the different triage areas (red,
yellow and green).
1383 patients in the age range 14 to 85 applied to the study
from October 2012 to January 2013.
The participants were asked in the form of
multiple-choice survey, about the various factors that could affect their satisfaction.
The results showed that there was a significant difference when it comes to a patients
social insurance; the process of applying and being accepted to the ED, the reason
behind the ED visit, the time between entrance to physical examination and the total
time spent in the emergency department. Furthermore, results also indicated that
there was no significant difference when it came to the hygiene, the medical care qual-
ity and the attitudes of the nurses. (Ozsahin et al. 2014) concluded that the patient
satisfaction level, was determined by different factors. More studies on this field may
offer important clues in the direction of increasing the standards of the quality in the
EDs.
Other researchers have examined waiting times in the context of EDs. The research
ranges from patients who leave before their treatment time (Goodacre et al. 2005;
Mohsin et al. 1998; Mohsin et al. 2007), to how patients perceive waiting time (Thomp-
son et al. 1996; Hall et al. 1996).
(Thompson et al. 1996) To determine the effects of actual waiting time, perceived
waiting time, information delivery and expressive quality on patient satisfaction,
(Thompson et al. 1996) conducted a 12 month study period. A questionnaire was
administered by phone to a random sample of patients from a suburban community
hospital emergency department. The patients were asked questions about waiting
times, information delivery, service quality and overall satisfaction. The results came
in the form of 1,631 respondents.
These results indicated that the perception of
waiting time and information delivery was associated with a positive overall satisfac-
tion rating for the ED. (Thompson et al. 1996) concludes that perceptions regarding
==PAGE:24==
2.4 Results
15
waiting time, information delivery and expressive quality, predicted overall patient
satisfaction, but the actual waiting times did not. Furthermore, (Thompson et al.
1996) suggests that by providing information, projecting expressive quality and man-
aging waiting time perceptions may be a more better solution to achieve improved
patient satisfaction in the Ed, rather than decreasing actual waiting time.
Triage
The triage system is a process used by EDs to sort patients according to urgency. Not
many researchers has explored this field. The Triage component consists only of 10%
(5) of the articles. This section consists of research on the various processes of the
triage system (Clifford-Brown et al. 2010), the perception of the triage system from
the patients perspective (Adeniji et al. 2016a), and a literature review that explores
the functionality of the triage system(Harding et al. 2011; Montefiori et al. 2017).
(Clifford-Brown et al. 2010) conducted a study about the activities and delays of
the triage system in ED, using the Manchester Triage system. This was done by
using a naturalistic observational design. The study setting was located at an ED of
in an urban university hospital ED. It consisted of 17 adult assessment cubicles, plus
minor paediatric area and a yearly patient count around 85.000. The triage system
here is performed before registration by a nurse, with at least 2 years experience in a
cubicle using the Manchester Triage System version 2. The data was collected over
a period of four weeks in May and June 2006. This collected data came from all
patients that was presented to triage either by ambulance or ambulatory. Based on
these collected data the authors of the study concluded that waiting times before a
triage, the triage time and the activities of the triage all vary unpredictably. Further-
more by removing non-patient-related task from the triage nurses, could accelerate
the triage process and improve patient experience.
(Adeniji et al. 2016a) explores the views of patients who have undergone through
the triage system in the ED. This study was conducted in Guglethu Community
Health Centre, Cape Town. (Adeniji et al. 2016a) made a semi-structured qualitative
interview on a sample of 5 triaged women(1 green, 3 orange and 1 yellow) and 4
triaged men(1 green and 3 yellow). The response showed that all the respondents
complained when it came to lack of information and understanding of the triage sys-
tem. The green triage patients found the the triage system biased and unfair and
found the ED nurse rude and unprofessional. Where the yellow and orange triage
patients found the nurses professional and helpful. The results also indicated that
most patient would turn to support staff (security staff or cleaners) for assistance
when dealing with the triage system. Especially the green patients would complain
if the waiting time surpassed the given waiting time given by the staff. The study is
concluded with the notion that patients do not have a good experience of the triage
system. To improve the triage, system managers must invent or change the design of
it. This could be achieved by either strengthening the staff or share more information
to the patients.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Results
16
Do a triage system work? is a research field that also has been explored by (Harding
et al. 2011). The (Harding et al. 2011) conducted a literature review by focusing on
the key words “triage” and “patient flow”. This resulted into 865 references, where
63 was selected for review and followed by a exclusion criteria which took the result
down to 25 articles. The 25 articles was analysed, and the results indicated that
the main objective of the triage system was to ensure that most urgent patient got
treated in a timely manner, the evidence suggest that triage system also can have a
positive effect on patient flow (Montefiori et al. 2017). The evidence do conflict when
it comes to the triage system capability to reduce the overall waiting times.
Geography
(Pines et al. 2011), have done research on international perspective on crowding out-
side America, in order to determine if experiences of other countries would help to
provide insight into causes and solutions for crowding in the US. Data was collected
from a total of 15 countries. Appendix A.2 and A.3 show a summarised information
on ED crowding from each country. The table shows an overview of each country
over the payment and primary care system, a short description of the evidence of
crowding and a plan to reduce the crowding. The results from the countries indicate
that in the majority of the countries, there is an evidence of increase in the ED visit-
rates and crowding. Crowding appears to be worsening in many countries, and many
authors identify the main cause of the problem, as the boarding of admitted patients.
(Pines et al. 2011) study conclude that by understanding the problem and potential
solutions of multiple countries across the globe, may provide vital information to
mitigate ED crowding in the US.
(Pitts et al. 2012) study ended with a similar conclusion. The purpose of the study
was to evaluate recent trends in ED crowding. The study period was 8 years, where
data from a survey patient records was extracted from a national sample of hospital
EDs. The results showed that the number of ED visits increased by 1.9%, this is a
60% rate faster than population growth. Despite several calls for action, ED crowding
is getting worse, (Pitts et al. 2012) conclude.
==PAGE:26==
2.5 Discussion
17
2.5
Discussion
The purpose of the review is to achieve an overview of state-of-the-art knowledge on
emergency departments. Our main objective in this review, was to get an understand-
ing of the main issues ED faces in modern society, and the various strategies that has
been used to solve these issues. Based on the analysis on the collected 53 articles, it
was clear to see that the majority of the research has been about Solutions, Problems
and Patients.
It is not very surprising that the majority of research has been conducted on the
Solution, Problem and Patient components. This was probably due to the increased
threat of crowding in EDs the last couple of years (Boyle et al. 2012; Di Somma et al.
2015; Asplin et al. 2003). Therefore, it makes sense that the majority of researchers
focus on these fields. They want to investigate the problems and solve them, before
things gets out of hand. Furthermore these three components have a tight association.
Most of the research methods used in the Patient component came in the form of sur-
veys. The results from the Patient component showed which problems the patients
faced at the ED, hence the Problem component. From the established problems, the
Problem component, it was then possible to make the Solution component.
The interesting thing here is that the majority of the solutions is about simulations
of the ED, making changes to staff management or ED processes(Uriarte et al. 2015;
Almagooshi 2015; Kuo et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2015). But none of the articles focused
on a solutions that would make the patient the centrepiece. The presented solution
in the research suggested solutions towards the environment of the patient, but not
directly to the patient. Only (Ozsahin et al. 2014) mentions the lack of research on
information systems effect on patients in the ED. This makes it difficult to clarify an
information systems impact on patients. This lack of knowledge, came as surprise for
us, because patients is the centrepiece of the ED.
2.6
Conclusion
A comprehensive review of the literature has been conducted. A total of 443 arti-
cles was found through three journal databases/search engines. These articles went
through a manual filtering selection process, followed by additional back/forward
search. This process resulted into 53 relevant journals, that has been used achieve
state-of-the-art of the situation at the ED.
The Literature Review has given us an overview of which fields that has been ex-
plored, and those that lack vital research.
Almost no research has been done on
solutions that affect patients directly. This is surprising, because the patients are the
core component in the ED. We therefore want to explore this further in our thesis.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Patients Experiences -
LUP 2017
LUP, which is short for ”Landsdækkende Undersøgelse af Patientoplevelser i akut-
modtagelser”, is a yearly national survey about patient experiences at the ED. (LUP
2018).
In the LUP 2017 report, 7606 patients were surveyed.
Through the survey, the
patients got the opportunity to express their feelings, according to their ED visit
experience. The answers from the survey could help to cast light on what could be
improved, in order to create a better patient experience. Overall from the collected
answers, 69% of the patients were satisfied with their experiences, while 12% of the
patients were not satisfied at all with their visit (LUP 2018).
”We called 1813 and was told to meet up at 11:30 o’clock, which would be our turn.
When we arrived at 11:30 o’clock, we then ended up waiting 2 hours before it was our
turn”— Anonymous Patient (LUP 2018)
”We waited 1 hour and 15 minutes from when we arrived, before being called in.
We did not hear anything at all while waiting. So it would be nice with some kind
of ongoing information of when you can expect to be called in ” — Anonymous
Patient (LUP 2018)
”I do not think that the ED did anything special. I was noted at my arrival, and
then I had the feeling that I should just ”take care” of myself and wait until it was
my turn. It would be nice, if there would be friendly face once in a while, which could
inform you, or something that informs you about how things are going, but that was
not the case” — Anonymous Patient (LUP 2018)
==PAGE:28==
3 Patients Experiences - LUP 2017
19
The three quotes provides valid information, which indicates that more informa-
tion could provide better patient experience. It makes sense that you as a patient
have to wait some time before being called in, but being uninformed for several hours
and not knowing when it is your turn can be really frustrating - as expressed from
the three quotes.
As expressed in Figure 3.1, it is possible to see the overall discontent.
Figure 3.1: Figure of Question 5 and 6 - Adopted from (LUP 2018)
From Figure 3.1 we can drag the following information out:
1. Question 5 (1225 answered): The patients are informed at the reception,
when they can be called in.
a) General outcome: Category ”Not at all”
2. Question 6 (1114 answered): The patients are informed of the development
of the waiting time, from arriving to being called in.
a) General outcome: Category ”Not at all”
According to the answers that were received from the patients, it is clear that the
patients are unhappy with the waiting time, nor are they informed of their turn.
This is a clear indication that there is a problem in providing information towards
the patients.
3.0.1
Region Hovedstaden
In the LUP 2017 report, 2.184 patients from Region Hovedstaden (Capital Region of
Denmark) answered the survey (Sandal-Jeppesen 2018).
Based on (Sandal-Jeppesen 2018) results, indicates that there is a higher percent-
age of patients that finds the waiting time acceptable. The waiting time is measured
from when the patient arrives, to when the patient is treated. The article points out,
that the percentage went from 64% in LUP 2016 report to 71% in LUP 2017 report,
which is an indication that the satisfaction level is improving.
==PAGE:29==
3 Patients Experiences - LUP 2017
20
(Sandal-Jeppesen 2018) also points out that ED has improved in providing in-
formation to patients, with an increase of 10 percent in patient satisfaction towards
information. This indicates that patients feel more informed compared to the study
from 2016.
3.0.1.1
Solutions in Denmark
The ED of Nordsjællands Hospital has incorporated a system, that sends a text-
message to the patients, whenever it is about to be their turn. This system make
it possible to inform the patients while waiting. This gives them the opportunity to
wait elsewhere. (Sandal-Jeppesen 2018)
Bispebjerg and Herlev Hospital ED use ”Waiting Room Nurses”, who walk around
and inform patients about where they need to be, and who is going to treat them.
(Sandal-Jeppesen 2018)
From these solution attempts, it is clear to see that some EDs are trying to tackle
the lack of information problems that are present at the ED. This could be an indica-
tion of the increased 10% in patient satisfaction from 2016 to 2017 (Sandal-Jeppesen
2018).
3.0.2
How can we use this information?
With the use of this research, we have now established an overview over the patient
satisfaction level towards the ED in Denmark, more specifically the patients view
towards information and waiting times.
With the use of the knowledge from the Literature Review and the LUP 2017 re-
port, we can confirm that there is a problem with the lack of information in the
waiting rooms at the ED. This confirms that the issues are real, thus giving us the
opportunity to solve a real life problem.
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 4
Theory
4.1
Triage
Triage is a factor in the everyday assessments of the patients in the ED. Triage
originates from the French word, ”Trier”, which is originally applied in the term of
sorting. (Robertson-Steel 2006). (Robertson-Steel 2006) describes that the original
concepts of triage, as a focus on mass casualty situations.
Triage is defined as a
process that changes accordingly to the status of the patient, as patients can come in
with different injuries that can vary from urgent to not-urgent.(Robertson-Steel 2006)
Hospitals in Denmark make use of Danish Emergency Process Triage (DEPT), which
is a national triage manual. DEPT explains the process of triage, how it sorts and
prioritises patients with urgent incidents - according to the seriousness of the injury.
By sorting the patients, makes it easier for the hospital staff to provide the right
treatment and resources to their patients. (Dahlin et al. 2012)
DEPT consists of 5 steps:
1. Red: Life-threatening condition. Needs immediate treatment.
2. Orange: Critical condition. Needs fast treatment.
3. Yellow: Stable condition, but can be unstable as well. Treatment is usually
within an hour.
4. Green: Stable condition. Not urgent.
5. Blue: Minor injury. Stable condition, therefore not urgent.
These steps are used in order to differentiate between patients, from less urgent inci-
dents to urgent incidents. By using the manual, the hospital staff can then identify
the criteria of the injuries that the patients have, and then categorise them into their
respected colours.
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Crowding Theory
22
4.2
Crowding Theory
One of the major problems the hospitals faces, is crowding in their EDs (Verelst et al.
2015). It has been suggested that ED crowding is in the balance state of the current
health care system(McCain et al. 2011). Despite this balance, the EDs still face vital
problems. Evidences show that patients are more likely to be harmed in a crowded
environment (Schull et al. 2004).
Other studies show that patients harmed by crowding in an emergency department,
still continue to suffer after they have been admitted, and that these patients usually
have longer hospital stays (Hoot et al. 2008). Crowding also has a negative effect on
the staff. Evidences show that there are associations with more sickness and the leave
of staff, when crowding is a part of the context(LLC 2017).
4.2.1
What is Crowding?
A large amount of research on the consequences of crowding has been conducted, but
there is no common acknowledgement in the definition of crowding(Boyle et al. 2012).
The Oxford dictionary describes the definition as followed:
”A large number of people gathered together in a disorganized or unruly way.”(University
2018a)
From this short definition it is easy to see that the word, ”Crowding”, is usually
involved in a negative context. It is important to define ”Crowding”, as it can open
doors for measurements and research (Boyle et al. 2012).
There exists a number of crowding scales in the literature, but unfortunately many
of these scales are limited by being country specific, or lack a gold standard in devel-
opment, as well as not being validated correctly (Boyle et al. 2012). Appendix C.1
lists the different ways to quantify crowding (Boyle et al. 2012).
A research group has created an eight point operational definition of crowding, vi-
sualised in Figure ?? (Beniuk et al. 2012). The interesting part of this definition, is
the structure, which has been divided in three sections:
Input measures focus on the beginning of the patient ED journey, which is about
the arrival process of the patients. It consists of ambulance offload time, patients
who leave the ED without treatment and the amount of time patients wait before
their initial triage.
The throughout measures, are about the patients stay at the ED. It consists of ED
occupancy rate, patients total length of stay, and the time it takes for a physician to
see the patient.
==PAGE:32==
4.2 Crowding Theory
23
Finally there are the output measures, which focuses on the end part of the patient
journey. It is about the ED boarding time and amount of patients boarding in the ED.
If an emergency department do not comply to one of these requirements, it will
then be categorised as crowded.
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Lean Method - User Experience
24
4.3
Lean Method - User Experience
Lean UX is an agile, iterative process, in which incorporates the following elements:
1. Generate ideas
2. Build the product
3. Measure the outcome - collecting data
4. Learning from the outcome
By using the process, new ideas are generated, which makes it possible to develop
new knowledge in which you keep iterating on until the customers needs has been
satisfied. (Klein 2013)
In Figure 4.1, is the structure of the process visualised.
Figure 4.1: The Lean Loop - Adopted from (Klein 2013)
How can Lean UX be used?
Lean UX is about iterating, iterating and iterating. (Klein 2013) As you keep chang-
ing the design approach, you keep validating if that approach is acceptable until
meeting the requirements of your user. After each iteration, you would be one step
closer to finalising the product, as the direct feedback from the users provide valid
data in order to make the product better.
Lean UX is a data-driven model, in which you use to learn about previous itera-
tions, and about real user behaviour. As (Klein 2013) states, you cannot learn if you
do not measure. Therefore, Lean UX is all about designing, measuring and learning,
hence Figure 4.1.
==PAGE:34==
4.4 Independent-samples T-test
25
4.4
Independent-samples T-test
The independent samples t-test, also known as Students t-test, unpaired t-test and
between-subjects t-test, can be used to test if two groups on a continuous depen-
dent variable means have a difference between them. This test allows you to deter-
mine whether the difference between two groups are statistically significant. (Leard-
Community 2018) It is not possible to combine the two groups, but the statistical the-
ory can be extended to support a mixed groups(paired and independent)(University
2018b).
4.4.1
Basic Requirements
Before running an independent-sample t-test, there are six assumptions that needs
to be considered (Leard-Community 2018)
1. Assumption 1: There is one dependent variable that is measured at the
continuous level.
2. Assumption 2: There is one independent variable that consists of two cat-
egorical, independent groups.
3. Assumption 3: There is independence of observations.
4. Assumption 4: There should be no significant outliers in the groups of your
independent variable in terms of the dependent variable.
5. Assumption 5:
The dependent variable should be about normally dis-
tributed for each group of the independent variable.
6. Assumption 6: There is homogeneity of variances.
4.5
Gamification
Through recent years, Gamification has gotten more popular within the marketing
and business sectors. It has also been noticed by the academics and educators of
various domains (Seaborn et al. 2015). Gamification is not a new concept, its root
lies in games, which has existed in human culture since the dawn of recorded culture
(McGonigal 2011). The reason behind this sudden popularity rise of Gamification is
because of different factors; cheaper and more advanced technology and its ability to
track personal data (Deterding 2012).
==PAGE:35==
4.5 Gamification
26
4.5.1
Definition
Currently there is no universal standard definition of Gamification, yet most of the
literature agrees that Gamification is defined as the use of game elements and me-
chanics in non-game contexts (Seaborn et al. 2015).
(Koch et al. 2011) attempts
to define Gamification as the involvement of of applying elements of “gamefulness,
gameful interaction, and gameful design” with a specific intention in mind.
While (Watson et al. 2015), defines Gamification as a tool for supplementing brand-
ing initiatives through the application of game elements and mechanics. Then there
is (Mathiassen et al. 2012) definition; Gamification is a game, thinking in practice.
(Mathiassen et al. 2012) defines Gamification as a a game of elements and game de-
sign techniques in non-game context.
The definition-suggestions provided by the mentioned researchers (Watson et al. 2015;
Koch et al. 2011; Mathiassen et al. 2012), all have something in common; “the inten-
tional use of game elements for a gameful experience of non-game tasks and contexts.”
This statement is what is closest to a standard definition of Gamification (Seaborn
et al. 2015).
4.5.2
Use of Gamification
Gamification is a multidisciplinary tool that spans across many domains(Seaborn et
al. 2015), such as:
1. Education
2. Health and Wellness
3. Computer science and engineering
4. Research
5. Marketing
The purpose and elements of Gamification depend on its context of the domain. E.g.
in the Education domain, applications of Gamification refer to using game elements
for a learning development and formal information settings. While in the Marketing
domain, Gamification is used to make things more “interesting and fun for customers”,
thus increasing the chance to optimise user experience for their customers.
Gamification is also used in the health/wellness section, which is relevant for our
thesis. E.g. in our Literature Review, the Solution component showed that some
hospitals have used Gamification to solve their problems in the ED (R. et al. 2014;
Giunti et al. 2018; Andreassen et al. 2013).
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 5
1st Iteration - Finding
the problem
The scope of this chapter is to find the problems that lies within the ED in Hvidovre
Hospital.
The first section consists of a problem statement. More specific this section intro-
duces the reader with the problem we want to solve.
The second section consists of our design approach, based on the problem statement.
The third section is about exploring the Emergency Department of Hvidovre Hos-
pital, in order to get more information on the environment.
The fourth section describes our second visit, where we test a new improved design
on the patients.
5.1
Problem statement
As described in the Literature Review, Chapter 1 and from (LUP 2018), we are
able to extract that patients are unhappy about the waiting time, which in the end
generates many frustrations.
According to (LUP 2018), it is shown that patients in Denmark are unhappy, they
do not have any information what so ever about the waiting process. They sit in the
waiting room, and wait until it is their turn, which can sometimes take several hours.
These frustrations will only keep increasing overtime. This provides valid information
that there is a certain issue with the waiting system in Danish EDs.
In some occasions, patients might even choose to walk away from the hospital, due
to frustrations of too long waiting times, and reasons of overcrowding.
They get
so frustrated over the lack of information, which eventually makes them walk away.
(Cremonesi et al. 2015) (Di Somma et al. 2015) (Bindman et al. 1991) (Bindman et al.
1991; Fayyaz et al. 2013; Sivey 2017)
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Design & Development
28
It is clear to see that when waiting without receiving any information at all, generates
frustrations in the patients. From this information, we therefore want to investigate
the following problem statement in this iteration:
”Will a visual waiting list solve the issue with the lack of information,
at the ED in Hvidovre Hospital?”
By showing the waiting list through an information system, could solve the prob-
lem with the lack of information.
In the end of this iteration, we should hopefully end up with patients seeing our
solution as a valuable tool to solve their lack of information.
5.2
Design & Development
The point of using the Lean UX in the first iteration, is that it starts with a feature
rather than a hypothesis. The essence of it, is that you come up with an idea that
can solve the problem, the design is then built from the idea to test if we could solve
them problem. If that is not the case, then the process is repeated until the problem
is solved (Klein 2013).
Figure 5.1: Validation process - Adopted from (Klein 2013)
With the use of the Lean Loop, Figure 4.1 Chapter 4 and Figure 5.1, we develop
an idea of how to solve the problem. The idea was to provide an overview of patient
waiting hours via a monitor.
Then we created a design from that idea, see Figure 5.3, which was then validated
through the ED staff at Hvidovre Hospital. This was an iterative process, we repeated
until our design hit a satisfactorily level. This validation is explained in section 5.3.
The initial approach was to create a design where the patients are in full focus. As
soon as the patient has gotten a triage from a nurse, then the patients should receive
a text message afterwards. The text message contains a unique ID, which they use
to identify themselves and their current waiting time on the TV-monitor. This gives
the ability to track and trace how their waiting time proceeds.
==PAGE:38==
5.2 Design & Development
29
The text message which the patient receives is visualised in Figure 5.2. The mon-
itor system is visualised in Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.2: Message containing unique ID
Figure 5.3: First Mockup with Triage colours
==PAGE:39==
5.3 Results
30
Every patient is categorised according to the triage system as described in Section
4.1. Therefore all receive a certain colour, according to the injury. The way triage
works, is that the patients are divided into their respected categorises (colours). Each
colour is associated with an average waiting time:
1. Red - Average waiting time < 1 minute
2. Orange - Average waiting time <= 10 minutes
3. Yellow - Average waiting time <= 60 minutes
4. Blue / Green - Average waiting time <= 240 minutes
The initial design, Figure
5.3, was created before we had any knowledge about
the processes and system that are used in the Emergency Department in Hvidovre
Hospital.
5.3
Results
According to the Lean Loop, Figure
4.1, the next step was to validate the design
that has been built. To generate results, we therefore planned visits to the ED at
Hvidovre Hospital, in order to validate the design and to get further knowledge upon
what systems that are used, and use this knowledge to improve and validate our de-
sign.
The section consists of all the knowledge we acquired and all the design changes
we committed from two ED visits.
5.3.1
The First Visit
The Emergency Department at Hvidovre Hospital is divided into different waiting
rooms, hence Figure 5.4
Figure 5.4: Different waiting areas at the Emergency Room in Hvidovre Hospital
==PAGE:40==
5.3 Results
31
Figure 5.4 illustrates 3 different waiting areas, where two of them function as cru-
cial waiting areas. The General Waiting Area and the Triage Waiting Room,
would be an ideal location for our solution.
During the first visit at the hospital, the patient journey, as visualised in Appendix
B.1, became clear, and what role 1813 plays in the system. When a patient arrives
at the ED, they have either called before their arrival to 1813 or they do not have
an appointment beforehand.
The patients that arrives at the emergency department, who already called 1813, are
categorised into one of the two categories that 1813 uses to identify urgency of patient
injuries (Fakta om 1813):
1. B/S-Category - Not a urgent injury - triage is not urgent - placed in the
normal waiting room
2. V-Category - Urgent injury - triage is urgent - placed in the triage waiting
room
When the patient announces their arrival at the reception, the receptionist already
knows their category which 1813 has given them. The receptionist can either place
them in the triage waiting room or the normal waiting room. The procedure contin-
ues; the patients are given a triage and then treated.
It can occur that patients arrive at the ED without calling 1813 first.
These pa-
tients are not defined in the given categories, and are therefore placed in the waiting
room with no triage. As their fractures and injuries are rather small, they are then
not seen as urgent patients. If they do not receive a certain triage, then the patient
is without triage and the colour remains grey in the administrative system.
Patients who have been waiting for several hours, come occasionally up to the re-
ception to share their frustrations. This creates a difficult situation for the hospital
staff, as there is not a system that can provide some sort of information that visualises
the about waiting times.
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Results
32
5.3.2
The Second Visit - Data collection
After the first visit at the hospital, it became clear that there was a general problem
with patients getting frustrated. From the first visit, we learned from the hospital
staff that our first design was lacking information of whose turn it actually was. Based
on that validation, we redesigned our design to clarify this issue.
The second design was created to provide more information to the patients in or-
der to improve the patient satisfaction. Visualised in Figure 5.5, it is possible to see
how the waiting times are distinguished from one another, as well a specific indication
of when it is your turn. The patients would still receive a text message with a certain
unique ID as shown in Figure
5.2, which they are able to follow on the monitor
placed in the waiting rooms.
Figure 5.5: ”It is your turn” - visualising waiting times
If an urgent incident occurs, then the patients would not be registered with a unique
ID, but with their triage colour and a text such as ”AKUT”. This indicates that other
waiting times will be affected, as an urgent incident just occurred. This is visualised
in Figure 5.6.
==PAGE:42==
5.3 Results
33
Figure 5.6: Urgent incident - visualising waiting times
As we received information from the hospital staff on our first visit, that patients
are often frustrated, we developed a qualitative study, to address the opinions from
the patients about the second design. The purpose of doing a qualitative study is
that it is not expressed in numerical terms, but includes more direct quotes from the
interviewees, which can be used directly to improve the design further.(Sharp et al.
2011)
5.3.2.1
Semi-Structured Interview
The data-collection method used for this iteration is a Semi-Structured Interview,
inspired by (Adeniji et al. 2016a). These interviews were conducted on 6 patients at
the ED. This is done in order to investigate if our solution, can have an impact on
the lack of information.
The questions in the Semi-Structured interview were open questions, which made
it possible for the participants to answer free of mind according to the subject. The
idea of using a Semi-Structured Interview, is that gives us the specific answers we are
looking for, as well as providing feedback on matters which has not crossed our minds.
Semi-structured interviews are intended to be replicable, so probing and prompting
would help the interview without creating any sorts of bias.(Sharp et al. 2011)
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Results
34
The questions provided for the patients, are visualised in Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.7: Questions for the patients
We interviewed 6 patients. As we are working with patients, we have therefore not
incorporated their identities, which are therefore kept anonymous. The patients are
identified as ”Patient 1”, ”Patient 2”, etc. The individual answers from the patients
are placed in B.2 - B.7.
The answers can be extracted in the following Table 5.1.
Patients agreeing on answer
Question -
look at Figure 5.7 for numbers
Statements in common
Patient 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
Q1
All agree on a queuing system, except Patient 1 who could not see it.
Patient 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
Q2
Solving the lack of information problem.
Patient 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
Q3
All agreed that it would help if there was a system that helped
Patient 1, 2
Q4
Two patients agreed that more information is needed.
Patient 2, 6
Q4
Difficult to understand ID - Patient 6 suggests using names.
Patient 3
Q4
A better understanding of the colors.
Patient 1, 4, 5
Q4
General improvement of design.
Patient 2, 4, 5
Q5
Score= 5, as idea and concept is good.
Patient 6
Q5
Score= 4, as there is room for improvement to reach 5.
Patient 1, 3
Q5
Score= 3, as there are things that needs to be changed.
Table 5.1: Extracted answers from the 6 patients participating
As Table 5.1 illustrates, the majority agrees on question 1, 2 and 3, which is about
the design and the idea. As visualised in the Table 5.1, there are as well disparities
according to question 4 and 5 about possible improvements and score.
==PAGE:44==
5.4 Discussion
35
5.4
Discussion
The purpose of this iteration, was to develop an idea that could solve the problem
about the lack of information in the ED. The first design that was developed, was
used as concept in order to see if we were on the right track. It was possible to see
after the first visit, that some changes needed to be made in order to test further on
patients.
Through the answers from the Semi-Structured interviews, on the second design,
showed that the majority understood the visualisation of waiting times. Based on
the results in Table 5.1 (Question 2), confirms that there is a lack of information at
the ED, which they would solve with our solution. This indicates that our solution
provides a certain value to the ED.
Nevertheless, when it came to specific elements, there was a lack of understanding.
As stated from Patient 2, 6 & 3, there were difficulties in understanding the ID and
colours. It makes sense that some of the patients express that, as it is not likely that
everyone understands the triage system, nor how the design interprets it. Although
the solution solves the problem with the lack of information, two patients stated that
more information on the design would create an even better understanding. These
elements are important to emphasise in future iterations in order to achieve better
results and understandings.
Most of the patients agreed that there are room for improvements, where the patients
emphasised the following critical elements:
1. ”Provide a better understanding of the colours, and what they stand
for (triage)”
2. ”Provide a better understanding of the ID which the patients receive”
3. ”Provide more information”
This indicates that we are on the right track concept-wise, but based on the feedback
on the design, it is clear to see that there are room for improvements.
The answers provide valid information of what the product/design is lacking, and
what can be done better to enhance the usability.
==PAGE:45==
5.5 Sub Conclusion
36
5.5
Sub Conclusion
The problem statement that we defined in Section 5.1, we wanted to investigate if
our solution could solve the lack of information problem.
Based on our findings, we can conclude that the patients see the value of our solution,
because it provides the needed information. Nevertheless our results also showed that
there was room for improvements when it came to the design, more specifically the
colours and the ID, was not understood that well.
In the next chapter, we want to explore, if by using a User-Centred Design (UCD)
approach, will enhance the understanding of our design, thus improving our solution
further.
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 6
2nd Iteration - User
Centred-Design
The scope of this chapter is to define how User-Centred Design (UCD) can be in-
corporated in order to create a better understanding of the waiting system for the
patients.
The first section of this iteration consists of defining the problem statement of what
we are going to explore, which is inspired of the outcome from the previous iteration.
This is followed by a UCD approach.
The second section consists of developing a Usability Test, to test specific user expe-
rience goals and values. This is tested on patients at the ED of Hvidovre Hospital.
The third section consists of analysing the data, which we gathered at the hospital.
The data is used to see, if we actually can confirm our stated problem statement.
6.1
Problem statement
From the extracted survey data, received from the first iteration, it is possible to
identify issues in understanding triage and the waiting times. Research has shown
that especially waiting times has a significant impact on patient satisfaction in the
ED (Soares et al. 2015). Therefore, it is important that patients of Hvidovre ED do
not misunderstand our solution.
We want to investigate, if by incorporating UCD, can enhance the understanding
of the waiting times and triage, hence our problem statement:
Is it possible to develop a better understanding of our solution, using
a User-Centred Design approach?
==PAGE:47==
6.2 User-Centred Design
38
6.2
User-Centred Design
User-Centred Design is a design process, which incorporates the users in the design.
The users are participating in order to help develop and finalise the product. The
end-users influence how the design should be (Abras et al. 2004).
When working with patients, it is vital that they participate in developing the prod-
uct the way they believe is the right way, as they are the end-users of our solution.
(Usability-gov 2018) describes the cycle of UCD through the following four steps.
1. Specify the context of use - Define who are going to use the product, for
what purpose and under what conditions they will use it.
2. Specify requirements - Identify the user goals, which should make the prod-
uct successful
3. Creating design solutions - Going from a rough concept, to an actual design
4. Evaluate designs - Use of usability testing
Using these 4 steps, we can then integrate UCD in order to improve the design of the
system, as well testing on actual users to interpret if the design is actually valid. In
order to do any form of design validation, there needs to be set some user experience
goals, which are then applied in the design test. The user experience goals cover a
range of emotions and felt experiences. As described in Table 6.1, it is possible to see
what aspects that are desirable, and what are undesirable (Sharp et al. 2011). The
desirable aspects are what we want to incorporate into the new design, in order to
introduce the best patients experience as possible.
Desirable aspects
Satisfying
Helpful
Fun
Engaging
Challenging
Enjoyable
Motivating
Provocative
Surprising
Pleasurable
Enhancing sociability
Rewarding
Exciting
Support creativity
Emotionally fulfilling
Entertaining
Cognitively stimulating
Easy to learn
Easy to remember how to use
Safe to use
Undesriable aspects
Boring
Unpleasant
Frustrating
Patrionizing
Making one feel guilty
Making one feel stupid
Annoying
Cutesy
Childish
Gimmicky
Table 6.1: User Experience Goals - Adapted from (Sharp et al. 2011)
The goals in Table
6.1, determines how a system feels to a user. There are many
different goals in Table 6.1, but it is not all of them that might be relevant to the
design, as it is being developed. We therefore chose to incorporate the following user
experience goals in the new design:
==PAGE:48==
6.2 User-Centred Design
39
1. Helpful
2. Satisfying
3. Easy to learn
4. Easy to remember how to use
5. Safe to use
As we are developing a system for patients waiting at the ED, we therefore want to
provide them with information that will help and satisfy them. The system has to
as well be easy to learn, and therefore as well easy to remember, if patients return
and have to wait yet again for a certain amount of time. One of the most important
things is that it has to be safe to use, as we are working with person-information data,
which is highly prioritised in not being shown to other patients.
In (Birnbaum et al. 2015), (De Vito Dabbs et al. 2009) and (Giunti et al. 2018),
they describe patient-centred design as a design process where patients can have an
impact on the design from start. They can as well have an impact in late testing,
where the focus is an iterative process in which the patient testes the design, and
where we as the product owners acknowledge the feedback and incorporate that in
the next design.
The process that we are following in the thesis, is an iterative process, where we
learn from the received feedback, which is the approach that we aim for when reach-
ing the goal. As described in (Birnbaum et al. 2015), when interviewing patients and
doing usability tests, can help defining the focus of the project.
In order to develop the design, we defined the following design principles. The prin-
ciples are intended to help us explain and improve our designs.
In (Sharp et al.
2011), they emphasise on the common design principles. The ones that we chose to
incorporate are the following:
1. Visual Concept - What is the idea behind the design - what is the meaning
in doing it.
2. Visibility - The more visible functions are, the more like it is that users will
be able to know what will happen next.
3. Consistency - Following the same pattern throughout the design. It makes
it easier to learn and use for the patients following the waiting system at the
monitor.
4. Effortless - It has to be as effortless as possible for the patients.
==PAGE:49==
6.3 Design and Development
40
6.3
Design and Development
Following the Lean process, as described in Chapter 5.2, we are iterating and learn-
ing from the past iteration to develop the new design.
The new design should create a better overview of the queuing system, and create a
better understanding. Using the same pattern as descried in the first iteration, Figure
4.1, it is possible to evaluate whether or not the users become more satisfied or get a
better understanding of the solution. Now with the established user experience goals
and the design principles, we will now in this section put it into practice.
The design in the following iteration is developed as a Minimum Viable Product
(MVP). It has the most important features visualising the unique ID, the time es-
timation, the triage colour and emergent incidents. The patients receive as well a
description of a estimated waiting time according to the colour that they have re-
ceived. Since we use a UCD approach, we therefore chose to define certain values
from the Value Pyramid.(Almquist et al. 2016). The chosen values are what we think
will provide value to the patients. They are illustrated in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: The Prioritised Value Pyramid - Adopted from (Almquist et al. 2016)
==PAGE:50==
6.3 Design and Development
41
From Figure 6.1, we are able to extract the following elements:
1. Self-transcendence - The solution can help other people and the society, as
it provides value towards every patient of the ED in Denmark.
2. Provides Hope - Providing something optimistic for the patients, as they can
track their waiting time through our solution.
3. Reduces Anxiety - Helping patients feel less worried and making them feel
more secure about their waiting time
4. Providing Access - Providing access to information, which is valuable for the
patients.
5. Quality - Providing good service for the patients
6. Avoids Hassles - Reduces hassles for the patients, as they get an overview
of their waiting time, thus eliminating questions and frustrations towards the
hospital staff.
7. Reduces Risk - It reduces the risk of patients leaving the hospital being frus-
trated of not having any information.
8. Informs - Informs with the waiting time as well as emergent incidents
9. Saves Time - As the system informs the patients, they are therefore able to
save time, as the solution gives them the opportunity to leave the waiting room.
As the functional elements are important for the product in order to have a quality
and functional product, likewise are the emotional elements. The emotional elements
give the patients the feeling of comfort, in order to feel that product actually provides
value towards them as users. Life-changing is an important aspect as well. The user’s
might consider how it affects them, and how it changes their life. The social-impact
indicates that the solution is a solution which can effect everybody.
6.3.1
Value Pyramid and User Experience Goals Combined
The user experience goals play well together with the four levels that are used from
the Value Pyramid. As illustrated in Figure 6.2, we have combined the values we
extracted from the value pyramid, with the defined user experience goals which were
extracted from Table 6.1. These values and UX goals establish the basics of how the
solution should be developed.
==PAGE:51==
6.3 Design and Development
42
Figure 6.2: Combination of Value Pyramid & UX goals
Functional level consists of the functional elements that are incorporated in our
solution. The system needs to be implemented as a system which uses the functional
values from the value pyramid supported by the UX goals. E.g. the functional value,
”Informs”, is supported by UX goals such as, ”Easy to learn” and ”Easy to remember
how to use”. Meaning that the information which is provided for the users should be
presented in a matter, which is easy to understand and easy to remember.
Emotional level consists of the emotional elements, according to the user’s feel-
ings. The solution is created in order to help and satisfy the end-user. Therefore
these UX goals can be combined with the defined values, as they both together have
an impact on the emotions of the user.
Life-changing level consists of what is life-changing for the end-user. Our solution
changes the state of mind when it comes to visiting the ED. The general thoughts that
comes to mind when visiting the ED, involves a lot of unknown waiting time. But
with our solution, it eliminates the unknown aspect, thus changing their view on EDs.
Social Impact level consists of what value it brings to the society. Our solution
could be implemented in all EDs of Denmark. Since every person could be a potential
patient at the ED, our solution can help a very broad user segment.
==PAGE:52==
6.3 Design and Development
43
6.3.2
Design outcome
With the use of the values from the Value Pyramid and the UX goals, we are able
to come up with the following design approach visualised in Figure 6.4 and Figure
6.5. The procedure is the same as defined in the first iteration, though with a more
improved and well-informed text-message illustrated in 6.3.
Figure 6.3: Improved Text-Message containing unique ID
Figure 6.4: Visualising waiting times - Design
==PAGE:53==
6.3 Design and Development
44
Figure 6.5: Emergency - Design
The two Figures, Figure 6.4 and Figure 6.5 emphasises on informing the patients,
which was lacking from the collected answers in the first iteration. We therefore chose
to develop a design where information is the more clear, and more explaining of who
the patients are, an explanation of the colours and what they represent on the screen.
6.3.3
Testing method
To validate the design, we chose to do a usability test. The usability test involves
measuring users performance on various tasks. The goal is to test whether the product
that is being developed is usable by the intended user, and to achieve the tasks in
which it is designed for. (Sharp et al. 2011)
The technique that is chosen here is the Think-Aloud test, where the testers were
asked to do a set of tasks accordingly to the design, and from that, think aloud what
they see and what they understand. (Sharp et al. 2011) Here we conduct answers
from the user tasks they are asked to do.
We have identified the following key questions in which we asked the testers:
1. Q1: Based on the received text message, can you please identify yourself and
the estimated waiting time?
2. Q2: Can you identify the average waiting time according to your waiting time
on the screen?
3. Q3: What do you think happened when seeing the 2nd screen?
4. Q4: When the 2nd screen appears, do you think that it will affect your waiting
time, if yes then how?
==PAGE:54==
6.4 Results
45
6.3.4
Procedure of test
To keep consistency between the patients, we defined a test procedure. The test was
divided into the following steps:
1. Participant is introduced to the project and the project owners
2. Participant is introduced to the user tasks, they need to complete, if they accept
to participate
3. The length of time needed for the study. Here we estimate the test to take
approximate 5-7 minutes, as we are placed in a hospital.
4. The participants is informed that they can withdraw from the study at any
time.
5. A promise that the identity of the patients will not be disclosed at any point of
the project.
This testing method usually involves video-recording, where the participant does the
user tasks while being recorded. But to ensure the privacy of the patients, we chose
not to record them.
The answers will provide qualitative data, where the answers provide direct feedback
towards the design, and if it fulfils the requirements of a UCD.
6.4
Results
In the usability test, we conducted answers from 9 patients using the Think-Aloud
technique as previously described. This is illustrated through two tables. One table
represents Q1 and Q2 (Table
6.2), while the other table represents Q3 and Q4
(Table 6.3). This makes it possible to differentiate between the user tasks which are
done by the user, and the general thoughts of understanding.
==PAGE:55==
6.4 Results
46
Q1
Time for Q1
Q2
Time for Q2
Patient 1
Was able
31,23 sec
Was able
26,27 sec
Patient 2
Was able
45,44 sec
Was able
34,22 sec
Patient 3
Was able
28,02 sec
Was able
38,45 sec
Patient 4
Was able
43,43 sec
Was not able (did not understand)
N/A
Patient 5
Was able
35, 56 sec
Was able
24,02 sec
Patient 6
Was able
29,32 sec
Was able
18,23 sec
Patient 7
Was able
35,55 sec
Was not able (did not understand)
N/A
Patient 8
Was able
26,12 sec
Was able
28,31 sec
Patient 9
Was able
29,16 sec
Was able
27,25 sec
Sum of answers
9/9 were able
0/9 were not able
7/9 were able
2/9 were not able
Average time
33,76 sec
28,10 sec
Table 6.2: Results for Question 1 and Question 2
Q3
Q4
Patient 1
Urgent incidents has occurred.
Yes, probably by adding some extra time to the waiting time.
Patient 2
Something to do with an ambulance arriving.
Maybe making the waiting time slower?
Patient 3
A patient has arrived with an urgent incident.
I have to wait more as a more urgent patient has arrived.
Patient 4
A page that shows urgent incidents
I do not know.
It does not reflect in the design.
Patient 5
Ambulance containing urgent incident.
I think it has an affection as urgent incidents have a higher priority.
Patient 6
An urgent incident happened.
I do not know.
It probably does have a meaning according to the time.
Patient 7
An ambulance has arrived with a patient.
Yes, because it is an emergency,
where the time is prioritised differently.
Patient 8
Reflection of urgent incidents and how they are visualised.
It makes sense if I receive the information of urgent incidents,
that it as well affects my time.
Patient 9
Ambulance which has an urgent patient inside.
Yes, it would probably add more minutes to my time.
Table 6.3: Results of Question 3 and Question 4
6.4.1
Data Analysis
The two tables illustrated in Section 6.4 represent each two questions. Extracting
data from table 6.2, it can be interpreted that the majority were able to successfully
do the user tasks in Q1 and Q2. While the answers from the Q3 and Q4 are slightly
different, but overall the 9 patients have opinions that are alike.
6.4.1.1
Question 1
9 out of 9 patients were able to detect themselves on the monitor after reading the
text-message, which indicates that the ID is understandable. According to the first
iteration, it was somehow difficult to understand who you were, which was therefore
expressed more in the text message in this iteration. This makes it easier for the user
to detect who they are as well, which is expressed from Table 6.2.
According to the 9 patients, the average time of doing the specific task was 33,76
seconds. This indicates that the time it takes for them to receive the message and
understand who they are on the monitor, is 33,76 seconds on average. As the pa-
tients are placed in a stressed situation, it is therefore quite fast that they can detect
==PAGE:56==
6.5 Discussion
47
it in less than a minute. The most important factor of this user task, was to figure
if the patients were able to detect their ID, and as of the results, 9 out 9 managed
successfully to do it.
6.4.1.2
Question 2
7 out of 9 patients were able to detect the average waiting time according to them-
selves. Two patients, Patient 4 and Patient 7, were not able to understand the average
waiting time. They had difficulties in finding the meaning and understanding of the
colours. There were difficulties in connecting the colours on their ID towards the
average waiting time colours. This therefore ended up with them giving up on the
task, hence the N/A in Table 6.2. The two patients are therefore not included in
the average time distribution.
On average, it took the 7 patients 28,10 seconds to perform the user task, which as
Question 1 is a quite fast time, as the patients still are placed in a stressed situation.
6.4.1.3
Question 3
From the received answers, it was expected that everyone should detect that the
ambulance symbolised a meaning with an urgent incident. This was therefore not a
surprise, that the 9 patients had similar answers according to what they thought the
screen represented.
6.4.1.4
Question 4
The outcome of Question 4, is more or less the same answers.
As expected, the
patients understood that the urgent incidents would affect the waiting time in some
way.
Although there were 7 out 9 patients that were confident in their answers,
there were as well two patients, Patient 4 and Patient 6, who had some difficulties
in understanding the effect. As one patient described, ”It does not reflect in the
design”. This indicates that there might be lack of information in our design.
6.5
Discussion
The purpose of this iteration, was to identify if a UCD can develop a better under-
standing of the queuing system. As addressed in the first iteration, we defined 3
elements, which were needed to be addressed in future iterations.
As the focus lied within UCD, we developed a more user-friendly design that tackles
these elements. In general the overall outcome of the first iteration was the lack of
understanding. Therefore this was optimised in this iteration, where we emphasised
on the following elements:
==PAGE:57==
6.6 Sub Conclusion
48
1. Optimised text message. The text message carry more information and the
text is now more user friendly.
2. Average waiting time.
Each colour is now associated with their average
waiting time.
3. Information of urgent incidents. We incorporated a visualisation of urgent
incidents through an ambulance icon.
These elements enhance the usability and understanding of the system according to
the received answers from the first iteration.
Our usability test on 9 patients went well.
The patients had a clear understand-
ing of who they were on the monitor, and what happened when an urgent incident
occurred. They had as well an overall understanding that an urgent incident affects
the waiting time. But there are as well some confused patients, which could not under-
stand the average waiting time. Two patients, Patient 4 and Patient 7, were not able
to identify the average waiting time, as they did not understand their colour. This is
definitely something which needs to be further addressed, as the patients should easily
be able to understand the meaning behind it. Likewise it is not thoroughly expressed
of what happens with the waiting time, when an urgent incident occurs. Patient 4
and Patient 6, were both a bit confused of how this could affect their waiting time.
We received answers from 9 participants in this usability test, which is a relatively
small number. To get an even better data analysis, a larger sample was needed to be
collected. The results can differ, if the sample size is larger.
6.6
Sub Conclusion
We can conclude on this iteration, that after developing an improved and more UCD
solution, improved the understanding of our solution. As reflected in Section 6.5, it
was stated that the sample size was relatively small. If we collected more data from
more patients, our results would be more reliable.
According to the first iteration, our solution was understood, but it had its flaws.
Especially when it came to the understanding of triage and the provided information.
The results from this iteration, has shown that by using a UCD approach has im-
proved our solution, more specifically the patients understand our design better now.
Now with an improved product in hand, we now need to measure its effect.
For
this purpose we have chosen to use empowerment as a measuring value. Chapter 7
explains the reason why Empowerment was chosen as a measurement tool, and how
we use it to measure our solution.
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 7
3nd Iteration - Patient
Empowerment
The purpose of this iteration, is to define a measurement tool in order to measure on
the established solution from the previous iteration. We will in this chapter introduce
and work with Empowerment, more specifically Patient Empowerment.
The first section of the chapter consists of defining what Patient Empowerment is, as
there are many different opinions of how it is defined.
The second section of the chapter consists of, how we have incorporated Patient
Empowerment Features into our design.
The third section of the chapter consists of measuring Empowerment at the ED on
the patients. Here we defined a questionnaire to measure empowerment score.
The fourth and final section of the chapter consists of discussing and concluding
on the results received from the created questionnaire.
7.1
Definition of Patient Empowerment
For this thesis the definition of empowerment is based on the combined research
conducted by Chamberlin, Aujoulat and Chen:
• The 15 quality elements (Chamberlin 1997)
• Empowerment is patients’ self-efficacy and capacity to make informed decisions
(Chen et al. 2016; Aujoulat et al. 2008).
The word “empowerment” has been been very popular, and used since it got famous
in the relation of political discussions about pedagogy in the 1970’s (Freire 1993).
Later the use of the word got more widespread and moved to other areas such as
social work (Rappaport 1981). But the word does not have a clear definition. As a
consequence, the word has become a common political rhetoric, and the use of the
==PAGE:59==
7.1 Definition of Patient Empowerment
50
word has been so flexible broad, that it is in danger of losing any inherent meaning
(Chamberlin 1997). Here is an example with use of the word in a political context:
The authorities belief was, that by cutting of the benefits of exposed citizens, would
make them more self-sufficient. This would make them more independent, thus more
“empowered” (Rappaport 1981). But if the term “empowerment” is used in another
context, e.g. the medical sector, it would have a complete different meaning. In this
context “empowerment” would be about providing different processes, structures and
relations that would strengthen a persons will of choice.
It is clear to see, that the meaning behind the word empowerment can differ greatly
based on its context. The term becomes even more problematic, when other countries
and languages get mixed. Therefore, the first step in making the term meaningful is
to define it (Chamberlin 1997).
7.1.1
Empowerment is self-efficacy
(Aujoulat et al. 2008) conducted an inductive explorative study, based on individ-
ual in-depth interviews with ill patients. This was done in order to understand the
process of empowerment. Based on (Aujoulat et al. 2008) evidence has shown that
patients who go through stressed experiences, can have the feeling of powerlessness.
The results of the study showed that empowerment and control are two separate
things. (Aujoulat et al. 2008) indicates that empowerment is actually a process of
personal transformation. This transformation occurs through a double process. The
first process is “holding on” to ones previous self-representation, role and learning to
control the disease and treatment. The second process is about “letting go”, by ac-
cepting to abdicate control, so that the patients see the illness as being of a reconciled
self(Aujoulat et al. 2008).
7.1.2
The qualities of empowerment
(Chamberlin 1997) has conducted research on the definition of empowerment. In her
research, a group of participants were studied in a user-run self-help program. Results
from the study indicated that many of the participants used the term “empowerment”
in their program definitions. An advisory board, consisting of a dozen of the leading
U.S. consumer self-help practitioners, was brought in to help to formulate the defini-
tion. The discussion with the advisory board showed that the term “empowerment”
shared many common elements with concepts such as “self-esteem” and “self-efficacy”.
Yet, the advisory board and Chamberlin felt that the “empowerment” term did not
fully capture the distinctive about empowerment. The results were analysed further,
and after much discussion, it was concluded that “empowerment” consisted of 15
qualities. The qualities list can seen in Appendix D.1.
==PAGE:60==
7.2 Hypothesis
51
7.1.3
Our definition of empowerment
For this thesis, we used the the combined work of (Aujoulat et al. 2008; Chamberlin
1997; Chen et al. 2016) to define patient empowerment. (Aujoulat et al. 2008) def-
inition of patient empowerment was already explained in the previous section, but
(Chen et al. 2016) also shares the same definition; patient empowerment involves pa-
tients’ self-efficacy and capacity to make informed decisions about their health (Chen
et al. 2016).
The work of (Chamberlin 1997) is also used to determine the definition. She points
out that the term “empowerment”, is a complex multidimensional concept, that de-
scribes a process rather than an event. Therefore it is not required for an individual to
possess every quality on the list, in order to be considered “empowered” (Chamberlin
1997). Based on that reason, a manual selection was conducted. Each chosen quality
was based on its relevance to an ED environment and our solution. The results of
this process ended with the following quality elements:
• Having decision-making power
• Having access to information and resources
• Having a range of options from which to make choices (not just yes/no, ei-
ther/or)
• Learning about and expressing anger
• Learning skills (e.g., communication) that the individual defines as important
• Not feeling alone; feeling part of a group
Our definition is that patient empowerment involves making self-efficacy and informed
based decisions and to learn/achieve new skills and knowledge, by making resources
and information available.
7.2
Hypothesis
Based on the findings of the Literature Review (Chapter 1), we concluded that no
research has been done on the solutions that affect patients directly. In the previous
chapter we created a User-Centred Design (UCD) solution to solve the problem we
found in Hvidovre Hospital. Now with a solution where the patients are in focus, we
want see if it is possible to implement empowerment features into our design and then
measuring its impact in the ED. We therefore want to explore the following hypothesis:
”There is a positive significant difference in empowerment score between
patients who saw the solution and patients who did not”
==PAGE:61==
7.3 Design and Development
52
7.3
Design and Development
In this section, we provide the methods, that was used to design and develop the new
empowerment features. It consists of the design goals that we are trying to achieve
and the methods used to evaluate the usability of the solution.
7.3.1
Empowerment components
Now with a clear definition of empowerment, the next step is to incorporate empower-
ment, hence the 6 empowerment qualities, into our solution. For this purpose we used
the concept-centric approach again, like we did in the Literature Review (Webster
et al. 2002). Table 7.1 illustrates the created concepts with their explanations.
Component
Empower quality
Explanation
Information
Having access to information and resources.
Information, is about informing the patient.
Patients do not have any knowledge about what is
happening when stationed in the ED (Lup2017).
It is important to provide information to the patients,
but only in a way that would give them an overview.
Learning
Learning about and expressing anger,
Learning skills (e.g., communication),
self-efficacy
Learning, is an important quality to empower the patients.
It is close connected to the information component.
We want to educate the patients by providing them with
relevant information about the ED.
Patient education has also been shown to improve
patient outcomes in comparable urgent settings (Wei et al. 2000).
Choice
Having decision-making power,
Having a rage of options
from which to make choices,
Informed based decisions
Choice, is an essential component quality for the empowerment of patients.
Giving the patients the power to make her/his own choices.
It does not matter how insignificance the choice is,
but just by giving them the option to choose is a great
boost to the patients empowerment (Bent Ottesen 2014).
Unity
Not feeling alone;
feeling part of a group
Unity, is used to empower the patients,
by giving them the feeling that they are not alone in the ED.
Table 7.1: Empowerment Components
7.3.2
User-Centred-Design
The UCD approach was used again like we did in the previous iteration Section 6.2.
In the previous iteration we combined the UX goals and the values from the value
pyramid to establish requirements for the design, see Figure 6.2. We reuse the process
in this iteration, but this time we added the new UX goals and values that came from
the implementation of the empowerment features, Table 7.2 illustrates this.
==PAGE:62==
7.3 Design and Development
53
Component
Empower quality
Value Pyramid - Values
UX goals
Information
Having access to information and resources.
Informs,
Provides Access,
Reduces Risk,
Reduces Anxiety,
Fun/Entertainment
Helpful,
Easy to learn,
Easy to remember how to use
Learning
Learning about and expressing anger,
Learning skills (e.g., communication),
self-efficacy
Saves Time,
Avoids Hassles,
Informs,
Self-Actualization
Helpful,
Easy to learn,
Easy to remember how to use,
Challenging,
Entertaining,
Rewarding,
Engaging,
Fun
Choice
Having decision-making power,
Having a rage of options
from which to make choices,
Informed based decisions
Quality,
Provides Hope,
Variety,
Motivation,
Safe to use,
Satisfying,
Motivating
Unity
Not feeling alone;
feeling part of a group
Self-Transcendence,
Afilliation and Belonging,
Provides Hope,
Reduces Anxiety,
Rewards me,
Connects
Satisfying,
Enhancing socialibility
Table 7.2: Combined Empowerment components with UX goals and Values
7.3.3
Usability Test
Based on these components, we created our first design which can been seen in Ap-
pendix [D.2 - D.10]. This new design was validated through Think-Aloud tests on
regular people. The reason behind doing these tests were that usually patients in the
ED are distressed, and this could affect their point of view. Therefore we wanted
to test our design on people who were in a “normal state”, because if the “normal”
people did not understand our design, then it would be pretty clear that a stressed
patient in ED would neither. This usability test was conducted in a controlled envi-
ronment on three individuals. This process was repeated twice. The final design can
be seen in Appendix [D.11 - D.21]. The clickable prototype for the mobile device, can
be accessed through the following url: Press here to open the clickable prototype
7.3.4
The Design Features
Information
When it came to providing information to the patients, our objective was clear. We
wanted to provide as much relevant information to the patients as possible, but with-
out flooding them, thus making them confused. Figure 7.1 illustrates the patient
estimated treatment time, and the average treatment waiting time of the day. A
patient waiting time consists of a unique ID, an estimated treatment time and a
triage colour. The design also makes it possible for the patient to see changes in their
time, in the case of an emergency in the ED. Our main objective here is to only show
information to the patient that will inform them about their treatment time.
==PAGE:63==
7.3 Design and Development
54
Figure 7.1: Information Features
Learning
As already mentioned, the Learning component is closely connected with the Infor-
mation component.
We want to educate the patients by providing them with a
combination with information and gamification. Research has shown that gamifica-
tion can play an important role in motivating people (Seaborn et al. 2015).
Figure 7.2 illustrates our attempt of this. Currently Hvidovre ED uses an A-4 paper
to inform their patients about the ED. But when asking the patients about it, the
response was ”that it was boring with too much text”. Our solution has been designed
too not show to much information at the same time. The information is split up, so
they learn one thing at a time. By doing it this way, they would not feel overwhelmed
with information like in the A-4 paper.
To make the learning process more fun and interesting for the patients, we have
added gamefication in the form of a quiz game. By giving the patients the option to
challenge their newly acquired knowledge, will make the waiting process more exciting.
==PAGE:64==
7.3 Design and Development
55
Figure 7.2: Learning Features
Choice
We have created a mobile-friendly version of our solution, see Appendix [D.11 - D.21].
Making it supportable for mobile devices, creates an option for the patients to leave
the ED facility or arrive at the ED of own accord. This quality, is one of the main
empowerment qualities in our solution.
Unity
Even though the patients are in the same ED waiting room, they are isolated. Almost
no form of contact is established between the patients. Our design creates a connec-
tion with the patients, by showing that other patients are waiting together with you,
as illustrated in Figure 7.1 and the high score of your quiz results Figure 7.3
==PAGE:65==
7.4 Measuring Patient Empowerment
56
Figure 7.3: Unity Features
7.4
Measuring Patient Empowerment
As mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, patient empowerment has gained con-
siderable importance throughout the years. There is still uncertainty about how the
best method to measure it (Barr et al. 2015). This is mainly due to the fact that
the definition of patient empowerment has not been clearly defined (McAllister et al.
2012). Therefore, there is no universally measurement standard of patient empow-
erment that can be used to evaluate and compare patient empowerment initiatives
across different health care services. A number of specific patient condition empow-
erment measurements have been published; the Genetic Counselling (Mcallister et al.
2011), the Patient Empowerment Scale (cancer) (Bulsara et al. 2006), measurement
of patient empowerment in catering for older people (Faulkner 2001), and the Dia-
betes Outcome Scale (Anderson et al. 2000).
(Herbert et al. 2009) has conducted a systematic review to identify questionnaires
that measure health-related empowerment, in adults or families, and rate them in
terms of reliability and validity (Herbert et al. 2009).
The review results showed
that out of 50 identified questionnaires, only 1 questionnaire had good evidence of
reliability and validity.
==PAGE:66==
7.5 Survey Procedure
57
Paul J. Barr has also used a systematic review to provide an overview of studies
assessing psychometric properties of questionnaires to capture patient empowerment
(Barr et al. 2015). His findings indicated that a range of patient empowerment con-
structs, that was classified into four domains:
• Patients states, experiences and capacities
• Patient actions and behaviours
• Patient self-determination within the health care
• Patient skill development
7.4.1
Patient Empowerment Questionnaire
Based on the found literature: The systematic reviews of patient empowerment (Barr
et al. 2015; Herbert et al. 2009), and the measurement examples (Bulsara et al. 2006;
Mcallister et al. 2011; Faulkner 2001; Mcallister et al. 2011; Anderson et al. 2000),
made it clear that using a questionnaire is a valid method to measure empowerment.
Therefore, an empowerment questionnaire of our own was created, which can been
seen in Appendix D.24.
7.5
Survey Procedure
A general procedure was created for the survey trial, to be sure that it was conducted
consistently and in a good practice. The procedure was split in two separate scenarios,
one where we showed our solution to the patient, and one where we did not. Each
patient went through the standard procedure as described below:
Procedure for the patients who did not see the solution
1. We briefly introduced ourselves to the patient, by explaining our background as
engineers. The patients were then asked if they would mind filling out a survey
about the ED.
2. If the patient agreed, then a copy of the survey was given and the purpose of
the survey was explained. This was an essential step, because we wanted to give
the feeling to the patients that their opinion/answers would play an important
role in the process of improving the quality of the ED.
3. When the patient finished the survey, it was then collected and the patient was
thanked for the cooperation.
==PAGE:67==
7.6 Results
58
Procedure for the patients that saw the solution
1. We introduced us to the patient, briefly explaining our background as engineers
and if they would mind seeing our solution we had created to improve and solve
the quality and problems of the ED.
2. If the patient agreed, a presentation of our solution was shown.
After the
presentation, a copy of the survey was given to the patient, and the patient
were asked to fill out the survey. The patient was explained that their answers
was anonymous and important. This was an essential step, because we wanted
to give the feeling to the patients that their opinion/answers would play an
important role in the process of improving the quality of the ED.
3. When the patient finished the survey, it was then collected and the patient was
thanked for the cooperation.
7.6
Results
This section contains the results obtained by the empowerment questionnaire, which
can be seen in Appendix D.24. The first subsection describes the patient data. The
second subsection consist of a statistical data analysis of the collected patient survey
data.
7.6.1
Data Set
The data set includes 50 subjects; 25 patients were surveyed without the solution,
which are referred as NotSeen and 25 patients were surveyed with the solution, which
are refeered as Seen. Table 7.3 shows all the subjects that took part in the survey.
Valid
Missing
Total
Group
N
Percent
N
Percent
N
Percent
NotSeen
25
100.0%
0
0.0%
25
100.0%
Seen
25
100.0%
0
0.0%
25
100.0%
Table 7.3: Dataset of Patients/Subjects
==PAGE:68==
7.6 Results
59
7.6.2
Statistical Analysis
The descriptive data statistics such as mean, standard deviation, independent-samples
t-test were used. The normality of data was investigated with Kolmogorov-Smimov
test and the assumption of homogeneity of variances was tested with Levens’s test for
equality of variances. The data were analysed with SPSS software (version 20) and
the significance level was considered to be 0.05.
Descriptive statistics
Descriptive statistics were used to calculate the mean and standard deviation of em-
powerment level for both subject groups (Table 7.4). The Mean for patients who saw
the solution empowerment score (4.16 ±0.40) was higher than the patients who did
not (2.23 ± 0.52), a statistically significant difference of 1.92 (95% CI, 1,77 to 2,20).
In other words, it seems that our solution has been effective in improving the average
score in empowerment. The complete Descriptive table can been seen in Appendix
D.25
Group
N
Mean
Std. Devation
Std. Error Mean
NotSeen
25
2.2337
0.51792
0.10358
Seen
25
4.1621
0.39712
0.07942
Table 7.4: Group Statistics
Assumption of homogeneity of variances
An important assumption of the independent-samples t-test is that the two groups
variances are equal in population. Failure to adhere to this assumption (that is if
variances are unequal), will increase the chance of making a Type 1 error. Equality
of variances is also known as homogeneity of variance.
From the Descriptive Table in Appendix D.25, you can see that the variance for
the NotSeen group was 0.268 and it was 0.158 for the Seen group. The variance for
the NotSeen group was double the size compared to the Seen group.
But, these estimates will differ due to sampling variability. Therefore to formally
test, if these two variance values are different in the population, we use Levenes’s
Test for Equality.
The first section of Table 7.5, shows the result of the Levene’s test.
The signifi-
cance level (Sig. or p-value) was p = 0.09, making the population variance of both
groups equal. This indicates that assumption of homogeneity of variances are met
(p-value was greater than 0.5).
==PAGE:69==
7.6 Results
60
Levenes’s Test for
Equality of Variances
t-test for Equality
of Means
95% Confidence Interval
of the Difference
Group
F
Sig.
t
df
Sig. (2-tailed)
Mean
Difference
Std. Error
Difference
Lower
Upper
Equal variances assumed
2.826
0.099
14.774
48
.000
1.92844
.13053
1.66599
2.19089
Table 7.5: Independent Samples Test
We compared the mean difference of empowerment score of both groups, which can
be seen in Table 7.5
Distribution Shapiro-Wilk
In order to determine if the score in each group are normally distributed then the
”Sig.” column located under the ”Shapiro-Wilk” column (Table 7.6), must be more
than 0.5(i.e, p<.05). The results in Table 7.6 shows that both group scores are higher
than .05, hence empowerment scores for each group were normally distributed, as
assessed by Shapiro-Wilk’s test (p > .05).
Koimogorov-Smirnov
Shapiro-Wilk
Group
Statistic
df
Sig.
Statistic
df
Sig.
NotSeen
.131
25
.200*
.977
25
.827
Seen
.095
25
.200
.979
25
.866
Table 7.6: Test of Normality
==PAGE:70==
7.7 Discussion
61
7.7
Discussion
Design
The purpose of this chapter was to develop a design that would empower the patients
of Hvidovre Hospital, and measure its effect. Therefore, it was important to deter-
mine a clear and precise definition of what empowerment was. Our expectation was,
that with a clear definition of patient empowerment, it would be possible to generate
design ideas that provided more patient empowerment. Yet, this was not the case.
Our definition also consisted of 6 different quality factors. Combining these factors
and turning them into design ideas, was a difficult task. We did come up with some
design ideas, but we also felt that these ideas did not give an extensive empowerment
solution. The concept-centric approach was used to fix this problem (Webster et al.
2002). This approach is used to structure our findings in a logical way. This method
boiled the 6 quality factors down to 4 concepts, which made the process of generating
empowerment ides a lot easier.
Results
statistically analysis, was conducted to conclude if the patients that used our solution,
would have an increased empowerment score. Table 7.4, gives a fast understanding if
that is actually the case. The mean of patients who saw the solution is higher than
the patients who did not see it. This was the result we excepted. Previous literature
and research have shown that it is possible to empower patients (Aujoulat et al. 2008;
Linhorst et al. 2003; McAllister et al. 2012; Chamberlin 1997) and to measure it (Barr
et al. 2015; Mcallister et al. 2011; Bulsara et al. 2006; Faulkner 2001; Anderson et al.
2000).
To make sure that the results were valid, a statistical analysis was used in the form
of a t-test (Section 7.6.2). We used this method to determine if there was a statis-
tically significant difference between the means of the two groups, that we collected
data from. And since results showed that was a statistically significant difference
between the means (p > .05), we fail to reject the null hypothesis and would not
accept the alternative hypothesis. Nevertheless, it is important to point out that the
sample size of the collected data is quite small (N=50), therefore the results might
differ if a much bigger sample was used.
Definition of empowerment
Many definitions of the term, empowerment, has been developed, and the meaning of
the term can differ, depending on the context it is used in. As a result, measurement
of patient empowerment suffer due to the lack of clarity and consensus. Therefore our
first goal was to make a clear definition of our understanding of the empowerment
term. As described in Section 7.1, we combined the definition of patient empower-
ment with research findings of (Chamberlin 1997; Aujoulat et al. 2008; Chen et al.
2016):
==PAGE:71==
7.8 Sub Conclusion
62
“Our definition is that patients empowerment involves making self-efficacy, in-
formed based decisions and to learn/achieve new skills and knowledge, by making
resources and information available.”
This fulfilled our objective to assert a clear definition of the empowerment term,
thus making a measurement possible. But it did not solve the existing problem of
this popular term; that there were too many definitions out there, on the contrary we
just added another one. Our definition may be based on the work of three researchers
that has tested their definition thoroughly, but we created a new one by combining
their work of different research definitions. This makes it difficult to validate if our
definition is precise.
7.8
Sub Conclusion
The purpose of this chapter was to test our solution through our hypothesis in Sec-
tion 7.2.
Based on the results, it is clear to see that the patients that used our solution, had a
significant increased patient empowerment score, compared to the patients who did
not see our solution.
Empowerment may be a term that does not posses a clear and precise definition.
But through research, our findings made it possible to make a clear definition of our
own, by combining the existing literature of other researchers. It is not clear that
this new definition captures the aspects of the term, empowerment. Further research
is needed to make this clear.
We believe that our results add value to the knowledge about patient empowerment,
and its linkage with design. This study confirms that it is indeed possible to increase
a patient empowerment score with empowerment design. Nevertheless, our results
remain tentative, the amount of measured patients should be conducted in a much
greater scale for more reliable results. Our findings do however indicate directions for
further research on patient empowerment association with design.
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
The purpose of this study was to define a solution for visualising and estimating
waiting times at the ED of Hvidovre Hospital, through the following 4 phases:
1. Litterature Review - Achieve a literature overview of the state-of-the-art knowl-
edge about the topic
2. 1st iteration - Finding the problems within the ED of Hvidovre Hospital
3. 2nd iteration - Develop a UCD solution based on the knowledge gained from
the 1st iteration
4. 3rd iteration - Incorporate patient empowerment features in the solution, and
measure its effect
Our analysis in this thesis, emphasises on the lack of patient-centred solutions that
we extracted from the Literature Review.
We introduce in this chapter implications for the study, both for the researchers
as well as practitioners. This is followed by the limitations of the study. Likewise
we have a subsection, ”Future Work”, which emphasises on important elements that
could be assessed in the future of this project.
8.1
Implications
8.1.1
Implications of Research
Literature Review
The purpose of the Literature Review was to get an overview of the state-of-the-art
knowledge on the EDs. The results of the review showed that out of the total 52
articles, 38% was about solutions, 23% was about problems, 23% was about patients,
10% was about triage and 6% was about geography. Since the objective of this study
was to create a solution of our own (creating a visual estimation waiting system), we
explored the literature for the solutions. As we already mentioned in the discussion
section of our Literature Review, we were quite surprised that no patient-focused
solution research was conducted.
==PAGE:73==
8.1 Implications
64
The majority of research was focused on changes to hospital management (Abdul-
wahid et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2013), simulations (Kuo et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2015)
and “improving” the triage system (LLC 2017; Clifford-Brown et al. 2010). These
results indicates that much more research on this area are yet to be explored.
3 Iteration
The purpose of the 3rd iteration was to find a measurement tool to measure the effect
of the established solution. Our choice landed on empowerment as the measurement
scale. We now wanted to explore theory on empowerment as a definition and a mea-
suring tool. But, to our surprise we discovered that empowerment as a term and a
measuring tool lacked consensus. Just from the definition alone, there was no clarity
(Chamberlin 1997). The definition and the meaning of the term would change dras-
tically from one context to another (Chamberlin 1997; Aujoulat et al. 2008).
When doing research on the use of empowerment as a measurement tool, we were
surprised again. Just like before, when it came to the definition of empowerment, the
measurement process/tool lacked consensus yet again. The collected literature on the
measurement of empowerment, showed that there was no standard (Barr et al. 2015;
McAllister et al. 2012). Rather, the measurement technique would change based on
the measurement target (Bulsara et al. 2006; Faulkner 2001; Anderson et al. 2000).
This discovery was surprising, and further proved that the lack of clarity of the em-
powerment term. Yet, this did not have a significant effect on our study, even though
there was a lack of a measurement standard, the majority of the found measurement
scales shared a common attribute. The common attribute which came in the form as
questionnaire, which we also adopted.
Our attempt to develop a patient empowerment measurement tool, was successful.
As predicted from our results from the empowerment survey, our results showed a
positive significant change between patients that used our solution and patients that
did not. By comparing our results, of 1.92 (empowerment mean) to the literature,
more specifically the other empowerment measurement scales results, showed a statis-
tically significant difference. Based on these results, we concluded that it was possible
to measure and improve the empowerment score, as done in the literature.
==PAGE:74==
8.1 Implications
65
8.1.2
Implication of Practice
1st Iteration
In the first iteration, we were in the idea-phase of the project, and were therefore
figuring out if the idea was on the right track. Following the Lean UX model (Klein
2013), our idea was formed into a design, which was then tested throughout a Semi-
Structured Interview as defined in (Sharp et al. 2011). We discovered that the answers
from the patients who participated in our interview, correlates with the results that
were found in (LUP 2018).
From our results, we can indicate that there is a certain value in visualising and in-
forming the patients that we provide from our solution.
As described in Section 5.3.1, we received plenty of information towards the sys-
tem and how it was today, from visiting the ED. Through this knowledge, we found
out that there was a general problem where patients were frustrated. Therefore our
solution would provide a certain value towards the hospital staff, as they would not
receive complaints and frustrations, because our solution would provide the needed
information.
2nd iteration
The purpose of the 2nd iteration, was to figure out if a User-Centered Design (UCD)
could provide a better understanding of our solution.
Our focus was on the patients of the ED, therefore we used the user experience
goals from Table 6.1, and values from the value pyramid Figure 6.1. These goals
and values were used in order to set requirements for our solution.
Our attempt of measuring this, was through a Think-Aloud test (Sharp et al. 2011),
where we tested if the design lived up to the specified requirements. From this test, it
was possible to see how large an understanding the patients had towards our solution,
when it was designed as a UCD. This did not come as a surprise, as the more a design
is centred around the users, the better they are able to understand it.
As in the first iteration, our solution provided value towards the hospital staff and
the patients. But now, with a more improved solution, which has the UCD aspects
incorporated, we can provide even more value to the ED of Hvidovre.
==PAGE:75==
8.2 Limitations
66
8.2
Limitations
Literature Review
Even though we used a comprehensive systematic approach, our Literature Review
is still affected by limitations. The main limitation, is that we only used journals we
found through the search databases, and not research reported in books. The reason
behind our choice to only rely on journals, is that they are known for their quality,
due to peer reviews. Another reason is that by increasing our searching scope, could
affect our literature findings, in way where the amount of literature could become too
much. The found literature had to be in a relatively fair size, in order for us to have
enough time to analyse it. However, this does not change the fact that by excluding
books and other literature materials would increase the risk of missing important
research of our study.
Limitations for the iterations
The limitation of these chapters were identified in the lack of participants, in our
interview and usability test. We tested our idea in the 1st iteration on 6 patients in
total,which is a relatively low number of participants. As we are validating the idea
and the concept of the solution, it would have provided more reliable results, if there
were more participants.
Likewise in the 2nd iteration, we managed to test on 9 patients, where we wanted to
validate the usability. As in the 1st iteration, the amount of participants, was relative
low.
The limitation of the 3rd iteration was identified in form of priming.
When test-
ing our solution on the patients, we introduced ourselves as engineers who were here
to solve and improve the problems and quality of ED, followed by us showing the so-
lution to the patients. This may not be the ideal approach, using this way we plant a
thought in their heads, that our solution would improve their situation. By “positive”
priming the patients could affect their survey answers, thus making our results less
reliable.
An overall limitation for the three iterations, is that we have few variables.
We
do not differentiate between e.g. Old/Young, Men/Women etc. The only variable is
that they are patients at the ED. The results would be much richer, if we categorised
our participants.
==PAGE:76==
8.3 Future Work
67
8.3
Future Work
The research that has been addressed in this thesis, incorporates usability, patient-
centred design and patient empowerment. This section, explains future processes,
proposals and other methods that could be developed to improve the state of the
product in the future.
The hospital staff at Hvidovre Hospital make use of Triage (Dahlin et al. 2012), to
perform their categorisation of the patients. We incorporated Triage in our solution,
where patients can see and track their received colour. Through our Think-Aloud
test in the 3rd iteration, one participant described that patients in the ED can feel
that their injury is not taken serious enough, if they get a ”too low triage colour”.
Likewise, one of our contact persons at the hospital, Ditte Gram Bek, validated
this, agreeing that by showing the patients colour could create issues. It could be
interesting too explore the possibilities of working with the colours and its psycholog-
ical effect on the patients.
Another future iteration would be to explore the interaction with Sundhedsplatfor-
men (SP). This is an important aspect, as the hospital staff needs to perform the
actions, which eventually leads to the visualisation of the waiting times.
Since we are working with personal patient data, safety is a high priority. As more
than 525.000 patients come yearly (measured 24th of January 2017) through the ED
of Region Hovedstaden (AHH 2017), there is a lot of data that needs to be processed
through the system safely. This needs to be approached due to the new policy of
personal data, General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). GDPR is a compre-
hensive law, in which should protect the individual citizen’s data throughout the
whole of Europe (GDPR 2018). Therefore this is an important aspect to look into in
future iterations.
As we developed a mobile-friendly solution, it is therefore required to possess a mobile
phone. In future iterations, we would like to synchronise our solution with automatic
printers, that prints out the patient’s unique ID. This service would provide informa-
tion to people who do not carry mobile phones.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
In this chapter we conclude on the project goals, based on our research and results.
1st project goal
The first task of the project was to identify the problems at Hvidovre Hospital ED.
For this purpose we used a Literature Review to gain knowledge about the state-of-
the-art on emergency departments (ED). This knowledge was supported by the (LUP
2018), and the findings from our visits at Hvidovre Hospital ED.
Through a comprehensive review of the literature, we found 443 relevant journals.
We analysed the found journals with a manual filtering selection process, followed
by a back/forward search, which resulted into 53 journals. With the use of these 53
articles, we found out that there was a knowledge-gap in the patient-centred solution
field of EDs, thus creating the scope of this study.
With the literature review we now had an overview of the literature of EDs, more
specifically we have learned where we could do a real difference.
This knowledge
was supported with additional literature from a national Danish patient survey (LUP
2018). The survey together with the information we learned from the patients and
staff of Hvidovre ED, correlated with the problems we found in Literature Review.
Through these processes, we confirmed the problems of the EDs, more importantly
Hvidovre ED, that no one have tried to solve these problems with a patient-centred
approach. n
2nd project goal
The second task was to develop a User-Centered Design (UCD) solution where the ED
patients of Hvidovre Hospital were the centre-piece. In accordance with the project
goal, we wanted to identify that UCD has an impact on the patient’s understanding.
Using the UX goals and values from the value pyramid, we could develop a more UCD
solution. From the results of the usability test, that we performed on 9 patients, we
could see that the patients had a better understanding of the solution. This indicates
that by developing a UCD solution, had an impact on the patient understanding,
which therefore indicates that UCD has an impact on the understanding.
==PAGE:78==
9 Conclusion
69
3rd project goal
The final task was to measure the solution’s effect, based on established empower-
ment features. This was done through a patient empowerment scale, in the form of
a questionnaire, which we defined from the work of (Chamberlin 1997; Chen et al.
2016; Aujoulat et al. 2008). From the results, with an improved empowerment solu-
tion, had a significant effect on 1.92 (95% CI, 1,77 to 2,20) and a p-value on p-value
= 0.09. This means that we fail to reject the null hypothesis and would not accept
the alternative hypothesis.
Overall
In this project; we found the problem, we designed a solution and we measured its
effect. Throughout these processes, our project has shown promising results. As de-
scribed in the thesis, there was no patient-centred solution knowledge in the literature.
Our opinion is, that our study provides valuable knowledge in the field of ED to other
researchers and practitioners, thus filling the patient-centred solution gap in the ED
literature somehow.
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX A
Figure A.1: Three-step Check List
==PAGE:80==
A
71
Figure A.2: A Comparison of Payment Systems, ED Crowding, and Attempts to
Mitigate Crowding Across 15 Countries
==PAGE:81==
A
72
Figure A.3: A Comparison of Payment Systems, ED Crowding, and Attempts to
Mitigate Crowding Across 15 Countries
==PAGE:82==
APPENDIX B
Figure B.1: User Journey at the ER
==PAGE:83==
B
74
Figure B.2: Patient 1 - Answer
==PAGE:84==
B
75
Figure B.3: Patient 2 - Answer
==PAGE:85==
B
76
Figure B.4: Patient 3 - Answer
==PAGE:86==
B
77
Figure B.5: Patient 4 - Answer
==PAGE:87==
B
78
Figure B.6: Patient 5 - Answer
==PAGE:88==
B
79
Figure B.7: Patient 6 - Answer
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX C
Table 1: A comparison of crowding scales.
Crowding Scale
Calculation
Outcome
Notes
Real-time emergency analysis of 
demand Indicators scores (READI) [ 35
]
DV > 7 indicates overcrowding, and further 
assessment is recommended.
The acuity ratio is based on a four-level acuity scale (4 
being most acute).
A BR > 1 indicates overcrowding.
Poor agreement between READI score and staff perception 
of crowding [36].
A PR > 1.5 indicates an understaffed ED.
AR close to 1 indicates a low burden of illness: 
AR close to 4 indicates a severe burden of 
illness.
Demand value (DV) provides an overall measure of demand based on current calculations of the three ratios.
Bed ratio (BR) assesses the demand per treatment space.
Provider ratio (PR) calculates how many patients can be seen by the physician providers based on the average number of patients seen per hour
(PPH) by each physician.
Acuity ratio (AR) measures the relative burden of illness by averaging the triage categories of all patients in the ED.
Emergency department work index 
(EDWIN) [37]
The number of patients present in the ED in 
triage category . 
The triage category (ordinal scale 1 –5, 5 
being most acute). 
The number of attending physicians on duty 
at a given time. 
The total number of beds, or treatment bays, 
available in the ED.
The number of admitted patients (boarders) 
in the ED.
EDWIN score < 1.5
 Active but manageable ED
EDWIN score 1.5–2.0
 A busy ED has an 
EDWIN score > 2
 A crowded ED
The triage system used was an inverted emergency severity 
index (ESI).
The scale was initially evaluated against nurse/physician 
perception of crowding.
Has been shown to be a strong predictor of ambulance 
diversion and to correlate well with staff perception of 
crowding [38].
Emergency department crowding score
Exact calculations for the EDCS are unclear, 
however, the specific inputs to the EDCS are 
the following:
(i) number of attending emergency 
physicians,
(ii) number of staffed ED beds,
(iii) number of critical care patients,
(iv) number of total ED patients,
(v) number of staffed hospital beds,
(vi) hospital occupancy rate.
EDCS score > 65 was found to be predictive of 
both ambulance diversion and the number of 
patients who leave without being seen by a 
physician.
Generates an output score between 0 and 100.
Three variables were identified that independently predicted 
physician and nurse ratings of EDC: (1) the number of 
boarders, (2) the total number of ED patients, and (3) the 
number of critical care ED patients. 
National emergency department 
overcrowding study (NEDOCS) [26]
0–50: normal
51–100: busy
101–140: overcrowded
141–180: severe
>180: disaster
Generates an output score between 0 and 200 however 
higher scores are possible.
Weiss has demonstrated that NEDOCS is highly correlated 
with clinicians’ perceptions of crowding, ambulance 
diversion, and patients leaving without being seen [ 39]
Total Patients
Total number of patients in the ED, including those in the waiting room, fast track
or observation areas.
ED Beds
Total number of ED beds, including those in hallways, fast track areas, chairs,
and elsewhere.
Admits
Total number of boarders/admitted patients in the ED at the time the score is
calculated.
Hospital Beds
Total number of hospital beds, typically the number of licensed beds that could
be used in a disaster.
Ventilators
The number of patients in the ED on ventilators or respirators
Longest Admit
The longest patient boarding time (in hours) at which the score is calculated
Last Bed Time
The time (in hours) from arrival to bed for the last patient assigned to a bed.
ED work Score [ 40]
Using the threshold work score = 4.77, predict 
the decision for ambulance diversion with 86% 
sensitivity and 80% specificity.
Published in 2006 by Epstein and Tian
Developed to be used in real time to direct ambulance 
traffic based on an objective measure of ED status.
The triage system used was an inverted emergency severity 
index (ESI).
Sometimes referred to as the Boston ED workscore.
Number of patients in the waiting room.
The total number of beds, or treatment bays, available in the ED.
The number of patients present in the ED in triage category 
.
The triage category (ordinal scale 1 –5, 5 being most acute).
Number of nurses on duty.
The number of admitted patients (boarders) in the ED.
ED occupancy Rate
ED occupancy rate above 1.0 indicates there 
are more ED patients than treatment bays.
The threshold to indicate crowding differs from 
study to study. Examples are OR = 1.0, 1.2, and 
1.4.
Suggested to be the simplest and overall best indicator of 
crowding. [13, 41]
Total patients (number of patients in the ED including those in the waiting room, boarding, hallway, and chairs.)
BT (the total number of licensed treatment bays including fast track or observation units, excluding hallway locations.)
Figure C.1: Overview of different crowding scales
==PAGE:90==
APPENDIX D
Figure D.1: The 15 empowerment Elements
==PAGE:91==
D
82
Figure D.2: 1 Mobile Display
==PAGE:92==
D
83
Figure D.3: 2 Mobile Display
==PAGE:93==
D
84
Figure D.4: 3 Mobile Display
==PAGE:94==
D
85
Figure D.5: 4 Mobile Display
==PAGE:95==
D
86
Figure D.6: 5 Mobile Display
==PAGE:96==
D
87
Figure D.7: 6 Mobile Display
==PAGE:97==
D
88
Figure D.8: Waiting List
Figure D.9: Waiting List News
==PAGE:98==
D
89
Figure D.10: Wait List Urgent
==PAGE:99==
D
90
Figure D.11: Final Waiting List Phone
==PAGE:100==
D
91
Figure D.12: Urgent Waiting List
==PAGE:101==
D
92
Figure D.13: Final average waiting time graph
==PAGE:102==
D
93
Figure D.14: Final average urgent waiting time graph
==PAGE:103==
D
94
Figure D.15: Final digital manual 1
==PAGE:104==
D
95
Figure D.16: Final digital manual 2
==PAGE:105==
D
96
Figure D.17: Final Quiz about the Queuing System
==PAGE:106==
D
97
Figure D.18: Final Example of Question and Answers in Quiz
==PAGE:107==
D
98
Figure D.19: Final Example of Question and Answers in Quiz - Correct answer
==PAGE:108==
D
99
Figure D.20: Final Quiz Points
==PAGE:109==
D
100
Figure D.21: Final High Score
==PAGE:110==
D
101
Figure D.22: Final Monitor Display
Figure D.23: Final Urgent Monitor Display
==PAGE:111==
D
102
Figure D.24: Empowerment Questionnaire
==PAGE:112==
D
103
Figure D.25: Descriptive Table
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
Abdulwahid, Maysam Ali et al. (2016). The impact of senior doctor assessment at
triage on emergency department performance measures: Systematic review and
meta-analysis of comparative studies. doi: 10.1136/emermed-2014-204388.
Abras, Chadia, Diane Maloney-Krichmar, and Jenny Preece (2004). “User-centered
design”. In: Bainbridge, W. Encyclopedia of Human-Computer Interaction. Thou-
sand Oaks: Sage Publications. issn: 1875-9270. doi: 10.1.1.94.381. arXiv:
arXiv:1011.1669v3.
Adeniji, Adeloye and Bob Mash (2016a). “Patients’ perceptions of the triage system
in a primary healthcare facility, Cape Town, South Africa”. In: African Journal
of Primary Health Care
Family Medicine 8.1, page 9. issn: 2071-2936. doi: 10.
4102/phcfm.v8i1.1148. url: https://phcfm.org/index.php/phcfm/article/
view/1148.
Adeniji, Adeloye A. and Bob Mash (2016b). “Patients’ perceptions of the triage system
in a primary healthcare facility, Cape Town, South Africa”. In: African journal
of primary health care & family medicine. issn: 20712936. doi: 10.4102/phcfm.
v8i1.1148.
AHH (2017). Key Numbers of Hvidovre Hospital. url: https://www.hvidovrehospital.
dk/om-hospitalet/organisation/Sider/Noegletal.aspx (visited on July 14,
2018).
Almagooshi, Sulaf (2015). “Simulation Modelling in Healthcare: Challenges and Trends”.
In: Procedia Manufacturing 3. 6th International Conference on Applied Human
Factors and Ergonomics (AHFE 2015) and the Affiliated Conferences, AHFE 2015,
pages 301 –307. issn: 2351-9789. doi: https://doi.ortheg/10.1016/j.promfg.
2015.07.155. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2351978915001560.
Almquist, Eric, John Senior, and Nicolas Bloch (2016). The Elements of Value. url:
https://hbr.org/2016/09/the-elements-of-value (visited on May 10, 2018).
Anderson, Robert M. et al. (2000). “The diabetes empowerment scale: A measure of
psychosocial self-efficacy”. In: Diabetes Care 23.6, pages 739–743. issn: 01495992.
doi: 10.2337/diacare.23.6.739.
Andreassen, Hege Kristin and Line Lundvoll Nilsen (2013). “User interface and pa-
tient involvement”. In: Studies in Health Technology and Informatics. Volume 190,
pages 21–23. isbn: 9781614992752. doi: 10.3233/978-1-61499-276-9-21.
==PAGE:114==
Bibliography
105
Aroua, A. and G. Abdulnour (2017). “Optimization of the emergency department in
hospitals using simulation and experimental design: Case study”. In: pages 4511–
4513. doi: 10.1109/WSC.2017.8248183.
Asha, Stephen Edward and Allan Ajami (2013). “Improvement in emergency de-
partment length of stay using an early senior medical assessment and streaming
model of care: A cohort study”. In: EMA - Emergency Medicine Australasia. issn:
17426731. doi: 10.1111/1742-6723.12128.
Asplin, Brent R. et al. (2003). A conceptual model of emergency department crowding.
doi: 10.1067/mem.2003.302.
Aujoulat, Isabelle et al. (2008). “Reconsidering patient empowerment in chronic ill-
ness: A critique of models of self-efficacy and bodily control”. In: Social Science
and Medicine. issn: 02779536. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2007.11.034.
Barr, Paul J. et al. (2015). Assessment of patient empowerment - A systematic review
of measures. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126553.
Beniuk, Kathleen, Adrian A Boyle, and P John Clarkson (2012). “Emergency depart-
ment crowding: prioritising quantified crowding measures using a Delphi study.”
In: Emergency medicine journal : EMJ 29.11, pages 868–71. issn: 1472-0213. doi:
10.1136/emermed-2011-200646. url: http://emj.bmj.com/content/29/11/
868.abstract.
Bent Ottesen, Mikkel B. Rasmussen (2014). BØRNERIGET Children’s Hospital Copen-
hagen The user experience at the world’s best hospital for children families. https:
//www.rigshospitalet.dk/boerneriget/english/competition%20material/
Documents/designprinciples_uk.pdf. [Online; accessed 19-November-2014].
Bichel-Findlay, Jen, Joanne Callen, and Antony Sara (2009). “Health information
systems and improved patient outcomes: Do nurses see the connection?” In: issn:
09269630. doi: 10.3233/978-1-60750-024-7-378.
Bindman, a B et al. (1991). “Consequences of queuing for care at a public hospital
emergency department.” In: JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Associ-
ation. issn: 0098-7484. doi: 10.1001/jama.1991.03470080061030.
Birnbaum, Faith et al. (2015). Patient engagement and the design of digital health.
doi: 10.1111/acem.12692.
Boyle, Adrian et al. (2012). “Emergency Department Crowding: Time for Interven-
tions and Policy Evaluations”. In: Emergency Medicine International 2012, pages 1–
8. issn: 2090-2840. doi: 10.1155/2012/838610. url: http://www.hindawi.com/
journals/emi/2012/838610/.
Bruballa, E. et al. (2018). “Scheduling model for non-critical patients admission into a
hospital emergency department”. In: Proceedings - Winter Simulation Conference.
isbn: 9781538634288. doi: 10.1109/WSC.2017.8248014.
Bulsara, Caroline et al. (2006). “The Psychometrics of Developing the Patient Em-
powerment Scale”. In: Journal of Psychosocial Oncology 24.2, pages 1–16. issn:
0734-7332. doi: 10.1300/J077v24n02_01. url: http://www.tandfonline.com/
doi/abs/10.1300/J077v24n02{\_}01.
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
106
Carrasquillo, Olveen et al. (1999). “Impact of language barriers on patient satisfaction
in an emergency department”. In: Journal of General Internal Medicine. issn:
08848734. doi: 10.1046/j.1525-1497.1999.00293.x.
Cerrito, Patricia B and David Pecoraro (2005). “Visits to the Emergency Department
as Transactional Data/PRACTITIONER APPLICATION”. In: Journal Of Health-
care Management / American College Of Healthcare Executives 50.6, pages 389–
395. issn: 1096-9012. url: http : / / search . ebscohost . com / login . aspx ?
direct=true{\&}db=cmedm{\&}AN=16372398{\&}site=ehost-live.
Chamberlin, Judi (1997). “A working definition of empowerment.” In: Psychiatric Re-
habilitation Journal 20.4, pages 43–46. issn: 1559-3126(Electronic),1095-158X(Print).
Chen, J et al. (2016). “Personalized Strategies to Activate and Empower Patients in
Health Care and Reduce Health Disparities”. In: Health Education and Behavior.
issn: 10901981. doi: 10.1177/1090198115579415.
Chen, Shi Jie and Saneel Siddavatam (2011a). “Computer simulation modeling and
analysis for a hospital emergency department”. In: 61st Annual IIE Conference
and Expo Proceedings. Institute of Industrial Engineers.
— (2011b). “Computer simulation modeling and analysis for a hospital emergency
department”. In: 61st Annual IIE Conference and Expo Proceedings. Institute of
Industrial Engineers.
Churilov, L (2007). “Combining Data Mining and Discrete Event Simulation for a
value-added view of a hospital emergency department”. In: Journal of the Oper-
ational Research Society 58.2, pages 246–254. issn: 0160-5682. doi: 10.1057/
palgrave . jors . 2602270. url: http : / / uvic . summon . serialssolutions .
com/2.0.0/link/0/eLvHCXMwVV07CgJREBvEEyxo7QUezPoeb2dq2cUD6AHe{\_
}ErvXzoLW2iVIm1ISBECcDMzdHJmp6FYRzUJiuia6tm3jn{\_}TsR833yY4-ecC7219PZ7lOAMoul-
SlKY1FhPSuzkxNkcOH6QVk1eKzH0JYRydcGHjNrtYYjbHPluG3BXOWaj9C{\_}JhJ4g.
Clifford-Brown, Joanna, Kirsty Challen, and Brendan Ryan (2010). “What happens
at triage: A naturalistic observational study”. In: Emergency Medicine Journal
27.12, pages 931–933. issn: 14720205. doi: 10.1136/emj.2009.078774.
Cremonesi, Paolo et al. (2015). “The Robustness and Effectiveness of the Triage
System at Times of Overcrowding and the Extra Costs due to Inappropriate Use
of Emergency Departments”. In: Applied Health Economics and Health Policy 13.5,
pages 507–514. issn: 11791896. doi: 10.1007/s40258-015-0166-5.
Dahlin, Jan et al. (2012). Danish Emergency Proces Triage. url: http : / / www .
sygehussonderjylland.dk/wm508026 (visited on May 25, 2018).
De Vito Dabbs, Annette et al. (2009). “User-centered design and interactive health
technologies for patients.” In: Computers, informatics, nursing : CIN. issn: 1538-
9774. doi: 10.1097/NCN.0b013e31819f7c7c.
Deterding, Sebastian (2012). “Gamification: Designing for Motivation”. In: interac-
tions 19.4, pages 14–17. issn: 1072-5520. doi: 10.1145/2212877.2212883. url:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2212877.2212883.
Di Somma, Salvatore et al. (2015). “Overcrowding in emergency department: an in-
ternational issue”. In: Internal and Emergency Medicine 10.2, pages 171–175. issn:
19709366. doi: 10.1007/s11739-014-1154-8.
==PAGE:116==
Bibliography
107
Duguay, C. and F. Chetouane (2007). “Modeling and Improving Emergency Depart-
ment Systems using Discrete Event Simulation”. In: Simulation 83.4, pages 311–
320. issn: 0037-5497. doi: 10.1177/0037549707083111.
Faulkner, Mark (2001). “A measure of patient empowerment in hospital environments
catering for older people”. In: Journal of Advanced Nursing 34.5, pages 676–686.
issn: 03092402. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2648.2001.01797.x.
Fayyaz, Jabeen et al. (2013). “Missing the boat: Odds for the patients who leave
ED without being seen”. In: BMC Emergency Medicine. issn: 1471227X. doi:
10.1186/1471-227x-13-1.
Freire, Paulo (1993). “Chapter 2 of Pedagogy of the Oppressed”. In: Pedagogy of the
oppressed. isbn: 9780511557712.
GDPR (2018). GENERAL DATA PROTECTION REGULATION. url: http://
www.gdpr.dk/index.php/http-gdpr-dk (visited on July 7, 2018).
Giunti, Guido, Vasiliki Mylonopoulou, and Octavio Rivera Romero (2018). “More
stamina, a gamified mhealth solution for persons with multiple sclerosis: Research
through design”. In: Journal of Medical Internet Research 20.3. issn: 14388871.
doi: 10.2196/mhealth.9437.
Goodacre, S. and A. Webster (2005). “Who waits longest in the emergency depart-
ment and who leaves without being seen?” In: Emergency Medicine Journal 22.2,
pages 93–96. issn: 14720205. doi: 10.1136/emj.2003.007690.
Hall, M F and I Press (1996). “Keys to patient satisfaction in the emergency depart-
ment: results of a multiple facility study.” In: Hospital & health services adminis-
tration 41.4, pages 515–532. issn: 87503735.
Hamilton, Richard, Frank Linnehan, and Roger A. Mccain (2006). Emergency De-
partment Overcrowding as a Nash Equilibrium: Hypothesis and Test by Survey
Methodology.
Harding, Katherine E., Nicholas F. Taylor, and Sandra G. Leggat (2011). Do triage
systems in healthcare improve patient flow? A systematic review of the literature.
doi: 10.1071/AH10927.
Herbert, Rosemary J. et al. (2009). “A Systematic Review of Questionnaires Measur-
ing Health-Related Empowerment”. In: Research and Theory for Nursing Practice.
issn: 08897182. doi: 10.1891/1541-6577.23.2.107.
Hoot, Nathan R. and Dominik Aronsky (2008). Systematic Review of Emergency De-
partment Crowding: Causes, Effects, and Solutions. doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.
2008.03.014. arXiv: NIHMS150003.
Huang, Edward Pei Chuan et al. (2013). “The impact of adding clinical assistants
on patient waiting time in a crowded emergency department”. In: Emergency
Medicine Journal 30.12, pages 1017–1019. issn: 14720205. doi: 10.1136/emermed-
2012-201611.
Hult, Christian. Fakta om 1813. url: https : / / www . regionh . dk / presse - og -
nyt/pressemeddelelser-og-nyheder/Sider/Fakta-om-1813.aspx (visited on
May 11, 2018).
Johannesson, Paul and Erik Perjons (2014). An Introduction to Design Science. isbn:
978-3-319-10631-1. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-10632-8.
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
108
Kaushal, Arjun et al. (2015). “Evaluation of fast track strategies using agent-based
simulation modeling to reduce waiting time in a hospital emergency department”.
In: Socio-Economic Planning Sciences 50, pages 18–31. issn: 00380121. doi: 10.
1016/j.seps.2015.02.002.
Klein, Laura (2013). UX for Lean Startups. Faster, Smarter User Experience Research
and Design. O’Reilly.
Koch, Michael et al. (2011). “From game design elements to gamefulness”. In: Schriften
zur soziotechnischen Integration, Band 3 15.2, page 2797. issn: 10961453. doi: 10.
1081/E-ELIS3-120043942. arXiv: 11/09 [ACM 978-1-4503-0816-8]. url: http:
//dialnet.unirioja.es/servlet/articulo?codigo=3714308{\%}5Cnhttp:
//doi.acm.org/10.1145/2181037.2181040{\%}5Cnhttp://dl.acm.org/
citation.cfm?doid=2181037.2181040{\%}5Cnhttp://schriften.soziotech.
org/band3.
Krochmal, Paul and Tamrah A. Riley (1994). “Increased health care costs associ-
ated with ED overcrowding”. In: American Journal of Emergency Medicine. issn:
07356757. doi: 10.1016/0735-6757(94)90135-X.
Kuo, Yong-Hong et al. (2016). “Improving the efficiency of a hospital emergency
department: a simulation study with indirectly imputed service-time distributions”.
In: 28, pages 120–147.
Lauks, Juliane et al. (2016). “Medical team evaluation: Effect on emergency depart-
ment waiting time and length of stay”. In: PLoS ONE 11.4. issn: 19326203. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0154372.
Leard-Community (2018). t-test. url: https://statistics.laerd.com/premium/
spss/istt/independent-t-test-in-spss-3.php (visited on June 6, 2018).
Lederman, Reeva et al. (2015). “Tick a box, any box: A case study on the unintended
consequences of system misuse in a hospital emergency department”. In: Journal
of Information Technology Teaching Cases 5.2, pages 74–83. issn: 20438869. doi:
10.1057/jittc.2015.13.
Lee, I-Hsin et al. (2017). “A new strategy for emergency department crowding: High-
turnover utility bed intervention”. In: Journal of the Chinese Medical Association
80.5, pages 297 –302. issn: 1726-4901. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcma.
2016.11.002. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1726490117300011.
Lin, Di, Jonathan Patrick, and Fabrice Labeau (2014). “Estimating the waiting time
of multi-priority emergency patients with downstream blocking”. In: Health Care
Management Science 17.1, pages 88–99. issn: 13869620. doi: 10.1007/s10729-
013-9241-3.
Linhorst, Donald M. and Anne Eckert (2003). “Conditions for Empowering People
with Severe Mental Illness”. In: Social Service Review 77.2, pages 279–305. doi:
10.1086/373909. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1086/373909. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1086/373909.
LLC, MultiMedia (2017). How to Fix the Emergency Room. url: https://www.wsj.
com/articles/how- to- fix- the- emergency- room- 1505268780 (visited on
April 5, 2018).
==PAGE:118==
Bibliography
109
LUP (2018). Den Landsdækkende Undersøgelse af Patientoplevelser. Technical re-
port januar, pages 1–56. doi: ISBN : 978 - 87 - 93048 - 22 - 5. url: https : / /
patientoplevelser . dk / sites / patientoplevelser . dk / files / national -
rapport-lup-akutmodtagelse-2017.pdf.
Martin, Niels et al. (2017). Developing an emergency department crowding dashboard:
A design science approach. doi: 10.1016/j.ienj.2017.08.001.
Mathiassen, Lars et al. (2012). “For the Win: How Game Thinking Can Revolutionize
Your Business”. In: Journal of Systems and Software 38.2, pages 398–424. issn:
0098-5589. doi: 10.1109/TSE.2011.26. url: http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.
2014.01.008{\%}7B{\%}25{\%}7D5Cnhttp://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.
2009.08.003{\%}7B{\%}25{\%}7D5Cnhttp://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2010.06.
001{\%}7B{\%}25{\%}7D5Cnhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1002/smr.1704{\%}7B{\%
}25{\%}7D5Cnhttp://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.08.030{\%}7B{\%}25{\%
}7D5C.
Mcallister, M. et al. (2011). “The Genetic Counseling Outcome Scale: A new patient-
reported outcome measure for clinical genetics services”. In: Clinical Genetics 79.5,
pages 413–424. issn: 00099163. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01636.x.
McAllister, Marion et al. (2012). Patient empowerment: The need to consider it as a
measurable patient-reported outcome for chronic conditions. doi: 10.1186/1472-
6963-12-157.
McCain, Roger A., Richard Hamilton, and Frank Linnehan (2011). “The problem
of emergency department overcrowding: Agent-based simulation and test by ques-
tionnaire”. In: Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems 652, pages 91–
102. issn: 00758442. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-21108-9_8.
McGonigal, Jane (2011). “Reality is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How
They Can Change the World”. In: New York, page 402. issn: 09269630. doi: 10.
1075/ni.10.1.03bro. url: http://vk.com/doc195058859{\_}332475945?
hash=c90a762ba7b55ce05b{\&}dl=696221d531cca93dff.
McMillan, JR, MS Younger, and LC DeWine (1986). “Satisfaction with hospital emer-
gency department as a function of patient triage”. In: Health care management
review 11.3, 21—27. issn: 0361-6274. url: http://europepmc.org/abstract/
MED/3733436.
Mohsin, M, A Bauman, and S Ieraci (1998). “Is there equity in emergency medical
care? Waiting times and walk-outs in South Western Sydney hospital emergency
departments.” In: Australian health review : a publication of the Australian Hospital
Association 21.3, pages 133–49. issn: 0156-5788. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/10185681.
Mohsin, Mohammed et al. (2007). “A population follow-up study of patients who left
an emergency department without being seen by a medical officer.” In: Emergency
medicine journal : EMJ 24.3, pages 175–9. issn: 1472-0213. doi: 10.1136/emj.
2006.038679. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17351221{\%
}5Cnhttp : / / www . pubmedcentral . nih . gov / articlerender . fcgi ? artid =
PMC2660023.
==PAGE:119==
Bibliography
110
Montefiori, Marcello et al. (2017). “Robustness and Effectiveness of the Triage System
in the Pediatric Context”. In: Applied Health Economics and Health Policy 15.6,
pages 795–803. issn: 11791896. doi: 10.1007/s40258-017-0340-z.
Müller, Sune D. and Frank Ulrich (2013). “Creativity and information systems in a
hypercompetitive environment: A literature review”. In: Communications of the
Association for Information Systems. issn: 15293181.
Mullins, Peter M. and Jesse M. Pines (2014). “National ED crowding and hospital
quality: Results from the 2013 Hospital Compare data”. In: American Journal of
Emergency Medicine. issn: 15328171. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2014.02.008.
Niehaves, Bjoern (2007). “On epistemological diversity in design science: New vistas
for a Design-Oriented IS Research?” In: Twenty-eighth International Conference
on Information Systems.
Okoli, Chitu and Kira Schabram (2010). “A Guide to Conducting a Systematic Litera-
ture Review of Information Systems Research A Guide to Conducting a Systematic
Literature Review of Information Systems Research”. In: Sprouts: Working Papers
on Information Systems 10 (26). issn: 1535-6078.
Olshaker, Jonathan S. (2009). Managing Emergency Department Overcrowding. doi:
10.1016/j.emc.2009.07.004.
Ozsahin, Faruk et al. (2014). “Satisfaction Level of Patients after Treatment Ad-
mitted to Emergency Department”. In: Journal of Academic Emergency Medicine,
pages 118–123. issn: 1305760X. doi: 10.5152/jaem.2014.63497. arXiv: 21692901.
url: http://akademikaciltip.com/eng/makale/3216/236/Full-Text.
Peffers, Ken et al. (2007). “A Design Science Research Methodology for Information
Systems Research”. In: Journal of Management Information Systems. issn: 0742-
1222. doi: 10.2753/MIS0742-1222240302. arXiv: z0022.
Pines, Jesse M. et al. (2011). “International perspectives on emergency department
crowding”. In: Academic Emergency Medicine 18.12, pages 1358–1370. issn: 10696563.
doi: 10.1111/j.1553-2712.2011.01235.x.
Pitts, Stephen R. et al. (2012). “National trends in emergency department occupancy,
2001 to 2008: Effect of inpatient admissions versus emergency department practice
intensity”. In: Annals of Emergency Medicine 60.6. issn: 01960644. doi: 10.1016/
j.annemergmed.2012.05.014.
Quitt, Jonas et al. (2009). “Does nonmedical hospital admission staff accurately triage
emergency department patients?” In: European Journal of Emergency Medicine.
issn: 09699546. doi: 10.1097/MEJ.0b013e32830c2193.
R., Schnall et al. (2014). “Use of Design Science for Informing the Development of
a Mobile App for Persons Living with HIV”. In: AMIA ...Annual Symposium
proceedings / AMIA Symposium.AMIA Symposium 2014, pages 1037–1045. issn:
1942-597X. url: http://ovidsp.ovid.com/ovidweb.cgi?T=JS{\&}PAGE=
reference{\&}D=emed13{\&}NEWS=N{\&}AN=25954413.
Rappaport, Julian (1981). “In praise of paradox: A social policy of empowerment over
prevention”. In: American Journal of Community Psychology. issn: 00910562. doi:
10.1007/BF00896357. arXiv: arXiv:1011.1669v3.
==PAGE:120==
Bibliography
111
Robertson-Steel, Iain R S (2006). Evolution of triage systems. doi: 10.1136/emj.
2005.030270.
Romano, E, G Guizzi, and D Chiocca (2015). “A decision support tool, implemented
in a system dynamics model, to improve the effectiveness in the hospital emer-
gency department”. In: International Journal of Procurement Management 8.1-2,
pages 141–168. issn: 17538432. doi: 10.1504/IJPM.2015.066291. url: http:
/ / www . scopus . com / inward / record . url ? eid = 2 - s2 . 0 - 84918831723{\ &
}partnerID=40{\&}md5=f001a976a80d9b5e06a47b6ca4278fca.
Sandal-Jeppesen, Joakim (2018). Mere tilfredshed med akutmodtagelserne. url: https:
//www.regionh.dk/presse-og-nyt/pressemeddelelser-og-nyheder/Sider/
Mere-tilfredshed-med-akutmodtagelserne-.aspx (visited on July 2, 2018).
Schull, Michael J. et al. (2004). “Emergency department crowding and thrombolysis
delays in acute myocardial infarction”. In: Annals of Emergency Medicine. issn:
01960644. doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2004.05.004.
Seaborn, Katie and Deborah I. Fels (2015). “Gamification in theory and action: A
survey”. In: International Journal of Human Computer Studies 74, pages 14–31.
issn: 10959300. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2014.09.006.
Sharp, Helen, Yvonne Rogers, and Jenny Preece (2011). “Interaction Design: Beyond
Human-Computer Interaction”. In: Book. issn: 10913556. doi: 10.1162/leon.
2005.38.5.401.
Sivey, P (2017). “Should I stay or should I go? Hospital emergency department waiting
times and demand”. In: Health Econ. issn: 1057-9230. doi: 10.1002/hec.3610.
Soares, Ana Maria and Minoo Farhangmehr (2015). “Understanding patient satisfac-
tion in a hospital emergency department”. In: International Review on Public and
Nonprofit Marketing 12.1, pages 1–15. issn: 18651992. doi: 10.1007/s12208-014-
0122-3. arXiv: 21692901.
Subash, F. et al. (2004). “Team triage improves emergency department efficiency”. In:
Emergency Medicine Journal. issn: 14720205. doi: 10.1136/emj.2002.003665.
Sun, Benjamin C. et al. (2013). “Effect of emergency department crowding on out-
comes of admitted patients”. In: Annals of Emergency Medicine. issn: 01960644.
doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2012.10.026. arXiv: NIHMS150003.
Takakuwa, Kevin M., Frances S. Shofer, and Stephanie B. Abbuhl (2007). “Strate-
gies for Dealing With Emergency Department Overcrowding: A One-Year Study
on How Bedside Registration Affects Patient Throughput Times”. In: Journal
of Emergency Medicine 32.4, pages 337–342. issn: 07364679. doi: 10.1016/j.
jemermed.2006.07.031.
Thompson, David et al. (1996). “Effects of Actual Waiting Time, Perceived Waiting
Time, Information Delivery, and Expressive Quality on Patient Satisfaction in the
Emergency Department”. In: 28, pages 657–65.
University, Oxford (2018a). Crowding Definition. url: https://en.oxforddictionaries.
com/definition/crowd (visited on April 6, 2018).
University, Pennsylvania state (2018b). t-test. url: https://onlinecourses.science.
psu.edu/stat555/node/36/ (visited on June 6, 2018).
==PAGE:121==
Bibliography
112
Uriarte, A Goienetxea et al. (2015). “System design and improvement of an emergency
department using Simulation-Based Multi-Objective Optimization”. In: Journal of
Physics: Conference Series 616.1, page 012015. url: http://stacks.iop.org/
1742-6596/616/i=1/a=012015.
Usability-gov (2018). User-Centered Design Basics. url: https://www.usability.
gov/what-and-why/user-centered-design.html (visited on May 25, 2018).
Verelst, Sandra et al. (2015). “Emergency department crowding in relation to in-
hospital adverse medical events: A large prospective observational cohort study”.
In: Journal of Emergency Medicine 49.6, pages 949–961. issn: 07364679. doi:
10.1016/j.jemermed.2015.05.034.
Wang, Teng-Kuan et al. (2015). “Lean principles and simulation optimization for
emergency department layout design”. In: Industrial Management & Data Systems
115.4, pages 678–699. issn: 0263-5577. doi: 10.1108/IMDS-10-2014-0296. url:
http://www.emeraldinsight.com/doi/10.1108/IMDS-10-2014-0296.
Watson, George F. et al. (2015). “Building, measuring, and profiting from customer
loyalty”. In: Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 43.6, pages 790–825.
issn: 00920703. doi: 10.1007/s11747-015-0439-4.
Webster, Jane and Richard T Watson (2002). “Analyzing the Past to Prepare for the
Future: Writing a Literature Review.” In: MIS Quarterly 26.2, pages xiii –xxiii.
issn: 02767783. doi: 10.1.1.104.6570. arXiv: 02767783.
Wei, H G and C A Camargo (2000). “Patient education in the emergency department.”
In: Academic emergency medicine : official journal of the Society for Academic
Emergency Medicine 7.6, pages 710–7.
Wiler, Jennifer L. et al. (2010). “Optimizing Emergency Department Front-End Op-
erations”. In: Annals of Emergency Medicine 55.2. issn: 01960644. doi: 10.1016/
j.annemergmed.2009.05.021.
Zengin, Suat et al. (2012). “Patient and relative complaints in a hospital emergency
department: A 4-Year analysis”. In: Turkiye Acil Tip Dergisi. issn: 13047361. doi:
10.5505/1304.7361.2012.55823.
==PAGE:122==
