==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Cooperation-Friendly Planning
Simulation in Games
Mads Vainø Baatrup (s162995)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Human-computer interaction in digital media often suffers from a lack of authentic,
human-like, artificially intelligent behavior, which results in unimmersive experiences.
The current trend of the digital entertainment industry is to make more intelligent
agents by means of machine learning algorithms. However, social cognition is not
something which is taught, but it is likely an innate ability that most human beings
posses.
Research has shown that there is one ability of human cognition, called Theory of
Mind (ToM), which is particularly significant in terms of defining social intelligence in
humans. ToM is the ability to empathize with other people; to see the world through
their eyes. It is the ability to attribute mental states - beliefs, desires, intentions,
emotions, etc., to oneself, as well as to others. Higher-order ToM relates to humans’
ability to reason about the way others use ToM.
The goal of this thesis is to investigate whether giving software agents the ability
to attribute mental states to themselves and to other agents, and to use higher-order
ToM, will allow the agents to exhibit complex, socially intelligent behavior in a video
game setting.
In order to perform this experiment, a video game was designed as a goal-driven
test environment for the socially reasoning agents. The agent architecture allowing
this level of reasoning was designed with the BDI model, which naturally includes
mental state representations and goal deliberation. The BDI model is extended with
higher-order ToM capabilities as a recursive function in the belief revision component
of the agents. It is the combination of these two systems that allows for the forming
of complex socially dependent strategies, by means of implicit coordination.
The implemented agent architecture enabled the design of actions and strategies
which exploit and alter the epistemic states of the agents. Using ToM to shift their
perspective to other agents, allowed the agents to form strategies without the use of
a centralized planning system or explicit communication.
It was found that the BDI model and the concept of ToM worked well as ab-
stractions for creating socially intelligent software agents in a goal-driven video game
environment. Although the creation of such a system is more complex than that of a
purely reactive system, once implemented, development of agent behaviors becomes
intuitive as it follows theories of human practical reasoning.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a master’s degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, July 22, 2018
Mads Vainø Baatrup (s162995)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would first and foremost like to extend my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Nina
Gierasimczuk, who first introduced me to the world of epistemic logic through her
entertaining and inspiring lectures. Nina has been an excellent supervisor who always
showed great interest in the project, and who has been a wonderful guide in times
when progress seemed slow.
In relation to the thesis I would additionally like to thank Thomas Bolander for
his enthusiastic lectures on multi-agent systems and automated planning, which were
of great use to this thesis.
Lastly, I would like to thank my wife, Siri, for her support in the time of writing
this thesis, and my children, Storm and Karla, who inspired the concept of the game
of which the thesis revolves.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
The Game
7
2.1
Narrative
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Game Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Methods & Implementation
13
3.1
Agent Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Agent Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Path Planning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Actions & Strategies
29
4.1
Classical Planning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
STRIPS Action Schemas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
HTN Refinement Schemas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Actions of CtC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Coordination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Discussion
53
6
Conclusion
59
Bibliography
61
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Social cognition is what allows human beings to process, store and apply informa-
tion about other people. The human social intelligence is what allows for complex
interaction and communication between individuals. People who have not developed
such cognitive capabilities, e.g. people with autism, cannot intuitively interact with
other people. One ability which has become particularly important in defining human
social intelligence is Theory of Mind. The concept relates to the human ability to
attribute mental states to other people, and to reason about other people’s ability to
assign mental states to oneself and to others, which can be different from ones own.
With the advent of computer generated virtual worlds, which allow for interac-
tion between humans and artificially intelligent agents, social intelligence becomes a
crucial component in creating a platform for meaningful, authentic, human-computer
interaction. In terms of making agents with more human-like behaviors, this thesis
proposes an implementation of the BDI model extended with Theory of Mind ca-
pabilities, to investigate the applicability of the concept as an abstraction to design
more believable agent behavior. To do this, a video game has been developed which
provides a testing ground for these agents to develop complex, socially dependent
behaviors, without the means of explicit communication.
The thesis will first introduce the motivation and goal of the project. Then the
game developed for the project is presented, followed by a walk-through of the meth-
ods used to create the agents and their planning capabilities and the implementation
of said methods. The resulting actions afforded by the implementation are then de-
tailed. Before concluding the thesis, the various findings, perspectives of the thesis,
and suggestions for future work are discussed.
1.1
Motivation
1.1.1
Artificial Intelligence in Video Games
Artificial intelligence (AI) and interactive media, specifically video games, have walked
hand-in-hand since their inception.
In 1951, computer scientist John Makepeace
Bennett and engineer Raymond Stuart-Williams built a 3.7 x 2.7 x 1.5 metre computer
called, Nimrod [16]. This custom-build computer offered the first man-vs-machine
digital computer game, where attendees of a British exhibition had an opportunity
to play a game of Nim against an artificial intelligence [29].
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
A few decades later we see the advent of life-like, three-dimensional, virtual en-
vironments populated with interactive characters. These environments grow increas-
ingly more complex and realistic, relative to the increase in computational resources
of the average home-computer system. Artificial intelligence becomes a crucial compo-
nent not only for digitization, production and health-care industries, but for the media
industry as well. As intelligent behavior is crucial for creating believable, personal
human-computer interaction [38], the task of designing cognitive (and computation-
ally feasible), socially capable software agents, is becoming increasingly relevant.
AI behavior in video games is typically purely reactive and implemented as either
a Finite State Machine1 (FSM) or a Behavior Tree2 (BT). These structures transi-
tion between a set of hard-coded behaviors depending on certain external or internal
events. The behaviors resulting from such models (especially BTs) can become quite
complex, but they are still only concerned with what the agent does, and not what
the agent wants. This means that the agents do not reason about, e.g. what they
believe to be true about the world but rather simply react to circumstances instinc-
tively. Furthermore, video game agents rarely employ a model for reasoning about
the player’s, or each others, mental state.
A lot is happening in the AI sub-field of machine learning regarding the creation
of ever-more intelligent algorithms to challenge human opponents. Examples include,
Google DeepMind’s AlphaGo3 and AlphaZero4 programs, IBM’s Watson5, and many
more. In the video game industry we see a similar trend. The StarCraft6 real-time
strategy (RTS) games, are notoriously known for their open-source, AI experimen-
tation communities [57, 58, 68, 67] and as AI research environments [18, 63]. We
see the same trend emerging in other genres such as multiplayer online battle arenas
(MOBAs) [56]. The artificial intelligence tested in these environments is typically
some form of reinforcement learning algorithm designed to teach the AI to win by
playing the game a very large number of times (through simulation), while being
rewarded for certain outcomes [24].
However, the challenge of creating socially intelligent agents is not necessarily a
question of learning, but rather a question of cognitive abilities. Research has shown
that there is one ability of human cognition, called Theory of Mind (ToM) [50], which
is particularly significant in terms of defining social intelligence in human beings.
1A mathematical model which in video game development is used to transition agent behaviors
between states according to certain conditions.
2A mathematical model which in video game development is used to select and/or compile simple
agent behaviours into more complex behaviors using a tree of actions.
3A Monte-Carlo tree search algorithm which in 2017 beat the world’s (at the time) no. 1 Go
player, Ke Jie [34].
4A repurposed AlphaGo algorithm which taught itself chess in 4 hours (solely by playing it) and
beat the previous world champion algorithm Stockfish. [3].
5A question-answering computer system which in 2011 beat Jeopardy world champions Brat
Rutter and Ken Jennings for the prize of $ 1 million [1].
6StarCraft is a military science-fiction media franchise, created by Chris Metzen and James
Phinney and owned by Blizzard Entertainment [59].
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Motivation
3
1.1.2
Cognitive Science of Theory of Mind
Human beings are not only capable of reasoning about the world around them, but can
also reason about the minds of others. ToM is the ability to attribute mental states
- beliefs, desires, emotions, percepts, etc. - to oneself, as well as to others. Among
other things, this ability allows humans to ‘mentalize’[26] other people’s actions and
expressions in a goal-oriented framework, sometimes referred to as the intentional
stance [19]. The emergence of higher-order ToM, i.e. reasoning about the way others
use ToM, can be attributed to the increased complexity of human social interaction,
according the the social brain hypothesis [21] (more on this in section 1.2).
Children under the age of 4 and people with autism, particularly Asperger’s syn-
drome, have what is known as mindblindness, i.e., they lack the ability of ToM [27, 4].
This is usually tested for with a false-belief task [69] determining the persons ability to
assign false-beliefs7 to others. In other words, they cannot naturally put themselves
into someone else’s shoes. People with Asperger’s therefore have significant difficulties
with social interaction and nonverbal communication, and must be taught to remem-
ber the meanings of other people’s expressions and to behave age-appropriately in
order to function in a social context [43]. Having a better understanding of ToM
could potentially give a better understanding of developmental disorders like autism.
As exemplified with the false-belief tasks, the field of cognitive science have for
the last 40 years studied the concept of ToM [50]. Recently, experiments have begun
using games and simulation to better understand and explain ToM, and to study the
benefits of this phenomena (see chapter 2). These experiments are often performed
on computational agents who use ToM in a number of settings to either compete,
cooperate, or both (see section 1.2).
In the previous sub-section we discussed the popular trend of training AI by means
of machine learning algorithms. However, teaching an artificial intelligence to reason
like a human being, by means of machine learning, poses a similar difficulty to that of
teaching autistic individuals to become socially capable. An algorithm can learn to
mimic human beings (and even surpass them in non-general intelligence). However,
‘mind-reading’is not an ability which can be taught, but rather an inherent ability
which needs to be an integral part of the agents ability to reason.
When it comes to making believable/human-like behavior of artificial intelligence,
the goal is not to make the AI smarter, but rather to make it more human. This
also applies to video games. AI in video games must retain what has become known
as artificial stupidity [40]. What this means is that the artificial intelligence of a
video game should not be so smart that the player cannot win, but complex enough
that the player feels engaged and immersed. This concept relates to the notion of
bounded rationality [55, 28], which is the idea that human decision making is bounded
by how manageable the problem in question is, by cognitive limitations, and by time
constraints.
Therefore, modelling rationality limitations can in fact lead to more
human-like intelligence.
7To recognize that others can have beliefs about the world that are diverging.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
Much of what makes many competitive games fun is grounded in the concept of
higher-order ToM. This term relates to the notion that humans have the ability to use
their ToM recursively [66]. By its recursive nature, if zero-order ToM entails no ability
to reason about the mental state of others, and first-order ToM is to have a ToM of
others, then second-order ToM is recognizing that others have a ToM about oneself,
etc. For example, ”Alice knows that Bob knows that she has an Ace” is a second-order
mental state attribution. In so-called knowlegde games [60] like Poker much of the
enjoyment of the game stems from reasoning about other players’ knowledge and the
interaction supported by this ability.
1.2
Goal
As stated in section 1.1, the motivation of the thesis is testing the applicability of
the concept of ToM in video games, with purpose of creating more human-like agent
behavior.
One ability afforded by ToM is the that of implicit coordination. By reasoning
about each others’ knowledge (or lack thereof) it is possible to form strategies with-
out any explicit communication. This ability is crucial in planning problems where
knowledge and capabilities to reach a certain goal are distributed between individuals.
For example,
Alice is out shopping for groceries. As she is walking down a lane in the
local grocery store she sees a man, Bob, walking down the same lane (in
line with Alice) in the opposite direction. However, Bob does not see Alice
as he is busy studying the tomatoes. Alice sees that Bob does not see her
and decides to step aside to avoid a collision.
Agent Alice uses ToM to reason about Bob’s knowledge from which she forms a
strategy to avoid mutual discomfort, by means of implicit coordination. This ability
transcends barriers of language and means of communication and is crucial in many
cases of human planning.
It is assumed that this ability could therefore allow agents to form complex strate-
gies in much the same way as humans do and in turn add to the complexity of their
behavior. To investigate this, a multi-agent video game was developed, which allows
a number of agents to form strategies using these abilities (more in chapter 2).
There exists three dominant hypotheses of the existence of the ability of ToM in
the human cognition.
• The Machiavellian intelligence hypothesis [12], which explains the evolution of
ToM as a competitive advantage which enables complex strategies of deception.
• The Vygotskian intelligence hypothesis [45], which explains the evolution of ToM
as a cooperative advantage which allows for complex strategies of collaboration.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Goal
5
• An the mixed-motive hypothesis which reasons the existence of ToM as a result
of both previous hypotheses [61].
It was a priority to include scenarios which could test all three hypotheses, so both
competitive and cooperative elements of forming strategies were possible in the game.
The goal of this thesis is to,
investigate the applicability of Theory of Mind as an abstraction to form
complex strategies in a video game simulation, by means of implicit coor-
dination.
To accomplish this goal the agents of the game will be designed with the BDI archi-
tecture, which naturally includes mental state representations and goal deliberation.
The belief revision process of the BDI model will be extended with the ability to
reason with higher-order ToM as a recursive function. It is the connection of these
two formalisms which will allow for implicit coordination and forming of complex
strategies within the game world.
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
The Game
Developing and using games for behavioral experiments to study the abilities of hu-
man cognition is a method which has long been used. For instance, many different
strategic games [20, 25, 6, 17, 44, 66] have been designed to test one or more of the
three ToM intelligence hypotheses (discussed in section 1.2). At the same time, video
games have a long running tradition as testing and benchmarking tools for artificial
intelligence [2, 37, 33, 5, 31, 39, 63].
The video game presented in this thesis serves as both a testing ground for devel-
oping the behavior of video game agents with ToM capabilities, as well as a way to
benchmark strategies evolving from the integration of ToM in the video game agent’s
reasoning system.
Capture the Cat
In order to accomplish the goal of testing the strategic benefits of giving software
agents the ability of reasoning about each others mental states, a game was designed
and implemented. The game will be referred to as Capture the Cat (CtC). It was
designed to incorporate a range of typical video game AI behaviors, such as hunting,
fleeing, guarding, searching, etc. and to allow for cooperative and competitive strate-
gizing. This chapter gives an overview of the different elements, rules and assumptions
of CtC.
2.1
Narrative
To give the reader an intuitive understanding of the rules of the game, and the game
itself, we begin with a narrative which will give an abstract description of the game
as a whole.
One day a family with x siblings choose to adopt a cat. The cat has not yet
been tamed and is of a very cautious nature. The next day upon returning
home from school one of the children forget to close the front-door of the
house. The cautious, (but curious) cat sees the open door and decides
to investigate. Seeing the cat approach the door the siblings panic and
as a result scare away the cat. The children pursue the cat to a nearby,
==PAGE:18==
8
2 The Game
abandoned office complex, where the cat enters through an open door. As
the children reach the entrance of the complex they notice a floor plan
on the wall next to it. Having familiarized themselves with the layout of
the rooms, they continue inside with the singular goal of retrieving the
cat. Once inside, the children decide not to speak, as any noise will surely
scare away the cat.
It is implied that the children have a social rank
befitting each of their own respective age, and that the younger children
will have a more hands-on role, while the older children will serve more as
coordinators, although they all have the collective goal of capturing the cat.
Meanwhile, the cat (now inside the complex) is doing what is in its nature,
which is to search for sustenance and to remain free using its finely-tuned
flight-responses.
There are certain elements of the narrative which are especially important (pointed
out with italicized words and sentences) and they are meant to convey the following:
1. The game consists of child agents and a cat agent.
2. The collective goal of the children is to capture the cat and the goal of the
cat is to find food while avoiding the child agents.
3. The child agents have a social ranking dictated by their respective ages.
4. The cat agent is cautious and easily scared.
5. The children know all the static elements from the floor plan and so does the
cat from exploring the complex before the arrival of the children.
6. The agents are not able to explicitly communicate and must coordinate
implicitly.
An additional rule which regards the end-state of the game:
7. The game ends if the children capture the cat or if the cat is able to consume
all food within the current level.
Together, these seven points form the basis for the rules of the game. The domain
of the agents will be further explored in chapter 4. The next section will cover the
functions of the different elements which make up the CtC game.
2.2
Game Elements
For the purpose of avoiding any unnecessary complexity, the game has only exactly as
many elements as needed to support the domain in its simplest form. The elements
of the game were chosen to support planning in a partially-observable, multi-agent
environment, as this is key to resembling most modern video game environments.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Game Elements
9
Figure 2.1: A level of the CtC game with three child agents (red, blue, green) and a
cat agent (black)
2.2.1
Tiles
All levels are constructed by a mixture of four different ‘tile-types’:
• Floor tiles These are the walkable locations of the level that are not within
any room (i.e. hallways).
• Room tiles These are the walkable locations which are considered to be inside
of a given room.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 The Game
• Wall tiles These are non-walkable tiles which create the borders of the level
and the rooms. They cannot be seen through.
• Pit tiles Like walls these are non-walkable tiles, mainly used for aesthetic
purposes but serve the same function.
These four elements represent the static, known elements of a level.
Figure 2.2: From left to right: a floor tile, a room tile, a wall tile, and a pit tile
(invisible in game)
2.2.2
Items
There are two types of items in CtC:
• Obstacles These are items which locations are unknown to the agents when a
level starts. They are non-walkable and cannot be seen through.
• Food These items are (currently) only of interest to the cat. The cat agent will
explore the level looking for these items. When the cat has consumed a food
item, it is removed from the map.
Together, these two items form the unknown objects of the game (excluding other
agents). The agents will update their path, mental state, or possibly goals as the
location of these items become apparent.
Figure 2.3: From left to right: an obstacle item, and a food item
2.2.3
Agents
Agents are the only moving objects in the game. They are in other words dynamic in
an otherwise static level. Agents must plan around each other in addition to avoiding
obstacles and other static elements to accomplish their respective goals. There are
two types of agents in the game:
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Game Elements
11
• Child The child agent is tasked with finding and capturing the cat agent. It
has the ability to reason about its surroundings, as well as other agents. Child
agents make noise when they move, and they must therefore take care and
strategize when it comes to pursuing its goal of retrieving the cat. The child
agent can move at walking and running pace. The faster the movement, the
more noise is generated.
• Cat The cat agent is tasked with finding food items and to avoid being captured.
It does not have the ability to reason about other agents and is only able to react
according to its own beliefs about the world. The cat will flee immediately upon
feeling threatened by a child agent. The cat can move at walking and sprinting
pace. The cat is noiseless.
Figure 2.4: a child agent (left) and a cat agent (right)
2.2.3.1
Properties
For the sake of information transparency different properties of the agents have a
graphical representation in the game. As this is a simulation of a video game they
serve to give insight into what the agents perceive, produce and plan for.
These
properties include:
• Field of vision The property of sight is displayed as a field of vision, demon-
strating the locations within a given level each agent is able to see.
• Sound The sound a child agent produces as it walks/runs is similarly displayed
within the level. This is shown by flashing tiles of the same color as the agent,
in the radius of which the agent’s noise can be heard.
• Planned path Small colored squares show the path an agent plans to take at
any given time. This gives a direct feedback of the agents current plan, and
gives insight into its strategies and goals.
• Rendezvous The rendezvous location which the agents have agreed to return
to should their exploration efforts have failed, i.e. if they did not find the cat.
Once more than one agent has returned here they will restart their search.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 The Game
Figure 2.5: The field of vision (top), the sound produced (bottom-left), the path
planned (bottom-middle), and the rendezvous location (bottom-right) of a child agent
This concludes the presentation of the game and the game elements. The next chap-
ter will discuss related work in the field of artificial intelligence in video games wrt.
deliberating agents; agents who plan by means of mental state representations.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Methods &
Implementation
In this chapter we will discuss the various methods and concepts used to implement
the agents in the video game simulation of CtC, as well as the implementation itself.
The chapter begins with a description of the BDI model as the control loop of the
agents and then moves on to methods used to implement the agent senses, ToM, and
coordination strategies, in that order.
3.1
Agent Architecture
This section begins with some necessary definitions and clarifications about the agent
architecture. We begin by presenting the agent architecture at the broadest level, the
agent control loop, and then proceed to describe the different sub-components therein.
3.1.1
The Belief-Desire-Intention Model
The BDI model [51] has been used to design the architecture of the agents in CtC.
To best understand the BDI architecture (see figure 3.1) one should consider the
basis for the model. The model was initially developed by Michael E. Bratman, an
American philosopher and professor at Stanford University, as a theory of human
practical reasoning [10]. As a software model, the main idea of BDI is to separate the
process of deliberating about what goals an agent wants to achieve, from the process
of planning how to achieve those goals.
BDI stands for Belief, Desire, Intention. The model enables agents to store mental
states containing information about the world and others. It is from the agent’s beliefs
that it forms its desires, and updates its intentions. The agent’s beliefs are in turn
updated by external percepts or events.
It is important to understand that both desires and intentions are goals; meaning
objectives an agent wants to achieve. The difference between the two terms lies in
the agent’s commitment to pursuing one or more of these goals. A desire which an
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Methods & Implementation
Figure 3.1: BDI architecture
agent has chosen to commit to (and intents to act upon) becomes the agent’s current
intention.
The BDI model can be considered as a control loop for an agent. The algorithm
implemented for the agents of CtC draws from the extended BDI algorithm proposed
in [52]. Before introducing the algorithm itself, we will first define the notations used:
• The variable B denotes the agent’s current beliefs.
• The variable D denotes the agent’s current desires.
• The variable I denotes the agent’s current intentions.
• The variable p denotes a discrete percept obtained from perceiving the world.
• The variable π denotes the current plan (a sequence of actions).
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Agent Architecture
15
Algorithm 1 Extended BDI-interpreter
1: B ←B0;
2: I ←I0;
3: while true do
4:
p ←perceive();
5:
B ←BRF(B, p);
6:
D ←options(B, I);
7:
I ←filter(B, D, I);
8:
π ←plan(B, I);
9:
while ¬empty(π) ∧¬succeeded(I, B) ∧¬impossible(I, B) do
10:
execute(head(π));
11:
π ←tail(π);
12:
p ←perceive();
13:
B ←BRF(B, p);
14:
if reconsider(I, B) then
15:
D ←options(B, I);
16:
I ←filter(B, D, I);
17:
end if
18:
if ¬sound(π, I, B) then
19:
π ←plan(B, I);
20:
end if
21:
end while
22: end while
Going through the algorithm step-wise, we see the first two steps (1 - 2) assign
initial beliefs and intentions. Step 3 initiates the loop. The first step of the control
loop (4) shows the assignment of the current percept obtained from perceiving the
environment. The percept, p, is then passed to the belief-revision-function (BRF),
along with the current beliefs, to update the set of beliefs (5). In step 6, the goals
which are supported by the agent’s current beliefs are assigned as the agents current
desires (see also algorithm 2). In step 7 the agent deliberates about which of the
current desires it wants to commit to (or act upon) and assigns them to the set
of intentions. From the current intentions the agent does means-end reasoning (8)
to produce a plan which fits the current intention (detailed in algorithm 3). The
conditions of the inner while-loop (9) serve as online goal monitoring, ensuring (at
run-time) that pursuing the current goal and plan is only continued while the plan
is not empty, has not yet succeeded, and is not impossible to execute. Most notable
about the inner loop is the online deliberation in step 14, which evaluates whether
the current intention is still viable or if the agent should re-deliberate (15 - 16). Step
18 evaluates whether the current plan is still valid for the intention currently being
pursued, and if not, proceeds to re-plan (19).
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Methods & Implementation
Figure 3.2: Activity diagram of the BDI control loop.
As there is no generic way of creating desires, these are usually stored in a ‘bank’.
When determining its desires (or options), the agent will (as mentioned above) only
consider the desires which are supported by its beliefs (see algorithm 2). For example,
a child agent will only consider the desire to guard a room entrance if the belief that
the cat is in said room is stored in the child agent’s beliefs, and the belief that the
cat sees the child is not.
Algorithm 2 options() function
1: init D;
2: for each goal g in goal-bank do
3:
if B supports g then
4:
add D ←g;
5:
end if
6: end for
7: return D;
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Agent Architecture
17
Predicates used in following example:
Sees(a, b)
Agent a sees agent b.
Sees(a, Sees(b, a))
Agent a sees that agent b sees agent a.
At(a, x)
Agent a is at location x.
In(a, r)
Agent a is in room r.
Explored(a, r)
Agent a has explored the room r.
As an example of the BDI cycle in the CtC domain, consider a child agent with the
initial beliefs and intentions,
B0 = {¬Sees(chld, cat), . . . }
and
I0 = {Sees(chld, cat), . . . }
The agent then receives a percept updating its belief base to contain the predicates:
{Sees(chld, cat), Sees(chld, Sees(cat, chld)), . . . }
In words, the child sees the cat and sees that it has been spotted by the cat (this of
course also means that ¬Sees(child, cat) is removed from the agent’s beliefs). With
this new belief emerges new desires:
{¬Sees(chld, Sees(cat, child)), At(chld, catLoc), At(cat, chldLoc)}
The child agent now has conflicting desires of either leaving the cat (getting out of its
sight), going to the cat, or luring the cat towards itself. In the deliberation process
of the BDI cycle (the filter function of algorithm 1), the child will then choose the
desire (i.e. commit to the goal) with the highest priority as its current intention.
The best plan (or action) which contains the intention (e.g. At(chld, catLoc)) as
its effect, and with the preconditions of the plan being met by the agent’s beliefs (e.g.
Sees(chld, cat)), will be selected for execution in an attempt to fulfill this goal (see
algorithm 3).
Algorithm 3 plan() function
1: init plan;
2: for each action a in action-bank do
3:
if B contains preconditions(a) and effect(a) contains current(I) then
4:
plan ←a;
5:
end if
6: end for
7: return plan;
A plan can result in either additional (sub-) goals or executable actions. In case a
plan consists of additional goals, these are added to the stack of intentions (I), the
current intention being the last in the stack. The rest of the intentions in the stack
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Methods & Implementation
are effectively ‘on hold’. Should the current intention be fulfilled or dismissed, the
next in the stack becomes the current intention, and so on.
Take the case of the intention,
Sees(chld, cat)
A child agent intents to find (i.e. see) the cat. A plan for this goal might produce
additional goals such as,
{In(chld, roomX), Explored(chld, roomX)}
In order to find the cat, the child will want to go to the rooms of a level and explore
them. This base of intentions is illustrated as a tree of sub-goal dependencies in figure
3.3. In a building with n rooms the initial intention will have n dependencies, which
each have their own sub-goal to be fulfilled. Eventually, an intention will lead to
a sequence of actions for the agent to execute (like a sequence of moves to get to
the specific room). Upon completion, (and if the cat is not yet spotted) the next
intention (another room) will be plucked from the tree eventually undoing the tree
leaf (node) by leaf. However, if the agent finds the cat and is currently pursuing the
Sees(chld, cat)
Explored(chld, roomX)
In(chld, roomX)
Explored(chld, roomY )
In(chld, roomY )
· · ·
Figure 3.3: Sub-goal dependencies of the Sees(chld, cat) goal. The child agent wants
to find the cat, so its goal must first be to explore the rooms of the level. In order to
explore these rooms it must first be in (i.e. go to) them.
goal In(chld, roomX), it must re-deliberate (step 14 of algorithm 1). The goal will
then change to something relating to the perceived cat agent. It may also be the
case that while pursuing In(chld, roomX), the agent discovers and obstacle (e.g. a
blocked door) and must re-plan (see step 18 - 19 in algorithm 1).
Figure 3.4 shows a class diagram of the Agent class as it was implemented in the
game.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Agent Architecture
19
Figure 3.4: The Agent nodes of the system.
3.1.2
Senses
The agents of CtC have been afforded two senses: sight and hearing.
They are
assumed to have the same sensing capabilities, i.e., they have the same field of view1
(FOV) dimensions, are able to see the same objects, and have the same hearing
capabilities.
1The part of the observable world that is seen at any given moment [62].
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Methods & Implementation
3.1.2.1
Sight
Because each tile in the game corresponds to a location, the number of tiles within
a certain area (the FOV) determines the locations an agent can visually perceive.
Algorithm 3.1.2.1 shows how the agent’s FOV is stored.
1 def fov(row, col, direction, max-width, max-length)
2
fov-locations := []; #set of locations representing the FOV
3
loc := {row, col}; #the current location of the agent
4
5
width := -1;
6
while width < max-width:
7
8
if direction is left or right
9
loc := {row + i, col};
10
else
11
loc := {row, col + i};
12
13
length := 0;
14
while not wall and not obstacle in loc and length < max-length:
15
length := length + 1;
16
17
fov-locations.add(loc);
18
19
row := row + direction.y;
20
col := col + direction.x;
21
loc := {row, col};
22
23
width := width + 1;
24
25 return fov-locations;
The algorithm is meant to show how locations, starting from the agents location and
proceeding in the direction it is facing, are stored.
In line 6 the while loop specifies the width of the FOV be no longer than the
constant, max-width, which determines how far the agent can see side-ways. Lines
8 - 11 illustrate that in the outer loop the width is either incremented row-wise or
column-wise depending on the direction the agent is facing. For instance, if the agent
is looking north then the width of his vision should be incremented column-wise, i.e.
horizontally. The conditional of the inner while loop - in line 14 - simply checks
whether the location is a wall or an obstacle location, and if not, adds the location
to the fov-locations while the max-length of the FOV is not exceeded. The location
is incremented in the direction the agent is facing (lines 19 - 21) before the loop
continuous.
The details of the algorithm are perhaps of limited relevance, but it is important
to illustrate that the agents’ FOVs are stored simply as locations of the tiles they
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Agent Architecture
21
represent.
Now that the agents can see, we will look at how they transform what they per-
ceive into beliefs about the world, i.e. how their working memory is organized and
updated. The first step in this procedure lies in the creation of percepts. These dis-
crete objects contain information about what objects are currently within an agent’s
FOV. Algorithm 3.1.2.1 shows how the agents generate percepts from their sight
component.
1 def see(fov-locations)
2
percept := empty;
3
4
for each location in fov-locations:
5
if obstacle in location
6
percept.add(obstacle);
7
else
8
if agent in location
9
percept.add(agent);
10
if food in location
11
percept.add(food);
12
13
return percept;
Once a percept is acquired it is passed to the BRF function (see algorithm 1), where
it is used to update the agent’s beliefs. The belief revision is a simple process of
storing the information contained in the percepts within the agent’s belief ‘bank’.
3.1.2.2
Hearing
Because sound is a property of the world (like light or smell), and not a property of
the agents, hearing is a simple matter of checking for a sound at the agent’s location.
In CtC, sound does not assign a producer of the sound. The agents do not know who
made the sound, they only know that someone made a sound at a certain location.
However, the agents are assumed to always be able to determine the location of origin.
1 def hear(location)
2
percept := empty;
3
4
for each sound in location:
5
percept.add(sound.origin);
6
7
return percept;
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Methods & Implementation
The percepts generated from the agent’s hearing component updates the agent’s be-
liefs as previously explained.
Now that the agent is capable of updating its beliefs via its senses, it can begin
to reason about these beliefs, which is where the ToM extension comes into play for
the child agents. The next sub-section will present the integration of ToM into the
agent architecture of CtC.
3.1.3
Theory of Mind
In CtC, ToM is in most cases related to what an agent can see or not see.
The
main inspirations for the implementation of ToM in the BDI architecture were the
notion of perspective shifts [22, 11], and the logic of higher-order observation from the
language, DEL-PAO [32]. In some cases higher-order observation is used to reason
about and/or update the beliefs of other agents, and in other cases it is used to plan
as another agent.
The child agents store representations of other agents as first-order beliefs includ-
ing (but not limited to) their location, facing direction, (visible) field of view, hearing,
as well as higher-order beliefs, i.e. their ToM of other agents. When time comes to
make coordinated plans, an agent will simply refer to its mental representation of
other agents it has observed.
As stated in section 1.1, ToM is a recursive phenomena and although the planning
in the current implementation of CtC works under bounded rationality, only allowing
agents to take advantage of two levels of ToM (first-order and second-order), it was
implemented as such. Algorithm 3.1.3 shows this.
1 def recursive-tom(agent, beliefs, fov)
2
foreach other-agent in fov
3
other-agent-fov := fov-of(other-agent);
4
new-fov := intersection(fov, other-agent-fov);
5
6
vision-percept := sight.perceive-as(other-agent, new-fov);
7
audio-percept := hearing.perceive-as(other-agent);
8
9
other-agent-beliefs := beliefs.tom-of(other-agent);
10
other-agent-beliefs.update(vision-percept, audio-percept);
11
12
recursive-tom(other-agent, other-agent-beliefs, new-fov);
13
14
return;
Algorithm 3.1.3 is meant to demonstrate how an agent can recursively update its
ToM of the agents which it can see.
Line 2 in the algorithm shows a loop going through all agents which are in the field of
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Agent Policies
23
vision of the agent. In lines 3 - 4, the perceived FOV of the sighted agent is assigned
as the intersection of the reasoning agent’s FOV and the sighted agent’s FOV. This
is because the reasoning agent can only see what the sighted agent can see, within his
own field of vision, i.e. it cannot see what the other agent sees in the locations not
visible to itself. Lines 6 - 7 shows the reasoning agent perceiving as though it was
the sighted agent (i.e. he is shifting his perspective). The reasoning agent updates
its ToM of the sighted agent accordingly in lines 9 - 10. Finally, the function is
recursively called with the beliefs the reasoning agent has about the sighted agent’s
beliefs along with the mutual FOV in line 12.
To better illustrate the process, consider figure 3.5.
It shows a representation of
these recursive shifts in perspective from the perspective of an agent updating its
beliefs based on the other agents it is currently observing.
Figure 3.5: A tree (right) demonstrating the recursive assignment of beliefs from what
an agent sees (left). Nodes represent agents and edges represent a shift in perspective.
3.2
Agent Policies
Coordinating the plans of multiple, cooperating agents usually requires a communica-
tion protocol or a set of policies which the agents can go by. Problems of multi-agent
coordination have long been studied [36]. As there is no explicit communication be-
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Methods & Implementation
tween the agents in CtC, some policies for coordination of strategies and collision
avoidance are required. To enable this form of planning the agents use social ranking
[54]. An agent’s rank determines its agent policy, i.e. if it will be eager or lazy. A
lazy agent will leave the coordination to another agent, while an eager agent will
be ‘eager’to (re-) plan. As discussed in [7], having all agents lazy will produce dead-
locks where the agents will wait for one another to go around. On the other hand,
over-eager agents will continuously re-plan ad infinitum.
It was discussed in chapter 2 that an agent’s social rank is determined by its ‘age’,
which in the game is simply an agent ID assigned offline. As such, the agent with the
lower rank will be eager and the higher ranking agent will be lazy.
As an example of this ranking system, consider figure 3.6 - illustrations 1) and 2).
Here the lowest ranking (blue) agent assumes the eager role and re-plans according
to the higher ranking (red) agent. Another example can be found in the description
of the Misdirect strategy in chapter 4.
Figure 3.6: Social ranking in action.
There are however certain scenarios in the agents’ partially observable environment
where social ranking will not suffice. For instance, social ranking will not work in
terms of coordination, if the lower ranking agent does not see the higher ranking
agent who’s path it is blocking. In such a scenario a high ranking agent could use
ToM to asses that the low ranking agent cannot see it, and to assume and eager role
as an exception. Section 4.5 of chapter 4 will cover ‘considerate’policies for implicit
coordination in more detail.
3.3
Path Planning
To generate plans of primitive actions, the agents use a best-first search algorithm
with different node representation and heuristics for different actions. The search
algorithm can be seen below:
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Path Planning
25
def search (init):
frontier := [init]; #priority queue sorting nodes by heuristic cost
explored := []; #set containing already evaluated nodes
while frontier not empty:
leaf := frontier.dequeue();
if leaf is goal
return extract-plan(leaf);
explored.add(leaf)
for each child of leaf
if child not in frontier and child not in explored
child.parent := leaf;
frontier.enqueue(child);
As an informed graph-search, the algorithm explores the state space of a planning
task, evaluating the nodes of lowest cost first thus generating a (search) tree of nodes
(representing states), where the plan is the shortest path (or sequence of actions) in
the tree to the desired state. A search tree of the state space presented in chapter 3
- figure 4.1 is illustrated in figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: An example of a search tree generated from an informed graph search of
the state space presented in figure 4.1. The nodes of the tree are states and the edges
are actions. Path-cost (g) and heuristic (h) is assigned to each node
The cost of a node is calculated by the evaluation function f = g + h, where g is the
cost of the path traveled and h is the heuristic of the distance to the goal (see figure
3.7). Once the goal state is reached, the plan is extracted by returning the action
of goal node, then the action of the parent of the goal node, then the action of the
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Methods & Implementation
grandparent, and so on, until the initial node is encountered. Thus a sequence of
actions (a path) is generated for the agent to follow.
In CtC the agents use both a Greedy best-first search and A*. The difference be-
tween these two algorithms is in the evaluation of nodes:
• The A* algorithm makes globally optimal decisions at each stage. The evalu-
ation function for A* therefore considers both path cost g and goal estimate
(heuristic) h when evaluating nodes.
• The Greedy algorithm makes locally optimal decisions at each stage.
The
evaluation function for Greedy therefore does not consider path cost g but only
goal heuristic h.
Although the Greedy search does not always produce optimal solutions, there are
certain scenarios where it produces more appropriate behavior, as is the case with
the Flee action (discussed below).
In CtC there are three main actions (excluding stationary actions), that other more
complex actions are build from. They are Go, Flee, and Flank. These are the only
high-level actions which produce actual plans of what we refer to as primitive actions
(i.e. north, south, east, west). We will now look at the heuristics and goal declarations
of these actions.
• The Go action is a simple case of an A* search to find the shortest path from
the current location to a desired location. The heuristic of a node in the Go
tree is
h = RectilinearDistance(current-location, to)
where current-location is the location currently being explored in the search and
to is the goal destination. The goal definition of a Go-node is simply formulated
as,
current-location == to
• The Flee action uses the Greedy algorithm to ensure that the initial steps
of fleeing is always in the direct opposite direction of the location being fled
from (not necessarily the same direction as that of the shortest path to the
destination). The heuristic of a Flee-node is calculated as:
h = ∞−RectilinearDistance(current-location, from)
where from is the location being fled from and current-location is the current
location being explored in the node. This results in a heuristic cost which is
smaller the further an agent is from the location being fled from. A node in
the Flee tree additionally contains a max-length property, which states the
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Path Planning
27
Figure 3.8: The search nodes of the planner.
maximum length of a solution and determines the termination of the search.
Therefore, the goal state of the Flee-node is stated as,
RectilinearDistance(current-location, from) >= max-length
• The Flank action can be considered an A* search where the heuristic is a
combination of those of the Go and Flee actions. The purpose of the action
is to circumvent a particular location while planning towards another specified
goal location. The heuristic of a flank node:
h = RectilinearDistance(current-location, to);
h = h −RectilinearDistance(current-location, avoid);
where avoid is the location to be circumvented and to is the destination. This
results in a heuristic which rewards close proximity to the destination while
punishing close proximity to the location to be avoided.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Methods & Implementation
3.4
Tools
The game was developed in the cross-platform video game engine Unity (version
2017.3.0f3) developed by Unity Technologies. The Unity development environment
covers all aspects of video game development including programming, animation, ren-
dering, audio and more. It supports both 2D and 3D video game development and
offers a primary scripting API in the programming language, C# (but also supports
JavaScript and UnityScript). CtC was programmed entirely in C# using the Mi-
crosoft .NET framework and UnityEngine libraries. Though BDI frameworks [47, 46,
8, 70, 49] already exist none of them have native C# support.
Visually the game was developed to display only the minimal required properties
of the game, while clearly conveying the functionalities. The game was graphically
designed with simple 32 x 32 pixel sprites2 (see figure 2.1). The Unity engine does
have some editor overhead so the graphical requirements were kept at a low.
2A two-dimensional bitmap that is integrated into a larger scene [30].
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Actions & Strategies
This chapter will describe the different actions and strategies which form the behavior
of the agents of CtC. It is due to the implementation of the BDI architecture and
ToM capabilities that the agents are able to make complex plans and to combine
them to form their most complex strategies. This implementation additionally allows
for some more flexible coordination policies.
The first part of this chapter will give a brief overview of the STRIPS planning
language (section 4.2) and HTN refinements (section 4.3), which will be used to
describe the actions of agents as schemas. The next section will introduce the domain
of the planning tasks, i.e. the actions themselves, and finally, the coordination of the
agents using ‘considerate’policies will be described and illustrated in the last section.
We begin this chapter with a brief overview of classical planning and the STRIPS
planning language, which will allow us to formalize the actions available to the agents
of CtC.
4.1
Classical Planning
Classical planning is a branch of automated planning, which aims to solve problems
of practical reasoning by generating sequences of actions in order to go from an initial
state to a desired goal state(s). Such a planning task can be formalized as a state
space or state-transition system (see figure 4.1).
Definition 4.1.1. A state space (or domain) in classical planning is Σ = (S, A, γ)
where,
S
is a finite (or recursively enumerable) set of states
A
is a finite (or recursively enumerable) set of actions
γ : S × A ,→S
is a computable partial state-transition function
If γ(s, a) is defined, a is said to be applicable in s. In Figure 4.1, if a is an edge
leading from s to another state s′ in the state space, then it is an applicable action,
e.g γ(s0, left) = s1 (left is applicable in s0).
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Actions & Strategies
Definition 4.1.2. A classical planning task is a triple (Σ, s0, Sg) where,
Σ = (S, A, γ)
is the planning domain (as described above)
s0 ∈S
is the initial state
Sg ⊆S
is the set of goal states
The solution is a plan, π = a1; . . . ; an, from the set of actions A such that γ(s0, π) =
π((s0, a1)) ∈Sg.
In other words, a solution to a planning task is a sequence of
actions which lead to all goal states. In Figure 4.1, the plan for the proposed solution
(the states in bold) is π = left; down. To avoid computing the entire state-space to
Figure 4.1: The state-space of a simple planning task, where the goal of the child is
to go to the cat. The shortest solution is shown in bold.
find a solution (exponential to the required variables to describe a state), classical
planning tasks usually define a heuristic. In the case of the example in Figure 4.1, a
sensible heuristic would be the rectilinear (or Manhattan) distance between location
0 and location 3. To allow for automatic computation of heuristics, a logical planning
language, like STRIPS or PDDL, is used to give structure to the states and actions
of the planning domain.
4.2
STRIPS Action Schemas
The STRIPS language [23] formalizes states as sets of ground atoms of the function-
free first-order language L. As an example, the actions and states presented in the
==PAGE:41==
4.3 HTN Refinement Schemas
31
state space above could be represented in STRIPS as:
s0 = {At(0)}
Sg = {At(3)}
ACTION: Move(x, y)
PRECONDITION: Location(x) ∧Location(y) ∧IsNeighbor(x, y) ∧At(x)
EFFECT: At(y) ∧¬At(x)
Note: we are utilizing the closed-world assumption, where everything not explicitly
claimed to be true is assumed to be false.
As can be seen, preconditions and effects are conjunctions of literals of L. Instan-
tiating the variables (the lower case letters) with constants of L creates a ground
action e.g.,
ACTION: Move(0, 1)
PRECONDITION: Location(0) ∧Location(1) ∧IsNeighbor(0, 1) ∧At(0)
EFFECT: At(1) ∧¬At(0)
Like a state-transition function in classical planning, preconditions in STRIPS deter-
mine the applicability of an action a. For an action to be applicable in a state s,
s must entail all preconditions of action a. A ground action’s effect represents the
change in state as a result of executing the action. In the above example, executing
the action Move(0,1) results in a state where At(1) is true and At(0) is now false.
We define a STRIPS planning task on L as (A, s0, ϕg) where A is a set of action
schemas over L, s0 is a set of ground atoms over L and ϕg is a conjunction of literals
over L called the goal formula.
By defining action schemas in STRIPS with preconditions and effects, the do-
main of a planning task can simply be represented as a set of action schemas (like
the one above), inducing a classical planning domain. This allows for a more com-
pact representation and the number of action schemas do not change by adding
more agents (cats and children) or locations to the task. In Figure 4.1, the actions
{left, right, up, down} can be replaced with instantiations of the simple STRIPS ac-
tions schema Move(x,y) shown above.
4.3
HTN Refinement Schemas
Using STRIPS action schemas allows for a much more succinct representation of ac-
tions. However, some actions can be formalized at higher level, consisting of other
high-level actions (HLAs), i.e. they cannot be directly implemented to become primi-
tive actions. For instance, the HLA, Go, is implemented into a sequence of primitive
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Actions & Strategies
actions (North, East, South, West) but the HLA, Search, expands into the HLAs, Go
and Explore. To describe such action hierarchies one needs some way of decompos-
ing complex tasks into smaller subtasks. One approach to this is Hierarchical Task
Network (HTN) Planning. The essential component of HTN is action decomposition
(or refinement), which is the recursive reduction of HLAs to a sequence of lower-level
actions until a plan consists of only primitive actions. These refinements are called,
refinement schemas, and they consist of the following:
• HLA name The name of the HLA that the refinement schema defines a de-
composition for.
• Precondition The conditions (a conjunction of function-free literals) which
have to be satisfied for the refinement to be applicable.
• Steps A sequence of either primitive- or high-level actions.
The primitve actions of the CtC domain consist of a rather simple set of five possible
moves, {North, South, East, West, None}. All HLAs consist of, or are refined to a
sequence of these five primitive actions.
As an example of HLAs and refinement schemas, consider the HLA, Search(a, r),
from the CtC domain. This HLA consist of two other HLAs (forming a hierarchi-
cal task of HLAs). One action for getting to the room, Go(a, r)), and another for
exploring the room (Explore(a, r)). These HLAs can be refined with the following
Search(a, r)
Explore(a, r)
Go(a, r)
Figure 4.2: Hierarchical task of the Search(a, r) action
refinement schemas:
REFINEMENT: Search(a, r)
PRECONDITION: Agent(a) ∧Room(r) ∧¬In(a, r) ∧¬Explored(a, r)
STEPS: [Go(a, r), Explore(a, r)]
REFINEMENT: Search(a, r)
PRECONDITION: Agent(a) ∧Room(r) ∧In(a, r) ∧¬Explored(r)
STEPS: [Explore(a, r)]
ACTION: Go(a, r)
PRECONDITION: Agent(a) ∧Room(r) ∧¬In(a, r)
EFFECT: In(a, r)
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Actions of CtC
33
ACTION: Explore(a, r)
PRECONDITION: Agent(a) ∧Room(r) ∧¬Explored(a, r)
EFFECT: Explored(a, r)
Notice that the Search(a, r) action has two refinements. HLAs can have multiple
refinements and an HLA plan achieves the goal from a given state if at least one of
its implementations achieves the goal from that state [53]. A HLA implementation
is an HLA refinement which produces a plan consisting of only primitive actions.
Each of the plans for the two HLAs, Go(a, r) and Explore(a, r), consist of primi-
tive actions which could look as follows,
1. Go(agt1, room1) = {east, east, north}
2. Explore(agt1, room1) = {north, west, north, east, east, south}
Therefore, the implementation of Search(room1) would be:
Search(agt1, room1) = {east, east, north, north, west, north, east, east, south}
Figure 4.3: Illustration of a plan generated for the Search(a, r) action.
Now that we are familiar with the languages we will use to describe the actions of
the CtC domain, the next section will give detailed descriptions of each action and
strategy of the game.
4.4
Actions of CtC
This section covers the different plans available to the agents. These plans dictate
the behavior of the agents and ultimately form the strategies which are the results of
this experiment and implementation.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Actions & Strategies
For clarity, some plans and strategies have accompanying illustrations, or cartoon
strips, demonstrating the behaviors resulting from execution of the plan. In the im-
ages, crossed tiles are wall tiles, dark tiles are room tiles, FOVs are square frames
in the same color as the agent they belong to (the intersection of FOVs is illustrated
by mixing the colors of the different FOVs), and small rectangles in the same color
as the agent they belong to illustrate the planned path of the agent.
Noteworthy predicates used to describe the actions:
Sees(a, b)
Agent a sees agent b.
Sees(a, Sees(b, a))
Agent a sees that agent b sees agent a.
At(a, x)
Agent a is at location x.
In(a, r)
Agent a is in room r.
Explored(a, r)
Agent a has explored the room r.
Has(a, b)
Agent a has agent b.
Consumed(a, f)
Agent a has consumed food f.
LowerRank(a, b)
Agent a has a lower social ranking than agent b.
Moving(a)
Agent a is moving.
Pursuing(a, b)
Agent a is pursuing agent b.
LastKnownLoc(x, a)
The last known location x of agent a.
RandomLoc(x, s)
A random location x in a set s of locations.
NonV isibleFov(a, b)
A set of locations within the FOV of agent a not
visible to agent b.
Please note that ToM perspective shifts are represented as the predicates,
Sees(a, Sees(b, a)), which corresponds to ‘agent A sees that agent B sees agent A’, or
Sees(a, ¬Sees(b, a)) meaning ‘agent A sees that agent B does not see agent A’, and
so on.
GO
The Go action is fairly simple. It has the following action schema:
ACTION: Go(a, x)
PRECONDITION: ¬At(a, x)
EFFECT: At(a, x)
The effect of the Go action is a plan, consists of a sequence of primitive actions
(as described in section 4.3), leading from the current location of the agent to a goal
location.
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Actions of CtC
35
EXPLORE
The action, Explore, is planned once an agent is inside the room which it intends
to search. Only rooms which have not already been explored are considered when
planning a room search.
ACTION: Explore(a, r)
PRECONDITION: Agent(a) ∧Room(r) ∧In(a, r) ∧¬Explored(a, r)
EFFECT: Explored(a, r)
The Explore action is actually planned as numerous Go actions in sequence, where the
destination is the room location farthest from the agent. This is done until the agent
has observed all locations within the given room, thus having explored the room.
Algorithm 4 Algorithm illustrating the planning of the Explore action.
plan := [];
destination := none;
if room is not explored then
destination := room.farthest-location();
plan := go(destination);
end if
return plan;
A successful execution of Explore has the effect that the room being explored is added
to the agent’s local set of explored rooms.
GRAB
The Grab action is applicable whenever a child agent is standing in the same location
as the cat.
ACTION: Grab(a, c, x)
PRECONDITION: Child(a)∧Cat(c)∧Location(x)∧At(a, x)∧At(c, x)∧¬Has(a, c)
EFFECT: Has(a, c)
The result of successful execution of the Grab action is the capture of the cat agent,
which ends the game with the child agents as the winners.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Actions & Strategies
LEAVE
This action is part of the Ambush strategy. If an agent is inside a room and executes
the Leave action, it will leave the room the same way it came in.
ACTION: Leave(a, r)
PRECONDITION: Agent(a) ∧Room(r) ∧In(a, r)
EFFECT: ¬In(a, r)
The action actually executes a Go action, where the destination is the first location
in the path traveled, which is not a room location:
Algorithm 5 Algorithm illustrating the planning of the Leave action.
plan := [];
destination := none;
i := path.length();
while i > 0 do
i = i - 1;
if path[i] is not a room location then
destination := path[i];
plan := go(destination);
return plan;
end if
end while
return plan;
The results of executing Leave is that the agent will be right outside the room entrance
which it had used to enter the room.
HALT
This action makes an agent stay in a location for an indefinite amount of time. The
action does not have a success specification but is only aborted if the agents intention
changes.
ACTION: Halt(a, x)
PRECONDITION: Agent(a) ∧Location(x) ∧At(a, x)
EFFECT: At(a, x)
The result of executing Halt is that the agent is in the same location as previously.
For the purposes of the agent control loop this is not the same as no action. Once a
plan is empty the agent will re-deliberate, therefore the result of Halt is the location
where it is already standing.
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Actions of CtC
37
WAIT
The action, Wait, is similar to the Halt action but with a timer attached to it. The
agent will stay in the same location until a countdown is completed.
ACTION: Wait(a, x, t1, t2)
PRECONDITION: Agent(a)∧Location(x)∧Time(t1)∧Time(t2)∧GreaterThan(t1, t2)
EFFECT: At(a, x) ∧Equals(t1, t2)
The result of executing Wait is the same as Halt; the agent is in the same location as
it was before executing the action.
CONSUME
The Consume action is only used by the cat agent as it is the only agent concerned
with eating. The action is part of the Eat strategy.
ACTION: Consume(a, f, x)
PRECONDITION: Agent(a) ∧Food(f) ∧Location(x) ∧At(f, x) ∧At(a, x)
∧¬Consumed(a, f)
EFFECT: ¬At(f, x) ∧Consumed(a, f)
While the agent is consuming the food object, the amount of food from the food
object is diminishing. Once the food amount is zero, the food object is removed from
the level.
Algorithm 6 Algorithm showing food diminishing while Consume is executed.
while food.amount > 0 do
await countdown(s);
food.diminish();
end while
FLEE
The action, Flee, is used by both agent types, although for slightly different purposes.
The cat agent will use flee when it feels threatened and the child agents will use the
action as part of the Track strategy.
ACTION: Flee(a, x, y)
PRECONDITION: Agent(a) ∧Location(x) ∧Location(y) ∧At(a, x)
EFFECT: At(a, y)
The result of the action is that the agent will be at the planned destination. The
action schema of Flee may look similar to that of Go, but the planning is different
(greedy best-first search), as discussed in section 3.3.
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Actions & Strategies
SEARCH
Figure 4.4: Tree of the Search strategy dependencies.
The Search strategy may not be the most relevant in terms of ToM or implicit
coordination, but it is key, not in terms of exploiting the epistemic state, but in
changing it. The Search strategy depends on the actions Go and Explore, but not
always both, hence it is conditional. The refinement schemas below show that in the
state where the agent is within the room to be searched, it will perform the action to
Explore. If it is not yet in the given room it will first execute the action to go there
and then the action to explore the room.
ACTION: Search(a, r)
PRECONDITION: Agent(a) ∧Room(r) ∧¬Explored(a, r)
EFFECT: Explored(a, r)
REFINEMENT: Search(a, r)
PRECONDITION: Agent(a) ∧Room(r) ∧¬In(a, r) ∧¬Explored(a, r)
STEPS: [Go(a, r), Explore(a, r)]
REFINEMENT: Search(a, r)
PRECONDITION: Agent(a) ∧Room(r) ∧In(a, r) ∧¬Explored(r)
STEPS: [Explore(a, r)]
The result of a successful execution of the Search action results in the given room
being added to the set of explored rooms for the agent in question.
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Actions of CtC
39
EAT
Figure 4.5: Tree of the Eat strategy dependencies.
The Eat strategy is performed by the cat agent when it sees a food object. If
the cat is already at the food object location, it will begin to consume the object.
Otherwise, it will plan a Go action to get to it first and then consume.
ACTION: Eat(a, x, f)
PRECONDITION: Agent(a) ∧Food(f) ∧Location(x) ∧At(f, x) ∧Sees(a, f)
EFFECT: Consumed(a, f)
REFINEMENT: Eat(a, x, f)
PRECONDITION: Agent(a) ∧Food(f) ∧Location(x) ∧At(f, x) ∧¬At(a, x)
STEPS: [Go(a, x), Consume(a, f, x)]
REFINEMENT: Eat(a, x, f)
PRECONDITION: Agent(a) ∧Food(f) ∧Location(x) ∧At(f, x) ∧At(a, x)
STEPS: [Consume(a, f, x)]
The result of a successful execution of the Eat strategy is that the food object is
removed from the level.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Actions & Strategies
REGROUP
Figure 4.6: Tree of the Regroup strategy dependencies.
The Regroup strategy is used by the child agents when they have searched all
rooms and have not found the cat agent and do not see other child agents. When
regrouping a child agent will go to a rendezvous location predetermined by the child
agents before the start of their exploration. As the refinements show, the child will
go to the rendezvous location and if already there, it will halt until it spots another
agent (child or cat).
ACTION: Regroup(a, x)
PRECONDITION: Child(a) ∧Location(x)
EFFECT: At(a, x)
REFINEMENT: Regroup(a, x)
PRECONDITION: Child(a) ∧Location(x) ∧¬At(a, x)
STEPS: [Go(a, x), Halt(a, f, x)]
REFINEMENT: Regroup(a, x)
PRECONDITION: Child(a) ∧Location(x) ∧At(a, x)
STEPS: [Halt(a, c, x)]
The result of a successful execution of the Regroup strategy will end in the child
waiting for another child (or the cat) and once spotted will re-initiate its search.
4.4.1
ToM Actions
The (higher-order) ToM actions and strategies are all the HLAs which in some way
use perspective shifts as part of their planning.
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Actions of CtC
41
FLANK
The Flank action (as described in chapter 3) is used to circumvent one agent while
going to another’s location. Flank is used in cases where an agent spots two other
agents, but neither of the other agents are presumed to see the spotting agent. Fur-
thermore, one of the other agents is a cat agent and one is a child agent. The other
child agent sees the cat but not the observing child agent.
ACTION: Flank(a, b, c, x)
PRECONDITION: Child(a)∧Child(b)∧Cat(c)∧Location(x)∧¬At(a, x)∧¬At(b, x)∧
At(c, x) ∧Sees(a, b) ∧Sees(a, ¬Sees(b, a)) ∧Sees(a, Sees(b, c)) ∧Sees(a, c)
∧Sees(a, ¬Sees(c, a))
EFFECT: At(a, x)
In addition to being a strategy of its own, Flank is also used in the Assist strat-
egy. Figure 4.7 shows how Flank works. In this example the blue child is moving to
the cat while keeping distance from the red agent. This results in a circumvention of
the red agent and in a case like the one depicted, a way to create an ambush for the
cat.
Figure 4.7: The Flank strategy. Here the blue child flanks the cat agent by approach-
ing it from the opposite direction of the red child. Neither the cat or the red child
sees the blue child (initially).
The result of a successful Flank is an advantageous situation where two agent are
on opposite sides of the target they wish to capture. This combines nicely with the
Misdirect strategy (see below).
MISDIRECT
The Misdirect strategy is used in a scenario where a child sees another child and the
cat at the same time. Additionally, the child has to believe that the other child sees
it as well an sees the cat.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Actions & Strategies
ACTION: Misdirect(a, b, c, x)
PRECONDITION: Child(a)∧Child(b)∧Cat(c)∧Location(x)∧¬At(a, x)∧¬At(b, x)∧
At(c, x) ∧Sees(a, b) ∧Sees(a, Sees(b, a)) ∧Sees(a, c) ∧Sees(a, Sees(b, c))
∧LowerRank(a, b)
EFFECT: At(a, x)
Figure 4.8 shows the Misdirect strategy in action. In illustration 1), the blue agent
sees the cat and the red child. It also sees that the red child sees the blue child and the
cat. In this scenario the cat sees neither of the children (although not a requirement
to execute the strategy). Here the social ranking (more details in section 4.5) comes
into play as the lowest ranking child will direct the cat toward the highest ranking
child. In 2), the lowest ranking child is the blue agent, so it will lead the cat towards
the red child. Illustration 3) shows the blue child chasing the cat towards the red
child and since the cat is now fleeing, both children will have entered the Capture
strategy, i.e. they are now both pursuing the cat.
Figure 4.8
The result of a successful Misdirect will lead the cat towards the direction of one of
the child agents.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Actions of CtC
43
ASSIST
The Assist strategy is used by a child agent if it sees another agent halting. In this
scenario the child infers that the other child sees something important (i.e. the cat)
in the part of the other child’s FOV, which is not visible to itself.
ACTION: Assist(a, b, c, x)
PRECONDITION: Child(a) ∧Child(b) ∧Cat(c) ∧Location(x)
∧RandomLoc(x, NonV isibleFov(b, a)) ∧¬At(a, x) ∧¬At(b, x) ∧Sees(a, b)
∧Sees(a, ¬Sees(b, a)) ∧¬Sees(a, cat) ∧¬Moving(b)
EFFECT: At(a, x)
Figure 4.9 shows the Assist strategy. In 1), the blue child sees the red child halt-
ing, but it does not see the cat.
The blue child will then assist the red child by
performing a Flank maneuver, effectively circumventing the red agent while going
towards the part of the red child’s FOV not initially visible to the blue child (by
means of ToM perspective shifts), as the spotted object must be located therein:
other-fov := beliefs.tom-of(other).fov;\\
locations := other-fov - intersection(this-fov, other-fov);
destination := random-of(locations);
Listing 4.1: Reasoning about the possible location of the cat within the FOV
of the other child agent by means of ToM.
Figure 4.9: The Assist strategy. In 1), the blue child spots the red child standing still.
In 2) the blue child goes to assist the red child.
The result of a successful Assist is that the agent is able to find the cat agent ap-
proaching from a different direction.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Actions & Strategies
TRACK
Figure 4.10: Tree of the Track strategy dependencies.
The Track strategy is unique in the sense that the strategy is formed by one agent
planning as though it was another agent. A child agent will go to the cat’s last known
location and track the cat by assuming the perspective of the cat and performing a
Flee action from the child agent’s original location.
ACTION: Track(a, c, x, y)
PRECONDITION: Child(a) ∧Cat(c) ∧Location(y) ∧Pursuing(a, c) ∧¬Sees(a, c)
EFFECT: At(a, y)
REFINEMENT: Track(a, c, x, y)
PRECONDITION: Child(a) ∧Cat(b) ∧Location(x) ∧Location(y)
∧LastKnownLoc(x, c) ∧Pursuing(a, c) ∧¬Sees(a, c)
STEPS: [Go(a, x), Flee(a, x, y)]
Figure 4.11 shows the blue child tracking the cat. In 1), the child is initially pur-
suing the cat agent. In 2), once the cat has fled, the child tracks the cat from its last
seen location and goes to the estimated destination of the fleeing cat. To recap how
Flee is actually planned, see section 3.3.
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Actions of CtC
45
Figure 4.11
The result of a successful Track strategy enables the child agent to find the cat once
again after it has fled.
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Actions & Strategies
CAPTURE
Figure 4.12: Tree of the Capture strategy dependencies.
The Capture strategy is performed by the child agents when they observe that
the cat agent is fleeing, i.e. have spotted a child and is sprinting. The policy of
the Capture strategy is to Grab the cat if the location of the cat is the same as the
location of the agent. Else, Go to the cat first, then Grab.
ACTION: Capture(a, c, x)
PRECONDITION: Child(a) ∧Cat(c) ∧Location(x) ∧At(c, x) ∧Sees(a, c)
∧Sees(a, Sees(c, a)) ∧IsMoving(c)
EFFECT: Has(a, c)
REFINEMENT: Capture(a, c, x)
PRECONDITION: Child(a) ∧Cat(c) ∧Location(x) ∧At(c, x) ∧¬At(a, x)
STEPS: [Go(a, x), Grab(a, f, x)]
REFINEMENT: Capture(a, c, x)
PRECONDITION: Child(a) ∧Cat(c) ∧Location(x) ∧At(c, x) ∧At(a, x)
STEPS: [Grab(a, c, x)]
A successful execution of the Capture strategy wins the game for the child agents.
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Actions of CtC
47
AMBUSH
Figure 4.13: Tree of the Ambush strategy dependencies.
The Ambush strategy is the only strategy with three refinement schemas. This
is because there can be a sequence of up to three actions in an Ambush strategy. A
child agent will use the Ambush strategy if it sees the cat agent and it knows that
the cat does not see the child. The refinements of the strategy demonstrate the three
possible states which determine the actions of the strategy.
ACTION: Ambush(a, c, r, x, y)
PRECONDITION: Child(a)∧Cat(c)∧Room(r)∧Location(x)∧Location(y)∧At(c, x)∧
EntranceOf(y, r) ∧Sees(a, c) ∧Sees(a, ¬Sees(c, a))
EFFECT: At(a, y)
REFINEMENT: Ambush(a, c, r, x, y)
PRECONDITION: Child(a)∧Cat(c)∧Room(r)∧Location(x)∧Location(y)∧At(c, x)∧
EntranceOf(y, r) ∧In(c, r) ∧In(a, r)
STEPS: [Leave(a, r), Go(a, y), Wait(a, y, ttar, tcur)]
REFINEMENT: Ambush(a, c, r, x, y)
PRECONDITION: Child(a)∧Cat(c)∧Room(r)∧Location(x)∧Location(y)∧At(c, x)∧
EntranceOf(y, r) ∧In(c, r) ∧¬In(a, r)
STEPS: [Go(a, y), Wait(a, y, ttar, tcur)]
REFINEMENT: Ambush(a, c, r, x, y)
PRECONDITION: Child(a)∧Cat(c)∧Room(r)∧Location(x)∧Location(y)∧At(c, x)∧
EntranceOf(y, r) ∧In(c, r) ∧¬In(a, r) ∧At(a, y)
STEPS: [Wait(a, y, ttar, tcur)]
REFINEMENT: Ambush(a, c, r, x, y)
PRECONDITION: Child(a)∧Cat(c)∧Room(r)∧Location(x)∧Location(y)∧At(c, x)∧
At(c, y) ∧¬In(c, r)
STEPS: [Go(a, y)]
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Actions & Strategies
Figure 4.14 shows the strategy in action.
Illustration 1) shows the action, Leave,
and is only relevant if the child agent is already in the same room as the cat agent.
Illustration 2) shows the action, Go, with the room entrance as the destination and
is only relevant if the agent is not already in the entrance of the room. Figure 3)
shows the final action, Wait. 4) illustrates that if the cat is not in a room, the agent
will follow using the action, Go, with the cat location as the destination. 1) is always
followed by 2) and 3). 2) is always followed by 3), and 3) and 4) are independent.
Figure 4.14: The Ambush strategy.
A successful execution of Ambush, puts the child agent in a advantageous position to
capture the cat.
To give an understanding of how the actions are used by the agents to strategize in
the game, a demonstration of the agents planning in a two-room level follows:
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Actions of CtC
49
The red child is going to the first room to explore. The blue child has spotted the cat.
The blue child has executed the Ambush strategy. The red child has spotted the blue child
standing guard and is therefore executing the Assist action.
The red child and the blue child are executing the Ambush strategy.
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Actions & Strategies
The cat spots the blue child.
The cat is fleeing to the other room. The red child is pursuing the cat. The blue child is
executing the Track strategy, which leads it to the other room.
The cat has finished fleeing and is performing the Consume action on the food object. The
red child no longer sees the cat and is therefore also executing the Track strategy.
==PAGE:61==
4.5 Coordination
51
Both children are ambushing and they see each other and the cat. The cat sees the red child
an is performing the Wait action (as the red child is not too close). The blue agent executes
the Misdirect action as it is the lowest ranking child.
Once the cat has been misdirected towards the red child, and they see the cat fleeing, the
red and the blue child will pursue the cat (Capture strategy). They manage to successfully
deceive the cat and Grab it.
4.5
Coordination
It was discussed in chapter 3 how the agents use policies for implicitly coordinating
their respective plans, using social ranking. There are however scenarios where this
approach does not suffice. Consider the state presented in Figure 4.18. In these states
the higher ranking (red) child is planning to go to a room via the entrance currently
being blocked by the lower ranking agent (blue). However, the blue agent cannot see
the red agent and so it cannot eagerly coordinate according to the red agent. Using
ToM, the blue agent knows that the lower ranking child cannot see it and therefore
decides to take an eager approach itself. In a sense the agents have a hierarchical
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Actions & Strategies
order, but at the same time they are ‘considerate agents’.
Figure 4.18: Considerate coordination policies.
As a final example of considerate agents, consider a scenario where a lower ranking
agent is running along a path, which interferes with a higher ranking agent’s path.
The higher ranking agent does however not have an urgent goal. In such a state, the
higher ranking agent will again assume the eager role, while the lower ranking, busy
agent will be lazy.
def bool sound(plan, intentions, beliefs)
for each other-child that child sees:
if (not beliefs.tom-of(other-child).sees(child)
or IsHigherRank(other-child, child)
or IsRecovering(other-child)
or IsRunning(other-child))
obstacles.add(location-of(other-child));
return false;
Listing 4.2: Checking for dynamic obstacles when evaluating soundness of plan.
Because the agents in CtC plan in a partially observable environment, and because
they do not take turns moving but rather have their on variable movements speed,
collision between non-communcating agents is inevitable. This can be demonstrated
with two agents about to round a corner. Consider that the agents move at the same
tick and the fact that they cannot see around corners. As they cannot communicate,
and due to the fact that their hearing does not reveal the producer of sound, there is no
obvious coordination strategy to avoid collision. Were the agents able to distinguish
each other from the sound they produce when moving, it would be a simple case of
social ranking and implicit coordination.
Instead a Recover event was implemented (as an action), so that in cases where
collision is inevitable, (in the current implementation) the agent with the lowest rank
(the youngest) would get a time punishment (the time it takes to recover from the
collision).
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
Equipping agents with mental state representations allowed designing actions which
are not possible in a purely reactive architecture. Actions like Ambush and Flank
(section 4.4.1) are highly dependent, not only on mental state representations, but
on higher-order ToM as well.
The BDI model enabled the agents to observe and to store beliefs of other agents,
which enabled the design of actions such as Search, where agents explore the closest
room which is believed to not have been explored yet. The BDI model additionally
enabled the agents to have goal-driven behavior based on beliefs, similar to that of
humans [10]. The benefits of such a model as opposed to hard-coded reactive behavior
are three-fold:
1. It allows for consistent planning and goal prioritization. A reactive agent will
react immediately to any stimuli it receives. A system design which considers
all possible reactions would require a lot of modelling effort. Having a goal and
an accompanying plan enables an agent to ignore stimuli which are not relevant
to the given intention. In CtC, reactive agents would for instance not be able to
have multiple intentions for the same percept, i.e. to either ambush or pursue
another agent. It would also abandon any currently executing action if another
stimuli, with an accompanying reaction, was received.
2. The architecture allows for resource constraints. A reasoning agent cannot act
infinitely fast as it has to reason about its goals and make plans for such goals.
This relates to the concepts of artificial stupidity and bounded rationality as
discussed in section 1.1.
3. It allows for more complex reasoning, especially with the addition of higher-
order reasoning capabilities. Because a reactive agent does not store mental
states, it is not able to, e.g., form strategies from previously acquired informa-
tion about another agent, i.e., it has no working memory.
The BDI model in itself therefore affords a much more intuitive abstraction to model
complex behavior than a corresponding reactive model would.
However, in this
project we found that the difference between the two models becomes significantly
more apparent with the extension of the BDI architecture to support (higher-order)
ToM.
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Discussion
This ability allowed the agents to consider not only their own goals and beliefs,
but also the goals and beliefs of other agents, when strategizing. As an example, the
Flank action requires an agent to reason about at least two other agents, and to have
a ToM of both agents and beliefs about their respective ToM of itself and each other.
The action itself may not seem complex, but it requires reasoning capabilities beyond
what is commonly implemented in artificially intelligent video game agents.
Although other approaches exist to enable the use of complex strategies in a video
games, such as [13], the BDI + ToM architecture worked well as an intuitive design
abstraction, as it resembles human reasoning. As discussed, this allows agents to
reason at a high level, while still enabling constraints on their resources.
When designing and observing the complex actions of the agents, it became ap-
parent that the agents’ reasoning capabilities were both beneficial in terms of creating
cooperative and competitive behavior. Some actions allowed for deception, such as
Misdirect and Ambush, while others were beneficial in terms of cooperation, e.g. As-
sist and Flank. It can additionally be argued that Misdirect and Flank were mixed-
motive, as they were both deceptive and cooperative. Misdirect enables two child
agents to collaboratively attempt a capture, as a result of deceiving the cat. The
same goes for the Flank action, which both exploits the cat’s epistemic state of ig-
norance, while actively attempting to change the epistemic state of another child for
collaborative benefits.
There are certain aspects of the game design itself which could be investigated further.
Some of these relate to specific implementation details, while others are concerned
with extending the communicative and strategic capabilities of the agents.
An example of the former, is the agents inability to turn their heads independently
of the body, and the lack of body rotation. Because the agents instantly face the
direction they are walking, some agent collision is possible. If two agents are standing
back-to-back and they decide to immediately walk in the direction of the other agent,
respectively, they will collide. In the game this is not an issue in terms of obstacles,
as the agents can see a few locations sideways, and they will therefore not ‘turn’ into
an obstacle. Although not possible in the game (because obstacles do not move), an
agent could theoretically walk in to an unobserved obstacle in the same way as the
previous example of the two agents walking into each other when facing away from
each other. Solutions to this problem could be to either allow for agents to turn their
heads without moving, or to require rotation before movement. The former seems
more intuitive when considering video game controls.
Such a solution would also address another possible modification of the agents’
abilities. The field of view of the agents is, as can be seen in Figure 2.1, rectangular.
This is likely not the most accurate representation of human sight, as the human field
of vision is more cone-shaped, than rectangular. Without the need to have a large
peripheral vision, the field of view could be represented more naturally, i.e. be more
triangular.
As the implementation is now, the agents are equipped with working memory
(i.e. their beliefs) and perception capabilities. There is no ‘short-term memory’, as
==PAGE:65==
5 Discussion
55
such. In some cases short-term memory could alter the agent’s behavior. Consider
the Flee action. This action is planned as a greedy best-first search, and will result in
an agent moving in the exact opposite direction of the location (or agent) being fled
from. If one considers a scenario where two child agents stand on opposite sides of
the cat agent, the cat agent will continuously flee in alternating, opposite directions,
which means that its capture is inevitable. In the current implementation the cat is
however able to perceive multiple agents at a given time, but only at the same tick.
This means that while the two child agents are far away from each other, the cat
agent will not consider both their locations when fleeing, resulting in the mentioned
behavior.
Of course there is also the option of adding additional strategies/actions to the
set of all actions. This would again allow for more options in terms of planning and
for a large space of combinatorial strategies. Examples of such actions are decoys,
strategic placements of food objects, and blockades (moving obstacles around).
The system could also be extended to allow for explicit communication in limited
scenarios. Just as sound created from movement, explicit communication between
agents in the form of announcements could be used to update the agents’ epistemic
state.
In a previously discussed example, agents may be able to hear each other
without seeing one another. In certain situations this information is useless, as the
agents cannot know who produced the sound, like when two child agents are about
to round a corner and they hear each other. In such a scenario the agents are at risk
of colliding, but taking the risk of announcing each others’ identities would allow for
coordination. In that case making announcements is a risk which may be assessed in
each situation and could allow for some interesting behavior.
Lastly, an implementation of coalition logic [48] within the BDI agent architecture
[14] could be interesting. This would allow the agents to more explicitly reason about
their strategic abilities in a given situation, regardless of what the other agents are
doing.
A natural next step is to perform testing of the agents’ behavior.
As one of the
goals of the thesis is to use mental state representation and ToM to implement a
more human-like behavior than that of purely reactive agents, it would be interest-
ing to implement a purely reactive architecture for comparison of the two models.
This could give insight into the strategic effectiveness of both models, as well as the
performance implications of a more complex architecture. Research has shown that
deliberating agents are exponentially more computationally demanding than reactive
agents. In [35] the authors found that increasing the number of reactive agents is
dramatically superior in terms of performance as opposed to increasing the delibera-
tiveness of the agents. However, classical deliberative agents are far superior in terms
of producing optimal, domain-independent plans [64]. Computational resources have
come a long way the last few decades, and since the subject of this thesis relates to
creating believable agent behavior, and not necessarily the most efficient agents pos-
sible, deliberative agents still seem like an appropriate agent architecture for such a
task. Additionally, most video games do not require abundant amounts of interactive
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Discussion
agents in a given level, and often only a few AI characters are interactive.
Testing the efficiency of each action and the most effective combinations of actions
could be interesting as well. This could be done with reinforcement learning, where
the agent is rewarded with respect to certain parameters such as sightings of the
cat agent, proximity to the cat and to other cooperative agents, number of wins,
completion time, and more. This would give insight into whether certain actions are
redundant, which actions are most effective, and possibly give ideas as to which other
strategies could be implemented.
As the product of the experiment is a video game simulation, it would also be
interesting to see how the system behaves compared to how human players would
play the game. Giving the human players control of the child agents would allow
them to form strategies of their own (without the means to explicitly communicate).
A comparison of the human players’ most effective strategies with the actions of the
simulated agents would be interesting with respect to the authenticity of AI agent
behavior, modification of existing agent strategies, and creation of new actions.
On the one hand, this thesis is about experimenting with models of practical rea-
soning to create human-like, intelligent agents, and, on the other hand, it is about
designing a game to be used as a test environment for AI. It could be interesting to
investigate to which extend the world of CtC could be used to benchmark interac-
tion of artificially intelligent agents in a multi-agent system. As mentioned in the
beginning of chapter 2, games have long been used to benchmark AI and to study
multi-agent behavior.
Making the agent architecture of CtC into a more general framework could also
be interesting in terms of AI development. Such a framework would minimize the
complexity of implementing reasoning agents for the field-expert programmer. This
would require a more general implementation of the BDI model with a ToM extension,
as proposed in [9]. Such a framework could allow the modeller to define the goals,
plans, and priorities of the agents, and then use the framework to compute the most
optimal intentions and plans. In terms of video game development, such a framework
could be an asset for a video game engines such as Unity. As Unity is one of the
most popular video game development platforms, allowing for simple and intuitive
implementation of video game agents with ToM capabilities could be beneficial to
many developers interested in creating meaningful human-computer interactions.
Interactive media which implements agents with the ToM ability could serve many
purposes. As discussed, it could create more immersive experiences in digital enter-
tainment by giving AI agents the ability to reason about the players mental state,
as well as the mental states of other agents and their ToM. It could also allow for
the development of games (or interactive experiences) which could teach individuals
living with mindblindness about social behavior. In section 1.1 it was discussed that
people who do not have ToM abilities must be taught how to socially interact with
other humans, as they cannot do this naturally.
Video games have long been studied and used for educational purposes, and as
==PAGE:67==
5 Discussion
57
such creating video games to be used for social cognition training does not seem far-
fetched. Additionally, studies show that video games are frequently used by people
with autism, which have difficulties in other social activities, and that they have poten-
tial benefits [42, 15]. These studies discuss the potential benefits of social interaction
with other people in online games, and how these can aid people with social cognitive
disorders in communicating with other people. Similar studies about autism and so-
cial media also find that there are potential benefits in this form of social interaction,
which is afforded by these media in the same way as online video games [65, 41]. It
was shown that adults with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) who use social network-
ing sites were more likely to have close friends and closer friendship relationships [41].
This form of digital interaction may serve as a more safe training environment, as the
online communication does not pose the same discomfort as face-to-face interaction.
If autistic individuals can learn social interaction from communication with other
people via digital media, then video games with higher-order ToM capabilities may
serve the same purpose. Such games could be developed to tackle facial expressions,
gestures, emotions, communication, and more.
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
This thesis investigated the use of the BDI model and the concept of Theory of
Mind (ToM) as abstractions for creating socially intelligent agents who are able to
coordinate implicitly by reasoning about each others’ epistemic state. Although the
implementation of such a system proved considerably more complex than that of
a purely reactive architecture, it provided a very intuitive platform for designing
practically reasoning agents.
The results of the experiment showed that the actions afforded by the architecture
allowed the agents of the system to make complex plans and coordination without
the ability to explicitly communicate by exploiting their ability to recursively shift
their perspective to reason about other agents’ beliefs and ToM.
The findings of the experiment illustrate that it is possible to implement cognitive
models of social intelligence in the architecture of video game agents, and that the
BDI model coupled with the concept of ToM provides a valid abstraction for such an
implementation.
==PAGE:70==
60
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Actors and Their Roles for $300, HAL? HAL! [Online; accessed 9-July-2018].
2011. url: https://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/09/arts/television/
09nova.html.
[2]
Rogelio Adobbati et al. “Gamebots: A 3d virtual world test-bed for multi-agent
research”. In: Proceedings of the second international workshop on Infrastructure
for Agents, MAS, and Scalable MAS. Volume 5. Montreal, Canada. 2001, page 6.
[3]
AlphaZero. AlphaZero — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. [Online; accessed
9-July-2018]. 2017. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AlphaZero#cite_
note-preprint-1.
[4]
Simon Baron-Cohen, Alan M Leslie, and Uta Frith. “Does the autistic child
have a “theory of mind”?” In: Cognition 21.1 (1985), pages 37–46.
[5]
Marc G Bellemare et al. “The arcade learning environment: An evaluation plat-
form for general agents”. In: Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 47 (2013),
pages 253–279.
[6]
Darse Billings. “The first international RoShamBo programming competition”.
In: ICGA Journal 23.1 (2000), pages 42–50.
[7]
Thomas Bolander, Thorsten Engesser, and Bernhard Nebel. “Better Eager Than
Lazy? How Agent Types Impact the Successfulness of Implicit Coordination”.
In: Distributed and Multi-Agent Planning (DMAP-16) (2016), pages 42–49.
[8]
Rafael H Bordini, Jomi F Hübner, and Renata Vieira. “Jason and the Golden
Fleece of agent-oriented programming”. In: Multi-agent programming. Springer,
2005, pages 3–37.
[9]
Tibor Bosse, Zulfiqar A Memon, and Jan Treur. “A recursive BDI agent model
for theory of mind and its applications”. In: Applied Artificial Intelligence 25.1
(2011), pages 1–44.
[10]
Michael Bratman. “Intention, plans, and practical reason”. In: (1987).
[11]
Torben Brauner. “Hybrid-logical reasoning in false-belief tasks”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1310.6435 (2013).
[12]
Richard Byrne and Andrew Whiten. “Machiavellian intelligence: social expertise
and the evolution of intellect in monkeys, apes, and humans (oxford science
publications)”. In: (1989).
==PAGE:72==
62
Bibliography
[13]
Guillaume Chaslot et al. “Monte-Carlo Tree Search: A New Framework for
Game AI.” In: AIIDE. 2008.
[14]
Qingliang Chen et al. “A first-order coalition logic for BDI-agents”. In: Frontiers
of Computer Science 10.2 (2016), pages 233–245.
[15]
Un-sun Chung et al. “A prosocial online game for social cognition training in
adolescents with high-functioning autism: An fMRI study”. In: Neuropsychiatric
disease and treatment 12 (2016), page 651.
[16]
Nimrod (computing). Nimrod (computing) — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
[Online; accessed 9-July-2018]. 2006. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Nimrod_(computing).
[17]
Edward De Bono. Edward de Bono’s Super Mind Pack: Expand Your Thinking
Powers with Strategic Games & Mental Exercises. Dorling Kindersley, 1998.
[18]
DeepMind and Blizzard open StarCraft II as an AI research environment. Deep-
Mind and Blizzard open StarCraft II as an AI research environment. [Online;
accessed 11-July-2018]. 2017. url: https://deepmind.com/blog/deepmind-
and-blizzard-open-starcraft-ii-ai-research-environment/.
[19]
Daniel Clement Dennett. The intentional stance. MIT press, 1989.
[20]
Marie Devaine, Guillaume Hollard, and Jean Daunizeau. “Theory of mind: did
evolution fool us?” In: PloS One 9.2 (2014), e87619.
[21]
Robin Dunbar. Grooming, gossip, and the evolution of language. Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1998.
[22]
Thorsten Engesser et al. “Cooperative epistemic multi-agent planning for im-
plicit coordination”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.02196 (2017).
[23]
Richard E Fikes and Nils J Nilsson. “STRIPS: A new approach to the appli-
cation of theorem proving to problem solving”. In: Artificial intelligence 2.3-4
(1971), pages 189–208.
[24]
OpenAI Five. OpenAI Five. [Online; accessed 11-July-2018]. 2018. url: https:
//blog.openai.com/openai-five/.
[25]
Liesbeth Flobbe et al. “Children’s application of theory of mind in reasoning
and language”. In: Journal of Logic, Language and Information 17.4 (2008),
pages 417–442.
[26]
Chris D Frith and Uta Frith. “Interacting minds–a biological basis”. In: Science
286.5445 (1999), pages 1692–1695.
[27]
Helen L Gallagher and Christopher D Frith. “Functional imaging of ‘theory of
mind’”. In: Trends in cognitive sciences 7.2 (2003), pages 77–83.
[28]
Gerd Gigerenzer and Reinhard Selten. Bounded rationality: The adaptive tool-
box. MIT press, 2002.
[29]
Eugene F. Grant and Rex Lardner. The Talk of the Town. 2017. url: https:
//www.newyorker.com/magazine/1952/08/02/it.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
63
[30]
Sprite (computer graphics). Sprite (computer graphics) — Wikipedia, The Free
Encyclopedia. [Online; accessed 11-July-2018]. 2004. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Sprite_(computer_graphics).
[31]
Matthew Hausknecht et al. “A neuroevolution approach to general atari game
playing”. In: IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games
6.4 (2014), pages 355–366.
[32]
Andreas Herzig, Emiliano Lorini, and Faustine Maffre. “A poor man’s epistemic
logic based on propositional assignment and higher-order observation”. In: In-
ternational Workshop on Logic, Rationality and Interaction. Springer. 2015,
pages 156–168.
[33]
Damian Isla and Bruce Blumberg. “New challenges for character-based ai for
games”. In: AAAI Spring Symposium on AI and Interactive Entertainment, Palo
Alto, CA. 2002.
[34]
AlphaGo versus Ke Jie. AlphaGo versus Ke Jie — Wikipedia, The Free Ency-
clopedia. [Online; accessed 9-July-2018]. 2017. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/AlphaGo_versus_Ke_Jie#cite_note-9.
[35]
Kevin Knight. “Are many reactive agents better than a few deliberative ones?”
In: IJCAI. Volume 93. 1993, pages 432–437.
[36]
Kurt Konolige and Nils J Nilsson. “Multiple-agent planning systems”. In: AAAI.
Volume 80. 1980, pages 138–142.
[37]
John E Laird. “Using a computer game to develop advanced AI”. In: Computer
34.7 (2001), pages 70–75.
[38]
Raúl Lara-Cabrera et al. “Game artificial intelligence: challenges for the scien-
tific community”. In: (2015).
[39]
Joel Lehman and Risto Miikkulainen. “General video game playing as a bench-
mark for human-competitive ai”. In: AAAI-15 Workshop on Beyond the Turing
Test. 2015.
[40]
Lars Lidén. “Artificial stupidity: The art of intentional mistakes”. In: AI game
programming wisdom 2 (2003), pages 41–48.
[41]
Micah O Mazurek. “Social media use among adults with autism spectrum dis-
orders”. In: Computers in Human Behavior 29.4 (2013), pages 1709–1714.
[42]
Micah O Mazurek, Christopher R Engelhardt, and Kelsey E Clark. “Video
games from the perspective of adults with autism spectrum disorder”. In: Com-
puters in Human Behavior 51 (2015), pages 122–130.
[43]
James McPartland and Ami Klin. “Asperger’s syndrome.” In: Adolescent medicine
clinics 17.3 (2006), pages 771–88.
[44]
Ben Meijering et al. “I do know what you think I think: Second-order theory
of mind in strategic games is not that difficult”. In: Proceedings of the Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. Volume 33. 33. 2011.
==PAGE:74==
64
Bibliography
[45]
Henrike Moll and Michael Tomasello. “Cooperation and human cognition: the
Vygotskian intelligence hypothesis”. In: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London B: Biological Sciences 362.1480 (2007), pages 639–648.
[46]
Vito Morreale et al. “Reasoning about Goals in BDI Agents: the PRACTION-
IST Framework.” In: WOA. Citeseer. 2006.
[47]
Ingrid Nunes, CJPD Lucena, and Michael Luck. “BDI4JADE: a BDI layer on
top of JADE”. In: ProMAS 2011 (2011), pages 88–103.
[48]
Marc Pauly. “A modal logic for coalitional power in games”. In: Journal of logic
and computation 12.1 (2002), pages 149–166.
[49]
Alexander Pokahr, Lars Braubach, and Kai Jander. “The jadex project: Pro-
gramming model”. In: Multiagent Systems and Applications. Springer, 2013,
pages 21–53.
[50]
David Premack and Guy Woodruff. “Does the chimpanzee have a theory of
mind?” In: Behavioral and brain sciences 1.4 (1978), pages 515–526.
[51]
Anand S Rao and Michael P Georgeff. “Modeling rational agents within a BDI-
architecture.” In: KR 91 (1991), pages 473–484.
[52]
Donald Rodriguez-Ubeda et al. “An Extended Reasoning Cycle Algorithm for
BDI Agents”. In: ().
[53]
Stuart Rusell and Peter Norvig. “Artificial intelligent: A modern approach”. In:
(2003).
[54]
Yoav Shoham and Moshe Tennenholtz. “On social laws for artificial agent soci-
eties: off-line design”. In: Artificial intelligence 73.1-2 (1995), pages 231–252.
[55]
Herbert A Simon. “Models of bounded rationality and other topics in eco-
nomics”. In: Collected papers (1982).
[56]
T.C. Sottek. The world’s best Dota 2 players just got destroyed by a killer AI
from Elon Musk’s startup. [Online; accessed 11-July-2018]. 2017. url: https:
//www.theverge.com/2017/8/11/16137388/dota-2-dendi-open-ai-elon-
musk.
[57]
Version2 vs. ITU’s StarCraft AI: Deep learning giver en helt anden spiloplevelse.
Version2 vs. ITU’s StarCraft AI: Deep learning giver en helt anden spilo-
plevelse. [Online; accessed 11-July-2018]. 2017. url: https://www.version2.
dk/artikel/version2-skarpere-end-deep-learning-1081651.
[58]
SSCAIT. [SSCAIT] Student StarCraft AI Tournament & Ladder. [Online; ac-
cessed 11-July-2018]. 2011. url: https://sscaitournament.com/.
[59]
StarCraft. StarCraft — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. [Online; accessed
11-July-2018]. 2007. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/StarCraft.
[60]
Hans Van Ditmarsch. “Knowledge games”. In: Bulletin of Economic Research
53.4 (2001), pages 249–273.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
65
[61]
Rineke Verbrugge. “Logic and social cognition”. In: Journal of Philosophical
Logic 38.6 (2009), pages 649–680.
[62]
Field of view. Field of view — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. [Online; ac-
cessed 12-July-2018]. 2003. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Field_
of_view.
[63]
Oriol Vinyals et al. “Starcraft ii: A new challenge for reinforcement learning”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04782 (2017).
[64]
Ioannis Vlahavas and Dimitris Vrakas. Intelligent techniques for planning. IGI
Global, 2005.
[65]
Deborah M Ward, Karen E Dill-Shackleford, and Micah O Mazurek. “Social
Media Use and Happiness in Adults with Autism Spectrum Disorder”. In: Cy-
berpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 21.3 (2018), pages 205–209.
[66]
Hermanes Albertus de Weerd. If You Know What I Mean. [Agent-Based Models
for Understanding The Function of Higher-Order Theory of Mind]. Harmen de
Weerd, 2015. isbn: 9789036781282.
[67]
StarCraft2AI Wiki. StarCraft2AI. [Online; accessed 11-July-2018]. 2017. url:
http://wiki.sc2ai.net/Main_Page.
[68]
StarCraftAI Wiki. StarCraftAI. [Online; accessed 11-July-2018]. 2015. url: http:
//www.starcraftai.com/wiki/Main_Page.
[69]
Heinz Wimmer and Josef Perner. “Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and
constraining function of wrong beliefs in young children’s understanding of de-
ception”. In: Cognition 13.1 (1983), pages 103–128.
[70]
Michael Winikoff. “JACK™intelligent agents: an industrial strength platform”.
In: Multi-Agent Programming. Springer, 2005, pages 175–193.
==PAGE:76==
