==PAGE:1==
Rh-Catalyzed Asymmetric
Hydroformylation in Biphasic Ionic
Liquid System
Kathrine Schiørring Steen Jensen - s134485
Supervisors:
Jakob Maximilian Marinkovic
Nanette Zahrtmann
Anders Riisager
Master thesis at Centre for Catalysis and Sustainable Chemistry
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
January 29th to July 29th 2018, 35 ECTS
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This project investigates hydroformylation of norbornene in a biphasic system with ionic
liquid and an organic solvent, using a catalyst complex with rhodium and a chiral diphos-
phite ligand and syngas. The reaction parameters investigated are organic solvent, tem-
perature, precursor, total pressure and partial pressure. Furthermore the recyclability of
the catalyst and ionic liquid is investigated.
Yield, conversion an enantiomeric excess are obtained by NMR and GC-MS and leaching
of rhodium is investigated by ICP.
This report explains relevant theory in the ﬁrst chapter, and next experimental proce-
dures and analysis is described. After that it moves on to discussing results. Here it
is found that the highest enantiomeric excess obtained is 70%. It is furthermore found
that enantiomeric excess is aﬀected by organic solvent, precursor and temperature, lower
temperatures improvint it. The better yields are found at higher total pressure, higher
H2 partial pressure, higher temperature and longer reaction time until a certain point.
Recycling the ionic liquid was found to give much lower yield and enantiomeric excess.
After concluding this, suggestions for future work are made.
This is a master project done from 29th of January to 29th of July 2018, corresponding
to 35 ECTS points.
i
==PAGE:4==
.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
During this project I have received much advice and assistance from several people, which
I am very grateful for.
This includes all of my supervisors who have discussed obtained results with me and
adviced me on how to proceed. Nanette Zahrtmann and Jakob Maximilian Marinkovic
have introduced me to and helped me with all experimental work. Nanette Zahrtmann
and Kasper Enemark-Rasmussen have helped me by picking a suitable method for NMR
analysis.
All NMR samples have been measured by Nanette Zahrtman and the ICP
analysis presented in this report is also performed by her. The di-phosphite ligand used
in this project is synthesized and sent here by Anton Cunillera Martin in Tarragona,
Spain, who has also provided very useful advice and discussion during this project.
iii
==PAGE:6==
.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
[BMIM][Tf2N] = 1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(triﬂuoromethanesulfonyl)imide
CDCl3 = Deuterated chloroform
CO = Carbon monoxide
CO2 = Carbon dioxide
Conv = Conversion
ICP = Inductively Coupled Plasma
ee = enantiomeric excess
Eq-Ax = Equatorial-Axial
Eq-Eq = Equatorial-Equatorial
Ext = External
Extr = Extracted
GC-MS = Gas Chromatography–Mass Spectrometry
H2 = Hydrogen
Hr = Hour
Hrs = Hours
Int = Internal
ml = Milliliter
MHz = Megahertz
mmol = Millimol
N-Extr = non-extracted
NMR = Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
p = Pressure
[Rh(acac)(CO)2] = (Acetylacetonato)dicarbonylrhodium(I)
Std = Standard
µl = microliter
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Hydroformylation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Side Reactions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Isomers of Hydroformylation Products
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.3
Mechanism of Hydroformylation with Bidentate Ligands
. . . . . .
5
1.2
Syngas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3
Catalysts Used in Hydroformylation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3.1
Metals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3.2
Ligands
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Ionic Liquids and Biphasic Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.4.1
Solubility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.4.2
Biphasic Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.4.3
Mass Transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.5
Diﬀerent Approaches and Their Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.5.1
Asymmetric Hydroformylation in Biphasic System with Ionic Liquid 15
1.5.2
Asymmetric Hydroformylation of Norbornene
. . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
Experiments and Analysis
17
2.1
Chemicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
Experimental Procedure of Catalytic Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4
Analysis of Catalytic Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.4.1
Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS) . . . . . . . . .
23
2.4.2
GC-MS with Chiral Column . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.4.3
Quantitative Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.5
Analysis Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.5.1
Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
vi
==PAGE:9==
2.5.2
Comparison of External and Internal Standard . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.5.3
Blank Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.5.4
Extraction Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
2.5.5
Evaporation of Norbornene From Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
2.5.6
NMR of Norbornene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
2.6
Insecurities of Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3
Results and Discussion of Catalytic Studies
46
3.1
Organic Solvents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.2
Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.3
Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.4
Partial Pressure Ratio
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.5
Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
3.6
Precursor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
3.7
Recycling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4
Conclusion
68
5
Future work
69
References
71
A Figures
74
B Tables
76
vii
==PAGE:10==
.
viii
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
In this project, asymmetric hydroformylation of the substrate norbornene in a biphasic
system consisting of an organic solvent and an ionic liquid using a catalyst complex with
rhodium and a chiral diphosphite ligand under syngas is investigated.
In this introduction chapter general hydroformylation, as well as asymmetric hydroformy-
lation is introduced and common side reactions, isomerism and the mechanism are ex-
plained. Next the components of the system; syngas, the metals and ligands used and
ionic liquids are addressed.
Finally diﬀerent approaches of asymmetric hydroformyla-
tion in biphasic ionic liquid systems and asymmetric hydroformylation of the substrate
norbornene are summarized.
1.1
Hydroformylation
Hydroformylation, which is also called oxo synthesis, is a reaction where the double bond
of an alkene is carbonylated to form an aldehyde with one more carbon than the initial
alkene, as seen in Figure 1. The carbonylation happens by an addition of one carbon
monoxide, CO, and one hydrogen, H2, usually in the form of syngas. [1][2]
Figure 1: Hydrofomylation reaction. [2]
The ﬁrst to discover hydroformylation was Otto Roelen in 1938 and now, every year, more
than 9 million tons of oxo-products are produced and the most used substrate is propene,
which is the substrate of ﬁgure 1 if the R-group is methyl.[2]
The aldehydes produced are useful starting points that can be converted into many other
functional groups, that are used in production of for example detergents, plasticizers and
lubricants.[3] An overview of some possible reactions of aldehydes are shown in Figure
2. It shows the pathway to amines, carboxylic acids, esters, alcohols and longer chain
alcohols through aldolisation and alkenes of longer chains.
1
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2: Overview of aldehyde reactions.[4]
When the carbonylation happens the aldehyde can be added in several diﬀerent ways
around the double bond, as visible in Figure 1, which leads to diﬀerent both regio and
enantioisomers. Asymmetric hydroformylation, which is the main topic of the experiments
in this project concerns enantioselectivity. Being able to produce only one enantiomer is
useful because some, especially bio applications, such as pharmaceuticals, require a pure
compound, and separating enantiomers is diﬃcult. Aldehydes speciﬁcally are interesting
to produce enantioselectively, because they as shown in Figure 2 give the possibility of
synthesizing several diﬀerent products.[1][2][5]
1.1.1
Side Reactions
Some of the more common side reactions to occur in hydroformylation are shown in Figure
3 below.
2
==PAGE:13==
Figure 3: Possible side reactions of hydroformylation.[6]
The ﬁrst reaction in the Figure 3 is a hydrogenation of the double bond. This happens
when hydrogen reacts with the double bond instead of carbon monoxide.
The second reaction shown is an isomerization of the double bond before the hydroformy-
lation reaction. This changes the position of the aldehyde on the product. This can both
be undesired or useful. When unwanted it results in a diﬀerent product than the needed
one, but it can also be used to for example move an internal double bond towards an
external position to get a linear aldehyde product.
The third shown reaction in Figure 3 is a further reaction of the aldehyde product, where
it reacts with hydrogen and forms an alcohol. This is a cascade reaction.
Fourth and last reaction is an aldol condensation where two aldehyde products react with
each other. [6]
1.1.2
Isomers of Hydroformylation Products
The aldehyde products resulting from hydroformylation can be a mix of several diﬀerent
isomers, as the reaction depending on the substrate has both regio and enantioisomers.
Firstly, the double bond can isomerize as is already shown in Figure 3 in the previous
Section 1.1.1. The regio isomerism is already shown previously in Figure 1. The case in
the ﬁgure is a terminal alkene, and in this case the resulting product will be either linear
3
==PAGE:14==
or branched. If the double bond is not terminal both products would be branched but in
diﬀerent positions.[4]
The substituents on the alkenes have an eﬀect on the regioselectivity. In the case in Figure
1, the branched product showed in the middle of the ﬁgure is preferred if the R group is
electron-withdrawing and the linear product to the right is preferred when the R-group is
an alkyl group. When the double bond is 1,1-disubstituted, that is, two substituents on
the same end of the alkene, so that it is still in some way terminal, the aldehyde will pref-
erentially be formed at the free end. If another substituent is added, so that the double
bond is trisubstituted, the aldehyde will be preferred at the lesser substituted end, simi-
larly to the 1,1-disubstituted case. For 1,2 disubstituded and terminal alkenes that don’t
have alkyl or electron withdrawing substituents, there are no known substrate-dependent
trends like the ones described for the other cases.[2]
Enantioisomers are mirrored products and are present whenever the product is not a lin-
ear aldehyde if two substituents don’t happen to be identical. Enantioselectivity depends
on a combination of the substrate and the catalyst.[2]
Isomerism of norbornenes hydroformylation product
Now the stereoisomerism of the product of norbornenes the substrate used in this project
will be explained.
The product of the hydroformylation of norbornene can have four diﬀerent stereomers
because it has more than one chiral carbon. These four are shown in ﬁgure 4.
Figure 4: Possible isomers resulting from hydroformylation of norbornene.
4
==PAGE:15==
Whether the aldehyde group points towards the 5-membered ring or the 6-membered ring
is denoted by exo and endoforms. The two isomers of the exoform are enantiomers and
so are the two of the endoform.[5]
1.1.3
Mechanism of Hydroformylation with Bidentate Ligands
The mechanism of hydroformylation is the same in organic solvents and in biphasic sys-
tems with ionic liquids.[7] Figure 5 below shows a proposed mechanism with bidentate
ligands, which the ligand used for the experiments in this report is. Each exchange of
ligand is dissociative, as a ligand dissociates and leaves the complex with one ligand less,
before another is associated.[2][8]
Below the steps of the mechanism is ﬁrst explained and next it will be discussed how the
amounts of reactant can inﬂuence the reaction cycle.
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 5: Mechanism of hydroformylation [2]
In step A, a hydrogen molecule adds to the rhodium complex dimer and it separates
into two complexes, each getting one of the hydrogen atoms. The rhodium complex has
two options for ligand organization it can either be equatorial-axial as the left one, with
one ligand coordination site in an equatorial and one in an axial position, or equatorial-
equatorial as on the right with both ligand coordination sites being equatorial.
The
consequence of these two diﬀerent organizations are explained later in section 1.3.2.
In Step B, a CO ligand dissociates from the complex and leaves it with an electron count
6
==PAGE:17==
of 16 and a free coordination site and the complex is now square planar.
This free coordination site is occupied by a substrate alkene in step C, which donates 2
electrons, and brings it to 18. The ligand can now again be coordinated eq-eq or eq-ax.
This is shown as a reversible step in the ﬁgure, but whether it actully is so is not estab-
lished experimentlly.
In step D the hydrogen is transferred to the alkene substrate by migratory insertion. As
seen in the ﬁgure, it can on either end of the double bond. This isomerization happens by
β-hydride elimintion. This is the step that determines the position of the aldehyde, as it
will be on the end of the double bond that the hydrogen is not. In this case the alkene is
terminal, so the one where the hydrogen is added at the internal end of the double bond
will be linear and the other will be branched. The complex is again square planar after
this step.
This is changed again in step E as another CO molecule coordinates to the available
site. Whether the isomerization happens before this step could depend on the pressure of
CO, as a higher pressure of CO could push step E forward. There are now four possible
conﬁgurations, as the two outcomes of the hydrogen being at diﬀerent ends of the double
bond can both have the ligand coordinate eq-eq and eq-ax.
In step F, one of the coordinated CO molecules are added to the substrate by migratory
insertion, to the end of the double bond that the hydrogen is not. This leaves the complex
square planar, but in an equilibrium, step G, where another CO molecule coordinates to
the available site. Again in both eq-eq and eq-ax formation.
Step H exchanges the substrate with hydrogen and the product is formed and the catalyst
can again either meet another substrate for a new reaction cycle or a CO can take the space
and then if following this hydrogen separates from it, the dimer will be formed again.[2][8]
As seen in ﬁgure 5 and explained above, the CO and H2 gas and the amounts of them
inﬂuences the cycle of the reaction.
Steps A and B need to proceed towards the complex numbered 17 for it to be able to
reach with a substrate. It is seen that H2 is necessary for step A to go in that direction,
and that CO must be removed for step B to do so. This means that a higher amount of
H2 and a lower amount of CO could make the rate of reaction higher.
Step E requires CO to proceed in the direction that forms the product, so this step could
proceed faster when more CO is present. Furthermore, this step proceeding faster could
mean less isomerization of the substrate.[2]
Step G is an equilibrium between the form that can proceed to release the product, and
7
==PAGE:18==
a 5-coordinated form with one more CO ligand that cannot. Here more CO would make
the complex that does not proceed more preferred.
In Step H H2 enables the product to be separated and the complex free again, so more
H2 would be expected to increase the rate.
The conclusion of these observations is that based on this mechanism more H2 being
present would be expected to increase the reaction. More CO decreases the rate of two
steps and increases the rate of one, and a higher amount could mean less isomerization.[2]
How the amount of CO overall aﬀects the rate of reaction, depends which step is rate
determining.
1.2
Syngas
The gas used in hydroformylation is a mix of CO and H2 which is also called syngas. This
section describes how syngas is produced, what else it is used for, and in the end other
options than syngas for hydroformylation are mentioned. As with the substrates in the
previous section, the solubility of syngas in ionic liquids will be explained in section 1.4.
Syngas is mainly produced by steam reforming from methane which is found in natural
gas: [9]
CH4 + H2O ⇄CO + 3H2
(1)
The syngas coming from this reaction can also be used in the water gas shift reaction to
produce more hydrogen from the CO and water, which adjusts the composition of the
gas: [9]
CO + H2O ⇄CO2 + H2
(2)
Besides from this and hydroformylation, syngas is also used for synthesizing methanol
and other alcohols and Fischer-Tropsch synthesis where synthetic fuels are made. [9]
Instead of CO, it is possible to use CO2, when ruthenium is used as a catalyst. When CO2
is used instead of CO, CO is formed in-situ by the water gas shift reaction mentioned
before and shown in equation 2, going backwards and the formed CO is used in the
reaction.[4][10]
8
==PAGE:19==
1.3
Catalysts Used in Hydroformylation
1.3.1
Metals
The most used catalysts for this hydroformylation are based on Cobalt and Rhodium,
where Rhodium is being used more and more compared to Cobalt. The Rhodium catalysts
are preferred because they generally have higher activities and require lower pressure and
temperature than Cobalt.[1]
Other metals that have been investigated include, platinum, iridium and ruthenium.[4]
1.3.2
Ligands
The ligands used have much inﬂuence on the selectivity, both regio and enantio of hydro-
formylation.
The regioselectivity leading to a branched or linear product, is aﬀected when using mon-
odentate ligands by the Tolman cone angle and the electron withdrawing properties of
the ligand. With bidentate ligands, the bite angle, aﬀects the selectivity. As mentiones
when the mechanism was explained, bidentate ligands can coordinate either equatorial-
equatorial or axial-equatorial. Figure 6 shows that eq-eq coordination has a bite angle of
120o and eq-ax as a bite angle of 90o. Which one of these bite angles the ligand is closer
to, is the coordination it will prefer, and in this way selectivity is inﬂuenced.[11]
Figure 6: The angles between equatorial ligands on the left and of equatorial and axial
ligands on the right.[11]
The most used type of ligands in hydroformylation have phosphor. Phosphanes and phos-
phites are used more, and phosphonates and phosphinites less.
9
==PAGE:20==
For the ligand to coordinate to the transition metal complex and have a chance to in-
ﬂuence selectivity, it must be switched with the CO that is there. The equilibrium of
whether CO or the ligand is more coordinated is aﬀected both by steric and electronic
properties of the ligand. For bidentate ligands, the distance between the two coordina-
tion points can inﬂuence how strongly it bonds. The CO partial pressure also aﬀects the
equilibrium, as increasing it favors the coordination of CO to the metal complex.
Phosphite ligands increase the reaction rate compared to phosphanes because they have
better electron withdrawing properties, which helps CO dissociate from the transition
metal.[11]
The ligand of this project is a chiral diphosphite, and is shown in ﬁgure 7.
Figure 7: The ligand used for experiments in this project.
This ligand has been tested for asymmetric hydroformylation before, with diﬀerent sub-
strates, and the results reported were; with vinyl acetate substrate dissolved in toluene
and [Rh(acac)(CO)2] using this ligand is reported to give enantiomeric excess up to 68%,
with main isomer being (R) form. Lower temperature and higher ligand/rhodium ratio
increased ee. With the substrate 2,5-dihydrofuran, again in toluene using the same pre-
cursor, it gave enantiomeric excess up to 64% with main isomer being the (S) form. On
this, pressure and partial pressure ratio was reported to inﬂuence ee. With the substrate,
2,3-dihydrofuran, the ee using this ligand, still with same precursor and toluene solvent,
ee of the main regioisomer was 84% with excess of the (R) form. These results show how
the combination of substrate and ligand is important for enantioselectivity.[12]
10
==PAGE:21==
1.4
Ionic Liquids and Biphasic Systems
Ionic liquids consist only of ions, and include by deﬁnition those who are liquid below 100
oC. The are liquid rather than crystalline because the the ions are asymmetric and bulky,
which makes forming a crystal structure more diﬃcult.
They have a relatively high
thermal stability, almost no vapour pressure and most ions have a low charge density
and low molecular interaction. Small amounts of impurities aﬀect properties, which can
aﬀect the useable lifetime of it. For use as a reaction solvent, they are considered less
hazardous than volatile organic compounds which they might be used in place of, as they
are nonvolatile and nonﬂammable. A lot of transition metal complexes are easily dissolved
in ionic liquids, which is useful when they are used as solvents for homogeneous catalysis.
Another useful property of ionic liquids, is the ability to adjust properties, by changing
the structure of cations, anions or both. [1][7][13]
An example of an ionic liquid structure is shown in Figere 8 below. This particular one
is [BMIM][Tf2N], and it is also the one used as a solvent in this project.
Figure 8: Structure of [BMIM][Tf2N].[14]
When using ionic liquids speciﬁcally as a solvent for hydroformylation they are partic-
ularly useful for alkenes with longer carbon chains, as alkenes are more soluble in ionic
liquids than in water.[15] Biphasic hydroformylation with water is used commercially by
Ruhrchemie, but using water is better for short alkenes with 2-5 carbon atoms as longer
ones are not soluble enough.[7]
When ionic liquids are used as a solvent for metal catalysts, it can be a challenge to
determine whether the reaction is homogeneous or heterogeneous. It is both possible that
the catalyst complex is dissolved and working homogeneously and that it is nanoparticles
of the metal. A ﬁrst indicator can be whether the reaction is usually homogeneous or
heterogeneous. In the case of hydroformylation, it is usually homogeneous, so a good
initial guess would be that it also is in ionic liquid. To further investigate the issue, two
options could be to poison the catalyst or consider the kinetics. When poisoning the
11
==PAGE:22==
catalyst, the amount of poisoning agent necessary would give an indication of the nature
of the reaction. If the reaction is heterogeneous only a small amount is necessary because
only a small part of the metal atoms are active. If it is homogeneous, and all metal atoms
are in solution, more poisoning agent is necessary. The kinetics can give an indication
of the nature because surface kinetics have diﬀerent characteristics than homogeneous
kinetics. Another approach is to look for the nanoparticles with various spectroscopic
techniques.[16]
Whether it is homogeneous or heterogeneous is useful to know, since the reason for using
a biphasic system in the ﬁrst place is a hope to have the higher rate and selectivity that
would come with a dissolved homogeneous transition metal complex compared to a het-
erogeneous catalyst.[1]
1.4.1
Solubility
The solubility in ionic liquids of both the catalyst, the syngas, the substrate and the prod-
uct should be considered. Ideally the catalyst should be very well dissolved, the substrate
and gas soluble enough to react and the product not too soluble so it can be separated.
[1][17]
In ionic liquids similar to the one used in this report, [BMIM][Tf2N] CO is generally more
soluble than H2, which has quite low solubility. Furthermore, a longer alkyl chain in place
of the butyl on the cation increased the solublity of both gases compared to a shorter
one. The solubility of H2 and CO gas in [BMIM][Tf2N] is at room temperature and 1
bar given by the Henry coeﬃcients 4500 bar for H2 and 950 bar for CO. [17] The type
of ionic liquid aﬀects the solubility of CO more than that of H2, possibly because of the
dipole moment of CO. This is seen in the right diagram in ﬁgure 9 where the solubility of
H2 is almost the same, but that of CO changes. Besides from this, both gasses are more
soluble in alkenes than in most ionic liquids as ﬁgure 9 also shows, on the right side. [18]
12
==PAGE:23==
Figure 9: Solubility of alkenes, CO and H2 in mmol/l in diﬀerent ionic liquids with
[BMIM]+ cation and other solvents. [16]
Some of the things that have an eﬀect of alkene solubility in ionic liquids are the length
of the alkene chain and temperature. In [BMIM][Tf2N] the solubility is higher for longer
chains, at least when looking at the short alkenes ethene, propene and 1-butene. But
as ﬁgure 9 shows, 1-hexene is more soluble than 1-octene. For these same short-chain
substrates mentioned before the solubility is higher in [BMIM][Tf2N] at lower temper-
ature. The ionic liquid itself also matters, and the eﬀect of some common anions on
alkene solubility in [BMIM] and other imidazolium type ionic liquids is [BF4]−< [PF6]−
< [CF3SO3]−< [CF3CO2]−< [Tf2N]−, with [Tf2N]−giving the highest solubility of these.
[17][18]
The solubility of aldehydes in [BMIM][Tf2N] increases with chain length. [17]
1.4.2
Biphasic Systems
This project used a liquid-liquid biphasic system, and how this generally would work is
explained here.
The purpose of a biphasic system is to be able to recycle a homogeneous catalyst easily.
The system consists of two solvents, a catalyst complex, a reaction substrate, and as re-
action proceeds, also a product. The two liquids should be immiscible, and the catalyst
should be soluble in only one of them. The solubility of the catalyst can be modiﬁed by
the choice of ligand. The substrate should be soluble enough in the phase that has the
13
==PAGE:24==
catalyst. This solubility can limit the rate of reaction if it is too low. The product should
be more soluble in the other phase that does not have the catalyst, so that it can easily
be separated and the phase with the catalyst can easily be recycled.[1]
Besides from the ionic liquid/organic combination used in this project and the water
mentioned earlier, another type of biphasic system that has been investigated for hydro-
formylation is ionic liquid and supercritical CO2.[1]
1.4.3
Mass Transfer
In hydroformylation with a biphasic ionic liquid system, mass transfer is both limiting
of transfer between organic and ionic liquid phase and of the gas into ionic liquid.[13]
One way to improve this, could be changing the components of the system, for example
using an ionic liquid in which either substrate, syngas or both are more soluble in, as is
addressed above.[18]
Another approach is trying a diﬀerent reactor.
It can happen that when scaling up
experiments, higher rates of reaction are found than in laboratory experiments, because a
reactor with more eﬃcient mixing or stirring. This of course only applies, if mass transfer
is limiting the rate. A type of stirrer design that should be able to increase the gas intake
into ionic liquids is shown in ﬁgure 10 below.[13]
Figure 10: Stirrer designed to maximize gas intake into ionic liquids. [13]
The reason this stirrer should work well is the shape of the part that would be stirring
the solution, in particular the holes in the blades.[13]
14
==PAGE:25==
1.5
Diﬀerent Approaches and Their Results
Here, reported results of asymmetric hydroformylation using ionic liquid biphasic systems
and asymmetric hydroformylation of norbornene are summarized. The focus is on the
obtained enantiomeric excess, rather than yield and conversion.
These two focus points are chosen because they are interesting for this project. The focus
on the norbornene substrate is relevant, because diﬀerent catalyst systems give diﬀerent
results with diﬀerent substrates.
1.5.1
Asymmetric Hydroformylation in Biphasic System with Ionic Liquid
The ligand (R)-BINAP (2,2’-bis(diphenylphosphino)-1,1’-binaphthyl), which is a biden-
tate chiral phosphine ligand has been used together with a [Rh(acac)(CO)2] precursor in
a biphasic system consisting of the ionic liquid [BMi][BF4] and toluene for hydroformyla-
tion of vinyl acetate. The same ligand was also used after being sulfonated, then called
(R)-BINAPS. The highest enantiomeric excess found with the biphasic system was 55.7
using (R)-BINAP and 55.1 using (R)-BINAPS. Furthermore, when using the sulphonated
ligand, the ee was found to be higher with a higher ligand/Rh ratio, lower temperature
and total pressure between 1 and 4 MPA had no notable eﬀect. The catalyst system was
recycled 6 times and the (R)-BINAP didn’t show a drop in ee until the 6th run, and with
the (R)-BINAPS, the enantiomeric excess was almost constant for all 6 runs. The ionic
liquid [BMI][BF6] was also tested and using this, ee was found to be lower.[19]
The ionic liquid [MBMIM][TfO] which is chiral, has been used with a [Rh(acac)(CO)2]
precursor and a TPPTS ligand in hydroformylation and has resulted in enantiomeric
excess up to 12%, with the S isomer being the main product. The ligand TPPTS is not
chiral, and neither is the precursor, so in this case the ionic liquid should be responsible
for enantioselectivity.[20]
1.5.2
Asymmetric Hydroformylation of Norbornene
Diphosphine ligands with diﬀerent alkyl groups have been used with rhodium precursor
Rh4(CO)12 in benzene at 80 atm, for hydroformylation of norbornane and leading to enan-
tiomeric excess of 2.3-4.8%. In this study a PtCl2 was also investigated with a pressure
of 70 atm CO and 170 atm H2 and a resulting ee of 5.1%.[21]
15
==PAGE:26==
The chiral ligand ABDPP, 1,6-anhydro-2,4-bis(diphenylphosphino)pyranose, based on d-
glucose was used with rhodium, in toluene with 6 MPa syngas. The result was up to 25%
ee. With this same system, higher ee of up to 93 and 68% were found with vinyl acetate
and styrene substrates.[22]
An enantiomeric excess of 92 was reported with the di-phosphine ligand TangPhos. This
was done with rhodium precursor [Rh(acac)(CO)2], toluene and room temperature. In
the same study other similar phosphine ligands were screened, a trend was shown that
more rigid, sterically hindered and electronrich ligands resulted in better enantioselectiv-
ity. The results of using other norbornene-like substrates ([2.2.1]-bicyclic oleﬁns]) were
mixed, with some gaining the same ee and some much lower.[23]
Lastly the use of hemispherical di-phosphites with the [Rh(acac)(CO)2] precursor in
toluene was reported to give an enantiomeric excess of up to 61. These ligands are quite
bulky and form chelate complexes where rhodium sits in a molecular pocket. Diﬀerent
di-phosphites were found to result in diﬀerent enantiomers, and temperature and pressure
were found to inﬂuence the result. At the same pressure, with the same di-phosphite, of
three temperatures 30, 55 and 80oC, 55oC resulted in the highest ee.[24]
16
==PAGE:27==
2
Experiments and Analysis
This chapter treats the experiments and analysis of the project.
First chemicals and
equipment is listed. Next the procedure used for catalytic studies is explained and after
that the analysis used for this. After this some experiments performed with the aim of
understanding the catalytic studies and their results better are described along with the
results of them. Finally insecurities of the methods used are explained.
2.1
Chemicals
The ligand used is a diphosphite, 3,5-Bis-O-[(3,3’:5,5’-tetra-tert-butyl-1,1’-biphenyl-2,2’-
diyl)phosphite]-6-O-isopropyl-1,2-O-isopropylidene-α-D-glucofuranose and it is synthesized
by Anton Cunillera Martin. The synthesis method is shown in ﬁgure 11. The starting
material is 1,2:5,6-O-di-isopropylideneglucofuranose, which is commercially available.[12]
Figure 11: Ligand synthesis.[12]
Not all the ligand used in this project is synthesized at the same time, but in diﬀerent
batches. Which batch is used for which reaction number is listed in table 1. The reaction
numbers are also in the tables showing the results.
17
==PAGE:28==
Table 1: Ligand
Ligand
Batch
Reactions
1
1-3
2
4-15
3
16-22, 43-46, 59, 64
4
23-28, 30-42
5
50-59, 60-63, 65-68
6
69-76
Table 2 lists other chemicals used.
18
==PAGE:29==
Table 2: Chemicals used for experiments and analysis.
Chemicals
Name
Molecular
formula
Company
Lot
number
Purity
CAS. no.
Norbornene
C7H10
Aldrich
Chemistry
MKBQ5062V
99
498-66-8
[Rh(acac)(CO)2] Rh(CO)2(C5H7O2)
Aldrich
Chemistry
MKBZ5229V
98
14874-82-9
Carbon
monoxide
CO
AGA
-
-
630-08-0
Hydrogen
H2
AGA
-
-
1333-74-0
[BMIM][NT2f]
C10H15F6N3O4S2
Aldrich
Chemistry
BCBT3791
≥98
174899-83-3
Decane
C10H22
Aldrich
Chemistry
BCBT7135
≥95
124-18-5
Cyclohexane
C6H12
Sigma-
Aldrich
SZBE083AV
≥99.9
110-82-7
Pentane
C5H12
Sigma-
Aldrich
SZBD080SV
≥99
109-66-0
Heptane
C7H16
Riedel-de
Ha¨en
STBG5155V
≥99
142-82-5
Dodecane
C12H26
Sigma-
Aldrich
MKBQ2068V
≥99
112-40-3
Deuterated
CDCl3
Aldrich
STBF7446V
99.8%
865-49-6
chloroform
STBH0552
D
Naphthalene
C10H8
Aldrich
03516AH
99+
91-20-3
2-norbornane
methanol
C8H14O
Aldrich
Chemistry
MKBT7029V
97
5240-72-2
Ethyl acetate
C4H8O2
Sigma-
Aldrich
STBG9085
99.7
141-78-6
19
==PAGE:30==
2.2
Equipment
This section lists the equipment used and what it is used for.
Glovebox
The glovebox has an atmosphere of argon with an overpressure set to 4-7 mbar. It is used
to add everything except gas into the autoclave.
Autoclave
For catalytic studies, an in-house constructed autoclave is used. This autoclave is shown
in Figure 12 below. It is used with a teﬂon liner in the bottom part and a teﬂon o-ring
between the two parts.
Figure 12: The autoclave used for catalytic studies. A: full view of closed autoclave. B:
manometer. C: inside of bottom part of autoclave and magnet. D: inside of top part of
autoclave.
Shaker
The shaker used is a KEBO-Lab REAX 2000. It is used for shaking when extracting the
reaction product from the ionic liquid and the reduction product formed when reducing
the reaction product for determining enantiomeric excess.
GC-MS
Two diﬀerent GC-MS are used.
One is Agilent Technologies 6850 Network GC System with Agilent Technologies 5975C
VL MSD. This one is used for determining the conversion of reaction. The column used
is HP-5MS 5% methyl siloxane capillary 30.0m x 250µm x 0.25µm.
The other is Agilent Technologies 7890A GC System with Agilent Technologies 5975C
20
==PAGE:31==
VL MSD with Triple-Axis Detector. This one is used to determine enantiomeric excess of
reaction product. The column used with this is a Beta DEXT M 120 Fused Silica capillary
column 30 m x 0.25 mm x 0.25 µm.
NMR
For NMR analysis a Bruker ultrashield 400 plus is used with a Bruker ACS-60 autosam-
pler. The wavelength used for H-spectra is 400 MHz.
Microwave
An Anton Paar Multiwave 3000 Microwave Reaction System is used to decompose sam-
ples before ICP.
ICP
Thermo scientiﬁc iCAP 7000 Series ICP spectrometer is used for ICP analysis.
2.3
Experimental Procedure of Catalytic Studies
This section will explain the procedure and details of how the investigated catalytic studies
are carried out.
First step is to weigh the chemicals and add them into the bottom part of the autoclave.
This is done inside a glovebox with an argon atmosphere because the ligand that is used
is sensitive to air. The order of the addition is ﬁrst the [Rh(acac)(co)2] and the ligand,
and then the ionic liquid. After adding this, the mixture is shaken a little bit to disperse
the solids in the ionic liquid. Next half of the organic solvent is added followed by the
norbornene substrate and the other half of the organic solvent. Last thing to be added is
the internal standard.
The amounts used are based on experiments done previously at CSC, and are listed in
Table 3. The internal standard is not included here but it is addressed later.
21
==PAGE:32==
Table 3: Amounts of chemicals used for reaction.
Amounts
[Rh(acac)
(co)2]
Ligand
Norbornene
Ionic
liquid
Organic
solvent
mmol
0.005
0.01
1.25
-
-
Mass [mg]
1.3
10.4
117.7
-
-
Volume [ml]
-
-
-
2
2
The amounts in Table 3 are not always what is practically measured, but the exact weight
is recorded. Table 4 shows the average, standard deviation, maximum and minimum of
the actual amounts. The Ionic liquid and the organic solvent is added with a pipette and
the same one is used each time to keep the amount as consistent as possible.
Table 4: Amounts of chemicals used for reaction.
Actual amounts
[Rh(acac)(CO)2]
Ligand
Norbornene
Average [mg]
1.2 ± 0.2
9.9 ± 0.9
120 ± 6
Max [mg]
1.6
12
136.9
Min [mg]
0.5
7.3
103.9
As only the bottom part of the autoclave ﬁts into the glovebox, a watch glass is placed
on top of it, both while measuring to keep anything from falling into it and to minimize
evaporation of the solvent, and when taking it out of the glovebox to try to keep less air
from entering it. Besides from this, the autoclave is closed as fast as possible also to avoid
air getting in. Some air will get in though, as the top of the autoclave is hollow.
Next step is to add the gas to the autoclave. CO and H2 are added separately, with
CO being added ﬁrst. When the CO gas is connected to the autoclave the connector is
opened shortly three times, to make sure that only CO and not air which could be in the
connector is added. Next the reactor is ﬂushed three times by adding 2-3 bars of CO and
evacuating it. The autoclave is then ﬁlled to a certain pressure of CO. After this, the
H2 is added and the connector is opened three times as for the CO to avoid adding air,
22
==PAGE:33==
before adding the needed pressure of H2.
Next, the stirring and any temperature control of the reaction is started, and the reaction
runs for 2 hours before the stirring is stopped again, and the gas is let out of the autoclave.
After the reaction the product is extracted from the ionic liquid to the organic phase.
First the two phases of the reaction mixture are separated. Next another two milliliters
of organic solvent, the same as used in the reaction, is added to the ionic liquid and this
is shaken for around a minute. This is then separated and added to the organic solvent
which was initially separated from the ionic liquid. This addition, shaking and separating
is repeated three times, so in the end there are 8 milliliters of organic solvent. When the
organic solvent is separated from the ionic liquid, it is transferred to a measuring cylinder.
This is done because it is necessary to know the exact volume for the analysis.
2.4
Analysis of Catalytic Studies
This section describes the procedures for the analysis methods used for all catalytic stud-
ies.
Analysis is done on both the 8 milliliters of organic solvent and 2 milliliters of ionic liquid
which result from the extraction of the product.
The enantiomeric excess of the product is measured using GC-MS with a chiral column.
The conversion is determined by measuring how much norbornene is left in the organic
phase by both NMR and GC-MS (with a non-chiral column). The NMR measurements of
the organic phases are also used to ﬁnd the extractable yield of the product. Furthermore
the ionic liquid is also analysed by NMR to ﬁnd out how much norbornene and product
remains in it after extraction to determine the total yield and conversion.
The details of these analyses are described in the following sections.
2.4.1
Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS)
GC-MS is a combination of gas chromatography and mass spectrometry. First a sample is
separated by the gas chromatography and then the mass spectrometer determines which
compound it is.[25]
GC-MS is used to determine the conversion of norbornene by measuring the amount of
norbornene left in the organic solvent after reaction. The method used is summarized in
23
==PAGE:34==
Table 5 below
Table 5: Overview of method used when determining conversion with GC-MS.
GC-MS method
Initial temperature
40 oC
Ramp
10 oC/min
Target temperature
180 oC
Hold time
1 min
Injection mode
Splitless
Flow
1 ml/min
To ﬁnd the conversion, an internal standard is used to quantify the amount. The inter-
nal standard is used rather than an external standard because the GC-MS measures the
amount by concentration and this can be aﬀected by the organic solvents evaporating.
The internal standards used are other organic compounds, similar to the solvent, to avoid
aﬀecting the reaction but still diﬀerent enough to distinguish them clearly in the GC-MS.
A list of what is used as standards in each solvent is shown below in ﬁgure 6. Dodecane
could not be used in decane because the used decane is 95% pure and contains a small
amount of all linear alkanes from heptane to dodecane, therefore cyclohexane is used in-
stead.
Table 6: Overview of standards used with diﬀerent solvents.
Standards
Solvent
Standard
Decane
Cyclohexane
Cyclohexane
Dodecane
Pentane
Dodecane
Heptane
Dodecane
For each standard, a calibration curve is made. Figure 13 below show the calibration
curves of decane with cyclohexane used as standard and of cyclohexane with dodecane
24
==PAGE:35==
used as standard. Calibration curves of pentane and heptane with dodecane standards are
not displayed as these solvents are only used twice each, as will be seen later in chapter
3. The curves and the resulting equation are expected to be the same when the same
standard is used in diﬀerent solvents.
The calibration curves are prepared by measuring approximately what corresponds to
a third of 0, 20, 40, 60, 80 and 100% of the concentration used in reaction into 50 ml
volumetric ﬂasks and adding standard to this with a ﬁnnpipette in an amount that cor-
responds to the concentration being 10 mol% of how much norbornene is used during
reaction. The volumetric ﬂasks are ﬁlled with the solvent and these standard solutions
are measured 3 times by GC-MS using the same method that is used when measuring the
samples. Only a third of the amounts are used because norbornene is not soluble in the
solvents at the full amounts. This means that when measuring the solvent from reaction,
it will be diluted 3 times.
Figure 13: Calibration curves for calculating conversion of norbornene.
The resulting equations of these calibration curves are for decane with cyclohexane stan-
dard:
y = 94.9x
(3)
This has a R2 value of 0.99.
The equation of the cyclohexane calibration curve with dodecane standard is:
y = 20.5x
(4)
With a R2 value of 0.98.
Figure 13 also displays the epoxide that is found in the norbornene. It is shown as the
ratio of the corrected area of the epoxide divided by that of the standard, in the same
25
==PAGE:36==
way as norbornene. This epoxide is an impurity of the norbornene, most likely formed by
reacting with the oxygen of the air. The presence of this means that the calibration curves
are not entirely reliable because the theoretical and real concentrations of norbornene do
not match.
As mentioned earlier, when the organic solvent containing the reaction product is mea-
sured, it needs to be diluted 3 times. This is done by transferring 0.5 ml of the solution
to a 2 ml vial, and adding another 1 ml of new solvent. After measurement, of which ex-
amples are shown below in Figure 14, the corrected area of the standard and norbornene
are found. The ratio of these two is put in place of the y in equation 4 or 3 and the
found x value will be the concentration. With concentration and the original volume of
the organic solvent after reaction and extraction the total amount of norbornene left in
solution after reaction can be found.
Figure 14: Examples of GC-MS used to ﬁnd conversion. The compounds of the peaks
are: A=cyclohexane, B=norbornene, C=octane, D=nonane, E=epoxide of norbornene,
F=decane, G=aldehyde product, H=undecane, I=dodecane.
The amounts of internal standard added are 26 µl of cyclohexane or 55 µl of dodecane.
26
==PAGE:37==
2.4.2
GC-MS with Chiral Column
A GC-MS with a chiral column is used to determine the enantiomeric excess of the
products.
Before this can be done, the product must be reduced from an aldehyde to an alcohol, as
shown in ﬁgure 15.
Figure 15: Reduction of the aldehyde to an alcohol using NaBH4.
To reduce the product, 100-200 µl of the organic phase containing the product and 2-3
small spoons of NaBH4 is added to 1 ml methanol. This is closed and stirred with a
magnet overnight, and while it does this it produces some gas. After this, around 1.5 ml
water is added to eliminate any remaining NaBH4, by the following reaction:
NaBH4(aq) + H2O →4H2 + NaBO2(aq)[26]
(5)
The formed alcohol is then extracted two times with 2 ml ethyl acetate, by shaking one
minute with a shaker. The ethyl acetate with the reduced product is measured by GC-MS
with a chiral column, using the method summarized in Table 7.
27
==PAGE:38==
Table 7: Parameters of the method used when determining enantiomeric excess.
GC-MS method using chiral column
Initial temperatire
100 oC
Ramp 1
2 oC/min
Target temperature 1
110 oC
Hold time 1
10 min
Ramp 2
8 oC/min
Target temperature 2
150 oC
Hold time 2
5 min
Injection mode
Splitless
Flow
3.5 ml/min
After measurement, the result looks like the example shown in ﬁgure 16. The two peaks
are from diﬀerent enantiomers. This is known from a test done previously at CSC, where
a racemix mixture was measured and two peaks were observed. The GC-MS analysis can
not be used to assign which peak is from which isomer.
Figure 16: Example of GC-MS to determine enantiomeric excess.
28
==PAGE:39==
To ﬁnd the enantiomeric excess from the two peaks shown in ﬁgure 16, they are inte-
grated manually and the resulting peak area is recorded. The enantiomeric excess is then
calculated as shown here:
ee =
area(B)
area(A) + area(B) −
area(A)
area(A) + area(B)
(6)
To test the precision of the method, the reaction mixture of two reaction was measured
several times. The reduction of each was performed two times separately, and of the
resulting two solutions of reduced product in ethyl acetate, two samples were taken out.
This gives 4 measurements of each, and the results were of the one 36, 35, 35 and 35%
and of the other 38, 38, 39 and 38%.
2.4.3
Quantitative Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
NMR is used to determine the yield and conversion by measuring the amount of nor-
bornene and the aldehyde product in both the ionic liquid and the organic phase after
reaction.
To quantify the amounts half of the volume of either of the two phases are taken out and
an external standard is added. The external standard used is napthalene and this one is
chosen because it is soluble in the solvents and its peaks do not overlap with the peaks
of interest. The amount of napthalene used is around 10 mol% of the norbornene added
before reaction. It is measured directly into the vial that it will be dissolved in for the
measurement to be as accurate as possible.
When the napthalene is dissolved, 50 µL of the organic phase or 25 µL of the ionic liquid
is added to an NMR tube along with 500 µL of CDCl3.
The measurement method uses 16 scans, a relaxation time of 30 seconds which is deter-
mined by a T1 study and solvent suppression. This is made by Nanette Zahrtmann and
Kasper Enemark-Rasmussen.
To analyse the resulting spectrums, the following steps are done:
1. Reference peak of CDCl3 is set to 7.26.[27]
2. Whittaker Smoother base line correction is used.
3. If necessary, manual phase correction is done.
4. Peaks of interest are integrated manually.
29
==PAGE:40==
The chemical shifts of the peaks used to determine conversion and yield are listed in Table
8 along with the number of protons associated with each. A spectrum with these indicated
is shown in Figure 17. The peaks between 7.4 and 7.5 ppm are also from napthalene but
they have a little bit of overlap with a small peak, barely visible in the ﬁgure, so the others
around 7.85 ppm are used. A spectrum of the ionic liquid phase is shown in Appendix A,
Figure 35. In this ﬁgure in the appendix, there is no peak from norborne, and this is the
same in every ionic liquid phase measured.
Table 8: Chemical shifts and number of protons associated with peaks used to determine
yield and conversion from NMR.
NMR
Compound
Aldehyde
Napthalene
Norbornene
Chemical shift [ppm]
9.64
7.85
6.00
Number of protons
1
4
2
The chemical shift of the aldehyde peak, shows that the product has the exo-form of the
possible isomers showed earlier in Figure 4 in Section 1.1.2.[28] Because they are diastere-
omers, the endo and exo-forms have diﬀerent chemical shifts, but the enantiomers do not,
so it is not possible to distinguish between those from this.[29]
30
==PAGE:41==
Figure 17: Typical NMR spectrum of the organic phase. (Reaction number 73-1.)
The integrals found from the spectra like the one in Figure 17 are used to ﬁnd the amounts
of norbornene and the aldehyde in the sample. Since the amount of napthalene added
is known, the ratio between the integrals can be used to ﬁnd the amount of the other
compounds with Equation 7 shown here:
n(a)
integral(a)
H(a)
=
n(b)
integral(b)
H(b)
(7)
a and b are in place of napthalene and either norbornene or the aldehyde. H indicates
the number of protons belongs to the integral, and substituting the product. This gives
the amount in half the solution, and by doubling it and relating it to the amount of
norbornene added the conversion and yield can be found.
2.5
Analysis Experiments
The purpose of the experiments and tests in this section, is to either test and see if the
analysis methods are reasonable or to investigate something that helps the analysis and
31
==PAGE:42==
interpretation of the results. For this reason the results of these tests are presented here
together with the description of the tests rather than in the results chapter so they can
be used to interpret the results.
ICP is used to investigate leaching, and as it is only done for a few selected samples, it is
presented in this section. Catalytic experiments using internal and external standards for
GC-MS are used to compare the two types, and other catalytic experiments are used to
compare a reference to a blank experiment. Extractio of the product from ionic liquid is
investigated, and so is the evaporation of norbornene from solution. Finally norbornene
is studied by NMR.
2.5.1
Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP)
ICP, Inductively Coupled Plasma, analysis is performed to investigate how much rhodium
is in each of the two phases of the system after reaction.
The preparation and measurement of samples by ICP described in this section, are done
in collaboration with my supervisor Nanette Zahrtmann.
For sample preparation, 100 µl of the reaction mixture is taken out and to this 4 ml aqua
regia, and this is heated in a microwave at 600 W for 10 minutes. Next it is diluted to
250 ml with 3 wt% nitric acid.
The measurement of the samples is done axially at the wavelength 369 nm. This wave-
length was used because it showed the least background overlap and better repetivity.
Each sample is measured 3 times.
To quantify the measurements, a calibrationcurve is made from solutions with a known
rhodium concentrations of; 0.0256, 0.0513, 0.0769, 0.1029 and 0.1285 mg/L. This calibra-
tion curve is shown in ﬁgure ﬁgure 18 below.
32
==PAGE:43==
Figure 18: Calibration curve used for ICP.
The resulting equation which will be used to determine the amount of rhodium in the
samples is:
y = 5597.4x + 244.76
(8)
and it has an R-value of 0.9914.
The results of the ICP analysis are shown in table 9.
Table 9: Results of ICP analysis of selected samples.
ICP results
pCO:pH2
Yield
No.
Solvent(a)
Ionic
liquid(a)
% in
solvent
% in ionic
liquid
Decane
4:16
high
41
0.5 ± 0.5
1.7 ± 0.09
22.7
77.3
16:4
low
58
2.2 ± 0.2
1.4 ± 0.2
61.1
38.9
Cyclohexane
4:16
high
42
1.5 ± 0.5
0.6 ± 0.1
71.4
28.6
16:4
low
56
2 ± 0.1
0.5 ± 0.1
80
20
(a) µmol in entire sample ± standard deviation.
For the ICP analysis, samples with a relatively low and high yield were chosen, as this
might have an importance. Two samples using decane and two using cyclohexane are
33
==PAGE:44==
measured as the solvent should inﬂuence how much rhodium is in each phase.
The results show that high experiments with a high yield had a higher percentage of
rhodium still in the ionic liquid compared to those with a low yield. When using decane
less rhodium leached to the organic phase than when using cyclohexane.
Experiment number 41 looks much better than the other experiments in terms of less
leaching, but it also has a quite high standard deviation in the measurement of the sol-
vent, so it is possible that it is not entirely as much better as it looks, or even better.
2.5.2
Comparison of External and Internal Standard
In the GC-MS analysis where conversion is found, a comparison is made between the
use of external and internal standard. This is done both to know if both quantify the
conversion equally well and if adding the standard inﬂuences the results. Besides from
GC-MS, NMR is also used to determine conversion, with an external standard, to help
the comparisen.
Table 10 and ﬁgure 19 both show the conversion determined by each of the three methods.
As these two show, this is investigated in both decane and cyclohexane, and in each two
reactions are done using internal and two using external standard for the GC-MS.
Figure 19: The conversion of some experiments performed at the same conditions
determined by GC-MS with both internal and external standard and by NMR with an
external standard.
From the ﬁgure and the table it is visible that when using NMR the results have less
variation than when using GC-MS. Comparing the results obtained from using the GC-
MS, the conversion found from external standard is lower than that found with an internal
34
==PAGE:45==
standard in both solvents.
Table 10 also lists the yield and enantiomeric excess, and there is some variation, but not
more than what is found in the experiments of this report, so the internal standard is
assumed not to inﬂuence the results much.
Table 10: Overview of measured conversion using diﬀerent standards and yield and
enantiomeric excess.
Conv. GC-MS
Int. Std. [%]
Conv. GC-MS
Ext. Std. [%]
Conv. NMR
Ext. Std [%]
Yield
[%]
ee [%]
No.
Cyclohexane
0
18
45
16
54
15
0
31
56
14
58
16
32
0
54
12
65
21
41
0
56
21
60
43
Decane
0
29
58
10
39
14
0
38
59
14
52
17
46
0
62
27
46
20
37
0
58
12
47
23
Based oﬀthese results, it is decided to do measurements of both GC-MS with internal
standard and NMR with external standard, and to primarily use those from NMR to
interpret the results, because these are more consistent.
2.5.3
Blank Experiment
As there is usually a diﬀerence between yield and conversion in the experiments of this
project, a blank experiments identical to usual experiments in every way except that no
catalyst is added. This is done to learn more about what happens to the substrate. Two
blank experiments are done using both cyclohexane and decane as organic solvents, as
these are the two solvents used the most. These are compared to two repeats of control
experiments, performed under same conditions but with the rhodium precursor and ligand
added. The resulting yield, conversion and the diﬀerence between the two are listed in
table 11 and the diﬀerence and the average diﬀerence is shown in ﬁgure 20.
35
==PAGE:46==
Table 11: Yield, conversion and diﬀerence of the two of blank and control experiments
Blank and control experiments
Type
Yield(a)
Conversion
Diﬀerence
Reaction
[%]
[%]
[%]
no.
Cyclohexane
control
14
54
40
21
27
56
29
43
blank
0
33
33
47
0
35
35
49
Decane
control
31
62
31
20
15
58
43
23
blank
0
33
33
29
0
36
36
48
(a) The yield is the combined yield of what is measured in organic phase and ionic liquid.
Figure 20: The diﬀerence between yield and conversion in two repeated experiments and
the average, in two diﬀerent solvents.
During blank experiments, no product is formed. As table 11 lists, the yield, conversion
and the diﬀerence between the two of control experiments varies between equal experi-
ments, and the yield varies more than the conversion. The diﬀerence between conversion
36
==PAGE:47==
is less, and the conversion of the blank experiments are also more similar. The average
”conversion” of the blank experiments are 34% in cyclohexane and 34.5% in decane. Fig-
ure 20 shows that this is similar to the average diﬀerence between conversion and yield of
the control experiments.
Besides from the epoxide which the norbornene is converted to when in contact with
air, no other side-products or impurities are visible in GC-MS or NMR. As described in
section 2.5.6, the epoxide accounts for around 11% of this diﬀerence. Besides from this,
norbornene is volatile and some might be lost both during measuring, reaction and extrac-
tion. Furthermore norbornene is not soluble enough in the used solvents for the amount
used to be entirely soluble. This means that some might be lost on the inside of the
reactor or sitting undissolved in the vial that it is stored in. Finally it is also possible that
other byproducts are formed even if they are not detected by the applied analysis methods.
2.5.4
Extraction Test
To see if the three times extraction that follow the solvent used in the reaction being
separated from the ionic liquid is reasonable, a test is done with ten instead of three
extractions. For this, the ionic liquid used is [BMIM][NTf2] and the organic solvents are
decane and cyclohexane as these are used the most. The reaction is performed the same
way as the other reactions, described in section 2.3, the only diﬀerence being that instead
of combining the solvent into one vial when separating it from the ionic liquid, it is put
into a new vial each time. Figure 21 shows these vials. If the yellow colour is assumed
to be an indicator of the product three times of extraction seem suﬃcient, as both sets
of vials show more or less clear liquid after number four, which is where the extraction is
stopped normally.
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 21: The vials containing each fraction of the extraction and separation of the
solvent from the ionic liquid.
All vials shown in ﬁgure 21 were measured by GC-MS and the results of this are shown in
22 below. The amounts in each are shown by corrected area as no standard is used. No
standard is added because it would not supply any useful extra informations as it is only
possible to quantify norbornene by this because the epoxide and the aldehyde product is
not available to make a calibration curve. The concentration of the components should
still be comparable enough for the purpose of this test between the diﬀerent vials as they
each contain the same volume and it is intended to ﬁnd out if 3 extractions are enough
to remove most of the product or not.
38
==PAGE:49==
Figure 22: The measured corrected area from GC-MS of the fractions of the extraction
tests in decane and cyclohexane.
The left part of ﬁgure 22 showing the test with decane shows that most if not all of the
norbornene is extracted from the ionic liquid after number 4. This is not the case for
the aldehyde product. The extracted amount does decrease a little for each time it is
extracted again but after four a signiﬁcant amount extracted. The epoxide seems to be
mostly extracted after four. The right part of ﬁgure 22 shows the test with cyclohexane.
Here it is seen that norbornene is extracted more easily than the aldehyde.
When comparing the two it seems that cyclohexane is better for extracting the aldehyde
from the ionic liquid. Both solvents extract norbornene much better than the product.
This is consistent with what is seen later in the results, when the ionic liquid is analysed
by NMR, there is some aldehyde left after almost each reaction and never any norbornene.
2.5.5
Evaporation of Norbornene From Solution
This section describes a test of whether norbornene evaporates from solution. It is per-
formed because the analysis shows a gap between what is added before reaction and what
is found in both phases after reaction.
For the test, two vials are used. One vial has 6 ml decane and 340 mg norbornene, which
gives around the same concentration as during reaction, assuming that all the norbornene
is in the organic phase. The other vial only has 6 ml decane. Addition of decane and
norbornene to the vials is done inside the glovebox to copy how the reactions are prepared.
The weight of the two vials is measured after removing them from the glovebox. They are
then left open with the lid placed loosely on top to avoid that anything falls into them
39
==PAGE:50==
but without stopping evaporation. The weight is then measured several times during the
following days.
When measuring the weight the vials are closed while they are moved from the fume-
hoods they are kept in to the scale and back again, which is around 5 minutes. During
this time the evaporation would be slowed down a bit, but as the evaporation is measured
over several days with between an hour and a day between measurements this should not
cause much insecurity.
Figure 23: The loss of mass by evaporation of norbornene.
Figure 23 above shows the change in mass over time, with the starting mass normalized
to zero to show the diﬀerence between the two more clearly. The ﬁgure shows that the
vial containing norbornene loses more mass than the one with only decane.
An overview of the change of mass during the experiment is also shown in table 12. The
table lists the total mass initially measured of the two vials. They are quite close, so it is
assumed that the diﬀerence in evaporation of decane will not have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on the result. This is supported by the diﬀerence in loss of mass between the two vials and
how it is 282% higher than the total loss of the vial not containing norbornene, meaning if
a bit more or less decane had been present in one vial from the start that the evaporation
from this wouldn’t disturb the interpretation of the result.
40
==PAGE:51==
Table 12: Overview of the evaporation of norbornene from decane. (Total mass contains
the vial, norbornene and decane).
Evaporation of norbornene
Vial number
1
2
Mass of norbornene [g]
0.3406
0
Volume of decane [ml]
6
6
Initial total mass [g]
13.5268
13.2193
Loss of mass after 48 hours [g]
0.0528
0.0138
Diﬀerence in loss of mass [g]
0.0390
The diﬀerence in % of the total loss
74
282
Besides from evaporating from the solution, norbornene is not entirely soluble in decane,
in the concentration used for reaction. This is visible in ﬁgure 24 below. Picture A is of
the two vials right after the contents are added. Vial 1 contains the norbornene. Pictures
B and C are taken two days after picture A, and picture B shows that vial 1 doesn’t have
visible amounts of norbornene dispersed in the decane, but some of it as picture C shows
is stuck on the bottom, well enough that shaking doesn’t visibly remove any of it.
Figure 24: A: The two vials right after measurement. B: The two vials after two days
(number 1 was shaken before the picture). C: The bottom of vial 1 after two days (it was
shaken before the picture)
41
==PAGE:52==
The conclusion of this experiment is that norbornene does evaporate from solution at
least if it is not entirely dissolved which is also the case during the reactions of this
project. That means that some norbornene can disappear during reaction. This test
cannot predict the amounts that might disappear as the solution in this case is standing
still with the lid open and the norbornene falls to the bottom and sticks there. During
reaction the solution is in a closed autoclave but stirred, and during extraction the solu-
tion shaken and not in a closed container. The movement of the solution during reaction
could increase the evaporation as norbornene doesn’t have the same chance to stick to
the bottom, and at the same time more time in a closed container could also slow it down.
2.5.6
NMR of Norbornene
The test described in this section, is a NMR measurement of norbornene as it is when it
comes from the container that it is kept in. The purpose is to ﬁnd out how much of the
alkene is oxidized to the epoxide shown in Figure 25 initially.
Figure 25: Norbornene epoxide.
The sample solution is prepared by adding 10 mol% of the norbornene reaction amount of
napthalene, the reaction amount of norbonene and 2 ml of CDCl3 to a vial. This solution
is used to prepare an NMR sample in the same way as described in section 2.4.3. The
area of resulting spectrum that is used to identify the epoxide is showed in Figure 26. A
more full version of the same spectra including the peaks of norbornene and napthalene
can be found in Appendix A.
42
==PAGE:53==
Figure 26: Area of interest of NMR spectrum used to quantify the epoxide impurity in
norbornene.
As the peaks of norbornene and napthalene are already identiﬁed in the section explaining
the general NMR analysis, here, only the part of the spectrum used for identifying the
epoxide is showed. The integrals of napthalene and norbornene are 1 and 4.96 respec-
tively. In Figure 26 two peaks are found at 2.45 and 3.07 ppm. They both belong to 2
H-atoms of the epoxide.[30] Of the two integrals of them 0.26 and 0.28, an average 0.27 is
together with the napthalene and norbornene peaks in equation 7 to ﬁnd the amounts of
each. The result is 87.7% norbornene and 4.8% epoxide of the norbornene initially added.
The remaining 7.5% could be evaporated.
2.6
Insecurities of Methods
This section describes the insecurities of the used methods that can aﬀect the reliability
of the results.
43
==PAGE:54==
Reaction and extraction:
When weighing chemicals in the glovebox, there is a chance of insecurity of the mea-
surements. This is because the glovebox pressure is not constant and that aﬀects the
reliability of the scale. This is mostly a problem when weighing the rhodium precursor,
because only 1.3 mg is needed. The insecurity of the scale when being as careful as pos-
sible is estimated to be at least 0.2 mg, and that is 15%. Of the ligand that is 2% and of
the norbornene it is 0.2%. Besides from the accuracy of the scaling, it is still not possible
to measure the exact amount, so the concentration of all components, and especially the
rhodium precursor will vary.
Evaporation of solvent and sublimation of norbornene is also a cause of insecurity. This
happens while adding to the autoclave, while closing it, when ﬂushing it with CO it
might also happen and ﬁnally when extracting the product from the ionic liquid. The
solvent evaporating changes the concentration both during reaction and for analysis. If
the amount of the solvent is diﬀerent it could aﬀect how much of each component is dis-
solved in each phase.
Most experiments are done at room temperature, and that is not the same everyday, but
generally varies between 22 and 28 oC.
Analysis
The preparation for NMR analysis introduces an insecurity in the transfer of 50% of
either of the phases to a new vial. The insecurity can come from the transfer itself, it is
possible that the amount the pipette is set to is not the exact amount that it transfers.
Furthermore, as the norbornene is not so soluble, the sample taken out might not actually
have half of the norbornene, but less. The insecurity can also come from the solvent, or
the norbornene having evaporated while stored. It is closed with paraﬁlm and kept in a
freezer, but it does need to be out of the freezer long enough to defrost before using it.
The GC-MS analysis to ﬁnd conversion has insecurities of both the calibration curves
made and evaporation. As mentioned in the section where the calibration curves were
presented, there is also epoxide, and it is not sure if the percentage is always the same
as it is formed by reacting with oxygen, so it could change.
Evaporation is an issue
because the vials used for GC-MS are not closed with paraﬁlm when they are placed in
the queue to be measured, and around the GC-MS the temperature is a bit warm, which
increases evaporation. The analysis with GC-MS has the same problem of low solubility
of norbornene making the concentration of a sample taken out less than it should be.
The main insecurity of the GC-MS analysis used to ﬁnd enantiomeric excess is that small
44
==PAGE:55==
peaks resulting from low yield might not be integrated accurately.
45
==PAGE:56==
3
Results and Discussion of Catalytic Studies
This chapter presents the results of the experiments performed. They are given by yield,
conversion, turnover number and enantiomeric excess. The yield is found as the percent-
age of product found out of the amount of substrate added. The conversion is how much
of the starting amount of substrate is not found in the reaction mixture after reaction.
The turnover number is based on the conversion and the amount of rhodium precursor
added, and is moles substrate converted by each mole rhodium per hour.[1] The enan-
tiomeric excess is deﬁned as explained in Section 2.4.2.
A set of standard conditions are set, and parameters will be varied one at a time. The
standard conditions are 2 hours reaction time, total pressure of 20 bar, 1:1 partial pressure
ratio, room temperature, and the component amounts listed in Table 3. Generally two
experiments are done with each set of conditions, with a few exceptions.
The results of each parameter variation is presented in this chapter and they are; organic
solvent, temperature, pressure, partial pressure, time and precursor. In the end some
conditions are picked to recycle the ionic liquid.
Results are presented graphically as bar charts or graphs for an easy overview and with
tables of the most important information for more detailed information, along with ex-
planations discussing them. Furthermore each table (except Tables 13 and 15) will have
an extended version with additional information in Appendix B.
3.1
Organic Solvents
The inﬂuence of the solvent used for the organic phase is explored by using the four
solvents listed in table 13. The solvents are all alkanes and diﬀer in number of C atoms,
and cyclohexane is cyclic, while the other three are linear. The boiling and melting points
are listed in the table and as seen, the boiling point of pentane is 35-36 oC. Because of
this it evaporates fast and after testing it, is found not to be suitable for the experiments
of this project.
46
==PAGE:57==
Table 13: Overview of organic solvents used.
Solvents
Solvent
C atoms
Boiling point[oC]
Melting point[oC]
Ref.
Cyclohexane
6
80.7
4-7
[31]
Decane
10
174
-30
[32]
Heptane
7
98
-91
[33]
Pentane
5
35-36
-130
[34]
Two reactions are done with each solvent at otherwise same conditions. The amounts of
solvents, substrate, precursor and ligand are as listed in table 3. The pressure is 20 bar,
the partial pressure ratio is 1:1, the reaction time is 2 hours and the temperature is room
temperature, around 25 oC.
Results are presented in Figure 27 and Table 14.
Figure 27: Conversion, yield and enantiomeric excess found when using diﬀerent organic
solvents with otherwise same conditions.
As seen in both the ﬁgure and the table the conversion and yield of decane, heptane
and cyclohexane are quite similar. Comparing yield and conversion results of repeats,
conversion of cyclohexane varies more than that of the other two, but yield varies less.
When reading the yield, it is important to keep in mind that it is only the yield that is
extracted, and does not include what is in the ionic liquid. The percentage left could be
diﬀerent due to diﬀerent solubility of the product in the solvents.
The conversion of pentane is measured as the highest, and the diﬀerence between this
47
==PAGE:58==
and the yield is quite high. This is most likely due to the fast evaporation of pentane, as
most of it disappears both during reaction and extraction meaning it probably does not
extract very much from the ionic liquid. This is the main reason for the decision not to
proceed with pentane.
The average enantiomeric excess of cyclohexane and pentane are equal but the separate
results of pentane are 50 and 62, which are so diﬀerent that this result might not be
entirely reliable. The two of cyclohexane are closer at 54 and 58%. The turnover num-
ber in all solvents generally has a higher % variation than the conversion. This is most
pronounced in cyclohexane, where the turnover number of reaction 16 is almost 3 times
as high as that of reaction 15, and the diﬀerence in conversion and also yield is nowhere
near as dramatic. In both decane, heptane and cyclohexane the highest turnover number
of the reaction goes with the lowest yield. This probably indicates that less rhodium has
been added to the ones with the lower yield and higher turnover number. This together
with the less dramatic diﬀerence in yield and conversion compared to turnover (keeping
in mind that numbers of yield and conversion are lower) suggests that how much of the
added rhodium is active could be aﬀected by solubility of it or concentration of substrate
or something diﬀerent again. A possible explanation is also the insecurity of the amount
added and variation in room temperature.
48
==PAGE:59==
Table 14: Yield, conversion, turnover, and ee results when using diﬀerent organic
solvents.
Organic solvents
solvent
Yield(a)
Conversion
Turnover
ee
Reaction
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
no.
Decane
10
58
90
39
14
14
59
76
52
17
Heptane
13
58
82
52
22
18
55
62
47
28
Cyclohexane
16
45
67
54
15
14
56
186
58
16
Pentane
6
95
140
62
18
6
92
119
50
19
(a) The yield is what is extracted into the organic phase.
The results shown here together with the properties shown in ﬁgure 13 are background
for selecting the solvents to proceed with for following experiments. Pentane is as already
mentioned excluded due to too much evaporation. Cyclohexane is preferred because it has
the highest enantiomeric excess. Between heptane and decane, decane is chosen because
there is little diﬀerence of results, and decane has a higher boiling point, meaning it will
evaporate less, which is better for accurate analysis.
In conclusion, both cyclohexane and decane are used for most of the following experiments.
3.2
Temperature
Here the eﬀect of changing the temperature is explored. Using decane as solvent and
besides from the temperature using standard conditions, experiments done at room tem-
perature and 40 oC. The results are listed in table 15.
49
==PAGE:60==
Table 15: Yield, conversion, and ee results when using diﬀerent reaction temperature.
Temperature
Temperature
Yield(a)
Conversion
ee
Reaction
oC
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
no.
40
53
100
38
12
53
100
40
13
Room
27
62
46
20
temperature
12
58
47
23
(a) The yield is what is extracted into the organic phase.
As read in the table, the conversion at 40 oC is 100%. This makes the turnover number
not make sense, and for that reason it is not displayed. Both the conversion and the yield
is higher at 40 oC and the average diﬀerence between the two is also higher at oC. As
the yield does not include what is in the ionic liquid, it is possible that there is more in
the ionic liquid for these than the other because of the higher concentration. The enan-
tiomeric is higher at room temperature than at 40 oC.
Besides from heating and room temperature, an attempt at cooling during the reaction
was made.
This was done with cyclohexane solvent, with a reaction time of 4 hours
and total pressure 20 bar, and ratio 1:1. The cooling was done using an icebath and a
magnetic stirrer, and the temperature was between 3.7-8.5 oC during reaction, with the
lower temperature at the end. The result was 0.6% yield and 31% conversion.
3.3
Pressure
In this section the results of changing the total pressure are shown. Both decane and
cyclohexane organic as organic solvent are used and the only change between experiments
is the total pressure which is 5, 10, 15 and 20 bar. Results are shown in Figure 28 and
Table 16.
50
==PAGE:61==
Figure 28: Yield, conversion, enantiomeric excess and turnover number found when
changing total pressure. The yield labeled as total is the combined of what is found in
organic and ionic liquid phases and the other is what is in the organic phase.
First thing to notice is that enantiomeric excess does not change much with pressure and
that it is higher when cyclohexane is used. Since the reaction should be happening in
the ionic liquid, the solvent would not be expected to have so much eﬀect. It is possible
that the solvents have diﬀerent solubility of the precursor or the ligand and that they are
either dissolved in diﬀerent phases to some degree, making less of the right complex form,
or even both in the organic solvent, making the reaction happen here.
With both solvents, the variation in enantiomeric excess is quite low, except at 5 bar,
where it is higher for both. This could be due to the slightly lower yield at this pressure
making it less reliable. At 10 bar in decane, the yield is as low as at 5 bar, and here more
diﬀerence than at higher pressures is seen in ee, but less than at 5 bar. It is also possible
that it is a coincidence that these experiments are less similar, as 14% yield should not be
51
==PAGE:62==
too little to measure ee or that there is a diﬀerent explanation. At 20 bar in cyclohexane,
the yield of reaction no 43 is almost twice that of reaction 21. A diﬀerence of 60 and 65
is shown in ee.
Looking at the yield, both the extractable and total is shown in the ﬁgure. Generally
there is not much change in this, but higher pressure does increase the yield. Turnover
is similar to yield, with a slight increase at higher pressure. The conversion of reaction
33 stands out as much lower than the rest, yield and turnover number are more similar
to the corresponding number 25. enantiomeric excess does also have some variation in
this reaction. Turnover does not follow any clear trend besides from a a general slight
increase with pressure. The possible reasons for this are the same as described in the
solvent section.
52
==PAGE:63==
Table 16: Yield, conversion, turnover, and ee results of varying pressure in two diﬀerent
solvents.
Pressure
Pressure
Yield(a)
Conversion
Turnover
ee
Reaction
[bar]
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
no.
Cyclohexane as organic solvent
20
14
54
85
65
21
27
56
79
60
43
15
21
44
55
55
26
20
53
55
53
30
10
28
47
66
59
27
18
44
62
60
34
5
19
52
63
70
44
13
37
60
59
46
Decane as organic solvent
20
31
62
69
46
20
15
58
82
47
23
15
17
53
74
45
24
21
54
62
45
32
10
14
42
55
46
25
14
29
49
51
33
5
15
52
70
56
45
13
48
50
47
50
(a) The yield is the combined yield of what is measured in organic phase and ionic liquid.
3.4
Partial Pressure Ratio
Here the partial pressure of the reaction is varied. First both CO and H2 are varied at
the same time while keeping the total pressure constant at 20 bar, showed in Figure 29
and Table 17. Next, one partial pressure is varied at a time, using argon to still keep the
total pressure constant, shown in Figure 30 and Tables 18 and 19.
53
==PAGE:64==
Except for partial pressure, all other conditions are kept constant as described at the start
of the results chapter.
Figure 29: Yield, conversion, enantiomeric excess and turnover number resulting from
changing CO and H2 pressure at the same time. The x-axis shows CO partial pressure,
and the H2 partial pressure is what is missing to reach 20 bar.
The yield of the experiments varying both partial pressures at the same time show that
a lower CO partial pressure and a higher H2 partial pressure increases the yield. This
follows what is expected from the mechanism shown at the start of the report. The yield
is higher when the organic solvent is decane.
Another point to notice about the yield, is that as both extractable and total yield is
displayed, it is seen that as expected from the extraction test done, more product is left
54
==PAGE:65==
in the ionic liquid when decane is used.
The variation in yield is very high in decane at partial pressure of CO of 4 bar, but the
ee is exactly the same for the two repeats. The same tendency of much higher variation
in yield than ee is seen for CO partial pressures of 10 and 13 bar and in cyclohexane at
10 bar. This could indicate that rate and selectivity are not decided by the same factors.
Conversion and turnover number is higher at lower CO and higher H2 partial pressures.
The conversion follows an odd pattern with the pressure variation, especially in cyclohex-
ane at 4, 6.5, 10 and 13 bar CO, where the variation is low, and the variation of results
would be a less likely cause.
Enantiomeric excess is much higher when using cyclohexane until 10 bar CO, and then at
13.5 bar they are similar, and at 16 bar switched. The enantiomeric excess with decane
is similar at 4, 6.5, 10 and 16 and slightly rising with higher pressure, but that at 13 bar
CO is lower. At 16 bar there is only one though, so the rise in ee after the decrease at
13 bar might not be reliable. In cyclohexane the ee is higher at CO partial pressures 4,
6.5 and 10 bar and lower at the higher CO partial pressures. It slows a slight increase
from from 4 to 10 bar, and then after the drop at 13 again a slight increase at 16 bar
CO. As in decane it was again only possible to determine ee for one of the experiments
done at 16 bar CO. A suggestion for an explanation for the change of ee is that the co-
ordination of the ligand to the complex could be aﬀected by the partial pressures of the
two gasses, in some way makes it easier or harder for it to be coordinated in the right way.
55
==PAGE:66==
Table 17: Yield, conversion, turnover, and ee results of varying partial pressures of CO
and H2. Reaction time is 2 hours.
Results of variation of partial pressure
pCO:pH2
Yield(a)
Conversion
Turnover
ee
Reaction
[bar]
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
no.
Organic solvent cyclohexane
16:4
11
48
57
41
53
6
38
60
-(b)
56
13:7
7
41
70
37
51
8
38
60
34
52
10:10
14
54
85
65
21
27
56
79
60
43
6.5:13.5
29
54
61
52
35
27
55
68
54
36
4:16
44
72
84
53
39
38
74
76
50
42
Organic solvent decane
16:4
8
38
64
-(b)
57(c)
11
41
47
45
58
13:7
22
58
65
35
54
12
52
73
31
55
10:10
31
62
69
46
20
15
58
82
47
23
6.5:13.5
36
64
75
46
37
41
71
111
43
40
4:16
23
60
88
43
38
46
87
95
43
41
(a) The yield is the combined yield of what is measured in organic phase and ionic liquid.
(b) The enantiomeric excess could not be determined because the yield is too low.
(c) Reaction 57 contained more cyclohexane (internal standard) than it should.
56
==PAGE:67==
Figure 30: Results of changing one partial pressure at a time while keeping the total
pressure constant. On the left pH2 is changed and on the right pCO. The solvent in all
these experiments is cyclohexane.
57
==PAGE:68==
The ﬁgure just displayed, Figure 30, shows the change of one partial pressure at a time,
with two diﬀerent partial pressures of the other gas, while the total is kept constant,
using argon when necessary. The reason that there is two diﬀerent partial pressures kept
constant of the non-varied gas, is that it is not possible to get the range from 4 to 16 bar
with the other gas at 10, which is the partial pressure usually referred to. An additional
experiment that would be nice to add would be 4 bar partial pressure each of CO and H2
and then the rest argon, as it would let one of the series in each graph have 3 points.
The conversion plot on the left is a almost a straight line, which suggests that partial pres-
sure of H2 is what matters, rather than that of CO. At the same time, the turnover plot
right under it does not show the same straight line. The conversion is a percentage of the
added substrate, and the turnover relates the conversion to the added rhodium precursor.
This means that the diﬀerence from the conversion to the turnover is how much rhodium is
present in the solution. As seen in Table 4, the added amounts of rhodium precursor, and
substrate too, varies quite a bit. This indicates that the limiting factor here is the partial
pressure of H2 more than the rhodium and the partial pressure of CO. This is to some
degree supported by the conversion plot on the right, where each graph is a constant H2
partial pressure. Both the pH2=4 and pH2=10 graphs are quite close to constant despite
the variation in CO pressure. This also shows that high CO pressure is not necessarily
limiting of the conversion, as the results of the variation of both partial pressures could in-
dicate. It does seem that it might limit the yield a bit at pH2=10 though, but reaction 43,
is similar to the other set, so if this happens to be the more accurate of the two it does not.
The enantiomeric excess does not have any clear dependence on just one partial pressure,
as the conversion and yield does, which indicates that both partial pressures inﬂuence
it. On the left graph, the yellow pCO=4 is not inﬂuenced by the partial pressure of H2
changing, but the red pCO=10 is. It is possible of course that the magnitude of H2 also
has an inﬂuence as they only overlap at pH2=10. On the right graph, there seems to be a
maximum around pCO=10 at both H2 pressures. At a higher pH2, higher pCO increases
the ee, but at lower pH2 a hither pCO decreases it. The highest enantiomeric excess is
found at equal partial pressures of 10 bar each CO and H2.
58
==PAGE:69==
Table 18: Yield, conversion, turnover, and ee results of varying partial pressure.
Partial pressure
pH2
Yield(a)
Conversion
Turnover
ee
Reaction
[bar]
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
no.
pCO=10 bar
4
8
38
55
49
62
4
6
33
47
45
63
10
14
54
85
65
21
10
27
56
79
60
43
pCO=4 bar
10
29.5
53
66
48
60
10
25.5
48
62
52
61
16
44
72
84
53
39
16
38
74
76
50
42
(a) The yield is the combined yield of what is measured in organic phase and ionic liquid.
59
==PAGE:70==
Table 19: Yield, conversion, turnover, and ee results of varying partial pressure.
Partial pressure
pCO
Yield(a)
Conversion
Turnover
ee
Reaction
[bar]
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
no.
pH2=10 bar
4
30
53
66
48
60
4
26
48
62
52
61
10
14
54
85
65
21
10
27
56
79
60
43
pH2=4 bar
10
8
38
55
49
62
10
6
33
47
45
63
16
11
48
57
41
53
16
6
38
60
-(b)
56
(a) The yield is the combined yield of what is measured in organic phase and ionic liquid.
(b) The enantiomeric excess could not be determined because the yield is low.
3.5
Time
This sections shows results from changing the time of reaction in Figure 31 and Table 20.
This is done only using cyclohexane as a solvent because previous experiments showed
slightly better and more consistent results with this. All conditions and reaction amounts
are the same except for the time. Reaction times of 1, 2, 4, 8 and 16 hours are used.
60
==PAGE:71==
Figure 31: Yield, conversion, enantiomeric excess and turnover found after diﬀerent
reaction times, with otherwise same conditions.
The yield is observed to increase until 8 hours and then decrease at 16. The increase of
yield is less than linear which is expected as the decrease in substrate concentration as
the reaction proceeds would lower the rate. It is also possible that deactivation of the
catalyst complex could contribute.
The decrease at 16 hours is less reliable because it is only repeated once rather than twice
as the rest of the experiments, and no conclusions should be made without repeating it.
Possible explanations for what made the yield go down and be lower than what should
have been formed after 8 hours should still be considered though. One is a further reac-
tion of the product. None was found in GC-MS or NMR, but if it is not soluble, it could
still have been formed. The reaction of the product with hydrogen to form an alcohol is
an option. This alcohol has been available to analyse with GC-MS and it did show up
in the chromatogram without overlapping with any solvent peaks, so it is reasonable to
assume that this reaction did not happen. The product could also have reacted with itself
in an aldol condensation, forming a product with twice as many carbon atoms and an
aldehyde group. This product might not be soluble enough that samples taken out of the
61
==PAGE:72==
reaction mixture for NMR and GC-MS analysis to contain it. Finally, after performing
this reaction, some residue was observed in the top of the autoclave, and this could be an
explanation. It could either be substrate, product or side product. Since the yield found
at 8 hours is higher than at 16, it is less likely that the substrate being at the top of the
container is the explanation for decrease in yield, than the other two.
The diﬀerence in total and extractable yield seems to follow the magnitude of yield with-
out being aﬀected by the time, so there is no indication that anything happens to either
solvent over time that aﬀects solubility.
The conversion at 8 hours is already close to 100%, and until then it increases in a less
than linear form in the same way as the yield.
The average enantiomeric excess does not show much variation in the ﬁgure, but there
is a diﬀerence of 16% from the lowest measured at 8 hours to the highest measured at 2
hours reaction time. At the same time if one looks at reactions number 69, 43, 67/68, 72
and 57, picking one reaction at each time, the enantiomeric excess of these are 57, 60, 58,
56 and 57 and show barely any variation except for a slight maximum at 2 hours.
It could have been expected that the ee would increase as the complex of rhodium and
ligand is formed in situ, and more time would let more form and increase the ﬁnal per-
centage of the right isomer formed. It is also possible that the catalyst would not be
stable for a longer reaction time, and that this would cause ee to decrease. This eﬀect
could be found in the increase from 1 to 2 hours and then the decrease after that, but is
not very pronounced, and the variation between measurements at the same time is too
high to conclude something like this.
Turnover goes down as expected, as it follows the decreasing slope of the conversion.
As also discussed earlier, the turnover of most reaction sets vary much more than the
conversion, again suggesting that amount of rhodium is not the main factor inﬂuencing
conversion. Maybe the solubility of it is limited, and adding more does not increase the
rate of reaction. Of course it should still be kept in mind that the measured amount of
rhodium used to calculate the conversion might not be very accurate.
62
==PAGE:73==
Table 20: Yield, conversion, turnover, and ee results of varying reaction times.
Results of variation of reaction time
Time
Yield(a)
Conversion
Turnover
ee
Reaction
[hrs]
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
no.
1
2
24
52
-(b)
66
6
31
108
57
69
2
14
54
85
65
21
27
56
79
60
43
4
43
61
45
58
67
45
76
78
58
68
8
68
95
25
49
65
73
98
37
56
72
16
36
100
22
57
70
(a) The yield is the combined yield of what is measured in organic phase and ionic liquid.
(b) The enantiomeric excess could not be determined because the yield is too low.
3.6
Precursor
This section presents the results of trying a diﬀerent precursor. This precursor is cationic,
and is expected to be more soluble in the ionic liquid. Judging visually when adding it,
that does seem to be the case. The structure of the precursor used for all other experiments
(Acetylacetonato) dicarbonylrhodium (I) and the cationic one Bis(1,5-cyclooctadiene)
rhodium(I) tetraﬂuoroborate are both shown in Figure 32. Results are shown in Fig-
ure 33 and Table 21.
63
==PAGE:74==
Figure 32: The two diﬀerent precursors used.[35][36]
As Figure 33 and Table 21 show, both yield, conversion, turnover number and enan-
tiomeric excess are lower when using the cationic precursor.
An interesting point to
notice is that the turnover number of both repeats is exactly the same when using it.
This could suggest that the amount of the precursor inﬂuences the rate more when using
this one or that it is more soluble.
Figure 33: Conversion, yield and enantiomeric excess found when using diﬀerent
rhodium precursors with otherwise same conditions.
If this cationic precursor is really more soluble than the other the reason for the lower
yield, conversion and enantiomeric excess could be that the groups on it don’t exchange
with the ligand added as well as the neutral precursor. Another possible reason could be
that the neutral precursor dissolves more in the organic phase and is less limited by mass
transfer than the cationic. If this is the case ICP analysis and/or recycling experiments
with the cationic precursor in addition to those of the neutral one presented in the next
section could help investigate this.
64
==PAGE:75==
Table 21: Yield, conversion, turnover, and ee results using two diﬀerent precursors.
Results of using diﬀerent precursors
Precursor
Yield(a)
Conversion
Turnover
ee
React.
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
no.
[Rh(acac)(co)2]
14
54
85
65
21
27
56
79
60
43
Bis(1,5-cyclooctadiene)
7
31
39
52
74
rhodium(I)
tetraﬂuoroborate
11
38
39
57
76
(a) The yield is the combined yield of what is measured in organic phase and ionic liquid.
3.7
Recycling
This section presents the resulting yield, conversion, enantiomeric excess and turnover
number of recycling the ionic liquid phase.
The recycling is done by, after extracting the product and separating the organic phase
from the ionic liquid of the ﬁrst reaction, to add new organic solvent and substrate into
the autoclave (not in the glovebox), connect the gas and run in the same way as the ﬁrst
reaction.
Three steps of recycling are done, and this is repeated twice. Reaction time is 2 hours
and organic solvent used is cyclohexane. All other conditions are the standard conditions
previously described. Results are shown in Figure 33 and Table 22.
65
==PAGE:76==
Figure 34: Yield, conversion, enantiomeric excess and turnover numbers found when
recycling the ionic liquid. 73 and 74 are reaction numbers.
The results show that both yield, conversion, enantiomeric excess and turnover decrease
with more repeats. The yield at 2 repeats is a bit insecure though, due to the low yield
of 3%.
These results make sense when keeping in mind the results of the ICP analysis, where it
was found that a large part of the rhodium was leached to the organic phase and would
then not be available in the second and third run of this recycling.
Besides from the leaching of rhodium the shaking of the vials during extraction could
contribute to degrading the ligand as it is sensitive to oxygen and there is air inside the
vial when this is done.
Although the numbers are so low that it might not be meaningful, the point that yield
and conversion become more similar in the second and third run than the ﬁrst, could be
because the amount of catalyst soluble and retaining in the catalyst is the same.
66
==PAGE:77==
Table 22: Yield, conversion, turnover, and ee results of recycling the ionic liquid phase.
The ionic liquid is recycled 3 times and this is repeated twice.
Results of recycling the ionic liquid phase
Repeat
Yield(a)
Conversion
Turnover
ee
Reaction
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
no.
1
10
40
55
61
73-1
2
3
33
46
57(c)
73-2
3
1
29
43
-(b)
73-3
1
8
32
49
63
74-1
2
3
27
38
53(c)
74-2
3
1
27
41
-(b)
74-3
(a) The yield is what is extracted and found in the organic phase.
(b) The enantiomeric excess could not be determined because the yield is low.
(c) This is a bit insecure due to the low yield.
67
==PAGE:78==
4
Conclusion
During this project, the asymmetric hydroformylation of the substrate norbornene in a
biphasic ionic liquid system with rhodium and a chiral di-phosphite catalyst has been
investigated by varying several parameters.
Choice of organic solvent was found to have an inﬂuence, with cyclohexane showing better
enantiomeric excess.
Lowering the temperature resulted in an increase in enantiomeric excess and a decrease
of yield.
The investigated range of total pressure inﬂuences the yield, but not the enantiomeric
excess.
Variation of partial pressure showed an increase in yield with increased H2 partial pres-
sure, and an interesting depence of enantiomeric excess of this.
The yield was found to increase with increasing reaction time, but only to a certain point,
after which the yield would decrease again. Although this remains to be conﬁrmed by a
repeated experiment.
Comparing precursors, the neutral [Rh(acac)(CO)2] gave better results than the cationic
Bis(1,5-cyclooctadiene) rhodium(I)tetraﬂuoroborate.
Recycling of the ionic liquid turned out to not work so well with the investigated system,
and rhodium was found to leach from the ionic liquid.
The maximum enantiomeric excess achieved was 70%, and of the investigated factors,
those who inﬂuence enantiomeric excess notably are; organic solvent, temperature and
precursor.
Although the yield did decrease with decreasing pressure, even at as low a pressure of
5 bar, a reasonable yield for the short reaction time was obtained. The yield was found
to be aﬀected most by temperature, partial pressure ratio and reaction time, and to a
smaller degree total pressure and precursor.
68
==PAGE:79==
5
Future work
In this chapter, future experiments that could be interesting to perform are listed and
discussed.
Firstly it could be useful to repeat the 16 hour reaction time experiment which was not
repeated, to conﬁrm whether the yield does decrease over time. If this is conﬁrmed, the
reaction time could be further investigated between 4 and 8 hours. This could be useful
because conversion almost reached 100% at 8 hours, and if the aldehyde yield goes down
with time, a higher yield might be found before 8 hours.
The temperature variation would be interesting to explore further in terms of cooling. As
it was found that lower temperature gave a higer yield. For this, higher reaction times
would probably be useful, as lower temperature also decreases yield.
An elaboration of the analysis could be nice, to determine which enantiomer is in excess.
This could possibly be done by investigating the optical rotation of the product. A chal-
lenge of this is that impurities make this method unreliable.[29]
As the recycling experiments did not show very good results, it would be interesting to
try and improve them. One option is to change parts of the system, such as the solvents
or to use the cationic precurser which might be more soluble in the ionic liquid. If the
components of the system are kept the same, possible options for improvement could be
to add argon to the vial that holds the solution before shaking it during extraction. As
the ligand is sensitive to oxygen, it might be degraded during the shaking if there is air
inside it. It is possible that the ligand aﬀects the solubility of the metal complex, and
if it is degraded it might leach more, as found by the ICP analysis. To explore this, it
could be interesting to look for the ligand in both phases by NMR, both to see if it is
in both phases or only one, and also to see if it is intact. If the ligand helping solubilize
the rhodium is the case, a longer reaction time of recycling experiments or an incubation
time before reaction, might also prevent leaching as it gives the complex more time to
form. The concentration of rhodium precursor or the ratio of organic solvent and ionic
liquid might also be interesting to try to avoid leaching, as it is possible that the rhodium
precursor is not entirely soluble in the amounts used. Increasing the ionic ligand/organic
solvent ratio could also help more catalyst stay in ionic liquid, but it might also slow
down the reaction if the product accumulates in the ionic liquid when there is less organic
solvent for it to go to.
Besides from improving recycling, other combinations of ionic liquids and organic solvents
are interesting to explore, because of the solubility of the components in either phase.
As increasing the ligand/precursor ratio in other cases has shown to increase enantiomeric
69
==PAGE:80==
excess, this could be interesting to try for this system.[19][12]
As enantiomeric excess is dependent on the ligand-substrate combination, it could be in-
teresting to try out a diﬀerent substrate to see if the result would be similar.
Finally it might be interesting to explore a lower total pressure as a milder condition
might be nice. The yield did go down with lower pressures but not so dramatically, and
combining it with a higher H2/CO pressure ratio, which showed higher yields, could pos-
sibly make up for it.
70
==PAGE:81==
References
[1]
J. Hagen, Industrial catalysis. Wiley-vch, 2015.
[2]
A. Cunillera, C. Godard, and A. Ruiz, ”Asymmetric Hydroformylation Using Rhodium”
in ”Rhodium Catalysis”. Springer International Publishing, 2017.
[3]
L. Gonsalve, A. Guerriero, E. Monﬂier, F. Hapiot, and M. Peruzzini, “The role of
metals and ligands in organic hydroformylation”, Top. Curr. Chem., vol. 342, pp. 1–
47, 2013.
[4]
R. Franke, D. Selent, and A. B¨orner, “Applied hydroformylation”, Chem. Rev.,
vol. 112, no. 11, pp. 5675–5732, 2012.
[5]
J. McMurry, Fundamentals of Organic Chemistry, International Edition. Brooks/Cole
Cengage Learning, 2011.
[6]
A. Behr and A. J. Vorholt, ”Hydroformylation and Related Reactions of Renewable
Resources” in ”Organometallics and Renewables”. Springer, 2012.
[7]
B. Rieger, A. Plikhta, and D. A. Castillo-Molina, “Ionic liquids in transition metal-
catalyzed hydroformylation reactions”, Top. Organomet. Chem., vol. 51, pp. 95–144,
2014.
[8]
M. Weller, T. Overton, J. Rourke, and F. Armstrong, Inorganic Chemistry. Oxford
University Press, 2014.
[9]
I. Chorkendorﬀand J. W. Niemantsverdriet, Concepts of Modern Catalysis and
Kinetics. Wiley-VCH, 2003.
[10]
M. Ali, A. Gual, G. Ebeling, and J. Dupont, “Ruthenium-catalyzed hydroformy-
lation of alkenes by using carbon dioxide as the carbon monoxide source in the
presence of ionic liquids”, ChemCatChem, vol. 6, no. 8, pp. 2224–2228, 2014.
[11]
K. D. Wiese and D. Obst, “Hydroformylation”, Top. Organomet. Chem., vol. 18,
pp. 1–34, 2006.
[12]
A. Gual, C. Godard, S. Castill´on, and C. Claver, “Highly eﬃcient rhodium catalysts
for the asymmetric hydroformylation of vinyl and allyl ethers using c1-symmetrical
diphosphite ligands”, Adv. Synth. Catal., vol. 352, pp. 463–477, 2010.
[13]
P. Wasserscheid and M. Haumann, Catalyst Separation, Recovery and Recycling.
Springer, 2006.
71
==PAGE:82==
[14]
Sigma-Aldrich. (Accessed 20.07.2018). 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis (triﬂuoromethyl-
sulfonyl) imide, [Online]. Available: https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/
product/aldrich/711713?lang=en&region=DK.
[15]
H. F. Ramalho, K. M. C. di Ferreira, P. M. A. Machado, R. S. Oliveira, L. O.
Silva, M. J. Prauchner, and P. A. Z. Suarez, “Biphasic hydroformylation of soy-
bean biodiesel using a rhodium complex dissolved in ionic liquid”, Ind. Crops Prod,
vol. 52, pp. 211–218, 2014.
[16]
N. Yan, “The nature of metal catalysts in ionic liquids: Homogeneous vs heteroge-
neous reactions”, Top. Organomet. Chem., vol. 51, pp. 1–16, 2013.
[17]
M. Haumann and A. Riisager, “Hydroformylation in room temperature ionic liquids
(rtils): Catalyst and process developments”, Chem. Rev., vol. 108, no. 4, pp. 1474–
1497, 2008.
[18]
P. J. Dyson and T. J. Geldbach, Metal catalysed reactions in Ionic liquids. Springer,
2005.
[19]
C. Deng, G. Ou, J. She, and Y. Yuan, “Biphasic asymmetric hydroformylation and
hydrogenation by water-soluble rhodium and ruthenium complexes of sulfonated (r)-
2,2’-bis(diphenylphosphino)-1,1’binapthyl in ionic liquids”, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem.,
vol. 270, pp. 76–82, 2007.
[20]
L. Leclercq, I. Suisse, and F. Agbossou-Niedercorn, “Biphasic hydroformylation in
ionic liquids: Interaction between phosphane ligands and imidazolium triﬂate, to-
ward an asymmetric process”, Chem. Commun., vol. 3, pp. 311–313, 2008.
[21]
G. Consiglio and F. Rama, “Chiral fully alkylated diphosphines as ligands for
rhodium- and platinum-catalyzed hydroformylation”, J. Mol. Catal., vol. 66, pp. 1–
5, 1991.
[22]
S. Lu, X. Li, and A. Wang, “A new chiral diphosphine ligand and its asymmetric
induction in catalytic hydroformylation of oleﬁns”, Catal. Today., vol. 63, pp. 531–
536, 2000.
[23]
J. Huang, E. Bunel, A. Allgeier, J. Tedrow, T. Storz, J. Preston, T. Correll, D.
Manley, T. Soukup, R. Jensen, R. Syed, G. Moniz, R. Larsen, M. Martinelli, and
P. J. Reider, “A highly enantioselective catalyst for asymmetric hydroformylation
of [2.2.1]-bicyclic oleﬁns”, Tetrahedron Lett., vol. 46, pp. 7831–7834, 2005.
[24]
D. S´emeril, D. Matt, and L. Toupet, “Highly regioselective hydroformylation with
hemispherical chelators”, Chem. Eur. J., vol. 14, pp. 7144–7155, 2008.
72
==PAGE:83==
[25]
P. Y. Bruice, Organic Chemistry. Pearson, 2014.
[26]
R. M. Mohring and Y. Wu, “Hydrogen generation via sodium borohydride”, AIP
Conference Proceedings, vol. 671, pp. 90–100, 2003.
[27]
G. R. Fulmer, A. J. M. Miller, N. H. Sherden, H. E. Gottlieb, A. Nudelman, B. M.
Stoltz, J. E. Bercaw, and K. I. Goldberg, “Nmr chemical shifts of trace impurities:
Common labarotory solvents, organics, and gasses in deuterated solvents related to
the organometallic chemist”, Organometallics, vol. 29, pp. 2176–2179, 2010.
[28]
C. Botteghi, S. Paganelli, A. Perosa, R. Lazzaroni, and U.-B. G., “Hydroformylation
of norbornene and 2,5-norbornadiene catalysed by platinum(0)-alkene complexes in
the presence of methanesulfonic acid: Determination of the stereochemistry of the
reaction”, J. Organomet. Chem., vol. 447, pp. 153–157, 1993.
[29]
J. Clayden, N. Greeves, and S. Warren, Organic Chemistry. Oxford University Press,
2012.
[30]
M. Fressancourt-Collinet, B. Hong, L. Leclercq, P. L. Alsters, J. Aubry, and V.
Nardello-Rataj, “Acidic three-liquid-phase microemulsion systems based on bal-
anced catalytic surfactant for epoxidation and sulﬁde oxidation under mild con-
ditions supporting information”, Adv. Synth. Catal., vol. 355, pp. 409–420, 2013.
[31]
Sigma-Aldrich. (Accessed 26.06.2018). Cyclohexane, [Online]. Available: https://
www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/sial/227048?lang=en&region=DK.
[32]
Sigma-Aldrich. (Accessed 26.06.2018). Decane, [Online]. Available: https://www.
sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/aldrich/30570?lang=en&region=DK.
[33]
Sigma-Aldrich. (Accessed 26.06.2018). Heptane, [Online]. Available: https://www.
sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/sial/246654?lang=en&region=DK.
[34]
Sigma-Aldrich. (Accessed 26.06.2018). Pentane, [Online]. Available: https://www.
sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/sial/236705?lang=en&region=DK.
[35]
Sigma-Aldrich. (Accessed 29.07.2018). [rh(acac)(co)2], [Online]. Available: https://
www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/aldrich/288101?lang=en&region=
DK.
[36]
Sigma-Aldrich. (Accessed 29.07.2018). Bis(1,5-cyclooctadiene)rhodium(i) tetraﬂuo-
roborate, [Online]. Available: https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/
aldrich/14694?lang=en&region=DK.
73
==PAGE:84==
A
Figures
Figure 35: Typical NMR spectrum of the ionic liquid phase. (Reaction number 54).
74
==PAGE:85==
Figure 36: Extended version of Figure 26
75
==PAGE:86==
B
Tables
In this appendix, extended tables for all tables in the results chapter, except Table 13 and
Table 15.
76
==PAGE:87==
Table 23: Extended version of Table 16.
NMR
GC-MS
P
Extr.
yield
N-extr.
yield
Total
yield
Conv.
Turnover
Conv.
Turnover
ee
React
T
React
no.
[bar]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
[oC]
20
27
4
31
62
69
46
51
46
23.2
20
12
3
15
58
82
37
52
47
23.5
23
15
14
3
17
53
74
42
59
45
23.9
24
18
3
21
54
62
87
101
45
24.3
32
10
11
3
14
42
55
38
50
46
23.8
25
9
5
14
29
49
39
65
51
24.4
33
5
12
3
15
52
70
43
58
56
25.2
45
11
2
13
48
50
39
40
47
25.3
50
20
12
2
14
54
85
32
49
65
23.8
21
21
6
27
56
79
41
58
60
27
43
15
17
4
21
44
55
45
56
55
25.9
26
17
3
20
53
55
38
40
53
23.7
30
10
16
12
28
47
66
50
75
59
25.4
27
14
4
18
44
62
36
51
60
24.4
34
5
15
4
19
52
63
29
34
70
25.4
44
11
2
13
37
60
16
26
59
24.8
46
77
==PAGE:88==
Table 24: Extended version of Table 17.
Results of variation of partial pressure - Cyclohexane - Extended
NMR
GC-MS
pCO
:pH2
Extr.
yield
N-extr.
yield
Total
yield
Conv.
Turnover
Conv.
Turnover
ee
React
T
React
no.
[bar]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
[oC]
16:4
9
2
11
48
57
26
31
41
27.2
53
5
1
6
38
60
9
14
-(a)
26.3
56
13:7
6
1
7
41
70
13
22
37
24
51
6
2
8
38
60
17
27
34
25.3
52
10:10
12
2
14
54
85
32
49
65
23.8
21
21
6
27
56
79
41
58
60
27
43
6.5:13.5
26
3
29
54
61
45
51
52
24.1
35
24
3
27
55
68
48
59
54
23.8
36
4:16
39
5
44
72
84
72
84
53
25.2
39
35
3
38
74
76
67
69
50
26.4
42
(a) The enantiomeric excess could not be determined because the yield is too low.
78
==PAGE:89==
Table 25: Extended version of Table 17.
Results of variation of partial pressure - Decane - Extended
NMR
GC-MS
pCO
:pH2
Extr.
yield
N-extr.
yield
Total
yield
Conv.
Turnover
Conv.
Turnover
ee
React
T
React
no.
[bar]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
[oC]
16:4
6
2
8
38
64
-
-
-(a)
27.9
57
9
2
11
41
47
31
36
45
26.6
58
13:7
16
6
22
58
65
50
57
35
28.4
54
9
3
12
52
73
38
53
31
28.2
55
10:10
27
4
31
62
69
46
51
46
23.2
20
12
3
15
58
82
37
52
47
23.5
23
6.5:13.5
26
10
36
64
75
58
69
46
25.2
37
33
8
41
71
111
61
96
43
27.3
40
4:16
18
5
23
60
88
47
58
43
24.7
38
39
7
46
87
95
81
89
43
25.4
41
(a) The enantiomeric excess could not be determined because the yield is too low.
79
==PAGE:90==
Table 26: Extended version of Table 18.
Results of variation of partial pressure - Extended
NMR
GC-MS
pCO
Extr.
yield
N-extr.
yield
Total
yield
Conv.
Turnover
Conv.
Turnover
ee
React
T
React
no.
[bar]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
[oC]
pCO=10 bar
4
7
1
8
38
55
20
29
49
26.3
62
5
1
6
33
47
8
11
45
27.1
63
10
12
2
14
54
85
32
49
65
23.8
21
21
6
27
56
79
41
58
60
27
43
pCO=4 bar
10
25
5
30
53
66
36
45
48
25
60
22
4
26
48
62
26
33
52
25.3
61
16
39
5
44
72
84
72
84
53
25.2
39
35
3
38
74
76
67
69
50
26.4
42
80
==PAGE:91==
Table 27: Extended version of Table 19.
Results of variation of partial pressure - Extended
NMR
GC-MS
pCO
Extr.
yield
N-extr.
yield
Total
yield
Conv.
Turnover
Conv.
Turnover
ee
React
T
React
no.
[bar]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
[oC]
pH2=10 bar
4
25
5
30
53
66
36
45
48
25
60
4
22
5
27
48
62
26
33
52
25.3
61
10
12
2
14
54
85
32
49
65
23.8
21
10
21
6
27
56
79
41
58
60
27
43
pH2=4 bar
10
7
1
8
38
55
20
29
49
26.3
62
10
5
1
6
33
47
8
11
45
27.1
63
16
9
2
11
48
57
26
31
41
27.2
53
16
5
1
6
38
60
9
14
-
26.3
56
(a) The enantiomeric excess could not be determined because the yield is too low.
81
==PAGE:92==
Table 28: Extended version of Table 20.
Results of variation of reaction time - Extended
NMR
GC-MS
Time
Extr.
yield
N-extr.
yield
Total
yield
Conv.
Turnover
Conv.
Turnover
ee
React
T
React
no.
[hrs]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
[oC]
1
1
1
2
24
52
-5
-12
-(a)
24.5
66
5
1
6
31
108
-5
-18
57
27
69
2
12
2
14
54
85
32
49
65
23.8
21
21
6
27
56
79
41
58
60
27
43
4
33
10
43
61
45
37
28
58
25.5
67
39
6
45
76
78
60
59
58
27.8
68
8
60
8
68
95
25
90
23
49
25.9
65
60
13
73
98
37
91
34
56
27.2
72
16
30
6
36
100
22
100
22
57
24.4
70
(a) The enantiomeric excess could not be determined because the yield is too low.
82
==PAGE:93==
Table 29: Extended version of Table 21.
Results of using diﬀerent precursors - Extended
NMR
GC-MS
Pre
cursor
Extr.
yield
N-extr.
yield
Total
yield
Conv.
Turnover
Conv.
Turnover
ee
React
T
React
no.
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
[oC]
[Rh(acac)
12
2
14
54
85
32
49
65
23.8
21
(co)2]
21
6
27
56
79
41
58
60
27
43
Cationic
6
1
7
31
39
-
-
52
24.7
74
9
2
11
38
39
-
-
57
26.2
76
83
==PAGE:94==
Table 30: Extended version of Table 22.
Results of recycling - Extended
Repeat
Extr.
yield
N-extr.
yield
Conv.
Turnover
ee
React
T
React
no.
[%]
[%]
[%]
[mol/mol/hr]
[%]
[oC]
1
10
-
40
55
61
24.4
73-1
2
3
-
33
46
57
24.6
73-2
3
1
2
29
43
-(a)
24.5
73-3
1
8
-
32
49
63
24.1
74-1
2
3
-
27
38
53
24.3
74-2
3
1
1
27
41
-(a)
24.4
74-3
(a) The enantiomeric excess could not be determined because the yield is too low.
84
==PAGE:95==
.
85
