==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Surrogate Based Optimization of Wind Turbine Rotor Tips 
Carl Mosbech 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0220 
June 2018 
==PAGE:2==
Authors: Carl Mosbech 
Title: Surrogate Based Optimization of Wind Turbine Rotor Tips 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0220 
June 2018 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project Period:  
January 2018 – June 2018 
ECTS: 30 
Education: Master of Science 
Supervisors: 
Frederik Zahle, DTU Wind Energy 
Michael McWilliam, DTU Wind Energy 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
ABSTRACT
This thesis seeks to give a ﬁrst glance at surrogate based optimization of wind turbine
blades. It touches upon the diﬀerent parts of a surrogate based optimization study and
introduces methods of diﬀerent complexity.
The methods are applied to a simpliﬁed design problem to allow dense sampling of the
design space and thus benchmarking the optimized results from the surrogates.
Methods of conducting global sensitivity analysis on the design problem are described
to enable evaluation of design parameters in the problem formulation. It is shown how
polynomial chaos expansion is an eﬃcient way of predicting the global sensitivity of the
model.
Polynomial regression and Kriging, a radial basis function method, are described and
implemented on the design case.
The thesis shows how a reﬁnement model, if balancing exploration and exploitation, can
be very eﬃcient in ﬁnding designs that are optimized in relation to the steady power.
The techniques are extended to multi-objective optimization where the surrogate modelling
show potential as well.
Finally, a qualitative analysis of the optimized designs is made. It is shown how the
algorithms are ﬁnding designs performing well on the optimization parameter steady
power although the design characteristics of the new blades result in high loads on other
parameters.
It is concluded that the surrogate based optimization indeed is an eﬃcient way of exploring
the design space of wind turbine blade design.
Aknowledgements
Great thanks should go to my main supervisor and contact throughout the project Michael
McWilliam. Besides providing inspiration for the topic and an introduction to the research
in the ﬁeld, Mike has used many hours helping me get up to speed with the Linux tools
needed to use the DTU-cluster. Beyond this Mike has been a guide in the process and has
explained complicated topics in a simple but detailed manner.
i
==PAGE:4==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract
i
Table of Contents
ii
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem Formulation
2
2.1
Simulation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Design parametrization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Objective function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Benchmark dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
External tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Sensitivity Analysis
9
3.1
Global sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Variance based decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
The Monte Carlo estimates of the Sobol indices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Polynomial Chaos expansion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.5
Initial behavior of the model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.6
Design window . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.7
Convergence of sensitivity indices.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.8
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Surrogate Construction
18
4.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Polynomial regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Radial base functions - Kriging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Surrogate Reﬁnement
29
5.1
Inﬁll Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Parallelism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Multi Objective Optimization
36
6.1
Evaluation of Pareto fronts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
Inﬁll criterion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
ii
==PAGE:5==
Table of Contents
7
Optimization on Surrogate
41
7.1
Matlab fmincon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.2
The multi-objective case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
8
Final designs
45
8.1
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
9
Conclusion
49
References
51
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
1
INTRODUCTION
Optimization is a part of almost all ﬁelds within engineering and wind turbine blade design
is no exception. However, wind turbine design evaluation is a resource intensive task and
requires many diﬀerent load cases to be fulﬁlling as a wind turbine is a highly dynamic
structure and operates in many diﬀerent environments. Furthermore, Wind turbine blade
evaluation involves both ﬂuid dynamics and structural dynamics and the geometric design
of the blade is inﬂuential on the loads aﬀecting the structure.
A full evaluation of a wind turbine blade design requires among other things evaluation of:
• Performance at diﬀerent wind speeds between cut in and extreme winds.
• Performance in diﬀerent turbulence intensities at each wind speed.
• Simulation of grid loss, pitch runaway, yaw error stuck pitch etc.
• Loads when parked in extreme winds and turbulence.
To satisfy the design load basis of a wind turbine 259 hours of time series simulation is
required spread out on 1880 diﬀerent evaluations[1].
It is not claimed that this amount of simulations is needed in every iteration of a design
optimization study. But it underlines the fact that even with simple simulation models it
is an unfeasible task to do a design optimization on wind turbines, including all aspects,
with conventional methods.
Surrogate based optimization methods seek to decrease the amount of expensive function
evaluations needed to ﬁnd good designs. This might allow for optimization of much more
complex models, including several load cases or even full scale CFD simulations.
The purpose of this thesis is to give a ﬁrst glance on the application of surrogate based
optimization to wind turbine blade design with the forcus being on the geometry of the tip.
It should be seen as an initial study covering the ﬁrst ground on the topic and investigating
the potential of SBO applied to wind turbine blade design. It has been important to boil
down the complexity of a turbine blade to a very simple problem to eﬀectively evaluate
the performance of the model against a unbiased large sampling study.
Due to the focus being mainly on application of methods, the thesis will rely as much as
possible on available tools and software. The theory behind the methods will be described
brieﬂy. To enable collaboration between HAWC2, Dakota and the hpc-cluster used in this
thesis, tooling has been made. These implementations will not be of focus in the thesis
since they are seen as black box solutions that might possibly be done in many diﬀerent
ways. If the reader is interested in the speciﬁc implementation tools used for this thesis
he/she is very welcome to contact the author.
1
==PAGE:8==
2
PROBLEM FORMULATION
As mentioned, the purpose of this thesis is to give a broad initial impression of the
applicability of surrogate based optimization to wind turbine blade design. The emphasis is
on exploring common methods in SBO and their performance in regard to ﬁnding optimal
designs within a given design window. The scope of the optimization is the tip of the blades.
The tip is being parametrized with simple techniques. The parametrization introduced
allows for complex designs of the center geometry of the blade. However, in this thesis
the design complexity is kept at a minimum with the focus being on assessment of the
methods introduced.
2.1
Simulation model
In this work HAWC2 is chosen as the simulation model to evaluate each design case.
HAWC2 is a commercial software package used extensively within the wind energy industry.
It is robust in a large design space and computationally eﬃcient.
The turbine chosen is the DTU 10 MW reference wind turbine which is an open source
turbine design with the basic input ﬁles for HAWC2 publicly available. For a detailed
description of the turbine see [2]. A structurally stiﬀscenario with uniform wind speed
below rated power is used. This is a simple case and for design evaluation it is missing
several key factors like turbulence and deﬂection in the blade. However, for the sake
of exploring the methods and taking a ﬁrst look at sensitivity analysis and surrogate
modelling of blade design it is a suited model.
The HAWC2 framework is permitting a change from this simple problem to a more realistic
high-ﬁdelity problem Without changing the basic approach presented in this thesis.
The coordinate system of the blade is shown in ﬁgure 2.1
Figure 2.1: The turbine blade shown with coordinate system and corresponding names.
2
==PAGE:9==
2. Problem Formulation
The design window used involves some quite exotic designs. Due to this the convergence
of the HAWC2 model is tested with a design outside normal conditions x = −20[m], y =
10[m], Twist = −7.8[deg]. The convergence is shown in ﬁgure 2.2. Here it can be seen
how the unconventional design creates a long convergence involving high power values. To
ﬂush this kind of behavior out of the model the simulation time is set to 700 s. Notice how
steady the power is after convergence. This indicates that simply taking the last power
value in the time series would be suﬃcient. However, to ensure robustness the average
of 10 points from the last 10 seconds of simulation is taken out by a python script as the
steady power value.
Figure 2.2: A convergence study with the design parameters x=-20[m], y=10[m], Twist=-
7.8[deg]. Based on this it is assumed that 700 s simulations are adequate.
The parameters of the HAWC2 evaluation of the DTU 10 MW reference turbine are shown
in table 2.1.
Simulation length
700 s
∆t
0.01 s
Convergence limits
1E3 1.0 1E-7
Wind speed
8 m/s
Remaining turbine geometry
and controller
According to DTU 10MW reference described in [2]
with all structural settings set to stiﬀ
Table 2.1: List of the model inputs for the HAWC2 simulations throughout the thesis
unless something else is stated.
2.2
Design parametrization
The geometry to be changed in the study is the center coordinates of the blade segments
at the outermost 20% of the blade. Besides this the twist and chord length of the tip
is included as design parameters. The rest of the turbine will not be changed from the
reference ﬁles.
The center coordinates and twist of the original 10MW blade is given in the HAWC2 input
ﬁle. These are originally constructed using polynomial splines[2].
To increase the number of data points in the htc-ﬁle without reconstructing the polynomial
spline a simple approach has been taken. Relevant data points are ﬁtted with a polynomial
3
==PAGE:10==
2. Problem Formulation
trend curve which is then used to generate extra data points. This method gives results as
shown in ﬁgure 2.3. Notice that it is only the blue points which have used in the ﬁt. This
results in a good ﬁt on the tip of the blade. The equation for the polynomials on prebend,
twist and sweep are shown in table 2.2. The chord is deﬁned in the aerodynamic input ﬁle
which already contains a reasonable amount of points.
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the geometric ﬁtting done of the blade in the swept direction to
increase the number of datapoints.
Parameter
Fitting curve
Prebend (y) [m]
y = −3.02E-06m−2z3 −1.67E-04m−1z2 −3.28E-03z + 1.36E-01m
Sweep (x) [m]
x = 1.07E-04m−2z3 −2.37E-02m−1z2 + 1.75E+00z −4.37E+01m
Twist (t) [deg]
t = deg
m
 −1, 50E-05m−2z3 + 1, 77E-03m−1z2 + 1, 31E-01z −1, 15E+01m

Table 2.2: The equations used to generate additional points in the htc-ﬁle. Note that the
unit of z is always meters since it is the radial position on the blade.
The parametrization of the tip is done using Bézier splines. These are used in similar
design applications when complex curves should be described with a limited amount of
points. The design generation tool is written in python and takes any number of Bézier
design points as input. The points are then distributed evenly along the outermost 20 %
of the blade with one point always located at the tip and one ﬁxed point located on the
transition between the unchanged section of the blade and the Bezier curve. In this thesis
curves consisting of a single design point are used resembling a linear line from the 20%
mark to the tip. An example of this is shown in ﬁgure 2.4. Here it can be seen how the
y-coordinates, denoting the prebend, are deﬁned by the Bezier point.
As seen in ﬁgure 2.4, the change in the design is largest at the tip when only using one
point. When changing the chord, the method is similar. However instead of directly
creating the geometry from the Bezier curve the original geometry is simply scaled with
the Bezier curve. This ensures that the chord is not changing at the two ends of the new
tip since the Bezier curve is 0 in one end of the tip section and the chord is 0 in the original
design at the very tip. The change of the chord is later left out of the study due to very
small variance in the output.
4
==PAGE:11==
2. Problem Formulation
Figure 2.4: An example of the design points for the c2def block in the htc-ﬁle using only
one Bezier point.
To avoid changing the swept area, and thus the power available to the turbine, when
extending the sweep of the blade, the new designs should in some way be scaled. In
this thesis it is done by ensuring that the total radius including hub doesn’t change at
any points between the original blade and the new design. In addition to this the angle
between the z-axis and each point should be maintained through the scaling. This gives
the following set of equations:
q
(zscaled + zhub)2 + x2
scaled =
q
(zorg + zhub)2 + x2org = R, zscaled
xscaled
= zunscaled
xunscaled
= f (2.1)
Solving this for xscaled gives:
xscaled = −
fzhub ±
q
R2f2 + R2 −z2
hub
f2 + 1
(2.2)
This is implemented in the python code writing the htc-ﬁles. The sign is determined for the
x-coordinate to be the same as of the unscaled blade. An example of this scaling method
is shown in ﬁgure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Plot showing how the x-coordinates of the new designed blade is adjusted to
ensure constant swept area.
5
==PAGE:12==
2. Problem Formulation
2.3
Objective function
A key part of any optimization study is determining the objective function. In regard to
wind power the main parameter to optimize is the levelized cost of energy i.e. the cost
of the produced energy. This value however is extremely complex and can never fully be
calculated in a single study.
In this thesis the focus is simply on the optimization of power production at a steady state
below rated speed. As mentioned the focus of this thesis is not on the model i.e. it is not
able to ﬁnd the actual optimal wing design. However, the focus is on the simpliﬁed methods
applied and how they work together with the mechanics of the simulation model. This
materializes in the very simple approaches to the method of design evaluation described in
this section.
Later in the thesis the torsional load will be taken in to account in a multi-objective study.
As shown later large negative sweep of the blade in the steady case has positive impact
on the power. This leads towards impractical designs with very large sweep. This large
sweep however brings as expected large torsional loads. With this in mind considering
both power and torsional load leads to more feasible designs which mimics the real case
scenario in a more realistic manner.
2.4
Benchmark dataset
It is assumed in most literature regarding surrogate modelling, that the surrogate model
is extensively sampled to a degree where the entire space is known since sampling the
surrogate model in many cases is cheap [3][4][5].
How to approach cases where this
assumption is not valid is addressed on a later point. However as for now it is assumed
that this is a viable way of ﬁnding optimal values and inﬁll criteria on the surrogate. The
surrogates are sampled in 3 · 105 points and evaluated based on this dataset. To allow
for quick comparison between the surrogate models and the HAWC2 model a benchmark
dataset consisting of the same sample points is created to essentially stand in as the model.
This allows the diﬀerent methods implemented in the thesis to get the "real" Hawc2 output
instantly in any point of the ﬁnite space.
This large data set also acts as a benchmark for the optimization methods. I.e. it is
assumed that the maximum in the benchmark set is close enough to the overall maximum
in the design space to act as a comparison basis.
2.5
External tools
Dakota
The software package Dakota is used in this thesis to enable large sampling studies, and to
review the methods in regard to sensitivity analysis and surrogate modelling implemented
in the software. The main reason for using Dakota is accessibility. It is readily available
as freeware and can be used without other software packages like Matlab. In this thesis
the Dakota package is coupled with python to create the sampling interface used on the
6
==PAGE:13==
2. Problem Formulation
hpc-cluster on DTU Risø. A ﬂowchart showing the process of running any sampling study
on the cluster is shown in ﬁgure 2.6. Documentation on Dakota is available in [6].
Figure 2.6: The process of sampling data from the HAWC2 model using Dakota
UQlab
Dakota has several limitations in the implementation of Kriging approximation. In this
work the main drawback of the package is the lack of variance estimates from the Kriging
approximation, as explained later. Dakota is also unable to export the model which would
allow external calculation of the variance. To enable more advanced investigations in this
thesis the Matlab extension UQLab has been employed. UQLab is developed by researchers
at Eidgenössische Technische Hochschile Zürich and is available for download by request. It
is led by Prof. Bruno Sudret and consists of an extensive collection of tools for uncertainty
quantiﬁcation. It includes a Kriging toolbox which will be used to investigate the use of
the Kriging variance in continuous sampling of the design space. The model options are
set as described in table 2.3.
7
==PAGE:14==
2. Problem Formulation
Option
Setting
Description
Meta model type
Kriging
The meta model chosen is Kriging
Trend type
Quadratic
As no measurable slowdown in the process is
found using the quadratic trend compared to
no trend model, the trend model is included
although the LARS approximation before the
modelling is still applied.
Estimation
method
Maximum
likeli-
hood
The most standard way of estimating the
surrogate.
optimization
method
Hybrid Genetic al-
gorithm
Takes advantage of the build-in matlab
optimization tools.
The initial genetic
algorithm approach decreases the bias from
the initial condition of θ.
Max iteration of
the optimization
100
The optimization never uses more than 50
iterations when ﬁtting the given model. 100
is simply chosen as an arbitrary upper limit.
Optimization tol-
erance
1e-5
Set in the default training example and has
shown to be suitable.
Nugget in the op-
timization
2.2e-16
Used to correct for some of the problems
occurring when the sample density increases.
It is set to machine precision of Matlab.
Bounds
[1e-16;200]
The initial genetic algorithm in the optimiza-
tion covers the large space eﬀectively. If only
gradient based optimization on the ﬁt is used
this window should be given more thought.
Table 2.3: The options used with UQLab. All other options are kept at default.
2.6
Conclusion
The parametrization of the new wing design is simple and able to create tip designs from
few input parameters. The stiﬀHAWC2 model with uniform inﬂow is a simpliﬁed estimate
of the performance of a wind turbine blade. However, the goal of this thesis is not to get a
credible suggestion to an optimized blade design for a real life turbine ready for production.
It is merely to touch upon the possibilities with surrogate based optimization and pave
the way for more detailed modelling and thus designs. The HAWC2 setup used has good
balance between being light and relatively cheap to evaluate, which allows for large sample
sizes and benchmarking of the results, while enabling an increase in complexity in many
diﬀerent ways without changing the overall framework.
8
==PAGE:15==
3
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
As a sampling-based method, surrogate based optimization is dependent on the number of
design variables. Referring to the so-called curse of dimensionality the number of points
needed to sample the design space adequately is increasing exponentially with the amount
of design variables. For example, a given 2 parameter problem may need 103 samples
to achieve a certain level of accuracy, a similar 4 parameter problem would need 106 to
achieve the same level of accuracy. In this case only two extra variables make the sample
study a thousand times more expensive to evaluate. It is thus important to choose design
variables which are sensible in regard to the study.
To identify and leave out unimportant design variables from the analysis, potential variables
can be ranked in regard to the eﬀect they have on a given objective function. In this way
the variables with high impact on the model output can be included in the analysis, and
the variables with little eﬀect on the objective functions can be excluded.
A method of evaluating the eﬀect of the design variables on the objective function is a global
sensitivity analysis. This gives an indication of the importance of a design variable for the
model output. If a sensitivity analysis shows very low variance due to a certain design
variable it should be considered to remove the variable from the study. This decreases the
necessary sample size signiﬁcantly ultimately improving the eﬀectiveness of the model.
3.1
Global sensitivity
In regards to sensitivity analysis the literature distinguish between local and global
sensitivity. The local approach is evaluating the derivatives of the model i.e. the local
change to an output based on an input parameter. Global sensitivity is concerning the
change of the model output caused by the input parameters on the entire design space. [7]
The goal of this chapter is to evaluate diﬀerent methods of estimating the global sensitivity
of the problem described in chapter 2 by investigating two general approaches. A more
broad comparison study including several new techniques is described in [8]. However in
this thesis only Monte Carlo estimates, latin hypercube sampling estimates and Polynomial
Chaos Expansion will be tested on the model. The monte-carlo and LHS estimates are
chosen since they are general approaches with few or no assumptions on the underlying
model [9]. PCE is chosen since it in [8] is identiﬁed as the most eﬀective method implemented
in Dakota for ﬁnding converged global sensitivity estimates without gradient information
from the underlying model being available.
9
==PAGE:16==
3. Sensitivity Analysis
3.2
Variance based decomposition
The main task in deﬁning the global sensitivity is to describe the variance of the model
output due to the design variables globally. In [10] a thorough description of the ﬁeld is
presented. In this thesis the choice of sensitivity indicator is the Sobol indices presented
in [11]. These are commonly used and describe the variance of a model with respect to
the individual input variables. The principle is a decomposition of a model having n
variables and a scalar output into what is called the ANOVA decomposition for ANalysis
Of VAriance[12]:
f(x) = f0 +
n
X
s=1
X
i1<...<is
fi1...is (xis, ..., xis) , fo =
Z
f(x)dx
(3.1)
Another way to express the summations without the rather exotic term i < ... ≤is is:
f(x) = f0 +
X
i
fi(xi) +
X
i<j
fij (xi, xj) + ... + f12...n (x1, x2, ..., xn)
(3.2)
Giving the total number of summands 2n. Following that:
f0 =
Z
f(x)dx
and
Z 1
0
fi1...isdxip = 0 for 1 ≤p ≤s
(3.3)
This is the basics of all variance based sensitivity methods. The variance constants are
deﬁned as:
Di1...is =
Z
f2
i1...isdxi1...dxis
(3.4)
The total variance is deﬁned as:
D =
Z
f2(x)dx −f2
0
(3.5)
With the total variance due to one variable being:
Dtot
y
= 1
2
Z f(x) −f(y′, z)
2 dxdy′
(3.6)
Assuming that x is random and uniformly distributed in the design space the D-constants
are equal to the variances of the function. The Sobol indices are:
Si1...is = Di1...is
D
(3.7)
This indicates the fraction of the entire variance due to the interaction from the given
variables i1...is. In a global sensitivity study with N variables the number of interaction
indices will be 2N −1. Estimating all these indices is often expensive and most likely not
relevant. In sensitivity analysis two indices are therefore generally used:
Sy = Dy
D , Stot
y
=
X
Si1...is = Dtot
y
D
(3.8)
10
==PAGE:17==
3. Sensitivity Analysis
Sy is the main variance. This is the variance due to only the variable y i.e. without
interactions between the variables. Stot
y
is the total variance. This is best understood as
any variance in the model due to the variable y.
The main task is to approximate these indices with a reasonable number of samples. The
most basic approach is sampling using the Monte Carlo estimates.
3.3
The Monte Carlo estimates of the Sobol indices
Monte Carlo estimates of the Sobol indices are introduced in [13]. For each sample point
in the study the function is evaluated in three points per variable. The points of evaluation
are:
 η′, ξ′ ,
 η′, ξ∗ ,
 η∗, ξ′
(3.9)
where η′ and η∗are two independently random values of the variables and ξ′ and ξ∗are
random values of the remaining function inputs. For instance if the global sensitivity of a
model f(A, B, C) due to A is needed two independantly random values of A, A′, A∗and
the subset (B, C), (B, C)′, (B, C)∗is found. The model is now evaluated in (A′, (B, C)′),
(A′, (B, C)∗) and (A∗, (B, C)′).
Now four entities are calculated:
φ = f
 η′, ξ′ , φ2, ψ = φf
 η′, ξ∗ and χ = 1
2
φ −f
 η∗, ξ′2
(3.10)
With increasing number of samples N the entities will converge toward variance estimation
like:
1
N
X
φ →f0,
1
N
X
φ2 →D + f2
0 ,
1
N
X
ψ →Dy + f2
0 ,
1
N
X
χ →Dtot
y
(3.11)
The sensitivity indices can then be calculated as in equation 3.8.
In [8] it is shown how Monte Carlo estimates for sensitivity analysis can be diﬃcult to get
converging even with very high sample count. This is the main drawback of the method
which gives the most unbiased sensitivity estimates of a deterministic computer model.
Considering the sampling plan might improve the convergence of the variance estimates.
Latin hypercube sampling
Latin hypercube sampling (LHS) is a sampling algorithm intended to increase the eﬃciency
of sample-based estimates [14]. It seeks to ﬁll out the "holes" in a sampling study by
distributing the samples in a deﬁned grid so that with least possible samples it is possible
to cover a design space.
Not any sample set which fulﬁlls the LHS-criterion is ideal. For instance, a straight line
through the design space with all design variable values increasing monotonically could be
described as an LHS set. It is sampling all values in the grid and has uniformly distributed
samples on the single variables.
11
==PAGE:18==
3. Sensitivity Analysis
To avoid such impractical sample sets most LHS-algorithms have some sort of iteration
process to ensure that the sample set is reasonable. The default algorithm used by Dakota
and Matlab optimizes on the minimum distance between sample points. This is to spread
out the samples in the entire space. The best way of understanding sampling methods is
graphically. In ﬁgure 3.1 four diﬀerent sampling methods are shown containing 9 sample
points.
Figure 3.1: Shown from left to right is: Latin hypercube sampling, Random sampling,
centered sampling, grid sampling.
In ﬁgure 3.1 it can be seen how LHS sampling distributes the sample points uniformly in
the design space unlike random sampling which might have irregular distribution of points
throughout the space. The centered study is missing out on a large part of the design
space but might be relevant if the properties of the centered data point only is needed.
The grid study has some degree of uniform spreading of the sample points. However, the
variables are sampled many times at the same point of the single variables. This might
be ineﬀective in calculating main eﬀects of the design variables. Notice that grid, LHS
and random sampling all converge towards the same sample set when sample count is
increased.
In [15] a detailed description of the use of latin hypercube sampling for use in sensitivity
analysis is given. The main conclusion in this paper is how the properties of the latin
hypercube set can be used to compute sobol indices estimates for all design variables with
fewer function evaluations than the classical Monte Carlo estimate. It relies on the same
overall theory as described above with some clever use of the properties of the sample sets.
This has been shown in [8] to improve the eﬃciency of a global sensitivity analysis. In
this thesis the implementation of LHS-estimates of Sobol indices is treated as a black box
method performed by Dakota.
3.4
Polynomial Chaos expansion
As with the surrogate approach to optimization some sensitivity analysis methods try to
determine an analytically simple estimation of the model instead of directly calculating
the variance from a sample set. One method is polynomial chaos expansion which is a
stochastic expansion. It has gained popularity as a nonintrusive black box method[8]. The
method introduced in [16] has a wide application and is used commonly. A good detailed
description of one mathematical implementation is found in [17]. All variants of the method
12
==PAGE:19==
3. Sensitivity Analysis
use the close linkage between a stochastic expansion and the ANOVA decomposition in
equation 3.1. As with the LHS estimates, this thesis will rely on the Dakota method to act
as a black box implementation of PCE. The main assumption in PCE is that of smoothness
in the output function which is a valid assumption in most continuous design optimization.
The number of points needed for determining the expansion is dependent on the order of
polynomial chaos expansion and uncertain input variables with the function:
N = pn
(3.12)
where n is the number of input variables and p is the order of the expansion required.
More samples than this number might be included with some ﬁtting technique employed
to create the best expansion from the available data [18].
3.5
Initial behavior of the model
The ﬁrst study conducted on the model is a sensitivity analysis consisting of variance
based decomposition of 6400 Monte Carlo sampling points. The result shows signiﬁcant
dominance in the variance from the twist parameter. This indicates either an impractical
search window or unimportant design parameters. In ﬁgure 3.2 it is shown how the
twist dominates the variance and that the chord parameter is almost irrelevant with the
preliminary design window. It is a product of the design boundaries given by the rest
of the blade (no change of chord at either ends of the tip) that the chord parameter in
this study has little impact. Based on this it is chosen that the chord parameter is left
out of the rest of the process since it reduces the complexity without removing signiﬁcant
variance in the output. In further studies it should be reintroduced as the chord impacts
the induction of the blade and thus is the design parameter used to adjust the angle of
attack needed for optimal induction of the blade [19].
Based on this initial study as well as several smaller sampling studies the design window is
adjusted to level out some of the diﬀerence in variance from the three remaining design
parameters.
To investigate a broad design window and get an idea of how the model behaves, a study
with latin hypercube sampling of 5000 points is conducted on the model. As post-process
the data has been distributed in 50 bins per variable. In each bin the maximum power
point is plotted. This gives an indication of how the maximum power of the model is
aﬀected by the design variables. The result is shown in ﬁgure 3.3.
The model behaves as expected in regard to twist and pre-bend with a maximum power
value on the conventional design window. However, when it comes to sweep the results are
less intuitive. It shows a power increase all the way to negative 30 m and positive 25 m. It
is diﬃcult to imagine a physical reason for this development. One possibility is that the tip
loss calculation of the HAWC2 model is based on the induction at the tip i.e. the pressure
acting between the airﬂow and the blade. If the blade is moved away from the position
where the general model assumes the tip is, and thus simulates zero induction, the tip
loss is artiﬁcially decreased on the rest of the blade. This thesis will as mentioned earlier
simply assume that the model is producing correct responses in the entire design window
since the focus is more on the methods of optimization than on the physical models.
13
==PAGE:20==
3. Sensitivity Analysis
Figure 3.2: Total variance from the initial sensitivity study with 6400 MC points with the
ﬁrst design window. The chord has very low sensitivity due to the design constraints and
is left out of the rest of the thesis.
Figure 3.3: The initial behavior of a 5000 LHS-samples study. Shown is the maximum
in bins dividing the design space. Notice how the sweep parameter has unconventional
impact on the model.
3.6
Design window
For the rest of the thesis the design window will be as shown in table 3.1. This is based on
the initial studies and does as described later produce variances on the diﬀerent design
parameters in the same orders of magnitude. The sweep parameter is chosen from -30 m
to 10 m which includes the entire range of power values in ﬁgure 3.3.
Parameter
Lower boundary
Upper boundary
Sweep
-30
10
Prebend
-15
5
Twist
-10
10
Table 3.1: The design window in the rest of the thesis.
3.7
Convergence of sensitivity indices.
A convergence study on the sensitivity analysis has been conducted using Dakota in
correlation with the method described in ﬁgure 2.6. The results of a convergence study
14
==PAGE:21==
3. Sensitivity Analysis
using ANOVA sensitivity analysis are shown in ﬁgure 3.4 with the main variance and 3.5
showing the total variance as described in equation 3.8.
Figure 3.4: It can be seen how LHS and random sampling at high sample counts converges
towards the same values. PCE shows a slightly faster convergence.
Figure 3.5: Total variance sensitivity convergence. Notice how the values of total variance
are closer to each other among the design parameters than main variance.
+
The convergence with random sampling and latin hypercube sampling is similar. In regard
to the total variance indices, the LHS results are slightly more stable at sampling sizes
less than 3200 points. This is expected since the advantage of the LHS-algorithm should
decrease with larger sample sizes. It should also be noted how the random sampling
algorithm at low sample count gives unpredictable results. At 800 samples the total
variance from the twist parameter is predicted lower than the one from the prebend
parameter by the random algorithm. This is shown by the converged results not to be
true.
It can be seen how the main variance indice of the twist parameter is more dominant
in respect to the other parameters, than the total variance indice is. This shows that
interaction eﬀects from both the sweep and prebend parameters are important in the
variance of the system. These interaction eﬀects might be of higher than second order and
should be included in the considerations when choosing how to build the surrogate model.
15
==PAGE:22==
3. Sensitivity Analysis
The total variance of the three diﬀerent parameters in this study is of the same order of
magnitude. This implies that all three parameters are important in the surrogate building
and that the design window is reasonable.
Polynomial Chaos Expansion
The polynomial chaos expansion method in Dakota is used to generate sensitivity estimates
of several diﬀerent order. In [8] it is shown how 6th order estimates provide good results.
Model of lower order could also be interesting. Below 6th order however for the HAWC
model case the Dakota method breaks down. It is not possible to determine why the
variance can’t be estimated at lower order of expansion. However, 6th 8th and 10th order
gives valid results as shown in ﬁgure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: The results of PCE analysis of the model. The results show good correlation
with the converged sampling study.
The polynomial chaos expansion of 10th order gives almost the same variance estimates as
the much more demanding LHS method.
Resource comparison
The main reason to investigate diﬀerent sensitivity analysis methods is to reduce the
computational resources needed for a global sensitivity study at a larger amount of design
variables. In table 3.2 the number of function evaluations needed for the three diﬀerent
approaches to converge is shown.
Function evaluations in the diﬀerent methods
MC
16000
LHS
4000
PCE
1000
Table 3.2: Comparison of the three diﬀerent sensitivity analysis methods in regard to
function evaluations. It is assumed that the PCE order of 10 as well as the sample density
of LHS and MC is signiﬁcant with increasing number of variables.
16
==PAGE:23==
3. Sensitivity Analysis
It can be seen in table 3.2 that even with only three design variables the resources needed
for a random sampling study is 16 times greater. This conclusion is expected to extend
in the case of more design variables. Shown in ﬁgure 3.7 is the expected development of
sample count needed to keep the accuracy in the sensitivity estimates.
(a) Function evaluations needed with amount of
variables
(b) Percentage increase in computing function
evaluations with variable count.
Figure 3.7: Development of function evaluations needed with increasing sample size.
In ﬁgure 3.7 it becomes apparent how big the possible saving of the PCE method is. At
10 design variables more than 106 times more function evaluations are thus needed with
random sampling than with the PCE method.
3.8
Conclusion
It has been described and shown how variance based decomposition is used to determine
the global sensitivity of a model. Monte Carlo, LHS and PCE estimates of the sensitivity
has been investigated. An initial study of the variance in the model has shown that the
implemented parametrization of the chord only accounted for 1e-4 percent of the variance in
the model. Based on this the variable is excluded from the rest of the thesis. Furthermore,
the initial study has shown that the model response in sweep might bring impractical
designs. Improving the underlying model will not be discussed in this thesis as the focus is
on the surrogate approximation of the model. The further results show that PCE has a
signiﬁcant advantage of 400% at only three design variables. This advantage is expected,
as other aspects of the problem, to increase exponentially with increased number of design
variables. The design window on the three remaining parameters results in sensitivity
indices of the same magnitude across variables.
17
==PAGE:24==
4
SURROGATE CONSTRUCTION
This section covers basic approaches to surrogate modelling and optimization. It describes
the implementation of ﬁrst least angle regression as a polynomial regression method and
next Kriging.
4.1
Background
Surrogate modelling is the creation of a cheap surrogate that approximates a more expensive
model.
By surrogate modelling is meant some kind of approximation method to an
underlying design problem. As an early example applied to computer models in [20] is the
notion of design and analysis of computer experiments or DACE referring to methods of
generating metamodels of simulation codes used in multidisciplinary design optimization.
Metamodelling is referred to as the general approach of creating an approximation of the
more complex underlying model.
In [21] an extensive review of the progress since then is given. A clear distinction in this
context should be made between local and global metamodels. Local metamodels refer to
approximations of the underlying model in single points. In the 1990’s research on global
approximation methods were getting more attention with the ﬁeld of aerospace as key
driver [21]. This thesis is only concerned about global approximation metamodels intended
to "replicate" the expensive underlying simulation model. In this case the approximation
is referred to as a surrogate [3].
In [4] an overview of the most common surrogate methods is given. In this thesis focus will
be on Kriging i.e. radial basis functions and polynomial regression. Models not employed
include Moving least-squares and Support vector regression
4.2
Polynomial regression
One of the most simple and accessible regression types is the polynomial regression. It is
easy to use and very cheap to evaluate on most mathematical processing tools. Furthermore,
it is used as a trend model for more advanced methods like Kriging introduced later in
the thesis. However, when handling large sizes of data with many variables it can be
expensive to generate regressions of even relatively low polynomial order. For instance, if
the model contains 10 input variables and cubic ﬁtting is desired, the regression requires
219 regression constants. Several algorithms exist to mitigate this issue. Forward stepping
is one eﬃcient method. However, it has been shown to be very aggressive in eliminating
useful predictors [22]. Forward Stagewise mitigates this issue by taking a much larger
number of steps towards the ﬁnal regression at the cost of eﬃciency. The middle ground
between these methods is Least Angle Regression (LARS).
18
==PAGE:25==
4. Surrogate Construction
Least angle regression
The fundamental approach in LARS, introduced in [22], is a step-wise comparison of
the covariates possible in the regression. It moves in steps along the covariate which is
most correlated with the residual of the data to be estimated. A kernel is the algebraic
expression for a part of the regression i.e. x2. The covariate is then the vector, denoted ξi,
occurring when the kernel is applied to the dataset. The LARS algorithm is in steps as
follows[23]:
1. Initiate the regression at all coeﬃcients ai..p = 0. The residual vector is now the data
set itself.
2. Find the covariate ξi available which is most correlated with the current residual.
3. Increase the coeﬃcient ai, in steps until another covariate ξk is more correlated than
the currently used.
4. Move along the common covariate in steps until yet another covariate becomes more
correlated with the residual.
5. Continue until all covariates of allowed order are used, maximum allowed covariates
are used, or no remaining covariate can bring down the residual with the current
step size.
The advantage in the algorithm against conventional regression methods, like the least-
squared error method, increases with the number of covariates available in the regression.
In ﬁgure 4.1 a simple example of the LARS method is shown. Here the data set consists of
two points with two variables (f(2, 5) = 4 and f(3, 2) = 5). The covariates available ﬁll
the set of available predictors below second order. The step size is for visual reasons large
compared to a normal regression. The ﬁrst step is taken along the path of x1 · x2. After
one step the residual is almost perfectly correlated with the joint direction of x2 + x1 · x2.
After a step in this direction the regression is within tolerance of the data set.
The LARS method is implemented in Matlab using a package based on the original paper
by Efron et. al. [24]. The strength of LARS is to ﬁnd relevant kernels for a regression.
Finding suitable factors for the regression can be done more eﬀectively with other tools.
When using the LARS algorithm in this thesis the relevant kernels on each new dataset
is found using LARS. When repeating regression on the same data set the kernels and
corresponding covariates are simply reused with the Matlab build in least squares method
x = lscov(A,B) which gives the best parameters using the covariates given.
To determine which kernels should be made available for the LARS algorithm an iterative
study is made. Initially the kernels available are the 4 linear terms (each input parameter).
The LARS algorithm then chooses one covariate and corresponding kernel. All kernels
"next to" the chosen is then made available. The method is visualized in ﬁgure 4.2 showing
an arbitrary progress with two variables (x,y) 4.1. It can be seen how the algorithm
"locks" on to certain kernels which are good predictors while moving on from others as new
possibilities arrive. This process is repeated until the number of kernels used has reached
the allowed, or until all kernels within the allowed order of regression are used.
19
==PAGE:26==
4. Surrogate Construction
Figure 4.1: Example of the Least Angle Regression method. Here is shown only second order
covariates and two data points: f(2, 5) = 4, f(3, 2) = 5. The covariates are normalized
and plotted to show the diﬀerent covariate directions.
The ﬁnal regression becomes:
f(x) ≈2x2 + 4.5x1x2
Figure 4.2: Illustration of the iterative approach to ﬁnding the best kernels for a LARS
approximation.
20
==PAGE:27==
4. Surrogate Construction
4.3
Radial base functions - Kriging
The regression method used to do more sophisticated regression on the data sets is Kriging
which is similar to a radial basis function method. The main equation of any RBF approach
is [4]:
f(x) = wT ψ =
nc
X
i=1
wiψi(||x −c(i)||)
(4.1)
where c(i) is the center of the i’th basis function, ψi is the basis function and wi is the
global weight of the individual function. Thus, the individual basis function can be built
to have less inﬂuence on the approximation the further the point of interest is from the
center of the function. Several basis functions are used in SBO including
• linear ψ(r) = r
• cubic ψ(r) = r3
• thin plate spline ψ(r) = r2ln(r)
• Gaussian ψ(r) = e−r2/2σ2
• multi-quadric ψ(r) = (r2 + σ2)1/2
• Inverse multi-quadric ψ(r) = (r2 + σ2)−1/2
Kriging is a Gaussian process. It is popular and used mostly although not exclusively to
interpolate deterministic noise-free data [25] which this thesis assumes the HAWC model
to be. It is compact and cheap to evaluate. Furthermore, it is one of the often used
SBO-techniques which has the least amount of assumptions regarding the shape of the
response functions [4]. A thorough explanation of the technique is given in [3].
Kriging assumes the function of interest to be in the form:
f(x) = g(x)T β + Z(x), g(x) = [g1(x)...gK(x)]T , β = [β1...βK]T
(4.2)
Where g1..k(x) are constant known functions and β1..k are unknown model parameters.
Z(x) is a random Gaussian process normally distributed with zero mean and variance σ2.
g(x)T β is thus the global approximation of the function f, with Z(x) describing the local
variations. This implies that the observed data as well is from a stochastic model even
though a deterministic computer model is used in many cases including this thesis. As it
will be shown later this pseudo-stochastic property of the approximation can be used in
surrogate-based optimization. The covariance across the approximation is:
cov
h
Z(x(i)), Z(x(j))
i
= σ2R
h
R(x(i), x(j))
i
(4.3)
where R(x(i), x(j)) is the correlation function between the data points sampled. Associated
with Kriging is the Gaussian correlation function:
R(xi, xj) = exp
"
−
n
X
k=1
θk|xi
k −xj
k|pk
#
(4.4)
with θk being unknown correlation parameters and n being the number of datapoints.
Note that in equation 4.3 R is the correlation matrix with Rij = R(x(i), x(j)). The Kriging
prediction in the point x is then[3]:
ˆy = µ + RxR−1(yT −1µ), Ri
x = exp
"
−
n
X
k=1
θk|xi
k −xj
k|p
#
(4.5)
21
==PAGE:28==
4. Surrogate Construction
Where 1 is a vector of length n ﬁlled with ones.
Now the basic approach of Kriging is to choose θk and p to maximize the likelihood of the
ﬁtted data to be predicted by the pseudo-stochastic model. Many methods including the
one implemented in Dakota is choosing p = 2 as default [6] and thus only optimizes on θ.
In [3] it is derived that the likelihood of the sampling data coming from a Kriging model
with mean µ and standard deviation σ2 is:
L =
1
(2πσ2)n/2|R|1/2 exp
"
−(y −1µ)T R−1(y −1µ)
2σ2
#
(4.6)
Taking the natural logarithm to this and solving for maximum likelihood gives estimates
for the mean and standard deviation:
µ = 1T R−1y
1T R−11, σ2 = (y −1µ)T R−1(y −1µ)
n
(4.7)
Substituting these in to 4.6 gives:
ln(L) ≈−n
2 ln(σ2) −1
2ln|R|
(4.8)
This likelihood is then optimized with any suitable optimization algorithm. The Dakota
documentation does not describe which approach is taken in the software, but several trials
has shown that the output is indeed dependent on the initial guess of θ, which indicates
that a local optimization algorithm is used.
This is relevant especially when many sample points are ﬁtted. With closely spaced sample
points the optimal θ-value moves towards higher values and it is easy to imagine that
the objective function isn’t convex i.e. a local maximum exists between the default guess
and the global maximum [3]. The UQLab package used allows for diﬀerent optimization
approaches. In this thesis the genetic algorithm hybrid is used since it handles non-convex
problems well. The main drawback of this method is computational cost. This could be
problematic when expanding the design space to more design variables.
To illustrate the eﬀect of the value of θ an implementation of the Kriging approximation
has been made in Matlab. This is now tested on two diﬀerent simple case studies. One is
a sine curve the other is simply 20 random points with linear interpolation.
In ﬁgure 4.3 it can be seen how the estimator with low value of θ is eﬃcient in ﬁnding large
smooth variations in the data. However, in the more stochastic case it is overestimating some
of the ﬂuctuations. The approximations with higher values of θ is poor at approximating
long smooth ﬂuctuation with sparse sampling data. However, it is more reactive and ﬁts
better on the stochastic data than the low θ approximation.
Since the Kriging model is a local estimator any global trend should be removed from the
dataset before the Kriging model is found. Dakota has implemented a quadratic trend
model which is tested against the LARS-model described previously with diﬀerent number
of kernels allowed in the LARS estimation. The ﬁts are done on 300 random sampled
training points and the evaluation is the mean squared error calculated on a 3200 points
LHS study. The result is shown in ﬁgure 4.4.
22
==PAGE:29==
4. Surrogate Construction
(a) Approximation on f = sin(2πx)
(b) Approximation to random output
Figure 4.3: Kriging approximation to two diﬀerent scenarios showing how low values of θ
are good at estimating large smooth variations. Higher values of θ are performing better
with the stochastic function. In both cases θ = 200 is too local and performs poorly.
It can be seen how the LARS algorithm with only a few kernels compared to the 14 in a
full quadratic ﬁt performs better than the Dakota trend model. At ten allowed kernels the
ﬁt is best after which over-ﬁtting presumably kicks in and decreases the performance of
the LARS ﬁt. Over-ﬁtting is occurring when the polynomial trend model ﬁts a relatively
stochastic model output with high order polynomial trend. This reduces the residual
between the trend and the training data but increases the regression error on the veriﬁcation
data. The point of over-ﬁtting is depending on the sample size and thus can’t be found
globally. In the rest of the thesis unless otherwise stated the trend is removed with a LARS
approximation including the 10 kernels of order less than 5.
23
==PAGE:30==
4. Surrogate Construction
Figure 4.4: A test of the trend function in the Dakota against the LARS-algorithm. The
model is given 300 random sampled training points. The Error is calculated based on 3200
LHS points. The max order of the kernels is 5. The calculation has been repeated with 20
random seeds to decrease biases due to randomness.
An advantage of using Kriging approximation is that the variance of the estimates is
available at any point. This enables ﬁrst of all an assessment of the model and the certainty
of the predictions in diﬀerent regions. Furthermore, the sampling strategy when reﬁning
the model can be made in a way that decreases the uncertainty in regions of interest. This
will be described further in chapter 5.
4.4
Performance
A surrogate model for optimization is evaluated on two main parameters:
• Prediction of any actual value of the result from the approximated model - the
regression error.
• Prediction of the location of the maximum in the design space i.e. predict the trend
of the objective function.
In a surrogate based optimization process the second parameter is the overall most
important measure of the quality of the surrogate since the goal of the process is to ﬁnd
an optimal design from a limited number of function evaluations. However, it might be of
value to know more about the model behavior and output values. And thus, since this
thesis is a broad investigation of the possibilities within surrogate modelling this will be
looked upon as well.
24
==PAGE:31==
4. Surrogate Construction
Regression error.
In testing the approximation methods, a diﬀerentiation between regression error and
regression residual is made.
As brieﬂy mentioned in section 4.3, regression error is
measuring the error between the approximation and the (unobserved) true model i.e.
the capabilities of the surrogate model to estimate new values on the expensive model.
This error will be the sole focus in this thesis. The regression residual is denoting the
error between the approximation and the training data already used in building the
approximation. For Kriging approximations, the residuals are always 0.
A common practice in testing a surrogate model is the leave one out method. A training
point or a subset of training points are removed from the training set before the model
ﬁt. The error between the given approximation and the removed subset of data points
is then measured. This process can be repeated through all data points available giving
the possibility to estimate the regression error of a surrogate method without the need
for a speciﬁc test data set. To speed up the process of testing surrogates and since plenty
sampling data is available for the given model, this method will not be used in this thesis.
This method would however be used in a high-ﬁdelity study where sampling the model is
much more expensive than constructing the surrogate.
The regression error is evaluated based on the mean squared error of the estimate:
MSE = Σϵ2
N
(4.9)
Where ϵ is the absolute diﬀerence between the approximation and the test data set and N
is the number of data points in test set. In this thesis the model is tested against an LHS
set with 103 samples. The result is shown in ﬁgure 4.5.
It can be seen in ﬁgure 4.5 how both estimation methods drop of quickly at low sample
numbers. The LARS approximation is generated with 10 kernels. This could presumably
be improved by increasing the kernel count. However, since the following chapters involve
many comparisons across sample sizes the kernel count is kept constant throughout the
thesis.
Maximum power location
The accuracy of the overall ﬁt is in many ways the intuitive way of evaluating the surrogate.
However, the focus of SBO is essentially on the optimization capability of the model.
Prediction of the placement and value of the best objective function value should thus be
the main concern of the evaluation.
To evaluate the capabilities of the surrogate model to locate the maximum power point,
the benchmark data set described in section 2.4 is used. The surrogates are constructed
based on a number of random samples. The maximum power point of the surrogate is
then found. In this case it is the placement of the maximum power and not the actual
value of the surrogate in that point which is of interest. The value of the HAWC model is
thus consulted in the point. This is giving the real power of the design, predicted by the
surrogate to be optimal.
25
==PAGE:32==
4. Surrogate Construction
Figure 4.5: The mean squared error of the two diﬀerent surrogate modelling techniques.
The results are averaged from 40 diﬀerent random sampling seeds. As expected the Kriging
model predicts the model response more eﬀectively.
Figure 4.6: Showing the ability of the Kriging model to predict the location of the
maximum in the model. For each Kriging ﬁt the maximum design point is validated with
the benchmark dataset. On the y-axis P* is the maximum power point found by the
Kriging estimator and P+ is the maximum of the benchmark dataset. The plotted values
are the mean from 20 random seeds.
26
==PAGE:33==
4. Surrogate Construction
This procedure is repeated with 30 diﬀerent random seeds per sample size investigated.
The result is shown in ﬁgure 4.6.
It is shown how the Kriging model doesn’t have any advantage compared to the random
sampling in ﬁnding an optimal design. At low sample sizes the estimations are especially
poor. The LARS algorithm performs slightly worse than the Kriging model.
To get an idea of the evolution of the surrogate models behind the development in ﬁgure
4.6 a visualization of the models corresponding to the one in ﬁgure 3.3 has been created.
Three plots with surrogates based on 40, 70 and 120 points respectively are shown in ﬁgure
4.7.
In ﬁgure 4.7 it is shown how the surrogate models evolve with sampling size. In general,
the Kriging method performs better in estimating the true value of the maximum power.
However as indicated in ﬁgure 4.6 the two models are almost equally good in predicting
the position of the maximum power design. The Kriging model is weak in predicting the
development of the sweep at the edge of the design space where the benchmark maximum
is located. Is is thus depending on the training data to contain data points in this area.
Since the training points are found with random sampling the model doesn’t perform
better than the random sampling approach.
4.5
Conclusion
The two main methods introduced in the section is Least angle regression and Kriging. It
is described how LARS is able to ﬁnd the important covariate in a polynomial regression
of high order with many design variables. This is further used as a trend model applied
to the training data before the Kriging model. It has been shown how the value of θ
in the Kriging prediction aﬀects the ﬁt, and thus why it is important to be conﬁdent in
the optimization strategy used in the Kriging prediction. The simple Kriging and LARS
models do not show any advantage compared to random sampling in ﬁnding design with
high power yield. This conclusion is not unexpected since it in general is diﬃcult although
not impossible to construct a response surface which predicts the model peaks signiﬁcantly
better than the training data.
27
==PAGE:34==
4. Surrogate Construction
(a) 40 training Points
(b) 70 training points
(c) 120 training points
Figure 4.7: The behavior of six diﬀerent surrogates (2 methods with 3 sample sizes) shown
as the maximum estimated data found in 50 bins distributed throughout each design
parameter.
28
==PAGE:35==
5
SURROGATE REFINEMENT
As shown in chapter 4 surrogate models build on random sampling with the techniques
employed until this point has no real advantage compared to the input samples themselves
in the ability to ﬁnd the maximum power design. However, a more complex sampling
strategy should be considered in regards to surrogate modelling. Kriging models based on
random sampling will in the rest of the thesis be referred to as Kriging without reﬁnement.
Since the surrogate model in most cases is cheap to construct and evaluate compared to
model evaluations, it should be used alongside the sampling and not only conclusively
when available computational resources are used. Several methods are available of diﬀerent
complexity.
In [3] it is described how especially the variance estimates from a Kriging model provides
valuable input to a reﬁnement strategy since it is possible to estimate the improvement
possible with more samples.
5.1
Inﬁll Criteria
The criteria from which to determine new sampling points in the surrogate modelling
process in called the inﬁll criteria. In [5] a description of three main approaches is given.
The basic approach of the methods is essentially optimization with diﬀerent objective
functions. The methods seek to ﬁnd the points which are improving the surrogate the most.
The diﬀerence between methods is thus the objective function and focus of the reﬁnement.
Exploration vs. Exploitation
When choosing between inﬁll criteria, it is basically a choice between exploration and
exploitation. Exploitation is as indicated based primarily on the surrogate already in place.
Exploiting focused methods are good at reﬁning surrogates already containing the correct
overall trends. They are less suited when improving initial surrogates which might be
deceiving in the overall ﬁt. Exploration is the eﬀort to expand the surrogate where it
might be weak. In exploration the focus is not so much on the eﬀort of optimization and
more on improving the overall accuracy of the surrogate. In ﬁgure 5.1 the mentioned inﬁll
criteria are shown in relation to each other in regard to exploration and exploitation.
29
==PAGE:36==
5. Surrogate Reﬁnement
Figure 5.1: Axis showing how the inﬁll criteria ranks in regard to exploration and
exploitation of the model.
Objective minimization
This method is basically an optimization study on the surrogate as is updates taking
the best evaluation point on the current surrogate and add it as sampling point to the
training set. This method is eﬀective at ﬁnding local minima in the model. Unlike the
other methods presented in this section objective minimization is applicable to all surrogate
methods and is not dependent on the variance output from the Kriging model. As shown
in ﬁgure 5.1 objective minimization is mainly exploiting the surrogate. Due to this it can
fail to ﬁnd regions of interest that are unknown if the initial sampling is poor[3].
Maximizing the Probability of Improvement.
Using the statistical properties of the Kriging approximation it is possible to determine
certain characteristics of the possible improvements in diﬀerent points. Introduced in [26]
is the method of ﬁnding the point in the approximation where the possibility of ﬁnding a
datapoint with the objective function smaller than T is highest. The method applies to all
stochastic approximation methods. The probability of the objective function being smaller
than T is:
Prob Improvement = Φ
T −ˆy(x)
s(x)

(5.1)
Where s(x) is the Estimated standard error and ˆy(x) is the mean prediction. Φ is the
Normal cumulative distribution function. Another stochastic method might assume another
cumulative distribution function. This strategy has the advantage that if it is converging to
a local minimum the sampling points in the area will drive down the standard error making
the term T−ˆy(x)
s(x)
very negative. This will push the searching strategy towards exploration.
This method is eﬀective in ﬁnding the maximum if the target value T is chosen correctly.
However, if it is chosen too high the method will be mainly local. In this case the method
will search a local minima region extensively before moving to explore the rest of the space.
If T is too ambitious it will do the contrary and possibly not converge towards a solution
but keep exploring to reduce the standard error in the entire space.
30
==PAGE:37==
5. Surrogate Reﬁnement
Maximize Expected Improvement
Maximized expected improvement presents a way to avoid having to deﬁne the target
improvement. The statistical expected improvement at point any is [5]:
Expected improvement = s(x)[uΦ(u) + φ(u)], u = fmin −ˆy(x)
s(x)
(5.2)
where fmin is the current minimum on the surrogate approximation. This method is in [5]
described as the most robust inﬁll criterion. However, it is still vulnerable to the initial
approximation being deceiving.
Exploration factor
To explore the eﬀect on moving on the axis shown in ﬁgure 5.1 a new simple inﬁll criterion
is implemented. It should be relatively easy to move the criteria between exploration
and exploitation. From the UQLab package the output is the mean of the prediction
and the variance. From this the standard deviation is calculated and multiplied with an
"exploration factor" FP . This gives an indice evaluating the "potential" of the point ˆT(x):
ˆT(x) = VAR(ˆy(x))0.5 · FP
(5.3)
This value is available for the entire prediction and the inﬁll criteria for any new point
now becomes:
• The point with the largest achievable value ˆT(x).
This new simple inﬁll criteria allows for continuous movement along the exploration/ex-
ploitation axis and thus investigation of the eﬀect.
5.2
Parallelism
The inﬁll criteria discussed are all based on iterations of single datapoints. However, since
parallel computing capabilities often is available it might be advantageous to add more
than one sample point per iteration. In this thesis in general ﬁve points are added per
iteration. The available data points are all ranked based on the relevant inﬁll criterion.
The sampling points are then added from the top. Points that are within a distance of 1
i.e. |xi −xj| <= 1 will not be added in the same iteration.
The overall approach of creating surrogates with reﬁnement strategies is shown in ﬁgure
5.3. The benchmark dataset is used as the expensive model.
5.3
Results
In ﬁgure 5.3 the results of the reﬁnement study is shown with diﬀerent factors FP on the
standard deviation together with random sampling, simple Kriging prediction and the max
expected improvement method.
Firstly, it can be concluded that all reﬁnement strategies perform signiﬁcantly better than
the random sampling methods as expected. The advantage in the reﬁnement is especially
31
==PAGE:38==
5. Surrogate Reﬁnement
Figure 5.2: The process of reﬁning the surrogate with UQlab without resampling the
design space.
Figure 5.3: The development of the max power points found by the surrogates with
reinforced sampling compared to methods without reﬁnement.
profound at low sample numbers. For instance, at 30 samples the best reﬁnement strategy
is resolving more than 80% of the deﬁcit between the random samples and the benchmark
dataset.
To illustrate the eﬀect of exploration vs. exploitation the quality of the maximum power
prediction is shown for the diﬀerent values of the exploration factor FP at 70 sample points
in ﬁgure 5.4. Here it is shown how a maximum exists balancing the risk of ﬁnding local
32
==PAGE:39==
5. Surrogate Reﬁnement
optimums with the risk of moving away from optimal regions too fast. At FP = 2 the
reﬁnement strategy at 70 sample points has found a design achieving more than 98 % of
the possible in the benchmark data set. Only 10 points in the 30.000 points large sample
set has a power value above this and random sampling would thus need on average 3000
sample points to achieve the same value. This conclusion is further strengthened when
considering the scaling of dimensionality mentioned previously. If the eﬃciency of the
methods scale with number of design variables as expected, the factor of improvement at
n design variables compared to random sampling can be calculated as:
Factor of Improvement =
 
30001/3
701/3
!n
= 3.5n
(5.4)
At only 8 design variables this means that the shown Kriging approximation with reﬁnement
strategy is almost 22500 times more eﬃcient at ﬁnding a power point close to the overall
optimal point compared to random sampling.
Figure 5.4: The quality of the max power predictions at 70 samples with diﬀerent factors
F added to the standard deviation as in equation 5.3
The evolution of the Kriging model with the reﬁnement method is shown in ﬁgure 5.5 with
the exploration factor set to 2. This ﬁgure utilizes the same plotting method as ﬁgure
3.3 and 4.7 dividing the data in bins and taking the maximum data in the bin. Here it
can be seen how the exploration term guides the sampling towards the optimum. In twist
however, it has a tendency towards too low twist values which is possibly driven by a bias
in the original data set.
33
==PAGE:40==
5. Surrogate Reﬁnement
5.4
Conclusion
Three diﬀerent common inﬁll strategies have been presented. The two of them has been
implemented along a third new simple inﬁll strategy based on the trade-oﬀbetween
exploration and exploitation. It has been shown how surrogate modelling with the right
inﬁll criterion and reinforced sampling can be very eﬃcient in ﬁnding designs that are
close to the maximum of the benchmark dataset. With the exploration factor FP = 2
and only 70 function evaluations a point within 2% of the benchmark maximum is found.
Compared with random sampling this is an increase in eﬃciency of 420% at only three
design variables. With more design variables this is further increased exponentially. The
methods implemented and tested in this section are showing how the surrogate based
optimization techniques are very promising in regards to design optimization of wind
turbine blades.
The conclusions are expected to extend to more complex models in
HAWC2 and possibly CFD-based evaluations.
34
==PAGE:41==
5. Surrogate Reﬁnement
(a) 15 training Points
(b) 25 training points
(c) 45 training points
Figure 5.5: Illustration of the variance based reﬁnement method. Here the factor on the
standard deviation is two as found in ﬁgure 5.4 to most eﬀective.
35
==PAGE:42==
6
MULTI OBJECTIVE OPTIMIZATION
As mentioned previously the real value to optimize on a wind turbine is the cost of energy.
An increase in power output often comes with increased loads on critical parts of the
system. This drives up cost of the structural components and can ultimately increase the
cost of energy even though the power output is increased. To investigate the trade-oﬀ
between power and load, a multi-objective study is conducted.
In ﬁgure 4.7 it is shown how increasing negative sweep in the blade is increasing the steady
power output of the model. This sweep however is also generating increased torsional loads
in the blade as the thrust force moves away from the center of the blade axis. Furthermore,
the torsional load in very large turbines like the 10 MW from non-linear eﬀects are getting
more attension in research recently [27]. Based on this, the multi-objective capabilities are
tested with power against torsional load at the blade root. However, the methods described
in the chapter might as well be applied to the ﬂapwise bending moment or another critical
load on the structure.
6.1
Evaluation of Pareto fronts
To evaluate the diﬀerent multi-objective methods an indice is needed as an indicator of
the quality of a given Pareto front. In [28] several diﬀerent methods are discussed. When
comparing multi objective optimization methods it is stated that the area-based methods
are most relevant. For this thesis the linear interpolated area of the Pareto front is used.
However, a method for penalizing the distance between points on the Pareto front is also
implemented. The half circle expanded between the points on the front is subtracted from
the interpolated area.
An example of the eﬀect of the penalty is shown in ﬁgure 6.1. Here it can be seen how the
front to the left has the largest interpolated area of the two. However, as the front to the
right consists of more points and still has the three original points, this front is valued
higher. When the half circles expanded by the points on the Pareto front is removed from
the area a more suitable description of the quality of the fronts is achieved. This indice is
given the name Q and is calculated with the following algorithm:
• Create Pareto front from the available data set.
• Do trapezoidal numerical integration of the front A =
R MzParetodPPareto
• Calculate distances d between neighboring points and remove half a circle: Q =
A −P 1
2π

d
2
2
When evaluating the multi-objective Kriging prediction, the design points predicted to be
on a Pareto front is sampled with real data using the benchmark set. A new Pareto front
is then created from this sample set and evaluated. Design points which are predicted by
36
==PAGE:43==
6. Multi Objective Optimization
the Kriging predictor to be on a Pareto front but isn’t when the real model is consulted is
not considered in the evaluation of the Kriging predictor.
Figure 6.1: Graphics showing the evaluation of the Pareto fronts. On the ﬁgure to the left
three points have been found on a front. To the right two more points are found besides
the original three. The evaluation penalizes the ﬁrst front for the distance between points
and thus the right front is evaluated as best.
6.2
Inﬁll criterion
As with power optimization, an inﬁll criterion is employed in regards to the multi-objective
study. It has been shown in section 5.3 that the simple approach to balance exploration
and exploitation can be more eﬀective than the Maximum Expected Improvement method.
Based on this the exploration factors FPower and FMz are investigated in multi-objective
analysis as well. In this case the two objectives are scaled to the maximum values in the
benchmark data set. The points are then scored from their "Pareto distance":
ˆT(x) =

 ˆyP (x) · FP
max(ˆyP ) , ˆyMz(x) · FMz
max(ˆyMz)

(6.1)
This value is ranked, and points are chosen with the highest value. However, like with the
single objective case, when new sample points are chosen points within a distance of 1 in
the design space are excluded from the "pool" of available samples.
This multi-objective study is done with exploration factor 1-4 in both moment and power.
The results are shown in table 6.1.
37
==PAGE:44==
6. Multi Objective Optimization
Power Multiplier FP \Mz multiplier FMz
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.7690
0.7930
0.8070
0.8150
0.7330
1
0.7600
0.7930
0.7720
0.8270
0.7970
2
0.7420
0.7500
0.7960
0.8220
0.8040
3
0.7430
0.7830
0.8190
0.7550
0.8080
4
0.7700
0.7100
0.7460
0.8110
0.8110
Table 6.1: Showing the quality indicator for the Pareto front calculated as described in
section 6.1 at with 60 sample points. The best point is indicated at (FP , FMz) = (1, 3).
The results are created as mean of 20 random seeds.
In table 6.1 it is shown how the exploration/exploitation balance is aﬀecting the eﬃciency
of the optimization study. At 60 sample points the factors FP = 1 and FMz = 3 ﬁnds
the best Pareto front on average covering almost 83 percent of the benchmarking dataset.
It should be noted that only a diﬀerence of about 8 percent exists between the best and
the worst inﬁll strategy. In general, it is expected to have lower diﬀerence in performance
between methods when doing multi-objective optimization. This is because a larger part of
the design space is relevant, and it is thus more likely with any sampling strategy to sample
near the optimal front. In ﬁgure 6.2 a comparison between the fronts created by Kriging
without reﬁnement, random sampling and the variance based inﬁll method is shown. The
exploration factors on the variance based Kriging is the best parameters found in table 6.1.
Figure 6.2: The reﬁnement development of the best exploration strategy shown in table
6.1 compared with blind Kriging and random sampling. Mean shown of 20 random seeds.
In ﬁgure 6.2 it is shown, as expected, that the advantage of the surrogate based reﬁnement
method compared with random sampling is smaller than in the single objective case. At
50 sample points the surrogate model only resolves 28 percent of the deﬁcit between
38
==PAGE:45==
6. Multi Objective Optimization
random sampling and the benchmark, corresponding to a random sampling study of a
little more than 80 points. However, an advantage to random sampling is present and as
described previously the computational savings of the method will increase exponentially
with number of design variables.
To monitor how this multi-objective study evolves three points in the study described is
shown in ﬁgure 6.3. Notice how some of the points predicted by the surrogate to be Pareto
optimal in the sample set, marked with purple circles in the ﬁgure, are far from the front.
(a) 10 training Points
(b) 30 training points
(c) 70 training points
Figure 6.3: Figures showing how the method of ﬁnding Pareto fronts in the design space
evolve. The exploration factors are set to FP = 1 and FMz = 3
It can be seen how the training data seem to group at low moment and P/Pmax ≈0.6.
This is a property from the underlying model characteristics. In ﬁgure 6.4 a heat map is
showing how the multi-objective output of the model is spread out in the space. A large
portion of the data is in the area around P/Pmax = 0.6 and it is thus expected that any
sampling strategy with a degree of exploration will have high sample density in this area.
39
==PAGE:46==
6. Multi Objective Optimization
Figure 6.4: A heat map showing the density of the model output in the multi-objective
space. The red line indicates the benchmark Pareto front.
6.3
Conclusion
The multi-objective capabilities of the Kriging model have been described and quantiﬁed
using an evaluation parameter based on the area of the Pareto front. It has been shown
that the exploration factors FMz = 3, FP = 1 performs slightly better in a 60 sample
study than other combinations.
With this combination the Kriging method resolves 28 percent of the deﬁcit between random
sampling and the Pareto front of the benchmark dataset at 50 samples corresponding to a
random sampling study of more than 80 samples.
It is expected that the beneﬁts of the surrogate based optimization compared to random
sampling is less obvious than with the single objective case, as the random sampling in
general has a better chance of ﬁnding Pareto optimal points in a multi-objective study
than ﬁnding points close to a global optimum.
It has been shown how the Pareto points found using the surrogate models follow the same
density in the multi-objective space as the benchmark sample set which is expected when
including some exploration in the reﬁnement strategy.
40
==PAGE:47==
7
OPTIMIZATION ON SURROGATE
Like described in section 2.4 it is a common practice to simply assume that the optimal
point as predicted by the surrogate model is known. However, with an increasing number
of design variables it might be advantageous to utilize some sort of optimization method
for ﬁnding the optimal point on surrogate instead of relying on rigorous sampling.
Optimization methods is a very large ﬁeld of research and it is outside the scope of this
thesis to give a comprehensive overview of the many possibilities. In this chapter, two
methods will be employed. The fmincon package in Matlab and the multi-objective genetic
algorithm implemented in Dakota.
7.1
Matlab fmincon
Optimization algorithms and their use on diﬀerent objective functions is a ﬁeld of research
in itself and it is not within the scope of this thesis to give a comprehensive review of the
possibilities within optimization on the surrogate, but just a glance at the opportunities.
Since the UQLab package used for many parts of the thesis already is a matlab module
it is appealing to use the eﬃcient and versatile black-box optimization tool in Matlab
fmincon to do optimization on the surrogate. fmincon has three relevant optimization
methods implemented:
• SQP
• Interior Point
• Active Set
To describe the theory and reasoning behind these methods is beyond the scope of the
thesis. All three algorithms are implemented as a black box optimizing on the UqLab
estimate with 70 samples found with surrogate reﬁnement using FP = 2. The initial
point in the optimization is chosen deliberately misleading to illustrate the problem of
the nonconvex nature of the Kriging estimator. Besides the initial point and the design
boundaries all options in the optimization methods are set to default. The results are
shown in ﬁgure 7.1.
Two main conclusions should be drawn from this simple study. As expected the deceiving
initial point leads the optimizer to a local optimum. The active-set method is able to ﬁnd
the best value on the surrogate despite the misleading initial point. This is assumed to
be caused by the relatively large step size of the active-set method [29]. All algorithms
converge at relatively low sample count. With that in mind the initial point problem could
presumably be solved by initiating the optimization algorithm at diﬀerent points. However,
given the nonconvex property of the Kriging approximation it can never be determined
with certainty that the best possible point is found.
41
==PAGE:48==
7. Optimization on Surrogate
(a) Optimization using the SQP algorithm.
(b) Optimization using the Interior Point method
(c) Optimization using the active set
Figure 7.1: Showing diﬀerent optimization algorithms
42
==PAGE:49==
7. Optimization on Surrogate
7.2
The multi-objective case
The genetic algorithm (also known as evolutionary algorithm) is, as the name suggests,
based on the evolution of solutions. It starts out with a base population. Based on a
criterion the population is then mutated and evaluated. The genetic algorithm used in
this thesis is the one embedded in Dakota and described in [30]. The basic approach
of the genetic method is as shown in ﬁgure 7.2 to evaluate the current population on
some performance parameter. The population, or a subset of it, is then mutated either
at random or following some mutation method. When evaluating the new population,
the convergence can be determined. This process is repeated until the population has
converged or the method has used the allowed number of iterations.
Figure 7.2: The basics of a genetic algorithm optimization method.
In [31] it is described in detail how the genetic algorithm can be eﬀectively used for
multi-objective optimization. The key parameters in the method is the rate and way of
mutation together with the convergence criterion. The parameters used in the Dakota
method for this thesis is shown in table 7.1. The main concern in choosing parameters for
the optimization method is the number of design evaluations, since the main motivation
for adopting the strategy is to reduce the number of evaluations required compared to
crude sampling. To control the number of function evaluations the stopping criteria of
the method is set to be the number of generations. This is essentially done by setting the
convergence type below machine precision.
Population size
200
Replacement type
Elitist
Mutation type
Uniform replacement
Convergence type
Metric tracker - 1e-10 percent change
Number of generations
17
Nitching type
Distance - 200
Table 7.1: The parameters used in the multi-objective genetic algorithm implementation
in Dakota.
The result using the genetic algorithm in Dakota is shown in ﬁgure 7.3. It shows how the
algorithm with 2.7e3 function evaluations is able to create a Pareto front close to the one
from 10e6 samples on the Kriging prediction. In ﬁgure 7.3 it can be seen how the initial
population in general is quiet far from the front. This indicates that the genetic algorithm
like expected has little dependence on the initial sample set.
43
==PAGE:50==
7. Optimization on Surrogate
Figure 7.3: Here it is shown how the genetic algorithm evolves to a solution through
18 populations with a total of 2.7e3 samples. Shown is the results as predicted by the
surrogate model. In section 6 it is shown how the surrogate can predict the Pareto front of
the HAWC model as well.
7.3
Conclusion
It has been demonstrated how optimization on the surrogate models can be done with good
results. Using the methods described in this section it is possible to resolve the optimal
predictions on the surrogate models with signiﬁcantly fewer function calls on the surrogate
than with the sampling method.
The genetic algorithm utilized in the section has been shown to resolve the Pareto front
of the surrogate with 100 times fewer function calls on the surrogate than used with the
sampling method.
Combining the performance of the genetic algorithm on the multi-objective surrogate with
the ﬁndings in section 6 leads to the conclusion that it is possible to do multi-objective
surrogate based optimization with as little as 70 function calls to HAWC, and ﬁnd Pareto
fronts within 20% of that of the expensive model.
44
==PAGE:51==
8
FINAL DESIGNS
In this chapter the actual design outputs from the optimization process will be investigated
by choosing four designs for further investigation. The ﬁrst point chosen is the maximum
power point found on the reﬁned Kriging approximation using the active-set algorithm as
shown in ﬁgure 7.1c. Three additional designs are chosen from the multi-objective design
optimization. In ﬁgure 8.1 the Pareto front from the MOGA-algorithm is shown together
with the corresponding validated Pareto front from the HAWC data. On the front three
points are chosen to represent high power yield, medium power and low power.
In ﬁgure 8.2 the design characteristics of the four diﬀerent design are shown. The prebend
on the low-power design is large compared to the other designs. This makes physically sense
since the main concern of this design is to decrease the torsional moment resulting from
the added sweep in the blade. The prebend moves the static edgewise force component of
the tip of the blade away from the center axis of the blade. This counteracts the moment
created by the ﬂapwise force on the swept blade.
8.1
Performance
In ﬁgure 8.3 time series of the four designs are shown together with the time series from
the original DTU 10 MW reference turbine in the same conditions.
In ﬁgure 8.3 it can be seen how the optimization methods indeed have found designs
Figure 8.1: Showing the Pareto front from the MOGA algorithm together with the
corresponding data from the HAWC model. Three points on the front is chosen for study.
45
==PAGE:52==
8. Final designs
(a) The x coordinates.
(b) The y coordinates.
(c) The twist coordinates.
Figure 8.2: Figures showing the four diﬀerent design evaluated after surrogate optimization.
generating an increased power yield compared to the reference turbine. However as expected
the load characteristics of the blade has changed signiﬁcantly. The large torsional moments
arising as a product of the swept designs are accompanied by large ﬂuctuations. The
prebend in the design results in a contribution in torsional moment from the gravitational
load normally seen in the edgewise moment of the blade. This eﬀect is dominant in the low
power design since it has a larger prebend to account for the aerodynamic static torsional
load.
These ﬂuctuating loads are potentially cost drivers, as they increase fatigue damage on the
structure.
46
==PAGE:53==
8. Final designs
8.2
Conclusion
The design found in the surrogate based optimization throughout the thesis has been
qualitatively evaluated. It has been shown how the models are able to ﬁnd designs which
based on the objective functions are performing as expected. The simplicity of the models
resolves in designs that shouldn’t be seen as optimize blade designs. However, it can be
concluded with conﬁdence that the maximum power design with only 60 samples on the
expensive model is within 2% of the best design in the design window given the steady
power as only objective function.
47
==PAGE:54==
8. Final designs
(a) Power
(b) Torsional moment
(c) Flapwise moment
Figure 8.3: Plots showing the time series of the four diﬀerent evaluated designs. As
benchmark is the original DTU 10 MW reference turbine shown.
48
==PAGE:55==
9
CONCLUSION
This thesis has in broad terms shown the potential of surrogate based optimization in wind
turbine blade design.
A parametrization of sweep, prebend, twist and chord of the wind turbine blade tip has
been described. It is shown how the swept area is kept constant by scaling the blade when
sweep is applied.
To identify the important design parameters and leave out less signiﬁcant ones, global
sensitivity analysis is employed. This leads to removal of the chord as design parameter as
the parametrization proposed in this thesis results in very low variance in the HAWC2
model due to the chord parameter.
It has been shown that polynomial chaos expansion is eﬃcient in the predicting the Sobol
indices of the model. which facilitates a large saving in computational power in regard to
global sensitivity analysis.
The two surrogate modelling approaches least angle regression and Kriging has been
described and applied to the HAWC model. However, it is shown that with no reﬁnement
i.e.
sampling ﬁrst and surrogate modelling second the models presented has no real
advantage compared with random sampling in ﬁnding good design.
Along the introduction of common model reﬁnement methods, a new reinforced sampling
strategy has been introduced which is allowing for weighting of exploration and exploitation.
It is found that the exploration factor FP = 2 is performing best. With only 70 function
evaluations, the method can ﬁnd design performing less than 2% worse than the benchmark
sample set containing 30e6 sample points and is thus performing 420% bettwer than
random sampling with only three design parameters. This eﬃciency is remarkable, and it
underlines the relevance of surrogate modelling in wind turbine blade design.
The surrogate modelling is expanded to multi-objective optimization with torsional moment
as the second objective. It is shown how the exploration factor aﬀects the two objective
functions and it is concluded that in the case presented the factors FP = 1 and FMz = 3
performs best. Using this setting the surrogate optimization approach is able to ﬁnd
Pareto front evaluated as only 20 % worse than the benchmark needing almost half the
training points as the random sampling approach. This result although impressive is not
as signiﬁcant as the single objective reﬁnement methods.
It has been described how optimization on the surrogate is possible and can decrease the
work load required to ﬁnd the optimal values on the surrogate. This might be required
when extending the design case to more design variables.
Lastly four designs from the study has been evaluated qualitatively. It is shown that the
49
==PAGE:56==
9. Conclusion
optimization has found designs performing well on the simple objective functions studied.
However, as a result of the design large ﬂuctuating torsional loads are identiﬁed. This
underlines the need for more rigorous objective functions and possibly the introduction of
inequalities in further studies.
Optimization on wind turbine blades considering a complete picture with many design
load cases or complex modelling like CFD is feasible when using the techniques presented
in this paper. This allows for more detailed design engineering and better understanding
of the cost drivers in wind turbine blades.
50
==PAGE:57==
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Natarajan M. H. Hansen, K Thomsen and A. Barlas. Design load basis for
onshore turbines - revision 00. DTU Wind Energy E; No 0074(EN), 2015.
[2]
Robert Bitsche Taeseong Kim Anders Yde Lars C. Henriksen Anand Natarajan
Morten Hansen Christian Bak, Frederik Zahle. Description of the dtu 10 mw
reference wind turbine. DTU Wind Energy, 2013.
[3]
Alexander I.J. Forrester, András Sóbester, and Keane Andy J. Engineering Design
via Surrogate Modelling - A Practical Guide. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2008. ISBN
ISBN: 978-0-470-06068-1.
[4]
Forrester Alexander I.J. and Keane Andy J. Recent advances in surrofate-based
optimization. Progress in Aerospace Sciences, 2009.
[5]
Donald R. jones. A taxonomy of global optimization methods based on response
surfaces. Journal of Global Optimization, 2001.
[6]
Various authors. DAKOTA, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for
Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation, and
Sensitivity Analysis - Version 4.2 Developers Manual. Sandia National Laboratories,
2008.
[7]
Francesca Campolongo Jessica Cariboni Debora Datelli Michaela Saisana
Andrea Saltelli, Marco Ratto Terry Andres and Stefano Tarantola. Global Sensitivity
Analysis - The Primer. Wiley, 2008.
[8]
V. Gregory Weirs, James R. Kamm, Laura P. Swiler, Stefano Tarantola, Marco
Ratto, Brian M. Adams, William J. Rider, and Michael S. Eldred. Sensitivity
analysis techniques applied to a system of hyperbolic conservation laws. Reliability
Engineering and System Safety, 107:157–170, 2012. ISSN 09518320. doi:
10.1016/j.ress.2011.12.008. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2011.12.008.
[9]
Bertrand Iooss and Paul Lemaître. A Review on Global Sensitivity Analysis Methods.
In Gabriella Dellino and Carlo Meloni, editors, Uncertainty Management in
Simulation-Optimization of Complex Systems: Algorithms and Applications, pages
101–122. Springer US, Boston, MA, 2015. ISBN 978-1-4899-7547-8. doi:
10.1007/978-1-4899-7547-8{\_}5. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-7547-8_5.
[10] Andrea Saltelli. Global sensitivity analysis: An introduction. Proceedings of the 4th
international conference on sensitivity analysis of model output (SAMO 2004), 2004.
[11] I M Sobol ’. Sensitivity estimates for nonlinear mathematical models. 1993.
51
==PAGE:58==
References
[12] I M Sobol ’. Global sensitivity indices for nonlinear mathematical models, review.
Wilmott Mag, 2005.
[13] I M Sobol ’. Global sensitivity indices for nonlinear mathematical models and their
monte carlo estimates. Mathematics and Computers in Simulation, 2001.
[14] R. J. Beckman M. D. Mckay and W. J. Conover. A comparison of three methods for
selecting values of input variables in the analysis of output from a computer code.
Technometrics, 2000.
[15] JC Helton and FJ Davis. Latin hypercube sampling and the propergation of
uncertainty in analyses of complex systems. Reliability Engineering and System
Safety, 2008.
[16] Norbert Wiener. The homogeneous chaos. American Jounral of Mathematics, 1938.
[17] Olivier Le Maïtre Thierry Crestaux and Jean-Marc Martinez. Polynomial chaos
expansion for sensitivity analysis. Reliability Engineering and System Safety, 2008.
[18] Robert W. Walters Serhat Hosder and Michael Balch. Eﬃcient sampling for
non-intrusive polynomial chaos applications with multiple uncertain input variables.
Collection of Technical Papers - Aiaa/asme/asce/ahs/asc Structures, Structural
Dynamics and Materials Conference, 2007.
[19] Jens Nørkær Sørensen. General momentum theory for horizontal axis wind turbines.
Springer, 2016.
[20] W. J. Welch T. J. Mitchell J. Sacks and H.P. Wynn. Design and analysis of computer
experiments. Statistical Science, 1989.
[21] Vladimir Balabanov Timothy W. Simpson, Vasilli Toropov and Felipe A.C. Viana.
Design and analysis of computer experiments in multidisciplinary design optimization:
A review of how far we have come – or not. 12thAIAA/ISSMO
multidisciplinaryanalysis and optimizationconference, 2008.
[22] Johnstone Iain Efron Bradley, Hastie Trevor and Tibshirani. Least angle regression.
The Annals of Statistics, 2004.
[23] Blatman Géraud and Sudret bruno. Adaptive sparse polynomial chaos expansion
based on least angle regression. Journal of Computational Physics, 2010.
[24] Sung Soo Kim. Matlab impelementation of lars, as copied from r implementation of
efron et. al., 2016. URL https://in.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/
fileexchange/23186-lars-algorithm?s_tid=prof_contriblnk. [Assessed June
29, 2018].
[25] J.W. Bandler S. Koziell and K. Madsen. A spacemapping-framwork for engineering
optimization - theory and implementation. Microwave Theory and Techniques, 2006.
[26] H.J Kushner. A new method of locating the maximum point of an arbitrary
multipeak curve in the presence of noise. Journal of basic engineering., 1964.
52
==PAGE:59==
References
[27] Various authors. UpWind - Design limits and solutions for very large wind turbines.
The Sixth Framework Programme for Research and Development of the European
Commission, 2011.
[28] Rubén Ruiz Gerardo Minella and Michele Ciavotta. A review and evaluation of
multiobjective algorithms for the ﬂowshop scheduling problem. INFORMS Journal of
Computing, 2008.
[29] Matlab documentation on the optimization toolbox. URL
https://www.mathworks.com/help/optim/index.html. [Assessed June 29, 2018].
[30] John Eddy and Kemper Lewis. Eﬀective generation of pareto sets using genetic
programming. Proceedings of DETC’01, Pittsburgh, PA, 2001.
[31] Hisashi Tamaki et. al. Multi-objective optimization by genetic algorithms: A review.
Proceedings of the Ieee Conference on Evolutionary Computation, 1996.
53
