==PAGE:1==
Activation of High-Temperature
PEM Fuel Cells
Master Thesis 2018
Technical University of Denmark
&
Danish Power Systems ApS
Author/Student
Michael Kolling Hansen - s134457
Supervisors
Jens Oluf Jensen - Professor at DTU
Qingfeng Li - Professor at DTU
Lars Nilausen Cleemann - Senior Researcher at DTU
Thomas Steenberg - CTO at DPS
2nd of July 2018
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Several obstacles are preventing high-temperature polymer electrolyte membrane
fuel cells to become a worldwide recognized power generator. One of them is due
to the activation process which is a mechanism occurring inside an acid doped
polybenzimidasole-based membrane-electrode assembly (MEA). The MEA needs
to be activated due to it having an unstable potential evolution typically within
the ﬁrst 100 hours from start-up. The mechanism(s) occurring during the activa-
tion time is investigated in this study. MEAs from Danish Power Systems ApS
(Kvistgaard, Denmark) were examined at Technical University of Denmark.
Two hypotheses about the allocation of phosphoric acid in the MEA during ac-
tivation are presented. One hypothesis describes a lack of acid situation in the
electrodes and the other hypothesis describes an acid ﬂooding situation in the
electrodes. To clarify these hypotheses several experiments were performed.
This activation phenomena was studied based on impedance spectroscopy com-
bined with an equivalent circuit model, polarization curves, steady-state galvano-
static activation measurements and scanning electron microscopy and energy-
dispersive x-ray spectroscopy. The conclusions are mostly based on the impedance
measurements and the activation curves conducted by altering parameters e.i.
temperature, gas ﬂow rates, current density, doping level, hot-pressed conditions
and operating pressure.
It was concluded that the cathode is the most involved electrode in the activa-
tion process based on signiﬁcant changes observed in catalytic resistance during
activation. From the observed activation time it is concluded that the performance
increase of the MEA is based on diﬀusion of phosphoric acid from the membrane
to the catalyst layer during the activation. The microscopy revealed mapped im-
ages of phosphoric acid migrating towards the cathode during the activation. The
major part of the activation curves reveal a signiﬁcant potential drop within the
ﬁrst 1-5 hours which is presumably due an instant local ﬂooding mechanism.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
5
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Why Fuel Cell Technology
7
2.1
Fuel Cell Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Hydrogen as a Fuel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
State of the Art HT-PEMFC
13
3.1
Basic Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.1
Acid-doped PBI Electrolyte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.2
Electrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.3
Resistances & Degradation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Characterization Techniques
20
4.1
Polarization Curve
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.1
Deﬁnition of EIS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.2
Equivalent Circuit Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.3
Nyquist Plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
SEM/EDX Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
The Activation Process
27
5.1
Previous Studies on the Activation Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Phosphoric Acid Redistribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Hypotheses
35
6.1
Hypothesis #1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Hypothesis #2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
After Activation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Methodology
39
7.1
Test Set-up Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.1.1
Dapozol R
○300 MEA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.1.2
Cell House Components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.1.3
Flow Scheme
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.1.4
IT System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.1.5
Baltic Fuel Cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.2
Experimental Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2.1
Impedance Spectroscopy Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
1
==PAGE:4==
8
Results & Interpretations
47
8.1
Ohmic Resistance in Flow Plates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8.2
Flow Rates & Temperature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.3
Current Density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
8.3.1
Low Current Densities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
8.3.2
High Current Densities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
8.4
Hot Press
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
8.5
Baltic Pressure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
8.6
Doping Level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
8.7
Polarization Curve
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
8.8
Phosphorous Mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
8.9
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
9
Conclusion
77
9.1
Future Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
10 Appendix
85
2
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
My deep gratitude is expressed towards all my supervisors;professor Jens Oluf
Jensen, professor Qingfeng Li, senior researcher Lars Nilausen Cleemann & CTO
of DPS Thomas Steenberg for their fuel cell expertise & knowledge, their useful
guidance and their constructive criticism during this study.
Another special thank is directed towards Silvia Martinez Alfaro, chemical en-
gineer at DPS, for teaching me how to put together MEAs at DPS, and helping
me gathering the papyex measurements by teaching me fundamental principles of
the experiments and software usage.
The last thank is for Larisa Seerup, laboratory technician at DTU, for helping
me by making the SEM/EDX cross sectional images of the MEAs.
3
==PAGE:6==
List of Abbreviations
AFC
Alkaline Fuel Cell
BoL
Beginning of Life
CL
Catalyst Layer
DC
Direct Current
DL
Doping Level
DMFC
Direct Methanol Fuel Cell
DPS
Danish Power Systems Aps
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
ECSA
Electrochemical Surface Area
EDX
Energy-Dispersive X-ray
EIS
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
GDL
Gas Diﬀusion Layer
HOR
Hydrogen Oxidation Reaction
HT-PEMFC
High Temperature Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell
LT-PEMFC
Low Temperature Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell
MCFC
Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell
MEA
Membrane Electrode Assembly
MPL
Micro-Porous Layer
OCV
Open Circuit Voltage
ORR
Oxygen Reduction Reaction
PA
Phosphoric Acid
PAFC
Phosphoric Acid Fuel Cell
PBI
PolyBenzImidazole
PEM
Polymer Electrolyte Membrane
PEMFC
Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell
PTFE
PolyTetraFluoroEthylene / Teﬂon
SEM
Scanning Electron Microscopy
SOFC
Solid Oxide Fuel Cell
TPB
Three-Phase Boundary
YSZ
Yttrium Stabilized Zirconium
4
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Ideas of how to reduce greenhouse gas emissions are growing faster every day. New
green technologies are developed more frequently to accommodate the idea of a
sustainable future and the knowledge about how to suppress the worldwide CO2
issue is getting stronger.
The fuel cell technology is among the expanding sustainable industries and has
got high interest for investments during the last 5-10 years. The fuel cell industry
exceeded $1 billion in revenues worldwide in 2012 [1].
There are still a lot of research needed to make the fuel cell industry more prof-
itable.
The basic ideas are to lower the manufacturing price of the fuel cells,
increasing the performance/eﬃciency and increasing the durability. These ideas
are common for each kind of energy conversion technology.
This study is focusing on one speciﬁc type of fuel cell which is the high tem-
perature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell (HT-PEMFC). This type of fuel
cell has received a lot of attraction especially for mobile applications due to its high
power density capacity and high impurity tolerance [2]. Dapozol R
○300 MEAs from
Danish Power Systems ApS (DPS) are investigated in collaboration with Techni-
cal University of Denmark (DTU) to get a better understanding of the beginning
phase of a fuel cell lifetime. The HT-PEMFC has an activation period starting
from Beginning of Life (BoL) and has a typical duration of ≈100 hours. Dur-
ing these 100 hours the performance of the fuel cell tends to be unstable until a
certain point of stabilization is reached. The underlying mechanism(s) behind the
activation period is unknown which has triggered this study to be initiated.
To investigate the activation process two hypotheses are created focusing on trans-
portation of phosphoric acid (PA) originating from the membrane. Durability ex-
periments are carried out to closely investigate this activation period by varying
parameters such as operating temperature, operating cell pressure, reactant gas
ﬂow rates, etc. Diﬀerent techniques are utilized to accommodate the hypotheses;
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) to investigate internal resistance
contributions during operation, conducting polarization- and activation curves to
investigate performance changes during activation, ion milled scanning electron
microscopy (SEM) cross sectional images are conducted to map phosphorous mi-
gration in the membrane and electrodes before and after activation.
5
==PAGE:8==
1.1
Motivation
The reason to initiate this study is mainly due to DPS having high interests in
optimizing the production of membrane electrode assemblies (MEA). The activa-
tion period prevents DPS to deliver MEAs directly from production to buyer due
to the measured potential being unstable the ﬁrst ≈100 hours of operation. DPS
is compelled to activate the produced MEAs before delivering. The intentions of
this study is to attain knowledge about the mechanism of the activation process
and how DPS will be able to reduce the activation time as much as possible. From
a large scale manufacturing point of view the stacks assembled with e.g. 100 fuel
cells also need to be tested/activated before delivering. The results from this study
is supposed to help reducing and/or predicting the activation time at large scale
as well.
6
==PAGE:9==
2
Why Fuel Cell Technology
The interest in fuel cells has grown to a large extent within the last 50 years
although it does not mean it is a new technology [3].
The ﬁrst ’gas battery’
was invented in 1839 by William Grove and was later known as the ﬁrst fuel cell
[4]. The interest in fuel cell technology became large more than 100 years after
the ﬁrst invention.
The climate and economic perspectives made the fuel cell
industry grow. The world population began to realize the climate changes and the
impacts of emitting green house gasses, e.g. carbon dioxide from conventional fuel
combustion [5]. The evolution in CO2 emissions worldwide are illustrated in ﬁgure
2.1.
Figure 2.1: An illustration of the world wide CO2 emissions in million tonnes from
1850 to 2011 [5]
It is estimated that CO2 emissions were 150 times higher in 2011 than in 1850.
The tremendous increase in CO2 is mainly due to industrialization during the
1900s and the population growth. From year 1850 fuel-consuming technologies
were invented exponentially, not only to satisfy scientiﬁc curiosity but also to
accommodate the large growth in population. The consequences of burning natural
gas, oil and coal by that time were not known. Nowadays China has the highest
emission rate of CO2 followed by the United States, India, Russia and Japan. By
realizing these consequences of burning fossil fuels creates incentives to focus more
on non/less-polluting technologies, such as fuel cells [5].
The current research in fuel cell technology is aiming at making the fuel cells more
proﬁtable to commercialize. The cost of the fuel cell components has been reduced
7
==PAGE:10==
through time which makes the interest grow, see ﬁgure 2.2 which illustrates an
example of the reduction in dollars per kWh through time [6].
Figure 2.2: The cost of an 80-kWnet automotive LT-PEMFC assuming a production
volume of 500.000 units per year according to the department of energy (DOE) in USA
[6].
To oblige the inclining rates of green house gasses in the atmosphere higher
investments and eﬀorts are put into the fuel cell industry. One of the reasons
to make the reduction in cost per kWnet by ≈57% possible from 2006 to 2015
is mainly due to the declining amounts of platinum content needed as the fuel
cell electrocatalyst. Even though ﬁgure 2.2 shows the cost reduction for a low-
temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell (LT-PEMFC) it gives also a
general picture of the overall fuel cell cost development due to the fact that many
fuel cell systems use or have used platinum or a platinum alloy as catalyst.
2.1
Fuel Cell Principles
Fuel cells have some features in common with batteries. These electricity generat-
ing technologies both utilize electrochemical principles to convert chemical energy
into electricity. The diﬀerence is that fuel cells generate electricity continuously
when feeding with a speciﬁc fuel while batteries need to be either replaced or
recharged once in a while.
8
==PAGE:11==
This study is focusing only on the PEM fuel cell type so the general principles
behind that type are elaborated more detailed. All fuel cell types are fed with
two reactants, usually gases, to make the oxidation and reduction on each side of
the cell. PEM fuel cells use hydrogen and oxygen as reactants to produce water,
heat and electricity. A fuel cell consists of many parts contributing diﬀerently to
maintain a high level of performance. The parts of a fuel cell is illustrated in ﬁgure
2.3a and the chemistry principle is illustrated in ﬁgure 2.3b.
(a) PEMFC components [7]
(b) PEMFC chemistry [8]
Figure 2.3: An example of PEMFC components (a) and chemical principles (b)
The membrane/electrolyte is that part classifying the type of fuel cell, e.g.
a LT-PEMFC uses a water based membrane called Naﬁon and a HT-PEMFC
uses a acid-base membrane called PBI. The membrane is responsible for the ion
transport in a fuel cell and the separation of anode and cathode. in a PEMFC
the membrane establishes the conduction of protons (H+). Hydrogen is used as
fuel and is oxidized at the anode on the catalyst surface. When the oxidation of
hydrogen occurs protons and electrons are released. The protons migrate through
the membrane to the cathode side while the electrons migrate through an electronic
conducting wire through a load to the cathode side. At the cathode side an inlet
of an oxidant specie e.i. pure oxygen or air is reduced when reacting with the
electrons on the catalyst surface. Oxygen reacts with electrons and protons to
form water and heat as product.
The sequence containing half-cell- and total
chemical reactions are highlighted in (2.1)-(2.3) [3].
Anode :
H2
→2 H+ + 2 e–
(2.1)
Cathode :
O2 + 4 H+ + 4 e– →2 H2O
(2.2)
Total :
2 H2 + O2
→2 H2O
(2.3)
9
==PAGE:12==
Fuel cells are used for many diﬀerent applications e.g. vehicles, portables de-
vices, stationary generators, etc. depending on the type of fuel cell. A single fuel
cell is able to generate <1 volt which is typically not enough for even the smallest
applications. It is therefor needed to make a stack of cells to be able to generate
higher voltages. In a stack all the cells are connected and the output power is the
total contribution of all the individual cells. The size of the stack depends on its
application, e.g. a portable computer needs 20-50 W power output which refers to
a small stack compared to a vehicle that needs 50-125 kW power output [9].
There are several types of commercial fuel cells. The choice of fuel cell type
depends on the application. Several parameters are varied when changing the fuel
cell application, e.g. workload, operating temperature, electrical eﬃciencies, etc.
Table 2.1 shows the most popular fuel cell types together with their most applied
electrolyte type, operating temperatures and a typical application.
Table 2.1: Most common fuel cell types and their speciﬁcations about electrolyte, oper-
ating temperature and applications [10]
Fuel cell
Membrane
Operating
Typical
type
/Electrolyte
temperature
applications
LT-PEMFC
Naﬁon (water based)
60-80 ◦C
Automotive
HT-PEMFC
PBI (acid-base)
120-200 ◦C
Automotive
MCFC
Potassium carbonate
600-700 ◦C
Stationary
PAFC
Liquid PA
150-200 ◦C
Stationary
DMFC
Naﬁon (water based)
60-130 ◦C
Portables
SOFC
YSZ (ceramic based)
800-1000 ◦C
Stationary
AFC
Potassium hydroxide
60-90 ◦C
Space crafts
2.2
Hydrogen as a Fuel
Hydrogen is the lightest known element in the periodic table. This has certain
numbers of advantages and disadvantages when considering hydrogen as a fuel.
One of the major challenges within the fuel cell industry is to make a proper
storage solution for hydrogen.
Due to hydrogen being a very volatile gas and
having a low volumetric power density it has the tendency to diﬀuse out through
common types of fuel storage/transport materials, e.g. steel containers, pipelines,
etc. The most common way to store pure hydrogen is pressurized in a container at
around 700-800 bars. This container is made of a special carbon ﬁber material for
mobile applications so the escape of hydrogen is limited while having a reduced
weight of the tank [3].
10
==PAGE:13==
One solution to this volatility problem of hydrogen is to convert hydrogen into
some sort of hydrogen carrier such as methanol (CH3OH). Methanol is liquid at
ambient conditions and thereby more easy to handle. Many high-temperature fuel
cell systems running on hydrogen use methanol as fuel through a reformer [3]. The
reformer makes the following chemical reaction:
CH3OH(g) + H2O(g) →+CO2(g) + 3 H2(g)
(2.4)
A byproduct from the reaction is carbon monoxide which is why a directly
connected reforming system is highly used for high-temperature fuel cell systems
due to their higher CO tolerance. The CO2 product has only diluting eﬀect as it
is chemically inert [3].
The motivations for using hydrogen (or methanol) as a fuel are to be found
when comparing with conventional combustion engines running on gasoline. Ta-
ble 2.2 sums up relevant properties of hydrogen, methanol and gasoline/octane
(C8H18).
Table 2.2: Some properties of hydrogen, methanol and gasoline [3].
Hydrogen
Methanol
Gasoline
H2
CH3OH
C8H18
Molecular weight [g/mol]
2.016
32.04
114.2
Boiling point [◦C]
-252.77
64.7
125.7
Net enthalpy of combustion at 25◦C [kJ/mol]
241.8
638.5
5512.0
Liquid density [kg/m3]
77
786
702
Gravimetric energy density [MJ/kg]
144
20
48
Volumetric energy density [MJ/dm3]
5 [700 bar]
16 [1 bar]
32 [1 bar]
As mentioned earlier, the molecular weight of hydrogen is the smallest known
and to make it more storeable and non-volatile it is converted to methanol which
has a much higher molecular weight. One of the large advantages is the gravimet-
ric energy density of hydrogen, which is 144 MJ/kg compared to gasoline which is
48 MJ/kg, which means that ideally it is possible to obtain three times as much
energy from hydrogen than gasoline if the same amount of fuel mass is considered.
Hydrogen has a low volumetric energy density compared to gasoline, which is why
hydrogen is typically stored highly compressed leading to the volumetric energy
density increases.
11
==PAGE:14==
There are several ways to produce hydrogen. The most extended hydrogen pro-
ducing technologies are highlighted [3]:
• Electrolysis which is the opposite reaction of a fuel cell, the reduction
of water produces hydrogen. By electrolysis hydrogen is produced at high
purity due to hydrogen and oxygen being the only products. The oxygen
and hydrogen are produced at the anode and cathode, respectively. The
following half-cell reactions show the anode and cathode part when an acidic
electrolyte is used:
Anode : 2 H2O
→O2 + 4 H+ + 4 e–
(2.5)
Cathode : 4 H+ + 4 e– →2 H2
(2.6)
The reaction takes place with a direct current (DC) ﬂowing through the cell
with a potential of ≥1.23 V which is the standard reduction potential of
splitting water [11].
• Steam reforming is the most used technology to produce hydrogen. Steam
reforming extracts the hydrogen bonded closely to a carbon atom from an
alkane - mostly natural gas/methane (CH4). This reaction is not as pure as
electrolysis but more popular due to it being a cheaper hydrogen production
technology.
Steam reforming with natural gas has the following reaction
mechanism:
CH4 + H2O →CO + 3 H2
(2.7)
Methane steam reforming is an endothermic reaction and usually takes place
around 800-900 ◦C involving a nickel-based catalyst.
• Water gas shift is a following reaction to the steam reforming process and
a way to reduce the amount of carbon monoxide produced during the steam
reforming. The water gas shift process has the following reaction:
CO + H2O →CO2 + H2
(2.8)
All three hydrogen producing processes are examples of how to extract hy-
drogen from other hydrogen-rich sources. Hydrogen can not be found as a free
element in nature or be mined out from the underground as many other heavier
elements. As long as hydrogen is needed as a fuel it will be necessary to have
sources containing hydrogen for extraction, e.g. water, alkanes, alcohols, etc.
12
==PAGE:15==
3
State of the Art HT-PEMFC
The HT-PEMFC which operates in the range of 120-200 ◦C originates from the
LT-PEMFC which operates in the range 60-80 ◦C. The temperature diﬀerence be-
tween HT-PEMFC and LT-PEMFC may not seem high although HT-PEMFC has
other advantages and disadvantages compared to LT-PEMFC. The HT-PEMFC
was invented back in 1995 [12] due to the fact that naﬁon based polymer in LT-
PEMFC is very intolerant to impurities such as carbon monoxide in the reactant
gases compared to HT-PEMFC. HT-PEMFC can tolerate >1.0% CO content in
the reformate gas while LT-PEMFC can only tolerate <0.002% due to the fact
that CO is strongly adsorbed on the platinum surface in the catalyst at the operat-
ing temperature for LT-PEMFC. This lowers the available electrochemical surface
area (ECSA) [2]. If hydrogen is produced from reforming processes, e.g. steam
reforming, carbon monoxide is formed as a byproduct. If the reformer is directly
connected to the fuel cell, larger amounts of carbon monoxide are expected to be
supplied into the fuel cell which is crucial considering a LT-PEMFC compared
to a HT-PEMFC. The HT-PEMFC has other advantages than just high impurity
tolerance such as improved heat and water management, high conductivities, good
mechanical properties and high thermal stability [13, 14]. The fuel eﬃciency of a
HT-PEMFC is higher than a LT-PEMFC if the exhaust heat produced in a HT-
PEMFC is used as steam production for the reformation process. This enables
a HT-PEMFC to reach an overall eﬃciency of 85-90% including heat utilization
compared to a LT-PEMFC which is 70-75% [15, p. 476].
The DOE points out the current technical status (year 2015) of PEMFC and
future technical targets (year 2020). For PEMFC to become a feasible solution
for e.g. transportation applications some enhancements need to take place within
the areas of diﬀerent fuel cell parts such as membranes, electrocatalyst, bipolar
plates and the whole membrane-electrode assembly (MEA). These targets support
the ideas of reducing the fuel cell fabrication cost and raise the fuel cell durability.
The status and future targets of some of the areas are highlighted in table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Current status and targets for PEMFC properties of automotive running on
H2 from DOE [16]
Characteristic
Units
2015 Status
2020 Targets
Cost
$/kWnet
17
14
Durability with cycling
hours
2.500
5.000
Total Platinum content
g/kW
0.16
0.125
Loss in performance at 1.5 A/cm2
mV
65
<30
13
==PAGE:16==
Other targets can be found in ref. [16]. DOE does not destinguish between
LT-PEMFC and HT-PEMFC. According to DOE the operating temperature of a
PEMFC is targeted to be 120 ◦C.
3.1
Basic Terms
The chemistry and fuel cell setup of a HT-PEMFC is basically the same as ex-
plained in subsection 2.1. This subsection is elaborating more detailed on the fuel
cell components e.i. electrolyte and electrodes to emphasize their importance. A
large part of the investigation is devoted to the MEA part of a HT-PEMFC due
to it being the most crucial and sensitive part of a fuel cell.
3.1.1
Acid-doped PBI Electrolyte
The electrolyte/membrane represents the core of a fuel cell. It is responsible for
the proton conduction from the anode to the cathode side as soon as the hydrogen
is oxidized plus separating the electrodes to avoid mixing the reactants.
The
triple-phase boundary (TPB) reactions are occurring at the interface between the
electrode and electrolyte, involving the reactant gas, the catalyst in the electrode
and the polymer in the electrolyte as shown in ﬁgure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: An illustration of the TPB reaction at the interface between the electrode
and the electrolyte involving hydrogen reactant gas, electrons and protons products [17]
When the hydrogen is oxidized on the catalyst surface, protons and electrons
are formed. The transportation of electrons and excess reactant gas through the
electrolyte has to be avoided as much as possible, otherwise performance will de-
crease due to it not being utilized as fuel and blocking the electrolyte for ion
transportation.
Another challenge is to make the electrolyte highly proton conductive. Nowa-
days, the electrolyte in a HT-PEMFC is an acid-doped PBI-based electrolyte. PBI
is short for Polybenzimidazole (poly[2,2’-(m-phenylen)-5,5’-bisbenzimidazole]) and
14
==PAGE:17==
is a benzimidazole polymer in the group of aromatic organic compounds. The re-
peating unit cell of a PBI molecule is shown in ﬁgure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: PBI repeat unit [18]
The PBI is doped usually in phosphoric acid which provides the proton conduc-
tivity of the electrolyte. The PBI is an alkaline polymer due to the imide-groups
(-NH-) having proton accepting properties. To have a high proton conductivity
the PBI is doped with a strong amphoteric1 acid, such as PA [14]. The amphoteric
property of PA is formulated in the following reaction:
2 H3PO4 →H2PO –
4 + H4PO +
4
(3.1)
When PBI is doped in this amphoteric acid the infrastructure of proton transfer
mechanism is established. It makes the hydrogen bond network between the PBI
and PA more dynamic. This causes the hydrogen bonds to break and form in the
electrolyte and thereby conducting the protons. This proton conducting process is
called the Grotthuss mechanism. The Grotthuss mechanism is believed to be the
most dominating proton transfer process in a PBI-based acid-doped electrolyte,
although the Vehicle Transport mechanism also plays a role [2]. The Vehicle Trans-
port mechanism is diﬀerent due to protons being carried/transported across the
electrolyte as in a vehicle. Water is the most popular proton solvent as protons
will be carried as H3O+ ions and are independent of the inﬁnite hydrogen bond
network. Due to PA having a signiﬁcantly higher viscosity than water, the vehicle
mechanism is believed to be vague in a HT-PEMFC with a PBI-based acid-doped
electrolyte [2, p. 37].
This type of polymer membrane doped in PA and operates at ≈160 ◦C it es-
tablishes a suﬃciently high chemical-, thermal- and mechanical stability in the
membrane.
3.1.2
Electrodes
The electrodes are the parts sandwiching the electrolyte and consist of diﬀerent
components such as; the gas diﬀusion layer (GDL), the micro-porous layer (MPL)
1A substance having both proton donor groups (acidic) and proton acceptor groups (basic)
15
==PAGE:18==
and the catalyst layer (CL). An illustration of these three layers are shown in ﬁgure
3.3. The CL is the most expensive part of the electrodes causing it to be also the
most investigated part of the electrode. The high price of the CL is mainly due to
the content of platinum, which is a noble metal used as the electrocatalyst both
at the anode and cathode site.
Figure 3.3: Electrode components; GDL, MPL and CL [19]
The GDL is a porous material commonly composed of woven or non-woven
carbon cloth or ﬁbers. The primary function of the GDL is as the name describes
to allow diﬀusion of hydrogen and oxygen gases to the catalyst layer to support
the electrochemical half-cell reactions (2.1) and (2.2) as mentioned in subsection
2.1. A secondary function is the need of electrical conductance which supports the
transport of electrons formed at the anode to the current collectors through the
GDL, and the transport from current collectors through the GDL to the cathode
where electrons are consumed. The GDL also provides mechanical strength to
support the CL [20].
Figure
3.4:
Plat-
inum particles on car-
bon support [21]
The MPL is located between the GDL and CL which
commonly consists of a mixture of carbon and polytetraﬂu-
oroethylene (PTFE e.g. teﬂon). The MPL reduces the con-
tact resistance between GDL and CL and thereby limiting
the loss of active catalyst sites. Due to the hydrophobic
properties of teﬂon the MPL improves the water manage-
ment and prevents ﬂooding of water and PA in the porous
structure. The MPL is a layer that supports/stabilizes the
CL. More speciﬁc MPL properties depend on the MPL type
[20].
The CL is located between the MPL and the electrolyte. The purpose of the
CL is to maintain the electrochemical processes at the anode and cathode at a
16
==PAGE:19==
proper rate. The electrocatalyst is commonly made up by platinum or platinum-
alloys with diﬀerent loading typically estimated in [mg/cm2]. Figure 3.4 illustrates
a carbon support particle decorated with active platinum particles. The CL is a
porous layer and has hydrophobic properties provided from the MPL, meaning
that a blocking barrier against water and PA is established. At the anode it is
the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) and at the cathode it is the oxygen re-
duction reaction (ORR). In a HT-PEMFC the ORR has a higher dependence of
platinum loading in the CL compared to HOR when using an acid-doped elec-
trolyte [2, p. 297]. The oxidation of hydrogen has fast kinetics and the exchange
current density is high [22] contrary to the reduction of oxygen which has a more
complex reaction mechanism with various intermediates involving multi-electron
transference [23].
3.1.3
Resistances & Degradation
The ideal HT-PEMFC is able to continuously deliver electricity as long as the fuel
and oxidant are ﬂowing to the system. By considering not having any losses (or
irreversibilities) the theoretical potential obtained from a single fuel cell running
on hydrogen and oxygen can be calculated from equation 3.2.
E = −∆G◦
r
2 · F
(3.2)
Where E is the reversible cell voltage (OCV), F is the Faraday constant, ∆G◦
r
is the Gibbs free energy of the reaction; H2 + 1/2 O2 →H2O which changes with
operating temperature and state of product (liquid or gas) [3, p. 30]. For a HT-
PEMFC operating at 200◦C the water product state is steam which implies that
the Gibbs free energy of reaction is approximately −220.4 kJ/mol and this gives a
reversible voltage of:
E =
220.4 kJ/mol
2 · 96 485 C/mol ≈1.14 V
(3.3)
This value assumes no losses due to resistances. The fuel cell will experience
voltage losses at diﬀerent currents due to diﬀerent resistances within the system
which are highlighted below [3, p. 48].
• Activation losses are due to the overvoltage needed to polarize the electrode
surface. The overvoltage is needed to establish electron transference to and
from the electrodes which lead to a voltage drop.
• Fuel crossover losses occur due to hydrogen permeability in the electrolyte
which causes fuel (hydrogen) to migrate through the membrane from the
anode to the cathode instead of being oxidized at the anode. This reduces
17
==PAGE:20==
fuel utilization and leads to lack of fuel cell performance. A worse scenario
is the formation of pinholes which are holes created in the electrolyte when
degraded. The pinholes make an easy path of hydrogen through the mem-
brane. Fuel crossover is why in practice the OCV usually is lower than the
theoretical value calculated in eq. 3.3.
• Ohmic losses is related to Ohm’s law and target the losses corresponding
to the transportation of ions through the electrolyte and the transport of
electrons through the electrodes and current collectors.
• Mass transport/concentration losses occur at the surface of the electrodes
from where the electrochemistry is processed when oxidizing the hydrogen
at the anode and reducing the oxygen at the cathode. When the reactants
are used there will be a concentration depletion at the surface and reactants
will need to be replaced. This constant lack of reactant concentration at the
electrode surfaces lead to a voltage loss.
Some of these losses can be addressed through a polarization curve. Such curves
are among the most used tools to characterize fuel cell performance. A polarization
curve shows the potential plotted against current density. Figure 3.5 illustrates
such curve.
Figure 3.5: State-of-art polarization curve [24]
When making a polarization curve of a fuel cell system at the beginning of its
lifetime the performance will most likely be better overall compared to e.g. half
way through its lifetime. This is due to several degradation mechanisms within
the fuel cell while running which causes performance loss. According to DOE the
18
==PAGE:21==
durability goal of an automotive engine running on fuel cells should be at least
5.000 hours in 2020 and keeping the performance of an automotive engine above
90% of that at beginning of life (BoL) of the fuel cell [16]. The comprehension
of the degradation mechanisms is a crucial investigation area if HT-PEMFC is
considered to become commercialized worldwide.
Some of the most essential HT-PEMFC degradation mechanisms are addressed
below [25].
• Decrease ECSA by loss of catalytic active sites (activation loss) due to
– Platinum particle agglomeration caused by platinum having a weakened
attachment to the carbon support and thereby tend to be dissolved and
recrystallize into larger particles [26, 27, 28].
– Carbon support corrosion caused by an oxidative reaction of the carbon
support forming carbon dioxide which leads to detaching of platinum
particles. At elevated temperatures the corrosion process is enhanced
and thereby a relevant issue for HT-PEMFC [25].
– Catalyst poisoning caused by catalyst sites being blocked due to ad-
sorption of e.g. carbon monoxide and other impurities depending on
the use of fuel and oxidant [14, 29, 26].
• Lack of reactants distribution to the TPB (mass transport loss) due to
– Electrode ﬂooding with acid caused by diﬀusion of PA from electrolyte
to the electrode which will decrease electrode hydrophobicity [26, 30].
– Gas channel blockage caused by diﬀusion and precipitation of foreign
elements into the porous electrode structure e.g. electrolyte polymer
remnants [26].
• Ohmic resistance increase (ohmic loss) due to
– Increased contact resistance between cell components caused by build-
up of corrosion products which act as electrical insulators [26, 31].
– Loss of electrolyte conductivity caused by dehydration of PA forming
polyphosphoric acid which has a lower ionic conductivity. General acid
loss/leaching decreases electrolyte conductivity due to e.g. high com-
pression which can squeeze out PA, condensed water can drag out PA
from electrolyte, among others [32, 33].
19
==PAGE:22==
4
Characterization Techniques
This chapter describes three characterization techniques in general and how they
are utilized in this study to attain knowledge about the activation process.
4.1
Polarization Curve
The polarization curve technique is shortly addressed in section 3.1 and ﬁgure 3.5
will be used as a general visualization while emphasizing the principles of a polar-
ization curve in this subsection.
When testing a fuel cell the polarization curve is one of the most common meth-
ods used to make an impression of how the potential response is when drawing
a current. By slowly increasing the current density and measuring the potential
response a line similar to the one in ﬁgure 3.5 can be drawn. As described in
section 3.1 the path along the polarization curve can be divided into diﬀerent
resistance/overpotential contributions. This testing method is commonly used be-
cause it is easy to compare performance of the fuel cell with other cells having
diﬀerent speciﬁcations.
In this study the polarization curves are not as widely used as the impedance
spectroscopy technique, which will be described in the next subsection. Although
the few polarization curves taken will be to compare an activated fuel cell with a
non-activated fuel cell to investigate which overpotential contribution is altering
during the activation process.
4.2
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
EIS is a tool used to investigate internal resistances in diﬀerent parts of an electric
circuit system. EIS is also a commonly used technique to investigate a fuel cell
system. EIS is the main characterization technique used in this study and thereby
the most elaborated.
4.2.1
Deﬁnition of EIS
The EIS method is useful to measure resistances when practical measurements
deviate from Ohm’s law, meaning when the potential response does not change
linearly when altering the current drawn from the system. By applying an alter-
nating current (AC) sinusoidal signal of either current or potential to the system
with a small amplitude the response is also an AC sinusoidal signal of either po-
tential or current, respectively. The impedance is deﬁned similar to the resistance
from the Ohm’s law but has a frequency-dependent current and voltage relation.
20
==PAGE:23==
The following equations show the resistance as the linear relation between poten-
tial and current deﬁned from the Ohm’s law to the left, and the impedance deﬁned
as the frequency-dependent relation between potential and current to the right:
R ≡E
I
Z ≡E(ω)
I(ω)
(4.1)
Where R is the resistance in [Ω], E is the voltage in [V], I is the current in [A]
and Z is the impedance in [Ω] [34].
The applied signal will be within a certain frequency range which is needed to ob-
tain all the diﬀerence resistant contributions. In fuel cell systems the EIS technique
is usually conducted by having a steady-state DC of either current or potential
running at a speciﬁc value and then superimposing an AC signal. The applied sig-
nal versus the response signal are measured at diﬀerent frequencies and makes a
horizontal displacement of the response signal on the time axis. This displacement
or shift on the time axis is called a phase shift as illustrated in ﬁgure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Sinusoidal current (I) response from an applied potential (E) signal giving
a phase shift on the time (t) axis [35]
The phase shift measured from the current response in ﬁgure 4.1 also has a
speciﬁc frequency value. The response signal can be analyzed as a Fourier series,
which is the sum of the response signals at diﬀerent frequencies [34]. The applied
signal usually has a small amplitude causing the response signal to be pseudo-
linear which makes the response signal sinusoidal if the applied signal is sinusoidal
at the same frequency.
21
==PAGE:24==
A detailed mathematical derivation is not included in this study. It is convenient
to represent impedance data through a Nyquist plot by using polar coordinates
where the phase shift can be translated to a phase angle.
The phase angle is
the argument (angle) from the x-axis and the impedance is the magnitude of the
vector, shown in ﬁgure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Data representation of impedance data showing phase angle as argument
and impedance as modulus vector [35].
The semicircular shape of the plot is elaborated later in this section. Figure
4.2 showed axis as a real and imaginary part which is convenient due to the fact
that impedance data is mostly treated as complex numbers. A general way of
describing impedance as complex numbers is:
Z = ZRe −i · ZIm
(4.2)
How to present data will be elaborated in subsection 4.2.3 with a fuel cell as
an example.
4.2.2
Equivalent Circuit Modelling
To comprehend impedance data it is necessary to make an equivalent circuit model
for the electrochemical system. When talking about electrical resistance it is con-
venient to relate it to a wire having the ability to slow down a current ﬂow. This
picture of a wire would correspond to a resistor representing an ohmic resistance
throughout the wire. In a fuel cell system there are more than one type of resis-
tance contributing component and the terminologies are:
• a resistor that is directly related to the Ohm’s law when drawing a cur-
rent or applying a potential. In the case of a fuel cell this is from the ion-
22
==PAGE:25==
transportation through the membrane, the electron transportation through
ﬂow plates/current collector and the charge transfer running the electro-
chemical processes on both anode and cathode [36][37].
• a capacitor that is composed of two conductor plates in parallel separated
by an insulating material. In the case of a fuel cell this is the charging of the
electrochemical double-layer in the electrodes [38][37].
• an inductor that is an electrical component able to store energy in a magnetic
ﬁeld when having an electric current running through. In the case of a fuel
cell that is the wires connected to the system that provide the ﬂow of current
which act as inductors [39][37].
• a warburg element is a modelling element tool used to model the gas trans-
fer/diﬀusion process. If the diﬀusion layer has a speciﬁc thickness the element
is called ﬁnite-length warburg [40].
Figure 4.3 shows the three circuit symbols plus letter symbols used to identify
the electrical components in a circuit system.
(a) A resistor (R) [36]
(b) A capacitor (C) [38]
(c) An inductor (L) [39]
(d) A warburg element (W) [40]
Figure 4.3: Electric circuit elements
To make an equivalent circuit model for a fuel cell is not an easy task due to
the fact that there is not only one model solution that ﬁts to one fuel cell system
[37]. The circuit elements in ﬁgure 4.3 are combined in series and parallel in a
certain way to represent a fuel cell.
In this study the model in ﬁgure 4.4 is used when ﬁtting the amount of impedance
data gathered.
23
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.4: Equivalent circuit model of a HT-PEMFC [41]
In ﬁgure 4.4, 1 is the inductor contribution of the wires (Lwires). 2 is the ﬁnite
warburg diﬀusion element. 3 is a resistor corresponding to the charge transfer
resistance at the cathode (RCT,c). 4 is a constant phase element used instead of
an ideal capacitor which represents the charge of the double-layer at the cathode
(QDL,c).
A constant phase element is a modiﬁed capacitor which often makes
a better ﬁt and includes the three-dimensional structure of the electrodes. 5 is a
resistor corresponding primarily to the ohmic resistance in the electrolyte and with
a smaller contribution from the ohmic resistance in the ﬂow plates collecting the
current (Relectrolyte). 6 is a resistor corresponding to the charge transfer resistance
at the anode (RCT,a). 7 is a constant phase element similar to 4 and represents
the charge of the double-layer at the anode (QDL,a).
4.2.3
Nyquist Plot
To investigate the intrinsic resistance in an electrochemical system, e.g. a fuel
cell, the measured impedance with frequency variations are of high interest and
those data can be examined and displayed in diﬀerent ways. The two common
ways to visualize the data are to make a Nyquist plot or a Bode plot. The nyquist
plot displays the negative imaginary part of the impedance (-ZIm) versus the real
part of the impedance (ZRe). The Bode plot can be displayed on more than one
way but the most common is ZRe or -ZIm vs. log(ω), where ω is the frequency in
hertz. Another bode plot could be φ vs. log(ω) where φ is the phase angle. To be
able to fully understand the shape of a Nyquist plot the equivalent circuit model
is needed. The plot in ﬁgure 4.5 shows an example of a nyquist plot including a
description of how the diﬀerent parts of a Nyquist plot is related to the processes
in a fuel cell.
24
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.5: A nyquist plot of an operating fuel cell [42]
During this study only the nyquist plot is considered. A nyquist plot gives an
indication of the magnitude of the diﬀerence resistances in the fuel cell system. The
nyquist plot in ﬁgure 4.5 shows two semicircles, one small (high frequency loop)
and one big (intermediate frequency loop) together composing the charge trans-
fer/catalytic resistance. The small semicircle is believed to represent the kinetic
resistances of the anode, and the big semicircle representing kinetic resistances of
the cathode. The low frequency loop contributes the gas transfer/diﬀusion resis-
tance, which is deﬁned as the ﬁnite warburg diﬀusion element. The equivalent
circuit model in ﬁgure 4.4 ﬁts to the Nyquist plot in ﬁgure 4.5. Along the Zreal
the frequency runs from high to low values. The intercept on the real axis at the
high frequency corresponds to only ohmic/electrolytic resistance and the intercept
on the real axis at low frequency corresponds to the total resistance of the system
[34].
More details about analyzing the nyquist plot will be further elaborated in section
8.
25
==PAGE:28==
4.3
SEM/EDX Principles
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is a tool used to obtain high-resolution 2-
dimensional images of a solid surface. It is an apparatus that use a focused signal
beam of high-energy electrons to obtain information about morphology, chemical
structure and orientation of materials by analyzing the response electron-sample
signal. SEM is usually performed across a surface of a sample. The sample width
ranging from 5 microns to 1 cm can be scanned with conventional SEM techniques.
This can give a spatial resolution of few nanometres to hundreds of nanometres
[43].
The Energy-Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) is a technique usually integrated
in the same apparatus as the SEM technique. A SEM image is needed to make
EDX measurements. EDX is an analytical tool used to analyze elemental composi-
tion of a sample. The main principle of EDX is to investigate interactions between
X-ray excitation and the surface of a sample. This signal can be translated into
an emission spectrum of all the diﬀerent elements from the surface.
The EDX technique is also able to make X-ray mapping of elements. This can be
done after obtaining the total X-ray emission signal from the surface and thereby
all the elements represented on the surface. One speciﬁc element can be chosen
for mapping with a speciﬁc color by inspecting the sample corresponding to the
speciﬁc X-ray signal [44].
In this study the focus will be on mapping phosphorous from a cross section of
a MEA before and after activated.
26
==PAGE:29==
5
The Activation Process
The activation process, also known as the break-in process, is a well known phe-
nomenon in the fuel cell industry especially when working with acid-base mem-
branes such as PBI. Although the exact nature of the activation process is still
unknown. By considering a HT-PEMFC starts to run at galvanostatic mode (con-
stant current) from BoL the activation is a period of time where the potential is
unstable until a certain duration of time.
A review of previous studies regarding galvanostatic activation are described
in this section based on the fact that activation experiments conducted through
this study are galvanostatic. The diﬀerent conclusions made from the activation
studies described in this chapter are mostly supported by using EIS, see section
4.2 for EIS elaboration.
5.1
Previous Studies on the Activation Process
All the previous studies highlighted in this section are explained superﬁcially in-
cluding only the results obtained and a short description of the analyses.
M. Boaventura et al. [41] tested two types of MEAs; an in-situ prepared and an
ex-situ prepared delivered from BASF which is called Celtec - P1000. The relevant
parameters about the MEA and during the activation of the Celtec - P1000 MEA
is highlighted in ﬁgure 5.1 where the rise in potential from ≈0.60 V to ≈0.68 V
is within the ﬁrst 50 hours starting from BoL.
Figure 5.1: Activation curve (left) including information about the tested MEA and
activation parameters (right) [41].
27
==PAGE:30==
The in-situ MEA had only slightly higher cathode Pt loading (1.0 mg/cm2)
and a doping level of 10 though it is believed that the doping level of Celtec
- P1000 was above 10. The activation procedure was the same for both MEA
types. They investigated the activation process through cyclic voltammetry, EIS
and polarization curves before and after activation. See ﬁgure 5.2 for polarization
curves and nyquist plots before and after activation of the same MEA as in ﬁgure
5.1.
Figure 5.2: Polarization curve (left) and nyquist plot (right) before and after activation
of the activated MEA in ﬁg. 5.1 [41].
They observed from the EIS spectrum that after activating both MEA types
the performance increased due to enhanced catalyst activity and a decrease in
ohmic resistance. The rationale behind the enhanced catalyst activity is due to
migration of PA from the membrane to the CL which increases the three-phase
zone and the decrease in ohmic resistance is due to humidiﬁcation of the membrane.
Vang et al. [45] tested six MEAs from two manufacturers; three from DPS
and three from BASF. The relevant speciﬁcations about the MEAs can be found
in ﬁgure 5.3 next to the activation curves. The activation data from the MEA
labelled DPS3 was lost meaning that only ﬁve of the MEAs were represented with
activation curves.
28
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5.3: Activation curve (left) including relevant information about the tested MEA
and activation parameters (right) [45].
The idea of testing the MEAs are twofold; one to compare the three diﬀerent
types by using EIS as the characterization tool and two to establish criteria for
when a MEA is activated. All the Celtec MEAs had a signiﬁcant performance
increase of 20 mV within the ﬁrst 20 hours of activation and afterwards tended
to either stabilize (BASF2), keep increasing steadily (BASF3) or decrease steadily
(BASF1). DPS1 and DPS2 decrease in performance until 80 hours and 30 hours
of activation, respectively, and increasing steadily afterwards. The plots in ﬁgure
5.4 show polarization curves of all six MEAs after activation and the impedance
spectrum of a Celtec P2100 and a Dapozol 77 MEAs. Due to a software bug a
polarization curve was not conducted from DPS1 right after activation but after
2 and 6 weeks.
29
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5.4: Polarization curve (left) and Nyquist plot (right) after activation of the
MEAs in ﬁg. 5.3 [45].
The Celtec MEAs exhibited a general better performance according to both po-
larization curves and impedance spectra. They observed through EIS an increase
in ohmic resistance during the activation and an increase of active area in the
electrode (decreased activation resistance). No general activation criterion could
be established due to diﬀerences in MEA preparation methods between BASF
and DPS. A signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the activation patterns is observed comparing
MEAs from BASF and DPS.
Tingel¨of et al. [46] investigated the activation process. The purpose was to
explore the activation time and describe methods to reduce that time. Four MEAs
of the type Celtec - P1000 from BASF were tested. The activation curves of all four
MEAs are shown in ﬁgure 5.5 along with relevant information about the MEAs
and activation procedure.
Figure 5.5:
Activation curves of four MEAs (left) including information about the
tested MEA and activation parameters (right) [46].
30
==PAGE:33==
All four MEAs showed a decrease in performance during the ﬁrst approximately
5 hours of activation and start increasing afterwards by approximately 20-25 mV
during the 100 hours of activation. Most of the voltage increase occurred within
the ﬁrst 60 hours. To accommodate the activation time curtailment Tingel¨of et
al. increased the temperature of M1 MEA to 200 ◦C after activating the MEA
at 160 ◦C for 100 hours. The further activation at 200 ◦C is shown in ﬁgure 5.6
together with polarization curves before activation, after activation at 160 ◦C and
after further activation at 200 ◦C.
Figure 5.6: Further activation curve at 200 ◦C of M1 (left) and polarization curves of
all three scenarios of M1 (right) [46].
The further activation at 200 ◦C showed a signiﬁcant voltage increase during
the ﬁrst 18 hours and then degraded after 40 hours. This gives an incentive to
conclude that a higher activation temperature leads to shorter activation time.
The polarization curves show a slight decrease of activation resistance after acti-
vated at 200 ◦C for 18 hours though the same curve showed a slight increase in
ohmic resistance. The pH of the water produced from the fuel cells was tested
to estimate the amount of PA in the water. At increased temperature the water
was observed to be more acidic which might be due to the fact that evaporation
of PA is more crucial at elevated temperatures which leads to a loss in membrane
conductivity. The most optimal activation conditions were concluded to be one-
day galvanostatic activation at 200 ◦C followed by two days of relaxation at 160 ◦C.
Galbiati et al. [47] tested four MEAs of the type Celtec - P2100 from BASF
in three diﬀerent ways. Two of the MEAs were tested equivalent to conﬁrm or
disconﬁrm repeatability.
All four activation curves during the ﬁrst 100 hours
including relevant information about the MEAs and activation procedures can be
found in ﬁgure 5.7.
31
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.7: Activation curve (left) including relevant information about the tested MEA
and activation parameters (right) [47].
MEA1 was activated at a total duration of 50 hours due to a daily startup
and shutdown. MEA1 was activated roughly 8 hours a day and afterwards cooled
down to room temperature. MEA2 and MEA2 bis were identical and activated
continuously for 100 hours. MEA3 was left for 1 hour in contact with the envi-
ronment and thereby exposed to air before activated continuously for 100 hours.
MEA2 and MEA2 bis showed best performance after activated. It is believed that
in MEA3 the PA had absorbed water from the atmosphere altering its position in
the MEA and thereby showed lower performance after 100 hours. Galbiati et al.
characterized resistances with EIS of MEA2 and MEA3 before and after activation
which are seen in ﬁgure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Impedance spectrum of MEA2 and MEA3 before and after activation [47].
32
==PAGE:35==
The EIS supports the activation curves, that MEA2 showed better performance
than MEA3. Both MEA2 and MEA3 have less overall resistance after activation.
The voltage improvement during the activation has been attributed to a decrease
in kinetic resistance while minor variations were observed for ohmic and mass
transport resistances. It was concluded that MEA1 had the fastest activation (50
hours) though the ﬁnal voltage value was below the desired one.
In a DPS internal report [48] four MEAs of the type Dapozol R
○100 were
tested with diﬀerent platinum loading altering from 0.75 mg/cm2 to 1.5 mg/cm2.
The four activation curves are shown in ﬁgure 5.9 including relevant information
about the MEAs and activation procedures. Only at the highest platinum load-
ing (1.5 mg/cm2) the performance increases during activation, the rest decrease in
performance at diﬀerent rates. The performance increase is related to the decrease
of catalytic resistance at the cathode side, meaning that more catalyst is presumed
to be available after activation.
Figure 5.9: Activation curve (left) including relevant information about the tested MEA
and activation parameters (right) [48]
33
==PAGE:36==
5.2
Phosphoric Acid Redistribution
It is believed that possible reasons for observing this voltage increase during acti-
vation are addressed to be either removal of impurities from the catalyst, humidi-
ﬁcation of the membrane or redistribution of PA from the electrolyte, during the
activation [14][46]. During this study the considerations regarding PA redistribu-
tion are chosen to be the main focus.
Eberhardt et al. [31] examined Celtec MEAs from BASF to quantify the redis-
tribution of PA in a HT-PEMFC in-operando by using X-ray imaging techniques.
The PA was quantiﬁed in the GDL and ﬂow plates while running the fuel cell
with varying current density (0.2 A/cm2 and 0.8 A/cm2) and temperature (140 ◦C
and 160 ◦C). By examining the PBI based membrane system it was shown that PA
tends to migrate from cathode to anode. This migration rate grows at high current
density and at high temperature. The reason for this mechanism is addressed to
the formation of hydrogen phosphate anion occurring by PA donating a proton to
a PBI molecule, which carry a part of the ionic current to the anode and thereby
increasing PA content. The current density was set to 0.2 A/cm2 at the beginning
of the experiment without noticing a signiﬁcant amount of PA migration until the
current density was raised to 0.8 A/cm2. The current density raise showed a sig-
niﬁcant increase in PA content at the anode within 15 minutes. Afterwards, the
current density was set to 0.2 A/cm2 again and back diﬀusion of PA was observed
at a slow rate. It was determined that 23 wt % of the total PA content from the
electrolyte migrated to the anode GDL and ﬂow plates at a current density of
0.8 A/cm2, until a steady-state value was reached.
34
==PAGE:37==
6
Hypotheses
Two hypotheses are presented in this section in the light of the activation review
(see section 5) and by having a close ongoing dialogue with the supervisors behind
this study [49][50][51][52]. These hypotheses are made up to accommodate whether
the content of PA is high or low in the electrode before and after activation. Both
hypotheses give rise to a poor utilization of catalyst sites in two diﬀerent ways.
The results obtained in this project will be discussed in section 8 to verify if one
or none of these hypotheses can be conﬁrmed.
6.1
Hypothesis #1
The ﬁrst hypothesis is named Lack of acid due to the idea of the electrodes not
having enough PA to establish suﬃcient ionic conductivity in the electrodes to
the membrane. According to this hypothesis the potential increase which is seen
during the activation process is explained based on PA diﬀusion/migration from
the doped membrane to the electrode.
The hypothesis does not elaborate on
speciﬁcs about the diﬀusion/migration properties of PA. A rough visualization of
this hypothesis is drawn in ﬁgure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: A rough illustration of hypothesis #1
The idea of this hypothesis is that there are several non-utilized platinum
particles in the catalyst layer. The PA is not being suﬃciently distributed in the
35
==PAGE:38==
CL before activated. During activation, the PA will diﬀuse more evenly in the CL
to make the platinum sites more exploited (see section 6.3 for elaboration).
6.2
Hypothesis #2
The second hypothesis is named Flooding.
This is due to the idea of the PA
content being far above what is suﬃcient inside the CL. This will prevent the
electrochemical reaction and transportation of the products. The excess of PA in
the CL comes from the membrane which has presumably been squeezed out in the
CL when assembling the cell. This hypothesis is drawn in ﬁgure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: A rough illustration of hypothesis #2
Flooding of an electrode in a fuel cell is where the CL has been overexposed
to PA so the platinum particles becomes inactive [3]. This issue is related to the
diﬀusivity of reactant gasses in PA which is low leading to a lower fuel cell per-
formance. This hypothesis about electrode ﬂooding also includes the idea of the
ohmic resistance being slightly reduced after activation due to the proton transport
length assumes to be larger at the ﬂooded stage (see section 6.3 for elaboration).
An overview of both hypotheses along with diﬀerent test measurements and
expected outcomes of those are listed in table 6.1
36
==PAGE:39==
Table 6.1: Overview of the hypotheses with presumable expected results from a number
of tests [49][50][51][52]
Test
Expected results
Hyp. #1: Lack of acid
Hyp. #2: Flooding
SEM/EDX of cross section
BoL: Small acid content
BoL: Large acid content in
right after hot pressing and
in CL and GDL
CL and possibly GDL
after successful activation
Activated: More PA in CL
Activated: Less PA in CL
than at BoL
than at BoL
Activation at
Faster activation
Faster activation
1.
increasing temperatures
Activation at increasing
No eﬀect
Faster activation
2.
gas ﬂow rates
Activation at increasing cell
Faster activation
No eﬀect or
3.
compression pressures
slower activation
Activation at increasing
Faster activation
Faster activation
4.
current density
Varied hot-pressing pressure
Closer to full activation at
No eﬀect or longer activation
3.
/time during fabrication
BoL at higher pressure/time
at higher pressure/time
Membrane fabricated with
Slower activation
Faster activation
5.
lower acid doping levels
(Less ﬂooding)
The numbers shown in the right end of the table indicate the individual expla-
nation number behind the expected results which are:
1. The PA moves faster at elevated temperatures due to higher diﬀusion rates
and more evaporation.
2. Considering Hyp. #2 the PA evaporates faster from the ﬂooded CL at higher
ﬂow rates. Considering Hyp. #1 the PA movement from the membrane to
the CL is expected to be unchanged at higher ﬂow rates.
3. Considering Hyp. #2 the increased pressure squeezes even more PA from
the membrane to the CL and thereby a slower activation is the expected
result. Considering Hyp. #1 the activation is expected to be faster if the
membrane is squeezing out PA into the dry CL.
4. At higher current densities the water formation at the cathode is increased.
Considering Hyp. #2 the PA is dragged out of the CL, and considering Hyp.
#1 the PA is dragged from the membrane. Although the electrochemical
migration is intensiﬁed when increasing current density. Both hypotheses
expect faster activation at increased current density.
37
==PAGE:40==
5. By lowering the acid doping levels2 the PA content in the membrane is re-
duced. Considering Hyp. #2 the activation is faster. Less PA means less
ﬂooding. Considering Hyp. #1 the lower acid content means longer time for
PA to diﬀuse into the CL from the membrane.
6.3
After Activation
Both hypotheses are assumed to have more or less the same PA distribution in the
CL after activation. After activation the platinum particles in the CL assume to be
better utilized in both hypotheses and thereby resulting in a general performance
increase of the fuel cell. A rough drawing of the activated fuel cell situation can
be seen in ﬁgure 6.3.
Figure 6.3: A rough illustration of an activated HT-PEMFC
Both reactants and products seem to have a better conductive environment
after activation because all the catalyst particles have a thin layer of PA and the
reactants are more free to move inside the pores of the CL.
2Doping level = number of phosphor molecules per PBI repeat unit
38
==PAGE:41==
7
Methodology
During this chapter the test set-up is described along with the diﬀerent experimen-
tal series and a detailed description of the performed characterization methods.
Four durability test stations were available for this study meaning that four MEAs
ran 100 hours at the same time, although only three of them were mostly used due
to a long term defect on the fourth test station.
7.1
Test Set-up Description
7.1.1
Dapozol R
○300 MEA
All the MEAs used in this study are from the danish company Danish Power
Systems ApS and are all manufactured at the company facility in Kvistgaard,
Denmark. All the MEAs are of the same type which are Dapozol R
○300. They
all have approximately the same load of platinum on both cathode and anode
which lies in the range of 0.8-1.0 mg/cm2.
They are all the same total size of
5 cm · 5 cm = 25 cm2 but have an active area of 21 cm2. All relevant information
about the Dapozol R
○300 MEA are highlighted in table 7.1. All the studied MEAs
are described in ﬁgure 10.3 in Appendix.
Table 7.1: Description of Dapozol R
○300 MEA fabricated at DPS [51]
Dapozol R
○300 MEA
Fuel cell technology
HT-PEMFC
Total cell area (Atotal) [cm2]
25
Active cell area (Aactive) [cm2]
21
Pt loading at anode [mg/cm2]
0.8-1.0
Pt loading at cathode [mg/cm2]
0.8-1.0
Assembling MEA
Hot-press3
H3PO4 doping level
≈11
Electrode thickness [µm]
≈250
Membrane thickness before doping [µm]
45 ±5
Membrane thickness after doping [µm]
≈80
Kapton (gasket) thickness [µm]
50
The MEA is assembled with a hot-press as a standard procedure. The MEA
is assembled with the central layer being the membrane, the next layer being the
kapton gasket and the last layer being the electrodes.
3Standard hot-press values: p = 1.5 tons in t = 3 minutes at Tpress = 100 ◦C
39
==PAGE:42==
7.1.2
Cell House Components
The cell house is an essential part of a fuel cell. It provides suﬃcient distribution
through the ﬂow plates, high sealing conditions, electronic transportation through
current collectors, mechanical and thermal resistance from the carbon material.
Figure 7.1 shows a picture of all the components in a fuel cell excluding the MEA.
Figure 7.1: Fuel cell components consisting of: A) 4 Teﬂon pins, B) 2 Flow plates, C)
8 screws, D) 2 Conduction enhancers, E) 2 Current collectors, F) 2 End plates, G) 2
Potential probes, H) 2 Current probes
Next to the MEA are the ﬂow plates. The ﬂow plates are with four serpentine
ﬂow distributors which is assumed to provide suﬃcient reactant distribution. They
40
==PAGE:43==
are running with a counter ﬂow conﬁguration to anode and cathode respectively
to utilize as much of the active MEA area as possible. Next to the ﬂow plates are
conduction enhancers made of carbon acting to establish better electron conduc-
tivity to the current collectors. The conduction enhancers are connected to the
current collectors which are made of gold. Two potential probes and two current
probes are connected to the current collectors. The cell house is closed and sealed
with two end-plates. The end-plates seal the interior of the cell house with eight
screws each mounted with a torque of 1 Nm.
7.1.3
Flow Scheme
A ﬂow scheme of the set-up is illustrated in ﬁgure 7.2.
Figure 7.2: A ﬂow scheme of the four set-up test stations [49].
7.1.4
IT System
The test bench including the four available test stations is named ”Grove - 12
channel durability test rig” and is connected to a communication system which is
connected to a PC. The communication of the test stations is controlled through
the LabView 2017 software on the PC. The LabView software is able to measure
and control diﬀerent parameters such as:
• the operating temperature of the fuel cell
• the volumetric ﬂow rate of the reactants
41
==PAGE:44==
• the drawn current from the fuel cell based on an electronic load
The LabView control system is able to collect data of all the measured pa-
rameters every second. The data collection is chosen to be done every 60 seconds
which is suﬃcient amount of data when the duration of one test is 100 hours.
To make the impedance measurements an external potentiostat connected to
a PC is connected to the fuel cell. The model of the potentiostat is VersaSTAT 4
AMETEK. The PC has the VersaStudio software that controls the potentiostat.
From VersaStudio parameters such as AC signal amplitude, frequency range, points
per decade, etc. can be controlled. The real- and imaginary impedance can be
monitored to the speciﬁc frequency at a certain time.
7.1.5
Baltic Fuel Cell
All the MEAs examined in this study are assembled in the four test stations men-
tioned in section 7.1.4, except two MEAs. The two MEAs are examined through
a second type of fuel cell testing, called Baltic Fuel Cell. The Baltic setup has
the ability to adjust the Baltic pressure during operation. This testing station is
included to investigate self-assembled MEAs instead of prefabricated hot-pressed
MEAs. The Baltic pressure is controlled with a pneumatic air inlet. The pres-
sure is focused on the active cell area (21 cm2) and the impact on the cell area is
controlled as shown in ﬁgure 7.3.
Figure 7.3: Conversion of Baltic pressure to force on active fuel cell area [53].
42
==PAGE:45==
7.2
Experimental Procedures
A series of experiments with varying parameters are conducted during this study.
The chosen experiments are closely related to those explained in table 6.1. The
purpose is to attain knowledge about the activation process and to conﬁrm or
disconﬁrm the hypotheses explained in section 6.
The varying parameters for the diﬀerent series of experiments are the ﬂow
rates (stoichiometries), the temperature, the current density, the baltic pressure
and the hot-pressing conditions. The temperature is simply varied between 160 ◦C
to 200 ◦without being aﬀected by other parameters. When the activation is cho-
sen to run at a speciﬁc current density, e.g.
0.200 A/cm2, the LabView soft-
ware is set to draw a total current. The active area of the MEA is 21 cm2 which
means that the total current drawn corresponding to the chosen current density is
I = J · A = 0.200 A/cm2 · 21 cm2 = 4.2 A.
Where I is total current, J is current density and A is active area of MEA.
When talking about ﬂow rates of reactants (H2 and O2) the units are usually vol-
ume per time but it is more convenient talking about ﬂow rates as stoichiometries,
see section 5 for elaboration. The oxidant used during all experiments is air (≈
21% O2) instead of pure oxygen (100% O2). The Labview software inputs have
to be in ml/min which need to correspond to the chosen stoichiometry values, e.g
λH2 = 1.2 and λair = 2.0. By using Faraday’s law of electrolysis and the ideal gas
law, see equation 7.1, it is possible to convert from stoichiometries to ml/min [3].
Faraday’s law of electrolysis
Ideal gas law
n =
I
F · z [mol/s]
V = n · R · T0
p0
[m3/s]
(7.1)
By substituting the molar amount from Faraday’s law into the ideal gas law,
the ﬂow rate in ml/min can be calculated.
V = I · R · T0 · 106 · 60 · λ
F · z · p0
[ml/min]
(7.2)
Where R, T0, F, z and p0 are constants and correspond to the gas constant,
temperature of reactants at inlet (ambient), faraday’s constant, number of elec-
trons transferred and pressure of reactants at inlet (ambient), respectively. If the
desired stoichiometries of hydrogen and air are λH2 = 1.2 and λair = 2.0, re-
spectively, the corresponding ﬂow rates of hydrogen and air are 38.8 ml/min and
154.1 ml/min, respectively.
It is also considered that when changing the current density to a new value and
keeping the stoichiometries constant, the ﬂow rates are changing proportional to
43
==PAGE:46==
the current density, see equation 7.2.
A certain set of running parameter values (running temperature, stoichiome-
tries and current density) are chosen to be called standard parameters. The stan-
dard parameters are T = 160 ◦C, λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0 and J = 0.200 A/cm2. The
chosen standard parameters are based on previous activation studies, see section
5, from where the majority have chosen the same values. If one of the parameters
is altered the rest are kept as constants unless speciﬁed otherwise. Several experi-
ments using standard parameters are conducted to clarify how uniform the MEAs
are produced. Table 7.2 describes the diﬀerent experiments conducted during this
study.
44
==PAGE:47==
Table 7.2: Conducted experiments on activation process
Serie no.
Experiment name
Experiment description
3 MEAs tested altering the stoichiometries:
1
Flow rates
1st: λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0
2nd: λH2/λair = 2.4/4.0
3rd: λH2/λair = 4.8/8.0
3 MEAs tested altering operating
Temperature
temperature and stoichiometries
2
&
1st: T = 160 ◦C , λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0
Flow rates
2nd: T = 200 ◦C , λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0
3rd: T = 200 ◦C , λH2/λair = 4.8/8.0
3 MEAs tested altering hot-press conditions
3
Hot press
1st: p = 0.5 ton , t = 3 minutes
2nd: p = 1.5 ton , t = 5 seconds
3rd: p = 1.5 ton , t = 10 minutes
3 MEAs tested altering current density
4
Current density 1
1st: J = 0.100 A/cm2
2nd: J = 0.200 A/cm2
3rd: J = 1.000 A/cm2
3 MEAs tested altering current density
and making polarization curve on 1st MEA
5
Current density 2
1st: J 4 = 0.200 A/cm2
2nd: J = 0.400 A/cm2
3rd: J = 0.600 A/cm2
2 MEAs tested altering current density
Mixed current densities
where the 1st is conducted for SEM/EDX
6
&
and 2nd MEA shifts current density
SEM/EDX
1st: J = 0.200 A/cm2
2nd: J 5 = 0.600 A/cm2
2 MEAs tested altering baltic pressure
7
Baltic pressure
1st: pmin = 2 bar
2nd: pmax = 7.5 bar
2 MEAs tested with
8
Doping level
1st: DL ≈8
2nd: DL ≈7
4A polarization curve has been measured with a current density interval from 0.00 A/cm2 to
≈0.85 A/cm2 before and after activation
5During activation the current density is set to be 0.600 A/cm2 for 23 hours and then shifted
to 0.200 A/cm2 for 1 hour, repeatedly
45
==PAGE:48==
7.2.1
Impedance Spectroscopy Measurements
Impedance measurements were gathered once a day while running the 100 hours
of activation unless speciﬁed otherwise. The EIS experiments were carried out in
potentiostatic mode with an amplitude signal of 5 mV. The frequency range was
set to run from 100 kHz (initial point) to 100 mHz (end point) with 13 points per
decade. See the rest of EIS settings in ﬁgure 10.1 in Appendix. The EIS is a four-
electrode setup having the working- and sense electrodes coupled to the anode and
the counter- and reference electrodes coupled at the cathode.
The equivalent circuit model used is the one in ﬁgure 4.4, as explained in sec-
tion 4.2. The nyquist plot in ﬁgure 4.5 shows the measured data as the blue line
and the modelled ﬁt as the red line. The idea is to obtain resistance values for the
diﬀerent components in the fuel cell. In section 8 the equivalent circuit model is
ﬁtted into the experimental data using a complex non-linear least square method
[54] with an online modelling tool called Elchemea Analytical [55]. When going
through the results the inductance part (positive imaginary impedance) of the
nyquist plots are not included. The inductance part is focusing on cables in the
system which is uninteresting when the main focus of this study is on the MEA
part of the cell.
When ﬁtting the model to the obtained results only the anode, cathode and
ohmic resistance values are interesting and not the warburg diﬀusion. The anode,
cathode and ohmic resistances are modelled according to the real impedance values
(zero imaginary impedance) and the warburg element is modelled according to
both. An example of the modelled ﬁt can be seen in ﬁgure 7.4. The small semicircle
at high frequencies is related to the anode resistance, the larger semicircle next to
is related to the cathode resistance and the last curve is the ﬁnite warburg diﬀusion
element.
Figure 7.4: Nyquist plots of a MEA from series no. 3 showing one with only the data
obtained (top) and one with the modelled ﬁtted to the data (bottom)
46
==PAGE:49==
8
Results & Interpretations
This section contains the results gathered during this study, SEM cross sectional
image with phosphorous mapping, Nyquist plots of impedance measurements,
activation- and polarization curves. The results will be discussed according to
theoretical liability and to conﬁrm or disconﬁrm the hypotheses which were in-
troduced in section 6. The results will be presented in accordance with table 6.1
and thereby not chronological with series no. As explained in section 7.2, a set of
operating standard parameters were chosen to be T = 160 ◦C, λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0
and J = 0.200 A/cm2. Several numbers of MEAs were activated with standard
parameters to clarify repeatability. Few MEAs were tested with diﬀerent ﬂow rates
(stoichiometries), diﬀerent temperatures and diﬀerent current densities. Some of
the MEAs were manufactured by altering hot-pressing conditions and doping lev-
els, these were activated at standard parameters for comparison. Self-assembling
MEAs in the Baltic setup were activated with diﬀerent pressures during activation.
Prior to the data treatment of the gathered activation curves, impedance mea-
surements, etc. a study regarding the ﬂow plates resistances were initiated to get
a clearer picture of MEA resistances.
All the MEAs assembled at DPS have an identiﬁcation name as, e.g. MEA-18-
B167 and has a related batch no. as DPS-18-014. All the MEAs were fabricated
for the purpose of this study, meaning that old MEA leftovers from DPS were
not examined in this study. The time from when the MEA is hot-pressed until
tested/activated is called storage time. The storage times of the diﬀerent MEAs
are thereby considered low and is not expected to have any signiﬁcant impact
on the results [56]. This assumption is the reason that the MEAs are named by
the B167 number and not the batch no. for convenience when going through the
results.
8.1
Ohmic Resistance in Flow Plates
When measuring potential diﬀerences and/or impedance in fuel cell systems the
only focus is to measure MEA properties. The electrochemical process, see equa-
tions 2.1 and 2.2, either produce or consume electrons. The electrons need to
migrate through the ﬂow plates and conduction enhancers to reach the current
collectors or opposite. There will be a potential loss due to resistance in mainly
the ﬂow plates. The measured diﬀerences of potential during the activation ex-
periments and the ohmic resistance when making impedance measurements are
presumably lower than the actual potential- and resistance diﬀerence. This is due
to voltage loss contribution from the ﬂow plates. The four operating cell houses
47
==PAGE:50==
used in this study are assumed to contribute diﬀerently to resistances originating
from the ﬂow plates. The resistance of the ﬂow plates can be estimated by using
a ﬂexible graphite sheet called Papyex instead of MEA together with impedance
spectroscopy [57].
The four cell houses used for activation studies were transported to DPS to
make the Papyex measurements of the cell houses. The cell houses are numbered
5, 6, 7 and 8. The numbers correspond to the channels that were at disposal of
the 12-channels durability system. Both the Papyex sheets and a potentiostat
(SP-150 BioLogic Science Instruments) for impedance spectroscopy containing an-
other software for electrochemical measurements (EC-LabV10.44) were available
at DPS. The Papyex was cut to have the total area corresponding to the active
area of a MEA (21 cm2) and a thickness of 0.5 mm. Although the Papyex is among
other things designed to measure resistances due to its high conductivity, it also
contain a certain amount of resistance itself.
By measuring with one and two
sheets of Papyex in each cell house the resistance contribution from only the ﬂow
plates can be isolated. Both Papyex sheets are assumed to have identical resis-
tances considering them being delivered from the same supplier.
Figure 8.1:
Equiva-
lent circuit model with
an inductor and a re-
sistor in parallel
A cell house containing a Papyex sheet is considered to
have a low ohmic resistance compared to a cell house with
a MEA. Due to that consideration it is reasonable to set
the potentiostatic amplitude signal relatively low (0.1 mV)
during the Papyex experiments than running the fuel cell
with a MEA (5 mV). The purpose is to measure the ohmic
resistance which is why the frequency range is from 10 MHz
to 10 kHz which is a relatively narrow range with high fre-
quency values. The rest of the settings can be found in
ﬁgure 10.2 in Appendix. The equivalent circuit model is
chosen to be identical to the one DPS uses to model the
impedance data from similar type of experiment with an inductor and a resistor
in parallel, see ﬁgure 8.1.
The Nyquist plot illustrated in ﬁgure 8.2 is an example of how the data looks
like for cell house no. 5 with one sheet of Papyex.
48
==PAGE:51==
Figure 8.2: Nyquist plot of cell house no. 5 with 1 sheet of Papyex
To estimate an ohmic resistance from the data in ﬁgure 8.2 an iteration ap-
proach is utilized to minimize the data to one resistance value on the real axis
intercept. 5000 iterations are conducted to make the best ﬁt according to the
used equivalent circuit model.
Cell house no.
5 with one Papyex sheet has
the ﬂow plates resistance R51 = 3.97 mΩ.
Cell house no.
5 with two Papyex
sheets has the ﬂow plates resistance of R52 = 4.11 mΩ.
By the subtraction
RPapyex = R52 −R51 = 0.14 mΩthe resistance of one Papyex sheet is calculated
and afterward subtracting that value from R51 the resistance of the ﬂow plates
isolated is calculated to be
R5 = R51 −RPapyex = 3.83 mΩ
(8.1)
The same calculations are executed for all four cell houses using the same
RPapyex value and are placed in table 8.1. The calculated resistances are conducted
to adjust the ohmic resistance of the impedance spectroscopy data gathered from
the activation experiments.
The activation curves from all the series of experiments are conducted galvanostat-
ically, displaying the potential change within the ﬁrst 100 hours. The potential in
the activation curves needs to be adjusted as well as the resistance in the impedance
spectra. The magnitude of the potential adjustments depends on the drawn cur-
rent density. For cell house no. 5 activating at 0.200 A/cm2 · 21 cm2 = 4.8 A the
potential is adjusted according to Ohm’s law:
U = I · R = 4.8 A · 3.83 · 10−3 Ω= 18.4 mV
(8.2)
49
==PAGE:52==
The same calculations are executed for all four cell houses and are also placed
in table 8.1 with current density of 0.200 A/cm2 due to it being the main value
throughout the series of activation experiments.
Table 8.1: Adjustment values of ﬂow plates resistances
Cell house no.
Ohmic loss
Potential loss (J = 0.200 A/cm2)
5
3.83 mΩ
18.4 mV
6
4.51 mΩ
21.6 mV
7
4.59 mΩ
22.0 mV
8
3.47 mΩ
16.6 mV
The potential adjustments at diﬀerent current densities will be underlined in
the respective parts of section 8.
All the results regarding impedance spectra, activation- and polarization curves
were calibrated according to the Papyex results. The activation duration was set
to be 100 hours, mainly, and the impedance measurements were conducted once a
day unless hindered from doing so. It is expected that the overall resistance was
decreasing during the activation.
8.2
Flow Rates & Temperature
By increasing only ﬂow rates mainly two things would be expected; mass transport
resistance decreases due to higher ﬂow of reactants to the CL and an increase in
ohmic resistance due to the drying eﬀect on the membrane. From the hypotheses
in table 6 no signiﬁcant eﬀect in activation time is expected to be seen for Hyp. #1
although Hyp. #2 expects faster activation. If the electrodes are ﬂooded before
activation the increase in ﬂow rates would lead to a higher drying speed of the
electrodes, thereby faster activation.
50
==PAGE:53==
In series no. 1, three MEAs are tested with the ﬂow rate stoichiometries being
B061 : λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0
B062 : λH2/λair = 2.4/4.0
B063 : λH2/λair = 4.8/8.0
Where B061 is tested with standard parameters.
The activation curves for all three MEAs are shown in ﬁgure 8.3. They all start
more or less from the same potential. B061 has a potential increase of ≈10 mV,
while B062 and B063 have an increase of ≈20 mV after 45-50 hours of activation.
Figure 8.3: Activation graphs for B061, B062 and B063 with changing ﬂow rate sto-
ichiometries. Fixed cell house, Aactive = 21 cm2, T = 160 ◦C, J = 0.200 A/cm2, DL =
11.
The activation curves show almost identical activation time which lean more
to Hyp. #1 due to the increased ﬂow rates have no eﬀect on activation time.
The ﬂuctuating voltage values measured at 0.5, 22.3, 47.1, 72.7 and 97.8 hours
originates from the impedance measurements and correspond to the 5 mV applied
AC signal.
Impedance measurements were conducted to investigate the types of resistances
and the changes during activation. The EIS data for the diﬀerent ﬂow rates are
shown in the Nyquist plots in ﬁgure 8.4. B061 has an initial ohmic resistance of
4.1 mΩafter 0.5 hours, decreasing slightly to 4.0 mΩafter 97.8 hours of activa-
tion. The anode resistance stays constant at 1.4 mΩand the cathode resistance
51
==PAGE:54==
decreases from 5.5 mΩto 5.2 mΩ, during the ﬁrst 47.1 hours and consecutive in-
crease to 5.4 mΩafter 97.8 hours of total activation.
B061 has a larger mass
transport resistance than B062 and B063 indicated by the low frequency diﬀusion
element being larger for B061. B062 has an initial ohmic resistance of 4.0 mΩwhich
appears fairly constant during the activation. The anode resistance stays constant
at 1.4 mΩand cathode resistance decreases from 10.0 mΩto 8.4 mΩthroughout
the whole activation. B063 has a constant ohmic resistance of 6.0 mΩduring the
activation. The anode resistance stays constant at 1.8 mΩand cathode resistance
decreases from 9.8 mΩto 8.7 mΩduring activation. It is observed that the ohmic
resistance increases when increasing ﬂow rate stoichiometries.
Figure 8.4: Nyquist plot of B061 (top), B062 (middle) and B063 (bottom). Fixed cell
house, Aactive = 21 cm2, T = 160 ◦C, J = 0.200 A/cm2, DL = 11.
52
==PAGE:55==
The mass transport resistance seems to decrease when increasing ﬂow rates
as expected due to more reactants being available at the TPB. The change in
modelled resistances for B061, B062 and B063 are highlighted in table 8.2.
Table 8.2: The change in resistances during activation at diﬀerent ﬂow rates
MEA
Time during
Cathode
Anode
Ohmic
i.d.
activation
resistance
resistance
resistance
B061
0.5 h
5.5 mΩ
1.4 mΩ
4.1 mΩ
97.8 h
5.4 mΩ
1.4 mΩ
4.0 mΩ
B062
0.5 h
10.0 mΩ
1.4 mΩ
4.0 mΩ
97.8 h
8.4 mΩ
1.4 mΩ
4.0 mΩ
B063
0.5 h
9.8 mΩ
1.8 mΩ
6.0 mΩ
97.8 h
8.7 mΩ
1.8 mΩ
6.0 mΩ
In series no. 2 changing the temperature and ﬂow rate are tested, meaning
that two MEAs are tested with diﬀerent temperatures and one MEA is tested with
diﬀerent temperature and ﬂow rate. All three MEAs are tested at the following
conditions:
B064 : T = 160 ◦C, λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0
B065 : T = 200 ◦C, λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0
B066 : T = 200 ◦C, λH2/λair = 4.8/8.0
Where B064 is tested with standard parameters.
The idea behind increasing operating temperature is to investigate the change in
catalytic resistance. According to the two hypotheses the MEA is expected to be
activated faster at elevated temperature. The activation curves for the three MEAs
are shown in ﬁgure 8.5. B064 and B065 show a potential decrease of ≈10 mV the
ﬁrst 1-5 hours and were activating positive afterwards. B064 was activated with
parameters equal to B061 from ﬁgure 8.3, though B064 show a diﬀerent path.
B064 was regaining ≈15 mV during 55-60 hours of activation. B065 was regaining
≈22 mV during 40-45 hours of activation.
The increase in temperature from
B064 to B065 showed a reduced activation time at ≈15 hours. B066 was exposed
to elevated temperature and ﬂow rate which has a signiﬁcant drying eﬀect on the
membrane. B066 seems to be activated after 50 hours and then degrade afterwards
supposedly due to the membrane being dried-out severely.
53
==PAGE:56==
Figure 8.5: Activation graphs for B064, B065 and B066 with changing temperature
and ﬂow rate stoichiometries. Fixed cell house, Aactive = 21 cm2, J = 0.200 A/cm2, DL
= 11.
The Nyquist plot of B066 is shown in ﬁgure 8.6. The ohmic resistance is increas-
ing from 5.8 mΩto 7.0 mΩduring 96.1 hours of activation. The anode resistance
stays constant at 0.9 mΩand the cathode resistance increase from 12.2 mΩto
20.3 mΩduring activation. The increase in resistance is supposedly due to corro-
sion of carbon support at elevated temperature and due to the drying-out process
of the membrane. The activation curve of B066 showed no sign of it being stabi-
lized before degradation occurred, and the Nyquist plot supported the degradation
processes by showing increase in resistance during activation.
54
==PAGE:57==
Figure 8.6: Nyquist plot of B066. Fixed cell house, Aactive = 21 cm2, T = 200 ◦C,
λH2/λair = 4.8/8.0, J = 0.200 A/cm2, DL = 11.
The Nyquist plots of B064 and B065 are shown in ﬁgure 8.7. B064 and B065
show close to a constant ohmic resistance of 4.2 mΩand 3.5 mΩ, respectively,
during 96.1 hours of activation. The anode resistances for B064 and B065 stay
constant during activation at 1.6 mΩand 1.4 mΩ, respectively. The cathode resis-
tance decrease for B064 from 8.8 mΩto 8.5 mΩ, and for B065 the cathode resistance
increase from 8.3 mΩto 8.5 mΩduring 96.1 hours of activation. The resistances
increase during activation for both MEAs, which is not expected according to the
activation curves in ﬁgure 8.5. According to the unchanging ohmic resistances the
activation at elevated temperature ﬁts more to Hyp. #1.
Figure 8.7: Nyquist plot of B064 (top) and B065 (bottom). Fixed cell house, Aactive =
21 cm2, λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0, J = 0.200 A/cm2, DL = 11.
55
==PAGE:58==
The change in modelled resistances for B064, B065 and B066 are highlighted
in table 8.3.
Table 8.3: The change in resistances during activation at diﬀerent temperature and
ﬂow rates
MEA
Time during
Cathode
Anode
Ohmic
i.d.
activation
resistance
resistance
resistance
B064
0.5 h
8.8 mΩ
1.6 mΩ
4.2 mΩ
96.1 h
8.5 mΩ
1.6 mΩ
4.2 mΩ
B065
0.5 h
8.3 mΩ
1.4 mΩ
3.5 mΩ
96.1 h
8.5 mΩ
1.4 mΩ
3.5 mΩ
B066
0.5 h
12.2 mΩ
0.9 mΩ
5.8 mΩ
96.1 h
20.3 mΩ
0.9 mΩ
7.0 mΩ
8.3
Current Density
In series no.
4, 5 and 6 the current density parameter was examined setting
the values to diﬀer between 0.100 A/cm2 and 1.000 A/cm2.
When setting the
current density to be 0.600 A/cm2 or above, impedance data was not able to be
conducted due to a current overload error function. By increasing current density
the activation time was expected to be shorter due to higher ﬂows of electrons,
protons, reactants and products which makes the diﬀusion of PA to reach an
equilibrium faster. Both Hyp. #1 and Hyp. #2 expect a faster activation when
increasing current density.
8.3.1
Low Current Densities
The three MEAs examined at low current densities are B082, B081 and B087 and
have the following speciﬁcations:
B082 : J = 0.100 A/cm2
B081 : J = 0.200 A/cm2
B087 : J = 0.400 A/cm2
Where B081 was tested with standard parameters.
The activation curves for the three MEAs are shown in ﬁgure 8.8. B082 and B081
seem to have identical activation time at ≈50 hours. B082 and B081 increase
≈20 mV and ≈15 mV, respectively, during the activation.
56
==PAGE:59==
Figure 8.8: Activation graphs for B082, B081 and B087 with changing current densi-
ties. Fixed cell house, Aactive = 21 cm2, T = 160 ◦C, λH2/λair = 4.8/8.0, DL = 11.
B087 has no increase in performance during the activation, on the contrary the
voltage drops ≈10 mV during the ﬁrst 1-5 hours and stabilizes afterwards.
The impedance measurements were conducted for B081, B082 and B087 and are
shown in ﬁgure 8.9. B082 has signiﬁcantly larger resistance compared to B081 and
B087. B082 has an ohmic resistance of 4.5 mΩand is not changing during the acti-
vation. The anode and cathode resistances are modelled to be 2.9 mΩand 12.0 mΩ,
respectively at 0.5 hours and after 95.1 hours the values are 2.6 mΩand 11.2 mΩ,
respectively, showing that catalytic resistances decrease during activation.
57
==PAGE:60==
Figure 8.9: Nyquist plot of B082 (top), B081 (middle) and B087 (bottom). Fixed cell
house, Aactive = 21 cm2, T = 160 ◦C, λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0, DL = 11.
B081 has an ohmic and anode resistances of 4.8 mΩand 2.1 mΩ, respectively
and is not changing during the activation. The cathode resistance decreases from
5.8 mΩto 5.2 mΩafter 95.1 hours of activation. The overall catalytic resistance
decreases for B081.
B087 has even lower ohmic and catalytic resistances than
B082 and B081. The ohmic resistance of B087 stays fairly constant at 4.3 mΩ
during activation. Anode resistance increases from 1.7 mΩto 2.2 mΩand cathode
resistance increases from 3.6 mΩto 3.8 mΩ. The impedance measurements of B087
show increase in catalytic and diﬀusion resistances during the whole activation and
thereby ﬁt to the activation curve showing no performance increase during the 100
hours. The impedance measurements of B082 and B081 also ﬁt to the activation
curves showing lower resistances during activation while the performance increase.
The change in modelled resistances for B081, B082 and B087 are highlighted in
table 8.4.
58
==PAGE:61==
Table 8.4: The change in resistances during activation at low current densities
MEA
Time during
Cathode
Anode
Ohmic
i.d.
activation
resistance
resistance
resistance
B081
0.5 h
5.8 mΩ
2.1 mΩ
4.8 mΩ
95.1 h
5.2 mΩ
2.1 mΩ
4.8 mΩ
B082
0.5 h
12.0 mΩ
2.9 mΩ
4.5 mΩ
95.1 h
11.2 mΩ
2.6 mΩ
4.5 mΩ
B087
0.5 h
3.6 mΩ
1.7 mΩ
4.3 mΩ
95.1 h
3.8 mΩ
2.2 mΩ
4.3 mΩ
8.3.2
High Current Densities
The three MEAs examined at low current densities are B082, B081 and B087 and
have the following speciﬁcations:
B088 : J = 0.600 A/cm2
B0916 : J = 0.600 A/cm2 & 0.200 A/cm2
B084 : J = 1.000 A/cm2
The activation curves for B088, B091 and B084 are shown in ﬁgure 8.10.
6B091 is activated with the repeating cycle:
23 hours at 0.600 A/cm2 and one hour at
0.200 A/cm2
59
==PAGE:62==
Figure 8.10: Activation graphs for B084, B088 and B091 with changing current den-
sities. Fixed cell house, Aactive = 21 cm2, T = 160 ◦C, λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0, DL = 11.
B088 showed an unstable activation path dropping ≈30 mV in voltage during
the ﬁst 20 hours and within few hours regaining ≈12 mV from where it stabilizes.
B084 showed a severe degree of instability until 70 hours of activation where it
stabilizes.
B091 shows an immediate drop of ≈8 mV within the ﬁrst hour of
activation and regain ≈6 mV during the next 10 hours, and seem stabilized from
that point. When the current density is switched to 0.200 A/cm2 the potential has
a constant value at ≈0.66 V from the ﬁrst to the last switch. After one whole cycle
of B091 the potential showed ≈5 mV lower than before switching to 0.200 A/cm2.
The impedance measurements were conducted for B091 during the four hours at
0.200 A/cm2 but due to a software bug the ﬁrst two measurements were lost. The
last two impedance measurements of B091 is shown in ﬁgure 8.11.
60
==PAGE:63==
Figure 8.11: Nyquist plot of B091. Fixed cell house, Aactive = 21 cm2, T = 160 ◦C,
λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0, J = 0.200 A/cm2, DL = 11.
The Nyquist plot of B091 is comparable with Nyquist plots obtained with stan-
dard parameters. This is to examine whether activating at 0.600 A/cm2 instead
of 0.200 A/cm2 show diﬀerent resistances. B091 has close to the same ohmic re-
sistance than B061 and B064 which is 4.0 mΩ. Although the anode and cathode
resistance are 2.2 mΩand 9.0 mΩ, respectively after activation, which is larger than
B061, B064 and B081. The change in modelled resistances for B091 is highlighted
in table 8.5.
Table 8.5: The change in resistances during activation at high current densities
MEA
Time during
Cathode
Anode
Ohmic
i.d.
activation
resistance
resistance
resistance
B091
71.5 h
9.0 mΩ
2.2 mΩ
4.0 mΩ
95.1 h
9.0 mΩ
2.2 mΩ
4.0 mΩ
8.4
Hot Press
All the prefabricated MEAs examined in this study were fabricated at identical
hot-pressing conditions, except the ones tested in series no. 3. The MEAs used in
all experiments except in series no. 3 were hot-pressed with 1.5 ton during 3 min
at 100 ◦C. It was expected to see higher potential at higher time and/or pressure
values and opposite with lower time and pressure values due to the contact change
between the electrodes and the membrane. Hyp. #1 expects shorter activation
time at higher time and/or pressure values while Hyp. #2 expects longer activation
time. The three MEAs tested in series no. 3 were all hot-pressed at 100 ◦C with
the following conditions:
B078 : p = 0.5 ton
t = 3 min
B079 : p = 1.5 ton
t = 5 sec
B080 : p = 1.5 ton
t = 10 min
61
==PAGE:64==
All three MEAs were tested at standard parameters. The activation curves of
B078, B079 and B080 are shown in ﬁgure 8.12 together with B061 from series no.
1 for comparison.
Figure 8.12: Activation graphs for B078, B079, B080 and B061 with changing hot-
pressing conditions. Fixed cell house, Aactive = 21 cm2, T = 160 ◦C, λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0,
J = 0.200 A/cm2, DL = 11.
B061 has a performance increase of ≈15 mV during the ﬁrst 40-50 hours of
activation and is the MEA having the highest potential after activation.
The
activation of B080 is almost identical with B061 according to activation time,
though it has only slightly lower voltage increase than B061. B078, B079 and
B080 are showing a large potential drop of ≈15 mV within the ﬁrst hour of
activation. B078 and B079 are showing lower performance than B080 and B061
which is supposedly due to deﬁcient contact between electrodes and membrane
when decreasing pressure and time, respectively. Although B078 is showing the
highest performance increase of ≈20 mV during the ﬁrst 40-45 hours of activation
and B079 is showing the lowest performance increase of ≈9 mV at 45-50 hours of
activation.
The impedance measurements were conducted for B078, B079 and B080, see ﬁgure
8.13 for Nyquist plots. The Nyquist plot of B061 is shown in ﬁgure 8.4.
62
==PAGE:65==
Figure 8.13: Nyquist plot of B078 (top), B079 (middle) and B080 (bottom). Fixed cell
house, Aactive = 21 cm2, T = 160 ◦C, λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0, J = 0.200 A/cm2, DL = 11.
All three MEAs show close to unchangeable ohmic resistances throughout the
activation at 4.2 ± 0.2 mΩ. B080 shows a constant anodic resistance at 1.0 mΩ.
The cathode resistance decreases 0.6 mΩafter 46.7 hours and increases again by
0.2 mΩafter 99.5 hours of total activation. The resistances observed for B080 are
supported by the activation curve having the activation time at 40-50 hours. B078
shows similar changes in resistances as B080. B078 shows also a constant anode
resistance at 2.0 mΩ.
The cathode resistance decreases with 0.4 mΩafter 46.7
hours, and after 99.5 hours it has increased with 1.0 mΩ. B079 showed the poorest
performance before and after activation according to the activation graph, and
is showing the highest resistances according to the Nyquist plot. The anode and
cathode resistances increase 4.0 mΩand 2.3 mΩ, respectively, during the activation.
The constant ohmic resistance observed makes it lean more to Hyp. #1. The
activation time of B078, B079, B080 and B061 are close to identical, favouring
63
==PAGE:66==
neither Hyp. #1 or Hyp. #2. The change in modelled resistances for B078, B079
and B080 are highlighted in table 8.6.
Table 8.6: The change in resistances during activation at diﬀerent hot-pressing condi-
tions.
MEA
Time during
Cathode
Anode
Ohmic
i.d.
activation
resistance
resistance
resistance
B078
0.15 h
6.9 mΩ
2.0 mΩ
4.2 mΩ
99.5 h
7.5 mΩ
2.0 mΩ
4.2 mΩ
B079
0.15 h
7.2 mΩ
2.4 mΩ
4.2 mΩ
99.5 h
9.5 mΩ
6.4 mΩ
4.2 mΩ
B080
0.15 h
6.1 mΩ
1.0 mΩ
4.2 mΩ
99.5 h
5.7 mΩ
1.0 mΩ
4.2 mΩ
8.5
Baltic Pressure
As explained in section 7.1.5, the Baltic set-up is diﬀerent from the mainly used
cell house set-ups, which is able to add pressure during operation. The purpose
of the Baltic experiments is to compare with the normal hot-pressed MEAs by
self-assembling the MEA parts directly in the cell house. When increasing the
pressure the performance is expected to increase. In series no. 7 the MEAs were
assembled directly in the cell house do not have an identiﬁcation number as the
hot-pressed MEAs, though all the parts are having the same characteristics as the
hot-pressed ones, see table 7.1. The two MEAs tested with Baltic pressure are
named Bal01 and Bal02 which were activated with the following parameters:
Bal01 : pbal = 2.0 bar
Bal02 : pbal = 7.5 bar
The rationale behind choosing these pressure values are to have a high and low
values. 2.0 bar is chosen to be the lowest pressure, if lowering the pressure further
the contact between the electrodes and membrane is considered to be weak. 7.5 bar
is the maximum performed pressure from the apparatus. By assembling with hot-
pressing procedure at 1.5 ton and assuming the total pressing area is the are of the
MEA (25 cm2) the pressure equals ≈60 bar which is much larger than the Baltic
pressure.
The activation curves for Bal01 and Bal02 are shown in ﬁgure 8.14. Both MEAs
show similar activation pattern by improving performance with ≈30 mV after
30-35 hours of activation. The potential values of both MEAs are nearly equal
and thereby assuming the change in Baltic pressure have no signiﬁcant inﬂuence
according to the activation curves.
64
==PAGE:67==
Figure 8.14: Activation graphs for Bal01 and Bal02 with changing Baltic pressure.
Baltic cell house, Aactive = 21 cm2, T = 160 ◦C, λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0, J = 0.200 A/cm2,
DL = 11.
The impedance spectra were conducted for Bal01 and Bal02 and can be seen
in ﬁgure 8.15.
Figure 8.15:
Nyquist plot of Bal01 (top) and Bal02 (bottom).
Fixed cell house,
Aactive = 21 cm2, T = 160 ◦C, λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0, J = 0.200 A/cm2, DL = 11.
65
==PAGE:68==
Bal01 shows a slight decrease of from 8.4 mΩto 7.6 mΩin ohmic resistance
during the activation while the ohmic resistance stays constant for Bal02 at 7.2 mΩ.
The ohmic resistances for both MEAs are ≈50% larger compared to the hot-
pressed MEAs which is presumably due to better established contact between
electrodes and membrane in the hot-pressed assembled MEAs. Bal01 shows an
increase in anode resistance from 7.8 mΩto 13.4 mΩand a decrease in cathode
resistance from 6.1 mΩto 6.3 mΩ. For Bal01 the anodic resistance is larger than
the cathodic which is contradictory. For Bal02 the anodic resistance increases from
5.0 mΩto 7.4 mΩand the cathodic decreases from 8.6 mΩto 7.0 mΩ. Both MEAs
show unstable impedance results at low frequencies corresponding to the diﬀusion
resistance which is presumably due to noise in the system. Both Bal01 and Bal02
show an overall larger anodic resistance. The anodic resistance increase while the
cathodic decrease for both MEAs. The change in modelled resistances for Bal01
and Bal02 are highlighted in table 8.7.
Table 8.7: The change in resistances during activation at diﬀerent Baltic pressures.
MEA
Time during
Cathode
Anode
Ohmic
i.d.
activation
resistance
resistance
resistance
Bal01
1.0 h
6.1 mΩ
7.8 mΩ
8.4 mΩ
98.3 h
6.3 mΩ
13.4 mΩ
7.6 mΩ
Bal02
0.5 h
8.6 mΩ
5.0 mΩ
7.2 mΩ
97.0 h
7.0 mΩ
7.4 mΩ
7.2 mΩ
8.6
Doping Level
The DL of the membrane describes the PA content in the membrane. For a Dapozol
300 MEA the DL is ≈11.
When lowering the DL the acid content decreases
meaning less amounts of PA are available to diﬀuse from membrane to electrode.
Hyp. #1 expects slower activation and Hyp. #2 expects faster activation. Two
MEAs were examined with lower DL:
B167 : DL ≈8
B168 : DL ≈7
B167 and B168 are activated at standard parameters. The activation curves of
the two MEAs are shown in ﬁgure 8.16 together with B061 which has a DL of 11.
The performance drops along the DL reduction. B061 is increasing ≈15 mV after
30-35 hours. B167 appears to have a slightly longer activation time of 35-40 hours
and has a performance increase of ≈25 mV. B168 shows the lowest performance.
During the 100 hours of activation B168 is not stabilizing and keeps increasing
performance. The performance of B168 increases ≈60 mV during the 100 hours.
66
==PAGE:69==
Figure 8.16: Activation graphs for B167, B168 and B061 with changing doping levels.
Fixed cell house, Aactive = 21 cm2, T = 160 ◦C, λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0, J = 0.200 A/cm2.
The impedance spectra were conducted for B167 and B168, shown in ﬁgure
8.17. B167 shows a constant ohmic resistance through the activation at 8.0 mΩ
which is around 50% higher than e.g. B061 that has a DL of 11. The anode
resistance stays constant at 4.9 mΩand the cathode resistance decreases from
6.5 mΩto 5.1 mΩduring 95.1 hours of activation. The impedance spectrum of
B168 is not able to be modelled due to it showing a high degree of non-uniform
measurements. Although the measurements appear to show a drop in both ohmic-
and catalytic resistances.
67
==PAGE:70==
Figure 8.17: Nyquist plots of B167 (top) and B168 (bottom). Fixed cell house, Aactive =
21 cm2, T = 160 ◦C, λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0, J = 0.200 A/cm2.
The change in modelled resistances for B167 is highlighted in table 8.8.
Table 8.8: The change in resistances during activation at diﬀerent doping levels.
MEA
Time during
Cathode
Anode
Ohmic
i.d.
activation
resistance
resistance
resistance
B167
0.8 h
6.5 mΩ
4.9 mΩ
8.0 mΩ
95.1 h
5.1 mΩ
4.9 mΩ
8.0 mΩ
8.7
Polarization Curve
During the activation of the MEAs examined in this study the major part show
performance increase. The activation was performed at steady-state conditions
with a constant current density. A polarization curve is able to investigate the
activation inﬂuence on a range of current density values. A polarization curve
was measured from B086 before and after 100 hours of activation with standard
parameters. The activation- and polarization curves for B086 are shown in ﬁgure
8.18 and 8.19, respectively.
68
==PAGE:71==
Figure 8.18: Activation curve of B086. Fixed cell house, Aactive = 21 cm2, T = 160 ◦C,
λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0, J = 0.200 A/cm2, DL = 11.
The activation curve showed a potential increase of ≈10 mV during 65-70
hours of activation.
The activation time of B086 is generally longer than e.g.
B061, B064, B081 etc.
The polarization curve measured before activation has
presumably changed the fundamental basis of the MEA.
Figure 8.19: Polarization curves of B086 before and after activation
69
==PAGE:72==
Figure 8.19 shows close to two identical polarization curves, though the po-
larization curve measured before activation has a slightly higher performance at
high current densities which is contradictory to the activation curve. The mass
transport contribution is not included in the polarization curves due to limitations
in the system making it impossible to draw higher currents.
8.8
Phosphorous Mapping
SEM/EDX measurements were conducted from two MEAs; one before activation
(B085) and one after activation (B090). To make the measurements the MEA
is cut in an ion mill machine (E-3500 Ion Milling System) and a high resolu-
tion image of the cross section is studied in a SEM machine (EVO MA10 Zeiss).
Considering B085 and B090 are having the same batch no. the two MEAs are
assumed to be identical. The idea of making the measurements are to map the
PA content/movement in a MEA after activation. B090 was activated at standard
parameters and the activation curve is shown in ﬁgure 8.20.
Figure 8.20: Activation curve of B090. Fixed cell house, Aactive = 21 cm2, T = 160 ◦C,
λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0, J = 0.200 A/cm2, DL = 11.
B090 has an activation time of 50-55 hours increasing ≈15 mV in potential.
From the activation curve it is expected to see a PA movement in the mapping
results after activation.
A SEM cross section image of B085 (unactivated) and B090 (activated) are shown
in ﬁgure 8.21, and the respective phosphorous mapping images are shown in ﬁgure
8.22.
70
==PAGE:73==
(a) SEM cross section image of unactivated B085
(b) SEM cross section image of activated B090
Figure 8.21: SEM images with left side being cathode and right being anode.
71
==PAGE:74==
(a) Phosphorous mapping image of unactivated B085
(b) Phosphorous mapping image of activated B090
Figure 8.22: Phosphorous mapping with left side being cathode and right being anode.
72
==PAGE:75==
The unactivated MEA shows close to evenly distributed PA from the membrane
to the anode and cathode. The brighter area in the center of the image is indicating
the membrane due to it having the highest content of PA. The vertical dark band
in the left part of the membrane is indicating no PA content in that area, which is
critical if a part of the membrane is lacking PA. After activation the PA seemed to
have migrated mainly towards the cathode. The water produced at the cathode is
presumably the reason for PA to diﬀuse from the membrane to the cathode. The
dark band from the unactivated MEA has disappeared in the activated MEA. The
images reveal that PA migrates not only to the CL but further to MPL and GDL.
These observations may occur due to variations in MEA to MEA production.
8.9
Discussion
According to the EIS data it is mostly observed that the major resistance change
is aimed at the cathode indicating that the catalytic resistance is changing when
reducing oxygen. This is highlighted in table 8.9 together with the change in the
corresponding anodic and ohmic resistances. The table describes that 12 out of
15 MEAs are showing that the changes in cathodic resistance are supporting the
activation potential path, e.g. when activation potential increases the cathode re-
sistance decreases. The major part of anodic and ohmic resistances stay constant
during the activation. This table supports the idea of the cathode being the most
involved electrode during the activation of a MEA.
All activation curves observed in this study except Bal01 and Bal02 show a
decrease in potential within the ﬁrst 1-5 hours of activation. A possible explana-
tion to this phenomena is due to an instantaneous local ﬂooding of the CL as soon
as a current is drawn. Tingel¨of et al. [46], see section 5, had observed the same
decrease in potential.
According to the previous studies from section 5, Boaventura et al. [41] sup-
ports the idea of Hyp. #1 by concluding that the reduced catalytic resistances
during activation is due to PA migration from membrane to CL. DPS internal
report [48] and Vang et al. [45] conclude that the activation process is mostly due
to catalytic changes at the cathode.
73
==PAGE:76==
Table 8.9:
The activation potential path for all MEAs including the corresponding
measured resistances and an indication whether the resistances support or oppose the
observed activation proﬁles
MEA
Changing
Activation
Cathode
Anode
Ohmic
i.d.
parameters
potential
resistance
resistance
resistance
B061
I
D
C
I
B062
Flow rates
I
D
C
C
B063
I
D
C
C
B064
Temperature
I
D
C
I
B065
&
I
I
C
C
B066
Flow rates
D
I
C
C
B078
Hot-press
I
I
C
C
B079
conditions
I
I
I
C
B080
I
D
C
C
B081
Low
I
D
C
C
B082
current
I
D
D
C
B087
densities
D
I
I
C
B084
High
D
n/a
n/a
n/a
B088
current
D
n/a
n/a
n/a
B091
densities
I
n/a
n/a
n/a
B167
Doping
I
D
C
C
B168
level
I
n/a
n/a
n/a
Bal01
Baltic
I
D
I
D
Bal02
pressure
I
D
I
C
I = increase, D = decrease, C = constant, n/a = not available
A = supporting the activation potential path
A = opposing the activation potential path
A = neither supporting nor opposing the activation potential path
When altering the diﬀerent parameters during these experiments in this study
some trends are observed in the results. In ﬁgure 8.23 all hot-pressed MEAs with
DL = 11 which are activated at standard parameters are shown for comparison.
74
==PAGE:77==
Figure 8.23: Activation curves of B061, B064, B081, B086, B090 and B091. Fixed
cell house, Aact = 21 cm2, T = 160 ◦C, λH2/λair = 1.2/2.0, J = 0.200 A/cm2, DL = 11.
Figure 8.23 also contain B091 which is the MEA having the activation cycle
of 0.600 A/cm2 for 23 hours and 0.200 A/cm2 for one hour. Only the 0.200 A/cm2
points are included in the ﬁgure indicating that B090 is observed to have a signif-
icant shorter activation time compared to the residual MEAs shown in the ﬁgure.
B091 is already activated after the ﬁrst cycle (24 hours) due to it showing close
to the same values during the remaining cycles although the potential values are
lower than the rest of the MEAs except B086. When activating at larger current
densities the formation of water at the cathode is increased which is presumably
the reason for B091 to have a signiﬁcant shorter activation time.
B086 is the
MEA of which a polarization curve was conducted before and after activation. It
is observed that performing a polarization curve before activation the activation
time is extended from the usual 35-50 hours to 70-80 hours until it stabilizes.
Furthermore the potential before and after activation is 25-40 mV lower compared
75
==PAGE:78==
to B061, B064, B081 and B090. When conducting a polarization curve the cur-
rent density reaches ≈0.800 A/cm2 which may damage the MEA and thereby the
steady-state performance of the cell. B061, B064, B081 and B090 show suﬃcient
reproducibility having the potential value after activation at 0.692 V ± 5.8 mV.
The mapping images of PA showed a migration of PA towards the cathode
during activation reasoned by the water formation at the cathode extracting the
PA from the membrane to the electrode. It is contradictory to ref. [31] conclud-
ing that PA migrates towards the anode, and that migration rate increased with
current density. The observation of PA migrating towards an electrode supports
Hyp. #1 of acid content being insuﬃciently low before activation.
To clarify whether Hyp. #1 or Hyp. #2 ﬁt mostly to the results, the activation
time is considered as the most expressive result. According to the expected results
in table 6.1, the actual results are shown in table 8.10 with colors verifying Hyp.
#1 as the most viable hypothesis. This conclusion is to be taken with a grain of
salt due to the lack of MEAs repeated with the same parameters.
Table 8.10: Overview of the hypotheses with actual results from the performed tests
Test
Actual results
Hyp. #1: Lack of acid
Hyp. #2: Flooding
SEM/EDX of cross section
BoL: Small acid content
BoL: Large acid content in
right after hot pressing and
in CL and GDL
CL and possibly GDL
after successful activation
Activated: More PA in CL
Activated: Less PA in CL
than at BoL
than at BoL
Activation at
Faster activation
Faster activation
increasing temperatures
Activation at increasing
No eﬀect
Faster activation
gas ﬂow rates
Activation at increasing cell
Faster activation
No eﬀect or
compression pressures
slower activation
Activation at increasing
Faster activation
Faster activation
current density
Varied hot-pressing pressure
Closer to full activation at
No eﬀect or longer activation
during fabrication
BoL at higher pressure/time
at higher pressure/time
Membrane fabricated with
Slower activation
Faster activation
lower acid doping levels
(Less ﬂooding)
A = when the expected results consolidate the actual results
A = when the expected results contradict the actual results
76
==PAGE:79==
9
Conclusion
The main purposes to initiate this study were to attain better understandings on
the mechanism that occur during the activation of a MEA and to discover ways
to reduce the activation time. To help purchasing those results, diﬀerent tech-
niques were utilized i.e. impedance spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy,
polarization- and activation curves. Prefabricated Dapozol R
○300 MEAs were in-
vestigated altering diﬀerent parameters along with self-assembled MEAs.
Two hypotheses were presented in this study; one regarding a lack-of-acid sit-
uation and one regarding a ﬂooding situation in the catalyst layer. The decreased
doping level showed slower activation supposedly due to less phosphoric acid is
squeezed out in the catalyst layer when assembling the MEA. The increased gas
ﬂow rate showed no signiﬁcant change in activation time.
The increased tem-
perature and increased current density showed faster activation. The increased
contact (Baltic) pressure and the increased hot-pressed pressure/time showed no
signiﬁcant eﬀect on activation time. The measured polarization curves showed no
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between activated/unactivated MEA.
The phosphorous mapping images of the MEAs showed a vertical band through
the membrane from where PA was missing before activation. A tendency of the
PA to migrate from the anode to the cathode during the activation of a MEA was
also observed which is presumably based on the formation of water at the cathode
dragging the PA towards the cathode.
According to the impedance measurements and the activation curves obtained
for most of the MEAs, the catalytic resistance on the cathode side was observed
to change the most during activation, compared to the anodic and ohmic resis-
tance, which stayed fairly constant. From these measurements the most involved
electrode during the activation process is believed to be the cathode.
The results from the decreased doping level, the increasing gas ﬂow rates, the
constant ohmic resistance observed during activation of the greater part and the
PA mapping images are supporting Hyp. #1 (lack of acid) and the results from
the hot-pressed conditions and the increased Baltic measurements are supporting
Hyp. #2 (ﬂooding).
The conclusion whether the results are verifying Hyp. #1 or Hyp. #2 is still
undecided but is mostly pointed towards Hyp. #1.
77
==PAGE:80==
9.1
Future Perspectives
All the experiments which are only performed once during this study are needed to
be at least duplicated to examine repeatability of the MEAs at the given condition.
From this study it is concluded that the cathode is the most involved electrode
during activation. Further investigations towards the cathode are appropriate to
better understand the activation process. This can be investigated by e.g. change
ﬂow rate stoichiometry of the reactants individually, or by collecting PA from cath-
ode and anode outlet gasses to monitor pH changes during the activation.
Regarding the SEM mapping images of PA, new images have to be conducted
activated at standard parameters to describe reproducibility. Furthermore MEAs
activated at higher current densities (≥0.400 A/cm2) need to be examined through
the phosphorous mapping to investigate whether the electrodes contain diﬀerent
amounts of PA than at standard current density (0.200 A/cm2) after activation.
B091 showed a signiﬁcant shorter activation time when comparing the one hour
at 0.200 A/cm2 with the remaining MEAs activated at standard parameters. In
future studies it is appropriate to investigate whether this development is trust-
worthy, if it is the activation time can be shortened by activating at higher current
densities for shorter time.
78
==PAGE:81==
References
[1] Green
Car
Congress.
Navigant:
fuel
cell
industry
passed
$1-billion
revenue
mark
in
2012
@ONLINE,
2012.
http://www.greencarcongress.com/2013/08/navigant-20130812-1.html
[Accessed 25 June 2018].
[2] Q. Li, D. Aili, J. O. Jensen, H. A. Hjuler. High Temperature Polymer Elec-
trolyte Membrane Fuel Cells. Springer, Department of Energy Conversion and
Storage, Technical University of Denmark, 2016.
[3] J. Larminie, A. Dicks. Fuel Cell Systems Explained. John Wiley Sons Ltd,
Ontario, Canada, 2nd edition, 2009.
[4] Smithsonian
National
Museum
of
American
History.
Col-
lecting
the
History
of
Fuel
Cells
@ONLINE,
2017.
http://americanhistory.si.edu/fuelcells/origins/origins.htm
[Accessed
26
January 2018].
[5] T. Damassa J. Friedrich. The History of Carbon Dioxide Emissions
@ONLINE, 2014. http://www.wri.org/blog/2014/05/history-carbon-dioxide-
emissions [Accessed 26 January 2018].
[6] J. Marcinkoski, J. Spendelow, A. Wilson, D. Papageorgopoulos.
DOE
Hydrogen
and
Fuel
Cells
Program
Record
@ONLINE,
2015.
https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/15015 fuel cell system cost 2015.pdf
[Accessed 26 January 2018].
[7] DTU
Energy
-
Section
for
Proton
Conductors.
Poly-
mer
Electrolyte
Membrane
Fuel
Cells
@ONLINE,
2013.
http://www.pro.energy.dtu.dk/Research/Fuel-cells [Accessed 7 June 2018].
[8] Wikipedia - The Free Encyclopedia.
Proton-exchange
membrane
fuel
applications
@ONLINE.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proton-
exchange membrane fuel cell [Accessed 7 June 2018].
[9] I. F. Grigoras. Performance and degradation tests on high temperature pro-
ton exchange membrane fuel cells (HT-PEMFCs). Master’s thesis, Aalborg
University - Department of Energy Technology.
[10] FuelCellStore.
Introduction to Fuel Cell Applications @ONLINE,
2017.
http://www.fuelcellstore.com/blog-section/intro-fuel-cell-applications
[Accessed 1 February 2018].
79
==PAGE:82==
[11] A. D. Ryabov. Green Challenges of Catalysis via Iron(IV)oxo and
Iron(V)oxo Species. Advances in Inorganic Chemistry, 65, 2013.
[12] J. T. Wang, R. F. Savinell, J. Wainright, M. Litt, H. Yu. A H2/O2 fuel
cell using acid doped polybenzimidazole as polymer electrolyte. Elec-
trochimica Acta, 41(2):193–197, 1996.
[13] M. Rau, A. Niedergesaess, C. Cremers, S. Alfaro, T. Steenberg, H. A.
Hjuler.
Characterization of Membrane Electrode Assemblies for
High-Temperature PEM Fuel Cells. Fuel Cells, 16(5):577–583, 2016.
[14] Q. Li, J. O. Jensen, R. F. Savinell, N. J. Bjerrum.
High temperature
proton exchange membranes based on polybenzimidazoles for fuel
cells. Progress in Polymer Science, 34(5):449–477, 2009.
[15] C. S. Sunandana. Introduction to Solid State Ionics Phenomenology and Ap-
plications. CRC Press, Broken Sound Parkway, Northwestern United States,
2016.
[16] Department of Energy, United States.
DOE Technical Targets for
Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell Components @ONLINE,
2015. https://www.energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/doe-technical-targets-polymer-
electrolyte-membrane-fuel-cell-components [Accessed 07 March 2018].
[17] A. Strong, C. Thornberry, S. Beattie, R. Chen, S. R. Coles. Depositing
Catalyst Layers in Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells: A
Review. Journal of Fuel Cell Science and Technology, 12(6):064001, 2015.
[18] K. A. Berchtold, R. P. Singh, J. S. Young, K. W. Dudeck. Polybenzim-
idazole composite membranes for high temperature synthesis gas
separations. Journal of Membrane Science, 415:265–270, 2012.
[19] E. H. Yu, U. Krewer, K. Scott. Principles and Materials Aspects of
Direct Alkaline Alcohol Fuel Cells. Energies, 3(8):1499–1528, 2010.
[20] ElectroChem Incorporate.
Gas
Diﬀusion
Layer @ONLINE, 2018.
http://fuelcell.com/gas-diﬀusion-layer/ [Accessed 16 March 2018].
[21] National Programme on Technology Enhanced Learning (NPTEL). Fuel Cell
Catalysts @ONLINE, 2012. http://www.nptel.ac.in/courses/103102015/12
[Accessed 16 March 2018].
[22] K. C. Neyerlin, W. Gu, J. Jorne, H. A. Gasteiger. Study of the exchange
current density for the hydrogen oxidation and evolution reactions.
Journal of Electrochemical Society, 154(7):B631–B635, 2007.
80
==PAGE:83==
[23] N. Markovic, T. J. Schmidt, V. Stamenkovic, P. N. Ross. Oxygen Reduction
Reaction on Pt and Pt Bimetallic Surfaces: A Selective Review. Fuel
Cells, 1(2):105–116, 2001.
[24] National Programme on Technology Enhanced Learning (NPTEL).
In-
troduction to Fuel Cell Technology - Overview @ONLINE, 2012.
http://www.nptel.ac.in/courses/103102015/12 [Accessed 10 April 2018].
[25] M. T. D. Jakobsen, J. O. Jensen, L. N. Cleemann, Q. Li. Durability Is-
sues and Status of PBI-Based Fuel Cells. High Temperature Polymer
Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells, pages 487–509, 2016.
[26] J. Wu, X. Z. Yuan, J. J. Martin, H. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Shen, S. Wu, W.
Merida. A review of PEM fuel cell durability: Degradation mecha-
nisms and mitigation strategies. Journal of Power Sources, 184(1):104–
119, 2008.
[27] J. C. Meier, C. Galeano, I. Katsounaros, J. Witte, H. J. Bongard, A. A.
Topalov, C. Baldizzone, S. Mezzavilla, F. Schueth, K. J. J. Mayrhofer. De-
sign criteria for stable Pt/C fuel cell catalysts. Beilstein Journal of
Nanotechnology, 5(1):44–67, 2014.
[28] S. S. Kocha.
Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cell Degradation, chapter Elec-
trochemical Degradation: Electrocatalyst and Support Durability,
pages 89–214. Elsevier Inc., 2011.
[29] R. Borup, J. Meyers, B. Pivovar, Y. S. Kim, R. Mukundan, N. Garland, D.
Myers, M. Wilson, F. Garzon, D. Wood, P. Zelenay, K. More, K. Stroh, T.
Zawodzinski, J. Boncella, J. E. McGrath, M. Inaba, K. Miyataka, M. Hori, K.
Ota, Z. Ogumi, S. Miyata, A. Nishikata, Z. Siroma, Y. Uchimoto, K. Yasuda,
K. Kimijima, N. Iwashitas. Scientiﬁc aspects of polymer electrolyte fuel
cell durability and degradation. Chemical Reviews, 107(10):3904–3951,
2007.
[30] A. Z. Weber, R. L. Borup, R. M. Darling, P. K. Das, T. J. Dursch, W. Gu, D.
Harvey, A. Kusoglu, S. Litster, M. M. Mench, R. Mukundan, J. P. Owejan,
J. G. Pharoah, M. Secanell, I. V. Zenyuk. A Critical Review of Modeling
Transport Phenomena in Polymer-Electrolyte Fuel Cells. Journal of
the Electrochemical Society, 161(12):1254–1299, 2014.
[31] S. H. Eberhardt, T. Lochner, F. N. Buechi, T. J. Schmidt. Correlating Elec-
trolyte Inventory and Lifetime of HT-PEFC by Accelerated Stress
Testing. Journal of the Electrochemical Society, 162(12):1367–1372, 2015.
81
==PAGE:84==
[32] S. Yu, L. Xiao, B. C. Benicewicz. Durability studies of PBI-based high
temperature PEMFCs. Fuel Cells, 8(3):165–174, 2008.
[33] C. Korte, J. Wackerl, W. Lehnert.
High Temperature Polymer Electrolyte
Membrane Fuel Cells, chapter Phosphoric acid and its interactions with
polybenzimidazole-type polymers, pages 169–194. Springer International
Publishing, 2016.
[34] A. J. Bard, L. R. Faulkner. Electrochemical Methods Fundamentals and Ap-
plications. John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2nd edition, 2001.
[35] GAMRY INSTRUMENTS.
Basics of Electrochemical Impedance
Spectroscopy @ONLINE, 2018.
https://www.gamry.com/application-
notes/EIS/basics-of-electrochemical-impedance-spectroscopy/ [Accessed 13
May 2018].
[36] ElectronicsTutorials. Resistivity @ONLINE, 2018. https://www.electronics-
tutorials.ws/resistor/resistivity.html [Accessed 17 May 2018].
[37] J. R. Vang. HTPEM Fuel Cell Impedance - Mechanistic Modelling and Ex-
perimental Characterization. PhD thesis, Department of Energy Technology,
Aalborg University.
[38] ElectronicsTutorials.
Introduction to Capacitors @ONLINE, 2018.
https://www.electronics-tutorials.ws/capacitor/cap 1.html [Accessed 17 May
2018].
[39] ElectronicsTutorials.
The
Inductor
@ONLINE,
2018.
https://www.electronics-tutorials.ws/inductor/inductor.html
[Accessed
17 May 2018].
[40] M. R. Hasan, V. W. Lei, S. B. Abd Hamid, W. J. Basirun. Eﬀect of Ce
Doping on RGO-TiO2 Nanocomposite for High Photoelectrocat-
alytic Behavior. International Journal of Photoenergy, 2014, 2014.
[41] M. Boaventura, A. Mendes. Activation procedures characterization of
MEA based on phosphoric acid doped PBI membranes. International
Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 35(20):11649–11660, 2010.
[42] S. S. Araya. High Temperature PEM Fuel Cells - Degradation and Durability.
PhD thesis, Department of Energy Technology, Aalborg University.
82
==PAGE:85==
[43] R. F. Egerton. Physical Principles of Electron Microscopy: an Introduction
To Tem, Sem, and Aem, chapter Physical Principles of Electron Mi-
croscopy:
an Introduction To Tem, Sem, and Aem, pages 1–202.
Springer US, 2005.
[44] Anderson Materials Evaluation. Energy Dispersive X-Ray Microanal-
ysis (EDX/EDS) @ONLINE.
http://www.andersonmaterials.com/edx-
eds.html [Accessed 23 May 2018].
[45] J. R. Vang, S. J. Andreasen, S. S. Araya, S. K. Kaer. Comparative study
of the break in process of post doped and sol-gel high temperature
proton exchange membrane fuel cells. International Journal of Hydrogen
Energy, 39(27):14959–14968, 2014.
[46] T. Tingelof, J. K. Ihonen. A rapid break-in procedure for PBI fuel
cells. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 34(15):6452–6456, 2009.
[47] S. Galbiati, A. Baricci, A. Casalegno, G. Carcassola, R. Marchesi. On the
activation of polybenzimidazole-based membrane electrode assem-
blies doped with phosphoric acid.
International Journal of Hydrogen
Energy, 37(19):14475–14481, 2012.
[48] S. M. Alfaro, T. Steenberg. Pt loading vs. performance. Technical report,
Danish Power Systems ApS (Kvistgaard).
[49] Senior Researcher at DTU - Energy: Lars Nilausen Cleemann, Spring 2018.
lncl@dtu.dk.
[50] Professor at DTU - Energy: Jens Oluf Jensen, Spring 2018. jojen@dtu.dk.
[51] Technical Director at DPS (Kvistgaard): Thomas Steenberg, Spring 2018.
ts@daposy.dk.
[52] Professor at DTU - Energy: Qingfeng Li, Spring 2018. qﬂi@dtu.dk.
[53] balticFuelCells GmbH - innovation in fuel cell technologies.
quickCON-
NECTﬁxture @ONLINE, 2018. http://www.balticfuelcells.de/qcfE.html
[Accessed 24 June 2018].
[54] Y. Tsai, D. Whitmore. Non-linear least squares analyses of complex
impedance and admittance data for solid electrolytes.
Solid State
Ionics, 7(2):129–139, 1982.
[55] S. Koch, C. Graves, K. V. Hansen - DTU Energy. Elchemea Analytical
@ONLINE, 2018. https://www.elchemea.dk/ [Accessed June 2018].
83
==PAGE:86==
[56] T. Søndergaard, L. N. Cleemann, H. Becker, T. Steenberg, H. A. Hjuler,
L. Seerup, Q. Li, J. O. Jensen. Long-Term Durability of PBI-Based
HT-PEM Fuel Cells: Eﬀect of Operating Parameters. Journal of the
Electrochemical Society, 165(6):F3053–F3062, 2018.
[57] Y. Fu, M. Hou, D. Liang, X. Yan, Y. Fu, Z. Shao, Z. Hou, P. Ming, B. Yi. The
electrical resistance of ﬂexible graphite as ﬂowﬁeld plate in proton
exchange membrane fuel cells. Carbon, 46(1):19–23, 2008.
84
==PAGE:87==
10
Appendix
Figure 10.1:
Settings of potentiostat when making EIS measurements of operating
MEAs
Figure 10.2: Settings of potentiostat when making EIS measurements of cell houses
with papyex
85
==PAGE:88==
Figure 10.3: Description of the used Dapozol R
○300 MEAs
86
