==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
University Technology Transfer in Denmark: 
Current Practice, Performance Analysis, and 
Recommendation  
 
Master Thesis 
 
 
 
Ekky Tammarar Alfian 
 
S160928 
 
July 2018 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
i 
Abstract 
 
University technology transfer (UTT) has become an important field for both policy makers and 
practitioners as especially universities have gained importance in the “third mission” to develop 
economic systems. How to be successful in UTT remains an elusive pursuit as only a few 
universities achieve great success while others do not. Denmark considers itself to perform behind 
several benchmarked countries in UTT. This research aims to analyze the UTT system in Denmark 
by measuring the UTT performance among Danish universities, to identify determinants of the 
performance, and learn about the formula for a successful UTT based on the Danish case. Through 
the combination of quantitative and qualitative methods, it is seen that assignment agreement 
strategy, an innovative university environment that is built through bottom up initiatives, an 
adequate business development capability, and a matrix university technology transfer office 
(UTTO) structure are the important determinants for UTT success. A pattern of “blockbuster” 
licensing revenue and a large portion of licensing, assignment, and option (LAO) agreement that 
comes out of research collaboration also influences UTT success. Culture and funding gap are 
identified to be the barriers to UTT in Denmark. Moving forward, placing academics as the 
centerpiece of UTT is important to drive UTT activities for the benefit of society. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
ii 
List of Abbreviations 
 
• AAU: Aalborg Universitet 
• AU: Aarhus Universitet 
• BD: Bayh-Dole 
• CBS: Copenhagen Business School 
• DEA: Data envelopment analysis 
• DTU: Danmarks Tekniske Universitet 
• IP: Intellectual property 
• IPR: Intellectual property rights 
• IPO: Initial public offering 
• ITT: International technology transfer 
• ITU: IT-Universitet 
• KU: Københavns Universitet 
• LAO: Licensing, assignment, and option 
• LUP: Law on university patenting 
• RU: Roskilde Universitet 
• SDU: Syddansk Universitet 
• TLO: Technology licensing office 
• TT: Technology transfer 
• TTO: Technology transfer office 
• UITT: University-industry technology transfer 
• UTC: University technology commercialization 
• UTT: University technology transfer 
• UTTO: University technology transfer office 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
iii 
Table of Contents 
Abstract .................................................................................................................................. i 
List of Abbreviations ................................................................................................................ ii 
1. 
Introduction .................................................................................................................... 1 
2. 
Literature Review ........................................................................................................... 6 
2.1. 
Defining UTT ............................................................................................................... 6 
2.2. 
University and Government Level Policy and Initiative to Support UTT ...................... 25 
2.3. 
Measuring UTT Performance ...................................................................................... 29 
2.4. 
Problems, Barriers, and Critiques to UTT .................................................................... 32 
2.5. 
Determinants of UTT Performance ............................................................................. 38 
2.6. 
Institutional Framework and Support Initiatives ........................................................ 48 
3. 
Methodology ................................................................................................................. 57 
3.1. 
Data Description ........................................................................................................ 57 
3.2. 
Performance Measurement ....................................................................................... 58 
3.3. 
Regression Analysis .................................................................................................... 61 
3.4. 
Interview ................................................................................................................... 62 
4. 
Data Analysis and Findings ............................................................................................. 63 
4.1. 
Effectiveness and Efficiency Performance ................................................................... 63 
4.2. 
Regression Analysis .................................................................................................... 65 
4.3. 
Interview Findings ...................................................................................................... 67 
5. 
Discussion and Limitation .............................................................................................. 76 
6. 
Conclusion, Recommendation, and Future Research ...................................................... 86 
References ............................................................................................................................ 89 
Appendix 1. John Hopkins University TTO Position Within University .................................. 100 
Appendix 2. Pennsylvania State University TTO Position Within University ......................... 101 
Appendix 3. Duke University TTO Position Within University ............................................... 102 
Appendix 4. Relational VS Transactional UTT Approach ....................................................... 103 
Appendix 5. Important Features of the Act of Technology and Innovation and the Act of 
Innovation Fund Denmark ................................................................................................... 104 
Appendix 6. Initiatives to Support UTT in Denmark ............................................................. 105 
Appendix 7. UTTO Manager Interview Outline .................................................................... 108 
==PAGE:5==
 
iv
Appendix 8. Data Definition ................................................................................................ 109 
Appendix 9. Correlation Test ............................................................................................... 111 
Appendix 10. Goodness of Fit Test Poisson Distribution ...................................................... 112 
Appendix 11. Data Envelopment Analysis Programming ...................................................... 113 
Appendix 12. Linear Regression Programming ..................................................................... 115 
Appendix 13. Academic Patenting in Denmark 1994-2003 ................................................... 119 
Appendix 14. Regression Diagnostics ................................................................................... 120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
1 
1. Introduction  
 
The larger objective of this research is aimed is to shed more light on the worldwide and 
ever-present question regarding the formula for a successful university technology transfer (UTT) 
practice/model, in this context using the case of Denmark, in the spirit that the current UTT system 
can be made even better for the benefit of society. The challenges notwithstanding, the topic of 
“technology transfer” (TT) has spurred great interest among academic researchers and policy-
makers (Bozeman, 2000). There is a voluminous amount of scientific literatures related to UTT. 
However, there are only a few attempts on using Denmark and Danish universities as the object of 
study. Thus, this research contributes in the rich collection of UTT studies by examining and 
analyzing the UTT system in Denmark.  
Why do countries, firms, and universities are interested in UTT in the first place? Through 
UTT universities contribute to the stock of technical knowledge and technologies that firms can 
draw on for innovation and hence economic growth (Bercovitz and Feldman, 2006). UTT can 
potentially generate revenues for universities (Bradley et al., 2013). Thus, UTT is mainly seen as 
to bring innovative ideas and inventions to the market, and additionally to gain revenue. The 
increased attention towards UTT is especially prompted by the growing importance of universities 
as a knowledge producing and dissemination institution in industrial innovation and the increased 
emphasis on the “third mission” of universities, which is to sustain and develop national and 
regional economic systems (Etzkowitz et al., 2000).  
UTT also benefits university researchers/scientists. Siegel et al. (2003) found that majority 
of scientists noted that interacting with industry has had a positive influence on their experimental 
work. This argument is strengthened further by the research of Murray (2002), that found that 
progress in science and technology in biomedical engineering co-evolve through several UTT 
mechanisms such as licensing, consulting, advising, and founding firms. 
Anecdotes of UTT success such as the lucrative licensing revenue (ie. Columbia University 
earned over $178 million in licensing revenue in 2003), IPO related wealth from internet search 
engines and browsers (ie. Stanford University earned $336 million from its sale of google stock in 
2005), Gatorade, gene sequencing, and drug discovery (Phan and Siegel, 2006), and the emergence 
of high-tech communities such as the Boston biotech community (Powell et al., 2007) drive 
countries and universities all around the world to pay attention even more on UTT. 
==PAGE:7==
 
2 
 
Historically, the study of TT has evolved over time. International technology transfer (ITT) 
emerged as a field of inquiry in the late 1960s and has, in the past decade, inspired a large literature 
interest (Contractor and Sagafi-Nejad, 1981). Before 1980, vast majority of research on TT 
focused on cross-national TT/ITT, especially TT from industrialized countries to less developed 
countries. The 1980s witnessed many new thrust in domestic TT policy and accompanying 
emphasis (Bozeman, 2000). Why does the focus shift in the 1980s? 
 
At the beginning, the competitiveness of USA seems to be the determining factor on the 
shift of focus. Coming out of World War Two, USA was unchallenged in its political and economic 
leadership. However, by the end of the 1970s it was clear that USA industry had lost its 
international competitiveness to Europe and particularly to Japan. A re-conceptualization of the 
role of public research systems began during the late 1970s in the USA following growing concern 
about the apparent deterioration of national comparative advantage in manufacturing and, in 
particular the increasing competition from Japanese firms (Stevens, 2004). The USA would 
compete by introducing the newest science-based technologies; many of which would be 
developed in research universities, while older technologies and their attendant manufacturing will 
be abandoned (Grimaldi et al., 2011). 
Developments in the USA regarding the shift of technology policy was also followed by 
Europe. Based on the development in the USA, starting from the early 1990s, structural changes 
in the external environment, aimed at encouraging a more active role for universities in TT, were 
introduced in Europe (Grimaldi et al., 2011). One of the most highly discussed government level 
policy in realm of UTT pertains the IPR ownership policy, whether IPR of publicly funded research 
should be owned by universities, known in the USA as the Bayh Dole (BD) Act or owned by 
scientists sometimes also referred to as the professor’s privilege. Denmark was the first country to 
decide, in 2000, to abolish the professor’s privilege in favor of university ownership (Geuna and 
Rossi, 2011). Curiously, the shift of government level technology policy related to UTT by Europe 
and other countries to imitate the system implemented in the USA seems to be motivated by the 
success of USA only without much considering the difference in the institutional landscape of 
higher education system in USA (Mowery and Sampat 2005). 
Implementation of the university IPR ownership of the BD Act in the USA is considered a 
success by the popular press (Mowery and Sampat, 2005; The Economist, 2005; Kenney and 
Patton, 2009). Indeed, post implementation of the BD Act saw an incredible surge in university 
==PAGE:8==
 
3 
patenting and licensing, and university spin-out companies in the USA (Nelson, 2001). However, 
for many institutions success in UTT has not been achieved (Phan and Siegel, 2006). Licensing 
revenues were highly concentrated at a few universities that patented “blockbuster” inventions (So 
et al., 2008). A substantial number of technology transfer offices (TTO) operate at a loss (Cardozo 
et al., 2011). For many institutions, efforts to make universities more entrepreneurial have not had 
sufficient impact (O’Shea et al., 2005). Findings by Wright et al. (2003) suggest that many 
universities are not experiencing a significant increase in spinoff behavior in Europe. 
UTT system built in the image of the BD Act in the USA also receives great criticism. 
Centerpiece of this criticism concerns the issue that this model encourages revenue maximization 
rather than facilitating dissemination of technology for the good of the entire society (Kenny and 
Patton, 2009; Litan, 2007). There are several cases where the implementation of the BD Act in 
other countries such as Japan and at Cambridge University in the UK actually retards technology 
diffusion (Breznitz, 2008; Carraz, 2008). Mixed success of UTT at different universities and the 
criticism of the BD Act certainly brings more spotlight on the question of what is the formula for 
a successful UTT? Why do certain universities perform better in UTT than the others? It also 
shows that a one size fits all structure in the case of UTT is unlikely to succeed (Borlaug et al., 
2009). 
The quest to find the best UTT practice/model at the university level is also a topic that 
attracts large interest. Not surprisingly, given the different background among universities, 
governance and practice of UTT differs from one university to another (Geuna and Muscio, 2009; 
Jefferson et al., 2016; Schoen et al., 2012). Nonetheless, scholars have attempted to debunk the 
determinants of universities that achieved success in UTT and commercialization of research by 
taking a university focused approach such as the case of KU Leuven in Belgium (Debackere and 
Veugelers, 2005) and MIT in the USA (O’Shea et al., 2007). Other studies used hypothesis or 
theoretical model on determinants and factors that influence the success of UTT in a university 
such as location, TTO capability and experience, organization structure incentive, et cetera and 
used both quantitative and qualitative methods to prove the hypothesis and theoretical model 
(Friedman and Silberman, 2003; Siegel et al., 2004; Markman et al., 2005; Wright et al., 2008 
According to the innovation scoreboard by the European Commission (2017) and the 
Global Innovation Index by Cornell University, INSEAD, and WIPO (2017) reports, Denmark is 
regarded as a country with a high innovation performance. Both reports point out innovation input 
==PAGE:9==
 
4 
such as the quality of human capital & research and institutions as the strong points of Denmark. 
The very high excellence in innovation input, however is not balanced with the same excellence 
in innovation output defined by the Global Innovation Index 2017 report as a result of innovative 
activities within the economy.  
In the same topic, the Danish Agency for Science, Technology and Innovation (2014a) 
reported that the commercialization of research result from public research institutions shows that 
Denmark is behind the benchmark countries as exhibited in Table 1. From the reports, it can be 
concluded that in the case of Denmark, there is still a room for improvement in translating research 
results from public research institution into something value added to the economy, and that is 
exactly the key role that UTT can contribute to. Thus, to define the improvement for UTT in 
Denmark, this research aims to answer three questions as follows: how do UTT performance of 
Danish universities compare to each other? What contributes to the difference in performance 
among Danish universities? And using the Danish context, what can we learn about the formula 
of a successful UTT? 
 
Table 1. Commercialization of research result from public research institutions*, per 
million public R&D investment (PPP) dollars, 2012 or most recent year available** 
Source: Danish Agency for Science, Technology and Innovation (2014a) 
  
License, sales, and option agreements 
New spinoff companies 
1 United Kingdom 
240 Ireland 
29 
2 Ireland 
120 Switzerland 
14 
3 Australia 
64 United Kingdom 
13 
4 United States 
54 Italy 
12 
5 Canada 
49 Spain 
8 
6 Switzerland 
45 Denmark 
7 
7 Denmark 
45 United States 
6 
8 Spain 
22 Canada 
5 
9 Italy 
5 Australia 
2 
* Data for UK, ESP and ITA only contains information about commercialization from universities 
** AUS: 2011, ESP: 2011, IRE: 2011 
 
To examine and analyze the UTT system in Denmark, data on UTT performance in Danish 
universities will be measured with the composite average z-score of UTT outputs that consists of 
the number of licensing, assignment, and option (LAO) agreement, number of spinoffs, and UTT 
revenue. Efficiency of the output is analyzed using Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA). Regression 
==PAGE:10==
 
5 
analysis and interview with UTT stakeholders is conducted to investigate factors differentiating 
UTT performance among universities in Denmark. 
Thus, the research report will be arranged as follows, Chapter Two will discuss the 
literature review, Chapter Three methodology, Chapter Four will discuss data analysis and 
findings, Chapter Five on discussion and limitation, and finally Chapter Six on conclusion, 
recommendation, and future research. 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
6 
2. Literature Review 
 
This chapter covers the literature review that forms the necessary theoretical foundation 
for this research. The literature review starts with the explanation of UTT including the explanation 
of university technology transfer office (UTTO), mechanisms of UTT, and the process of UTT. 
The literature review continues with policies and practices of UTT in the university level and 
governmental level. Various ways on measuring UTT effectiveness will also be discussed which 
relates to the methodology of this research. Problems & critiques to the current UTT model are 
discussed to give insight towards improving the current system. It is then continued with the 
explanation of the determinants of UTT performance that provides a theoretical foundation for 
stakeholders of UTT into various aspects to consider to be successful in UTT and lastly rounded 
off with the institutional framework and support initiatives for UTT. 
2.1. Defining UTT 
 
UTT can be defined as a process, whereby technologies originate in universities and 
ultimately used by industry (Siegel et al., 2004). Other scholars and organizations have also 
defined UTT as TT in general where university as an entity is mentioned. TT is any process by 
which basic understanding, information, and innovations move from a university, an institute, or 
a government laboratory to individuals or firms in the private and quasi-private sectors (Parker 
and Zilberman, 1993). TT is a process whereby invention or intellectual property from academic 
research is licensed or conveyed through use to a for-profit entity and eventually commercialized 
(Friedman and Silberman, 2003). TT is the process of transferring scientific findings from one 
organization to another for the purpose of further development and commercialization (AUTM). 
Before delving further into the topic, the understanding of technology as the transfer object 
in the context of UTT is important to comprehend. Technology in the context of UTT is embodied 
in an object and/or disembodied as a tacit knowledge (Biagini et al., 2014), maybe codified for 
example in a patent (Radosevic, 1999), and can be local and specific to a particular 
firm/organization (Mansfield, 1975). 
There are a number of ways to characterize the nature of technology as an invention. In 
their study of university technology licensing, Thursby et al. (2001) uses the characterization of 
technology in terms of distance from application which is also the standard categorization used by 
technology transfer offices (TTO) in evaluating invention disclosures which are: proof of concept 
==PAGE:12==
 
7 
but no prototype, prototype available but only lab scale (further development needed), some animal 
data available, some clinical data available, manufacturing feasibility known, and ready for 
practical and commercial use. Markman et al. (2005) characterize technology based on its 
technology development stage, which are: early stage, proof of concept, reduction to practice, and 
prototyping, formulation, compound. In the case of UTT, both Thursby et al. (2001) and Jensen 
and Thursby (2001) found that the majority of inventions disclosed to the TTO is embryonic by 
nature meaning early in the stage of development and needed further development. Detailed 
description of the characterization based on technology development stage can be seen on Table 
2. 
 
Table 2. Technology Characterization Based on Development Stage 
Source: Markman et al. (2005)  
Technology 
Stage 
Description 
Early stage 
An early stage technology may be an idea be reduced to practice. This 
technology could also be a crude extract of some plant or cell that seems to 
have an in vitro effect. Neither the exact compound in the extract is known, 
nor has the exact mechanism of the effect been identified. 
Proof of 
concept 
An idea or new technology has been developed to a point that it shows 
signs of having the proposed effect. Similarly, a few target compound in a 
crude extract may have been identified, but the mechanism by which they 
act may not have been discovered yet. 
Reduction to 
practice 
At this stage, an experiment on the idea has been replicated several times 
and the intended results have been reliably and repeatedly reproduced. The 
mechanism of the compound or compounds may have also been identified 
and, again, reliable results will have been produced. 
Prototyping, 
formulation, 
and 
compound 
The new technology can now be constructed as a reliable method of 
producing a given result and/or if it can be predictably manipulated to 
produce desired results. For instance, a compound from a crude extract 
would have been either scaled up to industrial scale; based on its identified 
action, the compound could be used to screen for inhibitors or be used as a 
diagnostic tool. At this stage, new technologies might be applied in new ad 
different settings. 
 
Technology for UTT can also be categorized according to type of innovations in terms of 
their impact on established capabilities of a firm classified by Henderson and Clark (1990). Radical 
innovation establishes a new dominant design and, hence, a new set of core design concepts 
embodied in components that are linked together in a new architecture. Incremental innovation 
==PAGE:13==
 
8 
refines and extends established an existing design (Henderson and Clark, 1990). Modular 
innovation is an innovation that changes a core design concept without changing the products 
architecture (Henderson and Clark, 1990). Architectural innovation is an innovation that changes 
a products architecture but leaves the components, and the core design concepts that they embody, 
unchanged (Henderson and Clark, 1990). Figure 1. illustrates the innovation classification along 
two dimensions, the horizontal dimension captures and innovations impact on components, while 
the vertical captures its impact on the linkages between components (Henderson and Clark, 1990). 
 
Figure 1. Framework for defining innovation 
Source: (Henderson and Clark, 1990) 
 
Components of UTT and their interaction can be explained thoroughly and succinctly by 
examining the Contingent Effectiveness Model (CEM) developed by Bozeman (2000). The CEM 
was developed by Bozeman (2000) to organize the voluminous journal pertaining TT specifically 
focusing on UTT and then later revised by adding public value effectiveness criteria into the model 
(Bozeman et al., 2014). The CEM draws its name from its assumption that parties to TT have 
multiple goals and effectiveness criteria (Bozeman, 2000), those criteria are: (1) out of the door; 
(2) market impact; (3) economic development, (4) political; (5) opportunity cost; (6) scientific and 
technical human capital; and (7) public value (Bozeman et al., 2014). Detailed description of the 
effectiveness criteria is provided in Table 3. 
==PAGE:14==
 
9 
Table 3. Technology effectiveness criteria 
Source: (Bozeman et al., 2014) 
Effectiveness 
Criterion 
Key Question 
Theory Base 
Major Advantage and 
Disadvantage 
Out of the door 
Was technology 
transferred? 
A theoretical or 
classical 
organizational 
theory. 
Advantage: Does not hold transfer 
agent accountable for factors that 
may be beyond control. 
Disadvantage: Encourages cynicism 
and focuses on activity rather than 
outcome. 
Market impact 
Did the transferred 
technology have an 
impact on the firm's 
sales or profitability. 
Microeconomics 
of the firm. 
Advantage: Focuses on key feature 
of technology transfer. Disadvantage: 
Ignores important public sector and 
nonprofit transfer; must 
accommodate market failure issues. 
Economic 
development 
Did technology transfer 
efforts lead to regional 
economic development. 
Regional 
science and 
public science 
theory 
Advantage: Appropriate to public 
sponsorship, focuses on results to 
taxpayers. Disadvantage: Evaluation 
almost always requires unrealistic 
assumptions. 
Political 
Did the technology 
agent or recipient 
benefit politically from 
participation in 
technology transfer? 
Political 
exchange 
theory, 
bureaucratic 
politics models 
Advantage: Realistic. Disadvantage: 
Does not yield to systematic 
evaluation. 
Opportunity cost 
What was the impact of 
technology transfer on 
alternative use of 
resources. 
Political 
economy, cost-
benefit analysis, 
public choice 
Advantage: Takes into account 
forgone conclusions, especially 
alternative uses for scientific and 
technical resources. Disadvantage: 
Difficult to measure, entails dealing 
with the "counterfactual". 
Scientific and 
technical human 
capital 
Did technology transfer 
activity lead to an 
increment in capacity 
to perform and use 
research. 
Social capital 
theory 
(sociology, 
political 
science), human 
capital theory 
(economics). 
Advantage: Treats technology 
transfer and technical activity as an 
overhead investment. Disadvantage: 
Not easy to equate inputs and 
outputs. 
Public value 
Did technology transfer 
enhance collective 
good and broad, 
societally values? 
Public interest 
theory, public 
value theory. 
Advantage: Excellent and easily 
sanctioned criteria for public policy. 
Disadvantage: Extremely difficult to 
measure systematically. 
 
==PAGE:15==
 
10
The model includes five broad dimensions that determine TT effectiveness: (1) 
characteristics of the transfer agent; (2) characteristics of transfer media; (3) characteristics of 
transfer object; (4) the demand environment; and (5) characteristics of the transfer recipient. Table 
4. explains the various dimensions influencing the TT effectiveness in detail. Figure 2. illustrates 
the elements of the revised CEM of TT (Bozeman et al., 2014). The arrows in the model indicate 
relations among the dimension (broken lines indicate weaker links) (Bozeman, 2000). To put it 
simply, the model says that the impacts of TT can be understood in terms of who is doing the 
transfer, how they are doing it, what is being transferred and to whom (Bozeman, 2000). 
 
Table 4. Dimensions of the Contingent Effectiveness Model 
Source: (Bozeman, 2000) 
Dimension  
Focus 
Example 
Transfer agent 
The institution or organization seeking 
to transfer the technology. 
Government agency, university, private 
firm, characteristics of the setting, its 
culture, organization, personnel. 
Transfer 
medium 
The vehicle, formal or informal by 
which the technology is transferred. 
License, copyright, CRADA, person-
to-person, formal literature. 
Transfer object The content and form of what is 
transferred, the transfer entity 
Scientific knowledge, technological 
device, process, and specific 
characteristic of each 
Transfer 
recipient 
The organization or institution receiving 
the transfer object. 
Firm, agency, organization, consumer, 
informal group, institution and 
associated characteristics. 
Demand 
environment 
Factors (market and non-market) 
pertaining the need for the transferred 
object 
Price for technology, substitutability, 
relation technologies now used, 
subsidy, market shelter. 
 
==PAGE:16==
 
11
 
Figure 2. Revised Contingent Effectiveness Model of Technology Transfer 
Source: (Bozeman et al., 2014) 
 
University TTO 
 
TTO is generally an organization designed to mobilize academic knowledge and discovery, 
so that the products of scholarship and research may have broad impact in society at large 
(Jefferson et al., 2016). UTTOs were established to facilitate commercial knowledge transfer from 
universities to practitioners or university/industry technology transfer (Siegel et al., 2004). UTTO 
and TTO in this case is distinguished because other organizations such as government lab/research 
agency may also have a TTO. UTTO therefore is the main transfer agent in this study. 
A TTO stimulates the transfer of know-how from science base into the commercial 
applications, by reducing the asymmetric information problem the firms face on the quality of the 
innovations by universities (Macho-Stadler et al., 2004). A TTO is often able to benefit from its 
capacity to pool the innovations across units within universities and build a reputation (Macho-
Stadler et al., 2004). UTTO marketing activities are most important for inventions in technological 
==PAGE:17==
 
12
areas where existing links between academia and industry is weak (Colyvas et al., 2002). 
According to Schoen et al. (2012), the key function of a UTTO is to act as an intermediary between 
the university and industry. This role is multifaceted, with three main activities: (1) research and 
funding services; (2) IP management (including the selection of declaration of invention and out-
licensing negotiations), and (3) spinoff services (Claryyse et al., 2005; Debackere and Veugelers, 
2005; Van Looy et al., 2011). 
Mission statement represents the concrete articulation of institutional values, based on 
which TTO officers decide how to best transfer technologies developed within their organization 
(Jefferson et al., 2016). Nevertheless, UTTO mission may have diverse objectives covering a range 
of themes, including provision of social benefit (via development of technologies for the 
marketplace); generation of income (via technology licensing); and economic development (via 
creation of startup companies) (Nelsen, 2007). Jefferson et al. (2016) from a study of five 
institutions which four of them are universities in the Americas found that societal benefit and 
support for research are central objectives in the mission statements of all four of the UTTOs 
studied. In addition, all universities except one explicitly emphasize the promotion of economic 
development in the local region or beyond as a central objective (Jefferson et al., 2016). 
 Personnel of a UTTO administer the commercialization process of a university’s 
intellectual property (IP), defined as patents, copyrights, trademarks, various know-hows, and 
related assets (Markman et al., 2005). At the most general level, UTTO personnel are responsible 
to: (a) evaluate and valuate disclosures of new discoveries; (b) seek legal protection for the 
technology, primarily through patenting; (c) sell licensing agreements to industry; and (d) collect 
royalty, oversee, and enforce contractual agreements with licensees (Markman, et al., 2005).  
Because UTT activities are interdisciplinary in nature, a UTTO must be comprised of 
personnel who balance technical, business, and legal skills (Jefferson et al., 2016). This is 
particularly important because of the diverse and sometimes conflicting demands that UTTOs must 
face (Jefferson et al., 2016). Jefferson et al. (2016) that studies different UTTO practices across 
several universities in the America, revealed different human resources models to attain the 
multifaceted expertise necessary for successful UTT. Technology managers at Stanford and UC 
Davis in the USA have interdisciplinary training, with backgrounds, comprising at least two or 
three preferred general skill sets (ie. scientific/technical, legal, or business). On the other hand, 
==PAGE:18==
 
13
most UTTO officers at Universidad Cátolica and Universidad de Concepción in Chile have 
expertise in one particular area. 
Moreover, Jefferson et al. (2016) note that at Stanford, officers with technical skills 
comprise more than two thirds of total staff (67%). Business skills are preferred secondarily (28% 
of staff). The Stanford Office of Technology Licensing (OTL) has an open policy of not hiring 
lawyers to handle technology transfer (5% of staff have legal backgrounds), as the licensing 
practice of OTL is to take risks, which may not be congruent with the training that attorneys 
receive. In contrast, in UC Davis TTO known as InnovationAccess, legal skills are valued above 
business skills: 26% of staff have legal background while 15% have business training. As a public 
institution, the University of California prefers to take fewer risks than Stanford, and lawyers are 
considered essential. Notably, more than half (52%) of InnovationAccess personnel have technical 
backgrounds. At Universidad Cátolica, business (50%) and technical (38%) skills are preferred 
over legal skills (6%). At Universidad de Concepción, technical skills (57%) are strongly favored 
over legal (15%) and business skills (14%). Similar as Stanford’s OTL, TTO at Universidad de 
Concepción does not involve lawyers in technology transfer agreements. A lawyer is however, is 
in charge of the Intellectual Property Unit (IPU), which oversees the TTO at an administrative 
level. 
A UTTO can be structured in many different ways. Schoen at al. (2012) studied the 
typology of UTTO in Europe. They identified four main types of TTOs: (1) classical TTO; (2) 
autonomous TTO; (3) discipline-integrated technology transfer alliance (TTA); (4) discipline-
specialized TTA. The classical TTO exclusively serves one university and is integrated into its 
administrative structure. The autonomous TTO is similar, but has a significantly higher degree of 
autonomy from the university’s administration. This autonomy particularly concerns budget 
allocation, human resource management, and reporting obligations. The discipline-integrated 
Technology Transfer Alliance (TTA) serves the technology transfer activities of several 
universities and is organized outside a university’s administrative structure. Finally, the discipline-
specialized TTA is focused on one academic discipline (e.g., life sciences or engineering) and, like 
the discipline-integrated TTA, serves several universities. 
Schoen et al. (2012) found that universities interested in spinoff creation would evolve 
toward an autonomous UTTO. Universities interested in private funding of their research activities 
would prefer classical, dependent, TTO model. The discipline specialized TTA model has 
==PAGE:19==
 
14
advantages for smaller universities by pooling inventions that leads to larger patent portfolios and 
higher bargaining power, and discipline specialized TTA is especially suitable for research areas 
that need different TT practices than others. 
Study by Markman et al. (2005) also reveal that a UTTO can be intended to be for profit 
or non-profit. Markman et al. (2005) found that for profit structures are positively related to new 
venture formation, while traditional university and non-profit TTO structure are most likely to 
correlate with the presence of university based business incubators. Moreover, study by Bercovitz 
et al. (2001) on UTTO organizational form at several universities in USA, shows that TTO can be 
shaped into various organizational formed such as H-form at John Hopkins University, MX-form 
at Duke University, and M-form at Pennsylvania State University. 
Continuing the explanation of organizational form based on the work of Bercovitz et al. 
(2001). John Hopkins University applied the H-form structure with multiple decentralized UTTO 
units and limited central control with each UTTO supported by its relevant division. Duke 
university applied the MX-form or collapse matrix where four associate directors in the 
organization has a primary responsibility for one or two facets of the university-industry TT 
interface such as spinoffs, sponsored research agreements, and patents and license administration 
while simultaneously oversees a specific technology area for example medicine, medical devices, 
et cetera. Lastly, Pennsylvania State has created an M-form organization with centralized 
administration office, and decentralized units. 
Universities like other types of organizations, have unique histories, differing capabilities 
and resources, and evolve different types of organizational structure including their UTTOs. 
Bercovitz et al. (2001) found that these different structures affect organizational performance terms 
of information processing capacity, coordination capabilities, and incentive alignment properties 
in a predictable manner. Indication is found that H-form structure optimizes unit-level information 
processing capacity and unit-level incentives, MX-form results in greater across unit coordination 
and incentive alignment, while the M-form offers more slightly more across unit coordination and 
incentive alignment competencies than the H-form. 
The position of the UTTO within the institution’s administrative structure can have a 
substantial impact on the ability of the UTTO to fulfill its TT objectives (Bercovitz et al., 2001). 
The situation of the UTTO within the institutional hierarchy reflects the importance that the 
institution intends to place on TT activities, and can determine the degree of autonomy that the 
==PAGE:20==
 
15
UTTO enjoys (Jefferson et al., 2016). Of all of the universities under the study of Bercovitz et al. 
(2001) and Jefferson et al., (2016), the TTOs are mainly situated within the institutions Office of 
Research. The situation of TTO within the institution’s Office of research establishes a clear and 
direct linkage between the basic and applied science developed therein, and the transmission of 
research results into commercializable products (Jefferson et al., 2016).  
The only exception here is John Hopkins University where the School of Medicine, School 
of Music, and Applied Physics Lab each has one TTO and these offices are loosely connected by 
an overarching governing body consisting the University President and Board of Trustees 
(Bercovitz et al., 2001). This type of position in administrative structure of John Hopkins 
University is influenced by the geographical condition of the university which is spread throughout 
Baltimore, USA reflecting a historical and spatial differentiation with a large degree of 
decentralization and autonomy among its constituent units (Bercovitz et al., 2001). 
Schoen et al. (2012) describe relevant structural dimension of TTO’s governance. First is 
the degree of discipline specialization. The degree of discipline specialization ranges from 
discipline specialized to discipline integrated. Discipline specialization means that decisions 
regarding TT are taken on departmental level and are focused on one specific discipline. In 
contrast, a discipline integrated TTO implies that decisions about TT activities are taken at an 
institutional level with the same rules and processes for all the departments.  
Second is the degree of task specialization. The degree of task specialization defines the 
distribution of tasks within the organization. A fully integrated TTO is responsible for all TTO 
activities in one organization. When the activities related to research funding services and IP 
management are executed by TTO, it is called backward integrated. A forward integrated TTO 
would be responsible for IP management and spinoff services. Specialization of IP management 
denotes the highest degree of specialization. Specialization on other activities other than IP 
management would not be referred to as a TTO. 
Third is the degree of autonomy. Schoen et al. (2010) distinguishes between dependent and 
independent TTO. A dependent TTO has to report to the university administration (ie. office of 
the provost or vice rector for research) and has limited decision making autonomy with respect to 
budget, incentives, and human resources management. Fourth and the last dimension according to 
Schoen et al. (2012) is degree of exclusivity. This structural variable indicates whether a TTO 
==PAGE:21==
 
16
serves more than one customer (university), as opposed to having an exclusive relationship with 
one institution.   
 
Mechanisms for UTT 
 
Generally, scholars determined two groups of mechanisms which are formal and informal 
UTT. Grimpe and Fier (2010) describe formal UTT as a mechanism to allocate property rights, 
whereas informal UTT is more about informal communication process. Following parts will 
discuss respectively formal UTT, informal UTT, and the application of UTT mechanisms in more 
detail.  
 
Formal UTT 
 
Examples of a mechanism that allocate property rights are patent, license, and royalty 
agreement (Link et al., 2007). In addition, university spinoff is also considered as a formal UTT 
as it is created when the licensee of a university assigned invention creates a new company to 
exploit it (Di Gregorio and Shane, 2003). Bercovitz and Feldman (2006) define contractual 
licensing as agreements that involves selling a company the rights to use a university’s invention 
in return for revenue in the form of up-front fees at the time of closing the deal, and annual, ongoing 
royalty payments that are contingent upon the commercial success of the technology in the 
downstream market. Licensing types can differ between exclusive or non-exclusive (Lee and Win, 
2004). Markman et al., (2005) differentiate licensing between licensing for cash, licensing for 
equity, and licensing for sponsored research. Licensing has traditionally been the most popular 
mode of UTT and arguably involves little transfer of tacit knowledge (Wright et al., 2008). 
Spinoffs provide academic entrepreneurs with an alternative pathway for disseminating and 
commercializing research, often when they are unable to license their technology to large 
companies or an external entrepreneur (Lowe, 2002).  
 
Informal UTT 
 
Mechanisms that flow through informal communication processes are technical assistance, 
consulting, joint publication with industry, and collaborative research (Link et al., 2007). 
Perkmann et al., (2013) describe informal UTT as a mechanism that can be in the form of formal 
activities such as collaborative research, contract research, and consulting, as well as informal 
==PAGE:22==
 
17
activities such as providing ad hoc advice and networking. Perkmann and Walsh (2007) explains 
the difference between research partnership and services in informal UTT. Research partnership 
such as collaborative and sponsored research are formal collaborative arrangements among 
organizations with the objective to co-operate on research and development activities. In contrast, 
research services such as contract research and consulting are paid for services performed by 
university researchers for and under the direction of industrial clients.  
Informal UTT represents an important way in which academic knowledge is transferred 
into the industrial domain; many companies consider it significantly more valuable than licensing 
university patents (Cohen et al., 2002). Perkmann et al. (2013) found that informal UTT has a 
higher activity volume than patenting and entrepreneurship. In relation with revenue, Perkmann 
and Walsh (2007) mentioned that income of higher education institutes from collaborative research 
and consultancy is greater than income from IPR for both cases separately. 
Examining university-industry linkages in the UK, D’Este and Patel (2007) found that 
university researchers interact with industry using a wide variety of channels and engage more 
frequently on consultancy & contract research, joint research, or training that are associated to 
informal UTT as compared to patenting and spinoff activities. Existing literature provides 
relatively little knowledge on informal UTT while most research emphasizes on formal UTT 
mechanism (Grimpe and Fier, 2010). Indeed, scholars have called that greater attention should be 
made to the broad range of knowledge transfer in addition to patenting and spinoffs due to the 
wide variety of UTT mechanisms (Bekkers and Freitas, 2008; D’Este and Patel, 2007). 
 
Application of UTT Mechanisms 
 
There is evidence that certain UTT mechanism works well or associated to a certain 
technology type and firm. Colyvas et al. (2002) investigates the importance of IPR in facilitating 
university invention into market. Results suggest that IPR are likely to be most important for 
embryonic inventions (need further development) and unimportant for inventions that are useful 
for industry "off the shelf". Jensen and Thursby (2001) based on their survey of USA universities 
supports the argument that the industrial use of federally funded research would be reduced 
without university patenting, emphasizing the embryonic state of most technology licensed and 
the need for inventor for commercialization.  
==PAGE:23==
 
18
Markman et al. (2005) on one of their research objectives study the licensing strategies that 
are most conducive to new venture formation subsequently relating it to the technology type in the 
development stage and type of firms associated as illustrated in Figure 3. licensing for sponsored 
research which is predominantly used by 11% of the UTTO sample in their research is usually 
paired with early stage technologies and associated with large firms as the technology in itself is 
still underdeveloped and market application is also unclear. Licensing for equity which is used by 
17% the UTTO sample in their research is usually paired with proof of concept or reduced to 
practice technologies. By using this strategy, UTTOs are investing in what really is a private 
partnership to further develop the technology, UTTOs bet also on the venture, rather than only the 
technology. Thus, licensing for equity is highly associated to new firm formation and to small 
firms. Licensing for cash which is predominantly used by 72% of UTTOs in their research is 
almost invariably paired with IP based technologies at the prototype stage, for which market has 
been identified and main beneficiary of licensing for cash are usually large firms. Markman et al. 
(2005) conclude that universities at USA that are most interested in generating short term cash 
flows from their IPR licensing strategies are least positioned to create long term wealth through 
venture creation. 
 
Figure 3. Relationship Between Technology Stage, Licensing Strategy, and Transfer Partner 
Source: Markman et al. (2005) 
 
==PAGE:24==
 
19
There are certain conditions where the UTT mechanism of patenting and licensing does 
not work well. Patenting imposes a cost that, from an economic perspective, is worth incurring 
only if the royalties from licensing those patents exceed the average cost of patenting (Shane, 
2004). If licensing is not effective in an industry, for example because knowledge is not easily 
codifiable, the willingness of firms to license university technology is low; the ability of 
universities to successfully license those patent is limited; and the royalties that universities can 
charge are small (Shane, 2004). Jensen and Thursby (2001) found that around in two-thirds of 
university patents in their research, commercialization was difficult without the tacit knowledge 
the researchers that had contributed to the patent. The commercialization of such patents may 
require an academic spinoff, or the engagement of the academic researchers as consultants in order 
to have value (Lindholm Dahlstrand, 2008). Thus, a high share of university patents might never 
be commercially exploited if universities focus too narrowly on the licensing route (Lindholm 
Dahlstrand, 2008). 
Academic spinoffs provide an effective vehicle to exploit radical, early stage technology, 
and it has the capacity to exploit the codified outcomes by combining and integrating them with 
the tacit knowledge of the inventors (as founders), which is required for further development of 
the technology (Gilsing et al., 2011). Polt et al. (2001) also argues that spinoffs and academic 
startups will be most important in those regions where no or very little downstream industry exist 
to which technology might be contracted. 
One could ask, what is the relationship between all of these different UTT mechanisms? 
Are they a substitute or a complementary to each other? research conducted by Van Looy et al. 
(2011) concluded that trade-offs between transfer mechanisms do not reveal themselves; on the 
contrary complementary relation is found such as contract research and spin off activities that tend 
to facilitate each other. In support of the view, Perkmann et al. (2013) also argue that informal 
UTT often precedes formal UTT in time and can hence be regarded as an input factor to the latter. 
Colvyas et al. (2002) note that licensing is usually the result of a bottom up activity of informal 
networks and contract research. In some cases, it may also accompany formal UTT, for instance 
when university spinoffs work collaboratively with the university labs they originated from 
(Meyer, 2003).  
Bercovitz and Feldman (2006) also note that in a commercialization of a technology, 
different transaction may occur between the university and company. For example, 
==PAGE:25==
 
20
commercialization can involve multiple licenses, and require that a company fund a sponsored 
research project for developmental work to usefully apply the licenses (Bercovitz and Feldman, 
2006). On patents, it may become much more important when not viewed in isolation as a mere 
source of income from royalties, but as a negotiation chip in sponsored research contracts with 
industry (Thursby et al., 2001), thus further bolstering the argument that UTT mechanisms 
complement each other. 
 
The UTT Process 
 
Various scholars seem to agree on the process of the traditional UTT. Figure 4. illustrates 
the traditional UTT model by Siegel et al. (2004) which is also similar with models presented by 
Bradley et al. (2013), Van Norman and Eisenkot (2017), and Rogers et al. (2000). Journey of the 
UTT starts with scientific discovery by the university scientist (Siegel et al., 2004). Research 
expenditure is an important resource to generate scientific discovery that eventually leads to 
invention disclosure (Rogers et al., 2000 and Anderson et al., 2007). As stipulated in a BD policy 
model, academics are required by law to file the invention disclosure to the TTO. Evaluation of an 
invention usually involves conducting analysis to determine: (1) whether the invention meets the 
requirements necessary for IPR protection or patentability; and (2) whether the invention has 
commercial potential or marketability (Wu et al., 2015).  
University officials must then decide whether they will attempt to patent the innovation, 
which is one of the mechanisms to protect the IP of an invention (Siegel et al., 2004). Once the 
patent has been awarded, the TTO can presumably market the technology, sometimes with faculty 
input (Siegel et al., 2004). In the marketing of inventions, UTTOs will frequently conduct market 
analyses, by collecting information about the technology of interest, its associated markets, and 
potential candidates in developing the invention into a commercially viable technology (Jefferson 
et al., 2016). The next stage of model involves working with firms or entrepreneurs to negotiate 
licensing agreement (Siegel et al., 2004). Finally, the license is used by either a firm or start up or 
spin off company (Siegel et al., 2004). Figure 4. also provides information on which stakeholder 
is involved in each activity. 
 
==PAGE:26==
 
21
 
Figure 4. Model for Traditional UTT 
Source: (Siegel et al., 2004) 
 
Following the traditional UTT model to understand how UTT process actually works, 
however can be misleading. Bradley et al. (2013) argues that the traditional UTT model has a 
number of limitation and does not accurately capture the complexities of UTT in practice. Firstly, 
the traditional UTT model is inaccurate as it binds TT to a linear path and oversimplify the 
complexity, does not capture the various branches of a practiced UTT process, a one size fits all 
that does not accurately depict differences in UTT across disciplines, and that the traditional model 
places to much emphasis on the importance of patents as the primary output in the TT process. 
Secondly, the traditional UTT model is inadequate as it fails to acknowledge the importance of 
informal mechanisms of TT, organizational culture of universities and of the firm impact, and the 
reward systems in place in universities that can greatly facilitate or impede faculty involvement in 
TT activities. 
Based on the identified limitations of the traditional UTT model, Bradley et al. (2013) 
proposes an alternative model of UTT as illustrated in Figure 5. The alternative model begins with 
scientific discovery, but the alternative model distinguishes the actor of the discovery, source of 
funding, and collaboration if any. The model also incorporates the possibility that the inventor 
might not disclose its invention and bypass the TTO instead. If the inventor chose to bypass the 
TTO, the TT process is carried out through informal mechanisms. Furthermore, ideas and 
knowledges that passes through informal mechanisms can also result in spinoff/startup company, 
adaptation of existing firms, and other forms of knowledge dissemination such as disclosing the 
invention to the public domain. It also considers that federal funding agency and inventors might 
==PAGE:27==
 
22
hold title to the invention if the university does not want to take title to the invention. The model 
also acknowledges other IP protection other patents such as copyrights, trademarks, and trade 
secrets.  
Whether it is related to inventor bypassing the TTO or not, interestingly Fini et al. (2010) 
found that much academic entrepreneurship occurs outside the university IPR system. More 
specifically, Fini et al (2010) found that on their research approximately two thirds of business 
started by academics are not based on disclosed and patented inventions. Still related to academic 
entrepreneurship, in Sweden 24% of spinoffs are direct university spinoffs with faculty members 
establishing the new firm (Lindholm Dahlstrand, 2008). Most of academic spinoffs, 62% are 
indirect university spinoffs where in these firms IPR or ideas have rested while the entrepreneur 
was working in the private industry (Lindholm Dahlstrand, 2008). The rest 14% of academic 
spinoffs occur when an external entrepreneur not a faculty member acquires the university research 
(with or without license) (Lindholm Dahlstrand, 2008). 
 
Figure 5. Alternative Model for UTT 
Source: (Bradley et al., 2013) 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
23
In application, UTTOs apply different practices in the process of UTT. Regarding 
invention disclosures, Jefferson et al. (2016) found that five institutions in their studies include 
policies of obligation for inventors to disclose all patentable invention, except for one institute that 
affords researchers more flexibility in placing new inventions into the public domain. Debackere 
and Veugelers (2005) mentioned that enforcing inventors to disclose their invention rarely occurs, 
and depends largely on incentive structures within the university. Jefferson et al. (2016) identified 
the usage of standard invention disclosures in all of the institutions they have studied. In addition 
to invention disclosures, some UTTOs utilize other mechanisms to identify inventions such as 
review and revision of applied science project portfolios, visit to laboratories, and personal 
interview with researchers (Jefferson et al., 2016).  
Some universities implement policies covering the identification and management of 
conflicts of interest and commitment (Jefferson et al., 2016). A conflict of interest (COI) is any 
situation where tension exist between an individual’s private interests and his or her private 
obligations while conflict of commitment (COC) takes place when there is potential for a conflict 
between the institution’s primary educational and research mission, and its interest in supporting 
TT and economic development (Jefferson et al., 2016).  
In relation to incentive structures, share of revenues that inventors receive as a share of 
revenue of their patented and commercialized products is a point of interest (Jefferson et al., 2016). 
A commonly cited principle is that 100% of royalty revenue should inure to the institution until 
all out of pocket expenses associated with protection and exploitation of the invention have been 
reimbursed (Friedman and Silberman, 2003). Subsequently, the inventor’s share can vary widely 
from institution to institution, but universities in the USA usually give 25% to 50% share of 
inventor royalty after net revenue expenses (Siegel et al., 2004). 
Different approaches are taken in evaluating the potential of an inventions. Some 
universities consider both patentability and marketability as key element for in-depth analysis 
while others only consider primarily patentability considerations, including assessment of 
inventorship, obligations to research sponsors, and prior art search (Jefferson et al., 2016). Once 
the UTTO decides to move the disclosure forward, it begins the patent application process (Bradley 
et al., 2013). Global patent protection is the most expensive type of patent, so universities might 
choose to apply for a domestic patent, which protects the technology at a significantly lower cost 
==PAGE:29==
 
24
(Siegel et al., 2004). In most cases, global/foreign applications are not filed unless there is an actual 
licensee to cover the cost of prosecution (Jefferson et al., 2016). 
In conducting the marketing of inventions, UTTOs use in house market analyses for most 
of their inventions (Jefferson et al., 2016). UTTOs employ similar direct marketing strategies that 
include sending e-mails, making phone calls, and organizing showcase meetings with primary 
market stakeholders (Jefferson et al., 2016). Indirect marketing strategies vary among UTTOs, for 
example Stanford university utilizes Techfinder search engine and participates in technology 
scouting events while UC Davis leverages social networks and search engines such as 
iBridge.Network (Jefferson et al., 2016). 
In evaluating companies as a potential licensee, institutions typically request development 
and commercialization information related to the technology for which a license is being requested 
(Jefferson et al., 2016). For example, Stanford University has a guide called the “New Company 
Outline Prospectus” which outlines the invention and its advantages, and then request information 
about the company, its technology development and marketing strategy, its business development 
plan, and risk analysis (Jefferson et al., 2016). According to the UTTO staff at Stanford, Stanford 
does not look for the best company per se, but rather the best “home” for the technology or in other 
words, companies that are most committed and capable of bringing the technology to market 
(Jefferson et al., 2016). 
Once parties have decided to proceed with a license agreement, each side will likely 
appoint members to its respective negotiation team (Jefferson et al., 2016). Teams can consist of 
persons in legal, financial, or other areas of expertise, and an attorney, while some institutions even 
do not use lawyers at all in the licensing process (Jefferson et al., 2016). Before entering into a 
license agreement, a termsheet may be employed to enumerate the major issues that are expected 
to arise in the negotiations (Jefferson et al., 2016). For example, Stanford University has drafted a 
termsheet for different kinds of technology fields (Jefferson et al., 2016). The protocol specifies 
that its UTTO must internally define the desired financial terms, the best alternative to non-
agreement, and the walk away conditions for each type of licensing agreement (ie. non-exclusive, 
field exclusive, or exclusive), prior to commencing negotiation with selected potential licenses 
(Jefferson et al., 2016). Such template agreements are not considered a standard practice in other 
UTTOs (Jefferson et al., 2016). 
==PAGE:30==
 
25
Polices by UTTOs in creating spinoffs are different. Some institutions have a formal policy 
on not to favor in-house spinoffs in technology licensing while some institutions tend to favor the 
independence of researcher entrepreneur, preferring to license to the new ventures that these 
researchers create (Jefferson et al., 2016). Where the UTTO is actively involved in the creation of 
new ventures, it may engage in activities such as writing or helping write a business plan, assisting 
with the incorporation of the company, locating the initial seed funding, or recruiting the 
management team (O’Shea et al., 2005). In contrast, where a UTTO is not actively involved in the 
process of creating or incorporating the new company, interactions between the company and the 
UTTO will be limited to arms-length negotiation and the eventual granting of a license for the use 
of technologies developed in the institution (Jefferson et al., 2016). In some cases, an institution 
can even regulate the involvement of researchers in the creation of spinoffs (Jefferson et al., 2016). 
Based on current practices of UTTOs in the UK, Weckowska (2015) found two approaches 
in commercialization, namely transaction focused practice and relation focused practice. 
Transaction focused commercialization practice is characterized by treating the outputs of 
scientific research as tradable products, and is focused on completing IPR transactions, such as 
sales and licenses. It is based on a belief that a competent pursuit of commercialization research 
entails commodification of scientific knowledge and successful sales and licenses of IPR. 
Meanwhile, a relation focused commercialization practice is focused on building relations among 
academics, commercial organizations and UTT managers. The practice is underpinned by a belief 
that competent pursuit of commercialization entails building and managing complex relations 
between stakeholders during all commercialization activities. 
A UTTO can also have different UTT mechanism strategies in achieving their objective. 
Bengtsson (2017) observed that Danish and Norwegian UTTOs increased their use of licensing 
strategy while Swedish UTTOs have maintained their use of spinoff strategy in the period of 2004-
2013. Choice of spinoff or licensing strategy could be affected by the UTTOs access to internal 
and complementary capabilities for business development such as incubators, science parks, and 
seed funds (Markman et al., 2005).  
2.2. University and Government Level Policy and Initiative to Support UTT 
 
 
Although UTTOs are considered the main organization in the university that is specialized 
in transferring technology, universities themselves have an important role to foster UTT. A 
==PAGE:31==
 
26
commercialization/UTT system in a university may include elements ranging from motivation and 
education to initiatives to support specific commercialization projects such as innovation centers, 
incubators, patenting offices, and seed capital funds (Rasmussen et al., 2006). 
 
Rasmussen et al. (2006) studied different initiatives on commercialization of university 
knowledge at Chalmers University of Technology in Sweden, the Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology (NTNU) in Norway, the University of Oulu in Finland, and Trinity 
College Dublin (TCD) in Ireland. Majority of the universities had entrepreneurship related courses 
and initiatives aiming to increase student motivation and competence to establish new firms. In 
addition to formal studies, student initiatives have emerged aiming at motivating, advising, and 
supporting fellow students who are interested in entrepreneurship and innovation. Business plan 
competition is another initiative that is effective in generating interest in technology 
entrepreneurship especially among students. 
 
Rasmussen et al. (2006) found various initiatives both in and around the university aimed 
to support specific commercialization projects based on university knowledge. Chalmers 
University set up a university owned foundation aiming to help technology based spinoffs in their 
critical years while also operating public seed capital arrangement and an on campus incubator. 
OuluTech at Oulu University is established to support new knowledge based companies in the 
region with patenting, marketing, technical advice, negotiations, financing et cetera. In 1994 LEN 
was established by NTNU and an external research institute that offers resources and services of 
seed capital, consulting, physical infrastructure, evaluation of business ideas, and filing for patents. 
In addition, NTNU also has an incubator in the university. 
 
Realizing that the availability of seed and venture capital pose an obstacle in development 
of new companies, universities have taken measure to solve this issue (Rasmussen et al., 2006). 
Chalmers University set up Chalmersinvest as a capital fund investing in technology based 
companies. At TCD there is also a university company venture fund available. As mentioned, LEN 
the commercialization company at NTNU operates a seed capital fund. Universities can also help 
in building professional network and capacities. Stanford for example offers advisory sessions 
with professional entrepreneurs to its academic community (Jefferson et al., 2016). At KU Leuven, 
Leuven Inc. is established which acts as a network organization bringing together like minded 
people from academic research groups, entrepreneurial startups, supporting services such as 
consultancy and venture capital, and established companies in the Leuven area to support and 
==PAGE:32==
 
27
stimulate the exchange of business experiences between its members (Debackere and Veugelers, 
2005). Numerous events and opportunities for informal networking, information, and training 
sessions are organized by Leuven Inc. (Debacekre and Veugelers, 2005). 
 
Universities have created entrepreneurship development programs. At MIT, The 
Deshpande Centre for Technological Innovation is established to bring market perspective to the 
work of university-based researchers as early in the innovation process as is practicable (O’Shea 
et al., 2007). The center identifies MIT researchers with promising ideas that can be developed 
more rapidly and effectively with a modest infusion of grant money for ongoing research and 
expert advice to guide the spinoff (O’Shea et al., 2007). From the inception in 2002 to 2004, the 
center has funded 51 projects with more than USD six million in grants (O’Shea et al., 2007). The 
Center for Entrepreneurship, located at the Sloan School of Management, aims to engage students 
and faculty from throughout MIT to provide research and educational programs in electronic 
commerce and in new product and venture formation; and to offer a variety of programs for 
mentoring students and alumni who are interested in starting new businesses (O’Shea et al., 2007) 
 
There are several spinoff incubation models that universities can employ. Clarysse et al. 
(2005) in their research describe two types that are related to universities which are the low 
selective model and supportive model. In terms of objective, the low selective model is oriented 
towards raising entrepreneurship awareness among researchers and/or students at the university 
(Clarysse et al., 2005). In the low selective model, economic and financial attractiveness of 
spinoffs is less of importance. In of the examples, selection criteria only have to require that the 
project is based upon technical developments and they have to cooperate with the research institute 
where they spinoff from. spinoff support focuses mainly on the validation phase with funds and 
limited physical infrastructure. Public funds are usually used to be invested in the early stage of 
spinoff project maximum around EUR 100,000 per project. TOP program in the University of 
Twente is one of the example of the low selective model where close to 30 spinoffs each year in 
2001 and 2002 is created (Clarysse et al., 2005). 
The supportive model is oriented towards generating spinoffs as an alternative to licensing 
out its IPR. In the supportive model, economic profitability is an important consideration for 
selection. Spinoff support includes business advice, coaching, access to space and equipment, and 
access to public/private investment in the range of EUR 350,000 - EUR 600,000 per business plan. 
==PAGE:33==
 
28
In the supportive model, a well-functioning IPR department and contract research which is often 
under the UTTO is important. 
According to economic literature, the main justification for government interventions that 
support universities “third mission” relating to economic development activities cite the 
persistence of barriers, in the form of market inefficiencies (Salmenkaita and Salo, 2002). 
Arguably the most significant hurdle among market inefficiencies is the so called funding gap, that 
is the lack of private funding sources available to support UTT activities and academic spin-offs, 
even more “advanced” or risk oriented investors, such as venture capital firms or business angels 
(Salmenkaita and Salo, 2002). Thus, governments could employ direct financial support measures 
that aims to close the funding gap for transferring from universities to industries (Kochenkova et 
al., 2016). A scheme found in many countries in bridging the funding gap is to provide 
development grants called proof of concept funds to verify the industrial applicability of a research 
based invention (Rasmussen, 2008). 
Salmenkaita and Salo (2002) also note another rationale for government intervention which is 
systemic failure. Because effectiveness of innovation systems depends on interactions among 
various players, different priorities, goals, and objectives can endanger their long term 
performance and prompt systemic failure. Government intervention helps mitigate such systemic 
failures in the commercialization of new technologies by creating incentives for interactions, 
collaborations, and knowledge and technology exchanges among organizations, across different 
stages of the innovation process (Salmenkaita and Salo, 2002). For example, governments might 
introduce technology programs, aimed at promoting collaborative R&D projects between industry 
and academia (Kochenkova et al., 2016) 
Just as there are differences in the goals and priorities of various actors, expertise, cultural, 
and language differences arise between academics and potential users of the technology, which 
can create communication gap in the different phase of UTT, hence a rationale for government 
intervention (Kochenkova et al., 2016). This gap or barrier requires intervention by a third party 
(ie. the government) which can provide dedicated facilities and consulting assistance to support 
interactions among different actors throughout the knowledge and TT process (Feldman et al., 
2002).  
Finally, the last rationale for government intervention is knowledge gap, because academic 
researchers and entrepreneurs might lack the managerial skills and competences needed to advance 
==PAGE:34==
 
29
their technologies or start-ups to a point at which it is possible to negotiate successfully with 
industrial partners or external investors (Rasmussen and Rice, 2012). Thus necessary public 
policies should seek to build competences within universities, by educating university staff about 
the elements and details of commercialization and TT (Kochenkova et al., 2016). 
 
Kochenkova et al. (2016) classify three macro-level government interventions in UTT. 
First is legislative/institutional reform which defines rules and boundaries for undertaking UTT 
activities. One legislative policy that has been a topic of much debate is IPR ownership. It is 
important to have transparent and clear IPR ownership (Link et al., 2003; Rasmussen and Rice, 
2012), otherwise it can lead to problems in the commercialization process and in the collaboration 
in the industry (Rasmussen and Rice, 2012).  Second is the direct financial support measures aimed 
to close the funding gap for transferring knowledge from universities to industry. Third set of 
policies encompasses competence building measures that address knowledge gaps between 
academic researchers and entrepreneurs related to technology exploitation and entrepreneurship 
issues. 
2.3. Measuring UTT Performance 
 
There are many ways in how to measure the performance of a UTT. As explained in 
Chapter 2.1, Bozeman et al. (2014) defined seven effectiveness criteria of TT to measure 
performance. For the purpose of this research, effectiveness will be focused on one criteria which 
is the “out of the door criteria” based on Bozeman et al. (2014) CEM model. This criterion is most 
often used by both scholars and practitioners and, in many cases the only one used (Bozeman et 
al., 2014). The primary assumption of Out of the Door criteria for TT effectiveness is that 
technology transfer agent has succeeded once the technology has been converted into a transfer 
mechanism, either formal or informal, and another party has acquired the technology (Bozeman et 
al., 2014). 
Indeed, along the years many empirical studies assessing the performance of UTT that has 
used the out of the door criteria to some extent. In a study assessing UTTO effectiveness in the 
USA, Rogers et al. (2000) used invention disclosures received, total US patent filed, licenses and 
options executed, licenses/options yielding income, number of startups, and gross license income 
received. Anderson et al. (2007) used licensing income, licenses and options executed, US patents 
==PAGE:35==
 
30
filed, US patents issued, and startup companies as the output measurement in measuring UTT 
efficiency in the USA. 
Siegel et al. (2003a) in a study of UTTO productivity in the USA decided to focus on two 
output factor which are licensing agreement and royalties. Chapple et al. (2005) use number of 
licenses and licensing income as output measures to study relative performance in UTTO in the 
UK. Caldera and Debande (2010) in assessing UTTO performance of Spanish universities use 
R&D contracts income, number of R&D contracts, licensing income, number of licensing income, 
and number of spinoffs as measure of output. Summary of selected empirical studies of UTT with 
their measurement of effectiveness is provided in Table 5. 
Various output measures used by numerous studies mentioned does not reflect the full 
extent of how technologies from universities can be transferred through various mechanisms. 
There seems to be uncertainty in regards to setting the boundaries in UTT mechanism and 
relationship between output criteria. Sponsored research and the formation of startups can also be 
viewed as UTT outputs, however both of them are often a direct result of licensing agreements 
Siegel et al. (2003a). Similarly, one could adopt a broad view of TT and treat patents, invention 
disclosures, and even students as UTT outputs (Siegel et al., 2003a). Surprising also that 
collaborative research and consulting activities does not receive much acclaim as UTT output in 
empirical researchers given in certain situation for example in the UK, Perkmann and Walsh 
(2007) mentioned that income from both collaborative research and consulting activities is higher 
than IPR related UTT activities. 
Out of the door effectiveness criteria is also the predominant consideration in qualitative 
studies. Mowery et al. (2001) use patenting and licensing to examine the effect of BD Act in the 
USA. Borlaug et al. (2009) use the number of startups and license agreements among other 
measures to evaluate the government FORNY program in Norway to support UTT. Breznitz 
(2011) provides the account of spinoffs, number of licensing agreements, and royalties in 
explaining he effect of technology transfer changes in the University of Cambridge, UK. These 
mentioned researches are an example on how Out of the Door criteria is frequently used in UTT 
studies. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
 
31
Table 5. Summary of Selected Empirical UTT Studies 
Author(s) 
Measurement of 
Effectiveness 
Methodology 
Key Result 
Rogers et al. 
(2000) 
Composite scale based on: 
invention disclosure, patent 
application, licenses yielding 
income, spinoffs; licenses 
income. 
Correlation analysis 
of composite TT 
score and linear 
regression. 
Significant and positive 
correlation are faculty quality, 
number of staff, age of UTTO, 
federal research funding. 
Siegel et al. 
(2003a) 
Licensing agreement, 
royalties. 
Total factor 
productivity (TFP) of 
licensing, stochastic 
frontier estimation 
(SFE) analysis, field 
interviews. 
UTTOs exhibit constant 
returns to scale with number of 
licenses, increasing returns to 
scale with respect to licensing 
revenue; organizational and 
environmental factors have 
considerable explanatory 
power. 
Chapple et 
al. (2005) 
Number of licenses, 
licensing income. 
Data envelopment 
analysis (DEA) and 
stochastic frontier 
estimation (SFE). 
UK UTTOs exhibit decreasing 
returns of scale and low levels 
of absolute efficiency; 
organizational and 
environmental factors have 
considerable explanatory 
power. 
Anderson et 
al. (2007) 
Licensing income, licenses 
and options executed, US 
patents filed, US patents 
issued, spinoffs. 
Data envelopment 
analysis (DEA). 
Significant inefficiency is 
found in many leading 
universities, universities with 
medical school are less 
efficient. 
Caldera and 
Debande 
(2010) 
R&D contracts income, 
number of R&D contracts, 
licensing income, number of 
licensing income, number of 
spinoffs. 
Linear regression 
analysis. 
Universities with established 
policies perform better, large 
and experienced UTTOs 
generate higher volumes of 
contract research but less 
important for licensing and 
spinoffs, universities with 
science park perform better. 
 
Several other UTT effectiveness measurement example is also worthwhile mentioning to 
give an overview which are market impact/economic development and public value. Other criteria 
such as political, opportunity cost, and scientific and technical human capital are seldom used.  
The Market impact/economic development criterion focuses on (1) the commercial success of the 
transferred technology including; (2) impacts on regional and or national economic growth 
==PAGE:37==
 
32
(Bozeman et al., 2014). Roessner et al. (2013) uses the AUTM annual surveys from 1996 and 2010 
economic input-output models to find the impact of university licensing to the USA economy 
during the period is in excess $162.1 billion and that jobs created over the same period from 7000 
to 23,000 per year. In smaller scale, Rowe and Temple (2011) calculated economic impact 
estimates from a TT in a specific industry. 
The public value is a new criterion added to the original CEM (Bozeman, 2000) that arises 
from the recognition that transfer agents, particularly public sector transfer agents but others as 
well, are housed within agencies and organizations that are themselves in pursuit of broad public 
interest goals (Bozeman et al. 2014). There have been several approaches in the use of public value 
effectiveness criteria for the study of UTT. Valdivia (2011) employs the public value model to 
evaluate the BD Act. Author identifies public value failures attributed to the BD Act beyond the 
conventional market failure approach normally used in assessing public policy. Sorensen and 
Chambers (2007) proposed new set of metrics to evaluate the success of UTT beyond money and 
patent, rather focusing on how well a TTO avails access to knowledge. 
Measuring Out of Door criteria has the merit of practical utility and convenience of 
measurement (Bozeman et al., 2014). However, it must be realized that using Out the Door 
criterion only, will likely never have direct knowledge that the TT activities have achieved the 
goals of having economic and social impacts beyond those accruing to the TT partnership 
(Bozeman et al., 2014). Despite its critical limitations, the Out the Door criterion is arguably the 
most commonly used criterion and the basis of most metrics employed for TT (Bozeman et al., 
2014). Therefore, in this research the number of licensing, assignment, and option (LAO) 
agreement and number of spinoffs are the performance measures used. In addition, revenue from 
UTT is also used to measure performance. 
2.4. Problems, Barriers, and Critiques to UTT 
 
Various studies have identified problems and barriers related UTT. Interestingly, the 
increasing trend of commercializing research also brought its own critiques. This chapter will 
discuss problems, barriers, and critiques to the present practice of UTT. Some contents of the 
discussion relate to the same topic at Chapter 2.2. discussing government rationale to support UTT, 
however the discussion on Chapter 2.2. focuses more on the government perspective. First part of 
==PAGE:38==
 
33
the discussion will focus more on organizational and managerial issues while the second part will 
focus more on the UTT system as a whole. 
 
Managerial and Organization Issues in UTT 
 
 
Through interviews with various UTT stakeholders in the USA, Siegel et al. (2004) 
identified numerous impediments to UTT, notably: cultural and information barrier among three 
key stakeholder types (university administrators, academics, firms/entrepreneurs), UTTO staffing 
and compensation practices, and inadequate rewards for faculty involvement in UTT, and 
inflexible university bureaucracy. 
 
Cultural and information difference can impede effectiveness of UTT, as described by 
Siegel et al. (2004), firms repeatedly expressed their frustration at the universities lack of a “deal 
making” mentality. The university’s risk aversion is especially frustrating for startup companies 
and other firms that need to respond quickly to changes in the competitive environment. Referred 
to as communication gap by Rogers (2000), communication gap between academics and potential 
adopters of the technology due to the differences in expertise, motives, culture, and language. It is 
important is important to understand the motivation and culture of different stakeholders in UTT. 
Firms and entrepreneurs seek to commercialize university based IPR for profit, UTTO and other 
university administrators regard themselves as the guardians of the university’s IPR portfolio, and 
academic scientists especially those who are untenured, seek the rapid dissemination of their ideas 
and breakthroughs (Siegel et al., 2007) 
On information barrier, the problem relates to the asymmetric information between 
industry and science on the value of inventions (Siegel et al., 2007). Firms typically cannot assess 
the quality of the invention, while researchers may find it difficult to assess the commercial 
profitability of their inventions (Siegel et al., 2007). Many firms pointed deficiencies in UTTO 
marketing and negotiation skills, while in theory a UTTO personnel should be effective facilitators 
of UTT for example in boundary spanning and bridging activities (Siegel et al., 2004). Likewise, 
in the UK, Chapple et al. (2005) also found the need to upgrade the business skills and capabilities 
of UTTO managers and licensing officers in the UK. 
University reward system has been found to affect faculty involvement in the patenting 
process (Siegel et al., 2004). Rewards for patenting in promotion and tenure are typically quite 
low. Furthermore, Siegel et al., (2004) noted that many senior faculty members look askance at 
==PAGE:39==
 
34
junior faculty members who become involved in TT, they allege such activity is time taken away 
from fundamental research. Perhaps, the most alarming finding from the research of Siegel et al. 
(2004) is that many inventors/scientists decided to avoid working/circumvent with UTTOs. That 
is when an invention is publicly disclosed, firms may contact the inventor and arrange to work 
with him/her and engage in informal commercialization and knowledge transfer, through 
consulting or sabbatical leave. This problem appears according to Siegel et al. (2004) due to the 
bureaucratic and inflexibility of universities in dealing with UTT. Illustration of organizational 
and managerial issues in UTT formulated by Siegel et al. (2004) is presented in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6. Organizational and Managerial Issues in the UTT Process 
Source: (Siegel et al., 2004) 
 
According to Rasmussen and Rice (2012), the nature of the new invention itself also 
presents an obstacle to UTT. First, the research process might generate a considerable share of 
tacit knowledge which cannot easily be converted to explicit knowledge, but instead may have to 
be transferred through personal interaction and learning over time (Jensen and Thursby, 2001). 
Second, university innovations are often embryonic in nature (Colyvas et al., 2002; Jensen and 
==PAGE:40==
 
35
Thursby, 2001), hence there is considerable risk associated with commercialization of research 
result, and the time lag between a research result and product or service introduced to the market 
is substantial. Thirdly, innovation or technology might be so radical in nature that no existing 
companies are willing to undertake commercialization (Markham et al., 2002). In addition, people 
may not use the new technology introduced due structural and environmental factors such as lack 
of physical, financial, human or social resources (Rogers, 2003). 
 
Issue and Critique to Current UTT Model 
 
The current UTT system widely practiced have garnered critiques from several scholars. 
First of all, one of the motivations of UTT which is to generate revenue for universities (Bradley 
et al., 2013) is debatable. Unfortunately for many institutions, success in UTT has not been 
achieved (Phan and Siegel, 2006). One of the finding that stands out from the descriptive statistics 
on USA university patenting is the fact that the majority of patents generates only comparative 
licensing income, while there is small number of patents that are responsible for the bulk of 
licensing income (Verspagen, 2006). Moreover, licensing revenues were highly concentrated at a 
few universities that patented “blockbuster” inventions (So et al., 2008). A recent econometric 
analysis using data on academic licensing revenues from 1998 to 2002 suggest that, after 
subtracting the cost of patent management, net revenues earned by USA universities from patent 
licensing were “on average, quite modest” nearly three decades after BD took effect (So et al., 
2008). A substantial number of TTOs operate at a loss and only six in one thousand disclosures 
produces more than $1 million in royalties (Cardozo et al., 2011). 
The most interesting discussion is related to scholars that are against the BD type university 
IPR ownership model. Kenney and Patton (2009) argue that the BD type model, in which 
universities maintain de jure ownership inventions, is not optimal either in terms of economic 
efficiency or for the advancement the social interest of rapidly commercializing technology and 
encouraging entrepreneurship. This model is plagued by ineffective incentives, information 
asymmetries, and contradictory motivations for the university, the inventors, potential licensees, 
and university UTTO (Kenny and Patton, 2009). 
Criticism also befell to the TTOs. The institutional arrangement within which a TTO is 
embedded have encouraged some of them to become revenue maximizers, rather than facilitators 
of technology dissemination for the good of the entire society (Kenny and Patton, 2009). Many 
==PAGE:41==
 
36
TTOs have become bottlenecks for TT rather than facilitators where the centerpiece of the problem 
lies on the objective of revenue maximizing (Litan, 2007). In turn, it has created incentives for 
TTOs to become gatekeepers rather than facilitators (Litan, 2007). To give solution the problem 
they have described, Kenny and Patton (2009) proposes two alternative models of IP ownership, 
first is to vest ownership to the inventor and the second is to make all available inventions 
immediately to public domain. Litan (2007) also proposes to move from the current revenue 
maximizing model to a volume oriented model that concentrates on the number of and speed which 
university innovations are sent out of the door and into the marketplace. 
Nelson (2001) warned about the potential down sides of the new proclivity of universities 
to patent and license. First, relates to the extent that universities can take on the role of “commercial 
enterprises” without jeopardizing their more traditional role that produce licensing revenues, that 
in turn creates tension among research groups, department, university central administration 
(Nelson, 2001). Tension and conflict of interest can also occur when faculty have a financial 
interest, as well as a scientific interest (Nelson, 2001). Furthermore, there are also evidence that 
companies are increasingly angry about universities claiming and trying to profit from IP (Nelson, 
2001). Second, is associated to the intrusion of IP rights into what used to be the domain of public 
science. (Nelson, 2001). 
Four potential negative effects of university patenting have been described by (Verspagen, 
2006) as follows: (1) Impact that patenting has on the “’culture of open science” and turn into a 
closed; (2) potential blockades that patents may form for further research; and (3) strategic 
behavior of universities that may move away from basic research with long-run impacts. Similarly, 
(Geuna and Nesta, 2006) also explain five potential negative impacts of university patenting: (1) 
patenting may have substitution effect towards publishing; (2) reduced teaching quality; (3) 
negative impact on the culture of open science; (4) diverting fundamental long-term research; (5) 
prohibits future academic investigation. Mowery et al. (2001) also warns that when universities 
put too much on patenting and licensing, the operation of other effective channels through which 
university inventions reach commercial invention might be compromised or even overlooked. 
Some scholars have even gone to research whether in actual IPR especially patenting 
activity is detrimental to open/public science with mixed conclusions. Murray and Stern (2007) 
found evidence of an anti-commons effect (the citation rate after the patent grant declines by 
approximately 10 to 20 percent) as a proof of the negative role of IPR towards scientific 
==PAGE:42==
 
37
knowledge. Hellman et al. (2007) concluded that patent is a complement to doing research. 
Likewise, Fabrizio and Minin (2008) concluded that publication and patenting are complementary, 
not a substitute, activities, for faculty member.  
Curiously, patenting and licensing have been conducted by universities when UTT would 
happen regardless without patenting and licensing, and the case happens to be one of the success 
stories of UTT in the USA. For example, the Cohen-Boyer recombinant DNA technique was being 
used by industry even before University of California and Stanford began to license their patents; 
patenting (and licensing widely) allowing the universities to generate income, but did not facilitate 
UTT (Sampat, 2006). Neils Reimers, the manager of the Cohen-Boyer licensing program, made 
this point explicitly noting that: “Whether we license it or not, commercialization of recombinant 
DNA was going forward. As I mentioned, a non-exclusive licensing program, at its heart is really 
a tax, but it is nice to say technology transfer” (Reimers, 1998). 
The same point applies to another publicly funded pre-1980 university invention, also a 
biotechnology research tool that also generates a spectacular royalty stream: Richard Axel’s co-
transformation process, patented and licensed by Columbia University (Sampat, 2006). In this 
case, firms were using the technology shortly after it was described in the scientific literature and 
before patent was granted, the university compelled firms to license the invention by threatening 
to sue the firms if they continued to use the technology without a license (Sampat, 2006). In case 
such as these, where universities are patenting inventions that would have been utilized or 
developed even without IPR, society suffers the well-recognized (deadweight) burden imposed by 
non-competitive pricing of patent sanctioned monopolies (Sampat, 2006).   
Another issue although debatable is related to patent quality. Henderson et al. (1998) which 
examines the impact of the BD Act on the quality of patents measured by the number of times it 
is cited by subsequent patents found that the quality of academic patents declined dramatically 
after the BD Act. The decline appears to be caused by the very rapid increase of “low quality” 
patents being granted to universities (Henderson et al., 1998). However, in a later research Sampat 
et al. (2003) concluded that there is no decline in university patent after the BD Act. The quality 
decline observed by Henderson et al. (1998) reflects truncation of the citations data as well as some 
change in the intertemporal distribution of citations to university patents (Sampat et al., 2003). 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
38
2.5. Determinants of UTT Performance 
 
A lot of studies have tried to uncover the determinants of a successful UTT. This section 
will discuss the determinants that achieve prominence in those studies. Determinants of UTT 
performance will be classified into governmental and environmental, university, and UTTO level 
determinants. Table 6. presents the summary of the determinants of UTT performance based on 
previous studies. Determinants of UTT performance provide an important basis to variables used 
in the methodology of the research as well as to the discussion following the findings of the 
research. 
 
Table 6.  Determinants of UTT Performance 
Level 
Determinant 
Governmental & 
Environmental 
IPR regime 
Technology demand and supply 
Location 
Bottom up initiatives 
University 
Scientific eminence, productivity, and discipline 
TT mission statement 
R&D financing 
History & culture 
Scientists with know-how in R&D activities 
Support policy 
UTTO 
UTTO size and experience, capability 
Organizational structure & autonomy 
Incentive scheme & inventor involvement for further technology 
development 
Input: Invention disclosure, legal expenditure, UTTO staff 
Relational approach 
UTT Mechanism strategy 
 
Governmental & Environmental Level Determinants 
 
Related to governmental and environmental level determinants, there are certain conditions 
needed to be met to achieve successful UTT which are transparent and clear IPR regime (Link et 
al., 2003; Rasmussen and Rice, 2012), a match between technology and demand supply 
(Debackere and Veugelers, 2005), and location in which high concentration of high technology, 
industry research, and entrepreneurial climate exist (Friedman and Silberman, 2003). Unclear IPR 
==PAGE:44==
 
39
regime can lead to problems in the commercialization process and in the collaboration in the 
industry (Rasmussen and Rice, 2012). Regarding the match between technology supply and 
demand, the supply factor of UTT relates to a well performing and competitive science base while 
demand for UTT requires the active presence of innovation strategies in the innovation sector 
(Pavitt, 1998).  
Location of a university has an impact towards the UTT performance. Friedman and 
Silberman (2003) found that location of a university in a region with a concentration of high 
technology firms, industry research, and entrepreneurial climate is positively related to UTT 
effectiveness in terms of licensing. Chapple et al. (2005) found that universities located in regions 
with higher levels of R&D and GDP appear to be more efficient in UTT. Reason for the regional 
characteristic influencing UTT is that there may be local technological/agglomeration spillovers 
from firms to universities, or vice-versa (Chapple et al., 2005). Moreover, the university’s ability 
to generate licenses and royalty income may depend on spillovers from industrial sector that 
includes access to the technology infrastructure of lawyers, venture capitalists, consultants, 
entrepreneurs, and industry-based researchers (Friedman and Silberman, 2003). 
Successful UTT initiatives often emerge bottom up from individuals and institutions at 
local level, rather than top down as a result of government intervention (Goldfarb and Henrekson, 
2002). Therefore, it is important that governments create an environment that induces bottom up 
approach through its policies and initiatives. Inducing bottom up approach means to be flexible 
according to local needs and support with funding, expertise development, experimenting, and 
networks, in contrast to a top down approach imposing a general set of policies and structures for 
commercialization of research (Rasmussen, 2008). 
Rasmussen (2008) cite that initiatives such as Flintbox and Prototype Development 
Program (PDP) at the University of British Columbia at Canada emerges due to government 
programs that encourages bottom approach. Flintbox is an online platform for marketing and 
licensing the outcomes of researches that allows organizations to describe and publish research 
projects online and associate products of research for online license, purchase, and download.  The 
PDP provides management and funding necessary to validate and realize the commercial potential 
of the technologies where the funding is sourced through several Canadian federal government 
funding agencies (Rasmussen, 2008). 
 
==PAGE:45==
 
40
University Level Determinants 
 
Friedman and Silberman (2003), found that a clear university mission in support of TT 
enhances UTT success, in the context of their research, the number of licenses and licensing 
revenue. In line with this argument, both Debackere and Veugelers (2005) and O’Shea et al. (2007) 
respectively cite the importance on the university mission of knowledge in the success of KU 
Leuven on industry science link and the mission of MIT on economic development in the academic 
entrepreneurship. Moreover, the technology licensing office (TLO)/TTO at MIT is closely attuned 
to the economic development mission of MIT and the entrepreneurial culture of the institution 
(O’Shea et al., 2007). Mission statement represents the concrete articulation of institutional values, 
based on which TTO officers decide how to best transfer technologies developed within their 
organization (Jefferson et al., 2016).  
Scientific excellence or eminence depending on how scholars name it, is of the one of the 
first determinants mentioned to have an influence towards UTT effectiveness. Debackere and 
Veugelers (2005) argued that reaching scientific excellence is a necessary first condition for 
industry-science links. Attractiveness for an industrial partner demands competence at universities 
both in short term oriented R&D and in long term oriented strategic research (Debackere and 
Veugelers, 2005). 
 Di Gregorio and Shane (2003) in the context of forming university spinoff found that 
intellectual eminence of a university increases new firm formation. Universities that are more 
intellectually eminent could be more likely to generate UTTO startups because intellectual 
eminence allows schools to produce new technologies in actual or perceived higher quality (Di 
Gregorio and Shane, 2003). According to Di Gregorio and Shane (2003), the argument stands 
because of two supporting arguments. First, is that better quality researchers are more likely to 
start firms to exploit their inventions than lesser quality researchers; and on average, higher quality 
researchers are found in more eminent universities. Second, a university’s prestige or reputation 
makes it easier to start companies to exploit their inventions than researchers from less eminent 
universities. 
Van Looy et al. (2011) on their empirical research, found that scientific productivity is 
positively associated with academic entrepreneurial activities. They hypothesize that 
entrepreneurial activities are a way to valorize research results beyond the traditional, scientific, 
dissemination mechanism, thus a broader and more solid scientific base of universities implies 
==PAGE:46==
 
41
more valorization opportunities. Different scientific disciplines also have an influence towards 
UTT. Thursby and Kemp (2002) found that biological sciences and engineering are more 
important to licensing than are physical sciences. This result occurs due to the more applied nature 
of engineering and the better market opportunities and orientation toward markets of biological 
sciences Thursby and Kemp (2002). 
The next determinant in the university level is university R&D financing. Carlsson and 
Fridh (2002), found that R&D expenditure has a high correlation cumulative active licenses and 
options. Likewise, Powers (2003) also found that federal and industry R&D finance support are 
important contributors to patenting activity. With respect to the objective of the support, federal 
sponsorship of academic result has historically been for basic research while industry R&D support 
is generally given to universities for specific applied purposes for which a firm believes it will 
benefit (Powers, 2003). Thus, it can be inferred that the more resources are spent on R&D, the 
greater the UTT outcome. 
O’Shea et al. (2005) in the research of universities at USA found that each university as a 
function of its history and past success in generating spinoffs, has different resource stocks 
available and these resource combinations are proven to be a relevant factor in explaining the 
ability to generate spinoffs at different universities. Shane (2004) supports the view that decision 
to start companies at MIT by faculty members were socially conditioned. Furthermore, efforts by 
pioneering entrepreneurial faculty members to found startups later proved beneficial because it led 
to new academics to believe that firm formation was an acceptable and desirable activity (Shane, 
2004a). Findings and views by O’Shea at al. (2005) and Shane (2004) supports the path 
dependency argument that current choices of technologies, products, and operation are heavily 
influenced, probably even constrained by cumulative effect of previous development (Arthur, 
1989). 
Culture influences the success of UTT. O’Shea et al. (2007) identifies culture within the 
MIT faculty that encourages entrepreneurship as one the contributing factor to a successful 
academic entrepreneurship at MIT. The MIT culture rewards the ‘academic entrepreneur’ that 
creates an open environment in which carrying out research with a company or a new venture is 
not considered in negative light, provided it enhances education of students and provides or 
contributes to opportunities to conduct important, nationally visible research (O’Shea et al., 2007). 
In MIT there are many smart people with desire to transfer new knowledge and technologies into 
==PAGE:47==
 
42
the world in important and beneficial ways (O’Shea et al., 2007). A word of mouth culture among 
the faculty member at MIT, is that if someone has not have done a spinoff yet you start to wonder 
what is wrong with you (O’Shea et al., 2007). Academics within MIT have positive attitudes to 
commercializing technology and starting companies (O’Shea et al., 2007). 
MIT environment is very supportive to start-up ventures and entrepreneurship is the goal 
of many on the campus (O’Shea et al., 2007). In relation with history, past successful MIT startup 
venture encourages faculty and students to take the plunge themselves and provide a group of 
visible role models (O’Shea et al., 2007). Furthermore, taking time off from an academic career to 
work in a company, owning a piece of company, or developing your own inventions is not atypical 
of an MIT professor’s career in the sciences and engineering (O’Shea et al., 2007). 
Research has shown that a critical human capital resource for the development of cutting 
edge technologies is access to persons with expert knowledge and talent (Powers and McDougall, 
2005). According to Powers (2003), one of the necessary conditions for the generation of startups 
from universities is the availability of scientists and engineers with suitable qualification and 
know-how in R&D activities. The availability of human capital implies higher skill and knowledge 
within a university, which is positive for the realization of TT activities (O’Shea et al., 2005). 
O’Shea et al. (2005) found that faculty quality and size to be predictors of university spinoff 
activity. The presence of star scientists and engineers affect university spinoff activity as they have 
leading edge knowledge with critical expertise and ability to create radical innovations 
(Schumpeter, 1950) conducive for commercial exploitation. 
Scholars have underlined the importance support policy in UTT performance. Even with 
several generations of academic researchers involved in knowledge transfers, a university still have 
to find and balance the right mix of transfer of innovation process in order to be performing 
(Debackere and Veugelers, 2005). Examples of the support policy are the availability of a patent 
fund and an intellectual property advisory group, availability of a venture fund and an advisory 
group to help spinoff, and networking events (Debackere and Veugelers, 2005). Caldera and 
Debande (2010) argued that adequate university policies may contribute in solving barriers in 
commercializing university research such as well-defined licensing contracts that can stimulate 
inventors to disclose their inventions and participate in the commercialization process. University 
policies covered in the study by Caldera and Debande (2010) cover three areas: management of 
technology transfer process, royalty sharing, and support for spin-off creation. Caldera and 
==PAGE:48==
 
43
Debande (2010) found empirical evidence that universities with established policies and 
procedures for the management of UTT perform better.  
 
Several studies have tried to research the influence of other support structures or other 
intermediaries in relation to UTT performance. Caldera and Debande (2010) found that 
universities with a science park perform better than those without. Traditional university and non-
profit UTTO structures are more likely to correlate with the presence of university based business 
incubators (Markman et al., 2005). University incubators aims to facilitate knowledge flows from 
universities to new technology ventures (Rothaermael and Thursby, 2005). Science parks were 
established to stimulate the formation and development of new technology based firms (Siegel et 
al., 2003b). According to Caldera and Debande (2010), science parks may facilitate UTT by 
facilitating information flow through geographical proximity and science parks provide support 
infrastructure for further development of inventions. 
 
UTTO Level Characteristics 
 
Studies have shown the importance of UTTO organizational structure towards UTT 
performance. Bercovitz el al. (2001) found that different UTTO organizational structure exhibit 
different organizational performance. Debackere and Veugelers (2005) argue that the involvement 
of research groups in matrix structure is critical for the TT performance. In alignment to the 
research of Bercovitz et al. (2001), matrix organization is similar in shape to the MX-form 
organization. Specifically, the matrix form that is a specialized and decentralized UTTO within 
the university is instrumental in securing sufficient level of autonomy for developing relations with 
industry, allowing for specialization in supporting services, and reducing the transaction cost in 
scientific knowledge market (Debackere and Veugelers, 2005). Furthermore, Debackere and 
Veugelers (2005) mentioned that a survey of eleven other European universities also recognizes 
the need to decentralize its UTTO structure. 
Autonomy is a part of the structural dimension of a UTTO (Schoen et al., 2012). Markman 
et al. (2005) found that the autonomy granted to the UTTO is an important dimension of the 
organizational structure. The organizational form with the lowest degree of autonomy which is the 
traditional UTTO structure is found to be more likely to license in exchange for sponsored research 
while licensing that induces venture creation, is supported UTTOs with profit extensions. The 
==PAGE:49==
 
44
European Commission (2009) also includes the level of autonomy granted as an important 
structural variable in their final report on knowledge transfer. 
Debackere and Veugelers (2005) mentioned the importance of autonomy in UTT success. 
A TTO division in KU Leuven is entitled to accumulate financial reserves based on the benefits 
they generate via UTT activities in contrast to the practices of most universities that centralize 
profits generated from UTT activities. A TTO division at KU Leuven enjoy complete autonomy 
as to balancing revenue and expenses from their UTT activities, therefore an incentive system for 
UTT is built upon flexibility and financial autonomy. Keeping in mind the traditional incentive 
system within departments and faculties which is promotion along the academic ladder, mainly 
based on the assessment of research quality and teaching ability, both traditional incentive and 
UTT incentive system at KU Leuven enables the university to maintain balance and a healthy 
tension between striving for scientific excellence and translating excellence towards application 
and innovation. 
Still related to the organization of UTTO, several scholars have found that experience of 
the UTTO which is measured by age in years since the UTTO office is established or went into 
operational, is an important determinant of UTT success (Friedman and Silberman, 2003; Powers, 
2003; Caldera and Debande, 2010; Lach and Schankerman, 2004). Friedman and Silberman (2003) 
and Lach and Schankerman (2004) found that older UTTOs execute more licenses, suggesting that 
efficiency gains arise as UTTOs gain experience in management of UTT. Powers (2003) also 
found the age of TTO is predictive in UTTO performance of number of patents and licenses. 
Caldera and Debande (2010) found that large and experienced UTTOs generate higher volume of 
contract research, appear to be less of a matter in terms of licensing and creation of spinoffs. 
First rationale for the importance of UTTO experience/age is that it takes time to establish 
a portfolio of invention disclosures, patents, and to sell licenses (Friedman and Silberman, 2003). 
Secondly, age of the UTTO can also measure any learning experience or effects in the UTTO 
(Friedman and Silberman, 2003). Thirdly, there is a cultural barrier between UTTO, scientists, and 
industry and time is needed for networks and personal relationships to be built to reduce the 
barriers (Friedman and Silberman, 2003). 
 
Powers (2003) found that UTTO size is positively predictive towards number of licenses 
and licensing income. Siegel et al. (2003a) found that larger UTTOs generate more TT outcomes. 
Similarly, Rogers et al. (200) also found that universities that are relatively more effective in TT 
==PAGE:50==
 
45
are characterized by a larger number of staff for technology licensing. Rationale for the influence 
of UTTO staff size towards UTT effectiveness can be seen as the effect of additional resources 
(Powers, 2003). 
Different capabilities are required by the UTTO depending on their focus for licensing 
strategy or spinoff strategy (Bengtsson, 2017). The licensing strategy primarily requires access to 
competencies and training in business law and patent practices (Lawson and Sterzi, 2014), as well 
as science and technology integrated into transaction focused commercialization practice 
(Weckowska, 2015). The spinoff strategy, on the other hand, requires competencies in business 
development and support capabilities for the startup and early growth phases, such as incubators, 
science parks, and seed funding integrated into relational focused commercialization practices 
(Weckowska, 2015; Bengtsson, 2017).  
 
Based on the process of UTT, Siegel et al. (2003a) and Link and Siegel (2005) determined 
that invention disclosures (a proxy for the set of available technologies for licensing), labor 
employed by the UTTO, and legal fees (external) incurred to protect the university’s intellectual 
property as the internal factor inputs for UTT. As labor employed by the UTTO is the same to 
UTTO size, focus of discussion on this part will be for invention disclosures and legal fees. Siegel 
et al. (2003a) found that invention disclosure is positive and highly significant towards licensing 
output in this case the number of licensing agreement and licensing revenue. As for legal fees 
(external), Siegel et al. (2003a) found that spending more on legal fees (external) reduces the 
number of licensing agreement, but increases licensing revenue. Explaining the relationship of 
legal fees (external) with licensing output, Siegel et al. (2003a) found that based on their feedback 
on field research with company managers that it was much difficult to negotiate with outside 
attorneys than university administrators, because lawyers tended to adopt a tougher negotiation 
stance and even other managers viewed a university’s liberal use of outside lawyers as a signal 
that the institution would be aggressive in exercising its IPR. 
Incentive scheme especially for inventors/researchers is one of the most mentioned 
drivers/characteristics of UTT performance. Jensen and Thursby (2001) found that development 
of university inventions in commercialization would not occur unless the inventor’s return is tied 
to the licensee’s output when the invention is successful which is an incentive to the inventor. It is 
necessary as Jensen and Thursby (2001) found in their survey of technology managers that 71% 
of respondents claim that successful commercialization of research requires cooperation by the 
==PAGE:51==
 
46
inventor and licensee in further development, thus another UTT determinant in inventor 
involvement for further development of the technology. Inventor involvement is deemed necessary 
as most inventions are embryonic and needs further development (Jensen and Thursby, 2001). As 
the owner of the invention, inventors are precisely the individual who understands the invention, 
its potential, and also most likely to have ideas for potential customers (Kenney and Patton, 2009). 
  Lach and Schankerman (2008) found that universities that give higher royalty to faculty 
scientists generate higher license income. Moreover, Lach and Schankerman (2008) found that 
scientists respond to both royalties in the form of cash and research lab support, suggesting that 
both pecuniary and non-pecuniary in this case research motivations play a role. Universities having 
more attractive incentive structures for UTT in example those that allocate higher percentage of 
royalty payments to faculty members, tend to be more efficient in UTT (Link and Siegel, 2005). 
Not only limited to royalty shares in licensing, as in the practice at KU Leuven, 
inventors/researchers are entitled to salary supplements based net proceeds from their contract 
research and consultancy activities and in the case of spinoffs, individual inventors can receive up 
to 40% of the IP shares (ie. IP stock or founders share) in the exchange for the input of know-how 
and goodwill.  
A mixed conclusion is found on the effect of royalties to spinoff activity. Di Gregorio and 
Shane (2003) find that percentage of royalties distributed to inventors is inversely related to spinoff 
activity. By increasing the opportunity cost of starting up a new venture, a high inventor share of 
royalties provides a disincentive to potential inventor entrepreneurs (Di Gregorio and Shane, 
2003). However, in another research Lockett and Wright (2005) found that royalty payments in 
particular are significantly positively associated with spinoff activity. 
Rationale behind incentives for inventors/researchers lies in their motivation to engage in 
UTT activities. Lam (2010) found that there is a diversity of motivation inventors/researchers for 
commercial engagement, and many do so for reputational/career reward and intrinsic satisfaction 
while financial rewards relatively play a small part. Similarly, O’Shea et al. (2007) found that 
validating technology in the marketplace, excitement to delve into business, and accumulating 
wealth to be the motivations behind MIT faculty member to engage in entrepreneurial activities 
with validating technology to be the strongest motivation. D’Este and Perkmann (2011) found that 
academics engage with industry to further their research rather than to commercialize knowledge. 
Furthermore, patenting and spinoff formation are motivated exclusively by commercialization 
==PAGE:52==
 
47
while joint research, contract research, and consulting are strongly informed by research related 
motives (D’Este and Perkmannn, 2011).  
Powell et al. (2007) mention UTT marketing that focuses on relationship over transactional 
(revenue maximizing) approach between universities and firms to be an important factor in UTT 
success. Using Stanford University as an example, Stanford viewed UTT as a means to build 
relationship and in licensing agreement for example Stanford University sees it as the beginning 
of a relationship that can last many years (Powel et al., 2007).  
The case of Cohen-Boyer gene splicing and fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) 
underlie the focus of Stanford in the relational approach. In the case of commercializing the Cohen-
Boyer gene splicing discovery, Stanford negotiated institutional patent agreements with different 
funding bodies and invest in a lot of time on explaining the invention to a lot of companies and 
business people (Powell et al., 2007). For the case of FACS, synergy between Stanford, scientists 
of the invention, and a commercial firm with the support of the National Cancer Institute continue 
on to produce prototypes that leads to the successful commercialization of the invention while at 
first the commercial potential of the invention does not seem to show good promise (Powell et al., 
2007). Had both cases the decision was based on transactional approach, results might have been 
different (Powell et al., 2007). The OTL and Stanford build connections and deepened 
relationships while in contrast many UTTOs at USA are staffed by patent attorneys, who focus 
more on contracts, and less on relationship building (Powell et al., 2007). 
Different kinds of UTT mechanism should be used appropriately depending on their 
situation. Licensing for sponsored research is usually paired with early stage technologies and 
associated with large firms as the technology in itself is still underdeveloped and market 
application is also unclear (Markman et al., 2005). Licensing for equity is usually paired with proof 
of concept or reduced to practice technologies and highly associated to new firm formation and to 
small firms (Markman et al., 2005). Licensing for cash is almost invariably paired with IP based 
technologies at the prototype stage, for which market has been identified and main beneficiary of 
licensing for cash are usually large firms (Markman et al., 2005). Academic spinoffs provide an 
effective vehicle to exploit radical early stage technology (Gilsing et al., 2011) and where no or 
very little downstream industry exist to which technology might be contracted (Polt et al., 2001). 
 
==PAGE:53==
 
48
2.6. Institutional Framework and Support Initiatives 
 
UTT systems in different countries have their own unique characteristics and dynamics 
(Geuna and Rossi, 2011).  These unique characteristics and dynamics are in part a result of the 
institutional framework adopted by the country where the university resides. The most frequently 
discussed institutional framework is regarding IPR ownership. However, university IPR regulation 
is only one part of a wider UTT regime regulation (Geuna and Muscio, 2009). Thus, this chapter 
will cover the institutional framework that provides the basis for UTT in Denmark and also 
initiatives from the government to support UTT. The issue of IPR ownership and academic 
patenting will be discussed in more detail. 
 
Institutional Framework and Support Initiatives for UTT in Denmark 
 
Denmark have eight public universities which are Aalborg Universitet (AAU), Aarhus 
Universitet (AU), Copenhagen Business School (CBS), Danmarks Tekniske Universitet (DTU), 
IT-Universitetet (ITU), Københavns Universitet (KU), Roskilde Universitet (RU), Syddansk 
Universitet (SDU) with no private universities (Danish Council for Research Policy, 2014). Four 
of eight universities in Denmark have medical faculties with university hospitals affiliated (Danish 
Council for Research Policy, 2014). 
The main legislation that provides the framework for TT between public research 
institutions and private enterprises is The Act of Inventions at Public Research Organization which 
was originally adopted at 1999 (Danish Council for Research Policy, 2014), which other scholars 
have named it as the Law on University Patenting (Valentin and Jensen, 2007). Although famously 
known as the abolishment of the professor’s privilege in Denmark because the legislation resulted 
in the transfer of rights invention to the university, The Act of Inventions at Public Research 
Organization in the bigger picture regulates the fundamental aspect of UTT. Purpose of the Act of 
Inventions at Public Research Organization is to ensure that research outcomes generated using 
public funding are exploited commercially to the benefit of the Danish society. A summary 
description of the Act of Inventions at Public Research Organization is explained in Table 7. 
 Important aspects of the Act include the ownership of invention vested to 
institutions/universities and the obligation for researchers to report their invention to the respective 
institution. After the disclosure, the university then has two months to declare the researcher 
==PAGE:54==
 
49
whether it intends over the IPR or allows the researcher to retain the rights (Bengtsson, 2017). If 
the university takes over the IPR, they must work actively for the invention to come to fruition 
(Bengtsson, 2017). The university assumes all of the cost of the patent applications and other types 
of protection (Bengtsson, 2017). The researcher has the right to receive compensation as 
determined by the individual university (Bengtsson, 2017). The most common compensation 
system is allocating one-third of income to each parties: the inventor, department, and the 
university (Bengtsson, 2017). It is a system where a big responsibility is given to the university to 
drive UTT. 
The Act of Inventions at Public Research Organization also requires the institution to 
establish adequate procedures and structures to deal with invention disclosures, patenting and 
licensing but does not specify a specific design of this organization (Danish Council for Research 
Policy, 2014), that creates a legal basis to establish UTTOs. In 2005, The Act of Inventions at 
Public Research Organization was adopted allowing universities to organize relevant research and 
TT activities and spinoff support in subsidiary company organization (Danish Council for 
Research Policy, 2014). 
Other legislations that provides the framework for UTT in Denmark are The Act of 
Technology and Innovation and the Act of Innovation Fund Denmark. The Act of Technology and 
Innovation provides the basis for the establishment of technical service provider institutes and 
incubators that acts as the support structure for UTT, furthermore enables the Ministry of Higher 
Education and Science to introduce initiative and co-finance activities related to technology and 
Innovation (Danish Ministry of Higher Education and Science, 2016). The Act on Innovation Fund 
Denmark is the legal basis for the establishment of Innovationsfonden with the purpose to provide 
grants for the development of knowledge and technology including advanced technology (Danish 
Ministry of Higher Education and Science, 2016), which in part provides vital financial support 
needed for UTT. 
 
UTT activity in Denmark is supported by numerous initiatives to ensure its success. 
Initiatives to support UTT mainly come from the Danish Agency for Science, Technology, and 
Innovation and Innovationsfonden. Initiatives are targeted to address various aspect such funding 
gap in innovative ventures, systemic gap of collaboration between private companies and public 
research institutions, and knowledge gap for new entrepreneurs. In addition, the national 
==PAGE:55==
 
50
foundation Vækstfonden has been set up in order to provide follow up capital for enterprises and 
co-founding for private venture capital funds (Danish Council for Research Policy, 2014). 
For early stage funding, the InnoBooster program from Innovationsfonden invests in 
knowledge based innovative projects up to DKK five million for small and medium sized 
companies, startups, and scientists (Innovationsfonden, 2018). The Innovation Incubator program 
from the Danish Agency for Science, Technology, and Innovation also provides pre-seed and seed 
capital for entrepreneurs and new innovative enterprises with a total budget of approximately EUR 
30 million (Danish Agency for Science, Technology, and Innovation, 2014).  
 
Table 7. Important Features of the Act of Inventions at Public Research Organization 
Legislation 
Description 
Act on 
Inventions at 
Public 
Research 
Organizations 
(1) Purpose of this act is to ensure that research outcomes generated using public funding 
are exploited commercially to the benefit of the Danish society (2) institutions can claim 
ownership to inventions made by their employees; (3) researchers are obliged to notify 
institutions of inventions and postpone publications if required; (4) institutions are 
required to evaluate inventions within two months; (5) institutions must establish adequate 
structures for TT; (6) contracts with industry involving IPR must be negotiated by the 
institution; (7) institutions can utilize income from transfer of rights to inventions on 
activities that fall within the scope of the institution's purpose; (8) mandatory profit sharing 
commercial revenues between institutions and inventors; (9) institutions can receive 
equity in return for IPR in spinoff companies 
 
Both the Innovation Incubator and InnoFounder program by Innovationsfonden provides 
incubation program for new entrepreneurs with an innovative idea. A number of initiatives are 
intended to enhance collaboration between private companies and public research organizations. 
Programs from the Danish Agency for Science, Technology, and Innovation such as Research 
Voucher, Innovation Agents, Innovation Consortia are intended to facilitate the collaboration 
between private institutions and public research organization with also the support of funding for 
the collaboration.  
 
A more direct financial initiative has also been given to support UTT in Denmark. As a 
part of the adoption of the Act of Inventions at Public Research Organization in 1999, the Danish 
==PAGE:56==
 
51
government set national budget grant to support practical implementation until 2012 (Danish 
Agency for Science, Technology, and Innovation, 2014b). From 2000 - 2003 institutional patent 
cost and marketing of inventions were supported (OECD, 2003; Baldini, 2006; Danish Agency for 
Science, Technology, and Innovation, 2014b). In doing so the Danish Parliament set aside 
58,000,000 DKK to make implementation Act of Inventions at Public Research Organization more 
attractive (Baldini, 2006).  From 2004 - 2007 developments of new research and TT concepts were 
supported by funding best practice projects (Danish Agency for Science, Technology, and 
Innovation, 2014). From 2007 onwards a proof of concept scheme provided early stage funding 
gap for universities (Danish Agency for Science, Technology, and Innovation, 2014b). Following 
a period of substantial increase in block funding to the universities it was eventually decided that 
the universities themselves must cover research and TT cost including proof of concept from 2013 
(Danish Agency for Science, Technology, and Innovation, 2014b). 
 
IPR Ownership and Academic Patenting 
 
One of the most discussed topic regarding institutional framework for UTT is related to 
IPR ownership of academic invention and this chapter is dedicated to discuss IPR ownership with 
more depth with a historical perspective. Moreover, discussion in this chapter is continued with 
the topic of academic patenting as IPR ownership of university inventions relates strongly to 
academic patenting. 
 In the USA where the issue first gain attention, the related legislation covering IPR 
ownership is known as the BD Act. The BD Act at 1980 basically allow federal contractors 
including universities to claim title/ownership/patent to inventions made as a result of federally 
funded research (Kenney and Patton, 2009; Verspagen 2006). The logic supporting the BD Act 
says that TT from university to industry will be greatly facilitated if universities got patent on their 
research results, and license these patents on an exclusive basis (Verspagen, 2006; Nelson, 2001). 
Otherwise competitors may move in and use freely available university knowledge to develop a 
competing application, and this prospect is enough to discourage private investment or little 
incentive to follow up university research (Verspagen, 2006; Nelson, 2001). Another motivation 
for BD type legislation is to generate licensing revenues for public sector research institutions (So 
et al., 2008). 
==PAGE:57==
 
52
Enactment of the BD Act saw an upsurge in patenting and licensing, furthermore startup 
companies in the USA. The number of patents issued to USA universities more than doubled 
between 1979 and 1984, more than doubled again between 1984 and 1989, and more than doubled 
again over the 1990s (Nelson, 2001). In terms of the science sector on patenting, this increased 
patenting was dominated by growth in biomedical patents, biomedical patents issued to the USA 
universities increased by 123% during 1969-1979 period, while non bio-medical patents grew by 
only 22% (Mowery et al., 2001). This unbalance is also reported by (Henderson et al., 1998) which 
finds that at the end of the 1980s, drugs and medicines is the largest field in which USA universities 
patent (around 35%).  
Over the same period, university licensing revenue gave increased greatly, from $221 
million in 1991, to $698 million in 1997 alone (Nelson, 2001). In a study at Columbia University, 
Stanford University, and the University of California Mowery et al., (2001) found that very small 
share of all patented inventions account for the majority of gross licensing for all three universities. 
Moreover, these leading earners are concentrated in biomedical area, a technology field 
characterized by relatively strong patents that are significantly important (Levin et al., 1987). A 
second important area of licensing at two of three universities is software which formal patent 
protection is less important (Mowery et al., 2001). Furthermore, while the numbers are more 
difficult to calculate, over the period between 1980 and 2000, a very large number of startup firms 
were established based on university research (Nelson, 2001). 
Then it is not odd that popular press among others believed that the increase in patenting 
and licensing activity, and growth in start-up companies is attributed strongly by the BD Act. 
However, several scholars contend to this notion. Although universities from the USA gave greatly 
expanded their patenting activities since 1991, the data suggest that this growth represented an 
acceleration of a trend that predated the passage of the BD Act (Mowery et al., 2001). There are 
also other aspects that contributes toward the great increase on patenting and licensing. First, the 
sharp increase of patenting and licensing clearly are associated with the development and 
maturation of certain new fields of university research, in particular the rise of biotechnology, 
where research results often seem to promise significant commercial value down the road (Nelson, 
2001). Over this period, biomedical research rose significantly as a fraction of overall university 
research, and a large share of that research involved biotechnology in one manner of another 
==PAGE:58==
 
53
(Nelson, 2011). Second, as a result of Court and Patent Office decisions, many of the research 
results in these fields became patentable (Nelson, 2001). 
The perceived success of BD Act in the USA have led other countries to adopt a similar 
kind of policy and recreate the same condition (Mowery and Sampat 2005; Siepmann, 2004; 
Lissoni et al., 2009). In Europe, the adoption is partly based on the notion that European countries 
have a strong science base, but also many problems in translating scientific advances into 
commercially viable new technologies that is also called the “European Paradox” (Dosi et al., 
2006). Lissoni et al. (2008) also mentioned that several European countries and the EU have 
introduced several legislative changes and policy initiatives aimed at pushing universities to take 
more patents on their research due to the perceived problem in Europe that has fewer technology 
transfer via patenting compared to the USA. These initiatives have been based on little or no data, 
beyond cursory looks at the large number of patent applications filed by universities in the USA 
as opposed to the very low numbers coming from European universities (Lissoni et al., 2008).  
Recent research, however suggests that comparing Europe and the USA on the basis of 
university owned patents may be misleading (Lissoni et al., 2008). Measuring the number of 
academic patenting, Lissoni et al. (2008) using the data from 1994-2001 found that universities in 
France, Italy, and Sweden do not contribute much less than their counterparts in the USA, rather 
they are less likely to reclaim the property of patents they produce (Lissoni et al., 2008). Academic 
patenting contains both patent the applications submitted by universities (university owned patent) 
and applications submitted by companies, individuals or governmental and non-profit 
organizations, as a result of various contractual arrangements between such organizations and 
scientists, their universities, and other public or private sponsors (university invented patents) 
(Lissoni et al., 2008). In Denmark as in other countries in Europe most academic patents are owned 
by business companies where 66% of academic patents in Denmark are owned by business 
companies while universities only own around 11% using the data from 1994-2003 (Lissoni et al., 
2009). 
Why does this difference between Europe and USA appear? Lissoni et al. (2009) provides 
three explanations. First, most European universities are by and large public institutions which 
operate under tight financial regulations by their central government Traditionally they have 
lacked the budgetary and organizational autonomy necessary to commercially exploit their faculty 
inventions alone (Lissoni et al., 2009). As a consequence, they may have decided in the past and 
==PAGE:59==
 
54
still decide today to allow their scientists to leave all the IPRs over their research results to any 
business companies willing to finance, or co-finance such results (Lissoni et al., 2009). In Europe, 
much of the university research that leads to patents does not show in the statistics, because private 
firms rather than the universities themselves apply for patent (Crespi et al., 2006). 
 Still related to the subject of public institution, in many European countries professors are 
civil servants whose careers, teaching loads, research opportunities, and wages depend much more 
on ministerial rules applied at the national level than on the local strategy and management 
decision of the university (Lissoni et al., 2008). Similarly, universities rely much more on funding 
from the national government than on self-financing of any kind; in addition, such funding comes 
mainly in the form of block grants, rather than through competitive bids for mission oriented 
financing (Geuna, 1999). As a result, academic scientists have little incentive to disclose their 
inventions to their university administrators and university administrators lack the incentive to 
chase for disclosures (Lissoni et al., 2008). Secondly, university patenting was common in the 
academia in the USA well before the introduction of the BD Act, although it was not necessarily 
associated with a profit motive (Mowery and Sampat, 2001). Thirdly, it may be that European 
universities exert less control over their faculty’s extra academic activities, especially consulting, 
from which large number of business owned patents may arise (Lissoni et al., 2009). 
In the case of Denmark, since 1955 the professor’s privilege had allowed Danish professors 
to retain IPR over the result of their research (Lissoni et al., 2009). This changed in 2000, when 
Denmark enact the Law on University Patenting (LUP) which transferred to the employer 
university rights to patent made by Danish university scientists alone or as participants in 
collaborative research in industry (Valentin and Jensen, 2007). This change of policy is inspired 
by the BD Act in the USA (Valentin and Jensen, 2007; Lissoni et al., 2009). Other backgrounds 
pertain concerns that professors privilege might hinder UTT and eagerness from industry to have 
one institutional counterpart instead of ten individual inventors also prompted this change of IPR 
ownership (Lissoni et al., 2009). 
While the spirit of the LUP was that of imitating the BD Act in the USA, the expertise of 
Danish universities in handling IPR matters at the when time the law was approved was vastly 
inferior of that their counterparts in the USA at 1980 (Lissoni et al., 2009). In fact, at the end of 
1980s, only AAU and DTU had an active TTO (Lissoni et al., 2009). At that time, the other Danish 
universities and hospitals had only small offices for external relations, whose main purpose was to 
==PAGE:60==
 
55
advise on applications for external funding of research projects (Lissoni et al., 2009). Such lack of 
experience in UTT made it initially hard for universities to understand the obligations imposed by 
and the resources needed to establish a UTTO (Lissoni et al., 2009). 
Few have made an analysis of the impact of the LUP in Denmark. Lissoni et al. (2009) 
reported that considerable amount of patenting activity has moved out of professor’s hands into 
those of universities. However, bulk of academic patenting consists of inventions owned by 
business companies, and this holds true both before and after the abolition of the privilege (Lissoni 
et al., 2009). Valentin and Jensen (2007) examined the effect of LUP by studying the contribution 
from university scientists to inventions patented by dedicated biotech firms (DBF) specialized in 
drug discovery in Denmark and Sweden. They found that there are significant reductions in 
contributions from Danish domestic academic inventors, combined with a simultaneous 
substitutive increase of non-Danish academic inventors. Certainly more proof in needed to assess 
the impact of LUP in Denmark. 
 
Understanding the Context of a Country for the Institutional Framework of 
UTT 
 
Universities in the USA are purported to excel at UTT (Powell et al., 2007). This 
assumption however, masks important features of innovation in the USA and attempts to emulate 
the example of USA must recognize the heterogeneity of its industries and institutions of higher 
education (Powell et al., 2007). As countries and universities all around the world seek to emulate 
the success of UTT in the USA, it is imperative to understand the country context of the whilst 
curiously the emulation of such system seems to be motivated by the success of USA only without 
much considering the difference in the institutional landscape of higher education system in USA 
(Mowery and Sampat 2005), as isomorphism or organizational borrowing is often selective, and 
can fail to recognize local contingencies (Powell et al., 2007). 
Powell et al. (2007) explained that the conventional explanation of the success of UTT in 
the USA is based on three arguments which are: (1) universities playing a key role as engines of 
growth stimulating regional economic development and fostering technology clusters; (2) 
favorable legislation especially the BD Act; (3) presence of venture capital. In a country context 
however, the features of transferring science into application in the USA is rarely explained. 
Powell et al. (2007) further explained key features of the system. Firstly, higher education in the 
==PAGE:61==
 
56
USA is decentralized and competitive. Government, industry, and foundations support research, 
tuition, gifts, and endowments reduce dependence on government. Those who want to emulate the 
USA example should be mindful of the way in which competitive funding system, drawing upon 
multiple sources, has also led to enduring institutional inequality. As a result of the decentralization 
and competition that takes place, the university system in the USA has become more responsive 
to the economic needs of society (Goldfarb and Henrekson, 2002) 
Second, the organizations that comprise the innovation system in the USA are 
institutionally diverse, including public and private universities, large and small firms, non-profit 
institutes, research hospitals, and government laboratories. Thirdly involves the organization of 
careers which encourages movement across organizations and roles. The reputation driven nature 
of the system creates a “winner take most” dynamic in which resources, promising students and 
staffs, and new ventures gravitate to centers of success. In Europe for example, the higher 
education system is different than in the USA. Goldfarb and Henrekson (2003) explain the Swedish 
university system and those in continental Europe, inasmuch of their universities are essentially 
parts of larger national bureaucracies and therefore compete with one another to only a modest 
degree.  
There is evidence that such emulation to the UTT model at other countries encountered 
problems and contradictions in application. Breznitz (2008) found that after the BD like model 
was implemented at Cambridge University, UK, during 2001-2004 the number of biotechnology 
spinoffs decreased, even while the UK and global population of biotechnology firms increased. 
Carraz (2008) studied the patenting practices at Tohoku University, Japan before and after Japan 
implemented a BD like law and found that the ownership of IPR changes, but did not increase in 
quantity. As already mentioned, Valentin and Jensen (2007) found that there are significant 
reductions in contributions from Danish domestic academic inventors, combined with a 
simultaneous substitutive increase of non-Danish academic inventors in dedicated biotech firms 
post the enactment of the LUP in Denmark.  
 
 
==PAGE:62==
 
57
3. Methodology 
 
Methodology used in this research is derived from various previous researches related to 
UTT. A composite score to measure UTT effectiveness will be the same method used by Rogers 
et al. (2000). The use of data envelopment analysis (DEA) to measure the efficiency of UTT at 
each university is also the same method used by Thursby and Kemp (2002) and Anderson et al. 
(2007). Linear regression is used to analyze factors that determine the performance of UTT. The 
use of linear regression for the purpose of this research is inspired by the same approach of 
numerous research on UTT such as Friedman and Silberman (2003), Caldera and Debande (2010), 
and Powers (2003). Interview to UTT stakeholders is conducted to gain in-depth knowledge of 
UTT organizational practices that determines UTT performance which otherwise cannot be gained 
through any quantitative analysis. The use of interviews is also inspired by the research of Siegel 
et al. (2003) that complements a quantitative analysis to assess UTT productivity at universities 
by conducting interviews with UTT stakeholders to identify organizational practices. 
3.1. Data Description 
 
Data required to conduct the research is sourced from various databases. Main data related 
to UTT activities of all major universities in Denmark is obtained from the publicly available data 
on the website of the Danish Ministry of Education and Research which is recorded from 2000-
2016. The database provides important data related to UTT outcome: number of LAO (licensing, 
assignment, and option) agreement, number of spinoffs, and revenue from UTT. Other UTT related 
data which is the use of resource and patenting such as expenditures related to UTT (excluding 
employee salary), UTTO staff size, number of research agreement (recorded starting from 2010), 
patents filled, and patents issued are also recorded. Other data related to the research spending and 
research personnel of each Danish university is obtained through the publicly available data from 
DKUNI. As the data of research spending is only available from year 2005 onwards, data used for 
this study spans from 2005 to 2016. Data collection for interview will be discussed in detail on 
Chapter 3.4. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
 
58
Table 8. Data Summary Statistic 2005-2016 
Variable 
Median 
Mean 
Min 
Max 
SD 
Number of Licensing, Assignment, and 
Option (LAO) Agreement 
 142  
 150  
 -  
 390  
 142  
Number of Spinoffs 
 22  
 18  
 -  
 51  
 17  
Revenue from UTT (million DKK) 
 27.76  
 40.42  
 -  
 159.77  
 53.51  
Research Agreement 
 1,748  
 1,905  
 66  
 5,218  
 1,773  
UTT Expenditure (million DKK) 
 28.26  
 52.82  
 0.36  
 207.66  
 69.17  
Invention Disclosure 
 508  
 480  
 -  
 1,306  
 465  
UTTO Size 
7.48 
7.29 
0.40 
15.70 
6.29 
Research Spending (million DKK) 
 10,842   15,893  
 805  
 40,578  
 14,613  
Research Personnel Science and 
Technology 
 474  
 668  
 -  
 1,887  
707  
 
Table 8. provides the basic descriptive statistic of the data for the research. Observing from 
the standard deviation (SD), it is seen that there is a variation in UTT performance among Danish 
universities. All of the UTT output in the number of LAO agreement, number of spinoff, and UTT 
revenue exhibit a high SD from its mean which indicates significant performance differences 
between the universities. Significant differences between the SD and mean are also observed on 
the determinants of UTT such as UTT expenditure and research agreement. 
3.2. Performance Measurement 
 
On measuring performance, a composite index approach by measuring the z-score of 
various effectiveness criteria and averaging them is used (Rogers et al., 2000). Z-score is a measure 
of distance from the mean using standard deviation. Effectiveness criteria considered in this 
research focuses more on the “out of the door” criteria which are the number of LAO agreement 
and number of spinoff in addition to UTT revenue. In this research, invention disclosure and patent 
are not considered as effectiveness criteria, but rather a means to achieve effectiveness, therefore 
not included as effectiveness criteria. 
UTT efficiency performance of universities is measured using DEA. DEA is a non-
parametric technique that, through linear programming, approximates the true but unknown 
technology without imposing any restriction on sample distribution (Berbegal-Mirabent et al., 
2013). DEA is a commonly used method to evaluate relative efficiency when there are multiple 
outputs and when meaningful aggregation is not possible (Thursby and Kemp, 2002). The strength 
of DEA is that it allows for the relative weight of each output to vary for each university (Anderson 
==PAGE:64==
 
59
et al., 2007). In this research, the DEA method allows efficiency of UTT with multiple outputs to 
be measured for each university. 
DEA produces an efficiency rating or score for each university by first determining the set 
of universities which exhibit the best practice (Thursby and Kemp, 2002). These universities form 
the frontier relates to outputs and inputs and all other universities are then compared to the subset 
of these best practice universities they most resemble in terms of levels of outputs and inputs 
(Thursby and Kemp, 2002). Thus, for each university, DEA determines whether it lies on the 
frontier (best practice) or if not, how far from the frontier it lies (Thursby and Kemp, 2002). Figure 
7. from Thursby and Kemp (2002) illustrates the best practice frontier and distance from the 
frontier condition. Consider an example of an UTT with single output and input with six 
universities. The line linking universities 1-4 is the best practice frontier. From the standpoint of 
efficiency, no one of these universities dominates each other, each uses more input and produces 
more output. Meanwhile, universities five and six are dominated by the others. Both university 
five and six lie below the efficiency frontier, and to measure efficiency they are compared to 
nearest facets linking efficient universities. 
 
Figure 7. DEA Production Frontier 
Source: Thursby and Kemp (2002) 
 
 Fundamental technological assumption of DEA models is that any production unit in this 
case university ! uses " = (%&, … , %)) ∈,-
. inputs to produce / = /&, … , /0 ∈,-
1  outputs, and 
these sets form the industry technology 2 : 2 = { ", 5 : " can produce 5} (Berbegal-Mirabent et 
al., 2013). The DEA model used is the output-oriented, variable returns to scale envelopment 
==PAGE:65==
 
60
model, the same model used by (Anderson et al., 2007; Berbegal-Mirabent et al., 2013). The linear 
program of the DEA follows as below. 
78%            :;<          (1)           
           >. @.          
/0,; . A;  ≥ :;< .
C
;D&
 E0,;<     , F = 1, … , G  (2) 
%),; . A;  ≥ 
C
;D&
 I),;<     , J = 1, … , K   (3) 
A; = 1   (4)
C
;D)
 
A;  ≥0,
! = 1, … , O   (5) 
 
The value of %),; denotes the amount of Jth input used by !th university. In this application, 
research spending of a university is used as an input which the same input variable used by 
Anderson et al. (2007). Basis of this selection is based on the research by Rogers et al. (2000) that 
provides a basic view of the university licensing process, and it puts research spending as is input. 
The outputs are given by /0,; for the Fth output of the !th university. Output variables considered 
for this application are number of LAO agreement, number of spinoff, and UTT revenue. Decision 
variable A; represents how much !th university is used in setting performance target for university 
!′. Fractional values of A; are allowed as this enables a target for university !′ to be developed 
from a combination of other universities. Decision variable :;< represents the efficiency score of 
university !′ under analysis. 
Objective function (1) measures efficiency of university !′ under analysis for all 
universities in the set. For efficient universities, :;< = 1 while for inefficient universities :;< > 1. 
For example, a fictitious university has a : = 1.10, this means that in order to operate efficiently 
the university has to increase and expand its output by 10% while keeping its input fixed. 
Constraint (2) describes the output of UTT while constraint (3) describes the input used in UTT. 
Constraint (4) allows the variable returns to scale and constraint (5) ensures the non-negativity of 
variable A. 
 
==PAGE:66==
 
61
3.3. Regression Analysis 
 
Regression analysis is conducted to analyze factors that influence UTT performance based 
on determinants explained in Chapter 2.5. focusing on UTTO inputs. Equation (6) analyzes the 
dependent variable of O22 G!@R!@ measured each by number of LAO agreement, number of 
spinoffs, and the amount of revenue. Explanatory variable S& KTUVT@JFT WJ>XYF>!ZV denotes the 
number of invention disclosure a UTTO receive, S[ O22 \%RVT]J@!ZV denote amount of money 
spend for UTT mainly for IPR spending, and S^ O22G _J`V denotes how many full time 
equivalent staff does a UTTO employ in average. All of the explanatory variable used in the linear 
regression refer to as the internal factor inputs for UTT by Siegel et al. (2003) and Link and Siegel 
(2005). 
 
O22 G!@R!@ =  a + S& KTUVT@JFT WJ>XYF>!ZV + S[ O22 \%RVT]J@!ZV + S^ O22G _J`V
+ c& ,V>V8ZXℎ \%RVT]J@!ZV
+ c[ _XJVTXV 8T] 2VXℎTFYFe/ ,V>V8ZXℎ fVZ>FTTVY +  g   (6) 
 
Control variable c& ,V>V8ZXℎ \%RVT]J@!ZV represents the amount of money that a 
university spends on R&D. Research by Carlsson and Fridh (2002) and Powers (2003) found that 
R&D expenditure influences UTT performance of a university, hence it is a variable under control 
in this research. Control variable c[ _XJVTXV 8T] 2VXℎTFYFe/ ,V>V8ZXℎ fVZ>FTTVY represents 
the number of researchers in the field of science and technology in a university at average. 
Researches have shown that the availability, size, and quality of university researchers is an 
important determinant to UTT (Powers and McDougall, 2005; Powers, 2003; O’Shea et al., 2005). 
Furthermore, certain scientific discipline such as biological sciences and engineering is found more 
important in UTT (Thursby and Kemp, 2002). Thus, research personnel of a university in science 
and technology is another variable under control in this research. Lastly, variables a and g 
respectively represents the regression coefficient and error of the model.  
The equations having dependent variable of UTT revenue is estimated by ordinary least 
square (OLS). The equations having dependent variable of the count of LAO agreements and 
spinoffs are estimated using Negative Binomial model. According Hausman et al. (1984), there 
are two ways to deal the discrete nature of count data: Poisson regression model or the negative 
binomial model. The Poisson distribution assumes that the mean and variance of the process are 
==PAGE:67==
 
62
equal. This assumption is violated when over-dispersion (under-dispersion) of the data is observed. 
As discussed in Chapter 3.1. the data for this research is characterized with a significant amount 
of over-dispersion observed by the high SD of the data. Hence, the Negative Binomial 
specification which is a generalization of the Poisson distribution, to take account of the over-
dispersion is more appropriate (Caldera and Debande, 2010). A goodness of fit test that rejected 
the Poisson distribution is also conducted to validate the choice of Negative Binomial model. 
3.4. Interview 
 
Interviews are conducted to UTTO managers at DTU, AAU, and AU. Objective of the 
interview to the UTTO managers is to explore different UTT organizational practices at different 
universities that may influence the UTT performance of a university. Main reason in choosing 
UTTO managers as the target of the interview is due to the obligation for any invention made by 
scientists/researchers employed in Danish universities to be disclosed at their respective university 
(Danish Ministry of Higher Education and Science, 2016), and the organization at the university 
in charge of assessing the invention disclosures is the UTTO  
Due to the time limit of this research, only three out of eight UTTOs mentioned above in 
Denmark are able to be interviewed. Therefore, important insights can be gained regarding the 
differences of UTT organizational practices on universities in Denmark to explain different UTT 
performance in Danish universities and the regression analysis, however it cannot be generalized 
to explain the whole result. In addition, one more UTT stakeholder is able to be interviewed which 
is a manager at the DTU Science Park. Objective in interviewing stakeholders other than the UTTO 
managers is to gain more knowledge of UTT at a university as a UTT activity is influenced by 
multiple stakeholders.  
UTTO managers are asked with the same set of questions and these set of questions are 
open-ended questions. Questions to the UTTO managers are aimed to uncover how the UTTO is 
organized and different practices of the UTTOs along the UTT process both explained in Chapter 
2.1., such as: how is the UTTO structured, how invention disclosures are evaluated, what is the 
IPR protection strategy of the inventions, what kind of support are given for university spinoffs, 
and et cetera. Detailed interview questions for the UTTO managers are available at the Appendix. 
Questions asked to UTT stakeholders other than the UTTOs are aimed to uncover support policies 
and initiatives aimed to foster UTT. 
==PAGE:68==
 
63
4. Data Analysis and Findings 
 
 
This chapter covers the data analysis of UTT in Denmark by using effectiveness and 
efficiency measurement to measure UTT performance, linear regression, and interview. Findings 
based on the data analysis will provide the main arguments for answering the research questions. 
4.1. Effectiveness and Efficiency Performance 
 
 The calculation result of effectiveness and efficiency on UTT in Denmark is presented in 
Table 9. For effectiveness, cells colored in green indicate a good performance and conversely in 
red indicate a bad performance relative to the other universities. Light green indicates performing 
above the average while the lighter it goes indicates that it performs closer to the average and dark 
green indicates a very good performance. Moreover, orange indicates performing slightly below 
average. For efficiency, cells colored in green indicate an efficient performance. Yellow indicates 
an inefficient performance while red indicates a highly inefficient performance. There is no result 
for CBS in efficiency as they did not generate any LAO agreement, spinoff, and UTT revenue.  
 
Table 9. Effectiveness and Efficiency of UTT in Denmark 2005-2016 
University 
Input 
Output 
Other Parameters 
Performance 
Research 
Spending 
(DKK) 
Licensing, 
Assignment, 
and Option 
Spinoff 
UTT 
Revenue 
(DKK) 
Invention 
Disclosure 
UTT 
Expenditure 
(DKK) 
Research 
Agreement* 
Effectiveness 
Efficiency 
AAU 
 10,421,672,830  
 390  
 21  
 35,804,925  
 704  
 27,580,098  
 2,856  
0.58 
1.00 
AU 
 29,018,990,444  
 169  
 26  
 39,101,579  
 670  
 81,054,310  
 2,871  
0.18 
1.72 
CBS 
 4,090,950,399  
 -   
 -   
 -   
 -   
 363,447  
 396  
-0.96 
 -  
DTU 
 27,619,272,956  
 272  
 51   159,774,718  
 1,306  
 207,655,736  
 5,218  
1.66 
1.00 
ITU 
 804,705,601  
 21  
 3  
 1,294,500  
 36  
 6,280,164  
 66  
-0.84 
1.00 
KU 
 40,578,388,188  
 233  
 24  
 66,194,005  
 765  
 66,862,104  
 2,463  
0.46 
1.48 
RU 
 3,351,384,103  
 2  
 -   
 1,451,098  
 12  
 3,816,277  
 336  
-0.94 
11.34 
SDU 
 11,261,844,673  
 114  
 22  
 19,719,286  
 346  
 28,931,119  
 1,032  
-0.14 
1.07 
Total 
 127,147,209,195  
 1,201  
 147   323,340,110  
 3,839  
 422,543,255  
 15,238    
  
Average 
 15,893,401,149  
 150  
 18  
 40,417,514  
 480  
 52,817,907  
 1,905    
  
* From 2010-2016 
 
==PAGE:69==
 
64
 Before discussing the result of the effectiveness and efficiency of every university, several 
points of interest can be observed from the data. First of all, AAU is the only university able to 
generate more revenue from UTT than their expenditure on UTT. DTU have the highest UTT 
output in all three parameters except for the number of LAO agreement and the difference between 
DTU and the next university with highest UTT output in each parameter is also significant. DTU 
also spends a lot on UTT expenditure compared to other universities in the study. AAU despite 
not spending the most in research spending and UTT expenditure manages to have the highest 
number of LAO agreement. 
In terms of effectiveness, DTU with the score of 1.66 are outperforming the UTT output 
of other universities by a significant difference in the number of spinoff and UTT revenue 
generated except for the number of LAO agreement. AAU are ranked second in UTT effectiveness 
with 0.58 due to having the highest number of LAO agreement and moderate result in other UTT 
outputs. KU with the score of 0.46 are also considered performing above the average considering 
its UTT revenue that is second only to DTU and performing moderately in other UTT outputs.  
AU with the score of 0.18 are performing slightly above the average compared to other 
universities. While having the second highest spinoff, AU are only ranked third and fourth highest 
in respectively in terms of UTT revenue and LAO agreement. Due to the low amount of UTT 
output compared to other universities, SDU with the score of -0.14 are considered to perform 
slightly below average, moreover ITU, RU, and CBS with the respective score of -0.84, -0.94, and 
-0.96 are considered to perform below average. Z-score is a measure of distance from the mean 
using standard deviation. Thus, DTU with the score of 1.66 are performing well above other 
universities while CBS with the score of -0.96 are performing well below the average of other 
universities. 
In terms of efficiency, DTU, AAU, and ITU with the score of 1.00 is considered efficient 
in UTT. In the case of DTU, efficiency is achieved due to DTU performing the best in two out of 
three UTT outputs while also spending fewer amounts of research spending compared to KU and 
AU. AAU with only the fifth highest in research spending can generate the highest number of 
licensing and performed moderately in other UTT outputs, therefore considered to be efficient. 
Efficiency is achieved by ITU by spending the least amount of research spending compared to all 
other universities while still managing to create substantial amount of UTT output. SDU with the 
efficiency score of 1.07 manages to generate modest UTT output with only the 4th highest 
==PAGE:70==
 
65
spending for research. KU and AU with respective efficiency score of 1.48 and 1.69 have a similar 
pattern which is a high spending in research while not generating the best return on UTT output, 
in fact KU and AU respectively spends the 1st and 2nd highest in terms of research spending. RU 
have an efficiency score of 11.34 due to the very low UTT output while still spending in research 
by a higher amount than ITU. In a university that is not considered efficient, for example SDU 
with a score of 1.07 have to increase their output by 7% while keeping its input fixed to be 
considered efficient. 
Combining the result of effectiveness and efficiency, a university that is considered above 
average in effectiveness may not be considered efficient and in the other way around a university 
that is considered efficient may not considered to be effective due to the usage of resource in this 
case research spending towards UTT outputs. For example, ITU have an effectiveness score of -
0.94 and an efficiency score of 1. It means that ITU’s overall UTT output is below the average. 
However, if compared to ITU’s research spending in generating UTT output, ITU is considered 
efficient as ITU have the smallest amount of research spending. Another example is KU, with an 
effectiveness score of 0.46 KU is considered performing above the average. However, with an 
efficiency score of 1.48, to be considered efficient KU must increase its UTT output by 48%. By 
comparing research spending and UTT outputs alone this interpretation KU’s UTT performance 
is logical as KU spends the highest amount of research spending while not leading in any UTT 
output measure. 
4.2. Regression Analysis 
 
Table 10. presents the regression analysis result for each UTT output. First of all, invention 
disclosure is only proven to be statistically significant for LAO agreement with a negative 
relationship, which means that more invention disclosure the UTTO receive results into less LAO 
agreement. This result contradicts the result of Siegel et al. (2003a) that found invention disclosure 
to be statistically significant with a positive relationship for the number of licensing agreement. 
No conclusion can be made for the relation of invention disclosure towards spinoff and UTT 
revenue as invention does not show to be statistically significant for any confidence level for both 
UTT output. 
UTT expenditure is only proven statistically significant towards LAO agreement with a 
negative coefficient. This result means that more UTT expenditure leads to less LAO agreement. 
==PAGE:71==
 
66
This result is somewhat similar to Siegel et al. (2003a) that found spending more on legal fees 
(external) reduces the number of licensing agreement. No conclusion can be made for the relations 
of UTT expenditure towards spinoff and UTT revenue as UTT expenditure does not show to be 
statistically significant for any confidence level for both UTT output. 
Expected result appears for UTTO staff size. UTTO size is found to be statistically 
significant with a positive relation with the LAO agreement and spinoff. UTTO size is also found 
to be significant with a positive relation albeit with a slight confidence level of 10%. This result 
means that a larger UTTO size will have more success in generating LAO agreements and spinoffs. 
The result is not surprising as several researches for example by Caldera and Debande (2010), 
Powers (2003), and Siegel et al. (2003) point out that larger UTTO size is related to higher UTT 
outcome. No conclusion can be made for the relations of UTTO size towards UTT revenue as 
UTTO size does not show to be statistically significant for any confidence level. 
 
Table 10. Regression Result for UTT Output 
  
LAO Agreement 
Spinoff 
UTT Revenue 
Explanatory Variable 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Invention Disclosure 
-0.013 * 
-0.008 
 
8.37E+04   
UTT Expenditure 
-1.09E-07 *** 
-5.62E-08 
 
 0.67    
UTTO Size 
1.35 *** 
0.838 . 
-5.62E+06   
Control Variable 
    
 
 
    
Research Personnel Science & Technology 
 0.021  *** 
0.011 
 
-1.73E+04   
Research spending 
-6.07E-10 *** 
-3.35E-10 
 
 0.001    
. P ≤ 0.10; * P ≤ 0.05; ** P ≤ 0.001; *** P ≤ 0.0001 
 
On the control variable, a statistically significant positive relation between research 
personnel in science and technology and LAO agreement validates the assumption that the number 
of research personnel and certain scientific discipline influences UTT success. A statistically 
significant negative relationship between research spending and LAO agreement is interesting. It 
is in line with the result of the DEA analysis that KU and AU is inefficient in UTT while spending 
high on research expenditure. Meanwhile it also contradicts the finding of Carlsson and Fridh 
(2002) that found R&D expenditure to have positive correlation for cumulative active licenses and 
options. 
 
==PAGE:72==
 
67
4.3. Interview Findings 
 
 
Each interview lasted for approximately one and a half hour. Two interviews are conducted 
through direct meeting while the other two meetings are conducted through phone interview. 
Interviews are recorded with hand writing. Interviewees responded well and answered directly to 
questions asked. Interview result to the UTTO at DTU, AAU, and AU is summarized in Table 11. 
 
UTTOs at DTU, AAU, and AU share many similarities. All of the UTTOs main objective 
is to pursue the benefit of society as it is the mandate of The Act of Inventions in Public Research 
Organizations. In general, incentive structure of royalty profit sharing is also the same where the 
inventor, department/research group, and university/faculty receive 1/3 each. All of the UTTOs 
are structured inside the university. UTTO’s at DTU, AAU, and AU have different staff 
compositions as illustrated in Figure 8. UTTO staff at AAU and AU mostly have legal background 
while UTTO at DTU mostly have technical background. Of all three UTTO’s, DTU employs the 
highest amount of staff with business background which is four equivalent full time employees 
and the highest proportion of staff with business background with 20% of the total staff. 
 
Figure 8. UTTO Staff Composition at AAU, AU, and DTU 2016 
Source: Danish Ministry of Higher Education (2017) 
 
The UTT process starts with the same process of inventors disclosing their inventions. 
Inventions are assessed based on their patentability and commercialization aspects. Surprisingly, 
6 
 14  
4 
2 
1 
4 
1 
4 
9 
2 
4 
3 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
AAU 
AU 
DTU 
Staff Size 
Legal 
Business 
Technical 
Others 
==PAGE:73==
 
68
licensee evaluation is rarely conducted whether because most licensing comes out of research 
collaboration for the case of DTU and AAU or just because it is only common to have one potential 
licensee for the case of AU. Companies that have a research collaboration with a university usually 
have a first right to access an invention that has commercial value. If the company is then interested 
in the new invention, they can negotiate the technology licensing from the UTTO of the university.  
UTTOs at DTU, AAU, and AU opted for different kinds of organizational form. The UTTO 
at DTU is organized on an MX or matrix form. This form organizes the IPR, business development, 
legal, and other supporting functions on a centralized structure while having an innovation head at 
each department. It is also the organization form opted by AU although not having an innovation 
head/ ambassador at each department. AAU meanwhile has opted for only a centralized structure. 
The innovation head/ambassador at each department functions as scout to find potential inventions 
to be disclosed while being at the forefront to provide information in relation to TT of research, to 
give advice, and to encourage innovation. AU have a collaboration to manage all 
commercialization activities of hospitals in the Central Danish Region. AU also hire external 
consultants for the Nanotech and Biomedicine Department to have a better ability to engage 
researchers in mentioned departments. 
DTU have just recently introduce a new function in their UTTO called innovation and 
infrastructure. The new function is responsible to create programs and provide necessary 
infrastructures to bring knowledge and technology created by academics in the university into 
practice in the real world. Several ideas for the program of the new function are for example to 
create a hackathon between researchers in the university and the industry and to create annual 
meetings to make academics inspired to bring knowledge into practice. 
A significant difference is observed within the pattern and strategy related to the LAO 
agreement. A large number of LAO agreement from both DTU and AAU came out of research 
collaboration while AU experienced a more proportionate balance of LAO agreement that came 
out of research collaboration and in-house research. A remark from the UTTO manager at AAU 
clearly depicts the situation: 
 
"Approximately 70% of licensing from AAU comes out from research collaboration" 
 
==PAGE:74==
 
69
In LAO agreement strategy, AAU opted to use more assignment agreement which is to 
transfer the ownership of the invention to the external partner rather than to license it. As seen 
from Figure 9. assignment agreement at AAU which amounted to 314 agreements or 
approximately 85% of the total LAO agreement from 2007-2016 is the dominant mechanism used. 
There are two reasons on why AAU opted to use assignment agreement. Firstly, because it is 
necessary to use assignment agreement to attract funding from the industry for research. 
Secondly, with the assignment agreement, companies can have more freedom to exploit 
the invention. Moreover, a company already engaged in a research collaboration usually negotiates 
a lower LAO agreement price to the university if an invention with commercial potential emerge 
from the research collaboration, thus it is often the case at AAU that companies negotiate a lower 
LAO agreement price with AAU. Remark from the UTTO manager at AAU included:  
 
“Most inventions are based on research collaboration therefore associated companies can 
negotiate lower fees on licensing. In a lot of cases, ownership of the invention is transferred to the 
company as most inventions are incremental towards previous knowledge. Thus, companies are 
better situated to own and exploit the invention” 
 
Interestingly, due to this practice the UTTO at AAU is perceived by other UTTOs in 
Denmark to license their technology at a lower price as remarked by the UTTO manager at DTU: 
 
"DTU's technology licensing model is basically the same as AAU, while AAU license the invention 
at a low fee, we charge it with market price" 
==PAGE:75==
 
70
Table 11. UTT Practice at DTU, AAU, and AU Based on Interview 
  
DTU 
AAU 
AU 
Mission 
Benefit of society. 
Benefit of society. 
Benefit of society. 
Organization 
Inside the university structure. 
Matrix organization. Most staff 
have technical background. 
Inside the university structure. 
Centralized organization. Most staff have 
legal background. 
Inside the university structure. Matrix 
organization. Manage commercialization 
activities for hospitals in the Central 
Denmark Region. Most staff have legal 
background.  
Invention 
Disclosure 
Standard process of inventor 
filling for invention. Matrix 
organization enables Innovation 
Head at each department to scout 
for potential invention disclosure. 
Standard process of inventor filling for an 
invention. Spending significant time in 
building close relations to their 
researchers to scout for potential 
invention disclosures. 
Standard process of inventor filling for an 
invention. Matrix organization enables 
innovation ambassador at several 
departments to scout for potential 
invention disclosure.  
Incentive 
Structure 
1/3 each for inventor, department, 
and university. 
1/3 each for inventor research group, 
institutes, and faculty. 
1/3 each for inventor, department, and 
university. 
Evaluation of 
Invention 
Commercialization and 
patentability with stronger 
emphasis on commercialization. 
Commercialization and patentability. 
Strong emphasis on the inventors 
intention on the invention. 
Commercialization and patentability. 
Licensee or 
investor 
evaluation 
Mostly not needed, because 
licensing of DTU invention often 
comes after research 
collaboration.  
Mostly not needed, because licensing of 
AAU invention often comes after research 
collaboration. In other cases, evaluation 
focus is on which licensee that can bring 
out the most value out of the invention. 
Licensing that came out of research 
collaboration and in-house research are 
approximately even in proportion. Only 
have one potential licensee in most 
instances, concern is more on the 
negotiation of the licensing price. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
 
71
  
DTU 
AAU 
AU 
Leveraging IPR 
Patenting proclivity is high when 
commercialization scope of the 
invention is locked. Sleeping 
patent policy of 12 years old non-
productive patent. Most 
inventions are at an early stage 
with high risk therefore modest 
fees are used, however if the 
invention has a high commercial 
potential, higher fees will be 
introduced. 
Only patent when it is commercially 
necessary. In a lot of cases, ownership of 
the invention is transferred under 
assignment agreement to the company as 
most inventions are incremental towards 
previous knowledge. Most inventions are 
based on research collaboration therefore 
associated companies can negotiate lower 
fees on licensing. 
Apply for EU patent priority application 
for nine months for potential inventions, 
but then it will be dropped if no potential 
partner to transfer the technology is found. 
Emphasis to license on market price and 
the UTTO might decide to step out of the 
deal if the price is unsuitable. High 
preference to license rather than 
assignment agreement. 
Managing 
Relation 
On-going relations. Open to 
multi-parties interested in using 
the invention throughout the UTT 
process. 
The UTT process at AAU is based on 
relations. Contacting a potential licensee 
through informal contacts. Inviting 
investors to a technology presentation of 
the university. Good and professional 
approach at negotiations. 
Manage closely a few selected investors 
and licensee with regular meetings. 
Several relations are created from scratch 
due to the need of the invention to be 
commercialized. 
Supporting 
Academic 
Entrepreneurship 
Mentoring and helping academics 
during process, identify surrogate 
entrepreneurs, internal proof of 
concept funds of annually 6 
million DKK. Access of science 
park and external seed funding.   
Internal proof of concept fund. 
Mentorship to potential entrepreneurs 
through the Open Entrepreneurship 
initiative. Access to science park. 
Incubators at IT, health, and social 
sciences department. Access to external 
seed funding. 
Training, mentorship, and workshop 
program to support academic 
entrepreneurs. No access to internal proof 
of concept funds. Provide support to 
access external proof of concept fund. 
Access to science park. Access to external 
seed funding 
Reflections 
People in Denmark with failure 
on entrepreneurship as a barrier to 
UTT. Only 40% of the 
technology portfolio is utilized 
while the target is 80%. 
“Blockbuster” licensing revenue 
occurs. 
Not a lot researchers aspiring to be 
entrepreneurs. Communication and 
misunderstanding with other stakeholders. 
Too much focus on commercialization of 
research based on IPR. “Blockbuster” 
licensing revenue occurs. 
Lack of internal proof of concept funds. 
Mindset of inventors that are more 
research oriented rather than commercial 
oriented. Academic entrepreneurs have a 
high fear of failure. UTT revenue are 
spread more evenly between portfolios.  
==PAGE:77==
 
72
The same LAO strategy cannot be said of DTU and AU. Licensing is the preferred 
mechanism for DTU and AU as illustrated in Figure 9. The main reason behind this strategy is to 
retain control over the inventions of the university. A remark from the UTTO manager of AU 
better explains the situation: 
 
“Given the opportunity, companies will always want to take ownership of the invention. However, 
assigning an ownership of an invention to an external party is least favored at AU as the university 
would like to have control over the invention that one of the benefit is leveraging the university to 
attract research funds”. 
 
 
Figure 9. Number of LAO Agreement at AAU, AU and DTU 2007-2016 
Source: Danish Ministry of Higher Education (2017) 
 
The importance of licensing with market price is emphasized by the UTTO and DTU and 
AU. At DTU as most technology is at an early stage of development modest fees are used in the 
licensing, larger fees are used in the licensing deal if the commercial potential of the technology 
is considered lucrative however such conditions rarely occur. The UTTO at AU might even step 
out the deal if they cannot agree on a suitable licensing price with the licensee. 
The “blockbuster” licensing revenue pattern where few inventions generate the majority of 
UTT occurs in DTU and AAU. DTU for example generated a large amount of revenue from 
49 
85 
117 
314 
45 
68 
6 
22 
15 
0 
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
350 
400 
AAU 
AU 
DTU 
Number of Agreements 
License 
Assignment 
Option 
==PAGE:78==
 
73
licensing a software related to wind energy. AAU also reaps a large portion of revenue from 
licensing in the ICT, healthcare, and energy area. UTT revenue at AU is spread more evenly 
between all licensed inventions. Referring back to the “blockbuster” licensing from DTU on wind 
energy, “blockbuster” licensing revenue seems to be influenced by the nature of the invention itself 
as quoted from the UTTO manager of DTU: 
 
“On the case of the wind energy software licensing that reaped a lot revenue, the software was the 
only kind of software on the market at that time and it happens to be useful and demanded all over 
the world” 
 
The inclination to patent at AAU is low. They only patent if it is commercially necessary 
for example if the invention incur a high development cost for a spinoff, if the invention is within 
the life science industry, and if the invention will be published. As explained, AAU also favors the 
assignment agreement over to the licensing agreement that results in less cost for IPR protection. 
The low inclination to spend on IPR and assignment agreement explains why AAU only is only 
ranked 5th highest in UTT expenditure while having the 3rd highest number of invention 
disclosures. 
Inclination to patent for both DTU and AU is higher than AAU. Both universities most of 
the time will proceed to the European priority application if the invention is considered to have 
potential for commercialization. DTU have a sleeping patent policy of dropping 12 years old non-
productive patent. Currently, only 40% of patent portfolio in DTU is utilized while this metric is 
not tracked both at AAU and AU. AU does not have a specific sleeping patent policy however 
they do mention that they drop a significant number of patent priority application as the quote 
below from the UTTO manager at AU: 
 
"Patenting is an expensive process, we drop a high number of priority application because no 
potential licensee is found to co-finance the patent" 
 
 
UTTOs have their own way in managing relations with potential licensees and investors. 
DTU are open to multi-parties interested in the process of marketing the new technology. AAU 
signifies the importance of building relations in the UTT process. They contact potential licensee 
==PAGE:79==
 
74
both through formal and informal contacts and also maintain good and professional approach at 
negotiations. AAU invites investors and companies to a technology presentation at the university 
as a part to market their portfolios. AU closely manage a few selected investors and licensee with 
regular meetings. 
Numerous support is initiated by the UTTO in DTU to foster entrepreneurship, especially 
to increase the number of university spinoffs. Support includes providing help and mentoring 
inventors throughout the process, identifying surrogate entrepreneurs, and providing a proof of 
concept fund. The entrepreneurship and innovation environment at DTU is also enhanced by the 
presence of other organizations such as DTU Science Park, PreSeed Ventures that provides early 
stage funding, and DTU Skylab that focuses on fostering student innovation and entrepreneurship. 
DTU Science Park and PreSeed Ventures are owned by DTU where a DTU representative sits at 
the board of both organizations.  
A number of bottom-up initiatives emerge from DTU to enrich the entrepreneurship and 
innovation environment such as The Danish Tech Challenge and FutureBox that focuses on the 
development of hardware based startups, and Bridging the Gap and Open Entrepreneurship that 
focuses on using experienced and external entrepreneurs to boost university spinoffs and startups. 
According to the DTU Science Park manager interviewed for this research, a significant number 
of DTU spinoffs emerge from The Danish Tech Challenge.  
AAU provides support for academic entrepreneurship through proof of concept funding 
and mentorship through the Open Entrepreneurship initiative. Incubators are also present at the IT, 
health, and social department. In addition, UTTO at AAU also help to connect with access to 
external funding. Innovation environment at AAU is enhanced by the presence of NOVI science 
park and incubators in the IT, health, and social science departments. AU does not provide access 
to internal proof concept funding.  A program of training, mentorship, and workshop to support 
academic entrepreneurs is provided by the UTTO at AU. Innovation environment at AU is 
enhanced by the presence of INCUBA science park and startup incubator for students. Important 
to note here that the availability of proof of concept fund will not benefit only for generating 
spinoffs but also beneficial for the development of any invention at the university, as proof of 
concept fund is used to verify the industrial applicability of a research based invention (Rasmussen, 
2008). 
==PAGE:80==
 
75
When asked about barriers and what could be done better for UTT in Denmark, all 
interviewees are unanimously critical upon the culture of Danish academics on entrepreneurship 
specifically about the fear of failure, to come out of the comfort zone to try new things, and the 
lack of entrepreneurial mindset among researchers. Specific for AU, the lack of internal proof of 
concept funds hinder the UTT process as the potential of an invention could not be validated further 
as quoted from the UTTO manager of AU as below: 
 
“Lack of internal proof of concept funds hinders the UTT process at AU. In effect, inventions turn 
out to be more of a discovery rather than an invention as many data are missing to prove the 
invention concept.  If we have more proof of concept fund, more inventions will be able to be 
commercialized” 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
 
76
5. Discussion and Limitation 
 
Findings from the data analysis shows that universities in Denmark exhibit different UTT 
performance among each other. DTU are by far performing well above the average in UTT 
effectiveness with the score of 1.66 while AAU as the nearest top performer second to DTU scored 
0.58. CBS as the lowest performer in effectiveness scored -0.96. The variety of scores in 
effectiveness ranging from 1.66 to -0.96 validates the difference in UTT performance. In the other 
way around, if the UTT performance between universities are generally the same, then the range 
of effectiveness score should be around zero. Universities that are considered to be efficient are 
DTU, AAU, and ITU with the efficiency score of 1.00. No other universities are considered to be 
efficient with RU as the lowest performer in efficiency scoring 11.34. Differences in efficiency 
scores ranging from 1.00 to 11.34 also validates the differences in UTT performance among 
Danish universities. 
What causes the different UTT performance of universities in Denmark? Results of the 
regression analysis in general does not show UTTO inputs to be the main factor behind different 
UTT performance of universities in Denmark. At hindsight, a negative relation of invention 
disclosure and UTT expenditure towards LAO agreement appears to be illogical as more input 
should lead to an increase in output. Furthermore, explanatory variables in the regression analysis 
also cannot explain the different performance in generating the number of spinoffs and UTT 
revenue. Only UTTO size has the result as expected based on previous studies that is positively 
correlated in generating LAO agreement. Thus, it is expected that different UTT organizational 
practice and specific UTT activity patterns can explain more on why universities in Denmark have 
different UTT performance.  
The first influential UTT organizational practice observed is the prevalence of AAU to use 
assignment agreement. Approximately 85% of LAO agreements from AAU are contributed by 
assignment agreement. The preference of companies to fully own university inventions provides a 
big incentive for companies to acquire and exploit inventions created at the university or with a 
joint collaboration with a university. The incentive is also compounded by a specific UTT pattern 
that most of LAO agreements at AAU comes out of research collaboration. Therefore, a lower fee 
can be negotiated by the company engaged in the research collaboration if they are interested in 
commercially exploiting the invention emerging from the research collaboration. 
==PAGE:82==
 
77
It has to be noted that the preference of companies owning the invention as exemplified by 
the case at AAU may be influenced by past academic patenting pattern in Denmark and the 
characteristic of technology invented at AAU. Lissoni et al. (2009) found that 66% of academic 
patenting in Denmark in the period of 1994-2003 is owned by business companies which means 
that historically companies in Denmark are used to owning the invention emerging out of research 
collaboration with universities, an important country specific context of Denmark that has to be 
considered. In addition, AAU also mentioned that most of their inventions are incremental towards 
existing invention thus favorable for companies to own it.  
This prevalence from AAU to use assignment agreement explains why AAU have more 
number of LAO agreements than any other Danish universities while perceived to have license the 
technology at a low price. It also explains why the explanatory variable of invention disclosure 
and UTT expenditure in the regression analysis has a negative relationship. It is not that more 
invention disclosure and UTT expenditure will lead to less LAO agreement, but there is a LAO 
agreement strategy in this case AAU that predominantly assign the ownership of their invention 
to companies that is very successful irrespective to the amount of UTTO inputs they use.   
The next important UTT organizational practice found is a mixture of organizational 
practice from the university and UTTO level. The UTTO at DTU consist of a significant number 
of staffs that have background in business and the UTTO provides support to spinoffs in the form 
of mentorship, identifying surrogate entrepreneurs, and providing internal proof of concept funds. 
The innovative environment at DTU is enhanced by the presence of DTU Science Park, PreSeed 
Ventures, DTU Skylab and bottom-up initiatives emerging from the university such as The Danish 
Tech Challenge, FutureBox, Bridging the Gap, and Open Entrepreneurship that plays an important 
role towards generating university spinoffs.  
The matrix UTTO structure at DTU helps to identify inventions that have commercial 
potential and help to set the right path towards commercialization at a very early stage. Innovation 
agents/ambassadors at each department in the matrix structure have the advantage over the central 
UTTO structure to identify potential inventions and to provide information to fellow academics 
related to UTT as they have better understanding over the technology and have a closer proximity 
to academics in their respective department. A UTTO staff with a background in business is 
important as spinoffs require mentorship and guidance at the early phase of development. 
Activities related to LAO agreement will also benefit from a UTTO staff with business background 
==PAGE:83==
 
78
as companies have found it easier to negotiate to a UTTO staff with experience in the industry 
either because they understand the company’s needs or their experience gives them more 
credibility (Conti and Gaule, 2008).  
As most invention disclosures at the UTTO are found to be embryonic in nature (Jensen 
and Thursby, 2001), it is important for universities to have access to funds for developing the 
invention at least enabling to reach the proof of concept stage of technology. Science park and 
incubator are also necessary to provide business capabilities for spinoffs (Weckowska, 2015). The 
innovative environment at DTU that is built with numerous support policies and initiatives is in 
accordance to the determinants of UTT performance that successful UTT of often comes out of 
bottom up initiatives (Goldfarb and Henrekson, 2002), the right mix of support policy (Debackere 
and Veugelers, 2005), and a matrix UTTO structure (Debackere and Veugelers, 2005). Access to 
both internal and external funds, significant number of UTTO staffs with business background, 
and the presence of a science park at DTU creates the business development capability required to 
develop a spinoff focus strategy (Bengtsson, 2017). Certainly DTU benefits from this environment 
and explains why DTU have more spinoffs than other Danish universities rather than UTTO inputs 
used as the explanatory variables in the regression analysis. 
The specific UTT activity pattern of “blockbuster” licensing revenue that occurs in 
Denmark in DTU and AAU shows that UTT revenue is influenced by the inherent commercial 
potential of the invention itself more than it is determined by UTTO inputs or other UTT 
organizational practices. The “blockbuster” licensing revenue pattern also explains why no single 
explanatory variable at the regression analysis is tested to be significant on UTT revenue. This 
“blockbuster” pattern on revenue is not surprising as it is also reported in the USA that most 
licensing revenue is contributed only by a few licensing agreements (Verspagen, 2006). 
Findings of this research indicates that organizational practice of assignment agreement, 
providing an adequate business development capability, a matrix UTTO structure, bottom-up 
initiatives, furthermore specific UTT activity pattern of “blockbuster” licensing revenue and a 
large portion LAO agreement that comes out of research collaboration of plays an important role 
in influencing UTT performance rather than UTTO inputs that consists of invention disclosure, 
UTTO size, and UTT expenditure. However, it does not mean that UTTO inputs have a negative 
relationship or does not influence UTT performance at all, but the importance of UTT 
organizational practices and specific patterns at universities in Denmark seems to trump the 
==PAGE:84==
 
79
influence of UTTO inputs. UTTO inputs remains as an essential component for UTT as without it 
there would be no UTT and it is also the main reason for the inclusion of UTT inputs as the variable 
for the regression analysis as it is also easier to quantify compared to other UTT determinants. 
Hence, the result does not undermine the methodology used in this research but rather shows that 
the amount of input/resource used for UTT alone does not guarantee UTT success. 
The difference of UTT performance among universities in Denmark shows the same 
pattern of different UTT performance between universities in one country based on previous 
studies in the USA and Spain (Rogers et al., 2000; Thursby and Kemp, 2000; Anderson et al., 
2007; Caldera and Debande, 2010). Comparison of explanatory factors that influences UTT 
performance among different universities in a country in this research and previous studies cannot 
be compared apple to apple as most of the previous studies focus only on factors that are 
quantifiable such as UTTO size, research spending, et cetera thus does not cover important 
organizational practices. This research confirms organizational practice and specific UTT patterns 
plays an important role in influencing UTT performance. Hence, future studies must incorporate 
findings from organizational practices hand in hand with determinants that can be quantified to 
provide a more complete conclusion to factors that determine UTT performance. 
Several lessons can be learned from the current UTT practice in Denmark. First is on the 
importance of informal UTT in this case research collaboration. The fact the two highest achievers 
of LAO agreements in Denmark which are AAU and DTU generates most of its LAO agreement 
out of research collaboration signifies the importance of informal UTT. In terms of university-
industry links, research collaboration which involves a high degree of relations between university 
and industry and emphasizes bidirectional knowledge interaction mechanism are judged to be 
more important than unidirectional knowledge interaction by both academics and industrial 
scientists (Meyer-Krahmer and Schmoch, 1998). In relation with licensing, informal UTT often 
precedes formal UTT (Perkmann et al., 2013) and licensing is usually the result of a bottom up 
activity of informal networks and contract research (Colyvas et al., 2002). Thus, a high number of 
LAO agreement achieved by AAU and DTU is in part a consequence of a strong collaboration 
forged with the industry.  
The next lesson is culture. Culture is found to be a barrier for UTT mentioned by all 
interviewees. Fear of failure, reluctance to try new things, low interest to become an academic 
entrepreneur, and the lack of entrepreneurial mindset among academics are stated to be a barrier 
==PAGE:85==
 
80
to UTT in Denmark. Indeed, culture is one of the determinants of a successful UTT (O’Shea et al., 
2005), and it seems that it is a side that needs improvement in the Danish academic society. It is a 
contrast to the culture showed by academia in MIT that have a positive attitude to commercializing 
technology, to take risks to start new companies, taking time off from an academic career to work 
in a company or developing their own inventions, and the strong desire to validate their technology 
in the marketplace (O’Shea et al., 2007). 
 It shows that with the UTT system where a big responsibility to drive the UTT is at the 
hands of the university through the UTTO, the involvement of academics remains pivotal to drive 
UTT, and the cultural issues mentioned impede the quality and quantity of the involvement.  By 
instilling the entrepreneurial culture and desire to put knowledge into practice, it is also likely that 
more bottom-up initiatives such as The Danish Tech Challenge, Bridging the Gap, and Open 
Entrepreneurship will appear to enrich the innovative environment of a university and support the 
success of UTT. 
Involvement of academics are very important to drive UTT. As the owner of the invention, 
inventors are precisely the individual who understands the invention, its potential, and also most 
likely to have ideas for potential customers (Kenney and Patton, 2009). The embryonic nature of 
most inventions also demands the involvement of academics even more necessary (Jensen and 
Thusrby, 2001). 
The current UTT system with the IPR ownership vested to the university and the UTTOs 
are a system modelled based in the USA. Yet, institutional context of higher education in the USA 
also plays an important role for success in UTT. Awarding property rights to universities works in 
the USA because universities are largely autonomous and competitive institutions (Goldfarb and 
Henrekson, 2002). Furthermore, as a result of the decentralization and competition that takes at so 
many levels, the university system in the USA has become more responsive to the economic needs 
of the society (Goldfarb and Henrekson, 2002). The decentralized and competitive nature of the 
higher education system at the USA is the opposite compared to Denmark, thus a different 
approach is required to increase the quantity and quality of involvement from Danish academics 
for UTT.  
There are three motivations for academics to engage in commercial activities which are 
driven by reputational/career reward, intrinsic satisfaction, and financial reward driven (Lam, 
2010). Mostly academics are motivated by intrinsic satisfaction to validate technology in the 
==PAGE:86==
 
81
marketplace and to further their research (Lam, 2010; O’Shea et al., 2007; D’Este and Perkmann, 
2011).  Universities and policy makers in the national level must find a way to motivate academics 
in Denmark to more involved in UTT activities. This could be achieved for example by increasing 
awareness and desire to bring technology into practice, give more autonomy, and structuring a 
favorable incentive scheme for inventors. 
The new innovation & infrastructure function at DTU’s UTTO is an example of the 
different approach to increase the quantity and quality of involvement from Danish academics. 
The innovation & infrastructure function which is tasked to create programs and provide necessary 
infrastructures to bring knowledge and technology created by academics in the university into 
practice in the real world is a break to the traditional UTTO function but might be a necessary 
improvement where a university exhibit a weak culture in entrepreneurship and in bringing 
knowledge into practice. Another idea is to introduce more low selective spinoff incubation 
programs (Clarysse et al., 2005). The objective is to raise entrepreneurship awareness among 
researchers and/or students at the university. The selection criteria should not focus much on 
economic and financial attractiveness but more on technical development. The program shall 
provide funds in the early validation stage of the spinoff. 
This research highlights the importance of support policy and structure for the success of 
UTT. A lack of business development capability for example in providing internal proof of concept 
fund at AU shows how funding gap can hamper the progress of UTT as it reduces the ability for 
inventions at AU to be developed further. Funding gap is arguably one of the most significant 
hurdle for UTT and often becomes a justification for government intervention (Salmenkaita and 
Salo, 2002). In another case, the situation at DTU provides an example on how a university with 
a business development capability and a matrix UTTO provides the necessary platform to create 
an innovative environment at the university and for UTT to flourish especially in generating 
university spinoffs.  
There are several debatable points of discussion that emerge from this research. The 
success of AAU by using assignment agreement draws an interesting point of discussion regarding 
the classic debate of IPR ownership of an invention. In an inventor ownership, companies will 
likely own the invention with a commercial potential of their interest that came out of a research 
collaboration without needing an assignment agreement. Now in the university ownership regime, 
companies need an additional cost in the form of assignment agreement, but is not a redundant 
==PAGE:87==
 
82
cost to the company and eventually to the society that is avoidable or in other words inefficient?  
Kenney and Patton (2009) argues that a basic rule of economic efficiency is that entitlements 
should be assigned to the party most likely to make optimal market judgements. In the inventor 
ownership, inventors are assumed to have the best idea on how to exploit the invention and in the 
case of research collaboration inventors can decide directly that the ownership of the invention 
should be vested to the company. 
Then again with the inventor ownership, inventors would have difficulties in funding the 
patent if no external party is willing to fund it and universities lose legitimation to force inventors 
in disclosing their invention to universities that would influence a university’s ability to control 
their invention which could be used to push UTT or attract research funding. Even in the university 
ownership, assigning an invention from the university to an external party is debatable in the first 
place. AU for example will only consider it when no other alternative exist in order to have better 
control over their inventions. Sourcing of a university’s research funding also determines whether 
assignment agreement is desirable or not as one of AAU’s motivation to use assignment agreement 
is to attract funding from the industry. Conversely, a university that relies heavily on public 
funding does not have the urgency to use assignment agreement to attract funding from the 
industry. 
This situation also adds to the debate regarding the critique of the patenting and licensing 
model in UTT that in some case patenting and licensing is not needed for UTT to happen as 
companies could just easily take ownership of inventions coming out of research collaboration. 
Similar situation with the invention of the Cohen-Boyer recombinant DNA and Richard Axel’s 
co-transformation in the USA that were already being used before it was patented and licensed 
(Sampat, 2006). Should universities then copy the AAU assignment model? Or never assign an 
ownership of an invention to an external party? Or as a country revert back to the inventor 
ownership? More research is still needed to determine the best course of action that is most 
beneficial to the society.  
 
An interesting remark is made by the UTTO manager of AAU on the usage of assignment 
strategy that it is used because most of their inventions are incremental therefore companies are 
best situated to exploit them. There is currently no empirical research evidence to prove that this 
statement is the best option. However, in the other end, academic spinoff is argued to be effective 
in exploiting radical and early stage technology (Gilsing et al., 2011) and important in regions 
==PAGE:88==
 
83
where no or very little downstream industry exist to which technology might be contracted (Polt 
et al., 2001). Thus, at hindsight the idea of using assignment for incremental innovation and 
spinoffs as a vehicle for radical innovation made sense.  
Although more research needs to be done on the modes of UTT that is effective for a 
specific technology in whether it is radical, incremental, architectural, or modular towards a 
company, universities and UTTOs must understand the characteristics of inventions in their 
university and the design their UTT mechanism properly. For example, DTU might want to 
consider focusing more on generating spinoffs than licensing considering their technology are 
more at the early stage of development or following the AAU example to assign the ownership of 
an invention to a company if the invention is an incremental innovation. 
In the context of The Act on Inventions of Public Research Organizations, as seen in Figure 
10. Danish UTTOs had a dramatic increase in LAO agreements while spinoff activity has remained 
steadily at a low level (Bengtsson, 2017). Bengtsson (2017) attributed this situation due to the legal 
framework of UTT in Denmark combined with limited funding of the system and limited access 
to business development capabilities which gave little option to the Danish UTTOs to do anything 
else than to evaluate invention disclosure from an IPR perspective, that is to patent and license.  
 
 
Figure 10. Development of LAO Agreement and Spinoffs at Danish Universities 2000-
2016 
Source: Danish Ministry of Higher Education (2017) 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
160 
180 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
License, Assignment, Option 
Spinoff 
==PAGE:89==
 
84
With insights gained in this research that most LAO agreement in DTU and AAU came 
out of research collaboration and preference of companies to own academic patenting prior to the 
enactment of The Act on Inventions of Public Research Organizations, it is a possibility that the 
increase of LAO agreement in Denmark is only a change in the pattern of invention ownership 
without in essence actually showing an increased activity in UTT. In addition to the limited growth 
of spinoffs generated, the influence of The Act on Inventions of Public Research Organizations 
enacted in 2000 in improving the UTT activity in Denmark has to be put into question.  
The pattern of “blockbuster” licensing revenue shows that universities have the potential 
to generate alternative revenue. However, looking at the experience of AAU it is not enough to 
only rely on “blockbuster” licensing to generate profit but also being very prudent in UTT 
expenditure especially for IPR protection. UTT considerations are not the sole reason for a 
university to apply an IPR for its inventions but also in example to attract research funds which 
complicates matters. Moreover, these “blockbuster” licensing revenue rarely occurs. In Denmark 
and also in many countries it must be underlined that UTTOs and universities promote UTT for 
the benefit for society not profit. By being an organization focused on maximizing profit/revenue, 
UTTOs may turn out to be an organization that becomes the bottleneck for UTT rather than 
facilitating it (Litan, 2007; Kenny and Patton, 2009). Considering also in the USA that a substantial 
number of TTOs operate at a loss (Cardozo et al., 2011), policy makers should understand that by 
setting UTT for universities as an alternative way to generate revenue is a hard objective to achieve 
and may be detrimental to society. 
Analysis of results and findings from this research is however made with several limitations 
and assumptions. First of all, it only considers universities in the innovation system, whilst the 
innovation system comprises of the public and private sector. Furthermore, in the public sector, 
non-university research institutes are not considered. Modes/mechanisms of UTT in this research 
focuses only on licensing and spinoffs while other modes such as consulting is not discussed. As 
spinoffs only considers new enterprise that depends on the license or assignment of technology 
from the respective university, startups that came out of the university that did non assign or license 
any technology from the university are therefore not considered.  
Important to note that this research mainly gather opinions from UTTO managers. It is 
interesting in the future to also consider the opinion of other actors in UTTO such as the industry 
and university researchers to have a more objective view. In terms of interviews, interviews are 
==PAGE:90==
 
85
conducted only for AAU, AU, and DTU therefore generalizing the findings of this research to the 
whole country of Denmark should be taken with care. 
 In the governmental UTT determinants, The Act of Inventions at Public Research 
Organization or LUP qualifies as a clear and transparent IPR regime. A match between technology 
supply and demand and location is not considered in this research. In university level determinants, 
quality of university research or faculty quality is not considered as such data in Denmark is hard 
to quantify. Scientific discipline focus of a university is represented by the number of research 
personnel in science and technology of a university. In the UTTO level determinants, UTTO 
capability and experience is not considered as assessing capability is subjective and in general the 
UTTO system after the enactment of the Act of Inventions at Public Research Organization is 
considered new for most Danish universities (Bengtsson, 2017). 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
 
86
6. Conclusion, Recommendation, and Future Research 
 
University technology transfer (UTT) has become an important field for both policy 
makers and practitioners as especially universities have gained importance in the “third mission” 
to develop economic systems. How to be successful in UTT remains an elusive pursuit as only a 
few universities achieve great success while others do not. Denmark considers itself to perform 
behind several benchmarked countries in UTT.  
In this research we have measured the UTT performance of Danish universities compared 
to each other, analyze the determinants of the different performance, and take several learnings 
from the UTT practice in Denmark. Universities in Denmark exhibit different UTT performance 
among each other. Through quantitative methods such as averaging the z-score of UTT outputs, 
data envelopment analysis, regression analysis, and qualitative method by interview to UTT 
stakeholders, it is indicated that assignment agreement strategy and an innovative university 
environment that is built through bottom up initiatives, an adequate business development 
capability, and a matrix university technology transfer office (UTTO) structure are the important 
determinants for UTT success. A pattern of “blockbuster” licensing revenue and a large portion of 
licensing, assignment, and option (LAO) agreement that comes out of research collaboration also 
influences UTT success. Culture and funding gap are identified to be the barriers to UTT in 
Denmark. 
Several recommendations for UTT policy and practice are made based on the learnings 
from this research. Licensing is often a result informal UTT. Thus, universities and policy makers 
at the national level have to be aware that they should not focus directly only on patenting, 
marketing, and licensing of an invention as a means to increase the yield of LAO agreements but 
also by first or concurrently focusing on building relations with the industry, one of them through 
research collaboration. 
Culture plays a crucial part for UTT. Involvement of academics in UTT is very important 
and it is evident that issues related to the relatively weak culture and mindset on entrepreneurship 
impede the involvement of academics in UTT, hence also impede the performance of UTT. Culture 
also instigates the bottom up approach required for UTT success. Different approaches must be 
used considering the institutional context in Denmark. The innovation & infrastructure function at 
DTU’s UTTO and the low selective spinoff incubation have been discussed. In general, policy 
makers must find a way to increase the quantity and quality of involvement from Danish academics 
==PAGE:92==
 
87
for UTT whether it is through increasing the awareness of academics to bring technology to 
practice, increase in incentives, educating academics on the aspects of research commercialization, 
and through other mechanisms. 
This research highlights the importance of support policy and structure for the success of 
UTT. Policy makers should be aware that by simply changing IPR ownership regulation and 
establishing UTTOs will not easily result to the increase UTT output especially university spinoffs. 
Instead, they have to ensure universities have the appropriate support especially in having an 
adequate business development capability. While several universities are able to provide enough 
support in example to provide proof of concepts funds, several other universities may not able to 
provide such resources and it is an area where the government should step in. Universities and 
UTTOs have to recognize that access to funds, significant number of UTTO staff with business 
background, science park and incubator are the necessary business development capability to have 
success in generating spinoffs. A UTTO matrix structure helps to identify inventions that have 
commercial potential and help to set the right path towards commercialization at a very early stage. 
It must be said that this research cannot provide all the answers for UTT in Denmark due 
to the vast nature of the topic, but this research rather opens up other interesting possibilities for 
further research. An interesting continuation of this research would be investigating UTT from the 
perspective of academics and industry in Denmark. Barriers of UTT from their perspective, what 
causes the weak culture of entrepreneurship or desire to bring knowledge to practice by academics, 
and UTT mechanisms that are favorable for industry are one of many interesting insights that can 
be gained from academics and industry. It will of course provide a more complete picture of UTT 
in Denmark thus beneficial for further policy making. As UTTO manager interviews in this 
research only cover AAU, AU, and DTU, interviewing UTTO managers in the remaining 
universities in Denmark is also a natural continuation of this research. 
On the influence of The Act on Inventions of Public Research Organizations, extending 
the research of Lissoni et al. (2009) that investigates the ownership of academic patenting into the 
latest year in addition to its trend can help to answer whether the increase of LAO agreement is 
only a shift of ownership or really showing an increase of UTT activity. Meanwhile, the limited 
spinoff growth is indicated to be caused by limited business development capability and culture.  
Several findings in this research can also be developed into an interesting research for the 
future, such as investigating further whether assignment agreement is the favorable UTT 
==PAGE:93==
 
88
mechanism to use for a specific type of technology or situation. Adding UTT determinants that are 
not considered in this research such as the balance between technology demand and supply and 
the influence of location can also add a different perspective. Lastly, cross country comparison on 
a similar university type for example comparing technical universities in different countries can 
perhaps provide better insights towards why universities perform differently in UTT. 
Moving forward, academics should be positioned as the centerpiece to drive UTT and for 
the support systems to be built around them. Current system positioned the university through the 
UTTO as the centerpiece of the UTT system by giving them such a big responsibility to drive 
UTT. Even with such responsibility, UTTOs at Denmark find difficulties to drive UTT forward 
due to the cultural barriers in the academia. Much policy attention has been put to discuss the right 
IPR ownership regime, incentive scheme, presence of science park, incubators, et cetera without 
really touching the substance on whether it will induce the involvement of academics or not. 
  Instead, policy discussions have to be aimed at how to increase the involvement quantity 
and quality of academics in UTT such as motivating and inspiring academics to put knowledge 
into practice, educate academics on the aspects of commercialization, and connecting academics 
to relevant people in the industry. UTTOs along with science park, incubator, seed fund, and other 
organizations will keep on playing an important part in supporting academics conducting UTT 
activities by providing the necessary service, infrastructure, and resource for academics and their 
inventions to develop and eventually to give value to the society. 
 Being the centerpiece of the system does not mean academics always have to be the CEO 
of their spinoff, but rather by playing an active role in UTT according to their own interest and 
capability for example by being the technical advisor for their own spinoff. Placing academics as 
the centerpiece of UTT has to be treated with care as it may deviate universities in the traditional 
role of research and teaching. A fine balance has to be struck between the roles of a university in 
research, teaching, and economic development. As technologies develop to become more 
complicated, involvement of academics will become even more important to transfer technologies 
and knowledge that would benefit society. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
 
89
References 
 
Anderson, T.R., Daim, T.U., Lavoie, F.F., 2007. Measuring the efficiency of university 
technology transfer. Technovation 27, 306–318. 
Audretsch, D. B., Link, A. N., & Scott, J. T., 2002. Public/private technology partnerships: 
Evaluating SBIR-supported research. Research Policy, 31, 145–158.
Arthur, B.W., 1989. Competing technologies, increasing returns, and lock-in by historical events. 
Economic Journal 97, 642– 665.  
AUTM. About Technology Transfer, Available at: https://www.autm.net/autm-info/about-tech-
transfer/about-technology-transfer/ (Accessed: 29 January 2018). 
Baldini, 2006. The Act on inventions at public research institutions: Danish universities 
patenting activity. Scientometrics 69 2, 387–407. 
Bekkers, R., BodasFreitas, I.M., 2008. Analyzing technology transfer channels between 
universities and industry: to what degree do sectors also matter? Research Policy 37 (10), 1837–
1853.  
Berbegal-Mirabent, J., Lafuente, E., & Solé, F. (2013). The pursuit of knowledge transfer 
activities: An efficiency analysis of Spanish universities. Journal of Business Research, 66(10), 
2051–2059.  
Bercovitz, J., Feldman, M.P., 2006. Entrepreneurial universities and technology transfer: a 
conceptual framework for understanding knowledge-based economic development. Journal of 
Technology Transfer 31, 175–188. 
Bercovitz, J., Feldman, M., Feller, I., Burton, R., 2001. Organizational structure as determinants 
of academic patent and licensing behavior: an exploratory study of Duke, John Hopkins, and 
Penn State Universities. Journal of Technology Transfer 26, 21–35.  
Biagini, B., Kuhl, L., Gallagher, K.S., Ortiz, C., 2014. Technology transfer for adaptation. Nat. 
Clim. Change 4 (9), 828–834. 
Breznitz, S., 2011. Improving or impairing? Following technology transfer changes at the 
University of Cambridge. Regional Studies 45, 463–478.  
Borlaug, S.B., Grünfeld, L., Gulbrandsen, M., Rasmussen, E., Rønning, L., Spilling, O.R. and 
Vinogradov, E., 2009. Between entrepreneurship and technology transfer: evaluation of the 
FORNY programme, in Rapport/NIFU STEP; 19/2009, NIFU STEP, Oslo, p.160.  
Bozeman, B., 2000. Technology transfer and public policy: a review of research and theory. 
Research Policy 29, 627–655. 
==PAGE:95==
 
90
Bozeman, B., & Gaughan, M., 2007. Impacts of grants and contracts on academic researchers 
interactions with industry. Research Policy, 36(5), 694–707. 
Bozeman, B., Rimes, H., Youtie, J., 2014. The evolving state of the art in technology transfer 
research: revisiting the Contingent Effectiveness Model, Res. Policy 44 34e49.  
Bradley, S.R., Hayter, C.S., Link, A.N., 2013. Models and Methods of University Technology 
Transfer. Now Publishers Incorporated, Boston. 
Caldera, A., Debande, O., 2010. Performance of Spanish universities in technology transfer: an 
empirical analysis. Research Policy 39 (9), 1160–1173.  
Cardozo, R., Ardichvili, A., Strauss, A., 2011. Effectiveness of university technology transfer: an 
organizational population ecology view of a maturing supplier industry. The Journal of 
Technology Transfer 36 (2), 173–202.
Carlsson, B. and A.C. Fridh, 2002, Technology Transfer in United States Universities: A Survey 
and Statistical Analysis, Journal of Evolutionary Economics 12, 199–232.  
Carraz, R., 2008. Incentives to patent in a leading Japanese university. In: Paper Presented at the 
SPF Project on Role of Universities in National Innovation Systems 3rd Workshop, Beijing (30–
31 October 2008).  
Chapple, W., Lockett, A., Siegel, D., Wright, M., 2005. Assessing the relative performance of 
U.K. university technology transfer offices: para- metric and non-parametric evidence. Research 
Policy 34 (3), 369–384, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2005.01.007. 
 
Clarysse, B., Wright, M., Lockett, A., Mustar, P., & Knockaert, M., 2007. Academic spin-offs, 
formal technology transfer and capital raising. Industrial and Corporate Change, 16(4), 609–640.  
Clarysse, B., Moray, N., 2004. A process study of entrepreneurial team formation: the case of a 
research-based spin-off. Journal of Business Venturing 19 (1), 55.  
Cohen, W.M., Nelson, R.R., Walsh, J.P., 2002. Links and impacts: the influence of public 
research on industrial R&D. Management Science 48, 1–23.  
Colyvas, J., Crow, M., Geligns, A., Mazzoleni, A., Nelson, R., Rosenberg, N., Sampat, B., 2002. 
How do university inventions get into practice? Management Science 48 (1), 154–170.  
Conti, A., and Gaule, P. (2008) The CEMI Survey of University Technology Transfer Offices in 
Europe. In CEMI Report: École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne: College of Management of 
Technology.  
Contractor, F. and Sagafi-Nejad, T., 1981, International Technology Transfer: Major Issues and 
Policy Responses. Journal of International Business Studies, 113-135.
==PAGE:96==
 
91
Cornell University, INSEAD, and WIPO, 2017. The Global Innovation Index 2017: Innovation 
Feeding the World, Ithaca, Fontainebleau, and Geneva  
Crespi, Gustavo, Aldo Geuna, and Bart Verspagen. 2006. University IPRs and knowledge 
transfer. Is the IPR ownership model more efficient? SPRU Electronic Working Paper Series 
Paper 154. 
D’Este, P., Patel, P., 2007. University–industry linkages in the UK: what are the factors 
underlying the variety of interactions with industry? Res. Policy 36 (9), 1295–1313. 
D’Este, P., Perkmann, M., 2011. Why do academics engage with industry? The entrepreneurial 
university and individual motivations. The Journal of Technology Transfer 36, 316–339.  
Danish Agency for Science, Technology and Innovation, 2014a. Research and Innovation 
Indicators 2014. 
Danish Agency for Science, Technology and Innovation, 2014b. Analysis of the Danish 
Research and Innovation System. 
Danish Agency for Science, Technology and Innovation, 2008. Public Research 
Commercialization Survey - Denmark 2008. 
Danish Council for Research Policy, 2014. International Perspectives on Framework Conditions 
for Research and Technology Transfer. 
Danish Ministry of Higher Education and Science, 2016. Laws and Regulations. Available 
at: https://ufm.dk/en/legislation/prevailing-laws-and-regulations (Accessed: 25 April 2018). 
 
Danish Ministry of Higher Education and Science, 2017. Viden til vækst 2016 - Offentlig-privat 
samspil om forskning. Available at: https://ufm.dk/publikationer/2017/viden-til-vaekst-offentlig-
privat-samspil-om-forskning-2016 (Accessed: 25 April 2018).  
 
Debackere, K. and Veugelers, R., 2005. The role of academic technology transfer organizations 
in improving industry science links. Research Policy, 34, 321–342.
Degroof, J., 2002. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, Sloan School of Management, MIT. 
Di Gregorio, D., and Shane, S., 2003. Why do some universities generate more start-ups than 
others? Research Policy 32(2): 209–227.  
Danske Universiteter, 2018. Universiteternes Statistiske Beredskab. Available at: 
https://dkuni.dk/tal-og-fakta/beredskab/ (Accessed: 25 April 2018) 
  
Dosi, G, P Llerena and P Sylos-Labini 2006 The relationships between science, technologies and 
their industrial exploitation: an illustration through the myths and realities of the so-called 
‘European Paradox’. Research Policy, 35(10), 1450–1464. 
==PAGE:97==
 
92
European Commission, 2017. European Innovation Scoreboard 2017. 
European Commission, 2009. Expert group on knowledge transfer. Final report 30 Nov 2009.  
Etzkowitz, H., Webster, A., Gebhardt, C., Terra, B.R.C., 2000. The future of the university and 
the university of the future: evolution of ivory tower to entrepreneurial paradigm. Research 
Policy 29, 313–330. 
Fabrizio, K.R., Di Minin, A., 2008. Commercializing the laboratory: faculty patenting and the 
open science environment. Research Policy 37, 914–931. 
Feldman, M., Link, A., & Siegel, D. (2002). The Economics of science and technology: An 
overview of initiatives to foster innovation, entrepreneurship, and economic growth. Boston: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Fini, R., Lacetera, N., Shane, S., 2010. Inside or outside the IP system? Business creation in 
academia. Research Policy 39, 1060–1069. 
Friedman, J, Silberman, J., 2003. University technology transfer: do incentives, management, 
and location matter? Journal of Technology Transfer 28, 17–30.  
Geuna, Aldo. 1999. The Economics of knowledge production: Funding and the structure of 
university research. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.  
Geuna, A., Muscio, A., 2009. The governance of university knowledge transfer: a critical review 
of the literature. Minerva 47, 93–114. 
Geuna, A., Nesta, L.J.J., 2006. University patenting and its effects on academic research: the 
emerging European evidence. Research Policy 35 (6), 790–807. 
Geuna, A., Rossi, F., 2011. Changes to university IPR regulations in Europe and the impact on 
academic patenting. Research Policy 30, 1068–1076.  
Gilsing, V., Bekkers, R., Bodas Freitas, I.M., van der Steen, M., 2011. Differences in technology 
transfer between science-based and development-based industries: transfer mechanisms and 
barriers. Technovation 31, 638–647. 
Goldfarb, B. and Henrekson, M., 2002. ‘Bottom-up versus top-down policies towards the 
commercialization of university intellectual property’, Research Policy, Vol. 32, No. 4, pp.639–
658.  
Grimaldi, R., Kenney, M., Siegel, D., Wright, M., 2011. 30 years after Bayh–Dole:  reassessing 
academic entrepreneurship. Research Policy 40 (8), 1045–1057.  
Grimpe, C., Fier, H., 2010. Informal university technology transfer: a comparison between the 
United States and Germany. The Journal of Technology Transfer 35, 637–650. 
 
==PAGE:98==
 
93
Hausman, J., Hall, B., Griliches, Z., 1984. Economic models for count data with an application 
to the patents–R&D relationship. Econometrica 52, 909–938.  
Hellman, T., 2007. Bridging the science to market gap: the role of patents. Journal of Economic 
Behavior and Organization 63, 624–647. 
Henderson, R., Jaffe, A. and Trajtenberg, M., 1998. Universities as a source of commercial 
technology: a detailed analysis of university patenting, 1965–1988. Review of 
Economics and Statistics 80: 119–127. 
 
Henrekson, M., Jakobsson, U., 2001. Where Schumpeter was nearly right—the Swedish model 
and capitalism, socialism and democracy. Journal of Evolutionary Economics 11, 331–358.  
Innovationsfonden, 2018. Innovationsfonden Investment Programs. Available 
at: https://innovationsfonden.dk/en (Accessed: 20 May 2018). 
Iversen, E.J., Gulbrandsen, M., Klitkou, A., 2007. A baseline for the impact of academic 
patenting legislation in Norway. Scientometrics, 70(2): 393–414.  
Jefferson, D.J., Maida, M., Farkas, A., Alandete-Saez, M., Bennet, A.B., 2016. Technology 
transfer in the Americas: common and divergent practices among major research universities and 
public sector institution. Journal of technology transfer, 42, 1307-1333. 
 
Jensen, R., Thursby, M., 2001. Proofs and prototypes for sale: the licensing of university 
inventions. American Economic Review 91, 240–259. 
 
Kenney, M., Patton, D., 2009. Reconsidering the Bayh–Dole Act and the current university 
invention ownership model. Research Policy 38, 1407–1422. 
 
Kilger and Bartenbach, 2002. New Rules for German Professors. Science 298/5596, 1173 – 
1175. 
Kochenkova, A., Grimaldi, R., & Munari, F., 2016. Public policy measures in support of 
knowledge transfer activities: a review of academic literature. The Journal of Technology 
Transfer, 41(3), 407–429.  
Lach, S., Schankerman, M., 2004. Royalty sharing and technology licensing in universities. 
Journal of the European Economic Association 2 (2–3), 252– 264. 
 
Lach, S., Schankerman, M., 2008. Incentives and invention in universities. RAND Journal of 
Economics 39, 403–433.  
Lam, A., 2011. What motivates academic scientists to engage in research commercialization: 
‘Gold’, ‘ribbon or ‘puzzle’? Research Policy, 40(10), 1354–1368.  
Lawson, C., and Sterzi, V., 2014. The Role of Early-Career Factors in the Formation of Serial 
==PAGE:99==
 
94
Academic Inventors, Science and Public Policy, 41: 464–79.  
 
Lee, J. and Win, H.N., 2004. Technology transfer between university research centers and 
industry in Singapore. Technovation, 24(5), 433-442. 
 
Levin, R.C., Klevorick, A., Nelson, R.R., Winter, S., 1987. Appropriating the Returns from 
Industrial Research and Development, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 783–820.  
Lindholm Dahlstrand, Å., 2008. University knowledge transfer and the role of aca- demic spin-
offs. In: Potter, J. (Ed.), Entrepreneurship and Higher Education. OECD Publication, Paris, 
France, pp. 235–254.  
Link, A.N., Siegel, D.S., Bozeman, B., 2007. An empirical analysis of the propensity of 
academics to engage in informal university technology transfer. Industrial and Corporate Change 
16, 641–655. 
Link, A.N., Siegel, D.S., 2005. Generating science-based growth: an econometric analysis of the 
impact of organizational incentives on university–industry technology transfer. The European 
Journal of Finance 11 (3), 169–181. 
Link, A., Scott, J., Siegel, D., 2003. The economics of intellectual property at universities. 
International Journal of Industrial Organization 21 (9), 1217–1225.  
Lissoni, F., Llerena, P., McKelvey, M., & Sanditov, B., 2008. Academic patenting in Europe: 
New evidence from the KEINS database. Research Evaluation, 17(2), 87–102. 
Lissoni, F., Lotz, P., Schovsbo, J., Treccani, A., 2009. Academic patenting and the professor's 
privilege: evidence on Denmark from the KEINS database. Science and Public Policy, 36 (8): 
595-607.  
Litan, R.E., Mitchell, L., Reedy, E.J., 2007. The university as innovator: bumps in the road. 
Issues in Science and Technology (Summer), 57–66. 
Lockett, A., Wright, M., 2005. Resources, capabilities, risk capital and the creation of university 
spin-off companies. Research Policy 34 (7), 1043–1057. 
Lockett, A., Vohora, A., Wright, M., 2003. Incubators without walls. International Journal of 
Entrepreneurship and Innovation, 245–256 (November). 
Lowe, R., 2002. Invention, innovation and entrepreneurship: the commercialization of university 
research by inventor-founded firms,’ PhD dissertation, University of California at Berkeley. 
Macho-Stadler, I., Perez-Castrillo, D., Veugelers, R., 2004. Licensing of university innovations: 
the case of a technology transfer office, mimeo. 
Mansfield, E., 1975. International technology transfer: Forms, resource requirements and 
==PAGE:100==
 
95
policies. American Economic Review, May, pp. 372-376. 
Mansfield, E., 1995. Academic research underlying industrial innovations: sources, 
characteristics, and financing. Review of Economics and Statistics, 77(1), 55–65.  
Markman, G.D., Phan, P.H., Balkin, D.B., Gianiodis, P.T., 2005. Entrepreneurship and 
university-based technology transfer. Journal of Business Venturing 20, 241–263. 
Markham, S.K., Kingon, A.I., Lewis, R.J. and Zapata III, M., 2002. The university's role in 
creating radically new products, International Journal of Technology Transfer and 
Commercialisation, Vol. 1, No. 1/2, pp.163–172.  
Meyer, M., 2003. Academic entrepreneurs or entrepreneurial academics? Research- based 
ventures and public support mechanisms. R&D Management 33, 107–115.  
Mowery, D.C., Nelson, R.R., Sampat, B.N., Ziedonis, A.A., 2001. The growth of patenting and 
licensing by the U.S. universities: an assessment of the effects of the Bayh-Dole act of 1980. 
Research Policy 30, 99–119. 
Mowery, D.C., Nelson, R.R, Sampat, B.N., Ziedonis, A.A., 2004. Ivory Tower and Indus- trial 
Innovation: University-Industry Technology before and after the Bayh-Dole Act in the United 
States. Stanford University Press, Stanford. 
Mowery and Sampat, 2001. Patenting and Licensing University Inventions: Lessons from the 
History of the Research Corporations. Industrial and Corporate Change 10/2:317-355.  
Mowery, D.C., Sampat, B.N., 2005. The Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 and university–industry 
technology transfer: a model for other OECD governments? Journal of Technology Transfer 30 
(1/2), 115– 127.  
Murray, F., Stern, S., 2007. Do formal intellectual property rights hinder the free flow of 
scientific knowledge? An empirical test of the anti-commons hypothesis. Journal of Economic 
Behavior and Organization 63, 648–687. 
Murray, F., 2002. Innovation as overlapping scientific and technological trajectories: exploring 
tissue engineering. Research Policy, 31. 
Nelsen, L., 2007. Ten things heads of universities should know about setting up a technology 
transfer office. In A. Krattiger, et al. (Eds.), Intellectual property management in health and 
agricultural innovation: A handbook of best practices. Oxford and Davis, CA: MIHR and Davis, 
PIPRA.  
Nelson, R.R., 2001. Observations on the post-Bayh-Dole rise of patenting at American 
universities. Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(1–2), 13.  
==PAGE:101==
 
96
O’Shea, R.P., Allen, T.J., Morse, K.P., O’Gorman, C., Roche, F., 2007. Delineating the anatomy 
of an entrepreneurial university: the Massachusetts Institute of Technology experience. R&D 
Management 37 (1), 1–16.  
O’Shea, R.P., Allen, T.J., Chevalier, A., Roche, F., 2005. Entrepreneurial orientation, technology 
transfer and spinoff performance of U.S. universities. Research Policy 34 (7), 994–1009. 
OECD, 2003. Turning Science into Business. Patenting and Licensing at Public Research 
Organizations. Paris: OECD.  
Parker, D.D. and D. Zilberman, 1993, ‘University Technology Transfers: Impacts on Local and 
U.S. Economies’, Contemporary Policy Issues 11 (2), 87–99. 
Pavitt, K., 1998. The social shaping of the national science base. Research Policy 27 (8), 793–
806.  
Perkmann, M., Tartari, V., McKelvey, M., Autio, E., Broström, A., D’Este, P., Fini, R., Geuna, 
A., Grimaldi, R., Hughes, A., Krabel, S., Kitson, M., Llerena, P., Lissoni, F., Salter, A., Sobrero, 
M., 2013. Academic engagement and commercialisation: A review of the literature on 
university–industry relations. Research Policy 42, 423-442.  
Perkmann, M., Walsh, K., 2007. University–industry relationships and open innova- tion: 
towards a research agenda. International Journal of Management Reviews 9, 259–280. 
Phan, P., Siegel, D.S., 2006. The effectiveness of university technology transfer: lessons learned, 
managerial and policy implications, and the road forward. Foundations and Trends in 
Entrepreneurship 2 (2), 77–144. 
Polt, W., Gassler, H., Schibany, A., Rammer, C., Valentinelli, N., Schartinger, D., 2001. 
Benchmarking industry-science relations—the role of frame- work conditions. European 
Commission/Federal Ministry of Labour, Austria, Vienna/Mannheim, June. 
Powell, W.W., Owen-Smith, J., Colyvas, J., 2007. Innovation and emulation: lessons from 
American universities in selling private rights to public knowledge. Minerva 45 (2), 121–142.  
Powers, J.B., 2003. Commercializing academic research: resource effects on performance of 
university technology transfer. Journal of Higher Education 74 (1), 26–50.  
Powers, J., McDougall, P., 2005. University start-up formation and technology licensing with 
firms that go public: a resource based view of academic entrepreneurship. Journal of Business 
Venturing 20 (3), 291–311.  
Radosevic, S., 1999, International Technology Transfer and Catch-up in Economic 
Development, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. 
Rasmussen, E., & Rice, M. P., 2012. A framework for government support mechanisms aimed at 
enhancing university technology transfer: The Norwegian case. International Journal of 
==PAGE:102==
 
97
Technology Transfer and Commercialisation. 
Rasmussen, E., 2008. Government instruments to support the commercialization of university 
research: lessons from Canada, Technovation, August, Vol. 28, pp.506–517.  
Rasmussen, E., Moen, Ø., Gulbrandsen, M., 2006. Initiatives to promote commercialization of 
university knowledge. Technovation 26 (4), 518–533.  
Reimers, N. 1998. Stanford’s Office of Technology Licensing and the Cohen/Boyer Cloning 
Patents, An Oral History Conducted in 1997 by Sally Smith Hughes, Ph.D., Regional Oral 
History Office. The Bancroft Library, Berkeley, CA. Available online at: 
http://ark.cdlib.org/ark:/13030/kt4b69n6sc.  
Roessner, J.D., 2000. Technology transfer. In: Hill, C. (Ed.), Science and Technology Policy in 
the US, A Time of Change. Longman, London. 
Roessner, J.D., Bond, J., Okubo, S., Planting, M., 2013. The economic impact of licensed 
commercialized inventions originating in university research. Research Policy 42 (1), 23–34. 
Rogers, E.M. (2003) Diffusion of Innovations, 5th edn., Free Press, New York. 
Rogers, E.M., Yin, Y., Hoffmann, J., 2000. Assessing the effectiveness of technology transfer 
offices at U.S. research universities. The Journal of the Association of University Technology 
Managers 12, 47–80.  
Rothaermel, F.T., Thursby, M., 2005. Incubator firm failure or graduation? The role of uni- 
versity linkages. Res. Policy 34 (7), 1076–1090.  
Rowe, B.R., Temple, D.S., 2011. Superfilling technology: transferring knowledge to industry 
from the National Institute of Standards and Technology. The Journal of Technology Transfer 36 
(1), 1–13.  
Salmenkaita, J.-P., & Salo, A. (2002). Rationales for government interventions in the 
commercialization of new technologies. Technology Analysis & Strategic Management, 14(2), 
183–200.
Sampat, B.N., Mowery, D.C., Ziedonis, A.A., 2003. Changes in university patent quality after 
the Bayh–Dole act: a re-examination. International Journal of Industrial Organization 21, 1371. 
Sampat, B.N., 2006. Patenting and US academic research in the 20th century: the world before 
and after Bayh Dole. Research Policy 35 (6), 772–789.  
Schoen, A., de la Potterie, B. V. P., & Henkel, J., 2014. Governance typology of universities 
technology transfer processes. Journal of Technology Transfer, 39, 435–453. 
Schumpeter, J.A., 1950. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. Harper, New York.  
Shane, S., 2004. Encouraging university entrepreneurship? The effect of the Bayh-Dole act on 
==PAGE:103==
 
98
university patenting in the United States. Journal of Business Venturing, 19(1), 127–151. 
Slaughter, S., Leslie, L.L., 1997. Academic Capitalism: Politics, Policies, and the 
Entrepreneurial University. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. 
Slaughter, S., Leslie, L., 1997. Academic Capitalism. Johns Hopkins University Press, 
Baltimore.  
Siegel, D.S., Waldman, D., Link, A.N., 2003a. Assessing the impact of organizational practices 
on the productivity of university technology transfer offices: an exploratory research. Research 
Policy 32 (1), 27–48. 
Siegel, D.S., P. Westhead, and M. Wright, 2003b, ‘Science Parks and the Performance of New 
Technology-Based Firms: A Review of Recent U.K. Evidence and an Agenda for Future 
Research,’ Small Business Economics 20, 177– 184.  
Siegel, D., Waldman, D., Atwater, Link, A.N., 2004. Toward a model of the effective transfer of 
scientific knowledge from academicians to practitioners: qualitative evidence from the 
commercialization of university technologies. J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 21, 115–142. 
Siegel, D.S., Veugelers, R., Wright, M., 2007. Technology transfer offices and 
commercialization of university intellectual property: performance and policy implications. 
Oxford Review of Economic Policy 23 (4), 640–660. 
Siepmann, T.J., 2004. The Global Exportation of the U.S. Bayh-Dole Act, University of Dayton 
Law Review 30, 209–244. 
So, A.D., Sampat, B.N., Rai, A.K., Cook-Deegan, R., Reichman, J.H., Weissman, R., 
Kapczynski, A., 2008. Is Bayh-Dole good for developing countries? Lessons from the US 
experience. PLoS Biology 6 (10) http://www.plosbiology. 
org/article/info:doi/10.1371/journal.pbio.0060262. 
Sorensen, J.A.T., Chambers, D.A., 2008. Evaluating academic technology transfer performance 
by how well access to knowledge is facilitated defining an access metric. The Journal of 
Technology Transfer 33 (5), 534–547. 
Statistics Denmark, 2018. Denmark in Figures 2018. 
Stevens, A.J., 2004. The enactment of Bayh–Dole. Journal of Technology Transfer 29 (1), 93–
99.  
Stenvik, A., 2009. University Employee Inventions in Scandinavian and Finnish Law. In: zu 
Waldeck und Pyrmont, W. P., Adelman, M. J., Brauneis, M., et al. (eds.) Patents and 
Technological Progress in a Globalized World, MPI Studies on intellectual Property, 
Competition and Tax Law, Vol. 6, pp. 339–51. Berlin: Springer.  
The Economist, 2005. The Bayh-Dole Act’s 25th birthday (December 20). 
==PAGE:104==
 
99
Thursby, J., Jensen, R., Thursby, M., 2001. Objectives, characteristics and outcomes of 
university licensing: a survey of major US universities. Journal of Technology Transfer 26 (1–2), 
59–72.  
Thursby, J., Kemp, S., 2002. Growth and productive efficiency of university intellectual property 
licensing. Research Policy 31, 109–124. 
Valdivia, W.D., 2011. The stakes in Bayh-Dole: Public values beyond the pace of innovation. 
Minerva 49 (1), 25–46. 
Van Looy, B., Landoni, P., Callaert, J., van Pottelsberghe, B., Sapsalis, E., Debackere, K. (2011). 
Entrepreneurial effectiveness of European universities: An empirical assessment of antecedents 
and trade-offs. Research Policy 40, 553-564.  
Van Norman G.A., Eisenkot, R., 2017. Technology Transfer: From the Research Bench to 
Commercialization: Part 2: The Commercialization Process. J Am Coll Cardiol Basic Trans 
Science 2017;2:197–208. 
Valentin, F., Jensen, R.L., 2007. Effects on academia-industry collaboration of extending 
university property rights. Journal of Technology Transfer 32 (3), 251–276.  
Verspagen, B., 2006. University research, intellectual property rights and European innovation 
systems. Journal of Economic Surveys 20 (4), 607–632. 
Weckowska, D. M. (2015). Learning in university technology transfer offices: Transactions-
focused and relations-fo- cused approaches to commercialization of academic research. 
Technovation, 41, 62–74.  
Wu, Y., Welch, E., & Huang, W., 2015. Commercialization of university inventions: Individual 
and institutional factors affecting licensing of university patents. Technovation, 36–37, 12–25. 
Wright, M., Clarysse, B., Lockett, A., Knockert, M., 2008. Mid-range universities in Europe 
linkages with industry: knowledge types and the role of intermediaries. Research Policy 37 (8), 
1205–1223.
Wright, M., Lockett, A., Clarysse, B., & Binks, M, 2006. University spin-out companies and 
venture capital. Research Policy, 35(4), 481–501.  
Wright, M., Vohora, A., Lockett, A., 2003. Annual UNICO-NUBS Survey on University 
Commercialisation. Nottingham Univer- sity Business School, Nottingham, UK.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:105==
 
100 
Appendix 1. John Hopkins University TTO Position Within University 
 
 
Source: (Bercovitz et al., 2001) 
 
==PAGE:106==
 
101 
Appendix 2. Pennsylvania State University TTO Position Within University 
 
Source: (Bercovitz et al., 2001) 
 
==PAGE:107==
 
102 
Appendix 3. Duke University TTO Position Within University 
 
Source: (Bercovitz et al., 2001) 
 
==PAGE:108==
 
103 
Appendix 4. Relational VS Transactional UTT Approach 
 
Source: (Weckowska 2015) 
Transactions-focused commercialization practice 
Five aspects 
of a TTO's 
role  
Relations focused commercialization practice 
Knowing aspect 
of practice 
Knowing aspect of practice 
  
Doing aspect of practice 
Knowing aspect of practice 
Knowing how to 
recognize 
commercializable 
research outputs  
Waiting to be informed by 
academics; raising awareness 
among academics of support 
for research commercialization  
1. Inducing 
disclosure of 
potentially 
commercializ
able 
inventions  
TTO staff develops close relations with 
academics to keep on top of progress in 
academic research and identify early 
opportunities for commercialization  
Knowing how to identify 
research with the potential 
to yield commercializable 
outputs  
Knowing how to 
assess  
appropriaility of 
potential 
revenues 
Focus on assessing 
patentability; assessment of IP 
ownership; technological 
assessment; desk- based 
market research to speculate 
about potential applications 
and financial returns  
2. Managing 
the 
university's 
Intellectual 
Property  
Focus on assessing the commercial 
viability of inventions; assessment of IP 
ownership; technological assessment; 
assessment of patentability; assessment of 
IP value: early desk-based market 
research to identify the players in the 
relevant industry and market dynamics 
early interactions with companies that 
launched products based on similar 
technologies in order to estimate the 
value that the university's technology can 
add to a product and understand the 
market dynamics  
Knowing how to assess 
appropriability and 
commercial viability of 
academic inventions  
Knowing how to 
help secure 
financial 
resources for IP 
development  
Help with identify funding for 
further development of 
inventions; mentoring 
academics during 
commercialization process, 
helping academics to become 
entrepreneurs  
3. Securing 
resources for 
IP 
development 
and 
exploitation  
Help with identifying funding for further 
development of inventions (e.g. proof-of- 
concept work, seed funding); mentoring 
academics during commercialization 
process, identifying surrogate 
entrepreneurs to run spin-outs;  
Knowing how to help 
secure financial and human 
resources for IP 
development and 
exploitation  
Knowing how to 
identify ‘buyers’ 
for university's 
IP  
Online and off-line distribution 
of marketing materials; 
reliance on contacts of 
academics whenever possible; 
‘first come, first served’ 
approach; prevailing one-way 
communication  
4. Identifying 
licensees 
and/or 
investors  
Online and off-line distribution of 
marketing materials; identification of 
potential licensees through the use of an 
academic's contacts and by means of 
extensive market research; talks with a 
number of potential licensees; prevailing 
two-way communication  
Knowing how to identify 
partners for the academics  
Knowing how to 
make one-off 
transactions with 
commercial 
organizations  
Focus on maximizing financial 
gains from IP exploitation; 
protecting interests of the 
University; retaining IP 
ownership whenever possible  
5. 
Intermediatin
g among 
scientists, 
firms, and 
university 
administrator
s  
Focus on maximizing opportunities for 
research collaborations; licensing as 
‘hooks for research contracts’; securing a 
win-win deal while protecting interests of 
the University; On-going management of 
the relation with a licensee or a 
university-owned spin-out  
Knowing how to build 
partnerships between a 
university and commercial 
organizations  
 
==PAGE:109==
 
104 
Appendix 5. Important Features of the Act of Technology and Innovation and 
the Act of Innovation Fund Denmark 
 
Legislation 
Description 
Act on 
Technology 
and 
Innovation 
(1) Purpose of the act is to promote technological development and innovation exercised 
through approved technological service provider institutes, innovation incubators, and 
innovation networks; (2) Ministry for Higher Education and Science may introduce 
initiatives, including co-financing of development activities, analysis, assessment, et 
cetera; (3) Ministry for Higher Education and Science may approve independent 
institutions or limited companies working for public benefit as approved technological 
service provider institutes; (4) Ministry for Higher Education and Science may approve 
innovation incubators; (5) Ministry for Higher Education and Science may grant co-
financing to innovation networks 
Act on 
Innovation 
Fund 
Denmark 
(1) The Innovation Fund Denmark is a fund for strategic research, advanced technology, 
and innovation shall be established by the Ministry for Higher Education and Science as 
an independent body within the government administration; (2) purpose of Innovation 
Fund Denmark is to provide grants for the development of knowledge and technology, 
including advanced technology, which leads to enhancement of research and innovative 
solutions for the benefit of growth and employment in Denmark; (3) the fund shall provide 
grants for strategic and challenge driven research, technological development and 
innovation which contribute overall in increasing the share of innovative enterprise, the 
share of investments by private sector enterprises in research development and the share 
of highly skilled employees in enterprises; (4) the fund may make grants to public private 
partnerships, decide to make grants as co-funding with other public and private grant 
makers, decide to allocate up to 20 percent of its annual grant through international fora if 
these fora award open-competition grants after specialist assessment, and participate in 
international fora as part of the grants grant making capacity 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:110==
 
105 
Appendix 6. Initiatives to Support UTT in Denmark 
 
Initiative 
Description 
Industrial PhD 
Programme aims at increasing knowledge sharing between universities and private 
firms. For this purpose, the industrial PhD is employed in the firm and enrolled in the 
university at the same time. The Danish Agency for Science, Technology, and 
Innovation subsidies the Industrial PhD's salary with a fixed monthly amount and the 
expenses at the university with a fixed amount over three years. A grant is approximately 
134,000 euro divided between the firm and university. (Danish Agency for Science, 
Technology, and Innovation, 2014). 
Research Voucher 
Programme provide support for research based collaboration between SMEs as and 
knowledge institutions. Purpose of this Research Voucher scheme is to enhance 
innovation in SMEs as well as to make public research more application oriented. 
Financial support is solely for the activities in the knowledge institutions, and could be 
up to a maximum 200,000 euros for projects with duration up to two years. (Danish 
Agency for Science, Technology, and Innovation, 2014). 
Innovation Agents 
The aim of the programme is to create innovation in small and medium sized firms to 
kick-start their innovation and collaboration with knowledge institutions. Innovation 
agents are public funded consultants that help firms identify barriers to innovation by 
performing an "innovation check". The agent also helps companies to take first steps ie. 
by making contact with the right knowledge institution or advisory expert, or to apply to 
a public pool for a grant for such innovation activities. (Danish Agency for Science, 
Technology, and Innovation, 2014). 
Innovation 
Consortia 
Innovation Consortia subsidies and facilitate collaboration between firms, research 
institutions, and non-profit advisory and knowledge dissemination parties. The purpose 
of the programme is that the parties jointly develop knowledge of technologies that 
benefit not only individual firms but entire industries within the Danish community. A 
consortium can apply for financial grants at the Danish Agency for Science, Technology, 
and Innovation. Typically grants amount to approximately 1-2 million euros. (Danish 
Agency for Science, Technology, and Innovation, 2014). 
Innovation 
Incubator 
Objective of the programme is to promote commercialization of new innovative ideas, 
invention and research in particular through creation of new knowledge based startups. 
The innovation incubators provide professional counseling and early stage funding (pre-
seed and seed capital) for entrepreneurs and new innovative enterprises. The innovation 
incubators fund 50 - 60 new knowledge based firms per year, and has a total budget of 
approximately 30 million euros. (Danish Agency for Science, Technology, and 
Innovation, 2014). 
 
 
==PAGE:111==
 
106 
Initiative 
Description 
Innovation Network 
Denmark (The National 
Danish Cluster 
Programme) 
The Innovation Network Denmark Programme supports the establishment of 
network and cluster organizations. An innovation Network is a cluster 
organization with participation of all relevant Danish universities and technology 
institutes within a specific technological area, a business sector or a cross 
disciplinary team. Each network has pools for innovation projects where firms 
and researchers work together to solve concrete challenges. The innovation 
networks also carry out idea generation process and matchmaking activities. 
Overall objective of the innovation network is to facilitate and encourage 
knowledge exchange between SMEs and knowledge institutions. (Danish 
Agency for Science, Technology, and Innovation, 2014). 
Strategic Platforms for 
Innovation and Research 
(SPIR) 
SPIR funds initiatives which seek to strengthen the link between strategic 
research and innovation and thereby promoting efficient knowledge 
dissemination and possibilities for fast application of new knowledge. Typically 
grants amount to approximately 8 - 10 million euros. (Danish Agency for 
Science, Technology, and Innovation, 2014). 
Innovation Voucher 
The programme supports collaborative projects between small or medium sized 
firm and knowledge institutions. The objective is to encourage more SMEs to 
collaborate with universities, research and technology institutes and education 
institutes. The maximum amount of public support is 13,500 euros. (Danish 
Agency for Science, Technology, and Innovation, 2014). 
Open Funds 
Open Funds are earmarked for innovative collaboration projects between firm 
and public knowledge institutions. The objective is to ensure that innovation 
projects that would benefit entire industries did not fall flat because they did not 
fit into the innovation system. Open funds could finance up to 50 percent of a 
project. The programme was terminated in 2012 (Danish Agency for Science, 
Technology, and Innovation, 2014). 
Grand Solutions 
Program wishes to facilitate cross investments in knowledge institutions and 
companies private as well as public. The investment should address tangible 
challenges and innovation needs of society and companies. Range of support 
from DKK 30 million - DKK 100 million (Innovationsfonden, 2018). 
InnoBooster-
Innovationsfonden 
InnoBooster invests in knowledge based innovative projects from small and 
medium sized companies, startups, and scientists. Support can be up to DKK 5 
million (Innovationsfonden, 2018). 
InnoFounder 
InnoFounder is a one-year incubator programme with advising and funding for 
new graduates with an innovative and scalable business idea. The programme 
gives a monthly grant, special grant for development of business idea, co-
working space, mentorship, workshops, and access to communities of investors, 
startups, and corporate professionals (Innovationsfonden, 2018). 
Industrial Researcher 
Programme 
The program invests in industrially focused PhD and Postdoc projects 
(Innovationsfonden, 2018). 
==PAGE:112==
 
107 
Initiative 
Description 
Danish Act of Invention 
and Technology Transfer 
Grant 
A grant of DKK 58 million was set aside during 2000-2003 to help universities 
and other PROs protect and market their inventions. The grant is used to help 
cover the external cost of patenting and marketing (up to 20,000 DKK per 
invention) as well as for helping PROs establish joint TTOs or networks along 
geographic/sectoral lines (ie. in life sciences) (OECD, 2003; Baldini 2006). 
Proof of concept 
allowance 
2006-2012 grant that allows TTOs to apply for smaller proof of concept 
allowances (Bengtsson, 2017; Danish Agency for Science, Technology, and 
Innovation, 2014b). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:113==
 
108 
Appendix 7. UTTO Manager Interview Outline 
 
1. TTO mission, objectives, tasks, and year of formation 
2. Organizational structure 
3. TTO staff capability and experience 
4. Invention disclosure (passive/proactive)? 
5. Evaluation of invention (patentability/marketability) 
6. Approach/strategy for IPR of inventions global/regional; always/conditional) and their 
usage (max research collaboration/max financial gain) 
7. Licensee/investor evaluation (identify buyer/partner/”best home”) 
8. Managing relation with licensee, inventors, and spinoffs (arms-length/on-going contact) 
9. Supporting academic entrepreneurship (active/arms-length negotiation/spinoff program) 
10. Approach for different technology discipline & development and their modes for UTT 
11. Inventor/department involvement in the process and incentive structure 
12. Interaction with other support structures (pre-seed, DTU scion) to foster UTT and 
whether owning the support structure also influential 
13. Thoughts and suggestions on current problem and improvements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:114==
 
109 
Appendix 8. Data Definition 
 
Source: (Danish Agency for Science, Technology and Innovation, 2008; Danske Universiteter, 
2018) 
 
Term 
Definition 
Assignment 
agreement 
Agreement on the transfer of ownership of intellectual property ie. proprietary 
rights to a patent 
UTT cost 
Includes cost incurred for legal fees, patent costs, external consultants and 
specialist IP advice but does not include internal cost for staffing and operation 
of UTTO 
Invention disclosure 
A document from an employee, which informs the institution of an invention 
done in the line of work providing basis for further evaluation of the 
commercial perspectives.  
License agreement 
An agreement where the licensor (ie. a PRO) retains ownership of IP but 
grants rights to the licensee (ie. a private enterprise) in the form of a contract 
that permits the licensee to exploit IP according to the contractual terms and 
conditions.  
Option agreement 
Provisional agreement where the institution grants the potential licensee or 
assignee a period during which it may evaluate the technology and negotiate 
the terms of a license agreement or assignment.  
Spinoff 
New enterprise that was dependent on licensing or assignment of the 
institutions technology for initiation. Also encompasses initiation of 
enterprises where the institutions have left it to the researcher concerned to 
exploit the IPRs to an invention commercially in return for an agreed 
remuneration for the institution  
UTT revenue 
Includes income generated by licensing as well as assignment of IP and 
cashed-in equity. Includes even remuneration from researchers retaining right 
to IP of inventions upon commercial exploitation of this IP. Does not include 
indirect income such as external research funding, sponsorships, commitments 
on future revenues, or the value of non-realized equity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:115==
 
110 
 
Term 
Definition 
Research personnel 
As a rule, VIP should only be attributed to the purposes of education, research, 
research-based government services and knowledge dissemination. The VIP 
category contains the following job categories: Professor with Special Tasks, 
Professor with Special Responsibility, Professor, Research Professor, Research 
Professor with Special Tasks, Guest Professor, Clinical Professor, Associate 
Professor, Associate Professor, Research Assistant (incl. Lector Week), Guest 
Sector, Assistant Professor, Research Assistant, Senior Adviser, Study Sector, 
Academic Assistant, Faculty of Applied Sciences, Research Assistant. , 
foreign lecturer (usually limited), lecturer, researcher, senior researcher, 
project researcher, scientific assistant, clinical assistant, graduate scholarships, 
research scholarships (senior scholarships), PhD fellow, postdoc, clinical 
lecturer, special dentist training full-time employment), psychological 
candidate position, teacher in social theory and methodology (special category 
for social advisory education at AAU), teacher at the diploma and export 
education program. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:116==
 
111 
Appendix 9. Correlation Test 
 
  
Licensing 
Spinoff 
Revenue 
UTT 
Expenditure 
Invention 
Disclosure 
UTTO 
Size 
Research 
Spending 
Science and 
Technology 
Research 
Personnel 
Licensing 
1.00 
0.73 
0.62 
0.53 
0.83 
0.69 
0.56 
0.70 
Spinoff 
0.73 
1.00 
0.93 
0.93 
0.97 
0.93 
0.72 
0.91 
Revenue 
0.62 
0.93 
1.00 
0.98 
0.93 
0.80 
0.68 
0.94 
UTT Expenditure 
0.53 
0.93 
0.98 
1.00 
0.90 
0.84 
0.67 
0.91 
Invention Disclosure 
0.83 
0.97 
0.93 
0.90 
1.00 
0.91 
0.77 
0.96 
UTTO Size 
0.69 
0.93 
0.80 
0.84 
0.91 
1.00 
0.86 
0.89 
Research Spending 
0.56 
0.72 
0.68 
0.67 
0.77 
0.86 
1.00 
0.88 
Science and Technology 
Research Personnel 
0.70 
0.91 
0.94 
0.91 
0.96 
0.89 
0.88 
1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:117==
 
112 
Appendix 10. Goodness of Fit Test Poisson Distribution 
 
#Goodness of Fit Test Number of Licensing 
obs<-c(390,169,0,272,21,233,2,114) 
prob<-c(0.125,0.125,0.125,0.125,0.125,0.125,0.125,0.125) 
#H0: Current model is evenly proportioned/Poission distribution 
#H1: Reject null hypothesis 
chisq.test(obs,p=prob) 
 
Chi-squared test for given probabilities 
data:  obs 
X-squared = 946.38, df = 7, p-value < 2.2e-16 
Conclusion: p-value significant thus reject H0 
 
#Goodness of Fit Test Number of Startup 
obs<-c(21,26,0,51,3,24,0,22) 
prob<-c(0.125,0.125,0.125,0.125,0.125,0.125,0.125,0.125) 
#H0: Current model is evenly proportioned/Poission distribution 
#H1: Reject null hypothesis 
chisq.test(obs,p=prob) 
 
 
Chi-squared test for given probabilities 
data:  obs 
X-squared = 113.52, df = 7, p-value < 2.2e-16 
Conclusion: p-value significant thus reject H0 
 
Note: 
- Goodness of fit is calculated using RStudio software 
 
==PAGE:118==
 
113 
Appendix 11. Data Envelopment Analysis Programming 
 
Sets 
        university   'all types of universities'   / aau, au, dtu, itu, ku, ru, sdu  / 
        output   'all output DMU'     /revenue, license, spinoff/ 
        input   'all input DMU' /research_spending/ ; 
alias (university,u)    ; 
alias (output,o)        ; 
alias (input,i)         ; 
 
 
table 
 
      university_output(u,o) 
 
                                      revenue       license       spinoff 
            aau                       36301925       400            23 
            au                        40217579       203            31 
            dtu                      161042718       334            64 
            itu                        1294500        21             3 
            ku                        66839005       247            24 
            ru                         1451098         2             0 
            sdu                       20319286       124            25 
      ; 
 
table 
 
      university_input(u,i) 
 
                       research_spending 
            aau         10421672830 
            au          29018990444 
            dtu         27619272956 
            itu           804705601 
            ku          40578388188 
            ru           3351384103 
            sdu         11261844673 
 
         ; 
 
 
Variables 
         z            'objective value' 
         e           'efficiency' 
        a(u) 'fractional value per university' 
; 
==PAGE:119==
 
114 
 
 
 
Equations 
        obj        'define objective function' 
        constraint_output 'output constraint' 
        constraint_input 'input constraint' 
        constraint_fractional 'fractional constraint' 
        constraint_positive 'positive constraint' 
      ; 
 
 
obj .. z  =e= e ; 
constraint_output(o)..  sum(u,university_output(u,o)*a(u)) =g= e*university_output("aau*",o) ; 
constraint_input(i)..   sum(u,university_input(u,i)*a(u)) =l= university_input("aau*",i)  ; 
constraint_fractional.. sum(u,a(u)) =e= 1  ; 
constraint_positive(u).. a(u) =g= 0 ; 
 
 
 
Model DEA /all/ ; 
 
Solve DEA using lp maximizing z ; 
 
Note 
- DEA is calculated using General Algebraic Modelling System (GAMS) software 
- To calculate efficiency of each university, change university initial at * 
 
==PAGE:120==
 
115 
Appendix 12. Linear Regression Programming 
 
#Define Directory 
wd="/Users/ekkytammarar/Documents/Ekky/DTU/Thesis/Technology Transfer/Analytics/csv" 
setwd(wd) 
 
#General Check 
trial=read.csv("multiplelm2005simplified.csv") 
head(trial) 
dim(trial) 
summary(trial) 
 
#call negative binomial package 
library(MASS) 
 
#Regression Model for Number of Licensing Agreement 
single= glm.nb (licensing ~ tt.expenditure + tto.size + invention.disclosure + 
science.and.technology.personnel + research.spending ,data=trial) 
summary(single) 
 
#Regression Result for Number of Licensing Agreement 
Deviance Residuals:  
      1        2        3        4        5        6        7        8   
-0.5848  -1.5219  -1.6553   0.1439  -0.2513   0.4092  -0.3369   1.7645   
 
Coefficients: 
                                   Estimate Std. Error z value Pr(>|z|)     
(Intercept)                       2.119e+00  3.364e-01   6.298 3.01e-10 *** 
tt.expenditure                   -1.090e-07  2.521e-08  -4.324 1.53e-05 *** 
tto.size                          1.350e+00  3.451e-01   3.912 9.16e-05 *** 
invention.disclosure             -1.329e-02  5.650e-03  -2.351 0.018707 *   
science.and.technology.personnel  2.116e-02  6.412e-03   3.299 0.000969 *** 
==PAGE:121==
 
116 
research.spending                -6.065e-10  1.742e-10  -3.482 0.000498 *** 
--- 
Signif. codes:  0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1 
 
(Dispersion parameter for Negative Binomial(7.4299) family taken to be 1) 
 
    Null deviance: 110.4775  on 7  degrees of freedom 
Residual deviance:   8.8764  on 2  degrees of freedom 
AIC: 85.218 
 
Number of Fisher Scoring iterations: 1 
 
 
              Theta:  7.43  
          Std. Err.:  4.50  
Warning while fitting theta: alternation limit reached  
 
 2 x log-likelihood:  -71.218 
 
 
#Regression Model for Number of Spinoff 
single= glm.nb (spinoff ~ tt.expenditure + tto.size + invention.disclosure + 
science.and.technology.personnel + research.spending ,data=trial) 
summary(single) 
 
#Regression Result for Number of Spinoff 
Deviance Residuals:  
      1        2        3        4        5        6        7        8   
-0.5603  -1.3498  -1.2120   0.1343  -0.2492   0.4071  -1.3854   1.8512   
 
 
==PAGE:122==
 
117 
Coefficients: 
                                   Estimate Std. Error z value Pr(>|z|)   
(Intercept)                       6.268e-01  4.864e-01   1.289   0.1975   
tt.expenditure                   -5.616e-08  3.516e-08  -1.597   0.1102   
tto.size                          8.375e-01  4.808e-01   1.742   0.0815 . 
invention.disclosure             -7.526e-03  8.016e-03  -0.939   0.3478   
science.and.technology.personnel  1.136e-02  9.109e-03   1.247   0.2122   
research.spending                -3.352e-10  2.472e-10  -1.356   0.1750   
--- 
Signif. codes:  0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1 
 
(Dispersion parameter for Negative Binomial(8.04) family taken to be 1) 
 
    Null deviance: 57.3324  on 7  degrees of freedom 
Residual deviance:  9.1967  on 2  degrees of freedom 
AIC: 59.738 
 
Number of Fisher Scoring iterations: 1 
 
 
              Theta:  8.04  
          Std. Err.:  6.85  
Warning while fitting theta: alternation limit reached  
 
 2 x log-likelihood:  -45.738 
 
#Regression Model for UTT Revenue 
single= lm (revenue ~ tt.expenditure + tto.size + invention.disclosure + 
science.and.technology.personnel + research.spending ,data=trial) 
summary(single) 
 
==PAGE:123==
 
118 
# Regression Result for UTT Revenue 
Residuals: 
       1        2        3        4        5        6        7        8  
-1965059 -4529519  -538326   554423  -396983  1557903 -2026115  7343675  
 
Coefficients: 
                                   Estimate Std. Error t value Pr(>|t|) 
(Intercept)                      -5.436e+05  4.531e+06  -0.120    0.915 
tt.expenditure                    6.698e-01  2.809e-01   2.385    0.140 
tto.size                         -5.621e+06  3.849e+06  -1.460    0.282 
invention.disclosure              8.368e+04  6.891e+04   1.214    0.349 
science.and.technology.personnel -1.734e+04  7.402e+04  -0.234    0.837 
research.spending                 1.029e-03  1.982e-03   0.519    0.655 
 
Residual standard error: 6542000 on 2 degrees of freedom 
Multiple R-squared:  0.9957, Adjusted R-squared:  0.9851  
F-statistic: 93.27 on 5 and 2 DF,  p-value: 0.01064 
 
Note: 
- Regression analysis is calculated using RStudio software 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:124==
 
119 
Appendix 13. Academic Patenting in Denmark 1994-2003 
 
Source: (Lissoni et al., 2009) 
 
 
==PAGE:125==
 
120 
Appendix 14. Regression Diagnostics 
 
 
LAO Agreement Output 
 
• LAO agreement vs independent variable plot chart shows in general that there is a linear 
relation between independent variables and LAO agreement with a few outliers observed. 
Random pattern shown in the residual vs fitted chart shows further that the linearity 
assumption of the model is fulfilled. 
• As LAO agreement is a count data, Poisson distribution apply 
• Except for a few outliers, residuals have a constant variability in region of 0.5. 
• Assumptions are fulfilled to use multiple linear regression. 
 
LAO Agreement VS Independent Variable Plot Chart & Residual VS Fitted Chart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:126==
 
121 
Histogram & QQ Plot 
 
 
Spinoff Output 
 
• Spinoff vs independent variable plot chart shows in general that there is a linear relation 
between independent variables and spinoffs with a few outliers observed. Random pattern 
shown in the residual vs fitted chart shows further that the linearity assumption of the 
model is fulfilled. 
• As spinoff is a count data, Poisson distribution apply. 
• Except for a few outliers, residuals have a constant variability in region of 0.5. 
• Assumptions are fulfilled to use multiple linear regression. 
 
Spinoff VS Independent Variable Plot Chart & Residual VS Fitted Chart 
 
==PAGE:127==
 
122 
 
 
Histogram & QQ Plot 
 
UTT Revenue Output 
 
• UTT revenue vs independent variable plot chart shows in general that there is a linear 
relation between UTT revenue and independent variables. Random pattern shown in the 
residual vs fitted chart shows further that the linearity assumption of the model is 
fulfilled. 
• The residual from the model is skewed as seen from the histogram and the QQ plot. 
• Except for a few outliers, residuals have a constant variability in region of 2e+06 
• Although residual from the model is skewed, a multiple linear regression is still used on 
the basis that the same approach is used by previous researches. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:128==
 
123 
UTT Revenue VS Independent Variable Plot Chart & Residual VS Fitted Chart 
  
 
 
Histogram & QQ Plot 
 
