==PAGE:1==
Car Sharing Demand in Denmark
Valerie Maria Hoening
Master’s Thesis written in the framework of the
DTU-TUM 1:1 M.Sc. Program in Management
Supervisors (DTU):
Anders Fjendbo Jensen
Stefan Eriksen Mabit
DTU Transport
Transportmodelling
Supervisor (TUM):
Szymon Albinski
TUM School of Management
Logistics and Supply Chain Management
Candidate:
Valerie Maria Hoening
DTU: s172330
TUM: 03636880
Technical University of Denmark
June 29, 2018
==PAGE:2==
i
Abstract
The objective of this thesis was to analyse the Car Sharing (CS) market in Denmark, focusing
on a university environment in the capital region around Copenhagen (CPH). Therefore, two
discrete choice models were estimated on two different data sets. On the one hand, revealed
preference (RP) data was analysed with a Binary Logit (BL) model to determine factors that
inﬂuence an individual to become a CS member. On the other hand, stated preference (SP)
data was gathered by conducting a mode choice survey with 179 respondents, mainly from the
CPH area. A multinomial logit (MNL) model was estimated in order to determine the market
shares for car, public transport, bike and CS among respondents. Adding a panel effect to the
MNL model enabled closer investigation of substitution patterns between modes. Simulations
of changes in the CS transport system give a detailed insight into potential market development.
Results show that CS users in Denmark are mostly male, have a high income, long education
and work in an urban area, which coincides with literature. At the moment only 0.36 % of the
Danish population are members of a CS scheme. Among the survey sample, which includes
a high amount of young people (below 35) the market share for CS is 11.44 %, suggesting an
increase in market share in the future.
==PAGE:3==
ii
Preface
This Master’s thesis, "Car Sharing Demand in Denmark", has been undertaken from February
1st to July 1st, 2018 at DTU Transport at the Technical University of Denmark in coopera-
tion with the TUM School of Management at the Technical University of Munich. The work
constitutes 30 ECTS.
I would like to thank my DTU supervisors, Anders Fjendbo Jensen and Stefan Eriksen Mabit
for their help, guidance and feedback throughout the whole project. I genuinely enjoyed our
discussions and learned a lot from both of you.
Special thanks to Andrea Vanesa Papu Carrone for jointly developing the survey and particularly
for her work computing the experimental design. I hope my work will help you for your further
research.
Finally, I would also like to thank my TUM supervisor, Szymon Albinski, for his critical in-
sights and feedback.
Valerie Maria Hoening
DTU: s172330
TUM: 03636880
==PAGE:4==
Table of Contents
iii
Table of Contents
List of Abbreviations
iv
List of Figures
vi
List of Tables
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background on Car Sharing
3
2.1
Car Sharing in Europe
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
The future of Car Sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Literature Review
6
3.1
Previous research on Car Sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Stated Preference Methods and Discrete Choice Models in the Transport Sector
12
4
Theory
14
4.1
Stated Choice Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Discrete Choice Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Mode Choice Experiment
23
5.1
Survey Structure and Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
Description of Data Sets
30
6.1
Transportvaneundersøgelsen (TU) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.2
Stated Preference Data (SP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7
Model Estimation and Results
38
7.1
Binary Logit Model of CS membership for TU data set . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.2
Multinomial Logit Model of mode choice for SP data set . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8
Discussion
52
9
Conclusion
60
Bibliography
62
Appendix
I
==PAGE:5==
List of Abbreviations
iv
List of Abbreviations
AIC
Akaike information criterion
ASC
alternative speciﬁc constant
AVC
asymptotic variance covariance
BCG
The Boston Consulting Group
BCS
Bundesverband CarSharing e.V.
BIC
Bayesian information criterion
BL
Binary Logit
CPH
Copenhagen
CS
Car Sharing
DKK
Danish Kroner
FF
free-ﬂoating
IIA
independence from irrelevant alternatives
iid
independently and identically distributed
MLE
maximum likelihood estimation
MMNL
mixed multinomial logit
MNL
multinomial logit
MSLE
maximum simulated likelihood estimation
PT
public transport
RP
revealed preference
RUM
random utility maximisation
SC
stated choice
==PAGE:6==
List of Abbreviations
v
SP
stated preference
TU
Transportvaneundersøgelsen
US
United States of America
VOT
value of time
WTP
willingness to pay
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
vi
List of Figures
6.1 Distribution of age in TU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.2 Distribution of age and education levels among survey respondents
. . . . . . . . .
35
6.3 Mode shares respective to gender and income groups among survey respondents
. .
36
==PAGE:8==
List of Tables
vii
List of Tables
4.1
Examples of full factorial and orthogonal design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.1
Attributes and levels for each alternative for commuting scenario . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.1
Descriptive statistics of socio-demographic proﬁles in TU data . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.2
Descriptive statistics of variables describing proximity to CS in TU data . . . . . .
33
6.3
Correlation table for selected TU variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.4
Descriptive statistics of socio-demographic proﬁles of survey respondents . . . . .
34
6.5
Observed market shares from survey data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.6
Observed market shares from survey data respective to car availability . . . . . . .
36
6.7
Survey respondents choosing the same mode over all choice situations . . . . . . .
37
6.8
Correlation table for time and cost variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.1
Model 1 for TU data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2
AIC and BIC for evaluating functional form of income
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.3
Model 2 for TU data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.4
Model 3 for TU data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.5
AIC and BIC for comparing BL model 2 and 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.6
Model 1 for SP data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.7
VOT for model 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.8
Model 2 for SP data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.9
VOT for model 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.10 Model 3 for SP data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.11 VOT for model 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.12 Observed and simulated market shares on extended survey data . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.13 Model 4 for SP data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.1
Elasticities of cost from MNL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.2
Elasticities of time from MNL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8.3
Elasticities of cost from MMNL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8.4
Elasticities of time from MMNL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
8.5
Model 5 for SC data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.6
Simulation of CS Membership based on changes in CS availability . . . . . . . . .
58
8.7
Simulation of mode shares based on a 20% CS cost reduction . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
==PAGE:9==
1 Introduction
1
1 Introduction
Car Sharing is a newly emerging urban transport mode that is increasingly gaining attention not
only by researchers but a large number of other stakeholders, including policy makers on local,
national and international levels, as well as car manufacturers and other companies associated
with mobility solutions.
Urbanization, climate change, the growing sharing economy: These are only a few reasons why
innovative mobility solutions such as Car Sharing have been strongly promoted in recent years.
According to the United Nations (2014), by 2050 more than 70 % of the world’s population
are expected to live in cities. This will lead to more and more cars in cities, leading to parking
space problems, congestion and pollution. While electric cars have been becoming more and
more attractive, the number of sold vehicles with regular combustion engines is still growing
(McKinsey, 2017), highly contributing to CO2 emissions and ultimately climate change (Euro-
pean Commission, 2015). Nevertheless, a shift to electric cars does not tackle the problem of
increasing congestion in cities. The only way to reduce this is by decreasing the total number of
cars. A possible solution is facilitated by the growing focus on the concept of sharing economy
(PWC, 2016). At the same time, the "millenial" generation exhibits new transport preferences
and has a high environmental awareness (Davis et al., 2012). Thus, transport demand for alter-
native transport solutions, such as Car Sharing, is expected to rise.
Car Sharing (from hereon referred to as CS) is said to address both environmental challenges
as well as decreasing congestion in cities. The basic concept is the shared use of one or more
vehicles between multiple people. The term does not comprise private sharing among friends
or neighbours, but rather a commercial form. The general understanding is that a company
provides the vehicles within a predeﬁned operating area, where registered users can rent the
vehicles on a short-term basis. It gives the users the beneﬁts of private vehicle ownership
without the costs, risks and responsibilities, such as parking, insurance and taxes, but rather
provides high ﬂexibility (Shaheen et al., 1998). Common assumptions about CS are that it
is expected to lead to a decrease in car ownership (Shaheen et al., 1998) and thus congestion
(Millard-Ball et al., 2005) as well as environmental impact (Martin and Shaheen, 2011).
The goal of this thesis is to assess the demand for CS in Denmark. As in many European cities,
Denmark’s capital Copenhagen (CPH) is expecting an increase of vehicles in the next years
(Tetraplan A/S, 2013). CS demand has been studied by several researchers in many different
countries using random utility maximisation (RUM) theory. As this transport alternative has
only been introduced on a large scale few ago, the demand is still small and growing. While
some distinct characteristics of CS users have been shown in different studies, the demand still
==PAGE:10==
1 Introduction
2
seems to vary highly between different countries and regions. Thus, the goal of this thesis is to
determine the demand for CS in Denmark, more speciﬁcally in the capital region around CPH,
focusing on a university environment, leading to the following ﬁrst research question:
1: How big is the market share of Car Sharing in Denmark?
Therefore, data from the National Transport Survey (Transportvaneundersøgelsen (TU)) will be
analysed for CS membership as well as the mode share of CS in the last years. Additionally, a
stated choice (SC) experiment will be conducted, focusing on a sample from a university envi-
ronment. Both data from TU as well as the stated preference (SP) data from the SC survey will
be analysed descriptively and based on RUM theory to answer the following research question:
2: What characteristics describe a Car Sharing user in Denmark?
Advanced models on the survey data set will be estimated to determine substitution patterns
among transport alternatives in CPH, answering the research question:
3: Which transport modes does Car Sharing alternative draw from?
Finally, the ﬁndings from analysing both data sets and the estimated models will be synthesised
to draw conclusions about how the future of CS could be like in Denmark:
4: How can the Car Sharing market develop in Denmark?
By investigating these research questions, this thesis aims at analysing the CS market in Den-
mark in order to enable future research and provide further insights for various stakeholders.
The developed survey could be used by researchers for conducting a large scale SC experiment
for all of Denmark. The estimated discrete choice models could be used for simulations about
the CS market development. Additionally, the results from the estimated models might give
indications to policy-makers and CS providers how to improve their offer of CS in Denmark in
order to gain more customers.
The remainder of this thesis is organised as follows: Firstly, the development and current status
of CS in Europe will be brieﬂy elaborated. The following chapter will give an overview of
relevant literature and previous research on CS in general and with regard to the methods used
in this thesis. Afterwards, the theory this thesis is based on will be explained in chapter 4. It
is divided in two parts: Firstly, the design of an SC survey will be outlined. Secondly, the
modelling methodology will be explained, including an introduction to RUM and the basic
principles of logit models, which are used for the estimation as well as interpretation measures.
Chapter 5 will focus on the survey conducted for this thesis, including the experimental design
and assumptions taken. Then, the two underlying data sets will be presented and descriptive
statistics will be provided. In chapter 7 results from the model estimations will be presented,
before the implications will be critically discussed. This thesis will be concluded with a short
summary of ﬁndings and results.
==PAGE:11==
2 Background on Car Sharing
3
2 Background on Car Sharing
CS is a new urban transport alternative, which is gaining attention all over the world. It entails
a short-term rental of vehicles on an as-needed basis. This allows great ﬂexibility for the user.
Fees are charged only by the minute and covers not only fuel consumption, but also insurance,
taxes and maintenance, etc.
The main types of CS are station-based CS and free-ﬂoating CS. The former mostly encom-
passes round trips and, as the name suggests, parking opportunities are limited to ﬁxed stations.
The latter is also referred to as point-to-point or one-way CS. Here, the vehicles can be picked
up and returned anywhere within a pre-deﬁned operating zone. Station-based CS is also often
named the "traditional" way of CS since the other type has only emerged in the last decade
(Jorge and Correia, 2013; Kortum, 2012). A third type that should be mentioned is peer-to-peer
CS, which comprises private CS among neighbours or friends. The main difference is that this
type is not commercial and is therefore often not classiﬁed as CS in the narrower sense. (Kopp
et al., 2013)
2.1 Car Sharing in Europe
Despite being perceived as fairly new, CS already emerged in the ﬁrst half of the 20th century
and has its roots in Central Europe. In 1948, the Swiss initiative "Sefage" marks the emer-
gence of an idea of sharing privately owned vehicles. Over the 70’s and 80’s, similar concepts
appeared in other European countries, such as France, the Netherlands and Germany. Accord-
ing to Olsen and Retting (2000), CS has existed in Denmark since 1997. Today, various CS
providers are active all over the world with different ﬂeet sizes and operating models. (Shaheen
et al., 1998)
The total CS market in Europe or even the whole world is hard to pin-point. The most obvious
reason is that a membership at one CS provider does not necessarily preclude being a member at
another provider as well. While The Boston Consulting Group (BCG) released a study in 2015,
indicating 2.1 million users in Europe, the German organisation Bundesverband CarSharing e.V.
(BCS) estimates the number of users only in Germany to be 2 million this year (BCG, 2016;
BCS, 2018). This coincides with a study by (Deloitte, 2017), which estimates that current
membership numbers in Europe are by now rather a high seven-digit number. They ﬁnd the
European CS market to make up for 50 % of the world market.
In literature, there is an ongoing discussion about how to accurately calculate the CS market.
Some researchers rely on the above mentioned studies, which consider registered members of
==PAGE:12==
2.2 The future of Car Sharing
4
a CS scheme (Firnkorn and Müller, 2011). Others argue that this is not a suitable number
for the actual market size (Schmöller et al., 2015). Since membership is often free of charge,
many people might sign up for a CS scheme, but never make use of it. This would lead to
an overestimation of the market size. Still, the total membership number can be seen as an
indicator for the number of actual users. Another possibility is to identify socio-demographic
characteristics of current CS users (e.g. Haustein and Jensen, 2017) and use these to forecast a
number of potential CS users according to these speciﬁc characteristics. However, this approach
is limited to those attributes that are included in the description of current CS users and often
omits individual decision-making and other inﬂuencing variables. Similarly, potential CS users
could be identiﬁed by relating to their annual driving or environmental awareness (Le Vine
et al., 2014). According to Le Vine et al. (2014), the true market size could range anywhere
between 1 and 20 % of the population in Western countries, depending on the study.
Comparing the CS market in Europe with the one in the United States of America (US) or
Asia, several differences can be observed. On the one hand, the European market is rather frag-
mented, both in terms of competition and segmentation (De Luca and Di Pace, 2015). Due to
its longer history in Europe, the CS market has grown organically rather than suddenly emerg-
ing. Generally, CS organisations only operate within a speciﬁc city or region and regulations
concerning shared mobility highly differ between cities (McKinsey, 2017). Only fairly recently,
multinational CS providers such as DriveNow and car2go entered the markets, while local CS
organisations have existed for many years (e.g. Nordsjællands Delebiler).
On the other hand, free-ﬂoating CS is much more common in Europe than in the US or Asia.
The German car manufacturer Daimler Inc founded its subsidiary car2go in 2008 as the ﬁrst
free-ﬂoating CS provider.
Not long after, several other providers emerged in Europe, e.g.
DriveNow in Germany, Enjoy in Italy or GreenMobility in Denmark (Kortum et al., 2016).
Today, car2go is the market leader in free-ﬂoating CS with a ﬂeet of 14,000 vehicles and 3 mil-
lion members in Europe, the US as well as China (Neckermann, 2017; Brown, 2015; Car2Go,
2017). Within Europe, DriveNow, which also operates in Denmark (Kane, 2015), is the second
biggest free-ﬂoating CS provider with 6,000 cars and 1 million users.
2.2 The future of Car Sharing
A common hypothesis is that CS will lead to less cars and therefore less congestion as well as
CO2 emissions in cities (Shaheen et al., 1998; Martin and Shaheen, 2011; Firnkorn and Müller,
2011; Mendes Lopes et al., 2014). According to Shaheen et al. (1998) a privately owned car
is on average only used by one person and for less than one hour a day. Car2Go (2017) shows
that a CS car is used up to six times more than a privately owned car. If every trip by a privately
owned vehicle is substituted by one using a shared vehicle, no changes in congestion will occur.
However, Cervero et al. (2007) have explained the assumption that the implementation of CS
leads to less congestion by self-enforcing behaviour. When not having a car available in the
household and instead using CS, individual car-travel reduces and with it fuel consumption,
==PAGE:13==
2.2 The future of Car Sharing
5
CO2 emissions as well as congestion. Another perspective is looking at vehicle sales. Studies
show that the number of privately owned vehicles will still increase due to increasing sales in the
next years. However, it is expected to at least be dampened by the popularity of CS (Firnkorn
and Müller, 2012; McKinsey, 2017). BCG (2016) suggest that in 2021, almost 100,000 vehicles
will be sold to CS providers, resulting in 280,000 of lost car sales in Europe. This can be
interpreted as one CS vehicle making up for three privately owned cars. However, this only
concerns the new sales. Other studies conclude that even more cars could be substituted by one
CS vehicle: around ﬁve according to Olsen and Retting (2000) and Millard-Ball et al. (2005) or
even up to ten according to Martin et al. (2010). Still, it remains to be seen whether CS really
leads to a reduction in vehicle numbers. (Kopp et al., 2013)
Apart from a reduction of private car ownership and reduced travel distance by car, CS can
contribute to CO2 emission reductions, due to the use of electric vehicles (Shaheen and Cohen,
2013; Millard-Ball et al., 2005). DriveNow’s current ﬂeet already encompasses over 20% of
electric vehicles (BMW Group, 2016). Car2Go (2017) state that the use of electric vehicles
is one of their main visions for CS in the future. The common doubts about electric vehicles
regarding their battery (Jensen et al., 2010), are not as big a problem since CS is mostly utilised
within cities and for short trips.
Shaheen and Cohen (2013) mention another future trend, namely the multi-nationalisation of CS
organisations. The biggest CS providers named in this thesis, DriveNow and car2go are both
active in many different countries and even continents. Following this observation, Shaheen
and Cohen (2013) expect increasing competition among CS providers from all backgrounds.
This emerging market is characterised by continuing launches, closures and mergers, e.g. of
DriveNow and car2go (Peitsmeier and Preuss, 2018). At the same time, Shaheen and Cohen
(2013) also expect more cooperation among CS providers. BCS encourages the combined sup-
ply of both station-based and free-ﬂoating CS (BCS, 2015). This is expected to raise the cus-
tomer beneﬁts by combining the ﬂexibility of free-ﬂoating with the reliability of station-based
CS.
Finally, the use of shared autonomous vehicles should be mentioned (Car2Go, 2018; Firnkorn
and Müller, 2015; Fagnant and Kockelman, 2014). These would depict a special case of CS
addressing several issues. On the one hand, it could be a solution to imbalance problems that
are currently an issue in free-ﬂoating CS systems. If a car is left in an area where the demand
is rather low, it can relocate itself to a high demand part of the operating zone leading to higher
utilisation. On the other hand, autonomous vehicles are expected to reduce emissions even
further due to efﬁcient driving.
==PAGE:14==
3 Literature Review
6
3 Literature Review
This thesis analyses the CS market by using discrete choice models in Denmark, or more specif-
ically its capital region CPH. Therefore, this chapter will ﬁrstly give a brief overview of research
topics into CS as a mode alternative. Afterwards, relevant research in the transport sector using
stated preference methods and discrete choice modelling with a focus on CS will be introduced.
3.1 Previous research on Car Sharing
CS can be investigated in numerous ways. As it is still fairly new and concerns many different
stakeholders, researchers have analysed it from many different angles. Demand can be modelled
by observing socio-demographic data of users, conducting stated preference experiments or
based on simulation. The supplier side incorporates operational issues such as solving the
imbalance problem arising from one-way CS or strategic decisions such as where to implement
a CS system or which pricing strategy to follow. Policy makers need to make decisions how
to tackle current transport problems and how to deal with a new transport alternative, such as
CS. Finally, the impacts of CS in terms of private vehicle ownership or environmental effects
are uncertain and can be investigated with various approaches. The following section highlights
some relevant research topics.
Demand
There are several ways to look at the demand for a new transport alternative.
The socio-
demographic characteristics of CS users have been explored by many different researchers
in different areas. Essentially, they all agree that users are generally male, younger than 35
(Firnkorn and Müller, 2012), live in urban areas (Prieto et al., 2017; Kortum, 2012), are well
educated (Le Vine et al., 2014; Millard-Ball et al., 2005) and have a high income (Kopp, 2015).
Jorge and Correia (2013) give a literature overview of the research that has been done in terms
of demand modelling as well as approaches to model one-way CS. They ﬁnd that while round-
trip CS has been investigated a lot in the past years, one-way CS and especially free-ﬂoating
CS has not gotten a lot of attention yet. One-way CS, whether station-based or free-ﬂoating,
allows a high degree of ﬂexibility by letting the user pick up and drop off the car in a different
location. However, it also infers a high degree of complexity as well since demand and supply
are constantly changing. Kopp et al. (2015) are one of the few researchers who focused on free-
ﬂoating as opposed to station-based CS users and investigated their mobility patterns. With the
==PAGE:15==
3.1 Previous research on Car Sharing
7
help of a specially developed mobile application, they collected mobility data from both CS
users as well as a reference group. Their results back the ﬁndings of several other studies in
terms of the socio-demographic proﬁle of CS users. CS users also tend to be more intermodal,
purpose-oriented and ﬂexible in their behaviour. This means they take shorter but more trips
than non CS users. In her doctoral thesis, Kopp et al. (2015) analysed the travel behaviour of
free-ﬂoating CS users in more detail. By using several different discrete choice models, she
covered various aspects. In a binary logit model, she ﬁnds amongst others, education level,
income and car ownership inﬂuence CS membership signiﬁcantly. Furthermore, she assesses
the modal split among CS users with several discrete choice models.
Becker et al. (2017) compared station-based and free-ﬂoating CS with respect to their user
groups. By conducting a comprehensive survey with three different groups (station-based CS
users, free-ﬂoating CS users and a control group), they analysed not only socio-demographic
data, but also attitudes, usage patterns and travel behaviour. Among their ﬁndings is the ob-
servation that free-ﬂoating CS is used more as a substitute for public transport, while station-
based CS is used when a vehicle is evidently required. Furthermore, they found that even more
free-ﬂoating users are male and generally younger as opposed to station-based CS users. This
coincides with results by Haustein and Nielsen (2015) and Haustein and Jensen (2017) who
assessed CS users in Denmark.
In fact, there have been several studies that inspect CS in Denmark. Shortly after the intro-
duction of CS in Denmark in 1997, Olsen and Retting (2000) conducted an extensive study to
understand the current impact and potential of CS. Later, Haustein and Nielsen (2015) anal-
ysed the socio-demographic data of CS users in Denmark. However, since free-ﬂoating CS
was only introduced in 2015 (Kane, 2015; Green Mobility, 2018), their analyses are limited to
station-based CS. Therefore, Haustein and Jensen (2017) conducted a survey among DriveNow
users in Denmark to determine their socio-demographic proﬁle as well as ﬁnding out about their
motivation for using CS.
In order to analyse the demand for CS as a new mode in an existing network, simulation is a
common method. Unfortunately, most simulations of CS are generally focused on station-based
CS as it is difﬁcult to model free-ﬂoating CS as a network. Balac and Ciari (2014) modelled
both station-based round-trip as well as one-way CS in Zürich, Switzerland using agent-based
simulation. In different scenarios, they changed the availability of the different CS types. They
ﬁnd that while one-way CS is utilised much more than round-trip CS, they are not substitutes
for one another, but are rather complimentary. Mendes Lopes et al. (2014) modelled one-way
CS in Lisbon by using agent-based simulation, in order to assess its potential based on the
economic performance. Inﬂuencing factors range from ﬂeet size and different parking decisions
to pricing strategies, thereby including both the users’ as well as the provider’s perspective.
Among their ﬁndings are a contrasting relationship between supply and marginal beneﬁts. The
smaller the ﬂeet size, the higher the marginal proﬁts. However, this also lead to a lower customer
satisfaction.
Kortum (2012) addresses the topic of why individuals would not choose CS. She lists a number
==PAGE:16==
3.1 Previous research on Car Sharing
8
of reasons, e.g. the inconvenience of transporting small children or functioning technology in
terms of GPS-signals and smartphone availability. Shaheen and Cohen (2013) mention that in
the past years CS has also become more popular in suburban areas, especially around colleges
and universities. This was analysed in more detail by Zheng et al. (2009) who estimated the
potential CS market at a major university in the US. They developed logistic regression models
to forecast whether an individual is willing to join a monthly or annual CS plan. As opposed
to many other studies, they also included individual attitudes towards car ownership and envi-
ronmental aspects in their analysis. They conclude that these attitudes as well as the person’s
familiarity with CS has a positive impact on the likelihood of joining a CS organisation.
The most common approach to demand analysis is by using discrete choice models, which is
explained in more detail in chapter 4. There are numerous studies analysing CS as a new mode
based on these models. As they are most relevant for this thesis, they are outlined in detail in
the next section 3.2.
Supply
The motivation for an organisation to enter the CS market as a provider are manifold. In their
comprehensive study of stakeholders and the diffused market for CS in Germany, Lindloff et al.
(2014) analyse the drivers for CS providers. While car manufacturers might see an opportunity
to portray a sustainable image as well as promoting their cars (see also Prieto et al., 2017;
Firnkorn and Müller, 2012), mobility providers such as the German railway company Deutsche
Bahn might be economically motivated by entering an emerging market (Lindloff et al., 2014).
Traditional, brand-independent CS organisations are mostly driven by ecological factors and
car rental companies, such as Hertz (Hertz Delebilen, 2018), are following an innovative trend
(Shaheen and Cohen, 2013).
As setting up a CS organisation is connected to rather high initial costs, Lindloff et al. (2014)
suggest that customer loyalty is the key to proﬁtability in the long run. In order to ensure cus-
tomer loyalty, CS providers need to take care of many different aspects that inﬂuence the user
and their opinion towards CS. Among these are the availability of vehicles at the right place and
time. This can be difﬁcult, if demand is spatially imbalanced and CS vehicles need to be relo-
cated to serve new customers. Several researchers have tried to tackle the imbalance problem.
According to Weikl and Bogenberger (2013), there are two main categories: operator-based and
user-based relocation. Within the operator-based relocation strategy, there are different research
possibilities. Some studies rely on simulation (Kek et al., 2009), others use mathematical mod-
elling to optimise the relocation of vehicles by maximising relocation utility (Albinski, 2015),
maximising CS service proﬁtability (Jorge et al., 2014) or minimising the number of relocation
vehicles and staff (Smith et al., 2013). Boyaci et al. (2015) developed a multi-objective model
for the relocation of free-ﬂoating CS vehicles, integrating both strategic and tactical planning
decisions such as the location of stations or the allocation of relocating staff. This way decision
makers can analyse the trade-off between the operators’ or users’ beneﬁts. Schmöller et al.
==PAGE:17==
3.1 Previous research on Car Sharing
9
(2015) also assessed free-ﬂoating CS usage by looking at the booking data of one CS provider
in two German cities. By conducting a cluster analysis, they point out the spatiotemporal dis-
tribution of vehicles in the system and their inﬂuencing factors, e.g. weather. Their insights can
help CS providers organise their relocation activities. Most studies investigate one-way station-
based CS, but not much focus has been on free-ﬂoating CS, since there are more inﬂuencing
factors involved when deciding where to place the vehicle. Especially for this, user-based re-
location could be a viable solution (Weikl and Bogenberger, 2013; Jorge and Correia, 2013;
Albinski, 2014).
One of the main drivers for transport choices is most certainly the cost. In general, CS pricing,
particularly for the free-ﬂoating type, has not gotten a lot of attention. This could be due to
little competition. In many European cities, either car2go or DriveNow or another organisation
were acting as the sole provider for free-ﬂoating CS. Ciari et al. (2015) investigated different
pricing schemes and their impact on free-ﬂoating CS demand. They simulated a hypothetical
free-ﬂoating CS service in Zürich, Switzerland with an activity-based approach.
Despite many researchers mentioning the assignment of electric vehicles in CS organisations
as either a future trend (Shaheen and Cohen, 2013) or speciﬁc customer attraction measure,
not many studies have analysed this aspect. Cartenì et al. (2016) included this in their analysis
of CS in Salerno, Italy: whether the shared vehicle was electric or with a conventional motor.
They found that the probability of switching from a privately owned car to an electric shared
vehicle is higher, thus concluding that the potential of an electric CS service is also higher than
CS with conventional cars. Wappelhorst et al. (2014) studied the effects of a CS organisation’s
(Flinkster) introduction of electric vehicles in Germany. Their ﬁndings suggest that e-carsharing
is mostly attractive to individuals who value environmental sustainability and often use public
transport or bike. It is negatively associated with car dependency and car afﬁnity. Wielinski
et al. (2017) not only assessed electric vehicles in free-ﬂoating CS, but also included hybrid
cars in their analysis. As could be expected, the tendency to use an electric vehicle reduces with
increasing distance, while it does not for hybrid cars. They explain this with the "range anxiety
effect" of not being able to return the car due to the battery level. Thus, the energy level has a
high impact on its attractiveness.
Another perspective that has been investigated in research is where to implement CS. CS
providers need to determine where the potential market is most promising and the opening
of a new location is worthwhile. Stillwater et al. (2009) investigated the use of CS vehicles
of a CS provider in North America. They found that dense urban areas with good access to
public transport are generally well suited for implementing a CS system. This is backed by
Kortum (2012), who also studied metropolitan areas to deﬁne success factors that make a city
a successful CS location. Additionally, they determined that a large population is important as
well as small household sizes that make a city more suitable to become a CS location. A few
years later, Kortum et al. (2016) assessed free-ﬂoating CS growth rates in 19 cities all over the
world, observing a growth in almost every city. However, some show a stagnation of growth if
no further vehicles are added to the system. When trying to deﬁne success factors that inﬂu-
==PAGE:18==
3.1 Previous research on Car Sharing
10
ence a cities CS growth, they encountered that these are different for European and US cities
(e.g. due to different household sizes and home ownership rates). Degirmenci et al. (2017) also
identiﬁed critical success factors of CS by conducting an extensive literature review as well as
performing expert interviews to validate their importance in reality. This showed that popula-
tion density, short access time to CS vehicle as well as areas with limited parking are important
when considering where to implement a CS system. In a second step, the authors deﬁned a set
of critical success factors especially for CS with electric vehicles, e.g. battery range or charging
infrastructure.
Policy
Political actors also play a role in the CS market. Partnering with different types of organisation
is critical for CS organisations (Millard-Ball et al., 2005). Shaheen (2013) emphasise the impor-
tance of the integration of different transport modes, which can be achieved by governmental
actors (e.g. by connecting CS and bikesharing initiatives). Lindloff et al. (2014) analysed the
impact of the German government on the diffusion of the CS market. The European Union
could also inﬂuence the development of CS in the future when making new policies regarding
transportation. Kek et al. (2009) state that supportive regulatory legislation is necessary in or-
der for CS to be able to grow. Firnkorn (2012) reports that new public policies such as parking,
electriﬁcation and the integration of CS into public transit systems are inevitable for CS to have
a meaningful impact. In another study, Firnkorn and Müller (2012) argue that policy-makers act
in a push-and-pull principle with car manufacturers with regard to CS. As explained before, car
manufacturers push CS for image and promotion reasons. Their counterpart, cities and politi-
cians are struggling with increased trafﬁc as well as parking capacity problems, thus pulling on
this new alternative.
Shaheen and Cohen (2013) name parking policies a key enabler for CS. This can also pose as
a high cost factor for the CS provider, if the local government does not provide free on-street
parking. Regulations vary highly between countries and even cities. While some providers pay
monthly fees or receive reduced costs from the local government, others are highly supported by
the city implementing dedicated CS parking zones. To overcome the problem of scarce parking
opportunities in urban areas, Kaspi et al. (2014) studied parking space reservation policies. The
main beneﬁts apart from a reduction of uncertainty for the user are the possibility to passively
redirect demand as well as new information for the providers. By reserving a parking space, the
users reveal their destination, which can be useful for other strategic and tactical decisions.
Impact
The motivations for the different stakeholders to support CS are diverse. Shaheen and Cohen
(2013) give an overview of the different types of impacts that CS entails. Apart from environ-
mental impacts in terms of emission reduction, they name reduced car ownership as well as
vehicle sales. Another aspect, mentioned by Millard-Ball et al. (2005) is reduced travel.
==PAGE:19==
3.1 Previous research on Car Sharing
11
Firnkorn (2012) assessed the impact of introducing a CS system on the use of other transport
modes in Ulm, Germany. Therefore, he conducted a survey among CS users. Respondents
were asked to indicate the annual kilometres travelled for each mode in three scenarios. Firstly,
assuming that car2go was not available today. Secondly, thinking back to their mobility before
car2go was introduced. And thirdly, as it is today. They ﬁnd that private vehicle owners reduce
the use of their car, while the others signiﬁcantly reduce the use of public transport by switching
to CS.
Cervero et al. (2007) analysed the long-term impact of CS on car ownership. They collected
data from CS members in San Francisco over several years and then estimated a binary logit
model for predicting the likelihood of owning a vehicle. After asking the CS members about
their car ownership changes, they estimated a second binary logit model to predict the likelihood
of reducing the number of owned vehicles. As the year of the study suggests, it was concerned
with station-based CS. Martin et al. (2010) analysed a large data set from a CS member survey
in the US and Canada. In their sample the number of vehicles dropped by 50% after joining
a CS organisation. While the average number of vehicles per household was 0.47 before, it
reduced to 0.24. The average before is so small, because 60 % of the household joining a CS
scheme already do not own a private car beforehand. They also compared the number of shed
vehicles with the newly added ones from the CS organisation, concluding that 9 to 13 privately
owned vehicles are substituted by one CS vehicle.
Later, Firnkorn and Müller (2012) looked at the impact of free-ﬂoating CS from the car man-
ufacturers’ perspective. Firstly, they discussed the motivation for a car manufacturer such as
Daimler Inc, to enter the CS market. Secondly, they conducted a survey among CS users in
Ulm, Germany, which revealed that CS leads to reduced number of private cars in the city.
While around 5% had already disposed of their vehicle, 40% considered it likely to forgo a ve-
hicle purchase in the future due to their use of CS. In a second study, Firnkorn and Müller (2015)
looked at potential vehicle reduction of CS users. Through an empirical analysis of a survey to
CS users in Ulm, Germany, they looked at the CS users willingness to forgo the purchase to buy
a new car in the future respective to the offered ﬂeet. Interestingly, they found that respondents
are less likely to state they would not buy a new car when the car2go ﬂeet consists completely
of electric vehicles. However, they also reported that having driven an electric vehicle before
inﬂuences the tendency to forgo the purchase of a new car positively.
Giesel and Nobis (2016) then compared the impact of station-based and free-ﬂoating CS on car
ownership. They surveyed users from both types of CS organisations and found out that users
of station-based CS have abolished a car more often than free-ﬂoating CS users. They conclude
that indeed CS tends to reduce car ownership and that more users for both types are necessary
to make private car ownership redundant.
Firnkorn and Müller (2011) estimated the environmental impact of the CS service, car2go in
Ulm, Germany. Therefore, they used data from a quantitative survey where respondents were
asked how many kilometres per year they travelled today and how they will expect to be travel-
ling in ﬁve years. Though this study has its limitations, the authors conclude that CS users will
==PAGE:20==
3.2 Stated Preference Methods and Discrete Choice Models in the Transport Sector
12
reduce their environmental impact measured in CO2 emissions by roughly 10%. Martin et al.
(2010) concentrated on greenhouse-gas rather than CO2 emissions in their study. They con-
ducted a survey among CS users in Canada and the US across different CS providers to deter-
mine how average emissions change. They take into account that some CS users might actually
increase their emissions, e.g. because they did not own a private vehicle before, and balance
the distribution of changes. They conclude that the average annual emissions per household
are reduced by a minimum of 0.58t of greenhouse-gases. Note that the annual greenhouse-gas
emissions of a regular vehicle is about 5t.
3.2 Stated Preference Methods and Discrete Choice Models
in the Transport Sector
A common instrument to analyse newly emerging transport modes, such as CS, is by conducting
surveys that are based on stated preference methods. This type of data collection has been
done by several researchers in the past and in different regions in Europe. The most common
way to analyse this type of data is by using discrete choice models, based on random utility
maximisation (RUM) theory. Studies that combine these two methods are especially relevant
for the topic of this thesis, as a stated choice experiment (SC) was conducted and analysed using
discrete choice models. Some comparable papers are outlined in the following.
Catalano et al. (2008) aimed to forecast the modal split between public transport, car, car pool-
ing and station-based CS in the rush hour in Palermo, Italy. Therefore, they conducted a stated
preference survey and analysed the results based on random utility maximisation theory. They
found that a multinomial logit model ﬁts the purpose of forecasting demand best. De Luca and
Di Pace (2014) modelled the interest or propensity in CS with discrete choice modelling con-
sidering the actual behaviour of an individual. By computing a satisfaction variable for each
individual, they include not only alternative speciﬁc attributes but also the utility of using other
available transport modes. This allows for a behavioural interpretation of the demand for CS.
Shortly after, De Luca and Di Pace (2015) assessed the demand for an inter-urban CS program
in Italy and again analysed the mode choice behaviour using discrete choice models, ﬁnding
that CS is mainly a substitute for public transport.
While the previously mentioned studies all concentrated on Italy, Ciari and Axhausen (2012) es-
timated the potential of CS as well as carpooling in Switzerland. They conducted a personalised
stated preference experiment and afterwards, analysed the modal split among the respondents,
who could choose among car, public transport and CS, by using discrete choice models. Based
on some quantitative measures such as the willingness to pay (WTP) or the value of time (VOT)
they concluded that car is preferred to CS. Also, they found that contrary to choosing to car
pool, CS is not driven by any ideological reasons. Le Vine et al. (2014) conducted an extensive
stated preference survey in London, England, that included both strategic as well as tactical de-
cisions. Respondents did not only choose a mode for a speciﬁc situation but also had to take a
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Stated Preference Methods and Discrete Choice Models in the Transport Sector
13
car purchase, joining a CS organisation or different public transport ticket options into account.
Based on the acquired data, they made different forecasts concerning CS membership as well as
private vehicle ownership. As they also compare round-trip with one-way CS, they ﬁnd that the
potential market for one-way CS is almost three times as big as the one for round-trip CS. Fur-
thermore, they suggest that an introduction round-trip CS leads to a higher reduction in private
vehicle ownership than a later introduction of one-way CS. Prieto et al. (2017) conducted an
international survey in three European and one Asian city to determine key socio-demographic
drivers for becoming a CS user and analysed the data with a bivariate probit model. They ﬁnd
that in some cities more people are interested in ride-sharing than CS. This opens the question
whether there are city speciﬁc factors that should be considered as well.
The sheer amount of studies all using similar approaches by combining the conduct of a stated
preference survey with the analysis using discrete choice models, shows how much results can
vary when regarding a different setting, e.g. CS in a different city. Thus, it reveals the need for
a study of the CS demand speciﬁc to CPH.
==PAGE:22==
4 Theory
14
4 Theory
The goal of this thesis is to analyse the CS market in Denmark, with a focus on CPH. Gener-
ally, preferences regarding mode choice can be determined by observing the travel behaviour
of individuals in real life situations. This type of data is called revealed preference (RP). It
seems to be the obvious choice when analysing travel behaviour, as it describes the reality well.
However, the data collection process is rather costly, some explanatory variables might be ne-
glected and potential changes to transport systems are almost impossible to capture (Kroes and
Sheldon, 1988). As CS is a relatively new mode and is not used as much as other modes yet,
RP data aggregated over many years might underestimate its market size. A common way to
overcome this issue, is by collecting stated preference (SP) data. Therefore, a stated choice (SC)
experiment needs to be conducted. It aims at ﬁnding behavioural responses of individuals for a
predeﬁned set of characteristics of alternatives in a hypothetical situation (Hensher et al., 1988).
Thus, SC surveys are especially suited for the analysis of newly emerging modes or changes to
the transport system. In order to take the advantages of both RP and SP data together, there are
several studies combining the two (Adamowicz et al., 1994; Dissanayake and Morikawa, 2010;
Schmid et al., 2018).
This thesis covers two different topics. Firstly, a survey was developed based on SC methods.
Secondly, two data sets, which will be more closely described in chapter 6, were analysed using
discrete choice modelling, which is based on random utility theory.
4.1 Stated Choice Experiments
SC experiments investigate what people would do given a set of characteristics of a situation
instead of observing what people to in real life. The purpose is to ﬁnd out what (which variables,
attributes or factors) and to which extent they inﬂuence their decisions (Choice Metrics, 2018).
Compared to gathering RP data, SC experiments are much cheaper, more ﬂexible and easier
to control (Kroes and Sheldon, 1988). The researcher can decide, which variables to include
ranging from alternative-speciﬁc variables, such as time and cost for a mode alternative, to
socio-demographic variables such as gender, age or even the composition of the respondent’s
household. Furthermore, it gives the advantage of obtaining multiple observations from each
respondent by presenting them with different situations with varied attribute levels. As respon-
dents are presented with different alternatives, they are confronted with making trade-offs that
they might not be aware of in their everyday life. Therefore, these can only be observed through
==PAGE:23==
4.1 Stated Choice Experiments
15
SC experiments (Fowkes and Wardman, 1988). The main advantage of SP data, of using hypo-
thetical situations to analyse new modes, is also its biggest disadvantage as people might not do
in reality what they say in the experiment. There might be constraints in their everyday life that
are not covered by the SC experiment. Respondents might be biased toward choosing an alter-
native for several reasons. In this case it could be social desirability, by indicating to take the
CS mode, knowing it is a "green" alternative and the reason for the experiment. Lastly, there is
also a risk of what Bates (1988) calls "respondent fatigue" when individuals are presented with
too many situations and do not consider all choice situations distinctly, but give in to biases and
prejudices.
According to Hensher (1994) there are two main variants of SC experiments. On the one hand,
respondents might be asked to rank or rate alternatives on a given scale. On the other hand, they
could be asked to choose the one that they are most likely to choose in real life given the cir-
cumstances of the situation expressed in different levels of attributes. The latter was chosen for
this master’s thesis. Each of the alternatives is described by a set of attributes that can assume
different levels. Hensher (1994) outlines several steps to determine this set of attributes, includ-
ing the decision of measurement units as well as the number and magnitudes of the different
levels. These are then combined into an experiment with different choice situations according
to a systematic design called the experimental design (see next section). In order to make the
results as meaningful as possible, it is important to make realistic assumptions when deﬁning
the attributes and levels (Ortuzar and Willumsen, 2011; Pearmain et al., 1991) as well as keep-
ing the number of attributes sufﬁciently small, so that respondents are not overwhelmed by the
amount of information they are supposed to process (Bates, 1988). This can be done by group-
ing alternatives and assigning the same attributes to proﬁt from recognition value (Pearmain
et al., 1991). There are several ways to make the situations relatable for the respondent. Firstly,
level values should be based on real values from the respondents’ environment, such as real
prices for public transport, fuel or parking. Secondly, through customisation, e.g. by asking
the respondent for a speciﬁc trip they have taken in the past and relating the decisions to that.
Thirdly, it could be an option to ask the respondent to imagine being in a speciﬁc scenario, such
as going grocery shopping. Other studies have taken a rather radical approach by asking the
respondent to imagine being a different person with a set of characteristics that were given and
make the choice for them (e.g. Le Vine et al., 2014).
Experimental Design
In SP experiments, the respondents are presented with a number of choice situations with dif-
ferent attributes and levels. While the shown attributes are always the same, the levels vary
between situations. The levels are drawn from an underlying experimental design to construct
the hypothetical choice situations. Basically, an experimental design is a matrix of values that
describes, which levels are shown in which situation in an SP experiment. The attributes are
represented as columns. Rows depict the choice situation. By not assigning the values in the
==PAGE:24==
4.1 Stated Choice Experiments
16
matrix randomly, the statistical power of the whole experiment is meant to increase. The re-
mainder of this section is largely based on Choice Metrics (2018).
There are several different design types that can be considered for an SC experiment. A full
factorial design considers all possible effects (direct and interaction), generating each possible
combination of levels (Ortuzar and Willumsen, 2011) as shown in table 4.1(a) with 3 exemplary
binary attributes A, B and C leading to 8 choice situations. While this is the most comprehen-
sive way, it is mostly not feasible as the number of choice situations becomes very large with
increasing attributes and levels. Therefore, it is common to rely on fractional factorial designs,
where each respondent is shown a subset of all choice situations. There are two different ways
to determine in a structured manner, which choice situations are shown to the respondents:
orthogonal and efﬁcient design.
(a) Full factorial design
s
A
B
C
1
-1
-1
-1
2
-1
-1
1
3
-1
1
-1
4
-1
1
1
5
1
-1
-1
6
1
-1
1
7
1
1
-1
8
1
1
1
(b) Orthogonal design
s
A
B
C
1
-1
-1
-1
2
-1
1
1
3
1
-1
1
4
1
1
-1
Table 4.1: Example of a full factorial and orthogonal design with three attributes and two levels
Orthogonal design is the most common approach, aiming at minimising the correlation among
attributes by ensuring that the attribute levels are varied independently of one another. An
example can be seen in table 4.1(b). It satisﬁes attribute level balance, which means that each
level occurs equally as often within each attribute. Orthogonal design is mostly used due to its
simplicity to construct as well as its property of ensuring that linear regression models will not
suffer from multicollinearity. However, an orthogonal design may often lead to non-orthogonal
data. The computed choice situations should be regarded carefully to determine whether they
are realistic. According to Fowkes and Wardman (1988) it is worth sacriﬁcing the purity of
the design to gain realism. As soon as a row is taken out of the design matrix, it is no longer
orthogonal. Furthermore, later added variables, such as socio-demographic data that are not
included in the design, lead to non-orthogonal data.
Efﬁcient design aims at minimising the standard errors of the generated parameters. It is based
on the asymptotic variance covariance (AVC) matrix of the parameters that are to be included,
which can be determined when prior information about these parameters is available. Thus,
efﬁcient designs depend highly on the accuracy of the priors. In Choice Metrics (2018) it is
stated that having good information about the priors is even more important than a sufﬁciently
large sample size. Hence, pilot studies to determine the coefﬁcient estimates are necessary. The
==PAGE:25==
4.2 Discrete Choice Models
17
most common way to determine the AVC matrix is by simulation. Parameters are estimated
based on simulated choices with the priors. This is repeated a large number of times to ﬁnd
an average AVC matrix. The design is then evaluated at several efﬁciency measures, e.g. the
D-error, which is the determinant of the AVC matrix and is calculated as follows:
Dp −error = det( Ω(X, β′) )1/K ,
(4.1)
if prior parameters β′ are known. It can also be calculated with priors zero as follows:
Dz −error = det( Ω(X, 0) )1/K .
(4.2)
The lower the errors, the more efﬁcient the design. Other efﬁciency indicators are for example
the A-error, which assumes the trace of the AVC matrix and is normalised by the number of
parameters or the utility balance or sample size estimate. (Choice Metrics, 2018)
4.2 Discrete Choice Models
According to Ben-Akiva and Lerman (1985) the goal of discrete choice analysis is to model a
choice situation with a ﬁnite set of alternatives that is mutually exclusive and collectively ex-
haustive. Therefore, the principle of utility maximising behaviour is assumed to hold for any
rational decision making individual. These types of models are called random utility maximi-
sation models (RUM) (Train, 2003). It is based on the assumption that a decision-maker n
chooses the alternative i from a set of alternatives J, which provides the maximum utility, if
and only if Uni > Unj ∀j ∈J, j ̸= i. As the utility Unj for any alternative j ∈J is subjec-
tive to the individual and no model can capture all inﬂuencing factors toward the individual’s
decision, the utility Unj cannot be modelled completely. Thus, the utility Unj is decomposed
into Unj = Vnj + εnj, where Vnj is the observed portion of utility that can be modelled also
referred to as the systematic or deterministic utility and εnj the unobserved portion or random
component. The observed portion Vnj of the utility Unj can be described as a linear relationship
of observable attributes xnj: Vnj = P
k β′
jxnj. These attributes can be both alternative-speciﬁc,
e.g. cost and time attributes for transport alternatives, or general, e.g. socio-demographic data.
Instead of dealing with utilities, it is assumed that a decision-maker behaves according to choice
probabilities deﬁned by a probability distribution function over the alternatives. This way, the
unobserved portion εnj can be treated as random with a joint density of f(εn) and probabilis-
tic statements about the decision-makers choice can be made. Depending on the speciﬁcation
of this density f(εn), different discrete choice models are obtained, some of which will be
explained in the following.
The most simple and widely used discrete choice model is logit. It is based on the assumption
that the random component εnj is independently and identically distributed (iid). This means
==PAGE:26==
4.2 Discrete Choice Models
18
that the εnj are independent of each other, suggesting that the unobserved portion of utility for
one alternative i is independent of the unobserved portion of utility of another alternative j. This
leads to probability function with a closed-form, meaning it can directly be calculated from the
following expression:
Pni =
eVni
P
j eVnj .
(4.3)
This ensures that the probabilities for all alternatives j sum up to one, as the denominator is
always the same. Thereby, any Pnj necessarily assumes values between zero and one. The
higher the systematic utility Vnj, the higher the probability Pnj. However, the relation between
the utility, and thereby the vector of observed variables xnj, and the probability is not linear, but
rather sigmoid or S-shaped. This suggests that parameters β′ cannot be interpreted directly, as
in a linear regression model (see equation 4.4). Instead, ratios of coefﬁcients, derivatives and
elasticities need to be consulted to interpret parameters.
Pni =
eβ′xni
P
j eβ′xnj
(4.4)
Another property of logit is the independence from irrelevant alternatives (IIA). It essentially
means that the ratio of two alternatives does not depend on any other alternative than those two.
The goal of discrete choice models is to ﬁnd estimators for parameters β that determine the
impact of the observed variables xnj on the utility and therefore probability of an alternative
j. This is done by the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) procedure (Train, 2003). The
log likelihood function, with yni = 1 if individual n chose alternative i and zero otherwise, is
calculated as follows:
L(β) =
X
n
X
i
yni ln(Pni) ,
(4.5)
and is maximised with respect to each parameter β to satisfy the ﬁrst-order condition as follows:
L(β)
dβ
=
X
n
X
i
(yni −Pni) xni
!= 0 .
(4.6)
Thereby, estimators β′ for each parameter β can be determined.
The most simple logit model is a binary logit (BL), where the choice set J only consists of two
alternatives i, j. Thus, the probability for choosing alternative j is Pn(j) = 1 −Pn(i). This
will be applied on one of the underlying data sets of this thesis (Transportvaneundersøgelsen,
TU) in order to model the decision to become the member of a CS organisation or not. The
most commonly used logit model is the multinomial logit (MNL), where the choice set J can
consist of more than two alternatives. Hence, it is a suitable method to model transport mode
choices, as it was done for the other underlying data set of this thesis (from the stated choice
experiment).
==PAGE:27==
4.2 Discrete Choice Models
19
The limitations of logit come from the distribution of the random components that is iid. As
the random components εnj are independent from each other both regarding the individuals n
as well as the alternatives j, only systematic, observable taste variations can be modelled. This
also suggests that panel data structures cannot be captured by a logit model. Furthermore, the
IIA property suggests that there is only proportional substitution among alternatives, which is
not always realistic.
Mixed Logit Models
The previously described limitations can be overcome by assuming a different speciﬁcation for
the density of the unobserved portion of utility f(εn). This is the case in the mixed multinomial
logit (MMNL), which is a highly ﬂexible model that can approximate any random utility model
(Train, 2003). Its probability function is made of an integral over the logit probability in equa-
tion 4.3 multiplied with a density function f(β). It is essentially a weighted average of the logit
formula evaluated at different β parameters. The calculation is as follows:
Pni =
Z 
exp β′xni
P
j exp β′xnj

f(β) dβ .
(4.7)
While equations 4.3 and 4.4 were of a closed-form, estimators could be calculated directly
based on the explained MLE procedure. This is not the case in an MMNL (4.7). Now, the
probabilities need to be approximated by simulation. For a predeﬁned number of draws R,
probabilities are simulated. The average of these simulated probabilities ˇPni =
1
R
P
r Lni(βr)
is an unbiased estimator itself. These are then inserted into the log likelihood function 4.5,
leading to the following equation:
SL(β) =
N
X
n=1
J
X
j=1
dnj ln( ˇPni) ,
(4.8)
that is maximised to ﬁnd parameter estimators based on maximum simulated likelihood estima-
tion (MSLE).
Interpretation of parameters
One of the most simple ways to interpret a model, is by calculating the ratio of coefﬁcients.
Thereby, trade-offs and substitution rates can be determined (Ben-Akiva and Lerman, 1985).
Common measures are the willingness to pay (WTP), which describes the price an individual
is willing to pay for a reduction of one unit of another parameter, or the value of time (VOT).
According to Rich (2016), the VOT is "the amount of money that an individual is willing to pay
in order to save one unit of travel time". Both measures are based on calculating a marginal rate
of substitution as a ratio of coefﬁcients. Hence, the VOT is derived as follows:
==PAGE:28==
4.2 Discrete Choice Models
20
V OT =
∂V/∂t
∂V/∂c ,
(4.9)
resulting in a value that is measured as monetary units per time units, e.g.
DKK/ hr. These
measures help to understand the preferences of the individuals in the data, but can also be used
for validating the model. If very unreasonable VOTs are observed, the model might need to be
revised.
As the estimated parameters β′ do not have a direct impact on the choice probability but only
on the utility function, it is best to analyse their impact by using derivatives and elasticities
(Train, 2003). The change in the choice probability given a change in an observed variable xni
is described by the derivative:
∂Pni
∂xni
= ∂Vni
∂xni
Pni(1 −Pni) .
(4.10)
Rather than derivatives, it is common to use elasticities as these are normalised for the variables’
units (Train, 2003). An elasticity describes the percentage change in a choice probability with
regard to percentage change in the observed variable xni. It is calculated as follows (Rich,
2016):
Ei,xni = ∂Pni
∂xni
xni
Pni
= ∂Vni
∂xni
xni(1 −Pni) .
(4.11)
The elasticity can also be calculated when determining the percentage change in the probability
of another alternative i when the alternative speciﬁc observed variable xnj is increased. This is
then called the cross-elasticity and is calculated as follows:
Ei,xnj = −∂Vnj
∂xnj
xnjPnj .
(4.12)
As can be seen in the formula, the cross-elasticity is independent of alternative i, which means
that the effect that a percentage change in one alternative-speciﬁc attribute as the same impact
on all the other alternatives. This observation is a manifestation of the previously introduced
IIA property for MNL models. The cross-elasticity is the same for all alternatives i, which
can be interpreted as one alternative proportionally drawing from the other alternatives. Train
(2003) calls this proportionate substitution.
MMNL models allow different substitution patterns that are not restricted by the IIA property of
logit models. As the probabilities in MMNL are determined by simulation, elasticities can also
be simulated by simulating percentage changes. The relative percentage change of a probability
of an alternative respective to a percentage change in a variable can then be determined as
follows (Rich, 2016):
Ei,xni = % change in Pni
% change in xni
= ∆Pni/Pni
∆xni/xni
= ∆Pni
∆xni
xni
Pni
.
(4.13)
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Discrete Choice Models
21
When interpreting any of the above explained measures, it is important to keep in mind that
they are based on the assumption that all individuals have the same variance in unobserved fac-
tors, also referred to as the same scale (Train, 2003). The estimated parameters β′ are actually
estimates β∗divided by a scale parameter σ. When calculating ratios of coefﬁcients or marginal
rates of substitution, the scale parameter σ is cancelled out. However, the magnitude of coef-
ﬁcients is indeed affected. Therefore, it is necessary to interpret elasticities as relative to one
another. Furthermore, it might be misleading to compare elasticities between different models
based on different data sets, as the scale parameter is likely different and therefore, the values
are not directly comparable.
Model ﬁt
Whether a model is a good ﬁt in terms of depicting the data is best done by comparing (Ben-
Akiva and Lerman, 1985). There are two statistical tests that are mostly used, which are both
based on the log likelihood values (see equation 4.5).
Likelihood Ratio Test
This test can be used in several ways. The most simple form assumes
the null hypothesis that all coefﬁcients are zero. The test statistic
−2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
(4.14)
is χ2-distributed with K degrees of freedom and K being the number of parameters added to
the null-model. In the same way two models can be compared, given that one is a restriction of
the other. Then the test statistic is calculated as follows: −2[L(ˆβr) −L(ˆβu)], the ﬁrst being the
restricted model. It is χ2-distributed with K = Ku −Kr degrees of freedom. If the value of the
test statistic exceeds the respective value in the χ2-distribution table, the null hypothesis can be
rejected. Generally, the goal is to reject the null hypothesis at a 5% signiﬁcance level, at least.
If it cannot be rejected, adding the parameters to the speciﬁcation of the restricted model might
not be improving the model sufﬁciently and could be left out.
Likelihood Ratio Index
This value is another way of comparing a model to its null-model
by using the log likelihood values. The most simple form is independent of the number of
parameters K, which can lead to misinterpretation as the L(ˆβ) increases with an increasing
number of parameters K. Therefore, it is common to calculate the adjusted likelihood ratio
index that includes the number of parameters K to remove the effect of overestimating L(ˆβ)
(Ben-Akiva and Lerman, 1985). It is calculated as follows:
¯ρ2 = 1 −L(ˆβ) −K
L(β0)
.
(4.15)
==PAGE:30==
4.2 Discrete Choice Models
22
Again, comparing it between models is inevitable as there are no general guidelines for when
a ¯ρ2 is sufﬁciently high (Ben-Akiva and Lerman, 1985). While the models do not need to be
a restriction of one another for using this measure, they should however be based on the same
data set, as the log likelihood values highly depend on the data.
Both the likelihood ratio test as well as the likelihood ratio index are limited to the comparison
of models that are a restriction of one another. Furthermore, the likelihood ratio test carries
a risk of overﬁtting, as the log likelihood value increases when adding parameters. Akaike
(1974) developed a measure, the Akaike information criterion (AIC), that describes the quality
of a model based on the log likelihood validated by the number of estimated parameters. It is
calculated as follows:
AIC = −2L + 2K .
(4.16)
This was developed further by Schwarz (1978) who developed the Bayesian information crite-
rion (BIC), which is calculated as follows:
BIC = −2L + 2ln(n)K ,
(4.17)
which also takes into account the number of observations in the data set. These two measures
can, for example, be used to evaluate different functional forms of variables to be included in a
model. It should be noted that both the AIC and BIC suggest that the lower the value, the better
the model, while the likelihood ratio index is higher the better the model.
==PAGE:31==
5 Mode Choice Experiment
23
5 Mode Choice Experiment
In order to gain insights into the substitution patterns between modes within Denmark, or more
speciﬁcally the university environment in CPH, a survey based on stated preference methods
was conducted. It was decided to use efﬁcient design for this study. Even though no priors were
available, only efﬁcient design allows for correlation among attributes. This was necessary to
make the choice situations more realistic, e.g. restricting CS time to be equal to car time as well
as adding contextual variables to all alternatives. This will be explained in more detail at the
end of in this chapter.
It should be noted that the experiment for this thesis serves as a pilot for another mode choice
experiment for a PhD-project that will be conducted in the next year. The time restriction and
scope of a thesis as well as missing priors also lead to the decision not to have a representative
sample but rather to send the survey through social media channels to the peer groups of the
author and supervisors.
5.1 Survey Structure and Design
The mode choice survey was mainly composed of four parts, two of which are stated choice
questions, where the respondent needs to indicate by single choice, which mode he/she would
take in a speciﬁc situation based on a speciﬁc set of attributes. The respondents were presented
with three or four choice alternatives, respectively. Only if a respondent owns a car, this al-
ternative was presented. The other three were ﬁxed: public transport, bike and CS. Another
alternative was also considered brieﬂy: walking. However, it was decided to leave it out since
it seems unlikely that an individual would decide between walking or using CS, which is the
mode to be analysed. Walking distances are usually much shorter than for the other modes.
Other studies investigating CS do often not include a bike alternative (Ciari and Axhausen,
2012; Catalano et al., 2008; Schmöller et al., 2015). Since this study is focused on Denmark
and cycling makes up for over 30 % of trips to work or leisure (Weinreich, 2017), it is considered
a relevant alternative.
In the ﬁrst part of the survey, general information about the respondent’s place of living as
well as the availability of the proposed transport alternatives for the individual were gathered.
This means that only respondents who have access to a car would be shown this alternative in
the choice situations later on. In this ﬁrst part, the respondent was also asked for information
concerning their recent commuting1 trip. The travel time as well as the mode were used as
1 Commuting can mean both to work or to the place of education.
==PAGE:32==
5.1 Survey Structure and Design
24
a reference to later pivot around for the choice situations. Additionally, the respondent was
asked to indicate some leisure trip scenarios that are realistic to occur in his/her everyday life2.
Secondly, the respondent was confronted with three mode choice situations regarding the pre-
viously prompted commute trip. Additionally to the original mode taken by the respondent,
car (if available), bike, public transport and CS were displayed. Thirdly, the respondent was
confronted with another three mode choice situations for leisure trips. The travel distance was
assigned randomly3. In order for the respondent to better relate to the situation, one of the situa-
tions that he/she indicated as relevant in their everyday life was displayed as well. Fourthly and
ﬁnally, some socio-demographic questions were asked, before the survey terminated. In order
to allow comparability of socio-demographic data between the stated preference data from the
survey (SP) and TU, similar levels and categories were used for e.g. occupation, education or
income. The full questionnaire can be found in the Appendix in section D.
In order to get meaningful and comparable results, some validations were done in the ﬁrst part
of the survey. For example, the ﬁrst question was whether the respondent lives in Denmark, in
order to ensure that they are familiar with the Danish transport alternatives and also prices. If
a respondent answered no, the survey was terminated. Since the goal for the experiment is to
study CS, another validation was done by asking the respondent whether they have a driver’s
licence. If not, CS would not be a viable alternative for them anyway and the survey was
terminated. Especially the second part of the survey - the commuting situation - might not be
relevant for every respondent, e.g. because they are retired or unemployed. One possibility
would be to again terminate the survey if the respondent does not commute. However, these
respondents could still express their preferences in leisure situations. Therefore, rather than
eliminating those from the complete study, those respondents that do not commute were referred
directly to the mode choices for leisure trips in order to get more observations and also capture
their preferences. Another exceptional case was for respondents who do not drive, bike or
take public transport to work. If a respondent indicated that they walk to their commuting
destination, they were directly referred to the leisure part of the survey. This was done because
- as stated above - it can be assumed that a respondent who walks to work regularly would most
probably not choose CS because the distance is likely very little. However, this respondent could
still indicate their mode choice for the leisure situations in the third part of the questionnaire.
Therefore, those that indicated as a commuting mode: walk or other, skipped the commuting
part, but were still asked for their preferences when considering a speciﬁc leisure scenario in
the third part.
The survey was constructed with the software Qualtrics (Qualtrics, 2018), which was available
to the author via a university subscription. It is an internet-based software for collecting and
analysing data through online surveys. It should be noted that this software is not originally
meant for stated choice experiments and is thus not optimal for building this type of survey.
Nevertheless, due to time and resource restrictions, it was decided to use Qualtrics for this
2 The respondent was asked to indicate for 3 situations whether they occurred in the last week:
"Taking a child somewhere."
"Going grocery shopping."
"Leaving the house to pursue a hobby."
3 Between 2 and 10 km.
==PAGE:33==
5.1 Survey Structure and Design
25
survey, keeping in mind that the follow-up experiment will be done with a different tool.
Before the survey was distributed, a small pilot study was conducted. Therefore, the survey was
sent out to 33 people who work at Transport DTU, the centre for transport research within the
department of Management Engineering. These were mostly professors and researchers who
have some experience in transport research and surveys. Within the following days, all of them
conducted the survey and some sent an email with feedback. While some addressed minor
aspects such as the formatting of some questions for better readability or remarks about the
phrasing of questions, others brought up some more grave issues. One important example was
the distance for the leisure choice situations. Before the pilot, a random distance between 2 and
20 km was assigned. However, this turned out to be too unrealistic for many pilot respondents.
Therefore, it was later on changed to a maximum of 10 km, which is more reasonable for a
leisure trip (e.g. taking a child to daycare, going grocery shopping or pursuing a hobby). A full
overview of the feedback and the decisions taken can be seen in the Appendix in table A.1.
Attributes and Levels
The attributes to be included for each alternative as well as their different levels are presented
in table 5.1. A labelled design is necessary, as some attributes are alternative-speciﬁc and differ
between alternatives, e.g. cost and time. Additionally, two contextual attributes are included:
rain and discomfort. These are similarly treated as socio-demographic variables as they are
included as dummy variables in the utility speciﬁcations of all but one alternative.
Alternative
Attribute
Unit
Reference
Levels
Bike
Time
(min)
*
-20%
-10%
0
+10%
Car
Time
(min)
*
-30%
-10%
+10%
+30%
Cost
(DKK)
*
-25%
0
+25%
+50%
Parking Cost
(DKK)
0
5
10
15
Parking Search
(min)
0
4
8
12
Carsharing
Time
(min)
*
-30%
-10%
+10%
32%
Cost
(DKK)
*
-50%
-25%
0
+25%
Access Time
(min)
2
4
6
8
Parking Search
(min)
0
4
8
12
Reservation
yes
no
Public Transport
Time
(min)
*
-20%
-10%
0
+10%
Cost
(DKK)
*
-50%
-25%
0
+25%
Access Time
(min)
2
4
6
8
Rain
yes
no
Discomfort (only leisure)
yes
no
Table 5.1: Attributes and Levels for each Alternative for the Commuting Scenario.
Attributes with a * in the reference column were calculated based on a reference value entered
by the individual.
==PAGE:34==
5.1 Survey Structure and Design
26
As levels for cost and time attributes were not ﬁxed but based on a reference value, some as-
sumptions regarding average distances, speeds and costs per mode needed to be made. Average
speeds were taken from the National Transport Survey (Transportvaneundersøgelsen, TU). Es-
pecially car speeds vary highly depending on the regarded trips. Since the focus of this study
is on free-ﬂoating CS, which is generally only available in urban areas, the averages were com-
puted for trips within the free-ﬂoating CS operating zone, essentially equalling the inner city of
CPH: 13.7 km/ h for bike, 15.1 km/ h for public transport, 26.7 km/ h for car. The driving speed for
car and CS was the same. From these speeds, ratios could be determined: public transport trips
take 1.77 times longer than driving by car and cycling even increases the time by a factor 1.9.
Regarding costs, some decisions were necessary. While cycling is free, public transport costs
were derived from the Danish National Transport Model (Landstraﬁkmodellen). A simple linear
regression was used to model the costs as a function of the distance travelled, where the intercept
was manually ﬁxed to the lowest available price. Costs are different depending on the purpose
of the trip. Thus, it was distinguished between commute (including both work and education)
and leisure trips. This is based on the assumption that an individual choosing an alternative for
their commuting trip, will most likely take this alternative several times per month and would
thus have a monthly card or similar. Furthermore, it was decided to restrict the regarded trips to
the ones taken within the free-ﬂoating CS area in CPH, to be consistent with the calculation of
average speeds. Costs are indicated in Danish Kroner (DKK). The regressions are as follows:
CostPT,Commute = 7.5 + 0.53 ∗Distance
(5.1)
CostPT,Leisure = 10.75 + 1.15 ∗Distance
(5.2)
A common way to calculate costs for driving a car is to simply take the costs for fuel. The
underlying assumption is that insurance or taxes are ﬁxed costs. Since this experiment does not
include a strategic decision (as e.g. Le Vine et al., 2014) whether or not to invest in a car, it
can be assumed that the marginal cost is zero. However, it can be argued that amortisation or
deterioration should be included. Especially when considering a commute trip, using the car
several times per month must lead to some attrition. Therefore, the costs for car in this study
were derived from the Transportokonomiske Enhedspriser Study (from the Center for Transport
Analytics, 2018) and consisted of both fuel and amortisation costs, leading to a cost factor of
1.676 DKK/ min.
Costs for CS were derived from the costs of the local CS provider GreenMobility (Green Mobil-
ity, 2018). Their regular price is 3.5 DKK/ min. However, some adjustments were made. Firstly,
for the commuting costs the same assumption applies as for public transport: An individual
regularly commuting to work by CS is likely to have a monthly plan, resulting in less costs.
GreenMobility offers a plan where the ﬁrst 20 hours only cost 1 DKK/ min, additional time is 2
DKK/ min. Assuming that the individual will use it more than 20 hours per month, we decided
on a CS cost of 1.5 DKK/ min for commute trips. Also, the CS cost for a leisure trip was reduced
to 3 DKK/ min. On the one hand, this includes the fact that GreenMobility offers a reduced price
==PAGE:35==
5.1 Survey Structure and Design
27
depending on the time of day and location of the vehicle or the fuel/battery level. On the other
hand, prices can be expected to decrease when the operating area is increased in the future. CS
prices in other European countries, e.g. Germany, are much lower already; around 30ct per
minute, which equals around 2.2 DKK/ min (Car2Go, 2018; Schmöller et al., 2015).
The attribute access time is included in the public transport as well as the CS alternative.
Schmöller et al. (2015) assume that an individual is willing to walk around 400 m to a CS
vehicle. This coincides with Catalano et al. (2008) and Ciari and Axhausen (2012), who used
values between 3 and 10 minutes in their stated preference surveys. Also taking into consider-
ation the distribution of access time from TU data, we decided on level values between 2 and 8
minutes. Parking costs were based on parking prices in CPH (VisitCopenhagen, 2018), which
typically range from 5 DKK/ min to 21 DKK/ min. Similary, Ciari and Axhausen (2012) based their
parking costs on real values from Zürich, Switzerland. While parking time, which means the
time that is spent searching for a parking space, is included in both car and CS, parking cost is
always zero for CS since this is covered by the provider. Catalano et al. (2008) also included
parking time in their analysis, varying between 0 and 10 minutes. Since parking spaces are
limited in CPH central area, levels 0, 4, 8 and 12 minutes were chosen for this study.
Finally, there is another attribute for the CS alternative, which indicates whether it is possible
to reserve the vehicle prior to the trip or not.
Two more contextual attributes are added that only assume two levels and are relevant for all
alternatives. Firstly, according to Schmöller et al. (2015), the weather can have an impact on the
mode choice. They assume that temperature is not as inﬂuential as precipitation, which is why
a rain dummy variable was included in this design as well. Secondly, a discomfort dummy was
added for the leisure trips. Depending on the leisure situations that the respondent marked as
relevant, one was chosen randomly and a scenario was phrased including a discomfort dummy
(e.g. going grocery shopping and only buying a few things vs. having to carry two or more
bags).
The levels for the time and cost attributes are equidistant. However, the percentages are not the
same. Some are skewed to the right or left, others are symmetric. This has several reasons. In
some trial runs, even before the pilot study, it became clear that the speed for bike and public
transport was realistic, but rather slow. As an example, the average speed of bike retrieved from
TU as explained above was 13.7 km/ h. However, some studies suggest that cycling, especially
in a bike friendly-city such as CPH, can be as fast as 19 km/ h (Olewitz, 2016). Therefore, it
was decided to skew the levels to the left, so that bike will become faster in more scenarios
than slower. As can be seen in table 5.1, this was different for car time. Since the study is
concentrated on urban areas, such as central CPH, congestion can slow down car drivers a lot.
At the same time, it is always possible that there is less trafﬁc and it is possible to be faster.
Therefore, the time for both car as well as CS is symmetrically altered through the levels. As
the goal of this study is to investigate CS, it was decided to include scenarios where the cost is
exceptionally cheap in order to see whether respondents would be more prone to choosing this
new mode if it was not as expensive as it is today. Public transport costs were also skewed to
==PAGE:36==
5.1 Survey Structure and Design
28
the left in order to portray possible governmental subsidies to make this mode more attractive.
The opposite was done for car, since these costs are comparably cheap. Assuming that petrol
prices will rise in the future, this distribution seems accurate.
Experimental Design
The experimental design for this SC survey was originally meant to be orthogonal, as this is
the most common design type and does not require priors. However, the main property of or-
thogonal design is that all estimable effects are uncorrelated. Thus, it is impossible to include
variables that assume the same level over all alternatives in the experiment, e.g. contextual vari-
ables such as rain or the same time for car and CS. Hence, D-efﬁcient designs were generated
with the software Ngene (Choice Metrics, 2018) using the RSC (Relabeling, Swapping and Cy-
cling) algorithm, allowing a) interdependencies between variables, b) contextual attributes in
order to give c) realistic choice situations. This allowed for the inclusion of contextual variables
rain and discomfort. Car and CS time were set to always be the same, as it is unrealistic that
one is faster than the other in the same travel situation. Additionally, a restriction was added
that parking time for CS always had to be smaller or equal than the parking time for car. This
was based on the assumption that sometimes additional parking spaces for CS are available in
CPH, which reduces the parking search time compared to a private car.
In order to make the choice situations realistic, it was decided to use a pivot design for the
commuting situations by asking the respondent for a reference time value for their last trip.
However, in order to build a customised efﬁcient pivot design, the travel time characteristics
of each individual would be required before hand. This would require a 2-step data collection,
ﬁrst to collect the trip characteristics and later, after the efﬁcient design is generated for each
respondent, to complete the choice experiment. This procedure was not considered optimal
nor feasible in the context of this work. Therefore, average distances for both commuting and
leisure trips were taken from TU. Assumptions were needed to determine a reasonable length.
The average distances of trips taken for all of Denmark are rather long. As the goal is to analyse
CS, trip distances of 200 km are not relevant for this study. One could argue that trips within
the free-ﬂoating CS area in CPH could be regarded. However, this is still very small and so
would average distances be. Thus, it was decided to take another restriction. Either origin or
destination of the trip had to be located within the free-ﬂoating CS area and the total distance
needed to be smaller than 50 km, which seems a reasonable maximum length for commuting
trips. Thus, the averages taken to compute the efﬁcient design were 13.67 km for commuting
and 8.88 km for leisure trips. However, this does not mean that trips that are smaller or larger
cannot be displayed in the survey. It is just an approximate value needed for the computation of
the design. This should be considered for revision in the follow-up PhD study.
Generally, as explained in 4, prior information about the parameters is necessary for comput-
ing the AVC matrix that is needed for determining an efﬁcient design. As a pilot survey was
not feasible within the scope of this thesis, priors were simply set to zero and the Dz-error as
==PAGE:37==
5.1 Survey Structure and Design
29
shown in equation 4.2 was used as the main efﬁciency measure. The program was run until no
further improvements were notable from the Dz-error. Essentially, four different experimental
designs were necessary for this survey: Commute (incl car), Leisure (incl car), Commute (excl
car), Leisure (excl car). The main difference between a commute and leisure situation was
that leisure choice situations were not based on an entered reference as well as an additional
dummy variable for discomfort being added. The attributes as well as their different levels were
presented in table 5.1. From these, the four experimental designs were created with 24 choice
situations each. The designs were each divided into eight blocks. Thus, each respondent was
presented with 3 leisure and 3 commuting choice situations. The Ngene syntax as well as the
ﬁnal designs can be found in the Appendix in ﬁgures A.1 - A.4 and tables A.2 - A.5.
==PAGE:38==
6 Description of Data Sets
30
6 Description of Data Sets
There are two underlying data sets in this thesis, the Danish National Travel Survey (TU) and
the results from a stated choice experiment (SC) as introduced previously. In the following
the two will be described both qualitatively and quantitatively. This means that the structure
and background as well as descriptive statistics will be presented. The former data set (TU)
can be interpreted as a RP data set, as respondents indicate their real travel behaviour, which
allows researchers to make conclusions about their preferences in retrospect. The latter data set
is based on a survey, which puts respondents in speciﬁc choice situations. Thereby preferences
are not revealed but stated (SP) speciﬁcally.
6.1 Transportvaneundersøgelsen (TU)
The ﬁrst data set is from the Danish National Travel Survey (Transportvaneundersøgelsen, TU),
which is managed by DTU Transport. It includes an individual survey and a one-day travel diary
of the respondents and is based on internet and telephone interviews. TU regards residents all
over Denmark from all ages and backgrounds. The surveyed individuals portray a representative
sample of the Danish population. Based on this extensive dataset, many different aspects of the
Danish transport system can be analysed. Market shares of various modes can be derived and
travel behaviour of Danish citizens can be assessed. A wide range of stakeholders, including
both researchers and decision-makers, beneﬁt from TU data. (Transport DTU, 2018)
This thesis is concerned with the analysis of CS in Denmark. TU has been conducted since
1992. However, only after February 2009 the mode alternative CS was added to the survey.
Therefore, the following analysis will only concentrate on data acquired after that year. Since
no data for 2018 could be acquired in time for this analysis, the data consists of entries between
2009 and 2017. Within this time frame data from travel diaries of 116,934 individuals were
collected. On average each individual took 2.91 trips on the surveyed day, making a total
number of surveyed 340,341 trips. Of these 116,934 individuals, 422 are members of a CS
organisation, which equals a share of 0.36 %. Unfortunately, it is observable from the data
whether they are part of a station-based or free-ﬂoating CS scheme. However, since free-ﬂoating
CS was only introduced in 2015 and only within CPH it can be assumed that most are station-
based CS members. Out of these 422 members, 9 (or 2.31 %) have reported on using CS on
the day they were surveyed on in a total of 23 trips, resulting in a market share of only 0.007
%. On average, they took 2.55 trips by CS when using it on the day. This suggests that rather
than using CS as a one-way service, these 9 individuals used it for longer tours with several
==PAGE:39==
6.1 Transportvaneundersøgelsen (TU)
31
all of TU
Greater CPH
CS Members
Freq
Perc
Freq
Perc
Freq
Perc
Gender
Male
56,955
48.71 %
6,137
48.02 %
250
59.24 %
Age
18 - 24
9,957
8.52 %
1,504
11.77 %
39
9.24 %
25 - 34
12,712
10.87 %
2,956
23.13 %
82
19.43 %
35 - 44
18,339
15.68 %
2,220
17.37 %
105
24.88 %
45 - 64
37,985
32.48 %
1,765
13.81 %
96
22.75 %
Annual Income
< 200
34,664
40.63 %
3,478
37.40 %
63
19.27 %
(gross in DKK
200-600
45,001
52.74 %
4,933
53.04 %
227
69.42 %
in thousand)
600 +
5,660
6.63 %
889
9.56 %
37
11.31 %
Occupation
Student
5,827
5.04 %
1,578
12.45 %
27
6.39 %
Employee
52,377
45.33 %
6,187
48.80 %
282
66.82 %
Retired
23,749
20.55 %
1,680
13.25 %
42
9.95 %
Education Level
University
43,567
37.26 %
6,929
54.22 %
260
61.61 %
Cars in household
none
17,596
15.05 %
5,614
43.93 %
155
36.73 %
one car
60,964
52.14 %
5,910
46.15 %
199
47.16 %
two or more
38,374
32.82 %
1,255
9.82 %
68
16.11 %
Home Address
within CPH
12,779
10.93 %
12,779
100.00 %
155
36.73 %
Table 6.1: Descriptive statistics of socio-demographic proﬁles in TU data with 116,934 obser-
vations including absolute frequency and percentage
stops. Even though no exact addresses of the departure and arrival points are available, the
municipality codes imply that all 9 individuals returned the CS vehicle to the starting point,
which can be seen as an indicator for round-trip CS. The following table 6.1 gives an overview
of the socio-demographic proﬁle of the regarded data set. In order to get a better understanding
of the relevant CS market, the greater CPH region is also regarded in detail as well as the
socio-demographic proﬁle of the 422 CS members.
As TU is a representative sample of the Danish population 51.29 % are female and 48.71 % are
male in all of TU, which can be expected. While this seems to be similar within the CPH area,
there are more male than female CS members. The age groups displayed in table 6.1 suggest
that the ages of the respondents could be normally distributed within the entire data set. This
can be veriﬁed by having a closer look at the age histogram, displayed in ﬁgure 6.1(a). There
are a lot of observations of young people and even children below the age of 18 in the data
set. Apart from those, the distribution seems to be rather normal with a peak around 45 years.
Figure 6.1 shows also the age distributions for the individuals within the CPH area as well as the
one for only the CS members. The average age of people living in CPH seems to be lower than
in the overall data set. Most CS members are between 30 and 50. Regarding annual income of
individuals, CS members have a higher income than the average in all of the TU data set. The
same applies for a higher education at a university, which is only represented by 37 % in all of
TU but 54 % within CPH and 61 % among CS members, respectively. It is also to be expected
that the percentage of people owning a car is smaller among CS members than in the whole
population. Finally, it should be noted that only 36 % of CS members live within the CPH area,
==PAGE:40==
6.1 Transportvaneundersøgelsen (TU)
32
that can also be seen as the area where free-ﬂoating CS is currently active. This leads to the
conclusion that among the 422 CS members, many are members of station-based CS schemes,
which are available all over Denmark and are not restricted to the CPH area.
(a) TU data set
(b) in Copenhagen
(c) CS Members
Figure 6.1: Distribution of age in complete data set (a), only for the 12,779 individuals living
in the CPH area (b) and the 422 individuals who are members of a CS scheme (c)
within TU data
TU includes a variable that indicates the euclidian distance to the next public transport station.
From this the access time can be derived, which can be an important factor for the mode choice
of an individual. It can be assumed that the distance to the next CS vehicle also inﬂuences an
individual’s decision whether or not to use CS or even become a member of a CS organisation.
Thus, it was decided to enhance TU data by further variables. Among them were distances to
the next CS station, the CS free-ﬂoating zone as well as some density measures indicating how
many station-based CS vehicles are located in a speciﬁc radius around the home. Therefore, 9
station-based and 2 free-ﬂoating CS providers in Denmark were considered. Their size ranged
from around 400 vehicles to as little as 5. Note that the list of providers might not be exhaustive
and very small local ones might have been neglected. A list of the included providers can
be found in Appendix B.1. The GPS coordinates of station-based CS vehicles were extracted
from the providers’ website or through personal contact and distances were calculated from
the individuals’ homes. For the free-ﬂoating zone, a distinction between the main zone and
satellites needed to be made. The main zone was deﬁned as the three municipalities CPH,
Frederiksberg and Gentofte, as this is the operating zone of the Danish provider GreenMobility.
A sketch of this area can be seen in Appendix B.1. Satellites are small zones outside of the main
zone where cars can also be parked and picked up. They are usually at important public places
institutions, such as the Technical University of Denmark, several hospitals or CPH airport.
A complete list of considered satellites can be found in Appendix B.2. The satellite zones of
both free-ﬂoating providers were manually extracted from their website and spatial polygons
were created in R (R, 2017). This software was also used to calculate the euclidian distances
from each individual’s home to each individual vehicle. Only the shortest was saved as was
the number of vehicles parked at this location, in order to later accurately calculate the density
measures. R also provides a function to calculate the shortest distance to a zone or polygon,
which was used to determine the shortest euclidian distance to the free-ﬂoating (FF) zone. An
overview of those variables for CS members can be found in table 6.2.
Both the distance to the closest station-based CS vehicle as well a the distance to the free-
==PAGE:41==
6.1 Transportvaneundersøgelsen (TU)
33
Distance (km)
#Cars
CS Station
FF Zone
1000m
2000m
Mean
15
74
5.3
17
Median
1.1
16
0
3
Std. Dev.
27
89
7.9
24.5
Minimum
0
0
0
0
Maximum
151
272
35
95
Table 6.2: Descriptive statistics of variables describing proximity to both station-based
and free-ﬂoating CS vehicles among CS members in TU
ﬂoating main zone or one of its satellite zones is shown. It can be seen that the distance to the
free-ﬂoating zone is much bigger than to the next CS station, both in terms of the maximum
as well as the mean and median. This emphasises the observation that not all CS vehicles are
located in the CPH area or its proximity, but rather all over Denmark. As free-ﬂoating CS is
only provided in CPH until now, the distances to the free-ﬂoating zone get rather high, when
an individual lives somewhere else, e.g. on Jylland. The other two displayed variables are
density measures, showing how many cars are located in a 1000m or 2000m radius around
the individuals’ homes. As the range for both variables is rather high with 0 to 35 or 95 cars,
respectively, it is more meaningful to interpret the median than the mean, which is prone to be
rather high. While the median for 1000m radius is 0, suggesting that most individuals do not
have any cars around their home, the median for 2000m is 3. This means that most CS members
have around 3 CS vehicles in a proximity of 2000m around their homes.
Distance
CS Vehicle Density
Home Address
Work
CS Station
FFZone
500m
1000m
2000m
Gr. CPH
FFZone
FFZone
Dist. Station
1
Dist. FFZone
0.654
1
500m
-0.259
-0.322
1
1000m
-0.293
-0.368
0.863
1
2000m
-0.309
-0.393
0.825
0.949
1
Greater CPH
-0.445
-0.635
0.485
0.557
0.598
1
HomeFFZone
-0.327
-0.460
0.650
0.742
0.796
0.716
1
WorkFFZone
-0.281
-0.417
0.382
0.434
0.461
0.509
0.547
1
Table 6.3: Correlation table for TU variables connected to proximity to CS, e.g. distance to CS
vehicles and zones, density of CS vehicles around home
The correlation table for these newly added variables to the TU data set shown in 6.3. These
observations are necessary for the modelling in the following chapter 7 when deciding, which
variables to include in the utility speciﬁcations. The correlation between the three density vari-
ables is rather high. Similarly, the density variables of vehicles around the home are correlated
with the free-ﬂoating zone, as many CS vehicles are located in this area. The correlations be-
tween the distance variables and all others are negative.
==PAGE:42==
6.2 Stated Preference Data (SP)
34
6.2 Stated Preference Data (SP)
The second data set was generated from the participants of the SC experiment, which was
described in detail in chapter 5. As mentioned there, it was not a representative sample of the
Danish population. Thus, it can be expected that some statistics are rather skewed and results
might be biased.
Frequency
Percent
Gender
Male
91
50.84 %
Age
18 - 24
53
29.61 %
25 - 34
90
50.28 %
35 - 44
24
13.41 %
45 - 64
12
6.70 %
Annual Income
< 200
97
54.19 %
(gross in DKK
200-600
39
21.79 %
in thousand)
600 +
28
15.64 %
Occupation
Student
100
55.57 %
Employee
65
36.31 %
Education Level
short-term university
56
31.28 %
mid- to long-term university
109
60.89 %
Household
single
43
24.02 %
ﬂat share
43
24.02 %
with children
42
23.46 %
Cars in household
none
125
69.83 %
one car
40
22.35 %
two or more
14
7.82 %
Home Address
within CPH
123
68.72 %
Table 6.4: Descriptive statistics of socio-demographic proﬁles of 179 respondents
In a time horizon of 10 days, 257 responses were collected. Out of these, 238 were validly
recorded. These again had to be reduced by those respondents who do not live in Denmark as
well as those who do not have a driver’s license since the target market was CS in Denmark. This
left 179 valid respondents. Each of these respondents were faced with 3 leisure scenarios and for
those who commute, another 3 commuting scenarios, leading to a total of 1005 observations.
An overview of the socio-demographic proﬁle of the sample is provided in table 6.4. A ﬁrst
look allows a brief familiarisation with the data collected through the survey. One observation
is that the genders are represented equally. Regarding the age distribution, a second look at
ﬁgure 6.2(a) shows that the sample is highly biased towards young people between 20 and 30
years. This also explains the high amount of people having a gross income of less than 200.000
DKK per year and the high amount of students (55.57%) in the sample. A second look at the
==PAGE:43==
6.2 Stated Preference Data (SP)
35
exact distribution of highest completed education levels in ﬁgure 6.2(b) shows that most of the
respondents already have or are currently in pursuit of a higher university education, e.g. a
Master’s degree. As 53% of those with mid-term further education and 35% of those with long-
term further education are still students, the sample seems to be even more skewed towards
high education individuals. All these students will most likely ﬁnish in the next few years as
highly educated people. These ﬁndings were to be expected as the survey was conducted in a
university environment.
(a) Age distribution
(b) Education levels
Figure 6.2: Distribution of age (a) and education levels (b) among respondents
Table 6.5 displays the overall market shares for the four examined modes: car, public transport,
bike and CS. However, this might be misleading as almost 70 % of the respondents were not
shown the car alternative, because they have no car available in their household. Therefore, the
shares respective to this availability should be regarded, as shown in table 6.6. It clariﬁes, that
the car mode is chosen more than a third of the times when available. Also, the share of CS
is much higher when a car is not available. It should be kept in mind that individuals were all
asked to imagine that CS is available to them, even though only 27.94 % indicated that they
already were members of a CS scheme (more details in appendix B.3).
Mode
Frequency
Share
Car
117
11.64 %
Public Transport
325
32.34 %
Bike
448
44.58 %
Car Sharing
115
11.44 %
Table 6.5: Observed market shares from survey data with 179 respondents
Several studies suggest that socio-demographic variables, such as gender, education or income
level have an impact on the mode choice of an individual, particularly regarding the CS mode
(Kopp, 2015; Le Vine et al., 2014; Prieto et al., 2017, etc). Therefore, the graphs in ﬁgure 6.3
provide some insights to this. From ﬁgure 6.3(a), it seems that indeed males are more prone
to using CS than females. While the share of CS does not seem to change signiﬁcantly among
different income groups (see ﬁgure 6.3(b)), the share of the car mode seems to increase with
==PAGE:44==
6.2 Stated Preference Data (SP)
36
Car available
Car not available
Mode
Frequency
Share
Frequency
Share
Car
117
36.79 %
Public Transport
60
18.87 %
265
38.57 %
Bike
119
37.42 %
329
47.89 %
Car Sharing
22
6.92 %
93
13.54 %
Table 6.6: Observed market shares from survey data respective to car availability
income. Furthermore, the share of both public transport and bike reduces with higher income.
These observations are important for determining later on, which variables to include in the
utility speciﬁcations of the different mode alternatives. Further graphs to illustrate the relation
between socio-demographic variables and the mode choice can be found in appendix B.
(a) Mode shares respective to gender
(b) Mode shares respective to income
Figure 6.3: Mode shares respective to gender (a) and income groups (b) among respondents
There is always the possibility that some individuals only choose the same mode over all choice
situations, no matter what the conditions. On the one hand, the trade-offs seen in the situations
could not have been too distinctive. On the other hand, there might be unobserved factors that
cause the respondent to stick to one speciﬁc mode, e.g. car owners being car enthusiasts. The
following table 6.7 shows how many respondents kept the same mode over all choice situations
they were presented with. It can be observed that most respondents retaining the same mode
choice over all alternatives are cyclists. This was to be expected in this sample that includes
many students, who are possibly rather cost sensitive and thus prefer the cheapest alternative.
Furthermore, it could be due to the region the survey was conducted in, as it is very common to
take the bike in the CPH area (Weinreich, 2017).
The ﬁrst part of this section was concerned with the socio-demographic proﬁle of the survey
sample. In order to get familiar with the underlying data, a correlation table for the alternative
speciﬁc variables that inﬂuenced the design of the experiment is presented in the following 6.8.
High correlations are marked in red. One is especially outstanding as the correlation between
car and CS time is 1. However, this is not surprising as these were set to be the same in the
experimental design as elaborated in chapter 5. It is also not surprising that the time variables
==PAGE:45==
6.2 Stated Preference Data (SP)
37
Mode
Frequency
Share
Car
4
2.23 %
Public Transport
11
6.15 %
Bike
23
12.85 %
Car Sharing
1
0.56 %
Table 6.7: Survey respondents choosing the same mode over all choice situations
for all modes are highly correlated with the distance as they are calculated based on that. This
also explains why the times among each other are correlated, e.g. for bike and public transport.
Car cost was also calculated based on the distance, which explains the high correlation between
car cost and time.
Dist
BikeTime
CarTime
CarCost
PTTime
PTCost
CSTime
CSCost
Dist
1
Bike(t)
0.971
1
Car(t)
0.920
0.827
1
Car(c)
0.888
0.790
0.921
1
PT(t)
0.973
0.976
0.836
0.813
1
PT(c)
0.239
0.198
0.295
0.328
0.266
1
CS(t)
0.920
0.827
1
0.921
0.836
0.295
1
CS(c)
0.610
0.648
0.442
0.317
0.632
0.110
0.443
1
Table 6.8: Correlation table for time and cost variables from survey
==PAGE:46==
7 Model Estimation and Results
38
7 Model Estimation and Results
This chapter outlines the modelling and estimation processes for the two previously introduced
data sets. Firstly, only simple models were estimated. The utility speciﬁcations were gradually
enhanced by adding new variables. Whenever a variable showed to be a signiﬁcant addition to
the model, it was kept. While not all steps will be reported in detail, explanations are given as to
what assumptions and interpretations were made. In a last step, mixed models were estimated
by including random distributions on certain coefﬁcients or adding panel effects.
7.1 Binary Logit Model of CS membership for TU data set
As explained in chapter 4, a binary logit model is composed of only two utility functions. In
this case, the goal is to model whether or not an individual is a member of any CS scheme.
It is therefore common to only include parameters in one of the two functions as estimators
are interpreted relative to the other function. This means that the alternative speciﬁc constant
(ASC) for the non-member function was set to zero for identiﬁcation and no other variables
were included in this function. Instead, several variables were added to the member-function in
order to ﬁnd the best model. The procedure was to add variables iteratively and one by one to
evaluate each effect. Different functional forms were also tested by trying a logarithmic form
or forming categories. In the ﬁrst set only socio-demographic data that was available in the TU
data set were included. The model can be seen in table 7.1.
Robust
Parameter
Coeff.
Asympt.
number
Description
estimate
std. error
t-stat
p-value
1
ASC CS-Member
-8.82
0.437
-20.18
0.00
2
Gender
0.296
0.115
2.58
0.01
3
Long Education
0.568
0.126
4.50
0.00
4
High School
-0.384
0.161
-2.38
0.02
5
Car Ownership
-1.87
0.141
-13.26
0.00
6
Bike Ownership
0.706
0.157
4.50
0.00
7
Income 4
0.623
0.0759
8.22
0.00
8
Children in Household
0.547
0.130
4.20
0.00
4 logarithmic
==PAGE:47==
7.1 Binary Logit Model of CS membership for TU data set
39
Summary statistics
Number of observations = 111, 057
L(β0)
=
−76978.846
L(ˆβ)
=
−2086.722
−2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
=
149784.249
¯ρ2
=
0.973
Table 7.1: Model 1 for BL on TU data
The estimated coefﬁcients need to be looked at from two points of view (Ben-Akiva and Ler-
man, 1985). On the one hand, a qualitative check whether the coefﬁcients are reasonable should
be conducted. This can be done by regarding the estimators’ signs. Only having a high school
degree (High School) seems to decrease the utility for becoming a CS member. This is to
be expected from many studies that suggest CS members are generally highly educated. It is
also backed by the third parameter Long Education that increases the utility of becoming a
CS member. The dummy variable Gender suggests that male individuals have a higher utility
than females. Bike and Car Ownership have opposite effects. While owning a car reduces the
utility of being a CS member, owning a bike increases it. Having Children in the Household
also increases the utility of being a CS member. The variable Income is not entering the utility
function as a categorical dummy variable as the others. It was ﬁrstly tested as a linear function.
However, it is very common to include income logarithmically. This showed to improve the
model signiﬁcantly. When testing and comparing different functional forms of variables, the
AIC and BIC can be consulted as shown in table 7.2. As both values are smaller when income
is included with a logarithmic form, this version is preferred. The coefﬁcient needs to be inter-
preted with care. If it entered the model linearly, the impact of a marginal increase of income on
the utility would be exactly the coefﬁcient. However, as income enters the model non-linearly,
the utility increases with 0.623/income, depending on the income of the individual. On the other
hand, the t-test should be regarded to test whether the coefﬁcients differ signiﬁcantly from zero.
This can be done easily, by checking the p-values for the coefﬁcients. The lower the p-value the
higher the signiﬁcance of the parameter to the model. Generally, the goal is to reject the null
hypothesis that the coefﬁcients are zero at a signiﬁcance level of at least 5 %, which is the case
for all eight parameters.
AIC
BIC
Income linear
4274.31
4351.26
Income logarithmic
4206.59
4283.54
Table 7.2: AIC and BIC for evaluating functional form of income in model 1
Next, the other goodness-of-ﬁt measures can be consulted. The most simple way is to make
use of the likelihood ratio test, which can be seen in table 7.1. The statistic −2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
is χ2-distributed with K = 8 degrees of freedom as there are eight parameters added to the
==PAGE:48==
7.1 Binary Logit Model of CS membership for TU data set
40
null-model. In this case, the null hypothesis that all coefﬁcients β are zero can be rejected at
a very high level of signiﬁcance. This is partly because the log likelihood of the null model
L(β0) is (negatively) very large as it depends on the number of observations in the TU data
set, which is 111,057. Ben-Akiva and Lerman (1985) suggest to test the null hypothesis that
all coefﬁcients except for the alternative-speciﬁc constant are zero: essentially comparing the
log likelihood of a model L(ˆβ) to the log likelihood of a model with only alternative-speciﬁc
constants L(c) = −2301.902:
−2[L(c) −L(ˆβ)] = −2[(−2301.902) −(−2086.722)] = 430.360 .
(7.1)
This hypothesis can also be rejected at a high signiﬁcance level, as 430.360 > 18.475, the latter
being the percentile of the χ2 distribution with K = 8 −1 = 7 degrees of freedom.
The other common goodness-of-ﬁt measure is the (adjusted) likelihood ratio index ¯ρ2. Its cal-
culation was demonstrated in chapter 4, equation 4.15. Comparing the likelihood ratio indices
of model 1 and the one with only the constant, an increase can be reported, suggesting once
more that model 1 is a better ﬁt: ¯ρ2(ˆβ) = 0.973 > 0.970 = ¯ρ2(c).
The ﬁrst model in table 7.1 only included variables that were already available in the TU data
set. In a second step, newly computed variables were included in the model. These were brieﬂy
explained in chapter 6 and describe the distance to the next CS vehicle, station or zone as well
as the density of cars around the individual’s home. This second model can be seen in table 7.3.
Robust
Parameter
Coeff.
Asympt.
number
Description
estimate
std. error
t-stat
p-value
1
ASC CS Member
-8.55
0.411
-20.79
0.00
2
Gender
0.309
0.114
2.71
0.01
3
Long Education
0.257
0.129
1.99
0.05
4
High School
-0.344
0.164
-2.10
0.04
5
Car Ownership
-1.27
0.144
-8.85
0.00
6
Bike Ownership
0.547
0.158
3.46
0.00
7
Income 5
0.549
0.0672
8.17
0.00
8
Children in Household
0.545
0.129
4.22
0.00
9
Distance CS Station 5
-0.188
0.0348
-5.40
0.00
10
Workplace in CS Zone
0.293
0.129
2.27
0.02
11
CS Cars within 500m
0.0660
0.0222
2.97
0.00
5 logarithmic
==PAGE:49==
7.1 Binary Logit Model of CS membership for TU data set
41
Summary statistics
Number of observations = 111, 057
L(β0)
=
−76978.846
L(ˆβ)
=
−2035.622
−2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
=
149886.449
¯ρ2
=
0.973
Table 7.3: Model 2 for BL on TU data
Parameters 1 to 8 are the same as in model 1 (see 7.1). While many more variables were tested,
the three new variables Distance to CS Station, Workplace in CS Zone and number of CS Cars
within a radius of 500m showed to be the best ﬁt. Amongst the other tested variables were
the distance to the existing free-ﬂoating zone, cars within 1000m or 2000m or whether the
home address is within the Greater CPH area. It is not surprising that no variables associated
with free-ﬂoating CS improve the model when looking back at the data as explained in chapter
6, as only 37 % of the members included in the TU data set, live within CPH and therefore
have access to free-ﬂoating CS. This also suggests that most of these individuals are probably
members of a station-based CS scheme. This explains why the distance to the next station-
based CS vehicle is a signiﬁcant addition to the model. This variable entered the model with a
logarithmic form, just as the income parameter. It can be assumed that the marginal decrease in
utility gets smaller the higher the distances are. Interestingly, the parameter Workplace in CS
zone adds meaningfulness to the model. It can be assumed that many people commute to the
capital region CPH from smaller cities and therefore could proﬁt from being a CS member even
though it is not offered in their hometown.
Again the likelihood ratio test (equation 4.14) and index values (equation 4.15) can be analysed
to see whether the addition of three new variables improves the model. While the ¯ρ2-value
stays the same, a likelihood ratio test reports a signiﬁcant improvement: −2[L(ˆβ)1 −L(ˆβ)2] =
−2[(−2086.722) −(−2035)] = 103.444 > 11.345 as the null hypothesis can be rejected at
even a 1% level of signiﬁcance.
As all variables have been tested and a BL model has been found (in 7.3), the ﬁnal modelling
step is to estimate a mixed logit model that allows for random taste variation. This can be
achieved by including a density function f(β) on one of the estimators. This density describes
the variation of estimators over the sample. The most common distribution is the normal dis-
tribution, which can be added to any of the continuous variables in the model. In this case, it
was tried for Income as well as the Distance to the next CS Station. The latter showed the most
improvements to the previous model in 7.3. As the variable was included as logarithmic in the
previous model, several distributions were tested. The most common is the normal distribution
β ∼N(µ, σ), where µ and σ are estimated by the model. Another possibility is the lognormal
distribution ln(β) ∼N(µ, σ). The latter could be reasonable as the variable was logarithmic
in the BL. Several models have been tested, but none showed to be a meaningful improvement
to the model, as the variance σ was often found to be insigniﬁcant. They can be seen in the
==PAGE:50==
7.1 Binary Logit Model of CS membership for TU data set
42
Appendix in tables C.1, C.2 and C.3. Furthermore, the model stability was tested by simulating
several times with different numbers of draws, starting from 100, to 1000 and 2000. Testing
showed that adding a normal distribution lead to the best results as can be seen in table 7.4.
Compared to model 2 in table 7.3, the distance variable is not included logarithmically as this
showed insigniﬁcant parameters.
Robust
Parameter
Coeff.
Asympt.
number
Description
estimate
std. error
t-stat
p-value
1
ASC Member
-8.51
0.421
-20.24
0.00
2
Gender
0.312
0.115
2.70
0.01
3
Long Education
0.279
0.130
2.16
0.03
4
High School
-0.354
0.165
-2.15
0.03
5
Car Ownership
-1.35
0.146
-9.24
0.00
6
Bike Ownership
0.562
0.160
3.52
0.00
7
Income 6
0.556
0.0683
8.14
0.00
8
Children in Household
0.546
0.131
4.17
0.00
9
µ Distance CS Station
-0.0402
0.0114
-3.54
0.00
10
σ Distance CS Station
-0.0298
0.00573
-5.20
0.00
11
Workplace in CS Zone
0.334
0.129
2.58
0.01
12
CS Cars within 500m
0.103
0.0183
5.66
0.00
Summary statistics
Number of observations
= 111, 057
Number of draws
=
2, 000
L(β0)
=
−76978.846
L(ˆβ)
=
−2039.079
−2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
=
149879.534
¯ρ2
=
0.973
Table 7.4: Model 3 for Mixed BL on TU data
The likelihood ratio test cannot be consulted in this case, as the change of a functional form of
a variable violates the requirement that models need to be a restriction of one another for these
comparisons. Instead, the AIC and BIC can be compared between model 2 and 3 (see table
7.5).
AIC
BIC
Model 2
4093.24
4199.04
Model 3
4102.16
4217.57
Table 7.5: AIC and BIC for comparing BL model 2 and 3
6 logarithmic
==PAGE:51==
7.2 Multinomial Logit Model of mode choice for SP data set
43
As mentioned in chapter 4, the model with the lowest AIC and BIC is preferred. For both values
this is the case for model 2. The likelihood ratio index also does not suggest any improvement
nor worsening as it stays the same. This shows that model 2 is better than model 3 and that
adding a mixing structure is not always an improvement.
7.2 Multinomial Logit Model of mode choice for SP data set
For this model, an initial utility speciﬁcation was already available as it was necessary to com-
pute the experimental design for the survey, as shown in table 5.1 in chapter 5. This model
is shown in table 7.6. It includes four utility functions for the alternatives: bike, car, public
transport (PT) and CS. The ultimate goal was to ﬁnd suitable utility speciﬁcations in order to
be able to interpret the data in a more meaningful way. Therefore, the ﬁrst task was to ﬁnd
accurate utility speciﬁcations depicting the alternative speciﬁc variables that were used to make
the experimental design. Only in a second step, socio-demographic variables were gradually
added to the model.
Robust
Parameter
Coeff.
Asympt.
number
Description
estimate
std. error
t-stat
p-value
1
ASC (Bike)
3.53
0.393
8.99
0.00
2
ASC (Car)
2.50
0.454
5.50
0.00
3
ASC (PT)
2.30
0.346
6.65
0.00
4
Time (Bike)
-0.0576
0.0102
-5.63
0.00
5
Time (CS)
-0.00391
0.0152
-0.26
0.80 *
6
Time (Car)
-0.00870
0.0164
-0.53
0.60 *
7
Time (PT)
-0.0187
0.0102
-1.84
0.07 *
8
Cost
-0.0297
0.00626
-4.74
0.00
9
Parking Search Time
-0.00232
0.0184
-0.13
0.90 *
10
Parking Cost per hour
-0.000752
0.0216
-0.03
0.97 *
11
Access Time (PT or CS)
0.0220
0.0260
0.85
0.40 *
12
Rain
-0.601
0.212
-2.83
0.00
13
Reservation (CS)
0.781
0.222
3.52
0.00
14
Discomfort
-1.60
0.220
-7.26
0.00
Summary statistics
Number of observations = 1005
L(β0)
=
−1195.588
L(ˆβ)
=
−1002.305
−2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
=
386.566
¯ρ2
=
0.150
Table 7.6: Model 1 for MNL on SP data
==PAGE:52==
7.2 Multinomial Logit Model of mode choice for SP data set
44
From table 7.6 several observations can be made that also outline the next steps that were
taken. As in the ﬁrst part of this chapter, the model should be looked at from two points of
view: qualitatively and quantitatively. On the one hand, a qualitative check can be conducted
by analysing the estimators’ signs. It is to be expected that increasing Time as well as Cost,
referring to the trip as well as the parking procedure, reduces an individual’s utility of using
this transport mode. Similarly, an increased Access Time should reduce the utility of using
public transport or CS. However, this is not the case in this model. Therefore, this parameter
will be investigated in more detail later on. The dummy variable describing the possibility to
reserve a CS vehicle prior to taking the trip (Reservation), shows to increase its utility. Special
attention should be given to the dummy variables Rain and Discomfort. In model 1, they are
included in all but one utility speciﬁcation (CS) for identiﬁcation. This means that compared
to using CS, Rain or Discomfort respectively, reduce the utility of using car, public transport or
the bike. Essentially, the underlying assumption of this model would be that Rain inﬂuences an
individual the same way when deciding between, e.g. public transport and bike. As this might
not be realistic, these parameters should be investigated further. After having checked the signs,
it could be interesting to look at the magnitude of the estimators. It seems that all time and cost
coefﬁcients are rather small. This could be due to the scale of the data. Therefore, for the next
models, the scale was adjusted by dividing all these variables by 100.
On the other hand, a quantitative check or t-test can be conducted by looking at the p-values of
the coefﬁcients to determine whether whether the coefﬁcients differ signiﬁcantly from zero. The
parameters that are marked with an asterisk, have a rather high p-value suggesting they are not
signiﬁcant to the model. The goal is to reject the null hypothesis that the coefﬁcients are zero
at a 5 % signiﬁcance level. This is not the case for the Time coefﬁcients for three alternatives as
well as the parking parameters (Parking Search Time and Parking Cost) and the Access Time to
public transport and CS, which raised some suspicion earlier already. Before analysing it more
closely, a few explanations should be made regarding the summary statistics in the bottom of
table 7.6.
The goodness-of-ﬁt measures were explained in chapter 4. The ¯ρ2-value (see equation 4.15)
only indicates how much better the model is compared to having all coefﬁcients with values zero
as suggested by Ben-Akiva and Lerman (1985). A common approach would rather be to add
additional parameters to the model (either by adding a new variable or making the coefﬁcients
alternative speciﬁc) and then compare the log likelihood values L(ˆβ) by conducting a likelihood
ratio test with a χ2-distributed statistic (see equation 4.14).
As mentioned above, one of the parameters that should be investigated more closely is the
Access Time to public transport or CS. Therefore, this parameter was divided and tested as
alternative speciﬁc. The underlying assumption being that the access times to CS and public
transport are perceived differently by the respondents. Indeed this showed to be the case. While
increased Access Time seems to reduce the utility of CS it increased the one for using public
transport. However, both showed to be insigniﬁcant (see Appendix table C.4). Therefore,
they were left out of the utility speciﬁcations in the following models. Similarly, Rain and
==PAGE:53==
7.2 Multinomial Logit Model of mode choice for SP data set
45
Discomfort were tested as alternative speciﬁc. Still, the CS alternative served as a reference. The
parameter Rain turned out not to be signiﬁcant for the car and public transport alternative. This
essentially means that individuals are not inﬂuenced by rain when choosing between car, public
transport and CS. Indeed, Rain showed to be signiﬁcant when included in the bike alternative.
This seems reasonable, as people might not mind rain when driving a vehicle, be it private or
shared, or when taking public transport, but might refrain from taking a bike when it is raining.
The parameter Discomfort showed not to be signiﬁcant for car, but for public transport and bike.
Again, this needs to be seen with regard to the fourth alternative CS. It seems that when carrying
large bags of groceries or a big sports bag, respondents do not distinguish signiﬁcantly between
car and CS.
Furthermore, the Time parameters were tested in different ways, as they showed large p-values
in model 1. As they were alternative speciﬁc at ﬁrst, one option could be to group them rea-
sonably. As car and CS times were presented as the same in each choice situation as explained
in chapter 5, it seems realistic to combine the two. Another interpretation could be to combine
car, public transport and CS and have an additional time parameter for bike, as this alternative
is for free. The latter option showed the best results, regarding signiﬁcance of parameters, ¯ρ2 as
well as the likelihood ratio test.
Time and cost coefﬁcients can also be tested and compared by qualitative tests, e.g. by calcu-
lating ratios such as the VOT. According to Rich’s (2016) calculation as shown in equation 4.9
in chapter 4, it can be calculated rather easily for linear speciﬁcations, by simply dividing the
cost by the time coefﬁcient. Since the bike alternative has no cost parameter as it is for free, no
VOT can be calculated. The others are shown in the following table 7.7.
Mode
Value of Time (VOT)
DKK/min
DKK/hr
Car
0.29
17.58
PT
0.63
37.78
CS
0.13
7.89
Table 7.7: Values of time for car, PT and CS for model 1 in DKK/min and DKK/hr
As explained in chapter 4, the VOT is mostly used for validation of the model. As the VOTs
shown in table 7.7 are rather low, compared to the danish average, which is around 70 DKK/hr,
this can be seen as an indicator for the model still needing improvement. Another possibility
to improve the VOT could be to also consider the cost parameter to be alternative speciﬁc. The
most obvious way of having three separate cost parameters showed only little improvement
to the model. Based on the assumption that car owners regard using their vehicle as almost
free, while it is clear that public transport and CS need to be paid for "out-of-pocket", it was
also tested to have two Cost parameters: one for car and one for the two remaining cost-based
alternatives public transport and CS.
A common way to increase signiﬁcance of parameters and also inﬂuence the VOT is by modify-
ing the functional form (Ben-Akiva and Lerman, 1985). Thus, both the cost as well as the time
==PAGE:54==
7.2 Multinomial Logit Model of mode choice for SP data set
46
coefﬁcients were included as logarithmic. However, this did not seem to improve the model.
Finally, it was decided to neglect Parking Search Time and Parking Cost in the following mod-
els, as these p-values indicated such a high insigniﬁcance to the model. The result of the above
mentioned changes was model 2, as shown in table 7.8.
Robust
Parameter
Coeff.
Asympt.
number
Description
estimate
std. error
t-stat
p-value
1
ASC (Bike)
4.12
0.304
13.57
0.00
2
ASC (Car)
0.989
0.334
2.96
0.00
3
ASC (PT)
1.53
0.229
6.69
0.00
4
Time (Bike)
-9.06
1.02
-8.88
0.00
5
Time (Car, PT, CS)
-3.31
0.974
-3.39
0.00
6
Cost (Car)
-1.58
1.45
-1.09
0.28
7
Cost (PT, CS)
-3.82
0.621
-6.14
0.00
8
Rain (Bike)
-1.30
0.157
-8.30
0.00
9
Reservation (CS)
0.675
0.216
3.12
0.00
10
Discomfort (Bike)
-2.49
0.232
-10.74
0.00
11
Discomfort (PT)
-0.970
0.204
-4.76
0.00
Summary statistics
L(β0)
=
−1195.588
L(ˆβ)
=
−927.046
−2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
=
537.084
¯ρ2
=
0.215
Table 7.8: Model 2 for MNL on SP data
Comparing model 1 and 2 can again be done qualitatively as well as quantitatively. On the
one hand, the estimators now have much more similar values as the variables were scaled. The
signs as well as the magnitude of the estimators seem reasonable considering the alternatives
they belong to. On the other hand, the ¯ρ2-values can be compared as both models refer to
the same data set. A clear increase can be observed from 0.150 to 0.215. Additionally, the
aforementioned statistical likelihood ratio test could theoretically be performed given that one
model is a restriction of the other (Ben-Akiva and Lerman, 1985). However, this is not the case.
Still, each of the results tables 7.6 and 7.8 already include the likelihood ratio test, under the
null hypothesis that all coefﬁcients β are zero. The value of the test statistic is then compared to
the percentile of the χ2-distribution with K = 11 degrees of freedom. Since 537.084 > 24.125,
the null hypothesis can be rejected at least at a 0.01 level of signiﬁcance.
The new VOTs could be calculated again. As the Time coefﬁcient is the same for all the three
cost-related alternatives, it stays the same in the calculation. However, as the Cost is now
divided in car cost and out-of-pocket costs for public transport and CS, the VOT will vary
==PAGE:55==
7.2 Multinomial Logit Model of mode choice for SP data set
47
between car and the other two. The new VOTs are shown in table 7.9.
Mode
Value of Time (VOT)
DKK/min
DKK/hr
Car
2.09
125.69
PT
0.87
51.99
CS
0.87
51.99
Table 7.9: Values of time for car, PT and CS for model 2 in DKK/min and DKK/hr
Compared to the VOTs in model 1 (7.7), the new values for public transport and CS seem much
more realistic. However, the VOT for car seems rather high now. As this is not the ﬁnal model,
this is not too problematic as it might change when new variables are added.
In the next step, the model is enriched by gradually adding socio-demographic variables to the
utility speciﬁcations and testing whether they add signiﬁcance to the model. Several factors
need to be considered. While some variables are clearly associated with an alternative, e.g.
Bike Ownership or the Number of Cars available, others could theoretically enter each alterna-
tive’s utility speciﬁcation. Therefore, a systematical process was followed when including new
variables. Firstly, they were included as a generic variable with the same parameter over all
alternatives, except the CS one, which was always seen as the reference. Secondly, they were
split up among the alternatives and the model was estimated with separate parameters. Thirdly,
different functional types were tested, e.g. logarithm or categorical. The ones that showed to
be insigniﬁcant were immediately eliminated from the model. Some variables were recorded as
categorical in the survey, e.g. Income, Occupation, Education. These were included as seemed
ﬁt from the data analysis that was conducted before and documented in chapter 6, e.g. Pur-
pose seemed to have an effect on bike usage (see B.5). This process lead to model 3, which is
displayed in table 7.10.
Summary statistics
L(β0)
=
−1195.588
L(ˆβ)
=
−838.078
−2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
=
715.021
¯ρ2
=
0.283
==PAGE:56==
7.2 Multinomial Logit Model of mode choice for SP data set
48
Robust
Parameter
Coeff.
Asympt.
number
Description
estimate
std. error
t-stat
p-value
1
ASC (Bike)
3.46
0.511
6.77
0.00
2
ASC (Car)
-0.141
0.400
-0.35
0.72
3
ASC (PT)
1.57
0.292
5.36
0.00
4
Time (Bike)
-10.5
1.12
-9.39
0.00
5
Time (Car, PT, CS)
-3.99
1.11
-3.60
0.00
6
Cost (Car)
-3.15
1.46
-2.15
0.03
7
Cost (PT, CS)
-4.79
0.735
-6.52
0.00
8
Rain (Bike)
-1.41
0.163
-8.62
0.00
9
Reservation (CS)
0.608
0.222
2.74
0.01
10
Discomfort (Bike)
-2.15
0.254
-8.46
0.00
11
Discomfort (PT)
-1.03
0.218
-4.73
0.00
12
Bike Ownersh. (Bike)
1.44
0.410
3.51
0.00
13
Number of Cars (Car) 7
1.89
0.487
3.88
0.00
14
Pendlerkort (PT)
1.21
0.175
6.88
0.00
15
Gender (Car, PT, Bike)
-0.508
0.217
-2.34
0.02
16
Purpose (Bike)
-0.783
0.181
-4.32
0.00
17
Employed (PT, Bike)
-0.639
0.195
-3.28
0.00
18
Children (Car, Bike)
0.999
0.198
5.04
0.00
19
Single (Car)
3.03
0.508
5.97
0.00
Table 7.10: Model 3 for MNL on SP data
Model 2 and 3 can now be compared by using the likelihood ratio test as explained by Ben-
Akiva and Lerman (1985). Model 3 is based on model 2 and simply adds variables to it. There-
fore, the likelihood ratio is calculated as follows:
−2[L(ˆβ)2 −L(ˆβ)3] = −2[(−927.046) −(−838.078)] = 177.936 .
(7.2)
This test statistic is χ2-distributed with K = 19 −11 = 8 degrees of freedom, since eight
additional parameters were added. Since it is bigger than threshold for the 5 % (and even 1
%) signiﬁcance, it can be concluded that the additional parameters added meaningfulness to the
model and should be included. This test was conducted for each iteration when a new variable
was added. In the following the new parameters will be elaborated more closely.
At ﬁrst, only alternative speciﬁc variables were added, e.g. Bike Ownership to the bike utility
function and Car Ownership to the car utility function. While the former worked well, the latter
seemed to correlate highly with the ASC for car. This could be expected as the car alternative
7 logarithmic
==PAGE:57==
7.2 Multinomial Logit Model of mode choice for SP data set
49
was only shown to those respondents who have a car. Therefore, it was decided to include the
Number of Cars instead, which still showed a similar effect as most of those respondents shown
the car alternative, had exactly one available (75 %). A possibility to change this, is to include
the logarithm of this variable. Thereby, the individuals who have one car available, do not
inﬂuence the utility function for car, as the logarithm of 1 is 0. However, those that own more
than one car do increase the utility of using the car alternative. This showed to be a signiﬁcant
improvement of the model. For the public transport alternative, two variables were tested:
Rejsekort 8 and Pendlerkort 9. Only Pendlerkort showed to be a signiﬁcant addition to the public
transport utility function. This is to be expected as a rejsekort is owned by most respondents
(93 %), only gives small discounts and is not a reason for preferring public transport to other
modes. The variable Gender was tested in various ways: as alternative speciﬁc and by grouping
alternatives differently. As shown in table 7.10, having the same parameter for car, public
transport and bike as opposing to CS, performed the best. As it assumes the value 1 for males,
it suggests that the utility of using car, public transport or bike reduces for males compared
to the utility of using CS. Purpose assumes the value 1 if a leisure trip is considered and 0 if
it was a commute trip. Again, various options were tested, it only showed to be signiﬁcant
when included in the bike alternative. It suggests that the utility for cycling decreases when a
leisure trip, as opposed to a commute trip, is considered. Several dummies for the categorical
variable Occupation were tested, e.g. student. However, as over 50 % of the sample from
the survey were students, this variable was not very meaningful. The variable Employed on
the other hand, showed to be signiﬁcant when included in the public transport and bike utility
speciﬁcation, suggesting employment leads to a reduction of utility of these two alternatives.
Another categorical variable is the household composition, which could assume values such as
single or double, each with and without children as well as ﬂatsharing. Again different ways
were tested to include these in the speciﬁcations. The most signiﬁcant were Children in the
Household when included in the car and bike alternative and jointly estimated as well as the
dummy variable Single household in the car alternative. Many other categorical variables were
tested as well, amongst them education and income levels or whether the home address is within
the current free-ﬂoating zone, which is composed of the most central municipalities in Greater
CPH. However, none of them showed to be signiﬁcant. The discrete variable age was also tested
in several functional forms: linear, logarithmic and categorical, but showed no improvement to
the model.
A curiosity of model 3 is the insigniﬁcance of the ASC for car. This could be interpreted as the
model already explaining most of the utility for this alternative, so that the constant becomes
insigniﬁcant. Another conspicuous point is the Time coefﬁcient for bike. It seems to be rather
high compared to the other estimators. This could be an indicator for the parameter accounting
for some unobserved factors that are not included in the model or else a very high penalty on
bike time compared to the other modes.
8 electronic ticketing system giving discounts on individual trips
9 commuter pass for travelling for free in a speciﬁed area
==PAGE:58==
7.2 Multinomial Logit Model of mode choice for SP data set
50
Mode
Value of Time (VOT)
DKK/min
DKK/hr
Car
1.27
76
PT
0.83
49.98
CS
0.83
49.98
Table 7.11: Values of time for car, PT and CS for model 3 in DKK/min and DKK/hr
Finally, the VOTs could be compared again, see table 7.11. As mentioned before, the VOT for
car is now in a more realistic range. This is a clear qualitative indicator for the model including
the socio-demographic variables being a much better ﬁt to the data than the previous model 2.
Additionally, the ¯ρ2 increased and indicates an improved model ﬁt.
After having included all observed parameters in an MNL, an MMNL is estimated, which al-
lows structures within the data. As this data set is comprised of panel data as individuals give
several responses, there could be correlation in unobserved factors for each individual. In order
to capture these effects, error components αi are added to the utility functions. As with ASC it
is necessary that one alternative’s error component is set to zero for identiﬁcation. As testing
showed that the error components for the public transport alternative has the smallest variance,
αPT
i
was set to zero. The model is shown in table 7.13. The model’s stability was conﬁrmed by
running it several times with different numbers of draws between 100 and 2000. These showed
very similar estimators, varying less than the reported standard error, implying a stable model.
Additionally, different mixing structures were tested, e.g. with a random distribution on the
Cost (see Appendix table C.6) or Time (see Appendix table C.5) coefﬁcients. However, none
showed to be signiﬁcantly better than model 4, which simply incorporates the panel effect by
adding error components.
Finally, one way of validating the model is testing it on another data set. In the weeks between
the modelling and hand in of this thesis, some more data was collected in the mode choice
survey. While there was no time to estimate a new model based on it, it could indeed be used
for validation. Therefore, the model 3 presented in table 7.10 was used to simulate market
shares on the extended data set. This lead to the following results.
observed market shares
simulated market shares
Car
16.22 %
19.51 %
PT
29.45 %
26.71 %
Bike
43.72 %
40.54 %
CS
10.61 %
13.22 %
Table 7.12: Observed and simulated market shares on extended survey data with 62 new respon-
dents based on MNL model 3
Comparing these percentage values, it seems that generally the model does not make any grave
miscalculations. While the car and CS alternatives are overestimated by around 3 percent points,
the bike and public transport alternatives are underestimated.
==PAGE:59==
7.2 Multinomial Logit Model of mode choice for SP data set
51
Robust
Parameter
Coeff.
Asympt.
number
Description
estimate
std. error
t-stat
p-value
1
ASC (Bike)
4.52
0.809
5.58
0.00
2
ASC (Car)
-0.238
0.599
-0.40
0.69
3
ASC (PT)
1.80
0.366
4.92
0.00
4
Time (Bike)
-13.60
1.60
-8.49
0.00
5
Time (Car, PT, CS)
-4.74
1.34
-3.54
0.00
6
Cost (Car)
-4.62
2.22
-2.09
0.04
7
Cost (PT, CS)
-5.77
0.902
-6.39
0.00
8
Rain (Bike)
-1.92
0.259
-7.43
0.00
9
Reservation (CS)
0.638
0.247
2.59
0.01
10
Discomfort (Bike)
-2.89
0.344
-8.41
0.00
11
Discomfort (PT)
-1.27
0.257
-4.94
0.00
12
Bike Ownersh. (Bike)
1.74
0.660
2.64
0.01
13
Number of Cars (Car) 10
3.52
0.727
3.17
0.00
14
Pendlerkort (PT)
1.44
0.300
4.81
0.00
15
Gender (Car, PT, Bike)
-0.546
0.299
-1.82
0.07
16
Purpose (Bike)
-1.03
0.261
-3.96
0.00
17
Employed (PT, Bike)
-0.601
0.307
-1.96
0.05
18
Children (Car, Bike)
1.19
0.343
3.46
0.00
19
Single (Car)
4.48
0.788
5.68
0.00
20
αBike
i
(Bike)
-1.60
0.219
-7.31
0.00
21
αCS
i
(CS)
-1.01
0.258
-3.92
0.00
22
αCar
i
(Car)
-1.03
0.381
-2.70
0.01
Summary statistics
Number of observations
= 1, 005
Number of individuals
=
179
Number of draws
= 1, 000
L(β0)
=
−1195.588
L(ˆβ)
=
−784.901
−2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
=
821.374
¯ρ2
=
0.325
Table 7.13: Model 4 for Mixed MNL on SP data with random coefﬁcients capturing panel effect
10 logarithmic
==PAGE:60==
8 Discussion
52
8 Discussion
In this chapter, the previously reported results are critically discussed and compared to other
ﬁndings in literature as well as set into context with the research questions formulated in the
introductory chapter 1.
RQ 1: CS market share
The ﬁrst research question of this thesis was concerned with determining the market share
of CS in Denmark, or more speciﬁcally CPH. This can be done by consulting both data sets
TU and the responses from the SC experiment. TU data suggested that only 0.36 % of the
Danish population are members of a CS scheme. The respondents to the survey were also asked
about their CS membership. In this sample 27.93 % indicated they are members of any CS
scheme. Out of these 90 % are members of a free-ﬂoating CS scheme, such as DriveNow or
GreenMobility, which are available in CPH. This suggests that the percentage of people living
in an urban area, such as CPH is higher than the average over all of Denmark (see also ﬁgure
B.6 in the Appendix showing the share of CS members within CPH compared to outside of
CPH). It is also possible that the share of CS members within TU is underestimated, as CS is
still new and has been growing strongly in the past few years. As the regarded TU data set
encompasses data since 2009, the overall CS membership share of 0.36 % might actually not
be a true representation of the current share.
From the SP data set, the market shares of the four investigated modes could also be determined.
As displayed in table 6.5, CS has a market share of 11.44 %. Comparing these to the information
from the TU data set that only 0.36 % of the sample are members of a CS scheme, this might be
overestimated. The results from the SC survey need to be regarded carefully as the sample by far
not representative for the danish population. It is very small and highly skewed towards students
(> 55 %). Furthermore, certain biases are likely to have inﬂuenced the results. Selection bias
can occur when respondents know that the investigation of CS is the aim of the survey. This is
also closely related to social desirability bias, which describes a respondents behaviour towards
a desirable result, e.g. choosing the innovative and green transport alternative CS. Finally, it
is also likely that the provided information was not read carefully by all respondents and some
information might have been neglected, forgotten or overlooked.
An approximation of the share of CS members only within the Greater CPH area can be made
by combing the TU and SP data sets. According to TU data, only 0.77 % of the people living
in Greater CPH are members of a CS scheme. However, taking into account that from the SC
==PAGE:61==
8 Discussion
53
survey, 25 % respondents were members, which all lived in the Greater CPH are and are mostly
younger than 35, a new market share can be calculated:
(#individuals in Gr. CPH and below 35) ∗0.25
#individuals in Gr. CPH
= 8004 ∗0.25
20, 963
= 9.55% .
(8.1)
This would lead to an overall share of CS members in Denmark of 1.94 %. Of course, the
calculation in 8.1 is highly simpliﬁed and the newly calculated share can and should only be
seen as an indication for the membership numbers being higher than shown in TU.
The results from the simulation of newly added survey data as shown in table 7.12 can also be
consulted. The estimated model that was used to simulate market shares, seems to overestimate
the CS alternative, as it was lower in the real data. Thus, while no deﬁnite value can be provided
for the CS market share in Denmark or CPH, the results are indeed an indication as to how the
market may develop in the next years. While CS membership numbers all over Denmark are
still rather low, the mode share is already above 10 % in a sample that is highly inﬂuenced by
young people’s choices living in urban areas, even though CS is still rather new to Denmark.
Especially, free-ﬂoating CS has only been available for a few years, and already 25 % of the
SP sample indicated they are a member of such an organisation. The combination of the infor-
mation from both data sets suggests that already the share of CS members within the Greater
CPH area is almost at 10 %. Even if this might be an overestimation of the true value, it is an
indication of what it could be like in the next years.
RQ 2: CS user characteristics
As expressed in chapter 3, researchers all over the world have assessed what socio-demographic
factors inﬂuence a person to use CS. The second research question of this thesis aimed at deter-
mining whether there are similar characteristics of CS members and users in Denmark. There-
fore, the two logit models presented in this thesis can be consulted. Generally, it can be expected
that the male gender, a high income, long education, urban living environment and single house-
holds have a positive effect on becoming a CS member as well as using this mode (Becker et al.,
2017; Kopp, 2015; Kortum, 2012; Prieto et al., 2017; Le Vine et al., 2014; Millard-Ball et al.,
2005; Schmöller et al., 2015, etc).
The BL model estimated in section 7.1 suggests that in Denmark the male gender, long educa-
tion, a high income as well as the location of the workplace have a positive impact on the utility
of becoming a CS member. Furthermore, car ownership has a negative impact as well as a low
education level. Interestingly, children in the household seem to have a positive impact on CS.
This contradicts the ﬁndings of Kortum (2012) who states that households with children tend
not to use CS due to the "car seat issue". Additionally, bike ownership has a positive impact.
This could be explained by multi-modality that has been mentioned as typical behaviour of CS
users as well (Kopp et al., 2015).
==PAGE:62==
8 Discussion
54
The MNL model presented in section 7.2 exhibits similar ﬁndings. However, it is more cumber-
some to interpret, as the included parameters are only relative to the other alternatives. Thus,
the gender variable, for example, has the same coefﬁcient for car, public transport and bike,
suggesting again that, compared to the others, CS is preferred by males. The employment sta-
tus of the individual has the same effect as on using car, while being employed has a negative
impact on public transport and bike compared to the two car associated alternatives. Other than
the BL model suggested and now in accordance with Kortum (2012), children in the household
seem to have a negative impact on CS as well as public transport, as this dummy has a positive
coefﬁcient in the car and bike alternative.
RQ 3: Substitution patterns
Substitution patterns between the different modes are interesting to many stakeholders, includ-
ing CS providers as well as policy- and decision-makers on a municipal or governmental level.
Therefore, the third research question was to determine how users change their behaviour when
confronted with changes in the transport system, e.g. cost or time increases.
Elasticities are a way of describing substitution patterns among alternatives. For logit models,
such as MNL, elasticities are a manifastiation of the IIA property. The following table 8.1
shows the elasticities with regard to cost for MNL model 3 shown in 7.10. As the cost parameter
enters this model linearly, the elasticity of CS cost is calculated for each individual as follows:
βCost(CS) ∗Cost(CS) ∗(1 −PCS). The cross-elasticity, which describes the percentage impact
on the probability of any of the other alternatives induced by a percentage change in CS cost,
is also calculated for each individual: −(βCost(CS) ∗Cost(CS) ∗PCS). The averages over all
individuals are the values displayed in table 8.1.
Car-Cost
PT-Cost
CS-Cost
Car
-0.1149
0.2100
0.1457
PT
0.0784
-0.4213
0.1457
Bike
0.0784
0.2100
0.1457
CS
0.0784
0.2100
-1.3267
Table 8.1: Elasticities of Car, PT and CS cost derived from MNL model 3 shown in 7.10
This study is particularly interested in the CS alternative. The values from table 8.1 suggest,
that a 10 % increase in cost for CS leads to a reduction of the probability of individuals choosing
CS of 13.3 %. At the same time, the other three alternatives would gain market share of 1.46 %
each. Due to the IIA property of MNL models, the cross-elasticity is the same for all remaining
alternatives.
Similarly, the elasticities for time can be determined as reported in table 8.2. It seems that
individuals are particularly sensitive to an increase in time when cycling. A 10 % increase
in bike time leads to a reduction of probability of individuals choosing bike of 19.98 %. The
==PAGE:63==
8 Discussion
55
cross-elasticity suggests that each of the other alternatives would gain 11.79 %. As mentioned
in chapter 4, it is important to interpret elasticities relatively to each other. Both tables 8.1 and
8.2 exhibit rather small elasticities for the car alternative compared to the other modes. This
can also be explained by the comparatively small market share of car in the sample, as the
probability directly inﬂuences the elasticity as shown in equation 4.11. Furthermore, the high
elasticity for time is inﬂuenced by the variable itself that is much higher than the time for the
other alternatives, due to the assumptions taken in chapter 5 about average speeds.
Car-Time
PT-Time
Bike-Time
CS-Time
Car
-0.0907
0.4062
1.1793
0.0717
PT
0.0590
-0.6881
1.1793
0.0717
Bike
0.0590
0.4062
-1.9829
0.0717
CS
0.0590
0.4062
1.1793
-0.5714
Table 8.2: Elasticities of Car, PT, Bike and CS time from MNL model 3 shown in 7.10
The cross-elasticities in tables 8.1 and 8.2 are a manifestation of the IIA property of logit mod-
els, as they are the same for all remaining alternatives. This might not always be realistic, as
individuals might be prone to switch one alternative for a speciﬁc other one. A common as-
sumption is that CS is a substitute for private cars, which would lead to less trafﬁc within urban
areas (Shaheen et al., 1998; Millard-Ball et al., 2005). However, there is also reason to believe
that CS is in fact a substitution for public transport for several reasons (Becker et al., 2017;
Firnkorn, 2012). Firstly, car ownership is comparably low already in Denmark. Secondly, CS
provides more ﬂexibility than public transport, which could be attractive to many people. These
unpropotional substitution patterns can be determined when analysing MMNL models, such as
model 4 (7.13), as these are not restricted by the IIA property. Instead of calculating elasticities,
which is rather complex for mixed logit models, they can also be determined through simula-
tion as explained in chapter 4. Increases in both cost and time by 10 % each were simulated
independently and their impacts expressed as elasticities are reported in tables 8.3 and 8.4.
Car-Cost
PT-Cost
CS-Cost
Car
-0.0730
0.0610
0.0502
PT
0.0902
-0.3837
0.1537
Bike
0.0443
0.1676
0.1055
CS
0.1467
0.3217
-1.3497
Table 8.3: Elasticities of Car, PT and CS cost derived from MMNL model 4 shown in 7.13
based on a simulation of a cost increase for each mode of 10 %
Indeed, the IIA property seems to be a restriction as a simulated increase of cost for CS does
not proportionally draw from the other alternatives. Again, individuals seem to react strongly
to an increase in CS cost, especially compared to an increase in car or public transport cost.
Individuals also tend to switch mostly between CS and public transport - both ways: A 10 %
CS cost increase leads to an increase in probability for public transport of 1.54 %; A 10 %
==PAGE:64==
8 Discussion
56
public transport cost increase leads to an increase in probability for CS of 3.22 %, thus backing
Becker et al. (2017); Firnkorn (2012). However, when car cost increases, the probability of CS
also rises by 1.46 %, indicating that CS is indeed a substitution for car trips.
Car-Time
PT-Time
Bike-Time
CS-Time
Car
-0.1085
0.0906
0.3383
0.0372
PT
0.0665
-0.5840
0.9505
0.0505
Bike
0.0793
0.3555
-1.6137
0.0600
CS
0.1219
0.5619
1.3104
-0.5990
Table 8.4: Elasticities of Car, PT, Bike and CS time from MMNL model 4 shown in 7.13 based
on a simulation of a time increase for each mode of 10 %
Additionally, the simulated time elasticities should also be consulted. An increase in public
transport time by 10 % leads to a large increase of the share of the CS alternative of 5.62 %.
As already suggested by the elasticities of the logit model in 8.2, individuals seem to be very
sensitive to increases in bike time. Interestingly, the probability of CS increases more than the
probability of public transport. However, it needs to be kept in mind that the market share
of public transport is generally much higher than CS. Finally, an increasing CS time by 10 %
seems to have a smaller impact than increases in CS cost by 10 %. The probability of the public
transport and bike alternative increase mostly as a reaction to an increase in CS time.
Generally, these ﬁndings of unproportional substitution patterns could indicate an underlying
nesting structure. One hypothesis could be that car and CS are in one nest, while the other two
are in another. Another hypothesis could be that rather public transport and CS are nested. In
order to test this, a cross-nested logit model was estimated to determine, which nest CS belongs
to. Therefore, correlation was added as random coefﬁcients for a combination of CS and each
of the other attributes γCarCS
i
(see Appendix table C.7). By consulting the coefﬁcients for these
random terms, the goal was to determine, which alternatives are most nested. As discussed
before, in order to determine whether a model is stable, different numbers of draws are necessary
to see whether the estimated coefﬁcients change signiﬁcantly. The reported results are based on
5000 draws. They show that only between car and CS signiﬁcant correlation occurs. Adding
these correlation coefﬁcients γ also inﬂuenced the previously added panel coefﬁcients α and
their signiﬁcance. The ﬁnal model with only signiﬁcant random coefﬁcients is seen below in
table 8.5.
Summary statistics
Number of observations
= 1, 005
Number of individuals
=
179
Number of draws
= 5, 000
L(β0)
=
−1195.588
L(ˆβ)
=
−784.421
−2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
=
822.334
¯ρ2
=
0.325
==PAGE:65==
8 Discussion
57
Robust
Parameter
Coeff.
Asympt.
number
Description
estimate
std. error
t-stat
p-value
1
ASC (Bike)
4.52
0.807
5.61
0.00
2
ASC (Car)
-0.194
0.606
-0.32
0.75
3
ASC (PT)
1.84
0.368
5.00
0.00
4
Time (Bike)
-13.6
1.62
-8.39
0.00
5
Time (Car, PT, CS)
-4.77
1.35
-3.53
0.00
6
Cost (Car)
-5.05
2.29
-2.21
0.03
7
Cost (PT, CS)
-5.69
0.881
-6.45
0.00
8
Rain (Bike)
-1.92
0.259
-7.42
0.00
9
Reservation (CS)
0.630
0.242
2.60
0.01
10
Discomfort (Bike)
-2.93
0.346
-8.45
0.00
11
Discomfort (PT)
-1.31
0.262
-4.99
0.00
12
Bike Ownersh. (Bike)
1.77
0.662
2.67
0.01
13
Number of Cars (Car) 11
2.11
0.874
2.42
0.02
14
Pendlerkort (PT)
1.40
0.285
4.90
0.00
15
Gender (Car, PT, Bike)
-0.557
0.296
-1.88
0.06
16
Purpose (Bike)
-1.01
0.259
-3.90
0.00
17
Employed (PT, Bike)
-0.755
0.324
-2.33
0.02
18
Children (Car, Bike)
1.13
0.338
3.34
0.00
19
Single (Car)
4.51
0.842
5.36
0.00
20
αBike
i
(Bike)
-1.57
0.215
-7.30
0.00
21
αCar
i
(Car)
-0.860
0.451
-1.90
0.06
22
γCarCS
i
(Car, CS)
1.00
0.237
4.23
0.00
Table 8.5: Model 5 for Mixed MNL on SC data with random coefﬁcients capturing correlation
among alternatives
RQ 4: CS market development
The ﬁnal research question was concerned with the future of CS in Denmark. The previously
reported ﬁndings provide some indications from different perspectives into how the CS market
may develop. Both descriptive data as well as the estimated models can be consulted and their
results consolidated.
Socio-demographic characteristics of current CS users were outlined earlier on in this chapter.
Theoretically, predictions could be made based on the models developed as part of this thesis,
simulating changes in the socio-demographic structure of the data set. As CS is often said
to be used mostly by young people (e.g. Kopp, 2015), their behaviour in the future could be
11 logarithmic
==PAGE:66==
8 Discussion
58
simulated. However, age showed not to be signiﬁcant in the models estimated for this thesis.
Other socio-demographic variables that distinguish CS users from the rest of the population
such as income, education level or car ownership could be modiﬁed if indicators for changes
were evident. However, to the knowledge of the author there are no current studies suggesting
any signiﬁcant changes in the Danish population.
As there is no indication of changes within the socio-demographic proﬁle of neither CS users
nor the Danish population, other factors could lead to an increase of the market share of CS in
Denmark. There are two dimensions that could be changed. On the one hand, the availability
of CS in Denmark could be increased. On the other hand, the offer could be adjusted, e.g. by
modifying prices.
Firstly, the measures relating to the availability of CS in the TU data set were changed for
simulation as shown in table 8.6. The shares for CS membership predicted by the base model
2 shown in 7.3 are displayed. Changes were simulated individually and the far right column
shows the combined impact. The expansion of the free-ﬂoating zone includes, additionally to
the greater CPH area, also the three other big cities12 in Denmark: Aarhus, Odense and Aalborg.
The third column, Higher Density, is based on the assumption that the amount of CS vehicles
will increase in the future. More speciﬁcally, the density variable describing the amount of CS
vehicles available in a radius of 500m around the individuals’ homes was doubled, if it was
not zero before, and else set to at least 1. Reduced distance is based on the hypothesis that CS
will be offered in more locations, therefore all distances to the next CS station are halved. The
combined effect shows all three changes.
Base
Expanded
Higher
Reduced
Combined
Model
CS Zone
Density
Distance
Effect
Member
0.30 %
0.32 %
0.36 %
0.35 %
0.43 %
Non-Member
99.70 %
99.68 %
99.64 %
99.65 %
99.57 %
Table 8.6: Simulation of CS membership respective to an expanded free-ﬂoating zone, higher
amount of cars in 500m radius and reduced distance to next CS station, based on
model 2 in table 7.3
These simulated market shares suggest that a higher availability of CS around Denmark will
increase membership numbers. However, only to a small degree. Thus, it seems that other
measures need to be taken in order to promote CS as a mode. As the elasticities from the SP
data in the previous section suggest, the surveyed individuals seem to be extremely sensitive
towards CS cost. Hence, it could be an option to reduce CS prices in order to increase the
market share.
The previously introduced elasticities (see 8.1 and 8.3) suggest that respondents of the survey
are CS cost sensitive. Thus, market shares for each alternative can be simulated based on a
cost reduction. This simulation was based on MMNL model 4 (7.13) as it is not restricted by
12 over 100,000 inhabitants
==PAGE:67==
8 Discussion
59
the IIA property as MNL models. It was mentioned in chapter 5 that the price for free-ﬂoating
CS in CPH is rather high compared to prices in other cities in Europe. The average price that
was assumed for the study was 3 DKK/ min compared to 2.2 DKK/ min elsewhere. Thus, it seems
reasonable to simulate a price reduction of 20 % as presented in table 8.7.
Car available
Car not available
Mode
base
CS-Cost -20%
base
CS-Cost -20%
Car
35.87 %
35.45 %
Public Transport
19.27 %
18.76 %
41.03 %
39.18 %
Bike
39.31 %
38.67 %
47.17 %
46.20 %
Car Sharing
5.55 %
7.11 %
11.80 %
14.62 %
Table 8.7: Simulation of mode shares based on a 20 % CS-Cost reduction based on MMNL
model 4 in table 7.13
The simulated market shares of the four investigated mode alternatives show that a CS cost re-
duction of 20 % would indeed lead to an increase in the CS market share. The increase is higher
for those individuals not owning a car. CS seems to draw rather proportionately from the car,
bike and public transport alternative when a car is available. When not having a private vehicle
available, the increase in the market share of CS seems to lead to a higher decrease in public
transport than bike. This was to be expected based on the previously calculated elasticities.
Summarising, based on the results from this survey, there is no evidence that the CS market will
increase without external changes. These changes encompass an extended as well as cheaper
offer of CS by increasing ﬂeet size and operating areas, adding new locations and reducing
prices. Other possibilities to improve the attractiveness of CS could be to introduce new pricing
structures, e.g. dependent on the time of day or the area the vehicle is rented in. However, as
mentioned before, the results from this thesis are by far not comprehensive. Therefore, relying
on common sense and related research, an increase in both CS membership and market share is
to be expected. Especially among young people, environmental consciousness is rising and so
does interest towards green transport alternatives (Davis et al., 2012). As these become older,
their values are not likely to change, increasing the share of people interested in alternative
transport solutions and thereby the potential market share of CS.
==PAGE:68==
9 Conclusion
60
9 Conclusion
CS is an innovative transport mode that has been implemented in many urban areas all over
the world. In Europe, its newest form: free-ﬂoating CS is prospering. It is meant to decrease
congestion in cities as it is a substitute for private vehicle ownership and thus concerns several
different stakeholders.
The goal of this master’s thesis was to analyse the CS market in Denmark, focusing on a uni-
versity environment in the capital region CPH. CS has been studied from many researchers and
viewed from different angles, as outlined in chapter 3. While characteristics of CS users in
Denmark have been studied before, its market share had not yet been estimated.
In order to answer four research questions concerning the market share of CS, the characteris-
tics of CS members and users, transport mode substitution patterns as well as the CS market
development, different data sets were considered and analysed based on RUM theory. The ﬁrst
RP data set (TU) was available from Transport DTU and enhanced with several CS speciﬁc
variables, describing the proximity of CS to an individual. This representative data set suggests
a CS member share of 0.36 % among the Danish population. The second SP data set had to
be acquired by conducting a SC experiment in a university environment. 179 respondents com-
pleted the survey, who were each presented with 3 to 6 mode choice situations, leading to 1005
observations. The modal split between the alternatives car, public transport, bike and CS was
determined, suggesting a market share for CS of 11.44 % within the sample.
For each data set, a simple logit as well as a mixed logit model were estimated. While the
simple BL about CS membership performed better than the mixed logit, adding a panel effect
to the MNL to estimate a mode choice model, showed a signiﬁcant improvement to the model.
Both models provide a signiﬁcant set of attributes that inﬂuence the decision to become a CS
member or the mode choice, respectively. Elasticities for the mixed MNL suggest unpropor-
tional substitution patterns among the four transport alternatives. By adding random correlation
coefﬁcients to the mixed MNL, a nested structure (car and CS) could be identiﬁed.
Both models were used for simulating potential changes of external measures such as the avail-
ability of CS or a cost reduction for the CS alternative. These results could be interesting to
both CS providers and policy-makers. An increased market share could be proﬁtable for both
sides. On the one hand, CS providers could proﬁt from more customers. On the other hand,
local governments could beneﬁt from less private vehicles in the cities as well as a "greener"
image.
Considering the ﬁndings from the simulations of both models and the preferences of the young
generation suggested by the survey, it is sensible to assume that the CS market share in Denmark
==PAGE:69==
9 Conclusion
61
will grow in the future. Especially in the Greater CPH area, where the share of young people
is vastly above average, it is fair to assume that the share of CS members is already higher
than suggested by TU data. As particularly free-ﬂoating CS membership numbers rise, so will
the demand for CS vehicles in the city, suggesting necessary growth of the free-ﬂoating CS
providers DriveNow and GreenMobility.
This thesis is by far not comprehensive and leaves room for further research. Many assumptions
were taken based on available data and the author’s common sense. These should be veriﬁed
when continuing to study the CS market in Denmark. Furthermore, the efﬁcient design for the
SC survey was used even though no priors were available. The results from this survey could
be used as priors for another one that should be conducted in the future. This would also be
an opportunity to achieve a representative sample instead of focusing the survey on a university
environment. Still, the ﬁndings from this thesis can be interpreted as an approximation of the
CS demand in Denmark.
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
62
Bibliography
Adamowicz, W., J. Louviere, M. Williams. 1994. Combining revealed and stated preference
methods for valuing environmental amenities.
Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 26(3) 271–292. doi:10.1006/jeem.1994.1017.
Akaike, Hirotugu. 1974. A New Look at the Statistical Model Identiﬁcation. IEEE Transactions
on Automatic Control AC-19(6) 716–723.
Albinski, Szymon. 2015. A branch-and-cut method for the Vehicle Relocation Problem in the
one-way carsharing. Degree project in optimizations and systems theory, KTH Royal Institute
of Technology, SCI School of Engineering Sciences, Degree Project in Optimizations and
Systems Theory.
Albinski, Szymon Janusz. 2014. A branch-and-cut method for the Vehicle Relocation Problem
in the One-Way Car-Sharing. Master’s thesis, KTH, Optimization and Systems Theory.
Balac, M, F Ciari. 2014. Modeling station-based carsharing in Switzerland. 14th Swiss Trans-
port Research Conference (May) 1–16.
Bates, John. 1988. Economic Issues in Stated Preference Analysis.
BCG. 2016.
What’s ahead for Carsharing?
URL https://www.bcg.com/
publications/2016/automotive-whats-ahead-car-sharing-new-
mobility-its-impact-vehicle-sales.aspx.
BCS. 2015. Kombinierte CarSharing-Angebote – das Beste aus zwei Welten verbinden. Bun-
desverband Car Sharing e.V. (1) 1–6.
BCS. 2018. Aktuelle Zahlen und Daten zum Carsharing in Deutschland. URL https://
carsharing.de/alles-ueber-carsharing/carsharing-zahlen.
Becker, Henrik, Francesco Ciari, Kay W. Axhausen. 2017. Comparing car-sharing schemes in
Switzerland: User groups and usage patterns. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
Practice 97 17–29. doi:10.1016/j.tra.2017.01.004.
Ben-Akiva, Moshe, Steven R Lerman. 1985. Tests and Practical Issues in Developing Discrete
Choice Models. Discrete Choice Analysis: Theory and Application to Travel Demand, vol. 6,
chap. 7. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 286. doi:
10.2307/1391567.
BMW Group. 2016. Annual Report 2016: A new era begins 121URL http://annual-
report2016.bmwgroup.com/bmwgroup/annual/2016/gb/layout/pdf/
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
63
en/Annual{_}Report{_}2016.pdf{%}0Ahttps://www.novonordisk.com/
content/dam/Denmark/HQ/AnnualReport/2016/PDF/Novo-Nordisk-
Annual-Report-2016.pdf.
Boyaci, Burak, Konstantinos G. Zografos, Nikolas Geroliminis. 2015. An optimization frame-
work for the development of efﬁcient one-way car-sharing systems. European Journal of
Operational Research 240(3) 718–733. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2014.07.020.
Brown, Chris. 2015.
Carsharing state of the market and growth potential.
URL
http://www.autorentalnews.com/channel/rental-operations/
article/story/2015/03/carsharing-state-of-the-market-and-
growth-potential.aspx.
Car2Go.
2017.
Factsheet.
Tech.
rep.,
Car2go
Group
GmbH,
Daimler
Inc.
URL https://www.car2go.com/media/data/germany/microsite-press/
files/factsheet-car2go_november-2017_en.pdf.
Car2Go. 2018. Tarife. URL https://www.car2go.com/DE/de/muenchen/costs/.
Cartenì, Armando, Ennio Cascetta, Stefano de Luca. 2016. A random utility model for park &
carsharing services and the pure preference for electric vehicles. Transport Policy 48 49–59.
doi:10.1016/j.tranpol.2016.02.012.
Catalano, M, B Lo Casto, M Migliore. 2008. Car sharing demand estimation and urban trans-
port demand modelling using stated preference techniques. European Transport \ Trasporti
Europei 40 33–50.
Center
for
Transport
Analytics.
2018.
Transportøkonomiske
Enhedspriser.
Tech.
rep.,
Denmarks
Tekniski
Universitet:
Transport
DTU,
Lyngby.
URL
http://www.modelcenter.transport.dtu.dk/Noegletal/
Transportoekonomiske-Enhedspriser.
Cervero, Robert, Aaron Golub, Brendan Nee. 2007. San Francisco City CarShare : Longer-
Term Travel-Demand and Car Ownership Impacts.
Transportation Research Record
1992(May) 70–80. doi:10.3141/1992-09.
Choice Metrics. 2018. Ngene: user manual and reference guide.
Ciari, Francesco, Milos Balac, Michael Balmer. 2015. Modelling the effect of different pric-
ing schemes on free-ﬂoating carsharing travel demand: a test case for Zurich, Switzerland.
Transportation 42(3) 413–433. doi:10.1007/s11116-015-9608-z.
Ciari, Franscesco, Kay W. Axhausen. 2012. Choosing carpooling or carsharing as a mode:
Swiss stated choice experiments. 91st Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research Board.
Washington DC, United States.
Davis, Benjamin, Tony Dutzik, Phineas Baxandall. 2012. Transportation and the New Genera-
tion: Why young people are driving less and what it means for transportation policy. Tech.
rep., Frontier Group and U.S. PIRG Education Fund.
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
64
De Luca, Stefano, Roberta Di Pace. 2014. Modelling the propensity in adhering to a carsharing
system: A behavioral approach. Transportation Research Procedia 3(July) 866–875. doi:
10.1016/j.trpro.2014.10.065.
De Luca, Stefano, Roberta Di Pace. 2015. Modelling users’ behaviour in inter-urban carsharing
program: A stated preference approach. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice
71 59–76. doi:10.1016/j.tra.2014.11.001.
Degirmenci, Kenan, Sandra Lapin, Michael H. Breitner. 2017.
Critical success factors of
carsharing and electric carsharing:
ﬁndings from expert interviews in Continental Eu-
rope. International Journal of Automotive Technology and Management 17(3) 294. doi:
10.1504/IJATM.2017.086413.
Deloitte. 2017.
Car Sharing in Europe.
Tech. rep., Deloitte GmbH Wirtschaftsprüfungs-
gesellschaft.
URL https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/
de/Documents/consumer-industrial-products/CIP-Automotive-Car-
Sharing-in-Europe.pdf.
Dissanayake, Dilum, Takayuki Morikawa. 2010. Investigating household vehicle ownership,
mode choice and trip sharing decisions using a combined revealed preference/stated prefer-
ence Nested Logit model: case study in Bangkok Metropolitan Region. Journal of Transport
Geography 18(3) 402–410. doi:10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2009.07.003.
European Commission. 2015.
Climate Change - CO2 emissions from passenger
cars. URL https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/transport/vehicles/
cars{_}en{#}tab-0-3.
Fagnant, Daniel J, Kara M Kockelman. 2014. The travel and environmental implications of
shared autonomous vehicles , using agent-based model scenarios. Transportation Research
Part C 40 1–13. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2013.12.001.
Firnkorn, Jörg. 2012. Triangulation of two methods measuring the impacts of a free-ﬂoating
carsharing system in Germany. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 46(10)
1654–1672. doi:10.1016/j.tra.2012.08.003.
Firnkorn, Jörg, Martin Müller. 2011. What will be the environmental effects of new free-ﬂoating
car-sharing systems? The case of car2go in Ulm. Ecological Economics 70(8) 1519–1528.
doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2011.03.014.
Firnkorn, Jörg, Martin Müller. 2012. Selling Mobility instead of Cars: New Business Strate-
gies of Automakers and the Impact on Private Vehicle Holding. Business Strategy and the
Environment 21(4) 264–280. doi:10.1002/bse.738.
Firnkorn, Jörg, Martin Müller. 2015. Free-ﬂoating electric carsharing-ﬂeets in smart cities: The
dawning of a post-private car era in urban environments? Environmental Science and Policy
45 30–40. doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2014.09.005.
Fowkes, Tony, Mark Wardman. 1988. The Design of Stated Preference Travel Choice Experi-
ments. Journal of Transport Economics and Policy 22(1) 27–44.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
65
Giesel, Flemming, Claudia Nobis. 2016.
The Impact of Carsharing on Car Ownership
in German Cities.
Transportation Research Procedia, vol. 19. 215–224.
doi:10.1016/
j.trpro.2016.12.082.
Green Mobility. 2018.
Pricing.
URL https://greenmobility.com/dk/en/
pricing/.
Haustein, Sonja, Anders Fjendbo Jensen. 2017. Effekt- og brugerundersøgelse af E-bybiler
i Region Hovedstaden : DriveNow operated by Arriva. Technical University of Denmark,
Management Engineering .
Haustein, Sonja, Thomas Alexander Sick Nielsen. 2015. Deleøkonomi i transport: udvikling,
trends og potentiale. Technical University of Denmark, Transport (DTU Transport Notat Vol.
19).
Hensher, D.a., P.O. Barnhard, T.P. Truong. 1988. The role of stated preference methods in
studies of travel choice.
Hensher, David A. 1994. Stated preference analysis of travel choices: the state of practice.
Transportation 21(2) 107–133. doi:10.1007/BF01098788.
Hertz Delebilen. 2018. Om Hertz Delebilen. URL https://www.delebilen.dk/om-
hertz-delebilen/.
Jensen, Anders Fjendbo, Linda Christensen, Stefan Lindhard Mabit. 2010. Development of a
stated preference experiment for electric vehicle demand 1–63.
Jorge, Diana, Gonçalo Correia. 2013. Carsharing systems demand estimation and deﬁned oper-
ations: A literature review. European Journal of Transport and Infrastructure Research 13(3)
201–220.
Jorge, Diana, Goncalo H.A. Correia, Cynthia Barnhart. 2014.
Comparing optimal re-
location operations with simulated relocation policies in one-way carsharing systems.
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 15(4) 1667–1675. doi:10.1109/
TITS.2014.2304358.
Kane, Mark. 2015.
400 BMW i3s Headed For DriveNow Car Sharing Service In Copen-
hagen.
URL https://insideevs.com/400-bmw-i3s-headed-drivenow-
car-sharing-service-copenhagen/.
Kaspi, Mor, Tal Raviv, Michal Tzur. 2014. Parking reservation policies in one-way vehicle
sharing systems. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 62 35–50. doi:10.1016/
j.trb.2014.01.006.
Kek, Alvina G H, Ruey Long, Qiang Meng, Chau Ha. 2009. A decision support system for
vehicle relocation operations in carsharing systems. Transportation Research Part E 45(1)
149–158. doi:10.1016/j.tre.2008.02.008.
Kopp, Johanna. 2015.
GPS-gestützte Evaluation des Mobilitätsverhaltens von free-ﬂoating
CarSharing-Nutzern. Doctoral thesis, ETH Zürich.
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
66
Kopp, Johanna, Regine Gerike, Kay W Axhausen. 2013.
Status Quo and Perspectives for
CarSharing Systems : The Example of DriveNow.
Gerike, R., Hülsmann, F., Roller, K.
(eds.) Strategies for Sustainable Mobilities: Opportunities and Challenges. Ashgate, Farn-
ham, 207–226.
Kopp, Johanna, Regine Gerike, Kay W Axhausen. 2015. Do sharing people behave differently?
An empirical of free-ﬂoating car-sharing members doi:10.1007/s11116-015-9606-1.
Kortum, K. 2012. Free-Floating Carsharing Systems: Innovations in Membership Prediction,
Mode Share, and Vehicle Allocation Optimization Methodologies. Ph.D. thesis.
Kortum, Katherine, Robert Schönduwe, Benjamin Stolte, Benno Bock. 2016. Free-Floating
Carsharing : City-Speciﬁc Growth Rates and Success Factors. Transportation Research Pro-
cedia 19(June) 328–340. doi:10.1016/j.trpro.2016.12.092.
Kroes, Eric P., Robert J. Sheldon. 1988. Stated preference methods. An introduction. doi:
10.2307/20052832.
Le Vine, Scott, Martin Lee-Gosselin, Aruna Sivakumar, John Polak. 2014. A new approach
to predict the market and impacts of round-trip and point-to-point carsharing systems: Case
study of London. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 32 218–229.
doi:10.1016/j.trd.2014.07.005.
Lindloff, Kirstin, Nadine Pieper, Nils C Bandelow, David M Woisetschläger. 2014. Drivers of
carsharing diffusion in Germany : an actor-centred approach. Int. J. Automotive Technology
and Management 14(Nos 3/4).
Martin, Elliot, Susan A. Shaheen. 2011.
Greenhouse gas emissions impacts of carsharing
in North America. Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 12(4) 1–114. doi:
10.1109/TITS.2011.2158539.
Martin, Elliot, Susan A Shaheen, Jeffrey Lidicker. 2010. Impact of Carsharing on Household
Vehicle Holdings Results from North American Shared-Use Vehicle Survey. Journal of the
Transportation Research Board No. 2143 150–158. doi:10.3141/2143-19.
McKinsey. 2017.
How shared mobility will change the automotive industry.
URL
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/automotive-and-assembly/
our-insights/how-shared-mobility-will-change-the-automotive-
industry.
Mendes Lopes, Mafalda, Luís M Martinez, Gonçalo Homem de Almeida Correia. 2014.
Simulating carsharing operations through agent-based modelling : an application to the
city of Lisbon , Portugal.
Transportation Research Procedia 3(July) 828–837.
doi:
10.1016/j.trpro.2014.10.060.
Millard-Ball, Adam, Gail Murray, Jessica Ter Schure, Christine Fox, Jon Burkhardt. 2005.
Car-Sharing: Where and How It Succeeds. Tech. rep., Transportation Resarch Program,
Washington DC, United States.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
67
Neckermann, Lukas. 2017. The carsharing market. URL https://www.arval.com/en/
profile/press-room/car-sharing-market.
Olewitz, Chloe. 2016.
Denmark’s smart trafﬁc signals prioritize buses and bicycles to
promote sustainability.
URL https://www.digitaltrends.com/cool-tech/
copenhagen-smart-traffic-lights-prioritize-buses-bikes/.
Olsen, Malene, Morten Retting. 2000. Evaluering af carsharing i Danmark. Center for Mobilitet
og Miljø (Miljøprojekt 572).
Ortuzar, Juan de Dios, Luis G. Willumsen. 2011.
Modelling Transport.
doi:10.1002/
9781119993308.
Pearmain, David, John Swanson, Eric P. Kroes, Mark Bradley. 1991. Stated preference tech-
niques: a guide to practice. 2nd ed. Steer Davies Gleave, Hague Consulting Group, Rich-
mond, Den Haag.
Peitsmeier,
Henning,
Susanne
Preuss.
2018.
Drive
Now
und
Car2Go
vor
der
Fusion.
URL http://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/unternehmen/
drive-now-und-car2go-vor-der-fusion-15413481.html.
Prieto, Marc, George Baltas, Valentina Stan. 2017. Car sharing adoption intention in urban
areas : What are the key sociodemographic drivers ? Transportation Research Part A 101
218–227. doi:10.1016/j.tra.2017.05.012.
PWC. 2016.
Future of the Sharing Economy in Europe 2016.
URL http:
//www.pwc.co.uk/issues/megatrends/collisions/sharingeconomy/
future-of-the-sharing-economy-in-europe-2016.html.
Qualtrics. 2018. Qualtrics. URL https://www.qualtrics.com.
Rich, Jeppe. 2016. Transport Models - From Theory to Practise. 6th ed. Technical University
of Denmark, Lyngby.
Schmid, Basil, Simona Jokubauskaite, Florian Aschauer, Stefanie Peer, Reinhard Hössinger,
Gerike Regine, Sergio R. Jara-Diaz, Kay W. Axhausen. 2018. A pooled RP/SP mode, route
and destination choice model to capture the heterogeneity of mode and user type effects.
Transportation Research. Part A, Policy and Practice doi:10.3929/ETHZ-B-000225616.
Schmöller, Stefan, Simone Weikl, Johannes Müller, Klaus Bogenberger. 2015. Empirical anal-
ysis of free-ﬂoating carsharing usage: The munich and berlin case. Transportation Research
Part C: Emerging Technologies 56 34–51. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2015.03.008.
Schwarz, Gideon. 1978. Estimating the dimension of a model. The Annals of Statistics 6(2)
461–464.
Shaheen, Susan, Daniel Sperling, Conrad Wagner. 1998. Carsharing in Europe and North Amer-
ica: Past, Present, and Future. Transportation Quarterly 52(3) 35–52.
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
68
Shaheen, Susan A. 2013.
Introduction Shared-Use Vehicle Services for Sustainable Trans-
portation : Carsharing , Bikesharing , and Personal Vehicle Sharing across the Globe 8318.
doi:10.1080/15568318.2012.660095.
Shaheen, Susan A, Adam P Cohen. 2013. Carsharing and Personal Vehicle Services : World-
wide Market Developments and Emerging Trends Carsharing and Personal Vehicle Services
: 8318. doi:10.1080/15568318.2012.660103.
Smith, Stephen L, Marco Pavone, Mac Schwager, Emilio Frazzoli, Daniela Rus. 2013. Re-
balancing the Rebalancers: Optimally Routing Vehicles and Drivers in Mobility-on-Demand
Systems. doi:10.1109/ACC.2013.6580187.
Stillwater, Tai, Patricia Mokhtarian, Susan Shaheen. 2009. Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board 2110(December) 27–34. doi:10.3141/2110-
04.
Tetraplan A/S. 2013.
Traﬁkudviklingen i Region Hovedstaden 2010-2030.
Tech. rep.,
Region Hovedstaden, Copenhagen. URL https://www.regionh.dk/til-fagfolk/
trafik/Analyser-og-rapporter-om-trafik/mobilitet/Documents/
Trafikstr{\T1\o}mme2010og2030Tetraplan.pdf.
Train, Kenneth E. 2003. Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge University
Press 1–388doi:10.1017/CBO9780511753930.
Transport DTU. 2018.
The Danish National Transport Survey - TU.
URL http://
www.modelcenter.transport.dtu.dk/english/tvu.
United Nations. 2014. World Urbanization Prospects 2014. Tech. rep. doi:(ST/ESA/SER.A/
366).
VisitCopenhagen. 2018.
Parking Zones and Prices in Copenhagen.
URL https:
//www.visitcopenhagen.com/copenhagen/transportation/parking-
zones-prices.
Wappelhorst, Sandra, Martin Sauer, Daniel Hinkeldein, Anke Bocherding. 2014. Potential of
electric carsharing in urban and rural areas. Transportation Research Procedia 4 374–386.
doi:10.1016/j.trpro.2014.11.028.
Weikl, Simone, Klaus Bogenberger. 2013. Relocation strategies and algorithms for free-ﬂoating
car sharing systems. IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Magazine 5(4) 100–111. doi:
10.1109/MITS.2013.2267810.
Weinreich, Marianne. 2017.
Danish Cycling Know-how.
Tech. rep., Cycling Embassy of
Denmark, Copenhagen.
URL http://www.cycling-embassy.dk/wp-content/
uploads/2017/09/821-019-Messeavis-266x365-mm-enkeltsidet.pdf.
Wielinski, Grzegorz, Martin Trépanier, Catherine Morency. 2017. Electric and hybrid car use
in a free-ﬂoating carsharing system 8318. doi:10.1080/15568318.2016.1220653.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
69
Zheng, Jie, Michelle Scott, Michael Rodriguez, William Sierzchula, Dave Platz, Jessica Guo,
Teresa Adams. 2009.
Carsharing in a University Community.
Transportation Research
Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board 2110 18–26. doi:10.3141/2110-03.
==PAGE:78==
Appendix
==PAGE:79==
I
Annex
A:
Survey Design
Table A.1: Anonymised feedback from pilot survey as well as discussed changes and decisions
Category
Feedback
Possible Change
V’s Opinion
Actual Change
Status
Introduction
Postal codes with name
more like TU?
no
x
Introduction
Parking conditions at home
more like TU?
no
x
Introduction
income categories
more like TU?
no
x
Introduction
what if you don’t work/study
add question
yes
option: I don’t commute
Done
Reference Trip
I take another mode than displayed
option: other
yes
option: other mode
Done
Reference Trip
investigate stops on way to work
add question
no
question: do you stop?
Done
Leisure Scenarios
confusing if you have no children
add option
no
how "often" instead...
Done
Leisure Scenarios
what does unlikely mean
rephrase
yes
...of how likely?
Done
Situations
display total travel time as well
add total travel time
no
x
Situations
parking time confusing
rephrase
yes
"Parking search" time
Done
Situations
add car purchase/maintenance costs
add ﬁxed costs
no
remark in explanation
Done
Situations
distance too big
restrict distance
yes
<10km
Done
Other
if representative can’t be in English
translate to Danish
no
x
Other
Formatting
yes
Done
Other
Backbutton
add backbutton?
no
x
==PAGE:80==
II
Figure A.1: Ngene Code for Design 1: Commute (incl car)
Figure A.2: Ngene Code for Design 2: Leisure (incl car)
==PAGE:81==
III
Figure A.3: Ngene Code for Design 3: Commute (no car)
Figure A.4: Ngene Code for Design 4: Leisure (no car)
==PAGE:82==
IV
Table A.2: Experimental Design 1: Commute (incl car)
Sit.
CarCS.time
Car.cost
Car.park.c
Car.park.t
PT.time
PT.cost
PT.access
Bike.time
CS.cost
CS.park.t
CS.access
CS.res
Rain
Block
7
35
35
5
12
45
11
8
55
24
4
4
1
1
1
17
28
23
5
4
56
11
8
67
47
0
2
1
0
1
20
41
35
5
8
45
19
6
49
24
8
6
1
0
1
4
35
29
5
4
56
19
4
61
24
4
4
0
1
2
10
22
18
15
12
56
7
2
61
59
12
8
0
1
2
11
22
18
15
4
61
11
2
67
59
0
8
1
0
2
1
22
23
10
12
56
7
8
67
47
0
2
0
1
3
16
35
29
0
4
61
19
2
55
35
4
8
0
1
3
23
41
29
0
12
45
15
6
49
35
8
4
0
0
3
12
28
23
0
12
61
15
2
61
47
4
8
1
0
4
14
35
18
10
0
56
7
4
61
59
0
6
0
0
4
15
41
35
10
4
50
15
2
49
24
4
8
0
1
4
13
22
18
10
12
56
11
8
67
59
0
2
0
1
5
18
41
23
10
0
45
11
6
55
47
0
2
0
0
5
19
28
18
0
8
50
7
8
67
59
8
2
1
0
5
9
28
35
10
8
61
19
6
49
24
4
4
1
1
6
21
22
35
15
12
50
7
6
61
35
8
4
1
1
6
24
35
29
15
12
45
7
4
49
59
12
6
0
0
6
2
28
29
15
8
61
19
4
55
35
4
6
1
0
7
3
41
23
0
8
45
15
8
49
47
8
2
1
1
7
6
28
29
5
12
50
15
6
55
35
12
6
1
1
7
5
22
18
5
8
61
19
2
61
47
0
8
1
1
8
8
41
35
15
0
50
11
4
55
24
0
4
0
0
8
22
35
23
0
8
50
15
4
67
35
0
6
0
0
8
==PAGE:83==
V
Table A.3: Experimental Design 2: Leisure (incl car)
Sit.
CarCS.time
Car.cost
Car.park.c
Car.park.t
PT.time
PT.cost
PT.access
Bike.time
CS.cost
CS.park.t
CS.access
CS.res
Rain
Disc.
Block
5
22
23
10
0
36
26
4
39
30
0
6
1
0
1
1
9
26
15
5
8
29
16
6
32
61
8
4
1
0
0
1
15
22
23
15
12
29
21
6
32
30
8
4
0
1
1
1
1
14
15
10
12
39
16
2
43
61
0
8
1
1
0
2
7
18
11
0
12
39
16
6
39
76
0
4
0
0
1
2
10
22
23
10
12
29
16
4
32
46
12
6
0
1
1
2
12
14
11
5
12
36
11
8
43
76
4
2
1
0
1
3
18
14
15
15
4
36
16
8
43
61
4
2
1
1
0
3
19
26
19
0
4
32
21
8
35
46
0
2
0
1
0
3
3
18
15
5
8
39
26
2
39
46
0
8
1
1
0
4
14
26
23
5
4
32
26
2
35
30
4
8
0
0
0
4
24
14
11
0
8
39
21
4
43
61
4
6
0
1
1
4
4
26
19
5
8
29
16
4
32
61
8
6
0
0
0
5
8
18
11
15
4
36
11
8
39
76
0
2
0
0
0
5
23
18
15
10
12
32
11
2
35
76
12
8
1
0
1
5
6
22
19
15
4
36
21
2
32
46
4
8
0
0
1
6
17
14
11
0
12
39
26
4
43
46
4
6
1
1
1
6
22
26
23
10
0
32
26
6
35
30
0
4
1
0
0
6
2
22
19
0
12
32
21
4
35
46
8
6
1
1
0
7
11
18
19
15
12
29
11
6
35
61
12
4
1
1
1
7
16
14
11
15
8
39
11
2
43
76
4
8
0
0
0
7
13
26
23
0
0
29
21
8
39
30
0
2
1
0
1
8
20
18
19
10
8
36
26
6
39
30
0
4
0
1
1
8
21
22
15
5
12
32
11
8
32
76
8
2
0
1
0
8
==PAGE:84==
VI
Table A.4: Experimental Design 3: Commute (no car)
Sit.
PT.time
PT.cost
PT.access
Bike.time
CS.time
CS.cost
CS.park.t.
CS.access
CS.res
Rain
Block
6
61
7
2
49
22
59
4
8
0
1
1
7
61
15
2
61
22
35
12
8
1
0
1
10
45
15
8
67
41
24
4
2
1
0
1
2
45
11
8
67
28
35
12
2
1
0
2
4
45
7
8
55
28
59
8
2
0
1
2
19
50
15
4
49
28
47
4
6
1
1
2
1
56
19
2
49
35
35
0
8
1
1
3
15
61
11
4
61
28
47
8
6
0
0
3
18
56
11
6
67
41
47
0
4
0
0
3
17
50
19
4
55
35
24
4
6
1
1
4
20
50
7
8
67
35
59
0
2
0
0
4
21
45
15
8
55
35
35
12
2
0
1
4
3
50
11
6
49
35
47
0
4
0
1
5
12
61
11
4
61
22
47
8
6
1
0
5
23
56
19
2
49
41
24
8
8
0
1
5
11
45
19
6
55
35
24
12
4
1
1
6
14
56
19
4
61
41
24
8
6
0
0
6
24
61
19
2
61
41
24
4
8
0
0
6
8
61
7
2
61
22
59
0
8
1
0
7
13
56
11
6
67
28
47
4
4
1
0
7
22
50
7
6
55
22
59
12
4
0
1
7
5
50
7
6
49
22
59
8
4
1
1
8
9
56
15
4
67
28
35
12
6
0
0
8
16
45
15
8
55
41
35
0
2
1
1
8
==PAGE:85==
VII
Table A.5: Experimental Design 4: Leisure (no car)
Sit.
PT.time
PT.cost
PT.access
Bike.time
CS.time
CS.cost
CS.park.t.
CS.access
CS.res
Rain
Disc.
Block
1
36
26
2
35
26
30
0
8
1
0
1
1
12
29
21
6
32
26
46
0
4
0
1
1
1
13
39
11
4
35
14
76
4
6
1
1
0
1
3
36
21
4
39
14
46
12
6
1
0
1
2
10
36
16
6
43
18
61
8
4
0
0
0
2
22
39
16
2
43
18
61
4
8
0
0
0
2
9
29
16
6
32
14
61
12
4
1
1
1
3
11
32
11
8
43
14
76
8
2
1
0
0
3
19
32
26
6
39
26
30
4
4
1
1
0
3
6
32
11
6
32
22
76
0
4
0
1
1
4
8
32
21
8
43
26
46
4
2
0
0
0
4
15
36
21
2
32
18
46
8
8
0
1
1
4
2
36
26
4
43
22
30
12
6
0
0
0
5
5
29
26
4
32
26
30
12
6
0
1
1
5
14
29
21
8
39
26
46
0
2
1
1
0
5
16
39
16
2
35
14
61
8
8
1
1
0
6
17
32
16
8
39
18
61
4
2
1
0
1
6
20
39
11
4
35
18
76
0
6
0
0
1
6
7
29
16
8
39
22
61
8
2
0
1
0
7
21
32
11
6
32
14
76
12
4
0
1
1
7
23
29
26
8
39
22
30
12
2
1
0
1
7
4
36
11
4
35
18
76
0
6
1
0
1
8
18
39
26
2
35
22
30
4
8
1
1
0
8
24
39
21
2
43
22
46
8
8
0
0
0
8
==PAGE:86==
VIII
Annex
B:
Further Data Insights
TU data set
Table B.1: CS providers taken into account for calculation of distance and density measures to
enrich TU data set
Provider
#Cars
Station-based providers
Albertslund Delebil
20
Hertz Delebil
120
Islandsbrygge Delebil
5
Køge Delebiler
5
LetsGo
142
Lyngby Delebiler
17
Munksøgård Delebiler
14
Nordsjællands Delebiler
16
Silkeborg Delebiler
2
Free-ﬂoating providers
DriveNow
∼400
GreenMobility
∼400
Figure B.1: Main operating zone of free-ﬂoating CS in CPH
==PAGE:87==
IX
Table B.2: List of considered satellite zones for free-ﬂoating CS in CPH
Satellite zone
Provider
Ballerup Center
DriveNow
Car Rentals Lyngby
DriveNow
CPH Airport
DriveNow & GreenMobility
CPH Airport Hotel, Tårnby
DriveNow
Den blåplanet, Kastrup
DriveNow
Dragør
DriveNow
DTU Campus Ballerup
DriveNow
DTU Campus Lyngby
DriveNow & GreenMobility
Herlev Hospital
DriveNow & GreenMobiltiy
Hvidovre Hospital
DriveNow & GreenMobility
Novo Nordisk Headquarters, Bagsværd
DriveNow
Rødovre Centrum
DriveNow & GreenMobility
S-tog Station: Malmparken, Ballerup
DriveNow
==PAGE:88==
X
SP data set
Figure B.2: Mode choice respective to Education Level
Figure B.3: Mode choice respective to Occupation
==PAGE:89==
XI
Figure B.4: Mode choice respective to address within CPH or the free-ﬂoating CS zone
Figure B.5: Mode choice respective to purpose of the trip
==PAGE:90==
XII
Figure B.6: CS Membership respective to address
Table B.3: CS members among respondents and distribution of CS types among CS members
Frequency
Share
CS Members
50
27.93 %
free-ﬂoating
45
90.00 %
station based
6
12.00 %
peer-to-peer
11
22.00 %
==PAGE:91==
XIII
Annex
C:
Additional Models
TU data
Table C.1: Mixed BL model for TU data with normal distribution on logarithm of distance to
next CS station
Robust
Parameter
Coeff.
Asympt.
number
Description
estimate
std. error
t-stat
p-value
1
ASC Member
-8.58
0.419
-20.49
0.00
2
Gender
0.310
0.114
2.72
0.01
3
Long Education
0.261
0.129
2.01
0.04
4
High School
-0.345
0.164
-2.11
0.04
5
Car Ownership
-1.28
0.144
-8.84
0.00
6
Bike Ownership
0.548
0.158
3.46
0.00
7
Income 13
0.550
0.0677
8.14
0.00
8
Children in Household
0.544
0.129
4.21
0.00
9
µ Distance CS Station 12
-0.202
0.0394
-5.12
0.00
10
σ Distance CS Station
-0.126
0.0872
-1.45
0.15 *
11
Workplace in CS Zone
0.300
0.130
2.31
0.02
12
CS Cars within 500m
0.0599
0.0246
2.44
0.01
Summary statistics
Number of observations = 111, 057
L(β0)
=
−76978.846
L(ˆβ)
=
−2035.333
−2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
=
149887.026
¯ρ2
=
0.973
13 logarithmic
==PAGE:92==
XIV
Table C.2: Mixed BL model for TU data with lognormal distribution on distance to next CS
station
Robust
Parameter
Coeff.
Asympt.
number
Description
estimate
std. error
t-stat
p-value
1
ASC Member
-7.62
0.523
-14.57
0.00
2
Gender
0.313
0.115
2.71
0.01
3
Long Education
0.260
0.131
1.99
0.05
4
High School
-0.346
0.165
-2.09
0.04
5
Car Ownership
-1.29
0.145
-8.85
0.00
6
Bike Ownership
0.553
0.160
3.47
0.00
7
Income 14
0.553
0.0680
8.12
0.00
8
Children in Household
0.541
0.130
4.15
0.00
9
µ Distance CS Station
1.08
1.93
0.56
0.58 *
10
σ Distance CS Station
6.10
0.995
6.13
0.00
11
Workplace in CS Zone
0.302
0.131
2.31
0.02
12
CS Cars within 500m
0.0792
0.0212
3.74
0.00
Summary statistics
Number of observations = 111, 057
L(β0)
=
−16656.014
L(ˆβ)
=
−2037.052
−2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
=
29237.924
¯ρ2
=
0.877
14 logarithmic
==PAGE:93==
XV
Table C.3: Mixed BL model for TU data with lognormal distribution on income
Robust
Parameter
Coeff.
Asympt.
number
Description
estimate
std. error
t-stat
p-value
1
ASC (Member)
-8.54
0.410
-20.81
0.00
2
Gender
0.309
0.114
2.71
0.01
3
Long Education
0.257
0.129
1.99
0.05
4
High School
-0.344
0.164
-2.10
0.04
5
Car Ownership
-1.27
0.144
-8.85
0.00
6
Bike Ownership
0.547
0.158
3.46
0.00
7
µ Income 15
0.547
0.0670
8.17
0.00
8
σ Income
-0.0205
0.0140
-1.46
0.14 *
9
Children in Household
0.545
0.129
4.22
0.00
10
Distance CS Station 15
-0.188
0.0348
-5.40
0.00
11
Workplace in CS Zone
0.293
0.129
2.27
0.02
12
CS Cars within 500m
0.0661
0.0222
2.97
0.00
Summary statistics
Number of observations = 111, 057
L(β0)
=
−76978.846
L(ˆβ)
=
−2035.590
−2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
=
149886.513
¯ρ2
=
0.973
15 logarithmic
==PAGE:94==
XVI
SP data
Table C.4: MNL model for SP data with two parameters for access time
Robust
Parameter
Coeff.
Asympt.
number
Description
estimate
std. error
t-stat
p-value
1
ASC (Bike)
3.73
0.387
9.63
0.00
2
ASC (Car)
0.626
0.423
1.48
0.14
3
ASC (PT)
0.885
0.398
2.22
0.03
4
Time (Bike)
-8.83
1.09
-8.12
0.00
5
Time (Car, PT, CS)
-2.99
1.05
-2.86
0.00
6
Cost (Car)
-1.52
1.44
-1.05
0.29
7
Cost (CS, PT)
-3.70
0.632
-5.86
0.00
8
Access Time (CS)
-0.0763
0.0478
-1.60
0.11
9
Access Time (PT)
0.0456
0.0349
1.31
0.19
10
Rain (Bike)
-1.29
0.157
-8.19
0.00
11
Reservation (CS)
0.667
0.216
3.08
0.00
12
Discomfort (Bike)
-2.47
0.233
-10.63
0.00
13
Discomfort (PT)
-0.950
0.203
-4.68
0.00
Summary statistics
Number of observations = 1005
L(β0)
=
−1195.588
L(ˆβ)
=
−925.501
−2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
=
540.175
¯ρ2
=
0.215
==PAGE:95==
XVII
Table C.5: MMNL model for SP data with random distribution on time coefﬁcients
Robust
Parameter
Coeff.
Asympt.
number
Description
estimate
std. error
t-stat
p-value
1
ASC (Bike)
4.34
0.700
6.20
0.00
2
ASC (Car)
-0.303
0.562
-0.54
0.59
3
ASC (PT)
1.46
0.315
4.65
0.00
4
µ Time (Bike)
-14.9
1.70
-8.75
0.00
5
σ Time (Bike)
-4.61
0.863
-5.34
0.00
6
µ Time (Car, PT, CS)
-4.52
1.31
-3.45
0.00
7
σ Time (Car, PT, CS)
-3.76
0.866
-4.35
0.00
8
Cost (Car)
-4.93
2.02
-2.45
0.01
9
Cost (CS, PT)
-5.33
0.883
-6.04
0.00
10
Rain (Bike)
-1.83
0.247
-7.42
0.00
11
Reservation (CS)
0.592
0.219
2.70
0.01
12
Discomfort (Bike)
-2.60
0.301
-8.66
0.00
13
Discomfort (PT)
-1.09
0.236
-4.61
0.00
14
Bike Ownersh. (Bike)
1.72
0.557
3.09
0.00
15
Number of Cars (Car) 16
2.31
0.784
2.95
0.00
16
Pendlerkort (PT)
1.44
0.268
5.38
0.00
17
Gender (Car, PT, Bike)
-0.551
0.260
-2.12
0.03
18
Purpose (Bike)
-0.901
0.256
-3.52
0.00
19
Employed (PT, Bike)
-0.607
0.271
-2.24
0.03
20
Children (Car, Bike)
1.40
0.342
4.10
0.00
21
Single (Car)
3.60
0.769
4.68
0.00
Summary statistics
Number of observations = 1005
L(β0)
=
−1195.588
L(ˆβ)
=
−786.260
−2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
=
818.656
¯ρ2
=
0.325
16 logarithmic
==PAGE:96==
XVIII
Table C.6: MMNL model for SP data with random distribution on cost coefﬁcients
Robust
Parameter
Coeff.
Asympt.
number
Description
estimate
std. error
t-stat
p-value
1
ASC (Bike)
3.54
0.624
5.68
0.00
2
ASC (Car)
-0.196
0.652
-0.30
0.76
3
ASC (PT)
1.57
0.338
4.65
0.00
4
Time (Bike)
-12.2
1.48
-8.26
0.00
5
Time (Car, PT, CS)
-4.40
1.39
-3.16
0.00
6
µ Cost (Car)
-7.41
3.11
-2.38
0.02
7
σ Cost (Car)
-6.84
2.32
-2.94
0.00
8
µ Cost (CS, PT)
-8.17
1.26
-6.48
0.00
9
σ Cost (CS, PT)
-5.01
1.12
-4.46
0.00
10
Rain (Bike)
-1.57
0.191
-8.23
0.00
11
Reservation (CS)
0.673
0.239
2.82
0.00
12
Discomfort (Bike)
-2.42
0.282
-8.60
0.00
13
Discomfort (PT)
-1.11
0.244
-4.56
0.00
14
Bike Ownersh. (Bike)
1.55
0.475
3.25
0.00
15
Number of Cars (Car) 17
2.58
0.783
3.30
0.00
16
Pendlerkort (PT)
1.24
0.251
4.92
0.00
17
Gender (Car, PT, Bike)
-0.487
0.281
-1.73
0.08
18
Purpose (Bike)
-0.956
0.207
-4.62
0.00
19
Employed (PT, Bike)
-0.549
0.292
-1.88
0.06
20
Children (Car, Bike)
0.997
0.311
3.21
0.00
21
Single (Car)
3.09
0.890
3.47
0.00
Summary statistics
Number of observations = 1005
L(β0)
=
−1195.588
L(ˆβ)
=
−817.484
−2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
=
756.208
¯ρ2
=
0.299
17 logarithmic
==PAGE:97==
XIX
Table C.7: MMNL model for SP data with nesting structure coefﬁcients
Robust
Parameter
Coeff.
Asympt.
number
Description
estimate
std. error
t-stat
p-value
1
ASC (Bike)
4.60
0.806
5.71
0.00
2
ASC (Car)
-0.161
0.613
-0.26
0.79
3
ASC (PT)
1.81
0.385
4.70
0.00
4
Time (Bike)
-13.6
1.63
-8.30
0.00
5
Time (Car, PT, CS)
-4.65
1.35
-3.44
0.00
6
Cost (Car)
-4.93
2.32
-2.13
0.03
7
Cost (PT, CS)
-5.80
0.926
-6.26
0.00
8
Rain (Bike)
-1.92
0.259
-7.41
0.00
9
Reservation (CS)
0.638
0.248
2.57
0.01
10
Discomfort (Bike)
-2.90
0.352
-8.25
0.00
11
Discomfort (PT)
-1.30
0.271
-4.79
0.00
12
Bike Ownersh. (Bike)
1.70
0.645
2.64
0.01
13
Number of Cars (Car) 18
2.19
0.844
2.60
0.01
14
Pendlerkort (PT)
1.44
0.319
4.50
0.00
15
Gender (Car, PT, Bike)
-0.558
0.299
-1.86
0.06
16
Purpose (Bike)
-1.03
0.264
-3.90
0.00
17
Employed (PT, Bike)
-0.731
0.327
-2.23
0.03
18
Children (Car, Bike)
1.18
0.361
3.27
0.00
19
Single (Car)
4.37
0.855
5.11
0.00
20
αBike
i
(Bike)
-1.41
0.338
-4.19
0.00
21
αCS
i
(CS)
-0.413
0.511
-0.81
0.42 *
22
αCar
i
(Car)
-0.699
0.636
-1.10
0.27 *
23
γCarBike
i
(Car, Bike)
0.623
0.469
1.33
0.18 *
24
γBikeCS
i
(Bike, CS)
-0.426
0.520
-0.82
0.41 *
25
γCarCS
i
(Car, CS)
0.918
0.308
2.98
0.00
Summary statistics
Number of observations
= 1, 005
Number of individuals
=
179
Number of draws
= 5, 000
L(β0)
=
−1195.588
L(ˆβ)
=
−783.914
−2[L(β0) −L(ˆβ)]
=
823.348
¯ρ2
=
0.323
18 logarithmic
==PAGE:98==
XX
Annex
D:
Survey Questionnaire
Figure D.1: Introduction and ﬁrst question
==PAGE:99==
XXI
Figure D.2: Place of living
==PAGE:100==
XXII
Figure D.3: Car availability
==PAGE:101==
XXIII
Figure D.4: Carsharing use
Figure D.5: Mobility availability
==PAGE:102==
XXIV
Figure D.6: Reference Trip
==PAGE:103==
XXV
Figure D.7: Description of Choice Situations
==PAGE:104==
XXVI
Figure D.8: Presentation of Choice Situations
==PAGE:105==
XXVII
Figure D.9: Socio-demographic proﬁle (1/2)
==PAGE:106==
XXVIII
Figure D.10: Socio-demographic proﬁle (2/2)
