==PAGE:1==
Runtime Fog Conﬁguration for
Time-Sensitive Applications
Dimitrios Revythis
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
An increasing demand for adaptability and interoperability in safety-critical
systems has been observed in recent years, mainly cue to the popularization of
fog computing and cyber-physical systems (CPS). Time Sensitive Networking
(TSN) is an extension of the well known Ethernet standard which aims to meet
these demands. TSN separates the network traﬃc in three layers. The ﬁrst
layer which is called Time Triggered (TT), provides complete determinism to
message transmission allowing TSN to be used for critical systems while the
other two layers, Audio-Video-Bridging (AVB) and Best Eﬀort (BE) can be
simultaneously used for non-critical messages.
Not only TSN can be used in mixed criticality and high criticality networks, it
also promotes scalability and interoperability as it is based on Ethernet which is
widely used and studied protocol. Recent standards have introduced a Conﬁg-
uration Agent (CA) which has the capability of re-conﬁguring a TSN network.
This brings TSN a step closer to being a platform that can be used for crit-
ical systems and provide adaptability and interoperability at the same time.
However, the standards are not proposing a full solution and only provide a
framework that can be used to create one.
In this thesis, the framework provided by IEEE’s TSN is used in combination
with Internet Engineering Task Force’s (IETF) NETCONF to propose a sys-
tem that can be reconﬁgured during runtime. All the necessary elements are
presented and then brought together in order to achieve runtime reconﬁgura-
tion. Apart from the networking protocols that are used to connect the various
system entities, a scheduling algorithm is needed as creating a TSN schedule is
a non trivial problem. Thus, a meta-heuristic called GRASP is used to create
viable TSN schedules in a limited time frame.
==PAGE:4==
ii
In order to achieve runtime reconﬁguration, it is assumed that the changes in the
system will be known some time in advance and the scheduling algorithm will
have suﬃcient time to compute a schedule before the request arrives. However,
in a real life application not all of the future changes characteristics may be
available. Thus, a level of uncertainty is introduced in the size of the predicted
streams.
However, this uncertainty introduces multiple possible schedule conﬁgurations
and in most cases not of all of them can be explored within the given time limit.
To counter this, several algorithms are proposed that select some of the possible
conﬁgurations using GRASP and try to maximize the available bandwidth of
the predicted streams. The reserved space is still available for lower priority
level messages and is only used to incorporate the streams as soon as possible
but only after the relevant request is made. The performance of these algorithms
as well as the quality of the resulting schedule is also evaluated and compared
to an oﬄine maximized approach using several synthetic test cases.
The proposed solution is divided into two separate problems with the ﬁrst one
being the creation of such schedules. The second problem is to accommodate
the streams after a request has been made in a way that the regular network
operations are not disrupted. The necessary steps that need to be followed to
solve both parts of the problem and the interaction among the entities of the
system are also explored and presented.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Computer Science and
Engineering.
The work has been supervised by Professor Paul Pop.
Lyngby, 02-July-2018
Dimitrios Revythis
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Thesis Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Time Sensitive Networking
5
2.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Ethernet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
TSN switches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
IEEE standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Credit Based & Time Aware Shapers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Conﬁguration Agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Protocol Conﬁguration
15
3.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
NETCONF framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
YANG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
UNI Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
OPC UA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
System model
23
4.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Architectural model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Application model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.2
Flow and Frame model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
4.3.3
Schedule Creation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3.4
Scheduling algorithm Interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Motivation and Problem Formulation
35
5.1
Motivational Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Problem Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Existing approaches to determining GCLs
41
6.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
ILP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.3
Heuristic strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.4
Meta-heuristic GRASP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.5
Objective functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.6
GRASP Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7
Schedule Reconﬁguration for Extensibility
47
7.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2
Background Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.2.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.2.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.3
Stream incorporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.3.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.3.2
Stream discovery & request type . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.3.3
Stream activation steps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
8
Evaluation
63
8.1
Test Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8.2
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
8.3
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
8.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
9
Discussion
71
9.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
9.2
Results discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
9.3
Mode changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
9.4
Algorithms optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
9.5
AVB impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
9.6
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
10 Conclusion
77
A Motivational Example
79
Bibliography
83
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Industry refers to the activities involved in in the process of producing or man-
ufacturing material goods and all related services. Industry which nowadays
covers approximately a third of the global economic output, became a part
of human activities after the ﬁrst industrial revolution.
The ﬁrst industrial
revolution occurred after the introduction of steam powered machinery in the
production leading to the development of large scale factories. After the ﬁrst
revolution, two more have taken place, resulting into increased productivity and
cost reduction. The second and third revolutions manifested after the transition
to electricity and the industrial digitalization. Nowadays, we are at the brink
of a fourth revolution (Industry 4.0) which is the result of Internet of Thing’s
(IoT) inﬂuence in the industrial sector [27].
IoT which has brought rapid changes to a huge range of society’s products and
services, has started to be included into industrial automation and processes.
IoT’s cloud based systems can oﬀer extended capabilities in form of storage
and computational power to many applications at the cost of non-determinism
in the operation of the network, as IoT provides no guarantees. That lack of
determinism is prohibitive in most industrial systems which more often than not
are classiﬁed as critical and require both real-time capabilities and reliability.
Thus, fog computing was created in pursuance of breaching that gap between
Information Technology’s (IT) services that provide ﬂexibility and scalability
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
and the Operational Technology’s (OT) requirements of reliability, real-time
limitations and determinism. Fog (or edge) computing implements cloud com-
puting features and services while maintaining the required determinism. This
is achieved through a close proximity to the implementation’s hardware, loca-
tion awareness and low latency restrictions [3] [37]. In turn, fog computing oﬀers
interoperability, advanced network services, virtualization and adaptability.
The result of the convergence of IT and OT leads to the creation of cyber-
physical systems (CPS) that constitute the backbone of the Industrial IoT (IIoT)
or Real-Time IoT (RT-IoT) [28] [37] [12]. IIoT leads to systems with enhanced
capabilities, especially in areas such as information gathering and distribution,
as well as increased computational power and storage capacity.
At the same time, the requirements of the systems have also increased. One
prime example is the network bandwidth increase, which occurs due to the in-
creased information ﬂow among a system’s CPS. Multiple networking protocols
and systems have already been introduced with a varying capabilities and costs
that aim to handle the increased network traﬃc. The variety is a result of the
divergence of the industries and the diversity of the industrial systems. Some of
the networks that have already been used in OT systems include CAN, Flexray,
Proﬁbus and multiple Ethernet variations such as for example TT-Ethernet and
EtherNet/IP.
Ethernet in particular has seen a sharp rise in industrial applications in recent
years, as it combines high throughput, scalability and cost-eﬀectiveness [1] [4].
Thus, IEEE has created Time Sensitive Networking (TSN) [6].
TSN’s main
goal is to create an Ethernet-based fully deterministic network that promotes
interopability among devices and in conjunction with Ethernet’s inherent ben-
eﬁts, further increases capabilities of networks.
However, with the increased network capabilities, systems become even more
demanding. Modern networks require ﬂexibility, sustainability, and robustness
of production environments simultaneously to meet these increasing demands.
Until now, most networks are designed oﬄine and only after a signiﬁcant amount
of modeling, simulations, testing and certiﬁcations become operational. Even,
in networks that have more relaxed requirements and the previous processes are
not mandatory, most of the requirements still persist and therefore, the design
of the network is done in a similar way.
The oﬄine network setup creation can lead to relatively good or even optimal
solutions in respect to Quality of Service (QoS) but at the same time, the
sustainability and the ﬂexibility of the network may suﬀer. In modern networks,
addition or removal of end systems or devices can occur under both expected
or unexpected scenarios.
For example, an end system might connect to the
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Related work
3
network and assume a predetermined role during operation or a device might
fail and be replaced by another during runtime. Some measures can be taken
to adhere to these problems during the network setup creation phase but not
everything can be predicted.
A possible solution to the ﬂexibility and sustainability fronts would be re-
conﬁguration during runtime.
Runtime re-conﬁguration can provide a series
of new capabilities to networks and reduce the systems’ design phase. How-
ever, conﬁguration of a deterministic network is a computationally demanding
operation and might also introduce transition errors or implications if not done
carefully which deems it an interesting and complex problem.
The goal of this thesis is to propose a system design that aims to reconﬁgure a
TSN during runtime. TSN is selected because of its increasing popularity, its
interopability and some of its inherent features that constitute runtime reconﬁg-
uration process feasible. Thus, the thesis will cover the proposal of such a system
and try to demonstrate its eﬀectiveness and limitations through evaluation.
1.1
Related work
This section covers a portion of the work done in relevant concepts such as
schedule creation and network reconﬁguration.
A huge eﬀort has already been placed in developing eﬃcient algorithms that
optimize TSN schedules and some examples include [32] [36] and [31]. However,
there is limited research in the reconﬁguration process and even less in online
reconﬁguration.
The work done in [32] also includes some heuristics that solve the scheduling
problem in reasonable for a real time system’s point of view.
Guitierrez et al. in [11] [12] [10] have researched self conﬁgurable networks which
also include monitoring, notiﬁcations and reconﬁguration but without hard time
limits.
Some work has also been done in [34] and [39] [40] on extensible networks that
can accommodate future streams as well as network modiﬁcations.
Finally, the concept of mode changes have also been explored in [33] and [14]
which try to predict the possible modes of a system’s operation and pre-compute
the corresponding schedules in advance.
==PAGE:12==
4
Introduction
1.2
Thesis Overview
The thesis consists of eight chapters as follows:
Chapter 1 contains the introduction and previous related work.
Chapter 2 serves as an introduction to Ethernet, TSN, relevant IEEE stan-
dards and the Conﬁguration Agent which an integral part of the reconﬁguration
procedure.
Chapter 3 describes the available protocols that can be used to communicate
between the system’s entities.
Chapter 4 describes the system model separated in architectural and applica-
tion models, the requirements of the scheduling algorithms and the process of
creating a TSN schedule.
Chapter 5 deﬁnes the project goals, the assumptions made to achieve them
and a motivational example.
Chapter 6 presents existing scheduling algorithms as well as the meta-heuristic
that is used for the evaluation of the proposed solution.
Chapter 7 is the proposed designed that aims to satisfy the goals set in chapter
4. It is separated in two sub-problems, which are then further analyzed and
discussed.
Chapter 8 contains the evaluation of the solution proposed in chapter 6, the
obtained results and more speciﬁcally the evaluation of the proposed algorithms.
Chapter 9 includes a discussion of the proposed solution as well as possible
extensions and optimizations of the proposed system design and algorithms.
Chapter 10 concludes the thesis.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Time Sensitive Networking
2.1
Overview
Time Sensitive Networking (TSN) is an ongoing IEEE project and its main goal
is to extend Ethernet, which is deﬁned in the IEEE 802.3 standard, with timing
capabilities [20]. The development is primarily done by the Time-Sensitive Net-
working (TSN) Task Group which is a sub group of the IEEE 802.1 Working
Group and is primarily done in the form of standards. Some of theses standards
are an integral part of the solution proposed in this thesis.
The mandatory
standards and some optional ones will be discussed in more detail in section 2.4.
A TSN network diﬀers from an Ethernet one mainly on the guarantees that
it is able to provide.
TSN speciﬁes three diﬀerent traﬃc classes.
The ﬁrst
one is called Time-Triggered (TT) and is a version of Ethernet that supports
Time-division Multiple Access (TDMA). TT class can provide speciﬁc timing
predictions for its streams and minimize jitter. Since, TT messages receive a
speciﬁc time slot in which no other streams are allowed to be transmitted, they
are not aﬀected by the rest of the network.
That also makes TT messages
timings calculable and allows them to be used for critical applications. The
second TSN traﬃc class is called Audio-Video-Bridging (AVB). AVB uses pri-
ority based messages which are transmitted in the time that a TT message is
not. Despite the fact that AVB streams are delayed from TT streams, AVB can
==PAGE:14==
6
Time Sensitive Networking
still accommodate streams with soft deadlines, by virtue of TT’s predictability.
Since TT can be predicted, it just reduces the bandwidth available to AVB but
by a known amount. Therefore, timing analysis can still be performed for AVB
calculating the worst case transmission time of an AVB frame and an approx-
imation of its end-to-end latency. Finally, TSN supports a Best-Eﬀort (BE)
traﬃc class in which messages have no timing guarantees. Those messages are
transmitted as regular Ethernet Frames and their end-to-end latency is aﬀected
by both TT and AVB.
2.2
Ethernet
Since TSN is an extension of the Ethernet, a brief description of Ethernet is
provided in this section.
Ethernet networking deﬁnes a set of switches which are connected by full-duplex
links which means that it is physically possible for each link to transmit in both
directions at the same time. Messages are transmitted using hops among the
network switches from a source node to a destination node.
An example of
an Ethernet network can be seen in Figure 2.1. There is no time or directional
restriction to a sender’s transmission towards its available switches in the default
protocol.
SW1
EN1
EN3
EN2
Figure 2.1: Message transmission in an Ethernet network
Ethernet messages consist of frames. Each frame has a predetermined format
deﬁned in the 802.3 standard and can be seen in Figure 2.2. Each Ethernet
frame can be 64 -1522 bytes long, out of which the actual payload or data of
the message are 42 -1500 bytes long. In cases that the transmitted data are
bigger than 1500 bytes which is the Maximum Transition Unit (MTU), multiple
==PAGE:15==
2.3 TSN switches
7
frames are used. Apart from the data, the message contains the sender’s and the
receivers Message Authentication Code (MAC) addresses (6 bytes). The length
of the message (2 bytes) is also sent along the rest of the message as well as a
4 byte cyclic redundancy check called Frame Check Sequence. A message may
also include one or multiple 802.1Q tag if the message is a part of a Virtual Local
Area Network (VLAN). Each 802.1Q tag consists of 4 bytes and is split between
Tag protocol identiﬁer (TPID) and Tag control information (TCI). TPID is a
unique message identiﬁer and is used to distinguish the frame from untagged
frames and frames from diﬀerent messages. TCI consists of Priority Code Point
(PCP), Drop Eligible Indicator (DEI) and VLAN Identiﬁer (VID). PCP deﬁnes
the priority class of the message which in cases of TSN are Time-Triggered
(TT), Audio-Video-Bridging (AVB) and Best-Eﬀort (BE). DEI deﬁnes if the
frame can be dropped in cases of high congestion. VLAN identiﬁer indicates
in which VLAN the frame belongs to and is used by the network management.
It should also be noted that, MTU size remains unaﬀected by the addition of
802.1Q tags and the additional space which is occupied is removed from the
message’s payload. Finally, each Ethernet message is placed within an Ethernet
packet which is 84 -1542 bytes long.
Apart from the message itself, it also
contains the Preamble which is 7 bytes of alternating 0 s and 1 s which are used
for synchronization, the 1 byte Start of Frame Delimiter (SFD) which breaks the
0 s -1 s pattern and signiﬁes the start of the message and the Interpacket Gap
which enforces a gap between the transmission of the two consecutive frames.
Figure 2.2: Ethernet frame
2.3
TSN switches
The scheduling of a TSN network takes place in the switches. There are speci-
ﬁcation for the capabilities of TSN switch and the network is usually separated
on a TSN and a non-TSN part based on switches capabilities. TSN switches
and the end nodes that are connected directly to them constitute a TSN cloud
==PAGE:16==
8
Time Sensitive Networking
in which all TSN requirements and capabilities are met and IEEE standards
can be applied (also see section 2.4). A TSN cloud can communicate with the
rest of the network and non-TSN switches but no guarantees can be provided
for this part of the communication.
More speciﬁcally, each switch has ingress and egress ports which are connected to
edges (or links). When a frame is received by a switch through one of the ingress
ports it is placed in one of several queues, based on its data path resources. Data
path resources of a stream contain its priority level and its traﬃc class and can
be found in the IEEE 802.1Q header. The stream’s ID and destination are used
to specify the outgoing link of the stream. There are usually two ingress ports
and eight egress ports. Each egress ports is linked to a separate queue and has
a diﬀerent priority level. Thus, when a message is allowed to be transmitted, it
is selected from the highest priority queue with a waiting message.
2.4
IEEE standards
There are several standards relating to TSN and most of them can be used
concurrently. A brief description of the most relevant ones will follow. A more
detailed description of some of them can be found in [7].
IEEE 802.1BA - Audio-Video-Bridging (AVB) Systems [17]:
The standards deﬁne the main AVB proﬁles, features and conﬁgurations re-
quired to transport time sensitive streams. It was initially developed to handle
audio and video data streams on an Ethernet network without additional con-
ﬁgurations.
IEEE 802.1Qat - Stream Reservation Protocol [16]:
Stream Reservation Protocol (SRP) is used to request and eventually create
a path between a listener and a talker which meets jitter, end-to-end latency
and bandwidth guarantees. It is one of the basic components of AVB and by
extension of TSN.
IEEE 802.1AS - REV - Timing and Synchronization [25]:
Since the TT part of TSN is TDMA based, precise notion of time is needed.
802.1AS - REV addresses synchronization between end nodes and streams. It
provides performance speciﬁcations for switches which are refered to as "Time
Aware Bridges" and requires Two-Step Delay message processing, Peer-to-Peer
Transparent Clocks and Path Delay Processing.
All clocks are synchronized
based on a selected node’s master clock called grandmaster. Then, a spanning
tree is created to distribute the grandmaster clock to the rest of the network.
==PAGE:17==
2.4 IEEE standards
9
IEEE 802.1Qav - Forwarding and Queuing of Time-Sensitive Streams
[15]:
Forwarding and Queuing of Time-Sensitive Streams (FQTSS) introduces the
Credit-Based-Shaper (CBS) to prevent starvation of lower priority tasks. This
standard in conjunction with Stream Reservation Protocol (SRP) also bounds
the maximum end-to-end latency of an AVB message to 2 ms when there are
at most seven hops between the sender and the receiver. A more detailed de-
scription of CBS can be found in section 2.5.
IEEE 802.1Qbv - Enhancements for Scheduled Traﬃc [18]:
This standard changes the way the time-triggered communication is realized
by introducing a Time-Aware-Shaper (TAS). TAS controls the queues’ outputs
directly using Gate-Control-Lists (GCL). GCLs will be discussed further in sec-
tion 2.5.
IEEE 802.1Qcc – Enhancements and Performance Improvements [26]:
IEEE 802.1Qcc provides support for more streams, conﬁgurable stream reserva-
tion and interaction with higher layer services. The latter is the most important
part for this project as it deﬁnes a User Network Interface (UNI) and a Conﬁg-
uration Agent (CA). The UNI will be presented in section 3.1 and the CA will
be analyzed in section 2.6.
IEEE 802.1Qbu - Frame preemption and Interspersing Express Traf-
ﬁc [19]:
With this standard, Frame Preemption is introduced, which helps to increase
the available bandwidth. This increase occurs due to the fact that a band has
to be used to ensure that no interference between an already transmitting frame
and a TT one takes place. The previous transmission needs to be completed
before any TT frame transmission starts and therefore transmission of messages
cannot happen within that band. Frame preemption signiﬁcantly reduces the
band which is needed from the maximum AVB interfering frame to the largest
interfering fragment.
IEEE 802.1CB - Frame Replication & elimination for Reliability [24]:
This standard introduces fault tolerance characteristics to TSN through redun-
dancy. Redundant copies of messages are transmitted in parallel over disjoint
paths which are then combined by the redundancy management. In essence,
this standard trades bandwidth for fault tolerance by introducing seamless re-
dundancy.
IEEE 802.1Qca - Path Control and Reservation [21]:
It is used with IEEE 802.1CB to deﬁne how the redundant paths are set up.
IEEE 802.1Qci - Per-Stream Filtering and Policing [22]:
==PAGE:18==
10
Time Sensitive Networking
Frame counting, ﬁltering policing, input gating and class selection procedures
are introduced for managed object and switches by this standard. Those can
be used to increase the robustness of the network or introduce monitoring or
discovering mechanisms.
IEEE P802.1Qch – Cyclic Queuing and Forwarding [23]:
It provides further improvements that results to a ﬁxed delay overhead for each
stream of a particular traﬃc class by each switch as well as support for additional
traﬃc classes.
Mandatory
Optional
802.1BA
802.1Qbu
802.1Qat
802.1Qca
802.1AS - REV
802.1Qci
802.1Qav
802.1CB
802.1Qbv
802.1Qch
802.1Qcc
Table 2.1: Summary of IEEE standards
Not all of the above standards are mandatory for the proposed solution. Ta-
ble 2.1 shows the list of mandatory and optional protocols. For the remainder of
this thesis, it is assumed that the mandatory list is in place and that the solution
is built on top of those standards. The optional standards can either provide
performance improvements or introduce additional functionality. Some parts of
the standards are discussed in more detail bellow due to their importance and
relevance to the current work.
2.5
Credit Based & Time Aware Shapers
The ﬁnal goal of the IEEE 802.1Qav is to maintain the maximum delay of
an AVB message bellow 250µs per switch (or bridge) even in high utilization
scenarios.
However, due to the higher priority of TT traﬃc this cannot be
achieved by default. Therefore, CBS was introduced. CBS gives credits to each
of the queues that is not currently transmitting and removes credits from the
one that does so. When the queue is empty and not transmitting, the credit
is set to 0. When a queue has negative credit, it has to pass the priority on
the lower priority queues. Furthermore, a Class Measurement Interval (CMI) is
deﬁned. That is class speciﬁc and deﬁnes the maximum continuous data a talker
can transmit. Using these two, CBS is able to handle the existing starvation
issues and bound AVB latency.
==PAGE:19==
2.5 Credit Based & Time Aware Shapers
11
Even though, CBS can provide some determinism in the latency of AVB and it
is suitable to soft real-time application it cannot handle hard real-time ones. In
order to accommodate them, IEEE 802.1Qbv deﬁned the Time-Aware-Shaper
(TAS). Time aware shaping takes place at the egress ports of the switches. It
makes use of the time synchronization which is introduced through the standard
to create Gate-Control-Lists (GCLs). GCL is a schedule that speciﬁes which
egress port will transmit at any given time. In essence it takes the form of a gate
which allows or disallows a message from each queue to go through. It should be
noted that only one egress port can be active in the same time slot. Since every
received frame is placed in a speciﬁc queue and its arrival time is known, the
existence of a TT frame in a queue is also known. By separating AVB frames
and TT frames in diﬀerent queues the scheduling algorithm is able to pinpoint
the exact position of each message in the queue. Therefore, by controlling which
queue is going to transmit in each time frame, the time that a TT frame will be
transmitted is known. That also means that the arrival of the message to the
next switch is also known and consequently to the rest of the network switches.
Thus, a CBS can block any interference that non-scheduled traﬃc could have
created to TT traﬃc.
Figure 2.3: CGL Example [31]
This is also ensured by providing guard bands before any TT transition to
ensure that no blocking occurs.
The size of the bands depends on the size
of the biggest message (in this case MTU, if there is no preemption, which
can cause a signiﬁcant bandwidth reduction, especially in the cases that the
scheduling algorithm does not take that into account while building the schedule.
If preemption is used, only a small overhead is added.
An example of the
==PAGE:20==
12
Time Sensitive Networking
previous network’s CGL for the message transition from the end nodes EN1
and EN2 to the switch SW1 is shown in Figure 2.3.
2.6
Conﬁguration Agent
IEEE 802.1Qcc deﬁnes a Conﬁguration Agent (CA) with the ability to recon-
ﬁgure the network upon request. The CA consists of two separate units, the
Central User Conﬁgurator (CUC) and the Centralized Network Conﬁgurator
(CNC). They communicate with the rest of the network by using a User Net-
work Interface (UNI). The UNI speciﬁcation is not a part of the standard and
possible implementations are discussed in chapter 3. IEEE 802.1Qcc deﬁnes
three conﬁguration models which are:
• Fully Distributed Model: In this model the user provides the network
requirements and each end node as well as each switch are responsible for
handling their own schedule and conﬁguration. Thus, when a change is
realized the user only provides the newly added stream’s requirements and
the UNI is used between the network and the end nodes.
• Centralized Network / Distributed User Model: This model distinguishes
itself from the previous one through the use of CNC. CNC has a global
knowledge of the network topology. It means that CNC knows each in-
dividual switch and link. The end nodes are still in control of their own
schedule but this time the schedule in switches is managed by the CNC.
• Fully Centralized Model: In this model knowledge and control of CNC is
extended to the end nodes. The CNC of a fully centralized model now has
global knowledge of the network and the schedule of every end node and
switch. Additionally, CUC is introduced which handles end nodes request
but relies to the CNC to communicate with the rest of the network. CUC
only has an abstract notion of the infrastructure of the network which is
converted to speciﬁc parameters by the CNC. This model can be seen in
Figure 2.4.
Even though the fully distributed model seems appealing because of its scala-
bility, it cannot be used in cases that the reconﬁguration is time bounded as
the information gathering would introduce an additional overhead. In a similar
way, the lack of control of the end nodes can also result in jitter because the
end nodes are allowed to forward their messages in a non-periodic way. In a
network that those requirements must be in place, a centralized model has to
==PAGE:21==
2.6 Conﬁguration Agent
13
CUC
CNC
UNI
SW1
EN1
EN3
EN2
CA
Figure 2.4: Conﬁguration Agent architecture
be used. Another reason for this is the complexity of creating a schedule which
can be better optimized while having global network knowledge.
In the centralized model, the CUC handles incoming stream requests and is
responsible for transforming those requests into frames and eventually into traﬃc
parameters. The request may come directly from a system moderator or from
an end node using a predetermined message passing system. Alternatively the
traﬃc parameters may also come from a network discovery system, if one is
in place. The message passing system can be for example a publish-subscribe
system or a request-based system. The received request is then converted to
a set of virtual constraints (e.g a request of the form: "sender: EN1, receiver
EN3, message size: 1500 bytes, Period: 200 ms").
These traﬃc parameters are in turn passed on to the CNC which transforms
them into routes in the physical network and into GCLs at the aﬀected switches.
In order to do so, CNC must be able to discover and verify the underlying phys-
ical topology and subsequently match that with the more abstract one that is
provided by CUC. Moreover, it needs to verify the capabilities of all the network
elements (switches end nodes) and the links. Finally, CNC is responsible to dis-
tribute any given schedule to the underlying elements in case a new schedule is
provided by the CUC.
==PAGE:22==
14
Time Sensitive Networking
The communication between CUC, CNC and the rest of the network can be
seen in Figure 2.4 in which, CNC and CUC communicate through the UNI and
the end nodes communicate with the CUC to request the addition of the new
stream. The solid arrows represent the TSN communication ﬂow between the
end points (ES1, ES2, ES3) and the switch (SW1). More details about how
the communication between the system entities takes place can be found in
chapter 3.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Protocol Conﬁguration
3.1
Overview
In the previous chapter, a User Network Interface (UNI) was introduced. In
the fully centralized model the UNI acts as the intermediate between the CUC
and the CNC. Its main purpose is to convey the stream information to the
CNC. However, the UNI is not a part of the IEEE standards and therefore, the
implementation is up to the system’s designer. Despite that, the implementation
must be compatible with the NETCONF framework. Moreover, the request of
the new stream needs to be communicated to the CA in a predeﬁned way. This
chapter presents some of the available protocols that can be used to handle the
aforementioned communication.
3.2
NETCONF framework
As far as network management is concerned, there are two diﬀerent approaches.
The ﬁrst one is the "Network is the Record" in which network conﬁguration is
done directly. In such an approach the user directly modiﬁes the conﬁguration of
each device. This is commonly done through Command Line interfaces (CLIs).
==PAGE:24==
16
Protocol Conﬁguration
By contrast, the "Generate Everything" approach uses a conﬁguration database
to generate the device conﬁgurations for all the devices of the network. Then,
each device loads those conﬁgurations.
The NETCONF framework belongs to the "Generate Everything" approach and
is created by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) [8] [35]. NETCONF
creates the required databases that can be used by a given protocol to conﬁgure
the network. It deﬁnes clients and servers that are used to control and modify the
conﬁgurations of all network devices. A NETCONF policy manager is used to
control NETCONF devices and act as a policy decision and enforcement point.
So, the NETCONF framework can substitute CLIs which promotes network
interoperability.
This is because there are no CLI standardization and each
manufacturer produces its own version which in most cases is not compatible
with rest.
This can lead to signiﬁcant overhead in cases of mixed networks
because the user will have to handle each CLI separately.
Content
Configuration 
data
Messages
Operations
Notification 
data
Secure
Transport
Layer
Example
<rpc>, 
<rpc-reply>
<edit-config>
SSH, TLS, SOAP/HTTP/TLS,…
<notification>
Figure 3.1: NETCONF Protocol layers
NETCONF deﬁnes a running conﬁguration datastore which describes the net-
work’s current operation as well as conﬁguration data, state date and users.
Apart from the running conﬁguration, a candidate and a startup conﬁguration
are deﬁned. The policy manager has the option of modifying the candidate con-
ﬁguration datastore without interfering with the network’s normal operation.
Thus, when a reconﬁguration is required the candidate datastore of the aﬀected
nodes is updated before activating a substitution between the running and the
==PAGE:25==
3.3 YANG
17
candidate conﬁguration. If network synchronization protocols such as the ones
described in section 2.4 are in place, the switch can happen in a predetermined
point in time to minimize the eﬀect it will have on the network.
Finally, NETCONF framework deﬁnes the underlying protocol’s layers which
can also be seen in Figure 3.1:
• Content: It consists of conﬁguration and notiﬁcation data
• Operations: Typical examples are <get-conﬁg>, <edit-conﬁg> and <load-
conﬁg> and are used to handle conﬁguration datastores.
• Messages: The main messages of NETCONF are on top of Remote Pro-
cedure Calls (RPC)
• Secure transports: RPC messages run over secure channels such as SSH,
TLS and HTTP.
3.3
YANG
Since NETCONF datastores are standardized and promote interoperability, a
predetermine language to describe the datastores is required.
To that end,
IETF has also created YANG which is speciﬁcally tailored to deﬁne and describe
NETCONF model. YANG strives to be a readable and user friendly language
[2]. YANG can also be converted without any information loss to its twin YIN.
YIN is based on the Extensible Markup Language (XML). Therefore, most of
the existing tools are able to process YIN and by extension YANG. YANG’s
network and object deﬁnitions are contained within modules as can be seen in
Figure 3.2. Each module has a separate name and an namespace within an
XML tree.
Information is stored as a part of a module in the leaves of the XML tree. Typ-
ical terms deﬁned in YANG are leaves, leaves lists, RPC operations, actions,
containers and data nodes. Each module can also have sub-modules to further
increase the readability and usability of the language. YANG supports notiﬁ-
cations, operations and grouping. This enhances the selective conﬁguration of
nodes or groups of nodes, both simplifying and speeding up the conﬁguration
process.
==PAGE:26==
18
Protocol Conﬁguration
Figure 3.2: YANG example [2]
3.4
UNI Protocols
There are some compatible protocols with the NETCONF framework.
The
protocols need to adhere with the protocol layers deﬁned by NETCONF frame-
work, which are described in Section 3.2 and also shown in Figure 3.1. The
variety is observed both in the commands and the transport layer. The set of
the used commands has to be a superset of the NETCONF deﬁned commands.
Each command issued by a NETCONF server should be able to be translated to
one of the protocol’s commands. On top of that, another diﬀering point is the
transport layer, as NETCONF framework can be used with any secure transport
protocol.
Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) which is part of the IETF’s
Internet Protocol Suite was initially used [5]. It deﬁnes a set of network elements
such as gateways, terminal servers and devices, as well as management stations.
Management stations are used to enforce the network management operations
on the rest of the network nodes which are commonly referred to as managed
objects. The purpose of SNMP is to accommodate the secure information ﬂow
between the managed objects and the stations. In order to do so, SNMP needs
to deﬁne a concrete set of operations, administrative relations and the form of
==PAGE:27==
3.4 UNI Protocols
19
RESTCONF
NETCONF
GET
<get-conﬁg>, <get>
POST
<edit-conﬁg> (“create”)
PUT
<edit-conﬁg> (“replace”)
PATCH
<edit-conﬁg> (“merge”)
DELETE
<edit-conﬁg> (“delete”)
OPTIONS
(discover supported operations)
HEAD
(get without body)
Table 3.1: RESTCONF and NETCONF command equivalce
both exchanges and information streams.
When IETF deﬁned the NETCONF framework, they also deﬁned their own
protocol.
NETCONF deﬁned its own set of commands.
A subset of those
commands can be seen in Table 3.1. NETCONF sessions are typically running
over Secure Shell (SSH) and consist of operations which are wrapped within
XML-encoded RPCs. IETF created the new command set because SNMP could
not scale suﬃciently for modern networks, as those have both an increased
amount of managed objects while the complexity of said objects is also increased.
Worst case execution times for the SNMP’s SET command and it’s NETCONF
equivalent edit-conﬁg can be seen in Table 3.2. A more extensive comparison
can be found in [13].
Managed
Operation Time (s)
objects
SNMP
NETCONF
1
0.00896
0.195
10
0.0182
0.216
100
0.112
0.252
1000
1.335
0.861
10000
11.57
7.321
Table 3.2: Worst case operation time
RESTCONF which is again created by IETF is an extension that requires
the NETCONF framework to be in place and can cooperate with all other
NETCONF compatible frameworks. Figure 3.3 shows how a NETCONF and
a RESTCONF based servers can co-exist in the same network and Table 3.1
includes some RESTCONF command examples. RESTCONF is operating over
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS) while still making use of RPC
==PAGE:28==
20
Protocol Conﬁguration
to accommodate the Create, Read, Update, and Delete (CRUD) operations.
RESTCONF does not use the sessions as NETCONF does.
NETCONF Client
Web app
datastore
Network device
RESTCONF
NETCONF
Figure 3.3: NETCONF - RESTCONF co-existence
RESTCONF apart from the YANG model ﬁles, it also uses translated YANG
data models which are converted into JavaScript Object Notation (JSON).
JSON is a more compact and readable form of YANG and can be used in the
same way that YIN is used. Additionally, JSON is a common way to parse XML
ﬁles and can be used by many REST APIs which is one of the main advantages
of RESTCONF over NETCONF. One obvious disadvantage is the creation of a
subset network that can be interacted with only through a RESTCONF server.
3.5
OPC UA
Open Platform Communications Uniﬁed Architecture (OPC UA) which is de-
veloped by the OPC Foundation can be used to handle the addition of new
streams to the network [30]. OPC UA was initially a client-service protocol but
its newer version also supports publish-subscribe and multicast data exchange.
In essence, it means that UPC UA can be used to handle the communication
between end nodes that have a stream request and the Conﬁguration Agent
(CA) of NETCONF. In the case of TSN, this procedure has to be made in a de-
terministic way with bounded delay between the initial request and the normal
operation of the publish-subscribe scheme.
For that purpose, two types of messages are deﬁned. The ﬁrst type are notiﬁca-
tion messages which are used to create new streams and remove the ones that
==PAGE:29==
3.5 OPC UA
21
are no longer needed. The second type of messages are conﬁguration messages
which handle the transportation of relevant information to the aﬀected nodes
and switches. It should be noted that the messages exchanged between end
nodes are transmitted through the CA which handles the message creation and
conﬁguration procedures. After the messages are set up, they start to commu-
nicate directly through the allocated stream path.
In order to achieve determinism OPC UA should be given dedicated transmis-
sion slots which can ensure bounded end-to-end latency.
This can be easily
achieved by adding a new TT message with the required bandwidth and period
requirements. If the timing requirements are not too strict, high priority AVB
messages can be used as an alternative but that requires AVB delay analysis
which may not be available. This will also be discussed in subsection 7.3.2.
==PAGE:30==
22
Protocol Conﬁguration
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
System model
4.1
Overview
The proposed design will be discussed in chapter 7 but in order to do so, some
perquisites need to be presented and discussed. Since the end goal is the cre-
ation of a new conﬁguration for an existing system, a scheduling algorithm needs
to be used. A scheduling algorithm is proposed in chapter 6 but any schedul-
ing algorithm can be used instead. In the proposed solution the input to the
scheduling algorithm is provided through a ﬁle that contains all the required
information and treats the scheduling algorithm as a black box. However, al-
ternative methods can be used as long as the scheduling algorithm receives the
required information in an unambiguous way.
The requirements that a scheduling algorithm needs to meet are also discussed in
chapter 6. However, a scheduling algorithm cannot operate without a properly
deﬁned input. Thus, the scheduling algorithm’s input should contain both the
architectural and the application model of the system. In eﬀect, the input of
the scheduling algorithm should contain the network as well as the ﬂows that
need to be scheduled.
Finally, the scheduling algorithm should also include a termination value. This
is because, exploring all possible options takes a substantial amount of time
==PAGE:32==
24
System model
which is be available in a system that needs to be re-conﬁgurable in real time.
The most common termination values are either time-based or objective-value-
based.
4.2
Architectural model
The ﬁrst step to compute a schedule for a network is the knowledge of the
network itself.
It involves the set of end nodes and switches as well as the
physical links connecting them.
Thus, the system topology is modeled as a
directed graph G which involves a set of vertices V and a set of edges E such
as G(E, V ). The set of vertices is also partitioned in the set of the end nodes
(or end systems) ESes and the set of TSN switches (or bridges) SWs. Graph
G is a directed graph and the direction of the communication links should also
be included in the graph information but since only full-duplex links are used
between network objects, it is not mandatory. Hence, the part of the scheduling
algorithm that parses the topology should create two edges to connect e.g. ES1
and SW1 such as [ES1,SW1] and [SW1,ES1] are both members of E but the
input ﬁle could be simpliﬁed to include only one of those, implying the existence
of both. Alternatively, a non-directed graph could be used without inﬂuencing
the results.
Furthermore each link of E should have three properties:
• Transmission rate (tr ∈R)
• Propagation delay (pd ∈R)
• Number of associated ports (np ∈N)
The typical transmission rate of a TSN system is either 100 Mbps or 1 Gbps
and refers to the throughput of each link. It should be noted that since the link
is bi-directional the previous numbers refer to the throughput of each direction.
The propagation delay refers to the delay of the physical link and is proportional
to its length. This can have an impact in cases that the length of the physical
cables diﬀer signiﬁcantly and the resulting delay can create variations in the
transmission time on diﬀerent links. Finally, np refers to the number of egress
ports that can transmit on this speciﬁc link.
Even though all of these are deﬁned, for simpliﬁcation reasons they will be set
in default values for the remainder of this project. Transmission rate will be set
to 1 Gbps and the propagation delay will be set to 0. The time that is required
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Architectural model
25
for a single frame transmission will be based on the size of the frame itself, since
both relevant metrics are constant. Finally, each link will be associated with
a single egress port resulting in np = 1 when the vertex v ∈ES and np = 8
when the vertex v ∈SW. This way, the scheduling algorithm will be able to
diﬀerentiate between the output of the switch and an end node.
The scheduling algorithm should be able to work with any given topology which
is discovered by going through the list of edges E. This is also used to deﬁne the
route that a message ﬂow would need to follow to transmit a message between a
given sender and receiver pair. The most common approach is to follow the path
that requires the least amount of "jumps" which means the minimum amount
of switches involved.
Even though the network topology does not have any direct inﬂuence on how
the schedule is computed, it has an impact on the system as a whole. The topol-
ogy inﬂuences the time needed to distribute schedules and the distance between
some entities, such as the Conﬁguration Agent (section 2.6) or the Background
Process (section 7.2), can also aﬀect the system’s response as will be further ex-
plained in subsection 7.3.3. Consequently, a topology that involves a centralized
point will yield better results regarding runtime conﬁguration purposes.
Figure 4.1: Common network topologies [38]
A list of common network topologies is shown in Figure 4.1 [38]. The perfor-
mance of the reconﬁguration is dependant on the amount of jumps required
between the CA and the furthest end node, as well on the distance between CA
and Background Process. It is easy to see that for a ring topology with n nodes
the furthest node from the CA is n/2−1 independently of CA placement, while
in the case of the line can be between n/2 −1 and n −1. Furthermore, some
topologies, such as the fully connected one, are infeasible for a TSN network,
as it would require a large number of switches. Since the system would like to
minimize the worst case, an ideal topology would be a balanced star topology
with both CA and Background Process placed in the middle of the star. Finally,
the initial topology will change in a frequent basis and it may not be able to be
maintained. However, some eﬀort should be made by the system designer to do
==PAGE:34==
26
System model
so whenever possible, as the worst case reconﬁguration time is proportional to
the aforementioned distances.
4.3
Application model
4.3.1
Overview
While the above architectural nodes describe the set of managed objects and the
network’s topology, it does not cover the main "ingredients" of the scheduling
algorithm which are, the transmitted messages that need to be scheduled. This
section will cover the deﬁnition of the ﬂows in an unambiguous way and the
requirements that a TSN scheduling algorithm should meet.
4.3.2
Flow and Frame model
The deﬁnition of a frame was given in section 2.2 and refers to a single message
transmission between two deﬁned nodes. Both nodes are included within the
message as sender and receiver. Whenever the transmitted messages exceeds
the MTU more than one frames need to be used. A collection of frames that
are part of the same message is called ﬂow.
A ﬂow may be a part of either one of the underlying TSN traﬃc classes. Only TT
ﬂows need to be scheduled by the scheduling algorithm. Thus, AVB ﬂows and
BE ﬂows will not be considered by the scheduling algorithm during the schedule
construction. This does not mean that AVB ﬂows should be ignored, as they
consist a big part of the network traﬃc and also have their own requirements.
The two main diﬀerences between a TT ﬂow and AVB ﬂow are the jitter and
"hardness" of their deadlines, which is the impact of a deadline miss. AVB ﬂows
cab be more easily scheduled and diﬀerent metrics can be used to measure the
system’s performance related to AVB traﬃc. This will be further discussed in
subsection 7.2.2.3 and section 9.5.
The collection of ﬂows represented by a set of ﬂows si ∈S, with si being a
single ﬂow, constitutes the TT communication of the network. A TT ﬂow is
transmitted periodically and the transition should have 0 jitter. Thus, at the
start of each period, a ﬂow (i.e. a set of frames) is transmitted from a sender node
towards a receiving node. In between, the ﬂow is received and re-transmitted by
a number of switches. The time in which each frame is received by each switch
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Application model
27
or end node should be precise and known in advance for every frame of a TT
ﬂow of S. The number of frames in each ﬂow should also be deﬁned and should
be proportionate to the size of the message.
A ﬂow is then transmitted periodically with period T along a route (r). It is
quite common that the deadline (d) is equal to the period but that is not a
mandatory restriction. Another relevant metric is the end-to-end latency (l).
End-to-end latency refers to the time it takes to transmit a frame through the
network. It is therefore measured from the time the sender node ﬁnishes the
transmission of all frames until the last frame is received by the receiver. End-
to-end latency needs to always be smaller than the transmission deadline as TT
ﬂows have hard real time requirements.
The route of each ﬂow is selected by the scheduling algorithm before the schedul-
ing of the ﬂow occurs. Only the scheduling algorithm and the CNC should have
a complete route of each ﬂow (r). Thus, the scheduling algorithm should main-
tain a set of routes R such as every r ∈R. Each of the intermediate nodes
does not need to be aware of the full route and only needs to know when each
message should be received and be re-transmitted. The ﬁrst part includes the
expected arrival time of each frame and the incoming link (in). For the second
part, each managed object is given a predetermined point in time in which they
will transmit each frame into a speciﬁc outgoing link (t).
Each ﬂow needs to be properly deﬁned by set of attributes. The set of attributes
for a ﬂow can be seen bellow in which ES refers to the set of end nodes such as
ES ∈V :
• T ∈N: Period in microseconds
• D ∈N: Maximum end-to-end latency in microseconds
• d ∈N: Deadline in microseconds
• ua ∈ES: sender end node
• ub ∈ES: receiver end node
• r ∈Ra,b: A route in the network connecting ua and ub
• s ∈r: Sending link, i.e., outgoing link from ua
• t ∈r: Receiving link, i.e., incoming link in ub
• k ∈N: Number of frames on each link
==PAGE:36==
28
System model
Therefore, each ﬂow si is deﬁned by a set of the above attributes such as:
si = (T, D, d, ua, ub, r, s, t, k)
(4.1)
In section 4.2, it was mentioned that the Transmission rate (tr) and the Propa-
gation Delay (pd) will be set into the default values of 1 Gbps and 0 respectively.
Since every transmitted frame will be at most of size MTU (or 1542 bytes) that
bounds the transmission time (Tt) of a single frame to 12.336µs as described
by Equation 4.2.
Tt = MTU
tr
+ pd = 1542 bytes
1 Gbps
+ 0 = 12.336 µs
(4.2)
4.3.3
Schedule Creation
Several restrictions are imposed on the scheduling algorithm by both hardware
limitations and the TSN standards.
Those restrictions make the scheduling
process computationally hard and time consuming but are necessary for the
deterministic transmission of TSN ﬂows. The restrictions that the scheduling
algorithm has to apply to the created schedule are listed in this section which
aims to present the process of schedule creation.
4.3.3.1
Hyperperiod
Before going into details about the schedule creation the concept of a hyperpe-
riod should be deﬁned. A schedule consists of TT ﬂows that are periodic. This
means that after a speciﬁc amount of time the whole schedule is going to be
repeated as well. Thus, the schedule itself will also end up being periodic. A
hyperperiod is the cycle time of the complete schedule and it only depends on
the periods of the TT ﬂows. More precisely, a hyperperiod is calculated as the
Least Common Multiple of the ﬂow periods and can be computed beforehand.
4.3.3.2
GCL oﬀset assignment
In general, creating a schedule refers to the process of assigning a time frame
for each message transmission during which the message is allowed to be trans-
mitted. In a TSN schedule that time frame needs to precisely deﬁned and a
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Application model
29
deterministic message transmission is required. This can be achieved due to
bounded delays of TSN network. The transmission time of each message is con-
trolled by Gate Control Lists (GCLs) as it was mentioned in section 2.5. Thus,
in a TSN creating a schedule is equivalent to assigning values to the GCLs.
A GCL for a single switch is a 0 or 1 assignment for each queue of each outgoing
port and each time slot. Since the queues are linked to the output ports, the
GCL also applies for the queues.
This means, that for each time frame, a
GCL is a table which shows which ports are allowed to transmit and which are
not. At each time slot, only one frame is allowed to be transmitted in order
to maintain determinism in the schedule. Since only a single message can be
transmitted over the physical link at a single time frame due to Ethernet and
physical limitations, allowing more than one message transmission can cause one
of them to stop transmitting. This can only happen in cases that both queues
have a waiting message and both ports are open. Hence, leaving two ports open
at the same time can lead into multiple potential cases which should not be
allowed, as the system would lose track of the transmitted messages and the
determinism that involves. This results in a table for each TSN switch in which
only one of the ports is allowed to be non-zero at every given time. That being
said, maximizing the amount of time frames that contain ones, also maximizes
the networks throughput since the lower queues should be assigned to AVB and
BE messages assuming they are not empty as well. End nodes also have their
own GCL but since they only have 1 outgoing port that ends up being an single
row table.
Since TT messages are periodic, it should be easy to observe that a GCL for
an end node can also be described by an oﬀset assignment to each frame. Both
oﬀset and GCL can describe in which time slot should a frame be transmitted in
the same way and without information loss. In a similar manner, the switches’
GCLs can also be described by a set of oﬀsets which deﬁne when each frame
should be transmitted. This is only possible thanks to the determinism in the
system, which allows to scheduling algorithm to pinpoint the exact location
of each message. The exact location means that the scheduling algorithm has
knowledge of both the position within the queue and the queue that a message
is placed in, as well as the rest of the queue contents. This happens because the
system knows both the start of each frame’s transmission and the time it takes
to transmit it, given the transmission rate and propagation delay assumptions.
Thus, in both cases of managed objects, a created schedule can be described and
deﬁned by either a set of GCLs for each of the objects or by an oﬀset assignment
for each of the ﬂows’ frames.
No matter which of the methods is used, the end goal is to provide such an
assignment so that each ﬂow meets its deadline. Since, that should be repeated
with the aforementioned hyperperiod, the scheduling algorithm only needs to
==PAGE:38==
30
System model
deﬁne precise oﬀsets or GCLs for a single hyperperiod. The scheduling algorithm
should also factor in the ordering of these oﬀsets, so that a message is already
waiting at the queue before trying to transmitting it. For example if a frame
is transmitted from ES1 to SW1 and then to ES2, and the frame is MTU size,
then the frame oﬀsets of the transmissions [ES1,SW1] and [SW1,ES2] should
be at least 12, 336 µs apart to allow the frame to ﬁnish its transmission and
be placed in a SW1 queue. If another message is placed on that queue, then
the GCL needs to either open twice to allow or stay open long enough to allow
both messages to go through. A way to prevent that is to place the message
in an empty queue. By doing this, the message will always be the next one to
be transmitted, but since the queues are limited and AVB and BE traﬃc needs
some queues as well, this is not always the possible.
Finally, each of the ﬂows should reach the destination within its deadline which
is the main goal of the scheduling algorithm.
That requires the scheduling
algorithm to keep track of the route of each ﬂow and ensure that the GCLs or
oﬀsets are deﬁned in a way that all ﬂows are able to reach their destination
in time.
If the scheduling algorithm, manages to compute that for a single
hyperperiod then, the schedule is complete.
4.3.3.3
Buﬀering
Each switch can begin the transmission of a frame only if the frame is fully
buﬀered within a queue of the switch. This means that each frame needs to
be fully received and placed into a queue before any re-transmission occurs.
If the timing synchronization is perfect, then each frame would be ready for
transmission exactly after the time it is received. For instance, the previous
frame transmission ES1 →SW1 →ES2 with the initial frame having 0 oﬀset
would result into an 0 + 12, 336 oﬀset for the [SW1,ES2] transmission. Since
there is always a synchronization error between managed objects, an additional
delay is introduced.
This delay is bounded by a worst-case synchronization
error ϵ. It needs to be included to the calculation in cases that the frame will
be re-transmitted instantly after its arrival. Thus, the example oﬀset for the
[SW1,ES2] transmission becomes 0 + 12, 336 + ϵ. ϵ depends on the system and
the scheduling algorithm used for this thesis which is presented in chapter 6
assuming ϵ = 5, 008. That makes the earliest possible re-transmission being
0 + 12, 336 + 5, 008 µs = 17, 344 µs and the scheduling algorithm assigns a
minimum oﬀset of 18 µs between consecutive frame re-transmissions.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Application model
31
4.3.3.4
Zero jitter tolerance
Jitter is deﬁned as the time diﬀerence between the arrival time of frames at
each period. Since, the scheduling algorithm handles TT streams zero jitter
is allowed. However, the scheduling algorithm deﬁnes precise oﬀsets for each
frame within each hyperperiod enforcing the zero jitter requirement.
4.3.3.5
Queue determinism
There are two additional sources of non-determinism that can occur in the
queues apart from buﬀering that was already mentioned. Non-determinism in
queues can result in the wrong frame transmission as the scheduling algorithm
can lose track of the frame position within the queue.
The ﬁrst possible scenario of wrong transmission happens in cases of frame loss
either during transmission or during the queue placement. Frame loss should
not happen frequently in the ﬁrst place and if it does, it will aﬀect the opera-
tion of the receiving end node. However, the impact to other ﬂows should be
mitigated. The problem occurs since the scheduling algorithm expects a speciﬁc
order of frames in the queues. Thus, if both the lost frame and the next one
are supposed to be in the queue when the GCL is set to open, the next frame
will be transmitted instead, resulting in a wrong transmission which can have a
cascading eﬀect if not managed.
The second possible scenario occurs when two diﬀerent arriving frames are
placed in the same queue in almost the same time.
This is a result of the
frame synchronization error and can result in alternating the order that the
frames are placed and can vary at each period.
Both of those issues can be mitigated by using diﬀerent queues for frames that
arrive in a close time frame and the scheduling algorithm should also be able to
impose that restriction to the schedule.
4.3.3.6
Schedule quality
It was previously mentioned that one way to provide determinism about the
queues is to use diﬀerent queues for each message. However, queues are also
used by AVB and BE traﬃc and the scheduling algorithm should leave some of
the queues free for those. In general, the less queues the scheduling algorithm
uses the better it is for the rest of TSN traﬃc, as AVB and BE messages should
==PAGE:40==
32
System model
not be placed in TT queues to maintain determinism. This is a secondary goal
of creating a schedule. Furthermore, another goal that the scheduling algorithm
can strive for is end-to-end latency. That is achieved by forwarding each frame
as fast as possible.
In essence, it is minimizing the time each frame spends
within each queue of the switch.
It can be observed that the secondary objectives are i many cases contradic-
tory since the second one can only be maximized by placing the messages into
diﬀerent time frames or into diﬀerent queues. The scheduling algorithm can
either try to ﬁnd a balance between the two or aim to maximize one of them.
This can be controlled by properly deﬁning an objective function and assigning
appropriate weights to each of the objectives.
4.3.4
Scheduling algorithm Interface
The scheduling algorithm used bellow uses ﬁles as an input and output but any
other variation can be used. In general the input should contain, in accordance
to the architectural and application model, the following:
• a list of devices including their type
• a list of physical links between devices
• a list of ﬂows that should be scheduled
• the maximum time the scheduling algorithm should search
The type of the device should be either an end node or a switch. The physical
links between the devices are assumed to be bidirectional and therefore either
direction is suﬃcient to include them. By using the set of devices and the set
of links, the scheduling algorithm should be able to construct the system graph
that represents the system architecture. Finally, each ﬂow should contain a list
of information that allows it to be scheduled. Each ﬂow should contain:
• a distinctive name or id
• the maximum data size that it might transmit
• a period
• a deadline
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Application model
33
• a sender node
• a receiver node
• a ﬂow type
Most of those are self-explanatory apart from the ﬂow type. The ﬂow type in
most cases includes TT ﬂows but AVB ﬂows can also be used. Additionally, the
deadline is normally set to be equal to the period and thus can be omitted. It is
also assumed that the scheduling algorithm is able to generate routes between
sender and receiver nodes but if this is not the case or a predeﬁned routes need
to be used. In this case, the sender and receiver nodes should then be replaced
by the route while the period and the deadline should be modiﬁed accordingly.
Apart from the input ﬁle which describes the system and its contained ﬂows, the
scheduling algorithms described in chapter 6 also take command line parameters
as input which deﬁne:
• the optimization strategy
• the input ﬁle
• the extra ﬁle
• the maximum execution time
• some extra technical parameters.
The optimization strategy selects which scheduling algorithm should be used
out of four main options (ASAP, ALAP, GRASP, ILP which will be explained
in the scheduling algorithm chapter), as well as which attribute among queue
usage, end-to-end latency or their combination will be used for the objective
function. The input ﬁle describes the initial system and the extra ﬁle deﬁnes the
modiﬁcations done to the system during runtime. The maximum execution time
deﬁnes how much time the heuristic will spend before returning the best found
solution.
Some of the extra parameters which are optional specify technical
information, such as output ﬁle location. Some others, such as the strategy
options or the seed, are used to inﬂuence the scheduling algorithm output.
When given the previous information, the scheduling algorithm should be able
to create the schedule if it is feasible and output the result. The scheduling
algorithm described in chapter 6 provides the following output:
==PAGE:42==
34
System model
• the total number of ﬂows and frames
• the oﬀset, duration and ﬁnish time of each frame
• the queue assignment for each ﬂow instance
• queue utilization on links
• the end-to-end latency of each ﬂow
• the maximum number of used queues
• the time it takes to complete the schedule
• overall end-to-end latency
• the objective value if applicable
The schedule is deﬁned by the frame oﬀsets as discussed in section 2.5 and
can be converted to GCLs. The duration and the ﬁnish time are additional
information but are not necessary as they can be computed by using the oﬀset
and the input frame size. The rest of the information such as the queue usage
and the end-to-end latency can be used to evaluate the quality of the solution,
if an objective is not deﬁned in advance.
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Motivation and Problem
Formulation
In this chapter, a motivational example will be given. It will be followed by
a discussion about the problem diﬃculty and a set of assumptions to restrict
the solution scope will be presented. Finally, the goal of this project will be
introduced.
5.1
Motivational Example
Scheduling algorithms always try to create schedules that are either optimal
or maximize an objective function. In most cases, the resulting schedule ends
up being a good solution for the problem at hand. However, most of existing
scheduling algorithms provide solutions that depend solely to the given input
and do not take into account possible future modiﬁcations. This process has no
impact to oﬄine created schedules that are not going to be modiﬁed after their
design phase. However, since there is an increasing demand for more adaptable
networks, re-conﬁgurable networks become more common. In [36] the concept of
porosity is introduced. Porosity is a measure of extensibility of a schedule as the
scheduling algorithm maintains free time slots in diﬀerent parts of the schedule.
When new streams need to be scheduled on top of an existing schedule, those
==PAGE:44==
36
Motivation and Problem Formulation
time slots can be used. By doing so the system can avoid creating a new schedule
which is both time consuming and computationally expensive. Creating those
slots is a diﬃcult problem in itself, as there are many possible scenarios of added
streams which in most cases will beneﬁt from diﬀerent slots. At the same time,
adding too much space might have a negative impact on the initial schedule.
However, re-conﬁgurable systems can beneﬁt greatly from extensible schedules
since, adding a new ﬂow to a system is signiﬁcantly faster than creating a new
schedule. Having a system with the correct slots can prove to be diﬃcult but
at the same time, if this is possible, the reconﬁguration process becomes several
magnitudes faster.
For example, in the system shown in Figure 5.1 an initial conﬁguration could
contain 9 ﬂows with varying data sizes, periods, senders and receivers. A com-
plete list of the ﬂows can be found in Appendix A. In this system, an initial
schedule could be the one presented in Figure A.1. This is an optimal schedule
if the scheduling objectives are the resulting end-to-end latency and the queue
usage. The resulting values can be seen in Table 5.1 where 0 in queue usage
translates into an optimal solution according to the used scheduling algorithm.
ES 1
ES 2
ES 3
ES 4
SW 2
SW 3
SW 1
Figure 5.1: Example topology
However, if another ﬂow would be needed to be scheduled on top of that sched-
ule, it would be hard to ﬁt. More speciﬁcally, adding a ﬂow of 6000 bytes from
ES2 to ES3 with a period of 200 µs would be impossible without moving already
scheduled ﬂows. Thus, the system would need to re-conﬁgure the whole schedule
in case that such a ﬂow arrives which would also inﬂuence multiple nodes and
switches.
If the added ﬂow could be predicted in advance, the schedule could be modiﬁed
accordingly to be able to accommodate it. In order to so, some of the spec-
iﬁcations of the added ﬂow need to be known in advance. In that case, the
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Assumptions
37
scheduling algorithm would be able to schedule the system in such way, so that
the added ﬂow will have suﬃcient time slots. A schedule that can also include
the previous tenth ﬂow can be seen in Figure A.2. In fact, not only a ﬂow of
6000 bytes can be added between ES2 and ES3 but additional 7500 bytes can
also be added alongside the previous 6000 bytes resulting in the schedule shown
in Figure A.2.
Latency
Queue
Combined
Latency
Queue
Latency
Queue
Latency
Queue
Initial
122.11
0
127.56
0
127.56
0
1 added ﬂow
135.14
1
146.14
3
146.14
3
2 added ﬂows
188.15
5
179.61
4
202.97
6
Table 5.1: Scheduling objectives
Table 5.1 shows the resulting end-to-end latency and queue usage for three
diﬀerent objective functions of the scheduling algorithm. The increase in both
end-to-end latency and queues might seem signiﬁcant but the utilization increase
of the system also needs to be taken into account. In that context, the ability to
add the ﬂows without the need of reconﬁguration should out-value the reduction
in the average performance of the existing traﬃc. Thus, this thesis will aim to
propose a system that can create such schedules and ways to accommodate, ﬂow
addition requests and runtime reconﬁguration.
5.2
Assumptions
The scheduling problem of a TSN network is NP-hard problem and an optimal
solution can only be obtained in simple cases [9].
A possible way to obtain
solutions is based on Integer Linear Programming (ILP). Even in the simple
cases, that the result can be obtained by an ILP solution, it can take hours
to be calculate.
The diﬃculty can sharply increase in larger networks or in
networks with higher utilization.
Typical industrial networks contain 100 to 1000 end nodes and have varying
utilization. In most cases, the TT traﬃc can be assumed to have relatively low
utilization of approximately 20%. The payload of the critical traﬃc is usually in
the range of 100 - 500 bytes but is not bounded by that. Critical message periods
can be as low as 100 us but in most cases can be assumed to be 1 −10 ms and
the deadline is usually the period. Despite the low utilization are not allowed to
have any jitter and low end-to-end latency is preferable. Obviously, with as low
==PAGE:46==
38
Motivation and Problem Formulation
utilization as this, the schedulability of the streams is not in question and can
be handled in relatively short time despite the rest of the requirements. Other
cases of industrial networks might involve higher network utilization which can
be for example 50% or 60% with diﬀerent message periods and varying message
criticality and jitter allowance.
Whenever TT traﬃc utilization is relatively low, the AVB traﬃc occupies most
of the remaining network bandwidth resulting in quite high overall network
utilization. AVB ﬂows can have similar but more relaxed requirements compared
to TT. Their messages can be signiﬁcantly larger and contain several MTU
size frames. Since, the TT precedes AVB, the streams with the hard-real time
guarantees are unaﬀected by the AVB utilization.
On the other hand, it is
preferable to schedule the TT in a way that it is as less intrusive to AVB as
possible. All in all, the scheduling of such a problem ends up being way to
complex to solve in real time. Given the size and utilization of the network, it can
also be assumed that the AVB traﬃc cannot be fully analyzed during runtime
since the network traﬃc will be constantly evolving and general principles have
to be used to improve AVB.
At the same time there is a bounded reconﬁguration delay which will be assumed
to be in the area of seconds as anything lower becomes unrealistic. The system
also needs to ensure consistency during the reconﬁguration process, as well as
the handling of computing and distributing the schedule to all aﬀected nodes.
In order to handle the previous requirements and still be able to provide guaran-
tees, some assumptions need to be made for the network and its conﬁguration.
First of all, the network needs to comply with the mandatory IEEE standards
that are presented in section 2.4. Secondly, the end nodes and the switches
that constitute the TSN cloud need to have suﬃcient requirements to be able
to handle and support the existing traﬃc and the capabilities described in the
standards. Moreover, at least one node capable of computing the schedule in the
way described in section 7.2 has to be part of the network at any given time and
that this node will have the required resources available whenever requested.
Finally, due to the way TT streams are scheduled, some information about the
incoming streams needs to be available beforehand. That involves the period as
well as the sender and the receiver of the ﬂow which is used to also determine
the route. That is because, the messages on the egress ports need to be sched-
uled sequentially along the path of the stream. In practice, one has to know the
direction of the stream (for example ES1 →SW1 →ES2), because the oﬀset
of the stream needs to be increasing along that path.
If this is not known,
the scheduling algorithm needs to reserve separate slots for each direction of
the message which results into signiﬁcant bandwidth loss. Additionally, only a
bounded number of ﬂows should be allowed to be modiﬁed at any given instance,
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Problem Formulation
39
because both the schedule creation and the schedule distribution times are pro-
portionally increased with the number of changes, as more managed objects are
aﬀected. In general, it is assumed that the system has enough available band-
width to accommodate the requested stream inclusions and that the resulting
system will be reasonably schedulable. Another assumption is that a single ﬂow
of limited size is greedily schedulable on top of the existing schedule without
requiring a full reschedule. The last assumption is made to ensure that the sys-
tem can handle non-predicted ﬂows that are added within the time bound and
can be easily ensured in systems in which network utilization is not too high.
5.3
Problem Formulation
The scope of this thesis is to propose a framework which can reconﬁgure a TSN
with real time restrictions while maintaining Quality of Service (QoS) as much
as possible. The proposed system should be able to incorporate predicted ﬂows
and network topology changes within some seconds depending on the system as
well as limited non-predicted ﬂows that can be greedily scheduled. The system
should reconﬁgure itself periodically even without any changes to prevent QoS
degradation resulting from ﬂows and network topology changes and provide
optimized solutions whenever possible.
A secondary scope is to provide some simple algorithms that are used to com-
pute the modiﬁed schedules and measure the feasibility and quality of their
solutions by demonstrating their performance in restricted time scenarios. The
optimization of such algorithms and the way the system predicts streams are
out of the scope of this project.
More speciﬁcally, the system should receive the system’s architecture and a list
of ﬂows as deﬁned in chapter 4. These will deﬁne the original system which will
be perceived as the current system conﬁguration and will involve the system
architecture G(E, V ) and the list of existing ﬂows si ∈S. The system should
also receive a list of modiﬁcations that will be performed on the existing system
as an additional input A. The additional input may contain architectural mod-
iﬁcation, ﬂows addition, removal or modiﬁcation or any combination of them.
Then, the system will aim to use that input to create a schedule that will be able
to handle the predicted changes described in A and when they occur, perform
the modiﬁcation operation during runtime within a given time limit.
Thus, the thesis aims to address the reconﬁguration problem by proposing both
a design of an adaptable system and some algorithms that can handle the un-
certainty of the streams within limited time.
==PAGE:48==
40
Motivation and Problem Formulation
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 6
Existing approaches to
determining GCLs
6.1
Overview
In this chapter the scheduling algorithm that is used to test the system is pre-
sented. Some relevant characteristics, features and limitations of the scheduling
algorithm will be introduced. The scheduling algorithm and all of its strategies
were developed by Michael Lander Raagaard in [31].
The proposed scheduling techniques are based on heuristics and therefore are
not guaranteed to ﬁnd the optimal solution. However, there are many cases in
which the solution that is found can be proven to be optimal within the time
limit.
Before going into details about each implementation, it should be mentioned
again that the scheduling problem is to assigning an time oﬀset to each frame or
assigning values to the GCLs as it was described in subsection 4.3.3. It should
also be noted that the scheduling algorithm does not diﬀerentiate between TT
or AVB ﬂows and schedules them in the same way.
==PAGE:50==
42
Existing approaches to determining GCLs
6.2
ILP
Integer Linear Program (ILP) is one way to compute the optimal solution to the
scheduling problem. ILP creates all possible schedule variations and calculates
the objective value of each one before selecting the solution that maximizes
it. Even though it is a good way to reach the optimal solution and prove its
optimality, the time it takes to compute all the schedules, even in small cases,
is prohibitive for real time reconﬁguration.
6.3
Heuristic strategies
Because of the timing constraints of the reconﬁguration, an exhaustive search
solution cannot be applied. This leads to the creation and use of heuristics that
reduce the computational and therefore the time cost of the solution in expense
of optimality.
A heuristic that solves the scheduling time in only a small fraction of time
compared to the ILP solution, is shown in algorithm 1. In this approach, each
ﬂow is scheduled independently of the others greatly reducing the potential
moves that the scheduling algorithm needs to explore. This process is repeated
until either all the ﬂows are scheduled, the next ﬂow fails to do so or the time
limit given to the algorithm is reached. The disadvantage of this approach is
that the algorithm can rarely achieve an optimal solution. In fact, it is not
guaranteed to ﬁnd a solution even in cases that one or multiple solutions exist.
Several approaches can be followed to direct the scheduling algorithm to select
speciﬁc moves over others, resulting into multiple possible heuristic implemen-
tations.
The most obvious one would be to try and schedule each frame as
soon as possible and in that way aim to increase the available time for the fol-
lowing frames. A heuristic that implements it was created and called As Soon
As Possible (ASAP). Similarly, an As Late As Possible (ALAP) heuristic was
created which achieves similar results. Finally, by doing diﬀerent post process-
ing steps, several more variations of ASAP and ALAP were created which are
ASAPQ, ASAP-L, ASAPQ-L, ASAP-LF, ASAPQ-LF and their corresponding
ALAP versions.
==PAGE:51==
6.4 Meta-heuristic GRASP
43
6.4
Meta-heuristic GRASP
A way to improve the performance of heuristics is to guide their search for a
better solution. This is done by the meta-heuristic GRASP. GRASP selects
the better performing heuristics of the above for the speciﬁc problem and then
performs a series of moves on the resulting solution to ﬁnd an improved one.
Thus, GRASP consists of two steps. The creation phase in which a initial so-
lution is created and an improvement phase, where a better solution is locally
searched. Those two processes correspond to the diversiﬁcation and the intensi-
ﬁcation process which are common heuristic and meta-heuristic processes. Some
randomization is needed in both of those steps in order to increase the explored
paths.
Algorithm 1: Greedy randomized heuristic
1 Function GreedyRandomized(F, G, γ):
2
x ←∅
3
F ←SortByPeriod(F)
4
for fi ∈F ′ do
5
RCL ←RestrictedCandidateList(γ, fi)
6
while ScheduleFlow(x, fi, RCL) = true do
7
x′ ←x ∪{fi}
8
RCL.AddCandidate(x′)
9
if RCL.Lenght > 0 then
10
x ←RCL.GetRandomCandidate()
11
end
12
end
13
end
14 return x
The ﬁrst part of the process is the computation of an initial solution and is
shown in algorithm 1. The algorithm takes as input architecture of the system
G(E, V ), the ﬂows to be scheduled F and a parameter γ as shown in line 1.
Then, the ﬂows are sorted based on their period. The sorting takes place be-
cause it becomes harder to schedule high period ﬂows the further the scheduling
process progresses. In general, the scheduling algorithm has greater possibilities
to succeed when it schedules high priority schedules ﬁrst. Then, the results of
previously mentioned heuristics are obtained and their objective value is calcu-
lated. Even though the initial objective value is a good indication of the optimal
solution of the neighbourhood, it might not always be the case. For that reason
the parameter γ in combination with function RestrictedCandidateList is used
in lines 4 - 5. γ deﬁnes how many of the previous solutions are going to be used
==PAGE:52==
44
Existing approaches to determining GCLs
and when γ = 1, only the best one is selected. The function returns a list of
solutions that are considered good enough to be improved. In every iteration
(lines 6 - 12) a new solution is generated greedily and if it is better than existing
ones the candidate list is updated. Algorithm 1 constitutes the construction
phase of the meta-heuristic GRASP which is shown in algorithm 2
GRASP takes as input a problem instance (F and G) and two parameters, γ and
pi. It initiates a variable x (line 2) which will hold the best solution found by
the algorithm and it will be returned when the algorithm terminates (line 10).
The termination criterion can diﬀer based on the goal and is commonly either
time or objective value based. Since the scheduling algorithm will be used in a
system with real time constraints, time will be the termination criteria as shown
in line 3. Line 4 calls algorithm 1 using the problem instance and parameter γ,
which returns a new schedule as described above. In line 5 the created solution is
optimized via local search until the local optimum is found. The ﬁrst step of the
local search is to create the neighbourhood of the solution. The neighbourhood
is created by constructing all the schedules that can be created by removing up
to π ﬂows from the initial solution, where π is a parametric input of GRASP.
Then, the previous heuristics are used and their objective values are calculated
and compared to the previous solution. It should be noted that the search space
grows exponentially with π and therefore π’s value should be kept small. Finally,
if created solution is the best found so far, x is updated (lines 6 - 7).
Algorithm 2: GRASP Metaheuristic
1 Function GRASP(F, G, γ, π):
2
x ←∅
3
while time < limit do
4
x′ ←GreedyRandomized(F, G, γ)
5
x′ ←LocalSearch(x′, F, G, π)
6
if Obj(x′, S) < Obj(x, S) then
7
x ←x′
8
end
9
end
10 return x
6.5
Objective functions
The objective value function of the scheduling algorithm can be selected to
be one out of three possible options. The ﬁrst one is the amount of queues
the schedule uses.
This might seem irrelevant, but by using less queues for
==PAGE:53==
6.6 GRASP Performance
45
the highest priority frames, the quality of service of the lower priority streams
which are either AVB or BE is increased as more queues are available to them.
The second one is more obvious as it is the average end-to-end latency of the
scheduled ﬂows. Finally, the last objective value function is the combination of
the two and uses weights to guide the solution towards the desired balance.
6.6
GRASP Performance
GRASP was compared against the optimum solution obtained through the ILP
approach on several test cases with diﬀerent parameters. The test cases are
described in detail in section 8.1. GRASP solves 98%, 78%, and 33% of test
cases to optimality and uses 0.02, 0.22 and 1.2 extra queues with low, medium,
and high utilization, respectively. Moreover, it far outperforms any single of
the initial heuristics. It should also be noted that the results are obtained with
ﬁxed execution times ranging from 1 to 60 mins which will not be a viable time
for the goal of this thesis. However, since the utilization will be less than the
one used in the experiments GRASP is able to calculate a viable schedule (not
necessarily the optimal) in as low as 5 s in most cases. GRASP performance
using those setting can be found in section 8.4.
==PAGE:54==
46
Existing approaches to determining GCLs
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 7
Schedule Reconﬁguration
for Extensibility
7.1
Overview
In this chapter the proposed solution will be presented. It will be a two-fold
solution as there are two separate identiﬁed problems. The problems that need
to be addressed are:
• The strict timing requirements between the request and the stream acti-
vation time.
• The complexity of creating a TSN schedule which cannot be computed in
real-time for large enough networks.
These contradicting problems cannot be solved by any scheduling algorithm
and therefore a two-fold solution is proposed. The ﬁrst half of the solution is a
background process that tries to create a schedule that can accommodate future
streams by creating slots in advance. The second half is a real-time process that
uses the created slots to incorporate future streams as soon as possible. This
can only be done by knowing some of the streams information in advance as
mentioned in section 5.2.
==PAGE:56==
48
Schedule Reconﬁguration for Extensibility
7.2
Background Process
7.2.1
Overview
The only way to circumvent the timing requirements of computing a TSN sched-
ule, is to pre-compute it when it is possible. For that goal, a Background Process
(BP) is introduced.
The BP should take place in an end node of the network with preferably a short
distance (in number of hops) to the CA node. There can also be a part of the
same node. The interaction between the BP and the rest of the system can
be seen in Figure 7.1. This is because a frequent ﬂow of information between
the two is going to be needed and by placing them close, communication de-
lays are minimized. BP should have enough computation power to handle the
required computations within a certain time. This is highly dependant on the
requested changes and the size of the network but by making use of the previous
assumptions it can be limited in the area of seconds.
CUC
CNC
UNI
SW1
EN1
EN3
EN2
CA
BP
Monitor
Figure 7.1: System architecture including Background Process and Optional
Monitor
BP should use the system predictions, the user input or the results of the mon-
itoring scheme and try to create a new schedule ahead of time. In that way,
==PAGE:57==
7.2 Background Process
49
when an actual request is made, the computed schedule can be used to update
the current nodes without any additional computation delay. In addition to the
previous, BP should also be kept up to date with any network changes, such
as new streams, changes in network topology and new or removed managed ob-
jects. However, there might be stream requests that are not predicted. In those
cases, BP should try to greedily add the stream on top of the computed schedule
as fast as possible. This can only be achieved in real time using heuristics which
theoretically could fail. However, this can barely happen given the bounded
network utilization and the request should be able to be handled within 1 −2
s at worst. This solution will not in most cases be the optimal one resulting
into bandwidth loss and performance degradation of the AVB traﬃc. Apart
from the non optimal schedule calculations, the frequent adding and removing
streams will also degrade network performance and the continuous removal and
addition of TT and AVB streams will result in non optimal use of the network
resources. Thus, another goal of the BP process is to periodically improve the
existing solution.
Thus, BP has three diﬀerent functions:
• Schedule predicted streams
• Greedily add non-predicted streams
• Periodically improve and update the schedule
Thus, the BP should get the latest network update from the CA as well as
the predicted streams as fast as possible and start constructing the new sched-
ule whenever a change is realized. The scheduling algorithm should treat the
predicted streams as regular TT streams and as far the scheduling algorithm is
concerned those should be indistinguishable. However, the scheduling algorithm
is run multiple times using diﬀerent conﬁgurations for the predicted streams.
That is because the size of the predicted streams is not known in advance and
the system should be able to ﬁgure out the combination of sizes of streams
and verify that a schedule can be computed for the selected sizes. Therefore,
the scheduling algorithm will be a part of an outer loop that tries out multiple
possible conﬁgurations and keeps track of the one that maximizes an objective
function.
There are multiple approaches on how to construct the conﬁgura-
tions and deﬁne the objective function but will be discussed in more detail in
Figure 7.2.2.1.
The whole process should also be time bounded as the optimal solution is rarely
reachable before a new change occurs or the reconﬁguration deadline is reached.
The objective function for this system should be deﬁned in a way that it maxi-
mizes both AVB and TT properties as TT will constitute only a small portion of
==PAGE:58==
50
Schedule Reconﬁguration for Extensibility
the total network traﬃc. An AVB traﬃc analysis should also be used if possible
to maximize AVB throughput and end-to-end delay. It should also occur peri-
odically even if no new predictions have been made in order to keep up to date
with network changes and generate more optimized solutions than the initial
one.
Finally, in the case of a non-predicted stream request, the system should try to
greedily add on top of the latest computed solution as soon as possible. Thus,
a greedy approach should be used to add the stream on top of a previously
calculated schedule. This should succeed most of the times (or even every time
depending on the scheduling algorithm implementation choice) due to the low
utilization. Even if that is not a case, a schedule can be constructed from scratch
within 1.5 s in networks with as many as 1000 managed objects but with low
utilization according to [31].
7.2.2
Implementation
7.2.2.1
Process Overview
The implementation of the BP can vary depending on the system, its require-
ments and its properties. However, all of the implementations should have some
common features. All of them should have the same interface with the CA and
therefore its input and output should always the same.
The input involves the current system conﬁguration which involves the cur-
rent system architecture and the current ﬂows, as well as the predicted system
changes. The changes may involve architectural changes and removal, addition
or modiﬁcation of ﬂows. The added ﬂows should also include a minimum and
a maximum value which the scheduling algorithm will aim for. Furthermore,
as an input the BP should also receive reconﬁguration deadline which would be
determined by either the expected arrival time of the new streams or by the
periodic system reconﬁguration time limit. The output should always be the
computed schedule and the objective value that the solution achieves and it
serves as its performance measure.
The point in which the implementations diﬀer is the way they pick the sizes
of the added ﬂows. The modiﬁcation process determines which schedules the
BP tries to compute and in turn the objective values of the created schedules.
Thus, the BP will continuously create a new schedule by modifying the sizes of
the the predicted ﬂows, compute the schedule and its objective value, evaluate
the result and update its best solution until the time runs out, an optimal
==PAGE:59==
7.2 Background Process
51
Schedule 
initial system
Schedule 
system
Flows , {}, 
Schedule 
parameters,
Architecture
E not {} 
and 
t < limit
For E(j) 
in E
Flows , E, 
Schedule 
parameters,
Architecture
S 
complete
Schedule,
Obj. Value
When done 
for all E(j)
Next E(j)
False
True
Next E(j)
False
Remove E(j) 
from E
True
S<-S’
Figure 7.2: Overview of the BP
solution is found or an update or request is received by the CA. An overview
of a generic BP can be seen in Figure 7.2. Some simple algorithms that handle
the modiﬁcation process will be proposed in the next section. Those algorithms
are used to obtain results on some test cases to provide a system evaluation in
section 8.4.
7.2.2.2
Modiﬁcation algorithms
The proposed algorithms correspond to the "create new parameters" step of
the BP. It should also be mentioned again that the implementation of eﬃcient
algorithms is system dependant and out of the scope of this project. A possi-
ble improvement of those algorithms could occur through the use of specialized
heuristics. A brief presentation of each algorithm will take place and will then
be followed by a method to obtain maximized results using the incremental algo-
rithm in limited time. The maximized algorithm cannot however be preformed
in real time as it might not meet reconﬁguration deadline. The latter solution
==PAGE:60==
52
Schedule Reconﬁguration for Extensibility
is be used to evaluate the system in section 8.4.
The proposed algorithms are:
• an incremental algorithm
• a random algorithm
• a binary search algorithm
The ﬁrst proposed algorithm increases the size of a single added ﬂow at a time
by a speciﬁc amount which is called step. By doing this, the algorithm tries
to gradually increase the allocated bandwidth until the maximum size or the
algorithm’s time limit is reached.
Algorithm 3: Incremental Scheduling
1 Function INCR(F, A, G, step, δ):
2
for aj ∈E do: aj ←min
3
S ←GRASP(F, A, G, π)
4
Obj′ ←Obj(S′)
5
while t < limit & obj < max & A ̸= ∅do
6
for aj ∈A do
7
aj ←aj + step
8
S′ ←GRASP(F, A, G, π)
9
if S is Complete then
10
S ←S′
11
Obj ←Obj′
12
else
13
Remove aj from A
14
end
15
end
16
end
17 return S, Obj
In the case that step = 1 and limit = ∞, the algorithm will evaluate options
step by step until the maximum schedulable size is reached. Even though the
obtained solution is not optimal, in most cases a maximized solution in turns
of added ﬂows bandwidth is reached and in most of the remaining cases the
solution is close to that. There are some exceptions to this which can occur due
to the order that the algorithm explores the available options. For example, in
a case of 4 added ﬂows with a minimum requested size of 3000 bytes for each
and a maximum of 8000 bytes the maximized solution could be [8000, 4500,
==PAGE:61==
7.2 Background Process
53
7500, 6000]. There might be a case in which the combination [6000, 6000, 4500,
4500] is schedulable whereas the schedule [6000, 6000, 6000, 4500] is not. In
such a case the ordering of the size exploration would result in a non-maximized
solution.
Again, these are unlikely to occur in low utilization scenarios and
in most cases the resulting objective value ends up being maximized. Thus,
algorithm 3 can be used to determine a maximized solution which in turn can
be used to evaluate the performance of the rest of the algorithms.
More speciﬁcally, the input of the algorithm is a problem instance which con-
tains the system’s architecture G(E, V ), the pre-existing ﬂows F, the parameters
which are used by GRASP (δ is listed in the algorithms to increase readability
but it is assumed to include both π and γ), the step and the time limit. An ad-
ditional input A is given to the algorithm which deﬁnes possible modiﬁcations to
G and F and the added ﬂows with their minimum and maximum requirements.
The algorithm calculates the initial schedule with minimum sizes to determine if
it still schedulable (line 2) before computing the minimum objective value (line
3). In lines 6 - 7, the value of the next added ﬂow, that belongs to a list of ﬂows
that are to be examined, is increased by the step value and the new schedule is
calculated (line 8). If the schedule is successfully computed, the objective value
and the best assignment that is found so far are updated (lines 9 - 11). If not, the
algorithm assumes that this ﬂow’s size can no longer be increased and the ﬂow
is removed from the list of examined ﬂows (line 12). This process is repeated
until the time limit is reached, the maximum size of every ﬂow is successfully
scheduled or the examined set is empty (line 5). Finally, the algorithm outputs
the biggest objective value found, as well as the assignment that produces it
(line 17). It should also be noted, that the mentioned objective value function
is diﬀerent to the GRASP objective function described in section 6.5. Instead,
this objective function tries to maximize the added bandwidth of streams and
will be discussed further in subsubsection 7.2.2.3
This algorithm has a good performance in high utilization networks in which
the best schedulable solution, if one exists, will be close to the minimum values.
Another case that the algorithms performs well is when a schedule using max-
imum sizes can be scheduled (which happens in low utilization scenarios) and
the step is relatively large. In contrast, the algorithm performs poorly in cases
which involve a combination of a low utilization network, a strict time limit
and a large variation between the minimum and the maximum sizes. Since the
high utilization cases are out of the scope of the thesis this algorithm is used
with step = 2 instead. This solution might fail to ﬁnd the maximized solution
as it might "jump over" it but, at the same time, converges relatively fast to
solutions that are close to the maximum value. By doing that, the performance
of algorithm 3 ends up being rather good even if the time is limited.The algo-
rithm is also used with the aforementioned settings (time = ∞and step = 1)
to determine the maximized solution, which is used for evaluation purposes.
==PAGE:62==
54
Schedule Reconﬁguration for Extensibility
The second modiﬁcation algorithm which is shown in algorithm 4 is a random-
ized approach. The algorithm operates in the same fashion as algorithm 3 but
instead of increasing the size gradually, each size is randomly assigned. The
values that are assigned are selected uniformly between the minimum and the
maximum sizes. The performance of this algorithm can be quite good but at
the same time it can be unreliable. The unreliability is increased proportion-
ally with the utilization and decreased proportionally with the number of tries.
A solution to increase the algorithms performance in hard to solve cases is to
introduce a fail counter. The fail counter should track the consecutive fails of
the algorithm to compute a schedule and when a fail limit is reached, the al-
gorithm should modify its search space accordingly. In this implementation of
the algorithm, the number of consecutive fails is set to be half of the available
tries (based on execution time) and the search space is modiﬁed by halving the
maximum size that is used.
Algorithm 4: Randomized Scheduling
1 Function RAND(F, A, G, δ):
2
while t < limit do
3
for aj ∈A do
4
aj ←rand(min, max)
5
end
6
S′ ←GRASP(F, A, G, δ)
7
Obj′ ←Obj(S′)
8
if S is Complete then
9
if Obj′ > Obj then
10
S ←S′
11
Obj ←Obj′
12
end
13
else
14
fail_count ←fail_count + 1
15
end
16
if fail_count = fail_limit then
17
max ←max/2
18
end
19
end
20 return S, Obj
The algorithm’s input is similar to the previous one and contains the ﬂows F,
the architecture G, the parameters δ and the changes to the system based on
the additional input A. In lines 3 - 4, each added ﬂow is assigned a random size
and the schedule and the objective function value is computed (lines 6 - 7). If
the system is schedulable the objective value and the best solution are updated
==PAGE:63==
7.2 Background Process
55
(lines 9 - 11). If not, the fail counter is increased as long as a solution is not
already found (lines 13 - 14). If the fail counter reaches the limit, the search
space reduction is performed by replacing max with max/2 (lines 16 - 17). The
algorithm has the same output as algorithm 3, which is the best assignment
found and its objective value (line 20).
Algorithm 5: Binary Scheduling
1 Function BIN(F, A, G, δ):
2
temp ←BinaryAssign(min, max)
3
for aj ∈A do
4
aj ←temp
5
end
6
while t < limit & Obj < max do
7
S′ ←GRASP(F, A, G, δ)
8
if S is Complete then
9
temp ←BinaryAssign(temp, max)
10
for aj ∈A do
11
aj ←temp
12
end
13
Obj′ ←Obj(S′)
14
if Obj′ > Obj then
15
S ←S′
16
Obj ←Obj′
17
end
18
else
19
temp ←BinaryAssign(min, temp)
20
for aj ∈A do
21
aj ←temp
22
end
23
Obj′ ←Obj(S′)
24
if Obj′ = Obj then
25
temp ←RandAddition(min_add, max_add)
26
for aj ∈A do
27
aj ←temp
28
end
29
end
30
end
31
end
32 return S, Obj
Algorithm 3 is a constructive approach to the modiﬁcation process whereas
algorithm 4 is a randomized one.
Algorithm 5 is a third approach and is a
==PAGE:64==
56
Schedule Reconﬁguration for Extensibility
combination of the two. It assigns the same value to all of the added ﬂows and
the scheduling algorithm performs a binary search between the minimum and
the maximum available values. The procedure is repeated until the maximum
value is reached or the time limit expires.
Binary scheduling algorithm is a compromise between the two previous solutions
and its weakest point is in cases where the best solution contains a big variety
among the ﬂow size assignments. An example using the previous added ﬂows
assignments would be a maximized solution of [10500, 3000, 12000, 6000]. In this
case, a binary search approach would end up with a best solution of [3000, 3000,
3000, 3000] which is far from the maximized. To mitigate this, a randomized
addition is performed on top of the result of the binary search.
This only
happens when there is suﬃcient time but with reasonable time limits and size
ranges, at least some addition tries should take place. The randomized addition
is performed when the search would try to compute a schedule with the objective
value which is equal to the best computed so far. In that case, the scheduling
algorithm adds a random value on top of the existing size values. An example
of that would be a failed try on [6000, 6000, 6000, 6000] while [4500, 4500, 4500,
4500] is already scheduled. In that case the scheduling algorithm, instead of
trying the same values again, will randomly add 0, 1500 or 3000 on top of that
solution.
The algorithm itself receives exactly the same input as algorithm 4 and has
the same output. It uses the variable temp to hold the current value that the
scheduling algorithm tries to compute and it is initialized in line 2 as (min +
max)/2.
Then, the value assigned to all the added ﬂows in lines 3 - 4.
In
line 7 the schedule with those settings is computed and based on the result
the algorithm branches on the upper or the lower search space. This is done by
updating the value of temp to be (temp+max)/2 and (min+temp)/2, based on
the schedule completion (lines 9 - 11 and 19 - 21 respectively). If the schedule is
successful, the objective value is also calculated and the best solution is updated
(lines 13 - 16). If the resulting objective value is equal to the best obtained so
far, then the random addition is performed and the new values are assigned to
the added ﬂows (lines 24 - 27). The whole process is repeated until the time
limit or the maximum value is reached (line 6) before the solution is returned
(line 32).
7.2.2.3
Objective value function
It is mentioned during the description of the modiﬁcation function, that an
objective value is used. This objective value diﬀers from the one used by the
GRASP scheduling algorithm. The GRASP scheduling algorithm tries to op-
==PAGE:65==
7.3 Stream incorporation
57
timize one of three objective value metrics, which are maximize end-to-end la-
tency, queue usage or their combination and are discussed in section 6.5. Since,
the size of the added streams is not determined in advance, the modiﬁcation
algorithms try to determine the frame size combinations that maximize the
bandwidth of the added ﬂows. Thus, the objective value of the algorithms is
deﬁned as the sum of the size of each added ﬂow over its period. This aims to
reduce or eliminate requests that cannot be handled in real time, which occurs
in cases that the newly added stream requires more bandwidth than the one
allocated to them. It should be noted that this case can only occur in high
utilization scenarios in which the maximum requested size cannot be allocated
in time. In such scenarios, the system can only try to schedule the additional
ﬂows as non-predicted which should succeed because of the reduced search space
(since the size will now be constant) as long as the end schedule is schedula-
ble. In conclusion, the objective value function of the modiﬁcation algorithms
returns the bandwidth which is allocated to the added ﬂows over their period
and is maximized when the maximum requested bandwidth is reached.
An alternative objective value function implementation would be one that mea-
sures impact of solution on the performance of AVB. Such a function would
improve the quality of service of networks in which most of the traﬃc is AVB.
The main problem with this approach is that measuring impact of TT on AVB
is not a trivial procedure and it would introduce additional overhead. Thus, it
may be unrealistic to use such a function while trying to modify the network
within limited time. On the other hand, a AVB performance-based objective
function is recommended when no major changes are made to the network and
the BP aims to reconﬁgure the system to improve its performance.
7.3
Stream incorporation
7.3.1
Overview
Every time a change in the network is realized, a network reconﬁguration is
needed. A change can for example occur due to an operational mode change, a
new end node that is added to the system, a task moved to another end node
or an end node or switch failure. In the cases that the request is predictable,
it is assumed that the background process will have created the requested slot
and therefore the stream can be introduced to the slot with almost no additional
delay. In the rest of the cases, in which no prediction has been made, the system
attempts to add the newly requested stream greedily on top of the existing
solution. Due to the limited TT utilization (see section 5.2), the system should
==PAGE:66==
58
Schedule Reconﬁguration for Extensibility
be able to do so quite fast, as the scheduling algorithm would only need to
modify a handful of nodes. It should also be noted, that this is not necessarily
true in higher utilization systems in which the scheduling algorithm may not
be able to greedily add a ﬂow and would need to construct a new schedule and
thus even a heuristic based solution will take too much time.
7.3.2
Stream discovery & request type
The most relaxed assumption that can be made regarding stream discovery is
that the connected end node is responsible for the communicating with the CUC.
In this case, the end node informs the CUC about the new stream request and
its requirements. Alternatively, the network should discover any newly created
end nodes or streams by itself and be reconﬁgured accordingly. That requires a
system that monitors the network at real time and is able to detect any topology
changes and newly added steams. The interaction between the network monitor
and the rest of the system can be seen in Figure 7.1. Even though this approach
can be interesting, it cannot be done within some seconds and that is because
the network discovery mechanisms require some time to collect and process the
data.
The request can be made in multiple ways.
The easiest way to implement
the request message is to send it as BE traﬃc. However, it cannot provide any
delivery guarantees and therefore cannot be used for time sensitive applications.
The second option is to use a AVB message.
The main problem with this
approach is that AVB delay analysis cannot be done in real-time in a changing
network and the exact delay of an AVB message cannot be guaranteed. That
can be simpliﬁed by making the AVB message that handles the request top or
high priority. That makes the request message less susceptible to AVB traﬃc
and the knowledge of TT streams can be suﬃcient to bound its delay. The
last alternative is to introduce a periodic TT slot which will handle the request
messages. In that case, the main diﬃculty would be the direction of the stream
which needs to be known in advance in order to reserve the slot. This can be
circumvented in a known topology in which new nodes can only be connected to
speciﬁc switches. For example in a star topology, the ﬂow can be introduced to
move from the outer parts of the star towards the inner nodes. That also assumes
that the CA is connected to the center of the star but makes the introduction
of the slot less complex. The results can be summarized in the Table 7.1 where
V and X mark a viable and an invalid combination respectively.
It should also be mentioned that the use of BE streams or network discovery
streams is not always a non-feasible solution and can be applied to systems with
more relaxed requirements. It is also highly dependant on the overall network
==PAGE:67==
7.3 Stream incorporation
59
Notiﬁcation
Discovery
TT
V
X
AVB
V
X
BE
X
X
Table 7.1: Notiﬁcation and Network discovery
statistics, restrictions, reconﬁguration time limit and changes frequency which
make the decision vary among diﬀerent applications.
7.3.3
Stream activation steps
Every time a new stream needs to be added, a request to the CUC needs to be
made. The origins of this request can be a new added stream, a user, a request
by a newly connected node, a new request from an existing node or a result of
the network discovery scheme. It can be a part of the already predicted streams,
based on the systems predictions or mode changes and already been allocated
a slot by the BP or be a non-predicted stream which is not already included in
the predictions. In the ﬁrst case, the system assigns the stream to its created
slot while in the latter the fastest approach would be a greedy addition on top
of the existing TT schedule. So, the solution will be divided into two separate
sequences of steps.
In the cases of the already predicted stream, assuming that there is suﬃcient
time between the prediction and the request, the updated schedule should be
held by the BP node. The sequence of that is used for the incorporation of a
predicted stream is listed bellow:
1. Send the stream request to CUC using OPC UA
2. Request the updated schedule from the BP
3. Update BP data
4. CUC transforms the schedule and the new stream into a set of traﬃc
parameters
5. Send the traﬃc parameters to CNC using NETCONF
6. CNC converts the traﬃc parameters to physical parameters such as stream
routes and GCL schedules
==PAGE:68==
60
Schedule Reconﬁguration for Extensibility
7. CNC distributes the draft of the reconﬁgured schedule to all nodes
8. The draft network schedule is activated in a predetermined time
The ﬁrst three steps of the process can be completed within some ms in all cases.
Two possible options are discussed about the transmission of this message, which
should either be a high priority AVB message or a TT message. This is still
dependant on the network topology but the expected time is bounded and can
be calculated in both cases. A TT message delay can be precisely calculated by
looking at the GCLs while the AVB message will be bounded by (n + 1) ∗250
µs where n is the number of jumps between the requesting node and CUC.
Therefore, the delay of the ﬁrst two steps is bounded by (n + m + 2) ∗250 µs
where n, m are the jumps required for the ﬁrst and second message respectively.
The third step is not a part of the activation process itself and therefore does
not add to the time of the critical path but needs to be part of the activation
process. In this step, the BP updates its conﬁguration and places the added ﬂow
to the list of the existing ﬂows while removing it from the future streams list.
The ﬂow’s information are now made concrete and the BP can start diﬀerent
calculations based on that.
Steps 3 and 5 cannot be accurately calculated, since the standards do not deﬁne
a speciﬁc way to do so, but given the number of aﬀected streams and managed
objects, it can be assumed to take negligible time. At the same time, the message
transition occurring in step 4 is also negligible in cases that the CNC and CUC
are parts of the same entity but can introduce a delay in cases that the physical
entities are separated. In this case, the transmission delay will be bounded by
the (n + 1) ∗250 µs in the same way as the previous messages.
In step 4, the transmission of the individual conﬁguration is transmitted to all
nodes that need to be altered. It should be noted that a new schedule is only
sent to the managed object that need to be changed. Those can be selected out
by using ﬁltering on top of the YANG ﬁles. It is also assumed that only some
message changes will occur within that time frame and therefore the stream
requests will be limited. This is required because should too many streams are
changed, then the network needs to be reconﬁgured at the same time and that
can take a lot of time. More details about the distribution times can be found
in [13]. Assuming that in a worst case scenario 1000 managed objects need to
be reconﬁgured, the reconﬁguration should take less than 1 s.
Finally, the activation time should be set in a way that the drafts are in place in
all aﬀected nodes before the activation occurs, in order to prevent message loss
or schedule inconsistencies between managed objects during the reconﬁguration.
Furthermore, the less disruptive time for schedule swapping is at the end of a
==PAGE:69==
7.3 Stream incorporation
61
hyperperiod. Thus, this step introduces an additional delay of one hyperperiod
which in most cases is in the area of ms.
Theoretically, there can be cases
in which the hyperperiod is rather large, but that requires a combination of
varying large periods and high utilization. Since the utilization in this system
is supposed to be kept rather low, such a case cannot exist. Even if it does, it
can introduce a delay between 10−3 s and 10−1 s.
This means that the overall delay between the stream activation request and
the network reconﬁguration is around 1s and is always less than 1.5 s as 10−1 +
(n + m + k + 3) ∗250 ∗10−3 + 1 < 1.5.
For non-predicted stream the main diﬀerence will be in the second step, in
which the schedule needs to calculate on the spot, as discussed in section 7.2.
Then, the delay of the second step will be increased by at most 1.5 s. That
is because it will take negligible time to add greedily on top of an existing
schedule and around 1s in the case the new schedule needs to recalculated from
scratch. Thus, in the case of a non-predicted stream the overall delay can be
bound by 3 s instead. However, adding too many non-predicted streams without
performing any optimization can lead to a similar situation to the one shown
in the motivational example and therefore it is assume that only a few of those
can occur before the system has suﬃcient time to be fully or partly optimized
by the BP.
==PAGE:70==
62
Schedule Reconﬁguration for Extensibility
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 8
Evaluation
In this chapter, a simulation of the system’s performance is presented.
The
algorithms of the BP process are run with multiple diﬀerent test cases while
trying to emulate a realistic environment.
8.1
Test Cases
The test cases that are used are based on the work done by Michael Lander
Raagaard [31] and are in turn based in work done in [29] and [6]. The test cases
trying to be as close to an industrial system as possible, but such process is not
trivial. If too many ﬂows are added to a system compared to the system size, it
can result into high utilization to the whole system or introduce congestion to
some of the edges deeming the system unschedulable. On the other hand, if too
few streams are included, the solution will become trivial. Similarly, introducing
too many nodes and switches can make the system scheduling unrealistic to
achieve within strict time constrains.
Six diﬀerent topologies are used with three diﬀerent group sizes. The topologies
are constructed in such way that there is no route redundancy and the paths
are deterministically selected. The selected topology is close to a star topology
==PAGE:72==
64
Evaluation
to mitigate highly congested edges and countermeasure the lack of redundant
routes. Three small and two medium examples can be seen in Figure 8.1
(a) ES = 3, SW=1 
(d) ES = 18, SW = 32 
(e) ES = 28, SW = 48 
(b)  ES = 5, SW = 2 
(c) ES = 4, SW = 3 
Figure 8.1: Small and medium topology examples [31]
The ﬂow selection is accomplished based on the resulting hyperperiod, since
hyperperiod can have a signiﬁcant impact to the resulting complexity of the
problem and therefore to its schedulability within a time limit. There are three
diﬀerent hyperperiod groups of 1 ms, 6 ms and 30 ms. Within each group three
diﬀerent ﬂow rates are deﬁned as high, low and medium ﬂow rates. The high-
rate ﬂows have a maximum of 3 MTU size (or 4500 bytes) while the low-rate
ﬂows can range between 10 and 100 MTUs (or 15000−150000 bytes). The ﬂows
where generated randomly but meeting some restrictions. The ﬁrst restriction
is that the link utilization of each link does not exceed a speciﬁc threshold and
the a predeﬁned minimum average utilization is reached.
The test cases mentioned so far, include the system topology and the existing
ﬂows. In order to simulate changes to the system some random changes are made
to the network. The changes could potentially involve the adding or removal
of switches, end nodes and their respective connecting links. Another possible
change is the adding of new ﬂows or removal of existing ones. The added ﬂows
could even have a diﬀerent period than the existing ﬂows and their size is not
concretely deﬁned and can range between a minimum and a maximum value,
reﬂecting the uncertainty of the future stream requests.
Since too many unknown parameters are involved in the process and the schedul-
ing algorithm itself adds to the randomization, only a handful of test cases are
selected and demonstrated. The selected test cases vary in some of these param-
eters each time and are used to demonstrate how each algorithm is inﬂuenced
==PAGE:73==
8.2 Procedure
65
by the problem at hand and the limitations of the system. In all of the test
cases, a number of additional streams are added and removed depending on
the initial problem’s size. The larger the system the more ﬂows are added but
in larger case the uncertainty of the included ﬂows is decreased, to reduce the
complexity of the problem. The minimum and maximum sizes of the added
ﬂows are between 2 and 8 MTUs respectively for smaller cases and 2 and 6 for
the bigger ones. The added ﬂows have random senders, receivers and periods.
The direction of the ﬂows is also randomly selected. The removed ﬂows are
selected randomly from the list of the existing ﬂows. In most of the test cases
2 ﬂows are removed. Thus, if a test case has for example 13 initial ﬂows and
15 ﬁnal ﬂows, it means that 4 ﬂows are added and 2 are removed. Moreover in
the smaller cases an additional switch alongside two extra nodes are added to
demonstrate the eﬀect of newly added objects have in the system. The switch
is connected to the newly added nodes and pre-existing switch of the network.
Managed objects are not added in the larger test cases as their impact would be
minimal. Additional periods are also introduced. The number of the additional
periods are proportional to the hyperperiod and the test case’s size.
8.2
Procedure
In order to compute the modiﬁed system’s schedule, some steps must be done in
advance. Initially, the system must conﬁrm that a solution for the initial system
is reachable within the time frame given. Then, the changes are introduced to
the system and the scheduling algorithm tries to compute the schedule with
the minimum settings. If either of those schedules fails to compute a schedule
within the time limit, the test case should not be considered a realistic one for
the system. The time limit is set to be 15 s or 8 s and the selected scheduling
algorithm that performs the computation is GRASP_Q, which optimizes the
queue usage. Obviously, the time limit is also inﬂuenced by the system’s compu-
tational power. The obtained results are obtained using a PC with an Intel Core
i5-6300HQ processor which has 4 2.30 GHz cores and 12 GB of RAM. It should
also be mentioned, that the PC is not exclusively running the experiments and
the actual performance is in practice lower that the aforementioned.
If both initial schedules are computed, an maximized or almost maximized so-
lution for the new system should be computed as well. This is used to compare
the algorithms’ performance to the a maximized solution and is computed us-
ing the incremental algorithm with step 1 in conjunction with the GRASP_Q
scheduling algorithm with 15s time limit until no more frames could be added,
or the maximum solution is reached. This solution is not maximized in all cases
because of two main factors. The test cases used have a substantial amount of
==PAGE:74==
66
Evaluation
diﬀerent schedule combinations which depends on the number of added ﬂows
and their size uncertainty and in worst case all of them need to be computed.
Thus, the time limit on the scheduling algorithm has to be used, but at the
same time, since the scheduling algorithm is based on heuristic, there are cases
in which the result is not found within the time limit resulting in a wrong so-
lution. In most cases, the scheduling algorithm is able to calculate the same
result within 10 s and in some cases in even 5s and the 15s is used to provide
some result consistency. The time limit as well some minor bugs still existing
in the scheduling algorithm can lead to wrong results and might inﬂuence a bit
the end results and that is why the 15 s are used. In a real system implemen-
tation a combination of a higher performance system and a speciﬁcally tailored
algorithm can reduce the computation time to 10 s which will be the assumed
execution time of each schedule computation even though in reality 15 s are
used.
8.3
Procedure
After the maximized solution is calculated, the system uses the algorithms de-
scribed in Figure 7.2.2.1 sequentially to get their respective best solution and
best objective value within the given time limit. The scheduling algorithm is
allowed to compute either 8 schedules with time limit of 15 s or 12 schedules
of 8 s. The scheduling time can be reduced to 10 d or 5 s respectively based
on the system requirements and the BP’s computational power. The computed
schedules are also adjustable and they should be modiﬁed according to the sys-
tem size and utilization to improve results. The same goes for the minimum
and maximum frame sizes which are either between 2 −6 or 2 −8 MTUs for all
test cases.
Finally, the solution obtained by the ﬁrst scheduling algorithm as well as the
best objective values of each algorithm and their respective size assignments
are the output of the system using the maximized solution are presented in
section 8.4.
8.4
Results
The obtained results can be summarized in the following tables. The initial
system refers to the original test case and the new system to test case after
the modiﬁcations are performed. The objective value is calculated to be the
==PAGE:75==
8.4 Results
67
size of each added ﬂow divided by the period of the corresponding frame and
can show the eﬀective number of frames that the system reserved for future
streams. The end-to-end latency and the queue usage is a result obtained by
the scheduling algorithm and is a metric of the schedule’s quality according to
those two metrics.
The ﬁrst table shows the information related to each test case which includes
the number of end nodes, switches, ﬂows and diﬀerent periods as well as the
resulting hyperperiod. These numbers constitute a suﬃcient description of each
test case in terms of size and utilization.
Test
ES
SW
Hyperperiod
Flows
Periods
Case
init
new
init
new
init
new
init
new
added
init
new
TC1
3
3
1
1
1
1
19
20
3
4
5
TC2
3
5
1
2
6
6
12
13
3
5
6
TC3
3
3
1
1
30
30
17
19
4
8
10
TC4
5
5
2
3
6
6
13
15
4
5
7
TC5_1
32
32
18
18
6
6
37
40
5
5
7
TC5_2
32
32
18
18
6
6
37
40
5
5
7
TC6
48
48
28
28
30
30
86
92
8
7
9
TC7
48
48
28
28
6
6
62
66
6
5
8
TC8
256
256
146
146
1
1
368
380
14
3
4
Table 8.1: Test cases description
Test
Initial
Modiﬁed
Case
e2e
queues
e2e
queues
obj. val.
# frames
TC1
1059
3
-
-
-
-
TC2
2609
1
1880
1
79,5
22
TC3
12024
1
8605
1
36,3
24
TC4
1290
1
2503
1
30
24
TC5_1
1636
0
3813
4
69
30
TC5_2
1308
2
3837
4
69
30
TC6
17447
2
20027
7
62,85
29
TC7
2657
0
9923
6
76
24
TC8
661
0
868
7
144
35
Table 8.2: Schedule quality
The metric of the end schedule quality can be demonstrated by comparing the
end-to-end latency and the queue usage of the original schedule with the new
one. The obtained results can be seen in Table 8.2. The objective value and the
==PAGE:76==
68
Evaluation
total number of frames (not normalized according to period) are also shown. It
should also be noted, that the latter is expected to have worse results because
the modiﬁed systems have in most cases high utilization than the initial ones.
In general, since the scheduling algorithm is trying to optimize for queue usage,
a solution with less queues is considered better even if the end-to-end latency
increase is signiﬁcant. Queue usage of 0 means that the optimal schedule both
in terms of latency and queue usage is computed according to the scheduling
algorithm. However, since a randomized heuristic is used and the allowed time
is relatively low, the results vary in each run and should be not considered to
be anything more than an indication.
Test Case
# schedules
time
min
max
TC1
8
15
2
6
TC2
8
15
2
6
TC3
8
15
2
6
TC4
8
15
2
6
TC5_1
8
15
2
6
TC5_2
12
8
2
6
TC6
12
8
2
6
TC7
8
15
2
4
TC8
8
15
2
4
Table 8.3: Test case settings
Test
Maximized
Incremental
Random
Binary
case
# MTUs
obj.
# MTUs
obj.
# MTUs
obj.
# MTUs
obj.
TC1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
TC2
23
79,5
22
72
19
69,5
20
72,5
TC3
24
36,3
24
36,3
18
34,6
24
36,3
TC4
24
30
24
30
15
27
24
30
TC5_1
30
69
26
64,5
23
61,25
25
57,5
TC5_2
30
69
26
61
23
62,75
30
69
TC6
29
62,85
20
54,8
37
79,1
24
58,05
TC7
24
76
24
76
19
60,5
24
76
TC8
38
144
32
144
48
192
42
117
Table 8.4: Algorithms comparison
Table 8.3 includes additional information on the scheduling algorithm’s setting
for each test case. The settings are in terms of number of computed schedules,
the time (in seconds) given to the scheduling algorithm for each one and the
minimum and maximum size each added frame should have.
==PAGE:77==
8.4 Results
69
Finally, the performance of each algorithm is shown alongside the maximized so-
lution. The algorithms’ performance diﬀer based on the test case but additional
variations can be observed due to scheduling bugs and cases that the scheduling
algorithm failed to compute a complete schedule in time, even though one might
have existed. There are also cases in which a schedule with some added ﬂows
size assignments could be computed by one algorithm while failing to do so with
another during the same run. These situations are more frequent in the systems
with harder schedules due to either high utilization, size or a combination of the
two. The obtained results are shown in Table 8.4.
==PAGE:78==
70
Evaluation
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 9
Discussion
9.1
Overview
This chapter focuses on considerations on topics relevant to the project.
A
discussion of the results, is then followed by some implementation suggestions
while possible project extensions are proposed in section 9.6.
9.2
Results discussion
The results in section 8.4 show that the algorithms can accommodate several
added ﬂows with varying periods and sizes, despite the uncertainty of their sizes.
The objective value which is the number of MTUs that were added normalized
over the added ﬂows’ periods is shown in Table 8.1. Table 8.1 also shows the
amount of MTUs that were able to be added on top of the schedule for the max-
imized process while Table 8.4 shows the amount of MTUs for each algorithm
individually. This is an important metric as it also deﬁnes the upper bound of
possible schedules. For example if only one ﬂow is added with minimum size of
2 MTUs and a maximum of 6, only 5 diﬀerent possible conﬁgurations need to
==PAGE:80==
72
Discussion
be computed and the scheduling algorithm can run all possible settings. At the
same time, if the number of added ﬂows increases, the resulting combinations
sharply increase and in that case the scheduling algorithm can explore only a
small portion of the possible conﬁgurations before the time limit expires.
Similarly, the size of the system can also aﬀect the performance of the schedul-
ing algorithm as the allowed time for each test case is limited. Table 8.1 shows
the size of the system and Table 8.3 shows the time limit given to the schedul-
ing algorithm for each test case. Table 8.3 also shows the selected minimum
and maximum size settings which alongside the number of added ﬂows deﬁne
the amount of possible size combinations and therefore can also be used as a
complexity indication for each case.
Another metric that inﬂuences the complexity is utilization. In general, the
higher the utilization, the harder it is for the scheduling algorithm to compute
a schedule. This can also inﬂuenced by the hyperperiod. Higher hyperperiods
are harder to solve as the problem size sharply increases but smaller hyperperi-
ods may contain a higher portion of high frequency frames that can be proven
similarly hard to schedule.
The previous discussion demonstrates that the complexity of a schedule can be
inﬂuenced by multiple parameters such as hyperperiod, utilization, number of
added ﬂows, system size, added ﬂows size uncertainty and scheduling algorithm
settings. TC4 can be an example of an easy schedule as its overall utilization
is relatively low, the hyperperiod is not too high and the size of the system
is small. On the other hand, TC8 is considered to be a hard case despite the
reduced uncertainty of added ﬂows size due to the larger size of the system.
At the same time, in TC1 the scheduling algorithm was not able to compute
a viable schedule in the given time lime despite the small size of the system
because of the higher utilization.
The quality of the resulting solution also varies but is proportional to the com-
plexity of the problem. Table 8.2 shows the comparison between the solution
provided by the maximized algorithm and the initial schedule and the impact
that the addition of the ﬂows has on the number of queues and the end-to-end
latency of the ﬂows. It should also be noted that an increase is expected as
the utilization of the new system is higher due to the added ﬂows. The addi-
tion of diﬀerent periods should also negatively inﬂuence the previous metrics as
schedules with harmonic periods tend to perform better.
Furthermore, these results also include all of the predicted streams but in most
cases not all of them will be added at the same time. At the same time, there
should be time frames in which the changes to the network are limited and those
time frames can be used by BP to increase the performance of the network.
==PAGE:81==
9.3 Mode changes
73
Finally, it should also be noted, that adding and removing streams would result
in even worse performance if no optimization takes place and the BP is expected
to do so periodically. Despite that, in some cases the increase in both queues
and end-to-end latency is relatively higher compared to the initial one. The
performance decrease is mostly proportional to the complexity of the test case.
Finally, a comparison of the performance of the algorithms can be seen in Ta-
ble 8.4. The performance of the algorithms meets the expectations for the most
part and their strengths and weaknesses can be observed. The incremental al-
gorithm performs better in low utilization scenarios and in cases that the link
utilization is more balanced or in high utilization cases in which the maximized
solution is close to the minimum size assignment. The random algorithm per-
forms better or at least equally well compared to the rest in medium and high
utilization cases but it becomes unstable when less time (which translates in
less tries) is used. It should also be noted that the test cases that are used,
are not good examples for the randomized algorithm and therefore it seems to
under-perform based on these results. The binary algorithm tries to get the
beneﬁts of the other two but it is highly inﬂuenced by cases with higher stream
size uncertainty. This occurs, because the algorithm takes more time to get to
the solution’s neighborhood and in these cases the randomized addition does
not have suﬃcient time.
In conclusion, the system is able to accommodate future stream request at
the cost of higher end-to-end latency and queue usage.
The performance of
the algorithms in most cases meets the expected results despite some outliers
that are a byproduct of the limited time given to the scheduling algorithms,
the heuristics randomization and some bugs that still exist in the scheduling
algorithm.
9.3
Mode changes
The proposed system is able to handle a limited amount of changes within a
small period of time, because of the scheduling complexity. However, there are
cases in which multiple changes take place at once. In many cases, a group of
changes is linked to an operational change in the Operational System that TSN
is part of. Those changes, which are commonly referred to as mode changes,
can happen in a predetermined way or occur due to the reaction of a system
to events. Predetermined mode changes can occur during the normal system
operation, in which case, they can be entirely predicted since the system should
be able to determine the process and ﬂows of the next mode, based on its
inputs and the current mode. On the other hand, event based mode changes
==PAGE:82==
74
Discussion
can happen because of emergency or deviation from the correct behavior and
thus, cannot be predicted.
In both cases, a lot of network changes may be needed in a sort period of time
which might be proven challenging for the TSN reconﬁguration process. A way
to prevent this is to pre-compute and store an initial schedule for each mode.
The schedule should contain all the mandatory operations of the corresponding
mode and ideally a set of empty slots for commonly used network ﬂows. The BP
can then use these pre-computed schedules as a starting point for its solutions
and add existing streams in the empty slots, if applicable, or on top of the
schedule if not. This process should be able to reduce the computation that
needs to be performed in real time and may be able to meet the reconﬁguration
requirements of the system even during mode changes.
In that case, some
additional functionalities should exist in the system. The CA should also be
notiﬁed about the mode change in advance and transfer that information to the
BP, which should be able to separate the previous mode streams from the rest
of the traﬃc and ﬁgure out which of the stored schedules should be used before
starting the scheduling process.
9.4
Algorithms optimization
The algorithms that were proposed in Figure 7.2.2.1 are simple solutions and
mean to gather some performance results of the proposed system. However,
none of those is an optimized nor a speciﬁcally tailored solution to the problem
in hand. All of the algorithms rely on general purpose heuristics and meta-
heuristics to compute the schedule and those are called multiple times, trying to
create a solution with a better objective value. At the same time, the algorithms
have similar input settings for diﬀerent network scenarios. Specialized heuristics
could be developed in order to handle the varying size of the added streams in
a more eﬃcient manner and adjust the runtime of the algorithm based on the
utilization and relevant statistics of the network.
Even in the simple implementations some algorithms outperform the others in
diﬀerent network utilization, hyperperiod and added ﬂows ranges. Thus, a se-
lection of the best performing algorithm fr each test case would greatly increase
the BP performance. However, that would require keeping track of parameters
of the network and select algorithm accordingly. Network monitoring can be
achieved in real time without impacting the network performance. A solution
that involves monitoring is applied in [10] where an autonomous reconﬁguration
solution was proposed. In this solution, the CA is handling the network recon-
ﬁguration while switches with advanced capabilities are responsible for tracking
==PAGE:83==
9.5 AVB impact
75
network changes and monitoring network statistics. A similar system can be
utilized in the proposed solution as well, which can then select the appropriate
algorithm based on the network statistics. In a system with multiple algorithms,
optimizing each one of them for a speciﬁc scenario would also be a viable option
and could yield better overall performance.
Finally, it should be noted that the proposed system currently should currently
pick one algorithm that performs better in the average case of a set of network
parameters as a speciﬁc implementation is not selected and the algorithms are
run sequentially. This is not needed in a system with monitoring capabilities
or a system with higher computational power. In the latter case, the system
could run diﬀerent algorithms or the same algorithms with diﬀerent parameters
in parallel and, in the end, select the best solution.
This would also allow
a combination of more greedy solutions that yield better results with higher
probability of failing to compute a schedule in time and more stable solutions
that result in more guaranteed solutions with more average results.
9.5
AVB impact
As previously mentioned, in many industrial cases, the network is dominated by
AVB traﬃc and the TT utilization can be relatively low. In such cases, the TT
schedule creation is not as hard as the rest cases and the network performance
is not determined by the performance of TT ﬂows. Thus, the BP should try to
create a schedule the optimizes the AVB performance as much as possible. This
can be done in two diﬀerent ways.
The ﬁrst one is to include the highest priority AVB ﬂows to the TT schedule
calculation and in eﬀect treat, as far as the scheduler is concerned, as TT. By
doing this, TT and the highest priority AVB messages will be optimized in
terms of end-to-end latency and queue usage.
This should also create some
additional space in the queues for the lower priority traﬃc. This improvement
however, even if queue optimization is selected, is not guaranteed to improve the
performance of the rest of the AVB and may, in some cases, hinder it instead.
In order to improve the overall AVB quality of service, the system should instead
perform a AVB traﬃc analysis, which is the second approach. The main problem
with this approach is that the traﬃc analysis is computationally expensive and
cannot be performed in real-time. In order to mitigate it, an approximation
approach on AVB traﬃc analysis if that is even possible, needs to be adopted.
In any case, no matter which is the approach to the solution, the scheduler
==PAGE:84==
76
Discussion
should be able to shift its objective value function from TT-based to AVB-
based in cases of low TT utilization. This will in turn provide a better overall
network performance.
9.6
Future work
There are multiple directions that the project could be extended to.
For example, a network monitoring solution could be included as proposed in
[10] [12], that can measure network parameters and use those to select the
best performing algorithm or optimize its settings. Furthermore, the heuristic
itself can be further improved or new heuristics which are application speciﬁc
can be created.
The objective value functions can also be improved.
AVB-
based objective functions can be used in low utilization cases in which AVB
performance becomes more important.
Another approach to the problem would be to start the scheduling process from
oﬄine created schedules that include the streams in the network that are not
modiﬁed or removed. This would decrease the computational time at the cost
of memory space, but it would be a useful feature for supporting mode changes.
Mode changes can then be used to apply bigger scale changes to the network at
short amount of time.
More results can provide a better understanding of the procedure and uncover
new ways to improve it. Additional uncertainty parameters can be explored
apart from size and prediction probabilities can be included. Another possible
direction could be a comparison of this approach with a solution that greedily
adding streams on top of a schedule, which can show the diﬀerence in per-
formance between the two solutions. Simulation with randomly created ﬂows
over a period of time can demonstrate their adaptability capabilities and show
the extend of the performance degradation if any, that is the byproduct of the
network changes.
Finally, a more speciﬁcally tailored solution for a speciﬁc industrial test case
could also be explored either as a simulation or as an actual experiment. This
test case can provide useful insight on how the algorithms and the system in
general would perform in a real system after settings, heuristics and algorithms
are optimized for the given problem.
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 10
Conclusion
In this thesis a design that can handle network reconﬁguration during runtime
is proposed. The thesis describes relevant procedures and technologies and gives
an outline of the problem before trying to address it. The main problem which
is the reconﬁguration process is then separated in two sub-problems.
An overview of TSN and the standards related to it are initially presented, fol-
lowed by an overview of existing network protocols that can handle conﬁguration
of a TSN and conﬁgure its elements. The managed objects include the end nodes
and the switches of the network. OPC UA in combination with the NETCONF
framework which is written in YANG language and potentially the RESTCONF
protocol is proposed to handle the information ﬂow within the network. These
protocols handle the communication between the diﬀerent entities of the system
and the managed objects. A centralized architecture is then proposed based on
the Conﬁguration Agent which is introduced by the TSN standards to handle
the reconﬁguration process.
Then the two sub-problems are tackled. The ﬁrst sub-problem is the creation
of a extensible schedule which is able to accommodate predicted streams. A
Background Process is proposed to handle this problem which communicates
directly with the CA and has two main purposes. The BP is responsibility is
to handle the added streams and any network changes and produce a schedule
that can accommodate them within a time limit. At the same time, the BP
==PAGE:86==
78
Conclusion
always tries in the background to improve the current schedule in terms of
end-to-end latency and queue usage. The BP uses GRASP which is a meta-
heuristic-based scheduling algorithm and a collection of algorithms that utilize
it to maximize the bandwidth of the newly added streams.
Any scheduling
algorithm can be used instead of GRASP as long as the algorithm meets the
scheduling requirements and the interface that was described.
The algorithms try to schedule frames before the schedule request is made by
following some predictions which are outside the scope of the thesis.
Then,
they reserve the corresponding time slots which will be used when the request is
made. The algorithms main purpose is to select some of the multiple scheduling
conﬁgurations that exist due to the uncertainty in the added streams’ informa-
tion and more speciﬁcally the size. The algorithms are also presented, analyzed
and used in several test cases to demonstrate their eﬀectiveness and the resulting
schedule quality.
Three diﬀerent algorithms are used. The ﬁrst one is an incremental approach
in which the size of the added frames is gradually increased with a constant
step until the time limit or the maximum value is reached. The second solution
is a randomized algorithm which sets random values to the sizes of the added
streams and repeats until it runs out of time. A binary approach is used for
the third algorithm which assigns the same size to all the added ﬂows, while the
size is determined in the same way a binary search algorithm would do between
the minimum and the maximum size of the frames. After the binary algorithm
reaches the neighborhood of the best solution, it performs a randomized increase
in their sizes to try to improve the solution. The algorithms are not optimized
but their results are relatively good for networks that are reasonably large or
the utilization of the network is suﬃciently low which is also one of the thesis
assumptions.
The second sub-problem is the inclusion of the added ﬂows to the slots created
by the BP using the previous algorithms.
The full process between an end
node’s request to send or receive information and the assignment of those slots is
presented step by step. Some worst case time bounds are also calculated based
on the delay that occurs due to message transmission.
The implementation
details regarding the process of updating the schedule of the managed objects
and how the pairing of the slots and the request is done are not described in
detail, as it is highly dependant on implementation choices.
In conclusion, the thesis introduces the process of runtime schedule reconﬁgu-
ration of a TSN network based on the assumptions that are made, proposes a
two-fold solution to realize it and then presents and evaluates the quality and
the performance of the proposed solution.
==PAGE:87==
Appendix A
Motivational Example
Flow ID
Data size
Sender
Receiver
Period
1
30000
4
1
1000
2
3000
1
4
500
3
3000
3
2
200
4
3000
4
3
100
5
4500
2
4
500
6
3000
3
4
500
7
1500
2
4
200
8
15000
3
2
1000
9
1500
2
3
500
10
6000
2
3
200
11
7500
2
3
500
Table A.1: List of ﬂows for motivational example
==PAGE:88==
80
Motivational Example
Figure A.1: Initial Schedule
==PAGE:89==
81
Figure A.2: Schedule after addition of ﬂows
==PAGE:90==
82
Motivational Example
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1] Atos.
The convergence of it and operational technology.
White paper
(November 2012).
[2] Bjorklund, M. Yang-a data modeling language for the network conﬁgu-
ration protocol. RFC6020 [Z]. IETF (2010).
[3] Bonomi, F., Milito, R., Zhu, J., and Addepalli, S. Fog computing
and its role in the internet of things. In Proceedings of the ﬁrst edition of
the MCC workshop on Mobile cloud computing (2012), ACM, pp. 13–16.
[4] Carlsson, T. Industrial ethernet and wireless are growing fast. https:
//www.hms-networks.com/press/2017/02/20 - online article - accessed:
01.07.2018.
[5] Case, J. D., Fedor, M., Schoffstall, M. L., and Davin, J. Simple
network management protocol (snmp). Tech. rep., 1990.
[6] Craciunas, S. S., Oliver, R. S., Chmelík, M., and Steiner, W.
Scheduling real-time communication in ieee 802.1 qbv time sensitive net-
works. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Real-Time
Networks and Systems (2016), ACM, pp. 183–192.
[7] Ditzel, G. A., and Didier, P. Time sensitive network (tsn) protocols
and use in ethernet/ip systems. ODVA Inc., pp. 1–24.
[8] Enns, R., Bjorklund, M., and Schoenwaelder, J. Network conﬁgu-
ration protocol (netconf). Network (2011).
==PAGE:92==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] Garey, M. R., Johnson, D. S., and Sethi, R.
The complexity of
ﬂowshop and jobshop scheduling. Mathematics of operations research 1, 2
(1976), 117–129.
[10] Gutiérrez, M., Ademaj, A., Steiner, W., Dobrin, R., and Pun-
nekkat, S. Self-conﬁguration of ieee 802.1 tsn networks. In Emerging
Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA), 2017 22nd IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on (2017), IEEE, pp. 1–8.
[11] Gutiérrez, M., Steiner, W., Dobrin, R., and Punnekkat, S. A
conﬁguration agent based on the time-triggered paradigm for real-time net-
works. In Factory Communication Systems (WFCS), 2015 IEEE World
Conference on (2015), IEEE, pp. 1–4.
[12] Gutiérrez, M., Steiner, W., Dobrin, R., and Punnekkat, S. Learn-
ing the parameters of periodic traﬃc based on network measurements. In
Measurements & Networking (M&N), 2015 IEEE International Workshop
on (2015), IEEE, pp. 1–6.
[13] Hedstrom, B., Watwe, A., and Sakthidharan, S. Protocol eﬃcien-
cies of netconf versus snmp for conﬁguration management functions. Uni-
versity of Colorado, Master Thesis (2011).
[14] Heilmann, F., Syed, A., and Fohler, G. Mode-changes in cots time-
triggered network hardware without online reconﬁguration. ACM SIGBED
Review 13, 4 (2016), 55–60.
[15] IEEE. Ieee standard for local and metropolitan area networks - virtual
bridged local area networks amendment 12: Forwarding and queuing en-
hancements for time-sensitive streams. IEEE Std 802.1Qav-2009 (Amend-
ment to IEEE Std 802.1Q-2005) (Jan 2009), C1–72.
[16] IEEE. Ieee standard for local and metropolitan area networks—virtual
bridged local area networks amendment 14: Stream reservation protocol
(srp). IEEE Std 802.1Qat-2010 (Revision of IEEE Std 802.1Q-2005) (Sept
2010), 1–119.
[17] IEEE. Ieee standard for local and metropolitan area networks–audio video
bridging (avb) systems. IEEE Std 802.1BA-2011 (Sept 2011), 1–45.
[18] IEEE.
Ieee approved draft standard for local and metropolitan area
networks - media access control (mac) bridges and virtual bridged local
area networks amendment:
Enhancements for scheduled traﬃc.
IEEE
P802.1Qbv/D3.1, September 2015 (Jan 2015), 1–52.
[19] IEEE.
Ieee approved draft standard for local and metropolitan area
networks-media access control (mac) bridges and virtual bridged local area
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
85
networks amendment: Frame preemption.
P802.1Qbu/D3.1, September
2015 (Jan 2015), 1–50.
[20] IEEE. Ieee standard for ethernet. IEEE Std 802.3-2015 (Revision of IEEE
Std 802.3-2012) (March 2016), 1–4017.
[21] IEEE. Ieee standard for local and metropolitan area networks– bridges and
bridged networks - amendment 24: Path control and reservation. IEEE Std
802.1Qca-2015 (Amendment to IEEE Std 802.1Q— as amended by IEEE
Std 802.1Qcd-2015 and IEEE Std 802.1Q—/Cor 1-2015) (March 2016),
1–120.
[22] IEEE. Ieee approved draft standard for local and metropolitan area net-
works – bridges and bridged networks amendment: Per-stream ﬁltering and
policing. IEEE P802.1Qci/D2.1, November 2016 (Jan 2017), 1–62.
[23] IEEE. Ieee draft standard for local and metropolitan area networks – me-
dia access control (mac) bridges and virtual bridged local area networks
amendment: Cyclic queuing and forwarding. IEEE P802.1Qch/D2.1, Jan-
uary 2017 (Jan 2017), 1–23.
[24] IEEE. Ieee standard for local and metropolitan area networks–frame repli-
cation and elimination for reliability. IEEE Std 802.1CB-2017 (Oct 2017),
1–102.
[25] IEEE. Ieee draft standard for local and metropolitan area networks - tim-
ing and synchronization for time-sensitive applications. IEEE P802.1AS-
Rev/D6.0 December 2017 (Jan 2018), 1–496.
[26] IEEE. Ieee draft standard for local and metropolitan area networks–media
access control (mac) bridges and virtual bridged local area networks amend-
ment: Stream reservation protocol (srp) enhancements and performance
improvements. IEEE P802.1Qcc/D2.2, March 2018 (Jan 2018), 1–214.
[27] Lasi, H., Fettke, P., Kemper, H.-G., Feld, T., and Hoffmann, M.
Industry 4.0. Business & Information Systems Engineering 6, 4 (2014),
239–242.
[28] Lee, J., Bagheri, B., and Kao, H.-A. A cyber-physical systems ar-
chitecture for industry 4.0-based manufacturing systems. Manufacturing
Letters 3 (2015), 18–23.
[29] Oliver, R. S., Craciunas, S. S., and Stöger, G. Analysis of determin-
istic ethernet scheduling for the industrial internet of things. In Computer
Aided Modeling and Design of Communication Links and Networks (CA-
MAD), 2014 IEEE 19th International Workshop on (2014), IEEE, pp. 320–
324.
==PAGE:94==
86
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[30] OPC Foundation.
Speciﬁcation part 14:
Pubsub, release candidate
1.04.24. OPC Uniﬁed Architecture (Feb 2017), 1–125.
[31] Raagaard, M. L.
Algorithms for the Optimization of Safety-Critical
Networks. Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kongens
Lyngby, Denmark, 2017.
[32] Raagaard, M. L., Pop, P., Gutiérrez, M., and Steiner, W. Run-
time reconﬁguration of time-sensitive networking (tsn) schedules for fog
computing.
In Fog World Congress (FWC), 2017 IEEE (2017), IEEE,
pp. 1–6.
[33] Real, J., and Crespo, A. Mode change protocols for real-time systems:
A survey and a new proposal. Real-time systems 26, 2 (2004), 161–197.
[34] Schneider, R., Goswami, D., Chakraborty, S., Bordoloi, U.,
Eles, P., and Peng, Z. On the quantiﬁcation of sustainability and ex-
tensibility of ﬂexray schedules. In Design Automation Conference (DAC),
2011 48th ACM/EDAC/IEEE (2011), IEEE, pp. 375–380.
[35] Schonwalder, J., Bjorklund, M., and Shafer, P.
Network con-
ﬁguration management using netconf and yang.
IEEE communications
magazine 48, 9 (2010).
[36] Steiner, W.
Synthesis of static communication schedules for mixed-
criticality systems. In Object/Component/Service-Oriented Real-Time Dis-
tributed Computing Workshops (ISORCW), 2011 14th IEEE International
Symposium on (2011), IEEE, pp. 11–18.
[37] Steiner, W., and Poledna, S. Fog computing as enabler for the indus-
trial internet of things. e & i Elektrotechnik und Informationstechnik 133,
7 (2016), 310–314.
[38] wikibooks. Communication networks/network topologies. https://en.
wikibooks.org/wiki/Communication_Networks/Network_Topologies -
online article - accessed: 01.07.2018.
[39] Zheng, W., Chong, J., Pinello, C., Kanajan, S., and Sangiovanni-
Vincentelli, A. Extensible and scalable time triggered scheduling. In
Application of Concurrency to System Design, 2005. ACSD 2005. Fifth
International Conference on (2005), IEEE, pp. 132–141.
[40] Zhu, Q., Yang, Y., Natale, M., Scholte, E., and Sangiovanni-
Vincentelli, A. Optimizing the software architecture for extensibility
in hard real-time distributed systems. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics 6, 4 (2010), 621–636.
