==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Real time calculation of distances
in Dial-a-Ride Problems with Time Win-
dows
Jacopo Bolentini (s161191)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Management Science
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 424
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4800
www.ms.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This thesis presents a framework to solve a dynamic Dial-a-Ride Problem with Time
Windows in a large and real road network, and to calculate in real time distances from
a node to another node. The road network considered counts almost one million arcs
and more that three hundred thousands nodes. A total number of 1′650 travel requests
has been generated.
Since no information on the requests was available, an algorithm to solve static a
Dial-a-Ride Problem has been developed in order to create a benchmark for the dynamic
variant. The instance in analysis has been first solved this way, and some results have
been drawn.
The framework developed to solve the dynamic Dial-a-Ride Problem performs cycles
of 10 seconds. At any loop, some requests are inserted in the system to simulate the
incoming calls from clients. For every client, Dijkstra’s Algorithm is used to calculate
distance in real time from one starting node to a list destination nodes in a single run.
With this method, a distance matrix is updated any time a new client requires to use
the service.
Once the distances are calculated, the dynamic Dial-a-Ride Problem is
solved and a Simulated Annealing procedure is conducted to optimize the solution. The
Simulated Annealing keeps optimizing the solution until the 10 seconds loop is over. The
loops terminate when the service itself is finished, that is at the end of the day after 24
hours.
Some results for the dynamic Dial-a-Ride has been drawn and compared to the static
counterpart to study the quality of the solution.
This work is to be considered as a proof of concept for applying a real time calculation
of the distances on a NP-hard problem over a real and large road network.
A better and more sophisticated version of this framework could be applied and used
in a corporate environment.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Management Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a master
degree in Industral Engineering and Management.
Kongens Lyngby, July 22, 2018
Jacopo Bolentini (s161191)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Reading guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature
5
2.1
Vehicle Routing, Pickup and Delivery, and Dial-a-Ride Problem . . . . .
5
2.2
Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Analysis
9
3.1
Dial-a-Ride Problem – DARP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Depots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Dynamic calculation of distances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Heuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Neighborhood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Implementation
23
4.1
Issues and assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Distance matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Multithreading
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
The program developed – Pseudo code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Data
31
5.1
Edgelist
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Request creation and handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
Results
35
6.1
Parameter tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
6.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Conclusion
43
7.1
Accomplishments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2
Future works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Bibliography
47
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Medical improvement in the past few centuries increased people life expectancy, com-
pared to what it used to be just a couple of generations ago. This is obviously a remark-
able achievement for the society, but it comes with the rise of some new challenges that
must be addressed. People live longer than they used to, and population is getting older
and able to survive many illnesses that used to be deadly just some time ago. Taking
care of sick or disabled people used to be a task for the families to undertake; nowadays
the entire society instead demands that the weakest have to be taken care by the entire
community, granting them help and services supported by the welfare.
Because of this, many services today are conceived and tailored just for the purpose
of helping those who cannot sustain by themselves. Many obstacles must be overcome
to grant those people a comfortable life, and many services must be provided.
1.1
The problem
For the weakest parts of society – disabled, elderly, etc –, transportation constitute one
of the most relevant problems. In facts, people who are impaired in the movements
encounter many difficulties in using mass transportation systems. Much effort has been
made to make public transport more and more accessible.
However, in order to be
fast and efficient, it is very difficult to take into account also elders and disable people.
Of course, some attempt has been made in this direction – such as reserved spots on
buses and trains, ramps for wheelchairs, etc – but it is rare nonetheless to see somebody
belonging to one of the previously mentioned categories use public transportation, due
to the many obstacles that are nearly impossible to eliminate, along with the general
discomfort. Because of that, for a small portion of the population, those types of services
remain almost inaccessible.
To overcome those issues and grant public transport services to everybody, trans-
portation companies, often pushed by governments, are instituting services ad hoc to
serve the interested categories with “on demand” public transportation. Those systems
may have different features in the many countries in which this sort of service is run,
but all of them can be traced back to what in literature is called a Dial-a-Ride Problem
(DARP).
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
1.2
Purpose
The purpose of this thesis is to formulate an algorithm for the Dial-a-Ride Problem
that has to be able to process dynamically, in real time, a substantial amount of travel
requests in a large graph, and assign to every applicant a vehicle in order to fulfill every
request while minimizing at the same time the total number of vehicles used, hence the
costs. The focus of this thesis will be on creating a framework able to solve the problem
on a real road network with real requests.
One of the main issues of the Dial-a-Ride Problem is to find a balance between
good quality of service and the associated costs.
Since the categories for which the
service is intended require high standards of comfort – on which it is hardly possible
to make savings of any sort – it is necessary to focus on lowering the costs of the
service minimizing the number of vehicles necessary to run. Anyhow, this is incredibly
challenging since the service requests come approximately randomly during the day and
must be addressed in their entirety – unlike regular public transportation that bases
the fulfillment of the demand on statistics and forecasting, and allows travelers to get
transported while standing on the vehicle in case there is shortage of seats. Having a
forecast on demands allows the companies to prepare in advance and dispatch enough
vehicles to meet it, generally making the whole service more efficient. This is not possible
in Dial-a-Ride, since every requests may have starting location and destination virtually
anywhere in the area of service, making impossible to know beforehand where exactly
the service will start or end.
The problem this thesis intend to tackle has been suggested by Trapeze1, a multina-
tional company that provide solutions in transportation, along with Qampo2, a software
house in Aahrus that cooperates with Trapeze.
1.3
Contribution
The purpose of the thesis, as previously mentioned, is to develop a framework for the
Dial-a-Ride Problem that is able to handle large amount of users on a large network.
The goal is to be able to create a reliable algorithm able to optimize the utilization
of the vehicles as the time passes during a day, that can also operate on large areas,
possibly entire countries, with a dynamic number of clients that changes during the
run of the algorithm. Few attempts has been made so far, and not many articles can
be found in literature. Previous DARP algorithms assume all distances to be given in
advance, in a distance matrix form, avoiding the problem of calculating in real time
distances between nodes. That problem is non-trivial, since solution times are crucial in
a dynamic environment on a big scale road network.
The main contribution of this work is applying a metaheuristic approach to the
dynamic Dial-a-Ride Problem for large instances. The focus is on the dynamic aspect
1http://www.trapezegroup.com/
2https://qampo.com/
==PAGE:11==
1.4 Set-up
3
of the problem, since the main challenge is to being able to calculate several distances
between pairs of nodes in a graph in real time. To better understand and highlight
this point, it is possible to make a comparison to one of the most popular services
on the internet to calculate street level distances: Google Maps3. Since this service
only calculates the distance between two locations, in order to calculate all distances
from a single starting location to thousands of destinations, the process must be called
thousands of times. Assuming it takes 1 millisecond to calculate a distance, to know all
the distances between one thousands node it will need a total of one thousand seconds
to complete all the calculations and calling the process one million times. A different
approach has been used in this thesis by using Dijkstra’s algorithm, that is able to
calculate distances in a graph much slower, but to calculate multiple in a single call.
Doing so, assuming a constant solution time of half a second for calculating all distances
between one starting location and one thousand destination, it is possible to call the
algorithm only one thousands time, resulting in a overall running time of five hundred
seconds.
1.4
Set-up
The work has been conducted with the intent of process on average one thousand requests
per hour, trying to simulate different variations in the demands during the day, hence a
reduced amount of request in the night hours and a spike of several hundreds of requests
per hour in the morning and afternoon. This fluctuations in demand has been estimated
by relating the approximated number of requests per day – 22’000 4 – with some statistics
on a taxi calls.
The requests has been generated randomly in a large and dense graph. With large
graph is intended a graph with a number of nodes and arcs that is in the order of
magnitude of some hundred of thousands. With dense graph is intended a graph in
which nodes are well connected to each other, and the arcs connecting them have a low
cost (distance) associated, such as a dense populated area like a city or a metropolitan
region.
To simulate the request calls during a day, it has been decided to make several runs
of the code, one every ten seconds, so that it is possible to collect every time some new
requests and optimize them along with the other already present in the model. The aim
is to simulate an entire day into only two hours run of the program developed, calling
therefore the optimization procedure a total of 720 times. For every ten seconds loop of
the program are simulated 120 seconds of a day.
The program developed is meant to be a proof of concept, and is more a prototype
than a company software. It is plausible to assume that the use of a lower level pro-
3There are no public information on how this service calculates a distance between two locations
nor the time spent performing it, but considering connection latency and some processing not strictly
inherent to the calculation of the distance itself, it is plausible to assume it to be in the orders of
magnitude of milliseconds.
4Information directly obtained from Trapeze
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
gramming environment and an adequate amount of experience in programming may
improve the running times of the algorithm by at least a factor of five. Even if the goal
is to process all the requests within the time limit of two hours, it has been considered
acceptable exceed this limit as reasonably needed.
The result presented consider two different implementations of Dial-a-Ride on the
same dataset. The static implementation is intended to be used as benchmark to study
how much room for improvement there is starting from a lower bound solution. The
results of the dynamic implementation are presented considering constant time intervals
during the day, and calculating the improvement rate for every time interval, since the
requests during the day keep changing, modifying in fact the number of clients considered
at any given time.
1.5
Reading guide
In chapter 2 an overview of the problem in literature is given, along with a report on
the state of the art. In chapter 3 a formal description of the problem and the methods
used in the development of the algorithm is presented. In chapter 4 is given a thorough
description on how the problem has been modelled, how the work has been implemented,
and how the challenges that this problem has posed have been addressed. In chapter 5 it
is described the data that has been used for the development the framework. In chapter 6
the results obtained from the tuning of the parameters and from the test that has been
conducted on both the static and the dynamic implementation are exppained. Finally,
in chapter 7 some conclusions are drawn and possible future works are presented.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Literature
The Dial-A-Ride Problem can be seen as a variant of the more generic Pickup and De-
livery problem, that also is a specification of the broad category of problems that known
as Vehicle Routing Problems. In this chapter, a short description of those problems is
presented, along with an overview of the literature concerning Dial-a-Ride.
2.1
Vehicle Routing, Pickup and Delivery, and
Dial-a-Ride Problem
The Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) is a combinatorial optimization problem. The goal
of this problem is to find the optimal set of routes for the transportation of a defined
amount of clients to their destinations, having available fleet of vehicles that originates
and terminates in a depot.
The first record in literature of the VRP can be traced to Dantzig, Fulkerson, and
Johnson (1954) [10], that lead to the definition of the VRPT generalization of the renown
Travelling Salesman Problem. The first introduction of more vehicles to the problem is
attributed to Clarke and Wright (1964) [7], and that can be considered the first study
on the VRP as it is defined today (Eksioglu, Vural, and Reismanc, 2009) [12].
A brief overview on the VRP is now presented. Given a graph G = (V, A), V is the
set of vertices V = 1, 2, . . . , n and A is the set of arcs. Vertices j = 1, 2, . . . , n correspond
to clients with a non negative demand dj ≥0. Vertex 0 correspond to the depot. Every
arc (i, j) has an associate cost cij representing the cost of travelling the specific arc from
vertex i to vertex j. If the cost cij = cji for all i, j ∈V , the problem is categorized as a
Symmetric VRP, otherwise Asymmetric VRP (Toth and Vigo, 1998) [20].
Several variations to this problem exists, tailored on the specific requirements of the
instance that is intended to solve. The most common regards the introduction of time
windows (Vehicle Routing Problem with Time windows – VRPTW), a capacity limit
on the vehicles (Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem – CVRP), the introduction of
multiple trips for a single vehicle (Vehicle Routing Problem with with Multiple Trips –
VRPMT), or a combination of them.
A specification of the VRP is the Pickup And Delivery Problem (PDP). It addresses
the problem of collecting a parcel in a location and delivering it to a destination taking
into account the size and the weight of the parcel, and having available a fleet of vehicles
to operate the routes with a starting location and an end location.
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Literature
The Pickup and Delivery Problem is a generalization of the Dial-A-Ride Problem:
in facts, the only difference is that ther is a parcel instead of a person. The weight and
size attributes of the parcel are reduced to a single unitary attribute to keep track of
how many customers are present in a vehicle [18].
2.2
Review
According to Cordeau (2007) [9] in western countries the demand for Dial-a-Ride services
is increasing. The reasons for this phenomenon can be attributed to the aging of the
population, and the trend towards the development of new health care systems. Research
on this topic has followed this trend. Early research on Dial-a-Ride has been carried out
by Psaraftis (1980 [16] that developed a Dynamic programming approach for both the
static and the dynamic version of the problems.
Ruland (1995) [17] formulated the Dial-a-Ride as an integer program, developing
some classes of valid inequalities and presenting some solutions using the branch-and-
cut algorithm. The problem is defined as a TSP with more constraints, such as the order
of some nodes in the route. Cordeau (2006) [8] introduced a mixed-integer formulation
for the DARP using branch-and-cut algorithm to solve the problem with some new valid
inequalities, as well as some other known inequalities for the TSP, VRP and DARP on
small and medium size instances. Cordeau and Laporte (2007) [9] reported the state of
the art of the Dial A Ride. A survey on dynamic Pickup and Delivery Problem, with an
extension on dynamic Dial A Ride problem has been conducted by Berbeglia, Cordeau
and Laporte (2010) [5]. Attanasio, Cordeau, Ghiani and Laporte (2004) [3] developed
parallel algorithm for the dynamic DARP using TABU search on small size instances.
Dijkstra (1959) [11] published an article in which it is explained the whole procedure
of his algorithm to calculate the short path in a graph. Ahuja et al. (190) [2] explored
many ways to improve the computational time of Dijkstra’s algorithm through the use
of many implementation of the heap queues, such as radix heap and Fibonacci heap.
Kirkpatrick et al. (1983) [15] formulated for the first time the simulated annealing,
relating the procedure to the statistical mechanics phenomenon. Szu and Hartley (1987)
[19] presented a modified version of the metaheuristic allowing the algorithm perform
semi-local search and long jumps in the solution area to be able to explore it in its
entirety. Ingber (1989) [14] studied the algorithm applying statistics on the search and
introduced the re-annealing technique to intervene the temperature parameter during
the run to better fit the solution area.
Based on the literature studied, it has been concluded that the use of metaheuristic
methods to solve the dynamic DARP on large network is almost mandatory. Many
successful attempt have been conducted to solve the problem on small instances to the
optimum, but very few were using real road network. Almost the entirety of the attempt
used a distance matrix that was calculated in a preprocessing stage of the algorithm, and
no article were found in literature regarding dynamic DARP and real time calculation
of the distance matrix.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Review
7
In light of this, it has been decided to opt for the Dijkstra’s algorithm with heap queue
to calculate fast, in real time, all required distances and constantly update the distance
matrix. It has also been decided to use a pure simulated annealing metaheuristic to find
a good quality solution in short time, avoiding unnecessary complication the problem.
Finally, it has been created an heuristic to model the Dial-a-Ride with Time Windows
to be able to create the constraints, using the MIP formulation as a reference.
==PAGE:16==
8
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Analysis
3.1
Dial-a-Ride Problem – DARP
The Dial-a-Ride problem consists of designing a vehicle route and a schedule for a
variable number n of users who specify a pickup location and a destination. Very often,
a user will have two requests during the same day, an outbound request from the pickup
location to the destination, and an inbound request for the return trip. In the nominal
formulation, the service is supplied by a fleet of m identical vehicles, all based in a single
depot. The most common example for this kind of problem is represented by door to
door transportation services for elderly and disabled people (Cordeau et al., 2007) [9].
3.1.1
Features of DARP
With Dial-a-Ride a broad variety of problems is defined. Those problems share the main
feature of designing the vehicle route and the schedule for customers, but there are some
major differences. Dial-a-Ride services operate mainly in two different way: static and
dynamic. With static is meant that all the transportation requests are known beforehand;
with dynamic requests are revealed throughout the day and routes are adjusted in real
time. Moreover, many different problems and formulation may depend on the number
of depots in which the vehicles are based (single or multi depot Dial-a-Ride problems
MD-DARP). It is often assumed that the fleet of vehicles is homogeneous. In reality,
especially in the situation involving elders or disabled people, different customers may
require different specifics for their ride, such as a wheelchair ramp, enough space for a
stretcher, or just and additional seat for an accompanying person (Cordeau et al., 2007)
[9].
The objective of any DARP is to minimize the total cost while satisfying all the
demand and eventual side constraints. However, since those models are above all applied
to services addressed to the weakest part of the society, it is also mandatory to provide
also a good level of comfort. Some of the criteria might be route duration, route length,
waiting time of the customer both for inbound and outbound trip, the total time spent
in the vehicle, or the difference between desired and actual delivery times. It is possible
to treat those comfort requirement both as constraints or part of the objective function
(Cordeau et al., 2007) [9].
A common variation of DARP is to let the customer decide the pickup time or the
destination time, letting this way define a time window (DARPTW) in which their
==PAGE:18==
10
3 Analysis
request must be accomplished. This may be due to some meeting or appointment (e.g.
a visit to the doctor) and make formulation and solution of the problem a lot more
complicated, especially if those time widows are narrow.
A shared opinion on how
customers could constrain their requests with time windows is to let them set the arrival
time of the outbound trip and the pick up time of the inbound trip, setting then some
constraint in the model limiting the total duration of the trip (Cordeau et al., 2007) [9].
3.1.2
Mathematical model for DARPTW
Several formulation have been proposed to model DARPTW. As stated previously, the
time window variation is probably the most common formulation of the problem since
is the one that has more relevance in a practical application of the problem.
This
formulation is the closest to the problem in analysis, so a detailed description is presented.
Hereby a three-indices mixed integer programming (MIP) formulation by Cordeau (2006)
[8] for the static DARP single depot is presented.
G = (V, A) is a directed graph, where V is partitioned into the sets P = {1 . . . n},
D = {n + 1 . . . 2n}, and H = {0, 2n + 1}. Subsets P and D respectively contain pick-up
nodes and delivery nodes. Nodes H = {0, 2n+1} respectively represent origin depot and
destination depot. A request consists in a pair (i, n+i), where i ∈P and n+i ∈D. K is
the set of vehicles, k ∈K. Every vehicle has a capacity Qk. Also, there is a limit duration
of the trip associated to every vehicle, denoted Tk. To each vertex vi ∈V is associated a
load qi, with q0 = q2n+1 = 0, qi ≥0 for i = 1 . . . n, and qi = −qi−n for i = n + 1, . . . , 2n.
It is also associated a service duration time, di ≥0 with d0 = d2n+1 = 0. The arc set
is defined as A = {(i, j) : i = 0, j ∈P or i, j ∈P ∪D, i ̸= n + j or i ∈D, j = 2n + 1}.
The cost of traversing an arc (i, j) with the vehicle k is equal to ck
ij, while the travel time
is denoted by tij. At last, for each node i ∈V and each vehicle k ∈K, Bk
i is the time at
which the vehicle k begins service at node i, Qk
i is the load of the vehicle k after visiting
node i, and Lk
i is the ride time of a user picked up at i on vehicle k. There is a limit
to the travel time associated with every customer, and is defined by both the constant
value L, and the time window of the vertex i is [ei, li]. The constant value L refers to a
policy limit imposed by the service provider that prevents a client to stay in a vehicle
for more than a reasonable amount of time.
The decision variable xk
ij is binary, and is 1 if and only if the arc (i, j) is traversed
by the vehicle k, 0 otherwise.
==PAGE:19==
3.1 Dial-a-Ride Problem – DARP
11
min
∑
k∈K
∑
i∈N
∑
j∈N
ck
ijxk
ij
(3.1)
subject to
∑
k∈K
∑
j∈N
xk
ij = 1
∀i ∈P
(3.2)
∑
j∈N
xk
ij −
∑
j∈N
xk
n+i,j = 0
∀i ∈P, k ∈K
(3.3)
∑
j∈N
xk
0j = 1
∀k ∈K
(3.4)
∑
j∈N
xk
ij −
∑
j∈N
xk
ij = 0
∀i ∈P ∪D, k ∈K
(3.5)
∑
i∈N
xk
i,2n+1 = 1
∀k ∈K
(3.6)
Bk
j ≥
(
Bk
i + di + tij
)
xk
ij
∀i ∈N, j ∈N, k ∈K
(3.7)
Qk
j ≥
(
Qk
i + qj
)
xk
ij
∀i ∈N, j ∈N, k ∈K
(3.8)
Lk
i = Bk
n+i −
(
Bk
i + di
)
∀i ∈P, k ∈K
(3.9)
Bk
2n+1 −Bk
0 ≤Tk
∀k ∈K
(3.10)
ei ≤Bk
i ≤li
∀i ∈N, k ∈K
(3.11)
ti,n+1 ≤Lk
i ≤L
∀i ∈P, k ∈K
(3.12)
max {0, qi} ≤Qk
i ≤min {Qk, Qk + q1}
∀i ∈N, k ∈K
(3.13)
xk
ij ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈N, j ∈N, k ∈K
(3.14)
The objective function (3.1) aims to minimize the total routing cost. Constraint
(3.2) ensure that every request is served exactly one time, meaning that all the requests
must be served and that not a single request is served multiple times. Constraint (3.2)
makes sure that the same vehicle serving the origin node also serve the destination node,
making sure it is the same vehicle that start and finish one trip (inbound or outbound).
The following three constraint ensures that every vehicle starts at the origin depot (3.4),
ends at the destination depot (3.6), and that the flow is conserved during the trip (3.5),
so a vehicle entering a node has also to leave of the same node to continue with the trip.
Constraint (3.7) ensures that service time at the destination node cannot take place
before the time needed to serve the pickup node and to travel the distance in between
pickup and destination. Constraint (3.8) makes sure that the vehicle has enough capacity
in order to reach the destination node. Constraint (3.9) defines the ride time that will
be used in constraint (3.12) to force the trips to stay within the travel time limit per
customer. Constraint (3.10) forces every vehicle to be scheduled within its time limit
from the moment it comes out of the depot to the moment it goes back in. Constraint
(3.11) ensures that the time in which a node is served lays inside the specified time
windows, while constraint (3.13) impose a capacity constraint on the vehicle.
The formulation is not linear because of constraint (3.7) and (3.8). However, those
constraint can be linearized.
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Analysis
Bk
j ≥Bk
i + di + tij −M k
ij(1 −xk
ij)
∀i ∈N, j ∈N, k ∈K
(3.15)
Qk
j ≥Qk
i + qj −W k
ij(1 −xk
ij)
∀i ∈N, j ∈N, k ∈K
(3.16)
M k
ij and W k
ij are two constant values that are calculated as M k
ij ≥max{0, li + di +
tij −ej} and W k
ij ≥min{Qk, Qk + qi}. Those constants have value big enough so that
the equation set the decision variable to one only when certain requirements are reached.
This constraint formulation is known as bigM formulation.
3.2
Depots
Many of the variations of the DARP found in literature depend on how many depots
for the vehicles are considered.
There are several formulations that depend on the
number of depots, and it is possible to categorize DARP also according to that. Many
instances of the DARP-single depot (DARP-SD) are solved to optimality using the known
solution method of the mixed integer programming. As the number of depots increase,
the complexity of the problem does as well. Some formulations of DARP-multi depot
(DARP-MD) can be found in literature, but only smaller instance have been solved to
optimality. The problem in analysis has been formulated without taking into account
any depot – in other words that the overall amount of depots is infinite. This choice
has been made because there were no information about the number of depots, nor
the locations. Moreover, creating an adequate amount of depots and assign them a
certain number of vehicles is a complete different problem that would have complicated
significantly the problem in analysis.
However, an attempt to keep the problem close to reality has been made by forcing
the vehicle to end their route close to the node where they started their service. A
parameter has been set to decide how distant from the starting point a vehicle can finish
its service, and it has been decided to be 20km.
The distance between the starting point and the ending point is calculated using
the Euclidean distance. Since the only goal of this constraint is to guarantee that those
points are not too much far apart, and that spatial coordinates are available in the
dataset, there is no need of any complex calculation. Using the street distance instead
could also be an option, since it has been calculated in the distance matrix, but has not
being used since there was no particular reason to give a stricter constraint.
Since starting location and ending location are kept relatively close to each other, it
is possible in the future to think about some solutions regarding the position of depots.
It will be possible, by changing this parameter, to build routes that start and finish in
roughly the same area, and using this information to group the trips and assign vehicles
to some depot.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Dynamic calculation of distances
13
3.3
Dynamic calculation of distances
In the problem in analysis, due to its dynamic nature, it is not possible to know before-
hand which nodes will be involved in the process of finding a solution. Since it is also
prohibitive to calculate and store a distance matrix with every node in the graph (almost
half a million), the idea is to use an algorithm to reduce calculations to a smaller dis-
tance matrix, only considering the nodes that are involved in the requests of the DARP.
This can be achieved using Dijkstra’s algorithm for calculating distances between all the
nodes associated to the requests. Every node, one at the time, is used as starting loca-
tion, while all the remaining nodes constitute the destination list; the distances found
from the starting node to all the destinations are kept and stored, and constitute a row
in the distance matrix. A more detailed description in section 4.2.
Dijkstra’s algorithm was proposed in the late 50’s by the Dutch computer scientist
and engineer Edsger Wybe Dijkstra. It finds the shortest path, in a graph with non
negative arc weights, from the source s to all the other nodes of the graph. Because of
this feature, it has been chosen to work with this specific algorithm.
One of the main challenges of the Dial-a-Ride is being able to have access to node-
to-node distances in short time, many times. One possibility could be to select a fast
algorithm – such as a* (Zeng and Church, 2009) [22] – able to calculate distances between
two nodes in very short time, store the result of every instance, and run it any time a
distance between a new pair of nodes is required. That is a viable option, but it has a
quite high level of high complexity due to the number of calls, since it is not possible
to know beforehand how many times such algorithm will be run.
On the contrary,
Dijkstra’s algorithm compute the shortest path distance from the source node to every
other node in the graph in a single run. It is possible to stop the run when a certain
criterion is met, storing in memory all distances calculated before it is stopped. Most
of the distances calculated are probably non needed for the solution of the Dial-a-Ride
problem, but there is always the possibility that at least one of them will be required
in another step of the main program. Storing those non necessary distances does not
compromise the overall performance; some issues may arise in case there is very limited
memory capacity, but in reality this possibility is remote. This way, it is possible to
build a distance matrix that is fast and easy to access.
Dijkstra’s algorithm
Dijkstra’s algorithm, in its nominal formulation, consists of
finding a tree of shortest distances to all nodes starting from a root node.
A label
d(i), called potential, is maintained for every node representing the distance between
the source and every other vertex in the network.
The label is an upper bound on
the shortest path to node i. At every iteration of the algorithm, the nodes are split
into two subsets, one indicating those already visited and permanently labelled with the
distance to the source, and those yet to be visited having a temporary distance label.
The permanent label associated to every node represent the actual shortest distance
from that node to the source. The core concept of the algorithm is to scan through
every node, starting from the source s, permanently label the nodes in the order of their
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Analysis
distance from the source. Initially, all the label are initialized to ∞, with the exception
of the source node, that is labelled to zero instead. At every iteration, the label of a
node is the shortest distance from the source along a path composed only by nodes
that have a permanent label. The algorithm selects, at every iteration, the node with
the smallest temporary label (breaking ties is arbitrary) and evaluate the distance from
the selected node to all the others directly connected; then it makes the selected node
label permanent. The algorithm terminates when all the node labels have been made
permanent (Ahuja, 2014) [1]. For a more detailed overview on the algorithm and proof
of correctness, see Dijkstra (1959) [11].
Below is illustrated the algorithm as described by Ahuja (2014) [1].
Algorithm 1 Dijkstra’s algorithm
1: S ←0
2: S := ∅
3: ¯S := N
4: d(i) := ∞for each node i ∈N
5: d(s) := 0 and pred(s) := 0
6: while |S| < n do
7:
let i ∈¯S be a node for which d(i) = min{d(j) : j ∈¯S}
8:
S := S ∪{i}
9:
¯S := ¯S \ {i}
10:
for each (i, j) ∈A(i) do
11:
if d(j) > d(i) + cij then
12:
d(j) := d(i) + cij and pred(j) := i
13:
end if
14:
end for
15: end while
Often it might be more interesting calculating the shortest path between the source
and a target node. Since the algorithm computes the minimum distance from the source
to all other nodes, it is possible to slightly modify the algorithm creating an exit condition
inside the while loop with an if statement.
This condition will possibly terminate the algorithm before it calculates every short-
est path distance for every node, stopping right after the shortest path source–target is
computed. Note that the exit condition can be also a list of nodes, so that the algo-
rithm calculates all shortest path until all nodes in the list have been considered, and
terminating right after the last path is calculated.
Complexity
The computational time of the algorithm in the worst case depend on two
basic operations: node selection and distance updates. With node selection is intended
the operation of scanning through all the temporary label potentials in search of the
node with the smallest value. This operation depend on the cardinality of the subset of
temporary labelled nodes, therefore – defining the graph G = (V, A), with n ∈V as the
==PAGE:23==
3.4 Heuristics
15
number of nodes and m ∈A ans the number of arcs – it is n+(n−1)+(n−2)+. . .+1 =
O(n2). With distance update, instead, is intended the operation of evaluating if the
current label of a node satisfy the condition d(j) > d(i) + cij and setting the new label
to d(j) = d(i) + cij if so.
This operation is conducted A(i) times for every node i,
therefore a total amount of ∑
i∈N |A(i)| = m times. Since every update requires O(1),
the algorithm takes O(m) total time to perform the distance updates. At this point, it is
established that the complexity of the algorithm is O(n2). Since the complexity analysis
is conducted considering the worst case, the exact same conclusion can be drawn also
for the modified algorithm with target exit condition.
It is clear at this point that the most critical operation is the node selection. Differ-
ent implementation of the algorithm have been formulated to drastically decrease the
computational effort of this operation by a clever use of data structure to reduce the
worst case complexity (Ahuja, 2014) [1].
Heap queue
One of the most common data structure used to improve the complexity
of Dijkstra’s algorithm is the d-heap priority queue. This data structure efficiently store
data according to a property. Data is arranged in a tree structure with the property, in
this specific case, that the parent node value must be smaller or equal to the value of
the children. The parameter d ≥2 represent the number of children that are associated
to every parent node. Every time a new node is inserted in the heap, the property
is checked, and nodes are swapped until the parent-children condition is satisfied. It
is obvious that the root of the tree it is always the node with the smallest value in
the entire tree. The operation of inserting and sorting new nodes in a d-heap require
O(d logd n) time, while deleting the node with the minimum value require O(1). This
makes the total running time of the entire Dijkstra’s algorithm O(m logd n + nd logd n).
Now it is possible to select the ideal value for d = max{2; ⌈m
n ⌉}, that will result in an
overall running time for Dijkstra’s algorithm of O(m logd n) (Ahuja, 2014) [1].
3.4
Heuristics
DARPTW is an NP-hard problem (Cordeau, 2006)[8], that means that it is not known
a method to find an optimal solution in polynomial times.
As stated previously in
the description of the problem chapter 1, it is crucial to have a solution in a very small
amount of time. The only option available is to sacrifice a little the quality of the solution
in return of a quick computation. For those reasons, it has been decided to follow an
heuristic approach. To not further complicate the problem with advanced metaheuristic
method, it has been decided to perform Local Search in the form of Simulated Annealing.
This procedure has been used in a broad variety of situation, with remarkable success.
For example, in geometry processing this approach is used to better fit a mesh over an
3D image (Bærentzen et al., 2012) [4]; in transportation, it has been successfully used to
solve the optimal bus transit route network design, outperforming other methods such
as Genetic Algorithm (Fan and Machemehl, 2006) [13].
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Analysis
3.4.1
Simulated annealing
The Simulated Annealing algorithm (Burke and Kendall, 2005) [6], is one of the best
known local search algorithm. It performs quite well and is applicable in a large variety
of situations. This method basically consists in applying the procedure of a simple local
search algorithm with the added possibility to escape local optima.
Local search – Hill climbing
Local search algorithms are widely used as a general approach for solving hard combina-
torial optimization problems. They all have in common some feature of an underlying
neighborhood function that is used to guide the search of the solution in a problem. The
purpose of the problem is, obviously, to find the global optimal solution i∗⊆S, that
is the solution that has the optimal value f ∗. The neighborhood function is a mapping
N : S →2S, which defines for every solution i ∈S a set of solution N(i) ⊆S that
are reachable from i. In a nutshell, starting from a solution, is the area of possible
solutions that can be found starting from the already found solution i. The set N(i) is
the neighborhood of the solution i, and every element j ∈N(i) is a neighbor if i.
The simplest form of local search is called hill climbing. It is an iterative process that
starts in a random place of the solution area – with an random initial solution – and
iteratively explores the neighborhood of the current solution in search of a better one.
As the name of the algorithm suggests, a better solution might be one that has a higher
objective value, but it is fairly easy to revert the criterion to make the algorithm search
for a new solution with a lower objective value. Whenever a better solution is found, it
replaces the previous one and the search for a better one continues. The neighborhood of
the newly found solution is different from the previous, therefore it is still to be explored.
This procedure terminates when no better solution can be found in the neighborhood
of the current solution. By definition, iterative improvements end up in local optima.
Depending on both the quality of the initial solution and search strategy used, those
algorithms can be easily trapped in poor local optima, without having the possibility of
escape them. To avoid this limitation while maintaining the core concept of the local
search, it is possible to extend the procedure into accepting also, in a controlled and
limited way, solutions that do not improve the objective value, and that is the basic idea
of the simulated annealing or TABU search.
Pure simulated annealing
Simulated Annealing is one of the simplest mataheuristic algorithm. It was originally
inspired by the physical process of annealing of metals and because of this analogy – even
if it is not so strong in the end – the control parameters were named after it: temperature,
and cooling factor. Those parameters are used to allow the local search procedure to
accept also deteriorating solutions to a limited extent, controlling and limiting the rate
in which this happens to avoid getting out of track.
==PAGE:25==
3.4 Heuristics
17
The local search principle of looking for and accepting an improving and solution still
holds, and is a key feature of the algorithm. The procedure begins with the initialization
of the problem, in which an initial solution is computed and the initial parameters are
set. The parameters are used to calculate how the deteriorating solution are accepted
and the severity of the deterioration. To evaluate the new solution, a delta evaluation
function is called. There are several methods to compare the quality of the solution
that are heavily dependant on the problem in analysis, all with the purpose to compare
the current solution with the one that has been found in the neighborhood, to see if the
newly found will lead to an improvement or a deterioration: if it is an improving solution
the local search principle are applied as usual; if it is a deteriorating solution, based
on the severity of the deterioration, a probability of acceptance is applied. Assuming
that a minimization problem is taken into account, the common way of calculating this
probability is
p (f(j) −f(i)) = exp
(
−f(j) −f(i)
T
)
(3.17)
For a deteriorating value of f(j)−f(i) > 0 (only deteriorating solutions are evaluated
this way) Equation 3.17 will give a result confined in the interval [0, 1). p(f(j) −f(i))
varies according to the value of f(j) −f(i), depending how severe is the deterioration
taken into account, and according to the temperature of the iteration. The temperature
T decreases at every iteration by a cooling factor α. The temperature has a noticeable
impact on the acceptance of a deteriorating solution. It contributes to determine the
likelihood with which a deteriorating solution is selected, but mostly decide for how
long, in the run of the algorithm, a severe deteriorating solution can be selected. An
high value of temperature in the early stages will result in a high acceptance rate of
a deteriorating solution both if the deterioration is severe or not, while a low starting
temperature will only permit the acceptance of small deterioration. The cooling factor
α modifies the temperature T at each iteration so that the chance of accepting great
deterioration may occur only in the early stages of the run (Burke and Kendall, 2005)
[6].
In 2 is illustrated the procedure of the simulated annealing as described by Aarts,
Korst, and Michiels [6]. The notation has been adapted to match with the explanation
of the algorithm in this section.
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Analysis
Algorithm 2 Simulated annealing procedure
1: INITIALIZE (tstart, α, istart)
2: i := istart
3: T := tstart
4: while stop criterion do
5:
GENERATE (new solution j form Ni)
6:
if f(j) ≤f(i) then
7:
i := j
8:
else
9:
if exp
( f(j)−f(i)
T
)
> random [0, 1) then
10:
i := j
11:
end if
12:
end if
13:
T = T · α
14: end while
3.5
Neighborhood
Following the principles of the local search, a swap function has been developed. This
operation has the purpose to create new feasible solutions starting from an already
feasible one, possibly lowering the cost.
It has been decided to store the solution in a list. This list collects all the vehicles
that are being used during the service. Every vehicle is represented by another list,
containing all the information regarding the itinerary that has to be travelled and the
clients that are in the vehicle. The swap function only selects two clients among all
vehicles, and trade their places. It is also possible that the function selects only one
client and a different car, so that instead of switching the position of two clients, only
one is moved into another car. An illustration of the vehicle list is presented in Table 3.1,
in which it is possible to see how the different vehicles are stored and all the information
listed for every car.
Table 3.1: Illustration of the vehicle list.
car 1
[itinerary 1 and 2]
(info client 1) (info client 2) . . .
car 2
[itinerary 3 and 4]
(info client 3) (info client 4) . . .
car 3
[itinerary 5 and 6]
(info client 5) (info client 6) . . .
...
car n
[itinerary n −1 and n]
(info client n −1) (info client n) . . .
The objective is to reduce the number of cars, and swapping two clients every time
does not allow to delete unnecessary vehicles. Because of that, the swap function can
also – randomly again – move a client into another vehicle, basically swapping a client
for nothing in return. This way it is possible to remove clients from a car, and eventually
==PAGE:27==
3.5 Neighborhood
19
delete the unnecessary car if other vehicles can handle the clients that have been moved.
In Table 3.2 is illustrated an example of how the swap function manage to reduce the
overall number of cars in the problem; in that instance, client 4 has been moved from
car 2 to car 1, while client 3 has been moved from car 2 to car 3, leaving this way empty
the second vehicle.
Table 3.2: Illustration of the vehicle list after some swaps.
car 1
[itinerary 1, 2 and 4]
(info client 1) (info client 2) . . . (info client 4)
car 2
[ ]
car 3
[itinerary 5, 6 and 3]
(info client 5) (info client 6) . . . (info client 3)
...
car n
[itinerary n −1 and n]
(info client n −1) (info client n) . . .
3.5.1
Solving the TSP
While swapping the clients among the cars, an itinerary is provided for every vehicle.
This is a very basic route the driver has to follow, that highlight only the order in which
clients assigned to the car have to be served or picked up according to their Service
Time. Deciding the order in which the vehicle has to visit every node and returning an
itinerary basically means solving the well-known Travelling Salesman Problem. Since
this problem is NP-hard, it is prohibitive to attempt solving it to optimality, especially
because that should be done for every vehicle, an because the amount of clients assigned
to a single vehicle can reach substantial values. This would result in incredibly long
solution times, and it is obviously in contrast with the real time nature of the problem
in analysis.
To solve this issue, a heuristic approach has been developed, focusing more on the
speed then on the quality of the solution. This has been possible by using the Service
Times associated to every single trip. As stated before in this section, all Service Time
represents the time in which a client must arrive at destination, and it is possible to
estimate a departure knowing the distance of a trip and the speed of the vehicle. A
departure time has been calculated for every trip. Using the times at destination and
the intervals for the pickup, it is possible to rearrange the nodes and create an itinerary
for the driver, as illustrated in Figure 3.1.
Since every vehicle is created with an itinerary already set in it1, it is sufficient to
only insert the itinerary of the newly swapped customer at the end of the itinerary
that was present already in the vehicle, and then gradually interlace the two itineraries
according to the times assigned to every node, basically ordering the nodes based on
1There is only one itinerary possibility in a single client situation, that is of course serving first the
forward trip (in order pickup and destination), waiting for the backward trip, and then serving it when
the time is come (in order pickup and destination). For every new client inserted in the system, a new
vehicle is created specifically for the client, with the itinerary already set.
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Analysis
Figure 3.1: Representation of how requests are interlaced.
their associated times. Given that all pickup nodes have an interval of times, itineraries
were created using only the highest of the two values. If in the result some of the inter-
vals of the pickup nodes overlap, the nodes associated to those intervals are permuted
(Figure 3.2).
The complexity of a permutation, in terms of big O notations, is O(n!). Theoretically,
this can heavily disrupt the performance of the algorithm. However, due to the previously
mentioned constraint that limit the number of passengers in a vehicle to maximum four,
all itineraries that have more than four pickup nodes in a row are discarded2, limiting
therefore the elements in a permutation.
After a set of different itineraries is computed, a feasibility function is called to
discard all non feasible solutions, and an evaluation function selects the one with lower
cost – lower distance.
3.5.2
Evaluation function and feasibility check
As explained in the previous section, any time a swap is performed, many different
itineraries may be created for a single vehicle. However, since swapping between clients
is a random procedure, it might happen that two clients in the same car are not compat-
ible together. The algorithm tries to force clients together first, and then evaluate the
feasibility of that specific combination of clients. Two (or more) clients are not compat-
ible, for example, if their destinations are very far apart and their Service Time are too
close, so that serving one client on time will result in serving the other late.
2Every time the vehicle serves a pick up node, it means that one passenger gets in the vehicle.
Having four pick up nodes one after the other, means that four clients are getting in the car, reaching
the limit of capacity
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Neighborhood
21
Figure 3.2: Representation of how request are interlaced, with some of the nodes per-
muted.
To study the quality of a single itinerary, an evaluation function has been developed.
This function begins with a feasibility check, that determines whether the itinerary in
analysis must be discarded as unfeasible, or it is actually feasible and its cost must be
evaluated. The feasibility check only takes into account the travel times, and evaluates
for every pair of nodes in the itinerary if there is enough time to travel, from the first node
in the pair to the other, without being late. If the itinerary is feasible, the evaluation
function, similarly to the feasibility check, then calculates the distance between every
pair of nodes, returning the total distance of the whole itinerary. If the feasibility check
flags an itinerary as unfeasible, the evaluation function assign infinite as total distance
without performing any calculation. After all the different itineraries of a vehicle are
evaluated, the one with the lowest cost (distance) is selected and assigned to the vehicle.
This procedure is applied to both the vehicles involved in a swap. If all the itineraries
of a vehicle are unfeasible, the evaluation function will return an infinite value, and the
local search procedure will avoid every solution with infinite cost, rejecting the new
solution resulting from the swap.
==PAGE:30==
22
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Implementation
In this section it is described how the problem has been addressed in terms of construc-
tion, implementations, tools that has been used, and assumptions that has been adopted.
The algorithm has been implemented using Python 3.6 on an i7-6700HQ 2.6GHz laptop
computer. The DTU cluster via ThinLinc has also been used for the parameter tuning
procedure. To address the problem in analysis, two different programs have been devel-
oped: one for the dynamic situation, and one for the static. The static version of the
problem has been implemented with the purpose to create a benchmark to evaluate the
solution of the dynamic case.
4.1
Issues and assumptions
Several assumptions has been made to simplify the calculations of the problem and to
overcome some issues that arose while implementing it.
Distance matrix
It has been decided to assume the distance matrix to be symmetric.
This may seem like a rough approximation of the problem, but since it is more impor-
tant for the analysis to look at the travel time between two nodes than knowing the
accurate distance between two nodes, this approximations can actually be meaningful.
A symmetric distance matrix implies that, in a graph, every arc is bi-directed. This
is, of course, not very realistic, since there are plenty of situations in which a road net-
work does not act lice a bi-directed graph (one way roads is the most clear example of
that). However, it is arguable to say that even if the forward distance and the backward
distance between two points are not the same, there is hardly a noticeable difference
between the two that may have a major impact on the time spent travelling both paths.
As an example, travelling from DTU to Kongens Nytorv in central Copenhagen by car
takes a distance of 14.9 km and a travel time of 19 minutes; the same travel done back-
wards takes 15.6 km and 19 minutes (both according to Google maps). Even if there
is a difference of more than half a kilometer, the travel time can be approximated as
being the same for both trips. Theoretically, it is possible to think about an instance
that disprove this approximation, but still it is hard to find it in reality.
The lower bound
For both the static and the dynamic problems, it is possible to
determine a simple lower bound. This comes useful in the construction of an initial
solution for the local search procedure. Knowing that every customer has to travel to
==PAGE:32==
24
4 Implementation
the designated location first, and then go back where he started, it is arguable to say
that, in the worst case, one vehicle is assigned to every client, therefore the number of
vehicles is equal to the number of clients. The program developed make use of this notion
generating a new vehicle every time a new requests is inserted. An unsuccessful attempt
of building a more sophisticated greedy heuristic to calculate has been conducted, but
the large amount of possibilities along with the, as well, large amount of constraint
created by the time windows undermined the construction of such heuristic.
Number of clients in a vehicle at the same time
The vehicles usually used in
those situations are small buses or vans. The number of seats in those kind of vehicles
is usually more than six. However, since the service is meant for disabled and elder
peoples, a certain level of comfort is required. For this reason, it has been decided to
limit the amount of people that can be seated in the vehicle at the same moment to four,
knowing that this limitation would prevent the vehicles to be filled to their maximum
capacity, possibly worsening the solution. Aside from the comfort, this approximation
accommodates also the need of the clients to be accompanied by an aid – like a relative
or nurse –, or can be seen as unusable space reserved for a wheelchair.
It has been decided to consider all vehicles alike since there was no information avail-
able, knowing also that differentiating the typology of the vehicles would have increased
substantially the complexity of the problem.
Vehicle speed
To calculate the time that occurs travelling from one node to another,
it is necessary to know the speed of the vehicles. To limit the complexity of the problem,
the speed was assumed to be constant at 50 km/h. Since the dataset used for testing the
algorithm describes an urban area, composed by a variety of different roads with different
speed limits, an educated guess drove the decision of this parameter. A more advanced
version of the algorithm could attempt to resolve this approximation by considering the
specific speed limit for every road as well as the probability of incurring in a traffic jam
or street works.
Building all requests with two legs: forward trip and backward trip
It has
been assumed that all clients would request both transportation to their destination,
and transportation back where they started. This assumption has been made to avoid
the creation of two different groups of methods in the code, one for each type of request.
It is arguable to say that working with two-legs requests is generally more complex
than working with only requests that have one leg, since more trips in total have to be
handled. Also, since the service in analysis is intended to help people with disabilities,
it is quite probable that a client would request both trips, therefore it is possible to
consider realistic the assumption that most of the clients would ask also for the travel
back.
Reducing the day in two hours
In order to simulate the creation of the requests as
if they were collected by a call center, it was necessary to how the calls are distributed
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Distance matrix
25
during a the time span of an entire day. Since testing and tuning are very time consuming
operations that requires to solve the problem several times, running the program for a full
day would have been prohibitive. To overcome this issue, it has been decided to shrink
the day and fit it into two hours. The daily number of requests have been downsized to
be comparable to the two-hours day, as well as the distribution of the calls during the
day.
Refreshing requests every ten seconds
To simulate the real time behaviour of the
problem, it has been decided to introduce a time dependant loop in the code. Every
ten seconds, the program updates the current situation with a new number of incoming
clients, and deleting the clients that have already been served. The amount of seconds set
for the loop was decided considering the time that is needed by Dijkstra and Local Search
combined to give acceptable results, while also taking into account the responsiveness
that such algorithm must guarantee.
4.2
Distance matrix
As described in section 4.1, it has been decided to build a symmetric distance matrix.
This way, for every request was only necessary to calculate the distances of the forward
trip and reuse those same distances also for the returning trip. Since it has been decided
to divide the day in many short period of time (10 seconds, to simulate incoming calls
from clients), it is possible to update the distance matrix only once at every period. In
each of those periods, a random number of requests is taken in consideration, calculating
therefore all the distances only for a limited amount of nodes at the time.
At each period, every node of every request were saved in a list. Every element of
that list has been used as starting node in the Dijkstra’s algorithm. In a separate list
all nodes encountered so far have been saved. This list has been used in Dijkstra as list
of destinations.
Since it was assumed that every client had both a forward and backward trip –
and that the road network can be approximated to a bi-directed graph – all distances
concerning the backward trip were not calculated using Dijkstra, but inferred instead
from the forward trip and rearranged as needed to cut down computation time.
One of the main issues encountered is the fact that the implementation of the Dijkstra
that has been used takes a significant amount of time to calculate all distances. This
amount of time is not fixed, and it has been noticed to increase over time as long as
the algorithm gets to the end of the run. This is due to the fact that the Dijkstra’s
algorithm has been modified so that, given a starting node and a list of destination
nodes, the search of the minimum distance continues until the shortest path for every
node in the destination list is found. Since there is no way to anticipate which distances
will be relevant, it is necessary to store them all and keep them updated any time new
nodes are inserted in the algorithm. Doing so, every time a new client makes a requests,
it is mandatory to calculate all distances between the new client’s pickup node and all
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Implementation
the other nodes that are already present in the distance matrix. This influences the
calculation times because the longer the destination list is, the higher the amount of
computations become, increasing therefore the calculation time.
4.3
Multithreading
From the early stages of the development of the algorithm, it has been noticed that
building the distance matrix was the most time consuming operation – as explained
previously in this section. In the way the Dijkstra’s algorithm has been implemented,
it has been noted that the running times for every iteration were constantly increasing
a little. With the objective of performing the calculation of the distance and the local
search procedure within a 10 seconds frame, it is crucial to be able to calculate as many
distances as possible in the shortest amount of time. In fact, all the time not spent
in calculating distances, is used in the local search, and more swaps can be performed,
consequently increasing the quality of the search.
For every ten seconds update in the main loop of the program, Dijkstra’s algorithm
is called several times – two times for every request. For every update of the situation,
it is possible to collect all the information regarding the incoming requests. Knowing all
the nodes that are involved in the new cycle of the program makes possible to update
the list of all nodes involved so far, consequently allowing to parallelize the distances
calculation process. One of the crucial aspects of parallelization is to have functions that
do not depend one another, so that their processes can be calculated at the same time
by the different cores in the CPU.
The time spent by the operating system managing multiple threads in the same
moment is then regained in solving multiple instances concurrently.
The CPU used
for testing have available eight logical cores, so it was possible to calculate up to eight
Dijkstra’s instances at the same time. With the right setup and adequate resources, it
is possible extend the number of Dijkstra’s instances at will, possibly never incurring in
the situation of being forced to solve them in sequence.
4.4
The program developed – Pseudo code
In this section a thorough description of the implementation is presented. In Algorithm
3 is illustrated the pseudo code, showing the most relevant procedure that have been
implemented.
==PAGE:35==
4.4 The program developed – Pseudo code
27
Algorithm 3 The implementation of the algorithm developed
1: INITIALIZATION
2: α
3: Temperature = Initial Temperature
4: main_counter = 0
5: best_solution = list()
6: best_value = ∞
7: distance_matrix = matrix()
8: while request list is not empty do
9:
control = True
10:
control2 = True
11:
while time.time() - lap < 10 do
12:
lap = time.time()
13:
if control then
14:
main_counter += 1
15:
control = False
16:
if best_solution is not empty then
17:
DELETE SERVED TRIPS
18:
end if
In the initialization (line 1) are grouped all the starting procedure to run the code,
such as importing the libraries, reading the edgelist file and store it in a dictionary for
quick access to every edge, reading all the request files that has been generated, and
setting some parameters.
After the initialization, the parameters for the simulated annealing procedure are set.
The best_solution list variable is created empty and the best_value variable is set to
infinity – since we are minimizing. The distance_matrix is also initialized empty.
To loop throughout the day, a while cycle has been implemented (line 11). The
exit condition of this cycle are that the list of request might be empty. This is a viable
option in the developed algorithm because the goal is to serve all the requests stored in
the request_list. In a real environment, this exit condition should be set with a time
limit of 24 or more hours in order to terminate the run of the algorithm at the end of
the day.
Two binary control variables are initialized to ensure that, later in the program,
certain operation are run only once. A second while loop is implemented (line 11) to
simulate the real time incoming of calls from customers that intend to use the service. It
has been decided to break this loop every ten seconds to restrict all calculations within
this time limit.
The delete served trips function is enclosed in an if statement, so that it is
called only when there are trips in that has to be deleted. As the name of the function
suggests, it scans the best solution in search of trips that have been served already, and
it removes them. This is done before local search, so that the swap function does not
trade places with trips that do not exist anymore.
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Implementation
A variable named main_counter (line 14) counts how many time the inner while
loop is entered (it increases its value only once every time the loop is entered due to the
binary control variable). As it is described in chapter 5, every request has an attribute
named timecall that represent the time in which a request is submitted. A for loop
(line 20 - 23) cycles over every request in the request list, then selects and removes all
requests that has the timecall lower than 120×main_count. The value 120 represents
the number of real seconds that the algorithm is simulating. All the requests that are
selected in this loop are stored in a list named incoming_requests.
Another for loop (line 24 - 26) cycles all the requests in the incoming_request list so
that the create new vehicle function can create the vehicles necessary to receive all
the new clients that booked a ride. The update distance matrix function (line 27)
gather all the nodes belonging to the newly come trips and enlist them together with
all the nodes that has been encountered so far. Then, the Dijkstra’s algorithm is called
twice for every request (since the nodes that denote a trip are two) and is solved with
the multithreading technique. The results are then gathered and the distance_matrix
is updated. After that, the update best solution function retrieve the best solution
of the previous iteration (that has been skimmed from the served tips) and add to it all
the new vehicles just created.
19:
for request[timecall] < 120 * main_count do
20:
incoming_request.append(request)
21:
request.pop()
22:
end for
23:
for request in incoming_request do
24:
CREATE NEW VEHICLE
25:
end for
26:
UPDATE DISTANCE MATRIX (multithrading)
27:
UPDATE BEST SOLUTION (append new vehicles to best solution)
28:
if control2 then
29:
control2 = False
30:
INITIAL EVALUATION −→best_value
31:
incumbent_solution = best_solution
32:
incumbent_value = best_value
33:
end if
34:
end if
An if statement (line 29) checks if it is the first time that the while loop is cycling,
and in that case the initial evaluation function is called to evaluate the quality of
the solution, updating the value of best_value. Best_solution and best_value are then
copied into the two variables incumbent_solution and incumbent_value.
At this point the simulated annealing procedure can start.
The while loop will
continue to cycle skipping all the preliminary instructions. The incumbent_solution
and incumbent_value variables are copied into new_solution and new_value. The swap
==PAGE:37==
4.4 The program developed – Pseudo code
29
function (line 37)is called and modifies the variable new_solution, that is immediately
evaluated storing the result in new_value, and compared with incumbent_value by
calculating their difference, that is stored in the variable delta_value.
An if statement checks if the delta_value is a negative number(line 40). If it is,
the new_solution and the new_value become the incumbent_solution and the incum-
bent_value. If new_value is also lesser than the best_value, a new best solution is
found and the corresponding variables best_solution and best_values are updated. If
the delta_value is non negative instead (line 47) the probability function calculates
the probability acceptance of the worsening solution, as explained in Equation 3.17, and
if it is accepted, incumbent_value and incumbent_solution are updated.
Finally, the temperature is multiplied with the cooling factor α (line 51). At the end
of both the while loops, best_value and best_solution are printed and the program
finishes its run.
35:
new_solution = incumbent_solution
36:
new_value = incumbent_value
37:
SWAP FUNCTION (new_solution)
38:
new_value = EVALUATE (new_solution)
39:
delta_value = new_value - incumbent_value
40:
if delta_value < 0 then
41:
incumbent_value = new_value
42:
incumbent_solution = new_solution
43:
if new_value < best_value then
44:
best_solution = new_solution
45:
best_value = new_value
46:
end if
47:
else if PROB(delta_value, temperature) > random.randrange(0, 1) then
48:
incumbent_value = new_value
49:
incumbent_solution = new_solution
50:
end if
51:
temperature = temperature * α
52:
end while
53: end while
54:
55: print(best_solution)
56: print(best_value)
==PAGE:38==
30
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
Data
In this section all the dataset that has been used in the developing of the program are
presented. These datasets represent the road network and the requests database.
Road data are usually managed through a format known as GIS, geographic infor-
mation system. However, those files collect a remarkable amount of data, most of which
is not relevant for the sake of this thesis, and generally quite complicated to handle.
For this reason, it has been decided to rely on an edgelist type of file, that represent a
road network in the form of a collection of arcs connecting two spatial points. In the
data used for this thesis, every entry in the edgelist file represents a segment of a road
confined by two intersections, and every node represent an intersection or the end of a
street.
5.1
Edgelist
The road network graph used for the development and the testing of the program repre-
sent all the streets of the New York metropolitan area, also known as the Tri-state area.
The data has been downloaded from the Figshare data repository1. Since the challenge
of this work is to be able to apply this framework on a nationwide scale level, the size
of the graph was the feature that drove the choice.
The graph is composed of 1.246.342 arcs connecting 448.792 nodes. Unfortunately
parts of this dataset were not connected to the others, constituting therefore sub-graphs.
A thorough scan of the graph has been conducted in order to remove all the not connected
nodes, resulting in a reduced graph of 914.389 arcs and 334.930 nodes.
This graph is constituted by a wide variety of roads that have different characteristics,
such as number of lines, speed limit, one way turns, one way roads. As explained in the
previous chapter in section 4.1, many approximation has been adopted, and therefore
it was not necessary to resort to such means. Nonetheless, as a proof of concept, it is
possible to model those characteristics in the graph by creating fictitious nodes and arcs.
In Figure 5.1, an example on how it is possible to model a specific feature of a road. In
the figure, it is represented an intersection of two roads with a one way turn (left), and
the graph modelling of such a feature (right). In the example, considering a starting
graph in which all arcs are bi-directed, the edge connecting note 3 to node 5 has been
modified to be uni-directional, and a new arc connecting node 5 to node 4 has been
added, with cost equal to the sum of the edges that are cut this way.
1https://figshare.com/articles/Urban_Road_Network_Data/2061897/1
==PAGE:40==
32
5 Data
Figure 5.1: Example: modelling a one way turn in a graph.
5.2
Request creation and handling
To develop and test the programs, a reasonable number of requests has been created.
Since little information was available regarding the clients, several assumption has been
made – as shown previously in this section. It has been decided to generate a total
number 1′650 requests, divided in categories according to the distance between the
starting point and the destination, trying to consider and simulate all the possibilities
that can happen also in reality. Since the service is mainly intended for elderly and
disabled, very short distances has also been considered. In Figure 5.2 is illustrated the
distribution of the requests, categorized according to the travel distance.
Figure 5.2: Number of requests divided according to the distances.
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Request creation and handling
33
Since there was no information regarding the distances travelled by the vehicles for
the service in analysis, taxi statistics has been used as a reference2. However, the two
services are meant for different categories of people with different needs, therefore it
was not possible to use directly those statistics. An educated guess has been made to
adapt the taxi statistics to the DARP. Since it is quite common that disabled and elderly
encounter issues even to cover short distances, a relatively high amount of requests with
very short trips – 1 km – has been generated. The requests with very long travel distance
– 100 km – has been inserted mainly to test the behaviour of the program. The remaining
requests has been created roughly following the distribution in the statistics for taxis.
Every request has been generated with the following layout:
• Starting Node
• Ending Node
• Service Time
• Starting Node X coordinate
• Starting Node Y coordinate
• Ending Node X coordinate
• Ending Node Y coordinate
• Call time
Starting Node and Ending Node
The requests has been generated selecting a ran-
dom starting node in the graph, and then searching for a random destination node that
suited the desired distance. This decision was made to accommodate the possibility that
virtually every node in the graph can be selected both as starting point and destination.
Service Time and Call Time
To every requests has been added two different time
attributes. The first attribute indicates the time in which a certain request must be
served; the second attribute indicates the time in which the call to book a request has
been made. Both the attributes are measured in seconds from midnight.
To simplify calculations, Service Time always indicates the time in which a client
must arrive at destination, whether it is a forward or backward trip. It was simpler to
model the problem in this manner, since all calls have an uniform structure, and there
is no need to differentiate between time for departure and time at destination. It is
possible however, in a real situation, to allow the client instead to indicate at what time
he would like to be picked up at the moment of the call, and then estimate the time
at destination knowing the distance of the trip and assuming a constant speed of the
vehicle.
2https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/642759/taxi-private-hire-vehicles-2017.pdf
==PAGE:42==
34
5 Data
Since no information was given regarding the distribution of the requests during a
day, statistics regarding taxis has been used once more [21]. It has been noted that most
of the calls in a day occur early in the morning and late in the afternoon, probably to
accommodate the need of workers to get to their workplaces. Again, this hardly can
be related to elderly and disabled, therefore another educate guess was made to better
fit the requests to a more realistic situation. Most of the evening and late night calls
has been moved to the morning and the early afternoon, to reflect the average lifestyle
of an elder. In Figure 5.3 is illustrated the distribution of the requests in the dataset
generated during a day.
Figure 5.3: The distribution of the request during a day will be inserted here.
The Call Time attribute has been calculated by subtracting to the Service Time a
random number in the range that space between half an hour and three hours.
Even if, in most of the cases, it is acceptable to be a little late a destination, it has
been decided to be strict on the arrival time at destination to simplify the calculations.
On the contrary, it has been decided to allow some slackness in estimating the departure
time, calculating it as an interval. One of the values of the interval is the difference
between the Service Time and the duration of the trip. For the second value of the
interval, a 20% slackness on the trip duration has been used, so that short trips have a
strict interval, while long trips have a more broad one. The reasons for this lay on the
fact that, generally, one is more inclined to wait or travel for a little longer if the trip he
has requested is long, while he is less willing to wait or travel more than necessary if the
requested trip is short – on a two hours long trip, being picked up two hours and a half
before the specified Service Time to possibly serve other clients is basically irrelevant,
but the same reasoning hardly can be applied for a customer that only has to travel for
five minutes.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 6
Results
In this chapter are described the parameter tuning procedure and the results obtained.
As indicated in chapter 3, the Simulate Annealing makes use of two parameters whose
value has to be tailored to the problem. Once different combinations of parameters have
been tested, the two most promising are selected and used to calculate the final results.
The parameter tuning procedure has been conducted on the static version of the
DARPTW. That is because this version of the problem has been developed to establish
a benchmark for the dynamic counterpart, and require less time and effort to be solved.
The parameters tuned in the static problem have been also used in the dynamic.
The results for both problems are illustrated and analyzed.
6.1
Parameter tuning
The simulated annealing algorithm require the tuning of two different parameters: the
initial temperature and the temperature decay. Four different initial temperatures have
been tested. Those values have been selected considering the order of magnitude of the
values that the variables in the program may assume.
To calculate the the value of a solution in the developed algorithm, two factors have
been considered: the number of vehicles and the distance every vehicle has to travel.
The objective is to minimize both factors, focusing mostly on the number of vehicles. It
has been assigned a cost of 100′000′000 for every vehicle in the solution, and a value of 1
for every meter travelled by a vehicle. The value for every car is that high to prevent any
interference between the two costs: it is very unlikely in facts that all vehicles combined
could travel for a hundred thousands kilometers in a day. This way, it is possible to keep
separated the two costs, minimize them both, and prioritizing the reduction of the total
number of vehicles over the total distance travelled in a day1.
The four initial temperature values considered are: 50 million, 100 million, 500
million, and 1 billion.
As in the static DARPTW there are no time limitations to calculate the solution,
a fixed amount of swaps were used as limit. Those limits were set according to the
number of swaps that the program developed for the dynamic DARPTW is roughly
able to handle at every refresh of requests.
1For example, having 10 cars that travels 1′000 km each, would result in an objective value of
1′000′010′000. Having instead 9 cars that travels 2′000 km each, would result in an objective value of
900′018′000. Since the second solution has a lower objective value, it is considered to be better than
the first one, even though the total distance travelled is higher.
==PAGE:44==
36
6 Results
The temperature decay (α) parameters selected are: 0.99, 0.98, 0.97, 0.96, and 0.95.
Since the number of swaps is fixed, it has been decided to select relatively slow cooling
rates that lower the outcome Equation 3.17 to values close to zero after several hundreds
of iterations.
As the parameter tuning procedure is very time consuming, a restricted amount six
runs of the algorithm for every combination of the parameters to tune has been con-
ducted. Since selecting the pair of values associated to best run is not a good indicator,
the average performance of every combination of parameters over all the runs has been
evaluated. To do so, two indicators are calculated: the average gap and the standard
deviation. In (Equation 6.1), I represents the total amount of runs the code has been
launched, zi indicates the result of the i-th run, while z∗represents the best value ob-
tained in those runs; in (Equation 6.2), Ei is the average gap percentage of the i-th run,
and µ is the average value of the gaps. The former indicates the average distance, in
percentage, between the lowest result obtained and the results of every run. The lowest
the percentage, the more consistent the parameters are on average. The latter indicate
how scattered the results obtained are from the average. The lowest the value is, the
more reliable are the parameters.
E = 1
I
I
∑
i=1
(zi −z∗)
z∗
· 100
(6.1)
S =
√∑I
i=1(Ei −µ)2
I
(6.2)
In Table 6.1, Table 6.2, and Table 6.3 are illustrated the results of average gap and
standard deviation, for every combination of the two parameters, for the three different
swap limits tested. In every table, values of E are percentages; the initial temperature
parameters are expressed in million.
In the choice of the best pair of parameters, more relevance has been attributed to
the standard deviation. No particular methodology has been used in the selection, as it
was clear at fist sight which one was the best combination in Table 6.1 and Table 6.2,
as in both tables the values selected were the absolute lowest. In Table 6.3, the choice
has been mostly driven by the average gap, as the lowest standard deviation in the table
was associated by a not particularly good average gap value.
Table 6.1: Average gap and standard deviation for 1000 swaps limit.
T
50M
100M
500M
1000M
α
E
S
E
S
E
S
E
S
0.95
1.80
0.88
2.53
2.16
4.49
2.55
0.74
0.68
0.96
1.71
1.11
2.53
2.16
4.33
2.97
2.14
0.93
0.97
2.58
1.42
1.27
1.30
2.67
1.21
3.33
1.79
0.98
4.00
1.86
2.02
1.00
2.20
1.65
4.57
2.28
0.99
3.01
1.78
3.14
1.83
2.14
1.30
2.79
2.11
==PAGE:45==
6.1 Parameter tuning
37
Table 6.2: Average gap and standard deviation for 10000 swaps limit.
T
50M
100M
500M
1000M
α
E
S
E
S
E
S
E
S
0.95
1.74
1.28
1.58
1.19
2.61
1.37
4.09
2.16
0.96
2.44
2.04
1.87
1.52
2.04
1.16
2.48
1.73
0.97
2.46
2.63
2.19
2.12
3.83
2.90
2.23
1.76
0.98
1.15
1.09
2.14
1.95
1.58
1.50
2.32
2.08
0.99
0.99
0.58
1.01
1.26
3.72
2.29
2.34
1.90
Table 6.3: Average gap and standard deviation for 25000 swaps limit.
T
50M
100M
500M
1000M
α
E
S
E
S
E
S
E
S
0.95
4.20
2.33
2.06
1.77
3.36
1.81
2.22
1.41
0.96
2.20
1.19
2.24
2.18
5.28
1.72
3.01
2.38
0.97
3.17
2.81
0.79
1.11
4.20
2.20
1.23
1.27
0.98
3.36
2.05
1.57
1.19
2.85
1.98
5.39
2.86
0.99
2.33
2.13
3.59
2.09
2.20
0.53
2.54
1.53
In the three tables (Table 6.1, Table 6.2, and Table 6.3), the combination of parameter
selected resulted to be different for every number of swaps. In order to decide which pair
to use in the full run of the algorithm, another table has been created by calculating the
average of every combination in the three tables. The result is illustrated in Table 6.4.
Table 6.4: Average values of the three settings.
T
50M
100M
500M
1000M
α
E
S
E
S
E
S
E
S
0.95
2.58
1.50
2.06
1.71
3.49
1.91
2.35
1.42
0.96
2.12
1.44
2.21
1.96
3.89
1.95
2.54
1.68
0.97
2.74
2.28
1.42
1.51
3.57
2.10
2.27
1.60
0.98
2.84
1.67
1.91
1.38
2.21
1.71
4.09
2.41
0.99
2.11
1.50
2.58
1.72
2.68
1.37
2.56
1.85
Similarly to the situation explained before, the choice of the best pair has been driven
by looking first at the best values of standard deviation, and then deciding according to
the average gap. The parameters selected are 100′000′000 for initial temperature, and
0.97 for temperature decay.
==PAGE:46==
38
6 Results
6.2
Results
6.2.1
Static DARPTW
After having tuned the parameters, the algorithm have been run five times with the
selected initial temperature and temperature decay, limiting the number of swaps at
25′000. The number of requests (clients) considered is set to the maximum, that is 1′650.
In Table 6.5 the results of each run is presented. The objective value is the sum of every
vehicle in the solution multiplied by the cost of each vehicle, plus the cost of every route
in the solution. In the table are highlighted the number of vehicles necessary to serve
all the clients, the time necessary to complete every run, expressed in seconds, and the
improvement of the solution from the lower bound in percentage.
Table 6.5: Results for static DARPTW serving 1650 clients, with 25’000 number of
swaps, initial temperature at 100 million, and temperature decay at 0.97.
1st run
2nd run
3rd run
Objective value
67′460′115′564
69′059′709′455
68′260′229′232
Number of vehicles
674
690
682
Time elapsed (sec)
15′356
14′943
15′442
Improvement (%)
59.15
58.18
58.67
4th run
5th run
average
Objective value
67′560′050′316
67′460′812′984
67′960′183′510.2
Number of vehicles
675
674
679
Time elapsed (sec)
15′067
15′473
15′256.2
Improvement(%)
59.09
59.15
58.85
The average has been calculated to summarize all runs in a single value. The im-
provement from the initial solution amount at roughly 60%, meaning than the number
of cars required has been reduced by more than half. The average running time to solve
the instances is a bit more than four hours, and it is almost entirely used to calculate
the distance matrix.
6.2.2
Dynamic DARPTW
Presenting the results for the dynamic DARPTW is not easy. That is because at every
step of the algorithm, the dataset changes. In fact, every ten seconds, some new clients
are taken into account and some clients are deleted because their request has been
accomplished (as previously mentioned in chapter 4).
The same parameters selected during the tuning procedure have been set, and a total
of five runs of the algorithm developed have been launched. The average of the results
has then been calculated, and a graph has been drawn to represent the solution.
==PAGE:47==
6.2 Results
39
Figure 6.1: Graphical representation of the solution for the dynamic DARPTW. In
blue, the number of cars that are currently in use at every period of time
throughout a day. In red, the cumulative amount of clients that have been
served during the day. In yellow, the cumulative amount of clients that are
being served during the day (clients served and clients yet to be served).
In Figure 6.1 the solution for the dynamic DARPTW is illustrated. The X axis
represent the time in a day, while the Y axis represents the number of clients and the
number of vehicles. It is possible to represents clients and vehicles on the same axis
since the lower bound solution consider one vehicle for one client, therefore the scale is
alike. In blue are represented the number of vehicles active at every given time. It is
possible to note how that curve starts to ramp up around 6 AM and to decrease after
12 AM. This behaviour reflects the distribution of the requests during a day illustrated
in Figure 5.3. The number of cars active in the early hours are barely lower than the
number of clients that require the service. This can be considered a normal behaviour
as the pool of request to optimize is limited, and it is likely that most of the request are
unfeasible together. As the number of requests increases, also the number of active cars
gets higher, therefore the likelihood that some of the requests may be merged.
In red is represented the cumulative amount of clients that have been served already
by the service. It can bee seen how the number of clients served rapidly increases as the
number of vehicles increases.
In yellow is indicated the cumulative amount of clients at every given time in the day.
This represent the sum of the clients that have been served plus the number of active
clients. With active clients are intended those clients whose request has been taken and
that are waiting to be served.
It is difficult to understand the quality of the solution from this graph, therefore a
different one has been drawn.
In Figure 6.2 put in comparison the number of vehicles (in blue) with the number of
active clients (in red). The X axis represent the time of the day; the Y axis represents the
number of clients and the number of vehicles. The same consideration on the duality of
==PAGE:48==
40
6 Results
Figure 6.2: The distribution of the request during a day will be inserted here.
this axis still holds from the previous graph. From this graph it is possible to understand
better the performance of the algorithm developed. It is possible to consider the red
curve as the lower bound solution, in which one vehicle can only serve one client. As
expected, whenever the number of clients is limited, the algorithm struggle in optimizing
significantly the service for the same reasons described above. It is possible to note a
considerable improvement once the requests start to peak.
The number of vehicles
throughout the day ranges from a minimum of 12 early in the morning, to a maximum
of 377 around noon, and with an average of 120. The number of active clients ranges
from a minimum of 14 in the morning, to a maximum of 542 in the peak hour, with an
average of 177.
To compare the quality of the solution with the static DARPTW, a third graph has
been produced relating the number of active clients to the number of vehicle at any
given time, calculating the percentage improvement at every requests refresh. This has
been possible since the lower bound can be directly liked to the number of active clients.
Figure 6.3: The distribution of the request during a day will be inserted here.
==PAGE:49==
6.2 Results
41
In Figure 6.3 is represented the percentage improvement from the lower bound solu-
tion. It is possible to see how, for the same reason previously explained, the improve-
ment is limited in the early hours, then rumps up when the peak of requests occurs.
The improvement percentage ranges form a minimum of 8.7% early in the morning, to
a maximum of 39.9% in the late afternoon, with an average 20.7%.
The running times of the dynamic DARPTW, on average, were just below five hours
(17′769 seconds). Due to the higher complexity of this version of the problem compared
to the static version, this result it is considered to be in line with the expectations.
However, it must be said that the algorithm should end its run after only two hours, but
the non optimal implementation of some parts of the code prevented this to happen –
mostly Dijkstra. As already mentioned in chapter 4, it has been decide to break the two
hours limits since the developed program stands as a proof of concept.
Comparing the improvement percentage of the two version of the DARPTW, it is
clear that, as expected, the static version performed the best. That is because having all
the information in advance allows the simulated annealing to optimize using the entire
pool of requests. The always changing and limited size pool of requests in the dynamic
DARPTW limits substantially the performance of the algorithm. That is because the
the requests cannot be taken into account anymore for any optimization once they have
been served, and cannot be swapped by the swap function. Having all the information
beforehand allows the algorithm to operate on all the requests, since none has been
served. However, being able to have in the dynamic algorithm an average improvement
half the size of the average improvement of the static can be considered a success.
It is not possible to directly compare the objective values of the two versions of the
problem. That is because in the static version the entirety of the requests are considered
and a certain number of vehicles has been found. This same situation also happens in
the dynamic version, but several times on a much smaller scale, without the possibility
to keep track of the vehicles that gets deleted and created.
Due to the non trivial
complexity of such a feature, in the current state of the algorithm, it is not possible to
calculate an objective value for the dynamic problem that is directly comparable to the
value of the static problem.
==PAGE:50==
42
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
7.1
Accomplishments
The goal of this thesis was to develop a framework for the dynamic Dial-a-Ride Problem
with Times Windows that can optimize, in real time, a non specified number of requests
from clients on a real road network of substantial dimension. This work is to be consid-
ered as a proof of concept, as the author does not have a background as a programmer,
that is required in order to create a corporate program with optimized performance.
The work has been conducted developing two different algorithms to study two dif-
ferent version of the problem: the static DARPTW and the dynamic DARPTW. The
static DARPTW has been studied in order to create a benchmark to understand the
quality of the solution of the dynamic DARPTW, as the development of the latter was
the core contribution of this thesis.
The static problem has been studied by solving the instance in analysis with a pure
simulate annealing metaheuristic. A parameter tuning procedure has been conducted
to select the most reliable initial parameters.
The dynamic problem has then been
studied, using the same methods developed for the static and implementing the real
time reception and dispatch of requests. The same data and the same initial parameters
were used.
In the static version, it has been considered as lower bound the solution corresponding
to assigning a unique vehicle to every client in the dataset. In the dynamic version the
same principle has been considered, but a different lower bound has been considered
based on the number of active clients at any given moment. An unsuccessful attempt to
build an heuristic to create a better lower bound solution has been made, but due to the
complexity of the problem, not many attempt has been conducted. Because of the low
quality of the lower bound, a substantial improvement in the optimization is expected.
The results of the static version showed an average improvement of roughly 60% over
the lower bound solution. These results have been used as a benchmark to study the
result of the dynamic version, since the dataset has been generated and therefore there
are no other results available with which it is possible to do some comparisons.
The results of the dynamic version showed an average improvement of almost 30%
over a whole day run simulation. These results, in line with the expectations, had a
lower improvement from the lower bound solution compared to the static case, due to
the different and more complex nature of the problem.
The results for the dynamic problem can be considered a success, as the goal of this
work was to create a viable framework for a real time optimization on a big network has
==PAGE:52==
44
7 Conclusion
been met, and some substantial improvement has been reported. Real time calculations
of distances between two nodes can be a viable option for dealing with large network
instances, and can be applied in dynamic situation where part of the information cannot
be known beforehand.
The only side node regards the running times: even though they can be considered
acceptable, it was not possible to end the run within the established time limits. However,
there is room for improvements regarding both the hardware that has been used, an the
implementations of some crucial parts of the code that could greatly increase the overall
performance, meeting that way the time limits.
7.2
Future works
Due to the lack of experience of the author in programming, parts of the code developed
may be improved substantially. As it has been noticed during the test runs, the imple-
mentation of Dijkstra’s algorithm must be improved. A better approach on checking
whether or not all destination nodes has been evaluated must be thought. Also, a lower
level programming language than Python should be considered to greatly increase the
calculation performance.
The use of a lower level programming language could also greatly increase the number
of swaps that are performed every at every cycle of the algorithm, resulting in a better
probable further general improvement of the solution.
For the test runs, a laptop computer has been used with a limited amount of cores
in the CPU and a limited processor frequency. A dedicated hardware with enough cores
and speed could substantially improve the performance of the framework, calculating
in parallel every necessary instance of Dijkstra’s algorithm, cutting greatly the running
times and leaving more seconds for the local search to find better solutions.
Some features can also be added to improve the quality of the solution, such as
implementing another type of swap that trades places, in specific situations, between
single legs of a trip – instead of only considering clients. This could help refine the
solution, and could lead to the exploration of some other parts of the solution area that
are currently inaccessible.
An improvement to the study of the solution for the dynamic DARPTW regards the
implementation of a feature to keep track of the vehicle during the whole time span of
the run, in order to be able to count when and where on the graph vehicles are eliminated
and created.
Some future works that do not regards improvements in the implementation could
consider the use of different metaheuristic approach that can possibly lead to better
solutions.
More test could also be done varying the typology of graph: all tests have been
conducted on a very dense and generally well connected network such as the New York
metropolitan area. It could be interesting to study the performance of the framework in
situation in which nodes are very far apart on from the others, such as the countryside,
==PAGE:53==
7.2 Future works
45
or a network with both features, such as a medium or low populated area, with only
some and separated cities.
==PAGE:54==
46
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
Ravindra K Ahuja, Thomas L Magnanti, and James B Orlin. Network flows. Else-
vier, 2014.
[2]
Ravindra K Ahuja et al. “Faster algorithms for the shortest path problem”. In:
Journal of the ACM (JACM) 37.2 (1990), pages 213–223.
[3]
Andrea Attanasio et al. “Parallel tabu search heuristics for the dynamic multi-
vehicle dial-a-ride problem”. In: Parallel Computing 30.3 (2004), pages 377–387.
[4]
J Andreas Bærentzen et al. Guide to computational geometry processing: founda-
tions, algorithms, and methods. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
[5]
Gerardo Berbeglia, Jean-François Cordeau, and Gilbert Laporte. “Dynamic pickup
and delivery problems”. In: European journal of operational research 202.1 (2010),
pages 8–15.
[6]
Edmund K Burke, Graham Kendall, et al. Search methodologies. Springer, 2005.
[7]
Geoff Clarke and John W Wright. “Scheduling of vehicles from a central depot to
a number of delivery points”. In: Operations research 12.4 (1964), pages 568–581.
[8]
Jean-François Cordeau. “A branch-and-cut algorithm for the dial-a-ride problem”.
In: Operations Research 54.3 (2006), pages 573–586.
[9]
Jean-François Cordeau and Gilbert Laporte. “The dial-a-ride problem: models and
algorithms”. In: Annals of operations research 153.1 (2007), pages 29–46.
[10]
George Dantzig, Ray Fulkerson, and Selmer Johnson. “Solution of a large-scale
traveling-salesman problem”. In: Journal of the operations research society of Amer-
ica 2.4 (1954), pages 393–410.
[11]
Edsger W Dijkstra. “A note on two problems in connexion with graphs”. In: Nu-
merische mathematik 1.1 (1959), pages 269–271.
[12]
Burak Eksioglu, Arif Volkan Vural, and Arnold Reisman. “The vehicle routing
problem: A taxonomic review”. In: Computers & Industrial Engineering 57.4 (2009),
pages 1472–1483.
[13]
Wei Fan and Randy B Machemehl. “Using a simulated annealing algorithm to
solve the transit route network design problem”. In: Journal of transportation
engineering 132.2 (2006), pages 122–132.
[14]
Lester Ingber. “Very fast simulated re-annealing”. In: (1989).
==PAGE:56==
48
Bibliography
[15]
Scott Kirkpatrick, C Daniel Gelatt, and Mario P Vecchi. “Optimization by simu-
lated annealing”. In: science 220.4598 (1983), pages 671–680.
[16]
Harilaos N Psaraftis. “A dynamic programming solution to the single vehicle many-
to-many immediate request dial-a-ride problem”. In: Transportation Science 14.2
(1980), pages 130–154.
[17]
KS Ruland and EY Rodin. “The pickup and delivery problem: Faces and branch-
and-cut algorithm”. In: Computers & mathematics with applications 33.12 (1997),
pages 1–13.
[18]
Martin WP Savelsbergh and Marc Sol. “The general pickup and delivery problem”.
In: Transportation science 29.1 (1995), pages 17–29.
[19]
Harold Szu and Ralph Hartley. “Fast simulated annealing”. In: Physics letters A
122.3-4 (1987), pages 157–162.
[20]
Paolo Toth and Daniele Vigo. “Exact solution of the vehicle routing problem”. In:
Fleet management and logistics. Springer, 1998, pages 1–31.
[21]
Yazhe Wang, Baihua Zheng, and Ee-Peng Lim. “Understanding the effects of taxi
ride-sharing—A case study of Singapore”. In: Computers, Environment and Urban
Systems 69 (2018), pages 124–132.
[22]
Wei Zeng and Richard L Church. “Finding shortest paths on real road networks:
the case for A”. In: International journal of geographical information science 23.4
(2009), pages 531–543.
