==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
High Speed Consensus with
Trusted Execution Environments
Single Active Counter Byzantine Fault Tolerance
Koen Tange
Espoo, Finland 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
In recent years, Byzantine consensus algorithms have seen a surge in popularity with
the rise of Bitcoin and blockchain technology. A major problem that hampers adop-
tion of existing consensus algorithms in blockchain scenarios is their scalability. There
has been much research in the past years aiming to optimize these algorithms and
increase their efficiency.
For example, recent work has shown that voting rounds
present in many classical algorithms can be made drastically more efficient by the
use of message aggregation techniques.
Another trend is towards the usage of trusted hardware to increase performance
and lower resource requirements of these algorithms. Trusted hardware enables algo-
rithms to reduce the lower bound on the number of replicas from 3f + 1 to 2f + 1,
where f is the number of tolerated faults. Currently, all existing Byzantine consensus
algorithms either use no trusted hardware at all, or assume that all replicas have ac-
cess to the same trusted hardware. This leaves a gap in the design space, neglecting
scenarios where only some machines have access to trusted hardware.
In this work, we investigate the possibilities where only a subset of all replicas
has access to trusted hardware. We introduce the SACBFT framework, consisting of
two transformations that can be applied to existing Byzantine consensus protocols,
increasing their efficiency by allowing them to make use of trusted hardware that
exists in the system.
We apply the framework to PBFT and RePBFT to produce SACPBFT and
SACRePBFT respectively , and show how to apply the framework to other proto-
cols.
We also evaluate a proof-of-concept implementation of SACPBFT, showing
that it can dramatically reduce network usage and increase performance even when
only a single replica has access to trusted hardware.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Between the start of my Master’s programme and now, I have learned so much more
than I expected. Tasting the atmosphere and methods at two great universities has
broadened the perspective with which I look at academia, and I am grateful for having
been given the chance to do so.
I would like to thank my supervisors, N. Asokan and Nicola Dragoni for their
support, and giving me the opportunity to work on my thesis at the Secure Systems
group. Every day I felt like I learned something new, and being surrounded by such an
intelligent and stimulating group of people has been a great experience. In particular
I would like to thank my advisors, Lachlan Gunn and Jian Liu for their invaluable
feedback and guidance, ensuring that I always progressed in the right direction. I
would also like to thank Ricardo Vieitez and Fritz Alder for their suggestions and
help regarding technical matters.
Over the last two years I have made many new friends in both Aalto University and
DTU. I’d like to thank them for the many adventures and more generally providing
me with an amazing time, giving me the motivation to keep working but also teaching
me to balance work and life.
Finally, I am grateful to my parents for their never-ending stream of support, love,
and inspiration, which led me to pursue a Master’s degree in the first place, and got
me to where I am now – at the end of my thesis.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background and Preliminaries
3
2.1
Byzantine Fault Tolerance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Trusted Execution Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Multisignatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Problem description
17
3.1
Problem description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Fault tolerance goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Performance Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Framework
21
4.1
Design outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Applying SACBFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Examples of transformed protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Implementation
39
5.1
Cryptography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Key generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
Software structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Evaluation
47
6.1
Theoretical evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.2
Experimental evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7
Discussion
53
7.1
Fault tolerance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.2
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8
Related Work
57
9
Conclusion
59
Bibliography
61
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Distributed consensus has recently gained popularity with the advent of blockchain
technology. However, before Bitcoin [38] and blockchain as a paradigm existed, there
was already an entire field of research dedicated to consensus algorithms, with a
variety of protocols that facilitate distributed consensus in (often) closed groups of
machines.
These algorithms can be categorized according to their failure models. The first
group, the fail-stop model, assumes that participants either act correctly or crash. The
second group, the Byzantine fault model, assumes that failing participants can exhibit
arbitrary behavior.
Tolerating Byzantine failures is essential to some distributed
systems where safety is paramount, but proves to be a complex problem to solve
efficiently. For both failure modes there exist upper bounds on how many failures can
be tolerated in a system.
Some recent work in Byzantine fault-tolerant protocols assumes that each partic-
ipant has access to some piece of trusted hardware that can be expected to either
execute correctly or crash. These trusted components are then leveraged to contain
some functionality of participants, providing increased fault tolerance and raising the
upper bound on tolerated failures of the Byzantine fault model to that of the fail-stop
model.
There do not currently exist any protocols that make the assumption that only a
subset of the participants contain trusted hardware. In this thesis, we investigate this
model and introduce SACBFT, a framework that can transform existing protocols
into protocols that make use of the available trusted hardware to achieve improved
performance and fault tolerance.
1.1
Motivation
While Byzantine consensus protocols exist that leverage trusted hardware, all of these
require that every machine contains this trusted hardware.
This is not always a
realistic assumption.
For example, consider the scenario where machines in an existing consensus system
are gradually upgraded to more modern machines, which often have access to trusted
hardware. As long as not all machines are upgraded, it is currently impossible to run
consensus protocols that make use of this trusted hardware. A protocol that could
make use of the available trusted hardware could potentially increase performance
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
already after the first machines in the system are upgraded. Additionally, it would
lower the investment required to benefit from trusted hardware compared to existing
protocols when deploying a new system.
Other examples of scenarios where such a protocol could provide value can be
found in the areas of embedded systems and IoT1 devices.
In these areas, some
machines in a consensus system might have to be as lightweight as possible, and will
only contain a minimal set of low-end components. These machines can be constrained
on e.g. power consumption or weight. An example of such a scenario is one with a
drone fleet flying above a number of ground stations. These stations can have high-
end hardware with power-hungry processors, while the drones are more restricted in
their choice of hardware.
With the increased usage of embedded systems in vehicles (especially self-driving
cars), we see another use-case for consensus systems, which can aid in providing safety-
critical functionality such as emergency brakes when certain sensors detect an object
in the vehicles’ path. In cars, the various control systems are typically independent of
each other and communicate through special protocols. The control systems also have
variable hardware specifications, depending on their function. The heavier systems
could be equipped with trusted hardware, which can then be utilized in consensus
protocols.
Also for already existing protocols that rely on trusted hardware, there is a need for
some sort of transition protocol in order to deal with churn; old trusted components
in a system are likely to be broken, in which case a protocol should be able to get by
with relying only those machines that contain newer trusted hardware.
With these cases in mind, protocols capable of utilizing all trusted hardware avail-
able to the system (regardless of how many machines in the system contain trusted
hardware) could prove to be valuable choices.
1.2
Contribution
In this work we present Single Active Counter Byzantine Fault Tolerance (SACBFT),
a framework that provides transformations for existing, classical Byzantine consensus
protocols to make use of trusted hardware available to the system. Additionally, the
framework allows one to reduce network complexity of existing protocols from O(n2)
to O(n) by using message aggregation techniques to reduce the number of messages
sent in voting rounds.
We apply SACBFT to PBFT [12] and RePBFT [19] to produce SACPBFT and
SACRePBFT. We also provide instructions on how to apply SACBFT to other pro-
tocols.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of SACBFT, we developed a proof-of-concept
implementation of SACPBFT, and compare the performance of this protocol with
PBFT and Zyzzyva [35].
1Internet of Things
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Background and
Preliminaries
In order to understand the material discussed in this thesis, it is important to have
some background knowledge on relevant topics. This chapter summarizes the most
important ones.
2.1
Byzantine Fault Tolerance
A fundamental problem in the field of distributed systems is that of getting the in-
dividual parts of a distributed system to reach agreement when some parts of this
system might exhibit arbitrary behavior. This arbitrary behavior is known as Byzan-
tine behavior.
Many algorithms have been proposed to solve this problem, each
probing the trade-off between resilience and performance.
Before we look at these algorithms in more detail, we will introduce common
terms and concretely define the problem, allowing us to see where the complexity
comes from and why all practical algorithms have to make certain assumptions.
2.1.1
The Byzantine Generals Problem
The Byzantine Generals problem was introduced by Lamport, Shostak and Pease [36].
They describe the problem by using the example of a Byzantine army laying siege to
an enemy city. This city is so large that in order to surround it, the generals have to
split up the army into smaller groups, each led by one general. The generals have to
come up with a battle plan, but cannot leave their own soldiers, so they communicate
using messengers. These messengers carry written messages signed by the generals,
meaning that they cannot be forged, which would be possible if messengers delivered
messages orally.
The generals fear that some among them might be traitors however, so they wish
to communicate in a way that ensures the generals can still reach agreement despite
traitorous generals actively trying to sabotage them. Lamport et al. have shown that
it is possible to tolerate f traitors if and only if there are at least 3f + 1 generals in
total. In more abstract terms, the goal is that n processes reach consensus , in the
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Background and Preliminaries
presence of up to f Byzantine processes. Here “Byzantine” indicates the possibility
of arbitrary behavior, which includes coordinated malicious behavior.
This setting has two interesting properties: Firstly, it is a no-one-trusts-no-one
situation; it is unknown which processes are Byzantine, so processes have to operate
with the assumption that any other process might be faulty.
Secondly, there are
only two-party communication channels. This makes the problem more difficult, as
processes can equivocate, that is, send conflicting messages to different processes.
In the Byzantine generals example a traitor could tell general A to attack while
simultaneously telling general B to retreat.
2.1.2
Network model
Because the Byzantine Generals problem concerns remote processes communicating
with each other, the network model plays an important role in problem complexity.
In order to be applicable to realistic scenarios, we look at an asynchronous net-
work model. In this model, messages can get lost in transit, delayed, duplicated, or
delivered out of order.
Fischer, Lynch and Paterson [20] have shown that distributed consensus in a
completely asynchronous network model is not possible, because it is impossible to
detect the presence of even one unannounced process death.
We thus need to modify the asynchronous model and make it synchronous by
adding a synchrony assumption. Castro and Liskov introduced the weak synchrony
assumption [12], stating that the delay between a process sending a message and other
processes receiving this message cannot grow indefinitely.
The resulting network
model enables us to prove correctness of consensus algorithms, while maintaining
realistic assumptions on network conditions.
In addition to this, all communication channels in our model provide provide
transferable authentication. This means that every message sent through the channels
comes with an authentication token that allows anyone to verify the authenticity
(and integrity) of these messages. Thus, MACs cannot be used to implement this
authenticated channel, since they typically only provide authentication between two
parties, and verification requires knowledge of a shared secret. Digital signatures on
the other hand work fine, as verification requires knowledge of a public key. We require
transferable authentication as it is a precondition for providing non-equivocation [17].
2.1.3
BFT Algorithms
Byzantine fault tolerant(BFT) algorithms are distributed algorithms that are able
to reach consensus between n replicas in the presence of a prescribed number of
tolerable Byzantine faults f, where f ≤⌊n−1
3 ⌋. All algorithms we consider in this
work use the network model with the weak synchrony assumption as described in
section 2.1.2. Additionally, all algorithms discussed in this thesis are a form of state
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Byzantine Fault Tolerance
5
machine replication[46], and we will in the remainder of this thesis refer to processes
as replicas, as is standard in the literature.
Processes interacting with a BFT algorithm are called clients. They send request
messages to the system, and the system will perform deterministic operations specified
in these requests. Clients wait for a reply to arrive from the system, which contains
the results of their request.
Note that for some algorithms, the client requires a
certain amount of replies from individual replicas in the system in order to consider
a request to be completed. The complete process of a client sending a request, the
system processing it and sending a reply to the client is called a transaction.
By definition, BFT algorithms must satisfy two correctness properties:
• Safety: This property states that operations are executed one at a time, and
in the same order across all correct replicas. This implies satisfying the lineariz-
ability property [26].
• Liveness:
this property states that clients will always eventually get a reply
to their request messages, even in the presence of up to f faulty replicas. This
guarantees that the system will eventually reach a state where it can make
progress(i.e. handle transactions).
In the following subsections we will describe three BFT algorithms. the Practi-
cal Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT) algorithm, as well as the Resource Efficient
Byzantine Fault Tolerance framework, and Zyzzyva.
2.1.3.1
Practical Byzantine fault tolerance
Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance [12] is a BFT algorithm described in a break-
through paper by Castro and Liskov. This algorithm was the first BFT algorithm ca-
pable of reaching acceptable performance levels in real-world systems, and introduced
several important concepts, which have since been used in many BFT algorithms. We
describe BFT algorithms using these concepts as classical BFT algorithms.
In PBFT, a request is sent to the primary replica. This is a replica with the special
role of receiving requests and assigning a sequence number to them.
A sequence
number is a unique identifier in the form of a monotonically increasing counter value.
When it assigns a sequence number to an incoming request, it broadcasts this in a
PREPREPARE message to all other replicas in the system. When a replica receives
a PREPREPARE message it checks whether the sequence number is valid, and if so it
broadcasts its “acceptance” of the sequence number to all other replicas. this is called
the PREPARE phase. This broadcast is necessary in case a primary replica is Byzantine
and sends different sequence numbers to groups of replicas in the system. After the
PREPARE phase, all correct replicas in the system have arrived at the prepared state.
The PREPREPARE and PREPARE phases together form the ordering process of PBFT;
once a replica is in the prepared state for a particular request r and sequence number
n, we know that n cannot be assigned to a different request anymore. This PREPARE
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Background and Preliminaries
phase is essentially a voting round to accept the sequence number proposed by the
primary in the PREPREPARE phase.
For actual execution of the request, PBFT initiates another voting round called
the COMMIT phase. After the commit phase, all correct replicas are in the committed
state, will execute the request operation, and send their reply to the client.
When the system has f or fewer faulty replicas, a client will receive at least n −f
replies to a request. After f +1 of these replies, it knows that the system has reached
the next state and the request has been successfully processed.
These two voting rounds provide safety to the algorithm, but not liveness. For
that, PBFT relies on views. The protocol moves through consecutively numbered
views. Each view is a configuration where one replica is chosen to act as primary.
Additionally, each replica keeps a log of all transactions in a view. When the primary
fails, a view-change is initiated where a new primary is elected in a deterministic way,
and all replicas share their logs of the view, ensuring that all replicas are up-to-date
with all transactions before continuing to the next view.
A primary can fail at any time, but broadly speaking we can discern two cases:
either the primary will fail between transactions, and the client will not be able to
reach the primary, or the primary will fail during a transaction and replicas will stop
receiving messages from the primary.
In the first case, the client will broadcast a notification to all replicas stating that
it cannot contact the primary, and in the second case correct replicas will wait for a
specified amount of time, after which they consider the primary to be faulty.
Once a replica considers a primary to be faulty, replicas will attempt to change
the primary by initiating a view-change. A view-change brings all correct replicas
up-to-speed with the committed requests by sharing a request log, and elects a new
primary for the next view. After a view-change has been completed, the client will
send its requests to the new primary. Since there are only assumed to be a maximum
of f faulty replicas, the system eventually will pick a correct replica as primary, which
ensures liveness.
Figure 2.1 shows the communication pattern for a successful transaction in PBFT.
As can be seen, both voting rounds (during the PREPARE and COMMIT phases, respec-
tively) require considerably more messages than the other phases, since each replica
broadcasts their vote to all other replicas. More formally, one voting round requires
O(n2) messages to be transmitted, and we say that the communication complexity
of PBFT is O(n2). These voting rounds form a bottleneck for the performance and
scalability of this algorithm, as bandwidth requirements increase quadratically with
respect to the number of replicas.
2.1.3.2
Resource-efficient Byzantine fault tolerance
Resource-efficient fault tolerance [19] (ReBFT) provides a framework to minimize the
amount of replicas required during optimal functioning of the system, and is based
on the observation that in the absence of faults, protocols such as PBFT send more
messages than strictly necessary.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Byzantine Fault Tolerance
7
C
0
1
2
3
request
pre-prepare
commit
reply
prepare
×
Figure 2.1: The communication pattern of one transaction in the PBFT protocol.
This system tolerates one fault, and thus requires 3f + 1 = 4 replicas.
Replica 0 acts as primary, while replica 3 is faulty and does not send
any messages. As can be seen, the client receives 3 ≥f + 1 replies, and
thus knows the transaction was successful.
ReBFT divides replicas into two sets: the set of 2f + 1 active replicas and the set
of f passive replicas.
In normal execution, a transaction involves all active replicas, who act as if the
passive replicas are not part of the system (i.e. when they broadcast a message in
the original protocol, they will broadcast this to only active replicas in the ReBFT
variant). In the REPLY phase, all active replicas then send their reply to the client as
usual, but also send an UPDATE message to all passive replicas. Once a passive replica
receives f + 1 UPDATE messages, it will execute the request operation, in order to
stay up-to-date with the active replicas. One important observation that should be
made is that this is not part of the transaction; passive replicas can execute requests
asynchronously, and clients do not require them to be up-to-date in order to consider
the transaction to be complete.
Once a fault is detected, the BFT system will start a protocol switch. First, the
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Background and Preliminaries
system will switch to a transition protocol which activates all passive replicas, and
ensures that they are all in the same state, by agreeing on a global history. Once this is
done, the system falls back to the original BFT protocol that includes 3f + 1 replicas
so that it can proceed even in the presence of faults. After a specified number of
transactions in this fallback protocol, it will switch again to the normal-case protocol.
In order to prevent denial of service attacks by switching to often (which is expensive),
the number of transactions in the fallback protocol increases exponentially with every
switch, ensuring that switches do not happen too often.
C
0
1
2
3
request
pre-prepare
commit
reply
prepare
(passive)
Figure 2.2: Communication pattern of a transaction in a RePBFT system capable
of tolerating one fault. Here replica 3 is passive, and receives an update
only at the end of the transaction.
Figure 2.2 shows RePBFT, the ReBFT variant of PBFT. As can be seen, the
number of replicas participating in the protocol is reduced, which in turn results in
a reduction of messages. Nevertheless, the number of messages is reduced by only a
constant factor, and communication complexity is still O(n2).
We categorize algorithms separating active from passive replicas as optimistic BFT
protocols, since they make the assumption that faults are very rare occurrences.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Byzantine Fault Tolerance
9
2.1.3.3
Zyzzyva
Zyzzyva [35] is a BFT protocol where replicas speculatively execute requests. That is,
replicas execute requests before they reach agreement on the order. As with PBFT,
there exist views and primary replicas in Zyzzyva, and the primary replica proposes
a sequence number to all replicas when it receives a request from the client. However,
instead of initiating a voting round, replicas simply execute the request operation and
send the result to the client. In an optimal situation (i.e. there are no failures of any
kind) replicas do not learn whether agreement actually has been reached on the order
of the request; only the client has this knowledge.
There are four possible cases for the replies obtained by the client:
a The client receives 3f + 1 consistent replies. This is the easy case: the
client simply considers the transaction to be complete, and no further commu-
nication ensues.
b The client receives between 2f + 1 and 3f consistent replies. In this
case, the client creates a commit certificate from 2f + 1 consistent replies, and
broadcasts this in a COMMIT message to all replicas. Some replicas might then
have to roll-back their state, and have to ensure that their state is consistent
with other replicas. They do this by finding out which sequence numbers are
missing and requesting the corresponding requests from the primary through a
FILL-HOLE message. If a replica encounters inconsistent view numbers for the
same requests during this phase it will initiate a view-change. If a replica man-
ages to make its history consistent with other replicas and execute the request,
it will send a LOCAL-COMMIT message to the client. When a client receives 2f +1
of these it considers the transaction to have completed successfully.
c The client receives fewer than 2f + 1 consistent replies. The client will
then broadcast the request to all replicas, which in turn will attempt to forward
it to the primary. If it turns out the primary is faulty, replicas will then act on
this and initiate a view-change.
d The client receives replies with inconsistent sequence numbers. This
is an indication of a faulty primary, and the client collects the inconsistent
replies and broadcasts these to all replicas, as a proof of misbehavior of the
primary. Replicas will subsequently roll-back their state to what it was before
this transaction, and initiate a view-change so a different primary will be elected.
Even though this only gives a high-level overview of the protocol, we can see that
while it initially may appear as simple, complexity increases considerably as soon as
faults are encountered.
Two important observations can be made as well: firstly, replicas require the
ability to roll back already executed operations. This is an important disadvantage,
and rules out Zyzzyva as a contender for certain use-cases for BFT algorithms that
involve operations that cannot be reverted (e.g. the decision to jettison fuel from an
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Background and Preliminaries
aircraft). Secondly, while in PBFT (and most other classical BFT algorithms) the
client is allowed to be Byzantine, in Zyzzyva a Byzantine client can force the system
into an inconsistent state. For example, if (just) the primary replica is faulty, it might
equivocate on the sequence number of a request, observable by the client from replies
(case d), but if the client fails to notify replicas about this they will permanently end
up with inconsistently ordered requests, violating the safety property.
C
0
1
2
3
request
prepare
commit
local
commit
reply
×
Figure 2.3: Communication pattern of a transaction in a Zyzzyva system, capable
of tolerating one fault. In this figure, replica 3 is faulty. Solid arrows
indicate messages sent during optimal execution, while dashed arrows
indicate messages that are only sent when faults are detected.
Because voting rounds in Zyzzyva use the client as an intermediary, replicas do
not need to broadcast their vote to all other replicas.
Therefore, communication
complexity is O(n).
Moreover, as Figure 2.3 shows, in the optimal case Zyzzyva
requires only 3 communication steps, thus minimizing the processing time for a single
transaction.
Since in Zyzzyva, replicas do not reach agreement in the common case, we cate-
gorize it as being a speculative BFT protocol.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Trusted Execution Environments
11
2.2
Trusted Execution Environments
A Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) is a piece of hardware that provides a secure
code execution environment, isolated from other parts of the system. In particular,
TEEs guarantee that other software running on the system is not able to read or mod-
ify the TEE memory. This makes them suitable for security-critical tasks. TEEs may
also provide other features, such as sealed storage, allowing for data to be encrypted
and stored on long-term storage, without having to reveal it, and remote attestation,
which allows remote processes to verify the authenticity of the TEE and the integrity
of the code running on it.
TEEs are becoming increasingly common. Intel provides the Intel Software Guard
Extensions (SGX) technology [29] on most modern x86 processors, and ARM Trust-
Zone [2] is available on many ARM devices. Both Intel SGX and ARM TrustZone
enable developers to write their own applications running in a secure environment.
There exist TEEs with fixed functionality as well, for example hardware implementing
the TPM [48] standards.
For the purpose of this thesis any TEE satisfying the following properties suffices:
• The TEE provides a secure code execution environment, isolated from the rest
of the system
• The TEE provides means to remotely attest the authenticity of the TEE and
the integrity of the code running on it
• The TEE provides persistent storage that is both isolated and secure.
2.2.1
Intel SGX
Intel SGX provides trusted hardware components and CPU instructions in modern
x86 processors that enable developers to run code securely, protected from even the
operating system itself. Developers can write sensitive code as code that runs inside
“enclaves”, which are isolated environments that ensure that other parts of the system
cannot read or modify their memory. Enclaves provide strictly defined interfaces to
the encapsulating application, which allow developers to communicate with the secure
portion of their program.
Additionally SGX provides means to remotely attest code.
2.2.2
Trusted monotonic counters
In this work, we require an ordering primitive to uniquely tag messages with. We
describe a simple counter primitive that is able to guarantee uniqueness through use
of TEEs.
The counter is required to be trusted, in that it is not possible for unauthorized
code to read or modify the state of this primitive, and given a counter value, it has to
be possible to remotely verify that the value was produced by some specific counter.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Background and Preliminaries
The second property it has to satisfy is monotonicity. That is, the counter will
never assign the same value twice; it enforces a strictly increasing order on its state,
which is updated with every query to the counter.
A TEE lends itself well for a counter with these requirements, as the trusted
component is provided by the environment itself, and monotonicity can be guaranteed
through remote attestation.
In order to be able to tag messages, we require a mechanism to bind a counter
value c to some message M. To this end, the TEE maintains an asymmetric key pair,
and with every query accepts some message M as input. It then signs the tuple ⟨c, M⟩
with its private key, effectively binding c to M. Monotonicity guarantees that this c
is unique and therefore it is impossible to bind the same c to a different message.
To allow for remote verification, the TEE needs use remote attestation techniques
to prove to a verifier that a specific key pair is maintained by this TEE. Whenever
the TEE then signs a ⟨c, M⟩tuple with its private key, verifiers can assert that this
value was indeed generated by the TEE.
What remains is to ensure that the TEE does indeed maintain a trusted monotonic
counter, and does not simply pretend to do so towards verifiers. This can be done by
either fixing the TEE functionality during the manufacturing process (i.e in hardware),
or by remotely attesting the TEE code itself, ensuring that a trusted monotonic
counter has been properly instantiated on it.
As stated, the TEE maintains a key pair (st, pt), where s denotes the private
(secret) key, p the public key, and t uniquely identifies the key pair. It also has access
to a Sign(x, si) function that signs message x with private key s, producing xσi,
where σi denotes a signature belonging to key pair i.
The counter interface must expose at least one function, Increment(M), which
takes as input some message M. It then increments the monotonic counter and binds
the newly obtained counter value c to this data through a signature. When successful,
the signed tuple ⟨c, M⟩σt is returned to the caller.
Algorithm 1 TEE Increment function
1: procedure Increment(M)
▷Increments the counter and binds it to M
State: c
▷counter value
State: (st, pt)
▷Asym. key pair
Require: Atomicity of this algorithm
2:
if c = MAX INTEGER then
3:
abort
4:
end if
5:
c ←c + 1
6:
Sign(⟨c, M⟩, st)
7:
return ⟨c, M⟩σt
8: end procedure
The pseudocode for Increment is listed in Algorithm 1. As can be seen, a check is
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Trusted Execution Environments
13
included to ensure that the same value is not used twice in case of an integer overflow.
It is important to mention that this algorithm is only secure if the key pair is
unique per instantation of the TEE; when initializing the TEE, c will be set to some
initial value, and the if TEE is shut down after a few increments to the counter, it
can be re-initialized to sign different messages for the same counter values unless the
key pair is unique per instantation as well. The algorithm can be extended to include
a session-id that uniquely identifies the instantiation, to allow re-use of keypairs. We
do not include this in this algorithm however, as the details of this vary between
TEEs and we do not rely on it for our implementation in Chapter 5.
As a final note on trusted monotonic counters, when implementing this on a TEE,
atomicity of any operation that modifies the state of the TEE has to be ensured in
order to guarantee monotonicity of the counter value.
2.2.3
TEE-enabled BFT algorithms
A number of BFT algorithms utilize the power of trusted hardware to increase effi-
ciency. One benefit of using TEEs is that it becomes possible to reduce the Byzantine
fault tolerance problem complexity to that of crash tolerant problems, lowering the
minimum amount of replicas required to tolerate faults to be just 2f + 1 [18, 16, 50,
37, 32]. We describe one of these, MinBFT [50], in more detail.
2.2.3.1
MinBFT
MinBFT is an algorithm based on PBFT1, with a similar communication pattern. It
also employs views for liveness, and utilizes a primary replica for assigning a sequence
number to requests.
Due to the possibility of equivocation, it is in general not possible to achieve
consensus with less than 3f + 1 replicas in the presence of f faults. When we allow
for the usage of TEEs however, we can eliminate the possibility of equivocation. This
is because if we require messages to be signed by a TEE, this TEE can then add
some unique tag to the message. Replicas receiving a message will then compare this
tag to what they expect the next tag value to be. If these values are not equal, the
receiver has reason to suspect the primary of equivocation, and will not process the
message any further.
In MinBFT, a tamperproof trusted counter service similar to the one described
in Section 2.2.2 is assumed to exist in every replica, that is able to produce a signed
certificate proving that a certain counter value is uniquely bound to some message.
By using this counter value as a sequence number for incoming requests, it is able to
eliminate the voting round required by PBFT in its PREPARE phase: when replicas
receive a message from the primary with a counter value that is bound to a request
through a certificate, they are sure that this counter value can never be used for
another request.
1The paper also introduces MinZyzzyva, but we will not discuss this algorithm here.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Background and Preliminaries
Since equivocation is no longer an issue when it comes to ordering requests, it
becomes possible to decrease the minimum number of replicas to 2f + 1, and the
voting round to agree on the request order is no longer necessary.
×
C
0
1
2
request
commit
reply
prepare
Figure 2.4: the communication pattern of a transaction in a MinBFT system capa-
ble of tolerating one fault. Note that with MinBFT only 2f +1 replicas
are necessary to tolerate f faults. Replica 0 acts as the primary, while 2
is faulty and does not send any messages. As can be seen, the PREPARE
phase no longer includes a voting round, because of the tamperproof
assumption of the trusted counter service.
Figure 2.4 shows the communication pattern of MinBFT. In order to enable repli-
cas to properly detect a faulty primary, the client broadcasts requests to all replicas,
instead of only the primary as in PBFT. Then, in the PREPARE phase, the primary
obtains the signed certificate binding a sequence number to the request and broad-
casts this to the replicas. In the remaining two phases, replicas vote to commit and
then send their replies to the client.
Even though only 2f + 1 replicas are required, the COMMIT phase still includes an
all-to-all broadcast, leaving the communication complexity at O(n2).
In Section 4.2.4 we examine the view-change sub-protocol in MinBFT, to illustrate
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Multisignatures
15
the necessity of TEEs in this process.
2.3
Multisignatures
A multisignature scheme[4] is a signature scheme that allows N signers to collectively
sign a message M. These N signers have individual private keys s1 . . . sn that are not
known to the public or even other signers, and individual public keys p1 . . . pn that
are publicly available. The public keys can be aggregated into a collective public key
p1...n, and individual signatures can be aggregated into a collected signature x1...n.
The public key p1...n can then be used to verify that signers 1 to n all participated
in x1...n. Multisignature schemes aim to make this more efficient by requiring only a
single signature to be transmitted to and verified by a verifier, rather than requiring
n transmissions and verifications. The aggregated signature can be larger in size than
an individual signature, but it is smaller than the collection of n individual signatures.
Multisignature schemes are slightly different from signature aggregation schemes,
in that signature aggregation schemes enable efficient aggregation of n signatures on
n distinct messages, while multisignature schemes enable efficient aggregation of n
signatures on one message [9].
2.3.1
Boneh-Lynn-Shacham signatures
The Boneh-Lynn-Shacham [9] (BLS) aggregate signature scheme relies on pairing-
based elliptic curve cryptography to deliver compact aggregated signatures. In this
scheme, signatures consist of a single x coordinate on an elliptic curve, and their
aggregation amounts to multiplication of these coordinates. The resulting aggregate
signature is therefore also an x coordinate and of the same size as the individual
signatures.
This is an aggregate signature scheme, and explicitly does not allow the signing of
one message, as it makes signature forgery possible. However, it can be turned into a
multisignature scheme by requiring each signer to publish a zero-knowledge proof of
the discrete logarithms belonging to their public keys, before signing any message [9,
page 6].
Two key characteristics of BLS aggregate signatures are that they require only
one communication round trip to generate one aggregate signature, whereas most
other schemes require two round trips (e.g. Schnorr multisignatures [40]). A second
characteristic is that the generated signatures are very small, making them ideal for
a situation where limiting network traffic is deemed important.
2.3.2
ByzCoin
ByzCoin [34] is a BFT protocol designed to solve scalability issues with existing con-
sensus schemes used by cryptocurrencies. To do this, it builds on PBFT, but (among
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Background and Preliminaries
other improvements) reduces network complexity to O(n) by using collective signing
techniques [47] to eliminate the need for all-to-all broadcasts during voting. Collec-
tive signing uses multisignature schemes, and requires all participants to send their
signature (i.e. vote) to one designated leader, which then aggregates all votes and
broadcasts these to all participants. This is a trade-off: it requires more communica-
tion steps per voting round than an all-to-all broadcast, but fewer messages overall
and thus less bandwidth. The added latency introduced by the extra communication
steps can be seen introducing as constant overhead to the protocol, but in return the
bandwidth requirements grow in O(n). Therefore, for larger n it will perform better.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Problem description
As we have seen in Chapter 2, BFT protocols need to provide safety and liveness
properties in order to be considered correct. To achieve these requirements entails
considerable complexity, which has a negative impact on performance.
In Chap-
ter 2 have seen how protocols aim to increase efficiency by various means. Often
these means rely on some extra or stronger assumptions, such as rollbacks and non-
Byzantine clients for Zyzzyva, and a trusted counter for MinBFT.
In this chapter we elaborate on the various assumptions our work is built upon.
We then identify several fault-tolerance goals that we aim to satisfy, after which we de-
scribe a set of non-correctness-critical properties, which we formulate as performance
goals.
3.1
Problem description
All existing BFT algorithms make either the assumption that all replicas have access
to a TEE, or assume that none have a TEE. Neither of these assumptions cover the
situation where a strict subset of all replicas has access to a TEE. There are legitimate
reasons why only a subset of replicas might have TEEs available. Neither assumption
accommodates for this, and one will have to fall back to the no-TEE assumption in
order to achieve Byzantine fault tolerance. This wastes the potential of the available
TEEs however, and passes by on performance improvements that may be gained from
these.
Additionally, many classical BFT algorithms operate with O(n2) communication
complexity. Previous work (see Section 2.3.2) has already shown that this can be
improved upon to achieve O(n) complexity instead. There is currently no general
transformation that can be applied to these algorithms to achieve better communica-
tion complexity.
Based on the above observations, we motivate our work with the following ques-
tion:
• Can we achieve Byzantine consensus with fewer than n TEEs a single voting
round, and O(n) communication complexity?
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Problem description
3.2
Assumptions
In this work, we make the following assumptions:
• There can be up to f = ⌊n−1
3 ⌋faulty replicas in the system.
This
corresponds to the standard BFT adversary model.
• Communication satisfies the weak synchrony assumption. We rely on
the traditional weak synchrony assumption introduced by PBFT [12] (as de-
scribed in Section 2.1.2) in order to be able to guarantee liveness.
• It is rare for a replica to fail. When designing BFT algorithms, this is an
often-made assumption, and is realistic, as many use cases for BFT algorithms
involve situations where under normal circumstances all replicas behave cor-
rectly. This assumption suggests that algorithms should optimize for the “com-
mon” case, where there are few or no faults. For example, algorithms such as
Zyzzyva [35] use speculative execution to reduce the number of voting rounds in
the common case, and optimistic BFT algorithms such as RePBFT [19] reduce
the number of replicas actively participating in voting rounds. Additionally,
this assumption allows us to exercise some freedom in the efficiency of view-
changes; typically these are much more expensive than processing an operation,
but when a view-change is a relatively rare occurrence, the performance cost
remains acceptable.
• A subset of replicas has access to a TEE. This is a weaker assumption
than the one made by all existing TEE-reliant BFT protocols: they assume that
TEEs are available to all replicas. This weaker version gives us more flexibilty
and allows for optimizing BFT protocols for new scenarios.
• TEEs are secure. With “secure” we mean that they cannot be compromised,
their code can be attested remotely, and that it is impossible to obtain any
data from the TEEs, except the values that are returned by the programming
interface of these TEEs. We also assume that TEEs can crash.
3.3
Fault tolerance goals
We separate our goals into two classes: Fault-tolerance goals and Performance goals.
Fault-tolerance goals concern the correctness of the system as well as its resilience
against Byzantine faults. We consider the following fault tolerance goals:
F-1 Maintain correctness properties: If a protocol does not satisfy the necessary
correctness properties, it cannot be considered to be Byzantine fault-tolerant.
Since we aim to create a drop-in replacement for existing protocols, we must
guarantee that our transformations do not break these properties when we apply
them to existing protocols. Specifically, we need to guarantee that if a protocol
==PAGE:29==
3.4 Performance Goals
19
satisfies the safety property, modifying it according to our framework does not
violate this property.
Similarly, if a protocol satisfies the liveness property,
this property must still hold after we modify the protocol according to our
framework.
F-2 Maximize the number of tolerated faults: One aspect in which TEE-
powered BFT algorithms such as FastBFT and MinBFT stand out is that they
tolerate ⌊n−1
2 ⌋Byzantine faults, whereas the maximum without TEEs is ⌊n−1
3 ⌋.
It is thus clear that using TEEs enables us to increase the amount of tolerated
faults, although it should be noted that TEEs alone are not sufficient to achieve
this, we also need authenticated communication channels between replicas [17].
This can be easily done with asymmetric cryptography or MACs , and it is stan-
dard to make this assumption in any case. Our goal is to increase the number
of tolerated faults for a given number of replicas (or, equivalently, decrease the
number of required replicas for a given number of tolerated faults) when not all
replicas possess a TEE.
F-3 Minimize the number of TEEs necessary: We also want to minimize the
hardware resources required in order to implement this framework. Having to
invest in fewer TEEs makes the framework more easily accessible and more
widely applicable.
F-4 Minimize the trusted computing base: Finally, we want to keep the trusted
computing base as simple as possible. Requiring complex code increases the
probability of bugs appearing, and bugs in a trusted computing base can prove
fatal for the overall trustworthiness of the system. Ideally, the code should be
small and simple enough to allow for formal verification of the functionality.
In addition to that, it becomes easier to include dedicated trusted hardware
with the TEE-provided functionality in machines, as the TEEs will require less
memory, computing power, and storage.
3.4
Performance Goals
Another important goal of our framework is to improve performance both by the use
of a TEE and by other means. Specifically, we seek to achieve the following:
P-1 Minimize communication complexity: Firstly, we want to minimize the
asymptotic communication complexity of algorithms through application of our
framework. Many (older) BFT algorithms require replicas to broadcast their
votes to all other replicas. This results in O(n2) messages being sent for one
vote. Recent work shows that message aggregation using signature aggregation
or secret sharing [34, 37] can reduce the communication complexity to O(n),
reducing bandwidth requirements and noticeably improving the efficiency of
voting rounds. Since there are already protocols with these techniques in place,
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Problem description
we should aim to reduce the communication complexity of any protocol to which
our framework is applied to O(n) as well, so that it can compete with the current
state of the art.
P-2 Minimize the number of voting rounds: Existing BFT protocols that make
use of TEEs require fewer voting rounds to complete an operation, which con-
tributes significantly to their efficiency. While we cannot rely on all replicas
having a TEE, we do want to improve the efficiency of existing protocols where
possible. One of the efficiency goals of this research project is therefore to see
if we can minimize the required number of voting rounds.
P-3 Minimize transaction latency: The latency of one transaction is a good way
of evaluating performance. While the biggest factor in latency is the communi-
cation complexity, it is worthwhile to look at other ways of reducing transaction
latency. For example, using computationally intensive cryptographic algorithms
adds noticeably to latency as well, especially when we consider small systems
(e.g. 4 replicas). Therefore, we list this as a separate performance goal.
3.5
Summary
To summarize, we consider the following goals, to which we will refer throughout this
thesis:
F-1 Maintain correctness properties
F-2 Maximize the number of tolerated faults
F-3 Minimize the number of necessary TEEs
F-4 Minimize the trusted computing base
P-1 Minimize communication complexity
P-2 Minimize the number of voting rounds
P-3 Minimize transaction latency
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Framework
Our proposed framework utilizes trusted hardware to maintain a “Single Active
Counter” (SAC) at the primary replica. We therefore call it SACBFT.
The SACBFT framework can be split into two parts: the first is a replacement
for the ordering process of existing protocols, while the second part modifies any
remaining voting rounds (e.g. the COMMIT phase in many BFT algorithms) to make
use of signature aggregation. In order to see why we need to replace the ordering
phase, we will first look at how PBFT orders requests, after which we will show how
SACBFT is able to replace this.
Afterwards, we look at voting phases in general, and how their communication
overhead can be reduced by making use of signature aggregation techniques.
We then examine view-changes, where we discuss how MinBFT is able to perform
view-changes with only 2f + 1 replicas while tolerating f faulty ones, and describe
how SACBFT affects the view-change process of existing protocols.
Finally, we show how to apply SACBFT to existing protocols, and apply it to
PBFT and RePBFT to produce SACPBFT and SACRePBFT.
4.1
Design outline
The first SACBFT transformation replaces the ordering phase of an existing protocol
by using a trusted monotonic counter accessible by the primary to bind counter values
to incoming requests. It does this by signing a tuple consisting of the cryptographic
hash of the request and a fresh (i.e. has not been used before) counter value. This is
then sent to all replicas in a PREPARE message. Because the primary is the only replica
that actively maintains a counter, we call this counter the “Single Active Counter”
(SAC). The top half of Figure 4.1 depicts the SACBFT transformation to the ordering
process.
The second transformation concerns voting phases. Many classical BFT protocols
have at least one voting phase after the ordering phase, typically called the COMMIT
phase. Since replicas need to learn about the votes of other replicas, they typically
broadcast their vote to all replicas. This results in O(n2) messages being sent in a sin-
gle voting phase. In SACBFT, replicas send their vote (in the form of a signature) to
only the primary instead, which then broadcasts an aggregation of all received signa-
tures. With this optimization, communication complexity of voting rounds is reduced
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Framework
C
0
1
2
3
request
pre-prepare
prepare
C
0
1
2
3
request
prepare
TEE
C
0
1
2
3
commit
commit
C
0
1
2
3
voting round
ordering process
Figure 4.1: An illustration of the SACBFT transformations. The first transforma-
tion (top) removes the voting round from the ordering process, replacing
it with a simple broadcast from the primary 0 (which now has TEE) as
can be seen on the top-right figure. The second transformation lowers
network complexity of voting rounds to O(n), by aggregating messages
at the primary.
Communication arrows and phases affected by the
transformations are colored blue.
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Communication
23
to O(n). The bottom half of Figure 4.1 depicts the voting round transformation made
by SACBFT.
4.2
Communication
The communication pattern of most post-PBFT BFT protocols can be divided into
a number of phases. For example, most protocols have a REQUEST phase, where the
client sends its request to one or more replicas. SACBFT is no different in this respect.
The
subsequent
phases
can
differ
per
protocol, but many of these BFT protocols rely on similar patterns, and SACBFT
can be applied to these. In this section we discuss these common phases and the
SACBFT-specific improvements that can be made to them. Note that SACBFT is a
framework applicable to many BFT protocols, and we only discuss the elements that
are required by SACBFT itself. Usually, a protocol includes more data per message,
e.g. a view number or replica identifiers. When applying SACBFT to an existing
protocol, we extend these original messages. That is, we leave the original data in a
message as is (unless explicitly stated otherwise) and add the SACBFT-specific data
to it.
Many BFT protocols agree on the sequence number to be used for a request by
using a two-phase voting round. Typically these phases are called the PREPREPARE
and PREPARE phases respectively. Since SACBFT determines transaction ordering
by means of an attested monotonic counter, it does not require such an agreement.
Instead, it just needs to distribute the sequence number obtained from the trusted
counter (together with the request) to all replicas, each of which can then verify that
this number was indeed issued by the trusted counter and meant for this particular
request. We call this the PREPARE phase, and we will specify the SACBFT-specific
features in more detail in subsection 4.2.1. In most classical non-TEE BFT protocols,
the PREPARE phase is followed by a COMMIT phase, where replicas attempt to reach
consensus on the next state of the replicated state machine. As this does not concern
the sequence number directly, SACBFT also requires this phase. We will see however,
that some improvements can be made to any voting round, including the COMMIT
phase.
4.2.1
PREPARE phase
In order to see how we can improve upon the PREPARE phase in existing protocols,
we look at how ordering is achieved by PBFT. Many protocols use the same ordering
procedure, meaning that this analysis holds for those protocols as well.
In PBFT, the primary assigns a sequence number to incoming requests, which is
then broadcast to all other replicas in a PREPREPARE message. Replicas then agree
on this sequence number by broadcasting a PREPARE message to all replicas. The
authors of PBFT define prepared(m, v, n, i) predicate to be satisfied after a (correct)
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Framework
replica i broadcasts a PREPARE message for request m, view v, and sequence number n,
and has inserted both messages into its log. After the replicas have received enough
PREPARE messages, the prepared predicate ensures non-equivocation of the sequence
number [12, page 4].
The replicas then broadcast a COMMIT message which finalizes the ordering and
allows replicas to process the request. Thus, ordering in PBFT is a procedure con-
sisting of two phases. To see how a TEE can help us improve upon this, we first look
at why two phases are necessary.
It is easiest to illustrate the necessity of a two-phase agreement by omitting the
COMMIT phase in PBFT (thus allowing replicas to execute requests immediately after a
successful PREPARE phase) and showing that the protocol is now vulnerable to certain
attacks.
4.2.1.1
Why PBFT requires two voting rounds
f
f
f
1
p
A.1) PREPREPARE
A.2) PREPARE
A.3) VIEW-CHANGE
Figure 4.2: A possible attack on the PBFT protocol when the COMMIT phase is
omitted. Each horizontal step separates the 3f + 1 replicas into four
groups. The red outline indicates a group of f faulty replicas whereas a
black outline indicates correct replicas. Blue arrows relate to request r,
while red arrows relate to request r′. Lines ending in dots indicate that
messages get delayed. A blue fill indicates that a group of replicas has
executed r, while a red fill shows that r′ has been executed instead.
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Communication
25
In the weakly synchronous network model, an attacker can delay messages for any
length of time, as long as they are delivered at some point in time (see Section 2.1.2).
As we shall see, this assumption together with the fact that during the PREPREPARE
phase the primary replica can equivocate on the request message for a particular
sequence number, allows a malicious group of replicas to coordinate an attack and
force the system into an inconsistent state. Figure 4.2 shows how such an attack can
be executed.
Each horizontal bar is divided into four sections, the first three each representing
f replicas, and the last bar represents the remaining replica. The first bar (colored
with a red outline) consists of f faulty replicas, including the primary replica. All the
other replicas are assumed to behave correctly. Step A.1 shows how a Byzantine-faulty
primary can equivocate during the PREPREPARE phase. The blue arrows indicate mes-
sages relating to request r, while the red arrows contain a different request r′. Once
all replicas have received the PREPREPARE messages they will attempt to broadcast a
PREPARE message.
However, in Step A.2 the attackers delay all messages in the system (shown as
lines ending in . . . ) except for those with the rightmost replica as their destination.
This replica then receives 2f + 1 (including its own) PREPARE messages for request
r′. Since we have omitted the COMMIT phase, this will cause the replica to execute r′,
indicated with the red fill in its bar.
The rightmost replica will now be “ahead” of the other replicas in its state, but
the safety property is not yet violated; all requests thus far have been executed in the
same order.
The remaining 2f correct replicas will initiate a view-change once they have re-
ceived the messages that were delayed at Step A.2. View-changes are supposed to
ensure that all correct replicas end up in the same state by requiring all replicas to
share a log of their processed requests, with the necessary data for other replicas to
be able to verify the legitimacy of these requests and execute them if necessary.
However, during the view-change in step A.3, the f faulty replicas will pretend
that they only sent a PREPARE for r, which together with the f correct replicas that
initially received a PREPREPARE for r will form a majority of 2f replicas claiming
that r is the request that should be executed for this sequence number. The PBFT
view-change protocol only requires 2f such messages and thus this is enough for all
remaining 3f replicas to agree on executing r (indicated with a blue fill in their bars).
As can be seen in the bottom bar, we end up with 3f replicas having executed r,
and one correct replica having executed r′ instead. This is an inconsistent state and
violates the safety property, and is thus a vulnerability in the protocol.
When we include the commit phase, this is no longer possible, as Figure 4.3 shows.
We consider two possible variations on the attack, listed as A and B, and show that
neither of them can be successful.
Both scenarios start in the same way, with a
malicious primary equivocating on the PREPREPARE message.
In scenario A, once
again all messages except for those sent to the rightmost replica are delayed, causing
only the rightmost replica to arrive in a prepared state as indicated by the half-filled
bar. However, in order for the replica to actually execute the request it will need to
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Framework
receive 2f + 1 consistent commit messages as well. As no other correct replica has
arrived in a prepared state, it will only be able to receive f + 1 consistent COMMIT
messages (Step A.3), and thus the request will never be executed.
In scenario B, the attackers now delay all PREPARE messages except for those sent
to the rightmost f +1 replicas (Step B.2). Now, this will put all of those replicas in a
prepared state. Step B.3 shows that it is then possible to have the rightmost replica
receive enough COMMIT messages to execute r′. However, there are now f + 1 correct
replicas that are in possession of a valid PREPREPARE message for r′ as well as 2f + 1
valid PREPARE messages for this same request. This is enough proof to convince all
other replicas that r′ is the request that belongs to this sequence number during a
view-change.
Even without taking view-changes into account, it is impossible to force the re-
maining f correct replicas into a prepared state for a different request, as they will at
most receive 2f PREPARE messages (f from themselves and f from the faulty group),
while they require 2f + 1 such messages. The COMMIT phase is thus a necessary part
of PBFT, and cannot be omitted without violating the safety property. This holds
for many BFT protocols, and we will therefore need to look at ways of improving the
efficiency of this voting round, rather than omitting it. We describe how to improve
voting rounds after we specify the SACBFT PREPARE phase.
f
f
f
1
p
A.1) PREPREPARE
A.2) PREPARE
A.3)COMMIT
f
f
f
1
p
B.1) PREPREPARE
B.2)PREPARE
B.3)COMMIT
Figure 4.3: Two variants on the attack depicted in Figure 4.2, that both get stuck,
as they will need to be able to provide 2f +1 valid PREPARE messages to
put a replica in the commited state, but are unable to do so. Blue/red
arrows indicate messages relating to requests r and r′ respectively. Half-
filled bars indicate that a group of replicas has reached the prepared
state for the request belonging to their color. Full bars indicate that
they have also commited the request.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Communication
27
4.2.1.2
SACBFT PREPARE phase
As we have seen in the previous subsection, two voting rounds are required in all
protocols that do not rely on TEEs, because the primary is otherwise able to use the
same sequence number for two different requests which ultimately leads to the system
arriving at an inconsistent state.
In SACBFT, the primary replica has a trusted monotonic counter as described in
Section 2.2.2, which we use to bind sequence numbers to requests. Moreover, since
the primary replica is the only replica that assigns these sequence numbers, only the
primary needs to have access to such a counter at any one time.
When we bind
requests to sequence numbers like this, replicas can simply verify the legitimacy of
the resulting signatures to maintain a globally consistent ordering of requests. This
observation forms the cornerstone of the SACBFT framework; as long as at least one
replica has a trusted counter at its disposal, we can use this counter to reduce the
number of voting rounds.
As in PBFT, a PREPARE message is sent to all replicas by the primary replica
when it receives a request message M.
First however, the TEE has to bind this
request to a specific sequence number.
This is done by calling the TEE-function
Increment(H(M)) where H(x) is a cryptographic hash function.
The TEE will
return a signed tuple ⟨c, H(M)⟩σpC , where c is the obtained counter value, and σpC is
a signature by the primary’s trusted counter. consisting of the sequence number and
this hash. The primary then has to share this counter with all replicas by broadcasting
the message ⟨PREPARE, M, ⟨c, H(M)⟩σpc ⟩.
Every replica that receives such a PREPARE message must verify that the hash of
M is equal to the hash signed by the counter, as well as that ⟨c, H(M)⟩σpc is a valid
signature.
For signature verification, we assume the existence of a Verify(X, P)
function that returns true if X is indeed signed by P, and false otherwise. When
either of these fails, the replica must assume that the primary is malicious, and will
request a view-change.
The pseudocode for these procedures is given in Algorithm 2.
4.2.2
Voting
While the improvements from the previous subsection replace the voting round in
the PREPARE phase, many BFT protocols require at least one other voting round.
Usually this is the COMMIT phase. Classical protocols require every replica to broadcast
their vote to all other replicas. This results in O(n2) messages being sent, which
hampers scalability. Recently, work has utilized signature aggregation techniques to
reduce the communication complexity to O(n)[34]. With SACBFT we apply these
techniques to all remaining voting rounds in the original protocol, reducing the overall
communication complexity to O(n).
For
this,
we
rely
on
a
multisignature
scheme,
which
provides
a
MultiSign(d, ki) algorithm that will sign data d with private key ki of some replica i,
yielding ⟨d⟩σ∗
i , where ∗denotes that σi is signed using a multisignature scheme. The
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Framework
Algorithm 2 SACBFT PREPARE phase
1: upon reception of request message M at the primary replica p do
2:
⟨c, H(M)⟩σpc ←TEE.Increment(H(M))
3:
broadcast ⟨PREPARE, M, ⟨c, H(M)⟩σpc ⟩
4: end
5: upon reception of ⟨PREPARE, M, ⟨c, h⟩σpc ⟩do
6:
if Verify(⟨c, h⟩σpc , pC) ̸= true then
7:
Request view-change and abort transaction
8:
end if
9:
if c ≤latest successfully used counter then
10:
Request view-change and abort transaction
11:
end if
12:
if H(M) ̸= h then
13:
Request view-change and abort transaction
14:
end if
15:
continue with next phase in protocol
16: end
scheme also needs to provide an
Aggregate(⟨d⟩σ∗
1 , . . . , ⟨d⟩σ∗
i ) function that, given a number of signatures on the same
message d, produces an aggregated signature ⟨d⟩σ∗
1...i, . . . for this message. Finally the
scheme needs to provide a MultiVerify⟨d⟩σ∗
i...j function that verifies an (aggregated)
signature for some message d.
A voting round can be improved by having all replicas sign their vote through
the multisignature scheme and sending this to the primary replica.
The primary
then collects all issued votes , and once it has received enough valid votes (i.e. they
pass verification) it will aggregate the received signatures into one signature. If the
primary replica can equivocate during the ordering process, then the voting rounds
will require at least 2f + 1 votes to tolerate Byzantine faults. When equivocation
during the ordering process is not possible, then f + 1 votes are sufficient to prove
that at least one correct replica has committed to the vote. This is because when the
primary cannot equivocate on the round number, Byzantine replicas will not be able
to convince a correct replica to commit to a different message for this same round
number either, even when banding together.
This aggregated signature is then broadcast to all replicas, which will verify the
aggregated signature to make sure that it does indeed represent enough replicas. To
illustrate these techniques we have included pseudocode for an abstract improved
version of a typical voting round in Algorithm 3 and Algorithm 4. Note that if not
enough replicas vote, the current transaction cannot complete successfully, and it will
have to be aborted, and thus abstention is equivalent to a vote against executing the
request operation. When voting, replicas need to account for the fact that the primary
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Communication
29
might have failed and will not reply with an aggregated signature. Therefore replicas
must wait for a reasonable duration, after which they will request a view-change if
they have not received an aggregated signature.
Note also that the vote simply consists of signing the received sequence number.
Should a particular protocol require more than one voting phase, we can accommodate
this by simply including a phase-tag in the signed data.
Algorithm 3 SACBFT voting round (all replicas)
1: when replica i participates in a voting round do
2:
c ←sequence number bound to current transaction
3:
⟨c⟩σ∗
i ←MultiSign(c, ki))
4:
set a timer to wait for a reply from the primary
5:
send ⟨<PHASE NAME>, ⟨c⟩σ∗
i ⟩to primary replica
6: end
7: upon reception of ⟨<PHASE NAME>, ⟨c⟩σ∗
1,...2f+1⟩at replica i do
8:
if MultiVerify(⟨c⟩σ∗
1...2f+1) ̸= true then
9:
Request view-change and abort transaction
10:
end if
11:
Cancel the timer waiting for a reply from the primary
12: end
Algorithm 4 SACBFT voting round (primary)
1: upon reception of enough ⟨<PHASE NAME>, ⟨c⟩σ∗
i ⟩messages at primary replica do
2:
if ∃i MultiVerify(⟨c⟩σ∗
i ) ̸= true then
3:
return “Not all signatures are valid”
4:
end if
5:
⟨c⟩σ∗
1...2f+1 ←Aggregate((⟨c⟩σ∗
1 , (⟨c⟩σ∗
2f+1)
6:
broadcast ⟨<PHASE NAME>, ⟨c⟩σ∗
1...2f+1⟩to all replicas
7: end
On Algorithm 4, line 3, an error message is returned. The actions taken based on
this error can vary from implementation to implementation. One possibility is for the
primary to keep waiting until it has received replies from all replicas, thus allowing
for a chance to still obtain enough valid votes before it considers the transaction a
failure.
4.2.3
REPLY
The REPLY phase consists of one or more replicas sending the outcome of the request to
the client. It is not necessary for the client to have any knowledge of the internal state
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Framework
of the system, which includes the counter value. Because all changes a protocol caused
by the SACBFT transformation are purely internal (they only concern communication
between replicas), nothing changes in the REPLY message of the original protocol. This
means that the SACBFT transformations can be applied without modifying client
software, which gives SACBFT an advantage over existing TEE-based protocols.
4.2.4
View-changes
Since in SACBFT we can make use of a TEE accessible by the primary replica, it
makes sense to explore whether we can use this TEE to optimize view-changes. In
order to see that this is not possible, we will look at what happens when we adapt
MinBFT to have only one TEE (at the primary replica).
4.2.4.1
MinBFT with one TEE
MinBFT reduces the number of required replicas to 2f + 1, however it is assumed
that every replica has access to a TEE.
In MinBFT, every replica keeps track of whether incoming PREPARE messages have
consecutive sequence numbers called Unique Identifiers (UIs). When a replica does
not receive a PREPARE message for the next expected sequence number in time, it will
broadcast a request for a view-change. It should be noted that in MinBFT replicas
can execute requests without receiving a PREPARE message from the primary, if they
receive f + 1 consistent COMMIT messages for this particular UI from other replicas.
This is possible because the UI is generated inside a TEE, and if the verification
procedure checks out it is assumed to have originated from the primary replica.
Now, if we look at a variant of MinBFT where only the primary replica has access
to a TEE, it will be possible for the system to arrive at an inconsistent state if the
attacker executes a well-timed view-change. Figure 4.4 shows the execution of this
attack. It starts with a client sending a request k to all replicas. This starts a timer in
every replica, which after a certain time period will result in the replica requesting for
a view-change if the request has not been handled by then. In step A.2 and A.3, the
request is executed in a normal way, except that the rightmost replica is not involved
at all: the primary never sends a PREPARE message to the rightmost replica, and all
subsequent messages to that replica are delayed by the attackers.
Because the rightmost replica has not received anything, it will request a view-
change after some period of time.
As step A.4 shows, the malicious replicas all
participate in this, and will request a view-change as well. This results in all replicas
receiving f + 1 REQ-VIEW-CHANGE messages, which is enough to trigger an actual
view-change.
In MinBFT, VIEW-CHANGE messages include a log of all successfully executed mes-
sages in the last view, so that replicas that are not up to date can work through
this list and reach the most recent state before entering the next view. However, all
malicious replicas can work together to equivocate on this log. As indicated by the
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Communication
31
f
f
1
p
C
A.1) REQUEST
A.2)PREPARE
A.3)COMMIT
A.4)REQ-VIEW-CHANGE
A.5)VIEW-CHANGE
includes messages for requests 1 to  
includes messages for requests 1 to
not related to any request
replica(s)
replica(s) in prepared state
replica(s) in committed state
Figure 4.4: A possible attack on MinBFT, if it only required the primary replica to
have a TEE. Blue arrows indicate messages containing information up
to request k, while red arrows indicate messages carrying information
up to request k−1. Black arrows do not carry information related to any
request. Half-filled bars indicate that a group of replicas have reached
the prepared state for request k, and completely filled bars indicate that
it has also been committed.
blue arrows in step A.5, they will send a log that includes k to all replicas, except for
the rightmost replica. To this replica, they send a log that does not include this last
request k; it will only receive information on requests 1 to k −1. Meanwhile, attack-
ers will delay messages to or from the rightmost replica, except for the messages they
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Framework
send themselves.
With this, the view-change operation can be completed, but the rightmost replica
will be left in a state where k has not been executed, and will no longer accept
messages from the previous view so it will never reach a state where k has been
executed. This violates the safety property.
When all n replicas have access to a TEE, this attack can be protected against by
requiring every VIEW-CHANGE message to include a UI (unique identifier generated by
the TEE). Because these UIs need to be sequential, equivocation can be detected by
all replicas, so it will no longer be possible to equivocate on the log.
What this shows us is that while using a TEE to bind sequence numbers to requests
stops Byzantine replicas from equivocating on requests themselves, we still need to
take into account that the system can be put into an inconsistent state by selectively
omitting (information in) messages.
One might be inclined to think that f + 1 TEE-enabled replicas are enough to
prevent an attack like this from happening to a view-change, but in that case an
attacker can violate the liveness property by controlling f TEE-enabled replicas and
prevent them from participating in a view change, or having them participate with
an incorrect message log.
In the case where there are somewhere between f + 1
and n TEE-enabled replicas, an attacker will still be able to do this, as at least f + 1
consistent view-change messages are needed to be sure that at least one correct replica
has participated in it.
4.2.4.2
View-changes in SACBFT
Looking at MinBFT, it seems as though we require 2f +1 TEEs for a successful view-
change. Whether it is possible to reduce the number of required replicas when the
number of TEE-enabled replicas exceeds x for 1 ≤x < n, remains an open question
for now. We circumvent this by not relying on TEEs at all during a view-change,
since we cannot make any guarantees on how many replicas have access to TEEs. We
leave exploring possible improvements as a topic for future research.
When applying the SACBFT transformation to an existing protocol, view-changes
can largely remain the same. While we do not modify any functionality in a protocol’s
existing view-change algorithm, we do need to change the way a protocol decides on
the next primary.
We cannot elect just any replica to act as the next primary when a view change
occurs; we need to make sure that it has a TEE, otherwise we cannot make use of
trusted counter. However, if we have fewer than f + 1 TEE-enabled replicas, this
will not always be possible, since all of them can fail.
Therefore, we change the
selection procedure for primaries. Primary selection is done in a round-robin fashion,
where all TEE-enabled replicas are first in line. So, if there are 1 ≤x < f + 1 TEE-
enabled replicas, there will be x attempts to start a view with a TEE-enabled primary.
Once we exceed x, we will fall back to the original protocol that includes two voting
rounds to provide ordering. We must ensure that the order in which replicas attempt
to elect primaries is deterministic, so that all correct replicas will choose the same
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Communication
33
primary. We can base the order on e.g. the replica id (assuming there exists ordering
in their identifiers). This way, we maintain liveness of the protocol, even when all
TEE-enabled replicas fail.
Falling back to the original protocol will negatively impact performance, but does
not need to be catastrophic. Rules can be implemented to attempt retry the SACBFT
protocol after a given amount of time, or after manual intervention has been taken by
the system administrators. Moreover, the implementation of the protocol does not
have to be that much more complex just because it contains a fallback protocol, as
shown by [25], and it can even improve the flexibility of the protocol.
When we have at least f + 1 TEE-enabled replicas it is no longer necessary to
consider replicas without a TEE as potential primaries for a new view, as we are
guaranteed to eventually reach a TEE-enabled replica that has not failed. This way
we will not have to fall back at all, since liveness is ensured even with just this set of
TEE-enabled replicas as candidates for a primary.
As a final note on view-changes, we mention that while their functionality does not
change, care has to be taken when applying the SACBFT transformations to existing
protocols, in order to not break view-changes. For certain protocols (e.g. PBFT),
view-changes rely on PREPREPARE messages as proof that a request was assigned a
sequence number.
When applying SACBFT, this will have to change to rely on
PREPARE messages or simply the ⟨c, H(M)⟩σpC tuple instead.
4.2.5
Correctness
The correctness properties of SACBFT rely heavily on the correctness properties of
the underlying protocol. In most cases, the correctness arguments remain valid with
minor changes.
We need to show that if the protocol satisfied the safety property without SACBFT,
this still holds with the SACBFT changes to the PREPARE phase. Luckily, this is rela-
tively easy to see: within a view, monotonicity of the sequence number is guaranteed
because of the TEE used by the primary, and we assume that actions performed by
this TEE are atomic and do not leak any information apart from their return values.
Correct replicas check whether a sequence number has already been used before ac-
cepting an incoming PREPARE message, preventing replay attacks. Moreover, because
we use a trusted monotonic counter, non-equivocation is ensured. This is a property
that is often used a mid-point in proofs of correctness (e.g. in [12] and [37]). Since
with SACBFT this mid-point is provided, the proofs will still hold.
The message aggregation techniques used by SACBFT only modify the way mes-
sages are distributed, and moreover the primary is unable to modify or forge incoming
votes because it does not possess the correct private keys. This does not change the
safety properties satisfied by the original protocols in any way either.
Finally, in classical BFT protocols, view-changes are often needed to guarantee
liveness. We only change the order the primary replicas are picked, which has no
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Framework
impact on liveness, as it is still guaranteed that eventually a correct replica will be
picked to act as a primary in the next view.
4.3
Applying SACBFT
The two transformations described in this chapter can be applied to a protocol sep-
arately from each other. The ordering phase transformation has some requirements
and is not completely trivial to apply to an existing protocol.
The voting round
transformation on the other hand is fairly simple and has no special requirements.
For both transformations, one first has to ensure that the protocol includes a
primary replica.
4.3.1
Applying the ordering phase transformation
In order to apply SACBFT ordering phase transformation to a protocol, one first has
to make sure that the protocol satisfies the following:
1. Sequence numbers are “picked” by one primary replica, and distributed to all
other replicas through this replica.
2. Its safety proof includes non-equivocation of the sequence number as a proof
mid-point.
3. View-changes are only necessary for liveness.
4. At least one replica has access to a TEE.
While it is possible to apply the SACBFT ordering phase transformation to a
protocol even if requirement 2 does not hold, one will have to provide a separate
safety proof for the transformed protocol in order to guarantee correctness.
The transformation itself can be applied as follows:
1. Ensure that all TEE-enabled replicas are first in line to become primary in the
primary election process.
2. Ensure that all replicas can remotely attest the TEE-enabled replicas, and can
verify signatures generated by these replicas.
3. Identify the ordering phases of the original protocol.
4. When the current primary has a TEE, replace these ordering phases with a
PREPARE message, broadcast from the primary, that includes a sequence number
picked by the primary’s TEE and bound to the current request (as described in
Section 4.2.1).
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Examples of transformed protocols
35
4.3.2
Applying the voting round transformation
The voting round transformation is less involved. It can be applied to any PBFT-like
protocol, as long as there is a primary replica involved. The steps for this are as
follows:
1. Ensure that all replicas have an asymmetric key pair belonging to a multisigna-
ture scheme.
2. Ensure that all replicas have access to the public key of each replica in this
multisignature scheme.
3. Identify all voting rounds in the original protocol.
4. Replace each voting round with a voting round based on signature aggregation
as described in Section 4.2.2).
4.4
Examples of transformed protocols
4.4.1
SACPBFT
When applying SACBFT to PBFT, we replace the two voting rounds in the original
protocol. Firstly we replace the first voting round (PREPREPARE and PREPARE) with a
simple broadcast from the primary replica, informing all other replicas of the request
and sequence number. The second voting round occurs in the COMMIT phase. As
discussed previously, this is a voting round with H(M) as a ballot, and replacing it
with the SACBFT voting scheme brings down communication complexity to O(n) at
the cost of an extra round’s latency.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Framework
C
0
1
2
3
request
pre-prepare
commit
reply
prepare
request
commit
reply
prepare
×
TEE
PBFT
SACPBFT
PBFT
Figure 4.5: An illustration of the communication patterns of PBFT and SACPBFT
with one faulty replica (3).
As can be seen in figure 4.5, the total number of communication steps nonetheless
remains the same. This is because we manage to remove one step in the prepare
phase, and this compensates for the extra communication step required for signature
aggregation.
Algorithm 5 shows minimal pseudocode for SACPBFT. The REQUEST message
contains client identifier c, operation o and timestamp t, while in the other messages
v refers to the view number and i to the replica identifier. Note that line 21 line is
open to interpretation. One can decide to have the protocol wait for a reasonable
amount of time, in hopes of still obtaining f + 1 valid signatures, or notify the client
that not enough commit messages have been received and abort the transaction.
4.4.2
SACRePBFT
As figure 4.6 shows, applying SACBFT to RePBFT is very similar to its application
to PBFT. The first voting phase is replaced with SACBFT’s prepare phase, and
the second voting phase with a signature aggregation scheme.
This is analog to
the changes made to PBFT. The only difference is actually introduced by RePBFT;
replies are not only sent to the client, but also to passive replicas.
The pseudocode for SACRePBFT is not shown as it is mostly analogous to the
SACPBFT code in Algorithm 5. The one difference is that the ”broadcast to all
replica‘’ messages will change to ”broadcast to all active replicas‘’, and in the REPLY
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Examples of transformed protocols
37
phase an UPDATE message will also be sent to all passive replicas.
Additionally,
if at any time an incorrect message is received by enough replicas, SACRePBFT
will initiate a protocol switch to SACPBFT, analogous to how RePBFT switches to
PBFT(described in [19]).
C
0
1
2
3
request
pre-prepare
commit
reply
prepare
request
commit
reply
prepare
(passive)
TEE
RePBFT
SACRePBFT
RePBFT
Figure 4.6: An illustration of the communication patterns of RePBFT and
SACRePBFT with one passive replica (3).
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Framework
Algorithm 5 SACPBFT
1: upon reception of request M = ⟨REQUEST, o, t, c⟩at primary replica do
2:
⟨u, H(M)⟩σp ←TEE.Increment(H(M))
3:
broadcast ⟨PREPARE, ⟨u, H(M)⟩σp, v, M⟩to all replicas
4: end
5: upon reception of ⟨PREPARE, ⟨u, H(M)⟩σp, v, M⟩at replica i do
6:
if v < current view then
7:
ignore this message
8:
end if
9:
if c ≤last received signed sequence number then
10:
Request view-change and abort transaction
11:
end if
12:
⟨u⟩σ∗
i ←MultiSign(u, ki)
13:
set a timer to wait for a reply from the primary
14:
send ⟨COMMIT, ⟨u⟩σ∗
i , H(M), v, i⟩to primary replica
15: end
16: upon reception of f + 1 ⟨COMMIT, ⟨u⟩σ∗
i , v, H(M)⟩messages at primary replica
do
17:
if v < current view then
18:
ignore this message
19:
end if
20:
if ∃i : MultiVerify(⟨u⟩σ∗
i ) ̸= true then
21:
return “Not all signatures are valid”
22:
end if
23:
⟨u⟩σ∗
1...f+1 ←Aggregate(⟨u⟩σ∗
1 , . . . , ⟨u⟩σ∗
f+1)
24:
broadcast ⟨COMMIT, ⟨u⟩σ∗
1...f+1, v, H(M)⟩to all replicas
25: end
26: upon reception of ⟨COMMIT, ⟨u⟩σ∗
1...f+1, H(M), v, i⟩at replica i do
27:
if v < current view then
28:
ignore this message
29:
end if
30:
if MultiVerify(⟨u⟩σ∗
1...f+1) ̸= true then
31:
Request view-change and abort transaction
32:
end if
33:
Cancel the timer waiting for a reply from the primary
34:
r ←execute operation o
35:
send ⟨REPLY, v, t, c, i, r⟩to client c
36: end
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
In order to evaluate the performance of the protocol transformations proposed in
this thesis, we implemented a proof-of-concept version of the SACPBFT algorithm
(Section
4.4.1) that is able to execute an arbitrary number of transactions in one
view.
Our software was developed in a combination of the C, C++ and Go [24]
programming languages.
In this chapter we describe the structural choices and implementation choices of
our proof-of-concept, after which we briefly describe the configuration parameters.
First we discuss the cryptographic primitives we used.
5.1
Cryptography
SACBFT relies on cryptographic functions for secure hashing, signatures, and mul-
tisignatures. In this section we elaborate on our choices for these functions in the
proof-of-concept implementation of SACPBFT.
5.1.0.1
Hashing
In Chapter 4 we rely on a secure cryptographic hash function in order to hash requests.
We use SHA256 of the SHA-2 hash function family. This is a well known and widely
deployed cryptographic hash function, and is considered to be secure by the academic
community at the time of writing.
In our implementation, we rely on the OpenSSL [41] SHA256 implementation,
provided by the libcrypto [42] API.
5.1.0.2
Multisignatures
We also require a specific multisignature scheme for the SACBFT voting phase trans-
formation described in Section 4.2.2. In principle, any multisignature scheme would
suffice, although preference goes to one that has small signature sizes and minimal
communication overhead.
While we rely on the BLS signature scheme (see Sec-
tion 2.3.1), we would like to note that recent work by Boneh et.
al.
introduces
a multisignature scheme that could provide better performance [8]. Unlike BLS, it
does not require special measures to allow for signing the same message, and the
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Implementation
public aggregate key is sufficient to verify which replicas participated in the signature
(unlike BLS, where a separate public aggregate key will have to be computed). Un-
fortunately, the work is mainly theoretical and no implementation exists at the time
of writing.
We use the BLS aggregate signature scheme as a multisignature scheme, since
SACBFT requires all replicas to sign the same message. For this, we require a zero-
knowledge proof on the private keys used for multisignatures, to prevent signature
forgery.
For this proof-of-concept implementation, we have not implemented this,
as the test environment is controlled by us, and signature forgery is not a concern.
Moreover, the proof should be done when distributing the keys, and it does there-
fore not affect performance of the algorithm. In a real-world deployment, the zero-
knowledge proof must be done before the system is used. For this, there exist ample
zero-knowledge proof protocols (see e.g. [6, 11, 22]).
We use an efficient BLS implementation in Go, originally written for the Vu-
vuzela [51] project. The code is slightly modified, since the original implementation
did not allow for aggregating signatures on the same message. To be able to interface
with this implementation, we wrote C bindings for the Go BLS code, which we then
used in our proof-of-concept implementation.
With the unmodified Go library, BLS operations generally take less than a mil-
lisecond (except the verification operation, which grows with the number of signa-
tures), calling the same operations from within our C++ code, operations tend to
take roughly 4 milliseconds. This is likely due to heavy context switching as well as
page faults, considering the Go library spins up a garbage collector and calls many
Go standard library functions (the entire Go Runtime had to be embedded in our
program). Since this overhead is constant-time, we do not consider it to be a big
issue as it will be negligible when the number of replicas increases.
5.1.0.3
Signatures
The trusted monotonic counter described in Section 2.2.2 relies on a signature scheme
to bind counter values to messages. Since we use Intel SGX as a TEE, it is convenient
to use a signature scheme that is already available in the intel SGX SDK API [28]. the
SGX SDK implements and provides an interface for the NIST ECDSA standard [39],
using Curve P-256.
5.2
Key generation
The keys are generated during deployment of the system. We discuss the generation
of the two types of key pairs separately.
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Key generation
41
BLS key pairs
The BLS keys are generated through a Go program that generates the keys for all
replicas in one run. This is done while setting up the system, and is done by one
machine. While in a production setting it is much safer for each replica to generate
their own key upon e.g. first execution of the program, and then communicate their
public key with all other replicas, this adds complexity to the code that is unnecessary
for the purpose of measuring performance.
We therefore use a single program to
generate all keys, and then distribute the keys from this central system.
In a production environment there should also be a protocol in place for changing
keys after a replica has been compromised or has failed. This protocol should ensure
that no replicas accept messages signed by the replica’s previous key and are aware
of the replica’s new public key.
This program takes a parameter n to determine the number of keys it should
generate, after which it writes n public keys to one file, and creates a subdirectory
with n files each containing one private key (named r1 to rn).
Trusted counter key pair
This key pair is generated if the program is started, tries to take the role of a primary
replica, and does not find an existing key pair on the system. It will then generate the
key pair, save the public key to the harddisk, seal the private key with a key known
only to the TEE, and saves the encrypted private key to the harddisk as well.
Again, in a production environment, there should be a protocol allowing each
replica to communicate their TEE public key to all other replicas. Since we do not
want to add unnecessary complexity, and only use a single TEE for the entire system
(since we do not test view-changes), this is sufficient for our purpose.
Unlike the BLS keys, this key pair cannot be generated on any system – the private
key is encrypted with a key known only to the TEE belonging to the machine that
generated the key pair. Therefore, we need to execute this on the system that will
act as a primary replica for our benchmarks.
In a production setting, it should not generally be necessary to replace a TEE
key pair, unless the security of the TEE itself is compromised – something we assume
does not happen.
Key generation steps
In order to successfully generate and distribute the keys, the following steps should
thus be taken:
1. Generate n BLS keys on a central system.
2. Run the SACPBFT program in server mode, taking on the role of primary.
3. Distribute the BLS public key file and the counter public key file to all machines.
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Implementation
4. Distribute the private keys to the relevant replicas and ensure their configuration
file points to their private key (See Section 5.3.4).
Note that Step 2 has to be performed on the system that will also act as primary
for the evaluation phase.
While this approach is not as safe as having each replica generate their own
BLS key, it considerably simplifies key distribution, and the security risk is deemed
acceptable in our test setup.
5.3
Software structure
Server mode Client mode
SACPBFT
Transaction Manager
Transaction types
Network manager
Message types
Transaction module
Network module
TCP Server
TCP Client
Transaction queue
Trusted Counter
Conﬁguration
Cryptography
Figure 5.1: High-level structure of the SACPBFT proof-of-concept implementation.
The SACPBFT code itself is mostly written in C++ using an object-oriented
approach, with small parts in pure C for the interface between trusted code and
untrusted code. The trusted code implements a trusted monotonic counter. It also
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Software structure
43
provides several extra functions to generate an ECDSA key pair, and to save/store
them securely to disk, in such a way that only the SGX enclave can read them.
The majority of untrusted code can be divided into two modules, as Figure 5.1
shows. The first module is the network module, containing all code related to network
connections and data transmission. The second module is related to transactions,
containing a manager to order them and manage their execution, and the individ-
ual transaction types themselves. Both modules rely on a cryptography module for
cryptographic functions.
Our program is able to function in server (i.e. replica) mode , or client mode.
Both modes rely on the same network module for communication, but the server
mode also requires the transaction module. Both modes also rely on a configuration
parser module that parses configuration files and translates configuration values to
their correct types.
This mode implements all replica behavior, and additionally relies on a trusted
counter module that provides all trusted counter functionality.
The client mode allows the user to specify the request size as well as the number
of requests to perform in succession. When the number of requests is specified, the
client will wait until it has received enough replies before sending the next request.
5.3.1
Trusted computing base
The trusted monotonic counter runs completely inside an SGX enclave. This counter
exposes a function getCounter(X), which corresponds to the Increment function
described in Section 2.2.2. In order to ensure atomicity of this function, the function
obtains a mutex before it executes.
The pseudocode of the Increment function requires c and st, pt to be persistent
between function calls. To achieve this, we simply define them to be global variables
within the enclave. We keep the same key-pair throughout instantations of the en-
clave, meaning this is not a secure implementation. It makes deployment on our test
setup considerably easier however, and since key generation and distribution is not
performance-critical, we consider this to be a permissible omission for our proof-of-
concept.
Remote attestation
Remote attestation is needed to bind the key pair belonging to the trusted counter to
an actual enclave. We briefly describe how to perform remote attestation using Intel
SGX in a safe way, ensuring that a malicious actor will not be able to forge signatures
that should come from the counter.
Intel SGX allows enclaves to produce “quotes”[27, page 15], that contain a number
of data fields allowing users to verify the legitimacy and authenticity of the enclave.
Relevant for our purpose are the MRENCLAVE field, which uniquely identifies the
code running on the enclave, the MRSIGNER field, which uniquely identifies the
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Implementation
developer key with which the enclave was signed, and a report field which will be
used to include a hash of the counter’s public key pt.
First, the developer needs to obtain a certified asymmetric key pair from Intel,
which they use to sign the enclave itself when compiling the program for production
usage.
During the development process, the developer will have to generate a quote from
an enclave running the final (production-ready) enclave code, to obtain the correct
MRENCLAVE value. This value then has to be made public so that integrity of the
enclave code can later be verified.
During the deployment phase, the following steps need to be taken:
1. All TEE-enabled machines must generate an asymmetric key pair.
2. All TEE-enabled machines must produce a quote of their trusted counter en-
clave, including (a hash of) their public key generated in the previous step in
the report data, to bind the public key to this enclave.
3. The quotes have to be verified. In particular, for each quote, the MRSIGNER
value has to correspond to the correct developer key, the MRENCLAVE value
has to correspond to the MRENCLAVE value made public by the developers,
and the (hash of the) public key included in the quote has to match the (hash
of the) public key that is claimed to belong to this TEE.
4. If all verifications passed successfully, the public keys can safely be distributed
to all replicas.
Note that the verification in step 3 should be done in a trusted environment.
Alternatively, the quotes can also be distributed to all replicas and verified separately
by their managers, as long as it is done before actual execution of the protocol.
5.3.2
Communication
The SACPBFT prototype uses TCP connections to communicate between replicas.
Each replica sets up a connection with the current primary during the startup phase.
This way, TCP handshakes do not have to be performed for every transaction, reduc-
ing latency as a result.
The network module heavily relies on the Boost ASIO [15] library for network
operations.
5.3.2.1
Message format
We use Google Protocol Buffers [23] as a serialization format for the different messages
sent by replicas. Protobuf is a popular data interchange format, allowing for efficient
serialization of messages. Our prototype uses the following message types:
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Software structure
45
• SIGNATURE: This is simply a data structure to hold signatures generated by a
trusted counter as well as BLS signatures. This message type is used as part of
PREPARE and COMMIT messages.
• REGISTER: Registers a client to all replicas. This allows replicas to map the
client ID to an actual host, and opens a TCP session with this client (used for
sending REPLY messages).
• REQUEST: Contains the request message sent by a client to the primary replica.
• PREPARE: The PREPARE message is sent by the primary to all replicas. It con-
tains the corresponding REQUEST sent by the client, together with a SIGNATURE
message containing the counter value bound to this request.
• COMMIT: This message represents both communication steps in the commit phase
of SACPBFT. Replicas send a COMMIT message to the primary, including two
signatures: the signature they received from the primary in a PREPARE message,
and a BLS signature representing the replica’s vote.
Once the primary has
obtained enough of these it will broadcast another COMMIT message, with an
aggregated BLS signature in its body.
• REPLY: This contains the request operation result and is sent to the client by
all replicas.
5.3.3
Transactions
Whenever a replica receives a message, it will hand this over to the transaction module.
This module maintains a queue of currently open transactions, and ensures that
incoming messages arrives at the correct transactions.
Each transaction runs in a separate thread, which gets destroyed once the trans-
action finishes. This ensures that the network thread does not get blocked for long
periods of time when processing messages within a transaction.
Since the goal of this proof-of-concept implementation is to enable benchmarking
of the performance of the algorithm, our transactions support just one operation: the
NOOP “no-operation” operation. This operation does not actually do anything, but
can take an arbitrary amount of data as operation parameters, to allow for testing
the performance of different message sizes.
5.3.4
Configuration
The proof-of-concept program requires a configuration file containing necessary infor-
mation for correct functioning of the system. This allows us to change the configu-
ration during evaluation of the framework. Each replica has its own unique version
of the configuration file, as it also contains file paths to their BLS key pairs. Other
important parameters in the configuration file are :
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Implementation
• The amount of replicas in the system.
• The ID of the primary replica.
• A list mapping all replica IDs to IP addresses with TCP ports.
• A list mapping all clients IDs to IP addresses with TCP ports.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Evaluation
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed framework, we make an estima-
tion of the data transmitted per transaction, which we use to compare the network
usage of PBFT and SACPBFT. We also created an experimental setup that simulates
a BFT system running SACPBFT in the optimal case.
6.1
Theoretical evaluation
We compare the quantity of transmitted data of PBFT and SACPBFT in the optimal
case where there are no faulty replicas.
To make a realistic estimation of the size of the transmitted data per transaction,
we need to estimate the sizes of all elements in each message.
For each type of
element, we provide a realistic size estimation, which we use to plot the growth rates
of transmitted data as a function of the amount of replicas in the system.
We define the size estimations for the message elements as follows:
Element(s)
Size
Description
–
1
message tag (e.g. REQUEST or PREPARE)
o
0
request operation (size varies)
t
8
timestamp (UNIX Epoch time)
c, i
2
ID type (client ID, replica ID)
v, n, u
4
numerical type (view nr, seq. nr, counter value)
h(x)
32
hash (SHA256)
r
0
operation result (varies)
σx
64
signature (ECDSA)
σ∗
x
32
multisignature (compressed BLS)
Some values warrant some extra explanation: we define the size of the message tag to
be S(e) = 1 byte, which corresponds to the size of the message tag in our implementa-
tion. However, this is not a lower bound – There are only 4-5 different message types
in this protocol, and is possible for an implementation to work without the tags. For
the growth rate comparison it does not matter much; each message in both protocols
contains the same number of message tags.
ID fields are 2 bytes. This is because we evaluate the transmitted data size for
up to 300 replicas, meaning that we need 9 bits to uniquely represent all replica IDs.
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Evaluation
Since in most architectures bytes are the smallest allocatable unit, we use 2 bytes
instead. Other realistic choices would have been standard sizes for integers (4 bytes
or 8 bytes).
We specify the request operation and operation result size to be 0. This is because
the possible operations depend on the implementation and scenario. Moreover, in
both PBFT and SACPBFT these are only sent once by each replica, meaning that
they would add the same amount of transmitted data to each transaction for both
protocols. We can therefore safely ignore them when inspecting the growth rate of
the transmitted data.
With the message elements defined, we then define a size function S for messages
in PBFT and SACPBFT as follows:
PBFT
Message
Size
a1 = ⟨REQUEST, o, t, c⟩
S(a1) = 11
a2 = ⟨PREPREPARE, v, n, h(m), a1⟩
S(a2) = 52
a3 = ⟨PREPARE, v, n, h(m), i⟩
S(a3) = 43
a4 = ⟨COMMIT, v, n, h(m), i⟩
S(a4) = 43
a5 = ⟨REPLY, v, t, c, i, r⟩
S(a5) = 19
SACPBFT
b1 = ⟨REQUEST, o, t, c⟩
S(b1) = 11
b2 = ⟨PREPARE, ⟨u, h(m)⟩σpC , v, b1⟩
S(b2) = 112
b3 = ⟨COMMIT, ⟨u⟩σ∗
i , h(m), v, i⟩
S(b3) = 75
b4 = ⟨COMMIT, ⟨u⟩σ∗
1...n, h(m), v⟩
S(b4) = 73
b5 = ⟨REPLY, v, t, c, i, r⟩
S(b5) = 19
From these equations, it might look like SACPBFT requires more network traffic
at a first glance, since the message sizes are larger than those of PBFT. While this
might be true for individual messages, PBFT transmits considerably more messages
per transaction. We construct functions PBFT(N) and SACPBFT(N) that capture the
communication required for one transaction, where N is the number of replicas.
PBFT(N) = S(a1) + (N −1)S(a2) + (N 2 −N)(S(a3) + S(a4)) + NS(a5)
SACPBFT(N) = S(b1) + (N −1)(S(b2) + S(b3) + S(b4)) + NS(b5)
Figure 6.1 plots these functions for increasing N. SACPBFT transmits much less
data per transaction, especially when the number of replicas increases, indicating that
it is more suitable for low-bandwidth environments than PBFT.
Note that the functions presented in this section are merely an estimation and do
not provide an exact lower bound. In a real setting other things need to be taken
into account as well, for example the overhead of the varying underlying network
protocols, as well as possible overhead from authenticated encryption protocols used
to set up secure channels between machines.
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Experimental evaluation
49
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Number of replicas
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
Size (bytes)
Transmitted data per transaction vs. number of replicas
PBFT
SACPBFT
Figure 6.1: Estimation of transmitted data per transaction.
6.2
Experimental evaluation
We assess the performance impact of our improvements by simulating a BFT sys-
tem with one client and n replicas, and measuring the average time it takes for one
transaction to complete.
To assess the performance impact of our improvements we deployed proof-of-
concept implementations of PBFT and SACPBFT to a test cluster. As SACPBFT
is a modification of PBFT, it makes sense to compare these.
Test setup
Our test setup consists of five SGX-enabled machines, operating in an isolated switched
network (See Figure 6.2). Each system runs on an Intel Core i5-6500 processor, fea-
turing 4 cores and no hyperthreading. The first system (SGX-1) has 16GB RAM,
and all others have 8GB RAM.
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Evaluation
1Gbit Switch
1Gbit Switch
sgx-cluster-0
sgx-cluster-1
sgx-cluster-2
sgx-cluster-3
sgx-cluster-4
Figure 6.2: The network layout of the cluster used in our experimental setup.
We distribute the number of replicas in our system evenly over the available
machines (e.g.
when the system contains 30 replicas, each machine will run 6 of
these). In addition to that, the first machine also runs the client. Each replica runs
in its own process.
Testing
For each protocol, we measure the time it takes for a transactions to complete for
increasing values of n. For each sample point, we execute ten requests, each carrying a
1024B payload, and calculate the average time per transaction based on the obtained
data.
The bandwidth of each machine is limited to 8Mbit (up- and downlink separately),
in order to more accurately simulate a constrained network environment (e.g.
a
number of embedded devices communicating with each other using light-weight RF
protocols).
For the SACPBFT implementation, only the process managing the primary replica
has access to an SGX enclave.
Results
Figure 6.3 depicts the average transaction latency for a 1024B payload for increasing
values of n. As can be seen, PBFT’s performance drops fast compared to the other
two algorithms when the number of replicas increases. This is due to its all-to-all
broadcasts. When f ≈30, transactions take around 550 milliseconds to complete.
SACPBFT achieves considerably better performance.
With the same amount
of replicas, transactions take only around 150 milliseconds to complete. When the
number of replicas is small however, PBFT outperforms SACPBFT. This due to the
overhead introduced by calls to the LBS signature library, as explained in Section 5.1.
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Experimental evaluation
51
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Tolerable number of faulty replicas(f)
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
480
540
600
mean latency [ms]
Latencies for a 1024B payload
sacpbft
pbft
Figure 6.3: Transaction latency vs. number of replicas.
There is room for efficiency improvement in the SACPBFT implementation however,
so it is possible to reduce this gap.
==PAGE:62==
52
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
The evaluation done in Chapter 6 allows us to compare the transaction latency of
various protocols to that of SACPBFT. However, in Chapter 3 we defined more goals
than just minimizing transaction latency. In this section we look at the extent to
which each of these goals is satisfied. We also propose alternatives and point out
areas of improvement that might further increase performance. Finally, we discuss
possibilities for future research.
7.1
Fault tolerance
Requirement F-1 states that the framework should maintain safety and liveness prop-
erties of the underlying protocols. As described in Section 4.2.5, our framework does
not break liveness arguments in existing protocols. Safety arguments will also still
hold as long as the underlying protocol uses non-equivocation as a mid-point in the
proof. All protocols investigated in the scope of this thesis do so, indicating that this
is an acceptable limitation. This allows the framework to act as a drop-in replace-
ment, in that no extra effort is needed to ensure the correctness of the transformed
protocol. Moreover, if an existing protocol does not use non-equivocation as a proof
mid-point, this does not necessarily mean that the safety property is violated, but
rather that manual work is needed to verify that it still holds. Overall, the goal is
thus satisfied, although manual verification might be necessary in rare cases.
The second goal, F-2 is to maximize the number of tolerated faults. The SACBFT
framework requires 3f +1 replicas, like all other solutions that do not rely on trusted
hardware. The reason we have not been able to improve this so we can tolerate more
faults, is not because the transactions within a view require it (a single transaction can
function with 2f + 1 replicas if both the PREPARE and voting round transformations
are applied), but rather that view-changes are not modified by the framework and
still require 3f + 1 replicas. If a system has 2f + 1 TEEs, it is possible to bring down
the replica requirement to 2f + 1 for the entire system, as then a view-change sub-
protocol where 2f +1 TEEs participate can be used, as in e.g. minBFT [50]. Whether
view-changes can be improved upon in other cases remains an open question for now.
We also stated that we want to minimize the number of TEEs necessary (F-3),
with the intent to increase performance with minimum investment. Our framework
is able to increase the efficiency of transactions with as little as 1 TEE. We can thus
consider this goal to be satisfied. The caveat is that with only a single TEE, the
==PAGE:64==
54
7 Discussion
performance benefits exist only for as long as the TEE-enabled system does not fail.
This is a limitation that cannot be circumvented, but increasing the number of TEEs
decreases the likelihood of this ever happening. Once the system has f + 1 or more
TEEs, the performance benefits are permanent. This is still an improvement over the
2f + 1 requirement of other protocols that rely on TEEs.
The final fault tolerance goal states that the trusted computing base should be as
small as possible (F-4). The SACBFT framework relies solely on a trusted monotonic
counter, the pseudocode of which is listed in Algorithm 1. The length of this algorithm
suggests that it is possible to implement the counter in only a few lines of code.
However, the complexity of the signature algorithm has to be taken into account. If
the Sign operation requires complex code then this goes against goal F-4. On the
other hand, many popular signature schemes have battle-tested implementations that
have been reviewed and improved by many contributors.
With SGX, the standard libraries provide an interface to perform signature oper-
ations, which we use to keep the codebase small. In our proof-of-concept implementa-
tion, the codebase for the trusted counter is slightly over 100 lines of code, including
auxiliary functions to initialize the cryptographic context, generate key pairs and
seal/unseal them. This is still relatively small and it is manageable to formally verify
this code. All in all, the trusted computing base has the potential to be very small
and its functionality is well defined, meaning that it can be thoroughly tested for
correctness.
7.2
Performance
One of the main goals of SACBFT is to increase performance of existing protocols.
An important factor in this is goal P-1: minimizing communication complexity. The
painful spots in existing protocols are traditionally the voting rounds, where each
replica needs to inform all other replicas of its vote. The O(n2) communication com-
plexity this brings, has been reduced to O(n) with multisignature techniques in earlier
work. The SACBFT transformations allow one to replace classical voting rounds with
multisignature voting rounds as well, thereby reducing the communication complexity.
This O(n) complexity is on par with the current state of the art in BFT algorithms,
and we can thus say that the communication complexity is minimal.
The second performance goal (P-2) aims to minimize the number of voting rounds.
While Zyzzyva can be considered to have the minimum number of voting rounds in
the optimal case (i.e.
none), it operates in a non-standard adversary model and
requires rollbacks. We therefore consider this unrealistic and look at the minimum
round number in the traditional model instead. In the traditional model, TEE-based
algorithms require the smallest number of voting rounds: these algorithms can omit
one voting round by relying on trusted components, and we based the SACBFT
ordering process transformation on this concept. This transformation removes the
ordering phase voting round and as a result SACBFT is able to bring down the
==PAGE:65==
7.3 Future work
55
number of voting rounds to the minimum seen existing algorithms (with Zyzzyva as
an exception).
The final performance goal is to minimize transaction latency (P-3). There are
3 approaches to this: firstly, one can minimize the number of communication steps
for a transaction. For most protocols, the amount of communication steps stays the
same after the SACBFT transformations, when a multisignature algorithm is used
that requires a single round trip. Some schemes require two round trips for one voting
round (e.g. Schnorr multisignatures as used in CoSi [47]). If such a scheme is used
with SACBFT then the amount of communication steps can increase.
The second way in which one can attempt to minimize latency is by reducing
communication complexity. This saves bandwidth and will reduce latency especially
when the number of replicas increases. This is defined as a separate performance
goal (P-1) and has already been discussed. The all-to-all broadcast voting model is
more efficient for very small groups of replicas, so one possible improvement here is
to modify the algorithm to use the all-to-all broadcast for all systems with fewer than
x replicas, and use the aggregation method otherwise.
The third way is to restructure the network topology of the system to optimize
bandwidth usage and allow for faster propagation of messages. Some protocls such
as FastBFT [37] and Byzcoin [34] experiment with different topologies such as a tree
topology with the primary as a root. This allows messages to propagate through the
system in O(log n) time. In this thesis we do not explore different topologies, since
it adds complexity to the fault tolerance problem (e.g. in a binary tree, the protocol
needs to ensure that all replicas are reachable even when one of the internal nodes
fails), but this is certainly a subject worth exploring in future work.
As the results in Chapter 6 show, SACBFT is capable of significantly reducing
transaction latency, although it only focuses on one out of three ways to minimize
latency. To really minimize latency, the implementation plays a major role as well.
In our proof-of-concept implementation of SACPBFT, we can identify several areas
where we could increase performance and reduce latency. One such example is the
way the multisignature scheme is implemented. While the BLS implementation used
in the proof-of-concept is optimized by itself, the code is written in Go and accessing
this from C/C++ requires the entire Go runtime to be included in the binary (which
includes a garbage collector), as well as several adapter interfaces that make memory
allocations that could otherwise be avoided.
Goal P-3 can therefore be seen as
partially satisfied; latency is reduced but there is room for further optimization.
7.3
Future work
The work presented in this thesis has introduced a number of questions we have not
yet been able to answer, and demand further research. In addition to that, there are
some optimization techniques we have not explored yet.
Firstly, it remains an open question whether is possible to reduce the number of
participating replicas in view changes when fewer than 2f + 1 replicas have a TEE.
==PAGE:66==
56
7 Discussion
Should this turn out to be the case, it will impact goal F −1 (we need to ensure that
liveness still holds), as well as F-2 since the number of tolerated faults will go up
to possibly even ⌈n−1
2 ⌉. It is also possible that it will negatively affect F-4, since it
might require more from the TEE than just a trusted counter.
While right now the added value of SACBFT is primarily as a bridge from no
TEEs to a full TEE-enabled system, increasing the number of tolerated faults would
increase the potential for SACBFT to actually replace existing TEE-based approaches
in some situations, since it would be able to provide the same benefits with a smaller
investment.
A second point that warrants more research is the impact of different network
topologies on the performance of SACBFT, something we already briefly touched
upon in Section 7.2. While the topology is not something that can be chosen for
every system, it is worthwhile to know what the impact is of SACBFT for a given
topology. This can then lead to more informed choices on whether it pays off to apply
SACBFT to some situation.
The performance impact of choosing different multisignature schemes is another
aspect that we want to look at in future work. In this thesis, we use the BLS scheme,
which requires only one round-trip for a vote, but is computationally more expensive
than some other algorithms that require more round trips. It is interesting to see
in which cases the added latency of an extra round trip is preferable to the added
latency of computation. Other aggregation techniques can be investigated as well.
As mentioned in Chapter 6, PBFT outperforms SACPBFT when the number of
replicas is very small.
This points to the possibility of increasing performance in
these cases by using the all-to-all broadcast voting method instead. The point where
it becomes more efficient to use the aggregation method is very likely dependent on
network properties, and defining a method for determining this threshold given a set
of network properties is an interesting topic for future work.
The SACPBFT proof-of-concept implementation itself also has room for improve-
ment. For example, it might be made faster by relying on a pure C/C++ imple-
mentation of the BLS scheme instead of the current Go implementation. the proof-
of-concept also currently creates a new thread for each transaction. While threads
for completed transactions are terminated, the overhead of managing threads is not
necessary, as a thread pool could be used to manage transactions, or it can be avoided
by using strands instead of threads.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 8
Related Work
Since Lamport’s formalization of the Byzantine general’s problem [36], there has
been much research on Byzantine agreement problems. Before the introduction of
PBFT [12], many solutions tended to rely on a synchronous model (e.g. [21]), or
attempted to circumvent the FLP impossibility [20] by relying on randomization [14,
5, 10], atomic broadcasts [45] (a mechanism allowing processors to reliably broadcast
messages), or unreliable fault detectors [13, 43] (modules local to each machine that
attempt to establish which of the other machines might have crashed).
PBFT was the first protocol to use the weak synchrony assumption, which for
the first time put Byzantine consensus within reach of practical applications. Since
its introduction , there have many many protocols building upon PBFT to improve
its efficiency, both by reducing transaction latency and by lowering resource require-
ments.
One such example is ByzCoin [34], which uses multisignatures as a means to
achieve message aggregation for its voting rounds, bringing down communication
complexity. Multisignatures are not the only way to achieve message aggregation
however. For example, FastBFT [37] uses shared secrets to aggregate messages, re-
quiring a TEE but only relying on the XOR operation for shared secrets, resulting
in extremely low computation overhead. SACBFT builds upon the multisignature
message aggregation introduced by ByzCoin, to achieve similar reductions in commu-
nication complexity.
In an attempt to reduce the amount of resources used, Yin et. al.[52] have shown
that by separating agreement from execution, there only need to be 2f + 1 executing
processes (although it still requires 3f + 1 agreement processes). TEE-enabled proto-
cols improve upon this by lowering the number of processes to 2f + 1 altogether [18,
50, 16, 37, 32, 44].
Two of the earliest TEE-based protocols [16, 18], depend on
trusted hardware to implement attested append-only memory and atomic multicasts
respectively. Veronese et. al. [50] remarked that simplicity is a key concern for trusted
components, a requirement not satisfied by those algorithms. This moved them to
specify the USIG trusted counter service, forming the core of MinBFT. Going even
further, CheapBFT [32] combines the efforts of MinBFT and ReBFT [19] to lower the
lower the number of replicas participating in agreement to f + 1 when there are no
faults, and only involving the remaining f replicas when faults are detected. FastBFT
draws inspiration from ByzCoin and CheapBFT to reach O(n) communication com-
plexity with f + 1 active replicas.
==PAGE:68==
58
8 Related Work
When we consider the complexity of TEE-enabled BFT protocols in more detail,
we see that this varies a lot. We based the trusted counter used in SACBFT on
MinBFT’s USIG service. This is one of the simplest forms of a TEE. On the other
end of the spectrum we find protocols such as [44] that rely on trusted hypervisors and
virtual machines to achieve similar benefits. the complexity of TEEs used by other
protocols lie somewhere between a trusted counter and a complete VM infrastructure.
ReBFT is like SACBFT in that it is a framework that can be applied to other pro-
tocols. The authors demonstrate this by applying it to PBFT and MinBFT. SACBFT
and ReBFT can compliment each other to produce a protocol that has the benefits
of both frameworks, as we showed with SACRePBFT in Section 4.4.2.
In the Wormhole model [49], existing TEE-enabled BFT protocols can be de-
scribed with the TEEs being wormholes. For all of these systems, Nw = Np, where
Nw is the number of wormholes and Np is the number of processes. The Wormhole
model allows for the case where Nw < Np, and this exactly what SACBFT explores.
By requiring fewer wormholes, it brings the hybrid fault model closer to classical BFT
algorithms.
There has been some research investigating the lower bound on required replicas
when the system contains partial reliable broadcast channels [31]. This work can
provide a basis for determining the lower bound for systems where a subset of replicas
has a TEE.
With the introduction of Bitcoin [38], there have been many efforts to improve
upon its proof-of-work Nakamoto consensus algorithm. Algorithms targeting open
blockchains differ from the traditional BFT algorithms in that they seek to achieve
consensus in a permissionless setting; participants are not known before the protocol
starts, and there is no pre-existing trust (as required for traditional algorithms during
system setup). Research to alternatives includes proof-of-stake protocols [33, 7], proof-
of-space [3, 1], and proof-of-elapsed-time [30].
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
In this work we introduced SACBFT, a framework that provides transformations
for existing BFT protocols to utilize available trusted hardware and increase perfor-
mance. It is the result of investigating the previously unexplored assumption that
a subset of all machines in a BFT system has access to trusted hardware. Through
our framework, we enable existing protocols to tap into the potential of these trusted
components. Additionally, SACBFT uses modern techniques to reduce the commu-
nication complexity.
The framework consists of two transformations. The first transformation requires
at least one replica to have access to a trusted counter, but eliminates the need for
a voting round during the PREPARE phase of existing protocols. The second trans-
formation implements message aggregation through multisignatures to reduce the
communication complexity of all remaining voting rounds to O(n). Together, these
transformations can significantly increase the performance of a classical protocol, as
shown by the results produced by our proof-of-concept implementation on our cluster
setup.
We also discussed when a transformed protocol might need to fall back to the
original protocol, and showed that with f + 1 TEEs, this is no longer necessary.
While SACBFT is already capable of providing a performance boost to existing
protocols, there remain some open questions which demand future research, as de-
scribed in Section 7.3. Notably, we have not yet established whether it is possible to
reduce the number of replicas required to successfully complete a view change when
the system contains fewer than 2f +1 TEEs. This could lead to a major improvement
in the resilience of SACBFT.
==PAGE:70==
60
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Hamza Abusalah et al. Beyond Hellman’s Time-Memory Trade-Offs with Appli-
cations to Proofs of Space. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2017/893. https:
//eprint.iacr.org/2017/893. 2017.
[2]
ARM. Security on ARM - TrustZone. url: https://www.arm.com/products/
security-on-arm/trustzone.
[3]
Giuseppe Ateniese et al. Proofs of Space: When Space is of the Essence. Cryptol-
ogy ePrint Archive, Report 2013/805. https://eprint.iacr.org/2013/805.
2013.
[4]
Mihir Bellare and Gregory Neven. “Multi-signatures in the Plain public-Key
Model and a General Forking Lemma”. In: Proceedings of the 13th ACM Con-
ference on Computer and Communications Security. CCS ’06. Alexandria, Vir-
ginia, USA: ACM, 2006, pages 390–399. isbn: 1-59593-518-5. doi: 10.1145/
1180405.1180453. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1180405.1180453.
[5]
Michael Ben-Or. “Another Advantage of Free Choice (Extended Abstract):
Completely Asynchronous Agreement Protocols”. In: Proceedings of the Sec-
ond Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing. PODC
’83. Montreal, Quebec, Canada: ACM, 1983, pages 27–30. isbn: 0-89791-110-5.
doi: 10.1145/800221.806707. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/800221.
806707.
[6]
Eli Ben-Sasson et al. Scalable, transparent, and post-quantum secure computa-
tional integrity. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2018/046. https://eprint.
iacr.org/2018/046. 2018.
[7]
Iddo Bentov, Ariel Gabizon, and Alex Mizrahi. “Cryptocurrencies without Proof
of Work”. In: CoRR abs/1406.5694 (2014). arXiv: 1406.5694. url: http://
arxiv.org/abs/1406.5694.
[8]
Dan Boneh, Manu Drijvers, and Gregory Neven. Compact Multi-Signatures for
Smaller Blockchains. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2018/483. https://
eprint.iacr.org/2018/483. 2018.
==PAGE:72==
62
Bibliography
[9]
Dan Boneh et al. “Aggregate and Verifiably Encrypted Signatures from Bilinear
Maps”. In: Proceedings of the 22Nd International Conference on Theory and
Applications of Cryptographic Techniques. EUROCRYPT’03. Warsaw, Poland:
Springer-Verlag, 2003, pages 416–432. isbn: 3-540-14039-5. url: http://dl.
acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1766171.1766207.
[10]
G Bracha. “An O(Lg N) Expected Rounds Randomized Byzantine Generals
Protocol”. In: Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual ACM Symposium on The-
ory of Computing. STOC ’85. Providence, Rhode Island, USA: ACM, 1985,
pages 316–326. isbn: 0-89791-151-2. doi: 10.1145/22145.22180. url: http:
//doi.acm.org/10.1145/22145.22180.
[11]
Benedikt Bünz et al. Bulletproofs: Short Proofs for Confidential Transactions
and More. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2017/1066. https://eprint.
iacr.org/2017/1066. 2017.
[12]
M. Castro and B. Liskov. “Practical byzantine fault tolerance”. In: Proc. OSDI
(1999).
[13]
Tushar Deepak Chandra and Sam Toueg. “Unreliable Failure Detectors for Reli-
able Distributed Systems”. In: J. ACM 43.2 (March 1996), pages 225–267. issn:
0004-5411. doi: 10.1145/226643.226647. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.
1145/226643.226647.
[14]
B. Chor. “Randomization in Byzantine Agreement”. In: Randomness and Com-
putation (1989). url: https://ci.nii.ac.jp/naid/10020875179/en/.
[15]
Christopher Kohlhoff, The Boost Software foundation. BOOST ASIO library.
url: https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_67_0/doc/html/boost_asio.
html.
[16]
Byung-Gon Chun et al. “Attested Append-only Memory: Making Adversaries
Stick to Their Word”. In: SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev. 41.6 (October 2007), pages 189–
204. issn: 0163-5980. doi: 10.1145/1323293.1294280. url: http://doi.acm.
org/10.1145/1323293.1294280.
[17]
Allen Clement et al. “On the (Limited) Power of Non-equivocation”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 2012 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing.
PODC ’12. Madeira, Portugal: ACM, 2012, pages 301–308. isbn: 978-1-4503-
1450-3. doi: 10.1145/2332432.2332490. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.
1145/2332432.2332490.
[18]
Miguel Correia, Nuno Ferreira Neves, and Paulo Verissimo. “How to Tolerate
Half Less One Byzantine Nodes in Practical Distributed Systems”. In: Proceed-
ings of the 23rd IEEE International Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems.
SRDS ’04. Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2004, pages 174–
183. isbn: 0-7695-2239-4. url: http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id =
1032662.1034362.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
63
[19]
T. Distler, C. Cachin, and R. Kapitza. “Resource-Efficient Byzantine Fault Tol-
erance”. In: IEEE Transactions on Computers 65.9 (September 2016), pages 2807–
2819. issn: 0018-9340. doi: 10.1109/TC.2015.2495213.
[20]
Michael J. Fischer, Nancy A. Lynch, and Michael S. Paterson. “Impossibility
of Distributed Consensus with One Faulty Process”. In: J. ACM 32.2 (April
1985), pages 374–382. issn: 0004-5411. doi: 10.1145/3149.214121. url: http:
//doi.acm.org/10.1145/3149.214121.
[21]
J. Garay and Y. Moses. “Fully Polynomial Byzantine Agreement for Proces-
sors in Rounds”. In: SIAM Journal on Computing 27.1 (1998), pages 247–290.
doi: 10 . 1137 / S0097539794265232. eprint: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1137 /
S0097539794265232. url: https://doi.org/10.1137/S0097539794265232.
[22]
Rosario Gennaro et al. Quadratic Span Programs and Succinct NIZKs without
PCPs. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2012/215. https://eprint.iacr.
org/2012/215. 2012.
[23]
Google. Google Protocol Buffers. url: https://github.com/google/protobu
f.
[24]
Google. The Go Programming Language. url: https://www.golang.org.
[25]
Rachid Guerraoui et al. “The Next 700 BFT Protocols”. In: Proceedings of the
5th European Conference on Computer Systems. EuroSys ’10. Paris, France:
ACM, 2010, pages 363–376. isbn: 978-1-60558-577-2. doi: 10.1145/1755913.
1755950. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1755913.1755950.
[26]
M. P. Herlihy and J. M. Wing. “Axioms for Concurrent Objects”. In: Proceedings
of the 14th ACM SIGACT-SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of Programming
Languages. POPL ’87. Munich, West Germany: ACM, 1987, pages 13–26. isbn:
0-89791-215-2. doi: 10.1145/41625.41627. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.
1145/41625.41627.
[27]
Intel. Intel SGX Developer Guide. url: https://download.01.org/intel-
sgx/linux-2.1.3/docs/Intel_SGX_Developer_Guide.pdf.
[28]
Intel. Intel SGX Linux Developer Reference. url: https://download.01.org/
intel-sgx/linux-2.1.3/docs/Intel_SGX_Developer_Reference_Linux_2.
1.3_Open_Source.pdf.
[29]
Intel. Intel Software Guard Extensions (SGX). url: https://software.intel.
com/en-us/sgx.
[30]
Intel. PoET 1.0 Specification. url: https://sawtooth.hyperledger.org/
docs/core/releases/latest/architecture/poet.html.
[31]
Alexander Jaffe, Thomas Moscibroda, and Siddhartha Sen. “On the Price of
Equivocation in Byzantine Agreement”. In: Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Sym-
posium on Principles of Distributed Computing. PODC ’12. Madeira, Portugal:
ACM, 2012, pages 309–318. isbn: 978-1-4503-1450-3. doi: 10.1145/2332432.
2332491. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2332432.2332491.
==PAGE:74==
64
Bibliography
[32]
Rüdiger Kapitza et al. “CheapBFT: Resource-efficient Byzantine Fault Toler-
ance”. In: Proceedings of the 7th ACM European Conference on Computer Sys-
tems. EuroSys ’12. Bern, Switzerland: ACM, 2012, pages 295–308. isbn: 978-1-
4503-1223-3. doi: 10.1145/2168836.2168866. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.
1145/2168836.2168866.
[33]
Aggelos Kiayias et al. Ouroboros: A Provably Secure Proof-of-Stake Blockchain
Protocol. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2016/889. https://eprint.iacr.
org/2016/889. 2016.
[34]
Eleftherios Kokoris Kogias et al. “Enhancing Bitcoin Security and Performance
with Strong Consistency via Collective Signing”. In: 25th USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security 16). Austin, TX: USENIX Association, 2016,
pages 279–296. isbn: 978-1-931971-32-4. url: https://www.usenix.org/conf
erence/usenixsecurity16/technical-sessions/presentation/kogias.
[35]
Ramakrishna Kotla et al. “Zyzzyva: Speculative Byzantine Fault Tolerance”. In:
ACM Trans. Comput. Syst. 27.4 (January 2010), 7:1–7:39. issn: 0734-2071. doi:
10.1145/1658357.1658358. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1658357.
1658358.
[36]
Leslie Lamport, Robert Shostak, and Marshall Pease. “The Byzantine Generals
Problem”. In: ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 4/3
(July 1982), pages 382–401.
[37]
J. Liu et al. “Scalable Byzantine Consensus via Hardware-assisted Secret Shar-
ing”. In: ArXiv e-prints (December 2016). arXiv: 1612.04997 [cs.CR].
[38]
S. Nakamoto. “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System”. In: (2009).
url: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf.
[39]
NIST Computer Security Resource Center. FIPS 186-4 Digital Signature Stan-
dard. url: %7Bhttps://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.186-4%7D.
[40]
K Ohta and Takuya Okamoto. “Multisignature schemes secure against active
insider attacks”. In: 82 (January 1999).
[41]
OpenSSL Software Foundation. OpenSSL. url: https://www.openssl.org.
[42]
OpenSSL Software Foundation. OpenSSL Crypto Library. url: https://www.
openssl.org/docs/man1.0.2/crypto/crypto.html.
[43]
Kim Potter Kihlstrom, Louise Moser, and Peter Melliar-Smith. The SecureRing
protocols for securing group communication. February 1998.
[44]
Hans P. Reiser and Rudiger Kapitza. “Hypervisor-Based Efficient Proactive
Recovery”. In: Proceedings of the 26th IEEE International Symposium on Re-
liable Distributed Systems. SRDS ’07. Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer
Society, 2007, pages 83–92. isbn: 0-7695-2995-X. url: http://dl.acm.org/
citation.cfm?id=1308172.1308224.
[45]
Michael K Reiter. “The Rampart toolkit for building high-integrity services”.
In: Theory and Practice in Distributed Systems. Springer, 1995, pages 99–110.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
65
[46]
Fred B. Schneider. “Implementing Fault-tolerant Services Using the State Ma-
chine Approach: A Tutorial”. In: ACM Comput. Surv. 22.4 (December 1990),
pages 299–319. issn: 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/98163.98167. url: http://doi.
acm.org/10.1145/98163.98167.
[47]
E. Syta et al. “Keeping Authorities ”Honest or Bust” with Decentralized Wit-
ness Cosigning”. In: 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). May
2016, pages 526–545. doi: 10.1109/SP.2016.38.
[48]
Trusted Computing Group. TPM Library Specification. url: https://truste
dcomputinggroup.org/resource/tpm-library-specification/.
[49]
Paulo E. Verı́ssimo. “Travelling Through Wormholes: A New Look at Dis-
tributed Systems Models”. In: SIGACT News 37.1 (March 2006), pages 66–
81. issn: 0163-5700. doi: 10.1145/1122480.1122497. url: http://doi.acm.
org/10.1145/1122480.1122497.
[50]
G. S. Veronese et al. “Efficient Byzantine Fault-Tolerance”. In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Computers 62.1 (January 2013), pages 16–30. issn: 0018-9340. doi:
10.1109/TC.2011.221.
[51]
Vuvuzela. Vuvuzela crypto library. url: https : // github . com / vuvuzela /
crypto.
[52]
Jian Yin et al. “Separating Agreement from Execution for Byzantine Fault
Tolerant Services”. In: SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev. 37.5 (October 2003), pages 253–
267. issn: 0163-5980. doi: 10.1145/1165389.945470. url: http://doi.acm.
org/10.1145/1165389.945470.
==PAGE:76==
