==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Combining deep learning and structural
modeling to predict T-cell receptor
speciﬁcity
MSc student Tobias Hegelund Olsen - s132421
Supervisors:
Associate Professor Paolo Marcatili
PhD student Kamilla Kjærgaard Jensen
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Bio and Health Informatics
Immunoinformatics and Machine Learning group
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
30th of July 2018
This report is the written result of the MSc thesis ’Combining deep learning and structural modeling to predict
T-cell receptor speciﬁcity’, attended at the Technical University of Denmark in January 2018.
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
A key element in the adaptive cellular immunity is the interaction between a T-cell receptor
(TCR) and a peptide presented on a major histocompatibility complex (MHC). Understanding
the TCR speciﬁcity can be used in a variety of ﬁelds such as immunotherapy and vaccines.
Unfortunately with the seemingly endless combinations of different TCR, peptide and MHC, an
enormous laboratory work is needed to ﬁnd which peptide-MHC complex is cognate to a given
TCR. A computational approach to predict TCR:p:MHC complexes is therefore highly sought
to reduce the amount of laboratory work. In this study we present an approach that makes
it possible to predict the T-cell receptor speciﬁcity to p:MHC-I complexes with a relatively
good performance by combining structural modelling and deep learning. A benchmark based
on 1098 positive and negative TCR:p:MHC complexes, modelled using a state-of-the-art in-
house modelling pipeline and scored with the template identity and several energy terms derived
from FoldX, was used to train different neural network designs, optimized in a cross-validation
setup and with variable selection. A large performance improvement was shown to be gained
from using feature selection, while implementation of a deep network, a convolutional neural
network, resulted in a small further performance improvement. This study produced a good
standard for future T-cell receptor speciﬁcity predictors to improve on.
i
==PAGE:3==
Resum´e
Et vigtigt element i den cellulære del, af det adaptive immunforsvar, er interaktionen mellem T-
celle receptorer (TCR) og peptider præsenteret af et major histocompatibility complex (MHC).
Forst˚aelse af TCR speciﬁciteten kan blive brugt i et bredt udvalg af omr˚ader, s˚asom immunoter-
api og vacciner. Den bundløse kombination af TCR, peptid og MHC, medfører dog en stor
mængde laboratoriearbejde til at ﬁnde den TCR som binder sig til et givet p:MHC. For at reduc-
ere mængden af laboratoriearbejde, er en beregningsmæssig metode til at forudsige TCR:p:MHC
komplekser derfor højt eftertragtet. I dette studie præsenterer vi en metode som gør det muligt at
forudsige T-celle receptore speciﬁciteten til p:MHC-I komplekser med en relativ god præstation,
ved at kombinere strukturel modellering og deep learning. En benchmark baseret p˚a 1098 pos-
itive og negative TCR:p:MHC komplekser, modelleret med en state-of-the-art in-house mod-
ellerings pipeline og scoret med template identitet og et udvalg af energi termer erhvervet fra
FoldX, blev evalueret med forskellige neurale netværk, optimiseret med en cross-validation op-
sætning og med variable selection. En stor præstations forøgelse var observeret ved brug af vari-
able selection, imens implementationen af et deep netværk, et convolutional neuralt netværk,
resulterede i endnu en forøgelse af præstationen. Dette studie producerede en god standard for
fremtidige T-celle receptor speciﬁcitet forudsigerer at forbedre.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This report contains the computational work performed and results obtained from the master
project: Combining deep learning and structural modeling to predict T-cell receptor speciﬁcity.
The work was performed at the Immunoinformatics and Machine Learning group, within the
Department of Bio and Health Informatics, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The
project has been performed under supervision of Associate Professor Paolo Marcatili and PhD
student Kamilla Kjærgaard Jensen.
The Immunoinformatics and Machine Learning group is thanked for providing a good working
environment and space. Furthermore Associate Professor Paolo Marcatili is thanked for his
highly appreciated supervision and fruitful discussions. Also, PhD student Kamilla Kjærgaard
Jensen is thanked for providing the in-house modelling pipeline used in the project and her
invaluable supervision.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
MHC
TAP
TCR
CTL
HLA
TIL
pdf
LYRA
HMM
ANN
FNN
CNN
AUC
ROC
Major Histocompatibility Complex
Transporter Associated with antigen Processing
T-Cell Receptor
Cytotoxic T-Lymphocyte
Human Leukocyte Antigen
Tumor Inﬁltrating Lymphocyte
Probability Density Function
LYmphocyte Receptor Automated modelling
Hidden Markov Model
Artiﬁcial Neural Network
Feedforward Neural Network
Convolutional Neural Network
Area Under the Curve
Receiver Operating Characteristic
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The immune system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Cellular immunity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
T-cell receptor (TCR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.3
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
TCR:p:MHC complex usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.1
Adoptive T-cell transfer therapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.2
T-cell vaccines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.3
Project purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Immunoinformatics background
7
2.1
Protein modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Homology modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
In-house TCR:p:MHC modelling pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Energy functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Feedforward neural network (FNN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.2
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.3
Performance measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Methods
15
3.1
TCR:p:MHC data set creation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.1
Positives complexes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.2
Negative complexes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Modelling of TCR:p:MHC models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Calculation of features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.1
FoldX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.2
Identities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Neural network designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.1
Feedforward neural network (FNN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4.2
Variable selection (Random Forest)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4.3
Convolutional neural network (CNN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Results
23
4.1
TCR:p:MHC data set analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Modelling performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.1
DockQ-score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
v
==PAGE:7==
4.3
Analysis of features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.1
Energy terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.2
Template identities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Prediction performances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4.1
Feedforward neural network (FNN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4.2
Variable selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4.3
Convolutional neural network (CNN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Discussion
33
6
Conclusion
35
7
References
36
8
Appendix
40
8.1
PDB data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
8.2
Feature importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Diseases have always been a constant threat for people’s life and well-being. Vaccination was
a breakthrough, which allowed the prevention of many dangerous infectious diseases and even-
tually lead to the discovery of the immune system [1]. Nowadays, 200 years later, we still do
not fully understand how the immune system works. Recent advances in computational biol-
ogy have proven to be helpful in deciphering the immune system mechanisms. Speciﬁcally, in
predicting the T-cell receptor speciﬁcity.
We will now give a short overview of the immune systems major features.
1.1
The immune system
The immune system is an enormous umbrella term. The term is often used for the system an
organism has to protect it from pathogens such as viruses and bacteria, but at the same time,
bacteria also have their version of an immune system. The type of immune system an organism
has therefore varies a lot and depends highly on the organism [2]. In the following we will focus
on the vertebrate immune system, and more speciﬁc the human immune system.
The immune system can be roughly divided into two parts, the innate immune system and
the adaptive immune system. The innate immune system is the evolutionary older part of
the immune system. It consists of ﬁxed defensive mechanisms ready to act straight away on
pathogens. These defensive mechanisms are inherited and present from birth. Mucous secre-
tion and macrophages are examples of the innate immune system [3].
The adaptive immune system is sometimes called the speciﬁc immune system. This is related
to its main function of adapting to diseases and remembering them for future infections by the
same pathogen. It results in a speciﬁc response and removal of a speciﬁc pathogen. Even though
the system in itself is inherited, the speciﬁcity is not. An organism can therefore only have an
adaptive immune response against a pathogen it has been exposed to [4].
As with the innate immune system, the adaptive immune system can be further divided into a
humoral and cell-mediated part. For the adaptive immune system, the humoral part is mainly re-
sponsible for extracellular pathogens and is regulated by B-cells and their speciﬁc receptors, the
antibodies. The cell-mediated part, which deals with intracellular threats, consists of phagocyte
activation, cytotoxic T-cell and helper T-cell activation, and release of various cytokines. The
main activation step is when a peptide (epitope), derived from a pathogenic protein (antigen), is
presented by an major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and recognized by a T-cell receptor
(TCR). We will explain the details of this mechanism in the following [4, 5].
1
==PAGE:9==
1.1.1
Cellular immunity
The cell-mediated immune system is also called the cellular immunity. A large part of the
cellular immunity is based on the different responses resulting from a T-cell interacting with a
cell presenting a peptide bound to an MHC. MHCs can be split into different classes depending
on their structure and peptides presented. MHC class I (MHC-I) is the most abundant class and
is present on the surface of all nucleated cells. The complex that arises when a peptide is bound
to an MHC is termed p:MHC [6].
The peptide presented on MHC-I originates from the cytoplasm of the presenting cell. Here a
proteasome constantly chops up proteins passing by, into peptides of length 8-12 amino acids.
This is usually the cells own proteins, but can in the case of an infection be the pathogens
proteins. These peptides are then transported through the TAP (Transporter associated with
antigen processing) into the endoplasmic reticulum. Here they are bound to an MHC-I, which
is subsequently transported to and presented on the surface. It is important to underline that only
a minor fraction of all peptides (around 2%) are able to be presented. In the case of an infection,
the cell would now be presenting peptides from a pathogen. The correct T-cells can then with
their T-cell receptor (TCR) interact with these p:MHC complexes and induce a response. In
the case of MHC-I the interacting T-cells are called Cytotoxic T-cells (CTLs). CTLs induce
apoptosis and thereby kill the cell presenting the p:MHC it interacts with [6, 7]. Following this
mechanism infected cells are killed, reducing the spread of the pathogen. Figure 1 shows this
process more precisely.
Figure 1: The process within a nucleated cell, from protein in the cytoplasm to presentation on
MHC-I. Adapted from [8].
As an interaction between a TCR and p:MHC (TCR:p:MHC) leads to apoptosis and many
peptides from the cell itself (self-peptides) are presented on MHCs, some measurements must
be present to avoid CTLs from killing every healthy nucleated cell. First, the TCR of a T-cell
is highly speciﬁc, only interacting with 1 out of 100.000 p:MHCs [9]. There are cases of cross-
2
==PAGE:10==
reactivity (TCRs binding to multiple different p:MHCs), but at the same time single mutations
in either the TCR, peptide or MHC can result in loss of recognition [9, 10]. Second, there is
a deselection of TCRs recognizing self-peptides. This is done by a process termed negative
selection, which ultimately avoids the expansion of CTLs recognizing self-peptides. T-cells
also undergo another selection called positive selection, which removes T-cells which are not
capable of binding to any p:MHC complex [11].
Figure 2 shows the killing of an infected cell by TCR interaction to its p:MHC.
Figure 2: Lysis of an infected cell by an activated cytotoxic T lymphocyte. Adapted from [12]
As this project focuses on the TCR:p:MHC-I interaction, MHC will always refer to MHC-I
from now on.
1.1.2
T-cell receptor (TCR)
The TCR is a membrane anchored heterodimer. It often consists of the two protein chains,
TCR-α and β, but can also exist in the form of a γ and a δ chain. Each chain has two extracel-
lular domains; the constant and variable domain seen in Figure 3. Both domains are from the
Immunoglobulin superfamily. The constant domain gets its name from its low polymorphism,
and links the variable domain with the transmembrane region of the TCR. Disulﬁde bonds are
also formed between the two constant domains of the TCR α and β, which helps stabilizing the
TCR complex. The variable domain has a high polymorphism rate and is the part of the TCR
which interacts with the p:MHC [13]. The diversity is especially concentrated on three hyper-
variable loops on each variable domain. These loops are called Complementarity Determining
3
==PAGE:11==
Regions (CDR) and are named CDR1, CDR2 and CDR3. CDR3 is the longest and most vari-
able of the three and mainly interacts with the peptide, while CDR1 and CDR2 mostly interacts
with the MHC [14]. Figure 3 shows the CDR’s in purple.
Figure 3: Illustration of the full TCR:p:MHC complex. 1) The constant domain of the TCR. 2)
The variable domain of the TCR. 3) The interactive part of the MHC. 4) The β chain and α3
domain of the MHC. CDRs are shown in purple, with the CDRs of TCR αs numbered. Orange,
MHC α; Green, MHC β; Yellow, TCR α; Light blue, TCR β; Dark blue, peptide; TCR, T-
cell receptor; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; CDR, complementarity determining
regions.
1.1.3
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
The MHC class I complex consists of two chains, α and β2-microglobulin (β2m). The α chain
can be divided into three domains, α1, α2 and α3. The α3 domain has a membrane spanning
part and noncovalently binds to β2m as seen in Figure 3. α1 and α2 together form two α-
helices and an anti-parallel β-sheet which collectively creates a cavity. This cavity is where a
peptide of usual length 8-12 can be bound. In this cavity (also termed MHC binding domain)
the peptide is stabilized by some of its residues, by interacting with the MHC. MHCs are both
polygenic and polymorphic resulting in a broad variety of peptides that can be bound. There are
three MHC class I genes in the human genome; Human Leukocyte Antigens (HLA)-A, HLA-
B and HLA-C and thousands of different alleles. This allows for a wide variety of peptides
enabled to be presented, broadening the coverage of the immune response to pathogens, but it
is still only approximately 2% which binds to an MHC [7, 15].
As the TCR:p:MHC interaction is the catalyst of the cellular response, it is highly relevant in
different immune related research. Examples of immunological ﬁelds in which this interaction
is fundamental are immunotherapies and vaccines [16].
4
==PAGE:12==
1.2
TCR:p:MHC complex usage
With each individual having an estimated 25 million distinct clonotypes of TCRs [10], together
with the polygenicity and polymorphicity of MHCs, it is impossible to know every possible
combination of the TCR:p:MHC complex. Being able to not only match a TCR, MHC and
peptide based on their sequences, but also estimate their afﬁnity would be beneﬁcial in a number
of areas. A few of those are presented in the following sections.
1.2.1
Adoptive T-cell transfer therapy
Adoptive cell transfer therapy is the transferring of cells into a patient. These cells are derived
from the patient or another individual. In cancer patients, tumor reactive T-cells are present as
tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes (TILs). These TILs do not control the disease, but ex vivo expan-
sion and reintroduction of the TILs have showed good therapeutic responses in some patients.
Unfortunately this process is expensive, reducing its feasibility. A resource demanding part of
the method is experimentally testing all isolated TILs against pre-selected MHC alleles with
bound neoantigens. Neoantigens being antigens from cancer cells [16, 17]. By computationally
predicting the TILs speciﬁcity to the p:MHC complexes and then test the TILs based on these
predictions, one could therefore potentially save both time and money.
1.2.2
T-cell vaccines
Instead of transferring T-cells into a patient, another method of generating tumor reactive T-
cells is by vaccination. A vital part of this method is the selection of an antigen, which when
presented on an MHC induces a strong T-cell response. The interaction of the TCR:p:MHC has
been noted to inﬂuence the strength of the T-cell response [18]. Unfortunately as previously
mentioned, with the variety of the TCR and MHC, combined with the speciﬁcity of the TCR,
it is impossible to guess a TCR:p:MHC complex with a good afﬁnity. A computational predic-
tion of the speciﬁcity of a TCR could thereby be highly beneﬁcial and reduce the amount of
laboratory work signiﬁcantly [16].
1.2.3
Project purpose
With immunology being a complex area of study, there is a need for tools to simplify it. A lot of
different computational tools have been developed to help understand immunology and make
the life of a researcher easier. A computational predictor of the TCR speciﬁcity would be such
a tool.
As shown by (Lanzarotti et al., 2018) it is possible to predict some TCR speciﬁcity for p:MHC
class II, by using a combination of structural modelling and force ﬁeld scoring.
5
==PAGE:13==
On the other hand it also showed that the accuracy of the model was highly correlated with the
ability to generate meaningful predictions. It is therefore important to incorporate the model
quality into the prediction pipeline, since it not only affects the reliability of the output, but also
the relative importance of the different features. To meet the aforementioned demand, this study
was designed. The purpose of this study is to create a prediction of TCR speciﬁcity based on
structural modelling and deep learning.
6
==PAGE:14==
2
Immunoinformatics background
The following paragraphs will give some theoretical background about certain immunoinfor-
matics methods and tools.
2.1
Protein modelling
Predicting a proteins three dimensional fold based on its sequence has been intriguing scientists
for years. Different approaches have been suggested through time, some more successful than
others. In the 90’s predicting the fold based on the energy landscape showed some promise on
very short proteins, but as soon as the approach was used on longer protein sequences it was
observed to be neither feasible or accurate [19]. A second approach is based on the observa-
tion that the three dimensional structure of a protein is more conserved than its sequence. It is
interesting to note that there are millions of proteins, but the number of unique structural folds
are two to three orders of magnitude lower [20]. With a steadily increasing amount of veri-
ﬁed structures becoming available, this gave birth to the modelling approach called homology
modelling [21].
2.1.1
Homology modelling
Homology modelling, or comparative modelling, exploits the conservation of the three dimen-
sional structure and has been shown to produce useful models in a number of cases [22]. The
main step in homology modelling is to align the sequence of a target protein to the sequence of
a homologous protein with a known structure. As the structure is highly conserved, the newly
aligned sequence should be close to its natural fold. In homology modelling, the used homolo-
gous protein is termed the template and the modelled sequence is called the query. Technically
the sequence identity does not determine how good a template is for modelling, but generally a
higher identity results in better models. As seen in Figure 4, there are some limits for ensuring
that the template is homologous. Homologous proteins which have less than 20% sequence
identity can be found, but as there is a high proportion of unrelated proteins that share less than
20% identity, an often used rule of thumb is to not go under 30% [21, 23].
7
==PAGE:15==
Figure 4: Graph highlighting the safe zone for choosing a homologous protein based on the
sequence identity and length. Adapted from [24].
A commonly used software for homology modelling is MODELLER [25]. MODELLER trans-
forms the query-template sequence alignment into spatial restraints that drive the protein mod-
eling. The homology modelling process consists of four parts; fold assignment, query-template
alignment, model building, and model evaluation. The purpose of the ﬁrst step, fold assignment,
is to ﬁnd the optimal template for modelling. This can be done by using pairwise sequence-
sequence comparison. As mentioned earlier, the template identity generally results in a better
model and a template is therefore often selected on this criteria. The query-template align-
ment step is to ensure a correct alignment. For target-template identities of more than 40%, the
alignment is almost always correct. MODELLER can automatically select a template for the
modelling or take an user given template [22, 25].
A popular homology modelling approach, for the modelling step, is the use of satisfaction of
spatial restraints, which MODELLER also applies. Satisfaction of spatial restraints is the con-
struction of a set of restraints (distance, dihedral angle etc.) on the target based on the alignment
to the template. Each restraint is then converted into a probability density function (pdf). MOD-
ELLER then optimizes the model to violate as few restraints as possible and outputs the three
dimensional model of the provided target. In the end the model is evaluated [22, 25].
2.1.2
In-house TCR:p:MHC modelling pipeline
Modelling a protein complex is more difﬁcult than single chains. Not only does the single
chains need to be properly modelled, but the orientation between each other is highly important
in order to achieve a good model [26]. An in-house TCR:p:MHC modelling pipeline developed
by Kamilla Kjærgaard Jensen is an example of how to model a complex. The pipeline consists
of three phases. A modelling step of the p:MHC complex and a modelling step of the TCR,
which are run in parallel. Finally, a second modelling step combines the p:MHC and TCR
models into the full TCR:p:MHC complex. Figure 5 gives an overview of the pipeline.
8
==PAGE:16==
Figure 5: Overview of the in-house TCR:p:MHC modelling pipeline. 1) p:MHC modelling
with MODELLER [25]. 2) TCR modelling with LYRA [27]. 3) Second round of MODELLER,
combining the p:MHC and TCR models.
In the ﬁrst phase the p:MHC is modelled by homology modelling with MODELLER and a
self derived template database. The second phase uses a webserver speciﬁcally made for lym-
phocyte receptor structural modeling, called LYRA [27], to model the TCR. The modelling of
p:MHC and TCR have both been proven to be fairly accurate on their own [27]. The third phase
consists of a second round of homology modelling where the modelled p:MHC and TCR are
used together with a template for the whole TCR:p:MHC complex. The validation and testing
of this pipeline has been partially performed during this thesis.
2.2
Energy functions
It has become commonly accepted that proteins actively fold into their lowest energy state. This
means that modelled proteins with lower energy states are generally considered better models.
To be able to understand the energy changes of a protein based on its conformation, energy
functions can be used [28]. There are different approaches for deriving energy functions for
modelled proteins, such as physical potential approaches (theoretical simulation of force ﬁelds),
statistical potential approaches (potential functions derived from a large number of structures),
and empirical potential approaches, where the mutual weights on the individual terms in the
energy functions are ﬁtted from experimental data [29].
A lot of algorithms have been developed to calculate energy functions for proteins based on
the aforementioned approaches [28, 30]. FoldX [31] is an example of such an algorithm, and
uses an empirical potential approach. FoldX calculates multiple energy terms (van der Waals,
hydrogen bonding, electrostatics ect.) both for each individual chain, but also for the interaction
between chains in a given complex. Another function of FoldX used in this project is energy
minimization by empirically mutating residues into themselves until a better energy value is
achieved [30, 31].
9
==PAGE:17==
2.3
Machine learning
Machine learning is the science of algorithms that can learn and make predictions on data. A
popular type of algorithm used for machine learning is artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN), which
was ﬁrst described in 1943 by Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts, while studying how neurons
work in humans [32]. Drawing inspiration from biological neural networks, an ANN is an
interconnected group of neurons processing an input into an output, by ﬁrst being trained on
preexisting data. A variety of ANNs exists, with the simplest version being the feedforward
neural network (FNN). Even though it is the simplest version, it is still a powerful tool which
can solve many problems [33, 34].
2.3.1
Feedforward neural network (FNN)
An FNN consists of an input layer, a hidden layer and an output layer. The information only
ﬂows from the input layer towards the output layer, meanwhile passing through the hidden layer.
The architecture of neural networks is inspired heavily by the neurons in the brain, and each
node is therefore often referred to as a neuron [32, 33].
Figure 6: Illustration of an FNN with two input neurons (blue circles), three hidden neurons (red
circles) and one output neuron (green circle). It can be seen how the network is fully connected,
as each neuron is connected to all neurons in the layer before and after. Adapted from [34].
In Figure 6 an FNN with two input neurons, three hidden neurons and one output neuron is
illustrated. FNNs are fully connected, meaning that each neuron is connected to all neurons in
the preceding and next layer [33].
In an FNN every neuron is calculated based on the neurons in the previous layer. Every neuron
value is therefore dependent on the input. Each neuron focuses on a feature which is given to
it by chance. The output neuron is therefore depending on which features the hidden neurons
have found in the input values [35].
Calculation of the predicted output is called the forward pass. For a given neuron, all neurons
in the layer before it have their values multiplied by a weight and summed up. A bias with the
10
==PAGE:18==
value 1 and multiplied with its own weight is also added. The bias allows the activation function
to shift along the x-axis, which is critical for proper learning. The summed value is then applied
in an activation function. An example of an activation function is the logistic sigmoid activation
function [33, 35]. The forward pass can be seen in Equation 1, where f is the activation function,
b is the bias, w is the weight, x is a given value and h is the neuron value.
h = f(b·wb +
n
∑
i=1
xi ·wi)
(1)
To achieve the weights which turn the input into a correct output, they need to be trained.
Training consists of using input values with known output values, termed targets, and then
predicting an output value. The difference between the predicted and target value is termed
the error. The purpose of the training is then to minimize this error by changing the weights
and then train again. After continuous iteration an increasingly better prediction occurs. The
adjustments of the weights are done with the help of an algorithm called back-propagation.
Back-propagation updates the weights of the network using gradient descent [33, 35].
A concern when training neural networks is to over-ﬁt the network. When a network is over-
ﬁtting it learns the training data by heart, but not the general rules for predicting independent
data [36].
Cross validation with early stopping is a method used to give a fairer estimate of the predic-
tion performance while reducing over-ﬁtting when training and maintaining a good generalized
prediction. Cross-validation works by dividing the data used for training into a number of parti-
tions. In a ﬁve-fold cross-validation this is ﬁve partitions. To reduce over-ﬁtting it is important
that similar data are placed in the same partitions. For training, three of the partitions are used
for training, while a fourth is used to decide when to stop training (early stopping). Ideally the
error of the training set and validation set (fourth partition) are both decreasing per training cy-
cle. At some point the validation set error starts rising, indicating that over-ﬁtting to the training
set has started. Training is then stopped and the weights, which gave the lowest error in the
validation set, are then subsequently used to test the performance on the ﬁfth partition, the test
set [37]. Figure 7 illustrates a ﬁve-fold cross-validation.
11
==PAGE:19==
Figure 7: Five-fold cross-validation. Data is divided into ﬁve partitions. Three partitions are
used as training data, the fourth is used to do early stopping and the ﬁfth is used to test the
performance. This is done until all partitions have been the test partition.
In a nested cross-validation, four networks are made for each test partition. This results in 20
networks. Here the four other partitions takes turn being the validation set. The four predictions
are then averaged for each test partition and the performance measured [37].
An example of an FNN is NetMHCpan-4.0 [37], a tool that is also used in the pipeline developed
in this thesis. This algorithm predicts the p:MHC-I interaction based on eluted ligand and
peptide binding afﬁnity data. NetMHCpan-4.0 also uses a nested cross-validation [37].
2.3.2
Convolutional neural networks (CNN)
Another type of neural network is the convolutional neural network (CNN). In a CNN, an FNN
is preceded by a combination of two types of layers. These layers are the convolutional layer
and pooling layer. As a CNN consists of more than one layer it is a deep neural network [38].
The convolutional layer consists of running ﬁlters over the input as seen in Figure 8. A ﬁlter
allows the network to catch features that are hidden within the sequence of the input, such as
an amino acid sequence. A number of feature maps are constructed based on the number of
ﬁlters used, as seen in the Figure 8. Different ﬁlters catch different features, while different
ﬁlter sizes are used to catch different sizes of features [38]. Examples of biological features are
the secondary structure or hydrophobic parts. The detection of biological features anywhere in
a sequence makes CNN a valuable machine learning tool [39].
12
==PAGE:20==
Figure 8: Illustration of the creation of a feature map from a convolutional ﬁlter. Each feature
map is derived from a different ﬁlter. Adapted from [40].
How ﬁlters catch these features are based on weights and activation functions as with neurons
previously explained. The weights are also training with back-propagation in the same way [38,
39]. For convolutional layers the Leaky ReLu activation function has become popular, because
of the increased robustness it gives compared to other activation functions [41].
Pooling refers to summarizing the input. The pooling layer does this by reducing the dimensions
of the input. A type of pooling is max pooling, which selects only the maximum value in a
dimension. Max pooling could be used to remove the length dimension of a protein sequence
and output the maximum activation of each feature in the sequence [38, 39].
After this feature extraction, convolutional and pooling layer, the actual prediction will occur
by feeding these features into an FNN [38, 39].
2.3.3
Performance measurement
There exists a variety of approaches to evaluate the performance of a network. A commonly
used one is the area under the curve (AUC) of a receiver operator characteristic curve (ROC).
In a ROC curve the predictions from a network is sorted based on their predictions. A threshold
is then chosen, and the true and false positive rates are calculated based on the target values of
the predictions and subsequently plotted. A true positive is a prediction over the threshold with
a target value of 1, while a false positive is a prediction over the threshold with a target value of
0 [42]. With the addition of more coordinates a ROC curve is drawn as seen in Figure 9.
13
==PAGE:21==
Figure 9: Comparison of different ROC curves. The higher AUC the ROC curve has the better
it is. If a ROC curve follows the red line, the predictions are random. ROC, Receiver operator
characteristics; AUC, Area under the curve. Adapted from [43].
The AUC from the resulting curve can then be used to describe how good the prediction is. An
AUC of 0.5 means the predictions are random and an AUC of 1 means it predicts perfectly [42].
14
==PAGE:22==
3
Methods
This chapter will describe in dept the approach and the different methods used in this study.
Figure 10 gives a simpliﬁed overview of the study ﬂow, from data set creation to the training of
the different networks.
Figure 10: Overview of the strategy used for training neural networks to predict TCR speciﬁcity.
TCR, T-cell receptor; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; FNN, feedforward neural net-
work; CNN, convolutional neural network.
15
==PAGE:23==
3.1
TCR:p:MHC data set creation
A data set of positive and negative TCR:p:MHC complexes were constructed and grouped into
ﬁve partitions based on the identity of the positives. The complexes were represented by their
sequence in a FASTA format.
3.1.1
Positives complexes
Previous to this work, a data set of 61 known structural TCR:p:MHC complexes had been
constructed. Each structure consisted of the variable domain of TCR α and β, the interacting
domains (α1 and α2) of the MHC and the bound peptide.
Five partitions containing similar TCR:p:MHC complexes with approximately the same number
of complexes in each, was made. First the 61 complexes were grouped with 70% identity. This
resulted in 20 groups, which were then distributed into ﬁve different partitions containing; 14,
13, 12, 11 and 11 complexes, respectively.
These 61 complexes are referred to as the positive complexes from now on.
3.1.2
Negative complexes
From each positive complex three different types of negatives were constructed. The difference
between the positives and their corresponding negatives were in two cases a different peptide
and the last a different TCR. To distinguish them from each other they were named N (source
protein Negative), R (Random protein negative), and S (Switched TCR negative).
N negatives
At ﬁrst, the sequence of the peptide was isolated from the positive complex. This sequence
was then blasted with NCBI’s blastp [44] using PAM30, 100% identity and no gaps. From the
resulting blast, a sequence longer than 100 amino acids in length was chosen. This was done in
order to discard source proteins that were too short. In cases where the length exceeded 20.000
amino acids, the source protein was divided in half and the part containing the alignment was
used as the source protein. This was done because the max length of the input sequence in the
next step was 20.000. In cases where no 100% identical sequence could be found, the one with
the highest identity was chosen instead. These cases could have derived from research projects,
where the peptide was mutated from the original.
The source protein was then, together with the length of the positive peptide and the posi-
tive MHC allele, run through NetMHCpan-4.0 [37] a predictor of p:MHC class I binding.
NetMHCpan-4.0 chops the given protein into every possible peptide with the given length,
and then predicts the afﬁnity between each peptide and the given MHC allele. NetMHCpan-4.0
16
==PAGE:24==
measures the afﬁnity in Rank%, the rank of the predicted afﬁnity compared to a set of random
natural peptides. As the positive peptide was in the source protein, its Rank% was also calcu-
lated. The peptide with the closest Rank% to the positive peptide was then selected as the N
negative peptide. The N negative complex was then made by switching the peptide from the
positive complex with the N negative peptide.
R negatives
To make the R negatives, a random protein (following the amino acid composition (%) from
the UniProtKB / Swiss-Prot data bank [45]) of 20.000 length was given to NetMHCpan-4.0.
Together with the length of the positive peptide and MHC allele as input values, the output
peptide with the best Rank% was deﬁned as the R negative peptide. The R negative peptide was
then switched with the positive peptide to make the R negative complex.
S negatives
The S negatives were made by switching the TCR of positive complexes within the same previ-
ously made partitions. To make sure a negative complex would not get a TCR which truly could
bind to it, a restriction of the new TCR being less than 90% identical was used. This made sure
every p:MHC, which was in a positive complex, was also present in a negative complex.
Five negatives were made for each positive; 3 N, 1 R and 1 S negatives. The negatives were then
clustered in the same partition as their corresponding positive. Figure 11 shows more ﬁgurative
the construction of the negatives.
17
==PAGE:25==
Figure 11: The different negatives for each positive TCR:p:MHC complex. The same color
symbolizes they are derived from the same positive complex. N negatives have a new peptide
with a similar Rank%, R negatives have a new peptide with a lower Rank% and S negatives
have a new TCR. TCR, T-cell receptor; MHC, Major histocompatibility complex.
3.2
Modelling of TCR:p:MHC models
The 61 positive and 305 negative complexes were then modelled with the in-house TCR:p:MHC
modelling pipeline described in Section 2.1.2. As input, a FASTA ﬁle with the sequence of the
variable domain of the TCR α and β, the interactive domains (α1 and α2) of the MHC and
the bound peptide was used. To remove the possible bias of positive complexes having better
templates available than their corresponding negatives, blacklisting was done. Blacklisting is
the removal of certain complexes from the list of available templates when modelling. For each
positive complex and their corresponding negatives, the same templates were blacklisted. The
template identical to the positive was blacklisted. Templates with an identity over a deﬁned
threshold to either the positive or its corresponding negatives would also be blacklisted for
both the negatives and positive. The blacklisting was done for p:MHC, TCR and TCR:p:MHC
separately. Each complex was then modelled with the four thresholds; 99.9, 95, 90 and 80%.
From modelling all positives and negatives with the different thresholds, a total of 1464 models
were constructed. To evaluate how good the modelling of the models was, DockQ [46] was
used. The DockQ-score is a measurement of Protein-Protein Docking of models and is based
on Fnat, LRMS, and iRMS, each relevant to the protein-protein interaction [46]. The DockQ-
score was calculated, for each positive model and their corresponding true structure, between
18
==PAGE:26==
the TCR and the p:MHC with otherwise standard settings.
3.3
Calculation of features
The following features were calculated for all models.
3.3.1
FoldX
Energy terms for the modelled complexes were calculated using FoldX [31]. First the Re-
pairPDB command was used to repair residues which had bad torsion angles, van der Waals’
clashes or other contributions to a worse energy state. The AnalyseComplex command was sub-
sequently used on the repaired models to calculate the actually energies. For each model, 22
different internal energy terms were calculated for each of the four chains (peptide, MHC, TCR
α and β), totalling 88 terms. At the same time 29 different interaction energy terms between
two different chains (6 combinations), totalling 174 terms, were also calculated for each model.
A combined 262 energy terms, based on both internal and interaction energies, were therefore
collected for each model.
3.3.2
Identities
The identities were retrieved from the in-house modelling pipeline. The identities were deﬁned
by the percentile of identical amino acids between the models and the template used for the
model. For the TCR:p:MHC complex identity the TCR, MHC and peptide each weighted 1/3
of the identity.
A list containing the BLOSUM62 score between each amino acid in the models and their cor-
responding templates was also made for p:MHC, TCR and TCR:p:MHC separately.
3.4
Neural network designs
Different neural networks were trained to try and predict the speciﬁcity of the TCR, by separat-
ing positive and negative models. All networks were implemented in Python [47], with the use
of TensorFlow [48].
A ﬁve-fold cross-validation was used for training of all networks. The models were partitioned
into the ﬁve deﬁned partitions explained earlier in Section 3.1.1.
The minibatches were produced by shufﬂing the positives and take out the ﬁrst 5 (batch number
divided by 6) positives. The negatives were then shufﬂed and for each positive 5 negatives
which had less than 5% difference in template identity was chosen. This was done for each of
the 6 positives while excluding the chosen negatives for the next positive. This minibatch was
19
==PAGE:27==
then used for training, and then the next 5 positives was used for next minibatch. This was done
till all positives had been used to train with.
3.4.1
Feedforward neural network (FNN)
From each model, 263 features (template identity of the TCR:p:MHC complex and the 262
energy terms) were used to train an FNN. The hyperparameters were estimated empirically,
resulting in 1 hidden layer with 300 hidden nodes, a learning rate of 0.0001 and a batch size of
30. The forward-propagation uses a sigmoid as the activation function between each layer with
a softmax also used on the output layer. For the back-propagation AdamOptimizer was used.
The ﬁve predicted test partitions were then concatenated, plotted in a Receiver Operating Char-
acteristic (ROC) curve and had the Area Under the Curve (AUC) calculated.
3.4.2
Variable selection (Random Forest)
To remove unimportant features, which only complicated while not improving the prediction,
the feature importance was calculated for each of the 263 features. For this, Random Forest was
used in a nested ﬁve-fold cross-validation. The resulting 20 importance calculations from each
feature were then averaged to give one value per feature. Three new FNNs were, as previously,
trained while removing features with an average importance under the following thresholds;
0.001. 0.01 and 0.02. The AUC was then, as mentioned above, calculated for these networks.
3.4.3
Convolutional neural network (CNN)
A CNN was also trained to try and improve the prediction. The models were partitioned as
in the previous FNN, but the input was slightly different as the input had an extra dimension.
The width was the sequence of the complex represented by the BLOSUM62 scores between
the model and its templates, as explained in Section 3.3. For each amino acid the dept was the
BLOSUM62 scores and the features used in the previous FNN. Figure 12 illustrates this more
precisely.
20
==PAGE:28==
Figure 12: 1) TCR:p:MHC template identity and energy features, 2) List of BLOSUM62 score
between each amino acid in the model and the p:MHC and TCR templates, 3) List of BLO-
SUM62 score between each amino acid in the model and the p:MHC:TCR template. TCR,
T-cell receptor; MHC, Major histocompatibility complex.
The CNN used was designed the following way. First, each chain (MHC, peptide, TCR α
and β) in the input went through their own convolution layer. Afterwards the output from these
layers were concatenated and went through another convolution layer. This output was then max
pooled. These steps were done with ﬁve different ﬁlter sizes (1, 3, 5, 7 and 9) and their output
from max pooling was subsequently concatenated and used as an input in an FNN designed as
the previous ones. The outline is seen in Figure 13.
21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 13: Overview of the CNN design. The input is divided into the four chains, which are
subsequently run through their own convolutional layer. The results are then concatenated and
run through another convolutional layer before being max pooled. The output is concatenated
with outputs using different ﬁlter sizes before entering an FNN. TCR, T-cell receptor; MHC,
Major histocompatibility complex; ConV, Convolutional layer; FNN, Feedforward neural net-
work.
The hyperparameters for the CNN were found empirically. In the ﬁrst convolution layer 200
ﬁlters were used and in the second, 300 ﬁlters. The FNN had one hidden layer with 150 hidden
neurons. The learning rate was 0.0001 and the batch size 30. For the convolution layers leaky
ReLu was used as the activation function, while sigmoid was used in the FNN with a softmax
on the ﬁnal output. For the back-propagation AdamOptimizer was used.
22
==PAGE:30==
4
Results
In this chapter the results acquired from the study are presented.
4.1
TCR:p:MHC data set analysis
A collection of 61 TCR:p:MHC complexes, shown in Appendix 8.1, were used as positives.
Each complex consisted of the variable domains of TCR α and β, the interactive part of the
MHC and the peptide. The complexes were a mixture of mice (8) and humans (53) dispersed
between 2 and 8 different alleles, respectively. The complexes also contained peptides with four
different lengths as seen in Figure 14.
(a)
(b)
Figure 14: (a) shows the data distribution of mouse (red) and human (blue) alleles. (b) shows
the distribution of peptide length.
The complexes were then grouped into 20 groups sharing 70% identity (measured as described
in Section 3.1.1). The 20 groups were subsequently partitioned into 5 partitions with 5 groups
in each, resulting in 14, 13, 12, 11 and 11 complexes in each partition. These complexes are
referred to as positives from now on.
There are no known database with negative TCR:p:MHC complexes. Therefore, with the as-
sumptions about the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of TCRs noted in Section 1.1.1, negatives were
designed by changing the peptide or TCR. For each positive we generated three different types
of negatives with the nomenclature N, R and S, as explained in Section 3.1.2. N negatives were
expected to be harder to predict and 3 of this type of negative were therefore generated. This
was based on the N negative having a peptide with a binding afﬁnity similar to the correspond-
ing positive, and therefore possibly similar interaction energies. Similar afﬁnity was deﬁned as
less than 2% difference in Rank% from the positive peptide, based on NetMHCpan-4.0 calcula-
tions. Four complexes (3mv7, 3mv8, 3mv9 and 4prp) had peptides with a short source protein.
The source protein being short, resulted in some N negatives to have a higher Rank% difference
23
==PAGE:31==
than 2%. In these cases the threshold were increased to less than 4%. Figure 15 shows the
distribution of N negatives afﬁnity.
Figure 15: Differences in Rank% of N negatives and their corresponding positive. The color
represents the order of difference of the N negatives. Red, furthest away; Green, middle; Violet,
closest. As seen four N negatives are not under the 2% threshold, but were included anyways.
For the R and S negatives, only one of each were made for a given positive. This totaled to ﬁve
negatives, of three different types, from each positive.
This resulted in 61 positive and 305 negative complexes. The sequences of these complexes
were saved in a FASTA format, ready as input for the modelling pipeline.
4.2
Modelling performance
Models of each TCR:p:MHC complex, positive and negative, were made with the pipeline
described in Section 3.2. For each complex, four different models were constructed with the
different template identity thresholds of 80, 90, 95 and 99.9%. This was done in order to
increase the data set, but also make it more diverse as it was desired to predict not only good
models (modelled with close to 99.9% templates), but also bad models (modelled with less than
80% templates). The combined number of models, of both negative and positive complexes at
the different thresholds, was then a total of 1464 models.
4.2.1
DockQ-score
To get an idea of the quality of the modelling based on the selection of templates, the DockQ-
score was calculated as explained in Section 3.2. This was only done on the positive models as
it is based on comparing the model to the real structure.
24
==PAGE:32==
Figure 16: Densitiy plot of the DockQ-score for the different thresholds. It can be seen that
using a better template when modelling results in better models, as an increase in template
threshold results in better DockQ-scores.
As seen in Figure 16, a bias in the DockQ-score can be seen depending on the threshold used to
model. The difference between 80%, 90% and 95% is less obvious compared to the threshold
of 99%. It is worth noting that the 99% threshold allows for templates of up to 99% identity,
but does not guarantee templates with a high identity. Models with 99% threshold and a low
DockQ-score could therefore be the result of the models having no good template available in
the template database.
4.3
Analysis of features
To help with the analysis and prediction of the positive and negative models, a variety of features
were calculated for each model.
4.3.1
Energy terms
For the calculation of energies, FoldX was used as described in Section 3.3.1. For a given
model, 22 different internal energy terms were calculated for each of the four chains (peptide,
MHC, TCR α and β), resulting in 88 terms. From the interaction between two different chains
25
==PAGE:33==
(6 combinations in total) in a model, 29 different interactive energy terms were also calculated.
The combined number of interactive energy terms was therefore for each model 174 terms. This
resulted in a total of 262 different energy terms for each model.
A density plot of the interaction energies was made to see if it were possible to easily differen-
tiate between negatives and positives, as seen in Figure 17.
Figure 17: Density plots of the total interaction energy for each type of model, modelled with
different thresholds. The density plots for each model behaves the same, except for some slight
differences for S models at 80% threshold. The plots show that there is no way to separate the
positive and negative models based on the total interaction energy. P, positive models; N, N
negative models; R, R negative models; S, S negative models.
In Figure 17 no easy differentiation can be seen between the negatives and positives at any of
the thresholds. At the same time the distributions were similar between each different threshold
as well.
4.3.2
Template identities
The measured identities all refer to the identity between the sequence of the TCR:p:MHC model
(either a positive or negative) and the template used to model it. Section 3.3 recalls how the
identity between the full modelled complex and template was calculated.
26
==PAGE:34==
Figure 18: Density plots of the TCR:p:MHC template identity for each type of model modelled
with different thresholds. With 80 and 90% threshold no separation can be made between
positive and negative models. At 95% a few positive models can be separated, but at 99% a
large proportion of positives can easily be separated. P, positive models; N, N negative models;
R, R negative models; S, S negative models.
Figure 18 shows a density plot of the template identity of the full complex at the different
thresholds. It can be seen that with 99.9% threshold, it is easy to separate positive from negative
models based on the template identity. With 80 and 90% no separation can be made, while 95%
have a few complexes with clear separation.
As the templates with 99.9% identity showed a too clear separation between the positives and
negatives models, they were excluded from the network training to diminish skewing the pre-
diction. This meant a resulting 1098 models were used for predictions as seen in Table 1.
27
==PAGE:35==
Table 1: Shows the total amount of models and where they were derived from. The models
were modelled with the three different thresholds; 80, 90 and 95%. P, positive models; N, N
negative models; R, R negative models; S, S negative models.
Complexes
Models with different thresholds
P
61
183
N (1,2,3)
183
549
R
61
183
S
61
183
Total models
366
1098
4.4
Prediction performances
To reduce over-ﬁtting and produce a reliable prediction for independent date sets, a ﬁve-fold
cross-validation was used with the partitions explained earlier in Section 4.1 for each network.
A special minibatch algorithm was also implemented in all networks to decrease the template
identity bias.
4.4.1
Feedforward neural network (FNN)
A feedforward neural network (FNN) was designed as described in Section 3.4. For the FNN
each model was represented by 263 features (262 energies and 1 complex template identity).
As the network was a classiﬁer the output was a single value between 0 and 1 (0 being negative
and 1 positive). Based on empirical evidence the networks hyperparameters were 1 hidden layer
with a size of 300 hidden nodes, a batch size of 30 and a learning rate of 0.0001. This resulted
in an AUC of 0.57 as seen in Figure 19. To see if this was an improvement in performance
compared to just using the total sum of all energy terms, the ROC and AUC were also calculated
for the total energy sum as seen in Figure 19. The AUC was also calculated for the sum of all
interaction energies (results not shown), and was slightly worse than the total energy sum.
28
==PAGE:36==
Figure 19: ROC curve and corresponding AUC of predictions from the FNN and the sum of all
energy terms. The sum of all energy terms has an AUC of 0.53 (blue). A small improvement to
an AUC of 0.57 can be seen from using an FNN (yellow). FNN, Feedforward neural network;
ROC, Receiver Operating Characteristic; AUC, Area Under the Curve.
4.4.2
Variable selection
To decide which variables (features) to remove in order to have less features, the feature impor-
tance of each feature were calculated using Random Forest. The following heat-map shown in
Figure 20 displays the feature importance of all the features. Many of the input features have
low feature importance in every partition, hinting they are unimportant.
29
==PAGE:37==
Figure 20: Heat-map of the feature importance of each feature calculated in a nested ﬁve-fold
cross-validation. Their feature importance is illustrated by the color.
The selection was done by removing features with an average feature importance under a certain
threshold over all 20 subsets shown in the heat-map. To make sure important features were not
removed, three different threshold were used; 0.001, 0.01 and 0.02. This resulted in 161, 10 and
5 features being left, respectively. Figure 21 shows how the AUC was affected by how many
features were removed.
30
==PAGE:38==
Figure 21: ROC curve and corresponding AUC from FNNs using different numbers of features.
It can be seen how removing features with worst importance improves the prediction up to
a certain point, where-after removing more features starts to decrease the performance of the
prediction. FNN, Feedforward neural network; ROC, Receiver Operating Characteristic; AUC,
Area Under the Curve.
The ten most important features can be seen in Table 2, while a more complete list can be found
in Appendix 8.2.
Table 2: The ten most important features and their feature importance. The capital letters
correspond to which chain the energy is derived from. PA, is the interaction energy between the
peptide and TCR α. B, is the internal energy for TCR β. The rest of the name corresponds to a
speciﬁc energy.
Importance
Feature
Importance
Feature
0.214
Ident complex
0.0185
A energy Ionisation
0.0429
PA energy Ionisation
0.0138
AB entropy mainchain
0.0249
PA electrostatic kon
0.013
PB entropy sidechain
0.0239
A Backbone Hbond
0.012
B energy Ionisation
0.0237
MP Interaction Energy
0.0112
PB Electrostatics
31
==PAGE:39==
4.4.3
Convolutional neural network (CNN)
To try and improve the performance, a CNN was designed as described in Section 3.4. The
used hyperparameters of 200 ﬁlters, 150 hidden nodes, 30 as a batch size and a learning rate
of 0.0001, were based on empirical evidence. The input used can be described as a box, where
the width is the length of the model sequence, the height is 1 and the depth is the values for
each amino acid. The values for each amino acid consisted of the BLOSUM62 score between
the model and the template for the complex, followed by the BLOSUM62 score between the
model and the separate templates for the TCR and p:MHC. The rest of the values were the same
for all amino acids, the 263 values also used in the previous FNN. As with the FNN the output
consisted of a prediction between 0 and 1. The threshold of 0.01 was used for variable selection
as it showed the best performance in the FNN.
Figure 22: ROC curve and corresponding AUC from the FNN, FNN with variable selection and
CNN with variable selection. It can be seen how ﬁrst feature selection resulted in an improved
performance, followed by switching to a CNN resulted in a further improved performance.
FNN, Feedforward neural network; ROC, Receiver Operating Characteristic; AUC, Area Under
the Curve.
Figure 22 shows the AUC of the FNN, FNN with variable selection and CNN with variable
selection. A clear improvement can be seen when using variable selection, while a further
signiﬁcant improvement can be seen when switching to a CNN.
32
==PAGE:40==
5
Discussion
The TCR speciﬁcity is the key to understanding adaptive cellular immunity. With the seemingly
endless combinations of different TCR, peptide and MHC, a computational approach to predict
TCR:p:MHC complexes is highly sought. In this study a combination of structural modelling
and deep learning were used to make a TCR speciﬁcity predictor.
Three types of negatives; N, R and S, were made to in order to cover the different types of
possible negatives and thereby construct a good predictor. With the similar afﬁnity, N negatives
were expected to be difﬁcult for the networks to distinguish from the positives. To try and
counter this 3 N negatives were therefore constructed. Meanwhile the R negatives taught the
networks that a really good afﬁnity to the MHC does not necessarily result in a good TCR
speciﬁcity. The S negative made sure all positive p:MHC complexes were seen as a negative as
well, and thereby removing an easy way for the network to distinguish between positives and
negatives.
In previous similar experiments, the prediction performance was correlated to the accuracy of
the modelling [49]. From the density plots of the DockQ-score it can be seen how the quality of
the models change based on the identity of the template. The modelling accuracy was therefore
depending on the template used. As it was expected that the interaction between the p:MHC and
TCR plays an important role in the prediction, the modelling accuracy might also be correlated
to our prediction performance. As artiﬁcial bias’ can effect the predictions negatively, multiple
steps were taken against it [50]. The models were produced multiple times, and it was seen by
introduction of the partition step, especially for designing the S negatives, combined with the
implementation of the minibatch, that it largely removed any clear artiﬁcial bias.
From the 262 different energy terms derived from FoldX, the total of the interaction energies
was plotted in a density plot. Here it was not possible to see that better templates resulted in
better interaction energies. It was neither possible to see a difference between positives and
negatives interaction energies. This could prove to be bad, as it might not be possible for any
prediction to take place based on the energies.
The template identities of each model type were also plotted in a density plot. While the density
plots were on top on each other for 80 and 90%, and 95% was only slightly off, 99% showed
a clear difference between positive and negatives. This could prove problematic, as this easy
feature could skew the networks towards predicting solely on having a good template. This
would not be feasible for a good predictor, as it would predict poorly on every model which
did not have a good template. As we wanted to make a generalizing prediction of both bad and
good models, we removed all models build with a 99% identity threshold.
33
==PAGE:41==
A predictor was ﬁrst made with an FNN design. From using all energy terms and the template
identity (263 total values) as input, an AUC of 0.57 was achieved. As an AUC of 0.53 was
calculated for the total sum of energies, it can be argued there is some improved prediction,
nevertheless not much. As each new input introduces more weights which have to be adjusted,
a high number of features can make it difﬁcult for the network to adjust them in an optimal way.
If many of these features are also redundant and give no useful information to the prediction,
it can hurt the performance by making it easier for the network to over-ﬁt on the training set,
as they are essentially more variables to over-ﬁt on. Variable selection was therefore used to
remove unimportant features and reduce over-ﬁtting. Removing features with an average im-
portance under 0.01, resulted in a large increase in performance and an AUC of 0.73. Removing
more features and the performance started to decrease, indicating the remaining features were
important for the prediction.
The template identity had the highest feature importance, but as other energy features were
still relevant for the prediction, the prediction was not overshadowed by the template identity
feature. The high feature importance of the ionization and electrostatics between the peptide
and both TCR α and β is interesting. This might be connected to the polar backbone of the
peptide often facing away from the MHC, as its anchor residues side chain is interacting with
the MHC [51]. Five of the ten most important features are interactions with the peptide, which
is not too surprising as it is central in the TCR:p:MHC binding.
To make a better prediction a CNN was designed. The same features as in the variable se-
lected FNN were used to train the CNN. The CNN gave an AUC of 0.75, showing a signiﬁcant
improvement from when using an FNN.
An AUC of 0.7-0.8 is considered a fair performance for a prediction tool. This is therefore
a good start, but improvements are needed to make this prediction tool more attractive for
researchers. The importance of a good template was shown, and with a growing TCR:p:MHC
complex database, the same approach as used in this project will slowly become better with
time. The study also showed the importance of choosing the right features. Implementing a
more advanced feature selecting method might therefore also improve the performance. AUC
was the only performance measure used in this study, and it could therefore be interesting to
use different evaluations techniques, such as Ranking tests. Implementation of more features,
such as the one-hot encoding of the modelled sequence, DockQ-scores and RMSD, could also
improve the prediction. Since a FNN can not take a sequence as an input, the implementation of
these features would require the use a CNN. It could also be interesting to use this approach with
values from Rosetta, where no minimization step is required, since FoldX requires an energy
minimization step, and see how it affects the predictions.
34
==PAGE:42==
6
Conclusion
This study showed that it is possible to predict the T cell receptor speciﬁcity by combining
structural modelling and deep learning.
The prediction was based on a data set consisting of 61 positive complexes and 305 negative
complexes of the three different types of negatives. Each complex were modelled three times
with different templates resulting in 1098 models. For each model the template identity and
several energy terms were used as features. With these features a prediction performance (AUC
of 0.57, 0.73 and 0.75) were achieved with an FNN, an FNN with variable selection and a CNN
with variable selection, respectively. From using feature selection, it was shown that a large
performance improvement could be found by removing unimportant features. From thereafter
applying deep learning with a CNN, a further signiﬁcant performance improvement was shown.
As the structural TCR:p:MHC database increases, the prediction tool will also improve as an
increased amount of data will result in better generalizing. Future studies should therefore make
sure to increase this database. Improving the feature selection method might also increase the
prediction performance. Nonetheless this study resulted in a good standard for a T-cell receptor
speciﬁcity prediction to improve on.
35
==PAGE:43==
7
References
[1]
Kendall Smith. “Edward Jenner and the Small Pox Vaccine”. In: Frontiers in Immunology
2 (2011), p. 21.
[2]
A. Golubov. “CRISPR: Bacteria Immune System.” In: Genome Stability: From Virus To
Human Application 292 (2016), pp. 87–98.
[3]
Klaus Heeg. “The Innate Immune System.” In: Neuroimmune Biology 7 (2008), pp. 87–
99.
[4]
Harikesh S. Wong and Ronald N. Germain. “Robust Control of the Adaptive Immune
System.” In: Seminars in Immunology 36 (2018), pp. 17–27.
[5]
Arturo Casadevall and Liise-Anne Pirofski. “A New Synthesis for Antibody-Mediated
Immunity.” In: Nature Immunology 13 (2012), pp. 21–28.
[6]
Alessandro Sette et al. “Optimizing Vaccine Design for Cellular Processing, MHC Bind-
ing and TCR Recognition.” In: Tissue Antigens 59 (2002), pp. 443–451.
[7]
Eric W. Hewitt. “The MHC class I antigen presentation pathway: strategies for viral
immune evasion.” In: Immunology 110 (2003), pp. 163–169.
[8]
Michael R. Pisano and Michael Ford. “Mass Spectrometric Characterization of Pep-
tides Associated with Molecules of the Major Histocompatibility Complex.” In: Cayman
Chemical (2017).
[9]
Andrew J. T. George, Jaroslav Stark, and Cliburn Chan. “Understanding speciﬁcity and
sensitivity of T-cell recognition.” In: Trends in Immunology 26 (2005), pp. 653–659.
[10]
David K. Cole et al. “Structural Mechanism Underpinning Cross-reactivity of a CD8
T-cell Clone That Recognizes a Peptide Derived from Human Telomerase Reverse Tran-
scriptase”. In: The Journal of Biological Chemistry 292 (2017), pp. 802–813.
[11]
Timothy K. Starr, Stephen C. Jameson, and Kristin A. Hogquist. “Positive and Negative
Selection of T Cells.” In: Annual Review of Immunology 21 (2003), pp. 139–176.
[12]
Marjet Elemans, Naﬁsa-Katrin Seich al Basatena, and Becca Asquith. “The Efﬁciency of
the Human CD8+ T Cell Response: How Should We Quantify It, What Determines It,
and Does It Matter?” In: PLoS computational biology 8 (2012), e1002381.
[13]
Jose M. Rojo, Raquel Bello, and Pilar Portoles. “T-Cell Receptor.” In: Advances in Ex-
perimental Medicine and Biology. 640 (2008), pp. 1–11.
[14]
Maureen M. Hughes et al. “T cell receptor CDR3 loop length repertoire is determined pri-
marily by features of the V(D)J recombination reaction.” In: Eur. J. Immunol 33 (2003),
pp. 1568–1575.
36
==PAGE:44==
[15]
Andrew J. Bordner. “Structure-Based Prediction of Major Histocompatibility Complex
(MHC) Epitopes.” In: Immunoproteomics: Methods and Protocols (2013), pp. 323–343.
[16]
Takumi Kumai et al. “Cancer immunotherapy: moving forward with peptide T cell vac-
cines.” In: Current Opinion in Immunology 47 (2017), pp. 57–63.
[17]
Rikke Andersen et al. “Long-Lasting Complete Responses in Patients with Metastatic
Melanoma after Adoptive Cell Therapy with Tumor-Inﬁltrating Lymphocytes and an At-
tenuated IL2 Regimen.” In: Clinical Cancer Research 22 (2016), pp. 3734–3745.
[18]
Shuqi Zhang et al. “Direct Measurement of T Cell Receptor Afﬁnity and Sequence from
Naive Anti-Viral T Cells”. In: Science translational medicine 8 (2016), pp. 341–360.
[19]
K. A. Dill et al. “The Protein Folding Problem.” In: Annual review of biophysics. 37
(2008), pp. 289–316.
[20]
Melissa R. Pitman and R. Ian Menz. “Methods for Protein Homology Modelling.” In:
Applied Mycology and Biotechnology 6 (2006), pp. 37–59.
[21]
N. Eswar and A. Sali. “Comparative Modeling of Drug Target Proteins.” In: Comprehen-
sive Medicinal Chemistry II 4 (2007), pp. 215–236.
[22]
Narayanan Eswar et al. “Comparative Protein Structure Modeling Using Modeller.” In:
Curr Protoc Bioinformatics (2006).
[23]
William R. Pearson. “An Introduction to Sequence Similarity (‘Homology’) Searching.”
In: Current protocols in bioinformatics 42 (2013), pp. 311–318.
[24]
Elmar Krieger, Sander B. Nabuurs, and Gert Vriend. “Homology Modeling.” In: Struc-
tural Bioinformatics 44 (2008), pp. 509–524.
[25]
A. Sali and T. L. Blundell. “Comparative protein modelling by satisfaction of spatial
restraints.” In: J. Mol. Biol. 234 (1993), pp. 779–815.
[26]
Andrew Waterhouse et al. “SWISS-MODEL: homology modelling of protein structures
and complexes.” In: Nucleic Acids Research 46 (2018), 296–W303.
[27]
M. S. Klausen et al. “LYRA, a webserver for lymphocyte receptor structural modeling.”
In: Nucleic Acids Research 43 (2015), pp. 349–355.
[28]
Pedro E. M., Lopes Olgun Guvench, and Alexander D. MacKerell. “Current Status of
Protein Force Fields for Molecular Dynamics.” In: Methods in molecular biology 1215
(2015), pp. 47–71.
[29]
E. Capriotti, P. Fariselli, and R. Casadio. “A neural-network-based method for predicting
protein stability changes upon single point mutations.” In: Bioinformatics 20 (2004),
pp. 63–68.
37
==PAGE:45==
[30]
D Benjamin Gordon, Shannon A Marshall, and Stephen L Mayo. “Energy functions for
protein design.” In: Current Opinion in Structural Biology 9 (1999), pp. 509–513.
[31]
J. van Durme et al. “A graphical interface for the FoldX forceﬁeld.” In: Bioinformatics
27 (2011), pp. 1711–1712.
[32]
Warren S. McCulloch and Walter Pitts. “A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in
nervous activity.” In: The bulletin of mathematical biophysics 5 (1943), pp. 115–133.
[33]
Chen Chyi-Tsong and Chang Wei-Der. “A Feedforward Neural Network with Function
Shape Autotuning.” In: Neural Networks 9 (1995), pp. 627–641.
[34]
Hammam Soliman et al. “Artiﬁcial Neural Network Algorithm for Condition Monitor-
ing of DC-link Capacitors Based on Capacitance Estimation.” In: ournal of Renewable
Energy and Sustainable Development 1 (2015), pp. 294–299.
[35]
Jing-Ru Zhang et al. “A hybrid particle swarm optimization–back-propagation algorithm
for feedforward neural network training.” In: Applied Mathematics and Computation 185
(2007), pp. 1026–1037.
[36]
Douglas M. Hawkins. “The Problem of Overﬁtting.” In: Journal of Chemical Information
and Computer Sciences 44 (2004), pp. 1–12.
[37]
Vanessa Jurtz et al. “NetMHCpan-4.0: Improved Peptide–MHC Class I Interaction Pre-
dictions Integrating Eluted Ligand and Peptide Binding Afﬁnity Data.” In: The Journal
of Immunology 199 (2017), pp. 3360–3368.
[38]
V. Kishore Ayyadevara. “Convolutional Neural Network.” In: Pro Machine Learning Al-
gorithms (2018), pp. 179–215.
[39]
M. Ragoza et al. “Protein-Ligand Scoring with Convolutional Neural Networks.” In:
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 57 (2017), pp. 942–957.
[40]
Nameer Hirschkind, Jyo Pari, and Jimin Khim. Convolutional Neural Network. 2018.
URL: https://brilliant.org/wiki/convolutional-neural-network/.
[41]
G. Zhao et al. “Training Better CNNs Requires to Rethink ReLU.” In: CoRR (2017).
[42]
Caren Marzban. “The ROC Curve and the Area under It as Performance Measures.” In:
Weather and Forecasting 19 (2004), pp. 1106–1114.
[43]
Inc. OpenEye Scientiﬁc Software. Drawing ROC Curve. 2018. URL: https://docs.
eyesopen . com / toolkits / cookbook / python / plotting / roc . html # figure -
depiction-roc-theory.
[44]
G. M. Boratyn et al. “BLAST: a more efﬁcient report with usability improvements.” In:
Bioinformatics 41 (2013), pp. 29–33.
38
==PAGE:46==
[45]
Sylvain Poux et al. “On expert curation and sustainability: UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot as a
case study.” In: Bioinformatics 33 (2017), pp. 3454–3460.
[46]
S Basu and B Wallner. “DockQ: A Quality Measure for Protein-Protein Docking Mod-
els.” In: PLoS ONE 11 (2016), https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0161879.
[47]
G. van Rossum. Python tutorial. Tech. rep. CS-R9526. Amsterdam: Centrum voor Wiskunde
en Informatica (CWI), May 1995.
[48]
Martin Abadi et al. TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous Sys-
tems. Software available from tensorﬂow.org. 2015. URL: https://www.tensorflow.
org/.
[49]
Esteban Lanzarottia, Paolo Marcatili, and Morten Nielsen. “Identiﬁcation of the cognate
peptide-MHC target of T cell receptors using molecular modeling and force ﬁeld scor-
ing.” In: Molecular Immunology 94 (2018), pp. 91–97.
[50]
Asa Ben-Hur and William Stafford Noble. “Choosing negative examples for the predic-
tion of protein-protein interactions.” In: BMC Bioinformatics 7 (2006).
[51]
Rakina Yanevaa et al. “Peptide binding to MHC class I and II proteins: New avenues
from new methods”. In: Molecular Immunology 47 (2010), pp. 649–657.
39
==PAGE:47==
8
Appendix
8.1
PDB data
PDB ID
MHC-I
Peptide
PDB ID
MHC-I
Peptide
3vxr
HLA-A24:02
RYPLTFGWCF
3tjh
H2-Ld
SPLDSLWWI
1g6r
H2-Kb
SIYRYYGL
3qdg
HLA-A02:01
ELAGIGILTV
5c07
HLA-A02:01
YQFGPDFPIA
3gsn
HLA-A02:01
NLVPMVATV
4mnq
HLA-A02:01
ILAKFLHWL
4qok
HLA-A02:01
EAAGIGILTV
4qrp
HLA-B08:01
HSKKKCDEL
4jff
HLA-A02:01
ELAGIGILTV
2vlr
HLA-A02:01
GILGFVFTL
3utt
HLA-A02:01
ALWGPDPAAA
2oi9
H2-Ld
QLSPFPFDL
1mwa
H2-Kb
EQYKFYSV
4jfe
HLA-A02:01
ELAGIGALTV
5c08
HLA-A02:01
RQWGPDPAAV
5bs0
HLA-A01:01
ESDPIVAQY
5brz
HLA-A01:01
EVDPIGHLY
5c0c
HLA-A02:01
RQFGPDWIVA
3w0w
HLA-A24:02
RFPLTFGWCF
2vlk
HLA-A02:01
GILGFVFTL
3qeq
HLA-A02:01
AAGIGILTV
4g8g
HLA-B27:05
KRWIILGLNK
2e7l
H2-Ld
QLSPFPFDL
3e3q
H2-Ld
QLSPFPFDL
2bnq
HLA-A02:01
SLLMWITQV
5c09
HLA-A02:01
YLGGPDFPTI
3mv8
HLA-B35:01
HPVGEADYFEY
4prp
HLA-B35:01
HPVGQADYFEY
5eu6
HLA-A02:01
YLEPGPVTV
5c0a
HLA-A02:01
MVWGPDPLYV
3uts
HLA-A02:01
ALWGPDPAAA
5hhm
HLA-A02:01
GILGLVFTL
3qdm
HLA-A02:01
ELAGIGILTV
4eup
HLA-A02:01
ALGIGILTV
5d2n
HLA-A02:01
NLVPMVATV
3ffc
HLA-B08:01
FLRGRAYGL
3qdj
HLA-A02:01
AAGIGILTV
2ypl
HLA-B57:03
KAFSPEVIPMF
5hho
HLA-A02:01
GILEFVFTL
3vxs
HLA-A24:02
RYPLTLGWCF
4mji
HLA-B51:01
TAFTIPSI
2f54
HLA-A02:01
SLLMWITQC
5men
HLA-A02:01
ILAKFLHWL
4mxq
H2-Ld
SPAPRPLDL
2f53
HLA-A02:01
SLLMWITQC
2p5w
HLA-A02:01
SLLMWITQC
2pye
HLA-A02:01
SLLMWITQC
3hg1
HLA-A02:01
ELAGIGILTV
3tfk
H2-Ld
QLSDVPMDL
5e9d
HLA-A02:01
ELAGIGILTV
3mv7
HLA-B35:01
HPVGEADYFEY
2nx5
HLA-B35:01
EPLPQGQLTAY
2p5e
HLA-A02:01
SLLMWITQC
3vxm
HLA-A24:02
RFPLTFGWCF
5c0b
HLA-A02:01
RQFGPDFPTI
4l3e
HLA-A02:01
ELAGIGILTV
4jfd
HLA-A02:01
ELAAIGILTV
5euo
HLA-A02:01
GILGFVFTL
3mv9
HLA-B35:01
HPVGEADYFEY
2bnr
HLA-A02:01
SLLMWITQC
40
==PAGE:48==
8.2
Feature importance
Importance
Feature
Importance
Feature
0.214
Ident complex
0.0067
AB entropy sidechain
0.0429
PA energy Ionisation
0.0066
M backbone clash
0.0249
PA electrostatic kon
0.0065
PA Electrostatics
0.0239
A Backbone Hbond
0.0064
MP electrostatic kon
0.0237
MP Interaction Energy
0.0063
AB Sidechain Hbond
0.0185
A energy Ionisation
0.006
P backbone clash
0.0138
AB entropy mainchain
0.0057
A entropy sidechain
0.013
PB entropy sidechain
0.0056
AB Electrostatics
0.012
B energy Ionisation
0.0055
M disulﬁde
0.0112
PB Electrostatics
0.0055
MP Electrostatics
0.0099
PA Solvation Hydrophobic
0.0055
MB torsional clash
0.0097
P entropy sidechain
0.0054
MP Backbone Hbond
0.0095
P total energy
0.0053
B torsional clash
0.0092
A total energy
0.0052
MB energy Ionisation
0.0088
MP torsional clash
0.0052
MA Electrostatics
0.0083
P entropy mainchain
0.0052
A Electrostatics
0.0082
MA helix dipole
0.0051
MA Van der Waals clashes
0.0081
PB Interface Residues
0.0051
AB Solvation Polar
0.0079
AB backbone clash
0.005
PA entropy mainchain
0.0075
MA torsional clash
0.005
B disulﬁde
0.0075
MA Van der Waals
0.005
A backbone clash
0.0074
PA Interaction Energy
0.0048
MB electrostatic kon
0.0074
B entropy sidechain
0.0046
PA torsional clash
0.0073
P Solvation Polar
0.0046
MP Sidechain Hbond
0.0073
MA Solvation Polar
0.0046
B Sidechain Hbond
0.0069
MA entropy sidechain
0.0046
A Solvation Hydrophobic
0.0067
MP Solvation Polar
0.0046
A Sidechain Hbond
0.0067
MP IntraclashesGroup2
0.0045
B entropy mainchain
0.0067
MB Interface Residues
0.0044
P Solvation Hydrophobic
0.0067
MA Interaction Energy
0.0043
PB Van der Waals clashes
41
