==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Sustainable Energy -
Electrical Energy Systems
Distributed Learning in Wind Power
Forecasting
Benedikt Sommer (s161965)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3800
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The present work builds on recent discoveries in the field of wind power forecasting.
Studies showed that when predicting wind power generation at a wind farm level
short periods ahead, including measurements from nearby sites in statistical models
has proven to increase the forecast accuracy. Building on this insight, the present
piece of work aims to combine the general concepts and benefits of online and dis-
tributed learning to present a novel algorithm in the domain of high-dimensional
wind power forecasting.
Analyses of the in the domain of high-dimensional wind
power forecasting only available online and distributed algorithm showed relatively
long computational times for large-scale setups. To tackle the poor scaling behavior,
a gradient based online and distributed algorithm is presented that shows a significant
speed up for very large datasets. Along the novel distributed algorithm a framework
is presented where the privacy of each wind farm operator is protected since no other
agent is able to access the true power measurements of each operator’s site. Further-
more, the presented framework provides an efficient management of the exchanged
messages among all wind farm operators.
The novel algorithm and its communication reduced version are benchmarked against
the already existing online and distributed algorithm on a large real world wind power
dataset. The obtained results show that while reducing the computational time by
a great extend, the forecast accuracy experiences a negative impact. Nevertheless,
the results show that the gradient based algorithm can be used as an alternative in
applications where the computational power of each agent is limited, hence very light
algorithms are required.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Electrical Engineering at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master degree
in Sustainable Energy - Electrical Energy Systems.
Kongens Lyngby, August 2, 2018
Benedikt Sommer (s161965)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I want to thank Pierre Pinson for giving me the opportunity to work
with him. I am especially grateful because he accepted me as one of his students
even though to work on the topic of distributed online learning was more than a last-
minute decision. When looking back, I can happily say now that this was definitely
the right decision. Furthermore, I also want to express my gratitude to my other su-
pervisor, Jakob Messner. I am deeply thankful that even after leaving the Technical
University of Denmark he was continuously supporting me and my work. I want to
thank both of my supervisors for all the interesting dialogues, their important input,
all their support and open ears when I was facing all sorts of obstacles with this the-
sis. When handing in this thesis, also the part of my life as a Master student at the
Technical University of Denmark ends. The opportunity to study in an international
environment at one of Europe’s best technical universities enriched my life in many
ways. Here I would like to point out all the interesting encounters and exchanges of
thoughts and knowledge over the past two years. For this I want to thank all the
talented people I have met but especially Guillermo Esteban Fernandez and Andrea
Marin Radoszynski. With both I have spent most of my time either inside or outside
of the university. Besides receiving excellent education, I also had the opportunity
to apply my newly obtained knowledge while working for Anemo Analytics. For this
opportunity and all their trust I want to thank Tommy Berg, Michael Johansen and
all the other employees of Anemo Analytics. My experience of spending the past
two years in one of Europe’s finest cities would have not been as exciting as it has
been while living “in der Oehlenschläger”. Grüße gehen hier raus an Konstantin Sal-
vamoser und Moritz Saive-Pinkall. Second to last, I want to thank my father and
the remaining part of my family. Without the continuous support of my father over
the past six years my life as a student would have not been the same. Thank you
for always supporting me especially when considering that most of my requests and
needs are, and most likely always will be of short notice.
Last, I want to express my eternal gratitude to my sister and brother in law. Without
them, I would not be even close to where I am today.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
List of Figures
vi
List of Tables
x
Nomenclature
xi
Abbreviations
xii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Autoregressive Models
7
2.1
Univariate autoregressive models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Multivariate autoregressive models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Regularized multivariate autoregressive models . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Batch Learning
13
3.1
Centralized batch learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Decentralized batch learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Hyperparameter tuning of batch algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Limitations of batch learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Distributed Online Learning
23
4.1
Online ADMM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Hyperparameter tuning of online algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
4.3
Desired online algorithm properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Gradient Based Distributed Online Learning
33
5.1
Centralized MIDAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Distributed MIDAS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Simulation studies on synthetic data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
Computational complexity of the Adaptive D-MIDAS
. . . . . . . . .
55
5.5
Data exchange of the Adaptive D-MIDAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6
Case Study on Real World Data
61
6.1
Presentation of Danish wind power dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.2
Data preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.3
Case study setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.4
Hyperparameter tuning of online algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.5
Performance evaluation of algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7
Conclusions and Future Works
77
7.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
7.2
Future works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A Appendix
81
A.1 Algorithm implementations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
A.2 Simulation study results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
A.3 Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
Bibliography
88
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
3.1
Setup of centralized batch learning. The central agent sj learns a large
batch model by including off-site information obtained from the contracted
agents. The icons are obtained from [23].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Setup of the ADMM algorithm when learning a regularized AR-X model
for the central agent sj. The icons are obtained from [23]. . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Average estimated parameter β for varying training periods obtained in
a Monte-Carlo simulation with 1000 runs. Ttrain indicates the samples
contained in the training dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1
Time spent by each agent to complete its tasks during a time stamp of
the OADMM algorithm, when the total number of agents S varies. The
order of the AR-X model is set to 4. All the shown values are averages
across all 500 simulated time stamps. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.1
Application framework of the distributed MIDAS. The icons can be found
on [23].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Uncertainty of estimated parameter a1 when deploying the Vanilla D-
MIDAS (top) and OADMM (bottom) algorithm.
The shown quantile
and mean values (solid lines) are obtained from the distribution of model
parameters which is created by a MC-Simulation with 1000 runs. The
black dashed line indicates the true parameter value. . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
Uncertainty of estimated parameter a2 when deploying the Vanilla D-
MIDAS (top) and OADMM (bottom) algorithm.
The shown quantile
and mean values (solid lines) are obtained from the distribution of model
parameters which is created by a MC-Simulation with 1000 runs. The
black dashed line indicates the true parameter value. . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4
Uncertainty of estimated parameter a3 when deploying the Vanilla D-
MIDAS (top) and OADMM (bottom) algorithm.
The shown quantile
and mean values (solid lines) are obtained from the distribution of model
parameters which is created by a MC-Simulation with 1000 runs. The
black dashed line indicates the true parameter value. . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
vii
5.5
Uncertainty of estimated parameter a4 when deploying the Vanilla D-
MIDAS (top) and OADMM (bottom) algorithm.
The shown quantile
and mean values (solid lines) are obtained from the distribution of model
parameters which is created by a MC-Simulation with 1000 runs. The
black dashed line indicates the true parameter value. . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.6
Estimated sparsity with respect to the true parameter matrices B1 and
B2 when deploying the Vanilla D-MIDAS and OADMM algorithm. The
shown numbers are average values obtained from a MC-Simulation with
1000 runs. The black dashed line indicates the true parameter sparsity.
.
48
5.7
Estimated sparsity with respect to the true parameter matrices B1 and
B2 when using the Vanilla D-MIDAS with different λ values. The shown
numbers are average values obtained from a MC-Simulation with 1000
runs. The black dashed line indicates the true VAR model sparsity. . . . .
50
5.8
Uncertainty of estimated parameter a1 (top left), a2 (top right), a3 (bot-
tom left) and a4 (bottom right) when deploying the Vanilla D-MIDAS.
The shown quantile and mean values (solid lines) are obtained from the
distribution of model parameters which is created by a MC-Simulation
with 1000 runs. The black dashed line indicates the true parameter value.
51
5.9
Estimated sparsity with respect to the true parameter matrices B1 and
B2 when deploying the Vanilla D-MIDAS and OADMM algorithm. The
shown numbers are average values obtained from a MC-Simulation with
1000 runs. The black dashed line indicates the true VAR model sparsity. .
52
5.10 Uncertainty of estimated parameter a1 (top left), a2 (top right), a3 (bot-
tom left) and a4 (bottom right) when deploying the Adaptive D-MIDAS.
The shown quantile and mean values (solid lines) are obtained from the
distribution of model parameters which is created by a MC-Simulation
with 1000 runs. The black dashed line indicates the true parameter value.
53
5.11 Mean learning rate η of the best performing estimators which are learned
for the sites that contain the time varying model parameters a1 (top left),
a2 (top right), a3 (bottom left) and a4 (bottom right). The results are
obtained from the MC-Simulation with 1000 runs.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.12 Time spent by each agent to complete its tasks during a time stamp of the
OADMM algorithm and Adaptive D-MIDAS, when the total number of
agents S varies. The order of the AR-X model is set to 4. All the shown
values are averages across 500 time stamps. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.1
Locations of the in the case study considered Danish wind farms. The
round red dots indicate exemplary the locations of the contracted agents
wind farms, whereas the black cross marks the location of the central
agent’s site. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.2
RMSE skill score of the Adaptive D-MIDAS with reference to the persis-
tence forecast for 1-step ahead forecasts. The skill scores are computed
for the time stamps t = 10000 to t = 20000 of the cleaned Danish dataset.
In each simulation a different error forgetting factor µ is applied. . . . . .
66
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
viii
6.3
RMSE skill score of the Adaptive D-MIDAS with reference to the persis-
tence forecast for 1-step ahead forecasts. The skill scores are computed
for the time stamps t = 10000 to t = 20000 of the cleaned Danish dataset.
In each simulation a different combination of the hyperparameters L and
pconst are applied.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.4
RMSE (top row) and MAE (bottom row) skill scores of the online and
batch algorithms for different lead times. The skill scores are computed
for the time stamps t = 20000 to t = 40000 of the cleaned Danish dataset.
The dots indicate the mean of the respective skill score distribution. . . .
69
6.5
Average AR-X model lag 1 coefficients for the Adaptive D-MIDAS (left)
and OADMM (right) algorithm over the last 100 time stamps when per-
forming 1-step ahead forecasting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.6
Average AR-X model lag 4 coefficients for the Adaptive D-MIDAS (left)
and OADMM (right) algorithm over the last 100 time stamps when per-
forming 1-step ahead forecasting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.7
Average AR-X model lag 1 coefficients for the Adaptive D-MIDAS (left)
and OADMM (right) algorithm over the last 100 time stamps when per-
forming 4-step ahead forecasting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.8
Bias scores of online and batch algorithms for different lead times. The
bias scores are computed for the time stamps t = 20000 to t = 40000 of
the cleaned Danish dataset. The dots indicate the mean of the respective
bias score distribution. The whiskers indicate the smallest and greatest
value of the respective distribution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.9
RMSE (top row) and MAE (bottom row) skill scores of the Adaptive D-
MIDAS and its accelerated (communication reduced) version for different
lead times. The skill scores are computed for the time stamps t = 20000
to t = 40000 of the cleaned Danish dataset. The dots indicate the mean
of the respective skill score distribution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.1 Uncertainty of estimated parameter a1 (top left), a2 (top right), a3 (bot-
tom left) and a4 (bottom right) when deploying the Vanilla D-MIDAS with
the following hyperparameter settings: λ = 0, η = 0.075 and p = 2 ln (S · L). 84
A.2 Uncertainty of estimated parameter a1 (top left), a2 (top right), a3 (bot-
tom left) and a4 (bottom right) when deploying the Vanilla D-MIDAS
with the following hyperparameter settings: λ = 0.001, η = 0.075 and
p = 0.75 ln (S · L).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.3 Estimated sparsity with respect to the true parameter matrices B1 and
B2 when deploying the Vanilla D-MIDAS and OADMM algorithm. For
the Vanilla D-MIDAS the following hyperparameter values were applied:
η = 0.075, λ = 0, 001 and p = 0.75 ln (S · L). The shown numbers are
average values obtained from a MC-Simulation with 1000 runs. The black
dashed line indicates the true VAR model sparsity. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
ix
A.4 Time spent by central agent to complete its tasks depending on the number
of models learned in parallel and total number of agents S when using the
Adaptive D-MIDAS. The order of the AR process is set to 4.
. . . . . . .
86
==PAGE:12==
List of Tables
4.1
Overview of the OADMM’s sent and received messages per time stamp
from the perspective of the central agent.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1
Overview of the Adaptive D-MIDAS’s sent and received amount of data
per time stamp from the perspective of the fusion center operator. . . . .
58
==PAGE:13==
Nomenclature
β(sj)
s,t
Estimator at time stamp t of a distributed online algorithm when the con-
tracted agent s predicts power at the central agent’s site sj
βsj
Estimator to predict power production at site sj in a centralized offline setup
θ(sj)
s,t
Dual variables at time stamp t of the D-MIDAS when the contracted agent s
predicts power at the central agent’s site sj
eys
Uncentered time series vector of normalized power measurements at site s
Ks
Secondary encryption matrix of site s in the OADMM algorithm
Ms
Primary encryption matrix of site s in the OADMM algorithm
ys
Centered time series vector of normalized power measurements at site s
η
Learning rate of the MIDAS
ˆy(sj)
s,t|t−k k-step ahead partial prediction of site s for the central agent’s site sj
λ
Regularization parameter
µ
Forgetting factor
ΩC
Set of the contracted agents wind farms, ΩS\sj
ΩS
Set of all wind farms
ρ
Hyperparameter of the ADMM and OADMM algorithm that controls the
step-size
A
Design matrix that contains the explanatory variables of all in ΩS defined
sites
k
Subscript indicating how many time steps ahead a prediction is made for
L
Order of the AR process
sj
Site of the central agent
ys,t
Normalized and centered power measurement at time stamp t and site s
==PAGE:14==
Abbreviations
ADMM Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers algorithm.
AR Autoregressive model.
AR-X Autoregressive model with exogenous input.
ARIMA Autoregressive integrated moving average model.
ARMA Autoregressive moving average model.
C-MIDAS Centralized MIrror Descent Algorithm made Sparse.
D-MIDAS Distributed MIrror Descent Algorithm made Sparse.
FLOP Floating-point operation.
LASSO Least absolute shrinkage and selection operator.
MAE Mean absolute error.
MSE Mean squared error.
OADMM Online Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers algorithm.
OLS Ordinary least squares.
RLS Regularized least squares.
RMSE Root mean squared error.
SMIDAS Stochastic MIrror Descent Algorithm made Sparse.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Context
In power systems with growing shares of stochastic generators, such as solar photo-
voltaics (PV) and wind power plants, power production forecasts gain more and more
importance. Power system operators recognized early that actions must be taken to
manage the increasing amount of stochastic generators efficiently. Actions do not
only include the provision of the required infrastructure improvements through grid
reinforcement measures but also intelligent system operation schemes. At this, it is
common practice to utilize power forecasts of stochastic generators to determine the
required capacity of spinning reserves [1][2]. In this context, very-short term forecasts
of the time horizon from minutes up to multiple hours are used to increase the system
reliability while being economically efficient as possible [1][3].
Besides the interest of system operators to obtain accurate forecasts, the operators
of the stochastic generators themselves do also have a great interest in that. When
trading the produced energy in the various electricity markets, it has been proven
that very-short term forecasts deliver valuable information which ultimately increase
the revenues of the respective source [4][5]. In case the stochastic generator is part of
a portfolio which includes storage units, forecasts can improve the interplay between
generation and storage technologies [6].
In the general context of wind power forecasts, it is possible to classify forecasts
based on their time horizon. Besides the prior introduced description of very-short
term forecasts, ultra-short [1] and immediate-short [7] are also terms found in the
literature associated with forecasts of lead times from minutes up to multiple hours.
Lead time is a term that defines the period for which a forecast is made for. Besides
the difference in terminology, all sources share the agreement that state-of-the-art
forecast models with such time horizons in the domain of wind power forecasting are
predominantly based on statistical methods.
These methods try to identify statistical relationships between an output variable,
being the power production of a wind farm or a single wind turbine, and the in-
put variables. Potential input variables are past measurements of power production
and/or wind speed at the site where power should be predicted for. After learning
==PAGE:16==
1.1 Context
2
the relationship between the input and output variables from historic measurements,
statistical models that are used for very-short term forecasts utilize then the latest
measurements of the input variables to compute the output variable. Here, current
information about the development of the meteorological conditions at the site where
power production should be predicted are not from importance [1][7]. Contrary to
this, when forecasting power production days ahead, models utilizing information
about the future development of the meteorological conditions outperform statistical
models [8][9]. Information about the meteorological conditions are obtained by using
numerical weather models.
Considering models based on statistical methods, the interested reader can find many
variations in the literature. When focusing on time series based models, most are
variations or extensions of autoregressive (AR) models such as autoregressive moving
average (ARMA) [10] or autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) models
[11]. These models are already powerful when using only measurements taken at the
site where the power production should be predicted. However, it has been proven
that including data measured at nearby sites can substantially increase the perfor-
mance of statistical models [8][12][13]. A better performance is achieved by utilizing
the correlation between the data measured at the site which receives a forecast and
the remaining sites.
In times where the number of wind farms steadily increases,
exploiting this circumstance is very attractive. High-dimensional wind power fore-
casting is often used in the literature related to the framework where measurements
from a large number of other sites are included in the forecasting model.
Increasing the accuracy of the forecasting model does not come for free. The im-
provement comes at the cost that the model size increases, since the model takes
more input variables into account, which ultimately requires more time to learn an
estimator. Therefore, such models are often used in a framework where the model
is fitted once on a training dataset and used thereafter for predictions. Here, after
finishing to train the model, the estimator parameters are kept constant. This pro-
cedure is often known as batch learning. The origin of the term comes from the fact
that an estimator is obtained by fitting the model on a batch of data. Most often the
batch is only a subset of a larger dataset.
Since a batch model is only trained on a subset of data, it is not possible to ac-
count for the non-stationarity of the wind power time series. The non-stationarity
stems from the fact that weather patterns change but also a change of a wind farm’s
layout affects the characteristics of its normalized power production. It is straightfor-
ward to understand that an estimator which has been learned on historic data that
yet has not been exposed to any of these changes will not provide the most satisfying
predictions. A common applied method to overcome this limitation is to train the
model on a sliding training window, meaning the model is trained again on a specified
amount of past observations whenever new data becomes available. However, for very
large batch models this is not a suitable solution since the time to refit the model can
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Context
3
exceed the time horizon of the next prediction. The circumstance of using adaptive
models to incorporate changes in the underlying time series explains the interest in
so-called online algorithms in the domain of wind power forecasting.
Instead of learning a model from a batch of data, online algorithms learn a model
sample by sample. By this means, whenever a new sample of data arrives, the respec-
tive online algorithm updates the model parameters. By doing so, it is possible to
account for temporal changes in the underlying time series dataset. Therefore, online
algorithms are in general capable to adjust for instance to weather pattern changes
due to seasonal effects. For most algorithms the parameter updates can be carried
out very fast whereby even for very short lead times it is possible to use an updated
estimator to make the next prediction.
For wind power forecasting, online algorithms are presented in [8], [14] and [15]. The
only of the prior mentioned algorithms which exploits the benefit of including off-site
information, being power measurements from other sites, is presented in [8]. One of
the key challenges of including measurements from nearby sites into the respective
model is the potential unwillingness of competing wind farm operators to share sensi-
tive data with each other. In this piece of work, when using the term sensitive data it
is referred to measurements which give a third party the possibility to extract perfor-
mance indicators of a particular site. Furthermore, when having access to sensitive
data, such as the power production of wind farms from a number of competitors, it
is possible to use this information to gain benefits when trading energy in the various
electricity markets. The circumstance to avoid sharing sensitive data gave rise to the
introduction of distributed learning techniques in wind power forecasting.
In a more general context the application of distributed learning techniques aim
to resolve two matters. Considering the case where a large number of wind farm
operators work together to improve the individual forecasts for their sites by includ-
ing measurements from all the remaining participating wind farms. To learn these
large models centralized, meaning that a third party such as a forecasting company
has access to the data of each site, the necessary computational infrastructure must
be present. Distributed learning techniques aim to reduce the computational burden
of learning a large model by splitting it into many easier tasks to solve. At this,
each smaller task can be solved by any processing unit which is part of the network.
The benefit here is that the processing unit only requires a fraction of computational
power to solve the smaller tasks compared to what it would take to train the whole
model. However, this comes at the cost of communication since each network node
must communicate their results with the remaining nodes.
An even more important benefit of distributed learning techniques is that some al-
gorithms are designed to ensure that no actual measurements of model input data
are shared among participating agents. This is a very powerful property aiming to
deal with the unwillingness of wind farm operators to share sensitive data with com-
==PAGE:18==
1.2 Objective
4
petitors.
Eventually, this will presumably increase the likelihood that competing
operators come together to improve the forecasts for their sites. Another interesting
scenario is to consider a setup where the power system operator likes to receive pre-
dictions for all sites in its network to improve the system reliability. Also here, using
a distributed learning algorithm avoids that each operator must share its sensitive
data with competing operators or the system operator.
Up until today, to the best knowledge of the author, only a handful of scientific
publications address the potential of distributed learning techniques in the domain
of wind power forecasting. Distributed algorithms are presented in [13], [16] and [17].
In [18] a distributed algorithm to predict wind speed is developed. A drawback of
these algorithms is that they are all batch algorithms. Thus, to account for the non-
stationary nature of wind power production, it is necessary to refit the estimator on
a sliding window whenever new data becomes available. Without the possibility to
carry out the model parameter updates efficiently, this approach is unpractical due
to the non-negligible time to refit a large batch model in a distributed setting.
The author of [19] developed the concept presented in [13] further into a distributed
online algorithm applied to high-dimensional wind power forecasting. None of the
aforementioned works applied their algorithms to large datasets. Only [19] tested the
performance of its algorithm on a dataset with more than 100 sites. The remaining
distributed algorithms were tested on even smaller datasets. When considering the
online algorithm of [19] it is argued that the algorithm is not particular suitable for
a large-scale setup since one of the algorithm parameter updates requires to solve
a linear system of equations. At this, the size of the system is dependent on the
number of wind farm operators that are part of the learning agreement. Keeping
in mind that solving a large equation system takes a considerable amount of time,
it is claimed that not all algorithm parameter updates can be carried out efficiently.
Therefore, the necessity to solve an equation system will ultimately slow down the
algorithm in a large-scale setup where the measurements from hundreds of sites are
included in the forecast model.
1.2
Objective
The objective of this piece of work is to develop, present and discuss a novel protocol
for high-dimensional wind power forecasting. The protocol should be based on a dis-
tributed online algorithm which efficiently updates its parameters whenever new data
becomes available. Efficient parameter updates are necessary since the desired goal
is to test the developed algorithm on a dataset of power measurements from more
than 300 wind farms. By doing so, the utilized dataset is substantially larger than
the datasets that are considered in the prior presented publications. The necessity to
perform the parameter updates efficiently is important when testing the algorithm in
a controlled environment but also when it comes to the real world application where
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Structure
5
an updated estimator must be available as soon as possible.
Fast parameter updates are also desired due to the fact that most online algorithms
require to tune algorithm specific parameters, so called hyperparameters, on historic
data before the algorithm is eventually applied to unseen data. Regarding this, it
is beneficial if the algorithm has only a small numbers of parameters to tune which
ideally can be optimized independently.
Based on these circumstances the novel
algorithm should be designed such that the hyperparameter tuning process can be
conducted without great costs.
In addition, the protocol should ensure the privacy of each participating agent. Pri-
vacy is hereby defined as the inability of other participating agents or entities to easily
retrieve sensitive data from any incoming stream of data. Thus, the distributed learn-
ing protocol should not require to share unprotected, raw measurements. Besides
ensuring privacy, the applicability in a real world setup should be possible by reduc-
ing communication between agents and entities to a minimum. This includes both
the number as well as the size of each exchanged message.
Last, the developed algorithm should not only be fast but also be able to gener-
ate satisfying forecasts. Therefore, the algorithm must be able to compete with other
distributed learning techniques, both in the offline and online setting. The bench-
marks are conducted for multi-step ahead deterministic forecasts. Regarding this, all
models are based on autoregressive processes to achieve comparability. This decision
is justified by the overall agreement in the forecasting community that for very-short
term forecasts AR models are well suited.
1.3
Structure
In Chapter 2 a broad introduction to AR models is given since they are the chosen
tool in this piece of work. After introducing so-called AR-X models that also include
off-site information in the form of other wind farms power production, a regulariza-
tion technique to control the model complexity is presented.
Chapter 3 first presents the conventional framework in which batch AR-X models are
learned. Building on the presented limitations, the concept of decentralized batch
learning is introduced. Here, the Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers, a tech-
nique that is used in [13] to learn batch AR-X models, is presented to illustrate the
concept of applying distributed learning techniques to learn batch models. Subse-
quently the concept of hyperparameter tuning for batch models is introduced. In
the last section of this chapter a simulation study on synthetic data is conducted
to show the general limitations of batch models when the underlying time series is
non-stationary.
==PAGE:20==
1.3 Structure
6
Building on the given limitations of batch models, the concept of online learning
is introduced in Chapter 4. After discussing the general idea of online learning, the
online Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (OADMM) algorithm that has
been developed in [19] is presented. In the subsequently following sections first the
computational complexity of the algorithm is discussed, followed by an analysis of
the exchanged messages between wind farm operators. Thereafter, a strategy to find
well performing hyperparameters for online algorithms is introduced. The chapter
closes with the formulation of desired distributed online algorithm properties which
are found by considering the findings of the conducted analyses.
The main contribution of this thesis is presented in Chapter 5, where the novel dis-
tributed online learning algorithm is introduced.
The first section introduces the
so-called Stochastic MIrror Descent Algorithm made Sparse that is the foundation of
the novel distributed online algorithm. The following section then presents the steps
to obtain a framework in which a distributed version of the centralized algorithm
can be applied while ensuring the privacy of each agent. The developed algorithm is
called Vanilla D-MIDAS and its general properties are discussed while presenting the
results of a simulation study performed on synthetic data. Based on the obtained
insights, an extension of the algorithm is developed that achieves better adaptivity
while reducing the complexity of the hyperparameter tuning scheme.
The performance of the developed Adaptive D-MIDAS is subsequently evaluated on
real world data in Chapter 6. The first sections of the chapter introduce the dataset
and the applied data preprocessing steps. Thereafter, the setup of the simulation
study is shown, followed by the presentation of the hyperparameter tuning process
results. In the main section of the chapter the Adaptive D-MIDAS’s performance
on unseen data is compared to the performance of a regularized batch AR-X model
and the OADMM algorithm. Along the presentation of the results, analyses are con-
ducted to explain the outcome of the simulation study.
This piece of work closes with Chapter 7 where first the main results are summa-
rized and discussed.
Additionally, practical challenges when applying distributed
online algorithms in the domain of high-dimensional wind power forecasting are pre-
sented. Last of all, future improvements and potential applications of the developed
distributed online learning algorithm are elaborated.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Autoregressive Models
This chapter provides an introduction to the autoregressive (AR) models that are
used in the further part of this thesis. First, the fundamentals of AR models are
presented by introducing a model which uses only locally measured data to predict
the future power production of a wind farm. Thereafter, the straightforward exten-
sion to include power measurements from other wind farms is presented. In the last
section of this chapter a regularization technique is introduced to control the model
complexity which becomes a very powerful and necessary tool when learning large
models.
Throughout this thesis, vectors (y) are denoted with lowercase, whereas matrices
(Y ) are denoted with uppercase, boldface letters. yi denotes the ith element of a
vector y and Yi,j the element in the ith row and jth column of a matrix. The p1- and
p2-norm of a vector y ∈RI are denoted as ∥y∥1 := ∑I
i=1|xi| and ∥y∥2 :=
√∑I
i=1|xi|2,
respectively.
2.1
Univariate autoregressive models
Let eyt ∈[0, 1] denote the normalized power production of a wind farm at time stamp
t, where t ∈1, ..., T. The measurement at time stamp t is assumed to be the aver-
age normalized production over the last period, where the period length is beforehand
determined. Throughout this thesis, and as not otherwise declared, the power produc-
tion of a wind farm is always believed to be normalized. The normalized production
is obtained by dividing the power production at time stamp t by the nominal capacity
of the respective wind farm.
Let us consider the scenario where a wind farm operator at time stamp t would
like to receive a deterministic forecast for its wind farm’s normalized power produc-
tion at time stamp t + 1, commonly labelled as 1-step ahead forecast. Additionally,
it is assumed that the wind farm operator has only access to power measurements
coming from its own site. The term on-site information refers to this condition where
a wind farm operator builds a model on data which is exclusively measured at the site
where power production is predicted. Contrary to this, the term off-site information
==PAGE:22==
2.1 Univariate autoregressive models
8
generally describes the case where the wind farm operator has access to additional
measurements from either other wind farms or meteorological stations. In this the-
sis however, off-site information refers always to power measurements at other wind
farms.
In such a basic setup commonly applied methods are based on autoregressive pro-
cesses, which explore the dependency in time between present and previous power
measurements. This is expressed by the idea that a sample at time stamp t can be
modelled as the weighted sum of the t −1, t −2 to t −L previous samples. Here, L is
used to indicate the order of the autoregressive process and determines the farthest
in the past measured data sample which is believed to affect the present measure-
ment at time stamp t. The term univariate AR model rises from the fact that only a
single feature (i.e. power measurements) is used within the model. The relationship
between the response variable (future, predicted power production) and the explana-
tory variables (past, measured power production) is shown in
eyt = β0 +
L
∑
l=1
βleyt−l + ϵt
(2.1)
where the subscript l denotes the respective lag. The scalar β0 is a constant term
which is most often called the bias or intercept term. The independent error term
ϵt represents the noise in the time series data and is drawn from a Gaussian normal
distribution with zero mean and a constant variance.
The model parameters are
usually found by using the time series of the wind farm’s power production, which is
obtained by collecting the normalized power production measurements eyt in a vector
ey. It should be noted that the vector is ordered such that the measurement at time t
is followed by the measurement at time stamp t+1. In case the time series is centered
in the following manner,
y = ey −
∑T
t=1 eyt
T
(2.2)
the constant term β0 in (2.1) can be neglected. At this, the column vector y denotes
the centered time series.
The benefit of centering the time series is that one less parameter must be estimated
to model the relationship between a present and its L past measurements. There-
fore, for the sake of simplicity and if not otherwise stated, from here on y denotes
always a centered time series. To obtain the model parameters β1, β2 up to βL the
unconstrained optimization problem
min
β1,...,βL
T
∑
t=1+L
l(yt,
L
∑
l=1
βlyt−l)
(2.3)
must be solved, where l(·, ·) is any convex loss function. In the process of learning an
AR model used for producing deterministic forecasts commonly a l2 loss function is
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Multivariate autoregressive models
9
used. This approach is also followed in this piece of work. The optimization problem
min
β1,...,βL
T
∑
t=1+L
(yt −
L
∑
l=1
βlyt−l)2
(2.4)
is the relevant formulation of (2.3), which is also known as the ordinary least squares
(OLS). The appropriated selection of the parameter L will be discussed in the further
part of this chapter.
Using scalar notation, the shown minimization problem must be solved by using an
appropriated numerical method. However, as it is discussed in the following, when
using vector notation under the right conditions it is possible to obtain a closed form
solution. Thus, the model parameters are obtained by applying only linear algebraic
operations which is usually substantially faster than applying a numeric method.
Assuming that the model parameters are obtained, the estimator can be used to make
predictions. The prediction at time stamp t is obtained by simply using (2.1) without
considering the constant β0 and error term ϵt.
In the prior presented scenario only 1-step ahead forecasts are considered.
How-
ever, most wind farm and system operators are also interested to receive forecasts
for time stamps which are further ahead into the future. To satisfy this need, the
approach as applied in [8] is followed, where a model is learned for each desired lead
time. Contrary to this approach, it is also possible to obtain a prediction for greater
lead times by the iterative computation of the 1-step ahead prediction. By fitting in-
dividual models for each lead time it is avoided to accumulate forecast errors, which
is the case when applying the iterative computation of the 1-step ahead forecast [8].
To receive a model to predict power more than 1-step ahead into the future the
optimization problem
min
β(k)
1
,...,β(k)
L
T
∑
t=1+L
(yt+k−1 −
L
∑
l=1
βlyt−l)2
(2.5)
must be solved. The index k indicates the lead time of the forecast, i.e. how many
steps ahead the prediction is made for.
2.2
Multivariate autoregressive models
The previous presented AR model to forecast wind power production based on only
using local power measurements can be easily adapted to include off-site information,
being the power measurements from other wind farms. Instead of only exploiting
the dependency in time between a present measurement and its previous once, a
second component is added that now also exploits the dependency in space between
the explanatory variables and the response variable. The dependency in space can
==PAGE:24==
2.2 Multivariate autoregressive models
10
be explained by understanding that a close-by site can provide information about
upcoming changes in weather conditions [12]. A term that is found in the relevant
literature to describe AR models which include also measurements from other sites
is AR-X models (AR models with exogenous input).
To simplify the following notations, let ys,t be the normalized and centered power
measurement at site s and time stamp t, where s ∈ΩS = {s1, ..., sS}. The total
number of wind farms under consideration is here represented by S. Additionally,
in the following only 1-step ahead forecasts are considered to ease the subsequent
notations. Thus, the index k is neglected.
When learning a model to predict power production ysj,t at site sj while using the
power measurements from the additional S-1 sites, the optimization problem as pre-
sented in (2.4) extents to
min
βs1,1,...,βsS ,L
T
∑
t=1+L
(ysj,t −
L
∑
l=1
(βsj,lysj,t−l
|
{z
}
On-site
+
∑
sϵΩS\sj
βs,lys,t−l
|
{z
}
Off-site
))2
(2.6)
The term high-dimensional wind power forecasting is used when the number of sites
S −1 from whom it is expected to gain useful information grows large. When intro-
ducing vector notation, ys ∈RT −L,1 is defined as the column vector that contains
the normalized and centered power measurements from t = 1 + L to t = T at site s.
Furthermore, let at = (y1,t−1, y2,t−1, ..., yS,t−L) denote the row of the design matrix
A ∈RT −L,S·L at time stamp t. It should be noted that at is the set of explanatory
variables which are used to predict the power production at time stamp t. This is a
slight abuse of notation since at does in fact not contain any measurements from time
stamp t. βs is the column vector which contains the model parameters in order with
the arrangement of explanatory variables as shown in at. Again, when considering
the example where power production should be predicted at site sj while including
measurements from the remaining S-1 sites in the regression model,
min
βsj
ysj −Aβsj
2
2
(2.7)
is the resulting optimization problem. As prior mentioned, the OLS can be solved
analytically under the right conditions. The analytical solution of (2.7),
βsj = (A⊤A)−1A⊤ysj
(2.8)
shows that a solution only exists if the matrix product A⊤A is non-singular and
therefore invertible [20]. If this case does not apply, it is necessary to employ numerical
methods to solve the optimization problem. Here, the interested reader can find many
methods in the literature. When eventually obtaining the solution of the minimization
problem by either using an analytic or numeric method,
ˆysj,T +1|T = aT +1βsj
(2.9)
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Regularized multivariate autoregressive models
11
is used to calculate the prediction for wind farm j at time stamp T +1. The notation
T + 1|T is chosen to indicate that the prediction for the power production at time
stamp T + 1 is issued at time stamp T. Throughout this piece of work, a prediction
is always indicated by using a hat above a variable.
One commonly known drawback of the OLS is that its estimations often have low bias
but large variance, which is a general signal of overfitting [21]. The tradeoff between
low bias and large variance becomes a greater challenge in case models with a great
number of features are learned. Additionally, the OLS performance suffers whenever
the optimization problem is ill-conditioned, i.e. the numbers of features is greater
than the number of samples. Especially in high-dimensional wind power forecasting
the challenge of ill-conditioned problems can be faced in case a higher order AR-X
model is learned for thousands of sites.
Several strategies exists to deal with this known problem, such as the application
of subset selection or regularization through ridge regression. However, in this piece
of work the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) is applied to
improve the OLS estimates [22]. The reasoning for this particular choice and the
necessity to have some kind of regularization when training a statistical model in the
domain of high-dimensional wind power forecasting are elaborated in the following
section.
2.3
Regularized multivariate autoregressive models
The idea behind the LASSO is to control the model complexity by adding an addi-
tional term to the OLS objective function which penalizes the sum of the absolute
values of the parameter vector βsj [22]. Adding the LASSO to (2.7) changes it into
min
βsj
1
2
ysj −Aβsj
2
2 + λ
βsj

1
(2.10)
where λ ≥0 is the shrinkage or regularization parameter. The presented formulation
belongs to the family of regularized least squares (RLS).
By varying the value of the regularization parameter λ, the sparsity of βsj is con-
trolled, i.e. the number of model parameters that are equal to 0. The greater is the
number of model parameters that are equal to 0, the greater is the sparsity. Increas-
ing the value of λ leads to a greater bias when using the estimator. In contrast to
this, the variance is reduced. This relationship is known as the bias-variance tradeoff.
Before training a batch model, one has to decided on an appropriated regularization
strength. Such model parameters that must be selected before starting to train the
model are often called hyperparameters. A common applied method to find a suitable
λ value is called cross-validation [22]. The method and its application when learning
==PAGE:26==
2.3 Regularized multivariate autoregressive models
12
a regularized model from time series data is explained in Section 3.3.
The importance of preventing overfitting by reducing the variance of the estimator
becomes essential in the domain of high-dimensional wind power forecasting. Besides
preventing overfitting, the LASSO is also commonly used for feature selection. Trans-
lated to the problem at hand, the LASSO is particular useful. Considering that it is
necessary to decide on the order of the AR process before fitting the model. Let us
now assume further that no prior knowledge (expert knowledge) about the relevance
of specific lags is available. When choosing a model with a larger than optimal order
(greater lags do not contain any valuable information) the LASSO naturally identifies
the most relevant lags by shrinking the less important parameters to 0. At this, a
balance must be found between the order and the related time to train the model.
However, as the further part of this thesis will show, this approach does not work
well in a very high-dimensional case with a great number of considered wind farms.
Increasing the performance of the estimator by adding the LASSO comes at the cost
that usually no closed form solution exists for the minimization problem as shown in
(2.10) anymore. The only exception is the case where the design matrix A is com-
posed of orthogonal columns. In this special case, the solution is obtained by applying
a soft-thresholding operator [22]. If this case does not apply a numeric method must
be utilized to obtain the model parameters. Relevant methods include least-angle
regression (LARS) or a variety of gradient based methods. Worth noting is that such
algorithms iteratively update the model parameters until a specified convergence cri-
terion is reached. In the most simple case this can be the number of iterations. A
more sophisticated criterion is to track model parameter changes over the number
of iterations. Once the model parameters do not change significantly anymore, the
algorithm stops and returns the model parameters that are obtained in the last it-
eration. Finding the model parameters through iterative schemes is applied when
learning a batch model centralized but also in a decentralized setup. Both concepts
are introduced and discussed in the following chapter.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Batch Learning
In this chapter a broad introduction to the application of batch algorithms in the do-
main of wind power forecasting is presented. First, the concept of centralized batch
learning is introduced and an overview over relevant algorithms is given. Thereafter
it is discussed why centralized batch learning is not well suited for high-dimensional
wind power forecasting. Next follows the introduction of decentralized batch learning
and the brief presentation of one available algorithm. Thereafter, two basic strate-
gies to select the hyperparameters of batch learning algorithms are introduced. The
last section presents a simulation study on synthetic data to show the in general
observed limitation of batch algorithms when the underlying time series dataset is
non-stationary.
3.1
Centralized batch learning
In the broad sense the concept of centralized learning refers to the characteristic
that a single entity or a single node within a system has access to all the required
model input data. To emphasize this, let us consider the following setup. There is
an operator of a single wind farm (index j) which contracts operators of additional
S −1 sites to participate in a learning agreement. Let us call the operator of site sj
the central agent and the other S −1 operators the contracted agents. The learning
agreement is based on the arrangement that the contracted agents share their data
with the central agent such that it is able to learn a large batch model which is based
on on-site as well as off-site information. In this setup the communication is always
uni-directional, i.e. data is always transmitted from the contracted agents towards
the central agent. This applies both for learning the estimator as well as using it to
make predictions for the central agent’s site. To simply the following notations and
illustrations, let us assume again that only power measurements are used as explana-
tory variables. At this, the same notation as introduced before is used where ys,t is
the normalized and centered power measurement at site s and time stamp t, and ys
is the respective time series with t ∈1, ..., T. Additionally, let ΩS = {s1, ..., sS} be
the set of all sites and ΩC = ΩS\sj the subset of contracted agents. The procedure of
the central agent learning the estimator is illustrated in Figure 3.1. In this setup, it
is indifferent to the contracted agents which kind of model the central agent decides
to use, since their only action is to share their data. After receiving the data from
==PAGE:28==
3.1 Centralized batch learning
14
all contracted agents, the central agent can decide then on which model to use and
subsequently start solving the respective optimization problem. This is indicated by
the minimization problem which is placed next to the central agent. For more sophis-
ticated models, e.g. models with l1-regularization, it is likely that the minimization
problem is solved iteratively. After obtaining the model parameters βsj, this setup
requires the contracted agents to share their latest power measurements so that the
central agent can compute the prediction for its site at time stamp t.
Figure 3.1: Setup of centralized batch learning. The central agent sj learns a large batch
model by including off-site information obtained from the contracted agents. The icons are
obtained from [23].
A different setup applicable to centralized batch learning is that each site shares
their data with a third party, such as a wind power forecast provider. The forecast
provider with its expertise then fits a model for each site where each respective model
also includes data from the other participating sites. In such a setup, not only the
central agent would receive predictions for its site. Thus, the forecast provider would
learn a total of S AR-X models. As in the previous mentioned setup where only the
central agent would receive a forecast for its site, the communication is uni-directional
during the model training and testing phase, i.e. data is transmitted from all sites to
the forecast provider. The communication becomes bi-directional once the obtained
models are used to make predictions. This is due to the fact that the forecasting com-
pany requires the latest measurements from all sites to form the predictions. After
forming the latest predictions, the forecast provider needs to share them with all the
respective sites.
Relevant algorithms which utilize the benefits of off-site measurements are applicable
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Decentralized batch learning
15
with one of the two introduced setups. In [24] a study is conducted to compare the
performance of different AR-X models, both for deterministic as well as probabilis-
tic 1-step ahead forecasts. The models were learned in the traditional batch setting,
with a training and testing phase. In the end, a regime switching AR-X model with
a generalized-logit-normal transformation was the best performing algorithm. The
application of this transformation is described more detailed in the further body of
this piece of work.
Worth mentioning is that only 3 sites were considered in the
conducted study, which explains why no regularization technique was applied. The
authors of [25] applied a novel regularization technique to control the sparsity, i.e.
the number of parameters that are equal to 0 in the estimator, of the AR-X model.
Their method is based on using a hyperparameter which determines the number of
non-zero model parameters. The utilization of this hyperparameter results in a con-
strained optimization problem which due to its complexity does not scale nicely with
the number of contracted sites. A simulation study on 25 Danish wind farms with
multi-step ahead forecasts (up to 6-steps ahead) could proof that this approach can
compete with the traditional LASSO formulation. Here it is shown that the devel-
oped algorithm outperforms the standard LASSO as introduced in Section 2.3.
None of the aforementioned publications discussed the potential unwillingness of wind
farm operators to share data, such as power measurements, with either other com-
peting wind farms or a third party such as a forecast provider. It is acknowledged
that privacy is not an issue if all sites are owned and operated by the same entity.
This applies to the case where an entity would like to explore the benefits of off-site
information when making predictions for each site within its portfolio. However, in
case the sites of the portfolio are located far apart from each other, the benefits of
including off-site information decrease [8][12]. Considering now the desire to learn a
large model for hundreds of sites, it is unlikely that all sites are owned by the same
entity. The potential limitation due to privacy constraints when learning large AR-X
models which utilize data of sites from different owners gave rise to the introduction
of distributed learning techniques in the domain of wind power forecasting.
3.2
Decentralized batch learning
Applying distributed learning techniques to learn AR-X models in the domain of
high-dimensional wind power forecasting aim to resolve two challenges. First, these
techniques try to reduce the computational burden of learning large models by decom-
posing the original optimization problem (i.e. minimization of mean squared error
over training dataset) into many, easier to solve, problems. This idea is not new and
is frequently applied in the domain of large-scale optimization, where it is not uncom-
mon that the dataset is too large to load into the memory of a single machine. Instead,
the dataset is split into chunks where each chunk is then loaded into the memory of
a machine which is part of a network. In general, the possibility exists to either split
the dataset across samples (horizontal splitting) or across features (vertical splitting).
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Decentralized batch learning
16
As discovered in the available literature, most authors consider the case of horizontal
splitting. Nevertheless, splitting the dataset across features is particular interesting
in the domain of high-dimensional wind power forecasting since each site measures
and therefore possesses a unique piece of the overall dataset. Once the chunks of
data are loaded into the memory of each machine, the machines start to perform
computations on their respective data. In most distributed learning algorithms these
computations are based on solving an optimization problem. Since the problem solved
by each machine is part of a larger problem, we call them subproblems. After each
machine found a solution to its respective subproblem the results are communicated
to a machine which then solves a master problem. This machine can either be an
independent one, which does not possess any part of the overall dataset, or instead
a machine which does hold a piece of the dataset in its memory. Successfully solving
the master problem requires then to share the results with all machines which are part
of the distributed learning algorithm. The procedure of solving many subproblems
followed by solving a single master problem is repeated until an algorithm specific
convergence criterion is reached.
A widely applied distributed learning algorithm is the so-called Alternating Direction
Method of Multipliers (ADMM) [26]. A particular interesting feature of the ADMM
algorithm is that it does not require each machine to share their locally stored data
(e.g. active power measurements in the introduced case of wind power forecasting)
unprotected with all other agents of the network. In case the algorithm is applied
to learn a regularized AR-X model in a learning agreement of competing wind farm
operators, it implies that their privacy can be partially protected. The author of
[13] realized this powerful property of the ADMM and applied the algorithm to learn
a regularized batch AR-X model in a distributed setting. In this publication, the
ADMM algorithm is utilized to solve the LASSO problem as presented in Section 2.3
of the previous chapter. The author considered the case where only the central agent
receives a prediction for its site.
The procedure of the prior introduced centralized learning setup, where only the
central agent solves an optimization problem to find the model parameters, is sub-
stituted by collectively learning the model parameters. In the centralized setup, all
contracted agents only contribute with their data but are passive while the central
agent solves the learning problem.
This is significantly different in the decentral-
ized setup where the contracted agents actively participate to solve the optimization
problem. Thus, a general property of distributed learning algorithms is that they
substitute the requirement of having all the model input data available centralized
with communication overhead. The communication overhead comes from the fact
that in each iteration of the ADMM algorithm data is exchanged between the central
agent and all its contracted agents. Figure 3.2 shows the data exchange during an
iteration of the ADMM algorithm. Besides the regularization strength λ, the algo-
rithm requires an additional hyperparameter ρ, which controls the step-size of the
algorithm. The hyperparameter L refers again to the order of the AR-X model and
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Decentralized batch learning
17
S indicates the total number of sites that participate in the learning agreement. Fur-
thermore, i indicates the current iteration number. As it can be seen, the central
agent performs the task of solving the master problem, which in this particular case
has a closed-form solution. Solving the subproblems by each agent requires an itera-
tive algorithm, where the author of [13] proposed the so-called ”Shooting” algorithm.
The interested reader can find the full description of the algorithm in [13], where also
possible stopping criteria are proposed.
Figure 3.2: Setup of the ADMM algorithm when learning a regularized AR-X model for the
central agent sj. The icons are obtained from [23].
As it can be seen further in Figure 3.2, each contracted agent is not forced anymore
to share local measurements unprotected with the central agent. Instead, the product
of the local design matrix, As, with the local set of model parameters, βs, is shared.
Under the assumption that the central agent has no access to the local set of param-
eters, it is not straightforward to prove that it can retrieve the explanatory variables
of the contracted agents. This property is used in the following to ensure privacy
partially. The adjunct partially refers to the fact that it is not straightforward to get
access to local measurements of the contracted agents. Nevertheless, no full proof is
presented that confirms the preservation of privacy.
Since the central agent does not have access to the complete set of model parameters
anymore, it requires the contracted agents to participate actively when the central
agent computes a prediction for its site. The exact procedure is described in the
following chapter where the online extension of the ADMM is presented. In case all
local model parameters are assembled to form βsj and under an appropriated choice
of ρ, the obtained estimator is equivalent to the one obtained in the centralized setup
==PAGE:32==
3.3 Hyperparameter tuning of batch algorithms
18
when applying 2.10. Last, it should be noted that more data is exchanged during the
model training phase compared to the centralized setup. This is summarized under
the term of communication overhead, which includes both the number of exchanged
messages as well as their size. Considering that the length of all exchanged vectors in
the ADMM algorithm is equal to the length of the considered training dataset, the
total amount of exchanged data is not negligible.
All available publications that applied distributed learning techniques in the domain
of wind power forecasting are based on the ADMM. The author of [13] only con-
sidered deterministic forecasts. In [16] the authors extended this setup to compute
probabilistic forecasts. However, instead of considering the LASSO regularization, a
l2 regularization is applied to obtain closed-form solutions for the algorithm parame-
ter updates. Here it must be investigated if the applied l2 regularization lowers the
performance of the estimator in the high-dimensional case with hundreds of sites or
even provides better results than the standard LASSO formulation. An additional
publication [17] extended the prior presented LASSO setup such that each agent re-
ceives a forecast for its site. The algorithm is based on two nested ADMM loops and
requires the presence of a fusion center. The concept of a fusion center or supervisory
node is discussed in the further body of this piece of work. Worth mentioning is that
the authors investigated the possibility and impact of different sparsification patterns
on the estimators performance. All aforementioned publications produce very-short
term forecasts and validate their algorithms on relatively small datasets with up to
66 sites as considered in [17]. Furthermore, all authors applied their algorithms in
the classic batch setup where a model is learned on past data and subsequently used
to make predictions without updating its parameters on more recently obtained data.
Only the author of [13] brought to attention that this approach does not produce
the most satisfying results in case the time series is non-stationary. It is also worth
pointing out none of the authors mentioned the possibility to perform asynchronous
updates. In the high-dimensional setup with hundreds of sites the ability to perform
asynchronous updates is likely to become crucial to reduce the total time it takes to
learn the model. Especially when it is required to perform hyperparameter tuning,
whose concept is presented in the following section.
3.3
Hyperparameter tuning of batch algorithms
Up until this point, it has not been discussed how to select a well performing regular-
ization strength for a given dataset. A basic strategy is to first split the dataset into
two subsets, one with samples obtained more recently and one with older obtained
samples. Then, for a chosen regularization strength the subset with the older obtained
samples is used along with the employed algorithm to learn the model parameters.
Once the estimator is obtained, its performance is measured on the second subset
of data. It is possible to choose from different performance indicators. The most
popular metrics are the mean absolute error (MAE), the mean squared error (MSE)
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Limitations of batch learning
19
and the root mean squared error (RMSE). For a given dataset with T samples, the
performance metrics are computed with
MAE = 1
T
T
∑
t=1
|yt −ˆyt|
(3.1)
MSE = 1
T
T
∑
t=1
(yt −ˆyt)2
(3.2)
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
T
T
∑
t=1
(yt −ˆyt)2
(3.3)
where a prediction at time stamp t is indicated by ˆyt. After repeating this procedure
for different values of λ, the value with the best performance on the test set is chosen
to make predictions with. It is common to train the model with the selected regu-
larization strength again on the complete dataset. When eventually obtaining the
final estimator, it is subsequently used to make predictions. Most often, the estima-
tor is then used without updating its parameters as long as its performance on new
arrived, unseen data is satisfying. The methodology of learning a model on a training
dataset and then evaluating its performance on a test set is known as cross-validation.
The same strategy can also be applied to find all kinds of hyperparameters, such as
the parameter ρ of the presented ADMM algorithm and the order L of all AR models.
Another possibility to find a well performing hyperparameters is to use K-fold cross-
validation. Here, the dataset is portioned into K subsets of approximately even size.
The batch model is then learned on K-1 subsets, whereas its performance is estimated
on the remaining subset. This procedure is repeated such that each subset is once the
testing dataset and K-1 times used as part of the training dataset. The following sec-
tion will point out that due to the non-stationarity of wind power time series, both
approaches face in general significant challenges when performing hyperparameter
optimization for batch models.
3.4
Limitations of batch learning
As described earlier in the introduction, there is a significant flaw with batch learning.
Namely, it is not possible to account for the non-stationary nature of the wind power
time series.
Non-stationary time series are defined as a process where either the
mean, the variance or even both vary over time [27]. Contrary to this, a stationary
time series has a constant mean and variance. The non-stationarity in wind power
generation data has manifold reasons. Among those are park layout changes, either
at the site sj itself or at one of the contributing wind farms.
Moreover weather
patterns change frequently. A prominent example for this are seasonal changes, where
==PAGE:34==
3.4 Limitations of batch learning
20
both the direction as well as the average wind speed can vary [8]. When training a
model on time series data which has not been exposed to any of these changes, it
is naturally to understand that the performance of the learned estimator will suffer
once these changes take place. In this case it is necessary to update the parameters
by refitting the model on more recently obtained data. However, this might also not
be an appropriated solution. To give a more illustrative answer, a simple simulation
study is conducted on synthetic data which is created by an univariate autoregressive
process of order 1. The synthetic time series is created by using
yt = βyt−1 + ϵt
(3.4)
where the error term ϵt is drawn from a Gaussian normal distribution with 0 mean
and 0.1 variance. The total length of the generated time series is set to be 20000.
The true model parameter value β is kept constant for the first 5000 time stamps at
0.8, then slowly decreases to 0.5 over the next 10000 time stamps. For the last 5000
time stamps its value is kept constant at 0.5. The initial yt value of the time series
at time stamp t = 1 is set to 0. Since each time series realization is determined by
the randomness of the added noise ϵt at each time stamp t, in total 1000 realizations
are generated to be able to obtain an unbiased estimation of β that is not influenced
by the uniqueness of each realization.
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Time stamp [-]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
β [-]
True parameter values
Estimated parameters for Ttrain = [0, 5000]
Estimated parameters for Ttrain = [0, 20000]
Figure 3.3: Average estimated parameter β for varying training periods obtained in a Monte-
Carlo simulation with 1000 runs.
Ttrain indicates the samples contained in the training
dataset.
The optimization problem to obtain an estimation of the true model parameter β is
solved by using the Python machine learning library scikit-learn [28]. An estimation
of β is obtained by using the function LinearRegression. To emphasize the prior men-
tioned flaw of batch models, two different training periods are selected as shown in
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Limitations of batch learning
21
Figure 3.3. The shown average parameter value is obtained by first estimating the
parameter for each of the 1000 time series realizations. Subsequently, the average
value is obtained by computing the mean of the obtained estimated parameter distri-
bution. This approach has been followed for each of the indicated periods.
When fitting a model only on the first 5000 time stamps of each realization where
the time series is stationary, Figure 3.3 shows that the obtained average β value is
almost identical to its true value. Assuming that the estimator is used subsequently
for the next 15000 time stamps to make predictions, it is straightforward to see that
the predictions will no deliver satisfying results due to the change in the true parame-
ter value. The applied algorithm to obtain the estimated parameter cannot take any
changes into account since it has only seen the first 5000 time stamps of each time
series realization. This emphasizes the inability of batch learning schemes to generate
accurate forecasts when the underlying true parameter value starts to change after
the training phase.
An additional interesting observation is made when an estimator is learned on the
complete length of the time series.
At this it is seen that the average estimated
parameter is found to be in between the lower and upper bound of the true values.
Assuming now that the true parameter value stays constant at 0.5 after the estimator
is learned, the performance of the estimator is again not satisfying. Both presented
examples highlight the difficulty of choosing an appropriated training length when
applying batch learning.
Since this challenge is well known, some strategies already exist to overcome the
prior described limitation. A prominent approach is to train the model on a sliding
training window [8][29][30]. The idea behind this is to always refit the model on a
beforehand specified number of past observations whenever a new sample becomes
available. An additional extension considered in the literature is to give more weight
to more recent obtained data by using a forgetting factor [8][30]. At this, samples ob-
tained in the past, and therefore also their respective error, receive less weight when
training the model by minimizing the squared error. Hereby, the learned estimator
takes recent changes better into account, since the respective samples receive more
weight when solving the optimization problem.
In general it can be concluded that training a model on a sliding window is an
improvement over the usage of basic batch models. However, in case the true param-
eter values change frequently, tuning the window length and forgetting factor is not
straightforward. Additionally, when the AR-X model is large, being the order L and
the number of considered sites S are large, refitting the model frequently is costly. In
a distributed setting, due to the required exchange of data, it can be easily the case
that the time horizon to make a prediction for is shorter than the time it takes to
refit the model. This circumstance provides the incentive to find algorithms which
are adaptive but also computational cheap when it comes to refitting the model with
==PAGE:36==
3.4 Limitations of batch learning
22
the latest obtained measurements.
Besides the expected long time to learn a large AR-X model in a distributed set-
ting, one must also keep in mind that the training datasets of each site must be
synchronous, i.e. must contain data that is recorded over the same period of time.
When considering a large-scale application with more than 1000 sites, this can be
considered as another limitation of batch learning. Regarding this, one has to keep
in mind that wind farms are subject to scheduled and unscheduled downtime, which
in worst case scenarios can be up to multiple months. An example for a scheduled
downtime could be the replacement or maintenance of the wind turbine’s gearbox,
where it is unlikely that the same gearbox is used throughout the complete lifetime
of the turbine. When considering further an off-shore wind farm and the increased
difficulty of conducting maintenance services or repair works in time, it is natural to
understand that the scheduled downtime of a wind farm can increase to non negligible
numbers. A relevant unscheduled downtime can be caused by a defect in the off-shore
wind farm’s export cable. Here it can be considered that replacing the faulty cable
will take also a considerable amount of time.
One must keep in mind that when such a scheduled or unscheduled downtime takes
place, the respective batch AR-X model must be refitted without taking the offline
wind farm into account. When the wind farm is online again, the AR-X model should
ideally be refitted while including the measurements from the respective site. In a
large-scale setup, this procedure is expected to become cumbersome.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Distributed Online
Learning
Instead of minimizing the squared error over a chunk of data such as practiced in
batch learning, online algorithms learn a model sample by sample.
Based on an
initial first guess of the model parameters, traditional online algorithms update the
parameters each time a new sample of data becomes available. The motivation to
learn a model in an online setting is twofold. When working with big data, batch
learning algorithms require to load large amounts of data into the memory of a single
machine. The required amount of memory is at this determined by the number of
samples and features. Contrary to this, most online algorithms store only one sample
at a time in memory. This reduces the amount of required memory significantly. In
case an online algorithm receives data sequentially it is capable to adapt to temporal
changes within the dataset. This circumstance is the motivation to perform online
learning with non-stationary wind power time series data. Here it is expected that
the online model is capable of capturing the changing dynamics of the wind power
generation data.
For completeness it should be mentioned that the authors of [8] recognized this po-
tential and developed a framework to learn an AR-X model online but centralized.
The framework is based on learning a regularized (by utilizing the LASSO) vector
autoregressive model online, by applying the algorithm presented in [31]. To the best
knowledge of the author this is the only framework in the domain of wind power
forecasting that learns a large AR-X model centralized and online.
However, as
prior discussed the requirement to have all the model input data available centralized
might become a limiting factor when it comes to the application of the algorithm in
a large-scale real world setup. The author of [19] acknowledged this limitation and
developed an online algorithm that learns a regularized AR-X model in a distributed
setup. The developed online ADMM (OADMM) algorithm is to the best knowledge
of the author the only algorithm which learns an AR-X model distributed and online.
To get a better understanding on why this algorithm is not particular suitable for a
large-scale setup, it is presented and discussed in the following.
==PAGE:38==
4.1 Online ADMM
24
In the first section of this chapter the already developed distributed OADMM al-
gorithm is presented for benchmark purposes, followed by a discussion of the algo-
rithm’s complexity. A simulation study is presented which estimates the time it takes
to learn from a new arrived sample when using the OADMM algorithm. The study
is conducted with respect to the number of contracted agents to show the poten-
tial limitation when it comes to a large-scale application. Thereafter, the required
communication between agents is investigated to give an estimation on how much
data is exchanged per time stamp. Next, a methodology to select the algorithm’s
hyperparameters is presented. The last section picks up the presented limitations
and formulates the desired properties of the novel distributed online algorithm.
4.1
Online ADMM
The OADMM is an extension of the batch ADMM algorithm as presented in Section
3.1. Thus, it also solves a LASSO problem in a distributed setting. Nevertheless,
contrary to the batch ADMM optimization problem the loss function is now time
dependent, as
min
βsj ,t
1
2
t−1
∑
τ=1+L
(aτβsj,t −ysj,τ)2 + λ
βsj,t

1
(4.1)
illustrates [19]. Equation (4.1) shows that in the online setting at time stamp t one
tries to minimize the cumulative loss over all the past samples. Therefore, the central
agent receives an updated estimator βsj,t at every time stamp t. Since the optimiza-
tion problem is solved for every t in {L, L+1, ..., T}, it is desired to find a solution to
the problem by applying recursive strategies. The idea of recursion is that an object
can be defined in terms of itself. Applying this concept to online algorithm means
that the algorithm parameters at time stamp t can be defined with respect to their
previous values at time stamp t −1.
The OADMM algorithm is based on decomposing the shown LASSO problem at time
stamp t across the different participating sites (s1, ..., sS) by applying the well stud-
ied ADMM technique [26], which eventually leads to the constrained minimization
problem
min
βs1,t,...,βsS ,t
1
2
t−1
∑
τ=1+L
(
∑
s∈ΩS
as,τzs,t −ysj,τ)2 + λ
∑
s∈ΩS
∥βs,t∥1
subject to
βs,t −zs,t = 0, ∀s ∈ΩS
(4.2)
When solving (4.2) in a distributed setting it would require each contracted agent
to share their local explanatory variables as,τ with the central agent, which would
result in the violation of privacy. The author of [19] solved this by introducing an
encryption matrix Ms ∈RL,L. The matrix can be chosen by each agent randomly
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Online ADMM
25
but with the requirement that the matrix must be non-singular [19]. Furthermore,
to increase the adaptivity of the algorithm the author introduced a forgetting factor
that is used to give less weight to older obtained samples. By adding the encryption
matrices and the forgetting factor µ ∈(0, 1), (4.2) rewrites to
min
βs1,t,...,βsS ,t
1
2
t−1
∑
τ=1+L
(
t−1
∏
k=τ+1
µk
)
(
∑
s∈ΩS
as,τMszs,t −ysj,τ)2 + λ
∑
s∈ΩS
∥βs,t∥1
subject to
βs,t −Mszs,t = 0, ∀s ∈ΩS
(4.3)
The author of [19] points out that the when using (4.3) the privacy of the contracted
agents is again under thread. The applied solution is based on an additional encryp-
tion matrix Ks ∈RL,L, which this time must be orthogonal. By adding the second
encryption matrix the recursive algorithm parameter updates are found to be
βs,t = Sλ/ρ(Mszs,t−1 −us,t−1)
(
Hsj,t + ρ(KM)⊤(KM)
)
zsj,t = Psj,t + ρM ⊤(βsj,t + usj,t−1)
us,t = us,t−1 + βs,t −Mszs,t
Hsj,t = µtHsj,t−1 + (atM)⊤(atM)
Psj,t = µtPsj,t−1 + (atM)⊤ysj,t
(4.4)
where ρ is an algorithm parameter that controls the step-size and λ is again the
regularization strength of the LASSO problem. Sκ(z) is the so-called soft-thresholding
operator [32], which is defined as
Sκ(z) =





z −κ
if z > 0 and κ < |z|
z + κ
if z < 0 and κ < |z|
0
if κ > |z|
(4.5)
To obtain the elements of βs,t ∈RL,1 the soft-thresholding operator is applied element-
wise. The collection of private encryption matrices in M is a block-wise diagonal
matrix defined as M = diag (Ms1, Ms2..., MsS). The vector M ⊤(βsj,t + usj,t−1) is
obtained by vertically stacking all the local M ⊤
s (βs,t + us,t−1). One has to keep in
mind that these operations are only performed by the central agent.
To get a better understanding on the application of the OADMM, Algorithm 1 shows
the tasks of the central and contracted agent/s. In Algorithm 1 the superscript sj is
added to the variables of the contracted agents to indicate that the respective opera-
tions are performed for the operator of site sj. This index becomes important when a
wind farm operator is contracted by more than one central agent to participate in a
learning agreement. Furthermore, in [19] the general possibility to change the encryp-
tion matrices Ks and Ms whenever a contracted agent desires to do so is discussed.
Since the central agent must compute the large matrix KM, which is expected to
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Online ADMM
26
Algorithm 1 Online ADMM
1: Initialize β
(sj)
s,0 , z
(sj)
s,0
and u
(sj)
s,0 for s ∈Ωs, Hsj,0, Psj,0 and t to be 0. Contracted agents
share KsMs with the central agent j such that it can build KM. Central agent decides
on λ, ρ, µ and L.
2: while agents want to perform distributed learning do
3:
t := t + 1
4:
for s ∈Ωs do
5:
Agent s receives latest observation and forms as,t
6:
β
(sj)
s,t
:= Sλ/ρ(Msz
(sj)
s,t−1 −u
(sj)
s,t−1)
7:
ˆy
(sj)
s,t|t−1 := as,tβ
(sj)
s,t
8:
share ˆy
(sj)
s,t|t−1, as,tMs and M ⊤
s (β
(sj)
s,t
+ u
(sj)
s,t−1) with central agent
9:
end for
10:
ˆysj,t|t−1 := ∑
s∈Ωs ˆy
(sj)
s,t|t−1
▷Central agent j forms final prediction
11:
Central agent j stacks local as,tMs and M ⊤
s (β
(sj)
s,t
+ u(j)
s,t−1)
12:
atM := (as1,tMs1, ..., asS,tMsS)
13:
M ⊤(βsj,t + usj,t−1) := (M ⊤
s1(β
(sj)
s1,t + u
(sj)
s1,t−1), ..., M ⊤
sS(β
(sj)
sS,t + u
(sj)
sS,t−1))
14:
ysj,t is revealed and central agent suffers loss
15:
Hsj,t := µsj,tHsj,t−1 + (atM)⊤(atM)
▷Update covariance matrix
16:
Psj,t := µsj,tPsj,t−1 + ysj,t(atM)
▷Update covariance vector
17:
Central agent updates zsj,t and distributes local values to contracted agents
18:
Hsj,t + ρ(KM T )(KM))zsj,t = Psj,t + ρM ⊤(βsj,t + usj,t−1)
19:
(z
(sj)
s1,t, ..., z
(sj)
sS,t) := zsj,t
20:
for s ∈Ωs do
21:
Agent s receives z
(sj)
s,t
and performs u-update
22:
u
(sj
s,t := u
(sj)
s,t−1 + β
(sj)
s,t
−Msz
(sj)
s,t
23:
end for
24: end while
become computational expensive for large S and L, in this piece of work it is advised
to keep the encryption matrices constant. From the notation chosen in Algorithm
1 it can be seen that the encryption matrices do not carry the superscript sj. This
implies further that each agent chooses two general encryption matrices which are
independent of the respective central agent. The reason to do so is to simplify the
notations.
As one can see each agent performs a task where it computes a prediction ˆy(sj)
s,t|t−1
with a set of model parameters that are referenced to the site of the central agent, sj.
We call this scalar a partial prediction. The subscript s and superscript sj indicate
that the partial prediction is for site sj and computed with the data measured at
site s. From now on a similar convention is followed also for other algorithm param-
eters, whereby a superscript sj always indicates that the respective parameter/value
is computed for the site sj. Whereas the subscript s indicates that a value belongs
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Online ADMM
27
or is coming from site s.
The algorithm requires to share the partial predictions with the central agent which
then assembles all received values to obtain the final prediction for its site. The prop-
erty that each site holds a share of the overall set of model parameters is the result of
the applied decomposition technique and can be considered as a general property of
distributed learning algorithms when the dataset is split vertically. Important to note
is that the central agent must solve a set of linear equations to obtain the latest zsj,t.
The following section discusses that this step imposes a limitation when it comes to
the application of the OADMM algorithm in a large-scale setup.
4.1.1
Computational complexity
A frequent applied metric to estimate the computational complexity of algorithms is
to consider the algorithm’s number of floating-point operations (FLOPs). A FLOP is
defined as one addition, subtraction, multiplication, or division of two floating-point
numbers. For online algorithms one is interested in an estimation of the computa-
tional complexity per time stamp. Additionally, in a distributed setup it is convenient
to give further an estimation of the computational complexity for each agent. There-
fore, when analyzing the complexity of the OADMM algorithm it is convenient to
distinguish between the operations carried out by the central and contracted agent/s.
As a last remark it should be noted that it is common to only compute bounds of
the computational complexity, since obtaining an exact number is in most cases not
necessary.
In general it can be seen that the computations carried out by the contracted agents
are simple vector algebraic operations and thus are computational-wise cheap. The
majority of the OADMM algorithm computations are performed by the central agent.
At this, solving the set of linear equations is identified as the most complex task.
In this piece of work the OADMM algorithm is implemented in the programming
language Python, where the function solve of the numpy library is used to obtain
a solution to the linear system. The solver uses the LU-decomposition to efficiently
solve the system. In [33] the complexity of the LU-decomposition is given with 2
3n3
FLOPs, where n is the number of equations. To obtain zsj,t in each time stamp,
hence a system with S · L equations must be solved. Thus, the complexity of solving
the equations system grows cubic with the number of agents and the order of the
AR-X model.
To get an estimation on how long it takes each agent to complete its tasks dur-
ing every time stamp, a small simulation study is conducted on a toy dataset. The
dataset is created with
y = Xβ + ϵ
(4.6)
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Online ADMM
28
where every column j in X ∈RT,L·S is randomly sampled from a Gaussian normal
distribution with 0 mean and a variance of σ2
j ∈[0.2, 1]. The additive noise is gen-
erated from a normal distribution with 0 mean and a constant variance of 0.1. The
true parameter vector β is a sparse vector, where the sparsity is set to 0.8 and the
non-zero elements are randomly sampled from the standard uniform distribution. In
each simulation the parameter L is set to 4 to represent an AR(4) process, whereas
the parameter S which represents the number of wind farm operators is steadily in-
creased. It is acknowledged that this is not the formal way to create a synthetic time
series. Nonetheless, for this simulation study it is a convenient way to create a toy
dataset that can be used along with the OADMM algorithm to obtain an estimation
about its runtime. Last, it is decided to set the length of the toy dataset to 500 time
stamps.
Figure 4.1: Time spent by each agent to complete its tasks during a time stamp of the
OADMM algorithm, when the total number of agents S varies. The order of the AR-X
model is set to 4. All the shown values are averages across all 500 simulated time stamps.
Figure 4.1 depicts the average time required per time stamp to complete the central
and contracted agents tasks. Additionally, it is shown how long on average it takes
the central agent to solve the linear system (LS) to obtain zsj,t. To undergird the
prior presented hypothesis that the OADMM algorithm becomes computational sig-
nificantly more expensive in case the agents are allowed to change their encryption
matrices, Figure 4.1 juxtaposes the case of keeping the encryption matrices constant
with the case where all agents change their encryption matrices every time stamp.
Changing the encryption matrices every time stamp might be considered as an overkill,
yet this extreme case is chosen to show the impact on the required time to learn from
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Online ADMM
29
a new sample. The implementation of the OADMM algorithm in the programming
language Python can be found in the Appendix A.1.1. A personal computer operated
on Windows 10 with an i5-5200U CPU and 8 GB of DDR3 RAM is used to perform
the simulation study.
As Figure 4.1 shows, the prior assumption that the tasks carried out by the con-
tracted agents can be completed efficiently is in fact the case. More important to
note is the increase in the time it takes the central agent to complete its tasks depen-
dent on S. First, it is observed that solving the LS accounts for the largest share of
the overall time spent by the central agent to complete its tasks. Second, the cubic
increase in complexity of the LU-decomposition could be verified. Although, it seems
that for large S the increase in complexity can be better modeled with an exponent
smaller than 3. A possible explanation is that on modern machines the FLOPs of
a task do not represent the respective computational time accurately. However, the
increase in computational time is at least quadratic with respect to S and L. Last, it
could be proven that using variable encryption matrices will slow down the algorithm.
Figure 4.1 shows that the cost of having variable encryption matrices becomes greater
with a growing number of agents S. Considering further the differences between the
time it takes a central and a contracted agent to solve its tasks, when applying the
OADMM algorithm in a centralized setup solving the LS would still represent the ma-
jority of the overall time spent per time stamp. This observation becomes important
when testing the algorithm in a controlled setup to investigate its performance.
4.1.2
Communication requirements
Besides considering the time it takes each agent to complete its respective tasks, one
also has to consider the time it takes to exchange the algorithm parameters. To give
a good estimation it is required to know which protocol is applied to exchange the
messages between the central agent and all its contracted agents. To present a com-
plete communication protocol is out of the scope of this piece of work. Nevertheless,
to get an idea on how many messages are exchanged in every time stamp, Table 4.1
can be used.
Additionally, the table shows the content and size of each message,
which is given by the dimension of the respective vectors. The last row indicates
the total amount of exchanged floating-point numbers per time stamp between the
central agent and its contracted agents. For simplicity and during the negligible im-
pact when employing the OADMM algorithm for a large number of time stamps, the
initial exchange of the algorithm hyperparameters (i.e. λ, µ and ρ) and encryption
matrix product (KsMs) are not listed.
As Table 4.1 shows, the total amount of exchanged floating-point numbers grows
linearly with the order of the AR-X and the number of contracted agents. Further-
more, it can be seen that the amount of incoming data is greater than the amount
of outgoing data. When choosing for the floating-point numbers a 32-bit represen-
==PAGE:44==
4.2 Hyperparameter tuning of online algorithms
30
Table 4.1: Overview of the OADMM’s sent and received messages
per time stamp from the perspective of the central agent.
Sent messages
Received messages
Content
z(sj)
s,t
∈RL,1
M ⊤
s (β(sj)
s,t + u(j)
s,t−1) ∈RL,1,
ˆy(sj)
s,t|t−1 ∈R , as,tMs ∈RL,1
Number
S −1
S −1
Total number of
floating-point numbers
L · (S −1)
(2L + 1) · (S −1)
tation, a single number requires 4 byte of memory. Considering the example of an
AR(4) process where the central agent has 999 contracted agents, it would receive
less than 36 kilobyte of data. Increasing the precision of the floating-point numbers
by choosing a 64-bit representation would only double the amount of received data
to roughly 72 kilobyte per time stamp. Since it is unpractical to only exchange single
floating-point numbers, more complex data structures are usually utilized. In case
each contracted agent stores their respective parameters (assuming 64-bit floats) in
a Python dictionary, it would requires less than 300 byte of memory. Hence, the
central agent would receive less than 3 megabyte of data per time stamp. This rough
calculations points out that the exchanged amount of data is negligibly small which
supports the applicability of the algorithm even in case some wind farm operators do
not have access the high-speed internet.
4.2
Hyperparameter tuning of online algorithms
The second to last section of this chapter will discuss the selection of the algorithm’s
hyperparameters ρ, µ, λ and L. Before starting to tune the hyperparameters, one
should think about whether there is a dependency between the parameters or not.
Concerning the OADMM algorithm, it is assumed that a dependency exists between
all 4 hyperparameters. Although it is believed that the selection of the forgetting
factor µ has only a small impact on the remaining 3 parameters. The dependency
among all 4 hyperparameters implies that ideally all hyperparameters must be opti-
mized together.
In this piece of work the following generic approach is applied which is basically a
cross-validation scheme. First, based on expert knowledge a set of values are assigned
to each of the hyperparameters. Next, the sets are used to compute the Cartesian
product. Then, each set of the product is used to perform online learning on a training
set of historic data. The RMSE or any similar performance metric over the training
dataset is then used to compare the performance of each hyperparameter set. For
satisfying sets of hyperparameters this procedure is repeated with a finer selection
for each parameter. When the performance metric does not decrease significantly
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Desired online algorithm properties
31
anymore with a new set of hyperparameters, the best performing set is then chosen
for the subsequent application of the algorithm.
The author of [19] proposes to use an adaptive forgetting factor which is error de-
pendent to achieve a better performance of the learned estimator. A presented argu-
ment speaking for the adaptive factor is that during periods where the wind power
time series is stationary, almost no forgetting is required (µ should be very close to 1).
Contrary to this, during non-stationary periods past observations should be forgotten
faster, which requires a smaller µ. The presented adaptive forgetting value selects µ
according to the MAE over a chosen number of past predictions. This comes at the
cost that the adaptive forgetting factor requires to tune 4 hyperparameters, which
eventually results in a total of 7 OADMM hyperparameters. According to Figure
4.1 it takes at least 1 second to complete a time stamp when the central agent con-
tracts around 800 sites. Assuming further that the training set contains 5000 samples,
which can be considered to be a relatively small training set, it would take roughly 80
minutes to evaluate the performance of a single hyperparameter set. This estimation
does not include the cost of communication, which will eventually increase the overall
training time. Based on these numbers, evaluating a large grid of hyperparameters
can become very costly. Thus, in this piece of work it is decided to apply a constant
forgetting factor whereby it is only required to tune 4 hyperparameters. This decision
will reduce the time to optimize the hyperparameters significantly. Furthermore, it
should be noted that the author of [19] did not quantify the improvements of the
adaptive over the constant forgetting factor.
Last it should be mentioned while running some basic tests with the algorithm it
is observed that the algorithm is relatively sensitive to the selection of the hyper-
parameters. Especially varying the regularization strength showed relatively large
impacts on the obtained estimations. Therefore it is argued in favor of tuning the
remaining 4 hyperparameters more accurately than spending significantly more time
on tuning the additional hyperparameters of the adaptive forgetting factor. Keeping
in mind that the improvements of the adaptive forgetting factor are not quantified
yet, applying a constant forgetting is believed to be the reasonable choice since the
hyperparameter tuning process is easier.
4.3
Desired online algorithm properties
It is verified that the time to learn from a new sample with the OADMM algorithm
scales at least quadratic with respect to the number of agents and the order of the
AR-X model. Besides that, the algorithm also requires the central agent to solve a
linear system every time stamp which takes for a large number of contracted agents
a considerable amount of time. Considering further that due to the dependency be-
tween each other, the hyperparameters of the OADMM algorithm must be tuned
simultaneously, obtaining a well performing estimator in a high-dimensional setting
==PAGE:46==
4.3 Desired online algorithm properties
32
will take a respectable amount of time. Furthermore, basic tests showed that the
algorithm is relatively sensitive with respect to the hyperparameter selection which
makes it generally more difficult to obtain well performing parameters for a given
dataset.
Based on these observations, the to be developed distributed online algorithm should
ideally scale linearly with the number of agents and the AR order. In addition to that
the new algorithm should not require to solve a linear system due to the fact that
it becomes very expensive in a large-scale setup. Furthermore, the hyperparameter
optimization process should be less complex, both in terms of the number of param-
eters to tune as well as the dependency of the parameters among each other. Similar
to the OADMM algorithm, the number of exchanged messages per time stamp as
well as the amount of exchanged data should be as small as possible. At this it is
desired to be in the range of the OADMM algorithm. Last, the new distributed online
algorithm should have some sparsification technique so that it is possible to deploy
the algorithm in a high-dimensional case.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5
Gradient Based
Distributed Online
Learning
Following up on the previous presented desired properties when it comes to the ap-
plication of a distributed online algorithm to learn an AR-X model in the domain of
high-dimensional wind power forecasting, many available algorithms do not satisfy all
properties. To start with and as already discussed in [19], the already existing other
online ADMM algorithms [34][35][36] are not suitable to learn large AR-X models
due to their complex algorithmic parameter updates. Thus, it takes relatively long
time to learn from a new arrived sample which is in general undesired. Other online
ADMM algorithms are only formulated for consensus problems, such as the algorithm
presented in [37]. Consensus problems are suitable for setups where the dataset is
horizontally distributed. A dataset can be considered to be horizontally distributed
when each agent receives samples with the exact same features. Contrary to this, ver-
tically distributed datasets imply that each agent observes a feature which is unique
in the dataset. This applies to the case when learning an AR-X model in the domain
of wind power forecasting, where each agent holds a portion of the overall dataset.
Therefore, applying consensus based algorithms directly to the considered task is not
possible. Unfortunately, it is observed that the overwhelming majority of the already
existing distributed online algorithms only address the case where the dataset is split
horizontally. Examples can be found in [38], [39] and [40]. Attempts are made to
reformulate the prior algorithms without being successful. After browsing through
the vast majority of the available distributed online algorithms, attempts are made to
obtain a distributed version of the online, but centralized, algorithm of [8]. At this,
all attempts failed due to the required covariance matrix, which is obtained by the
product a⊤
t at.
After these unsuccessful trials, the idea to focus on computational cheap centralized
online algorithms and develop their respective distributed versions which eventually
are applicable to vertically split datasets is followed. The cheapest and most basic
==PAGE:48==
5.1 Centralized MIDAS
34
algorithms that learn an estimator sample by sample are part of stochastic gradient
descent algorithm family. While studying the structure of these algorithms it could
be seen that it is possible to obtain a suitable distributed version. However, among
other deficits, the basic stochastic gradient descent algorithm does not impose any
sparsity on the estimator. In the course of further literature research two suitable
sparsity imposing variants of the stochastic gradient descent family are found. The
algorithm presented in [41] is based on a truncation step, where the model parameters
that cross 0 after each gradient step are truncated to be 0. A gravity parameter is
used to pull model parameters closer to 0. After having a closer look at the algorithm
it is realized that the algorithm requires identical and independently distributed sam-
ples. When working with AR models and wind power time series data, this property
is not given. Tests on synthetic datasets could verify that the algorithm is indeed
not suited for wind power time series, due to the fact that the algorithm diverged fre-
quently. The observed behavior lead to unsatisfactory forecast accuracy. Fortunately,
the Stochastic MIrror Descent Algorithm made Sparse (SMIDAS) presented in [42]
does not necessarily require identical and independently distributed samples. Basic
simulation studies could prove this observation and furthermore showed promising
results in terms of forecast accuracy. As a consequence, it is decided to develop a
framework that enables the application of the algorithm in a distributed setting.
The first section of this chapter will present the centralized algorithm developed in [42]
and its respective formulation when learning an AR-X model online. Building on the
obtained centralized online algorithm, the steps to decompose the algorithm across
all in the learning agreement participating agents are shown. Next, a suitable appli-
cation framework is presented which employs the distributed online algorithm while
ensuring the privacy of each agent. Section 5.3 applies the obtained distributed online
algorithm to a synthetic dataset to investigate the ability to track temporal changes
in the underlying dataset. At this, the OADMM algorithm is used as a benchmark.
Based on the obtained results, extensions are presented which eventually lead to the
presentation of the Adaptive D-MIDAS and its communication reduced version.
5.1
Centralized MIDAS
The SMIDAS presented in [42] is initially developed to learn regularized batch mod-
els from a dataset with a great number of samples. In fact, the authors address the
LASSO problem as introduced earlier in Section 2.3. As for other stochastic gradi-
ent based algorithms, the SMIDAS is applied in a framework where the dataset is
first randomly shuffled. Thereafter, the algorithm is used to learn the estimator by
sequentially drawing all samples from the dataset. If an algorithm specific conver-
gence criterion is not fulfilled when drawing the last sample from the dataset, the
dataset again shuffled and the process to learn the estimator continues. Each com-
pleted round of learning from all samples in the dataset is often known in the machine
learning community as an epoch. The purpose of randomly shuffling the dataset is to
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Centralized MIDAS
35
increase the convergence speed. The process stops whenever the convergence criterion
is fulfilled. In case multiple epochs are required to fulfill the criterion, the algorithm
evaluated a single observation multiple times. Contrary to this framework, the idea
of this piece of work is to employ the algorithm to non-stationary wind power time
series data without shuffling the dataset. In addition, the algorithm evaluates a sam-
ple only once by still drawing the samples sequentially from the dataset. By following
this method, it is expected that the algorithm is able to track temporal changes in
the underlying dataset while being computational-wise extremely cheap.
The developers of the SMIDAS adapted the idea of the truncation step, as intro-
duced in [41], and combined it with a stochastic mirror descent algorithm, which is
further extended by applying the p-norm updates that are discussed in [43]. For a
complete derivation of the algorithm the interested reader should consider the origi-
nal publication [42]. The basic idea behind mirror descent algorithms is to utilize two
weight vectors, a primal vector (β ∈RS·L) and a dual vector (θ ∈RS·L). Both weight
factors are related via a link function θ = f(β), which in this particular algorithm is
chosen to be the p-norm function
fk(β) = sign (βk)|βk|q−1
∥β∥q−2
q
(5.1)
[42]. Since the link function is taken to be the gradient map ∇F of some strictly
convex function F, it is possible to define the inverse relationship β = f −1(θ) by
f −1
k (θ) = sign (θk)|θk|p−1
∥θ∥p−2
p
(5.2)
where p =
q
q−1 [42]. As one can see, the function f −1(·) applies the shown operations
to each element of the input vector θ. The remaining steps are presented in Algorithm
2, where the central agent j learns an AR-X model online but centralized. ln is the
natural logarithm and sign the signum function. The term ”Stochastic” in SMIDAS
is dropped, since the algorithm applied to wind power time series does not randomly
draw a sample from the dataset. Centralized MIrror Descent Algorithm made Sparse
(C-MIDAS) is chosen to label the algorithm that is applied in a centralized setting.
When initializing the hyperparameter p of the p-norm the strategy as presented in
[42] is followed, where p is dependent on the dimension of the dataset’s feature space.
It is suggested to use the relationship p = 2 ln (L · S) for regression problems. On the
first look, the complexity (measured in FLOPs) of the C-MIDAS seems to be mul-
tiple times smaller than the one of the OADMM algorithm. Furthermore, it can be
also seen that the algorithm does not require the explicit computation of covariance
structures, such as Ht and Pt in the OADMM algorithm. This is the case since the
C-MIDAS does not minimize the cumulative loss over all past observation. Therefore,
both algorithms learn an estimator based on different approaches.
==PAGE:50==
5.2 Distributed MIDAS
36
Algorithm 2 Centralized MIrror Descent Algorithm made Sparse (C-MIDAS)
1: Initialize βsj,t, θsj,t and t to be 0
2: p := 2 ln (L · S)
3: while central agent wants to perform online learning do
4:
t := t + 1
5:
Central agent builds at with latest measurements from contracted sites
6:
ˆysj,t|t−1 := atβsj,t−1
7:
Central agent suffers loss and updates parameters
8:
vsj,t := (atβsj,t−1 −ysj,t)at
9:
eθsj,t := θsj,t−1 −ηvsj,t
10:
∀k, θ(sj,t),k := sign (eθ(sj,t),k) max {0, |eθ(sj,t),k| −ηλ}
11:
βsj,t := f −1(θsj,t)
12: end while
After the central agent suffers its loss, the algorithm parameter update is carried out
in four steps. Step 8 in Algorithm 2 shows the estimated gradient of the LASSO’s
l2 loss function with respect to βsj,t−1. The next step builds the intermediate dual
vector eθsj,t by taking a step into the opposite direction of the gradient, whereby the
step size is controlled by the learning rate η. Subsequently, the dual vector θsj,t is
obtained through the truncation step of eθsj,t, where the velocity of the parameters
approaching 0 is controlled by the product of λ and η. When selecting a large value
for λ, the elements in eθsj,t are pulled faster towards 0. When they eventually cross
0, the respective element is truncated to be 0. Therefore, a greater value of λ will
increase the sparsity of the estimator. The final step of the algorithm is part of the
mirror descent algorithm where the updated model parameters are obtained by apply-
ing the link function f −1(·). As one can see, none of the algorithm parameter updates
requires complex operations, such as solving a linear system, which speaks in favor
of the algorithm. The following section will present the decomposition steps that
will lead to the presentation of the distributed version of the MIDAS. Additionally,
a framework is presented in which the novel distributed algorithm can be employed
while the privacy of each agent is protected.
5.2
Distributed MIDAS
Building on the prior knowledge obtained in Chapter 4 it is known that the prediction
ˆysj,t|t−1 of the central agent can be decomposed into S partial predictions, ˆy(sj)
s,t|t−1
where s ∈ΩS. Furthermore, it is recognized that if the central agent shares every
time stamp its residual (ˆysj,t|t−1 −ysj,t), the contracted agents are able to perform
step 8 to 10 of Algorithm 2 by themselves. At this point, it is assumed that the central
agent is willing to share the forecast error for its site with all the contracted agents.
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Distributed MIDAS
37
This is reasonable to assume as long as the central agent is predicting power for a
single site or a small portfolio. However, as soon as the portfolio is relatively large and
thus represents a considerable share of the overall installed wind power capacity in a
specific region, the information about the portfolio’s forecast error could be used by
the contracted agents to gain benefits when trading their respective produced power
in the various electricity markets. A benefit worth mentioning is that based on the
market power of the central agent, the contracted agents could analyze the forecast
error and, depending on the likelihood of the central agent to either predict too high
or too low in certain hours, place their respective bids accordingly in the market. This
way, the contracted agents have the benefit to get a better insight on the direction of
the market with respect to the required up- or down-regulation. A market area where
this approach could bring benefits is the Nord Pool area in Northern-Europe, where
the deviations between the bidden and actual produced quantities are penalized.
Unfortunately, because of the p-norm it is not possible to decompose the link function
f −1(·) across all agents. A possible solution requires an intermediate communication
step where the contracted agents share their private dual vector θ(sj)
s,t
with the cen-
tral agent, which first computes the norm ∥θ∥p−2
p
and then shares the obtained scalar
again with all contracted agents. After receiving the denominator of the link func-
tion, each contracted agent is able to perform the last step of Algorithm 2 with their
private dual variables. Unfortunately, when applying this solution it is possible that
the central agent is able to retrieve the contracted agent’s local set of explanatory
variables. The weakness of the solution is that it is trivial for the central agent to
do so due to step 8 of Algorithm 2. From here it can be seen that no agent can ever
have access to the local dual variables and the residual together. The concept of a
so-called fusion center (supervisory node) will help to achieve this condition.
5.2.1
Application framework
Introducing a fusion center means that an additional agent is added to the setup,
whose function it is to supervise the communication between the central agent and
all its contracted agents. The additional agent can be understood as an entity which
provides and manages the protocol to perform distributed online learning. Thus, the
entity could be a wind power forecast provider who has the necessary knowledge to
implement and tune the respective distributed learning algorithm. At this point it
is reasonable to assume that the operator of a single wind farm does not have the
knowledge nor the technical infrastructure to manage a large-scale distributed learn-
ing project. Furthermore, it is unlikely that the owner of a single wind farm has
the resources to contract a large number of wind farm operators to participate in a
learning agreement. Concerning this matter, a forecast provider is considered to be
more qualified to create standardized contracts which then can be used to contract
a large number of wind farm operators to join the learning agreement. Figure 5.1
illustrates the proposed setup that employs the MIDAS in a distributed setting. As
==PAGE:52==
5.2 Distributed MIDAS
38
before, the set ΩC contains the sites of the contracted agents, whereas sj is the site
of the central agent. The building placed in the middle of the figure represents the
fusion center.
Figure 5.1: Application framework of the distributed MIDAS. The icons can be found on
[23].
As Figure 5.1 illustrates, the central agent does not directly communicate with the
contracted agents anymore. Instead, all data packets transit through the fusion cen-
ter. This brings many benefits. Foremost, it is assumed that the fusion center has
technical capabilities in terms of managing incoming and outgoing data that are mul-
tiple times greater than the capabilities of the wind farm operators. This applies to
computational power, which is used to structure incoming data packets, as well as
the required high-speed internet connection for receiving and sending data fast.
Contrary to a setup without a fusion center, the load on the internet access point of
the central agent is expected to be reduced. Here it is argued that a standard internet
access point is not well suited to receive data packets from a great number of agents
that arrive at a high frequency. The load on the central agent is reduced, since the
fusion center operator can bundle all the data coming from the contracted agents and
eventually send a single packet to the central agent. The ability of the fusion center
operator to structure and bundle data becomes particular useful when considering a
setup where each participating wind farm operator receives a prediction for its site.
Thus, all in the learning agreement participating wind farm operators collectively
learn S AR-X models. This would require each wind farm operator to take the role
of the central agent once, while performing the tasks of a contracted agent S −1
times. Managing the communication in such a setup without the presence of a fusion
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Distributed MIDAS
39
center would become very cumbersome. When instead introducing a fusion center,
each wind farm operator finishes the tasks for all the remaining sites and sends the
obtained results in a single packet to the fusion center. Regarding this, it is assumed
that packing and unpacking the packets is significantly faster than exchanging many
small packets within the learning network. Furthermore, the exchange of data be-
comes more structured, since for the same amount of exchanged data less messages
are required.
The fusion center can also be used to introduce privacy to the distributed MIDAS.
As it has been prior discussed, the central agent is able to retrieve the explanatory
variables of the contracted agents since it has access to the residual of its site and
the θ(sj)
s,t
vector of each contracted agent. Based on this insight, it is proposed that
all agents, including the central agent, share their θ(sj)
s,t
vector with the fusion center
operator, who then computes the norm and returns the obtained scalar to all agents.
This means that the central agent does not get access to the local dual variables any-
more and thus is it not able to retrieve the explanatory variables of the contracted
agents. As long as the fusion center operator does not get access to the residual, the
privacy of all agents is protected. Therefore, it would be necessary for the central
agent to share its residual directly with all its contracted agents. This might be a
feasible solution in a low-dimensional setup. But as it as been already pointed out,
for a large-scale setup the communication becomes more structured and most likely
more efficient if all data packets transit through the fusion center. By this means, one
has to find a tradeoff between deploying a protocol with an efficient communication
and ensuring the privacy of the participating agents.
The first proposal is to relax the privacy restrictions by tolerating the possibility
that the fusion center operator is capable to retrieve the local explanatory variables
of each in the learning agreement participating agent. While doing so, it is necessary
that the fusion center operator is an independent and trusted entity which does not
utilize the insights obtained through the forecast errors and power measurements of
the participating sites for its own good. When deciding to relax the restrictions on
privacy in such a manner it is still ensured that no wind farm operator can access the
power measurements of any other site than its own. At this point it is acknowledged
that this approach can be also substituted with a framework where the fusion center
operator collects all the necessary data and runs the centralized MIDAS or any other
online algorithm for each of the participating sites. Therefore, the following frame-
work is introduced.
Before starting to learn an online AR-X model with the distributed MIDAS, the
central agent shares a decryption key with all its contracted agents. Then, the group
of wind farm operators start to learn the AR-X model. In each time stamp, the central
agent still distributes the residual through the fusion center with all its contracted
agents, although this time the residual is encrypted such that the fusion center opera-
==PAGE:54==
5.3 Simulation studies on synthetic data
40
tor cannot access the residual. After receiving the encrypted residual, each contracted
agent uses the respective decryption key to decrypt the residual. Each wind farm op-
erator then computes its θ(sj)
s,t
vector and shares it with the fusion center operator
which then computes the p-norm. Subsequently, the denominator of the link function
is distributed again among all agents such that each agent can use the link function
to perform the final step of the distributed MIDAS. When applying this framework,
the privacy of each single wind farm operator is protected. Since it is only required
to encrypt a single scalar, it is believed that the encryption and decryption step can
be performed very fast.
Algorithm 3 shows the resulting distributed Vanilla MIDAS. The encryption step is
conducted by applying the encryption key Ksj(·) to the residual, whereas the decryp-
tion step is denoted by K∗
sj(·). As one might notice, the Vanilla D-MIDAS requires
more messages to be exchanged than the presented OADMM algorithm. The reason
for this is that all dual variables must be gathered at a single node inside the learning
network to obtain the denominator of the link function. However, overall less floating-
point numbers are exchanged, which is a benefit of the algorithm. Furthermore, it
can be seen that the Vanilla D-MIDAS requires to tune 4 hyperparameters, λ, η, the
p-norm exponent p and L. Due to the product of λ and η these parameters must
be tuned together. Contrary to this it is believed that the hyperparameter p can
be tuned independently of λ and η. This can be considered as an improvement over
the OADMM algorithm where the 4 hyperparameters should be all tuned together.
The in the following section presented simulation studies on synthetic data will ana-
lyze the characteristics of the Vanilla D-MIDAS. Based on the obtained insights two
extensions are presented.
5.3
Simulation studies on synthetic data
The Vanilla MIDAS is tested on a synthetic dataset which is created by using the
vector autoregressive formulation
yt = yt−1B1 + yt−2B2 + ϵt
(5.3)
where yt ∈R1,10 are the synthetic power measurements at 10 different sites. ϵt ∈
R1,10 is again the noise vector of the time series, where each element of the vector
is drawn from a Gaussian normal distribution with 0 mean and 0.1 variance. The
parameter matrices are defined such that each row references to a particular central
agent’s site. By this means, non-zero off-diagonal elements in B1 and B2 imply that
the time series of lagged power measurements (in this particular case lag 1 and lag 2)
belonging to the site of column n (contracted agent) correlates with the time series of
power measurements belonging to the site of row m (central agent). Therefore, the
lagged power measurements of site n provide useful information to improve the fore-
cast accuracy of the central agent’s site m. The true parameter matrices are selected
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Simulation studies on synthetic data
41
Algorithm 3 Vanilla D-MIDAS
1: Central agent initializes p := 2 ln (L · S) and shares it with fusion center operator and
contracted agents. Additionally, central agent selects η, λ and the decryption key Ks∗
j
as it desires and shares all parameters with the contracted agents.
2: Initialize t and β
(sj)
s,0 , θ
(sj)
s,0
for s ∈Ωs to be 0.
3: while agents want to perform distributed online learning do
4:
t := t + 1
5:
for s ∈Ωs do
6:
Agent s receives latest observation and forms as,t
7:
ˆy
(sj)
s,t|t−1 := as,tβ
(sj)
s,t
8:
Transmit partial prediction to fusion center
9:
end for
10:
Fusion center operator bundles partial predictions and sends them to central agent
11:
ˆysj,t|t−1 := ∑
s∈Ωs ˆy
(sj)
s,t|t−1
▷Central agent forms final prediction
12:
ysj,t is revealed and central agent suffers loss
13:
rsj,t := ˆysj,t|t−1 −yt,sj
▷Compute residual
14:
r∗
sj,t := Ksj(rsj,t)
▷Encrypt residual
15:
Central agent sends encrypted residual r∗
sj,t to fusion center
16:
Fusion center operator distributes r∗
sj,t among all agents
17:
for s ∈Ωs do
18:
rsj,t := K∗
sj(rsj,t)
▷Decrypt residual
19:
eθ
(sj)
s,t
:= θ
(sj)
s,t−1 −η · as,trsj,t
▷Compute intermediate dual vector
20:
∀k, θ
(sj)
(s,t),k := sign (eθ
(sj)
(s,t),k) max {0, |eθ
(sj)
(s,t),k| −ηλ}
▷Perform truncation
element-wise
21:
Transmit θ
(sj)
s,t
to fusion center
22:
end for
23:
Fusion center operator computes denominator of link function, γsj,t
24:
θsj,t := (θ
(sj)
s1,t, ..., θ
(sj)
sS,t)
▷Stack all dual vectors
25:
γsj,t :=
θ
(sj)
t

p−2
p
▷Compute norm
26:
Fusion center operator shares γsj,t with all agents
27:
for s ∈Ωs do
28:
Agent s receives norm and uses link function
29:
∀k, β
(sj)
(s,t),k :=
sign (θ
(sj )
(s,t),k)|θ
(sj )
(s,t),k|p−1
γsj ,t
▷Apply link function element-wise
30:
end for
31: end while
such that the created time series does not diverge, i.e. Y ∈RT,10 does not approach
± inf. Furthermore, the values are chosen in a way that they could represent real
world parameter matrices. The diagonal elements of the parameter matrices have
greater values than the off-diagonal elements. This is a result of the understanding
that the greatest correlation of a specific site’s power production is always observed
with the sites own lagged measurements. Many off-diagonal elements are chosen to
==PAGE:56==
5.3 Simulation studies on synthetic data
42
be 0 to represent the real world case where useful information is only extracted from
a limited number of contracted sites. The parameters a1, a2, a3 and a4 are selected
to change their respective values over time. By this means it is possible to observe
the algorithm’s ability to track parameter changes.
In the framework of a Monte-Carlo-Simulation it is decided to use (5.3) to create
the synthetic time series for each of the 10 sites with 25000 samples, whereby the
procedure is repeated to obtain 1000 realizations. To identify potential weaknesses of
the Vanilla D-MIDAS, the tracking ability of the OADMM algorithm is used as a com-
parison. Since the purpose of the simulation study is not to evaluate the performance
of each algorithm in terms of the RMSE or similar metrics, no hyperparameter opti-
mization is performed. Thus, it should be noted that the selection of hyperparameters
can be considered as suboptimal.
B1 =
















0.9
0
0
0.2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.8
0.1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.85
0
0
0
0
−0.15
0
0
0
0
0
0.75
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
a1
0.2
0
0
0
0
0
a2
0
0
0
0.9
0.2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.85
0
0
0
0
0
0
−0.1
0
0
0
0.7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.9
0
0
0
0
0
0.15
0
0
0
0
0.8
















B2 =
















−0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−0.45
0
0
0
0
0
−0.1
0
0
0
0
−0.55
−0.15
0
−0.2
0
0
0
0
0
−0.15
0
−0.65
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.2
0
0
−0.5
0
−0.1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−0.55
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−0.1
−0.4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−0.6
0.1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−0.5
a3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
a4
















5.3.1
Vanilla D-MIDAS
For the first simulation study, the Vanilla algorithm as presented in Algorithm 3 is
used. It should be noted that the encryption/decryption steps of the algorithm are
neglected since the algorithm is applied in a controlled environment. The learning
rate η of the MIDAS is set to 0.075, the regularization parameter λ is set to 0.0001
and the p-norm exponent is chosen to be 2 ln(10 · 2). For the OADMM algorithm the
hyperparameters were set to be: λ = 0.05, ρ = 10 and µ = 0.999.
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Simulation studies on synthetic data
43
The framework of Monte-Carlo-Simulations is chosen since the estimated parame-
ters are dependent on the randomness of each time series realization. Therefore, to
obtain an unbiased estimation of the model parameter values, the algorithms are used
along with each of the 1000 time series realizations. At this point it should be noted
that the time series are created only once and are subsequently used to estimate the
model parameters with both algorithms. As a consequence, it is guaranteed that both
algorithms estimate the model parameters on the exact same dataset.
Figure 5.2 shows the obtained estimations for the lag 1 parameter a1, which is set
to be constant for the first 14000 time stamps. At time stamp 14000 the true model
parameter value starts to decrease slowly. The shown values are obtained by first
estimating the parameters for each of the 1000 time series realizations by performing
online learning. Subsequently, the shown mean and quantile values are calculated
for each of the 25000 time stamps, where the distribution of each time stamp is ob-
tained by considering the 1000 conducted simulations. In all the following figures,
the number behind every quantile indicates the percentile which is used to obtain the
respective quantile of the underlying model parameter distribution.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
a1 [-]
Quantile (0.05)
Quantile (0.95)
Mean
True value
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
a1 [-]
Figure 5.2: Uncertainty of estimated parameter a1 when deploying the Vanilla D-MIDAS
(top) and OADMM (bottom) algorithm. The shown quantile and mean values (solid lines)
are obtained from the distribution of model parameters which is created by a MC-Simulation
with 1000 runs. The black dashed line indicates the true parameter value.
First of all, Figure 5.2 depicts that the burn-in period, being the number of time
stamps it takes to obtain a good approximation of the true parameter values, is mul-
==PAGE:58==
5.3 Simulation studies on synthetic data
44
tiple times greater for the Vanilla D-MIDAS than for the OADMM algorithm. The
D-MIDAS requires at least 5000 samples to obtain an estimation of the model param-
eter (considering the mean of the estimated parameter distribution per time stamp)
which is close to the true value of 0.7. Contrary to this, the OADMM algorithm
requires less than 1000 time stamps. Ergo it can be concluded that the MIDAS is
relatively data hungry. However, the burn-in period of the D-MIDAS can be reduced
by increasing the learning rate η. By increasing the learning rate, the algorithm takes
greater steps into the opposite direction of the estimated gradient when computing
the intermediate dual variables. As a result, the dual variable updates become more
subjective to greater forecast errors. The result is that the algorithm becomes more
sensitive to the estimation of each sample’s gradient, whereby it is observed that the
variance of the estimated parameter increases, i.e. the shown difference between the
lower and upper quantile becomes greater. Here it is expected that the interquantile
range can be used as an indicator of the estimated parameter distribution’s variance
per time stamp.
At the same time, even though the algorithm occasionally takes steps into the wrong
direction, due to taking greater gradient steps into the direction of the global mini-
mum, the algorithm approaches the true parameter value faster. The steps into the
wrong direction are expressed by the a greater deviation from the respective true
parameter value. As a consequence, one has to find a tradeoff between reaching a
fair estimation of the true parameter values fast, while at the same time keeping the
variance of the estimated parameter for subsequent time stamps low. When increas-
ing the learning rate η not only the burn-in period is reduced but also the algorithm
becomes more adaptive. Thus, the algorithm is able to react better to fast changes in
the true parameter value. Overall, it can be concluded that the Vanilla D-MIDAS is
capable of tracking the changes of the true model parameter a1, although a slightly
greater variance in the estimated parameters is observed.
A similar tradeoff between adaptivity and the variance of the estimated model pa-
rameter distribution exists for the OADMM algorithm as well, where the forgetting
factor µ controls the adaptivity of the algorithm. Choosing a smaller forgetting fac-
tor, i.e. past data is forgotten faster, the algorithm adapts to true parameter changes
faster, whereby this also comes at the cost of a greater variance in the estimated pa-
rameters. A lower forgetting factor would therefore decrease the small observed delay
between the true and estimated parameter (mean of the distribution) at time stamp
14000, when the true value starts to decrease. However, the OADMM algorithm is
generally less sensitive to great forecast errors, and thus greater model corrections,
than the MIDAS due to the covariance structures.
Contrary to model parameter a1 which is always positive, the lag 1 parameter a2
is set to change its algebraic sign when creating the synthetic time series. Figure
5.3 shows the obtained results of the MC-Simulation, where a similar behavior with
respect to the burn-in period of the Vanilla D-MIDAS is observed. Additionally in
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Simulation studies on synthetic data
45
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
a2 [-]
Quantile (0.05)
Quantile (0.95)
Mean
True value
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
a2 [-]
Figure 5.3: Uncertainty of estimated parameter a2 when deploying the Vanilla D-MIDAS
(top) and OADMM (bottom) algorithm. The shown quantile and mean values (solid lines)
are obtained from the distribution of model parameters which is created by a MC-Simulation
with 1000 runs. The black dashed line indicates the true parameter value.
Figure 5.3 it can be seen that the D-MIDAS is not able to keep track of the true model
parameter value once the parameter value crossed through 0. Instead of keeping track
of the true value, the algorithm estimates the model parameter to be 0. This is under-
stood as a result of the applied sparsification strategy, which includes the truncation
step as well as the utilization of the p-norm link function. The OADMM algorithm,
contrary to the Vanilla D-MIDAS, keeps successfully track of the true parameter
value. While the true parameter value is kept constant at 0.15, it can be observed
that the mean of the obtained parameter distribution fits the true value very well. In
addition it is worth pointing that the variance of the estimated parameter is on the
same level for both algorithms.
In difference to the two previous presented model parameters, model parameter a3
is located in the lag 2 parameter matrix B2. Again, the true model parameter is
set to change its algebraic sign when creating the synthetic time series. Contrary to
model parameter a2 though, the initial value of a3 is set to be smaller. The from
the MC-Simulation obtained results are depicted in Figure 5.4. Here it can be seen
that the D-MIDAS is in general capable of tracking a parameter that changes its alge-
braic sign. Considering that the parameter is estimated be to 0 throughout all 1000
==PAGE:60==
5.3 Simulation studies on synthetic data
46
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
a3 [-]
Quantile (0.05)
Quantile (0.95)
Mean
True value
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
a3 [-]
Figure 5.4: Uncertainty of estimated parameter a3 when deploying the Vanilla D-MIDAS
(top) and OADMM (bottom) algorithm. The shown quantile and mean values (solid lines)
are obtained from the distribution of model parameters which is created by a MC-Simulation
with 1000 runs. The black dashed line indicates the true parameter value.
simulations for roughly 3000 time stamps, the tracking ability with the current set
of hyperparameters is rather suboptimal. As already discussed for parameter a2, the
sparsification technique of the algorithm is expected to cause this behavior. Again,
the model parameter estimations of the OADMM algorithms are following the true
parameter value well. Additionally, it is also observed that the variance of the esti-
mated parameter values is on the same level for both algorithms.
The changes of the lag 2 model parameter a4 are illustrated in Figure 5.5.
This
parameter, as already model parameter a1, does not change its algebraic sign. From
Figure 5.5 it can be seen that the D-MIDAS estimates (mean value of the estimated
parameter distribution) the model parameter a4 to be 0 for a relatively long time. It
takes roughly 1000 time stamps for the algorithm to estimate the model parameter to
be non-zero. This is an interesting observation, considering that this behavior is not
observed for the estimation of model parameter a1. Nonetheless, after the initial burn-
in period, the Vanilla D-MIDAS keeps track of the true parameter value changes well.
Besides verifying the ability of the MIDAS to track the true model parameter changes,
it is also investigated if the algorithm is capable to reproduce the sparsity of the true
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Simulation studies on synthetic data
47
−0.6
−0.5
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
a4 [-]
Quantile (0.05)
Quantile (0.95)
Mean
True value
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
−0.6
−0.5
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
a4 [-]
Figure 5.5: Uncertainty of estimated parameter a4 when deploying the Vanilla D-MIDAS
(top) and OADMM (bottom) algorithm. The shown quantile and mean values (solid lines)
are obtained from the distribution of model parameters which is created by a MC-Simulation
with 1000 runs. The black dashed line indicates the true parameter value.
model parameter matrices. As it has been introduced in Section 2.3, sparsity is de-
fined as the ratio between the number of model parameters that are equal to 0 and
the total number of model parameters. Hence, the true sparsity of the shown VAR
model is obtained by counting the zero elements in B1 and B2 and dividing it by the
total number of model parameters. Eventually, a true sparsity value of 163
200 = 81.5%
is obtained. At this, the two time stamps where the time varying model parameters
a2 and a3 are equal to 0 are neglected.
After completing some test runs with the D-MIDAS it is observed that the algo-
rithm is not capable of shrinking model parameters with a respective true value of 0
in a way that they become exactly 0. Instead it is observed that most estimated pa-
rameters, for whom the respective true value is 0, are around the order of magnitude
between 10−6 and 10−9. Considering now that in this simulation study the samples
of the synthetic time series are on the magnitude of 100, such small model parameters
mean that the resulting partial prediction is practically 0. Therefore, the definition
of sparsity is relaxed such that it is calculated by considering a model parameter
to be 0 when the respective absolute value is smaller than 10−6. Regarding this it
should be noted that this approach is only followed to compute the sparsity of the
learned estimator. Thus, no model parameter rounding is conducted while learning
==PAGE:62==
5.3 Simulation studies on synthetic data
48
the estimator. Additionally, it should be mentioned that the OADMM algorithm is
capable of shrinking estimated parameters to become exactly 0.
To estimate the sparsity of the true parameter matrices B1 and B2 the following
methodology is followed. First, the algorithms are used to perform online learning for
each of the 10 sites along with a single time series realization as input data. Thus, 10
AR-X models are learned in parallel where each model tries to estimate the parame-
ters of a single row number in B1 and B2. This can be considered as the setup where
a single site acts as the central agent once while being a contracted agent 9 times.
While performing online learning, for each time stamp and AR-X model the number
of model parameters for whom the absolute value is smaller than 10−6 are recorded.
To obtain the estimated sparsity of the shown VAR model at a single time stamp,
one has to sum the numbers that are recorded for all 10 AR-X models and divide it
by 200. This approach is repeated for each of the 1000 time series realizations, while
the estimated sparsity of the estimator is recorded for each time stamp.
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sparsity [%]
Vanilla D-MIDAS
OADMM
True sparsity
Figure 5.6: Estimated sparsity with respect to the true parameter matrices B1 and B2 when
deploying the Vanilla D-MIDAS and OADMM algorithm. The shown numbers are average
values obtained from a MC-Simulation with 1000 runs. The black dashed line indicates the
true parameter sparsity.
Figure 5.6 shows the obtained average sparsity across all MC-Simulation runs per
time stamp. Here it can be seen that both algorithms have difficulties to shrink the
absolute value of model parameters with a respective true value of 0 below the chosen
threshold of 10−6. Nonetheless, the D-MIDAS achieves a better sparsity than the
OADMM algorithm. Although one has to keep in mind that the applied regular-
ization strength might be lower than optimal. Furthermore it is observed that the
shown sparsity of the estimators learned by the Vanilla D-MIDAS increases steadily
over time. At this point it is assumed that this is a result of the applied truncation
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Simulation studies on synthetic data
49
step, where in each time stamp the product of λ · η is subtracted from the interme-
diate dual vector. Therefore, it is expected that more estimated model parameters
approach 0 over the course of the simulation. In addition it can be seen that the
slope of the shown sparsity value curve is greater for the first 1000 time stamps than
for the following 24000 time stamps. This is understood as a result of the applied
p-norm link function, where the chosen exponent value of 2 ln (S · L) impacts the size
of the model parameters. A greater exponent results in a greater denominator of the
link function and thus applies a greater shrinkange on the model parameters. This
also implies that a greater denominator value behaves as a pulling force that keeps
an estimated model parameter close to 0.
Based on these insights the MC-Simulation is repeated on the same synthetic dataset
while decreasing the regularization parameter λ of the Vanilla D-MIDAS to 0. The
remaining hyperparameters are left unchanged. The obtained results indicate that
the truncation step is not responsible for the suboptimal behavior of the MIDAS to
track parameters whose respective true values cross 0. The only improvement with
respect to the ability to track changes of the true parameter values is that the mean of
the estimated model parameter distribution is shifted upwards. This is expected since
the truncation step reduces the absolute value of each model parameter consistently
over the course of the simulation. The obtained estimations of the model parameters
a1, a2, a3 and a4 are illustrated in Figure A.1 of the Appendix. The loss of the trun-
cation step by reducing λ to 0 becomes visible when considering the development of
the sparsity (mean of the obtained sparsity distribution for each time stamp) over the
considered simulation time of 25000 time stamps. Figure 5.7 juxtaposes the obtained
sparsity values for the simulations with λ values of 0 and 0.0001.
Figure 5.7 shows an interesting behavior of the MIDAS. As it has been prior as-
sumed, the initial slope of the mean sparsity curve is caused by the applied p-norm
link function. However, the p-norm link function is also capable of providing a decent
level of sparsity, even though the truncation step is not applied as in the simulation
with a λ value of 0. Interestingly it is observed that after the initial increase in spar-
sity, the sparsity returns to a level which is similar to the one that is observed at the
very beginning of the simulation. Overall, it can be concluded that the truncation
step is necessary to provide additional sparsity, which in this case is observed as the
difference between the two shown curves.
Due to the circumstance that the p-norm link function also introduces sparsity, the
simulation is repeated with a decreased p-norm exponent of 0.75 ln (S · L). By doing
so, it is expected that the ability of the MIDAS to keep track of parameters whose true
values cross through 0 is increased. Again, the learning rate η is set to 0.0075 and the
hyperparameter λ to 0. According to Figure 5.8, when lowering the p-norm exponent
to 0.75 ln (S · L) the MIDAS is able to track the changes of the model parameter a2
and a3 significantly better. With the decreased exponent value the algorithm is able
to keep track of the true parameter values even though their respective value changes
==PAGE:64==
5.3 Simulation studies on synthetic data
50
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sparsity [%]
λ = 0.0001
λ = 0
True sparsity
Figure 5.7: Estimated sparsity with respect to the true parameter matrices B1 and B2 when
using the Vanilla D-MIDAS with different λ values. The shown numbers are average values
obtained from a MC-Simulation with 1000 runs. The black dashed line indicates the true
VAR model sparsity.
its algebraic sign. This is a significant improvement over the previous presented re-
sults where the algorithm estimated both parameters to be 0 over a long period of
time even though their respective true values are non-zero.
But as Figure 5.9 shows, this improvement in terms of adaptivity comes at the cost
of loosing the ability to obtain a sparse estimator. Here at can be seen that with
the chosen p-norm exponent value the MIDAS does not shrink any model parameters
(mean over all the 1000 MC-Simulation runs) below the threshold of 10−6, where the
threshold is again applied with respect to the absolute values of the estimated model
parameters. Even increasing the λ value does not provide a significant improvement
in terms of sparsity. Figure A.2 and A.3 of the Appendix show the simulation results
when applying a λ value of 0.001. The throughout this section described algorithm
properties are again observed. The greater regularization strength of the truncation
step affects all model parameters and therefore significantly lower values are observed
for a1, a2, a3 and a4.
Based on the desire to obtain a very light and fast algorithm in combination with the
obtained results on the behavior of the Vanilla MIDAS, it is decided to disregard the
truncation step. By doing so, the algorithm is reduced by one algorithmic parameter
update step which reduces the required time to perform the model parameter up-
dates. More importantly, the MIDAS has also one less hyperparameter to tune. This
reduces the overall time spent while tuning the hyperparameters with the scheme
as introduced in Section 4.2. Neglecting the truncation step can be justified by the
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Simulation studies on synthetic data
51
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Quantile (0.05)
Quantile (0.95)
Mean
True parameters
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
−0.6
−0.5
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
Figure 5.8: Uncertainty of estimated parameter a1 (top left), a2 (top right), a3 (bottom left)
and a4 (bottom right) when deploying the Vanilla D-MIDAS. The shown quantile and mean
values (solid lines) are obtained from the distribution of model parameters which is created
by a MC-Simulation with 1000 runs. The black dashed line indicates the true parameter
value.
overall small improvement it provides when the MIDAS is applied to learn an AR-X
model online. The following section introduces an additional extension to the Vanilla
D-MIDAS algorithm which is expected to increase the overall adaptivity while also
reducing the relatively long observed burn-in period.
5.3.2
Adaptive D-MIDAS
Considering the prior discussed tradeoff between achieving a high adaptivity while
keeping the observed variance of the estimated model parameter distribution low,
the following extension is proposed. Instead of learning a single estimator with a
constant learning rate η that has been found while tuning the hyperparameters, the
idea is to learn multiple estimators in parallel, where each estimator differs from the
others by the applied learning rate. The estimator with the best performance over a
determined number of past time stamps is then selected to make the prediction for
the upcoming time stamp. Here, the performance metric of the mean absolute error
is applied to select the best performing estimator. The number of past time stamps
that are effectively used to selected the best performing estimator is determined by
applying a forgetting factor µ in a similar fashion as already shown for the OADMM
==PAGE:66==
5.3 Simulation studies on synthetic data
52
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sparsity [%]
Vanilla D-MIDAS
OADMM
True sparsity
Figure 5.9: Estimated sparsity with respect to the true parameter matrices B1 and B2 when
deploying the Vanilla D-MIDAS and OADMM algorithm. The shown numbers are average
values obtained from a MC-Simulation with 1000 runs. The black dashed line indicates the
true VAR model sparsity.
algorithm. However, in this particular case the forgetting factor is multiplied with
the MAE of the respective site,
MAE(η)
sj,t = µMAE(η)
sj,t−1 +
ˆy(η)
sj,t|t−1 −yt,sj

(5.4)
where the superscript η indicates from which estimator the prediction is coming from
and subsequently also for which estimator the MAE is calculated for. When apply-
ing this strategy, the necessary time for each agent to learn from a newly arrived
sample is expected to scale linearly with the number of estimators that are learned
in parallel. Considering now that on the first look the Vanilla D-MIDAS seems to
be computational-wise extremely cheap, the linear increase in computational time is
tolerable. The amount of data that is transferred between all agents at each time
stamp scales also linearly with the number of estimators that are learned in parallel.
Again, considering the small amount of data that must be exchanged when learning
a single estimator with the Vanilla D-MIDAS, a linear increase seems to be acceptable.
When using the Adaptive D-MIDAS, the central agent must now provide a list with
learning rates to all of its contracted agents. Algorithm 4 of the Appendix shows the
relevant changes compared to the presented Vanilla D-MIDAS. To show the benefits
of the Adaptive D-MIDAS, a simulation is conducted where 6 models are learned
in parallel. The selected learning rate values range from 0.025 to 0.15, while being
spaced 0.025 apart from each other. The truncation step is disregarded, thus λ is
set to 0. As in the previous study, the p-norm exponent is set to 0.75 ln (S · L). The
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Simulation studies on synthetic data
53
MAE forgetting factor µ is chosen to be 0.996. This value corresponds to an effective
estimator evaluation data length ξ of 250, which is computed with
ξ =
1
1 −µ
(5.5)
[8]. When applying the Adaptive D-MIDAS within the same MC-Simulation frame-
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Quantile (0.05)
Quantile (0.95)
Mean
True parameters
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
−0.6
−0.5
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
Figure 5.10: Uncertainty of estimated parameter a1 (top left), a2 (top right), a3 (bottom
left) and a4 (bottom right) when deploying the Adaptive D-MIDAS. The shown quantile
and mean values (solid lines) are obtained from the distribution of model parameters which
is created by a MC-Simulation with 1000 runs. The black dashed line indicates the true
parameter value.
work, the results depicted in Figure 5.10 are obtained. The impact on the reduced
burn-in period becomes clearly visible for the time varying parameters a1 and a4. At
this, the burn-in period could be reduced by roughly 2000 time stamps, while at the
same time keeping the variance of the estimated model parameter distribution for the
following time stamps low.
Worth noting is that the mean of the estimated parameter distribution for the last
5000 time stamps of parameter a2 is visibly higher than for the simulation with a
fixed learning rate of 0.075. To give an illustrative answer Figure 5.11 should be
considered that shows the average learning rate of the best performing estimator at
each time stamp over all 1000 MC-Simulation runs. To obtain the shown values, the
following methodology is applied. While learning the AR-X model online for the sites
==PAGE:68==
5.3 Simulation studies on synthetic data
54
which contain the shown time varying parameters along with the input data of a
single time series realization, the learning rate of the best performing estimator was
recorded every time stamp. Figure 5.11 shows then simply the average learning rate
of the best performing estimator for each of the 4 time varying parameters over all
1000 MC-Simulation runs.
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
η [-]
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
η [-]
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
Figure 5.11: Mean learning rate η of the best performing estimators which are learned for
the sites that contain the time varying model parameters a1 (top left), a2 (top right), a3
(bottom left) and a4 (bottom right). The results are obtained from the MC-Simulation with
1000 runs.
First of all it can be seen that the best performing estimator for roughly the first 2000
time stamps is the one with the greatest available learning rate of 0.15. This is ex-
pected since a greater learning rate results in bigger steps towards the global minimum
of the minimization problem. Therefore, the estimated model parameters approach
their respective true values faster whereby better predictions are obtained. The more
samples the algorithm has learned from, the better do also the other estimators with
a lower learning rate approximate the true parameter values. Considering now that a
greater learning rate does introduce a higher variance in the estimated model param-
eters (i.e. model parameter changes are large in relatively terms for consecutive time
stamps due to large observed forecast errors) it is natural to understand that frequent
large deviations from the true model parameters decrease the performance of the es-
timator. Therefore, the algorithm chooses an estimator with a lower learning rate to
make the prediction for the next time stamp. This behavior is indicated by the de-
creasing slope of the shown curves. However, once the time varying parameters start
==PAGE:69==
5.4 Computational complexity of the Adaptive D-MIDAS
55
to change their values, it is observed that the algorithm picks again an estimator with
a greater learning. Here it can be seen that the greater the slope of the true parameter
change is (considering Figure 5.10), the greater is the observed mean learning rate
of the best performing estimator across all 1000 MC-Simulation runs. This behavior
emphasizes again the fact that to achieve greater adaptivity a greater learning rate
is required. Additionally, it shows that the dynamics of the Adaptive D-MIDAS work.
When considering the model parameters a2 and a3 it is interesting to note that the
algorithm chooses an estimator with a smaller learning rate (mean across all 1000
MC-Simulation runs) for the last 5000 time stamps even though Figure 5.10 shows
that there is still quite a difference between the true parameter value and the mean
of the obtained estimated parameter distribution. This is again a consequence of the
prior presented circumstance that having model parameter estimates with a relatively
large variance does not provide the best forecast accuracy (here measured and indi-
cated through the MAE). Therefore, an overall better performance is achieved with a
lower learning rate (and thus an estimator with less overall variance in the estimated
model parameters) even though the estimation of the time varying parameter is either
slightly above or below the respective true value.
Another benefit of using the Adaptive D-MIDAS is that no hyperparameter opti-
mization must be performed to find the most suitable learning rate for a particular
site. Here it is assumed that expert knowledge is applied to selected an appropriated
set of learning rate values. This is a reasonable assumption when considering that
most times wind power time series are standardize. As a consequence, the optimal
learning rate values are always going to be of the same magnitude. The total number
of AR-X models learned in parallel is at this determined by the available computation
and communication infrastructure of each agent. However, the following section will
demonstrate that the Adaptive D-MIDAS is extremely cheap in terms of computa-
tional complexity.
Even though it is not necessary anymore to select a single, well performing, learning
rate, one must instead select an appropriate error forgetting factor µ. Including the
p-norm exponent and the AR order L this results in total of 3 hyperparameters to
tune when using the Adaptive D-MIDAS. Furthermore, it is believed that µ can be
optimized independently from the remaining two hyperparameters.
5.4
Computational complexity of the Adaptive
D-MIDAS
Up to this point, it was only argued that the Vanilla and Adaptive D-MIDAS are
computational-wise extremely cheap. The argument was at this based on the shown
operations in Algorithm 3 and 4, where it can be seen that the tasks of each agent are
==PAGE:70==
5.4 Computational complexity of the Adaptive D-MIDAS
56
conducted by applying basic vector algebraic operations. The following small simula-
tion study validates this assumption while comparing the time it takes for each agent
to complete its respective tasks when using on one hand the Adaptive D-MIDAS and
on the other hand the OADMM algorithm. The simulation study’s setup is the same
as already presented in Section 4.1.1, where synthetic data is used to evaluate the
time it takes each agent to complete its respective tasks for the OADMM algorithm.
As before, the order of the AR process is set to 4 and the number of contracted agents
is steadily increased. For the Adaptive D-MIDAS it is decided to learn 6 models in
parallel. Again, both algorithms are used to evaluate 500 samples. To achieve com-
parability in terms of computational speed, the Adaptive D-MIDAS is implemented
in a similar fashion as the OADMM algorithm. The implementation of the Adaptive
D-MIDAS can be found in A.1.2 of the Appendix.
Figure 5.12: Time spent by each agent to complete its tasks during a time stamp of the
OADMM algorithm and Adaptive D-MIDAS, when the total number of agents S varies.
The order of the AR-X model is set to 4. All the shown values are averages across 500 time
stamps.
Figure 5.12 juxtaposes the time it takes for each agent to complete its respective
tasks when a new sample of data arrives. The shown values are averages across all
500 simulated time stamps. The task of computing the p-norm, which is required
for the denominator of the link function, is assigned to the fusion center operator.
First, it is observed that under both algorithms the time it takes a contracted agent
to complete its tasks is of the same scale. This is no surprise due to the fact that in
both algorithms the tasks of a contracted agent are extremely simple to solve. Sec-
ond and more interesting, it is verified that the central agent can carry out its tasks
multiple times faster when using the Adaptive D-MIDAS. This is expected, since the
==PAGE:71==
5.5 Data exchange of the Adaptive D-MIDAS
57
D-MIDAS does not require the time consuming step of solving a linear system of
equations. According to Figure 5.12, the Adaptive D-MIDAS carries out the central
agents tasks almost 100 times faster than when using the OADMM algorithm in a
setup with 800 agents. One might argue that the OADMM algorithm does not out-
source tasks to a fusion center and therefore the comparison is not representative.
Regarding this, one has to keep in mind that the most time consuming task of the
OADMM algorithm is to find a solution to the linear system of equations. Due to pri-
vacy constraints it is not possible to outsource this particular time and computational
power consuming task. Therefore, even when exploiting the possibility of outsourcing
all other OADMM tasks to a fusion center, the central agent would still carry out its
tasks multiple times slower than when using the Adaptive D-MIDAS. In addition, one
might argue that the time it takes to encrypt and decrypt the exchanged residuals is
not considered. Here it is again reasoned that it is likely to carry out both steps fast
and efficiently.
This small simulation study could verify that the Adaptive D-MIDAS, even when
learning 6 models in parallel, can carry out the tasks of the central agent multiple
times faster than when employing the OADMM algorithm. Figure A.4 of the Ap-
pendix verifies further that the required time of the central agent to complete its
tasks scales linearly with the number of models learned in parallel.
Therefore, it
can be concluded that the computational complexity of the Adaptive D-MIDAS does
allow the application in a large-scale setup while learning multiple models in parallel.
Although being computational cheaper than the OADMM algorithm, it can be ar-
gued that the Adaptive D-MIDAS requires one more data exchange step, being the
exchange of dual vectors with the fusion center, that ultimately will slow down the
algorithm. Besides presenting and discussing the amount of exchanged data under
the Adaptive D-MIDAS per time stamp, the following section will present another
extension to relinquish this additional communication step.
5.5
Data exchange of the Adaptive D-MIDAS
Since the proposed framework suggests that all data packets transit through the fu-
sion center, Table 5.1 displays the amount of data the fusion center operator receives
and sends in each time stamp when using the Adaptive D-MIDAS. Again, the setup is
considered where only the central agent receives a prediction for its site. The number
of models learned in parallel is indicated by Nη. Furthermore, it is considered that
the fusion center operator assembles all received partial predictions to reduce the
amount of transmitted data. This is indicated with the subscript a in ˆy(sj,η)
a,t|t−1, which
is obtained by the sum over all contracted agents partial predictions. Table 5.1 shows
that the amount of outgoing data scales linearly with the number of models learned
in parallel Nη and the number of agents S. Contrary to this, the amount of incoming
==PAGE:72==
5.5 Data exchange of the Adaptive D-MIDAS
58
Table 5.1: Overview of the Adaptive D-MIDAS’s sent and received amount of data
per time stamp from the perspective of the fusion center operator.
Outgoing
Incoming
Number
Parameter
Number
Parameter
Nη
ˆy(sj,η)
a,t|t−1 ∈R
Nη · (S −1)
ˆy(sj,η)
s,t|t−1 ∈R
Nη · (S −1)
r(η)
sj,t ∈R
Nη
r(η)
sj,t ∈R
Nη · S
γ(η)
sj,t ∈R
Nη · S
θ(sj,η)
s1,t
∈RL,1
Total floating-point
numbers transmitted
2Nη · S
Nη · S · (1 + L)
data scales additionally with the order of the AR-X model. The fusion center operator
would receive (S −1)·(3L+1) floating-point numbers per time stamp when applying
the same framework to the OADMM algorithm. In such a framework, the amount of
outgoing data is with 3L · (S −1) + 1 floating-point numbers per time stamp slightly
lower than the amount of incoming data. From this it can be seen that both, incoming
and outgoing data, scales with the order of the AR-X model. The larger numbers for
the OADMM algorithm are caused by the fact that each contracted agent must share
the vectors M ⊤
s (β(sj)
s,t
+ u(sj)
s,t−1) ∈RL,1 and as,tMs ∈RL,1 with the central agent
every time stamp. Concerning these numbers, it can be concluded that when learning
two models in parallel with the Adaptive D-MIDAS algorithm, the amount of data the
fusion center receives per time stamp is for both algorithms of the same scale. This
rough calculation neglects the increase of the data size when encrypting the residuals.
In a real world setup the selected data type and structure will eventually determine
the total amount of data (in byte) that will transit through the fusion center. Con-
cerning this, when choosing the same data type and structure for both algorithms,
the presented numbers indicate that when learning a small number of models with
the Adaptive D-MIDAS in parallel, the total amount of exchanged data is of the
same magnitude. However, since the amount of exchanged data scales linearly with
the number of models learned in parallel, communication constraints will eventually
limit the total number of learned models. Therefore, even when considering the cir-
cumstance that the central agent can perform its tasks multiple times faster when
using the Adaptive D-MIDAS, in a real world setup it is unlikely that learning a large
number of models in parallel is feasible. Furthermore, one has to consider that up to
this point, only 1-step ahead forecasts are considered. Therefore, when performing
multi-step ahead forecasting with a total of k steps, the central agent would learn
k · Nη models in parallel. For large k and Nη the amount of exchanged data will
eventually slow down the algorithm. Paired with the requirement of the Adaptive
D-MIDAS to have an additional communication step to compute the p-norm, it is
not unreasonable that the total time to learn from a new sample will be greater than
the time it takes when using the OADMM algorithm. The following strategy tries to
resolve this observation.
==PAGE:73==
5.5 Data exchange of the Adaptive D-MIDAS
59
5.5.1
Accelerated and Adaptive D-MIDAS
For the OADMM algorithm, when applied in a framework with a fusion center, it is
observed that the algorithm can be split into two phases. In the first phase, all con-
tracted agents send their partial predictions and algorithm parameters to the fusion
center which will then forward the algorithm parameters and the assembled partial
predictions to the central agent. This accounts for one communication step. The
second phase starts with the central agent sending the updated dual variables to the
fusion center operator which then distributes the respective variables among all con-
tracted agents. This accounts for the second and last communication step. Therefore,
the OADMM algorithm requires each agent to establish a connection to exchange
data with the fusion center twice per time stamp.
Concerning the Adaptive D-MIDAS, the first phase requires all contracted agents
to send their partial predictions to the fusion center operator.
After assembling
the partial predictions, the fusion center operator forwards them to the central agent.
Once the central agent suffers its loss, it subsequently encrypts the residuals and sends
them to the fusion center operator, which then distributes them among all contracted
agents. This makes up for a total of 2 communication steps. The last and third com-
munication step results from the requirement of all agents to send their dual variables
to the fusion center operator. The operator calculates the norms and distributes the
obtained values among all agents. This marks the last and third communication step.
Considering that establishing a secure connection to exchange data takes always some
time, in general it can be said that having too many communication steps will even-
tually slow down a protocol. Therefore, based on the idea that in a scenario with a
large number of sites S and an AR-X model with a great order L, the p-norm scalar
γ(η)
sj,t does not change its value significantly from one to the next time stamp, the
following extension is proposed.
Instead of requiring the exchange of dual variables with the fusion center operator
to obtain the scalar γ(η)
sj,t at time stamp t, it is suggested to use the scalar γ(η)
sj,t−1 to
perform the final parameter update instead. By doing so, it is not required anymore
to wait until each agent receives the denominator of the link function to perform the
update. Instead, it is proposed that the current dual variable values are exchanged in
the first phase of the algorithm where all contracted agents send their partial predic-
tions to the fusion center. While the central agent suffers its loss, the fusion center
operator will compute the norm. When the central agent distributes the residuals
through the fusion center at time stamp t, the fusion center will attache the latest
γ(η)
sj,t−1. This strategy practically means that the p-norm link function is always used
with lagged values of the dual variables.
An additionally benefit of this proposal
is that the calculation of the norm is now parallelized with the tasks of the central
agent. Whereas in the standard Adaptive D-MIDAS it is a serial task, where all
agents must wait to use the link function until the fusion center operator computed
==PAGE:74==
5.5 Data exchange of the Adaptive D-MIDAS
60
the norm. Therefore, it is expected that this action will make the protocol even faster.
A practical issue with this approach is that at time stamp t = 0 all dual variables are
initialized to be 0. This means, when using the lagged values at time stamp t = 1 the
computed norm would be 0. As a consequence, the link function would be based on a
division by 0 which results in an unfeasible algorithm parameter update. Therefore,
it is proposed to use the standard Adaptive D-MIDAS for an initial amount of time
stamps before switching to the communication reduced variant. Tests could show
that the performance of the estimator does not decrease much when the communi-
cation reduced Adaptive D-MIDAS is already used after the first 1000 time stamps.
The following chapter will compare the performance of the accelerated version with
the standard Adaptive D-MIDAS algorithm on a real world wind power time series
dataset.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 6
Case Study on Real
World Data
In the previous chapter the novel distributed Adaptive D-MIDAS was presented and
its general ability to track changes of the true model parameters could be verified.
This chapter will analyze the performance of the novel algorithm on a real world
dataset of 311 Danish wind farms. The first section will introduce the dataset, which
is followed by the presentation of the applied data preprocessing methods. Thereafter,
the simulation setup is presented and the selection of the algorithm’s hyperparame-
ters is discussed. The last section of this chapter evaluates the performance of the
Adaptive D-MIDAS on unseen data. At this, it is benchmarked against the OADMM
algorithm and regularized batch AR-X models. Furthermore, the impact on the fore-
cast accuracy is analyzed when using the accelerated, communication reduced version
of the Adaptive D-MIDAS.
6.1
Presentation of Danish wind power dataset
The original dataset contains power measurements from 340 transformation stations
in Denmark with a temporal resolution of 15 minutes. Each measurement of a trans-
formation station is the sum of all to the station connected wind turbines power
production. The whole dataset contains more than 200000 samples and thus roughly
6 years of data. Since performing online learning on the complete dataset is too time-
intensive, only the first 60000 time stamps are considered further. In [44] an older
version of the dataset is used where the authors claim that the turbines which are
connected to a transformation station are in close proximity to each other. As a con-
sequence, the authors argue that it is reasonable to assume that each transformation
station represents a wind farm. This approach is also followed whereby from now on
each transformation station is considered to be a wind farm.
Since the dataset contains raw power measurements in kW, to use the dataset with the
introduced algorithms it is necessary to normalize the time series of each wind farm.
Regarding this it is realized that a number of sites experience capacity changes over
time. Unfortunately, only the time series of power measurements and the locations
==PAGE:76==
6.2 Data preprocessing
62
Figure 6.1: Locations of the in the case study considered Danish wind farms. The round
red dots indicate exemplary the locations of the contracted agents wind farms, whereas the
black cross marks the location of the central agent’s site.
of the sites are available and thus it is not possible to determine the exact moment
in time when the capacity changes take place.
Therefore, to not make avoidable
mistakes when normalizing the time series, sites which experience capacity changes
during the first 60000 time stamps are removed. Additionally, some sites contain
missing data or are offline (power production is equal to 0) for a great number of
consecutive time stamps. These sites are removed from the dataset as well. The
locations of the remaining 311 sites are shown in Figure 6.1.
To further avoid making mistakes when normalizing the time series of each site, the
first and last 10000 time stamps of the cleaned dataset are removed. The normaliza-
tion procedure is then based on first estimating the capacity of each site by computing
the 98th percentile of the site’s respective time series. The normalized power produc-
tion is then obtained by dividing the site’s time series by the estimated nominal
capacity. In the end, for each of the remaining 311 sites a time series with 40000
samples of normalized power production is obtained.
6.2
Data preprocessing
In general, AR models assume that the underlying time series data is Gaussian normal
distributed [45]. Unfortunately, this does not apply for time series of wind power
production. The observed distribution of a wind farm’s power production is skewed,
being a higher concentration of samples is observed at both ends of the distribution.
This is naturally to understand when considering a wind turbine’s power curve. To
==PAGE:77==
6.3 Case study setup
63
cope with this challenge when applying AR models to wind power data, the authors
of [24] propose to transform the wind power time series by using a logit-normal
transformation. The transformation
y = ln
(
x
1 −x
)
(6.1)
is applied to the normalized wind power time series of each site, where x values of
0 and 1 are set to 0.01 and 0.99 respectively [8]. In the last preprocessing step, the
obtained transformed series are centered by subtracting the mean of each series from
all samples of the respective series. This is done to avoid fitting an intercept term for
each AR-X model.
6.3
Case study setup
The case study is split into two phases. In the first phase, hyperparameter optimiza-
tion is performed for both online algorithms to find a set of hyperparameters that
works well with the dataset. To do so, the dataset is split into two parts, where the
first 20000 time stamps are used for hyperparameter optimization. The process and
results of finding suitable hyperparameters are presented in Section 6.4.
To obtain predictions for all sites of the dataset, each site is taking the role of the cen-
tral agent once, while being a contracted agent the remaining 310 simulations. This
is exemplary illustrated in Figure 6.1, where the black cross marks the location of the
central agent’s site, whose operator contracted 310 sites to join its learning agreement.
The shown red dots mark the locations of the contracted agent’s sites. Therefore, to
obtain predictions for all sites in total 311 AR-X models must be learned. Consid-
ering the dimensions of the dataset and the prior discussed expected computational
time of the OADMM algorithm, to conduct this case study it was necessary to use
the high performance computer (HPC) of DTU Elektro. When using the HPC it is
possible to assign a task to a specific processor core of the computer cluster. As a
simple solution it was decided to let each core solve one of the 311 simulations. By
doing so, a significant speed up is achieved whereby the total gain depends on the
number of available cores.
The HPC was used during the hyperparameter optimization phase as well as in the
second phase of the case study, where the algorithms performance is estimated on
the last 20000 time stamps of the dataset. It is decided to perform multi-step ahead
forecasting with up to 60 minutes ahead, which in this case is equal to forecasting at
maximum 4 time stamps ahead. Therefore, due to the chosen approach to fit a model
for each lead time, online learning must be performed for all 4 lead times. Regarding
this it is decided to tune the hyperparameters of the Adaptive D-MIDAS for each
lead time. However, due to the in general greater complexity of the hyperparameter
==PAGE:78==
6.4 Hyperparameter tuning of online algorithms
64
optimizing process and the longer simulation times of the OADMM algorithm, it is de-
cided to only tune the hyperparameters for the model which is used for 1-step ahead
predictions. The identified best performing parameters are thereafter also applied
for the models with greater lead times. The in the following shown results indicate
that this approach generates satisfying results. Tuning the hyperparameters of the
Adaptive D-MIDAS for all lead times is first of all less complex and furthermore the
simulations can be performed much faster.
6.4
Hyperparameter tuning of online algorithms
The applied hyperparameter tuning strategy is the one presented prior in Section 4.2.
Due to the relatively long simulation time of the OADMM algorithm, it is decided to
apply the same set of hyperparameters to all sites. In a real world application this
means that all central agents decide to use the same hyperparameters for their models.
This is done to reduce the required effort to tune the hyperparameters. Here it is
acknowledged that this decision is likely affect the performance of the algorithm for a
number of sites due to a suboptimal set of hyperparameters. To achieve comparability,
this approach is also followed when tuning the hyperparameters of the Adaptive D-
MIDAS, even though the simulation time is significantly lower.
To evaluate the
performance of a set of hyperparameters, the predictions are benchmarked against
the persistence forecast of the respective site. Persistence forecasts are a basic strategy
where the power measurement at time stamp t is used as the prediction for time stamp
t + k, where k indicates the lead time of the forecast. The RMSE metric is used in
this particular case to compare the performance of the persistence forecasts with
the forecasts generated by the online algorithms. Before calculating the RMSE the
obtained predictions are first back transformed by adding the mean of the respective
time series and thereafter applying
y =
ex
ex + 1
(6.2)
to obtain the predictions in the interval from 0.01 to 0.99.
After obtaining the RMSE for a time series of predictions, it is convenient to compute
a skill score that measures the improvement of the algorithm’s performance over the
persistence forecast
I = 1 −SModel
SP ers
(6.3)
where SModel is the metric of the model, such as the RMSE in this case, and SP ers is
the respective metric of the persistence forecasts. The computed skill score I is used
to select the best performing set of hyperparameters, as the two following sections
demonstrate.
==PAGE:79==
6.4 Hyperparameter tuning of online algorithms
65
6.4.1
Adaptive D-MIDAS
The Adaptive D-MIDAS requires to tune 3 hyperparameters, the p-norm exponent,
the error forgetting factor µ and the order of the AR-X model L. Here it is assumed
that the list of suitable learning rates is known a-priori. In all the following simula-
tions the list of learning rates is an interval of evenly spaced numbers between 0.0005
and 0.0025, where the step size is 0.0005. Thus, the list contains in total 5 learning
rates.
As prior explained, it can be assumed that µ can be optimized independently from the
AR order L and the p-norm exponent. However, it is believed that L and the p-norm
exponent should be tuned together even though the exponent implicitly considers L
by applying p = pconst ln (L · S). The reason to do so is based on the decreasing slope
of the natural algorithm with an increasing product L·S. Taking further into account
that a larger AR-X model requires generally more regularization, it is believed that a
larger L requires a slightly bigger pconst parameter. Furthermore, as already shown in
the simulation study on synthetic data, the burn-in period of the Adaptive D-MIDAS
is relatively long. Thus, it is decided to only use the last 10000 of the 20000 time
stamp long training dataset for benchmark purposes. As a consequence, the improve-
ment over the persistence forecast is only computed for the period between t = 10000
and t = 20000.
It is decided to first optimize the error forgetting factor µ.
To do so, the order
of the AR-X model is set to 4 and the multiplier of the p-norm exponent pconst is set
to 1. These numbers are chosen with the expectation of generating satisfying results.
In the first hyperparameter optimization round, the following list of µ values is eval-
uated: 0.5, 0.8, 0.95, 0.99, 0.995 and 0.999. All µ values are first evaluated for only
1-step ahead forecasts. After running the necessary simulations, the improvements
over the persistence forecast (in terms of RMSE) as shown in Figure 6.2 are obtained.
The boxplot shows the improvement for all of the 311 sites with respect to the applied
error forgetting factor µ. Each box extends from the lower to the upper quartile (Q1
and Q3 respectively), where the horizontal line indicates the median of the obtained
RMSE skill score distribution. The maximum length of the whiskers is set to 1.5
times the interquartile range (Q3-Q1). The upper whisker then indicates the last
sample which is found to be below or equal to the threshold of Q3 + 1.5(Q3 −Q1).
If a data point of the distribution is found outside of this range, it is classified as
an outlier and marked with a circle. The same concept applies for the lower whisker,
which marks the first sample that is found to be within the range of Q1−1.5(Q3−Q1).
Figure 6.2 then shows that the skill score distribution experiences only small changes
when varying µ. Throughout the hyperparameter optimization process, it is decided
to select the best performing parameter based on the median and Q1 of the skill score
distribution. Q1 is used as a decision criterion since it indicates a minimum skill score
that is achieved by 75% of all sites. Additionally, the number of outliers receive at-
==PAGE:80==
6.4 Hyperparameter tuning of online algorithms
66
Figure 6.2: RMSE skill score of the Adaptive D-MIDAS with reference to the persistence
forecast for 1-step ahead forecasts.
The skill scores are computed for the time stamps
t = 10000 to t = 20000 of the cleaned Danish dataset. In each simulation a different error
forgetting factor µ is applied.
tention. Based on these criteria, an error forgetting factor of 0.95 is identified as the
best performing among the shown values. Now, the same procedure is repeated with
a finer selection of forgetting factors. After completing the simulations of the second
round, a factor of 0.95 is still considered to be the best performing µ value.
Following the finding of a well performing µ value, the multiplier of the p-norm
exponent pconst and the AR order L are optimized together. The same learning rates
as in the prior simulations and the now optimized µ value of 0.95 are applied. In the
first round of the hyperparameter optimization process pconst takes values of 0.75, 1,
1.25 and 1.5, whereas L takes values between 1 and 6. This results in a grid of 24
possible combinations. After evaluating the simulation results, it is observed that the
best results are obtained for an AR order of 3 and 4 in combination with a pconst
factor of 1.
Figure 6.3 shows the simulation results of the second round with a finer parameter
grid. As it can be seen, only very small differences in terms of the skill scores are
observed. However, a model with an AR-(4) process and a factor of pconst = 1.05
performs slightly better than the remaining shown hyperparameter combinations. In
a real world setup where the exchange of data is likely to play an important role,
it is more reasonable to choose the AR-(3) model since its performance is insignifi-
cantly worse than the one of the AR-(4) model. However, since the simulations are
conducted in a controlled environment where data exchange does not affect the sim-
ulation time and on top of this the Adaptive D-MIDAS is extremely fast, the AR-(4)
model is chosen.
==PAGE:81==
6.4 Hyperparameter tuning of online algorithms
67
Figure 6.3: RMSE skill score of the Adaptive D-MIDAS with reference to the persistence
forecast for 1-step ahead forecasts.
The skill scores are computed for the time stamps
t = 10000 to t = 20000 of the cleaned Danish dataset.
In each simulation a different
combination of the hyperparameters L and pconst are applied.
The same procedure is thereafter also applied to find the hyperparameters of the
models used for greater lead times. Here it is observed that a better performance is
achieved with greater µ values and a higher AR order. Eventually, the best perfor-
mance of the models used for 2, 3 and 4-step ahead predictions is achieved with a
µ value of 0.995. The model used for 2-step ahead predictions performs best with a
L value of 5 in combination with a pconst value of 1. The same pconst value is also
found to perform well for 3-step ahead predictions, whereas the AR order increased
to 6. For 4-step ahead predictions a slightly higher pconst value of 1.1 in combination
with an AR order of 6 performs well.
6.4.2
OADMM
Tuning the hyperparameters of the OADMM algorithm is significantly more complex
since a dependency between all 4 hyperparameters is believed to exist. When tuning
all 4 parameters at once, a large grid of potential well performing hyperparameters
must be evaluated. Taking further into account that according to Figure 4.1 it takes
roughly 100 ms to learn from a new sample (assuming an AR-(4) process), a simu-
lation for a single site with 20000 time stamps will take around 30 minutes. As a
consequence, simulating only a single set of hyperparameters for all sites on a conven-
tional computer would take at least 6 days. Because of these long simulation times,
the importance of the HPC becomes striking.
==PAGE:82==
6.5 Performance evaluation of algorithms
68
To ease the optimization process, it is decided to fix the forgetting factor to a certain
value and only optimize the 3 remaining hyperparameters. This is done based on the
understanding that the forgetting factor impacts the selection of the remaining hyper-
parameters only to a small degree. The forgetting factor is fixed to a value of 0.999,
whereby this selection is based on the work that has been done on the same dataset
in [8]. In the next step, the grid that is span by the 3 remaining hyperparameters
is evaluated. After conducting the hyperparameter tuning process for 1-step ahead
predictions, the best performance is achieved with an AR order of 4, a ρ value of 1000
and a λ value of 8.5. Subsequently these values are used to tune the forgetting factor.
Eventually, a µ value of 0.9998 is found to perform well. As initially described, these
hyperparameter values are also applied to the models used for 2, 3 and 4-step ahead
forecasting.
6.5
Performance evaluation of algorithms
Besides comparing the Adaptive D-MIDAS with the OADMM algorithm, it is decided
to also use a conventional regularized batch AR-X model for benchmark purposes.
Furthermore, it should be noted that no online learning is performed for the case
where only on-site information is available. This decision is based on the results ob-
tained in [8], where a subset of the same dataset is also used to compare regularized
online learning algorithms. Here it is observed that online AR-X models are with a
great significance superior to online AR models that only utilize on-site measurements.
To fit the batch models, the function LassoCV of the Python machine learning library
scikit-learn is used. This function solves the earlier introduced LASSO problem for
a range of different regularization strengths. Then, in a cross-validation scheme the
best performing λ value is found. At this, it is decided to use a 5-fold cross-validation
scheme. As applied for the online algorithms, the first 20000 time stamps are used for
hyperparameter selection. Based on the results of the online algorithm hyperparame-
ter tuning process, the order of the batch AR-X model is set to 4. The same L value
is applied for all lead times. However, the tuning of the regularization strength is
repeated for all lead times and additionally for all sites. By this means, each central
agent performs an optimization of the regularization strength for the AR-X model
which is used to predict power at its site. This is different to the process applied for
the online models where a single regularization strength is applied to all sites. By
optimizing the regularization strength for each site it is expected to achieve a better
performance in terms of an increased forecast accuracy.
When utilizing the scikit-learn function to learn the parameters of the batch AR-
X models, the following settings are passed to the function: eps = 1e-3, n_alphas
= 100, fit_intercept = False, cv = 5 and max_iter = 5000. For the remaining set-
tings their respective default values are used. No intercept term is fitted since the
input data is centered as described in Section 6.2. Furthermore, the logit-normal
==PAGE:83==
6.5 Performance evaluation of algorithms
69
transformation is also applied when learning the batch models.
After performing
hyperparameter optimization on the first 20000 time stamps of the dataset, the iden-
tified best models are used to predict the wind farms power production on the last
20000 time stamps. Concerning the online algorithms, online learning is performed
on all 40000 time stamps, whereas the performance is only evaluated on the time
stamps between t=20000 and t=40000.
Figure 6.4 shows then the RMSE and MAE skill scores for all three algorithms and
lead times during the prior mentioned evaluation period. As already shown before,
boxplots are used to illustrate the skill scores for the all sites of the dataset. It can
be seen that being computational extremely cheap comes at the cost of a decreased
forecast accuracy. When considering the median and mean of both skill score distri-
butions, the developed Adaptive D-MIDAS is inferior to the OADMM algorithm for
all lead times. A paired t-test supports the statistical significance of the observation
due to the rejection of the null hypothesis for all lead times and skill scores. All ob-
tained p-values fall below the chosen threshold of 5%. An explanation for the better
Figure 6.4: RMSE (top row) and MAE (bottom row) skill scores of the online and batch
algorithms for different lead times.
The skill scores are computed for the time stamps
t = 20000 to t = 40000 of the cleaned Danish dataset. The dots indicate the mean of the
respective skill score distribution.
performance of the OADMM algorithm can be found when comparing the structures
of both algorithms. In each time stamp, the OADMM algorithm minimizes the cumu-
==PAGE:84==
6.5 Performance evaluation of algorithms
70
lative loss over all past observations which are implicitly modeled in the covariance
structures Ht and Pt. Since the matrix Ht and the vector Pt carry the covariance of
all past observations, it can be said that they contain some sort of inertia or memory.
Due to the inertia, outliers observed in the explanatory and response variable pairs do
not affect the current estimation of the model parameters much. This statement only
holds if the chosen forgetting factor µ is relatively large and thus as a consequence the
covariance structures carry a larger inertia. An outlier can be considered at this to
be a large deviation between the prediction and the observation caused by the great
variability in wind conditions. Additionally, a forced shutdown of a wind farm causes
large forecast errors since the model cannot anticipate the shutdown.
As discussed in the simulation study on synthetic data, when decreasing µ also the
OADMM becomes more subject to temporal variations within the time series dataset.
Here, decreasing µ gives less weight to older observations and therefore decreases the
inertia carried in the covariance structures. Tests could confirm that when decreasing
the forgetting factor the performance of the OADMM algorithm suffers significantly.
Therefore, it is understandable that during the hyperparameter tuning process a large
µ value of 0.9998, which corresponds to an effective training length of 5000 samples,
is found.
On the other hand when considering the Adaptive D-MIDAS it can be seen that
the cumulative loss over the past observations is not minimized. Instead, the gra-
dient with respect to the squared loss between the prediction and observation is
used to update the model parameters. Therefore, a great forecast error results in a
greater gradient step which ultimately leads to a greater change in the dual variables.
This practically means that whenever a great deviation between the observation and
prediction is experienced, a greater correction of the estimator is performed. As a
consequence, the parameter estimations of the Adaptive D-MIDAS are more subject
to variability than the parameters of the OADMM algorithm. However, since the
Adaptive D-MIDAS does not minimize the cumulative loss over past observations it
is significantly faster than the OADMM algorithm. When considering 1-step ahead
forecasts, the difference in terms of skill scores is not great between both algorithms.
Unfortunately the performance of the Adaptive D-MIDAS starts to suffer for greater
lead times. At this it is believed that the following circumstance is the perpetrator
for this observation.
When performing 1-step ahead forecasting the observation yt for the respective predic-
tion ˆyt|t−1 is observed obviously 1 time stamp after the prediction is made. Therefore,
before computing the next prediction ˆyt+1|t at time stamp t it is possible to use the
residual ˆyt|t−1 −yt to perform the model update. Assuming now that the central
agent’s site is forced to shut down while operating at rated power. This would result
in a great forecast error and subsequently in a greater change in model parameters.
But now taking into account that this shutdown does not represent a change in wind
conditions, the model parameters are updated on false information. Here it must be
understand that the model parameters of an AR-X model should ideally only capture
==PAGE:85==
6.5 Performance evaluation of algorithms
71
the dynamics of wind conditions. As soon as the wind farm is online again, it is under-
stood that the model will correct itself again in relatively short time. Regarding this,
it is beneficial that the time span between a prediction and its respective observation
is only 1 time stamp long.
Considering now instead the 4-step ahead prediction ˆyt+4|t issued at time stamp t.
Naturally one has to wait 4 times stamps before it is possible to update the estimator
with the respective observation. Here it is believed that the larger time span between
predicting and observing the respective true value has a longer lasting impact on the
model parameters in case a great forecast error is observed. Thus, an estimator is
used with a suboptimal forecast accuracy for a longer time compared to the estima-
tors that are used for 1-step ahead predictions. Taking further into account that for
greater lead times the forecast error grows, both circumstances are believed to impact
the performance of the D-MIDAS negatively.
Figure 6.5: Average AR-X model lag 1 coefficients for the Adaptive D-MIDAS (left) and
OADMM (right) algorithm over the last 100 time stamps when performing 1-step ahead
forecasting.
Additional interesting observations are made when considering the coefficient vectors
of the learned AR-X models. Figure 6.5 shows the lag 1 parameters of the learned
AR-X model for the Adaptive D-MIDAS and OADMM algorithm when performing
1-step ahead forecasting. The shown values are obtained by computing the average
parameter values over the last 100 time stamps of the simulations. The numbers
on the y-axis indicate the identification number of a central agent’s site. Therefore,
shown non-zero elements imply that the by 1 time stamp lagged power production of
site n correlates with the power production of site m, where n and m indicate the x-
and y-values respectively.
==PAGE:86==
6.5 Performance evaluation of algorithms
72
First of all it is recognized that the Adaptive D-MIDAS learns estimators that contain
overall more zero elements than the OADMM algorithm. Regarding this, coefficients
are rounded to be 0 whenever their absolute value is below the chosen threshold of
10−6. It is quite surprising to see that the Adaptive D-MIDAS performance is worse
than the OADMM algorithm performance even though its lag 1 parameter vectors
are in general more sparse. Here it was expected that in a high-dimensional setup a
greater sparsity leads to better predictions.
Additionally, Figure 6.5 shows that the Adaptive D-MIDAS finds useful informa-
tion predominately for sites which are located in proximity to the central agent’s site.
This observation can be made due to the fact that the dataset is organized such that
the first site of the dataset is the most western one. The last site of the dataset is
accordingly the one located most eastern. This observation supports the findings in
other publications where it is stated that useful information is most often found for
sites located in proximity to the site where power is predicted. However, when consid-
ering the parameters of the OADMM algorithm estimators, also a number of non-zero
cells are found far away from the diagonal. Considering further that more non-zero
elements are found in the upper diagonal section for both algorithms, the additional
observation can be made that the prevailing wind direction is west. Statistics from
the Danish Meteorological Institute confirm this observation [46]. This insight shows
that the Adaptive D-MIDAS is capable of capturing these important dynamics.
Figure 6.6: Average AR-X model lag 4 coefficients for the Adaptive D-MIDAS (left) and
OADMM (right) algorithm over the last 100 time stamps when performing 1-step ahead
forecasting.
Figure 6.6 shows in addition the lag 4 parameters of the AR-X models when per-
forming 1-step ahead forecasting. The differences between both algorithms are now
==PAGE:87==
6.5 Performance evaluation of algorithms
73
more distinctly visible. The figure of the OADMM algorithm parameters shows pre-
dominately positive numbers on the diagonal. Contrary, the diagonal elements of the
Adaptive D-MIDAS figure are predominately negative. Furthermore, the sparsity of
the Adaptive D-MIDAS lag 4 parameter vectors is significantly greater. These obser-
vations are also made when considering the model parameters of greater lead times.
However, it is not yet fully understood to which extend these differences in model
parameters affect the forecast accuracy. Nevertheless, it can be stated that using the
gradient to learn the model parameters shows different dynamics than when using
the covariance structures.
Last, Figure 6.7 shows the lag 1 parameters of the AR-X models when performing
4-step ahead forecasting. The differences between both algorithms are now clearly
visible. The shown lag 1 parameter vectors of the Adaptive D-MIDAS are still rela-
tively sparse, whereas the OADMM vectors show only a low level of sparsity. The
decrease in the sparsity of lag 1 parameter vectors are a result of the fact that for
greater lead times more useful information can be found in other site’s lagged power
measurements. According to Figure 6.7 the Adaptive D-MIDAS has some noticeable
troubles to extract that information from all the contracted agents sites. Even when
lowering the value of the p-norm exponent, similar sparse coefficient vectors are ob-
tained. This observation is also held responsible for the weaker performance of the
Adaptive D-MIDAS when predicting multiple steps ahead.
Figure 6.7: Average AR-X model lag 1 coefficients for the Adaptive D-MIDAS (left) and
OADMM (right) algorithm over the last 100 time stamps when performing 4-step ahead
forecasting.
==PAGE:88==
6.5 Performance evaluation of algorithms
74
When computing the bias with
Bias = 1
T
T
∑
t=1
yt −ˆyt
(6.4)
for all algorithms, Figure 6.8 shows the obtained results. The figure depicts that for
all lead times the predictions of the Adaptive D-MIDAS estimators are slightly more
biased than the predictions of the OADMM estimators. This is understand us a re-
sult of the greater sparsity observed for the Adaptive D-MIDAS estimators. Here, the
general understanding is applied that a more sparse estimator generates more biased
predictions. Contrary, a less sparse estimator generates predictions with a greater
variance. This circumstance is known as the bias-variance tradeoff.
Figure 6.8: Bias scores of online and batch algorithms for different lead times. The bias
scores are computed for the time stamps t = 20000 to t = 40000 of the cleaned Danish
dataset. The dots indicate the mean of the respective bias score distribution. The whiskers
indicate the smallest and greatest value of the respective distribution.
When again considering Figure 6.4 it can be seen further that the Adaptive D-MIDAS
outperforms the regularized batch AR-X models for both skill scores only when pre-
dicting 1-step ahead. The paired t-test supports this observation due to the rejection
of the the null hypothesis for both skill scores. When considering greater lead times,
the null hypothesis is additionally rejected for the MAE skill score when performing
2-step ahead forecasts. Concerning the RMSE skill score, the paired t-test indicates
that none of the two models performs better than the other. For 3-step ahead predic-
tions the paired t-test indicates that the null hypothesis cannot be rejected. At this,
p-values greater than the chosen threshold of 5% are obtained. Therefore, it is again
the case that it cannot be said with a statistical significance that one of the models
performs better than the other. Last, when considering 4-step ahead forecasts for
==PAGE:89==
6.5 Performance evaluation of algorithms
75
both skill scores the null hypothesis can be rejected since the obtained p-values are
below the specified threshold. This time however the t-test indicates that the batch
model performs better than the Adaptive D-MIDAS.
Concerning the outliers in Figure 6.4 it can be stated that the Adaptive D-MIDAS
performs visibly better than the batch model.
For the batch model a number of
outliers with low skill scores are observed. These outliers can be explained by consid-
ering the findings and arguments of Chapter 3. The most probable cause is that the
correlations between the input and output variables are quite different between the
training and testing periods. Therefore, the on the training dataset estimated model
parameters do not perform well on the testing dataset. This observation emphasizes
again one of the most powerful properties of online learning algorithms.
Figure 6.9: RMSE (top row) and MAE (bottom row) skill scores of the Adaptive D-MIDAS
and its accelerated (communication reduced) version for different lead times. The skill scores
are computed for the time stamps t = 20000 to t = 40000 of the cleaned Danish dataset.
The dots indicate the mean of the respective skill score distribution.
The in Section 5.5.1 presented communication reduced version of the Adaptive D-
MIDAS is also tested on the Danish dataset. When using the lagged p-norm scalar
of the link function and thus the accelerated version of the algorithm already after
1000 time stamps, the skill scores as shown in Figure 6.9 are obtained. The same
hyperparameters as used for the Adaptive D-MIDAS are also applied for its acceler-
==PAGE:90==
6.5 Performance evaluation of algorithms
76
ated version. It can be seen that when using the accelerated version the obtained
skill scores decrease only little. Therefore, in case communication constraints exist
the accelerated version of the Adaptive D-MIDAS can be used without suffering great
impacts on the forecast accuracy.
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusions and
Future Works
7.1
Conclusions
The objective of this thesis was to present a novel online and distributed algorithm
that is capable of learning large regularized AR-X models in the domain of high-
dimensional wind power forecasting. Due to the fact that distributed online algo-
rithms are just a recent discovered tool to predict wind power generation for very
short periods ahead, up until today only one additional algorithm is used for this
task. A simulation study could verify that the existing OADMM algorithm does not
scale well with an increasing size of the AR order L and the number of considered
wind farms S. The suboptimal scaling behavior is caused at this by the requirement
of solving a linear set of equations every time stamp, where the cumulative loss over
all past observations is minimized. Based on the relatively long time required in large
scale setups to solve the equation system, the requirement was formulated to find an
algorithm which is significantly lighter and scales better with the dimension of the
dataset.
Following the requirement, a novel distributed online algorithm named Vanilla D-
MIDAS was presented. In terms of computational complexity, the novel algorithm
is significantly lighter than the OADMM since it does not minimize the cumulative
loss over all past observations. The algorithm is based on a mirror descent algorithm
where the gradient with respect to the current squared loss of the forecast error is used
to update dual variables. The magnitude of the dual variable update is controlled
by multiplying the gradient with the learning rate η. Sparse solutions are obtained
by performing a truncation step where zero crossing dual variables are set to be 0.
The estimator parameters are subsequently obtained by using a p-norm link function
that links the dual variables with their respective estimator parameters. A complete
model parameter update can be carried out very fast since all update steps are based
on basic vector algebraic operations. To ensure privacy for the data of each wind farm
operator and further manage the exchange of messages efficiently, a framework was
presented that utilizes the presence of a fusion center. Along this framework, it was
further advised that the central agent distributes its forecast error encrypted through
==PAGE:92==
7.1 Conclusions
78
the fusion center with all its contracted agents.
The novel distributed and online algorithm was further tested on synthetic data where
it was observed that the truncation step does not provide benefits when learning an
AR-X model. Therefore, it was decided to neglect the truncation step whereby an
even lighter algorithm was obtained. Furthermore, the case study showed that the al-
gorithm faces a tradeoff between the capability to track fast changing true parameter
values and the variance of the estimated parameters. As a consequence the Adaptive
D-MIDAS was introduced. The extension is based on learning multiple models in
parallel whereby the models only differ by the applied learning rate. Based on the
forecast accuracy of each model over a controlled number of past observations, the
algorithm chooses the best performing model to make the next prediction. When
only considering the time spent by each agent to complete its tasks, an additional
case study showed that the Adaptive D-MIDAS, even when learning 6 models in par-
allel, is significantly faster than the OADMM. For a setup with 400 wind farms and
when learning an AR(4)-X model, the Adaptive D-MIDAS is approximately 25 times
faster than the OADMM algorithm. Due to the better scaling behavior of the Adap-
tive D-MIDAS, the gap in terms of computational speed becomes greater when more
wind farms are considered. However, the Adaptive D-MIDAS requires each agent to
exchange data 3 times per time stamp with the fusion center, whereas the OADMM
algorithm requires only 2 exchanges. Based on this circumstance, a communication
reduced version of the Adaptive D-MIDAS was introduced which also needs only 2
data exchanges with the fusion center.
When testing the novel Adaptive D-MIDAS on a real world dataset of 311 wind
farms, it was observed that being computational wise extremely cheap comes at the
cost of a decreased forecast accuracy. Regarding this, the difference in forecast skills
between both distributed online algorithms grew larger for greater lead times. For
1-step ahead forecasting it was argued that the Adaptive D-MIDAS can perform small
model corrections before computing the prediction for the next time stamp. Thus,
large model parameter variations caused by great forecast errors can be corrected soon
with the observation of the respective true production value. However, for greater
lead times these corrections are performed with a greater delay due to the greater time
between computing a prediction and observing the respective true production value.
Furthermore, the in general greater forecast error for greater lead times is believed to
affect the performance of the Adaptive D-MIDAS negatively, due to the sensitivity
of the algorithm to great forecast errors. In addition, interesting observations were
made when considering the model parameters of the estimated AR-X models. Here it
was observed that the estimators of the Adaptive D-MIDAS are generally more sparse
than the estimators of the OADMM algorithm. The difference in terms of sparsity
became striking for the estimated model parameters when predicting 4-steps ahead.
Nevertheless, the Adaptive D-MIDAS was capable to capture the basic dynamics in
the underlying dataset.
==PAGE:93==
7.2 Future works
79
Overall it can be concluded, that for very large setups the Adaptive D-MIDAS can
be considered as an alternative since the difference in performance between the novel
and the OADMM algorithm is not large. Due to the scaling behavior of both algo-
rithms, when performing online learning in a setup with more than thousand of sites,
the difference in terms of computational speed becomes striking. Furthermore, in a
setup where communication constraints exist the presented accelerated Adaptive D-
MIDAS can be used. However, this comes at the cost of increasing the performance
gap between the gradient based online learning and the OADMM algorithm more.
7.2
Future works
This thesis focused primarily on the development and discussion of the novel dis-
tributed online algorithm and the presentation of a suitable application framework.
However, the more general aspects and challenges of distributed online learning in
the domain of wind power forecasting are only discussed on the surface. Questions
related to the real world application include especially how to proceed with the late
arrival of data from contracted agents. Regarding this, one has to keep in mind that
the fusion center operator bundles all the partial predictions and eventually sends
them to the central agent. Therefore, the slowest contracted agent determines the
duration of the whole process. Assuming now that a contracted agent does not send a
partial prediction in time or not at all, one has to find strategies for these situations.
A straightforward strategy would be to simply use the partial prediction from the
previous time stamp. However, assuming that no partial prediction is received also
for further time stamps, one has to think about more advanced strategies. The same
challenge applies to all sorts of algorithm parameters, such as the exchange of dual
variables with the fusion center operator.
With respect to the real world application it is also necessary to investigate how
much the data exchange will slow down the distributed online algorithms compared
to the application in a controlled environment. This is especially worth investigat-
ing since the Adaptive D-MIDAS showed a significant speed up over the OADMM
algorithm in the controlled environment. The question here is how much the greater
communication overhead will affect the gap in terms of algorithmic speed. Further-
more, the obtained results will show how much faster the communication reduced
variant of the Adaptive D-MIDAS is.
Concerning the developed Adaptive D-MIDAS, in this piece of work only determin-
istic forecasts are considered. Taking into account that probabilistic forecasts gain
more importance, it is worth investigating if the presented algorithm can also be ap-
plied to generate probabilistic forecasts. Regarding this, it should be investigated if it
is possible to perform quantile regression. With respect to the further application of
the Adaptive D-MIDAS additional measures to reduce the sensitivity to great forecast
errors should be investigated. A possible action would be to perform no parameter
==PAGE:94==
7.2 Future works
80
updates in case a great forecast error is caused by the unforeseen shutdown of the
central agent’s site. By doing so it is expected that a slightly better performance is
achieved for greater lead times.
Finally, the important question must be asked if it is necessary to learn extremely large
AR-X models. Regarding this, it was observed for all algorithms that the performance
decreased with an increasing dataset. Even by applying the two different regulariza-
tion techniques, the algorithms had difficulties to identify the sites which provide
the most useful information. Therefore, for datasets with power measurements from
thousands of sites it is likely that feature selection will improve the forecast accu-
racy while decreasing the amount of exchanged data. Furthermore, by decreasing
the number of contracted agents the challenges as described in the first part of this
section are mitigated. As a next step, it is proposed to investigate a protocol that
combines the benefits of the Adaptive D-MIDAS and OADMM algorithm. At this,
the superior behavior of the Adaptive D-MIDAS in terms of computational speed can
be used to perform an online screening process where sites are identified that carry
useful information for the central agent’s site. While the Adaptive D-MIDAS per-
forms online learning with the complete dataset, the OADMM algorithm is only used
to perform online learning for the sites that are identified by the Adaptive D-MIDAS
to carry useful information. Here, advantages are taken of the OADMM’s covariance
structure and the overall better forecast accuracy it provides.
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER A
Appendix
A.1
Algorithm implementations
All in the following shown algorithm implementations are deployed in an environment
where the input data is preprocessed. To achieve higher functionality, all algorithms
are implemented as functions. The programming language Python (3.5.4) was used
to implement all algorithms. The input data is preprocessed such that a dictionary
(A_dict) is passed to the function, where the keys access the explanatory variables
of the respective sites. In addition to that, an array (y) is passed that contains the
preprocessed power measurements of the central agent’s site. Besides passing the
input data to the functions, a dictionary is passed that contains algorithm specific
settings.
A.1.1
OADMM
1 import pandas as pd
2 import scipy
3 import numpy as np
4 from scipy.stats import ortho_group
5 def OADMM(A_dict,y,Settings):
6
Lambda = Settings['Lambda'] ; Rho = Settings['Rho'] ; Mu = Settings['Mu']
7
S = len(A_dict.keys()) ; L = A_dict[0].shape[1] ; Np = S*L
8
H_t = np.zeros([Np, Np]) ; P_t = np.zeros([Np, 1])
9
SiteDict = {s:{} for s in range(S)}
10
for s in range(S):
11
SiteDict[s]['M'] = ortho_group.rvs(dim=L)
12
SiteDict[s]['K'] = ortho_group.rvs(dim=L)
13
SiteDict[s]['Beta'] = np.zeros([L,1])
14
SiteDict[s]['z'] = np.zeros([L,1])
15
SiteDict[s]['u'] = np.zeros([L,1])
16
SiteDict[s]['PartialPredictions'] = []
17
SiteDict[s]['at_M'] = []
18
SiteDict[s]['KM'] = SiteDict[s]['K'] @ SiteDict[s]['M']
19
SiteDict[s]['MbetaU'] = []
20
KM = scipy.linalg.block_diag(*[SiteDict[s]['KM'] for s in range(S)])
21
KM = KM.T@KM
22
StatsList = [] ;k = Settings['k']
23
for t in range(len(y) - k):
24
y_t = y[t]
==PAGE:96==
A.1 Algorithm implementations
82
25
if t < k:
26
for s in range(S):
27
a_t = A_dict[s][[t], :]
28
SiteDict[s]['PartialPredictions'].append((a_t @ SiteDict[s]['
Beta']).flatten())
29
SiteDict[s]['at_M'].append(a_t @ SiteDict[s]['M'])
30
SiteDict[s]['MbetaU'].append(SiteDict[s]['M'].T@(SiteDict[s]['
Beta']+SiteDict[s]['u']))
31
else:
32
Observation = y_t[0]
33
ModelPrediction = sum([SiteDict[s]['PartialPredictions'][-k] for s
in range(S)]).flatten()[0]
34
MbetaU = np.hstack((SiteDict[s]['MbetaU'][-k] for s in range(S)))
35
MbetaU = np.concatenate([MbetaU[ll, :] for ll in range(L)]).reshape
(L * S, 1)
36
at_M = np.vstack((SiteDict[s]['at_M'][-k] for s in range(S)))
37
at_M = np.concatenate([at_M[:, ll] for ll in range(L)]).reshape(1,
L * S)
38
H_t = Mu * H_t + (at_M).T @ (at_M) ; P_t = Mu * P_t + (at_M).T *
y_t
39
z_t = np.linalg.solve(a=H_t + Rho * KM, b=P_t + Rho * MbetaU)
40
for s in range(S):
41
s_idx = range(s, S * L, S)
42
z_t_s = z_t[[s_idx]]
43
SiteDict[s]['u'] = SiteDict[s]['u'] + SiteDict[s]['Beta'] -
SiteDict[s]['M'] @ z_t_s
44
SiteDict[s]['z'] = z_t_s
45
a_t = A_dict[s][[t], :]
46
SiteDict[s]['Beta'] = SoftTresholdingOperator(alpha_array=(
SiteDict[s]['M']@SiteDict[s]['z'])-SiteDict[s]['u'],kappa=
Lambda/Rho)
47
SiteDict[s]['PartialPredictions'].append((a_t @ SiteDict[s]['
Beta']).flatten())
48
SiteDict[s]['at_M'].append(a_t @ SiteDict[s]['M'])
49
SiteDict[s]['MbetaU'].append(SiteDict[s]['M'].T@(SiteDict[s]['
Beta']+SiteDict[s]['u']))
50
StatsList.append([Observation ,ModelPrediction])
51
StatsDF = pd.DataFrame(StatsList, columns=['Observation', 'ModelPrediction'
])
52
return StatsDF
Listing A.1: Online ADMM implementation as a function.
It should be noted that the
encryption matrices are exchanged only once, thus they are considered to be constant
throughout the simulation.
A.1.2
Adaptive D-MIDAS
1 import numpy as np
2 import pandas as pd
3 def Adaptive_MIDAS(A_dict, y, Settings):
4
EtaList = Settings['EtaList'] ; Mu = Settings['Mu']
5
p = Settings['p'] ; k = Settings['k']
==PAGE:97==
A.1 Algorithm implementations
83
6
S = len(A_dict.keys()) ; L = A_dict[0].shape[1]
7
SiteDict = {s:{} for s in range(S)}
8
for s in A_dict.keys():
9
SiteDict[s]['Beta'] = len(Settings['EtaList'])*[np.zeros([L, 1])]
10
SiteDict[s]['Theta'] = len(Settings['EtaList'])*[np.zeros([L, 1])]
11
SiteDict[s]['PartialPredictions'] = []
12
StatsList = []
13
GammaArray = np.zeros([len(EtaList), 1]) ; MAEArray = np.zeros([len(EtaList
),1])
14
for t in range(len(y) - k):
15
y_t = y[t]
16
if t < k:
17
for s in range(S):
18
a_t = A_dict[s][[t], :] ; temp = []
19
for i,Eta in enumerate(EtaList):
20
temp.append((a_t @ SiteDict[s]['Beta'][i]).flatten())
21
SiteDict[s]['PartialPredictions'].append(temp)
22
else:
23
Observation = y_t[0]
24
ModelPredictions = len(EtaList) * [0]
25
for s in range(S):
26
for i, Eta in enumerate(EtaList):
27
ModelPredictions[i] += SiteDict[s]['PartialPredictions'][-k
][i]
28
ModelPrediction = ModelPredictions[np.argmin(MAEArray)].flatten()
[0]
29
ResidualList = [ModelPredictions[i] - Observation for i,Eta in
enumerate(EtaList)]
30
StatsList.append([Observation , ModelPrediction])
31
for s in range(S):
32
a_past = A_dict[s][[t-k], :].T
33
for i, Eta in enumerate(EtaList):
34
SiteDict[s]['Theta'][i] = SiteDict[s]['Theta'][i] - Eta*
a_past * ResidualList[i]
35
for i, Eta in enumerate(EtaList):
36
MAEArray[i] = Mu * MAEArray[i] + np.abs(ResidualList[i])
37
templist = []
38
for s in range(S):
39
templist.append(SiteDict[s]['Theta'][i].flatten())
40
GammaArray[i] = np.linalg.norm(np.array(templist).flatten(), p)
** (p - 2)
41
for s in range(S):
42
a_t = A_dict[s][[t], :] ; temp = []
43
for i, Eta in enumerate(EtaList):
44
SiteDict[s]['Beta'][i] = (np.sign(SiteDict[s]['Theta'][i])
* np.abs(SiteDict[s]['Theta'][i]) ** (p - 1)) /
GammaArray[i]
45
temp.append((a_t @ SiteDict[s]['Beta'][i]).flatten())
46
SiteDict[s]['PartialPredictions'].append(temp)
47
StatsDF = pd.DataFrame(StatsList, columns=['Observation', 'ModelPrediction'
])
48
return StatsDF
Listing A.2: Adaptive D-MIDAS implementation as a function.
==PAGE:98==
A.2 Simulation study results
84
A.2
Simulation study results
The following figures are supplements to the simulation study performed on synthetic
data to investigate the performance of the presented D-MIDAS. The same synthetic
dataset as in introduced in Section 5.3 is used to generate the following results. Each
figure caption shows the hyperparameter values that are applied to generate the
illustrated results.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Quantile (0.05)
Quantile (0.95)
Mean
True parameters
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
−0.6
−0.5
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
Figure A.1: Uncertainty of estimated parameter a1 (top left), a2 (top right), a3 (bottom
left) and a4 (bottom right) when deploying the Vanilla D-MIDAS with the following hyper-
parameter settings: λ = 0, η = 0.075 and p = 2 ln (S · L).
==PAGE:99==
A.2 Simulation study results
85
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Quantile (0.05)
Quantile (0.95)
Mean
True parameters
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
−0.6
−0.5
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
Figure A.2: Uncertainty of estimated parameter a1 (top left), a2 (top right), a3 (bottom
left) and a4 (bottom right) when deploying the Vanilla D-MIDAS with the following hyper-
parameter settings: λ = 0.001, η = 0.075 and p = 0.75 ln (S · L).
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time stamp [-]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sparsity [%]
Vanilla D-MIDAS
OADMM
True sparsity
Figure A.3: Estimated sparsity with respect to the true parameter matrices B1 and B2 when
deploying the Vanilla D-MIDAS and OADMM algorithm. For the Vanilla D-MIDAS the
following hyperparameter values were applied: η = 0.075, λ = 0, 001 and p = 0.75 ln (S · L).
The shown numbers are average values obtained from a MC-Simulation with 1000 runs. The
black dashed line indicates the true VAR model sparsity.
==PAGE:100==
A.3 Algorithms
86
Figure A.4: Time spent by central agent to complete its tasks depending on the number of
models learned in parallel and total number of agents S when using the Adaptive D-MIDAS.
The order of the AR process is set to 4.
A.3
Algorithms
The following algorithm shows the tasks of the central and contracted agent/s of the
Adaptive D-MIDAS.
==PAGE:101==
A.3 Algorithms
87
Algorithm 4 Adaptive D-MIDAS
1: Central agent initializes p-norm value as it desires and shares it with fusion center oper-
ator and contracted agents. Additionally, central agent creates the encryption key Ksj
and shares decryption key K∗
sj with contracted agents. Central agent also selects a range
of learning rates, stores it in Ωη and finally shares set with contracted agents.
2: Initialize t and β(j,η)
s,0 , θ(j,η)
s,0
for s ∈Ωs and η ∈Ωη to be 0. Additionally, initialize
MAE(η)
sj
for η ∈Ωη to be 0. Central agent selects µ and keeps it private.
3: while agents want to perform distributed online learning do
4:
t := t + 1
5:
for s ∈Ωs do
6:
Agent s receives latest observation and forms as,t
7:
for η ∈Ωη do
8:
ˆy
(sj,η)
s,t|t−1 := as,tβ
(sj,η)
s,t
9:
Transmit partial predictions to fusion center
10:
end for
11:
end for
12:
Fusion center operator bundles partial predictions and sends them to central agent
13:
for η ∈Ωη do
14:
ˆy(η)
sj,t|t−1 := ∑
s∈Ωs ˆy
(sj,η)
s,t|t−1
▷Central agent forms predictions
15:
end for
16:
Central agent selects best performing estimator according to minη MAE(η)
sj
17:
ysj,t is revealed and central agent suffers loss
18:
for η ∈Ωη do
19:
r(η)
sj,t := ˆy(η)
sj,t|t−1 −yt,sj
▷Compute residual for each η
20:
MAE(η)
sj,t = µMAE(η)
sj,t−1 +
r(η)
sj,t

▷Update performance metric
21:
end for
22:
Central agent encrypts residual list by using Ksj(·) and sends it to fusion center
23:
Fusion center operator distributes encrypted residual list among all agents
24:
for s ∈Ωs do
25:
Agent s decrypts residual list with Ksj∗(·)
26:
for η ∈Ωη do
27:
θ
(sj),η
s,t
:= θ
(sj,η)
s,t−1 −η · as,tr(η)
sj,t
▷Update dual vector
28:
end for
29:
Transmit list of dual vectors to fusion center
30:
end for
31:
Fusion center operator computes denominators of link function, γ(η)
sj,t
32:
for η ∈Ωη do
33:
θ(η)
sj,t := (θ
(sj,η)
s1,t
, ..., θ
(sj,η)
sS,t )
▷Stack all dual vectors
34:
γ(η)
sj,t :=
θ
(sj,η)
t

p−2
p
▷Compute norm
35:
end for
36:
Fusion center operator shares γsj,t with all agents
37:
for s ∈Ωs do
38:
for η ∈Ωη do
39:
∀k, β
(sj,η)
(s,t),k :=
sign (θ
(sj ,η)
(s,t),k)|θ
(sj ,η)
(s,t),k|p−1
γ(η)
sj ,t
▷Apply link function element-wise
40:
end for
41:
end for
42: end while
==PAGE:102==
Bibliography
[1]
Y. Mao and W. Shaoshuai, “A review of wind power forecasting & prediction,”
2016 International Conference on Probabilistic Methods Applied to Power Sys-
tems (PMAPS), pp. 1–7, 2016.
[2]
P. Sørensen, N. A. Cutululis, A. Vigueras-Rodríguez, L. E. Jensen, J. Hjerrild,
M. H. Donovan, and H. Madsen, “Power fluctuations from large wind farms,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 958–965, 2007.
[3]
E. Ela, M. Milligan, and B. Kirby, “Operating reserves and variable generation,”
Technical Report, Aug. 2011, pp. 1–103.
[4]
R. J. Barthelmie, F. Murray, and S. C. Pryor, “The economic benefit of short-
term forecasting for wind energy in the UK electricity market,” Energy Policy,
vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 1687–1696, 2008.
[5]
A. Skajaa, K. Edlund, and J. M. Morales, “Intraday trading of wind energy,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 3181–3189, 2015.
[6]
P. Bacher, H. Madsen, and H. A. Nielsen, “Online short-term solar power fore-
casting,” Solar Energy, vol. 83, no. 10, pp. 1772–1783, 2009.
[7]
X. Wang, P. Guo, and X. Huang, “A review of wind power forecasting models,”
Energy Procedia, vol. 12, pp. 770–778, 2011.
[8]
J. W. Messner and P. Pinson, “Online adaptive lasso estimation in vector au-
toregressive models for high dimensional wind power forecasting,” International
Journal of Forecasting, 2018.
[9]
G. Giebel, G. Kariniotakis, M. Denhard, and C. Draxl, The State-Of-The-Art
in Short-Term Prediction of Wind Power: A Literature Overview, 2nd edition,
ANEMOS.plus. 2011, pp. 1–106.
[10]
R. Huang, T. Huang, R. Gadh, and N. Li, “Solar generation prediction using the
ARMA model in a laboratory-level micro-grid,” 2012 IEEE 3rd International
Conference on Smart Grid Communications, (SmartGridComm), pp. 528–533,
2012.
[11]
P. Chen, T. Pedersen, B. Bak-Jensen, and Z. Chen, “ARIMA-based time se-
ries model of stochastic wind power generation,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 667–676, 2010.
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
89
[12]
J. Dowell and P. Pinson, “Very-short-term probabilistic wind power forecasts by
sparse vector autoregression,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 2,
pp. 763–770, 2016.
[13]
P. Pinson, “Introducing distributed learning approaches in wind power forecast-
ing,” 2016 International Conference on Probabilistic Methods Applied to Power
Systems (PMAPS), pp. 1–6, 2016.
[14]
P. Kou, F. Gao, and X. Guan, “Sparse online warped Gaussian process for wind
power probabilistic forecasting,” Applied Energy, vol. 108, pp. 410–428, 2013.
[15]
L. Guo, C. Wang, P. Gao, Y. Wang, Y. Zhong, and M. Huang, “An online short-
term wind power prediction considering wind speed correction and error interval
evaluation,” 2014 International Conference on Information Science, Electronics
and Electrical Engineering, pp. 28–32, 2014.
[16]
Y. Zhang and J. Wang, “A distributed approach for wind power probabilistic
forecasting considering spatio-temporal correlation without direct access to off-
site information,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 2018.
[17]
L. Cavalcante, R. J. Bessa, M. Reis, and J. Browell, “LASSO vector autore-
gression structures for very short-term wind power forecasting,” Wind Energy,
vol. 20, pp. 657–675, Apr. 2017.
[18]
H. Allende-Cid, H. Allende, R. Monge, and C. Moraga, “Wind speed forecast
under a distributed learning approach,” 2013 32nd International Conference of
the Chilean Computer Science Society (SCCC), pp. 44–48, Nov. 2013.
[19]
D. Obst, “Distributed learning for high-dimensional wind energy production
forecasting,” Research Internship Report, 2016, pp. 1–61.
[20]
F. M. Sanches, D. S. Junior, and S. Srisuma, “Ordinary least squares estimation
for a dynamic game,” International Economic Review, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 623–
634, 2015.
[21]
G. V. Pendse, “A tutorial on the LASSO and the ”shooting algorithm”,” pp. 1–
16, 2011.
[22]
R. Tibshirani, “Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso,” Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society. Series B: Statistical Methodology, vol. 58, no. 1,
pp. 267–288, 1996.
[23]
Icons8. [Online]. Available: https://icons8.com/.
[24]
P.-J. Trombe and P. Pinson, “High-resolution forecasting of wind power gener-
ation with regime switching models and off-site observations, DTU Compute;
No. 2012-15,” Technical Report, 2012, pp. 1–24.
[25]
Y. Zhao, L. Ye, P. Pinson, Y. Tang, and P. Lu, “Correlation-constrained and
sparsity-controlled vector autoregressive model for spatio-temporal wind power
forecasting,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 2018.
==PAGE:104==
Bibliography
90
[26]
S. Boyd, N. Parikh, E. Chu, B. Peleato, and J. Eckstein, “Distributed optimiza-
tion and statistical learning via the Alternating Direction Method of Multipli-
ers,” Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–122,
2010.
[27]
D. Barbosa de Alencar, C. de Mattos Affonso, R. Limão de Oliveira, J. Moya
Rodríguez, J. Leite, and J. Reston Filho, “Different models for forecasting wind
power generation: Case study,” Energies, vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 1976–2003, 2017.
[28]
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M.
Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D.
Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine
learning in Python,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12, pp. 2825–
2830, 2011.
[29]
A. Carpinone, R. Langella, A. Testa, and M. Giorgio, “Very short-term proba-
bilistic wind power forecasting based on Markov chain models,” 2010 IEEE 11th
International Conference on Probabilistic Methods Applied to Power Systems,
pp. 107–112, Jun. 2010.
[30]
P. Pinson and H. Madsen, “Adaptive modelling and forecasting of offshore wind
power fluctuations with Markov-switching autoregressive models,” Journal of
Forecasting, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 281–313, 2012.
[31]
D. Angelosante, J. A. Bazerque, and G. B. Giannakis, “Online adaptive estima-
tion of sparse signals: Where RLS meets the ell1 -norm,” IEEE Transactions
on Signal Processing, vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 3436–3447, 2010.
[32]
I. Selesnick, “A derivation of the soft-thresholding function,” pp. 1–9, 2013.
[33]
M. Chiarandini, “Lecture slides: LU factorization,” 2014. [Online]. Available:
https://imada.sdu.dk/~marco/DM559/Slides/dm559-lu.pdf.
[34]
H. Wang and A. Banerjee, “Online alternating direction method,” Proceedings
of the 29th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1–8, 2012.
[35]
T. Suzuki, “Dual averaging and proximal gradient descent for online Alternating
Direction Multiplier Method,” Proceedings of the 30th International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), vol. 28, pp. 392–400, 2013.
[36]
S. Liu, J. Chen, P.-Y. Chen, and A. O. Hero, “Zeroth-order online Alternating
Direction Method of Multipliers: Convergence analysis and applications,” 2017.
”arXiv”: 1710.07804.
[37]
J. Matamoros, “Asynchronous online ADMM for consensus problems,” 2017
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pp. 5875–5879, 2017.
[38]
M. Akbari, B. Gharesifard, and T. Linder, “Distributed online convex opti-
mization on time-varying directed graphs,” IEEE Transactions on Control of
Network Systems, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 417–428, 2017.
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
91
[39]
Y. Yang, M. Pesavento, M. Zhang, and D. P. Palomar, “An online parallel
algorithm for recursive estimation of sparse signals,” IEEE Transactions on
Signal and Information Processing over Networks, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 290–305,
Sep. 2016.
[40]
P. Bouboulis, S. Chouvardas, and S. Theodoridis, “Online distributed learning
over networks in RKH spaces using random fourier features,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Signal Processing, vol. 66, no. 7, pp. 1920–1932, 2018.
[41]
J. Langford, L. Li, and T. Zhang, “Sparse online learning via truncated gradi-
ent,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 10 (Mar), pp. 777–801, 2009.
[42]
S. Shalev-Shwartz and A. Tewari, “Stochastic methods for l1-regularized loss
minimization,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12 (Jun), pp. 1865–
1892, 2011.
[43]
C. Gentile, “The robustness of the p-norm algorithms,” Journal of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 265–299, 2003.
[44]
R. Girard and D. Allard, “Spatio-temporal propagation of wind power predic-
tion errors,” Wind Energy, vol. 16, no. 7, 2013.
[45]
D. Richard A., “Gaussian process,” in Encyclopedia of Environmetrics. 2006.
[46]
J. Cappelen, Wind in denmark. [Online]. Available: https://www.dmi.dk/en/
climate/climate-changes-over-time/denmark/wind/.
==PAGE:106==
