==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Between market competition and
legislation
A realistic transition towards sustainable district
heating using TIMES-DK
Louis Michel Gilbert Godon s162912
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Management Engineering - System Analysis
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 426
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4800
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
TIMES-DK is a model used by the Danish Energy Agency as well as DTU to rep-
resent the Danish energy system from a holistic bottom-up approach. This partial
equilibrium model optimizes all the represented sectors in order to find the cheapest
energy system evolution under political constrains and targets. However, the way
district heating supply is modelled within TIMES-DK seems to curtail its possible
evolutions. Indeed, the absence of legislative framework as well as the competition
between future available technologies leads to a fast and homogeneous transition to-
wards large scale heat pumps. Even if this transition is a cost-wise optimal, it might
be unrealistic. The scope of the presented thesis is divided into three axis. First, an
overview of the danish district heating sector is given with its historical development
since the beginning of the past century, a comparison with EU countries and a brief
review of the applicable legislation. That first part also includes an introduction to
the model TIMES-DK. Secondly, based on an approximation of heat plants historical
development, a boundary is designed in order to realistically capture the transition
towards a sustainable and carbon-free heat supply. Thus, installation of cogeneration
of heat and power plants is limited to 1.5GW per 5 years periods while this cap is set
at 4GW for heat only plants. Finally, the role of existing legislation in hindering or
supporting the sustainable transition is examined. The current incentives to use co-
generation plants and consume natural gas are modelled together with technological
prohibitions in central areas. It is showed that the current district heating legislation
leads to higher heat prices and thus limits the development of the sector. The author
concludes by recommending to lower the incentives to use cogeneration plants while
relaxing the prohibitions on ambient air heat pumps and solar heating systems in
central district heating areas. Limitations of the applied methodologies as well as
possible improvements for TIMES-DK are also addressed.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This MSc thesis was prepared at the department of Management Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a
MSc Eng degree in Sustainable Energy.
Kongens Lyngby, July 30, 2018
Louis Michel Gilbert Godon s162912
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank in first place Kristoffer Steen Andersen for being my supervi-
sor during that six months period and orienting me towards such an exciting topic.
The advices and suggestions he provided me together with technical explanations on
TIMES-DK proved to be really helpful for the development of the methodology as
well as the performed analysis. His great availability has been very valuable to me. I
wish him the best for the future of his PhD.
Then I would also like to thank Kenneth Bernard Karlsson, Head of the Energy
System Analysis Group at DTU Management Engineering, for accepting to be the
the main supervisor of the present study. He created a framework in which I was
free to conduct my work and researches in any directions I wanted and I am truly
thankful for that.
I would also like to thank the whole academic staff I ever had the chance to learn
from at DTU. I discovered so many things about the world of sustainable energies,
from the technical design of a wind turbine blade to the creation of transition scenarios
for nationwide energy systems.
All this knowledge has been passed on to me by
passionate professors, assistants and PhD students. With that passion for energy
transition and incredible educational conditions I received at DTU, I feel like an
infinity of opened doors are offered to me for the future. I am sincerely grateful to
DTU about that.
Finally and less formally I would like to thank my family, my flatmate and my
closest friends for their love and support all along my education at DTU.
This project would not have been possible without any of the above mentioned.
Thank you all very much.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Danish energy transition and climate commitments . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
District heat in Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
What future for district heating in Denmark? . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.4
Introduction to TIMES-DK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2
Development realism
23
2.1
Need for improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.4
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
District heating legislation
33
3.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4
Conclusions and recommendations
55
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This opening chapter is meant to introduce different concepts in order to anchor the
problematic of the present work.
First, Denmark’s energy transition and climate
commitments will be presented. Secondly an overview of the danish district heating
sector will be given including its history and development, a comparison with the
other EU members, and an introduction to the current legislative framework. Then
the future of district heat in Denmark will be questioned and studies of the Danish
Energy Agency will be presented. Finally an introduction to the energy system model
TIMES-DK will be given, as this tool will used for the rest of the thesis.
1.1
Danish energy transition and climate commitments
After the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol in 1992, Denmark developed a strategy in
order to reduce its greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions. In 2005, the Danish Ministry
of the Environment explained in [1] that various measures were implemented, for
instance energy savings, switch to fuels from oil and coal to natural gas, intensive
development of cogeneration of heat and power (CHP) in decentral areas, integration
of renewable in the energy mix, etc. These efforts allowed the country to decrease its
carbon emissions by approximately 12% as pictured in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Denmark’s GHG emissions evolution between 1990 and 2003. Corrected
for temperature variations and international electricity trades.
A more recent study made by the Danish Energy Agency [2] reveals even better
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
reduction in year 2015 with GHG emissions reaching 64.4% of their 1990 levels. Figure
1.2 gives a more detailed representation of the situation in 2015, with emissions
stated per sector. First, it can be noticed that honourable cuts have been made by
households, services and goods sectors. But the most impressive reductions come
from the energy and transformation sector. According to the Danish Energy Agency,
this is due to increased plant efficiency, development of CHP production and a use of
renewable sources multiplied by almost a factor three.
Figure 1.2: Denmark’s GHG emissions per sector, comparison between 1990 and
2015 levels.
Focusing on the energy and transformation sector, the International Energy Agency
statistics [3] allowed to gather data to create Figures 1.3 and 1.4 that represent re-
spectively the gross electricity and heat generation per type of fuel.
Regarding the electricity production, deep changes have been performed since the
1990s. At the beginning of the period, coal alone represented 90% of the fuel used in
power plants, a share that dropped to less 25% in 2015. That tendency is expected to
continue as Ørsted, the main electricity supplier in Denmark, is planning to become
a coal-free supplier from 2023 [4].
As substitutes have been introduced gradually
during the 1990s natural gas together with renewable sources like biomass, wind or
solar energy, representing most of the ”Others” category of Figure 1.3. It has to be
noticed that since the late 2000s, renewables have overtaken the share of natural gas.
Similar trends can be observed about the heat mix.
Coal and oil represented
respectively 57% and 6% of the fuels used for heat production in 1990, shares that
decreased to 20% and 1% in 2015. As in power production, natural gas expanded in
the 1990s until the late 2000s when it started to be replaced by biomass and wastes.
However, at the end of the period, gas still covers 18% of heat supplies, a much higher
penetration than in the electricity sector. Wastes incineration plants developed all
along the 20th century, allowing that energy source to play an important role in
the heat mix. Considered as a domestic renewable resource and being convenient
when dealing with issues related to energy security and waste management, it kept
on expanding over that 25 years period.
Indeed, between 1990 and 2015, wastes
participation in heat production grew from 13% to 21%. But the most impressive
evolution is the one of biofuels, with shares rising from 8% to over 35%.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 District heat in Denmark
3
Figure 1.3: Denmark’s gross electricity production per type of fuel from 1990 to
2015.
Figure 1.4: Denmark’s gross heat production per type of fuel from 1990 to 2015.
1.2
District heat in Denmark
One particularity of Denmark’s energy system is the intensive use of district heating
(DH) systems. A recent study conducted by the Danish Energy Agency [5] showed
that 63% of danish households were supplied in heat by DH. The present section will
give first an overview of the history and development of DH systems in the country,
then a comparison with the European countries and finally a presentation of the
applicable legislation.
1.2.1
History and development
The very first DH system of Denmark was inaugurated in September 1903 in Fred-
eriksberg, a city in the outskirts of Copenhagen [6]. The municipality [7] and the
organization DBDH [8] explain that the distribution network was composed of a hos-
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
pital, a poorhouse and a children’s home. Heat was delivered to these buildings under
the form of steam generated in a waste incineration cogeneration plant. In this way,
the municipality managed to solve two problems at the same time: environmentally
friendly wastes disposal and cheap heat supply for municipal facilities.
The success of the project led other cities to give a chance to wastes incineration,
CHP plants and district heating systems. In this way, DH utilization grew steadily
during the 20th century and in the late 1930’s it accounted for 4% of the country’s heat
consumption. After the second world war, district heating and CHP plants developed
together as efficient and cheap ways to supply heat and electricity. As shown in 1992
by Mortensen and Overgaard [9], cogeneration developed steadily during the second
half of the century. Figure 1.5 displays the evolution of CHP plants penetration in
the electricity mix over the period 1950-1990. Over these 40 years, CHP participation
to the power production rose from 5.2% to 47.2%. As the technologies are dependant,
DH networks development followed the same path.
Figure 1.5: Share of electricity produced by CHP plants in Denmark.
The use of CHP plants and DH expansion was legally supported after the 1970’s
oil crises. At that time, the country energy needs were mostly covered by imported
oil products. The 1973/1974 first oil shock opened the eyes of the communities on
the importance of security of supply. It has then been decided to increase the energy
efficiency of the country, thanks to the use of DH and CHP allowing energy savings,
as well as strengthen the security of supply, by taking advantage of the natural gas
resources from the North Sea.
Natural gas network
Denmark’s natural gas resources were proven to reach the amount of 35bcm in 2014,
according to the World Energy Council [10].
In order to take advantage of that
domestic potential, a country wide gas transmission system has been developed mostly
in the 1980s [11]. Ørsted gas transport gives a map of the current network [12], seen
in Figure 1.6.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 District heat in Denmark
5
Figure 1.6: Danish gas system including connections - map by Ørsted.
After being treated at the delivery point of Nybro, the gas is injected in transmis-
sion pipelines covering the whole country. These pipelines are connected to neigh-
bouring countries and allowed Denmark to be a net exporter of natural gas, which
represents a good indicator in terms of security of supply. IEA statistics [3] allowed
to plot the graph Figure 1.7. The levels being positive from 1990 to 2015 show that
Denmark was self sufficient in terms of gas consumption all over the period. Moreover,
net exports means revenues from international gas trading and thus redistributable
funds in the Danish economy that might help reduce system costs.
Then, within the country, transmission pipelines deliver gas to two different type
of facilities:
• Storage units of Lille Torup and Stenlille that have together a total storage
capacity of 890 million Nm3, or approximately a third of domestic yearly con-
sumption [13].
• Distribution network used to deliver the gas to the consumption areas. The gas
is then used for power generation, in the industry, for residential heating and
as a fuel for DH plants. In this way, natural gas penetration in the fuels used
for heating increased from 0% to above 10% between 1972 and 1990 [5].
District heating expansion
The development of district heating networks was driven by Denmark’s Heat Supply
Act, the first legal framework regarding heat supply, adopted in 1979. The law was
meant to regulate the country heat planning, some aspects being still in effect today.
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
Figure 1.7: Denmark’s net gas exports.
This planning had three main objectives: reduce system cost, respect the environment
and improve security of supply. At this period, that meant developing CHP plants.
Indeed, the Act opens in this way [14]:
Heat Supply act, article 1
1. The objective of this Act is to promote the most socioeconomic and
environmentally friendly utilization of energy for heating buildings,
supplying them with space heating and hot water and reduce the
dependency of the energy system on oil.
2. In the agreement with the objectives mentioned in subsection (1),
the supply of heat shall be organized with a view to promoting the
highest possible degree of cogeneration of heat and power.
Based on the Act heat supply planning was achieved in years 1981-1982 [15] all
around the country in three steps:
1. Create a regional heat supply overview. The municipalities had to map their
heat demand, list the existing technologies and record the volumes of fuels
consumed. Projections of local demand were also required.
2. Then the municipalities were asked to assess different technical solution for their
future heat supply.
3. Finally, based on the information from the two previous steps, regional heat
plans have been written. Technological priority was given in each areas and
locations for future DH plants and networks have been identified.
During this process, the Danish Energy Agency provided support to the munic-
ipalities with economical and technical information on plants, fuels prices forecasts,
guidelines to calculate demand profiles, etc.
Followed during the 1980s the development of CHP plants and DH networks in
central areas, i.e. the largest urban areas. Indeed, the largest towns of Denmark
had a city wide heat network supplied at 95-98% with CHP plants running on coal,
natural gas or municipal wastes [16]. At the end of the decade, focus was made on
decentral, or rural, areas. In 1986 has been adopted by the Parliament the Cogenera-
tion Agreement, meant to implement on the grid 450MWe of small scale CHP plants
==PAGE:17==
1.2 District heat in Denmark
7
fueled with domestic natural gas, wastes and biomass. In 1990, the program has been
extended to 1400MWe. As a result, DH and natural gas networks boomed in the
1990s, thanks to the newly installed ”green-field plants” [5]. Figure 1.8 displays the
heat production of large and small scale CHP plants together with heat only plants
during the period 1990-2015. The increasing penetration of small scale CHP plants
and reduction of output by heat only plants in the 1990s is the direct result of the
Cogeneration Agreement.
Figure 1.8: Heat output per type of plant between 1990 and 2015 - Danish Energy
Agency.
However the tendency was reversed during the 2000s. This came from the fact that
penetration of renewables in the electricity mix pushed out of the market expensive
CHP plants, mostly the so called green field plants.
Between 2000 and 2014 the
share of electricity produced by wind farms rose from 12% to 39%, as seen on Figure
1.4. That inevitably led to a decline in CHP electrical production from 41% to 30%
[15], and thus cuts in heat output. Even tough the government tried to keep afloat
these plants through different subsidy schemes and tax reductions [5], they have been
lately progressively replaced by cheaper heat only technologies. These replacement
technologies can be heat pumps, solar heating systems or simply wastes and biomass
boilers. Regarding biomass used in heat plants, straw, wood chips and wood pellets
represented in the 2000s an advantageous fuel for DH production because they were
free of energy and CO2 taxes, as seen on Figure 1.9 [17]. As a result, amongst the
245 biomass-based DH plants in the country, there is 200 heat only plants against
only 45 CHP plants [18].
Apropos of the modern system, the Danish Energy agency identified in 2014 six
large central DH areas supplying 67PJ of heat to the consumers, representing 56%
of the overall district heat production. Medium and small sized areas, divided into
400 different zones, consumed the remaining 53PJ of district heat. Among the total
heat production, 67.4% came from CHP plants. Figure 1.10 maps these areas, the
location of the plants and the fuels consumed [19].
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Introduction
Figure 1.9: Decomposition of fuel prices at the 1st of January 2002 .
1.2.2
EU comparison
The Danish case is quite unique. In Europe, it is the second country with the high-
est share of the population supplied with DH, after Latvia and before Estonia and
Lithuania, as pictured on Figure 1.11 [5]. These countries share in common two char-
acteristics that might create an advantage for the development of district heating:
they are small and have a low population, compared with other European countries.
In these four countries, more than half the population is supplied with DH, which is
much higher than the average of the presented 20 countries being 17.7%.
Another interesting aspect is that these top-four countries are located in northern
Europe, where the climate implies high heat demands. That can explain why the
following countries on the ranking are located in northern or central Europe.
To
confirm that point it has been decided to confront these shares to the actual heat
demand of these countries. A European funded project [20] evaluated the heating
demand of buildings, both residential and commercial, for year 2010. Using these
data and the population of the countries allowed to get an approximation of the
heat demand per capita. Figure 1.12 displays the results and shows that a positive
correlation can be observed between DH penetration and demand. Obviously, the
development of district heat in a country does not only depend its size, population
or heat demand, as proved by the low correlation coefficient between the datasets.
Regarding the use of cogeneration, Denmark is the European country with the
largest share of electricity produced in CHP plants, as seen on Figure 1.13. This
constitutes a good condition for such an expanded DH supply. It is followed closely
by Lithuania which happens to also have a large DH coverage.
The case of the
United-Kingdom, Hungary and the Netherlands can be partly explained here: even
though such countries have an important heat demand per capita, a very small share
of electricity is produced in CHP plants - or even none. Thus very few excess heat
can be exploited in district heating networks. Moreover, in HU and NL, it seems that
DH is only produced with heat only plants, as the share of CHP in DH production is
null.
==PAGE:19==
1.2 District heat in Denmark
9
Figure 1.10: Denmark’s heat supply - 2014.
1.2.3
Legislative framework
As described earlier, production of heat in Denmark is regulated by the Heat Sup-
ply Act of 1979. That section will give a quick insight of the applicable legislation.
First the heat prices regulation will be presented. Secondly some requirements and
restrictions for project developments will be introduced.
==PAGE:20==
10
1 Introduction
Figure 1.11: DH penetration in Europe.
Figure 1.12: DH penetration vs. Heat demand in Europe.
1.2.3.1
Heat prices
One interesting part of the legislation is that DH companies are not allowed to make
profits when selling heat to the consumers. The Act, Article 20, gives the costs that
suppliers can recover in their income brackets:
• Fuels costs
• Wages and operational costs
• Research activities and administrative costs
• Delivery costs
• Costs related to public service obligations
• Finance expenses
==PAGE:21==
1.2 District heat in Denmark
11
Figure 1.13: Share of electricity and DH from CHP in Europe - 2013.
This is equivalent to pricing at the marginal costs of producers, because there is no
room for profit. This was meant to reduce the market-power of suppliers. Indeed,
a district heating market has the characteristics of a monopoly: on one distribution
grid there is usually one base load unit and few peak units owned by one company
while the consumers do not have the opportunity to choose their supplier.
That
strict pricing regulation, together with the obligation of transparency for producers,
simulate partially the conditions for perfect competition. In 2014, Li et. al [21] draw
a review of different pricing mechanisms and explained the case of Sweden, which
is somehow similar to Denmark. In the past two decades, the Swedish government
chose to deregulated their district heating market. In that way, DH companies were
able to take benefit of that situation by rising their heat prices. Table 1.1 gathers the
costs paid by Swedish consumers per building type. Between 2005 and 2012 the prices
rose by almost 30% in all the buildings, because of suppliers increased market power.
This led to consumers protests. In Sweden the owner of a DH networks, i.e. the local
DH producer, is the only one who can access it. In order to lever this barriers to
entry and create competition, the government started to evaluate the possibility of
granting a Third Party Access that should drive the prices to decrease.
Table 1.1: DH prices in Sweden 2005-2012, in SEK/MWh.
2005
2012
Variations [%]
Large buildings
600.8
774.5
28.9
Medium buildings
633.8
798.6
26.0
Small houses
666.8
848.0
27.2
However, Denmark’s strategy to price at marginal cost of production has limits.
The most obvious one is that it is not very attractive for DH companies that are not
allowed to make profit. That is also a reason of the wide presence of CHP plants in
Denmark: while the heat sales are not profitable, electricity trading revenues allow
plant owners to sustain their business.
==PAGE:22==
12
1 Introduction
1.2.3.2
Requirements and prohibitions in project planning
Project planning
The Heat Supply Act, Article 3, states that it is the duty of
each district council to plan the heat supply in the municipality. The decision power
is decentralized and operates on a local scale as municipalities have the final word
when approving projects of collective heat supply plants establishment, extension or
alteration - Article 4. The 6th Article gives the following preconditions on projects
content:
1. Identify clearly the supplied area and the energy used
2. Ensure the most economical utilization of energy
3. Coordination with existing facilities
In other words, a municipality has to draw different plans for heat supply in a given
area under the form of projects. The project with the lower costs, from a socioe-
conomic point of view, shall be selected. Environmental factors are also taken into
account, Article 1, for instance as externalities in the economical evaluation.
CHP plants
Even in the Act, cogeneration plants have a privileged position. In-
deed, the first reference to the technology is made Article 1 §2 when it is declared
that the heat supply shall be organized with highest possible degree of cogeneration
of heat and power. Thus, when municipalities are designing their heat supply plans,
at least one project of CHP plant shall be evaluated if the project requires a thermal
capacity higher than 1MWth, Article 6. And finally Article 9 informs that in some
extreme cases under specific conditions, the Ministry of Environment and Energy has
the authority to require a plant to convert to cogeneration of heat and power. These
different aspects of the legislation are responsible for the high penetration of CHP
plants in the Danish energy system.
Natural gas
The use of natural gas is also concerned by the regulation. A decree on
project approval [22] lists in its 16th article the fuels authorized in CHP plants. These
fuels are, in that order: natural gas, biomass, biogas and wastes. The Article 9 of the
Heat Supply Act gives also the power to the Ministry of Environment and Energy to
require the use of natural gas in CHP plants. Moreover, the Danish Energy Agency
reports in [5] that the early legislation about DH in Denmark divided the country
into zones that were supposed to be supplied by either district heat or natural gas.
In the latter zones, the law accords to municipalities the right to require connection
of new and existing building to the local gas distribution network. Therefore, the
natural gas participation in the heat mix can be maintain at a significant level.
Prohibited technologies
Not all technologies are allowed for heat production.
The Danish district heating association, or Danske Fjernvarme, wrote in 2015 a re-
port aiming at helping the municipalities in their heat supply planning [23]. The
==PAGE:23==
1.2 District heat in Denmark
13
applicable legislative texts have been summarized in order to explicitly show what is
allowed and where. The prohibitions are mostly effective in central areas. In such
urban areas electrical heat pumps and boilers, biomass boilers, solar heating systems
and geothermal technologies are forbidden. Heat only plants with a thermal capaci-
ties higher than 1MWth are not allowed either. Further more, the only authorized fuel
for heat plants in central heating areas is natural gas, while the following are allowed
only for peakers: oil, biogas, biomass and wastes. Nevertheless, these prohibitions
are somehow flexible and special authorization can be granted for test projects. For
instance in Copenhagen’s surroundings, an experiment called Hovedstadens Geoter-
miske Selskab investigates the feasibility of a geothermal heat plant located in Amager
[24]. The three Copenhagen’s heat supply companies, HVOFOR, CTR and VEKS,
are owner of the project at one third each. The use of geothermal is still anecdotal
as CTR declared over the period 2009-2013 yearly heat outputs from the test plant
between 413TJ and 109TJ, representing solely between 0.6% and 2.3% of their heat
sales [25]. The map of Copenhagen’s DH network is given Figure 1.14 and shows how
urban areas are dispatched between the heat suppliers. The geothermal test plant is
located in the southern part of the orange region.
Figure 1.14: Map of Copenhagen’s DH network with a focus on distribution com-
panies - provided by VEKS [24].
==PAGE:24==
14
1 Introduction
Obligation to connect
The Heat Supply Act also stipulates that municipalities
have the authority to require new buildings to connect to local DH network, Article
11. It is also the case for existing buildings for whom the connection can be done
within a certain time limit, Article 12. When these two articles are employed or even
just applicable, the district council can request the owner of the concerned building
to pay connection fees to the heat supplier, Article 13. Finally, Article 14 gives to
the city council the power to refuse installation of a specified heating system in a new
building in order to force connection. That set of articles might be interpreted as
quite intrusive into heat consumers’ free will but it can help to boost development
of local district heating. To lower the strength of municipalities, complaints can be
done to a specified Energy Appeal Board, Article 26.
1.3
What future for district heating in Denmark?
This section is meant to give forecasts for Denmark’s energy system in the middle
term with a focus on district heating. First a study conducted by the Danish Energy
Agency will be presented and then some expectations and local commitments will be
given.
1.3.1
Denmark’s Energy and Climate Outlook
The Danish Energy Agency developed a wide range of tools in order to perform analy-
sis on Denmark’s energy sector. With these modelling tools they are able to simulate
the evolution of their system on different time frames. Lately, investigations have
been performed on middle term evolution to understand how climate commitments
could be achieved and at what pace. For instance in 2015 was published the Danish
Energy and Climate Outlook - 2015 that aimed at modeling the evolution of the en-
ergy system until year 2025 [26]. The latest version, from 2017, has an extended end
of horizon up to 2030 [27]. Although the study covers the entire energy system, will
be presented only the results about electricity and heat production and households
heat consumption.
First of all, the main scenario illustrated by the report represents a frozen policy
scenario where all climate commitments after 2020 are not implemented as objectives
in the models.
This comes from the fact that the current policy agreement ends
in 2020.
Thus the 2020-2030 period certainly does not reflect what will actually
happen but what would be observed if nothing was done policy-wise. According to
the authors, that is an opportunity to identify the challenges to be faced in order to
meet more audacious climate commitments. Another alternative scenario is examined,
corresponding to the fulfillment of Ørsted’s (formerly DONG Energy), Denmark’s
largest energy producer, statement of February 2017 to become coal free by 2023 [4].
To create their scenarios, the Danish Energy Agency used five different energy
models:
==PAGE:25==
1.3 What future for district heating in Denmark?
15
• EMMA, for energy consumption in industries and residential appliances
• TIMES-DK, for residential heat consumption
• RAMSES, for electricity and district heat production
• The transport model, for energy consumption in the transport sector
• A summary model, to link together all of the previous models and facilitate
results handling
Regarding the whole energy system, positive results are limited due to the frozen
policies. Indeed, even tough the EU target to include a 30% of renewables in final
energy consumption by 2020 is comfortably achieved, being actually 10% ahead on
target, this share stagnates after the milestone year. Then until the end of the period,
fossil fuels consumption increases.
Figure 1.15 gives the observed results for net residential space heating demand,
detailed per technology. Over the modeled period, heat demand decreases by 8%
while the total floor area increases by 10%. That counter-intuitive observation is a
consequence of the competition between demolition of old energy intensive buildings,
energy savings for the existing stock and construction of new low-energy dwellings.
Heat pumps are projected to cover 15% of space heating demand by 2030, replacing
progressively oil and gas boilers.
Figure 1.15: Net space heating demand per technology, from DEA [27].
In electricity and DH productions, renewables are expected to account for respec-
tively 72% and 71% of the primary inputs in 2020. These shares will fall to 56%
and 51% in 2030 due to the lack of new policy. The use of biomass is forecasted to
almost double between 2015 and 2020, growing from 57PJ to 98PJ, but will decrease
==PAGE:26==
16
1 Introduction
to 89PJ at the end of the period. The authors recommend that one should take care
when interpreting these results because they are highly sensitive to the different fuels
prices forecasts. Coal exploitation will be multiplied by a factor 2.08 between 2018
and 2030, attaining 127PJ.
As regards electrical sector for milestone years 2015-2020-2030, simulated wind
farms production is respectively 42%, 48% and 39%, as a result of decommissioned
wind turbines being not replaced and an rising electricity demand. Meanwhile, solar
photovoltaic systems deliver 2%, 4% and 7% of the grid electricity over the same
years. The development of solar PV technology even under a frozen policy scenario
highlights its economic viability.
Large scale heat pump is a technology that facilitates integration of intermittent
renewable electric technologies. A 2017 study explained that by 2050 district heat is
estimated to cover 50% of European heat demand [28]. Large scale heat pumps are
expected to account for 25-30% of the supplied DH. Thus, the technology is expected
to develop all around Europe. But the DEA’s Energy Outlook does not display a
significant development of such heat pumps, meaning there is need for new policy to
be designed if EU heat roadmap is to be achieved.
Figure 1.16: Renewables penetration in electricity (left) and DH (right) mixes.
Figure 1.16 illustrates the projected penetration of renewables in electricity and
DH mixes. The solid lines represent the Baseline scenario with a complete frozen
policy, while dashed lines picture the Alternative scenario where only Ørsted policy is
respected. The share of wind in electricity production is not impacted by the inclusion
of Ørsted wish to turn coal free. It is explained by the fact that in the Alternative
scenario, it is the share of ”other renewables” that expands over the simulated period.
As a conclusion, if climate commitments are to be achieved new stronger policies
have to be implemented. They should focus on the share of renewables and large
scale heat pumps used in electricity and DH production.
Target can also be set
on residential heating technologies in order to diminish the consumption of natural
gas and thus replace it by either biomass, solar heat or district heat. Solar PV for
electricity generation and residential heat pumps are technologies that still expand
on their respective markets even when no further climate commitments are drawn.
Being already competitive, new policies can be flexible with them, as they can be
==PAGE:27==
1.3 What future for district heating in Denmark?
17
expected to increase their market shares.
1.3.2
Miscellaneous goals and expectations
The previous section depicted what could be expected if the 2020 energy and climate
strategy was maintained all the way to 2030 without adoption of further goals. Nev-
ertheless, finite objectives have already been declared all around the country. For
instance, the municipality of Copenhagen aims at producing a 100% renewable heat
by year 2025 mainly by CHP plants conversion to biomass [18]. Aarhus, the second
largest city of the country, set 2035 as a latest date to reach a fully CO2 neutral power
and heat production. Aalborg’s municipality is evaluating how to convert to green
energy the coal fired Nordjyllandsværket CHP plant, that has an electrical capacity
of 410MW and thermal capacity of 490MW [29].
When implementing scenarios with targeted CO2 reductions for the horizon 2050,
the Danish Energy Agency forecasts that heat pumps will play an important role
in DH composition. For instance in the scenario where wind potential is the most
integrated in the energy system, large scale heat pumps are expected to cover 29% of
DH production [5], while this participation was only 1.9% of 2013 DH output.
Another expectation is to observe a strong development of large scale solar heating
systems. Figure 1.17 displays the evolution of installed solar heating systems as DH
plants over the period 2006-2016, data have provided by the Danish Energy Agency.
This period experienced a boom for the technology, the capacity being multiplied by
more than 32 over a single decade. This rapid expansion is expected to continue.
According to the Danish Energy agency, solar heat could represent around 6PJ of the
produced district heat in 2025, that is to say 7 times the 2015 amount. This would
be facilitated by the development of seasonal heat storage in order to take the best
advantage of the potential.
Figure 1.17: Cumulative solar thermal capacity, provided by the Danish Energy
Agency.
==PAGE:28==
18
1 Introduction
1.4
Introduction to TIMES-DK
TIMES-DK is a model that aims at represent all the energy sectors in Denmark. It is
born from a collaboration between the Danish Energy Agency, the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark and E4SMA, an Italian company specialized in energy consultancy.
The information found in that section comes from the author own comprehension of
the model as well as a paper written by the engineers and researchers who developed
TIMES-DK [30]. The paper being unpublished and still under review, special access
has been provided by the authors.
TIMES Modelling
The name TIMES comes from The Integrated MARKAL-
EFOM Systems. Such a model is based on a bottom-up approach, which in other
words means the energy model relies on an detailed technological description in order
to picture the whole energy system landscape. TIMES is tailored for medium to long
term analysis of a given geographical area. It it a useful and flexible tool for energy
planning. Freedom is given in the representation of time and space, with the pos-
sibility to divide a year into time-slices and the selected area into sub-regions. The
generated techno-economic models rely on a partial equilibrium optimization under
the assumptions of foreknowledge and perfect market competition. The optimization
is a social welfare maximization though system cost minimization.
The objective
function describing total systems costs is made of several components [31]. Positively
are counted:
• Investment cost
• Costs during construction time
• Variable costs
• Fixed operation and maintenance costs
• Surveillance costs
• Decommissioning costs
• Taxes
And negatively, are accounted as revenues:
• Subsidies
• Recuperation of sunk material
• Salvage value
==PAGE:29==
1.4 Introduction to TIMES-DK
19
Energy sectors
TIMES-DK model includes five different energy sectors. The ex-
tracted, imported or exported primary energy commodities are modelled in SUP, the
supply sector. Electricity and district heat productions are covered by the ELC sector.
The final consumption of the industries, residential and transport sectors are mod-
elled by respectively IND, RES and TRA sectors. In the present work, the transport
sector has been left apart because it is not significantly impacted by modifications in
the district heating sector, and vice versa. In the DEA’s version of TIMES-DK, these
five sectors are calibrated on energy statistics of years 2010, 2012 and 2015. That
triple calibration was made in order to ensure methods and modelling consistency.
Geography
Figure 1.18 pictures how geography is aggregated in TIMES-DK. Two
regions are represented: eastern Denmark, or DKE, representing Sjælland, its south-
ern islands and Bornholm; and western Denmark, or DKW, composed by Jylland,
Fyn and the remaining islands. A specific thinner description is made for heat supply.
Three types of heating areas exist: central and decentral areas, both supplied by DH,
and individual areas where heating relies only on individual technologies. Next-to-
DH areas corresponds to zones close to current DH networks and being suitable for
an extension of the distribution grid. They can be interpreted as potential for DH
development.
Figure 1.18: Geography in TIMES-DK, from [30].
==PAGE:30==
20
1 Introduction
Time
TIMES models are meant to simulate yearly statistics. However, TIMES-DK
uses 32 subdivisions, or time slices. The naming convention contains 4 letters:
1. R, S, F or W if the time slice is in spRing, Summer, Fall or winteR
2. WD or NW if it belongs to a Work Day or Non-Work day
3. A final letter between A and D representing critical situations for the system:
A for high wind production in parallel with low electricity demand, B for the
opposite that is to say high ELC demand together with low wind penetration, C
means no solar photovoltaic production like night time for instance, and finally
D is used for the rest.
The distribution of hours per time slices is given Figure 1.19.
Figure 1.19: Number of hours per time slices, from model settings.
ELC sector
describes the production of power and heat. For each time slice a merit
order curve is used to choose the operating technologies based on their technological
and economic input parameters. It is also responsible for investments in future tech-
nologies. The produced electricity ELCC, central district heat HETC and decentral
district heat HETD are then injected into the transmission and distribution networks
to reach the end use sectors. However, the description made in TIMES-DK is limited
and doesn’t take into account dynamic aspect of electricity and heat generation like
grid auxiliary services or storage.
RES sector
This part of the model pictures the energy consumption by households.
The present work doesn’t take into consideration the electricity consumed by appli-
ances, only the heating part of the demand. Six energy service demands are included
in the model depending on the building covering the heat service: first based on its
type (detached or multi-storey) and then its location (central, decentral or individ-
ual areas not supplied with DH). The existing stock of buildings is divided into 12
categories: 6 possibilities of energy services and 2 construction date, before or after
==PAGE:31==
1.4 Introduction to TIMES-DK
21
1972; the later being used to quantify the potential for heat savings. The buildings
can consume different types of heat: heat from savings, heat from residential boilers
or heat from heat exchangers, that is to say DH. There is just two exceptions: in
individual areas heat from heat exchangers is not available and new buildings erected
in future modelling years can not consume heat from savings. Heat from boilers and
exchangers are produced in processes named Residential heating technologies, or RHT.
When dealing with district heat, the input of RHTs is heat from DH pipes, central
or decentral. For the other cases, RHTs consume other commodities like fossil fuels,
electricity for heat pumps, solar heat, biomass, etc.
IND sector
The industrial sector is highly disaggregated and detailled. Twelve
economic sectors are represented:
1. Agriculture, forestry, fishing, gravel and stone
2. Food, beverages and tobacco
3. Chemicals
4. Metals, machinery and transport equipment
5. Cement and bricks, glass and ceramics
6. Other commodity production
7. Wholesale and retail trade
8. Private service
9. Public service
10. Construction
11. Other utilities
12. Motor vehicles - purchase and repair
In each of these sectors, energy commodities are consumed in conversion processes
in order to cover an energy service demand. Savings potentials are also implemented
so that the model can use them together with conversion processes if needed. Seven
different energy service demand are defined, with different levels of demand per sector:
• High temperature, above 150◦C
• Medium temperature, below 150◦C
• Room heat
• Electric motors and cooling
==PAGE:32==
22
1 Introduction
• Light and IT
• Forest machines and fisher boats
• Forklifts
In all the sectors, district heat is used to meet demands of medium temperature (MT)
and room heat (RH). Figure 1.20 shows the averaged industrial DH consumption
over the three calibration years, heat for RH and MT are differentiated. As one can
imagine, with 34PJ RH represents the most of DH consumed in IND sector used
mostly in private service, public service and wholesale & retail. MT accounts for only
3.0 PJ of the industrial consumption of DH. Activities of the primary sector are the
one consuming MT from DH: agriculture, chemical and food industries.
Figure 1.20: Industrial DH consumption for RH and MT, averaged 2010-2012-2015.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2
Development realism
The present chapter is meant to explain the work done on the enhancement of new
technologies deployment. A first part will highlight where the problem is born and will
show the needs for improvement. Then the adopted methodology will be presented.
Finally the results will be exposed and a short sensitivity analysis performed.
2.1
Need for improvement
The energy transition modelled with TIMES-DK should be realistic, which means not
being too abrupt or too fast. This is inspired by the fact that the government does
not have an infinite amount of money to support the system transition, by creating
subsidies or special power purchase agreement for new innovative technologies. In
the same way, the companies owning and operating the supply plants can’t afford a
full green transition in a short amount of time. This can be explained by the fact
that when a new plant is erected it has a economical lifetime, usually shorter than
its technical lifetime, during which the asset is valuable. It is only at the end of the
economical lifetime, when money is no more at stakes, that the investors can start
participating in other projects. These reasons simulate some sort of inertia in the
development of new technologies.
However in the provided version of TIMES-DK nothing forbids the system to do
so. When running the model, a flash transition is achieved because of an unbounded
investment capacity. Figure 2.1 shows the investment in heat plants (HPL) and CHP
plants in each of the modelled period, using the TIMES attribute Var_Ncap. To
not bound model investments leads to peaks of c.a. 16GW observed in 2020 and
2050, while for all the remaining 5-years periods the maximal observed Ncap is only
1.29GW obtained in the milestone years 2030.
First of all there is no newly installed capacity in the calibration in year 2010
because it is the first period of the time horizon, where the LP problem can be
interpreted as a unit commitment problem and no investments in additional capacity
are needed.
For years 2012 and 2015 the reason is quite the same: this is once
again a unit commitment problem which encompass the capacities installed in 2010
as well as new stocks available for free respectively in 2012 and 2015. Thus, these 3
periods are locked by the calibration. Moreover, in the ELC_SubRES file, all the new
technologies have been made available only from 2018 onward. This comes from the
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Development realism
fact that the milestone years 2015 and 2020 represent respectively the periods from
2013 to 2017 and from 2018 to 2022. That means that technically no investments are
allowed earlier than 2018, represented by the milestone year 2020.
Figure 2.1: Newly installed CHP and HPL capacity.
Then two peaks are observed at the first and the last periods. In 2020 the model
invests in solar heating systems up to their potential because this technology is cheap
and doesn’t imply any fuel costs. Other technologies are also selected by the model
like geothermal and ambient air heat pumps. However, these technologies do not need
such a large Ncap because their availability factor is much larger: 98% for the heat
pump technologies while the yearly averaged availability for solar heating technologies
is 8.6%. This means that for the same yearly heat output the needed solar capacity
will be more than ten times higher than the heat pump thermal capacity.
Afterwards, some additional investments are made to match the increasing de-
mand of DH and restore the stocks that are being progressively decommissioned.
Finally, as the solar thermal capacity installed in 2020 has a technical lifetime of 30
years, the whole stock is replaced in 2050. Here at least two reasons combine together
in order to explain this choice of a late replacement. First, thanks to exogenous tech-
nological learning curves, the CAPEX and OPEX are lower at the end of the time
horizon, creating an incentive to make investments as late as possible. And secondly,
investing a lot in the last period leads to large valuable assets at the year End Of
Horizon + 1. This salvage value is taken into account negatively within the objective
function: the higher it is, the lower will be the objective function. As this is a problem
of social costs minimization having large remaining capacity at the end of the horizon
is interesting.
Intuitively speaking this behaviour seems rather unrealistic. If the only example
of solar heat is taken, a survey from the IEA Solar heating & cooling program [32]
reported in May 2018 that the global solar thermal capacity increased from 62GWth
to 472GWth between 2000 and 2017. That is equivalent to an averaged development
of 22.7GWth per year or 113.9GWth every five years. Then, considering that TIMES-
DK indicate a maximal installation of 15GWth of that technology per 5 years period,
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Methodology
25
that means around 13% of the global solar heat budget is absorbed by Denmark.
Considering the size of the country and its solar resources compared to other countries,
the limits of the model start to be revealed.
2.2
Methodology
In order to work around the issue described in the previous part, a boundary should be
added to the model to limit the investments within each 5-years period. This bound-
ary has to be set at a level determined from the historical evolution of DH systems.
Ideally, a list as long as possible of yearly installed capacities on DH grids should be
used in order to compute a realistic 5-years maximal installation. Nevertheless, such
a record was not available to the author.
2.2.1
Historical capacities approximation
Facing this problem, it has been chosen to approximate the installed capacity histor-
ical records from Figure 1.8 by starting with the assumption that generated district
heat and installed DH capacities are proportional. From that point if the total in-
stalled capacities of CHP and HPL is known for only one year it is possible to have
an estimation of the evolution of these installed capacities from 1990 to 2015. Thanks
to the triple model calibration, the HPL and CHP stocks are known for 2010, 2012
and 2015 and gathered in Table 2.1
Table 2.1: CHP and HPL installed capacities during the calibrated years, in GW.
Type of plant
2010
2012
2015
Cogeneration
5.23
5.24
5.17
Heat only
12.26
12.89
13.16
Using the hypothesis of proportionality between thermal production and capacity,
it is possible for each year y to calculate a factor that, once multiplied with the
installed capacity in one of the calibration year, will give the installed capacity in
Denmark at the same year y. However, as the installed capacity is known in 2010,
2012 and 2015, three different time series of this factor are computable, each of them
taking the value 1 in either 2010, 2012 or 2015. This means three evolution of thermal
power can be compute, each of them matching the data from one calibrated year.
For the considerations to come, the average of the three approximations will be
used as a best approximation in order to reduce dependency upon calibration.
2.2.2
Creating a deployment boundary
Once these curves are obtained, the difference in capacity between two years y1 and
y2, with y1 < y2, should indicate the changes in the system beween periods y1 and
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Development realism
y2. If the difference is positive it will correspond to newly installed capacity, if it
is negative it can be interpreted as decommissioned capacity. A first approach to
access the 5 year maximal newly installed capacity would be to compute each and
every 5 years capacity difference and simply select the maximum value as the desired
level for the model boundary. However, the methodology applied to get the time
series of thermal capacities creates a strong dependency on the yearly DH output
and heat demand, and thus lacks robustness. Indeed, from one year to another, the
heat output can vary while the assets on the grid are exactly the same. This is done
by just modifying the way plants are operated, like increase the number of full load
hours for a peaker if required from the demand side.
In order to tackle this dependency to the fluctuating yearly demand, it has been
decided to calculate the average 5 years variation in thermal power over a sliding 10
years window ∆5P(T), defined by Eq. (2.1).
∆5P(T) = 1
N
N
∑
i=0,i∈T
Pi+5 −Pi
(2.1)
With:
• T the chosen sliding 10 years period of interest: 1990-2000, 1995-2005, 2000-
2010 or 2005-2015.
• N + 1 the number of 5 years interval observed in T. As T = 10 years, N = 5
periods.
• Pi is the installed capacity at year i.
This development indicator has been calculated for CHP and HPL technologies over
all the 10 years periods. It has been chosen to concentrate on 5 years variations be-
cause of the way TIMES-DK is used: not all future years are modelled, only successive
periods represented by its central milestone year. For instance, 2020 represents years
2018 to 2022. In that way, the created boundary will be consistent with the model
definition.
Now that the historical deployment have been approximated, the maximal ob-
served variations should be selected for the creation of the boundary. In that way,
the installation of new DH plants will be performed at a realistic place of replacement.
That limit will be established in a proper TIMES scenario file. Has been added to
the model Eq. (2.2):
{
NCap (CHP, t) ≤max(∆5P CHP),
∀t ∈T
NCap (HPL, t) ≤max(∆5P HPL),
∀t ∈T
(2.2)
Where:
• NCap (CHP, t) and NCap (CHP, t) are respectively the newly installed capacity
of cogeneration and heat plants over the modeled period t.
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Results
27
• max(∆5P CHP) and max(∆5P HPL) represent the maximal 5-year evolution of
CHP and HPL previously calculated.
• T is the ensemble of the modeled future periods, characterized by the milestone
year 2020, 2025, 2030, 2035, 2040, 2045 and 2050.
2.3
Results
2.3.1
Historical capacities approximation
First of all, the approximated historical installed capacity are displayed on Figure 2.2.
The obtained stock evolution seems to agree with the market development presented
previous part. Along the 1990s CHP capacity increases while HPL are being decom-
missioned. This corresponds to the deployment of green field cogeneration plants in
decentral areas.
Then, changing market conditions tended to lower the production of such plants
and use HPL instead. Physically, it did not mean the green field plants have been
shut down, they simply lost market shares. As the present approximated capacity in
indexed on heat production, this results in an overall decrease in calculated capacity.
The observations and the explanations are the same for heat plants, with the opposite
tendencies. A major difference comes from the fact that actual new technologies were
deployed since the late 2000s, like solar systems and heat pumps.
Figure 2.2: Approximated installed CHP (left) and HPL (right) capacities between
1990 and 2015.
2.3.2
Development boundary
Table 2.2 gathers the averaged 5 years capacity variations for cogeneration and heat
plants, using Eq. (2.1). These mean variations reflects the tendencies observed on
the curves. The CHP capacity should increase at the beginning of the period, then
==PAGE:38==
28
2 Development realism
stagnate and finally slowly decrease. The opposite for HPL plants: a decrease during
the first years and rocket between years 2000 and 2015, but with sharper changes
than in the CHP case. Considering at first their sign and then their values, the mean
5-years differences agree with that description.
Table 2.2: CHP and HPL averaged 5 years variations over 1990-2015.
Period
CHP [MW]
HPL [MW]
1990-2000
1502
-4028
1995-2005
104
-578
2000-2010
-396
2672
2005-2015
-568
3929
To sum up, the development of both technologies for each 10-years period can now
be quantified by one mean 5 years value. The deployment boundary to be designed
should correspond to the maximal positive values observed in the Table, that is to
say the bold numbers. However, as it makes no sense to select a result accurate to the
MW from such strong assumptions, they will be approximated to 1.5 GW/5-years for
cogeneration plants and 4GW/5-years for heat plants.
After these bounds have been implemented to the model, the simulation has been
performed until 2050.
Figure 2.3 pictures the obtained results together with the
unbounded model output.
Figure 2.3: Newly installed CHP and HPL capacities, with and without develop-
ment boundary.
As expected no peak is observed and instead the installation of new capacity is
spread along the time horizon. The newly erected capacity is quite constant until 2035
with levels around 4GW, that is to say close to the deployment limit on heat plants.
In these years, the investments in HPL capacity are actually at their maximum, as
represented on Figure 2.4. The budget is mostly used for solar heating systems, with
some installed air heat pumps as well as Geothermal heat pumps but only in 2020.
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Sensitivity analysis
29
Then over years 2040 and 2045, the new installation are lower because heat plants
deployments reach respectively 49% and 30% of their authorized bound.
Finally, as the decommissioned units are progressively replaced year after year,
the investments made in 2050 are less interesting in terms of salvage value. That
might explain why the authorized bound is not reached in 2050.
Figure 2.4: Newly installed heat plants, per technology.
Regarding cogeneration plants, the new developments are systematically by far
under the limit. Table 2.3 depicts the results. Wastes incineration CHP are the only
technologies invested in, apart from year 2020 where it represents only 55.6% of the
new installations. That year, the other plants are gas engines running on natural gas.
Table 2.3: Cogeneration plants new installation per year, in absolute values and
relatively to the authorized 1.5GW.
Year
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050
NCAP [MW]
425
0
182
63
186
7
175
Activation of boundary [%]
28.3
0
12.1
4.2
12.4
0.5
11.7
To conclude, one should take care when interpreting in details the relative partic-
ipation of cogeneration and heat plants. So far that relies only on techno-economical
description of the plants, no policies or legislation being investigated yet.
2.4
Sensitivity analysis
As the boundary has been created based on strong assumption, a sensitivity analysis
can be performed in order to find out the impact of the selected max(∆5P CHP) and
max(∆5P HPL) on the simulated energy transition. To do so, two additional run have
been performed: one where the NCap boundaries for CHP and HPL are increased
by 10%, and the other one where they are reduced by 10%. These scenarios will
be referred to as respectively BND+10% and BND-10% while the initial constrained
case will be named Base constraint.
==PAGE:40==
30
2 Development realism
First of all Table 2.4 gathers the objective function ObjZ, or overall system costs,
for the three scenarios. The difference between the three cases might seem not signif-
icant but one should remember that the objective function encompasses all the costs
of SUP, IND, ELC and HOU sectors. The implemented boundaries being very close
to each other and affecting only the ELC sector, the variations in the three ObjZ
values are limited. However, the higher the upper bound on Ncap is set and the more
relaxed the optimization problem will be. That explains why BND-10% shows the
highest objective function and BND+10% the lowest.
Table 2.4: Objective functions, in billion kr2011.
Scenario
BND-10%
Base constraint
BND+10%
ObjZ [bnkr2012]
1303.40
1303.06
1302.74
Then Table 2.5 shows the overall investment costs ∑CostInv and newly installed
capacity ∑Ncap for CHP and HPL over the period 2020-2050. For scenarios BND-
10% and BND+10%, the deviation with respect to Base constraint is also calculated.
Reducing the boundary leads to curb the installation of new technology and thus
lower investments costs. The opposite tendency is observed when the limit on the
yearly NCap is increased. Nevertheless, in both cases the amplitude of the deviations
compared to the base case are similar: while the cumulated new capacity varies by
±1.6%, the cumulated investments fluctuates by ±1.5%.
Table 2.5: DH plants overall investment costs and installed capacity over 2020-2050.
∑CostInv
∑Ncap
Scenario
Value [Mkr2012]
Deviation [%]
Value [MW]
Deviation [%]
BND-10%
21835
-1.50
23054
-1.66
Base constraint
22166
-
23443
-
BND+10%
22507
1.54
23826
1.63
A closer look at the yearly installation of DH plants gives a better overview of the
transition’s dynamics. Figure 2.5 displays for the three scenarios the Ncap attribute
of CHP and HPL technologies over the simulated periods.
When the allowed installation bound is lowered by 10%, the new installed capac-
ities are quite constant until 2040, at levels between 3.6GW and 4GW. In 2045 the
investments in DH plants are close to the ones of the two other scenarios, but still
remaining a little lower at 1.1GW. Then for the period represented by the milestone
year 2050, Ncap increases to 3.1GW in order to maximize the salvage value of the
assets and thus dimish the objective function.
Regarding scenario BND+10%, the years 2020 to 2035 are characterized by higher
deployments, obviously thanks to the 10% increased boundary. In 2040 Ncap drops
to 390MW, a value significantly lower than the ones observed at the same period in
the two other scenarios. Afterwards the installations increases to reach 1.2GW and
==PAGE:41==
2.4 Sensitivity analysis
31
almost 4GW in respectively years 2045 and 2050. Once again, this might be a result
of salvage value maximization.
Figure 2.5: Yearly installation of DH plants for the three scenarios.
A transition as smooth as possible would be a transition where the new installed
capacity year after year is as constant as possible. In order to quantify that smooth-
ness has been been introduced the coefficient of variation cv of the Ncap timeseries
calculated as the ratio of NCap standard deviation σNcap to its mean value µNcap.
That coefficient, usually used in statistics, reflects the dispersion of a distribution
around its mean. The division by µNcap aims at normalize the spread represented by
the standard deviation in order to compare different distributions, or here different
scenarios. The smoothest transition occurs when Ncap is perfectly uniform along the
time horizon, corresponding to σNcap = 0 and thus cv = 0.
Table 2.6 shows the different calculated cv and their relative position with respect
to the Base constraint scenario. Here one should understand that the lower is the
limit on yearly installed capacity the more spread along the time horizon will be the
DH plants investments and the lower will be the calculated cv.
From the results
it could be stated that the transition represented by BND-10% is 17% smoother
than the Base constraint one, and 31% more unbalanced for BND+10%. For further
comparison, the unbounded transition represented on Figure 2.1 shows a cv of 1.51.
Table 2.6: Ncap coefficient of variation per scenario.
Scenario
BND-10%
Base constraint
BND+10%
cv [-]
0.305
0.367
0.529
Deviation [%]
-17.02
-
30.66
As a conclusion, the pace of the DH transition is sensitive to the selected Ncap
limitations. The obtained transition will result from the balance between the desired
level of realism and the optimization of social cost, that is to say the competition
between cv and ObjZ.
==PAGE:42==
32
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3
District heating
legislation
In this chapter, the author will present the work done on the inclusion of some
aspects of the current district heating legislation into the model TIMES-DK. A first
part will present the methodology used to model the different legislative components.
A description of the scenarios testing different relaxation in regulation will also be
given. Then a second part will expose and analyze the results obtained from the
different scenarios.
3.1
Methodology
This part will first present the chosen DH regulations and how they have been im-
plemented in TIMES-DK. And in a second time the description of the legislative
scenarios will be given.
3.1.1
Legislative components modelling
In order to design new policies for the development of DH system in the mid to long
term, different laws will be modelled and added to the system. These laws apply on
different geographical scale. Some regulate the DH sector everywhere in Denmark
and some others are restriction in central urban areas. For restrictions covering the
whole country, mainly interpreted from the Heat Supply Act, two have been chosen:
• The incentives to use cogeneration of heat and power in some areas. This has
been motivated by the fact that CHP plants are starting to lose market shares
in electricity tradings and that some renewable HPL technologies are becoming
more competitive for DH supply.
• The required use of natural gas for DH supply in certain areas, motivated by
the fact that Denmark’s natural gas resources are not unlimited and also that
this energy might generate high heat prices. Moreover, even though its emission
==PAGE:44==
34
3 District heating legislation
factor is low compared to other fossil fuels, natural gas is not CO2 neutral. Thus
its use is impossible in the desired carbon free energy system.
And then will be modelled the prohibitions in central areas of the following DH
technologies:
• Ambient air electric heat pumps
• Geothermal heat pumps
• Biomass fired heat only plants
• Solar heating systems
3.1.1.1
Cogneration of heat and power
No piece of legislation has been found by the author clearly stating that CHP plants
shall be used for DH supply. However there is several aspects of the current regulation
that gives an advantage to cogeneration plants. For instance profits are forbidden
when selling heat or also the municipalities are required to include a CHP plant in
their investigation when designing their heat plan. That led to high penetration of
CHP plants into the DH supply mix.
In order to model these aspects of the legislation, a lower boundary will be imple-
mented for the heat output of CHP plants. It has been chosen to think in terms of
share of heat production like described by Eq. (3.1):
QCHP,t ≥α (QCHP,t + QHP L,t)
∀t ∈T
(3.1)
Where:
• QCHP,t and QHP L,t are respectively the heat production of CHP and HPL
plants in year t
• α is the desired share of CHP production
• T is the ensemble of future modelled years
Using shares instead of absolute values is meant to mimic the development of DH
systems under the same CHP incentives. Indeed, setting a lower bound on an absolute
value could have resulted in decreasing shares over time, as demand is growing and
CHP is expected to be less competitive than renewable heat only plants. The value of
that share α is supposed to be dependant on the type of area to be supplied. Thus, α
will be set at the finest geographical scale available in TIMES-DK. Four geographical
areas are used: central or decentral DH areas located in either DKE or DKW.
Then it has been chosen to calculate the different geographical values of α based
on TIMES-DK calibrated years. It came from the assumption that the statistics used
for the model calibration reflected a perfect fulfillment of the CHP legal framework.
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Methodology
35
Thus the shares of CHP in HETC and HETD production have been calculated in
years 2010, 2012 and 2015 in both regions of the model.
Table 3.1 displays the
results. The shares of CHP production are very different when comparing central
and decentral areas which highlights the differences in DH-policies for these areas.
On the other hand, similar trends between DKE and DKW are proofs of consistency
at the national scale.
Table 3.1: Penetration of cogeneration plants in DH production during the cali-
brated years.
DH area
Share of CHP production α [%]
2010
2012
2015
Central DKE
92.72
97.00
92.57
Decentral DKE
26.30
22.09
22.76
Central DKW
95.35
90.27
90.67
Decentral DKW
35.52
40.54
40.25
For modeling into TIMES-DK, will be selected the minimums observed in the
calibrated years, represented in bold numbers.
This has been chosen in order to
avoid over-investments in cogeneration technologies.
3.1.1.2
Natural gas fired plants
For that part too, no piece of legislation has been found clearly stating that the use
of natural gas was mandatory in a given area. However as pictured by Figures 1.4
and 1.10 natural gas represents a significant part of heat generation and a lot of DH
plants consume it. That is more the result of incitements to use this fuel than a
requirement.
Even though current prices might reveal an advantage compared to other greener
commodities, forecasts tend to show that natural gas is expected to lose competitive-
ness. As an example, Figure 3.1 represents the prices forecasts used with TIMES-DK
by the Danish Energy Agency as well as DTU. The graph shows that natural gas price
is supposed to exceed straw price in the late 2020’s and become as expensive as wood
chips by 2035. Furthermore, in order to turn carbon free by 2050 Denmark will have
to abandon the use of natural gas for greener resources. These two arguments point
out the fact that North Sea gas might not a suitable resource for the future Danish
energy system, and thus incentives to consume it will at some point become somehow
obsolete. That is why it has been desired to include legislation about natural gas into
TIMES-DK in order to understand the consequences of their cancellation.
Once again, it has been decided to work on the finest geographical description
offered by TIMES-DK as the natural gas legislation apply mainly in areas supplied
by natural gas which are spread all over Denmark. As in the case of CHP production,
the consumption of natural gas will be constrained to a lower bound defined from the
model calibration. A limit on the share of natural gas in commodities consumption
==PAGE:46==
36
3 District heating legislation
Figure 3.1: Fuel prices forecasts in TIMES-DK.
will be adopted to simulate a development respecting the legislation.
Hence, the
designed limit will have a structure described by Eq. (3.2).
Φ (NGA, CHP + HPL, t) ≥β × Φ
(∑
i
ci, CHP + HPL, t
)
∀t ∈T
(3.2)
With:
• Φ (NGA, CHP + HPL, t) is the flow of natural gas entering all cogeneration
and heat plants during year t
• β is the desired share of natural gas in all commodities consumed for DH pro-
duction
• Φ (∑
i ci, CHP + HPL, t) is the flow of all the commodities, including natural
gas, consumed in all CHP and HPL processes during year t
• T is the ensemble of future modelled years
The different values of β have been calculated in years 2010-2012-2015. Table 3.2
displays the results together with the values of district heat produced by CHP and
HPL processes, designated by Q. During the calibration years, the share of Natural
gas (NGA) is null or almost null in central areas. This might come from the fact
that this fuel is consumed by the model mainly in peak load units and thus not very
significant in the fuels mix. However in central DKW β is exactly equal to zero which
could be the consequence of a questionable calibration of the ELC sector in TIMES-
DK. In decentral areas, the penetration of NGA is more significant: 6-7% in DKE
and around 16% in DKW.
The choice of β to be constrained in the model should be as consistent as possible
and reflect at the best the observations of the calibrated years. Thus the selected
values will be calculated as the averaged β weighted by the DH outputs Q, described
==PAGE:47==
3.1 Methodology
37
Table 3.2: Shares of NGA in DH fuels consumption β and DH production Q over
the calibration years, together with averaged NGA consumption β .
Area
Cen. DKE
Dec. DKE
Cen. DKW
Dec. DKW
β [%]
2010
1.038
6.161
0
16.100
2012
0.020
6.345
0
16.567
2015
0.300
7.245
0
16.790
Q [PJ]
2010
29.89
18.56
37.67
39.15
2012
29.29
17.51
36.73
37.61
2015
29.19
16.95
36.47
36.99
β [%]
-
0.457
6.558
0
16.479
Eq. (3.3):
βa =
∑2015
t=2010 Qa
t βa
t
∑2015
t=2010 Qa
t
∀a
(3.3)
Where:
• βa is the weighted averaged of β over the calibration years in the area a, a being
either Cen. DKE, Dec. DKE, Cen. DKW or Dec. DKW.
• Qa
t is the DH output in the area a at calibrated year t
• βa
t is the observed β in area a at calibrated year t
The calculated values of β are gathered at the end of Table 3.2 in bold. These will
be the lower shares implemented in the model. The newly created constraints will be
activated from year 2018 so that their impact is noticeable from the milestone year
2020.
3.1.1.3
Prohibitions in central areas
Finally some of restrictions, in terms of fuels and technologies, in central areas will
be investigated. As presented in the first chapter, are forbidden, among others, in
central urban areas:
• Solar heating systems
• Geothermal and ambient air heat pumps
• Biomass fired heat only plants
• Electric boilers
These prohibitions are easier to easier to model than CHP or NGA restrictions. Invest-
ments in new technologies will simply be forbidden by constraining Ncap to zero from
2018 for selected DH plants. Among all the technologies available for investments in
TIMES-DK generating HETC, will be banned:
==PAGE:48==
38
3 District heating legislation
1. Solar plants defined by the process EHSOLDHC5N labelled as Solar district
heating centralized including diurnal heat storage
2. Geothermal plants EHGEOAHC5N - Geothermal district heating absorption
heat pump 70C centralized, EHGEOAHC6N - Geothermal district heating ab-
sorption heat pump 50C centralized and EHGEOAHC7N - Geothermal district
heating - electric heat pump 70C centralised
3. The ambient air heat pump EHELCAMBHPC5N - Large heat pump ambient
temperature centralized together with the electric boiler EHELCEB5N - Electric
boilers centralized
4. The boilers fired by solid biomass: EHSTRBOC6N - District heating boiler,
biomass fired - Straw centralized, EHCPWBOC5N - District heating boiler,
biomass fired - Wood chips centralized and EHWPEBOC5N - District heating
boiler, biomass fired - Wood pellets centralized
Each of these items will represent one piece of legislation and will encompass all its
described technologies. Regarding item 3., heat pumps are more cost effective than
boilers, due to their coefficient of performance higher than 1, and will push boilers
out of the market in an unbounded case. But in another hand, it is not desired to
see boilers entering the market in cases where ambient air heat pumps are forbidden.
That is why these technologies are constrained together.
3.1.2
Creation of scenarios
First of all a naming convention is created in order to mention in an easy way the
modelled legislative components. Thus the restrictions will be be named:
• CHP the imposed share of cogeneration plants in DH production
• NGA the imposed share of natural consumed for DH production
• GEO-HP the prohibition of geothermal heat pumps in central areas
• ELC-HP the prohibition of ambient air heat pumps and electric boilers in cen-
tral areas
• Biomass the forbidden use of solid biomass in heat only plants in central areas
• Solar the prohibition of solar DH plants in central areas
With these policies, different scenarios will be created in order to understand what
would be the impact of their cancellation or continuation. As 6 policies are modelled
it would require theoretically 26 = 64 scenarios to fully understand all the possible
combinations of legislative relaxations. Nevertheless, a lot of these 64 possibilities
lead to similar outcomes. For instance, in the cases where CHP is activated, less than
==PAGE:49==
3.1 Methodology
39
10% of central DH output will be impacted by the inclusion or exclusion of GEO-HP,
ELC-HP, Biomass or Solar, which does not leave a lot of room for deep structural
changes on the heat market.
Figure 3.2: Scenarios definitions.
Figure 3.2 gathers the 14 scenarios that will be investigated. The idea was to start
with two extreme opposite configurations: the Baseline where all the legislation are
activated and No Restriction with all policies levied. From Baseline, deactivation of
few policies will be perform to understand their impact on the model. Such scenarios
will be interpreted as relaxation cases, described in the top part of the table. Then
from No Restriction the activation of policies will allow to grasp the effect of their
continuation on the unbounded case. These scenarios will be read as technological
prohibitions, described in the bottom part of the table. In that way each prohibition
will have a conjugated relaxation.
Regarding the relaxation cases for the policies in central areas, it has been chosen
to cancel the CHP policies as well in order to observe more significant modifications
on the central heat market. For these 7 scenarios the inclusion of NGA is not expected
to have a significant impact as this policy apply mainly in decentral areas. On the
other hand, NGA is not part of the prohibitions scenario, in order to be consistent
with the concept behind the creation of such scenarios: representing a deviation from
the unbounded case.
==PAGE:50==
40
3 District heating legislation
Finally it has been chosen to investigate the simultaneous cancellation and exten-
sion of GEO-HP and ELC-HP. That was motivated by the fact that the targeted
technologies are similar and somehow can have the same repercussions on the energy
system. Indeed both policies relate to heat pumps, known to be a technology linking
electricity and heat supply. It might be interesting to understand what can be ex-
pected from the energy system development when both are authorized or forbidden
in the same time.
N.B. All of the described scenarios include the development boundary designed at
the previous chapter.
3.2
Results
In this part will be presented the results from the simulations performed for each
scenarios. First will be given scalar indicators aiming at quantifying the scenarios
outcome.
A second part will evaluate how the heat is produced and what is the
structure of the heat mix. Then the evolution of the heat and electricity prices along
the modelled years will presented. Finally, the evaluation of district heat consumption
in RES and IND sectors will close the section.
3.2.1
Scalar indicators
3.2.1.1
Objective function
The most natural and simplest way to quantify the outcome of a scenario is to use
the objective function ObjZ of TIMES which includes all system costs. Figure 3.3
displays the obtained values in descending order.
Figure 3.3: Objective functions of each scenarios, in 2012 billion DKK.
First of all, the more an optimization model is constrained the more will be penal-
ized its objective function. That is why the extremes values are obtained for scenarios
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Results
41
Baseline and No Restriction, the latter with an ObjZ 1.63% lower than the first. Then
a clear gap is observable between the two scenarios including the policy CHP and
the 12 others in which it is deactivated. It must be understood here that the policy
on cogeneration plants is the one that has the largest impact on the overall system.
That makes sense as both heat and electricity supplies are affected here.
Then, an interesting pattern occurs in the activation and cancellation of central
areas legislation.
The order in which the relaxations scenarios are ranked is the
exact opposite ranking of the prohibitions scenarios. For instance, the relaxation of
the Solar policy will have a similar relative impact on the Baseline scenario than
its prohibition compared to the scenario No Restriction. This allows to order the
policies, and thus the technologies, based on their burden on ObjZ. From the most
disadvantageous to the one with the lowest impact on the energy system:
1. The prohibition of electric heat pumps, ELC-HP
2. The prohibition of solar systems, Solar
3. The prohibition of geothermal heat pumps, Geothermal-HP
4. The prohibition of biomass fired boilers, Biomass
Finally, a closer look at the results indicates that the values of the objective
function are the same for scenarios No Biomass and No Restrictions. This could
mean that the whole energy system is exactly the same in both cases and that the
relaxation of the Biomass policy is not a priority.
3.2.1.2
District heating costs
One of the problems with the interpretation of the objective function is that it en-
compasses all system costs. It would be interesting to have an indicator allowing to
compare the scenarios based only on the development of the district heating sector.
In that way, an indicator reflecting only DH supply costs has been designed as the
cumulative DH costs. It contains the sum over the period 2010-2050 of investment
costs, fuel costs including taxes, fixed and variable operation and maintenance costs.
However the sum of these costs might not reflect properly which scenario is the best
one DH-wise as the heat output depends on the included and excluded policies. Thus,
the cumulative DH costs will be divided by the overall produced DH over the same
period. The definition of the indicator is given Eq. (3.4):
CDH =
∑
t∈T CInv,t + CF uel,t + CT ax,t + CF OM,t + CV OM,t
∑
t∈T QHET C,t + QHET D,t
(3.4)
With:
• CDH the cumulative DH costs, the indicator
• CInv,t the investments, or CAPEX, at year t
==PAGE:52==
42
3 District heating legislation
• CF uel,t the costs of all consumed fuels at year t
• CT ax,t the taxes paid for fuels consumption at year t
• CF OM,t the fixed operation and maintenance costs at year t
• CV OM,t the variable O&M costs, or activity costs, at year t
• QHET C,t and QHET D,t district heat produced at year t in respectively central
and decentral areas
• T the ensemble of modelled years
All the mentioned costs are undiscounted and expressed in real values, or inflation free.
Figure 3.4 displays the CDH values for the 14 scenarios as well as the overall district
heat produced between 2010 and 2050. Each price component is displayed, fuel costs
and taxes being gathered, and the scenarios are ordered by descending CDH.
Figure 3.4: Cumulative DH costs CDH and cumulative DH output per scenario.
==PAGE:53==
3.2 Results
43
The relaxation scenarios have the same ranking when sorted by ObjZ or CDH
which can highlight a certain consistency in the methods. However, the situation is
different for the prohibition scenarios. Now No ELC-HP seems to reveal the lowest
CDH while it could have been expected to see the No Restriction at that position.
That is here that raises the difference between system and sector indicators. In fact,
the DH output is slightly higher in scenarios No Solar, No Biomass, No GEO and
No Restriction than for No ELC-HP. That difference in heat production might have
repercussions in other sectors. For instance, if these scenarios show lower heat prices,
RES and IND sectors might be positively impacted and generate savings compared
to No ELC-HP scenario.
Finally, when looking at the cost components, all of the four cases display similar
results. Fuel taxes and prices represent the highest participation in CCH, in second
position are the investment costs, FOM costs are third and VOM costs have the lowest
impact on the indicator. Table 3.3 shows these participations averaged over the 14
scenarios.
Table 3.3: Composition of CDH.
Investments
Fuels & taxes
FOM
VOM
Av. share of CDH [%]
25.9
47.7
16.5
9.9
3.2.2
Structure of heat supply
3.2.2.1
Heat mix
In order to understand how the heat is produced in each scenario, the heat mix
has to be calculated. This has been done for the extreme scenarios Baseline and No
Restriction, Figures 3.5 and 3.6 displaying their respective results. It has been chosen
to show only these two scenarios as the 12 others are simply deviations from them,
and to limit the number of figures.
The first thing to be noticed from these plots is their envelopes that represent the
amounts of district heat supplied in each area. In central areas, less DH is produced
in 2050 than in 2010 for the scenario Baseline, while in No Restriction the supply of
HETC is increasing all along the modelled years. On the other hand, the production
of decentral DH evolves more or less in the opposite way. Indeed, even though the
supplies are growing until the end of the time horizon in both scenarios, the levels of
produced heat in 2050 are higher for Baseline than for No Restriction. This is the
result of central DH being less competitive in Baseline and thus the model is trying to
shift DH consumption from central to decentral areas. That is actually not possible
for residential heat consumption but it is in the industrial sector. Thus as the shift
can’t be completely achieved, the overall DH output reaches 149.1PJ for Baseline and
167.7PJ for No Restrictions, meaning a 12% growth in DH consumption when the all
the policies are cancelled.
==PAGE:54==
44
3 District heating legislation
Figure 3.5: Composition of the heat mix, Baseline scenario.
==PAGE:55==
3.2 Results
45
Figure 3.6: Composition of the heat mix, No Restriction scenario.
==PAGE:56==
46
3 District heating legislation
In central areas few fuels are allowed when all the policies are activated. That is
why at the end of the period the DH mix is only composed by biomass and wastes with
the shares 53%-47% in DKW and 58%-42% in DKE. Then the same tendencies are
observed in both regions: the system relies on fossil fuels until 2045. The difference
lies in the type of fuels. While in DKE coal is completely phased out between 2015
and 2025 to be replaced by natural gas, in DKW the use of coal is maintained all the
way to 2035 and is complemented by a small amount of natural gas of c.a. 3.1PJ on
average.
When all the restrictions are levied, the transition in central areas is much richer.
From 2020 fossil fuels are reduced to a very small portion in DKE and entirely aban-
doned in DKW. Instead are introduced from 2020 electric heat pumps in both areas
and solar heating systems in DKE. In the same time, the biomass assets are smoothly
phased out until the mid 2030s in eastern Denmark and until the mid 2040s in the
west of the country. The apparition of solar heat in DKW happens later, in 2030.
In both areas, geothermal heat is also part of the heat mix but only to almost not
significant amounts. At year 2050 the heat mixes are composed by wastes, electricity
and solar heat with the proportions 22%-63%-15% and 34%-47%-19% for respectively
DKE and DKW.
For decentral areas under the Baseline scenario, the most present energy in the
heat mix at the beginning of the modelled period is biomass. Its consumption is
drastically decreased in the 2020s but kept at approximately constant levels until
2050. The averaged solid biomass consumption between 2025 and 2050 is 1.53PJ
in DKE and 6.97PJ in DKW. The shares of natural gas being constrained by the
activation of the NGA policy, that commodity is consumed with significant levels
until 2050. The use of coal appears with the development of Geothermal heat pumps.
This comes from the fact fact the processes describing such technologies receives in
input the commodity ELCSTM, labeled as Steam from geothermal ELC, together
with geothermal heat ELCGEO and electricity ELCC. The ELCSTM is created
by the process XBOELCSTM - Boiler to deliver steam to geo ads heat pumps which
burns coal. Once the geothermal asset is phased out in 2050, the consumption of coal
stops. Electric ambient air heat pumps are part of the mix since the first years of the
simulation. However they start to develop significantly in the 2040s when Geothermal
heat pumps are phased out. The most impressive technological deployment concerns
solar heating systems. As their installation is forbidden in urban areas, the whole
potential is used in decentral areas. They start to develop at the period 2020 in DKE
and 5 years later in DKW. In 2050, HETD is produced from natural gas, wastes,
biomass, electricity and solar heat with the following shares: 4%-13%-5%-36%-42%
in DKE and 13%-16%-10%-19%-42% in DKW. The shares of natural gas might not
be the one imposed by the NGA policy. This comes from distortions introduced by
simplifications when calculating the heat mix.
In the unbounded scenario the biomass assets are being phased out in the late
2030s. This makes some room for the development of solar heat that stabilizes quickly
at yearly levels above 8PJ of produced heat in DKE and the double in DKW. Geother-
mal heat pumps are also introduced at the beginning of the 2020s, followed by ambient
==PAGE:57==
3.2 Results
47
air heat pumps at the end of the decade. In the late 2030s natural gas is not used
anymore and as in the previous case, coal is abandoned when geothermal plants are
shut down in 2050. The main differences in the two regions lies in the use of waste in-
cineration that develops strongly in DKE to compensate the decreased productions of
natural gas and biomass fired plants. Such a development does not happen in DKW.
Only three commodities are used for DH supply in 2050: wastes, electricity and so-
lar heat. The corresponding shares are 23%-45%-32% in DKE and 8%-57%-35% in
DKW.
For the other 12 scenarios the outcomes are similar to the ones described above.
In the case of a relaxation scenario, the authorized technology will take important
shares of DH supply in the concerned area while the remaining areas are going to face
adjustments according to available potential. For instance in Relaxed Solar solar heat
develops strongly in central areas, pushing out of the market biomass technologies. In
parallel, as most of the solar potential is used in central areas, decentral DH generation
is compensated by the extensive use of ambient air heat pumps. The same kind of
modifications occur for prohibitions scenarios but these are deviations from the No
Restriction scenario instead of the Baseline. For instance when the policy ELC-HP
on ambiant air heat pumps in central areas is maintained, the whole solar potential of
DKE is used in central areas in order to compensate. As a result electric heat pumps
are extensively developed in decentral areas until it provides 99% of HETD in the
region.
3.2.2.2
Cogeneration plants
Then have been investigated the penetration, or persistence, of cogeneration plants
into the DH supply technologies. Figure 3.7 displays the obtained results.
In the four areas Baseline and Relaxed NGA show very similar results. This comes
from the fact that the share of CHPs are maintained above a certain level through
the policy CHP that is activated only for these two scenarios. When only CHP is
relaxed, the share of cogeneration still follows the same trend in central areas before
it starts to drop after 2025 in DKE and after 2030 in DKW.
In central DKE, Relaxed GEO will lead to the lowest penetration of CHP plants
with a c.a.
5% share in 2050.
On the other hand, central DKW hits the lowest
CHP shares when the CHP policy is levied alone, resulting in a 12% participation.
In both regions, the lines representing No GEO and No Biomass are almost hidden
by No Restriction. That highlights the fact that the concerned technologies are not
significantly represented in the central DH mix of the fully unbounded scenario, as
pictured on Figure 3.6. In DKE, the decommission of central CHP plants seems to
take place in three steps when all restrictions are cancelled: first a drop of 30% is
achieved between 2015 and 2020, then CHP production decreases slower in the 2020s
to reach a 50% share, and finally another 30% of CHP production is lost between
2030 and 2035. In DKW that transition is made only in two steps: a first drop after
2015 where CHP shares are halved, and a smooth decrease when from 2050 to the
end of the period.
==PAGE:58==
48
3 District heating legislation
Figure 3.7: Penetration of cogeneration plants in DH supply.
==PAGE:59==
3.2 Results
49
In decentral DKE the results are somehow surprising. The shares of CHP are
higher in No Restriction than in Baseline.
That might be explained by the fact
that in No Restriction the amounts of HETD produced are lower than the ones of
Baseline, resulting in relatively higher CHP penetration.
The highest shares are observed in the late 2020s when only heat pumps legislation
for central areas are cancelled. On the other hand, the lowest shares are achieved when
this policies are the only one maintained from the No Restriction case. However, these
two system behaviour occur when ELC-HP policy is concerned alone or together with
GEO-HP. But the same results are not observed when only GEO-HP is cancelled or
activated alone. If that policy is maintained alone, the results are similar to the fully
relaxed scenario. When it is the only one cancelled, the results are similar to the ones
of scenarios relaxed Solar, Relaxed CHP and to some extend Relaxed Biomass, that is
to say a gentle decrease on CHP penetration from 2020, with the exception of a small
peak in 2030 for Relaxed Biomass. Moreover, all the relaxation scenarios follow the
same trend at the end of the period, except for Relaxed NGA which is superimposed
with Baseline. That common behaviour is characterized by CHP shares between 22%
and 24% in 2035, followed by a slow decrease until they reach 15% to 17% in 2050.
In Decentral DKW the scenarios are distributed in 3 different pathways. First,
Baseline and Relaxed NGA are identical: the imposed CHP share is strictly respected
from 2020 to 2050. Then 5 prohibition scenarios follow the same tendency: No ELC-
HP, No HP, No Biomass, No GEO and the unbounded scenario No Restrictions.
Here, after a drop down to slightly below 5% in the 2020s, the share of CHP slightly
increases to stabilize between 6% or 8% depending on the scenario. Finally the 7
remaining cases are all the relaxation scenarios, except Relaxed NGA, together with
No Solar. In these scenarios the shares of CHP face the same drop in the 2020s but
keep on decreasing until all cogeneration plants are shut down in 2040. There is a
little particularity with No Solar where a new wastes fired CHP plant is erected from
2045. This plant produces in 2050 around 0.34PJ of HETD which represents 0.6%
of the district heat produced in decentral DKW at that time.
3.2.3
District heat prices
The developments and various supply structures described previously will have an
impact on the end-use sector of the model. Indeed, if the technologies involved in
the heat mix are too expensive, heat prices may rise and be followed by a decrease in
district heat consumption. In order to picture the competitiveness of DH, the heat
prices will be investigated. Eq. (3.5) defines how heat prices have been calculated
from the TIMES results:
p (c, r, t) =
∑32
ts=1 MC(c, r, t, ts) × Q(c, r, t, ts)
∑32
ts=1 Q(c, r, t, ts)
(3.5)
Where:
• p (c, r, t) is the price of commodity c in region r at year t
==PAGE:60==
50
3 District heating legislation
• MC (c, r, t, ts) is the marginal cost the production of commodity c, in region r,
at year t and during the time slice ts. It is available from TIMES output under
the attribute EQ_CombalM
• Q (c, r, t, ts) is the amount of commodity c produced in region r in year t and
time slice ts, represented in TIMES by the attribute V AR_FOut
The price presented here is actually the marginal costs averaged on the time slice and
weighted by heat output.
The calculated DH prices in central areas are gathered Figure 3.8.
When all
the policies are levied the prices are gradually decreasing to reach 40 kr/GJ in both
regions. These price reductions are due to the introduction of technologies which
can be identified here as electric ambient air heat pumps as the scenarios Relaxed
ELC-HP and Relaxed HP reveal the same prices evolution. Even if the technology is
cheap, solar heating systems are not driving prices to their lowest as No Solar returns
also results similar to the unbounded scenario.
In DKE, the other relaxation cases seem to show the same envelopes as the Base-
line scenario. That is to say strong variations and instability with on average an
increase in heat prices. However the impact of each scenario on the DH prices can be
ranked from the weakest to the strongest: in first comes Relaxed NGA, then Relaxed
CHP followed by the individual cancellations of GEO-HP, Solar and Biomass policies.
In DKW that ranking is the same with the only difference being in the swap of the
two latter scenarios.
Figure 3.8: DH prices in central areas.
In decentral areas the observed tendency are different. First, in DKE all scenarios
result in decreasing prices over time, on average when variations are disregarded.
In DKW the same observation can be done, except for Baseline and Relaxed NGA
that shows stronger variations and more instabilities. For these two scenarios the
prices aren’t increasing over time but fluctuating around their mean values that are
respectively 57.88kr/GJ and 57.17kr/GJ, values within the range recorded during the
calibration years.
==PAGE:61==
3.2 Results
51
As the prices are in ranges narrower than in central areas, it is more delicate to
state which of the policies have the largest impact on heat prices. Any conclusion
is also weakened by the uncertainties in the model and the fact that the observed
differences in prices are mainly side effects of changes in the heat mix of central
areas.
Figure 3.9: DH prices in decentral areas.
3.2.4
District heating consumptions
The differences in DH prices lead to variations in district heating competitiveness
compared to other heating technologies and thus affects the consumptions of end-use
sectors. In that part will be presented the consumptions of DH in RES and IND
sectors.
The supply sector SUP is designed in such a way that it consumes DH
in refineries. However that won’t be investigated here as the amounts involved are
negligible and because the results are strictly the same for all the scenarios.
3.2.4.1
Residential sector
Figure 3.10 displays the amounts of district heat sent in residential pipelines and
later absorbed by residential heating technologies. The demand of district heat in
all the areas is increasing with various levels according to the considered scenario.
However this is not the case for central areas of DKW where the amounts of DH
consumed decrease steadily until 2050 where they reach c.a. 90% of the 2015 levels.
In all the modelled areas the scenario No Restriction represents always the strongest
development of district heating while Baseline show either the slowest growth or the
lowest decrease. This is a direct consequence of the price gaps between the scenarios.
In central DH areas of DKE it is easily possible to differentiate the outcomes
of the relaxation scenarios.
The consumption of DH rises to higher levels when
are cancelled in that order: natural gas restrictions, CHP policies, prohibition of
geothermal heat pumps, prohibition of Solar heating systems, prohibition of biomass
==PAGE:62==
52
3 District heating legislation
and finally prohibition of ambient air heat pumps. That is in agreement with the
prices observed in previous section. In the other areas, the results are very similar
from a scenario to another, which makes it difficult to draw consistent conclusions.
3.2.4.2
Industrial sector
The DH consumption in IND sector for all the scenarios is presented on Figure 3.11.
Here the dynamics between the areas is quite unusual. If a scenario leads to higher
DH consumption in central areas, it will mean lower DH consumption in decentral
areas. For instance Baseline represents one of the strongest reductions in HETC
consumption but also one of the largest growth in decentral areas. This why the
amount of supplied HETD was higher in that scenario than in No Restriction. That
is again a consequence of high HETC prices for such scenarios. The problem here
is that the model is choosing to abandon district heating supply in central areas and
replace it by HETD consumption. The limitations of the geographical description of
the model appears here. For example, in the Private Service sector, 31 technologies
(savings excluded) are defined to cover the demand for IPDRH Private service demand
room heat. Among these technologies 2 consume central district heat and 2 consume
decentral district heat. However, as all of them produce the same commodity, the
model is free to choose which district heat is to be used to meet the demand of room
heat. In reality this is not possible. Thus a better geographical description of the
industrial sector is needed.
Nevertheless, the observed shift from central to decentral areas is not balanced
and DH consumption is not expanding as much as in less constrained scenarios. The
overall DH injected in IND sector in 2050 is 54.2PJ in the Baseline while it reaches
70.6PJ in No Restrictions, which is 30% higher. The twelve other scenarios show
values of DH consumption between these two extreme cases.
The penetration of
DH into IND sector is increasing when are cancelled: natural gas constrain, CHP
legislation, geothermal heat pump prohibition, biomass fired heat plant prohibition,
solar heat ban and finally electric ambient air heat pump.
==PAGE:63==
3.2 Results
53
Figure 3.10: DH consumed in RES sector.
==PAGE:64==
54
3 District heating legislation
Figure 3.11: DH consumed in IND sector.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 4
Conclusions and
recommendations
In this final part, the author will conclude critically the present study. Recommenda-
tions will also be given for further work on the model TIMES-DK. Will be addressed
the modelling of the development constraint of Chapter 2, the way legislation have
been modelled in Chapter 3, some possibilities to improve TIMES-DK, and finally
recommendations for DH policies relaxations.
Development constraint
First of all the method used to limit the installations of
DH plants is subject to high uncertainties due to questionable assumptions in the way
the constraint have been designed. The approximation of the historical deployment
based on recorded DH output and the data extracted from TIMES-DK calibration
years introduce two sources of uncertainties. First, the installed capacities in 2010-
2012-2015 found in the model are approximation made under certain assumption
and might include imperfections. However, as TIMES-DK has been developed by
teams of reliable energy system experts, the impact on the present work’s results are
limited, or even null. The uncertainties are mostly introduced by the assumption that
DH output and DH capacities are proportional. That created a designed boundary
strongly dependent on yearly DH demand and did not reflected fairly the reality, even
with the method employed to smoother variations through mathematical averaging.
The best way to create a deployment boundary reflecting the authentic installations
of DH plants would be to use directly the historical records of installed thermal power
instead of an approximation.
It might also be interesting to investigate the opposite of the deployment boundary,
some sort of phasing out boundary. It has often be observed in the results that some
technologies used in the calibration were phased out quickly in the 2020s in order to
be replaced by more cost efficient plants. That technological elimination is limited by
the fact that the deployment boundary sets a cap on the installation of replacement
technologies. However, as the assets are shut down before the end of their lifetime,
the real-world market inertia is not properly represented. It can be interesting to
model such a phasing out boundary and understand better how it would interact
with the deployment constraint. With this two constraint, it would also be possible
to examine the model behaviour under varying levels of market inertia.
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Conclusions and recommendations
Legislation modelling
The way DH legislation have been implemented into TIMES-
DK can also be questionable, specially the policies about cogeneration plants pene-
tration and natural gas consumption. Indeed, for each policies, constraints have been
designed based on the calibrated years of the model that might not fully reflect the
reality. Thus the created policies should not be interpreted as imposed shares based
on actual statistics but more as a wish to keep CHP production and gas consumption
above virtual levels. The uncertainties introduced by the methodology impact the
results in a way that they cannot be read as absolute real forecasted values. In the
other hand, the reader should better focus in the differences of trends between the
scenarios. Once again, the accuracy of the constraints could be enhanced if the DH
plants consumption and production over the past few years were investigated. But
even with these improvements a lot of uncertainties will still be part of TIMES-DK,
like the long term forecasts of fuels and technologies prices.
TIMES-DK improvements
As explained at the end of the third chapter there is
an issue in the way district heat is used in the industrial sector coming from the fact
that industries can switch from central to decentral district heat and vice versa. This
requires a better geographical representation of the IND sector. For instance, the
energy services demands that can be fulfilled with district heat, that is to say room
heat and medium temperature processes, could be subdivided into two geographic
demands according to their location: either in central or decentral areas. To include
the industrial demands in individual areas without DH supply, a third demand could
be introduced or a constraint on the amounts of HETC and HETD could be designed
to leave enough room for individual boilers representing such areas.
Moreover, from a scenario to another, the use of some renewable sources seemed
to shift widely from central areas to decentral areas, or the opposite. Sometime, the
whole potential of solar heat or geothermal heat was used in only one of the DH areas.
The amount of space available to erect such systems or the availability of the resource
itself might not be respected. This comes from the fact that the potential for such
energies is differentiated in DKE and DKW but not between central and decentral
areas. That thinner description of the potentials could lead to a more accurate system
representation and thus more reliable transition scenarios.
Finally, the author wanted to implement the legislation on the obligation for new
buildings to connect to DH networks.
The idea was to use a flexible constraint
in order to evaluate the impact of different application rate of this municipal right.
While this application rate would have been increased, it would probably have been
possible to find an optimum leading to the lowest system costs. Nevertheless the
current version of TIMES-DK was not ready to model this legislation. Indeed, when
the heat consumption of new buildings is imposed to certain levels of district heating,
the existing building stock compensate by reducing their DH consumption. In that
way the overall amount of district heat consumed in the residential sector remains
the same, and neither the DH supply nor the overall system costs are not impacted.
This could be solved by defining a thinner level of residential heat demand based on
==PAGE:67==
4 Conclusions and recommendations
57
both the buildings type and location but also their construction date.
Policy recommendations
The obtained results show that some of the investigated
policies can be revisited in order to facilitate the development and green transition of
the Danish district heating sector. First of all the incentives to use cogeneration plants
instead of heat only boilers can be reduced. Indeed, the present work highlighted
that the penetration of newer and cheaper heat only technologies on DH markets
can lower the prices for consumers and thus increase DH consumption and boost its
development. In parallel, the priority in central areas is to lift bans on ambient air heat
pumps and secondly to relax solar heating systems prohibitions. These relaxations
have been proven to push district heat competitiveness, making it more attractive for
end-use sectors. The other simulated policy relaxations can also be tested but will
have a lower impact on the energy system.
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
Environmental Protection Agency. Denmark’s Climate Policy Objectives and
Achievements - Report on Demonstrable Progress in 2005 under the Kyoto
Protocol. Danish Ministry Of The Environment, June 2005.
[2]
Danish Energy Agency. The Danish Energy Model - Innovative, efficient and
sustainable. 2016.
[3]
IEA. Denmark Statistics. June 2018. url: https://www.iea.org/countries/
membercountries/denmark/statistics.
[4]
Ørsted. Our vision and values. June 2018. url: https://orsted.com/en/
About-us/About-orsted/Our-vision-and-values.
[5]
Danish Energy Agency. Regulation and planning of district heating in Denmark.
June 2017.
[6]
Danish Energy Agency & DBDH. District heating - Danish and Chinese expe-
rience. 2013.
[7]
Frederiksberg Forsyning. 1903: Danmarks første fjernvarmeværk. url: http:
//www.frb-forsyning.dk/Default.aspx?ID=190 (visited on July 2018).
[8]
DBDH. District heating history - 1903: Denmark’s first district heating power
plant. url: https://dbdh.dk/district-heating-history/ (visited on July
2018).
[9]
HC. Mortensen, B. Overgaard. “CHP development in Denmark: Role and re-
sults”. In: Energy Policy 20.12 (December 1992), pages 1198–1206.
[10]
World Energy Council. Gas in Denmark. url: https://www.worldenergy.
org/data/resources/country/denmark/gas/ (visited on July 2018).
[11]
B.A. Christensen, C. Jensen-Butler. Energy and Urban Structure: Heat Planning
in Denmark. Geographical Institute, University of Aarhus, 1982.
[12]
Ørsted gas transport. Danish gas system including connection. url: https:
//gastransport.orsted.dk/ (visited on July 2018).
[13]
Energinet. Report: security of gas supply 2017. 2018.
[14]
Ministry of Environment and Energy. Heat Supply Act - Consolidated Act No.
772 of the 24th July 2000. July 2000.
==PAGE:70==
60
Bibliography
[15]
Bo Riisgaard Pedersen. District heating in Denmark: the development from fossil
fuels to green fuels and green electricity. Danish Energy Agency, June 2017.
[16]
Ture Hammar. The case of CHP in Denmark - and perspectives to other coun-
tries. Danish Energy Agency, September 1999.
[17]
The Danish Energy Authority. Heat supply in Denmark: Who, What, Where
and Why. Geographical Institute, University of Aarhus, January 2005.
[18]
Ole Odgaard. District Heating in Denmark: 2 questions and 5 answers on how
to promote cost-effective DH nationwide. Danish Energy Agency, September
2016.
[19]
Danish Energy Agency. Energy Infomaps - Heating in Denmark, 2014. url:
https://ens.dk/en/our-services/statistics-data-key-figures-and-
energy-maps/energy-infomaps (visited on July 2018).
[20]
S. Werner U. Persson. Quantifying the heating and Cooling Demand in Europe.
Halmstad University, 2015.
[21]
H. Li, Q. Sun, Q. Zhang, F. Wallin. “A review of the pricing mechanisms for
district heating systems”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 42.1
(October 2014), pages 56–65.
[22]
Energistyrelsen. Bekendtgørelse om godkendelse af projekter for kollektive varme-
forsyningsanlæg. June 2016.
[23]
Danske Fjernvarme. Varmeforsyningsloven og projektbekendtgørelsen i forbindelse
med varmeprojekter og varmeplanlægning lokalt. October 2015.
[24]
VEKS. Annual Review 2017. 2018.
[25]
CTR - Centralkommunernes transmissionsselskab I/S. Financial Statements &
Annual Report 2013. June 2014.
[26]
Danish Energy Agency. Danish Energy and Climate Outlook: 2015. December
2015.
[27]
Danish Energy Agency. Danish Energy and Climate Outlook: 2017. March 2017.
[28]
A. David, B. Vad Mathiesen, H. Averfalk, S. Werner, H. Lund. “Heat Roadmap
Europe: Large-scale electric heat pumps in district heating systems”. In: Ener-
gies 10 (2017).
[29]
Vattenfall. Vattenfall divests Danish power plant. June 2015. url: http://www.
frb-forsyning.dk/Default.aspx?ID=190 (visited on July 2018).
[30]
O. Balyk, K. S. Andersen, S. Dockweiler, M. Gargulion, K. Karlsson, R. Næraa,
S. Petrovic, J. Tattini, L. B. Termansen, G. Venturini. “TIMES-DK: technology-
rich multi-sectoral optimisation model of the Danish energy system”. In: Energy
Strategy Reviews (2018). (Under review).
[31]
U. Remme. Basic elements and equations of TIMES. Institut für Energiewirtshaft
und Rationelle Energieanwendung, Universität Stuttgart, November 2006.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
61
[32]
W. Weiss, M. Spörk-Dür. Solar heat worldwide: Global Maret Development and
trends in 2017, detailed market figures 2016. AEE INTEC, May 2018.
==PAGE:72==
