==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Electrical Engineering
3-D Ultrasound Imaging with Row Column and Synthetic
Aperture
Antonio Plaza Castro
Supervised by: Professor Jørgen Arendt Jensen, PhD, Dr. Techn.
Co-supervised by: Associate Professor Matthias Bo Stuart, PhD
Mikkel Schou, PhD
Technical University of Denmark
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 2018
==PAGE:2==
Cover image: At the top, an example of an Row Column aperture with an integrated apodization applied. At
the bottom, the optimal PSF in the XZ at the depth 75λ.
Author: Antonio Plaza Castro, s161817
Supervisors: Professor Jørgen Arendt Jensen, PhD, Dr. Techn.
Associate Professor Matthias Bo Stuart, PhD
Mikkel Schou, PhD
Project name: 3-D Ultrasound Imaging with Row Column and Synthetic Aperture
Project period: 2 January - 2 July
ECTS points: 35
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Electrical Engineering
Center for Fast Ultrasound Imaging (CFU)
Ørsteds Plads 349
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
DENMARK
Tel: (+45) 4525 5832
Web: www.cfu.elektro.dtu.dk
Author e-mail: s161817@student.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Preface
v
Summary
vii
Acknowledgements
ix
List of Figures
xiii
List of Tables
xvii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Outline of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
State of the Art
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Row Column Arrays
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Row Column Focusing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Row Column Apodization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Row Column Beamforming
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Point Spread Function Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Materials and Methods
19
3.1
General Parameters and Row Column deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Row Column with Fixed Focusing in Transmission and Reception. .
20
3.3
Integrated Apodization Study. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Row Column with Fixed Focusing Transmission and Synthetic Aperture.
25
3.5
Row Column Beamforming tool (2nd Stage) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.6
Synthetic Apodization in Transmission and Reception (3d Stage) .
29
iii
==PAGE:4==
iv
Contents
4
Results and discussion
31
4.1
Field II: Fixed Focus in Transmission and Fixed Focus/Dynamic Focus
in Reception
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Studying the Integrated Apodization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Row Column Synthetic Aperture with Fixed Focusing Transmission
39
4.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Project Conclusion and Future work
47
Bibliography
49
A ROCO Visualizing tool
53
B Code listings
59
B.1
Row Column with Fixed Focus in Transmission and Fixed Focus/Dy-
namicFocus in Reception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
B.2
Integrated Apodization study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
B.3
Row Column Synthetic Aperture with Fixed Focusing Transmission
73
B.4
Visualization functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis has been submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring
the MSc in Electrical Engineering degree. The research providing the foundation for the
35 ECTS thesis has been conducted over a period of six months from January 2nd to July
2nd, 2018 at the Center for Fast Ultrasound Imaging (CFU), Department of Electrical
Engineering. The project has been supervised by Prof. Jørgen Arendt Jensen, PhD, Dr.
Techn, and co-supervised by Assoc. Prof. Matthias Bo Stuart, PhD as well as by PhD
student Mikkel Schou.
Antonio Plaza Castro
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark, July 2018
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
==PAGE:7==
Summary
The general push towards more accurate medical imaging methods has led to the devel-
opment of several three dimensional (3D) imaging techniques, based on MRI, CT and
Ultrasound. This last one, while having great potential, still has not been applied exten-
sively beyond research. The purpose of this thesis is to develop techniques to perform 3D
ultrasound imaging using a Row-Column array. This is a technically challenging system
that has the potential of providing real-time cost-effective 3D medical images.
Throughout this work, a complete Row-Column imaging system with Synthetic
Aperture has been designed, veriﬁed and simulated. Hence, a detailed description of the
inner working of such systems is provided and their advantages as well as limitations are
explored. Imaging using a conventional delay and sum beamformer is compared against
synthetic aperture beamforming for Row-Column arrays considering line elements as
ultrasound sources. Moreover, a virtual array in transmission is successfully implemented
for this transducer to increase the signal to noise ratio of the imaged volume.
The simulations and analysis performed in this work show results from the ﬁrst Row-
Column with Synthetic Aperture and Fixed Focusing obtained at the Center for Fast
Ultrasound.
keywords: medical ultrasound, 3D, row column, imaging, integrated apodization, syn-
thetic aperture, synthetic apodization, beamforming, virtual sources.
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
This project has been a long and hard way where I have learned and accomplished many
things. None of those would have been possible on my own, so to start this report, some
gratitude is in order.
First and foremost I would like to thank my supervisor, Prof. Jørgen Arendt Jensen,
and my co-supervisor, Assoc. Prof. Matthias Bo Stuart. Thank you for believing in
my ability to undertake such a project and for guiding me week by week in the strange
and changing waters of Row-Column imaging. It’s in these waters where my other co-
supervisor Mikkel Schou, PhD has been like a lighthouse: answering all my questions,
reassuring me when I had little hope and showing me the way to ﬁnishing this report.
Thank you very much.
I would also like to thank everyone at CFU, especially Marion, for receiving me and
helping me whenever I’ve needed it and making Wednesdays the best days of the week
thanks to the cake.
These two years studying at DTU, outside my homeland, would not have been the
same without the family I have created here. Especially to the ﬁrst group of friends I
made here: Sotiris, Fruzsi, Ana, Tomás and my Spanish crew.
Thanks to my family for their constant support. My mother, who has patiently listened
to my beamforming doubts without even knowing what I was talking about. My father
whose hardworking attitude has always been an inspiration to me. Thanks to my brother
and sister and to my beloved grandparents.
If J.R.R. Tolkien had written The Lord of the Row Columns instead of The Lord of the
Rings, Guillermo would have been the character of Samwise. He has been both emotional
and technical support during this project. Thanks for your proof-reading, your help with
using the clusters and your priceless support from the ﬁrst to the last days of the project.
Thanks to my best friends: Dani, Jaime, Edu and Miki and my dogs Hugo and Mico.
Last but not least, thanks to Rocio, my strength and inspiration.
ix
==PAGE:10==
x
==PAGE:11==
For even the very wise cannot see all ends.
(J.R.R. Tolkien, The Fellowship of the Ring)
Dedicado a Mamina y el Abuelo.
xi
==PAGE:12==
xii
==PAGE:13==
List of Figures
2.1
Element addressing in a Row Column array, inspired by [17]. . . . . . .
5
2.2
Focal points with 1D linear array (left) and Row Column array (right).
5
2.3
Electronic focusing and steering of an ultrasound beam. Taken from [18]
6
2.4
Focal line when applying ﬁxed focusing with rows and columns. . . . .
7
2.5
Fixed Focusing: Acceptance Angle and Acceptance region. . . . . . . .
8
2.6
At the top a large aperture is shown with integration paths marked with
gray dashed lines, the integration paths are used to determine the spatial
impulse response. At the bottom, a line element is shown (in detail) where
it can be seen the approximation of the integration paths to vertical lines
[17]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.7
Row-Column Spatial Impulse without Integrated Apodization. . . . . .
11
2.8
Time of ﬂight of a focused emission. The vector sf links the ﬁrst source
line element that is excited with the focal line f. fp is then the vector from
the closest point on the focal line to the point that is being beamformed
p. pri is the vector from the point p to the nearest point on the receiver
line element ri. Taken from [17]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.9
Synthetic Aperture with ﬁxed focusing in TX concept (2D). . . . . . .
15
2.10 Synthetic Transmission and Reception Apodization concept. . . . . . .
16
2.11 Synthetic Reception Apodization of a single receiver element in both
planes XZ and YZ, it can be seen that the apodization is constant for
diﬀerent values of Y but it changes in the X and the Z direction.
. . .
16
2.12 Synthetic Transmission Apodization of a single emission made by a sub
aperture of N active elements in both planes XZ and YZ. Here, the
apodization is constant for diﬀerent X values since it depends only on the
Y and Z coordinates of the points. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1
Impulse and Excitation signals used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Row-Column with Fixed Focus TX and Fixed Focus RX Set Up. . . . .
22
3.3
1D array with elevation plane divided into mathematical elements. Taken
from [28]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
xiii
==PAGE:14==
xiv
List of Figures
3.4
Dimensions and symbols used to describe the geometry of each Row
Column element, in the image, the case of the columns is used. . . . .
23
3.5
Row-Columns aperture with diﬀerent size of integrated apodization region
but the same active area.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.6
Apodization (Electronic and Integrated) in Transmission and Reception
on the left. Focusing in Transmission on the right.
. . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.7
First Stage: The RF is obtained by using a sliding transmission aperture,
where the focus is moving along the y direction with the active aperture.
From each emission, all the RX signals are received and stored. The
signals are the result of the interaction of the emitted sound ﬁeld with
the scatter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.8
Example of an sliding aperture transmission where the red dots show the
source points X position (because they should be located at focal depth)
and the green dots represent the drain points, where each singular receive
element (in this case 10) is deﬁned by its both ends. . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.9
Beamforming with Line Elements, the active region Nact is deﬁned by a
line compound by the edges SA and SB. The focal line is described as
the line between FA and FB. The scatter point is deﬁned by the point
P. This illustration shows the path that is used to calculate the time of
ﬂight. The time elapsed between the emission from the Line Source, to
the point element through the Focal Line in addition to the time it takes
for the sound to come back to the receiver line elements. The projection
of P in the transmission and receiver is also shown in the yellow dotted
line. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.10 Second Stage. The BFM data is obtained after using the RC beamforming
tool. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.11 The BFM data is obtained after using the RC beamforming tool. . . .
30
4.1
Point Spread Function of several scatterers using a ﬁxed focusing for
transmit and receive with the focal depth at 20λ and 60λ. . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Point Spread Function of several scatterers using a ﬁxed focusing for
transmission (focal depth at 20λ and 60λ) and Dynamic Focusing in
reception. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
The red lines refer to the ﬁxed focusing and the blue ones to dynamic
focusing. This graph shows the radius of 6dB, 12dB and 20 dB cystic
resolution. The lowest the Cystic Resolution, the highest the contrast.
35
4.4
FWHM comparative between Fixed Focusing and Dynamic Focusing over
diﬀerent depths. A low FWHM equals a high resolution. The red line
refer to the ﬁxed focusing and the green one to the dynamic focusing.
35
==PAGE:15==
List of Figures
xv
4.5
The upper graph shows a comparative of the diﬀerent windows that can
be applied as a integrated apodization. The boxcar (no apodization),
Hann window, Hamming, Triangular and Blackmann are studied. The
Pulse Echo of the trasnmitted ﬁeld from a point at P(0, 0, 60λ) is shown
in after applying a logarithm scale of the real part of the signal (applied
as the absolute value of the Hilbert transform). The down graph shows
the distance between the peak of the main echo and the second echo for
each window.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6
Each line represents the elements added for the integrated apodization. In
the case of the columns, 5 elements added would make the column higher
(5 × columnwidth. The graph shows how the length of the integrated
apodization is crucial to get rid of the ghost echoes.) . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.7
Diﬀerent apodization lengths for the Pulse Echo ﬁeld at (0, 0, 180λ). The
number of elements chosen was 40. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.8
PSF in the XZ plane (X=0) and in the YZ plane (X=0) of a scatter
located at P(0, 0, 75λ). The set up was built and checked around this
point. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.9
[RC SA] PSF in the XZ (y=0) and YZ (x=0) planes.
Results from
placing diﬀerent scatterers at diﬀerent X and Z positions. The image
shows contour plots with a dynamic range from -60 dB to 0 dB. The
point spread functions are plotted one above other and all of them are
normalized using the highest value of all of them. . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.10 XZ Plane (y = 0) detail from the PSFs at diﬀerent lateral positions and
depths. The response is symmetric in the X direction so only the scatters
at the X position of X = −47λ, X = −24λ, X = 0λ. It is easier to
observe how the sidelobes became bigger since the depth is higher. . .
43
4.11 XZ Plane (y = 0) FWHM comparative of the scatters at diﬀerent depth
and lateral position X. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.12 XZ Plane (y = 0) Cystic Resolution comparative of the scatters at diﬀerent
depth and lateral position. (Using the radius at 6dB, 12dB and 20dB).
44
4.13 PSF in the XZ (y=0) and YZ (x=0) planes. The point spread functions
are plotted one above other.The point spread functions are plotted one
above other and all of them are normalized using the highest value of all
of them. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.14 YZ Plane (x = 0) detail from the PSFs at diﬀerent lateral positions and
depths.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.15 YZ Plane (x = 0) FWHM comparative of the scatters at diﬀerent depth
and lateral position Y. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.16 YZ Plane (x = 0) Cystic Resolution comparative of the scatters at diﬀerent
depth and lateral position Y.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A.1
Row-Column (ROCO) GUI Contour Mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
==PAGE:16==
xvi
List of Figures
A.2
Row-Column (ROCO) GUI Imagesc Mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.3
PSF in 3D (contour mode)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A.4
PSF in 3D (planes mode) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
==PAGE:17==
List of Tables
3.1
Simulation Parameters.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1
Point Spread Function metrics at optimal point with Synthetic Aperture
using the RC Beamforming tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
xvii
==PAGE:18==
xviii
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
1.1
Purpose
The purpose of this project is to investigate the Row Column Synthetic Aperture using
ﬁxed focusing in transmission. A setup has been designed, implemented and simulated
using Field II and the row-column beamforming tool. The image quality is assessed by
the measurements of the resolution and contrast of the point spread functions obtained.
1.2
Motivation
Nowadays, 3D ultrasound is almost used only for obstetric ultrasonic, where the fetus is
surrounded by water. These conditions make it possible to acquire 3D ultrasound images.
For other medical applications, 3D imaging with high quality is still a technical challenge
(due to large, complex, wiring, the heating of the probe and the large data rate provided
by a fully-addressed array). The 2D Row Column Addressing, although it is still in an
early research stage, offers a solution to the high number of channels needed that aims to
be a protagonist in the future of 3D imaging.
1.3
Outline of the thesis
Chapter 2 Introduces previous published literature in the ﬁeld of 3D row column imaging.
Then, the theory that is needed to understand the project is presented. It is divided into
Row Column addressing, focusing, apodization and beamforming. Finally, the way of
quantifying the quality of the output PSFs is also described.
Chapter 3 This chapter describes the methodology used to simulate the set ups for Row
Column with Fixed Focusing in TX and RX, an integrated apodization study and ﬁnally,
the implementation of the Row Column Synthetic Aperture using Fixed Focused in Trans-
mission.
Chapter 4 The results obtained after the simulation of the set ups described and discussed
here.
Chapter 5 Concludes the project and describes the perspective and ideas of future work.
1
==PAGE:20==
2
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER2
Theory
This chapter provides a description of the theoretical principles and the techniques that
have been applied throughout this project. For a detailed description of other fundamental
concepts in ultrasound, the reader is referred to the literature [1].
To begin, section 2.1 presents a literature review of the main three-dimensional (3D)
ultrasound techniques to date. This leads to a detailed description of element addressing
in Row Column imaging (section 2.2) and 3D imaging using a Row-Column Array with
ﬁxed focusing in transmission (section 2.3). An attempt to overcome some of the side
effects of Row-Column arrays is to use integrated apodization, explained in section 2.4.
Finally, the approach to beamforming with these arrays is explained in section 2.5).
2.1
State of the Art
Medical three-dimensional (3D) ultrasound has been in the spotlight for clinical imaging
research since the ﬁrst commercial 3D scanner was released in 1989. Its effectiveness as a
method of obtaining medical images, has since been demonstrated in several applications,
however 3D imaging is only available in high-end scanners and there is still a long way
to achieve the full potential of this technology and making it cost effective. This last
characteristic is vital since one of the main advantages of ultrasound imaging compared
to other methods is its relative low cost, aside from being a non-invasive method.
In the last two decades, several authors have developed different approaches for 3-D
ultrasound imaging [2] and [3]. A simpliﬁed description of these techniques is that 3D
ultrasound imaging can be obtained using a fully-addressed two dimensional (2D) array of
transducer elements or using a moving 1D array. 2D arrays present a lot of inconveniences
in both economical and technical aspects when building them. Thus, most of today’s
3D ultrasound imaging systems use 1D arrays to acquire the images. These techniques
go from freehand scanning a 1D array with an operator, which leads to distortions since
normally images are tracked without information of the position or the orientation of
the images, to more advanced mechanical 3D probes [4] that are based on a 1D array
transducer inside a hand-held instrument that has control of rotation, tilt or translation
to avoid distortions. This techniques are used in combination with 3D reconstruction
algorithms however, these algorithms are out of the scope of the main focus of the study
and will not be further elaborated.
2D array probes are considered the future to create a three-dimensional real-time
3
==PAGE:22==
4
Chapter 2. Theory
imaging, because unlike mechanically translated 1D array, 2D arrays do not need moving
parts to acquire a 3D volume and this movement has a cost on frame rate and reliability
[5] since the translation of a 1D array has poor spatial resolution in the elevation direction
[6]. 2D arrays also allows to have higher sensitivity since more elements are used to
transmit and receive. On the other hand building 2D arrays is a challenge due the the
high number of channels and the wiring needed to interconnect all channels [7] could
make this technology excluded. This, plus the huge amount of data that is gathered from
volumetric imaging have lead to use new techniques like Xampling of frequency domain
beamforming [8], develop new 2D transducer addressing systems like Mills cross arrays
[9] [10] [11]. These arrays present a reduced active region that introduces a reduced
signal-to-noise-ratio and higher side-lobes. In 2003, Row-Column Adressing 2D arrays
were suggested by Morton and Lockwood [12], this addressing allows to transform the 2D
array into two orthogonal 1D arrays, being each single element a column or a row. This
combination allows to transform a fully addresse NxN array into a 2N array, this in terms
of connections is passing from a N 2 connections to a much more feasible 2N connections.
Later research done by Démoré [13] discovered that ghost echoes were produced by the
geometry of the single elements in the Row-Column. Later research done by Rasmussen
and Jensen [14] introduced the concept of integrated apodization as a solution to the ghost
echoes. With this technology, a very good lateral and depth resolution can be obtained but
the elevation resolution is very poor due to the geometry of the single arrays. In order
to improve the elevation resolution, Synthetic Aperture techniques have been suggested
and implemented as a potential solution [15]. Synthetic aperture volumetric 3D imaging
with row column has been implemented at CFU before [16] but this project its the ﬁrst
implementation done using ﬁxed focusing in transmission.
2.2
Row Column Arrays
A central concept in this thesis is to understand what a Row-Column Array is and how
3D Ultrasound Imaging is performed with such an array.
The driving principle behind row-column addressing is to transform a 2D array into
two orthogonal 1D arrays. This is accomplished by addressing an entire column or
row of elements instead of each individual element, illustrated in ﬁg. 2.1. As stated in
section 2.1, this reduces the complexity of the wiring design and the power disippation
thermal effects of a fully addressed 2D array by reducing the number of channels from
N 2 to 2N. Therefore, a Row-Column array with 192 × 192 = 36, 864 sub-elements will
only have Ntot = 2 × 192 = 384 channels. Each single element in a row-column array is
a full row or a full column element that consists of Nsub sub-elements, meaning that all
the sub-elements from the same row or column will be excited with the same signal and
the same time delay.
Both rows and columns can be used interchangeably to transmit and receive but
throughout this study the convention "Row-Column ↔Transmit-Receive" is followed.
==PAGE:23==
2.3. Row Column Focusing
5
That is, rows are set as transmitters and columns as receivers.
Figure 2.1: Element addressing in a Row Column array, inspired by [17].
2.3
Row Column Focusing
As previously described, every element in a Row Column (RC) array consists of Nsub
sub-elements that are emitting the same signal with the same time delay. This means that
the sources for the ultrasound ﬁelds are line sources instead of point sources. This can
be seen in ﬁg. 2.2, which shows how these elements have a line segment as focal point
instead of a single focal point like traditional ultrasound sources. Throughout this section,
concepts in focusing will be explained for a 1D array and then extended to 2D arrays.
Figure 2.2: Focal points with 1D linear array (left) and Row Column array (right).
==PAGE:24==
6
Chapter 2. Theory
Focusing is a basic technique that permits the ultrasound ﬁelds to converge in phase
at a certain focal point (1D array). This is achieved by introducing time proﬁles in
transmission or reception. These proﬁles are calculated at each of the emitting elements
so that the wave each one transmits is added coherently in the desired direction or at
certain depth and incoherently otherwise, as shown in ﬁg. 2.3.
In a RC array, each of the rows in transmission is equivalent to each of the elements
of a 1D array. Therefore, since the delay proﬁle is the same for all sub-elements in a
row, the focusing point in the elevation plane will be constant, and therefore a line, as
shown in ﬁg. 2.2. Focusing in reception with the columns follows an analogous process
in an orthogonal direction, this is illustrated in ﬁg. 2.4. The limitation of such an array
is consequently, that a focusing point cannot be obtained along the axis of the elements,
which severely limits the resolution in this direction.
Two basic methodologies can be used for focusing, Fixed Focusing and Dynamic
Focusing. Fixed Focusing only achieves focusing at a certain focal depth. To maintain
focus over the axial direction, dynamic focusing is needed. This is performed at the
beamforming stage (in reception) using a delay and sum beamformer or synthetic aperture
beamforming, which is explained in section 2.5.2.
Electronic focusing
t
0
Excitation pulses
Transducer
elements
Beam shape
(a)
t
0
Excitation pulses
Transducer
elements
Beam shape
Beam steering and focusing
(b)
Figure 2.3: Electronic focusing and steering of an ultrasound beam. Taken from [18]
2.3.1
Fixed focusing and acceptance region
Fixed Focusing involves transmitting an ultrasound wave with multiple elements in the
array using a speciﬁc ﬁxed delay proﬁle for all elements to focus at one speciﬁc depth.
Thereby, with ﬁxed focusing is not possible to image with the same resolution at
different depths because each depth requires a different time delay proﬁle. In order to
==PAGE:25==
2.3. Row Column Focusing
7
calculate the time delay tdelay, all the time values that takes from the different elements n
to the point to focus are needed. This is done by using the speed of sound c = 1540m/s
and the distance rnf = d(f, n) from the radiating (or receiving) element n to the point to
focus f since tn = rnf /c.
Given a sub-aperture of Nact elements, the delay proﬁle is calculated so each of the
elements emits with its own delay, so that the waves converge at a speciﬁc point at the same
time and therefore in phase. For each element, the delay is tdelay = tn −min(tNact).
Figure 2.4: Focal line when applying ﬁxed focusing with rows and columns.
Applying this time proﬁle in emission results in a loss of resolution for all points
located far from the focal line.
The region where most of the acoustic ﬁeld is added coherently is called acceptance
region and is deﬁned by the acceptance angle α. The acceptance angle using a ﬁxed focus
is calculated using eq. (2.1), illustrated in ﬁgure 2.5 where A and B are the edges of the
sub-aperture and F is the focal point that refers to the point used to calculate the delay
proﬁles for the ﬁxed focusing.
==PAGE:26==
8
Chapter 2. Theory
α = αA + αB = arctan
 p
(xf −xA)2
zf
!
+ arctan
 p
(xf −xB)2
zf
!
(2.1)
Figure 2.5: Fixed Focusing: Acceptance Angle and Acceptance region.
When using Row-Column, one more dimension is added: the acceptance region is
converted into an acceptance volume, equivalent to what happens with the focal point to
the focal line.
2.4
Row Column Apodization
In this section two different types of apodization are explained.
First, the problem of Ghost Echoes that arises when using a Row-Column array is
presented. Rasmussen et al[17] analyzed this problem and proposed the use of integrated
apodization. Their analysis and solution are followed in section 2.4.1. On the other
hand, in order to shape the beam and move it along the aperture using a sliding aperture,
electronic apodization is used, and will be described in section 2.4.2.
2.4.1
Ghost Echoes and Integrated Apodization
Each RC element has an elongated shape where the length is 200 times longer than
its width. This results in very large edge effects, which leads to the appearance of the
so-called ghost echoes—undesired received signals, which lead to artifacts when imaging.
The response from each of these elements can be understood through derivations from
their calculated spatial impulse response h(r2, t) [19]. This is the detected sound ﬁeld at
point r2 when exciting the aperture with a Dirac delta function (2.2).
==PAGE:27==
2.4. Row Column Apodization
9
δ(x) = 0, for x ̸= 0
(2.2)
The signal recorded by an ultrasound system can therefore be described as the sum
of the contributions produced by the different scatterers after encountering an emmited
ultrasound wave. These contributions are the waves generated by the scattering of emitted
wave by the different scatterers.
Due to the Huygens-Fresnel principle it is possible to calculate the ﬁeld originated
from a sound radiating surface by considering all points on this surface as the source
of another spherical wave. Hence, the ﬁeld at any point can be calculated from the
superposition of these spherical waves. The received ﬁeld from a scatterer will depend on
the position of the scatterer.
To calculate this response, the theorem of acoustic reciprocity can be used (if the
receiver is exchanged with the source, the received signal remains the same). If a point
scatterer is used (emitting a spherical wave that would interact with the aperture), the
received signal would then be the sum of the contributions from the wave originating at the
scatterer over the aperture. This result is obtained by applying the Rayleigh integral[20]
over the surface of the aperture, as shown in eq. (2.3).
h(r1, t) =
Z
S
δ(t −|r1 −r2|
c
)
2π|r1 −r2|
dS
(2.3)
Where S is the aperture, r1 is the position of the ﬁeld point, r2 denotes the position
on the aperture, c is the speed of sound and t is the time. The interaction between the
spherical wave and the plane of the aperture makes a circle arc and the spatial impulse
response as a function of time is determined by the length of the arc that intersects the
aperture as shown in ﬁg. 2.6. The solution to this Rayleigh integral of the expanding arc
in polar coordinates, is presented in [17] and shown in eq. (2.4).
h(p, t) =







c
2π
Z θ2(t)
θ1(t)
a(ρ(t), θ)dθ,
if t ≥pz/c
0,
otherwise
(2.4)
Where a(·) is the apodization function of the aperture and ρ(t) is the radius of the projected
spherical wave.
Without integrated apodization, the apodization function a(·) is constant over the
single element and it is 0 outside it. If integrated apodization is applied, this would
take the shape of the weighting function. This integral can be further simpliﬁed if the
apodization function is constant along the integration paths.
Moreover, if the aperture is a assumed to be a long, thin and rectangular line element,
as illustrated in ﬁg. 2.6, the integration paths on the line element can be approximated by
==PAGE:28==
10
Chapter 2. Theory
m
l
n
L/2
L/2
r(t)
pl
pm
(pl, pm)
(0,0)
θ1
r(t)
r(t) =
p
(ct)2 −p2n
r(t)2 = (l(t)−pl)2 + p2
m
l(t)
(l(t)−pl, pm)
θ2
pm
Figure 2.6: At the top a large aperture is shown with integration paths marked with gray
dashed lines, the integration paths are used to determine the spatial impulse response. At
the bottom, a line element is shown (in detail) where it can be seen the approximation of
the integration paths to vertical lines [17].
a vertical line and therefore the apodization function depends only on the position along
the element, as shown in eq. (2.5).
h(p, t) =
(
c/2π(θ2(t) −θ1(t))ax(x(t)),
if t ≥t > t1
0,
otherwise
(2.5)
Being t1 the ﬁrst time at which spherical wave encounters the aperture. The pressure
at the point p, at time t can be calculated using eq. (2.6) [21].
p(p, t) = ρ0v(t) ∗∂h(p, t)
∂t
(2.6)
Where ρ0 is the density of the medium, v is the velocity normal to the transducer and
h is previously deﬁned spatial impulse response. When doing the derivative of the spatial
impulse, another simpliﬁcation can be done when using long and thin elements, like the
one used for Row-Columns, because the angular element width (θ2(t)-θ1(t)) changes
much slower than the apodization function at the edges of the line element ax(x(t)).
This leads to the conclusion that the pressure ﬁeld detected is depends mostly on the
apodization function along the single element ax(x(t)) over time.
Finally, in order to ﬁnd the pressure received at the point p by the row element like the
one shown in 2.7, the interaction of the spherical wave with the aperture must be analyzed
showing that three points are important due to the change in the apodization function. s1
==PAGE:29==
2.4. Row Column Apodization
11
Figure 2.7: Row-Column Spatial Impulse without Integrated Apodization.
where the wave front hits the closest point of the aperture at time t1, then the point (s2)
where the ﬁrst edge is encounter at time t2 and ﬁnally the second edge (s3) at time t3. At
these points there is a large discontinuity. Since the apodization over the entire element is
normally constant, the derivative of the aperture along the element is zero everywhere but
in the discontinuities located at s1, s2 and s3.
∂ax(x(t))
∂t
≈δ(t −t1) −δ(t −t2) −δ(t −t3)
(2.7)
This means that a single transmit pulse creates three wavefronts that occur when
emmiting from the point p and therefore, the spatial impulse response contains three
reﬂected waves. Since points s4 and s5 are also edges, the same effect could happen. The
difference is that the elements width is in the order of a wavelength so their responses are
merging with the one from s1. At this point, only the transmit spatial impulse has been
explained, but the pulse-echo spatial impulse takes into account the transmit and receive
impulse responses, dealing with 9 total responses instead of 3 from only a single scatter.
In order to reduce the inﬂuence of the edges s2 and s3 an apodization along the single
element should be applied. Tapering the response towards the edges will make ax(x(t))
converge to zero when approaching the edges s2 and s3.
Rasmussen et al [17] proposed an apodization function where a roll-off region is added
to the ends of the line elements. Its implementation is described in section 3.3. Finally,
the apodization function needs to fulﬁll the Nyquist criterion in space and therefore the
==PAGE:30==
12
Chapter 2. Theory
sampling interval needs to be equal or larger than λ/2 to avoid artifacts due to under-
sampling.
2.4.2
Sliding Aperture and Electronic Apodization
A sliding aperture is a sub-aperture that is moved along the total aperture. When using
the Row-Column of N elements, an sliding aperture of Nact can be moved along the
transducer by choosing which elements are active or not. This is done using electronic
apodization. As opposed to integrated apodization, this one is not applied during the
fabrication process. It can be changed at any time, since it is applied electronically by
exciting elements with different voltage amplitudes weighting the inﬂuence that each
single element has.
By controlling the active sub-aperture of the transducer, the acceptance region can be
moved along the aperture. Additionally, different windows can be applied to the active
aperture, controlling its size and shape. This has a direct impact in the radiation lobes,
as a larger aperture will produce a more directive main lobe. Additionally, different
weighting functions will affect the sidelobe level, which can be controlled using electronic
apodization windowing.
2.5
Row Column Beamforming
To optimize the resolution and contrast of the received signal, several techniques have
been explored. First, to correctly calculate the Time-of-Flight (ToF) with line sources,
an approach that is described in section 2.5.1. On the other hand, an implementation of
Synthetic Aperture beamforming for the Row-Column array is described in section 2.5.2,
which improves the resolution along the axial direction. This implementation requires a
so-called synthetic apodization, which restricts the inﬂuence of each transmission when
beamforming the points in reception. This is described in section 2.5.3.
2.5.1
Beamforming with Line Sources
In 3D imaging, fully-addressed 2D arrays can have two-way focusing in both lateral
directions which leads to high resolution in both directions. Due to the already described
peculiarities of the Row Column geometry when focusing (2.3), the rows are only able to
focus along the Y plane and the columns along the X plane.
When using a Delay and Sum (DAS) beamformer, the emitting and receiving elements
are assumed to be points. This assumption leads to mathematical errors since elements in
row column should be considered as lines. Also, the acoustic ﬁeld emitted from a point
source is very different from a line source. Wherever the point source has a spherical
wavefront, the line element emmits a cylindrical wavefront. This translates into a plane
wave along the element and a circular arc in the orthogonal plane. Rasmussen et al [17]
proposed and implemented a way to calculate the distance from the transducer to a given
point taking into account the line-segment geometry of the elements. The calculation of
==PAGE:31==
2.5. Row Column Beamforming
13
the distance from the line-element source to a certain point is based on the Time-of-Flight
calculation. This is deﬁned as the shortest distance from the source s to the point p but
going through the focal zone f in transmission and then directly to the receiver, shown in
ﬁg. 3.9. This distance is translated into time by dividing by the speed of sound.
                                    

 
    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

 
f
sf
Receive Array
Transmit Array
y
z
x
p
fp
prn
(a) ToF in y–dimension.
                                    

 
    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

 
f
sf
prN
Focal Line
Receive Array
Transmit Array
x
y
z
p
fp
pr1
pr2
prn
(b) ToF in x–dimension.
Figure 2.8: Time of ﬂight of a focused emission. The vector sf links the ﬁrst source line
element that is excited with the focal line f. fp is then the vector from the closest point on
the focal line to the point that is being beamformed p. pri is the vector from the point p
to the nearest point on the receiver line element ri. Taken from [17].
Given a N × N Row Column array, using (m, n) as a transmit-receive pair, where m
is the index for the transmitter and n for the receiver, eq. (2.8) is used to calculate the time
of ﬂight from the point p to each receiving element.
ToFm(p, n) = ||sf|| + ||fp|| + ||prn||
c
(2.8)
Due to practical limitations explained in section 3.4 and to simplify calculations as a
ﬁrst approach to Row Column beamforming, the Region of Interest (ROI), is assumed to
contain points always located below the focal line. If not, ||fp|| should be negative. In
order to make these calculations between line segments and points, Rasmussen suggested
the use of projections. This method is illustrated in ﬁg. 2.8. Being able to calculate the
minimum distance from a point to a line segment, the ToF equation 2.8 turns into:
ToFm(p, n) = ||szy −fzy||
c
+ d(rn, p) + d(f, p)
c
(2.9)
For each receiver n, each point p is beamformed by calculating the time of ﬂight that
takes to go from the point to the receiver (passing through the focal zone if used) using
==PAGE:32==
14
Chapter 2. Theory
this equation. Then the point p is beamformed by adding together all the signals from the
emission m and recorded by the receiver n at the time of ﬂight ToFm calculated from
that speciﬁc point ym,n(p, n). This value is then weighted by the apodization of each
element aelec, leading to eq. (2.10).
sm(p) =
N
X
n=1
aelec(n)ym,n(ToFm(p, n))
(2.10)
So, in other words, each point is beamformed by adding the sample from each of
the received signal that corresponds to the time of ﬂight calculated for that certain point
and receiver. In the case that several scatters are located at the same ToF correspondent
distance da for a particular receiver, they will add up together. Nevertheless, from the
same emission, since each receiver is located at a different place, the same two scatters
would have different time of ﬂights and the points would be beamformed differently. This
means that adding the contributions from all the different receivers of all the emissions,
the different points could be beamformed.
The tool developed by [17] (rc-beamformer) available at DTU-CFU was used in order
to calculate the Time of Flights and beamform the volume. This tool was developed in
order to use single element emissions.
2.5.2
Synthetic Aperture
Synthetic Aperture (SA) is an ultrasound technique that aims to maintain a constant resolu-
tion along the axial dimension by combining multiple low resolution images produced by
single element transmissions and receiving with the whole aperture [22]. In Row Column
Synthetic Aperture Imaging (RC-SAI), for each emission a Low Resolution Volume
(LRV) is acquired. Several LRVs are then summed coherently into a High Resolution
Volume (HRV). This is the beamforming technique implemented in previous studies for
imaging with a Row Column array, and while emitting with single elements provides the
largest possible number of LRVs to coherently sum into a HRV, it has some drawbacks.
One the one hand, there is a low signal to noise ratio (SNR) that results from ﬁring from
only one element and on the other hand the frame rate decreases since N ﬁrings happen
between consecutive frames.
In order to solve this with 1D array transducers, Karaman et al [23] proposed a
solution combining several elements that emit de-focused wave. This creates a so-called
virtual source, which insoniﬁes a region with higher power than a single element. This
approach is applied in this work, with the difference of using focused waves as opposed
to defocused ones. While the former generate a smaller acceptance region, if the ROI
is deeper than the focal depth (ﬁg. 2.9), the acceptance region is large enough to use
several LRVs to beamform a certain region. This combination of multiple elements in
transmission into a ﬁxed focused point follows the approach explained in section 2.3.
In this work, NLRV = N −Nact + 1 LRVs are obtained by emitting with a ﬁxed
focusing sliding aperture of Nact rows in transmission and receiving with N columns.
==PAGE:33==
2.5. Row Column Beamforming
15
After NLRV emissions, a High Resolution Volume is formed by coherently summing the
LRVs. This process is illustrated in ﬁg. 2.9. In order to choose which and how the LRV
images should be added, a Synthetic Apodization needs to be applied to the signals when
using SA.
Figure 2.9: Synthetic Aperture with ﬁxed focusing in TX concept (2D).
2.5.3
Synthetic Apodization in transmission and reception
When emitting with ﬁxed focusing, the acceptance region in transmit is constant and is
calculated as described in 2.3.1.
A so-called synthetic apodization can be applied in transmission to limit the inﬂuence
that each emission (and therefore, each LRV) has on the HRV when combining them.
This should be calculated for each point in the y and z direction (since this window is
constant along the x direction).
In reception, an apodization applied to the acceptance region limits the inﬂuence that
each receiver has when beamforming a point. Since in reception there is not focusing, the
acceptance region is not ﬁxed and it can be changed. ﬁg. 2.10 illustrates the acceptance
regions using the planes XZ and YZ.
For a point p(xp, yp, zp), ﬁrst the weighting that receiver element has is calculated
for all the emissions. This weighting is the one used in eq. (2.10), it is calculated by
comparing the angle βpr = arctan |xp−xrn|
zp
being rn the receive elements n. If β is
inside the acceptance angle αn, then the signal receive element rn is used to beamform
that point (weighted by a hamming window depending on how is the point displaced
==PAGE:34==
16
Chapter 2. Theory
Figure 2.10: Synthetic Transmission and Reception Apodization concept.
from the center of the emission or the reception). Although this method presents a higher
computational load [24], the resolution is increased.
Figure 2.11: Synthetic Reception Apodization of a single receiver element in both planes
XZ and YZ, it can be seen that the apodization is constant for different values of Y but it
changes in the X and the Z direction.
==PAGE:35==
2.6. Point Spread Function Measurements
17
Figure 2.12: Synthetic Transmission Apodization of a single emission made by a sub
aperture of N active elements in both planes XZ and YZ. Here, the apodization is constant
for different X values since it depends only on the Y and Z coordinates of the points.
2.6
Point Spread Function Measurements
In order to evaluate an ultrasound imaging system, the image quality is assesed like
a linear time invariant system by analyzing the impulse response of a system, in this
case the Point Spread Function (PSF). The Point Spread function is evaluated by its
Full-Width-Half-Maximum (FWHM) and the Cystic Resolution (CR). The FWHM is a
measure of spatial resolution and it is measuring taking the 1D proﬁle curve of the PSF (it
can be axial or lateral). It is deﬁned as the width between the points in a function at half of
the maximum value. A high resolution is inversely proportional to the value of FWHM.
The Cystic Resolution (CR) is used as a measurement of the contrast of an image.
It follows the following expression [25]: CRto =
Eout
to
Etot
to
where CRto is the contrast
measurement in dB. The time instance where the measurement is calculated is to. Etot
is the total PSF energy in an area, Eout is the energy outside a cyst deﬁned by a radius
that is placed right on top of the point. Since the radius can be changed, the contrast is a
measure of energy as a function of the radius length. In the case of the study, the radius is
on logarithm scale. A high contrast is equivalent to a low values of Cystic Resolution.
These two concepts would be used as a measurement of quality of the imaging system.
==PAGE:36==
18
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER3
Materials and Methods
This chapter describes the process of designing, simulating and analyzing a Row Column
array for 3D ultrasound imaging. First, the physical parameters of the array are described
in section 3.1 and the corresponding focusing parameters in section 3.2. After this, the
implemented integrated apodization is described and a comparative of different roll-
off values is set up in section 3.3. Synthetic Aperture beamforming is implemented
in section 3.4 and the second stage, using the Row Column Beamforming tool [17] is
described in section 3.5. Finally, the application of synthetic apodization to the transmitted
and received region of acceptance is implemented as described in section 3.6.
These implementations are simulated and veriﬁed using Field II [26] [27].
3.1
General Parameters and Row Column deﬁnition
In this section, the common set up parameters for the simulations are listed. All the
simulations are executed in very similar scenarios.
The Row Column transducer is simulated by creating two different 1D arrays: one
representing the rows used for transmission and another for the columns used in reception.
Both arrays are created in Field II using the same function (xdc_2d_array), where it
is possible to choose the number of elements in the x and y direction. In this function,
the width is set in the x direction and the height in the y direction, meaning that the
row array is created by exchanging the attributes used for the column array. The pitch
used is λ/2[m] to avoid grating lobes, the kerf (distance between elements) used was
λ/20[m]. The distances and lengths are expressed in terms of λ in order to make the
results independent from the frequency although the frequency used for all simulations
was f0 = 3 MHz. This was selected to maintain frequency of operation used in other
projects at the Center for Fast Ultrasound that involve a Row Column probe. The number
of elements is N = Nrows = Ncols = 192. This makes it possible to have multiple
emissions performed with an active aperture in transmission of Nact = 64 elements.
The height of the columns is set equal to the width of the rows, as shown in ﬁg. 3.4
hcol = wrow = N · dx. The optimal elements used for apodization was selected to be 25,
this decision was studied using the described method.
The excitation signal used for the simulations was a sinusoidal signal of duration
tmax = M · T = 3/f0 with amplitude 2V. The impulse response of the aperture is was
set as a sinusoidal signal of length tmax = 1/f0, simpulse(t) = sin 2πf0t · hann. The
19
==PAGE:38==
20
Chapter 3. Materials and Methods
hann window is applied in order to reduce the inﬂuence of side lobes but losing resolution
in the main lobe as a trade off. Both signals are illustrated in 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Impulse and Excitation signals used
Parameter name
Notation
Value
Unit
Speed of sound
c
1540
m/sec
Sampling frequency
fs
100
MHz
Excitation frequency
f0
3
MHz
Excitation wavelength
λ
0.5133
mm
Transmit focus depth
focaldepth
25λ or 60λ or 64λ
m
Transducer pitch
dx
λ/2
m
Transducer kerf
kerf
λ/20
m
Transducer width
width
0.45λ
m
Number of physical elements in one dimension
N
192
-
Number of elements used for the edge apodization
Napo
25
-
Number of elements to divide the physical elements
Nsubele
200
-
Number of active elements in transmission
Neleemit
64
-
Number of active elements in reception
Nelercv
64
-
Apodization window used in the active elements
-
Hann Window
-
Table 3.1: Simulation Parameters.
3.2
Row Column with Fixed Focusing in Transmission and Reception.
To obtain the ﬁnal results intended for this thesis, a step-by-step design process was
followed. To begin, a simple RC ﬁxed focus array was designed to understand the basics
of the Row Column geometry.
==PAGE:39==
3.3. Integrated Apodization Study.
21
In these ﬁrst simulations, the point spread function (PSF) of a RC array that uses
ﬁxed focus in transmission and reception is calculated. Reception using dynamic focusing
is also studied. The beamforming is done using FieldII, which uses Delay and Sum
beamformer assuming point sources.
The transducer is set up using the general simulation parameters decribed in table 3.1.
A 192 element transducer uses a sliding aperture in both transmission and reception with
Nact = 64 elements. This is implemented using electronic apodization. Each of the active
apertures is weighted using a Hann window. An integrated apodization of 25 elements is
implemented by adding a roll-off of a half Hann window at both edges.
The output of the simulation is the ﬁeld in the XZ (y = 0) and YZ (x = 0) planes
to measure the performance of this setup. In order to collect these planes, the following
steps were followed and illustrated in ﬁg. 3.2.
• Plane XZ (y = 0): In order to beamform the plane XZ, only one position of the
sliding aperture in transmission is used, this is the one centered at y = 0. The
active region emits a ﬁxed focused signal with focal points at 25λ and 64λ and
at (0, y = 0, z = 25λ or 64λ). The x coordinate does not inﬂuence the focusing
since, as described in section 2.3, the focal point is a line along y = 0. In reception,
to beamform the plane, all 129 positions of the sliding aperture in reception are
needed. Each of the active reception sub-apertures are focused at the x value of the
center of the active array. These delays are applied using (xdc_center_focus
and xdc_focus). After summing the signals received by the 64 active elements
an RF line is beamformed. An image in the XZ plane is therefore obtained from
the 129 lines in the lateral direction.
• Plane YZ (X = 0): In order to beamform this plane, two methodologies could be
used. The same methodology used for the plane XZ but emitting with columns and
receiving with rows is one option. The alternative is to use only one position of
the sliding RX aperture (that is centered at X = 0) and all the positions of the TX
sliding aperture. This would be 129 different emissions focused at the center of
the active region in the X coordinate and at the focal depths used before. For each
emission, the received active aperture beamforms a RF line.
A very similar set up is built to see the effect using Dynamic Apodization. In order to
do this, instead of using a ﬁxed delay proﬁle all depths per sliding aperture position, one
is calculated for each depth using the function xdc_dynamic_focus.
3.3
Integrated Apodization Study.
The integrated apodization is a fundamental part of this Row Column conﬁguration since
it provides a solution that attenuates the non-desired ghost-echo signals.
==PAGE:40==
22
Chapter 3. Materials and Methods
Figure 3.2: Row-Column with Fixed Focus TX and Fixed Focus RX Set Up.
In Field II, all elements in an array can be subdivided into mathematical elements
which can be given a speciﬁc weight, as shown in ﬁg. 3.3. To simulate the integrated
apodization a weighting value given by the chosen apodization function is applied to
each of the mathematical elements that lay inside the integrated apodization region of the
transmitting/receiving elements.
A low number of mathematical elements would recreate an under-sampled integrated
apodization, which would create additional artifacts similar to the ghost echoes since the
taper of the voltage towards the edges would not be smooth. For this study it was decided
to set 2 mathematical elements per λ/2, obtaining a total of Nmat = 2(N + 2Napol).
In order to ﬁnd the optimal aperture size after applying integrated apodization for a
given array aperture, a study using different windows and sizes is needed. The dimensions
of each column (and viceversa for each row) are hcol × wcol = N · dx × width =
96λ × 0.45λ, as shown in ﬁg. 3.4.
The size of the integrated apodization added to each side of the element is set in terms
of the number of elements N, Napo = kapo · N, and each apodization element has square
==PAGE:41==
3.3. Integrated Apodization Study.
23
−5
0
5
−2
0
2
x [mm]
y [mm]
Figure 3.3: 1D array with elevation plane divided into mathematical elements. Taken
from [28]
dimensions with side sapo = width = 0.45λ.
Figure 3.4: Dimensions and symbols used to describe the geometry of each Row Column
element, in the image, the case of the columns is used.
For this aperture with N = 192, if Napo elements are added on each side of the
element, the dimensions of an active column element after apodization are
hcol-apo × wcol = N · dx + 2Napo · width × width
(3.1)
= N(dx + 2kapo · width) × width
(3.2)
= λN
2 (1 + 4kapo · 0.45) × width
(3.3)
(3.4)
Knowing that kapo = Napo/N, we ﬁnd in eq. (3.5) that for the chosen values of pitch
and width of the array, the length of the element with integrated apodization can be almost
==PAGE:42==
24
Chapter 3. Materials and Methods
double the length without it (for Napo = N/2).
hcol-apo
hcol
=
λN
2 (1 + 4kapo · 0.45)
λN
2
= 1.8Napo
N
+ 1
(3.5)
Therefore, even though a larger integrated apodization will reduce more the ghost
echoes in the image, an analysis to ﬁnd the optimal number Napo must be found, that is, the
minimum number of integrated apodization elements that provides a sufﬁcient attenuation
of the Ghost echoes so that the size of the aperture is small enough to be comfortable for
medical use. The size for two apertures with different integrated apodization sizes but the
same active region size are shown in ﬁg. 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Row-Columns aperture with different size of integrated apodization region
but the same active area.
The windows Boxcar, Hann, Hamming and Blackman were compared with an apodiza-
tion size of of 15 apodization elements. The apodization was applied as a roll off to
the active aperture. Another option is to apply a Tukey window to the full aperture and
adjusting the value of r of the function in order to vary the window. This method was
not found useful since varying the parameter r did change the active aperture size. In
order to study the inﬂuence of the integrated apodization, the pulse-echo ﬁeld was used
transmitting with one single element. The result is quantiﬁed using the ratio between
the main signal and the biggest ghost echo. The point used to calculate the integrated
apodization were P1(0, 0, 97λ) and P2(0, 0, 180λ).
Once the most optimal window is selected, the next study is the size of the window.
Several window sizes (varying the number of elements used for apodization) are simulated
from Napo = 5 to Napo = 60 and a comparative is made again by comparing the ratio
of the main echo with the ghost echo. It needs to be remarked that this simulation the
pulse-echo ﬁeld is used and that the answer depends on the position of the point used. In
order to do a better approximation, all the points that we are desired to beamform should
be studied. In the case of this study, the number of elements needed for the minimum and
the maximum depth are studied in the center of the aperture.
==PAGE:43==
3.4. Row Column with Fixed Focusing Transmission and Synthetic Aperture.
25
3.4
Row Column with Fixed Focusing Transmission and Synthetic
Aperture.
This section describes the methodology used to simulate the Row Column with Fixed
Focus in Transmission and Synthetic Aperture. Previous research studies using SA and
line-element beamforming have only explored a conﬁguration where transmission is
made from single element emissions, with the drawbacks introduced in section 2.5.2.
Therefore simultaneously emitting multiple elements with a ﬁxed focal line and thus
having a so-called virtual array presents a novel approach to Row Column 3D imaging.
This set-up involves the use of a sliding aperture with nact = 64 active elements that
emits with a time proﬁle that is ﬁxed to a certain depth. In order to transmit a signal with
a certain delay proﬁle, several elements are needed.
The simulation uses the general parameters described in table 3.1. Two 2D arrays
are created with 192 elements to simulate the Rows and the Columns. In transmission, a
sliding aperture with 64 active elements is used. A Hann window is used to weight the
active elements giving a higher inﬂuence to the elements that are located in the center of
the active region. Within this active region, the delay proﬁle is ﬁxed to a certain depth that
is kept constant for all the emissions, forming a virtual array that emits a focused wave
from the focal point. The apodization and the delay for transmission are shown in ﬁg. 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Apodization (Electronic and Integrated) in Transmission and Reception on
the left. Focusing in Transmission on the right.
The focal depth was selected at fz = 64λ, given the dimensions of the aperture
area, the F# used was F# = ApertureW idth
F ocalDepth
= 64λ/2
64λ
= 2 and the delay proﬁle can be
==PAGE:44==
26
Chapter 3. Materials and Methods
calculated as described in 2.3. Apart from the consequences in the imaging, the focal
depth is important since the actual development state of the Row Column beamforming
tool can only beamform points located deeper than the focal depth.
Since there are Nact = 64 active elements, the number of total emissions is: Nemi =
N −Nact + 1 = 192 −64 + 1 = 129 emissions. For each emission, all the columns
receive a scattered signal. The delay proﬁle in the receive elements is set to zero. This
allows for each of the elements to have a very wide main lobe that receives signals
from a large area. The raw data at the receiving elements is simulated through Field II
(calc_scat_multi), and for each emission 192 unfocused signals (one signal per Rx
channel) are received. This makes a total of 192(RXchannels) · 129(emissions) =
24768 signals. This RF_data is the output of the ﬁrst stage that uses only Field II, its
summarized in ﬁg. 3.7.
Figure 3.7: First Stage: The RF is obtained by using a sliding transmission aperture,
where the focus is moving along the y direction with the active aperture. From each
emission, all the RX signals are received and stored. The signals are the result of the
interaction of the emitted sound ﬁeld with the scatter.
3.5
Row Column Beamforming tool (2nd Stage)
Once the RF data is available, the next stage is to process the LRVs to be be coherently
summed to form HRV by applying Synthetic Aperture Imaging. This step is done using
the RC Beamforming tool developed by Rasmussen [17].
The input data for this tool is the RF data to be beamformed which is obtained from
the ﬁrst stage. Then, the so-called Source Points and Drain Points are needed. The source
positions are the emitting sources in transmission. It is worth noting that this tool was
developed for being used with single transmit elements and in that case, the source points
==PAGE:45==
3.5. Row Column Beamforming tool (2nd Stage)
27
are each of the line elements. In this work, multiple elements are used in transmission
and therefore, the source points are the focal line segments, that is the virtual sources in
emission.
The source line position is deﬁned by giving the points at each of the ends of the
focal line segment. Since for each emission the focal position changes as the sliding Tx
aperture moves laterally (although the focal depth is kept constant), the source points
are not the same for all the RF-data signals and have to be given line by line for the
Nemi = 129 emissions.
Figure 3.8: Example of an sliding aperture transmission where the red dots show the
source points X position (because they should be located at focal depth) and the green
dots represent the drain points, where each singular receive element (in this case 10) is
deﬁned by its both ends.
The drain points are the line segments of the receivers. In this case, single elements
are used and the line element is placed in the center of the pitch along each element, this
approximationis assumed since wcol ≪hcol. The source and drain points are depicted in
ﬁg. 3.9 with only 10 receivers and the line elements are illustrated in ﬁg. 3.8.
The next input requested by the RC Beamforming Tool are the coordinates (y, x, z)
==PAGE:46==
28
Chapter 3. Materials and Methods
Figure 3.9: Beamforming with Line Elements, the active region Nact is deﬁned by a line
compound by the edges SA and SB. The focal line is described as the line between FA
and FB. The scatter point is deﬁned by the point P. This illustration shows the path that is
used to calculate the time of ﬂight. The time elapsed between the emission from the Line
Source, to the point element through the Focal Line in addition to the time it takes for the
sound to come back to the receiver line elements. The projection of P in the transmission
and receiver is also shown in the yellow dotted line.
of the points in space we are interested in beamforming. A very large number of points to
beamform would require a large processing time but on the other hand, if the number of
points between two points is too low, the volume would be very undersampled and the
results would not be useful. It is very important to highlight that these coordinates should
be included as (y, x, z) in order to obtain the correct results.
Another input of the function is the time axis from the rf data. All the RF_data is then
adjusted (with zero padding) to start at the same time. In the case of ﬁxed focusing, the
source points have to be deﬁned as the focal line segment ends, and the time axis needs
to be modiﬁed. The time that takes from the aperture to the focal line segment is not
considered by the function and it has to be extracted from the time axis.
The Rx synthetic apodization is also an input of this function but it will be explained
in section 3.6.
The output of this second stage is the beamformed data (BFM_data). The output
depends on the number of points in the volume to be beamformed. In the case of only
one beamformed point, the BFM_data would be 1 × Nemi = 1 × 129. The BFM_data
==PAGE:47==
3.6. Synthetic Apodization in Transmission and Reception (3d Stage)
29
(1, 1) contains the summed energy from the ﬁrst emission that is received by all the RX
channels at the sample with the coordinates of the point (x1, y1, z1) that corresponds to
the time of ﬂight(fs × ToFemission(point, drn)) calculated using the formula eq. (2.10)
for each Rx.
This is important to note, since even though there could be energy at this beamformed
point in the ROI, it doesn’t imply that a scatterer is located here. If a scatterer is located at
another point with the same Time of Flight than the point we are beamforming, the RX
channel will contribute to the BFM signal by adding the energy. Instead of only one point,
a whole volume can be beamformed, this is considered a Low Resolution Volume. This
stage is illustrated in ﬁg. 3.10.
Figure 3.10: Second Stage. The BFM data is obtained after using the RC beamforming
tool.
3.6
Synthetic Apodization in Transmission and Reception (3d Stage)
The last stage before applying synthetic aperture is applying synthetic apodization in
transmission and reception. These apodizations limit the region of inﬂuence of the
transmitters and receivers in the volume as explained in 2.5.3. The synthetic receive
apodization is another parameter that is included as an input in the RC beamformer. In
this study, it is calculated using an F# = 1 but since single element receivers are used,
another F# could be used. For each receiver, its acceptance angle is calculated as shown
in 2.5.3. The shape of the integrated apodization for one receiver is shown at the ﬁgure
2.11. Within the RC beamformer, a weighting is calculated for every individual point to
beamform with each single receiver. If the point is out of the region of acceptance of that
==PAGE:48==
30
Chapter 3. Materials and Methods
receiver, the weighting would be 0, if it is inside the weighting would be based on a Hann
window. This would give a higher value to the points that are closer to the to the center of
the acceptance region than the ones that lay close to the non-acceptance region.
In the case of the Synthetic Transmission Apodization the acceptance region is set by
the focal depth used. Since the simulation is set to 64λ, the F# = F ocalDepth
Aperture
=
64λ
64∗λ/2 =
2, the acceptance region is already deﬁned. An example of a synthetic transmission
apodization with ﬁxed focus is shown in ﬁgure 2.12. This apodization limits the emissions
that can be used to beamform a concrete point since the contribution only lead to adding a
de-phased signal that is translated into noise in the ﬁnal image.
The last part of this set up is adding the information from several emissions together.
After applying the three stages, the ﬁnal data of would be in the size of (Npoints ×
emissions). The number of points per emission are the low resolution volumes that will
be added together. Thanks to the synthetic apodization, the inﬂuence of the receiver and
the emissions have been limited. This last part is illustrated in 3.11.
In order to evaluate the system, different scatterers are to be beamformed to analyze
the imaging limitations in space of the set up. The FWHM and the Cystic Resolu-
tion are used to benchmark the resolution and contrast and obtained using the function
cfu_get_psf_metrics.
Figure 3.11: The BFM data is obtained after using the RC beamforming tool.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER4
Results and discussion
In this chapter, the results obtained after applying the methods would be analyzed in order
to get a quantitative analysis.
The ﬁrst results are obtained from simulating a row column transducer with ﬁxed
focusing in both emission and reception and a comparative is made with the the same
set up but using a dynamic focusing in RX. The second results show an analysis of the
integrated apodization. The third results show the Point Spread Functions obtained after
implementing and simulating the Row Column Synthetic Aperture with Fixed Focusing.
The PSF dynamic range would be from -60dB to 0dB. This dynamic range is most
of publications of Row Column that are from -30dB to 0dB. This is because, since it is
known that we are able to obtain a good resolution using row column but contrast is not
as good as desired, side lobes are very important to analyze.
4.1
Field II: Fixed Focus in Transmission and Fixed Focus/Dynamic
Focus in Reception
The ﬁrst part of the simulations are performed without using the RC beamforming tool
and beamforming using only Field II. Since line-element beamforming is not applied in
this implementation, the best results are not expected. Nevertheless, their importance in
the learning curve is fundamental since they serve as an introduction to the geometry of
the transducer and the techniques that are needed to apply in order to solve the drawbacks
of Row-Column.
ﬁg. 4.1 shows the PSFs obtained from using a Row-Column Transducer with Fixed
Focusing in transmission and Fixed Focusing in reception. Having a ﬁrst look, the
inﬂuence of having a very low focal depth in the penetration depth is shown. In the top
plots, where the focal depth is 20λ, the main beam is wider, due to the proximity of
the focal depth to the aperture. Consequently, there is a lower directivity and a loss in
resolution as the depth increases. On the other hand, since most of the energy is in the
wider main lobe, the side lobes are lower. This is the reason why no ghost echoes are
visualized when compare to the results with the focal depth at 60λ at the bottom of the
ﬁgure. The ﬁrst detail to highlight is the difference in resolution, since the focal depth is
placed at a higher depth, the beam is also narrower and the resolution improves at longer
depths. On the other hand and despite having the same integrated apodization region, the
ghost echoes are much higher with this conﬁguration increasing as a function of depth.
31
==PAGE:50==
32
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
In order to improve the imaging with this system, dynamic focusing in reception was
implemented. Having a constant F# signiﬁcantly enhances the resolution along the axial
direction as observed in ﬁgure 4.2 when using the focal depth 20λ (top of the ﬁgure).
Although the energy at deeper depths is still very low, the resolution improves notably
and its more uniform over the different depths. In the case of the focusing at 60λ (bottom
of the ﬁgure), the resolution is also improved but the problem with the contrast due to the
big sidelobes is not solved.
For both simulations, it can be seen that the planes compared (XZ and YZ) are exactly
the same. This is because the methods to obtain both planes are equivalent.
A quantitative analysis was also performed comparing the PSFs with ﬁxed and dy-
namic focusing in reception (with ﬁxed focusing in transmission at 60λ). To get quantita-
tive information from the resolution the FWHM was used, while the contrast was analyzed
using the Cystic Resolution at ﬁg. 4.3 and ﬁg. 4.4. In the quantitative results, it can be
observed that the Dynamic Focusing improves both Resolution and Contrast. The only
position where the results of ﬁxed focusing are as good as with Dynamic Focusing are at
the focal depth (60λ). This is in agreement with the theory since with ﬁxed focusing the
F# is calculated for one depth and the conﬁguration of the aperture is kept constant for all
depths. For the rest of depths, the quantitative analysis serves as a proof of the qualitative
analysis done previously. The resolution decays with depth and the same happens with
the contrast.
==PAGE:51==
4.1. Field II: Fixed Focus in Transmission and Fixed Focus/Dynamic Focus in Reception33
Figure 4.1: Point Spread Function of several scatterers using a ﬁxed focusing for transmit
and receive with the focal depth at 20λ and 60λ.
==PAGE:52==
34
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Figure 4.2: Point Spread Function of several scatterers using a ﬁxed focusing for trans-
mission (focal depth at 20λ and 60λ) and Dynamic Focusing in reception.
==PAGE:53==
4.1. Field II: Fixed Focus in Transmission and Fixed Focus/Dynamic Focus in Reception35
Figure 4.3: The red lines refer to the ﬁxed focusing and the blue ones to dynamic focusing.
This graph shows the radius of 6dB, 12dB and 20 dB cystic resolution. The lowest the
Cystic Resolution, the highest the contrast.
Figure 4.4: FWHM comparative between Fixed Focusing and Dynamic Focusing over
different depths. A low FWHM equals a high resolution. The red line refer to the ﬁxed
focusing and the green one to the dynamic focusing.
==PAGE:54==
36
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
4.2
Studying the Integrated Apodization
The results from the study of the integrated apodization aim to obtain the optimal window
to avoid ghost echoes. It also serves to understand the inﬂuence and the limitations that
this solution offers. The plot 4.5 shows that not all the windowing functions have the
same effectiveness. First of all, the boxcar, does not reduce the second echo but displaces
it as well. This is in agreement with the theoretical derivations in section 2.4.1, since
there is no tapering towards the edges of the aperture. The displacement of the echoes
also makes sense, since due to a longer aperture, the edge would be encountered by the
signal also later.
All of the other windows under test succeed in attenuating the ghost echoes, but
the one that achieves the best result is the Hann Window, since it produces the lowest
ghost-echo peaks (5dB lower than the second best option). As expected from the theory,
none of the windows affect in the main echo. From the ﬁgure 4.5 the Hann window was
selected to be used as the standard integrated apodization window.
Figure 4.5: The upper graph shows a comparative of the different windows that can
be applied as a integrated apodization. The boxcar (no apodization), Hann window,
Hamming, Triangular and Blackmann are studied. The Pulse Echo of the trasnmitted ﬁeld
from a point at P(0, 0, 60λ) is shown in after applying a logarithm scale of the real part of
the signal (applied as the absolute value of the Hilbert transform). The down graph shows
the distance between the peak of the main echo and the second echo for each window.
==PAGE:55==
4.2. Studying the Integrated Apodization
37
The second study shown in ﬁg. 4.6 tries to deﬁne the appropriate length of the
integrated apodization for the simulation setup. In this graph, the point used to calculate
the Pulse Echo ﬁeld was P(0, 0, 60λ), and the results show the signiﬁcant impact of the
length of the integrated apodization region. Nevertheless, since these signals are the pulse
echo ﬁeld, the ghost echoes from other points may not be as attenuated as the one showed
for this point. In order to make a more complete analysis, all the points considered to
beamform in the ROI should be analyzed. This consequence is also visible in the 4.1 with
the 60λ where the ghost echoes are more notable once the depth increases. For the depth
of 60λ, an apodization with 25 elements is sufﬁcient. This would make the transducer
larger, from eq. (3.5), for Napo = 25, hcol-apo/hcol = 1.8 Napo
N + 1 = 1.23, that is a 23%
increase in size with respect to a non apodized element. This is considered a satisfactory
compromise between size and ghost echoes.
Figure 4.6: Each line represents the elements added for the integrated apodization. In the
case of the columns, 5 elements added would make the column higher (5 × columnwidth.
The graph shows how the length of the integrated apodization is crucial to get rid of the
ghost echoes.)
In order to check and choose integrated apodization window and length that is useful to
the set up proposed with Synthetic Aperture, the pulse echo ﬁeld at the point P(0, 0, 180)
is analyzed. Using the ﬁgure 4.7 it was decided to use an Hann apodization with a length
of 40 elements for the Row Column Synthetic Aperture with Fixed Focusing Transmission.
In this case, the increase in length for each element is 38%, which might be larger than
originally desired.
==PAGE:56==
38
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Figure 4.7: Different apodization lengths for the Pulse Echo ﬁeld at (0, 0, 180λ). The
number of elements chosen was 40.
==PAGE:57==
4.3. Row Column Synthetic Aperture with Fixed Focusing Transmission
39
The simulation set up explained in section 3.4 was analyzed by placing points at
different points of the volume and the planes XZ(Y=0) and YZ(X=0) were analyzed.
4.3
Row Column Synthetic Aperture with Fixed Focusing Transmis-
sion
4.3.1
PSF at point P(0, 0, 75λ)
To design this system, a reference point was chosen where optimal results are expected.
This point to optimize was P(0, 0, 75) for the set up and it was used to verify that the
system was correctly implemented. The contour plots 4.8 show the PSF in both planes,
XZ (receiver plane) and YZ (transmission plane) in logarithmic scale with a dynamic
range from 0 to -60dB. Each contour line represents a step of -6dB. The measured values
are described in the following and summed up in section 4.3.1.
In the XZ Plane (left), the optimal PSF was measured obtaining a full-width-half-
max measurement of FWHM = 2.2λ. The −60dB sidelobe width is 10λ from −5λ
to +5λ. These contrast levels are considered an optimal value for a RC array at this
depth. This can be quantiﬁed by the Cystic Resolution where the 6dB and 12dB radius
are: CR6dB = 0.9302λ, CR12dB = 1.4441λ. This PSF is contained in the so-called
receiver plane so a better PSF is expected compared to the other one contained in the
plane YZ.
Nevertheless, the PSF in the YZ plane (right) shows satisfactory properties as well.
The FWHM = 5.15λ, is a huge improvement considering the initial lack of resolution
in the transmission plane (YZ) with Row Column. The contrast, measured with the
Cystic Resolution at 6dB, 12 dB and 20dB is CR6dB = 1.8945λ, CR12dB = 3.11λ,
CR20dB = 4.46λ. Apart from this, the ghost echoes have been completely removed
from both planes, this satisfactory result is expected since the length of the integrated
apodization was set to napo = 40 elements in order to remove ghost echoes until a depth
of 180λ.
XZ
YZ
FWHM
2.2λ
5.15λ
CR 6dB
0.9302λ
1.8945λ
CR 12dB
1.4441λ
3.11λ
Table 4.1: Point Spread Function metrics at optimal point with Synthetic Aperture using
the RC Beamforming tool
==PAGE:58==
40
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Figure 4.8: PSF in the XZ plane (X=0) and in the YZ plane (X=0) of a scatter located at
P(0, 0, 75λ). The set up was built and checked around this point.
4.3.2
Exploring the limitations of the set up
Once a satisfactory result was obtained in the point P(0, 0, 75λ). The limitations of
the system were studied by analyzing how the PSF evolved through the different parts
of the volume. This results are divided between scatterers placed at different positions
along the XZ (reception) plane shown in ﬁg. 4.9 and scatterers placed along the YZ plane
(transmission) shown in ﬁg. 4.13. The size of the aperture is 192λ/2), which means that
the aperture goes from −48λ to 48λ. The X positions that were analyzed are: X1 = 0,
X2 = ±24λ, X3 = ±48λ and the equivalent in the Y direction: Y1 = 0, Y2 = ±24λ,
Y3 = ±48λ. The depths explored are : Z1 = 75λ, z2 = 125λ, z3 = 175λ, z4 = 225λ.
These ﬁgures show the PSF of each scatterer superimposed on top of each other.
Although in the contour plots all of the PSFs are normalized by the same value (the
highest of all the PSFs), each of the PSFs was calculated and beamformed individually. If
not, the contributions from each PSF would have interacted between them and analyzing
the individual PSFs would have not been possible.
The PSFs at different X positions are shown at 4.10 where it can be appreciated
that the side lobes increase with the depth. In this case, the reason why the sidelobes
appear could because the dynamic apodization in reception runs out of aperture. Since
the Synthetic Apodization in reception is based on an F# = 1, the maximum depth we
can achieve with a complete aperture is: Depth = Aperture ·F# = 192 · λ/2 = 96λ.
==PAGE:59==
4.3. Row Column Synthetic Aperture with Fixed Focusing Transmission
41
It can also be seen that the sidelobes at x4 = ±47λ are tilted. In order to understand
this effect, let’s take the points at X = 0, here since the points are in the middle of the
array, the contributions from the different receivers are balanced (and symmetric) since
the same number of receivers are used at both sides of the point. In the case of the point
located in an extreme, more contributions are received from one side since the aperture is
limited, this could steer the sidelobes to a certain angle.
The FWHM and the Cystic Resolution are measured for the three X positions along
the depths in ﬁgure 4.11 and 4.12. Analyzing the FWHM, we can observe that the best
resolution is always obtained in the X = 0 position when compared to X = 24λ and
X = 47λ. This have sense since is the place were more contributions can be added. The
decreased resolution from the scatter at Z = 75λ to the scatter Z = 125λ is not very
signiﬁcant, but it decrease faster for the depths Z = 175λ and Z = 225λ. In the case of
the Cystic Resolution, the same trend is followed. The best contrast is obtained always
in the X = 0λ and it gets worse as a function of depth. It also noticeable that the ghost
echoes get stronger as a function of depth and that the strongest ghost echoes are always
at X = 0λ.
Additionally, analyzing the plane YZ for these scatters, what appears to be ghost
echoes at Z = 125λ are the superposed sidelobes.
The same study for scatterers placed along the Y direction was done and it is shown in
the ﬁgure 4.13. The individual PSFs were analyzed 4.14, it can be seen that the responses
are very different from the ones with the scatterers were moved along the X direction.
Here, the scatterers are positioned at different points of the transmission plane. The
Dynamic Apodization in Transmission is different since it is based on a ﬁxed focusing.
The ﬁrst fact that should be highlighted is the absence of a PSF from the point located
at P(0, −47λ, 75λ). First of all, this point is close to the focal depth f = 64λ, being
close to the focal line leads to being insoniﬁed by less emissions that contribute to the
beamforming point since the acceptance region is narrower than at deeper points.
This is also combined with the fact that the point is located close to the edge of the
aperture at Y = ±47. Similarly to the case of the scatterer at P(47λ, 0, 75λ), there is
a limited number of physical elements so that for the beamformed points located at the
edges, the number of contributions available are not the same than the ones available for a
point at the same depth but located at the center. This results into an unbalanced PSF. The
combination of these leads to having a PSF with less energy than the central ones, and in
this case, even lower than the -60dB limit. This is more noticeable in the transmission
plane than in the receiving plane since it can be already detected at the PSFs located at
Y = ±24λ where the PSF loses its symmetry while the other plane still is balanced at
this lateral position. In the analysis of resolution, it can be seen that the FWHM gets
much higher from Y = 0 to Y = 47λ meaning that the resolution is worse. In the case
of contrast, some problems were encountered when measuring the Cystic Resolution at
12dB and 20dB so the cystic resolution at 6dB is only shown.
==PAGE:60==
42
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Figure 4.9: [RC SA] PSF in the XZ (y=0) and YZ (x=0) planes. Results from placing
different scatterers at different X and Z positions. The image shows contour plots with a
dynamic range from -60 dB to 0 dB. The point spread functions are plotted one above
other and all of them are normalized using the highest value of all of them.
4.4
Discussion
Throughout this chapter ﬁxed focusing, integrated apodization and beamforming using
Row Column have been studied. As expected, the starting conﬁguration with Fixed
Focusing in both transmission and reception and without taking into account the line-
segment geometry in the beamforming has been outperformed by the implementation of
Synthetic Aperture with Row Column and Fixed Focus Transmission (when the ROI is
limited to points below the focal line).
The ﬁrst limitation is identiﬁed from the results of ﬁg. 4.9 at the plane XZ. Here
the huge sidelobes that appear at the scatterers located at Z = 125λ, Z = 175λ and
Z = 225λ can be avoided if the points to beamforme are located closer to the focal point,
to avoid these sidelobes, Max Depth = F# · N · dx = F# · 192λ/2 = F# · 96λ.
In the implemented case, the F# used for the Dynamic Received Apodization is F# = 1,
but it can be changed electronically. Varying this F# to higher values would be translated
in a loss of resolution but a deeper axial range would be available without producing
sidelobes. In addition, the huge size of the sidelobes in this plane could in principle be
==PAGE:61==
4.4. Discussion
43
Figure 4.10: XZ Plane (y = 0) detail from the PSFs at different lateral positions and
depths. The response is symmetric in the X direction so only the scatters at the X position
of X = −47λ, X = −24λ, X = 0λ. It is easier to observe how the sidelobes became
bigger since the depth is higher.
reduced by applying an apodization in the receiving elements from the edges. This could
reduce the effect that the limitation in the physical aperture has when beamforming the
points placed at the sides of the row column, as suggested in section 4.3.2
From the results shown in ﬁgure 4.13, another limitation in the ROI can be identiﬁed.
The Y direction is more limited than the X direction since points located at the edges and
close to the focal line would not be detected as shown in 4.14. A possible solution to
this problem could be addressed by changing the F# in the ﬁxed focus transmission and
placing the focal depth far from the ROI. Nevertheless, higher sidelobes in the YZ plane
would be expected and therefore, a loss in contrast.
The simulations present satisfactory results for scatters at Y = ±24λ although the
losing of symmetry of the PSF is a ﬁrst warning that says that not all the contributions
that should be added are available (because they would have come from a receiver that is
outside the physical array). Therefore with this setup the lateral dimensions of the ROI
cannot be as large as the insoniﬁed area, as the HRV does not have complete information
at the sides of the volume.
Finally, the integrated apodization study has proven to be a useful study to choose the
apodization needed for this setup to avoid the ghost echoes until a desired depth. Never-
theless, although integrated apodization is a reliable solution that effectively suppresses
the ghost echoes, the needed increment in the size of the aperture entails a sacriﬁce that
might not always be possible to make. Therefore, other alternatives or additional solutions
could be explored in future research.
==PAGE:62==
44
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Figure 4.11: XZ Plane (y = 0) FWHM comparative of the scatters at different depth and
lateral position X.
Figure 4.12: XZ Plane (y = 0) Cystic Resolution comparative of the scatters at different
depth and lateral position. (Using the radius at 6dB, 12dB and 20dB).
==PAGE:63==
4.4. Discussion
45
Figure 4.13: PSF in the XZ (y=0) and YZ (x=0) planes. The point spread functions are
plotted one above other.The point spread functions are plotted one above other and all of
them are normalized using the highest value of all of them.
Figure 4.14: YZ Plane (x = 0) detail from the PSFs at different lateral positions and
depths.
==PAGE:64==
46
Chapter 4. Results and discussion
Figure 4.15: YZ Plane (x = 0) FWHM comparative of the scatters at different depth and
lateral position Y.
Figure 4.16: YZ Plane (x = 0) Cystic Resolution comparative of the scatters at different
depth and lateral position Y.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER5
Project Conclusion and Future work
The initial aim of this Master’s Thesis was to implement a Dual Stage Beamformer with a
Row Column Array for 3D ultrasound imaging. Throughout the course of this project it
was seen how this goal was farther away than initially expected due to the peculiarities in
the nature of the Row Column Array. This array presents a steep learning curve from a
linear 1D array and there are a few non trivial ideas that need to be understood in detail
before proceeding to more advanced beamforming. However, much has been achieved
and the ﬁnal results of this thesis are satisfactory.
Moreover, this project of exploratory nature has been the ﬁrst study that successfully
implements a Sliding aperture Row Column array with virtual sources in transmission
at the Center for Fast Ultrasound. As already shown in section 4.3.1, this conﬁguration
provides an optimal FWHM of FWHMXZ = 2.2λ and FWHMY Z = 5.15λ.
To reach these ﬁnal results a long processing time had to be taken into account, which
in the last stretch of the project proved to be critical. The current performance of the RC
Beamforming tool processes 250000 voxels (60 samples in each direction x, y an z) from
one emission in 11.4s in a standard PC [17], which for a large sampling resolution along
several planes in space, results in long waits before results can be obtained and analyzed.
During the implementation, a lot of time was dedicated to getting the expected results
from the RC beamforming tool since the initial ones did not agree with the expected ones.
Towards the end of the project, an undocumented bug was found in the RC beamforming
tool. It was found that the coordinates to be input for the points to beamform in the RC
beamforming tool were ﬂipped, being (y, x, z). This caused unexpected errors when
applying Synthetic Dynamic Apodization.
Notwithstanding, the RC Beamforming tool, along with the research performed by
Rasmussen, et al. has been tremendously valuable in this project. It is my hope that this
project served to identify key points to improve in this tool and to provide unique insights
to keep advancing towards real time 3D ultrasound imaging with such a clever, albeit
complex array design.
To sum up, this project started with an implementation of Fixed Focusing at Tx and
Rx where the data is obtained plane by plane and without using the RC Beamforming
Tool so point sources instead of virtual line sources were assumed. These results were
improved with the implementation of the Row Column Synthetic Aperture with ﬁxed
focusing in transmission. Here, the importance of the synthetic apodization was raised
since its inﬂuence in the ﬁnal imaging system is notable.
An additional study was performed and it demonstrated that the ghost echoes can be
47
==PAGE:66==
48
Chapter 5. Project Conclusion and Future work
removed by the use of integrated apodization and that the size of the integrated apodization
region has a direct implication in the maximum depth that can be imaged without the
presence of ghosts echoes.
The results show that this set up can be a good basis for future research. Row Column
could potentially be used for 3D imaging but there is still a long way to achieve high
quality imaging. The next steps to continue this project should be centered in analyzing
the parameters to ﬁnd the optimal conﬁguration for the set up. The F# used for the
Dynamic Apodization in Reception inﬂuences the region where the point spread function
does not contain sidelobes in the plane XZ. The F# in transmission, would transform the
Synthetic Apodization in Transmission since it has been shown that points closed to the
lateral and the focal line have low energy. In order to solve the problem in the laterals
of the transducer were the physical limits of the array limits the number of contributions
that can be done, a hypothetical solution could be to apply an apodization window that
reduces the inﬂuence of the lateral elements so this effect is smoothed. Although this
still needs to be proved, this could potentially lower the sidelobes in the XZ plane too in
detriment of the energy recieved at the sides.
On the whole, this has been a very satisfying engineering project where a lot has been
learned from an area of engineering which only a year ago was very much unknown to
me. The challenges presented by this project were daunting at ﬁrst, requiring a lot of deep
understanding to obtain the ﬁrst results. Through the work done over these six months
and the many lessons learnt from the supervisors of this project, I have come to know and
understand the details and hidden aspects of this peculiar array. After the last successful
results described above I feel encouraged to hope that this imaging system could one day
be available for patients worldwide.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
T. L. Szabo, Diagnostic ultrasound imaging: Inside out, 2nd ed. Elsevier (Oxford,
UK), 2014 (cit. on p. 3).
[2]
A. Fenster and D. B. Downey, “Three-dimensional ultrasound imaging”, in Medical
Image Acquisition and Processing, J. K. Udupa and A. Fenster, Eds., SPIE, Sep.
2001. DOI: 10.1117/12.440246. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/
10.1117/12.440246 (cit. on p. 3).
[3]
R. W. Prager, U. Z. Ijaz, A. H. Gee, and G. M. Treece, “Three-dimensional ultra-
sound imaging”, Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part H:
Journal of Engineering in Medicine, vol. 224, no. 2, pp. 193–223, Feb. 2010. DOI:
10.1243/09544119jeim586. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/
10.1243/09544119jeim586 (cit. on p. 3).
[4]
Q. Huang and Z. Zeng, “A review on real-time 3d ultrasound imaging technology”,
BioMed Research International, vol. 2017, pp. 1–20, 2017. DOI: 10.1155/
2017/6027029. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1155/
2017/6027029 (cit. on p. 3).
[5]
N. M. Daher and J. T. Yen, “2-D array for 3-D ultrasound imaging using synthetic
aperture techniques”, IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelec., Freq. Contr., vol. 53, no. 5,
pp. 912–924, 2006 (cit. on p. 4).
[6]
C. H. Seo and J. T. Yen, “A 256 x 256 2-D array transducer with row-column
addressing for 3-D rectilinear imaging”, IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelec., Freq.
Contr., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 837–847, Apr. 2009 (cit. on p. 4).
[7]
M. Engholm, H. Bouzari, T. L. Christiansen, C. Beers, J. P. Bagge, L. N. Moesner,
S. E. Diederichsen, M. B. Stuart, J. A. Jensen, and E. V. Thomsen, “Probe develop-
ment of cmut and pzt row–column-addressed 2-d arrays”, Sens. Actuators A: Phys.,
vol. 273, pp. 121–133, 2018. DOI: 10.1016/j.sna.2018.02.031 (cit. on
p. 4).
[8]
M. Birk, A. Burshtein, T. Chernyakova, A. Eilam, J. W. Choe, A. Nikoozadeh, P.
Khuri-Yakub, and Y. C. Eldar, “Compressed 3d ultrasound imaging with 2d arrays”,
in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), IEEE, May 2014. DOI: 10.1109/icassp.2014.6854941. [On-
line]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/icassp.2014.6854941
(cit. on p. 4).
49
==PAGE:68==
50
Bibliography
[9]
R. E. Davidsen, J. A. Jensen, and S. W. Smith, “Two-dimensional random arrays
for real time volumetric imaging”, Ultrason. Imaging, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 143–163,
Jul. 1994 (cit. on p. 4).
[10]
S. S. Brunke and G. R. Lockwood, “Broad-bandwidth radiation patterns of sparse
two-dimensional vernier arrays”, IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelec., Freq. Contr.,
vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 1101–1109, Sep. 1997 (cit. on p. 4).
[11]
J. T. Yen, J. P. Steinberg, and S. W. Smith, “Sparse 2-D array design for real time
rectilinear volumetric imaging”, IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelec., Freq. Contr.,
vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 93–110, Jan. 2000 (cit. on p. 4).
[12]
C. E. Morton and G. R. Lockwood, “Theoretical assessment of a crossed electrode
2-D array for 3-D imaging”, in Proc. IEEE Ultrason. Symp., 2003, pp. 968–971
(cit. on p. 4).
[13]
C. E. M. Démoré, A. Joyce, K. Wall, and G. Lockwood, “Real-time volume imaging
using a crossed electrode array”, IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelec., Freq. Contr.,
vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 1252–1261, 2009 (cit. on p. 4).
[14]
M. F. Rasmussen and J. A. Jensen, “3D ultrasound imaging performance of a
row-column addressed 2D array transducer: A simulation study”, in Proc. SPIE
Med. Imag., 86750C, 2013, pp. 1–11 (cit. on p. 4).
[15]
C. H. Frazier and W. D. O’Brien, “Synthetic aperture techniques with a virtual
source element”, IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelec., Freq. Contr., vol. 45, no. 1,
pp. 196–207, 1998. DOI: 10.1109/58.646925 (cit. on p. 4).
[16]
H. Bouzari, M. Engholm, T. L. Christiansen, C. Beers, A. Lei, M. B. Stuart, S. I.
Nikolov, E. V. Thomsen, and J. A. Jensen, “Volumetric synthetic aperture imaging
with a piezoelectric 2-D row-column probe”, in Proc. SPIE Med. Imag., vol. 9790,
2016, pp. 1–9 (cit. on p. 4).
[17]
M. F. Rasmussen, T. L. Christiansen, E. V. Thomsen, and J. A. Jensen, “3-D
imaging using row–column-addressed arrays with integrated apodization — Part
I: Apodization design and line element beamforming”, IEEE Trans. Ultrason.,
Ferroelec., Freq. Contr., vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 947–958, 2015 (cit. on pp. 5, 8–14, 19,
26, 47).
[18]
J. A. Jensen, “Improved vector velocity estimation using directional transverse
oscillation”, in Proc. IEEE Ultrason. Symp., IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–4. DOI: 10.1109/
ULTSYM.2015.0011 (cit. on p. 6).
[19]
G. E. Tupholme, “Generation of acoustic pulses by bafﬂed plane pistons”, Mathe-
matika, vol. 16, pp. 209–224, 1969 (cit. on p. 8).
[20]
P. R. Stepanishen, “Transient radiation from pistons in an inﬁnite planar bafﬂe”, J.
Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 49, pp. 1629–1638, 1971 (cit. on p. 9).
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
51
[21]
A. D. Pierce, Acoustics, An Introduction to Physical Principles and Applications.
New York: Acoustical Society of America, 1989 (cit. on p. 10).
[22]
J. A. Jensen, S. Nikolov, K. L. Gammelmark, and M. H. Pedersen, “Synthetic
aperture ultrasound imaging”, Ultrasonics, vol. 44, e5–e15, 2006 (cit. on p. 14).
[23]
M. Karaman, P. C. Li, and M. O’Donnell, “Synthetic aperture imaging for small
scale systems”, IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelec., Freq. Contr., vol. 42, pp. 429–
442, 1995 (cit. on p. 14).
[24]
I. K. Holfort, A. Austeng, J.-F. Synnevåg, S. Holm, F. Gran, and J. A. Jensen,
“Adaptive Receive and Transmit Apodization for Synthetic Aperture Ultrasound
Imaging”, in Proc. IEEE Ultrason. Symp., 2009 (cit. on p. 16).
[25]
K. Ranganathan and W. F. Walker, “Cystic resolution: A performance metric for
ultrasound imaging systems”, IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelec., Freq. Contr.,
vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 782–792, 2007. DOI: 10.1109/TUFFC.2007.311 (cit. on
p. 17).
[26]
J. A. Jensen, “Field: A program for simulating ultrasound systems”, Med. Biol.
Eng. Comp., vol. 10th Nordic-Baltic Conference on Biomedical Imaging, Vol. 4,
Supplement 1, Part 1, pp. 351–353, 1996 (cit. on p. 19).
[27]
J. A. Jensen and N. B. Svendsen, “Calculation of pressure ﬁelds from arbitrarily
shaped, apodized, and excited ultrasound transducers”, IEEE Trans. Ultrason.,
Ferroelec., Freq. Contr., vol. 39, pp. 262–267, 1992 (cit. on p. 19).
[28]
J. A. Jensen, “Users’ guide for the Field II program, version 2.70 of may 26, 1999”,
Department of Information Technology, DTU, Tech. Rep., 1999 (cit. on p. 23).
==PAGE:70==
52
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIXA
ROCO Visualizing tool
Since visualization of row columns are normaly applied in 2D planes. A graphical user
interface was developed that allows load PSF and explore different planes of the volume
in the X, Y and Z direction and to change between Contour or B-mode images.
In addition, in order to analyze the volume, some 3D plots were also implemented. A
PSF example is plotted here:
53
==PAGE:72==
54
Chapter A. ROCO Visualizing tool
Figure A.1: Row-Column (ROCO) GUI Contour Mode
==PAGE:73==
55
Figure A.2: Row-Column (ROCO) GUI Imagesc Mode
==PAGE:74==
56
Chapter A. ROCO Visualizing tool
Figure A.3: PSF in 3D (contour mode)
==PAGE:75==
57
Figure A.4: PSF in 3D (planes mode)
==PAGE:76==
58
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIXB
Code listings
B.1
Row Column with Fixed Focus in Transmission and Fixed Focus/-
DynamicFocus in Reception


1 %% GENERAL PARAMETERS:
3 % General :
5 param . fo = 3e06 ;
% C e n t r a l
Frequency
(Hz)
param . f s = 100 e06 ;
% Sampling
Frequency
(Hz)
7 param . c = 1540;
% Speed
of Sound
(m/ s )
9 % Related
to
the Row Column :
11 param . n_elements = 192;
% Number of
elements
in
the RC ( # )
param . p i t c h = 2.7 e −04;
% P i t c h
Distance
(m)
13 param . k e r f = 2e −05;
% Kerf
Distance
(m)
param . h e i g h t _ c o l = 0.0568;
% Height
of
the RC Columns
(m)
15
param . lambda = param . c / param . fo ;
%
17
param . n _ a c t i v e = 64;
% Active
Elements
f o r
S l i d i n g
Aperture
( # )
19 param . f_number = 1 . 5 ;
param . f o c a l _ d e p t h = param . lambda ∗128;
% Depth
a t
the TX focus
(m)
21 %
param . f o c a l _ d e p t h = param . lambda ∗60;
% Depth
a t
the TX focus
(m)
23 param . s c a t t e r
= [
0 0 param . lambda ∗20;
25
0 0 param . lambda ∗40;
0 0 param . lambda ∗60;
27
0 0 param . lambda ∗80;
0 0 param . lambda ∗100;
29
0 0 param . lambda ∗120;
0 0 param . lambda ∗140;
31
0 0 param . lambda ∗160;
] ;
33
% param . s c a t t e r
= [0 0 param . f o c a l _ d e p t h
;
0 0 1.6∗param . f o c a l _ d e p t h
; ←-
0 0 2∗param . f o c a l _ d e p t h ];% 0 0 4∗param . f o c a l _ d e p t h ] ;
%
35
save ( ’ input_param . mat ’ ) %
59
==PAGE:78==
60
Chapter B. Code listings


appendices/matlab/input_generator_original.m


1 %% This Code shows ;
3 % RC with
Fixed
f o cu s in g
in Tx and Rx .
% RC with
Fixed
f o cu s in g
in Tx and Dynamic Focusing
in Rx .
5 % Using
only
f i e l d
( no rc_beamformer )
c l e a r
;
c l o s e
a l l ;
7
% In c l u d e
L i b r a r i e s :
9
path ( path ,
’C : \ Users \ plaza \ Desktop \WEEK14\ Tools \ F i e l d I I ’ ) ←-
% Load FIELDII
f i l e s
11 path ( path ,
’ . . \ Functions ’ )
% Load
Functions
%path ( path ,
’C : \ Users \ plaza \ CFUtools \ CFUGeneral ’ ) ;
13 run
’C : \ Users \ plaza \ CFUtools \ c f u t o o l s i n i t .m’
path ( path ,
’C : \ Users \ plaza \ Desktop \WEEK14\ Tools \ APC_tools ’ )
15 % Load
Parameters
Data :
17 load ( ’ input_param . mat ’ ) ;
19 y _ p o s i t i o n s = ( −((( param . n_elements / 2 ) −( param . n _ a c t i v e / 2 ) ) ) ∗param . ←-
p i t c h ) : param . p i t c h : ( param . p i t c h ∗( ( ( param . n_elements / 2 ) −( param . ←-
n _ a c t i v e / 2 ) ) ) ) ;
21
f i e l d _ i n i t (−1) ;
23 %% C r e a t i o n
of
the
Transducers :
% Transmission :
25
TX = APC_RC_ROW_creation ( param ) ;
% C r e a t i o n
of TX row ←-
t r a n s d u c e r .
27 APC_ROW_integrated_apodization (TX) ;
% Apply
I n t e g r a t e d ←-
Apodization
29 xdc _c e n t er _ f o c us (TX. th ,
[0 0
0 ] ) ;
% Apply
f o c a l ←-
c e n t e r :
xdc_focus (TX. th ,
0 ,
[0 0 param . f o c a l _ d e p t h ] ) ;
% Apply ←-
focus .
31
apo_tx = zeros (1 , TX. n_elements ) ;
33 apo_tx (1 ,
c e i l ( l e n g t h ( y _ p o s i t i o n s ) / 2 ) : param . n _ a c t i v e +( c e i l ( l e n g t h (←-
y _ p o s i t i o n s ) / 2 ) −1) ) = hamming ( param . n _ a c t i v e ) ;
% S e t t i n g ←-
i n i t i a l a t i o n
35 xdc_a po diz at ion (TX. th ,
0 ,
apo_tx ) ;
% Set
in
the TX←-
the
apo
37 f i g u r e ( 1 ) ;
s u b p l o t ( 2 , 1 , 1 )
==PAGE:79==
B.1. Row Column with Fixed Focus in Transmission and Fixed Focus/DynamicFocus in
Reception
61
39
c f u _ f i e l d _ p l o t _ a p o _ l i t e (TX. th )
t i t l e ( ’TX Aperture
S e t t i n g s ’ ) ;
41 a x i s
image ;
43
45 %% FIRST RESULTS:
% Reception
47
RX = APC_RC_COL_creation ( param ) ;
% C r e a t i o n
of RX col ←-
t r a n s d u c e r .
49 APC_COL_integrated_apodization (RX) ;
% Apply
col
t r a n s d u c e r
an
% i n t e g r a t e d
a p o d i z a t i o n .
51 % Fixed
Focus and NO Dynamic Apo .
f o r
i _ r x = 1: l e n g t h ( y _ p o s i t i o n s )
53
x d c_ c enter_focus (RX. th ,
[ y _ p o s i t i o n s ( i _ r x ) 0
0 ] ) ;
55
xdc_focus (RX. th ,
0 ,
[ y _ p o s i t i o n s ( i _ r x ) 0 param . f o c a l _ d e p t h ] ) ; % ←-
Apply
focus
apo_rx = zeros (1 , RX. n_elements ) ;
57
apo_rx (1 ,
i _ r x : param . n _ a c t i v e +( i_rx −1) ) = hamming ( param . n _ a c t i v e ) ; ←-
% S e t t i n g
i n i t i a l a t i o n
xd c_ apodization (RX. th ,
0 ,
apo_rx ) ;
% Set
in ←-
the TX the
apo .
59
[ r f _ l i n e ,
to ( i _ r x ) ] = c a l c _ s c a t ( TX. th , RX. th ,
param . s c a t t e r ,
ones (←-
s i z e ( param . s c a t t e r , 1 ) ,1) ) ;
61
r f _ l i n e s ( 1 : l e n g t h ( r f _ l i n e ) ,
i _ r x ) =
r f _ l i n e ;
63
end
65 % Adjust
Times so
a l l
the
s i g n a l s
use
the
same time
a x i s :
to_min = min ( to ( : ) ) ;
67 to_norm = to−to_min ;
69 to_max = max ( to_norm ( : ) ) ;
max_samples = l e n g t h ( r f _ l i n e s ) + c e i l ( param . f s ∗to_max ) ;
71
% Adjust
the
s i g n a l s .
73 f o r
i _ r x = 1: l e n g t h ( y _ p o s i t i o n s )
75
p r e z e r o s =
c e i l ( to_norm ( i _ r x ) ∗param . f s ) ;
poszeros = max_samples−l e n g t h ( r f _ l i n e s )−c e i l ( to_norm ( i _ r x ) ∗param . f s ←-
) ;
77
r f _ l i n e s _ n o r m ( 1 : ( max_samples ) ,
i _ r x ) = [ zeros ( prezeros , 1 )
;
r f _ l i n e s ←-
( 1 : l e n g t h ( r f _ l i n e s ) , i _ r x )
;
zeros ( poszeros , 1 ) ] ;
79 end
81
r f _ l i n e s _ n o r m _ l o g = 20∗log10 ( abs ( h i l b e r t ( r f _ l i n e s _ n o r m ) ) / max (←-
r f _ l i n e s _ n o r m ( : ) ) ) ;
==PAGE:80==
62
Chapter B. Code listings
83
d i s t
= l i n s p a c e ( to_min ,
to_min+ l e n g t h ( r f _ l i n e s _ n o r m ) / param . f s
, ←-
l e n g t h ( r f _ l i n e s _ n o r m ) ) ∗param . c / 2 ;
85 f i g u r e ;
87 s u b p l o t ( 1 , 2 , 1 )
contour ( y _ p o s i t i o n s / param . lambda ,
d i s t / param . lambda
, rf_lines_norm_log , ←-
[ −60:6:0]) ;
89
t i t l e ( ’XZ Plane : RC Fixed
Focusing
(TX and RX) ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
x l a b e l ( ’X a x i s [ \ lambda ] ’ , ’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
91 y l a b e l ( ’ Depth
[ \ lambda ] ’ , ’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
c o l o r b a r
93 colormap ( ’ j e t ’ ) ;
a x i s
image ;
95 % The Psf
i s
the
same
f o r
both
planes
with
t h i s
methodology .
s u b p l o t ( 1 , 2 , 2 )
97 contour ( y _ p o s i t i o n s / param . lambda ,
d i s t / param . lambda
, rf_lines_norm_log , ←-
[ −60:6:0]) ;
t i t l e ( ’YZ Plane : RC Fixed
Focusing
(TX and RX) ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
99 x l a b e l ( ’Y a x i s [ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
y l a b e l ( ’ Depth
[ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
101 c o l o r b a r
colormap ( ’ j e t ’ ) ;
103 a x i s
image ;
105 f i g u r e ;
107 s u b p l o t ( 1 , 2 , 1 )
imagesc ( y _ p o s i t i o n s / param . lambda ,
d i s t / param . lambda
, r f _ l i n e s _ n o r m _ l o g )←-
;
109
t i t l e ( ’XZ Plane : RC Fixed
Focusing
(TX and RX) ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
x l a b e l ( ’X a x i s [ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
111 y l a b e l ( ’ Depth
[ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
c o l o r b a r
113 colormap ( ’ j e t ’ ) ;
a x i s
image ;
115
s u b p l o t ( 1 , 2 , 2 )
117 imagesc ( y _ p o s i t i o n s / param . lambda ,
d i s t / param . lambda
, r f _ l i n e s _ n o r m _ l o g )←-
;
t i t l e ( ’YZ Plane : RC Fixed
Focusing
(TX and RX) ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
119 x l a b e l ( ’Y a x i s [ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
y l a b e l ( ’ Depth
[ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
121 c o l o r b a r
colormap ( ’ j e t ’ ) ;
123 a x i s
image ;
125 xdc_free (RX. th )
%% SECOND RESULTS:
Using Dynamic
a p o d i z a t i o n
in RX
127 % Reception
129 RX2 = APC_RC_COL_creation ( param ) ;
% C r e a t i o n
of RX col ←-
==PAGE:81==
B.1. Row Column with Fixed Focus in Transmission and Fixed Focus/DynamicFocus in
Reception
63
t r a n s d u c e r .
APC_COL_integrated_apodization (RX2) ;
% Apply
col
t r a n s d u c e r
an
131
% i n t e g r a t e d
a p o d i z a t i o n .
% juan = zeros (10000 ,129) ;
133
f o r
i _ r x = 1: l e n g t h ( y _ p o s i t i o n s )
135
% DYNAMIC FOCUS but NO Dynamic Apo
x d c_ c enter_focus (RX2 . th ,
[ y _ p o s i t i o n s ( i _ r x ) 0
0 ] ) ;
137
xdc_dynamic_focus (RX2 . th ,
0 ,
0 ,0) ;
%
xdc_focus (RX. th ,
0 ,
[ y _ p o s i t i o n s ( i _ r x ) 0 param . f o c a l _ d e p t h ] ) ; % ←-
Apply
focus
139
apo_rx = zeros (1 , RX2 . n_elements ) ;
apo_rx (1 ,
i _ r x : param . n _ a c t i v e +( i_rx −1) ) = hamming ( param . n _ a c t i v e ) ; ←-
% S e t t i n g
i n i t i a l a t i o n
141
xd c_ apodization (RX2 . th ,
0 ,
apo_rx ) ;
% Set
in ←-
the TX the
apo .
143
[ r f _ l i n e ,
to ( i _ r x ) ] = c a l c _ s c a t ( TX. th , RX2 . th ,
param . s c a t t e r ,
ones←-
( s i z e ( param . s c a t t e r , 1 ) ,1) ) ;
145
r f _ l i n e s ( 1 : l e n g t h ( r f _ l i n e ) ,
i _ r x ) =
r f _ l i n e ;
147 end
% Adjust
the
times :
149 to_min = min ( to ( : ) ) ;
to_norm = to−to_min ;
151
to_max = max ( to_norm ( : ) ) ;
153 max_samples = l e n g t h ( r f _ l i n e s ) + c e i l ( param . f s ∗to_max ) ;
155 f o r
i _ r x = 1: l e n g t h ( y _ p o s i t i o n s )
157
p r e z e r o s =
c e i l ( to_norm ( i _ r x ) ∗param . f s ) ;
poszeros = max_samples−l e n g t h ( r f _ l i n e s )−c e i l ( to_norm ( i _ r x ) ∗param . f s ←-
) ;
159
r f _ l i n e s _ n o r m ( 1 : ( max_samples ) ,
i _ r x ) = [ zeros ( prezeros , 1 )
;
r f _ l i n e s ←-
( 1 : l e n g t h ( r f _ l i n e s ) , i _ r x )
;
zeros ( poszeros , 1 ) ] ;
161 end
% RF _DATA:
163
r f _ l i n e s _ n o r m _ l o g = 20∗log10 ( abs ( h i l b e r t ( r f _ l i n e s _ n o r m ) ) / max (←-
r f _ l i n e s _ n o r m ( : ) ) ) ;
165
d i s t
= l i n s p a c e ( to_min ,
to_min+ l e n g t h ( r f _ l i n e s _ n o r m ) / param . f s
, ←-
l e n g t h ( r f _ l i n e s _ n o r m ) ) ∗param . c / 2 ;
167 % f i g u r e ;
% s u b p l o t ( 3 , 1 , 2 )
169 % s u b p l o t ( 3 , 1 , 2 )
f i g u r e ;
171 s u b p l o t ( 1 , 2 , 1 ) ;
contour ( y _ p o s i t i o n s / param . lambda ,
d i s t / param . lambda
, rf_lines_norm_log , ←-
==PAGE:82==
64
Chapter B. Code listings
[ −60:6:0]) ;
173
t i t l e ( ’XZ Plane : RC with
Fixed
Focusing
(TX)
and Dynamic Focusing
(RX) ’←-
,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
x l a b e l ( ’X a x i s [ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
175 y l a b e l ( ’ Depth
[ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
c o l o r b a r
177 colormap ( ’ j e t ’ ) ;
a x i s
image ;
179
s u b p l o t ( 1 , 2 , 2 ) ;
181 contour ( y _ p o s i t i o n s / param . lambda ,
d i s t / param . lambda
, rf_lines_norm_log , ←-
[ −60:6:0]) ;
t i t l e ( ’YZ Plane : RC with
Fixed
Focusing
(TX)
and Dynamic Focusing
(RX) ’←-
,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
183 x l a b e l ( ’Y a x i s
[ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
y l a b e l ( ’ Depth
[ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
185 c o l o r b a r
colormap ( ’ j e t ’ ) ;
187 a x i s
image ;
189 f i g u r e ;
s u b p l o t ( 1 , 2 , 1 ) ;
191 imagesc ( y _ p o s i t i o n s / param . lambda ,
d i s t / param . lambda
, r f _ l i n e s _ n o r m _ l o g )←-
;
t i t l e ( ’XZ Plane : RC with
Fixed
Focusing
(TX)
and Dynamic Focusing
(RX) ’←-
,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
193 x l a b e l ( ’X a x i s [ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
y l a b e l ( ’ Depth
[ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
195 c o l o r b a r
colormap ( ’ j e t ’ ) ;
197 a x i s
image ;
% The Psf
i s
the
same
f o r
both
planes
with
t h i s
methodology .
199
s u b p l o t ( 1 , 2 , 2 ) ;
201 imagesc ( y _ p o s i t i o n s / param . lambda ,
d i s t / param . lambda
, r f _ l i n e s _ n o r m _ l o g )←-
;
t i t l e ( ’YZ Plane : RC with
Fixed
Focusing
(TX)
and Dynamic Focusing
(RX) ’←-
,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
203 x l a b e l ( ’Y a x i s
[ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
y l a b e l ( ’ Depth
[ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
205 c o l o r b a r
colormap ( ’ j e t ’ ) ;
207 a x i s
image ;
209 xdc_free (RX2 . th )


appendices/matlab/ideal_psf_ﬁeld.m


1 f u n c t i o n
[ ROW ] = APC_RC_ROW_creation (
param
)
%APC_RC_ROW_CREATION Summary of
t h i s
f u n c t i o n
goes
here
3 %
D e t a i l e d
e x p l a n a t i o n
goes
here
==PAGE:83==
B.1. Row Column with Fixed Focus in Transmission and Fixed Focus/DynamicFocus in
Reception
65
5 %% 1 . ROW Parameters
7 ROW. n_elements = param . n_elements ;
ROW. p i t c h = param . p i t c h ;
9 ROW. k e r f = param . k e r f ;
ROW. h e i g h t = ROW. pitch −ROW. k e r f ;
11 ROW. width = param . h e i g h t _ c o l ;
13 % A u x i l i a r
V a r i a b l e s :
15 ROW.A = ROW. h e i g h t ∗ROW. n_elements ;
ROW.B = ROW. width ;
17 ROW.C = (ROW. B−ROW.A) / 2 ;
ROW.D = ROW. h e i g h t ;
19
% Mathematical
Elements
Set :
21
ROW. n_math_y =
2;
23 ROW. n_math_x = round (ROW.B / (ROW.D/ 2 ) ) ;
25 % C r e a t i o n
of
the
Transducer :
27 enabled_RX = ones (1 , ROW. n_elements ) ;
29 ROW. th = xdc_2d_array (1 , ROW. n_elements , ROW. width , ROW. height , ROW. ←-
kerf , ROW. kerf ,
enabled_RX , ROW. n_math_x , ROW. n_math_y ,
[0 0
0 ] ) ;
31
e x c i t a t i o n
= s i n (2∗pi ∗param . fo ∗( 0 : 1 / param . f s : 2 / param . fo ) ) ;
impulse = e x c i t a t i o n ’ . ∗hann ( l e n g t h ( e x c i t a t i o n ) ) ;
33
xdc_impulse (ROW. th ,
impulse ’ ) ;
35 x d c _ e x c i t a t i o n (ROW. th , e x c i t a t i o n ) ;
37
disp ( ’ROW t r a n s d u c e r
c r e a t e d
s u c c e s f u l l y . ’ ) ;
39
% x d c _ ce n ter_focus (ROW. th ,
[0 0
0 ] ) ;
41 % xdc_focus (ROW. th ,
0 ,
f o c a l _ p o i n t ) ;
43 % ROW_integrated_apo (ROW) ;
45 end


appendices/matlab/APC_RC_ROW_creation.m


f u n c t i o n
[ COL ] = APC_RC_COL_creation ( param )
2 %APC_FIXED_FOCUS_COL Row−Column Coumns C r e a t i o n
Function
%
D e t a i l e d
e x p l a n a t i o n
goes
here
4
%% 1 . COL Parameters :
6
COL. n_elements = param . n_elements ;
==PAGE:84==
66
Chapter B. Code listings
8 COL. p i t c h = param . p i t c h ;
COL. k e r f = param . k e r f ;
10 COL. width = COL. pitch −COL. k e r f ;
COL. h e i g h t = param . h e i g h t _ c o l ;
12
% A u x i l i a r
V a r i a b l e s :
14
COL.A = COL. width ∗COL. n_elements ;
16 COL.B = COL. h e i g h t ;
COL.C = (COL. B−COL.A) / 2 ;
18 COL.D = COL. width ;
20 % Mathematical
Elements
Set :
22 COL. n_math_y = round (COL.B / (COL.D/ 2 ) ) ;
COL. n_math_x = 2;
24
% C r e a t i o n
of
the
Transducer :
26
enabled_TX = ones (COL. n_elements ,
1) ;
28
COL. th = xdc_2d_array (COL. n_elements ,
1 , COL. width , COL. height , COL. ←-
kerf , COL. kerf ,
enabled_TX , COL. n_math_x , COL. n_math_y ,
[0 0
0 ] ) ;%%←-
3 . RX P
30
% Set
Impulse
Response and
E x c i t a t i o n
Signal :
32
e x c i t a t i o n
= s i n (2∗pi ∗param . fo ∗( 0 : 1 / param . f s : 2 / param . fo ) ) ;
34 impulse = e x c i t a t i o n ’ . ∗hann ( l e n g t h ( e x c i t a t i o n ) ) ;
36 xdc_impulse (COL. th ,
impulse ’ ) ;
x d c _ e x c i t a t i o n (COL. th
, e x c i t a t i o n ) ;
38
% TX_integrated_apo (COL) ;
40
disp ( ’COLUMN t r a n s d u c e r
c r e a t e d
s u c c e s f u l l y . ’ ) ;
42
end


appendices/matlab/APC_RC_COL_creation.m


f u n c t i o n
[ ROW ] = APC_RC_ROW_creation (
param
)
2 %APC_RC_ROW_CREATION Summary of
t h i s
f u n c t i o n
goes
here
%
D e t a i l e d
e x p l a n a t i o n
goes
here
4
%% 1 . ROW Parameters
6
ROW. n_elements = param . n_elements ;
8 ROW. p i t c h = param . p i t c h ;
ROW. k e r f = param . k e r f ;
10 ROW. h e i g h t = ROW. pitch −ROW. k e r f ;
ROW. width = param . h e i g h t _ c o l ;
==PAGE:85==
B.1. Row Column with Fixed Focus in Transmission and Fixed Focus/DynamicFocus in
Reception
67
12
% A u x i l i a r
V a r i a b l e s :
14
ROW.A = ROW. h e i g h t ∗ROW. n_elements ;
16 ROW.B = ROW. width ;
ROW.C = (ROW. B−ROW.A) / 2 ;
18 ROW.D = ROW. h e i g h t ;
20 % Mathematical
Elements
Set :
22 ROW. n_math_y =
2;
ROW. n_math_x = round (ROW.B / (ROW.D/ 2 ) ) ;
24
% C r e a t i o n
of
the
Transducer :
26
enabled_RX = ones (1 , ROW. n_elements ) ;
28
ROW. th = xdc_2d_array (1 , ROW. n_elements , ROW. width , ROW. height , ROW. ←-
kerf , ROW. kerf ,
enabled_RX , ROW. n_math_x , ROW. n_math_y ,
[0 0
0 ] ) ;
30
e x c i t a t i o n
= s i n (2∗pi ∗param . fo ∗( 0 : 1 / param . f s : 2 / param . fo ) ) ;
32 impulse = e x c i t a t i o n ’ . ∗hann ( l e n g t h ( e x c i t a t i o n ) ) ;
34 xdc_impulse (ROW. th ,
impulse ’ ) ;
x d c _ e x c i t a t i o n (ROW. th , e x c i t a t i o n ) ;
36
38 disp ( ’ROW t r a n s d u c e r
c r e a t e d
s u c c e s f u l l y . ’ ) ;
40 % x d c _ ce n ter_focus (ROW. th ,
[0 0
0 ] ) ;
% xdc_focus (ROW. th ,
0 ,
f o c a l _ p o i n t ) ;
42
% ROW_integrated_apo (ROW) ;
44
end


appendices/matlab/APC_RC_ROW_creation.m


f u n c t i o n
[
o u t p u t _ a r g s
] = APC_ROW_integrated_apodization ( ROW )
2 % I n t e g r a t e d
Apodization :
x_math_length = ROW. width /ROW. n_math_x ;
4 mat_el_in_C = ( round (ROW.C/ x_math_length ) ) ;
n_apo = ones (1 , ROW. n_math_x ) ;
6
window = hann ( mat_el_in_C ∗2) ’;
8
10 n_apo (1 ,
1: mat_el_in_C ) = window ( 1 : mat_el_in_C ) ;
n_apo (1 ,
(ROW. n_math_x−mat_el_in_C ) :ROW. n_math_x ) = window ( mat_el_in_C : ←-
end ) ;
12
apo = repmat ( n_apo , ROW. n_elements , 2 ) ;
==PAGE:86==
68
Chapter B. Code listings
14 elemen_no = ( 1 :ROW. n_elements ) ’;
16 e l e _ a p o d i z a t i o n (ROW. th ,
elemen_no ,
apo ) ;
18
end


appendices/matlab/APC_ROW_integrated_apodization.m


f u n c t i o n
[ ] = APC_COL_integrated_apodization ( COL )
2 %TX_INTEGRATED_APO Summary of
t h i s
f u n c t i o n
goes
here
%
D e t a i l e d
e x p l a n a t i o n
goes
here
4
n_apo = ones (COL. n_elements , COL. n_math_y ) ;
6 n_math_y_apo = ( round (COL.C / (COL.D/ 2 ) ) ) ;
8 hann_window = hann ( n_math_y_apo ∗2) ’;
10 a p o _ i n i t = repmat ( hann_window ( 1 : n_math_y_apo ) ’ ,
1 ,2) ’;
a p o _ i n i t = a p o _ i n i t ( : ) ’;
12
apo_end =
f l i p l r ( a p o _ i n i t ) ;
14
mid_samples = (COL. n_math_y ∗2)−(n_math_y_apo ∗2)−(n_math_y_apo ∗2) ;
16 apo_mid = ones (1 ,
mid_samples ) ;
a po _ l i n e = [ a p o _ i n i t
apo_mid apo_end ] ;
18
apo = repmat ( apo_line , COL. n_elements ) ;
20
elemen_no = ( 1 :COL. n_elements ) ’;
22
e l e _ a p o d i z a t i o n (COL. th ,
elemen_no ,
apo ) ;
24
end


appendices/matlab/APC_COL_integrated_apodization.m


1 f u n c t i o n
[ COL ] = APC_RC_COL_creation ( param )
%APC_FIXED_FOCUS_COL Row−Column Coumns C re a t i o n
Function
3 %
D e t a i l e d
e x p l a n a t i o n
goes
here
5 %% 1 . COL Parameters :
7 COL. n_elements = param . n_elements ;
COL. p i t c h = param . p i t c h ;
9 COL. k e r f = param . k e r f ;
COL. width = COL. pitch −COL. k e r f ;
11 COL. h e i g h t = param . h e i g h t _ c o l ;
13 % A u x i l i a r
V a r i a b l e s :
==PAGE:87==
B.2. Integrated Apodization study
69
15 COL.A = COL. width ∗COL. n_elements ;
COL.B = COL. h e i g h t ;
17 COL.C = (COL. B−COL.A) / 2 ;
COL.D = COL. width ;
19
% Mathematical
Elements
Set :
21
COL. n_math_y = round (COL.B / (COL.D/ 2 ) ) ;
23 COL. n_math_x = 2;
25 % C r e a t i o n
of
the
Transducer :
27 enabled_TX = ones (COL. n_elements ,
1) ;
29 COL. th = xdc_2d_array (COL. n_elements ,
1 , COL. width , COL. height , COL. ←-
kerf , COL. kerf ,
enabled_TX , COL. n_math_x , COL. n_math_y ,
[0 0
0 ] ) ;%%←-
3 . RX P
31 % Set
Impulse
Response and
E x c i t a t i o n
Signa l :
33
e x c i t a t i o n
= s i n (2∗pi ∗param . fo ∗( 0 : 1 / param . f s : 2 / param . fo ) ) ;
impulse = e x c i t a t i o n ’ . ∗hann ( l e n g t h ( e x c i t a t i o n ) ) ;
35
xdc_impulse (COL. th ,
impulse ’ ) ;
37 x d c _ e x c i t a t i o n (COL. th
, e x c i t a t i o n ) ;
39 % TX_integrated_apo (COL) ;
41 disp ( ’COLUMN t r a n s d u c e r
c r e a t e d
s u c c e s f u l l y . ’ ) ;
43 end


appendices/matlab/APC_RC_COL_creation.m
B.2
Integrated Apodization study


%% This
program was made to
study
the
I n t e g r a t e d
Apodization :
2 %% COMPARING WINDOWS:
f s =100 e6 ;
%
Sampling
frequency
[Hz]
4 c =1540;
%
Speed
of
sound
[m/ s ]
lambda=c / f0 ;
%
Wavelength
[m]
6 d e p t h _ t o _ e x p l o r e
=180∗lambda ; % DEPTH AT WHICH THE PULSE ECHO WILL BE ←-
OBTAINED.
8 f o r
i
=1:5
% name1 = [ ’ window_ ’
i ] ;
10 % rat_name = [ ’ r a t i o _ ’ name ] ;
12 % Create
an
a p e r t u r e
with
n_apo number of
elements :
[ name time
] = c r e a t e _ a p e r t u r e _ n _ a p o (15 ,
i .
d e p t h _ t o _ e x p l o r e ) ;
==PAGE:88==
70
Chapter B. Code listings
14 % This
f u n c t i o n
c r e a t e s
the
Aperture ,
% Applies
a window depending on
the
value
of
the
i
of 15
elements .
16 % i t
a l s o
c a l c u l a t e s
the
pulse
echo
f i e l d .
18 pks = f i n d p e a k s ( abs ( h i l b e r t ( name ) ) ) ;
[ max_val , index ] = max ( pks ( : ) ) ;
20 pks ( index ) =
[ ] ;
max_second = max ( pks ( : ) ) ;
22
r a t ( i ) = max_second / max_val ;
times = time +(1: l e n g t h ( name ) ) / f s ;
24
% P l o t
the
Pulse
Echo
F i e l d :
26
f i g u r e ( 1 ) ; hold on ;
28 s u b p l o t ( 2 , 2 , [ 1
2 ] ) ;
% p l o t ( times ,
20∗log10 ( abs ( h i l b e r t ( name ) / max ( name ) ) ) ,
’ LineWidth ’ , 2 ) ;
30
p l o t ( times ,
abs ( h i l b e r t ( name ) ) ) ;
32 hold on ;
t i t l e ( ’ Pulse
Echo
F i e l d
with
d i f f e r e n t
windows used
f o r
i n t e g r a t e d ←-
a p o d i z a t i o n ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
34 x l a b e l ( ’Time ( sec ) ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
y l a b e l ( ’ Normalized
Amplitude
(dB) ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
36 % This
graph
p l o t s
the
d i f f e r e n c e
between
the
Main lobe
and
the
ghost ←-
echo
% lobe .
38 legend ( ’ Boxcar ’ ,
’Hann ’ ,
’Hamming
’ ,
’ T r i a n g u l a r ’ , ’ Blackman ’ ) ;
s u b p l o t ( 2 , 2 , [ 3
4 ] ) ;
40 p l o t ( i ,
20∗log10 ( r a t ( i ) ) ,
’ −.∗’ ,
’ LineWidth ’ ,2) ; hold on ;
42 end
t i t l e ( ’ D i f f e r e n c e
between Main and Second Lobe ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
44 y l a b e l ( ’ D i f f e r e n c e
(dB) ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
s e t ( gca ,
’ XTickLabel ’ ,
[ ] )
46
legend ( ’ Boxcar ’ ,
’Hann ’ ,
’Hamming ’ ,
’ T r i a n g u l a r ’ , ’ Blackman ’ ) ;
48
50
%%
52
54 %% COMPARING SIZE OF THE APODIZATIONS :
% This
f u n c t i o n
c r e a t e s
an
a p e r t u r e
and
c a l c u l a t e s
the
pulse
echo
f i e l d
56 % with
d i f f e r e n t
s i z e s
of
i n t e g r a t e d
a p o d i z a t i o n .
58 f i g u r e ; hold on ;
f o r
i n t _ s i z e
= 5:5:60
60
name = [ ’ hann_int_ ’
num2str ( i n t _ s i z e ) ] ;
62
name_time = [ ’ t i m e _ i n t _ ’
num2str ( i n t _ s i z e ) ] ;
==PAGE:89==
B.2. Integrated Apodization study
71
64
[ name name_time
] = c r e a t e _ a p e r t u r e _ n _ a p o ( i n t _ s i z e ,
2 , ←-
d e p t h _ t o _ e x p l o r e ) ;
times = time +(1: l e n g t h ( name ) ) / f s ;
66
p l o t ( times ,
20∗log10 ( abs ( h i l b e r t ( name ) / max ( name ( : ) ) ) ) ,
’ LineWidth ’←-
,2) ;
68
pks = f i n d p e a k s ( abs ( h i l b e r t ( name ) ) ) ;
[ max_val , index ] = max ( pks ( : ) ) ;
70
pks ( index ) =
[ ] ;
max_second = max ( pks ( : ) ) ;
72
r a t ( i n t _ s i z e ) = max_second / max_val ;
x l a b e l ( ’Time ( sec ) ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
74
y l a b e l ( ’ Normalized
Amplitude
(dB) ’ ,
’ f o n t s i z e ’ ,
15) ;
end
76 p l o t ( times ,
ones ( s i z e ( name ) ) ∗−60,
’−−’ ) ;
legend ( ’5 elements ’ ,
’ 10
elements ’ ,
’ 15
elements ’ ,
’ 20
elements ’ ,
’ 25 ←-
elements ’ ,
’ 30
elements ’ ,
’ 35
elements ’ , ’ 40
elements ’
,
’ 45 ←-
elements ’
,
’ 50
elements ’ ,
’ 55
elements ’ ,
’ 60
elements ’ ) ;


appendices/matlab/analyze_int.m


f u n c t i o n
[ hp ,
s t a r t _ t i m e
] = c r e a t e _ a p e r t u r e _ n _ a p o (
apo_elements , ←-
window ,
d e p t h _ t o _ e x p l o r e
)
2 %CREATE_APERTURE_N_APO Summary of
t h i s
f u n c t i o n
goes
here
%
D e t a i l e d
e x p l a n a t i o n
goes
here
4
f i e l d _ i n i t (−1) ;
6 f s =100 e6 ;
%
Sampling
frequency
[Hz]
f0 =3e6 ;
%
Transducer
c e n t e r
frequency
[Hz]
8 M=3;
%
Number of
c y c l e s
in
pulse
c =1540;
%
Speed
of
sound
[m/ s ]
10 lambda=c / f0 ;
%
Wavelength
[m]
% apo_elements =40;
%
Number of
elements
used
f o r
the
edge ←-
a p o d i z a t i o n
12 no_elements =192;
%
Number of
p h y s i c a l
elements
in
one ←-
dimension
k e r f =lambda / 2 0 ;
%
Kerf
[m]
14 width=lambda/2−k e r f ;
%
Width
of
element
[m]
p i t c h =width+ k e r f ;
16 h e i g h t = p i t c h ∗( no_elements +2∗apo_elements ) ;
%
Height
of ←-
element
[m]
Nsub_ele= ( no_elements +2∗apo_elements ) ∗2
;
%
Number of ←-
elements
to
d i v i d e
the
p h y s i c a l
elements
i n t o
18 N_ele_emit= 64;
%
Number of
elements
in
t r a n s m i t
N_ele_rcv= 64;
%
Number of
elements
in
r e c e i v e
20
f_number = 2;
22 f o c a l _ d e p t h = f_number∗p i t c h ∗N_ele_emit ; % 25∗lambda ;
%
←-
Focal
depth
[m]
24 focus = [0 0
f o c a l _ d e p t h ] ;
u s e _ a l l _ e l e m e n t s = 1;
==PAGE:90==
72
Chapter B. Code listings
26
f o n t s i z e
= 15;
28 o f f _ s e t _ y =0∗lambda ;
%
O f f s e t
of
the
imaging
in
the
emit
d i r e c t i o n
( y←-
)
o f f _ s e t _ x =0∗lambda ;
%
O f f s e t
of
the
imaging
in
the
r e c e i v e
d i r e c t i o n ←-
( x )
30 o f f _ s e t _ z = f o c a l _ d e p t h ∗0;
%
O f f s e t
of
the
imaging
in
the
depth ←-
d i r e c t i o n
( z )
32
%% CREATE APERTURES:
34 %
Make the
a p e r t u r e
f o r
the
a r r a y
36 enabled_x=ones ( no_elements ,
1) ;
enabled_y=ones (1 ,
no_elements ) ;
38 TX = xdc_2d_array
(1 ,
no_elements ,
height ,
width ,
kerf ,
kerf ,
enabled_y ←-
,
Nsub_ele ,
1 ,
focus ) ; % TX
RX = xdc_2d_array
( no_elements ,
1 ,
width ,
height ,
kerf ,
kerf ,
enabled_x ←-
,
1 ,
Nsub_ele ,
focus ) ; % RX
40
%
Set
the
e x c i t a t i o n
of
the
a p e r t u r e
42
e x c i t a t i o n = s i n (2∗pi ∗f0 ∗( 0 : 1 / f s :M/ f0 ) ) ;
44
e x c i t a t i o n = e x c i t a t i o n .∗hanning ( l e n g t h ( e x c i t a t i o n ) ) ’;
x d c _ e x c i t a t i o n
(TX,
e x c i t a t i o n ) ;
46
%
Set
the
impulse
response
of
the
a p e r t u r e
48
impulse= s i n (2∗pi ∗f0 ∗( 0 : 1 / f s : 1 / f0 ) ) ;
50 impulse=impulse .∗hanning ( l e n g t h ( impulse ) ) ’;
xdc_impulse
(TX,
impulse ) ;
52 xdc_impulse
(RX,
impulse ) ;
54 % Apodization
E l e c t r o n i c
56 apo = ones (1 , no_elements ) ;
xdc_a po diz at ion (TX,
0 ,
apo ) ;
58 xdc_a po diz at ion (RX,
0 ,
apo ) ;
60 % % TX Focus :
62 xdc _c e n t er _ f o c us (TX,
[0 0
0 ] ) ;
xdc_focus (TX,
0 ,
[0 0
f o c a l _ d e p t h ] ) ;
64
% RX Focus :
66
delay_times = zeros (1 , no_elements ) ;
68 xdc_focus_times
(RX,
0 ,
delay_times ) ;
70
% I n t e g r a t e d
Apodization
( Hann window )
72
i f
window==1
==PAGE:91==
B.3. Row Column Synthetic Aperture with Fixed Focusing Transmission
73
a p o _ e l e _ i n t = boxcar (2∗apo_elements ∗2) ;
74
e l s e i f
window == 2
a p o _ e l e _ i n t = hann (2∗apo_elements ∗2) ;
76
e l s e i f
window == 3
a p o _ e l e _ i n t = hamming (2∗apo_elements ∗2) ;
78
e l s e i f
window == 4
a p o _ e l e _ i n t = t r i a n g (2∗apo_elements ∗2) ;
80
e l s e i f
window == 5
a p o _ e l e _ i n t = blackman (2∗apo_elements ∗2) ;
82 end
84 apo_ele = [ a p o _ e l e _ i n t ( 1 : apo_elements ∗2)
;
ones ( no_elements ∗2 ,1) ;
86 a p o _ e l e _ i n t ( ( apo_elements ∗2+1) : end ) ] ;
88 apo_ele_matrix =ones ( no_elements , 1 ) ∗apo_ele ’ ;
90 elements =(1: no_elements ) ’;
92 e l e _ a p o d i z a t i o n
(TX,
elements ,
apo_ele_matrix ) ;
e l e _ a p o d i z a t i o n
(RX,
elements ,
apo_ele_matrix ) ;
94
apo_tx = zeros (1 , no_elements ) ;
96 apo_tx ( round ( l e n g t h ( no_elements ) / 2 ) ) = 1;
xd c_ apo dization (TX,
0 ,
apo_tx ) ;
98
%% C a l c u l a t e
hp
100 % C a l c u l a t i o n
of
the
Pulse
Echo
F i e l d :
( a t
a
c e r t a i n
depth )
[ hp ,
s t a r t _ t i m e ] = calc_hp (TX,
[0 ,
0 ,
d e p t h _ t o _ e x p l o r e ] ) ;%% DEPTH At ←-
180 lambda
102
f i e l d _ e n d
104 end


appendices/matlab/create_aperture_n_apo.m
B.3
Row Column Synthetic Aperture with Fixed Focusing Transmis-
sion


1 %% CODE TO BEAMFORM SEVERAL SCATTERERS AT DIFFERENT Y POSITIONS :
3
c l e a r
a l l ;
5 c l o s e
a l l ;
7 %% I n i t i a l
Parameters :
9 f s =100 e6 ;
%
Sampling
frequency
[Hz]
f0 =3e6 ;
%
Transducer
c e n t e r
frequency
[Hz]
==PAGE:92==
74
Chapter B. Code listings
11 M=3;
%
Number of
c y c l e s
in
pulse
c =1540;
%
Speed
of
sound
[m/ s ]
13 lambda=c / f0 ;
%
Wavelength
[m]
no_elements =192;
%
Number of
p h y s i c a l
elements
in
one ←-
dimension
15
%% C r e a t i o n
of
the
S c a t t e r e r s :
17 % Coordinates
of
the
s c a t t e r e r s :
s c a t t e r _ x = 0;
% X c o o r d i n a t e
19
s c a t t e r _ y = −48∗lambda :24∗lambda :48∗lambda ;
% Y c o o r d i n a t e
s c a t t e r _ z
= 75∗lambda :50∗lambda :225∗lambda ;
% Z c o o r d i n a t e
21
%% C r e a t i o n
of
the name of
the
f i l e
t h a t
would
c o n t a i n
the
r e s u l t s .
23
formatOut = ’mmdd_HH_MM_SS’ ;
25 f i l e _ a p p e n d =
d a t e s t r (now , formatOut ) ;
27 par . c l u s t e r _ n o d e = ’ fcfu4 ’ ;
par . c l u s t e r _ f o l d e r
=
[ ] ;
29 par . save_folder_name = [ ’ / data / tmp13 / s161817 / r e s u l t s _ t h e s i s _ c l u s t e r / ’ ←-
f i l e _ a p p e n d
’ / ’ ] ;
31
i f
~ e x i s t ( par . save_folder_name ,
’ d i r ’ )
system ( s p r i n t f ( ’ mkdir −p %s ’ ,
par . save_folder_name ) ) ;
33 end
35 %% I n i t i a l i z e
the
c l u s t e r
37 g l o b a l
a d d i t i o n a l S u b mi t A r gs
% I n i t i a l i z e
c l u s t e r
i f
r e q u e s t e d %
39
i f
( isempty ( par . c l u s t e r _ f o l d e r ) )
par . c l u s t e r _ f o l d e r = [ par . save_folder_name
’ workers_temp ’ ] ;
41 end
43
i f
i s f i e l d ( par ,
’ c l u s t e r _ n o d e ’ ) && i s a ( par . cl ust er_ node , ’ char ’ )
i f
~ e x i s t ( par . c l u s t e r _ f o l d e r ,
’ d i r ’ )
45
system ( s p r i n t f ( ’ mkdir −p %s ’ ,
par . c l u s t e r _ f o l d e r ) ) ;
end
47
disp ( ’ I n i t i a t i n g
c l u s t e r ’ ) ;
sched =
c l u s t e r _ i n i t ( par . cluster_node , par . c l u s t e r _ f o l d e r ) ;
49
i s _ c l u s t e r = t r u e ;
i f
strcmp ( par . c l u s t e r _ n o d e ( 1 : 4 ) ,
’ f c f u ’ )
51
a d d i t i o n a l Su b m it A r g s = [ ’−−cpus−per−t a s k =24 −x
f c f u [ 2 ] ’ ] ;
a d d i t i o n a l Su b m it A r g s = [ ’−−tasks −per−node=1
’ ←-
a d d i t i on a l Su b m it A r g s ] ;
53
e l s e i f
( strcmp ( par . cluster_node ,
’ l2 . hpc . dtu . dk ’ )
| |
strcmp ( par . ←-
cl uste r_node ,
’ l3 . hpc . dtu . dk ’ ) )
a d d i t i o n a l Su b m it A r g s =[ ’−q cfu
’ ] ;
55
a d d i t i o n a l Su b m it A r g s =[ ’−W 40:00 −n 3 −R " span [ h o s t s =1]" −M 40GB←-
’
a dd i t io n a lS u b m it A r gs ] ;
end
57
==PAGE:93==
B.3. Row Column Synthetic Aperture with Fixed Focusing Transmission
75
end
59
61
63 %% Job
c r e a t i o n
and
s i m u l a t i o n
65 % Loop through
emissions
t h a t
c r e a t e s
jobs
f o r
each
psf
to
be
s i m u l a t e d ←-
and
% beamformed :
67
jobs = [ ] ;
69
f o r
i_z = 1: l e n g t h ( s c a t t e r _ z )
71
73
disp ( s p r i n t f ( ’−−−−−Z : %d −−−−−)’ , i_z ) ) ;
% Create
a Job
per
Group %
75
job = c r e a t e J o b ( sched ) ;
77
% Pass
path
and
run
i n f o r m a t i o n
to MATLAB i n s t a n c e
in
the
c l u s t e r .
79
paths = path ; % s t r i n g
81
paths = s t r r e a d ( paths , ’%s ’ , ’ d e l i m i t e r ’ , ’ : ’ ) ; % c e l l
a r r a y
% s e t ( job , ’ PathDependencies ’ , paths ) ;
% S e t t i n g
same
paths
f o r ←-
job
83
s e t ( job , ’ A d d i t i o n a l P a t h s ’ , paths ) ;
s e t ( job , ’ AutoAttachFiles ’ , f a l s e ) ;
85
87
f o r
i_y = 1: l e n g t h ( s c a t t e r _ y )
disp ( s p r i n t f ( ’−−−−−Y: %d −−−−−)’ , i_y ) ) ;
89
t h e _ d i r = pwd ;
91
% Task
C r ea t io n
:
93
c r e a t e T a s k ( job ,
@get_psfs_kernel_y_wrapper ,
1 , { t h e _ d i r , par , i_y ←-
, i_z }) ; % Each
t a s k
e x ec u t e s
one
@get_psfs_kernel_y_wrapper
%←-
w
t
p
t
d
,
==PAGE:94==
76
Chapter B. Code listings
par ←-
, ←-
←-
i_z ←-
, ←-
←-
i_y←-
95
end
97
99
i f
( i s _ c l u s t e r ) && (~ isempty ( job . Tasks ) )
submit ( job ) ;
101
jobs =[ jobs
job ] ;
e l s e
103
i f
( i s _ c l u s t e r )
d e s t r o y ( job ) ;
105
end
end
107
end
109
111 % Wait
f o r
jobs
to
f i n i s h
i f
( i s _ c l u s t e r ) && (~ isempty ( jobs ) )
113
a r r a y f u n ( @wait , jobs ) ;
r e s u l t s
= a r r a y f u n ( @fetchOutputs , jobs , ’ UniformOutput ’ , f a l s e ) ;
115
a r r a y f u n ( @destroy , jobs ) ;
i f
~ e x i s t ( par . c l u s t e r _ f o l d e r ,
’ d i r ’ )
117
system ( s p r i n t f ( ’rm −r %s ’ ,
par . c l u s t e r _ f o l d e r ) ) ;
end
119 end


appendices/matlab/rc_SA/tono_cluster_2706_yaxis.m


1 % Wrapper
f o r
c l u s t e r
submission .
% Avoids
p a s s i n g
the
complete
object ,
which makes
job
submission
slow .
3
f u n c t i o n
[
r e s u l t s
] = get_psfs_kernel_y_wra pp e r ( t h e _ d i r , par , i_y , i_z )
5 cd
( t h e _ d i r ) ; % Changes
d i r e c t o r y
r e s u l t s = g e t _ p s f s _ k e r n e l _ y ( par , i_y , i_z ) ; % c a l l
the
f u n c t i o n
and
send ←-
the
parameters
7 end


appendices/matlab/rc_SA/get_psfs_kernel_y_wrapper.m


1 f u n c t i o n
[
r e s u l t s
] = g e t _ p s f s _ k e r n e l _ y ( par ,
i_y , i_z )
3 % 1)
This
f u n c t i o n
c r e a t e s
a Fixed
Focus
S l i d i n g RC Aperture
and ←-
c a l c u l a t e s
the
s c a t t e r e d
f i e l d
==PAGE:95==
B.3. Row Column Synthetic Aperture with Fixed Focusing Transmission
77
% f o r
a l l
the
r e c e i v e r s
from a
c e r t a i n
s c a t t e r
o b t a i n i n g
the
RF_data .
5 % Using
f i e l d :
% −a v i o n _ r c _ c r e a t i o n _ a p e r t u r e
7 % −a v i o n _ f i x e d _ f o c u s _ s l i d i n g _ a p e r t u r e
9 % 2) The
r f _ d a t a
i s
transformed
to
bfm_data
using
the Row Column
% beamformer .
11 % i_y
:
I s
the
r e f e r e n c e
to
s e t
which
s c a t t e r
i s
going
to
be beamformed←-
.
choose_apo_rcv = 1; % Decide
i f
apply
Synt RX Apo (1 = yes )
13 choose_apo_tx = 1;
% Decide
i f
apply
Synt TX Apo (1 = yes )
15 % I n i t i a l i z e
F i e l d
Pro :
f i e l d _ i n i t (−1) ;
17
s e t _ f i e l d ( ’ t h r e a d s ’ ,
24) ;
19 a v i o n _ r c _ c r e a t i o n _ a p e r t u r e % C r ea t io n
of
the
Aperture .
21 % P o s s i b l e
S c a t t e r s
to
beamform
:
% with
the
parameters
i_y
and
i_z .
23
s c a t t e r _ x = 0; %:24∗lambda :48∗lambda ;
25
s c a t t e r _ y = −48∗lambda :24∗lambda :48∗lambda ;
s c a t t e r _ z
= 75∗lambda :50∗lambda :225∗lambda ;
27
% Input
p o i n t s
to
beamform :
29
x _ p o i n t s =(−68∗lambda : lambda /2:68∗lambda ) ;
31 z _ p o i n t s = (65∗lambda ) : lambda /10:(285∗lambda ) ;
y _ p o i n t s = x _p oi nt s ;
33
% S e l e c t i o n
of
the
s c a t t e r
to
beamform :
35
p o i n t s _ s c a t t e r
= [
s c a t t e r _ x
s c a t t e r _ y ( i_y )
s c a t t e r _ z ( i_z )
] ;
amplitudes = 1; % Amplitude
of
the
s c a t t e r e r
37
%% C a l c u l a t i o n
of
the RF DATA:
39 a v i o n _ f i x e d _ f o c u s _ s l i d i n g _ a p e r t u r e _ c a l c _ s c a t ;
41 disp ( s p r i n t f ( ’−−−−−XZ plane
f o r
z : %d −−x : %d −−−−−’ , i_z , i_y ) ) ;
%% XZ Plane :
43
% Get
the BFM data
in
the XZ plane
(RC beamforming
t o o l + RX Dyn Apo )
45
avion_get_bfm_data_XZ ;
47 bfm_data_xz = bfm_data ;
49 % Applying
the
S y n t h e t i c
Apodization
in
Transmission
avion_synth_APO_XZ
51 SA_apo_XZ= central_plane_SA_apo_tx_log ;
SA_XZ_lin = central_plane_SA_apo_tx ;
53
% Save
the
r e s u l t s :
==PAGE:96==
78
Chapter B. Code listings
55
filename_path = [ par . save_folder_name
s p r i n t f ( ’ planeXZ_z_%d−y_%d ’ ,
i_z ←-
, i_y ) ] ;
57 save ( filename_path , ’ SA_XZ_lin ’ ,
’ z _ p o i n t s ’ ,
’ y _ p o i n t s ’ ,
’ x _ p o i n t s ’ )
59
%% YZ Plane :
61 disp ( s p r i n t f ( ’−−−−−YZ plane
f o r
z : %d −−y : %d −−−−−’ , i_z , i_y ) ) ;
63 % Get
the BFM data
in
the YZ plane
(RC beamforming
t o o l + RX Dyn Apo )
65 avion_get_bfm_data_YZ ;
bfm_data_yz = bfm_data ;
67
% Applying
the
S y n t h e t i c
Apodization
in
Transmission
69 % and
adding
them
t o g e t h e r
with
S y n t h e t i c
Aperture :
71 avion_synth_APO_YZ
SA_apo_YZ= central_plane_SA_apo_tx_log ;
73 SA_YZ_lin = central_plane_SA_apo_tx ;
75 % Save
the
r e s u l t s :
77 filename_path = [ par . save_folder_name
s p r i n t f ( ’ planeYZ_z_%d−x_%d ’ ,
i_z ←-
, i_y ) ] ;
save ( filename_path , ’ SA_YZ_lin ’ ,
’ bfm_data_yz ’ ,
’SA_apo_YZ ’ ,
’ z _ p o i n t s ’ ,←-
’ y _ p o i n t s ’ ,
’ x_ po in t s ’ )
79
81 f i e l d _ e n d ;
83
r e s u l t s
= 1;
end


appendices/matlab/rc_SA/get_psfs_kernel_y.m


2
%f i e l d _ i n i t (−1) ;
4
f s =100 e6 ;
%
Sampling
frequency
[Hz]
6 f0 =3e6 ;
%
Transducer
c e n t e r
frequency
[Hz]
M=3;
%
Number of
c y c l e s
in
pulse
8 c =1540;
%
Speed
of
sound
[m/ s ]
lambda=c / f0 ;
%
Wavelength
[m]
10 apo_elements =40;
%
Number of
elements
used
f o r
the
edge ←-
a p o d i z a t i o n
no_elements =192;
%
Number of
p h y s i c a l
elements
in
one ←-
dimension
12 k e r f =lambda / 2 0 ;
%
Kerf
[m]
width=lambda/2−k e r f ;
%
Width
of
element
[m]
14 p i t c h =width+ k e r f ;
==PAGE:97==
B.3. Row Column Synthetic Aperture with Fixed Focusing Transmission
79
h e i g h t = p i t c h ∗( no_elements +2∗apo_elements ) ;
%
Height
of
element
[m]
16 Nsub_ele= ( no_elements +2∗apo_elements ) ∗2
;
%
Number of ←-
elements
to
d i v i d e
the
p h y s i c a l
elements
i n t o
N_ele_emit= 64;
%
Number of
elements
in
t r a n s m i t
18 N_ele_rcv= 64;
%
Number of
elements
in
r e c e i v e
20 f_number = 2;
f o c a l _ d e p t h = f_number∗p i t c h ∗N_ele_emit ; % 25∗lambda ;
%
←-
Focal
depth
[m]
22
focus = [0 0
f o c a l _ d e p t h ] ;
24 u s e _ a l l _ e l e m e n t s = 1;
f o n t s i z e
= 15;
26
o f f _ s e t _ y =0∗lambda ;
%
O f f s e t
of
the
imaging
in
the
emit
d i r e c t i o n
( y←-
)
28 o f f _ s e t _ x =0∗lambda ;
%
O f f s e t
of
the
imaging
in
the
r e c e i v e
d i r e c t i o n ←-
( x )
o f f _ s e t _ z = f o c a l _ d e p t h ∗0;
%
O f f s e t
of
the
imaging
in
the
depth ←-
d i r e c t i o n
( z )
30
32
34 %% CREATE APERTURES:
%
Make the
a p e r t u r e
f o r
the
a r r a y
36
enabled_x=ones ( no_elements ,
1) ;
38 enabled_y=ones (1 ,
no_elements ) ;
TX = xdc_2d_array
(1 ,
no_elements ,
height ,
width ,
kerf ,
kerf ,
enabled_y ←-
,
Nsub_ele ,
1 ,
focus ) ; % TX
40 RX = xdc_2d_array
( no_elements ,
1 ,
width ,
height ,
kerf ,
kerf ,
enabled_x ←-
,
1 ,
Nsub_ele ,
focus ) ; % RX
42 %
Set
the
e x c i t a t i o n
of
the
a p e r t u r e
44
e x c i t a t i o n = s i n (2∗pi ∗f0 ∗( 0 : 1 / f s :M/ f0 ) ) ;
e x c i t a t i o n = e x c i t a t i o n .∗hanning ( l e n g t h ( e x c i t a t i o n ) ) ’;
46 x d c _ e x c i t a t i o n
(TX,
e x c i t a t i o n ) ;
48 %
Set
the
impulse
response
of
the
a p e r t u r e
50 impulse= s i n (2∗pi ∗f0 ∗( 0 : 1 / f s : 1 / f0 ) ) ;
impulse=impulse .∗hanning ( l e n g t h ( impulse ) ) ’;
52 xdc_impulse
(TX,
impulse ) ;
xdc_impulse
(RX,
impulse ) ;
54
% Apodization
E l e c t r o n i c
56
apo = ones (1 , no_elements ) ;
58 xd c_ apo dization (TX,
0 ,
apo ) ;
xd c_ apo dization (RX,
0 ,
apo ) ;
==PAGE:98==
80
Chapter B. Code listings
60
% % TX Focus :
62
xdc _c e n t er _ f o c us (TX,
[0 0
0 ] ) ;
64 xdc_focus (TX,
0 ,
[0 0
f o c a l _ d e p t h ] ) ;
66 % RX Focus :
68 delay_times = zeros (1 , no_elements ) ;
xdc_focus_times
(RX,
0 ,
delay_times ) ;
70
72 % I n t e g r a t e d
Apodization
( Hann window )
74 a p o _ e l e _ i n t = hann (2∗apo_elements ∗2) ;
apo_ele = [ a p o _ e l e _ i n t ( 1 : apo_elements ∗2)
;
76
ones ( no_elements ∗2 ,1) ;
a p o _ e l e _ i n t ( ( apo_elements ∗2+1) : end ) ] ;
78
apo_ele_matrix =ones ( no_elements , 1 ) ∗apo_ele ’ ;
80
elements =(1: no_elements ) ’;
82
e l e _ a p o d i z a t i o n
(TX,
elements ,
apo_ele_matrix ) ;
84 e l e _ a p o d i z a t i o n
(RX,
elements ,
apo_ele_matrix ) ;


appendices/matlab/rc_SA/avion_rc_creation_aperture.m


%% This
f u n c t i o n
g e t s
the RF data .
2
4 n _ e l e _ o f f s e t _ t x = 0 : ( no_elements−N_ele_rcv ) ;
y _ c e n t e r s = ( no_elements−N_ele_rcv ) ∗(−p i t c h ) /2 + n _ e l e _ o f f s e t _ t x ∗p i t c h ;
6
% For a
S l i d i n g
Aperture
Transmission :
8
f o r
i _ t x = 1 : ( no_elements−N_ele_rcv +1)
10
% 1 s t .
Set TX a p o d i z a t i o n :
12
apo_tx =[ zeros (1 , n _ e l e _ o f f s e t _ t x ( i _ t x ) )
hanning ( N_ele_emit ) ’ ] ;
14
apo_tx ( no_elements ) = 0;
xd c_ apo diz at ion
(TX,
0 ,
apo_tx ) ;
16
% 2nd .
Set
Focus :
18
x d c_ c e n t er _ f ocus (TX,
[0
y _ c e n t e r s ( i _ t x )
0 ] ) ;
xdc_focus (TX,
0 ,
[0
y _ c e n t e r s ( i _ t x )
f o c a l _ d e p t h ] ) ;
20
% 3 rd .
Get RF l i n e :
22
[ r f _ l i n e ,
s t a r t _ l i n e ] = c a l c _ s c a t _ m u l t i (TX, RX,
p o i n t s _ s c a t t e r , ←-
amplitudes ) ;
times ( i _ t x ) =
s t a r t _ l i n e ;
==PAGE:99==
B.3. Row Column Synthetic Aperture with Fixed Focusing Transmission
81
24
r f _ p l a n e ( 1 : l e n g t h ( r f _ l i n e ) ,
1: no_elements ,
i _ t x ) =
r f _ l i n e ;
26 end
28 % Adjust
the
times :
30 tmin = min ( times ( : ) ) ;
times_norm = times−tmin ;
32 max_samp =
c e i l ( max ( times_norm ( : ) ) ∗f s ) ;% + l e n g t h ( r f _ p l a n e ) ;
34 % Adjust
the
s i g n a l s
so
a l l
of
them
uses
the
same time
a x i s :
36 f o r
i _ t x = 1 : ( no_elements−N_ele_rcv +1)
38 p r e _ z e r o s = zeros ( c e i l ( f s ∗times_norm ( i _ t x ) ) ,
no_elements ) ;
pos_zeros = zeros ( max_samp−s i z e ( pre_zeros , 1 ) , no_elements ) ;
40 r f _ d a t a ( 1 : ( max_samp+ l e n g t h ( r f _ p l a n e ) ) ,
1: no_elements ,
i _ t x ) = [←-
p r e _ z e r o s
;
squeeze ( r f _ p l a n e ( : , : , i _ t x ) ) ;
pos_zeros
] ;
42 end


appendices/matlab/rc_SA/avion_ﬁxed_focus_sliding_aperture_calc_scat.m


%% BEAMFORMING TOOL ( Beamform
the
points ,
apply
synth
Apodization
and
2 %% SLIDING APERTURE:
% ( done
f o r
plane XZ)
4
% Create
the window
t h a t
would be used
as
the
i n t e r i o r
of
the Dyn .
6 % Apodization
window = hann (202) ;
8 half_window = window ( 1 : 1 0 1 ) ;
half_window2 = window (101: end ) ;
10
t i m e _ a x i s =(1: s i z e ( r f _ d a t a , 1 ) ) / f s + tmin −f o c a l _ d e p t h / c ;
12
% i f
Dyn RX apo
i s
not
d e s i r e d :
14
i f
choose_apo_rcv == 0
16
apo_rcv= hanning ( no_elements ) ’;
apo_rcv=ones ( l e n g t h ( z _ p o i n t s ) ,1) ∗apo_rcv ;
18 end
20 bfm_data= zeros (
l e n g t h ( z _ p o i n t s ) ,
l e n g t h ( x _ p o i n t s ) ,
no_elements−←-
N_ele_rcv +1 ) ;
22 rcv_pos= zeros ( no_elements ,
3 ,
2) ;
24 % Obtain DRN p o i n t s
f o r
i =1: no_elements
26
rcv_pos ( i , : , 1 )
= [ ( i −(no_elements +1) / 2 ) ∗p i t c h −h e i g h t /2
0 ] ;
rcv_pos ( i , : , 2 )
= [ ( i −(no_elements +1) / 2 ) ∗p i t c h + h e i g h t /2
0 ] ;
28 end
==PAGE:100==
82
Chapter B. Code listings
30 % Get X p o s i t i o n s
of
the RX.
32 x _ e l e m e n t _ p o s i t i o n = [ 0 : ( 1 9 2 / 2
−1)]∗p i t c h + p i t c h / 2 ;
x _ e l e m e n t _ p o s i t i o n s = [ f l i p l r (−x _ e l e m e n t _ p o s i t i o n )
x _ e l e m e n t _ p o s i t i o n ] ;
34
% Choose and F number
f o r Dyn Apo RX:
36 f_number = 1;
38 % C a l c u l a t e
acceptance
angle
a l f a :
a l f a = atand ( f_number / 2 ) ;
40
window = hann (202) ;
42 half_window = window ( 1 : 1 0 1 ) ;
44 % For
each
t r a n s m i s s i o n :
46 f o r
i _ t x = 1: s i z e ( rf_plane , 3 )
% Obtain SRC p o i n t s
f o r
the
emission
48
emit_pos=[−h e i g h t /2
y _ c e n t e r s ( i _ t x )
f o c a l _ d e p t h ;
+ h e i g h t /2 ←-
y _ c e n t e r s ( i _ t x )
f o c a l _ d e p t h ] ’ ;
disp ( [ ’TX# = ’ ,
num2str ( i _ t x ) , ’
out
of
’ ,
num2str ( s i z e ( rf_plane , 3 ) )←-
] )
50
f o r
i =1: l e n g t h ( y _p oi nt s )
52
% P o i n t s
to
beamform
( t h i s
one
i s
not
done
p o i n t
by
p o i n t
% i n d i v i d u a l l y ) =
f a s t e r
implementation
54
p o i n t s = [ z _ p o i n t s ∗0
;
z _ p o i n t s ∗0+ y_ p o i n t s ( i )
;
z _ p o i n t s ] ;
56
i f
choose_apo_rcv == 1
58
f o r
i_p = 1: l e n g t h ( p o i n t s )
% C a l c u l a t e
i f
the
p o i n t
i s
in
the
acceptance
re gio n
of
60
% each
r e c e i v e r
x_p = p o i n t s (1 ,
i_p ) ;
62
z_p = p o i n t s (3 ,
i_p ) ;
64
d i s t _ x p = abs ( x_p−x _ e l e m e n t _ p o s i t i o n s ) ;
beta_rx_elements ( i_p ,
1:192) = atand ( d i s t _ x p / z_p ) ;
66
end
binary = beta_rx_elements < a l f a ;
68
beta_norm = binary .∗
beta_rx_ e l em e n t s / a l f a ;
70
% Apply Dyn RX Apodization
apo_rcv = half_window2 ( round ( beta_norm ∗100) +1) ;
72
apo_rcv = apo_rcv
.∗binary ;
end
74
% Add the
p o i n t s
to
the BFM data
bfm_data ( : ,
i ,
i _ t x ) = rc_beamform ( r f _ d a t a ( : , : , i _ t x ) ,
emit_pos , ←-
rcv_pos ,
p o i n t s ( [ 2
1
3 ] , : ) , c
, time_axis ,
apo_rcv ) ;
76
end
==PAGE:101==
B.3. Row Column Synthetic Aperture with Fixed Focusing Transmission
83
78
end


appendices/matlab/rc_SA/avion_get_bfm_data_XZ.m


1 %% BEAMFORMING TOOL ( Beamform
the
points ,
apply
synth
Apodization
and
%% SLIDING APERTURE:
3 % ( done
f o r
plane YZ)
t i m e _ a x i s =(1: s i z e ( r f _ d a t a , 1 ) ) / f s + tmin −f o c a l _ d e p t h / c ;
5
% i f
Dyn Apo RX i s
not
d e s i r e d :
7
i f
choose_apo_rcv == 0
9
apo_rcv= hanning ( no_elements ) ’;
apo_rcv=ones ( l e n g t h ( z _ p o i n t s ) ,1) ∗apo_rcv ;
11 end
13 bfm_data= zeros (
l e n g t h ( z _ p o i n t s ) ,
l e n g t h ( x _ p o i n t s ) ,
no_elements−←-
N_ele_rcv +1 ) ;
15 rcv_pos= zeros ( no_elements ,
3 ,
2) ;
17 % Obtain DRN p o i n t s :
19 f o r
i =1: no_elements
rcv_pos ( i , : , 1 )
= [ ( i −(no_elements +1) / 2 ) ∗p i t c h −h e i g h t /2
0 ] ;
21
rcv_pos ( i , : , 2 )
= [ ( i −(no_elements +1) / 2 ) ∗p i t c h + h e i g h t /2
0 ] ;
end
23
% X P o s i t i o n s
of
the
elements
in RX
25
x _ e l e m e n t _ p o s i t i o n = [ 0 : ( 1 9 2 / 2
−1)]∗p i t c h + p i t c h / 2 ;
27 x _ e l e m e n t _ p o s i t i o n s = [ f l i p l r (−x _ e l e m e n t _ p o s i t i o n )
x _ e l e m e n t _ p o s i t i o n ] ;
29 f_number = 1; % F number
of
the
a p o d i z a t i o n
in
Reception .
% C a l c u l a t i o n
of
the
acceptance
angle :
31
a l f a = atand ( f_number / 2 ) ;
33 % Create
the window
t h a t
would be used
as
the
i n t e r i o r
of
the Dyn . ←-
Apodization
window = hann (202) ;
35 half_window = window ( 1 : 1 0 1 ) ;
half_window2 = window (101: end ) ;
37
39 % For
each
t r a n s m i s s i o n :
41 f o r
i _ t x = 1: s i z e ( rf_plane , 3 )
43
% SRC P o i n t s
from
the
emission :
emit_pos=[−h e i g h t /2
y _ c e n t e r s ( i _ t x )
f o c a l _ d e p t h ;
+ h e i g h t /2 ←-
y _ c e n t e r s ( i _ t x )
f o c a l _ d e p t h ] ’ ;
==PAGE:102==
84
Chapter B. Code listings
45
disp ( [ ’TX# = ’ ,
num2str ( i _ t x ) , ’
out
of
’ ,
num2str ( s i z e ( rf_plane , 3 ) )←-
] )
47
f o r
i =1: l e n g t h ( y _p oi nt s )
49
% P o i n t s
to
beamform :
51
p o i n t s = [ z _ p o i n t s ∗0+ y _p oi nt s ( i )
;
z _ p o i n t s ∗0
;
z _ p o i n t s ] ;
53
i f
choose_apo_rcv == 1
55
f o r
i_p = 1: l e n g t h ( p o i n t s )
x_p = p o i n t s (1 ,
i_p ) ;
57
z_p = p o i n t s (3 ,
i_p ) ;
% C a l c u l a t e
the
Beta
f o r
each
p o i n t :
59
d i s t _ x p = abs ( x_p−x _ e l e m e n t _ p o s i t i o n s ) ;
beta_rx_elements ( i_p ,
1:192) = atand ( d i s t _ x p / z_p ) ;
61
end
63
% Apply
S y n t h e t i c
Dynamic
Apodization :
65
binary = beta_rx_elements < a l f a ;
beta_norm = binary .∗
beta_rx_ e l em e n t s / a l f a ;
67
apo_rcv = half_window2 ( round ( beta_norm ∗100) +1) ;
apo_rcv = apo_rcv
.∗binary ;
69
end
71
% Add the
p o i n t s
to
the BFM DATA:
73
bfm_data ( : ,
i ,
i _ t x ) = rc_beamform ( r f _ d a t a ( : , : , i _ t x ) ,
emit_pos , ←-
rcv_pos ,
p o i n t s ( [ 2
1
3 ] , : ) , c
, time_axis ,
apo_rcv ) ;
75
end
77 end


appendices/matlab/rc_SA/avion_get_bfm_data_YZ.m


1 %% THIS FUNCTION IS USED TO APPLY SYNTHETIC DYNAMIC APODIZATION IN TX:
% Create
the window ( t h a t
r e p r e s e n t s
the
weighting
i n s i d e
the ←-
acceptance
3 % reg ion )
window = hann (202) ;
5 half_window = window ( 1 : 1 0 1 ) ;
7 column = ones ( l e n g t h ( z _ p o i n t s ) ,
1) ;
9 % C a l c u l a t i o n
of
the
Acceptance
angle : ADVISE ,
change
to
Fnumber .
( now ←-
i t
% i s
f i x e d
to
an
a p e r t u r e
of 64 lambda .
11
a l f a _ t x = atand ((64∗p i t c h / 2 ) / f o c a l _ d e p t h ) ;
==PAGE:103==
B.3. Row Column Synthetic Aperture with Fixed Focusing Transmission
85
13
f o r
i _ t x = 1: s i z e ( bfm_data , 3 )
15
disp ( [ ’APO TX# = ’ ,
num2str ( i _ t x ) , ’
out
of
’ ,
num2str ( s i z e (←-
bfm_data , 3 ) ) ] )
17
% Get
the
f o c a l
p o i n t
of
the
emission
( i t s
a
f o c a l
l i n e
but
the ←-
X
% does
not
matter
here ) .
19
y_f = y _ c e n t e r s ( i _ t x ) ;
21
z_f = f o c a l _ d e p t h ;
f o r
i _ y p o i n t = 1: l e n g t h ( y _p o in t s )
23
y_p = 0; % Since
the
plane
i s
the XZ ( y = 0)
t h i s
makes
the ←-
implementation
f a s t e r .
25
% but
i s
only
u s e f u l
f o r
the
plane XZ.
27
f o r
i _ z p o i n t = 1: l e n g t h ( z _ p o i n t s )
29
z_p = z _ p o i n t s ( i _ z p o i n t ) ;
31
% C a l c u l a t i o n
of
the
angle
Beta :
33
d i s t _ y =
abs ( y_p−y_f ) ;
d i s t _ z =
abs ( z_p−z_f ) ;
35
b e t a _ t x = atand ( d i s t _ y / d i s t _ z ) ;
37
% Applying
S y n t h e t i c
Apodization
in TX:
39
i f
b e t a _ t x > a l f a _ t x
41
apo_tx_planey ( i _ z p o i n t ,
i_ypoint ,
i _ t x ) = 0;
43
e l s e
45 %
d i f _ a n g l e = ( a l f a _ t x −b e t a _ t x ) / a l f a _ t x ∗100;
%
apo_tx_planey ( i _ z p o i n t ,
i_ypoint ,
i _ t x ) = half_window (←-
round ( abs ( d i f _ a n g l e ) ) +1) ;
47
% Applying
S y n t h e t i c
Apodization
in TX:
49
beta_norm = b e t a _ t x / a l f a _ t x ;
51
apo_tx_planey ( i _ z p o i n t ,
i_ypoint ,
i _ t x ) = half_window2 (←-
round ( beta_norm ∗100) +1) ;
53
end
end
55
end
%
apo_post_tx ( 1 : l e n g t h ( z _ p o i n t s ) , 1 : l e n g t h ( x _ p o i n t s ) , i _ t x ) = ←-
repmat ( column ,
1 , l e n g t h ( x _p oi nt s ) ) ;
57
end
==PAGE:104==
86
Chapter B. Code listings
59
f i g u r e ;
61
imagesc ( apo_tx_planey ( : , : , 2 0 ) ) ;
63
%% THIS PART OF THE FUNCTION IS WHERE THE SYNTHETIC APERTURE IS APPLIED←-
:
65
% The Bfm data
from
the
d i f f e r e n t
emissions
and
a l r e a d y
s y n t h e t i c ←-
apodized
67 % are summed :
69 central_plane_SA_apo_tx = zeros ( s i z e ( bfm_data ( : , : , round ( s i z e ( bfm_data ←-
, 3 ) / 2 ) ) ) ) ;
71 f o r
i _ t x = 1 : ( s i z e ( bfm_data , 3 ) )
% A p p l i c a t i o n
of
the
Apodization
and summation
of BFM data :
73 central_plane_SA_apo_tx = central_plane_SA_apo_tx + bfm_data ( : , : , i _ t x )←-
.∗squeeze ( apo_tx_planey ( : , : , i _ t x ) ) ;
75 end
central_plane_SA_apo_tx_log = 20∗log10 ( abs ( h i l b e r t (←-
central_plane_SA_apo_tx ) ) / max ( central_plane_SA_apo_tx ( : ) ) ) ;
77
% R e p r e s e n t a t i o n
of
the
Plane :
79 f i g u r e
contour ( x _ p o i n t s / lambda ,
z _ p o i n t s / lambda
, central_plane_SA_apo_tx_log , ←-
[ −60:6:0]) ;
81 x l a b e l ( ’ L a t e r a l
Distance
( x Axis )
[ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,
f o n t s i z e ) ;
y l a b e l ( ’ Depth
(Z Axis )
[ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,
f o n t s i z e ) ;
83
t i t l e ( ’XZ PLANE with SA (129 LRI )
with
Synth . RX Apodization
and Synth . ←-
TX (YZ)
Apodization ) ’ ) ;
a x i s
image ;
85 colormap
’ j e t ’ ;
c a x i s ([−60
0 ] ) ;
87 c o l o r b a r ;


appendices/matlab/rc_SA/avion_synth_APO_XZ.m


1 %% THIS FUNCTION IS USED TO PPLY SYNTHETIC DYNAMIC APODIZATION IN TX:
% f o r
the
plane YZ (X=0)
3
choose_apo_rcv = 1;
5 choose_apo_tx = 1;
7 % Create
the window ( t h a t
r e p r e s e n t s
the
weighting
i n s i d e
the ←-
acceptance
% reg ion )
9 window = hann (202) ;
half_window = window ( 1 : 1 0 1 ) ;
11 half_window2 = window (101: end ) ;
==PAGE:105==
B.3. Row Column Synthetic Aperture with Fixed Focusing Transmission
87
13
% For
a l l
the
p o i n t s :
15 column = ones ( l e n g t h ( z _ p o i n t s ) ,
1) ;
% The
acceptance
angle
i s
c a l c u l a t e d −−> I t
i s now done
f o r
a
f i x e d
to ←-
an
17 % a c t i v e
a p e r t u r e
of 64
p i t c h
19
a l f a _ t x = atand ((64∗p i t c h / 2 ) / f o c a l _ d e p t h ) ;
21
f o r
i _ t x = 1: s i z e ( bfm_data , 3 )
disp ( [ ’APO TX# = ’ ,
num2str ( i _ t x ) , ’
out
of
’ ,
num2str ( s i z e (←-
bfm_data , 3 ) ) ] )
23
y_f = y _ c e n t e r s ( i _ t x ) ;
25
z_f = f o c a l _ d e p t h ;
f o r
i _ y p o i n t = 1: l e n g t h ( y _p o in t s )
27
y_p = y_ po in t s ( i _ y p o i n t ) ;
29
f o r
i _ z p o i n t = 1: l e n g t h ( z _ p o i n t s )
31
z_p = z _ p o i n t s ( i _ z p o i n t ) ;
33
d i s t _ y =
abs ( y_p−y_f ) ;
35
d i s t _ z =
abs ( z_p−z_f ) ;
% C a l c u l a t e
the
Beta
angle :
37
b e t a _ t x = atand ( d i s t _ y / d i s t _ z ) ;
39
i f
b e t a _ t x > a l f a _ t x
41
apo_tx_planey ( i _ z p o i n t ,
i_ypoint ,
i _ t x ) = 0;
43
e l s e
45 %
d i f _ a n g l e = ( a l f a _ t x −b e t a _ t x ) / a l f a _ t x ∗100;
%
apo_tx_planey ( i _ z p o i n t ,
i_ypoint ,
i _ t x ) = half_window (←-
round ( abs ( d i f _ a n g l e ) ) +1) ;
47
% Apply
the TX Dyn a p o d i z a t i o n :
49
beta_norm = b e t a _ t x / a l f a _ t x ;
apo_tx_planey ( i _ z p o i n t ,
i_ypoint ,
i _ t x ) = half_window2 (←-
round ( beta_norm ∗100) +1) ;
51
end
53
end
end
55 %
apo_post_tx ( 1 : l e n g t h ( z _ p o i n t s ) , 1 : l e n g t h ( x _ p o i n t s ) , i _ t x ) = ←-
repmat ( column ,
1 , l e n g t h ( x _p oi nt s ) ) ;
57
end
59
f i g u r e ;
==PAGE:106==
88
Chapter B. Code listings
imagesc ( apo_tx_planey ( : , : , 2 0 ) ) ;
61
63
%%
65 central_plane_SA_apo_tx = zeros ( s i z e ( bfm_data ( : , : , round ( s i z e ( bfm_data ←-
, 3 ) / 2 ) ) ) ) ;
67 f o r
i _ t x = 1 : ( s i z e ( bfm_data , 3 ) )
69
% A p p l i c a t i o n
of
the
Apodization
and summation
of BFM data :
71 central_plane_SA_apo_tx = central_plane_SA_apo_tx + bfm_data ( : , : , i _ t x )←-
.∗squeeze ( apo_tx_planey ( : , : , i _ t x ) ) ;
73 end
central_plane_SA_apo_tx_log = 20∗log10 ( abs ( h i l b e r t (←-
central_plane_SA_apo_tx ) ) / max ( central_plane_SA_apo_tx ( : ) ) ) ;
75
77 f i g u r e
contour ( x _ p o i n t s / lambda ,
z _ p o i n t s / lambda
, central_plane_SA_apo_tx_log , ←-
[ −60:6:0]) ;
79 x l a b e l ( ’ L a t e r a l
Distance
( x Axis )
[ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,
f o n t s i z e ) ;
y l a b e l ( ’ Depth
(Z Axis )
[ \ lambda ] ’ ,
’ FontSize ’ ,
f o n t s i z e ) ;
81
t i t l e ( ’XZ PLANE with SA (129 LRI )
with
Synth . RX Apodization
and Synth . ←-
TX (YZ)
Apodization ) ’ ) ;
a x i s
image ;
83 colormap
’ j e t ’ ;
c a x i s ([−60
0 ] ) ;
85 c o l o r b a r ;


appendices/matlab/rc_SA/avion_synth_APO_YZ.m
B.4
Visualization functions


1 f u n c t i o n
v a r a r g o u t = r o c o _ v i s u a l i z e r ( v a r a r g i n )
% ROCO_VISUALIZER MATLAB code
f o r
r o c o _ v i s u a l i z e r . f i g
3 %
ROCO_VISUALIZER ,
by
i t s e l f ,
c r e a t e s
a new ROCO_VISUALIZER or ←-
r a i s e s
the
e x i s t i n g
%
s i n g l e t o n ∗.
5 %
%
H = ROCO_VISUALIZER r e t u r n s
the
handle
to
a new ROCO_VISUALIZER ←-
or
the
handle
to
7 %
the
e x i s t i n g
s i n g l e t o n ∗.
%
9 %
ROCO_VISUALIZER( ’CALLBACK’ , hObject , eventData , handles , . . . )
c a l l s ←-
the
l o c a l
%
f u n c t i o n
named CALLBACK in ROCO_VISUALIZER .M with
the
given ←-
i n p u t
arguments .
==PAGE:107==
B.4. Visualization functions
89
11 %
%
ROCO_VISUALIZER( ’ Property ’ , ’ Value ’ , . . . )
c r e a t e s
a new ←-
ROCO_VISUALIZER or
r a i s e s
the
13 %
e x i s t i n g
s i n g l e t o n ∗.
S t a r t i n g
from
the
l e f t ,
p r o p e r t y
value ←-
p a i r s
are
%
a p p l i e d
to
the GUI before
roco_visualizer_OpeningFcn
g e t s
c a l l e d ←-
.
An
15 %
unrecognized
p r o p e r t y
name or
i n v a l i d
value
makes
p r o p e r t y ←-
a p p l i c a t i o n
%
stop .
All
i n p u t s
are
passed
to
roco_visualizer_OpeningFcn
via ←-
v a r a r g i n .
17 %
%
∗See GUI Options on GUIDE’ s
Tools menu .
Choose "GUI allows
only←-
one
19 %
i n s t a n c e
to
run
( s i n g l e t o n ) " .
%
21 % See
a l s o : GUIDE, GUIDATA, GUIHANDLES
23 % Edit
the
above
t e x t
to
modify
the
response
to
help
r o c o _ v i s u a l i z e r
25 % Last
Modified by GUIDE v2 .5 05−Mar−2018 15:16:13
27 % Begin
i n i t i a l i z a t i o n
code −DO NOT EDIT
g u i _ S i n g l e t o n = 1;
29 g u i _ S t a t e =
s t r u c t ( ’ gui_Name ’ ,
mfilename ,
. . .
’ g u i _ S i n g l e t o n ’ ,
gui_Singleton ,
. . .
31
’ gui_OpeningFcn ’ ,
@roco_visualizer_OpeningFcn ,
. . .
’ gui_OutputFcn ’ ,
@roco_visualizer_OutputFcn ,
. . .
33
’ gui_LayoutFcn ’ ,
[ ]
,
. . .
’ gui_Callback ’ ,
[ ] ) ;
35
i f
na rgin && i s c h a r ( v a r a r g i n {1})
g u i _ S t a t e . gui_Callback = s t r 2 f u n c ( v a r a r g i n {1}) ;
37 end
39
i f
nargout
[ v a r a r g o u t {1: nargout }] = gui_mainfcn ( gui_State ,
v a r a r g i n { : } ) ;
41 e l s e
gui_mainfcn ( gui_State ,
v a r a r g i n { : } ) ;
43 end
% End
i n i t i a l i z a t i o n
code −DO NOT EDIT
45
47 % −−−Executes
j u s t
before
r o c o _ v i s u a l i z e r
i s
made
v i s i b l e .
f u n c t i o n
roco_visualizer_OpeningFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles , ←-
v a r a r g i n )
49 % This
f u n c t i o n
has no
output
args ,
see
OutputFcn .
% hObject
handle
to
f i g u r e
51 % e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
defined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
% handles
s t r u c t u r e
with
handles
and
user
data
( see GUIDATA)
53 % v a r a r g i n
command
l i n e
arguments
to
r o c o _ v i s u a l i z e r
( see VARARGIN)
55 % Choose
d e f a u l t
command
l i n e
output
f o r
r o c o _ v i s u a l i z e r
==PAGE:108==
90
Chapter B. Code listings
handles . outp ut = hObject ;
57
% Update
handles
s t r u c t u r e
59 g u i d a t a ( hObject ,
handles ) ;
61 % UIWAIT makes
r o c o _ v i s u a l i z e r
wait
f o r
user
response
( see UIRESUME)
% u i w a i t ( handles . f i g u r e 1 ) ;
63
65 % −−−Outputs
from
t h i s
f u n c t i o n
are
r e t u r n e d
to
the command
l i n e .
f u n c t i o n
v a r a r g o u t = r o c o _ v i s u a l i z e r _ O u t p u t F c n ( hObject ,
eventdata , ←-
handles )
67 % v a r a r g o u t
c e l l
a r r a y
f o r
r e t u r n i n g
output
args
( see VARARGOUT) ;
% hObject
handle
to
f i g u r e
69 % e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
d efined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
% handles
s t r u c t u r e
with
handles
and
user
data
( see GUIDATA)
71
% Get
d e f a u l t
command
l i n e
output
from
handles
s t r u c t u r e
73 v a r a r g o u t {1} = handles . output ;
75
% −−−Executes on
button
p r e s s
in
b r o w s e _ d a t a s e t _ b u t t o n .
77 f u n c t i o n
b r o w s e _ d a t a s e t _ b u t t o n _ C a l l b a c k ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
[ filename ,
f i l e p a t h ] =
u i g e t f i l e ({ ’ ∗. mat ’ } , ’ Search
D a t a s e t
to
be ←-
d i s p l a y e d ’ ) ;
79
fullname = [ f i l e p a t h
filename ]
;
81
d a t a s e t _ f i l e
= i m p o r t d a t a ( fullname ) ; % probar
sino
solo
con
filename
83
handles . data =
d a t a s e t _ f i l e . rf_matrix_padded ;
85 handles . z_ axi s =
d a t a s e t _ f i l e . z_axis ;
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ x =
d a t a s e t _ f i l e . c e n t e r _ l i n e s ;
87 handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ y =
d a t a s e t _ f i l e . c e n t e r _ l i n e s ;
89 s e t ( handles . d i s p l a y _ d a t a s e t _ f i l e n a m e ,
’ s t r i n g ’ ,
filename ) ;
91 s e t ( handles . s l i d e r _ x z p l a n e ,
’min ’ ,
1) ;
s e t ( handles . s l i d e r _ x z p l a n e ,
’max ’ ,
s i z e ( handles . data , 2 ) ) ;
93 s e t ( handles . s l i d e r _ x z p l a n e ,
’ Value ’ ,
round ( s i z e ( handles . data , 2 ) / 2 ) ) ; % ←-
Somewhere between max and min
handles . index_xz = round ( s i z e ( handles . data , 3 ) / 2 ) ;
95
s e t ( handles . s l i d e r _ y z p l a n e ,
’min ’ ,
1) ;
97 s e t ( handles . s l i d e r _ y z p l a n e ,
’max ’ ,
s i z e ( handles . data , 3 ) ) ;
s e t ( handles . s l i d e r _ y z p l a n e ,
’ Value ’ ,
round ( s i z e ( handles . data , 3 ) / 2 ) ) ; % ←-
Somewhere between max and min
99 handles . index_yz = round ( s i z e ( handles . data , 3 ) / 2 ) ;
101 s e t ( handles . x y _ s l i d e r s ,
’min ’ ,
1) ;
s e t ( handles . x y _ s l i d e r s ,
’max ’ ,
s i z e ( handles . data , 1 ) ) ;
==PAGE:109==
B.4. Visualization functions
91
103 s e t ( handles . x y _ s l i d e r s ,
’ Value ’ ,
round ( s i z e ( handles . data , 1 ) / 2 ) ) ; % ←-
Somewhere between max and min
handles . index_xy = round ( s i z e ( handles . data , 1 ) / 2 ) ;
105
g u i d a t a ( hObject , handles ) ;
107
109
111 % −−−Executes on
s l i d e r
movement .
f u n c t i o n
s l i d e r _ x z p l a n e _ C a l l b a c k ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
113 % hObject
handle
to
s l i d e r _ x z p l a n e
( see GCBO)
% e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
defined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
115 % handles
s t r u c t u r e
with
handles
and
user
data
( see GUIDATA)
index_xz = round ( get ( hObject , ’ Value ’ ) ) ;
117 indexz_in_mm = handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ y ( index_xz ) ∗1000;
s e t ( handles . textbox_xz ,
’ s t r i n g ’ ,
num2str ( indexz_in_mm ) ) ;
119
switch
handles . mapaset
121
case
’bmode ’
( ( imagesc (
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ x ∗1000 ,
f l i p l r ( handles . z _ax is←-
∗1000) ,
f l i p u d ( ( squeeze ( handles . data ( : ,
index_xz ,
: ) ) ) ) ,
’←-
Parent ’ ,
handles . xz_plane ) ) ) ;
123
colormap ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ gray ’ )
s e t ( handles . xz_plane , ’ YDir ’ , ’ normal ’ )
125
case
’ contour ’
contour ( handles . xz_plane ,
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ x ∗1000 ,
handles . ←-
z_axis ∗1000 ,
squeeze ( handles . data ( : ,
index_xz ,
: ) ) , ←-
[ −40:6:0]) ;
127
colormap ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ j e t ’ )
end
129 c o l o r b a r ( handles . xz_plane )
c a x i s ( handles . xz_plane ,
[−40 0 ] ) ;
131 handles . index_xz=index_xz ;
133
t i t l e ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ S c a t t e r e d
F i e l d XZ PLANE’ ) ;
x l a b e l ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ L a t e r a l X d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’ ) ;
135 y l a b e l ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ depth
(mm) ’ ) ;
137 g u i d a t a ( hObject , handles ) ;
139
% Hints :
get ( hObject , ’ Value ’ )
r e t u r n s
p o s i t i o n
of
s l i d e r
141 %
get ( hObject , ’ Min ’ )
and
get ( hObject , ’Max ’ )
to
determine
range ←-
of
s l i d e r
143
% −−−Executes
during
o b j e c t
c r e a t i o n ,
a f t e r
s e t t i n g
a l l
p r o p e r t i e s .
145 f u n c t i o n
s l i d e r _ x z p l a n e _ C r e a t e F c n ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject
handle
to
s l i d e r _ x z p l a n e
( see GCBO)
147 % e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
defined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
==PAGE:110==
92
Chapter B. Code listings
% handles
empty −handles
not
c r e a t e d
u n t i l
a f t e r
a l l
CreateFcns ←-
c a l l e d
149
% Hint :
s l i d e r
c o n t r o l s
u s u a l l y
have a
l i g h t
gray
background .
151
i f
i s e q u a l ( get ( hObject , ’ BackgroundColor ’ ) ,
get (0 , ’←-
d e f a u l t U i c o n t r ol B a ck g r ou n d Co l o r ’ ) )
s e t ( hObject , ’ BackgroundColor ’ , [ . 9
.9
. 9 ] ) ;
153 end
155
157 f u n c t i o n
textbox_xz_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject
handle
to
textbox_xz
( see GCBO)
159 % e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
d efined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
% handles
s t r u c t u r e
with
handles
and
user
data
( see GUIDATA)
161
% Hints :
get ( hObject , ’ String ’ )
r e t u r n s
c o n t e n t s
of
textbox_xz
as
t e x t
163 %
s t r 2 d o u b l e ( get ( hObject , ’ String ’ ) )
r e t u r n s
c o n t e n t s
of ←-
textbox_xz
as
a
double
e d i t _ x = get ( hObject ,
’ s t r i n g ’ ) ;
165 e d i t _ x = char ( e d i t _ x ) ;
[ c
index_xz ] = min ( abs ( handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ y −(str2num ( e d i t _ x ) ) /1000) ) ;
167 s e t ( handles . textbox_xz ,
’ s t r i n g ’ ,
num2str ( handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ y (←-
index_xz ) ∗1000) ) ;
s e t ( handles . s l i d e r _ x z p l a n e ,
’ value ’ ,
index_xz ) ;
169
switch
handles . mapaset
171
case
’bmode ’
( ( imagesc (
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ x ∗1000 ,
f l i p l r ( handles . z_ax is←-
∗1000) ,
f l i p u d ( ( squeeze ( handles . data ( : ,
index_xz ,
: ) ) ) ) ,
’←-
Pa rent ’ ,
handles . xz_plane ) ) ) ;
173
colormap ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ gray ’ )
s e t ( handles . xz_plane , ’ YDir ’ , ’ normal ’ )
175
case
’ contour ’
contour ( handles . xz_plane ,
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ x ∗1000 ,
handles . ←-
z_ axis ∗1000 ,
squeeze ( handles . data ( : ,
index_xz ,
: ) ) , ←-
[ −40:6:0]) ;
177
colormap ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ j e t ’ )
end
179
c o l o r b a r ( handles . xz_plane )
181 c a x i s ( handles . xz_plane ,
[−40 0 ] ) ;
% a x i s
equal
t i g h t
183 handles . index_xz=index_xz ;
t i t l e ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ S c a t t e r e d
F i e l d XZ PLANE’ ) ;
185 x l a b e l ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ L a t e r a l X d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’ ) ;
y l a b e l ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ depth
(mm) ’ ) ;
187
g u i d a t a ( hObject , handles ) ;
189
191
==PAGE:111==
B.4. Visualization functions
93
% −−−Executes
during
o b j e c t
c r e a t i o n ,
a f t e r
s e t t i n g
a l l
p r o p e r t i e s .
193 f u n c t i o n
textbox_xz_CreateFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject
handle
to
textbox_xz
( see GCBO)
195 % e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
defined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
% handles
empty −handles
not
c r e a t e d
u n t i l
a f t e r
a l l
CreateFcns ←-
c a l l e d
197
% Hint :
e d i t
c o n t r o l s
u s u a l l y
have a
white
background on Windows .
199 %
See ISPC and COMPUTER.
i f
i s p c && i s e q u a l ( get ( hObject , ’ BackgroundColor ’ ) ,
get (0 , ’←-
d e f a u l tU i c on t r ol B a ck g r ou n d Co l o r ’ ) )
201
s e t ( hObject , ’ BackgroundColor ’ , ’ white ’ ) ;
end
203
% contour ( handles . graph_zplane ,
handles . RC_struct . c e n t e r _ l i n e s ∗1000 , ←-
squeeze ( handles . RC_struct . c e n t e r _ l i n e s ∗1000) ,
squeeze ( handles . ←-
RC_struct . rf_matrix_padded (
: ,
index_x ,
: ) ) ,
[ −40:6:0]) ;
205 % %hold
o f f
% colormap ( handles . graph_zplane ,
j e t )
207 % c o l o r b a r ( handles . graph_zplane )
% c a x i s ( handles . graph_zplane ,
[−40 0 ] ) ;
209 % t i t l e ( handles . graph_zplane , ’ S c a t t e r e d
F i e l d Z PLANE’ ) ;
% x l a b e l ( handles . graph_zplane , ’ L a t e r a l X d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’) ;
211 % y l a b e l ( handles . graph_zplane , ’ L a t e r a l Y d i s t a n c e ’ ) ;
% a x i s
equal
t i g h t
213
215 % −−−Executes on
button
p r e s s
in
bmode_button .
f u n c t i o n
bmode_button_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
217 handles . mapaset= ’bmode ’ ;
( ( imagesc (
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ x ∗1000 ,
f l i p l r ( handles . z _ax is ∗1000) , ←-
f l i p u d ( ( squeeze ( handles . data ( : ,
handles . index_xz ,
: ) ) ) ) ,
’ Par ent ’ , ←-
handles . xz_plane ) ) ) ;
219 colormap ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ gray ’ )
c o l o r b a r ( handles . xz_plane )
221 c a x i s ( handles . xz_plane ,
[−40 0 ] ) ;
s e t ( handles . xz_plane , ’ YDir ’ , ’ normal ’ )
223
t i t l e ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ S c a t t e r e d
F i e l d XZ PLANE’ ) ;
x l a b e l ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ L a t e r a l X d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’ ) ;
225 y l a b e l ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ depth
(mm) ’ ) ;
227 hold
o f f
229
( ( imagesc (
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ y ∗1000 ,
( handles . z _ax is ∗1000) ,
( ( ←-
squeeze ( handles . data ( : ,
: ,
handles . index_yz ) ) ) ) ,
’ P aren t ’ ,
handles←-
. yz_plane ) ) ) ;
231 colormap ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ gray ’ )
c o l o r b a r ( handles . yz_plane )
233 c a x i s ( handles . yz_plane ,
[−40 0 ] ) ;
s e t ( handles . yz_plane , ’ YDir ’ , ’ normal ’ )
235
t i t l e ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ S c a t t e r e d
F i e l d YZ PLANE’ ) ;
==PAGE:112==
94
Chapter B. Code listings
x l a b e l ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ L a t e r a l Y d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’ ) ;
237 y l a b e l ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ depth
(mm) ’ ) ;
hold
o f f
239
241
( ( imagesc (
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ x ∗1000 ,
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ y ∗1000 ,
( ( ←-
squeeze ( handles . data (
handles . index_xy ,
: ,
: ) ) ) ) ,
’ P aren t ’ ,
handles←-
. xy_plane ) ) ) ;
colormap ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ gray ’ )
243 c o l o r b a r ( handles . xy_plane )
c a x i s ( handles . xy_plane ,
[−40 0 ] ) ;
245 % s e t ( gca , ’ YDir ’ , ’ normal ’ )
t i t l e ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ S c a t t e r e d
F i e l d XY PLANE’ ) ;
247 x l a b e l ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ L a t e r a l X d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’ ) ;
y l a b e l ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ L a t e r a l Y d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’ ) ;
249 hold
o f f
251
g u i d a t a ( hObject , handles ) ;
253 % hObject
handle
to
bmode_button
( see GCBO)
% e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
d efined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
255 % handles
s t r u c t u r e
with
handles
and
user
data
( see GUIDATA)
257 % Hint :
get ( hObject , ’ Value ’ )
r e t u r n s
t o g g l e
s t a t e
of
bmode_button
259
% −−−Executes on
button
p r e s s
in
c o n t o u r _ b u t t o n .
261 f u n c t i o n
c o n t o u r _ b u t t o n _ C a l l b a c k ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
handles . mapaset= ’ contour ’ ;
263 g u i d a t a ( hObject , handles ) ;
contour ( handles . xz_plane ,
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ x ∗1000 ,
handles . z _ax is←-
∗1000 ,
squeeze ( handles . data ( : ,
handles . index_xz ,
: ) ) ,
[ −40:6:0]) ;
265 colormap ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ j e t ’ )
c a x i s ( handles . xz_plane ,
[−40 0 ] ) ;
267 c o l o r b a r ( handles . xz_plane )
t i t l e ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ S c a t t e r e d
F i e l d XZ PLANE’ ) ;
269 x l a b e l ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ L a t e r a l X d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’ ) ;
y l a b e l ( handles . xz_plane ,
’ depth
(mm) ’ ) ;
271
273 contour ( handles . yz_plane ,
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ y ∗1000 ,
handles . z _ax is←-
∗1000 ,
squeeze ( handles . data ( : ,
: ,
handles . index_yz ) ) ,
[ −40:6:0]) ;
colormap ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ j e t ’ )
275 c o l o r b a r ( handles . yz_plane )
c a x i s ( handles . yz_plane ,
[−40 0 ] ) ;
277
t i t l e ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ S c a t t e r e d
F i e l d YZ PLANE’ ) ;
x l a b e l ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ L a t e r a l Y d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’ ) ;
279 y l a b e l ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ depth
(mm) ’ ) ;
281
contour ( handles . xy_plane ,
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ x ∗1000 ,
handles . ←-
c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ y ∗1000 ,
squeeze ( handles . data ( handles . index_xy ,
: ,
: ) ) ,←-
==PAGE:113==
B.4. Visualization functions
95
[ −40:6:0]) ;
283 colormap ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ j e t ’ )
c o l o r b a r ( handles . xy_plane )
285 c a x i s ( handles . xy_plane ,
[−40 0 ] ) ;
t i t l e ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ S c a t t e r e d
F i e l d XY PLANE’ ) ;
287 x l a b e l ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ L a t e r a l X d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’ ) ;
y l a b e l ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ L a t e r a l Y d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’ ) ;
289
% hObject
handle
to
c o n t o u r _ b u t t o n
( see GCBO)
291 % e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
defined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
% handles
s t r u c t u r e
with
handles
and
user
data
( see GUIDATA)
293
% Hint :
get ( hObject , ’ Value ’ )
r e t u r n s
t o g g l e
s t a t e
of
c o n t o u r _ b u t t o n
295
297 % −−−Executes
during
o b j e c t
c r e a t i o n ,
a f t e r
s e t t i n g
a l l
p r o p e r t i e s .
f u n c t i o n
xz_plane_CreateFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
299 % hObject
handle
to
xz_plane
( see GCBO)
% e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
defined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
301 % handles
empty −handles
not
c r e a t e d
u n t i l
a f t e r
a l l
CreateFcns ←-
c a l l e d
303 % Hint :
place
code
in
OpeningFcn
to
p o p u l a t e
xz_plane
305
% −−−Executes on
s l i d e r
movement .
307 f u n c t i o n
s l i d e r _ y z p l a n e _ C a l l b a c k ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject
handle
to
s l i d e r _ y z p l a n e
( see GCBO)
309 % e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
defined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
% handles
s t r u c t u r e
with
handles
and
user
data
( see GUIDATA)
311
% Hints :
get ( hObject , ’ Value ’ )
r e t u r n s
p o s i t i o n
of
s l i d e r
313 %
get ( hObject , ’ Min ’ )
and
get ( hObject , ’Max ’ )
to
determine
range ←-
of
s l i d e r
index_yz = round ( get ( hObject , ’ Value ’ ) ) ;
315 index_yz_in_mm = handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ x ( index_yz ) ∗1000;
s e t ( handles . textbox_yz ,
’ s t r i n g ’ ,
num2str ( index_yz_in_mm ) ) ;
317
switch
handles . mapaset
319
case
’bmode ’
( ( imagesc (
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ y ∗1000 ,
( handles . z _ax is ∗1000) , ←-
( ( squeeze ( handles . data ( : ,
: ,
index_yz ) ) ) ) ,
’ Pare nt ’ , ←-
handles . yz_plane ) ) ) ;
321
colormap ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ gray ’ )
s e t ( handles . yz_plane , ’ YDir ’ , ’ normal ’ )
323
case
’ contour ’
325
contour ( handles . yz_plane ,
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ y ∗1000 ,
handles . ←-
z_axis ∗1000 ,
squeeze ( handles . data ( : ,
: ,
index_yz ) ) , ←-
[ −40:6:0]) ;
colormap ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ j e t ’ )
327 end
==PAGE:114==
96
Chapter B. Code listings
c o l o r b a r ( handles . yz_plane )
329 c a x i s ( handles . yz_plane ,
[−40 0 ] ) ;
handles . index_yz=index_yz ;
331
t i t l e ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ S c a t t e r e d
F i e l d YZ PLANE’ ) ;
x l a b e l ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ L a t e r a l Y d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’ ) ;
333 y l a b e l ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ depth
(mm) ’ ) ;
g u i d a t a ( hObject , handles ) ;
335
% −−−Executes
during
o b j e c t
c r e a t i o n ,
a f t e r
s e t t i n g
a l l
p r o p e r t i e s .
337 f u n c t i o n
s l i d e r _ y z p l a n e _ C r e a t e F c n ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject
handle
to
s l i d e r _ y z p l a n e
( see GCBO)
339 % e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
d efined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
% handles
empty −handles
not
c r e a t e d
u n t i l
a f t e r
a l l
CreateFcns ←-
c a l l e d
341
% Hint :
s l i d e r
c o n t r o l s
u s u a l l y
have a
l i g h t
gray
background .
343
i f
i s e q u a l ( get ( hObject , ’ BackgroundColor ’ ) ,
get (0 , ’←-
d e f a u l t U i c o n t r ol B a ck g r ou n d Co l o r ’ ) )
s e t ( hObject , ’ BackgroundColor ’ , [ . 9
.9
. 9 ] ) ;
345 end
347
349 f u n c t i o n
textbox_yz_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject
handle
to
textbox_yz
( see GCBO)
351 % e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
d efined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
% handles
s t r u c t u r e
with
handles
and
user
data
( see GUIDATA)
353
% Hints :
get ( hObject , ’ String ’ )
r e t u r n s
c o n t e n t s
of
textbox_yz
as
t e x t
355 %
s t r 2 d o u b l e ( get ( hObject , ’ String ’ ) )
r e t u r n s
c o n t e n t s
of ←-
textbox_yz
as
a
double
e d i t _ y = get ( hObject ,
’ s t r i n g ’ ) ;
357 e d i t _ y = char ( e d i t _ y ) ;
[ c
index_yz ] = min ( abs ( handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ x −(str2num ( e d i t _ y ) ) /1000) ) ;
359 s e t ( handles . textbox_yz ,
’ s t r i n g ’ ,
num2str ( handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ x (←-
index_yz ) ∗1000) ) ;
s e t ( handles . s l i d e r _ y z p l a n e ,
’ value ’ ,
index_yz ) ;
361
switch
handles . mapaset
363
case
’bmode ’
( ( imagesc (
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ y ∗1000 ,
f l i p l r ( handles . z_ax is←-
∗1000) ,
f l i p u d ( ( squeeze ( handles . data ( : ,
: ,
index_yz ) ) ) ) ,
’←-
Pa rent ’ ,
handles . yz_plane ) ) ) ;
365
colormap ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ gray ’ )
s e t ( handles . yz_plane , ’ YDir ’ , ’ normal ’ )
367
case
’ contour ’
contour ( handles . yz_plane ,
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ y ∗1000 ,
handles . ←-
z_ axis ∗1000 ,
squeeze ( handles . data ( : ,
: ,
index_yz ) ) , ←-
[ −40:6:0]) ;
369
colormap ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ j e t ’ )
end
371
==PAGE:115==
B.4. Visualization functions
97
c o l o r b a r ( handles . yz_plane )
373 c a x i s ( handles . yz_plane ,
[−40 0 ] ) ;
% a x i s
equal
t i g h t
375 handles . index_yz=index_yz ;
t i t l e ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ S c a t t e r e d
F i e l d YZ PLANE’ ) ;
377 x l a b e l ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ L a t e r a l Y d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’ ) ;
y l a b e l ( handles . yz_plane ,
’ depth
(mm) ’ ) ;
379 g u i d a t a ( hObject , handles ) ;
381
% −−−Executes
during
o b j e c t
c r e a t i o n ,
a f t e r
s e t t i n g
a l l
p r o p e r t i e s .
383 f u n c t i o n
textbox_yz_CreateFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject
handle
to
textbox_yz
( see GCBO)
385 % e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
defined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
% handles
empty −handles
not
c r e a t e d
u n t i l
a f t e r
a l l
CreateFcns ←-
c a l l e d
387
% Hint :
e d i t
c o n t r o l s
u s u a l l y
have a
white
background on Windows .
389 %
See ISPC and COMPUTER.
i f
i s p c && i s e q u a l ( get ( hObject , ’ BackgroundColor ’ ) ,
get (0 , ’←-
d e f a u l tU i c on t r ol B a ck g r ou n d Co l o r ’ ) )
391
s e t ( hObject , ’ BackgroundColor ’ , ’ white ’ ) ;
end
393
395 % −−−Executes on
s l i d e r
movement .
f u n c t i o n
x y _ s l i d e r s _ C a l l b a c k ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
397 % hObject
handle
to
x y _ s l i d e r s
( see GCBO)
% e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
defined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
399 % handles
s t r u c t u r e
with
handles
and
user
data
( see GUIDATA)
401 % Hints :
get ( hObject , ’ Value ’ )
r e t u r n s
p o s i t i o n
of
s l i d e r
%
get ( hObject , ’ Min ’ )
and
get ( hObject , ’Max ’ )
to
determine
range ←-
of
s l i d e r
403 index_xy = round ( get ( hObject , ’ Value ’ ) ) ;
index_xy_in_mm = handles . z_axis ( index_xy ) ∗1000;
405 s e t ( handles . textbox_xy ,
’ s t r i n g ’ ,
num2str ( index_xy_in_mm ) ) ;
407 switch
handles . mapaset
case
’bmode ’
409
( ( imagesc (
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ x ∗1000 ,
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ y ←-
∗1000 ,
( ( squeeze ( handles . data ( index_xy ,
: ,
: ) ) ) ) ,
’ Par ent ’ ,←-
handles . xy_plane ) ) ) ;
colormap ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ gray ’ )
411
s e t ( gca , ’ YDir ’ , ’ normal ’ )
case
’ contour ’
413
contour ( handles . xy_plane ,
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ x ∗1000 ,
handles . ←-
c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ y ∗1000 ,
squeeze ( handles . data (
index_xy ,
: ,
: ) )←-
,
[ −40:6:0]) ;
colormap ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ j e t ’ )
415 end
==PAGE:116==
98
Chapter B. Code listings
417 c o l o r b a r ( handles . xy_plane )
c a x i s ( handles . xy_plane ,
[−40 0 ] ) ;
419 handles . index_xy=index_xy ;
t i t l e ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ S c a t t e r e d
F i e l d XY PLANE’ ) ;
421 x l a b e l ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ L a t e r a l X d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’ ) ;
y l a b e l ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ L a t e r a l Y d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’ ) ;
423 g u i d a t a ( hObject , handles ) ;
425
% −−−Executes
during
o b j e c t
c r e a t i o n ,
a f t e r
s e t t i n g
a l l
p r o p e r t i e s .
427 f u n c t i o n
x y _ s l i d e r s _ C r e a t e F c n ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject
handle
to
x y _ s l i d e r s
( see GCBO)
429 % e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
d efined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
% handles
empty −handles
not
c r e a t e d
u n t i l
a f t e r
a l l
CreateFcns ←-
c a l l e d
431
% Hint :
s l i d e r
c o n t r o l s
u s u a l l y
have a
l i g h t
gray
background .
433
i f
i s e q u a l ( get ( hObject , ’ BackgroundColor ’ ) ,
get (0 , ’←-
d e f a u l t U i c o n t r ol B a ck g r ou n d Co l o r ’ ) )
s e t ( hObject , ’ BackgroundColor ’ , [ . 9
.9
. 9 ] ) ;
435 end
437
f u n c t i o n
textbox_xy_Callback ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
439 % hObject
handle
to
textbox_xy
( see GCBO)
% e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
d efined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
441 % handles
s t r u c t u r e
with
handles
and
user
data
( see GUIDATA)
443 % Hints :
get ( hObject , ’ String ’ )
r e t u r n s
c o n t e n t s
of
textbox_xy
as
t e x t
%
s t r 2 d o u b l e ( get ( hObject , ’ String ’ ) )
r e t u r n s
c o n t e n t s
of ←-
textbox_xy
as
a
double
445 edit _ x y = get ( hObject ,
’ s t r i n g ’ ) ;
edit _ x y = char ( e dit_xy ) ;
447 [ c index_xy ] = min ( abs ( handles . z_axis −(str2num ( e d i t _ x y ) ) /1000) ) ;
s e t ( handles . textbox_xy ,
’ s t r i n g ’ ,
num2str ( handles . z _ax is ( index_xy )←-
∗1000) ) ;
449 s e t ( handles . x y _ s l i d e r s ,
’ value ’ ,
index_xy ) ;
451 switch
handles . mapaset
case
’bmode ’
453
( ( imagesc (
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ x ∗1000 ,
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ y ←-
∗1000 ,
( ( squeeze ( handles . data ( index_xy ,
: ,
: ) ) ) ) ,
’ Par ent ’ ,←-
handles . xy_plane ) ) ) ;
colormap ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ gray ’ )
455
s e t ( gca , ’ YDir ’ , ’ normal ’ )
case
’ contour ’
457
contour ( handles . xy_plane ,
handles . c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ x ∗1000 ,
handles . ←-
c e n t e r _ l i n e s _ y ∗1000 ,
squeeze ( handles . data (
index_xy ,
: ,
: ) )←-
,
[ −40:6:0]) ;
colormap ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ j e t ’ )
459 end
==PAGE:117==
B.4. Visualization functions
99
461 c o l o r b a r ( handles . xy_plane )
c a x i s ( handles . xy_plane ,
[−40 0 ] ) ;
463 % a x i s
equal
t i g h t
handles . index_xy=index_xy ;
465
t i t l e ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ S c a t t e r e d
F i e l d XY PLANE’ ) ;
x l a b e l ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ L a t e r a l X d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’ ) ;
467 y l a b e l ( handles . xy_plane ,
’ L a t e r a l Y d i s t a n c e
(mm) ’ ) ;
g u i d a t a ( hObject , handles ) ;
469
471 % −−−Executes
during
o b j e c t
c r e a t i o n ,
a f t e r
s e t t i n g
a l l
p r o p e r t i e s .
f u n c t i o n
textbox_xy_CreateFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
473 % hObject
handle
to
textbox_xy
( see GCBO)
% e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
defined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
475 % handles
empty −handles
not
c r e a t e d
u n t i l
a f t e r
a l l
CreateFcns ←-
c a l l e d
477 % Hint :
e d i t
c o n t r o l s
u s u a l l y
have a
white
background on Windows .
%
See ISPC and COMPUTER.
479
i f
i s p c && i s e q u a l ( get ( hObject , ’ BackgroundColor ’ ) ,
get (0 , ’←-
d e f a u l tU i c on t r ol B a ck g r ou n d Co l o r ’ ) )
s e t ( hObject , ’ BackgroundColor ’ , ’ white ’ ) ;
481 end
483
% −−−Executes
during
o b j e c t
c r e a t i o n ,
a f t e r
s e t t i n g
a l l
p r o p e r t i e s .
485 f u n c t i o n
xy_plane_CreateFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject
handle
to
xy_plane
( see GCBO)
487 % e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
defined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
% handles
empty −handles
not
c r e a t e d
u n t i l
a f t e r
a l l
CreateFcns ←-
c a l l e d
489
% Hint :
place
code
in
OpeningFcn
to
p o p u l a t e
xy_plane
491
493 % −−−Executes on
button
p r e s s
in
s a v e _ f i g u r e s .
f u n c t i o n
s a v e _ f i g u r e s _ C a l l b a c k ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
495 % hObject
handle
to
s a v e _ f i g u r e s
( see GCBO)
% e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
defined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
497 % handles
s t r u c t u r e
with
handles
and
user
data
( see GUIDATA)
f i g 1 = f i g u r e ; s e t ( fig1 ,
’ V i s i b l e ’ ,
’ o f f ’ ) ;
499 copyobj ( handles . xy_plane ,
f i g 1 ) ;
saveas ( fig1 ,
’ xz_plane ’ , ’ png ’ ) ;
501 c l o s e ( f i g 1 )
f i g 2 = f i g u r e ; s e t ( fig2 ,
’ V i s i b l e ’ ,
’ o f f ’ ) ;
503 copyobj ( handles . yz_plane ,
f i g 2 ) ;
saveas ( fig2 ,
’ yz_plane ’ , ’ png ’ ) ;
505 c l o s e ( f i g 2 )
f i g 3 = f i g u r e ; s e t ( fig3 ,
’ V i s i b l e ’ ,
’ o f f ’ ) ;
507 copyobj ( handles . xy_plane ,
f i g 3 ) ;
saveas ( fig3 ,
’ xy_plane ’ , ’ png ’ ) ;
509 c l o s e ( f i g 3 )
==PAGE:118==
100
Chapter B. Code listings
511
% −−−Executes when
f i g u r e 1
i s
r e s i z e d .
513 f u n c t i o n
figure1_SizeChangedFcn ( hObject ,
eventdata ,
handles )
% hObject
handle
to
f i g u r e 1
( see GCBO)
515 % e v e n t d a t a
r e s e r v e d −to
be
d efined
in
a
f u t u r e
v e r s i o n
of MATLAB
% handles
s t r u c t u r e
with
handles
and
user
data
( see GUIDATA)


appendices/matlab/roco_visualizer.m
