==PAGE:1==
Guidelines for the indoor environment of a semi-outdoor space
regarding acousƟcs and arƟﬁcial lighƟng
Maria Djekic Arent Andersen
Spring 2018
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Title page
PROJECT TITLE
Guidelines for the indoor environment of a semi-outdoor space
regarding acousƟcs and arƟﬁcial lighƟng
DANISH PROJECT TITLE
Guidelines for indeklimaet i det tredje rum vedrørende akusƟk og
belysning
PROJECT TYPE
Master’s Thesis
PROJECT PERIOD
Spring 2018
CREDITS
30 ECTS
UNIVERSITY
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
InternaƟonal Centre for Indoor Environment and Energy
Anker Engelundsvej 1
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
AUTHOR
Maria Djekic Arent Andersen
s114201
FIELD OF STUDY
Architectural Engineering
SUPERVISOR
Jørn ToŌum
Associate Professor, DTU
Department of Civil Engineering
COMPANY COLLABORATION
Henning Larsen
Vesterbrogade 76
1620 Copenhagen V
Denmark
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This project was carried out as a master’s thesis in Architectural Engineering at the InternaƟonal Cen-
tre for Indoor Environment and Energy, Department of Civil Engineering at the Technical University of
Denmark. The project was completed during the course of spring of 2018 with Jørn ToŌum, Associate
Professor, Department of Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark as supervisor and in
collaboraƟon with the company Henning Larsen.
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
June 2018
Maria Djekic Arent Andersen
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to thank Jørn ToŌum, Associate Professor, Department of Civil Engineer-
ing at the Technical University of Denmark, for excellent supervising, dedicaƟon, support and for always
having an open door.
I would like to extent thanks to the companies Henning Larsen, Zarp Danmark and ÅF LighƟng for inter-
esƟng sparring and dedicaƟon to the project.
Also, thanks to Finnur Kári Pind Jörgensson, PhD student, Department of Electrical Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark, for great assistance and support throughout the project.
Lastly, I would like to thank Steen Rasmussen from Drivadan A/S for an interesƟng conversaƟon about
semi-outdoor spaces and for sharing experience and knowledge on the subject.
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
Semi-outdoor spaces have become increasingly interesƟng as numerous advantages appear when cre-
aƟng a second transparent skin around buildings. The energy savings are vast, the construcƟon of the
internal building can be made simpler, as it is not subjected to the weather, and lastly, the occupants
can enjoy the buﬀer zone for stay and thereby prolong the Ɵme spent outdoors during the year.
This study holds iniƟal invesƟgaƟons and suggested guidelines regarding the acousƟcal and lighƟng con-
diƟons in semi-outdoor spaces. InsƟtuƟonal, commercial and residenƟal categories were invesƟgated
for semi-outdoor spaces where the internal building is completely covered by the second skin of glass.
The simulaƟon tool ODEON was used to evaluate the reverberaƟon Ɵme needed to achieve an accept-
able level of noise exposure in the insƟtuƟonal and commercial categories. AddiƟonally, ODEON was
used to evaluate the eﬀect of diﬀerent acousƟcal treatments of the semi-outdoor space. The uƟliza-
Ɵon of the roof of the internal building as an absorbing area had the highest reducƟon in reverberaƟon
Ɵme, while also being more cost-eﬀecƟve compared to uƟlizing the facade. In addiƟon, a larger area of
vegetaƟon in the form of grass was also eﬀecƟve in terms of reducing the reverberaƟon Ɵme and noise
level. This study recommends reverberaƟon Ɵmes of 0,8 s to 1,4 s for the insƟtuƟonal category, 0,8 s to
1,6 s for the commercial category and 0,8 s to 1,8 s for the residenƟal category.
The lighƟng requirements were listed based on modiﬁcaƟons of exisƟng standards while guidelines were
established using the exisƟng literature, the acquired knowledge of the author and interviews carried
out with consultants of the companies Henning Larsen, Zarp Danmark and ÅF LighƟng. This study rec-
ommends a minimum maintained illuminance, in both the insƟtuƟonal and commercial categories, on
the task area and background of 50 lux and 20 lux, respecƟvely, with a uniformity of at least 0,40 and
0,25, respecƟvely. The width of the background area, which is just outside the semi-outdoor space,
should be at least 5 m. The UGR value should be 25 to 28 for the enƟrety of the semi-outdoor space to
prevent glare from the luminaires. For the specialized areas, local condiƟons must be upheld according
to exisƟng requirements for lighƟng at work places, without any adjustments.
In order to avoid echo it was found that the internal building should be placed so as to cover as much
as possible of two perpendicular facades of the semi-outdoor space. Furthermore, the ﬂoor area of
the internal building should preferably be a polygon with as many sides as possible, whilst covering a
minimum of the walls explained. If a rectangular shape is desired for the internal building, addiƟonal
screening should be used to block or divert the sound from travelling the great distance between the
parallel verƟcal surfaces. The same soluƟons are applicable to any geometry, including a dome shape, if
the distance travelled by the early reﬂected sound, from source to receiver, exceeds the criƟcal distance
of 17,2 m. To avoid ﬂuƩer echo and focusing, along with undesirable reﬂecƟons and possibly glare from
luminaires, it was found that the glass panes of the facade of the semi-outdoor space should be slightly
angled so that they were closer to the occupants near their heads and further from their feet.
AddiƟonal guidelines were presented for the lighƟng condiƟons of the semi-outdoor space to ensure
the opƟmum view of the surroundings, the sought visual appearance, an appropriate amount of privacy
and the acƟons needed to create the desired ambience within the space.
This study has found it possible to achieve the desired acousƟcal and lighƟng condiƟons in large scale
semi-outdoor spaces, where the internal building is covered completely. The use of such semi-outdoor
spaces was thereby found to be spanning over the residenƟal, commercial and even insƟtuƟonal cate-
gories, despite the quite substanƟal noise exposure oŌen found in the laƩer.
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Resumé
Interessen for det tredje rum er sƟgende, da mange fordele fremkommer, når man skaber en ekstra
transparent klimaskærm omkring bygninger. Energibesparelserne er store, konstrukƟonen af den indre
bygning kan gøres enklere, da den ikke udsæƩes for vejret, og endelig kan beboerne nyde buﬀerzonen
Ɵl ophold og derved forlænge den Ɵd, der bruges udendørs i løbet af året.
DeƩe projekt indeholder indledende undersøgelser og foreslåede retningslinjer for akusƟske og lysmæs-
sige forhold i tredje rum. InsƟtuƟonelle, kommercielle og boligkategorier er blevet undersøgt for tredje
rum, hvor den indvendige bygning er helt dækket af den ekstra klimaskærm lavet af glas.
Simuleringsværktøjet ODEON blev brugt Ɵl at evaluere den eŌerklangsƟd, der var nødvendig for at opnå
et acceptabelt niveau af støjeksponering i de insƟtuƟonelle og kommercielle kategorier. Derudover blev
ODEON brugt Ɵl at evaluere eﬀekten af forskellige akusƟske behandlinger af det tredje rum. UdnyƩelsen
af taget af den indre bygning som et absorberende område havde den højeste redukƟon i eŌerklangsƟd,
samƟdig med at den var mere omkostningseﬀekƟv sammenlignet med udnyƩelse af facaden. Derudover
viste det sig at et større areal af vegetaƟon i form af græs også som værende meget eﬀekƟv med hensyn
Ɵl at reducere eŌerklangsƟd og støjniveau. DeƩe projekt anbefaler eŌerklangsƟder på 0,8 s Ɵl 1,4 s for
den insƟtuƟonelle kategori, 0,8 s Ɵl 1,6 s for den kommercielle kategori og 0,8 s Ɵl 1,8 s for boligkate-
gorien.
Kravene Ɵl belysning blev opsƟllet på baggrund af modiﬁceringer af eksisterende standarder, mens ret-
ningslinjer blev opsƟllet ved hjælp af den eksisterende liƩeratur, forfaƩerens Ɵlegnede viden og inter-
views udført med konsulenter fra ﬁrmaerne Henning Larsen, Zarp Danmark og ÅF LighƟng. DeƩe projekt
anbefaler en minimumbelysningsstyrke, både i insƟtuƟonelle og kommercielle kategorier, på arbejds-
feltet og baggrunden på henholdsvis 50 lux og 20 lux, med en regelmæssighed på henholdsvis mindst
0,40 og 0,25. Baggrundsområdet, som foreﬁndes netop udenfor det tredje rum, skal være mindst 5
m. UGR-værdien skal være 25 Ɵl 28 for hele det tredje rum for at forhindre blænding fra armaturerne.
For specialiserede områder skal lokale forhold opretholdes i overensstemmelse med de allerede eksis-
terende krav Ɵl belysning ved arbejdsstaƟoner uden justeringer.
For at undgå ekko blev det konstateret, at den indre bygning skal placeres, således at den dækker så
meget som muligt af to vinkelreƩe facader af det tredje rum. Endvidere bør gulvområdet af den indre
bygning være en polygon med så mange sider som muligt og samƟdig dække et minimum af de nævnte
vægge. Hvis en rektangulær form ønskes for den indre bygning, skal der anvendes yderligere afskærmn-
ing for at blokere eller omdirigere lyden fra at rejse den store afstand mellem de parallelle verƟkale
overﬂader. De samme løsninger gælder for alle geometrier, herunder en kuppelform, hvis den afstand,
der rejses af den Ɵdlige reﬂekterede lyd fra kilde Ɵl modtager, oversƟger den kriƟske afstand på 17,2
m. For at undgå ﬂuƩer-ekko og fokusering, sammen med uønskede reﬂeksioner og muligvis blænding
fra armaturer, blev det konstateret, at glasruderne i facaden af det tredje rum skal være let vinklede,
således at de er tæƩere på brugerne nær hovedet og længere fra dem nær fødderne. Yderligere ret-
ningslinjer blev fremlagt for lysforholdene i det tredje rum for at sikre opƟmalt udkig Ɵl omgivelserne,
det søgte visuelle udseende, en passende mængde privathed og de nødvendige handlinger for at skabe
den ønskede atmosfære i rummet.
DeƩe projekt har konstateret, at det er muligt at opnå de ønskede akusƟske og lysmæssige forhold i
tredje rum, hvor den indvendige bygning helt dækkes af glaskonstrukƟonen. Anvendelsen af sådanne
tredje rum synes således at spænde over både bolig, komercielle og selv insƟtuƟonelle kategorier, på
trods af den ret omfaƩende støjeksponering, der oŌe ﬁndes i sidstnævnte.
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Contents
1
IntroducƟon
1
2
The semi-outdoor space
3
3
Scope
5
3.1
LocaƟon, orientaƟon, shape and size of the semi-outdoor space
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Type of semi-outdoor space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Target area for the semi-outdoor space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.4
Indoor environment aspects in the semi-outdoor space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Background
9
4.1
Usage of the semi-outdoor space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Geometry and construcƟon of the semi-outdoor space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.3
AdaptaƟon
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5
Framework of invesƟgated semi-outdoor spaces
11
5.1
Usage of the semi-outdoor space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.2
Geometry and construcƟon of the semi-outdoor space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.3
AdaptaƟon
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
6
AcousƟcs
15
6.1
IniƟal invesƟgaƟons and recommendaƟons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6.1.1
Fundamentals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6.1.2
ReﬂecƟon control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
6.1.3
Noise control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6.1.4
Localized condiƟons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.2
Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.2.1
ReﬂecƟon control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.2.2
Noise control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.3.1
Noise control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
LighƟng
53
7.1
IniƟal invesƟgaƟons and recommendaƟons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.1.1
Fundamentals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.1.2
Illuminance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.1.3
Luminance distribuƟon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.1.4
Glare
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.1.5
Daylight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.1.6
Localized condiƟons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.2
Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.3.1
Basic types of lighƟng . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.3.2
LocaƟon and context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.3.3
Visual appearance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.3.4
Luminaires
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
==PAGE:14==
8
Discussion
73
8.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
8.2
Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
8.3
Sources of error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
9
Further studies
79
10 Conclusion
81
References
83
List of ﬁgures
87
List of tables
89
Appendices
==PAGE:15==
1
IntroducƟon
It has become a worldwide goal to minimize the use of fossil fuels, in order to ensure the future of our
planet. Denmark is one of the leading countries in this pursuit and aims to become independent of fossil
fuels by the year 2050 (IEA, 2011). Many areas are apt for improvements via global iniƟaƟves, policies
and technologies but especially the building sector, as approximately 40 percent of the total energy con-
sumpƟon is consƟtuted by buildings, has immense potenƟal for opƟmizaƟon (IEA, 2017).
Semi-outdoor spaces are not a new phenomenon, but during recent years they have become increas-
ingly interesƟng, as the desire for creaƟng energy-saving and sustainable building soluƟons is present.
As a result, their potenƟal is beginning to be explored. When creaƟng a second transparent skin around
buildings, numerous advantages appear. The energy savings are vast, the construcƟon of the internal
building can be made simpler, as it is not subjected to the weather, and lastly, the occupants can enjoy
the buﬀer zone for stay and thereby prolong the Ɵme spent outdoors during the year.
Presently, no guidelines or requirements exist for the indoor environment of semi-outdoor spaces, in
either insƟtuƟonal, commercial or residenƟal premises.
Generally, the focus, when assessing the indoor environment of a semi outdoor space, has been on the
thermal aspect, as this oŌen seems to be more tangible and the one deemed most important. This can
be aƩributed to both of the following. The thermal environment of the semi-outdoor space has a direct
connecƟon to the energy demand of the internal building and furthermore, it could be postulated, and
some invesƟgaƟons even suggest, that thermal comfort of the occupants is indeed the most important
aspect of the indoor environment, when not considering extreme situaƟons (K. L. Møller, 2018). How-
ever, other aspects of the indoor environment of semi-outdoor spaces must not be overlooked and calls
for equal examinaƟon, classiﬁcaƟon and guidelines.
This study seeks to invesƟgate and set up guidelines for semi-outdoor spaces in regard to acousƟcal and
lighƟng condiƟons. Both aspects are somewhat unexamined and therefore the sparse invesƟgaƟons al-
ready performed must be compared with new ones in order to deﬁne the appropriate values to obtain
and the guidelines to use to achieve opƟmum acousƟcal and lighƟng condiƟons.
In this report, the subsecƟons involving the invesƟgaƟons carried out have been divided into two main
parts, one for each of the two aspects; acousƟcs and lighƟng. This has been done to create a beƩer
coherence within each area and ensure an opƟmal ﬂow within the subsecƟons present for each of them.
Naturally, the iniƟal part of the report, as well as the ﬁnal parts including the discussion, will contain both
aspects together.
1
==PAGE:16==
2
==PAGE:17==
2
The semi-outdoor space
A semi-outdoor space provides the occupants with the opportunity of achieving a natural outdoor expe-
rience within an arƟﬁcial environment created by a transparent, second building envelope. This enve-
lope or skin can take many diﬀerent shapes, while covering one or several buildings, a part of a building
or as a connecƟon between building blocks, as seen in Figure 1.
Figure 1: IllustraƟon of semi-outdoor spaces
The semi-outdoor space can help solve many of the problems encountered in the building sector. The
semi-outdoor space oﬀers reduced energy consumpƟon of the internal building, by producing a 20 %
to 35 % reducƟon in the heaƟng energy use, in temperate and cold climates, when comparing the same
house either protected or unprotected by a transparent second skin (Lin & Zmeureanu, 2006) (S. Møller,
2014). It allows for an abundance of design opportuniƟes for the construcƟon of the semi-outdoor space
itself and for the internal building, which does not have to withstand the outdoor environment and thus
no abrasion will occur.
The semi-outdoor space has the possibility of allowing for longer periods of occupancy in fresh air and in
close relaƟon to vegetaƟon and sunlight, as it shields against the ambient condiƟons such as wind, rain,
snow and the harmful ultra violet radiaƟon of the sun. Also, a semi-outdoor space has the potenƟal of
doubling the Ɵme we are able to spend outdoors because of this shielding and the fact that the space
is at least 3 °C warmer than the ambient throughout winter (Papachristou et al., 2016). This close con-
necƟon to nature is greatly desired by humans and studies even show that nature evokes our creaƟve
way of thinking and enhances our quality of life and thus should be an important part of our everyday,
where we spend most of our waking hours inside (Plambech & Van Den Bosch, 2015) (Holm & Tvedt,
1998) (Olesen & Seelen, 1993).
3
==PAGE:18==
4
==PAGE:19==
3
Scope
In this secƟon the scope of this study is deﬁned. In order to create this deﬁniƟon, the scope has been
both broadened and narrowed in diﬀerent aspects at the same Ɵme, as seen in Figure 2.
Semi-outdoor spaces in general
Institutional, commercial and residential
Indoor environment
Acoustics
Lighting
Room
Artiﬁcial
Institutional
Commercial
Residential
General
stay
Bedrooms
Work stations
Kitchens
Classrooms
Bathrooms
Storage
50%
50%
8 m
Figure 2: Broadening and narrowing the scope schemaƟc
The process of broadening and narrowing of the scope has included going from invesƟgaƟng semi-
outdoor spaces in general, to only the fully covered buildings with possibility of stay, to the enƟrety
of the commercial, insƟtuƟonal and residenƟal market, to the areas overlapping within all of them, to
invesƟgaƟng the indoor environment, to focusing on acousƟcs and lighƟng condiƟons, and ﬁnally to
invesƟgaƟng mainly room acousƟcs and arƟﬁcial lighƟng for each, respecƟvely.
3.1
LocaƟon, orientaƟon, shape and size of the semi-outdoor space
Many aspects are to be considered when designing a semi-outdoor space, such as locaƟon, orientaƟon,
shape and size.
The aspects of locaƟon and orientaƟon of the semi-outdoor space are mainly important due to thermal
condiƟons, but surrounding noise and available daylight are also inﬂuenced by these aspects. Therefore,
the locaƟon and orientaƟon must be considered carefully, when designing a semi-outdoor space, but
they will however not be dealt with in this study as there are already studies which do so. Furthermore,
5
==PAGE:20==
locaƟon and orientaƟon are only necessary for acousƟcs and lighƟng in relaƟon to building acousƟcs
and daylight, respecƟvely, which are not the focus of this study as explained later.
The shape and size of the semi-outdoor space however, are of importance to the invesƟgaƟons of the
room acousƟcs and arƟﬁcial lighƟng and thus this will be dealt with in terms of seƫng up design criteria
and guidelines.
3.2
Type of semi-outdoor space
Only semi-outdoor spaces which allow for stay between the internal building and the second skin will be
invesƟgated. In addiƟon, this study will focus only on instances where the second skin is made of glass
which completely covers the internal building. Lastly, only semi-outdoor spaces vastly greater in size
compared to the internal building will be invesƟgated, as seen in Figure 3. This is because such instances
are expected to present the most diﬃcult condiƟons in terms of acousƟcs and lighƟng. AddiƟonally, the
internal building will only be one-storey and cover 50 % of the total footprint of the semi-outdoor space,
which in addiƟon has a height of 8 m, regardless of its shape.
50%
50%
8 m
Section drawing
Plan drawing
Figure 3: IllustraƟon of the type of semi-outdoor space invesƟgated
3.3
Target area for the semi-outdoor space
The target area for semi-outdoor spaces lies within the residenƟal, commercial and insƟtuƟonal build-
ing categories, henceforth referred to as simply categories, and thus all of them will be invesƟgated in
this study. The residenƟal category will cover dwellings, while the commercial category will cover the
industry and oﬃce buildings, and the insƟtuƟonal category will cover schools, nurseries, kindergartens
and reƟrement homes. The commercial category will only include minor companies and oﬃce buildings,
as these are expected to be the target audience for the type of semi-outdoor space where the enƟre
building is completely covered.
It is assumed that within all three categories the semi-outdoor space can be used for general stay and
not for work staƟons, producƟon areas, teachings or bedrooms, toilets and the like as seen in Figure 4.
This is based on the fact that exisƟng criteria for and requirements to working environments could not
be achieved in semi-outdoor spaces, while the placement of bedrooms and toilets in such a space is not
feasible.
6
==PAGE:21==
Institutional
Commercial
Residential
General
stay
Bedrooms
Work stations
Kitchens
Classrooms
Bathrooms
Storage
Figure 4: IllustraƟon of the general stay within the insƟtuƟonal, commercial and residenƟal categories
While the enƟrety of the semi-outdoor space would not be suited for working environments, it is feasi-
ble that minor areas could be designed for smaller workstaƟons, holding meeƟngs or being able to sit in
smaller more private groups. This study will therefore also invesƟgate the possibility of installing such
minor specialized areas.
3.4
Indoor environment aspects in the semi-outdoor space
The acousƟcal condiƟons of a semi-outdoor space can be divided into two parts; building acousƟcs and
room acousƟcs. Building acousƟcs deals with the insulaƟon of the structure so as to avoid noise trav-
elling to the space from outside sources, while room acousƟcs deals with the noise created and sound
propagaƟon within the space. When assessing the acousƟcal condiƟons of a semi outdoor space both
building acousƟcs and room acousƟcs hold equal signiﬁcance. In this study, room acousƟcs have been
chosen as the focus within the acousƟcal part.
In terms of the lighƟng condiƟons in a semi outdoor space, it is also possible to divide this aspect into
two main parts; arƟﬁcial lighƟng and daylight. The daylight is closely related to the thermal condiƟons of
the semi outdoor space as a balance will always be sought between achieving the desired heat gain from
the sun and the appropriate daylight factor according to the use of the space. Studies have already been
performed to assess the thermal and daylight condiƟons of semi-outdoor spaces, whereas the arƟﬁcial
lighƟng condiƟons are yet rather unexplored and documented. In this study, arƟﬁcial lighƟng has been
chosen as the focus within the lighƟng part.
7
==PAGE:22==
8
==PAGE:23==
4
Background
This secƟon holds a series of invesƟgaƟons carried out to determine the usage and geometry of the
semi-outdoor space. For this purpose, exisƟng literature has been reviewed as well as an interview
carried out with the director of the Danish company Drivadan A/S. The company specializes in manu-
facturing large glass construcƟons for greenhouses, and for covering diﬀerent types of buildings such as
dwellings, schools and reƟrements homes, with their concept houseINglass.
AddiƟonally, this secƟon holds an invesƟgaƟon of the term adaptaƟon, as this is presumed to be a key
element when evaluaƟng the comfort of the occupants in a semi-outdoor space.
4.1
Usage of the semi-outdoor space
The usage paƩern of a semi-outdoor space is ﬁrst and foremost deﬁned by the thermal condiƟons and
solar radiaƟon. The occupants will only use the space for actual stay, when they are able to do so com-
fortably, and previous studies show that the thermal comfort is ranked as the most important aspect of
the indoor environment, when not including extreme situaƟons (K. L. Møller, 2018).
Previous studies have shown that the usage period of exisƟng semi-outdoor spaces over a year, when
using a Predicted Mean Vote (PMV) range of -1 to 1, is 6 months for at least 8 hours a day. AddiƟon-
ally, it was found that during the cooling season the semi-outdoor space can be used up Ɵll 16 hours a
day and for 45 % of the year, when considering that the possible occupied hours lie between 8.00 and
24.00 (Papachristou et al., 2016). Based on these ﬁndings, the usage period of a semi-outdoor space is
expected to be as illustrated in Figure 5.
0
4
8
12
16
Available for usage [hours]
Time of year [months]
Yearly usage
Figure 5: IllustraƟon of the Ɵme available for usage of the semi-outdoor space during the year
This usage period indicates that the somewhat darker hours of the day may also be occupied. The semi-
outdoor space would probably not be used throughout the enƟre usage period at night Ɵme, as it would
be too cold during March and April as well as October and November.
9
==PAGE:24==
4.2
Geometry and construcƟon of the semi-outdoor space
Shape more than volume aﬀects the indoor environment in terms of thermal condiƟons of semi-outdoor
spaces (Trankjær, 2018). A previous study show that dome shaped semi-outdoor spaces have a higher
annual median temperature than the rectangular or triangular shaped, making the dome shape more
desirable (Trankjær, 2018). The study also establishes that the desired vast height of a semi-outdoor
space can be achieved without compromising the desired thermal condiƟons. The height of the semi-
outdoor space is important in terms of achieving a high enough air change in the space, if it is solely
delivered by natural venƟlaƟon.
Henceforth, when using the term facade of the semi-outdoor space, it will refer to both the roof and
walls of the glass construcƟon. The construcƟon of the semi-outdoor spaces developed by Drivadan A/S
is made of single pane glass in a light grid system mounted on steel trusses. The usage of single pane
glass allows for a lighter grid system of the semi-outdoor space as they weigh less and do not require air
Ɵghtness. Furthermore, they are cheaper and easier to install.
4.3
AdaptaƟon
The term adaptaƟon is by deﬁniƟon “the gradual decrease of the organism’s response to repeated ex-
posure to a sƟmulus, involving all the acƟons that make them beƩer suited to survive in such an envi-
ronment” (Nikolopoulou & Steemers, 2003).
As thermal adaptaƟon is an already studied subject included in some standards, such as DS/EN 15251,
it could serve as a source of inspiraƟon for acousƟc and lighƟng adaptaƟon (EN15251, 2007). The con-
diƟons involving thermal adaptaƟon in standards cannot be used directly for the semi-outdoor space as
the circumstances are diﬀerent from that of indoor environments, to which they apply. This is especially
in terms of metabolic rate, which in the standards are set to be for sedentary occupants in order for the
thermal adaptaƟon adjustments to be valid. SƟll, the knowledge gained regarding thermal adaptaƟon
has been used as inspiraƟon in this study.
It is known that in order to obtain thermal comfort in agreement with their individual thermal predilec-
Ɵon, occupants implement assorted adapƟve approaches (Liu et al., 2012). People have their own es-
tablished preferences regarding what consƟtutes opƟmal comfort in indoor environments, and hereby
it can be expected that just as in the case of thermal adaptaƟon, they may be able to adapt to acousƟcal
and lighƟng condiƟons as well. When people adapt thermally they can do so by behavioral adaptaƟon,
where they adjust their clothing level, by either removing or adding clothes. AdaptaƟon can also occur
by psychological adaptaƟon, which has been found to be increasingly important when moving from in-
doors to semi-outdoor to outdoor, where expectaƟons, Ɵme of exposure and adapƟve opportuniƟes,
amongst others, play a crucial role (Liu et al., 2012) (Nikolopoulou & Steemers, 2003). Furthermore, it
has been shown that inhabitants of diﬃcult indoor environments, where condiƟons such as the tem-
perature is not easily controlled, are more comfortable at higher temperatures, than those of easily
restrained environments (Hwang & Lin, 2007).
10
==PAGE:25==
5
Framework of invesƟgated semi-outdoor spaces
Based on the background invesƟgaƟons carried out, a series of assumpƟons have been made regarding
the usage, geometry and construcƟon of the semi-outdoor space relevant for this study. Furthermore,
assumpƟons have been made regarding the adaptaƟon of the occupants of semi-outdoor spaces. The
assumpƟons stated here will be applied to the iniƟal invesƟgaƟons carried out for both the acousƟcs
and lighƟng aspects, and will then be further developed and detailed later for the results.
5.1
Usage of the semi-outdoor space
The usage period throughout the year for the semi-outdoor spaces invesƟgated in this study is assumed
to be as illustrated Figure in 5, meaning that the somewhat darker hours of the day may also be occu-
pied. It is assumed that the usage periods of the residenƟal, commercial and insƟtuƟonal categories are
somewhat diﬀerent from each other, as seen in Figure 6 and Figure 7, which represent the assumed av-
erage usage for each category. In reality, in all instances the schedule could in fact be diﬀerent; people
take vacaƟons at diﬀerent Ɵmes, some are working at home, some insƟtuƟons are open 24 hours a day
and so on. Therefore, it is concluded that the semi-outdoor space potenƟally could be used during the
enƟrety of the day within all categories invesƟgated.
0
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Occupancy ( 0=none, 1=full )
Time of day [hours]
Daily usage for the institutional and commercial categories
Weekends and
holidays
Workdays
Figure 6: Time available for usage of the semi-outdoor space during a day for the insƟtuƟonal and com-
mercial categories
11
==PAGE:26==
0
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Occupancy ( 0=none, 1=full )
Time of day [hours]
Daily usage for the residential category
Weekends and
holidays
Workdays
Figure 7: Time available for usage of the semi-outdoor space during a day for the insƟtuƟonal and com-
mercial categories
The semi-outdoor space is assumed to be used primarily during the periods where it presents a more
comfortable environment, compared to the outdoors. Furthermore, the space could have minor spe-
cialized areas, which could prolong the occupied hours of the semi-outdoor space, especially in the
commercial category. These areas could host smaller meeƟngs or even places for simpler work scenar-
ios, rendering the usage of the semi-outdoor space a bit wider.
5.2
Geometry and construcƟon of the semi-outdoor space
The main shape invesƟgated in this study will be a rectangular semi-outdoor space, while alternaƟve
shapes, such as a dome, will be touched upon brieﬂy. The alternaƟve shapes are included both because
of the desirability of domes as described and because it is expected that the shape of the semi-outdoor
space will aﬀect both the acousƟcal and lighƟng condiƟons.
The construcƟon used by Drivadan A/S is applied to the semi-outdoor spaces invesƟgated in this study.
The simple and non-airƟght construcƟon is desirable as the semi-outdoor space is expected to require
a quite high amount of natural venƟlaƟon. The high amount of natural venƟlaƟon is needed as the air
change is assumed to be delivered solely by natural venƟlaƟon, exploiƟng the thermal buoyancy eﬀect;
the stack eﬀect, and cross venƟlaƟon (Andersen, 2012). The natural venƟlaƟon will of course be con-
trolled by the occupants by opening parts of the semi-outdoor space, but also by the inﬁltraƟon and
exﬁltraƟon through the construcƟon.
The height of the semi-outdoor space is important in terms of achieving a high enough air change in the
space. Furthermore, a considerable height is assumed to be desired in order not to feel to enclosed,
when occupying the space. As such, this study will assume a height of 8 m in the type of semi-outdoor
space invesƟgated. Furthermore, the roof must have an inclinaƟon of at least 15 degrees, to be able to
dispose of snow so as to not jeopardize the staƟc structure (HFB, 2012).
Two diﬀerent volumes will be invesƟgated to suit the diﬀerent categories. Both will uphold the ﬂoor
area distribuƟon of 50/50, meaning that the internal building will cover 50 % of the enƟre footprint.
12
==PAGE:27==
The internal building and semi-outdoor space for now is only present as a footprint representaƟon and
the geometry is not yet set for either.
500 m2
500 m2
8 m
Min. 15˚
4000 m3 - 8000 m3
Section drawing
Plan drawing
Figure 8: Overall properƟes for Model A used for the insƟtuƟonal and commercial categories
The ﬁrst volume, Model A, will represent the commercial and insƟtuƟonal categories and can be seen in
Figure 8. The total footprint will be 1000 m2 and thus both the internal building and the semi-outdoor
space will each have a ﬂoor area of 500 m2. The total volume will be within the interval of 4000 m3 to
8000 m3, depending on the shape of the semi-outdoor space.
180 m2
180 m2
8 m
Min. 15˚
1500 m3 - 3000 m3
Section drawing
Plan drawing
Figure 9: Overall properƟes for Model B used for the residenƟal category
The second volume, Model B, will represent the residenƟal category and can be seen in Figure 9. The
total footprint will be 360 m2 and thus both the internal building and the semi-outdoor space will each
have a ﬂoor area of 180 m2. The total volume will be within the interval of 1500 m3 to 3000 m3, de-
pending on the shape of the semi-outdoor space.
Some users might want a large area to occupy in the semi-outdoor space, while others want a smaller
one. Therefore, a middle ground has been found to be 50/50, which is also evident in many of the
13
==PAGE:28==
projects by Drivadan A/S. This distribuƟon is also deemed appropriate in insƟtuƟonal use, as the space
should not be too large, since it is expected that children want to be able to use the outdoors as well
and not only the semi-outdoor space.
5.3
AdaptaƟon
It is likely that people would adapt in the same way to acousƟcal condiƟons, as they do to thermal con-
diƟons, by both types of adaptaƟon; behavioral and psychological. They could put on earphones if they
feel the need to lower the noise exposure and their expectaƟon to being in such a large glass construc-
Ɵon will undoubtedly also be diﬀerent than if they were in any other not similar space. In other words,
they would expect a much more lively, unpredictable and spacious acousƟcal environment. In terms of
the lighƟng condiƟons the same principles are expected to be present. People would possibly put on
sunglasses if the solar radiaƟon became too disturbing or expect extensive or limited daylight during
diﬀerent periods and thus adapƟng both behaviourally and psychologically.
It is assumed that solar shading is required in the insƟtuƟonal and commercial categories. Most of the
customers of Drivadan A/S have chosen not to have solar shading, which can be aƩributed the fact that
they are in the residenƟal category and thus have a much higher ability of adjusƟng their clothing level,
as they are in fact in their own home when occupying the semi-outdoor space. Furthermore, it can be
expected that they also have even larger tolerances towards the thermal state, because their mindset
is diﬀerent than those who use the semi-outdoor space commercially or insƟtuƟonally, and not as a
recreaƟonal space. This is also evident when people visit places like the beach where they claim ther-
mal comfort at much higher temperatures, than they would if they were at other venues (Bouyer et
al., 2007). People accept the varying and unpredictable thermal condiƟons of the outdoors, and are
prepared to accommodate them, once they have decided to venture outside and stay there, so natu-
rally the same could be expected in terms of acousƟc and lighƟng condiƟons (Nikolopoulou et al., 2001).
The residenƟal customers at Drivadan A/S have never complained about the acousƟcal condiƟons in
their semi-outdoor spaces, according to the director of the company. This could be due to the fact
that the residenƟal customers are rarely a large number of occupants in the semi-outdoor space and
therefore the noise level never becomes a problem. The same can thereby be said for the reverberaƟon
Ɵme of the spaces. It could also be aƩributed to the fact that they are simply adapƟng as they would
thermally. They have chosen a rather innovaƟve and new type of living and thus are open and more
acceptable of the condiƟons.
However, the commercial and insƟtuƟonal users are expected to be in need of acousƟcal treatment,
which was also found to be the case for these types of projects handled by Drivadan A/S.
14
==PAGE:29==
6
AcousƟcs
This secƟon holds the main acousƟc part of the report. It includes the iniƟal invesƟgaƟons of the present
standards and recommendaƟons associated, a descripƟon of the methodology used for the ﬁnal inves-
ƟgaƟons and the results thereof.
6.1
IniƟal invesƟgaƟons and recommendaƟons
This secƟon maps the current requirements for spaces similar to semi-outdoor spaces, such as atria,
which can either be used directly or modiﬁed in order to ﬁt and describe the desired acousƟcal con-
diƟons in the type of semi-outdoor space invesƟgated. Furthermore, general recommendaƟons for
designing large scale rooms and the aspects applicable to the use and intent of the semi-outdoor space
will be invesƟgated. The interview with Drivadan A/S has also been used to some extent for this purpose.
In this secƟon, these ﬁndings will be incorporated in a series of recommendaƟons, in terms of actual
criteria along with general recommendaƟons for design and layout of the semi-outdoor space to achieve
opƟmum acousƟcal condiƟons. In later secƟons within the acousƟcal part, the requirements and rec-
ommendaƟons set here, will be tested and validated.
6.1.1
Fundamentals
Presently there are requirements and general advice on acousƟcal condiƟons for spaces similar to a
semi-outdoor space, but none that apply directly. This secƟon will invesƟgate and disƟnguish between
those aspects which can be used with modiﬁcaƟons and those which cannot.
The basic goal when dealing with room acousƟcs in places such as those invesƟgated in this study, is
to minimize noise, which is mainly done with absorpƟon but also by uƟlizing reﬂecƟon to some extent.
Noise reducƟon is primarily achieved by reducing the reverberaƟon Ɵme, by adding absorpƟon, and
by avoiding basic faults like echoes, ﬂuƩer echoes and to some extent focusing (Gade, 2003). As seen
in Figure 10, which illustrates the three basic components present for treatment, and the focus area
of a semi-outdoor space holding faciliƟes such as explained, the reﬂecƟon must be controlled to some
degree but, like in the case for diﬀusion, it is not a priority, while absorpƟon is the main focus.
15
==PAGE:30==
Reﬂection
Diﬀusion
Absorption
Semi-outdoor
spaces
Figure 10: The three basic components of acousƟcal treatment and the focus area of semi-outdoor
spaces
In the following the reﬂecƟon control and noise control aspects will be described in detail.
6.1.2
ReﬂecƟon control
The surfaces of the room should be designed with respect to early reﬂecƟons, to avoid possible problems
with focusing, echo and ﬂuƩer echo. These are not the main focus, as opposed to achieving the desired
reverberaƟon Ɵme, as they primarily present problems in spaces for ampliﬁed speech and music. Nev-
ertheless, they should be considered and invesƟgated, as these may actually present a problem in such
large glass construcƟons. These potenƟal problems can be avoided by considering basic geometrical
properƟes, such as those invesƟgated in the following.
6.1.2.1
Focusing
Focusing will cause the sound distribuƟon to be uneven by focusing the sound in certain areas, while
leaving too liƩle in others (Gade, 2003). This eﬀect could possibly present a challenge in semi-outdoor
spaces where more than a few people are expected to gather, such as in commercial and insƟtuƟonal
use. Generally, concave surfaces may cause focusing and therefore circular rooms are unfavourable,
as seen in the plan drawing (a) in Figure 11. Dome shapes and concave ceilings in general could also
be a problem, as seen in the secƟon drawing (b) in Figure 11 but could be avoided in such structures
by ensuring a radius of curvature of the glass construcƟon which is larger than twice the height of the
room, as seen in the secƟon drawing (c) in Figure 11 (Gade, 2003).
16
==PAGE:31==
(a) Plan drawing of circular shape
(b) Section drawing of dome with r = h
(b) Section drawing of dome with r > 2h
Figure 11: IllustraƟons of focusing
6.1.2.2
Echo and ﬂuƩer echo
Echo is deﬁned as a single sound reﬂecƟon which is clearly audible as being separate from the direct
sound, which is illustrated in Figure 12. The ﬁrst reﬂecƟon will be perceived as an echo if it reaches the
listener 50 ms later than the direct sound (Gade, 2003). The risk of echo could be prevented by angling
each glass surface according to its distance to possible noise sources. Generally, the prevenƟon of echo
is of importance for venues where ampliﬁed speech and music are present, but this is also the case for
semi-outdoor spaces where such a large part of the surfaces are reﬂecƟng.
Section drawing
Plan drawing
Figure 12: IllustraƟon of echo
FluƩer echo is a frequent problem, caused by regular repeated reﬂecƟons between parallel, smooth
reﬂecƟng surfaces, which is illustrated in Figure 13. In larger rooms it is perceived as a long series of
disƟnct echoes, all evenly spaced in Ɵme. FluƩer echo should be avoided altogether by changing the
angle between the parallel surfaces by three degrees or ensuring that at least one of the parallel surfaces
is covered with absorpƟon (Gade, 2003).
17
==PAGE:32==
Section drawing
Plan drawing
Figure 13: IllustraƟons of ﬂuƩer echo
The dimensions of rectangular rooms should not be idenƟcal and thus a cubic shape should be avoided,
as many modes in such a room will have the same natural frequencies, causing bigger gaps in the transfer
funcƟon. The transfer funcƟon is the frequency response from a source posiƟon to a receiver posiƟon
in a room, which should be sought to be as smooth as possible, in order to achieve good room acousƟcal
design (Jacobsen et al., 2011). The natural frequencies of the room are idenƟﬁed as the maxima of the
transfer funcƟon.
6.1.3
Noise control
In order to obtain the opƟmum reverberaƟon Ɵme in a room, the acƟviƟes must be taken into account
and the surface materials should be chosen with sound absorpƟon properƟes appropriate for the pur-
pose. Surface materials with high absorpƟon coeﬃcients in the frequencies where potenƟal problems
are expected, should be used.
In residenƟal use, the sound levels will primarily be quite low and noise sources will most likely be only
a couple at a Ɵme. Therefore, it is expected that the reverberaƟon Ɵme will not present as big an issue
as in commercial and especially insƟtuƟonal contexts. Furthermore, people who live in semi-outdoor
spaces have stated that they experience no problems with the acousƟcal condiƟons and require no spe-
cial acousƟcal treatment in the space, according to the interview with Drivadan A/S. Thereby, it can be
assumed that the reverberaƟon Ɵme generally does not present a problem in residenƟal use. Nonethe-
less, target values should be set for the reverberaƟon Ɵme, as occasions could occur where occupants
would beneﬁt from not experiencing a too long reverberaƟon Ɵme, such as when hosƟng parƟes or the
like.
In commercial and insƟtuƟonal use, the reverberaƟon Ɵme should be considered more carefully espe-
cially as the number of noise sources are increased and enhanced. In large rooms the reverberaƟon Ɵme
is expected to be somewhat shorter at high frequencies, 1000 Hz to 4000 Hz, which is unavoidable due
to the air aƩenuaƟon. Therefore, the main challenges are expected to be in the mid frequencies, 500
Hz to 1000 Hz and the surface materials used should therefore be chosen with equally high absorpƟon
coeﬃcients in said frequencies (Jacobsen et al., 2011).
6.1.3.1
Noise exposure
The requirements set by the Danish Working Environment Authority, which should be upheld according
to the Danish Building RegulaƟons, states the noise exposure accepted in working environments (WEA,
18
==PAGE:33==
2017) (BR18, 2018). The maximum noise exposure for avoiding hearing damage is 85 dB(A), which is
found as the average noise exposure during an enƟre work day, which is achieved with either of the
values listed in Table 1.
Table 1: Noise limits and exposure during a working day (WEA, 2017)
Noise Level
Time
85 dB(A)
for
8 hours
88 dB(A)
for
4 hours
91 dB(A)
for
2 hours
94 dB(A)
for
1 hour
97 dB(A)
for
30 minutes
100 dB(A)
for
15 minutes
The values listed in Table 1 must also be upheld the insƟtuƟons for children, not only for the sake of
the working environment of the adults, but also for the children. The children should not be exposed to
higher noise exposure than the adults and both of them are dependent on these limits in order to avoid
strain of voice and hearing, along with ensuring general well-being (Hoﬀmeyer, 2008).
6.1.3.2
ReverberaƟon Ɵme
AbsorpƟon treatment is in many public places done to achieve proper intelligibility of speech and not
only for the purpose of noise reducƟon. A long reverberaƟon Ɵme deteriorates the intelligibility, which
is assumed to be of signiﬁcance in commercial and insƟtuƟonal use, to some extent. It is expected that
smaller groups of occupants are to be present at Ɵmes in the commercial use of semi-outdoor spaces
and thus conversaƟons should be able to take place without problems. In the insƟtuƟonal venues the
noise emiƩed is expected to be quite higher than in the other categories invesƟgated in this study. As
the sound levels are higher, the requirements to the reverberaƟon Ɵme are equally stringent; meaning
lower reverberaƟon Ɵmes (Jacobsen et al., 2011).
When a room has too much reverberance, speech loses intelligibility as the lingering speech sounds,
the vowels, are masking the more important details, the consonants. Some forms of music acƟvely seek
high reverberance, as it can add fullness and even blend all of the sounds of the instruments. However,
the semi-outdoor space is not an appropriate space for music, but some speech intelligibility is expected
to be required and thus the reverberaƟon Ɵme should never exceed 1,8 s (Gade, 2003).
A too low reverberaƟon Ɵme is neither desired, as the users will have a prerequisite to the acousƟcal
feel of the room and thereby some expectaƟons to the reverberance in such a large room with such a
large amount of glass. Therefore, it is also esƟmated that the reverberaƟon Ɵme should not be below
0,8 s (Jacobsen et al., 2011). However, the diﬀerent instances invesƟgated in the insƟtuƟonal, commer-
cial and residenƟal categories will not have the same target reverberaƟon Ɵme.
There are no requirements to the reverberaƟon Ɵme in semi-outdoor spaces, or even glass construc-
Ɵons, in either category, present in the Danish Building RegulaƟons, which refers to a minimum of Class
19
==PAGE:34==
C in the Danish Standard 490:2007 Sound ClassiﬁcaƟon of Dwellings, Vejledning om lydbestemmelser
i Bygningsreglement 2015 (akusƟsk indeklima) and the guidelines of the Danish Working Environment
Authority (BR18, 2018) (Rasmussen & Hoﬀmeyer, 2016) (DS490, 2007). Because of this, the require-
ments to the reverberaƟon Ɵme in other types of rooms, as similar as possible to that of a semi-outdoor
space, have been invesƟgated. This, combined with regulaƟons of other countries and previous studies
on similar spaces such as atria, has been invesƟgated in order to esƟmate an expected target value for
the reverberaƟon Ɵme in each of the categories invesƟgated. In all instances Class C has been chosen
as reference, in keeping of the current requirements.
In Vejledning om lydbestemmelser i Bygningsreglement 2015 (akusƟsk indeklima), which is a supplement
to the Danish Building RegulaƟons, the acousƟcal condiƟons for larger rooms; rooms with a volume
greater than 300 m3 and a ceiling height over more than four meters, are described as an absorpƟon
area dependent on the ﬂoor area of the diﬀerent rooms (Rasmussen & Hoﬀmeyer, 2016). This is stated
for both commercial and insƟtuƟonal spaces, but as it does not take into account the ﬂoor area to height
raƟo, is ineﬃcient when it comes to determining the target reverberaƟon Ɵme for semi-outdoor spaces
in general. For the spaces invesƟgated in this study which have a moderate height of 8 m, the require-
ments could be used as it would yield a reverberaƟon Ɵme of 1,2 s for the insƟtuƟonal and commercial
use (Rasmussen & Hoﬀmeyer, 2016). However, in general the requirement is ineﬃcient in such a versa-
Ɵle space as a semi-outdoor space. Large rooms for teamwork are listed with a target value of 0,4 s but
applies to rooms with a moderate ceiling height and therefore cannot be used (Rasmussen & Hoﬀmeyer,
2016). In addiƟon, the teamwork will take place in places with localized condiƟons, elaborated upon in
SecƟon 6.1.4, and thus the enƟre room should not accommodate this acƟvity.
The Norwegian Standard 8175:2012 AcousƟc condiƟons in buildings - Sound classiﬁcaƟon of various
types of buildings and the Icelandic Standard 45:2016 AcousƟc condiƟons in buildings - Sound classiﬁca-
Ɵon of various types of buildings are very similar and both present reverberaƟon Ɵmes for large rooms
in commercial and insƟtuƟonal categories, which depend on the height of the rooms (NS8175, 2012)
(IST45, 2016). Their values are mostly 0,2 Ɵmes the average height of the spaces, when upholding Class
C, which would yield a reverberaƟon Ɵme of 1,1 s to 1,4 s, assuming an average height of 5,5 m to 7
m, depending on the shape of the semi-outdoor space. However, as in the prior case, the ﬂoor area to
height raƟo is not included and therefore these are ineﬃcient without further invesƟgaƟons.
Another large room listed in Vejledning om lydbestemmelser i Bygningsreglement 2015 (akusƟsk indek-
lima), which can be used as reference for the commercial and insƟtuƟonal use, is the gym hall. The gym
hall has a target value of 1,6 s and 1,8 s for any volume smaller and larger than 3500 m3, respecƟvely.
The reverberaƟon Ɵmes are for a space without furnishing (Rasmussen & Hoﬀmeyer, 2016).
Previous studies show that adjusƟng the reverberaƟon Ɵme according to the volume of the given room
actually gives a more accurate representaƟon of the opƟmal reverberaƟon (Bradley, 2002) (Polomová et
al., 2014). However, the opƟmum relaƟonship between volume and reverberaƟon Ɵme has only been
invesƟgated in rooms designed for speech. According to these, the reverberaƟon Ɵmes for normal use
in the semi-outdoor spaces invesƟgated should be as follows. With a volume of 4000 m3 to 8000 m3,
equivalent to the commercial and insƟtuƟonal categories, an opƟmum reverberaƟon Ɵme is in the range
of 0,8 s to 0,9 s, which in the case of a semi-outdoor space could be adjusted to be in the range of 1 s
to 1,1 s. A volume of 1500 m3 to 3000 m3, equivalent to the residenƟal category, yields an opƟmum
20
==PAGE:35==
reverberaƟon Ɵme of 0,7 s, which in the case of a semi-outdoor space could be adjusted to be 0,9 s.
Another way to evaluate the reverberaƟon Ɵme is by using Cremers formula. By knowing the already
desired reverberaƟon Ɵme and volume of a space it can be used to ﬁnd the equivalent reverberaƟon
Ɵme for any given volume. The formula can be seen in EquaƟon 1.
T = T0
7
√
V
V0
(1)
Where
T
is the reverberaƟon Ɵme of the target room in
[s]
T0
is the reference reverberaƟon Ɵme in
[s]
V
is the volume of the target room in
[m3]
V0
is the reference volume in
[m3]
The large hall of a secondary school in Oldenburg, which is known for having a good reputaƟon on acous-
Ɵcal comfort, can be used as reference. The hall is approximately 8900 m3 and has a reverberaƟon Ɵme
of around 1,8 s (Rychtarikova et al., 2017). If the condiƟons from the hall was to be used, this would
yield a target reverberaƟon Ɵme of 1,6 s to 1,8 s for the commercial and insƟtuƟonal categories and a
reverberaƟon Ɵme of 1,4 s to 1,5 s for the residenƟal category.
All of the menƟoned reverberaƟon Ɵmes are for furbished spaces in the frequency range of 125 Hz to
4000 Hz, because of the somewhat versaƟle usage of the spaces. At the frequency band of 125 Hz, a
diﬀerence of plus/minus 20 % of the reverberaƟon Ɵme should be allowed. Furthermore, this frequency
range and addiƟonal decrease or increase in certain frequency bands, are also the ones used in Vejled-
ning om lydbestemmelser i Bygningsreglement 2015 (akusƟsk indeklima), for the other types of rooms,
as similar to that of a semi-outdoor space as possible (Rasmussen & Hoﬀmeyer, 2016).
It is assumed that the high values in each of the intervals for the target reverberaƟon Ɵmes presented,
will lead to the best condiƟons. This is based on the supposiƟon that acousƟcal adaptaƟon of the occu-
pants, which includes the fact that one has a certain expectaƟon to such large glass construcƟons, will
cause discomfort if the reverberaƟon Ɵme does not match.
In semi-outdoor spaces, the sound sources vary in level and in locaƟon constantly and thus the require-
ments to the acousƟcal properƟes are much more intangible. If the room has too much absorpƟon,
placed to achieve the desired reverberaƟon Ɵme and ensure that the background noise is kept at an
acceptable level for conversaƟons throughout the space, places close to these absorpƟon areas could
become unpleasant in terms of carrying out conversaƟons, as the spoken words would be absorbed too
much. This can also be prevented by having areas allocated diﬀerent purposes, such as silence zones,
zones for conversaƟon and so on. These areas would have so-called localized requirements, which are
dealt with later, and at the same Ɵme they will improve the overall acousƟcal condiƟons of the semi-
outdoor space. It is expected that materials with diﬀerent sound absorbing qualiƟes are to be used, to
obtain the desired absorpƟon in the enƟre frequency range invesƟgated.
21
==PAGE:36==
Another way to ensure that the absorbing and reﬂecƟng areas are more evenly distributed is by using
the ﬂoor as an absorbing area. The ﬂoor of the space will provide a large area available for absorpƟon,
which should be uƟlized in order to refrain from adding absorbing panels to the glass, as it will hinder
the view out and somehow go against the purpose and quality of the semi-outdoor space. However,
in some cases where more absorpƟon is needed, the glass panes could be exchanged with alternaƟve
materials, or the glass itself could be covered without hindering the transparency required. However,
to achieve the desired acousƟcal condiƟons in the insƟtuƟon, it is recommended that at least 10 % to
15 % of the total absorbing area is placed on verƟcal surfaces (Hoﬀmeyer, 2008). This will most likely
result in the need for absorbing parƟal parƟƟoning walls to be implemented.
The internal building itself is expected to be another large source of absorpƟon and most likely the en-
Ɵrety of the surfaces, except the windows, will need to be absorbing to some extent. So, the external
walls in the internal building and the roof are probably going to be covered in absorbing materials of
some sort.
Lastly interior such as furniture, vegetaƟon or even decoraƟons could be designed to funcƟon as absorp-
Ɵon as well. This will ensure a more even distribuƟon of absorpƟon in the room and that the absorpƟon
is close to the noise sources; the occupants.
In summaƟon the expected target values for each of the categories are listed in Table 2. The target
values for the insƟtuƟonal category is the lowest as the noise level here is expected to be higher. Next
comes the commercial where the noise level is also expected to be relaƟvely high, but not as high as in
the insƟtuƟonal and lastly, the residenƟal has the highest value, even though it has the smallest volume,
as the occupants are expected to be quite fewer in numbers and yield a lower noise level as well.
Table 2: IniƟal target reverberaƟon Ɵmes for all categories
Category
Target reverberaƟon Ɵme [s]
InsƟtuƟonal
0,8 - 1,4
Commercial
0,8 - 1,6
ResidenƟal
0,8 - 1,8
6.1.4
Localized condiƟons
Minor areas of the semi-outdoor space could be used for special purposes, which may be useful in the
commercial and industrial categories. In the commercial semi-outdoor space, smaller private areas for
relaxaƟon, work staƟons or places for non-oﬃcial meeƟngs with no speciﬁc requirements of total privacy
could be implemented. ParƟal parƟƟoning walls with high absorpƟon could be set up around such
spaces, either engulﬁng a couch, a cluster of smaller desk areas or even larger ones for the meeƟngs.
Such an example is illustrated in (a) in Figure 14.
22
==PAGE:37==
(a) Smaller absorbing booth
(b) Smaller reﬂecting screen
Figure 14: IllustraƟon of interior for localized acousƟcal condiƟons
It is also conceivable that in some areas smaller reﬂecƟve screens are combined with absorbing parƟal
parƟƟoning walls. Such a soluƟon can enable a speaker to perform without inﬂicƟng the enƟre semi-
outdoor space, while at the same Ɵme ensuring a high speech intelligibility. The reﬂecƟve screen will
ensure the correct direcƟon of the sound to the listeners and the absorbing screens will lower the local
reverberaƟon Ɵme and shield the area from the ambient noise. Such an example is illustrated in (b) in
Figure 14. In the insƟtuƟonal use the smaller areas can be used for the children to immerse themselves
in tasks and somewhat shield themselves from the condiƟons in the rest of the semi-outdoor space, as
this will not be designed to accommodate such acƟviƟes in general.
It is plausible that in residenƟal, insƟtuƟonal and commercial purpose, a scenario in which the room
is to be used for large gatherings such as birthday celebraƟons, Christmas parƟes or the like, could be
present. However, the semi-outdoor space should not be designed for these purposes as it requires a
diﬀerent approach and vastly diﬀerent acƟons to be taken. Therefore, it is assumed that in such events
the occupants will adapt the space interior themselves to improve condiƟons. This could be in the sense
of adding furnishing and temporary parƟƟoning walls or perhaps covering some of the large glass panes
or even adding vegetaƟon.
23
==PAGE:38==
24
==PAGE:39==
6.2
Methodology
Chosen parts of the recommendaƟons set up in the previous secƟon are tested using a simulaƟon tool
and calculaƟons in order to either validate them in general, or test if they can be achieved in the semi-
outdoor spaces invesƟgated.
The ﬁndings will then be thoroughly scruƟnized and evaluated upon and ﬁnally this will amount in a
series of ﬁnal guidelines presented in SecƟon 8.
The reﬂecƟon control invesƟgaƟons will determine the placement and shape of the internal building,
which will then be used for the simulaƟons carried out for the noise control invesƟgaƟons, as well as for
the lighƟng invesƟgaƟons carried out later, to some extent.
The simulaƟon tool ODEON has been used to validate, specify and further develop the acousƟcal rec-
ommendaƟons presented. The simulaƟons will illuminate the noise control aspect, while the reﬂecƟon
control will only brieﬂy be addressed and invesƟgated via simple calculaƟons.
6.2.1
ReﬂecƟon control
Most of the recommendaƟons for the reﬂecƟon control are directly transferred to the ﬁnal resulƟng
guidelines, presented later. This is done for recommendaƟons which must be adjusted to each speciﬁc
case and cannot be invesƟgated in general.
Focusing is primarily an issue when music is being played, while ﬂuƩer echo would primarily occur at
smaller distances between parallel surfaces, as no ampliﬁed sound is expected to be used. Nonetheless,
they should be invesƟgated for actual speciﬁc projects.
The occurrence of echo can easily be invesƟgated via simple calculaƟons. These invesƟgaƟons will be
carried out prior to the ODEON simulaƟons as the results should be incorporated into the simulaƟon
models.
The calculaƟon used for assessing the occurrence of echo was carried out according to the fact that
sound travels at a speed of 344 m/s, which resulted in a criƟcal distance. The criƟcal distance is when
the diﬀerence between the direct travelled distance and the ﬁrst reﬂected travelled distance of the
sound from source to receiver is the greatest, as illustrated in Figure 15. This was based on the worst-
case scenario which is when the source and receiver are standing close together and thus the distance
travelled by the direct sound is negligible. Echo can only occur from surfaces perpendicular to the noise
travelled from the source, seeing as this will result in echo for the receiver as they are standing close
together. This is because the echo only comes from the early reﬂecƟons and not from when the sound
has been reﬂected numerous Ɵmes upon diﬀerent surfaces before reaching the receiver.
25
==PAGE:40==
Section drawing
Plan drawing
S
R
SR
S
R
Figure 15: Placement of occupants for evaluaƟng the criƟcal distance in terms of experiencing echo
The criƟcal distance was evaluated based on the deﬁniƟon of echo occurrence presented earlier, which
states that the diﬀerence between the direct sound and the ﬁrst reﬂected, the delay Ɵme, should be
less than 50 ms in order to avoid echo. This correlaƟon can be seen in EquaƟon 2. The reﬂecƟon control
was invesƟgated for all three categories and thus both Model A and Model B were used.
Tdelay = d
c
(2)
Where
Tdelay
is the delay Ɵme in
[s]
d
is the diﬀerence in distance traveled between direct and early reﬂected sound in
[m]
c
is the speed of sound in
[ m
s ]
6.2.1.1
Models used for evaluaƟon of reﬂecƟon control
IniƟal models, without a set geometry of the internal building, were used to evaluate reﬂecƟon control.
A simple geometry of the semi-outdoor space was determined for each model, according to the details
described in SecƟon 4. The results found in regard to the reﬂecƟon control then determined the dimen-
sions of the models used for the noise control invesƟgaƟons. Therefore, these detailed models, used to
evaluate the noise control, will not be elaborated upon unƟl SecƟon 6.3.
The iniƟal models, with the simple geometry of the semi-outdoor space, can be seen in Figure 16 and
Figure 17. Both are also present in Appendix A.1.
26
==PAGE:41==
Figure 16: Plan and secƟons for the iniƟal Model A with dimensions
The total volume of Model A is 5500 m3, yielding an internal building of 1250 m3, assuming the one
storey building is 2,5 m of height.
27
==PAGE:42==
Figure 17: Plan and secƟons for the iniƟal Model B with dimensions
The total volume of Model B is 2160 m3, yielding an internal building of 450 m3, assuming the one storey
building is 2,5 m of height.
6.2.1.2
Preliminary invesƟgaƟon of reﬂecƟon control
In order to evaluate the iniƟal Model A and Model B in terms of the possibility of echo, EquaƟon 2 was
used to determine the criƟcal distance.
Tdelay = dcritical
c
⇔dcritical = Tdelay · c
= 50ms · 344 m
s
1000 ms
s
= 17, 2m
28
==PAGE:43==
So, the criƟcal distance is 17,2 m, which means that whenever the early reﬂected sound has to travel
more than that from source to receiver, echo could occur. This is based on the assumpƟon that the
receiver and source are close together, rendering the distance travelled by the direct sound void in the
evaluaƟons.
S
R
S
R
S
R
S
R
Critical distance
Model A - section drawing
Model B - section drawing
Model A - plan drawing
Model B - plan drawing
Figure 18: IllustraƟon of the criƟcal distance in terms of echo for all categories
In Figure 18 the criƟcal distance is illustrated on Model A and Model B as a circle with a radius of half
the criƟcal distance and centre in the posiƟon of the source and receiver. The radius of the circle illus-
trates the distance travelled from the source to the ﬁrst encountered surface and back to the receiver
and therefore it is set to be equal to half the criƟcal distance. All surfaces perpendicular to the sound
direcƟon, outside the circle, can cause echo. In both models the distance travelled by the early reﬂec-
Ɵons are greater than 17,2 m horizontally in the longitudinal as well as the transverse direcƟon, while
the distance is lesser when the distance is more verƟcal, meaning when reﬂected on the ceiling part
of the facade of the semi-outdoor space. These ﬁndings show that echo could occur because of the
reﬂecƟons of the walls of the facade of the semi-outdoor space, while echo could not occur because of
the reﬂecƟons of the ceiling of the facade of the semi-outdoor space in all categories. Both are valid for
Model A and Model B in all categories.
In other shapes such as domes, which as menƟoned are preferable due to the thermal condiƟons, the
condiƟons are somewhat diﬀerent. If the height and volume desired are assumed to be kept, the dome
will have a much larger radius compared to the height. With such a constellaƟon there will be no prob-
lems with echo as illustrated in Figure 19, which shows the criƟcal distance at diﬀerent posiƟons of the
source and receiver. As seen, all surfaces which could cause echo, the ones perpendicular to the sound
direcƟon, are inside the circle illustraƟng the criƟcal distance. An excepƟon would be if the walls of the
facade at the ground where to be made verƟcally, due to the placement of openings such as doors. In
such a case echo could occur horizontally between said elements.
29
==PAGE:44==
Model A - section drawing
Model B - section drawing
S
R
S
R
S
R
S
R
Critical distance
Figure 19: IllustraƟon of the criƟcal distance in terms of echo for all categories for alternaƟve shapes
6.2.1.3
Preliminary discussion of the reﬂecƟon control
The results found indicate that an opƟmal reﬂecƟon control calls for a number of speciﬁc acƟons to be
taken in terms of placement and shape of the internal building in both models and thus in all of the cat-
egories. This is only with respect to echo, as the other aspects such as ﬂuƩer echo and focusing should
be invesƟgated for speciﬁc cases and therefore only general guidelines will be presented for those later.
The results show that there is a possibility of echo both longitudinally and transversely in both models.
Therefore, the internal building should be placed so as to cover as much as possible of two perpen-
dicular facades of the semi-outdoor space as seen in (a) in Figure 20. Preferably the ﬂoor area of the
internal building should be a polygon with as many sides as possible and whilst covering a minimum of
the walls explained as seen in (b) in Figure 20. If indeed a rectangular shape is desired for the internal
building, addiƟonal screening should be used in order to block or divert the sound from travelling the
great distance between parallel verƟcal surfaces as seen in (c) in Figure 20.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 20: Placement and shape of the internal building in all categories in order to avoid echo
The alternaƟve shape of a dome has been invesƟgated as well and the results show that the problems
experienced are somewhat the same, as echo in such a space would come from verƟcal surfaces at the
ground level. The same soluƟons are applicable to a dome shape, as for the rectangular shape, and thus
they are to be found in the shape of the internal building. Based on these ﬁndings, the main models used
for the simulaƟons carried out for the noise control invesƟgaƟons, will have an internal building with the
shape of (a) in Figure 20. Detailed drawings for the models can be found in Appendix A.2. AddiƟonal
soluƟons will be discussed in SecƟon 8, but as these are not to be incorporated in the simulaƟons carried
out for the noise control, they will not be touched upon here.
30
==PAGE:45==
6.2.2
Noise control
The noise control was invesƟgated in terms of the noise exposure and reverberaƟon Ɵme, by using the
Basic version of the simulaƟon tool ODEON.
The models of the semi-outdoor spaces are ideal for simulaƟons in ODEON, as the tool is beƩer suited
for larger scaled rooms as opposed to smaller rooms like single oﬃces.
In order to validate the iniƟal recommended reverberaƟon Ɵme intervals and ﬁnd a speciﬁc target value,
the limits of noise exposure were used for the commercial and insƟtuƟonal categories. A speciﬁc num-
ber of speaking occupants were mimicking a crowd according to each category, to ﬁnd the appropriate
reverberaƟon Ɵme for each. The absorpƟon area and placement were then adjusted unƟl the require-
ments of noise exposure was upheld.
The residenƟal category was only invesƟgated in order to establish the eﬀects of noise control in terms
of reducing the reverberaƟon Ɵme in accordance with the iniƟal recommended interval. The noise expo-
sure was not invesƟgated as the noise level is expected to be quite low and thereby is deemed redundant
in terms of noise control.
6.2.2.1
Scenarios
Diﬀerent scenarios were invesƟgated for each of the three categories, to determine which placement
and amount of absorpƟon was the most eﬀecƟve, using default models as references. The default model
for each category has no added absorpƟon, but only standard properƟes for all materials.
A number of tests were performed to determine the eﬀect of diﬀerent individual scenarios. Not all sce-
narios were tested for each category however. The individual scenarios included adding absorpƟon to
the enƟre roof of the internal building, adding absorpƟon to the facades of the internal building towards
the occupied zones and not to the ones closely placed to the facade of the semi-outdoor space, expand-
ing the area of grass within the semi-outdoor space and lastly using absorbing booths. The iniƟal area
covered with grass in the default models was around 30 % of the footprint of the semi-outdoor space,
while the expansion ensured that the grass covered around 50 % of the footprint.
The outcome of this sequenƟal tesƟng was then used to present a ﬁnal scenario which determined the
reverberaƟon Ɵme that ensured an acceptable noise exposure or simply lay within the target reverber-
aƟon Ɵme intervals.
6.2.2.2
Models used for the evaluaƟon of noise control
The models used for the noise control were based on the preliminary discussion regarding the reﬂecƟon
control, in terms of the shape of the internal building. Detailed drawings of the models with dimensions
can be found in Appendix A.
All of the three-dimensional models of the diﬀerent semi-outdoor spaces invesƟgated, were made in
SketchUp and then implemented in ODEON for use in the simulaƟons.
31
==PAGE:46==
As an overall rule no geometries smaller than 30 cm were modelled, as this would require too long and
unnecessary simulaƟon duraƟons. As a result, many of the variaƟons in surfaces such as frames around
windows in the internal building or legs on tables were levelled out or omiƩed completely.
In all categories the internal building was placed one meter from the facade of the semi-outdoor space
in order to ensure that the enƟrety of the facades for both the internal building and semi-outdoor space
were accessible.
The facade of the semi-outdoor space is assumed to be made of load bearing galvanized and powder
coated steel trusses, covered with single pane glazing implemented in simple non-airƟght aluminium
frames, based on the construcƟons used by Drivadan A/S. The steel construcƟon was modelled three-
dimensionally, while the glazing and frames were levelled out and implemented as one planar surface
divided into diﬀerent parts. This was also done for the frames around the windows and doors of the
internal building, as they consƟtute such a small porƟon of the surface area. The levelled out surfaces
were incorporated into the simulaƟons tools with a weighted area for each part according to the actual
distribuƟon. This was done to save Ɵme and opƟmize the process of simulaƟng. The weighted areas are
elaborated upon later.
The ﬂoor of the semi-outdoor space is assumed to be primarily consisƟng of natural vegetaƟon such as
earth and grass, in all models. In addiƟon, Ɵles and minor ﬂower beds, referred to as vegetaƟon, are
assumed to be present, while installaƟons such as sandboxes and playhouses were only implemented in
the models for the insƟtuƟonal and residenƟal categories. The Ɵles and vegetaƟon areas were modelled
as surfaces while the interior objects were modelled three dimensionally.
A substanƟal number of windows at the top as well as at the boƩom of the semi-outdoor space are
expected to be open during longer periods, in order to ensure the required natural venƟlaƟon, espe-
cially in commercial and insƟtuƟonal use, due to the large number of users. However, the number of
open windows will vary according to season and thus the worst case scenario, which is when the lowest
number are open, were simulated. An open window will have an absorpƟon coeﬃcient of one and no
reﬂecƟon in terms of lighƟng and thus open windows are a posiƟve addiƟon in the semi-outdoor space
in all cases and should be included. The lowest number of open windows are expected to be during the
heaƟng season, where a band of two meters will be 40 % open along both of the roof surfaces near the
ridge. AddiƟonally, 5 % of the surface of each of the walls will have an opening degree of 40 %.
The windows of the internal building are slightly larger in the insƟtuƟonal model, with an addiƟonal
height of 0,4 m, which allows them to be placed lower without hindering the top view for the adults
while enabling the children to have a beƩer view of the semi-outdoor space. The residenƟal model on
the other hand, has smaller windows, as there are no requirements for daylight and thus the windows
are expected to be smaller in this category in general.
IllustraƟons of all three models used can be seen in Figure 21, Figure 22 and Figure 23. All of the prop-
erƟes related to geometry for the models can be found in Appendix C.1.
32
==PAGE:47==
Sandbox
Playhouse
Vegetation
Vegetation
Grass
Grass
Tables
Tiles
Openings
Openings
Figure 21: The model for the insƟtuƟonal category
Openings
Vegetation
Vegetation
Grass
Grass
Tables
Tables
Tiles
Openings
Figure 22: The model for the commercial category
Sandbox
Vegetation
Grass
Table
Tiles
Openings
Openings
Figure 23: The model for the residenƟal category
33
==PAGE:48==
6.2.2.3
Room properƟes of the models used to evaluate noise control
AssumpƟons were made to determine the materials used for each of the surfaces in the semi-outdoor
space, both in terms of the default models and the individual scenarios. All surfaces were assigned a spe-
ciﬁc type of material, with corresponding absorpƟon coeﬃcients. Generally, the materials chosen were
standard materials listed in the Annex of AuralizaƟon: fundamentals of acousƟcs, modelling, simulaƟon,
algorithms and acousƟc virtual reality (Vorländer, 2007), while in other cases the default materials in
the library of ODEON were used. The scaƩering of surfaces was speciﬁcally adjusted to compensate in
cases where the geometry had been altered signiﬁcantly for the sake of simplicity of the model. The
more simpliﬁed the geometry was, the higher scaƩering coeﬃcient. In all instances, the assumpƟons
have been made conservaƟvely to ensure that the results are more reliable.
6.2.2.4
Default models
Table 3 shows the properƟes for all surfaces related to the default models.
Table 3: Surface properƟes for the default models used for noise control
Surface
Material
ScaƩering
AbsorpƟon coeﬃcient
Frequency [Hz]
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
Semi-outdoor space, facade
Trusses
Steel
0,1
0,10
0,05
0,06
0,07
0,09
0,08
Covering
CombinaƟon
0,2
0,17
0,06
0,04
0,04
0,03
0,04
Glass panes 90 %
-
0,18
0,06
0,04
0,03
0,02
0,02
Aluminum frames 10 %
-
0,05
0,05
0,05
0,08
0,14
0,20
Covering (openings)
40 % absorpƟon
0,2
0,40
0,40
0,40
0,40
0,40
0,40
Semi-outdoor space, ﬂoor
Tiles
Stone
0,1
0,05
0,05
0,05
0,08
0,14
0,20
Ground
Grass
0,2
0,40
0,50
0,55
0,60
0,70
0,80
VegetaƟon
Plants
0,4
0,40
0,50
0,55
0,60
0,70
0,80
Semi-outdoor space, interior
Tables
Wood
0,1
0,14
0,10
0,06
0,08
0,10
0,10
Sandbox
Sand ﬁll
0,2
0,15
0,35
0,40
0,50
0,55
0,80
Wooden frame
0,14
0,10
0,06
0,08
0,10
0,10
Playhouse
Wood
0,5
0,14
0,10
0,06
0,08
0,10
0,10
Internal Building
Roof
ReﬂecƟng plates
0,1
0,05
0,05
0,05
0,08
0,14
0,20
Walls
Bricks
0,1
0,02
0,03
0,03
0,04
0,05
0,07
Windows and doors
CombinaƟon
0,2
0,11
0,08
0,05
0,04
0,04
0,04
Glass panes 80 %
-
0,10
0,07
0,05
0,03
0,02
0,02
Wooden frames 20 %
-
0,14
0,10
0,06
0,08
0,10
0,10
The glazing and frames of the facade of the semi-outdoor space were implemented as one planar sur-
face, with a weighted distribuƟon of 90 % and 10 %, respecƟvely, and assigned the surface as one com-
bined material. The same was done for the windows and doors of the internal building, with a distribu-
34
==PAGE:49==
Ɵon of 80 % glass and 20 % frames. For all these surfaces the scaƩering was raised to compensate for the
simpliﬁcaƟon of the geometry. The material used for the open windows were assigned an absorpƟon
of 40 % to best mimic the actual situaƟon.
The ground and vegetaƟon were also adjusted according to scaƩering, to beƩer represent their actual
non-planar surfaces. The roof of the internal building was made of standard high reﬂecƟng plates, while
the facade of the internal building was made of bricks. Windows and doors were outlined planar with
the surface of the walls and the panes assigned their own material as standard glass. The frames were
implemented with a weighted area of 80 %.
6.2.2.5
Individual scenarios
Table 4 shows the properƟes for all the surfaces used in the individual scenarios.
Table 4: Surface properƟes for the individual scenarios used for noise control
Surface
Material
ScaƩering
AbsorpƟon coeﬃcient
Frequency [Hz]
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
Semi-outdoor space, interior
Booths
Lightly upholstered panels
0,1
0,35
0,45
0,57
0,61
0,59
0,55
Internal Building
Roof
CombinaƟon
0,1
0,42
0,84
0,91
0,91
0,91
0,92
InsulaƟon 90 %
-
0,46
0,93
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
ReﬂecƟng surface 10 %
-
0,05
0,05
0,05
0,08
0,14
0,20
Walls
Perforated panels
0,1
0,30
0,69
1,00
0,81
0,60
0,62
In one scenario, the roof of the internal building is completely covered with an absorbing material, ex-
cept for 10 % of the area, which is leŌ for the possibility of uƟlizaƟon in terms of technical installaƟons
for venƟlaƟon or the like. The absorbing material used is a standard insulaƟon material of thickness 50
mm covered with fabric (Vorländer, 2007).
In another scenario, the facade of the internal building towards the occupied zones and not the ones
closely placed to the facade of the semi-outdoor space, is covered completely by absorpƟon, where
possible. The absorbing material of the walls will consist of the same standard insulaƟon material with
a thickness of 100 mm, but here it will be covered with perforated wooden panels (Vorländer, 2007).
This type of covering for the absorbing material is expected to be used to protect the surface, as it will
be accessible for the occupants and thus any possibility of damage should be prevented.
In the scenario involving the expansion of the grass area the same properƟes were used as for the de-
fault model, only the area was changed.
Lastly, in the scenario with the booths, these were made of standard upholstered panels, chosen based
on the fact that they should not be too lightweight, but able to withstand some wear and tear.
35
==PAGE:50==
6.2.2.6
Noise exposure
The noise exposure was evaluated only for the insƟtuƟonal and commercial categories.
The Ɵme of exposure was chosen to be four hours, equivalent to a noise level of maximum 88 dB(A).
This was chosen based on the assumpƟon that none of the occupants will be in the semi-outdoor space
for an enƟre work day. They might be present in the semi-outdoor space for some hours and then spend
the rest of their day both inside where the noise exposure is expected to be somewhat lower and out-
side, where the levels are completely diﬀerent and much lower.
The diﬀerent simulaƟons carried out for the noise control for the insƟtuƟonal and commercial cate-
gories, were for a kindergarten and oﬃce building, respecƟvely. These categories are the ones that
should abide the requirements to noise exposure and therefore are ideal for the simulaƟons, while one
type within each category was chosen to reduce the extent of the simulaƟons. Because of the chosen
simulaƟons for noise exposure, only the larger Model A was used, as it represents both the insƟtuƟonal
and commercial categories.
The kindergarten holds 100 children from the ages of zero to ﬁve and 26 kindergarten teachers, which
is appropriate according to the ﬂoor area of the internal building of 500 m2. This is based on a previ-
ous study examining such an insƟtuƟon, with a semi-outdoor space, upholding the requirements of the
Danish Building RegulaƟons, The Danish Working Environment Authority and the recommendaƟons by
the Danish Building Research InsƟtute (Sauerberg & Andersen, 2016).
The oﬃce building holds 50 people, which is a bit dense for a ﬂoor area of the internal building of 500
m2, but nonetheless appropriate as the internal building is one storey and the workstaƟons thereby can
take up a larger area, as space is not needed for a large core, elevators or the like, normally found in
large oﬃce buildings.
Sound sources and receivers for esƟmaƟon of the noise exposure
In order to evaluate noise exposure, point sources were placed throughout each model to mimic the
occupants. The values for the noise levels of the occupants were based on diﬀerent vocal eﬀorts for
females, males and children, derived from a previous study (Olsen, 1998). The original values from the
study are presented in sound pressure level for 1/3 octave bands. When incorporated in ODEON, the
values must be in sound power level in 1/1 octave bands and thus some modiﬁcaƟons were done. In
order to convert the values from 1/3 to 1/1 octave band EquaƟon 3 was used which averages the decibels
(Guyer, 2009).
Lavg = 10log
[
10
Lp1
10 + 10
Lp2
10 + ... + 10
Lpn
10
n
]
(3)
Where
Lavg
is the average sound pressure level in
[dB]
L
is the sound pressure levels in
[dB]
n
is the number of sound pressure levels in
[−]
36
==PAGE:51==
Then the sound pressure level was converted to sound power level, using EquaƟon 4 (Maekawa et al.,
2011).
Lp = LW + 10log
(
1
4πr2 + 4
R
)
(4)
Where
Lp
is the sound pressure level in
[dB]
LW
is the sound power level in
[dB]
r
is the distance from the source to the receiver in
[m]
R
is the room constant in
[−]
The equaƟon can be simpliﬁed as the measurements performed in the study were carried out in an
anechoic chamber at a distance of 1 m from the sources and thus free ﬁeld is assumed, meaning that
R →∞while r = 1m. Because of these condiƟons, the equaƟon can be simpliﬁed as seen below and
used as thus.
Lp = LW + 10log
(
1
4πr2 + 4
R
)
⇔LW = Lp −10log
(
1
4π
)
The noise levels of females, males and children at diﬀerent vocal eﬀorts converted to sound power lev-
els can be seen in Table 5. All the calculaƟons can be seen in Appendix B.
It is assumed that the most noisy acƟviƟes in the insƟtuƟons are concentrated outside. AcƟviƟes with a
high acƟvity level such as football, would most likely be played outside anyway and thus this assumpƟon
is based on a combinaƟon of common sense and the expectaƟon that the occupants will adapt to the
condiƟons of occupying a semi-outdoor space of glass and thereby avoid too noisy acƟviƟes in the space.
The sound levels used for the children were therefore set to be somewhere in between that which they
would have inside and outside. This equal speaking levels as listed in Table 6, where diﬀerent levels are
represented by a diﬀerent number of occupants, but only very few of them are with the level ShouƟng.
It is assumed that very few of the children will be shouƟng, especially at the same Ɵme and even when
it occurs, the teachers will stop it relaƟvely quickly. Therefore, as the simulaƟons can only mimic a con-
stant sound level, the number of shouƟng children is minimal.
When implemenƟng the results of the speech spectra into ODEON, the overall sound power level was
adjusted according to the mean speech level also presented in the menƟoned study (Olsen, 1998).
37
==PAGE:52==
Table 5: Speech spectra as sound power level in dB(A) according to octave bands depending on ﬁve
vocal eﬀorts by three groups of talkers
Vocal Eﬀort
Sound power level [dB(A)]
Mean speech level [dB(A)]
Frequency [Hz]
63
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
Females
Casual
21
44
55
56
48
45
41
44
56
Normal
21
45
57
60
55
50
49
46
69
Raised
21
43
62
66
64
60
55
51
76
Load
21
42
64
71
73
70
63
57
83
Shouted
21
38
63
76
83
82
76
67
93
Males
Casual
21
54
56
58
49
47
45
44
67
Normal
21
57
62
64
57
53
50
45
72
Raised
21
61
65
70
65
60
55
51
79
Load
21
64
71
79
77
72
66
58
88
Shouted
21
53
77
86
90
86
79
71
100
Children
Casual
21
35
55
58
51
48
44
44
67
Normal
21
38
59
62
57
52
50
48
72
Raised
21
39
62
67
66
62
58
54
78
Load
21
38
62
70
73
71
64
60
86
Shouted
21
53
61
76
82
81
76
67
93
The height of the sources varies for the two categories invesƟgated, as they were mimicking either chil-
dren or adults, both standing and seated. Figure 24 represents the heights used in the models.
The same was done for the receivers, which were placed alongside speciﬁc sources, to represent an
occupant. The number of receivers placed in each category was equal to roughly 20 % of the number of
sources and each receiver was placed to best illustrate and mimic the diversity in occupants and speech
spectra.
0,5 m
0,9 m
1,1 m
1,7 m
Adults
Children
Figure 24: Reference heights of children and adults, both standing and seated
38
==PAGE:53==
The number of sources and receivers along with their properƟes, for the noise exposure of both cate-
gories, can be seen in Table 6 and their distribuƟon in the models can be seen in Figure 25 and Figure
26. Detailed informaƟon about the sources and receivers can be found in Appendix C.2.
Receivers
Sources
Figure 25: Placement of sources and receivers for the noise exposure in the insƟtuƟonal model
Receivers
Sources
Figure 26: Placement of sources and receivers for the noise exposure in the commercial model
The simulaƟons were to mimic a criƟcal situaƟon, which is assumed to be when 100 % of the occupants
are present but seeing as far from everyone will be speaking at the same Ɵme, the number of occupants
speaking was set to 80 %. Hence, the number of speaking occupants translates to 80 children and 21
teachers in the insƟtuƟonal model, and 40 adults in the commercial model. The distribuƟon of adults
in both categories is assumed to be roughly 50/50 between males and females.
39
==PAGE:54==
Table 6: ProperƟes for sources and receivers in the noise exposure simulaƟons in ODEON
Type
Occupants
Number
Vocal eﬀort
Height [m]
InsƟtuƟonal
Source
Children
5
Casual
0,5
Source
Children
20
Normal
0,5
Source
Children
16
Normal
0,9
Source
Children
25
Raised
0.9
Source
Children
10
Loud
0,9
Source
Children
4
Shouted
0,9
Source
Female Teachers
3
Normal
1,1
Source
Male Teachers
2
Normal
1,1
Source
Female Teachers
6
Normal
1,7
Source
Male Teachers
6
Normal
1,7
Source
Female Teachers
2
Raised
1,7
Source
Male Teachers
2
Raised
1,7
Receiver
Children
5
-
0,5
Receiver
Children
11
-
0,9
Receiver
Teachers
1
-
1,1
Receiver
Teachers
3
-
1,7
Commercial
Source
Female Adults
3
Casual
1,1
Source
Male Adults
2
Casual
1,1
Source
Female Adults
13
Normal
1,1
Source
Male Adults
12
Normal
1,1
Source
Female Adults
5
Raised
1,7
Source
Male Adults
5
Raised
1,7
Receiver
Adults
6
-
1,1
Receiver
Adults
4
-
1,7
The direcƟvity paƩerns for the diﬀerent sources were set up as Tlknorm_NATURAL.SO8 for Casual and
Normal vocal eﬀort, and Tlkraise_NATURAL.SO8 for Raised, Loud and Shouted vocal eﬀort.
The Lombard eﬀect is normally used when invesƟgaƟng larger crowds of speaking occupants, as it takes
into account the increase in vocal eﬀort due to the ambient noise level (Rindel, 2010). However, this
is not expected to occur in the two categories as the occupants are primarily children in one instance,
which means that the conversaƟons are of a diﬀerent type of variety and duraƟon. Another reason is
the fact that they are relaƟvely scaƩered in both instances as opposed to all being close together while
everyone tries to carry out a conversaƟon.
40
==PAGE:55==
6.2.2.7
ReverberaƟon Ɵme
The reverberaƟon Ɵme was evaluated for all three categories; insƟtuƟonal, commercial and residenƟal.
Sound sources and receivers for esƟmaƟon of the reverberaƟon Ɵme
The sources and receivers for the reverberaƟon Ɵme simulaƟons were set up according to the Engineer-
ing category in Table 1 of DS/EN ISO 3382-2 AcousƟcs - Measurement of room acousƟc parameters - Part
2: ReverberaƟon Ɵme in ordinary rooms (DS/EN3382-2, 2008). AddiƟonally, the sources and receivers
were placed at least 1,2 m from any surfaces in the model and at the height of 1,2 m. For the commercial
and insƟtuƟonal categories four source-posiƟons were used, with six source-receiver combinaƟons. For
the residenƟal category three source-posiƟons were used, with four source-receiver combinaƟons.
The placement of sources and receivers for simulaƟons involving the reverberaƟon Ɵme, for all of the
categories can be seen in Figure 27, Figure 28 and Figure 29.
Receivers
Sources
Figure 27: Placement of sources and receivers for the reverberaƟon Ɵme in the insƟtuƟonal model
Receivers
Sources
Figure 28: Placement of sources and receivers for the reverberaƟon Ɵme in the commercial model
41
==PAGE:56==
Receivers
Sources
Figure 29: Placement of sources and receivers for the reverberaƟon Ɵme in the residenƟal model
The sources have all been assigned ISO3382-3-OMNI.SO8 in order to mimic pink noise, which should
be used when measuring the reverberaƟon Ɵme (DS/EN3382-2, 2008). Detailed informaƟon about the
sources and receivers can be found in Appendix C.2.
42
==PAGE:57==
6.3
Results
The results in this secƟon are regarding simulaƟons of noise control, carried out based on the method-
ology described earlier.
6.3.1
Noise control
The results are presented in secƟons according to their categories; insƟtuƟonal, commercial and resi-
denƟal. Each secƟon holds its respecƟve scenarios, which are all compared to a default model.
In the ﬁgures illustraƟng the results of each scenario in each category, the target reverberaƟon Ɵme
intervals presented earlier are illustrated to indicate if the results lie within. The intervals are market
with the allowance of 20 % deviaƟon in the frequency 125 Hz.
In all simulaƟons, the standard deviaƟon of the reverberaƟon Ɵme in each frequency never exceeded
0,05 s, which indicates that the distribuƟon of sources and receivers were placed opƟmally, and the
results are reliable as a representaƟon of the diﬀerent scenarios.
6.3.1.1
InsƟtuƟonal
Three diﬀerent individual scenarios were tested for the insƟtuƟonal category, in addiƟon to the default
and ﬁnal soluƟon.
Default scenario for the insƟtuƟonal category
The default model has all the default seƫngs in terms of materials and absorpƟon coeﬃcients. It is used
to evaluate the eﬀect of the diﬀerent scenarios.
Table 7: ReverberaƟon Ɵme and noise exposure for the default scenario of the insƟtuƟonal category
Scenario
ReverberaƟon Ɵme T20 [s]
Noise exposure
No.
DescripƟon
Frequency [Hz]
Sound level [dB(A)]
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
Avg.
Max.
Min.
Std. dev.
0
Default
Test value
1,4
1,8
1,8
1,6
1,3
1,0
92,2
103,3
82,2
6,9
In Table 7, the reverberaƟon Ɵme only exceeds the iniƟal target interval of 0,8 s to 1,4 s in the frequencies
250 Hz, 500 Hz and 1000 Hz. However, the noise level far exceeds the requirement of 88 dB(A).
Individual scenarios for the insƟtuƟonal category
In Scenario 1 absorpƟon was added to the facade of the internal building. Only the facades turning
towards the occupants were uƟlized, not the ones located where the building is placed closely against
the facade of the semi-outdoor space. The roof of the internal building was covered with absorpƟon in
Scenario 2 and in Scenario 3 a larger area of the ground in the semi-outdoor space was covered by grass,
but without interfering with the band of Ɵles going around the internal building. Figure 30 shows the
diﬀerent scenarios.
43
==PAGE:58==
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Figure 30: IllustraƟon of the individual scenarios for the insƟtuƟonal category
Table 8: ReverberaƟon Ɵme and noise exposure for the individual scenarios of the insƟtuƟonal category
Scenario
ReverberaƟon Ɵme T20 [s]
Noise exposure
No.
DescripƟon
Frequency [Hz]
Sound level [dB(A)]
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
Avg.
Max.
Min.
Std. dev.
1
AbsorpƟon on
facade
Test value
1,4
1,6
1,5
1,4
1,2
1,0
88,7
103,3
81,3
7,3
Diﬀerence
-0,1
-0,2
-0,3
-0,2
-0,1
-0,1
-3,5
0,0
-0,9
0,4
2
AbsorpƟon on
roof
Test value
1,2
1,2
1,1
1,1
1,0
0,8
88,9
103,3
81,6
7,1
Diﬀerence
-0,3
-0,6
-0,7
-0,5
-0,4
-0,2
-3,3
0,0
-0,6
0,2
3
Larger area with
grass
Test value
1,3
1,6
1,6
1,5
1,3
1,0
88,7
103,3
81,1
7,3
Diﬀerence
-0,1
-0,2
-0,2
-0,1
-0,1
0,0
-3,5
0,0
-1,1
0,4
In all three individual scenarios, the sound level is never reduced to below the requirements of 88 dB(A),
as seen in Table 8. Scenario 1 and Scenario 3, where the eﬀects of the facade and grass were invesƟgated
respecƟvely, had the highest reducƟon in noise level of 3,5 dB(A) compared to the default scenario. The
standard deviaƟon for all individual scenarios increased slightly indicaƟng that the distribuƟon became
more uneven, which also relates with the fact that the minimum sound levels were reduced, while the
maximum sound levels remained the same.
The reverberaƟon Ɵme for all three scenarios were also reduced, as seen in both Table 8 and in Figure
31. In Scenario 2, where the eﬀect of the roof was invesƟgated, the results even landed within the iniƟal
target interval. However, even though the reverberaƟon Ɵme of one scenario was within the target
interval, because the sound level in said scenario never met the requirements, combined scenarios were
invesƟgated as well.
44
==PAGE:59==
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
Reverbration time, T20 [s]
Frequency [Hz] 
Individual scenarios
Default
Absorption on
facade
Absorption on
roof
Larger area 
with grass
Target interval
Figure 31: The reverberaƟon Ɵme for the individual scenarios of the insƟtuƟonal category
Final soluƟon for the insƟtuƟonal category
This ﬁnal soluƟon is based on the sequenƟal tesƟng of the three prior scenarios. In this category, two
combined scenarios were pointed out and one chosen as the ﬁnal soluƟon.
Table 9: ReverberaƟon Ɵme and noise exposure for the combined scenarios of the insƟtuƟonal category
Scenario
ReverberaƟon Ɵme T20 [s]
Noise exposure
No.
DescripƟon
Frequency [Hz]
Sound level [dB(A)]
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
Avg.
Max.
Min.
Std. dev.
I
AbsorpƟon on
roof and larger
area with grass
Test value
1,1
1,1
1,1
1,0
1,0
0,7
86,9
103,3
80,5
7,2
Diﬀerence
-0,3
-0,7
-0,7
-0,6
-0,4
-0,2
-5,3
0,0
-1,7
0,3
II
AbsorpƟon on
facade and larger
area with grass
Test value
1,3
1,5
1,4
1,3
1,2
0,9
87,5
103,3
80,6
7,5
Diﬀerence
-0,1
-0,3
-0,4
-0,3
-0,2
-0,1
-4,7
0,0
-1,6
0,6
In both combined scenarios the sound level is below the requirement of 88 dB(A), as seen in Table 9,
with Scenario I, where the eﬀects of both the roof and grass were tested, having the largest reducƟon.
Scenario I also resulted in a reverberaƟon Ɵme within the target interval, whereas Scenario II was too
high at the frequency 250 Hz, as seen in Table 9 and Figure 32.
Within all scenarios tested, the problems with too high reverberaƟon Ɵme were found to be in the
mid frequencies, 500 Hz to 1000 Hz, as expected, but also in the frequency 250 Hz. Furthermore, as
expected, the reverberaƟon Ɵmes were somewhat shorter at the high frequencies, 1000 Hz - 4000 Hz
due to the air aƩenuaƟon.
45
==PAGE:60==
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
Reverbration time, T20 [s]
Frequency [Hz] 
Combined scenarios
Absorption on
roof and larger
area with grass
Absorption on
facade and larger
area with grass
Target interval
Figure 32: The reverberaƟon Ɵme for the combined scenarios of the insƟtuƟonal category
6.3.1.2
Commercial
Four diﬀerent individual scenarios were tested for the commercial category, in addiƟon to the default
and ﬁnal soluƟon.
Default scenario for the commercial category
The default model has all the default seƫngs in terms of materials and absorpƟon coeﬃcient. Even
though the localized booths are expected to be used to have localized condiƟons, they are not a part of
the default model. It is used to evaluate the eﬀect of the diﬀerent scenarios.
Table 10: ReverberaƟon Ɵme and noise exposure for the default scenario of the commercial category
Scenario
ReverberaƟon Ɵme T20 [s]
Noise exposure
No.
DescripƟon
Frequency [Hz]
Sound level [dB(A)]
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
Avg.
Max.
Min.
Std. dev.
0
Default
Test value
1,6
2,2
2,3
2,0
1,6
1,2
72,9
84,7
66,1
5,6
Table 10 shows that the reverberaƟon Ɵme only exceeds the iniƟal target interval of 0,8 s to 1,6 s in the
frequencies 250 Hz, 500 Hz and 1000 Hz. In this category the noise level of the default model never
exceeds the requirement of 88 dB(A).
Individual scenarios for the commercial category
The three individual scenarios for the commercial category were the same as for the insƟtuƟonal cate-
gory, but with a fourth addiƟon. In Scenario 4 the eﬀect of the booths was tested. Figure 33 shows the
diﬀerent scenarios.
46
==PAGE:61==
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Scenario 4
Figure 33: IllustraƟon of the individual scenarios for the commercial category
Table 11: ReverberaƟon Ɵme and noise exposure for the individual scenarios of the commercial category
Scenario
ReverberaƟon Ɵme T20 [s]
Noise exposure
No.
DescripƟon
Frequency [Hz]
Sound level [dB(A)]
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
Avg.
Max.
Min.
Std. dev.
1
AbsorpƟon on
facade
Test value
1,5
1,9
1,9
1,7
1,5
1,1
72,3
84,7
64,6
6,1
Diﬀerence
-0,1
-0,3
-0,4
-0,3
-0,2
-0,1
-0,6
0,0
-1,5
0,5
2
AbsorpƟon on
roof
Test value
1,3
1,4
1,4
1,3
1,2
1,0
72,3
84,7
64,6
6,1
Diﬀerence
-0,3
-0,8
-0,9
-0,7
-0,5
-0,3
-0,6
0,0
-1,5
0,5
3
Larger area
with grass
Test value
1,5
2,0
2,0
1,9
1,5
1,2
72,4
84,7
64,8
6,0
Diﬀerence
-0,1
-0,2
-0,2
-0,2
-0,1
-0,1
-0,5
0,0
-1,3
0,4
4
Absorbing
booths
Test value
1,5
2,0
2,1
1,9
1,5
1,2
72,4
84,7
62,4
6,1
Diﬀerence
-0,1
-0,2
-0,2
-0,2
-0,1
-0,1
-0,5
0,0
-3,7
0,5
In all four individual scenarios, the sound level was below the requirements of 88 dB(A), as seen in Ta-
ble 11 and almost the same with a diﬀerence between the highest and lowest average value of only
0,1 dB(A). Scenario 4, where the eﬀect of the booths was invesƟgated, had the highest reducƟon in the
minimum noise level of 3,7 dB(A) compared to the default scenario, even though the standard deviaƟon
for all individual scenarios increased slightly with around 0,5 dB(A). This indicates that the distribuƟon
became more uneven which is also due to the minimum sound levels being reduced, while the maximum
sound levels remained the same. However, it was expected that the standard deviaƟon for Scenario 4
was higher than the rest due to the larger reducƟon in minimum sound level.
The reverberaƟon Ɵmes for all four scenarios were reduced, as seen in both Table 11 and in Figure 34.
Scenario 3 and Scenario 4, where the eﬀects of the grass and booths were invesƟgated respecƟvely,
showed the same reverberaƟon Ɵmes in all frequencies, but neither were within the target interval.
Nor was the reverberaƟon Ɵme for Scenario 1, where the eﬀect of the facade was invesƟgated. Sce-
nario 2, where the eﬀect of the roof was invesƟgated, on the other hand proved to be within the target
interval.
47
==PAGE:62==
Because the results for Scenario 2, in terms of both noise exposure and reverberaƟon Ɵme, were so far
below the upper limits of the requirements, parameter variaƟons were made in the scenario by reduc-
ing the amount of absorpƟon area unƟl the ﬁnal soluƟon was found.
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
Reverbration time, T20 [s]
Frequency [Hz] 
Individual scenarios
Default
Absorption on
Facade
Absorption on
Roof
Larger area
with grass
Absorbing
booths
Target interval
Figure 34: The reverberaƟon Ɵme for the individual scenarios of the commercial category
Final soluƟon for the commercial category
This ﬁnal soluƟon is based on the sequenƟal tesƟng of the four prior scenarios, where the eﬀect of
the roof proved to be most successful, along with a thorough invesƟgaƟon of the parameter variaƟon
performed. Based on this, a soluƟon with a roof covered with 50 % absorpƟon was found to be ideal.
Table 12: ReverberaƟon Ɵme and noise exposure for the ﬁnal soluƟon of the commercial category
Scenario
ReverberaƟon Ɵme T20 [s]
Noise exposure
No.
DescripƟon
Frequency [Hz]
Sound level [dB(A)]
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
Avg.
Max.
Min.
Std. dev.
I
AbsorpƟon on
50% of roof
Test value
1,4
1,5
1,5
1,4
1,3
1,0
72,4
84,7
64,9
6,0
Diﬀerence
-0,2
-0,7
-0,8
-0,6
-0,4
-0,2
-0,5
0,0
-1,2
0,4
The ﬁnal soluƟon is shown in Table 12 and Figure 35 as Scenario I where the roof of the internal building is
covered with 50 % absorpƟon. The results for the reverberaƟon Ɵme lie within the iniƟal target interval
and the noise exposure is sƟll well below the requirements of 88 dB(A). By reducing the absorpƟon
area from 90 % to 50 %, the average sound level increased by only 0,1 dB(A), the maximum sound level
remained the same, the minimum sound level increased by 0,3 dB(A) and the standard deviaƟon was
actually reduced by 0,1 dB(A), indicaƟng a more even distribuƟon.
48
==PAGE:63==
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
Reverbration time, T20 [s]
Frequency [Hz] 
Final solution
Absorption on
50 % of roof
Target interval
Figure 35: The reverberaƟon Ɵme for the ﬁnal soluƟon of the commercial category
Just as in the case for the insƟtuƟonal category, all scenarios tested in the commercial category showed
problems with too high reverberaƟon Ɵme in the mid frequencies, 500 Hz to 1000 Hz, as expected, but
also in the frequency 250 Hz. Also, as expected, the reverberaƟon Ɵmes were somewhat shorter at the
high frequencies, 1000 Hz to 4000 Hz due to the air aƩenuaƟon.
6.3.1.3
ResidenƟal
Three diﬀerent individual scenarios were tested for the residenƟal category, in addiƟon to the default.
Within these individual scenarios, the ﬁnal soluƟon was also found.
Default scenario for the residenƟal category
The default model has all the default seƫngs in terms of materials and absorpƟon coeﬃcient. It was
used to evaluate the eﬀect of the diﬀerent scenarios.
Table 13: ReverberaƟon Ɵme for the default scenario of the residenƟal category
Scenario
ReverberaƟon Ɵme T20 [s]
No.
DescripƟon
Frequency [Hz]
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
0
Default
Test value
1,4
2,1
2,2
2,0
1,6
1,2
Table 13 shows that the reverberaƟon Ɵme only exceeded the target interval of 0,8 s to 1,8 s in the
frequencies 250 Hz, 500 Hz and 1000 Hz.
Individual scenarios for the residenƟal category
In Scenario 1 absorpƟon was added to the facade of the internal building. Only the facades turning
towards the occupants were uƟlized, not the ones located where the building is placed closely against
the facade of the semi-outdoor space. The roof of the internal building was covered with absorpƟon in
Scenario 2 and in Scenario 3 a larger area of the ground in the semi-outdoor space was covered by grass,
49
==PAGE:64==
but without interfering with the band of Ɵles going around the internal building. Figure 36 shows the
diﬀerent scenarios.
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Figure 36: IllustraƟon of the individual scenarios for the residenƟal category
The reverberaƟon Ɵmes for all three scenarios were reduced, as seen in both Table 14 and in Figure 37.
The scenario with the highest reducƟon and thus the most eﬀecƟve was Scenario 2, where the eﬀect
of the roof was invesƟgated. However, in this scenario the reverberaƟon Ɵme was below the target
interval at the frequency 4000 Hz. Both Scenario 1 and Scenario 3, where the eﬀects of the facade
and grass were invesƟgated respecƟvely, are within the iniƟal target interval. Because Scenario 3 is the
most inexpensive and easiest soluƟon to obtain, as it will only require at least 50 % of the footprint of
the semi-outdoor space to be covered with grass, this was chosen as the ﬁnal soluƟon.
Just as in the case for the insƟtuƟonal and commercial category, all scenarios tested in the residenƟal
category showed higher reverberaƟon Ɵmes in the mid frequencies, 500 Hz to 1000 Hz, as expected,
but also in the frequency 250 Hz. Also, as expected, the reverberaƟon Ɵmes were somewhat shorter at
the high frequencies, 1000 Hz to 4000 Hz due to the air aƩenuaƟon.
Table 14: ReverberaƟon Ɵme for the individual scenarios of the residenƟal category
Scenario
ReverberaƟon Ɵme T20 [s]
No.
DescripƟon
Frequency [Hz]
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
1
AbsorpƟon on
facade
Test value
1,1
1,3
1,2
1,2
1,1
0,8
Diﬀerence
-0,3
-0,8
-1,0
-0,8
-0,5
-0,3
2
AbsorpƟon on
roof
Test value
0,9
1,0
1,0
0,9
0,9
0,7
Diﬀerence
-0,4
-1,1
-1,3
-1,1
-0,7
-0,4
3
Larger area with
grass
Test value
1,3
1,8
1,8
1,7
1,4
1,1
Diﬀerence
-0,1
-0,3
-0,4
-0,3
-0,2
-0,1
50
==PAGE:65==
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
Reverbration time, T20 [s]
Frequency [Hz] 
Individual scenarios
Default
Absorption on
Facade
Absorption on
Roof
Larger area with
grass
Target interval
Figure 37: The reverberaƟon Ɵme for the individual scenarios of the residenƟal category
51
==PAGE:66==
52
==PAGE:67==
7
LighƟng
This secƟon holds the main lighƟng part of the report. As in the case for the acousƟcal part, this secƟon
includes iniƟal invesƟgaƟons of the standards and recommendaƟons which could be used when assess-
ing a semi-outdoor space. Furthermore, this secƟon holds a descripƟon of the methodology used for
the ﬁnal invesƟgaƟons and the results thereof.
7.1
IniƟal invesƟgaƟons and recommendaƟons
Presently there are requirements and general advice on lighƟng condiƟons for semi-outdoor spaces or
similar spaces. Some can be used directly while others need modiﬁcaƟons. This secƟon will invesƟgate
and disƟnguish between these aspects and list a number of recommendaƟons designed to ensure opƟ-
mum lighƟng condiƟons.
The standards which should be upheld according to the Danish Building RegulaƟons of 2018 are the
European Standard 12464-1:2011 Light and lighƟng - LighƟng of work places where part one is re-
garding indoor working environments and part two is for outdoor working environments (BR18, 2018)
(DS/EN12464-1, 2011) (DS/EN12464-2, 2014). These are valid for both the commercial and insƟtuƟonal
categories. Areas within the residenƟal category are not included, as was the case for the acousƟcal
condiƟons.
Some of the requirements can be used more or less directly in the semi-outdoor space, especially for the
localized condiƟons, whereas others must be adapted or completely omiƩed due to the lack of relevance
in a space surrounded by glass. These aspects will be dealt with in this secƟon. Other aspects, which
are not included in the standards, should be invesƟgated and recommendaƟons should be presented,
which will be done later in SecƟon 7.3.
7.1.1
Fundamentals
The basic goals when dealing with lighƟng in semi-outdoor spaces, is to ensure that the glare is kept at a
reasonable level, a minimum of illuminance and uniformity is upheld and that the luminance distribuƟon
during the darkest hours of the occupied period does not cause any discomfort.
Glare
Illuminance
Luminance
Figure 38: IllustraƟon of relevant aspects of the lighƟng condiƟons in a semi-outdoor space
Illuminance indicates the amount of luminous ﬂux from a light source falling on a given area, while
luminance describes the brightness of an illuminated or luminous surface and glare is deﬁned as the
sensaƟon produced by bright areas within the visual ﬁeld (Ganslandt & Hoﬀmann, 1992) (DS/EN12464-
1, 2011). All of these aspects are illustrated in Figure 38 and are primarily achieved by using adequate
shading along with the correct amount and placement of luminaires.
53
==PAGE:68==
In the areas where acƟviƟes other than general stay are expected to occur, such as smaller working
staƟons or places to carry out meeƟngs, localized condiƟons must be upheld, which will require special
and much more demanding measures. These requirements are already included in the standards and
can be used directly.
This study will primarily focus on the arƟﬁcial lighƟng of the semi-outdoor space but seeing as daylight
is such a prominent part of the semi-outdoor space, and because of the fact that they are both so inter-
twined, the daylight aspect will inevitably be invesƟgated upon to some extent as well.
7.1.2
Illuminance
Minimum requirements to the illuminance on task areas in commercial and insƟtuƟonal spaces similar
to those of a semi-outdoor space could be used to some extent. These requirements should be up-
held during the enƟre Ɵme of occupancy in both categories, but not for the residenƟal, where there are
no requirements. The laƩer is appropriate for the semi-outdoor space as well, as no actual minimum
requirements should be forced upon people in their homes, in terms of lighƟng. AddiƟonally, the day-
light is assumed to deliver more than the required illuminance throughout the majority of the occupied
hours, since sunlight and an overcast sky deliver illuminances of 100.000 lux and 10.000 lux, respecƟvely
(Ganslandt & Hoﬀmann, 1992). The arƟﬁcial lighƟng will therefore only be necessary during the darkest
hours and of course in specialized areas with localized condiƟons.
These minimum values at the task levels, which in all cases are assumed to be at ﬂoor level of the space
with a 0,5 m band deducted along the walls, are found in the European Standard 12464-1:2011 Light
and lighƟng - LighƟng of work places - Part 1: Indoor work places and the European Standard 12464-
2:2011 Light and lighƟng - LighƟng of work places - Part 2: Outdoor work places, which should be upheld
according to the Danish Building RegulaƟons (DS/EN12464-1, 2011) (DS/EN12464-2, 2014) (BR18, 2018).
For indoor work places, the requirements for public areas of assembly are 100 lux for circulaƟon ar-
eas and corridors, 200 lux for lounges and entrance halls, and 300 lux for playrooms and nurseries
(DS/EN12464-1, 2011). For outdoor work places, the requirements for general areas with light traf-
ﬁc and passages are 50 lux (DS/EN12464-2, 2014).
The acƟviƟes in the semi-outdoor space during the darker hours, where arƟﬁcial lighƟng is needed, is
expected to be somewhat diﬀerent than those occurring indoors in both insƟtuƟonal and commercial
use. Thus, the values found for the outdoor work places are beƩer suited for a semi-outdoor space. A
requirement of 50 lux is appropriate for a semi-outdoor space in both categories, as the room will have
localized areas for working tasks and therefore higher illuminance will not be needed throughout the
enƟre space. In terms of insƟtuƟons like kindergartens and nurseries, it must be expected that tasks
requiring higher illuminance will occur inside the internal building during the darker hours of the day
and therefore the level of 50 lux is appropriate in this constellaƟon as well.
Furthermore, a much higher illuminance than 50 lux in the semi-outdoor space, with its large glass area
will complicate the task of maintaining a suitable luminance distribuƟon and in avoiding glare, during
the darker hours. These factors will be elaborated upon in the following secƟons.
The requirements to the illuminance uniformity within the task area, for the very same areas listed
for the illuminance levels, are 0,40 in both DS/EN 12464-1 and DS/EN 12464-2 (DS/EN12464-1, 2011)
54
==PAGE:69==
(DS/EN12464-2, 2014). Again, the task area is assumed to be the enƟrety of the ﬂoor with a 0,5 m band
deducted along the walls.
For the indoor work places there are also requirements between the task area and immediate surround-
ings, which is the band described, and the task area and background area, which is deﬁned as being at
least 3 m wide adjacent to the immediate surrounding area (DS/EN12464-1, 2011). The requirements
are, in the case of an illuminance of 50 lux on the task area, 50 lux and 17 lux respecƟvely, as seen in
Figure 39 (DS/EN12464-1, 2011). For the outdoor work places the requirements are only for the sur-
rounding areas in general, which is deﬁned as a band with a width of at least 2 m around the task area
within the visual ﬁeld (DS/EN12464-2, 2014). The requirements for the surrounding areas are, also in
the case of an illuminance of 50 lux on the task area, 20 lux (DS/EN12464-2, 2014).
Based on these already deﬁned requirements, the minimum maintained illuminance in both categories
on the task area and immediate surroundings are already the same and thus should be treated as one,
while the background should have a minimum illuminance of 20 lux, as seen in Figure 39.
0,5 m
Min. 2 m
Task area
Band
Background
20 lux
50 lux
20 lux
0,5 m
Min. 3 m
Task area
Immediate surroundings
Background
50 lux
50 lux
17 lux
Indoor work places
Outdoor work places
Figure 39: Minimum requirements of immediate surrounding and background area in relaƟon to task
area
In a semi-outdoor space, the background area could be construed as the area just outside the glass con-
strucƟon of the semi-outdoor space, based on the transparency of the construcƟon, as seen in Figure
40. In this case the width of the background area should however be increased to 5 m, due to the size of
the invesƟgated spaces and enormity of the glass areas, and the requirements of the uniformity could
then be decreased equivalently to 0,25.
55
==PAGE:70==
Task area
Background
Band
Min. 5 m
0,5 m
20 lux
50 lux
20 lux
Semi-outdoor space
Figure 40: Minimum requirements and placement of background area in relaƟon to task area in a semi-
outdoor space
Guidelines for outside premises indicate that the minimum hemispherical illuminance uniformity of the
background area is 0,15 for pedestrian streets, footways, cycleways and schoolyards which could be
used for the semi-outdoor space and the surroundings outside the construcƟon (ÅF - Hansen & Hen-
neberg, 2009). However, as the semi-outdoor space does not serve as a transportaƟon route solely, but
as a place for stay, a higher value of 0,40 should be used within the semi-outdoor space. The minimum
hemispherical illuminance uniformity of the background area of 0,15 should however sƟll be used out-
side the semi-outdoor space, if this area serves as a transportaƟon route.
All recommendaƟons set for the background area outside the semi-outdoor space are only valid if in-
deed this area does not serve any other purpose, which calls for stricter and already set requirements.
7.1.3
Luminance distribuƟon
The visual comfort of occupants is aﬀected by the luminance distribuƟon of the space and therefore it
is important that the variability in luminance diversity is miƟgated and the distribuƟon is even without
too high irregularity in working environments. Too high luminance contrasts can cause faƟgue because
the eye needs to constantly re-adapt (DS/EN12464-1, 2011). This is also the case for a semi-outdoor
space, to some extent, but it should not be designed as strictly as in the case of actual working environ-
ments and in insƟtuƟons, except for the specialized areas. In DS/EN 12464-1 there are recommended
reﬂectances of walls and ceilings, which cannot be achieved for glass and thereby the semi-outdoor
space, as it changes with the daylight condiƟons (DS/EN12464-1, 2011). However, the eﬀect of diﬀer-
ent reﬂectances and luminance distribuƟon will be invesƟgated in SecƟon 7.3. All requirements set for
work places in terms of luminance distribuƟon and reﬂectances should be upheld at the localized con-
diƟons.
56
==PAGE:71==
7.1.4
Glare
Glare is deﬁned as the sensaƟon produced by bright areas, such as windows and parts of luminaires,
within the visual ﬁeld (DS/EN12464-1, 2011). Two aspects to glare are present. The ﬁrst is the objecƟve
depreciaƟon of visual performance, where visibility is reduced by the light of a glare source. The second
is the subjecƟve disturbance caused by stark contrast in, or excessive, luminance levels within the ﬁeld
of vision (Ganslandt & Hoﬀmann, 1992).
Currently there is no standardized method for raƟng the discomfort glare from windows, as it is diﬃcult
to evaluate (DS/EN12464-1, 2011). However, the Daylight Glare Index (DGI), could be used, especially if
the semi-outdoor space in quesƟon were intended for anything other than general stay, as invesƟgated
in this study. Here, it is assumed that the occupants will simply adapt to the condiƟons caused by the
daylight in the semi-outdoor space, much as if they were outside.
The discomfort glare caused directly by the luminaires is rated using the Uniﬁed Glare RaƟng (UGR)
tabular method (DS/EN12464-1, 2011). The appropriate UGR value of a semi-outdoor space can be de-
termined by uƟlizing the exisƟng values of the same similar spaces used for determining the illuminance
and uniformiƟes found in SecƟon 7.1.2. According to DS/EN 12464-1 the UGR value should be between
22 and 25, and as the semi-outdoor space is sƟll somewhat diﬀerent from these spaces a value of 25 to
28 seems appropriate (DS/EN12464-1, 2011). For the specialized areas, local condiƟons must be upheld
according to the already present requirements of glare at work staƟons, without any adjustments.
7.1.5
Daylight
The extensive daylight in the semi-outdoor space is expected to generate a need for shading in order to
prevent overheaƟng, especially in commercial and insƟtuƟonal use. It is important that any type of shad-
ing does not reduce the daylight factor inside the building too much. Such a shading will most likely be
placed at the top of the glass construcƟon to allow more sunlight to penetrate the semi-outdoor space
during winter where the sun is low and limit the penetraƟon during summer were the sun is high up on
the sky. This invesƟgaƟon is not part of the scope of this study, but it is included as such shading could
be useful in terms of minimizing the contrasts in the luminance distribuƟon during the darker hours. If
the shading is of a lighter colour and is drawn at night, it would ensure a large surface with relaƟvely
high reﬂectances compared to the dark windows. Thereby, it can be seen as a possible beneﬁcial solu-
Ɵon for the lighƟng condiƟons at the darker hours of the occupancy with sparse or none daylight, as well.
In any case, retractable shades are probably preferred, especially since the shading would hinder the
view out and thereby one of the key purposes of having a semi-outdoor space. Another soluƟon could
be some sort of coaƟng, which could also reduce the reﬂecƟons experienced from both within and from
outside the semi-outdoor space. Either way, all of the soluƟons should be as transparent as possible,
without defeaƟng their purpose.
In some types of semi-outdoor spaces, achieving the required daylight factor within the internal building
could present a problem. In such cases high, but not specular, reﬂectances of the surfaces in the semi-
outdoor space would maximize the daylight transmiƩed into the building (Johnsen & Christoﬀersen,
2007). This would most likely be needed in dense areas where the sunlight is blocked from penetraƟng
the semi-outdoor space from adjacent buildings or the like, and primarily comes from above.
57
==PAGE:72==
More sunlight is transmiƩed through a window if the penetraƟng angle of the sun is closer to being
perpendicular to the window plane (Johnsen & Christoﬀersen, 2007). This means that a larger heat
gain could be obtained by angling the glass facade of the semi-outdoor space accordingly, which may be
desired in terms of reducing the energy consumpƟon. This will be further invesƟgated in SecƟon 7.3.
7.1.6
Localized condiƟons
Local condiƟons upholding the requirements of the standards and the building regulaƟons could be
created by adding local shading, which will help minimize the glare from the windows. Glare can be
accepted in general in the semi-outdoor space, but in a working zone, similar values would be way too
high, causing discomfort. In such a case arƟﬁcial lighƟng, in the form of a desk lamp or perhaps even
ambient light from luminaires placed above the zone could be necessary in order to achieve the desired
condiƟons. An illustraƟon of such a system can be seen in Figure 41.
Figure 41: IllustraƟon of smaller booths or covered areas for localized lighƟng condiƟons
The requirements for the localized condiƟons will not be displayed here, as they are already present in
the standards and no modiﬁcaƟons should be done.
58
==PAGE:73==
7.2
Methodology
The lighƟng condiƟons of a semi-outdoor space require a quite diﬀerent approach than the one used
for the acousƟcs. The requirements set up in the previous secƟon should sƟll be upheld and some sort
of validaƟon should be sought, but this will not be done in this study. However, when designing a semi-
outdoor space, a variety of other aspects than those found in the standards must be considered and
these will be presented in this study.
These aspects will be presented in the following secƟon and will serve as the results parts of the lighƟng
secƟon. The aspects have been established, scruƟnized and listed using the exisƟng literature within
this ﬁeld, the acquired knowledge of the author and several interviews carried out with consultants of
the companies Henning Larsen, Zarp Danmark and ÅF LighƟng. These interviews were used to discuss
and evaluate the diﬀerent lighƟng aspects relevant for a semi-outdoor space.
Many soluƟons which should be considered in a semi-outdoor space are not described in standards, but
nonetheless they should be incorporated when designing such a space. The consultants in the business
have acquired certain guidelines through years of experience, which should be taken advantage of, and
that is exactly what this study did.
59
==PAGE:74==
60
==PAGE:75==
7.3
Results
The results in this secƟon are based on the methodology described earlier. First the three basic types of
lighƟng relevant in a semi-outdoor space are described brieﬂy and then diﬀerent areas of importance
are invesƟgated based on the use of the diﬀerent types of lighƟng.
7.3.1
Basic types of lighƟng
There are three basic types of lighƟng, which should be considered when designing a semi-outdoor
space; ambient, task and accent lighƟng
7.3.1.1
Ambient lighƟng
Ambient lighƟng, also called general lighƟng, provides the overall illuminaƟon needed for a space or
area, as illustrated in Figure 42. In the semi-outdoor space this type of lighƟng should provide a suf-
ﬁcient amount of illuminance so that it is safe to walk about the space. The ambient lighƟng should
uphold the minimum illuminaƟon levels presented in SecƟon 7.1 but the illuminance could deviate in
special areas where other condiƟons are preferred. This should be designed according to safety and thus
the minimum requirements should at all Ɵme be upheld near pathways and the like. Furthermore, the
ambient lighƟng should be controlled according to the daylight, as is the case for the lighƟng of indoor
working environments according to the Danish Building RegulaƟons (BR18, 2018).
Instead of only relying on the ambient lighƟng to be suﬃcient, local lighƟng could also be used for
pathways in the semi-outdoor space if the ambient lighƟng is preferred to be lesser in some areas due
to the visual appearance of the space. When ensuring the required illuminance levels on the task areas
for the commercial and insƟtuƟonal categories, which is assumed to be located at ﬂoor level in each,
the ambient lighƟng will serve as the primary source. However, for the actual specialized areas, where
the task area is at table height, task lighƟng will be required.
Figure 42: IllustraƟon of ambient lighƟng
The ambient lighƟng of the semi-outdoor space should follow the uniformity recommended in SecƟon
7.1 and should decrease in illuminance level from the internal building and outwards unƟl the outskirts
of the background area is reached.
7.3.1.2
Task lighƟng
Task lighƟng is provided directly at the task areas such as work staƟons in the semi-outdoor space and
are very much localized, as illustrated in Figure 43. This is in order to minimize the energy consumpƟon
as it require much higher illuminance values. Because the specialized areas are shaded from the sun,
61
==PAGE:76==
task lighƟng is assumed to needed, perhaps even during the dayƟme and not only during the darker
hours. However, if such areas are to be present the lighƟng should be controlled according to daylight
and moƟon sensors in order to save energy, but with the possibility of overruling by the occupants.
Figure 43: IllustraƟon of task lighƟng
7.3.1.3
Accent lighƟng
Visual interest in certain areas, surfaces or objects can be achieved by uƟlizing accent lighƟng, as illus-
trated in Figure 44. Accent lighƟng can be used in the semi-outdoor space to draw aƩenƟon to certain
areas both within the space, but also from the outside. In order to be eﬀecƟve, it requires at least three
Ɵmes as high illuminaƟon levels on the focal point, compared to the that of the ambient lighƟng on the
immediate surroundings (American LighƟng AssociaƟon, 2017).
Figure 44: IllustraƟon of accent lighƟng
7.3.2
LocaƟon and context
The locaƟonof the semi-outdoorspace also needs tobe consideredwhen designing the lighƟng. Whether
it is placed in an urban area, or in a more secluded one, could play a role in terms of deciding the level
of transparency desired of the semi-outdoor space. The locaƟon could determine if the surroundings
should be included and visual from inside the semi-outdoor space or if they should be shielding and not
visible to achieve privacy. If the semi-outdoor space is located in a city with a lot of traﬃc in the imme-
diate surrounding, these will already be quite well lit, which means that the semi-outdoor space should
be equally and even more lit in order to make it more visible. On the other hand, if privacy is required in
the darker hours, then the lighƟng inside the semi-outdoor space in such a locaƟon should be held at a
minimum. The same would be the case if the semi-outdoor space was located outside the city without
any immediate lighƟng on the surroundings, but in such a case the lighƟng required to draw aƩenƟon
would not have to be as prominent. However, in such cases the shielding of the semi-outdoor space
could not be achieved simply by having lower illuminaƟon. Instead other measures must be taken, to
achieve the desired privacy which will be dealt with in SecƟon 7.3.3.
62
==PAGE:77==
7.3.3
Visual appearance
The visual appearance of the semi-outdoor space has an impact on both the occupants, the surroundings
and on how the space is perceived from the outside.
7.3.3.1
Directed and diﬀuse lighƟng
A semi-outdoor space oﬀers the possibility for the occupants to escape the uniform condiƟons of the
oﬃces and insƟtuƟons. OŌen in such places the requirement for the illuminance and glare result in
diﬀuse lighƟng. These are of importance in working environments, and some directed light is indeed
achieved in the oﬃces from the minimum requirements set for the daylight factor. Even sƟll, diﬀuse
lighƟng will be dominant inside and disrupƟons of such condiƟons will be desirable and sƟmulaƟng for
the occupants.
Directed light highlights the three-dimensional form of spaƟal objects through shadowing and diﬀerent
shades in the light. The structure of the surfaces, such as texture and sheen, is emphasized by shadow-
ing and reﬂecƟons of the directed light. A completely diﬀused light lacks the directed part of the light,
making it diﬃcult to disƟnguish shape and structure, resulƟng in a room which will oŌen be perceived
as uninteresƟng, unsƟmulaƟng and even boring (Johnsen & Christoﬀersen, 2007).
The semi-outdoor space will provide an abundance of directed light from the sun and therefore will sƟm-
ulate and make a nice change during a day. The daylight presents a completely diﬀerent set of condiƟons
than arƟﬁcial lighƟng, via its variaƟon in intensity, colour temperature and ever-changing direcƟon. The
laƩer is of course both due to the natural movement of the sun throughout the day and of course the
seasons, but also in much shorter intervals due to the weather; clouds moving across the sky. These
condiƟons are the eﬀect of sunlight, whereas an overcast sky will cause diﬀuse lighƟng.
Up to 80 % of all sensory impressions are conveyed through the visual faculty. Therefore, light is the
most important communicator of informaƟon in relaƟon to human sensory faculty (Johnsen et al., 2011).
Light is very important in terms of general well-being and for the learning process involving the abiliƟes
of concentraƟon and percepƟon (Johnsen et al., 2011).
These abiliƟes are especially important to nourish in the insƟtuƟons, as the most important develop-
ment of the visual sense of children takes place during the insƟtuƟonal age. Therefore, the quality of
light is of major importance for the general development of children (Johnsen et al., 2011).
Children need a varying light environment, as in the semi-outdoor space, containing both high and low
illuminance levels and luminances in order to develop their ability to perceive known objects in the same
way, regardless of how these objects are presented, so they learn that an object is the same, although
it looks diﬀerent depending on the lighƟng condiƟons (Johnsen et al., 2011).
7.3.3.2
View of surroundings
The view of the surroundings is a main aƩribute of the semi-outdoor space. OŌen the space is expected
to be created to connect more closely to the surroundings, whether they consist of nature or a busier
area within a city.
63
==PAGE:78==
However, a lack of visual contact with the space right outside could occur if the correct measures are not
taken. Seeing as the semi-outdoor spaces invesƟgated in this study is completely covering one storey
buildings, it can be assumed that the surroundings of the glass construcƟon can in fact be occupied via
a garden, streets, parks or the like. Therefore, the dark surfaces created during the darker hours of oc-
cupancy where the semi-outdoor space is illuminated, will create a barrier towards the outside and a
lack of privacy can arise as the occupants within are not able to look outside, but can be sƟll be watched
from the outside.
A series of soluƟons to these problems can be found, such as covering the glass by curtains or even veg-
etaƟon but as the aim of this study is too maintain the glass construcƟon as intended and not interrupt
the transparency of it, such soluƟons do not seem appropriate. Other more suitable soluƟons, such as
avoiding reﬂecƟons and ensure illuminaƟon of the outside are presented in the following secƟons.
The problem with lack of privacy is probably more of an issue in residenƟal sense when on ground level,
than commercially and insƟtuƟonally as there are oŌen more people together in the two laƩer and
therefore the need for privacy is not as important.
7.3.3.3
Visibility
The illuminaƟon of the semi-outdoor space or certain aspects or objects within can be used to draw
aƩenƟon from the surroundings. In the commercial and insƟtuƟonal categories, the correct type of
lighƟng can even be used as adverƟsing and as means to draw people in and evoke their interest. This
can be done when it is occupied during the darker hours, but also outside the occupied hours.
The construcƟon of the semi-outdoor space has the possibility of being used as an architectural aspect
and in such cases, it should be deﬁned and shown oﬀby the correct lighƟng. The space itself can remain
illuminated by ambient lighƟng as used when the space is occupied, but the use of accent lighƟng can
also highlight certain interesƟng aspects within the space, while shedding other in darkness, if so de-
sired. The accent lighƟng can also be used to highlight the staƟc construcƟon of the semi-outdoor space
instead of the actual space within and thus show the architectural aspect in a diﬀerent and perhaps even
more interesƟng way. This could also be used to awaken the interest of the surroundings, but without
revealing the inside space and thereby stage it as somewhat of a mystery and arouse interest.
It is important that the lighƟng within the semi-outdoor space highlights the construcƟon in a ﬂaƩering
way without blinding the occupants of the surroundings, which can have much lower illuminance levels.
Therefore, the design of both the internal and external lighƟng should be designed and dimensioned
with this is mind, if indeed there is a desire to enhance and underline the visibility of the space from the
outside.
OŌen when located in a more secluded area the surroundings will be sparsely illuminated and low illu-
minance levels are required to draw aƩenƟon to the space. Also, any direct light from the semi-outdoor
space can cause discomfort due to glare and too high illuminance levels will cause a very uneven lumi-
nance distribuƟon in such cases. Therefore, the lighƟng should be adjusted accordingly.
In urban areas, on the other hand, the surroundings are most likely illuminated and therefore even
higher illuminance levels should be achieved to draw aƩenƟon to the space.
64
==PAGE:79==
7.3.3.4
Shape of the semi-outdoor space
The shape of the facade of the semi-outdoor space has a large eﬀect on the diﬀerent reﬂecƟons per-
ceived by the occupants. ReﬂecƟons can be very uncomfortable and even cause glare if the luminaires
are reﬂected directly towards the occupants at eye level.
The large glass panes of the facade could be angled slightly, as seen in Figure 45, so that the reﬂecƟons
from the luminaires are not as prominent from where the occupants are. Of course, this would require
a strategical ƟlƟng of the panes according to the shape and use of the space, but just as in the case of
reﬂecƟon control for acousƟcal purposes, this could be achieved if necessary. This would also require
speciﬁc placement of the luminaires, to ensure minimal reﬂecƟons in the Ɵlted panes.
(a) Angling towards occupants
(b) Vertical angling
(c) Angling away from occupants
Figure 45: IllustraƟon of angled glass panes in order to minimize reﬂecƟons
The type of angling illustrated in (a) in Figure 45, where the top of the glass is closest to the occupants is
the most desired. First, it ensures that the reﬂecƟons of most luminaires hanging higher than eye level
is reﬂected at such a high angle that the risk of glare and unwanted reﬂecƟons are minimized. This is
because reﬂecƟons coming from such high locaƟons will not be perceived due to the natural shading
and protecƟon caused by the oﬀset placement of the eyes in the head. Second, it has a posiƟve eﬀect
on the thermal gain in the semi-outdoor space as more sunlight is transmiƩed through the window if
the suns penetraƟng angle is closer to perpendicular, as explained. However, this type of angling could
cause collisions by occupants inside the semi-outdoor space as they would reach the glass with their
head before they would reach it with their feet and thus proving to be less safe to some extent.
The type of angling in (b) and (c) in Figure 45, where the glass is verƟcal and where the top of the glass
is furthest away from the occupants have a higher risk of delivering reﬂecƟons at a lower angle and thus
possibly causing glare and unwanted reﬂecƟons. The safety at these two possibiliƟes is however higher
as the risk of collision is smaller than in (a).
Naturally, the glass panes could not have an angle which ﬁts the course of the sun at all Ɵmes, unless
they are mechanically controlled, but they could be angled in order to best uƟlize the sunlight when
most needed. Thus, the angling could be adjusted according to the lower posiƟon of the sun during the
heaƟng season, as seen in (a) in Figure 46, when the thermal gain is desirable, as opposed to (b) in Figure
46, where the angling is adjusted according to the higher posiƟon of the sun during cooling season. The
ﬁrst soluƟon of angling is also desirable as it calls for a plane closer to verƟcal, which would make for an
65
==PAGE:80==
easier design and ensure that more of the space could be uƟlized as the occupancy could be even closer
to the glass.
Winter path
Summer path
Winter path
Summer path
(a) Angling of glass panes closer to vertical
(b) Angling of glass panes farther from vertical
Figure 46: IllustraƟon of angled glass panes according to the path of the sun
If no illuminaƟon is desired or possible outside, but the semi-outdoor space is sƟll illuminated and oc-
cupied during the darker hours, a sense of lack of privacy might arise. This could occur because of the
inability of the occupants to see the surroundings clearly, while they themselves are being illuminated,
which would be enhanced by too many reﬂecƟons in the glass panes, causing the view to be even more
hindered. This problem could also be lessened by angling the glass panes as shown in (a) in Figure 45
and in (a) in Figure 46.
The problem of too many reﬂecƟons could also be solved in other ways if a shape with completely ver-
Ɵcal glass panes are desired. This will be elaborated upon in the following.
66
==PAGE:81==
7.3.3.5
Surfaces within the semi-outdoor space
Too high luminances can give rise to glare, but this must be somewhat expected in a glass construcƟon
and thus it is assumed that the occupants will adapt to the environment. Therefore, the luminances
should not be adapted solely according to the condiƟons during the brighter hours of the day with sun-
light, but more according to the condiƟons during the darker hours.
Many of the surfaces in the semi-outdoor space, such as the facade of the internal building or the con-
strucƟon of the glass facade, should have mid to high reﬂectances, which would give a more uniform
and pleasant luminance distribuƟon during the day with the high illuminances of the daylight. At the
same Ɵme, such reﬂectances will enhance the visibility of the objects during the darker hours, but they
should not be so high that they will cause discomfort due to the nonuniform luminance distribuƟon. If
the space is lit with relaƟvely low illuminances this is not expected to be a problem, especially if the
outside is lit as well, ensuring that the glass panes do not present a very large surface with very low
reﬂectance during the darker hours.
The environment within the internal building in commercial and insƟtuƟonal use is expected to consist
of mainly diﬀuse lighƟng as well as a very uniform luminance. This lack in contrast can be perceived
as non-sƟmulaƟng and thus the condiƟons in the semi-outdoor space will make for a nice diversion, as
it will have a higher contrast in luminances, due to the diﬀerent surfaces such as vegetaƟon and the
brighter facades of the internal building. However, these contrasts in the semi-outdoor space should
not be too dominant and many surfaces should be given a high reﬂectance, to also prevent glare. Glare
can occur if the space has very low reﬂectances on the majority of the surfaces, especially during the
darker hours of the occupancy where the arƟﬁcial lighƟng is present.
Furthermore, a well-balanced luminance distribuƟon can only be achieved if the luminance, controlled
by the illuminance and reﬂectance, of all surfaces are taken into account. During the darker hours of oc-
cupancy, the semi-outdoor space will undoubtedly present an environment with a much diﬀerent lumi-
nance distribuƟon than normally found indoors, where the walls and ceiling oŌen have high reﬂectances
and the only surfaces with low reﬂectances are the windows and to some extent also the ﬂoor. In the
semi-outdoor space this will be almost completely reversed as the surfaces with low reﬂectance, the
glass panes, will dominate the space. A lot of other places exist with large dark and dominaƟng win-
dows, such as atria and the like, but the diﬀerence is that in the semi-outdoor space invesƟgated in this
study, the occupants are engulfed and surrounded by them. It is assumed that the occupants will have
a completely diﬀerent mindset when occupying the semi-outdoor space, much like when they adapt
thermally, but even sƟll some measure must be taken to ensure that the luminance contrasts are not
too vast.
ReﬂecƟons could be prevented in semi-outdoor spaces with verƟcal glass panes, or in other shapes
which would require it, by using special coaƟng. This is already assumed to be a necessity in some form,
on the panes placed at the top of the construcƟon to prevent some of the heat gain from the sun, min-
imizing the overheaƟng of the space, during the cooling season. However, at a lower placement in the
construcƟon this might hinder the view towards the surroundings, and thus should be considered and
designed carefully.
67
==PAGE:82==
7.3.3.6
Interior
The interior of the semi-outdoor space, such as furniture or larger objects such as playhouses in the
insƟtuƟonal category, have an impact on the lighƟng condiƟons, just as the surfaces. The same should
be achieved in regard to the reﬂectances, but as many of the interior objects are smaller, they can be
used to create a more interesƟng space. Therefore, some of the reﬂectances can deviate quite a lot
from the recommendaƟons set for the surfaces, to create a more sƟmulaƟng and diverse environment.
This could especially be in the insƟtuƟonal category, where the sƟmulaƟon of the visual sense of the
children is important.
Even though vegetaƟon should not be used to achieve privacy for the enƟrety of the semi-outdoor
space, if strategically placed, vegetaƟon could ensure that certain areas can remain somewhat hidden.
This could be achieved while sƟll enabling the occupants to uƟlize the transparency of the space, while
at the same Ɵme having the possibility of shielding themselves.
7.3.4
Luminaires
The luminaires of the relaƟvely dark space can give rise to glare if not adequately adjusted and dis-
tributed.
The most suitable soluƟon is to use the same approach as found previously, where luminaires are placed
both within and in the surroundings of the semi-outdoor space. This will ensure that the occupants
maintain a visual overlook, while levelling out the luminance contrasts.
7.3.4.1
Types of luminaires
There is an abundance of luminaires to choose from when designing a semi-outdoor space and diﬀerent
types are beƩer suited for diﬀerent tasks.
It is recommended that the luminaires intended for supplying the ambient lighƟng within the semi-
outdoor space and the ones outside are diﬀuse and spherical, as illustrated in Figure 47. When using
such luminaires, the surroundings in all direcƟons are evenly and mildly illuminated, creaƟng a calm
environment without too disƟnct boundaries. Also, when uƟlizing such luminaires, the risk of glare is
minimized.
Luminaires providing diﬀused downward oriented light is not recommended for the ambient lighƟng,
which is explained in SecƟon 7.3.4.2.
68
==PAGE:83==
Figure 47: IllustraƟon of spherical luminaires for ambient lighƟng
The luminaires used for task lighƟng could be either directed or diﬀuse depending on their placement.
The specialized zones could be equipped with directed desk lamps ensuring the opƟmum illuminance
on the task area. It is not assumed that the specialized areas will be used during the darker hours and
thus the luminance distribuƟon is not parƟcularly criƟcal as the surroundings will be lit with sunlight.
The luminaires used for the accent lighƟng should be directed light, which must be placed so as to avoid
any possibility of direct view of the light source in order to avoid glare. Asymmetrical linear lighƟng
could be used if the luminaires are to highlight facades, which will prevent the occupants from having a
direct view of the source unless they are standing directly above, below or beside the luminaire, close to
the surface, as seen in Figure 48. This type of lighƟng is also called a Wallwasher and when the internal
building has a height of 2,5 m the luminaires should be placed at a distance of 350 mm to 500 mm from
the surface in order to adequately illuminate it.
In such luminaires, an asymmetric prism can be used in front of the LED to ensure a narrow distribuƟon
of light, with which the light is precisely aimed towards the surface and not scaƩered. Tilted longitudinal
slats with a very low reﬂectance are used in front of the prism to make a dark light eﬀect. In this way,
the light source itself is shielded, while the only thing visible is the surface that is illuminated.
Figure 48: IllustraƟon of asymmetrical luminaires for accent lighƟng
Some luminaires can be installed as a safety precauƟon, in terms of scaring away burglars and avoid
potenƟal vandalism. Such luminaires need very high illuminances and are designed to cause glare and
thus they should only funcƟon when the space is unoccupied and perhaps even only when people are
trespassing to avoid unneeded energy consumpƟon and an unﬂaƩering illuminaƟon of the space.
69
==PAGE:84==
7.3.4.2
MounƟng and placement of luminaires
The luminaires used for the ambient lighƟng could be placed at all levels of the semi-outdoor space and
outside, as long as they provide the required illuminaƟon levels on the ﬂoor.
If luminaires providing diﬀused downward oriented light were used for the ambient lighƟng, they would
have to use too much energy to achieve the desired illuminance on the ﬂoor and possibly cause glare,
if they were mounted at the top of the semi-outdoor space. If such luminaires were placed at a level
reasonable in terms of eﬃciency, which would be at normal ceiling height equal to around 3 m, they
would most likely cause a dark void at the top of the construcƟon rendering this space unobtainable in
terms of visibility. In such cases they would only illuminate the zone beneath them, sheathing the space
above in darkness and thus in a sense defeaƟng the quality and purpose of the large semi-outdoor
space. The dark space above the occupants could seem heavy and create a very uncomfortable lighƟng
environment. If the space above the occupants is desired to remain dark instead, which could be so
that the occupants could see the stars, the enƟrety of the space should be kept dark. Some of the
recommended placements of the luminaires for the ambient and accent lighƟng can be seen in Figure
49.
Figure 49: IllustraƟon of diﬀerent luminaires and their placements inside and outside the semi-outdoor
space
The purpose of the recommended luminaires for the ambient lighƟng is not to be able to fully illuminate
the enƟrety of the semi-outdoor space and surroundings. They should only illuminate the immediate
surroundings according to the requirements and then fade out gradually the further away the surfaces
are from the occupants, thus only slightly illuminaƟng the top of the semi-outdoor space and for exam-
ple the top of the trees outside. This will also in some cases enable the occupants to even see the night
sky to some extent, which must be presumed to be an aƩribute desired in a semi-outdoor space.
Furthermore, all luminaires in the semi-outdoor space should not be placed too close to the large glass
panes of the facade, as this could give rise to unwanted reﬂected glare. The exact placement should be
found in accordance with the shape and possible angling of the panes, if such exists, but as a general
rule they should always be kept at a reasonable distance, which must be found based on detailed simu-
laƟons carried out for the case in quesƟon.
Ensuring illuminance between two panes in the facade of the semi-outdoor space could also solve the
problem of the large dark surfaces experienced, but the occupants would sƟll not be able to look out-
side, if this area was not illuminated as well. It would also be a more expensive soluƟon, both because
of the installaƟon itself and the fact that it would require double pane windows. Another side eﬀect
could be the thermal condiƟons which would be very diﬀerent and possibly problems with overheaƟng
70
==PAGE:85==
could arise. Nevertheless, it would make for an interesƟng visual experience and therefore could be
considered as an alternaƟve soluƟon in some cases.
Luminaires used for accent lighƟng, such as for highlighƟng the staƟc construcƟon could be placed re-
cessed or just near the ground. This could however result in glare when moving to close to the luminaires
and when placed further away, near the internal building for example, the same could occur if occupancy
is possible within the beam, between the object of illuminaƟon and the source. It is therefore recom-
mended that these types of placement are only used when the occupants cannot posiƟon themselves
in such ways. In instances where the occupants should be able to use the enƟrety of the space the lu-
minaires used for illuminaƟng the construcƟon or parts of it, they should be placed in connecƟon to the
construcƟon itself with limited distance between the two.
7.3.4.3
ProperƟes of luminaires
Circadian lighƟng could be used to ensure that the colour temperature of the arƟﬁcial lighƟng follows
that of the daylight. Circadian lighƟng is an automaƟcally controlled lighƟng concept that supports the
natural circadian rhythm of the human body. When using circadian lighƟng the colour temperature of
the arƟﬁcial lighƟng is warmer towards dusk and dawn, while being around 5500 K, equivalent to white
light, at noon. When mimicking the condiƟons of daylight, the atmosphere in the semi-outdoor space
will feel genuine and authenƟc, with the arƟﬁcial lighƟng blending in with the natural.
The colour temperature could also be used to create a desired atmosphere depending on the users. The
colour temperature could be a bit warmer; lower than 5500 K, so as to create a cosier ambience within
the space, or a bit colder; higher than 5500 K, so as to create a cooler environment, which could be de-
sired in certain venues or in other climates. Some luminaires could even have actual colouring designed
to create a more interesƟng visual appearance in the space.
The arƟﬁcial lighƟng of the semi-outdoor space should be controlled according to daylight to save en-
ergy. The control system should ensure that the lighƟng starts at high illuminance levels towards the end
of the day and then slowly dim as the daylight decreases, unƟl the minimum requirements are achieved.
And vice versa in the morning.
Lastly, the colour rendering should be equivalent to that which is required indoors; a minimum of 80 Ra
(DS/EN12464-1, 2011).
71
==PAGE:86==
72
==PAGE:87==
8
Discussion
The aim of this study was to invesƟgate and set up requirements and guidelines for semi-outdoor spaces
in regard to acousƟcs and lighƟng, based on exisƟng studies and standards together with new simula-
Ɵons and invesƟgaƟons.
8.1
Requirements
The requirements to the acousƟcal condiƟons include the reverberaƟon Ɵme in all categories; the in-
sƟtuƟonal, commercial and residenƟal. In the insƟtuƟonal category the target reverberaƟon Ɵme was
found based on the limits of noise exposure already set in the Danish building regulaƟons. The simula-
Ɵons showed that the reverberaƟon Ɵme required to obtain an acceptable noise exposure was within
the iniƟal target interval. Based on this, the recommendaƟon for the reverberaƟon Ɵme of the insƟ-
tuƟonal category is 0,8 s to 1,4 s. For the commercial category the noise exposure was acceptable re-
gardless of the reverberaƟon Ɵme and thus the simulaƟons were used to evaluate the acƟons needed in
order to obtain the iniƟal target interval for the reverberaƟon Ɵme. The same was done for the residen-
Ɵal category, where the noise exposure was not invesƟgated at all, as the sound sources in this category
were so few. Therefore, the iniƟal target intervals for the reverberaƟon Ɵme are adapted directly and
the recommendaƟons are 0,8 s to 1,6 s for the commercial category and 0,8 s to 1,8 s for the residenƟal
category.
The requirements to the lighƟng condiƟons include illuminance, uniformity and glare for the insƟtu-
Ɵonal and commercial categories only. The minimum illuminance in both categories on the task area
and background should be 50 lux and 20 lux, respecƟvely. The task area should be the enƟrety of the
ﬂoor with a 0,5 m band deducted along the walls. The width of the background area, which is located
just outside the semi-outdoor space, should be 5 m while the uniformity should be at least 0,25. The
uniformity of the task area should be at least 0,40.
The UGR value should be 25 to 28 for the enƟrety of the semi-outdoor space in order to prevent glare
from the luminaires.
For the specialized areas, local condiƟons must be upheld according to the already present requirements
for lighƟng condiƟons at work staƟons, without any adjustments.
8.2
Guidelines
The results found in the preliminary invesƟgaƟon of the acousƟcal reﬂecƟon control indicated that an
opƟmal reﬂecƟon control, in order to avoid echo, calls for a number of speciﬁc acƟons to be taken in
terms of placement and shape of the internal building in both models and thus in all of the categories.
The results showed that there is a possibility of echo both longitudinally and transversely in both models
and it was recommended that the internal building should be placed so as to cover as much as possible
of two perpendicular facades of the semi-outdoor space. Furthermore, the ﬂoor area of the internal
building should preferably be a polygon with as many sides as possible whilst covering a minimum of
the walls explained. With a rectangular shape of the internal building, addiƟonal screening can be used
to block or divert the sound from travelling the great distance between the parallel verƟcal surfaces,
to prevent echo. The same soluƟons are applicable to any geometry, including a dome shape, if the
distance travelled by the early reﬂected sound exceeds the criƟcal distance of 17,2 m.
73
==PAGE:88==
AddiƟonal soluƟons for avoiding echo could be found by ƟlƟng the glass panes slightly. Such acƟons
could also miƟgate and even eliminate other acousƟc aspects such as ﬂuƩer echo and focusing. In
terms of both the acousƟcal and lighƟng condiƟons, ƟlƟng the glass panes so that they were closer to
the occupants near their heads and further near their feet, had a posiƟve eﬀect. In terms of acousƟcs
it ensures that the sound is redirected towards the surfaces covered with absorpƟon, which could be
the ﬂoor of the semi-outdoor space or some parts of the internal building, instead of being directed to-
wards the other highly reﬂecƟve surfaces of the facade of the semi-outdoor space. In terms of arƟﬁcial
lighƟng the ƟlƟng ensures fewer reﬂecƟons and minimizes the possibility of glare from the luminaires.
Furthermore, it can have a posiƟve eﬀect on the thermal condiƟons by allowing more sunlight to be
transmiƩed through the facade of the semi-outdoor space during the heaƟng season and less during
the cooling season, as the angle of the sun changes.
A soluƟon where the glass panes are Ɵlted requires detailed invesƟgaƟons case by case as it relies largely
on the shape of the construcƟon.
Besides using the results of the noise control invesƟgaƟon to set up requirements to the reverberaƟon
Ɵme, they were used to determine which individual acƟons had the largest eﬀect on the reverberaƟon
Ɵme within each of the three categories. The results of the simulaƟons showed that in each category,
the scenario where the roof of the internal building was covered with absorpƟon, had the largest reduc-
Ɵon in the reverberaƟon Ɵme compared to the default models. The great reducƟon in the reverberaƟon
Ɵme in the scenarios where the absorpƟon was placed on the roof of the internal building could be at-
tributed to the following two facts. First, the area covered by absorpƟon on the roof is vastly larger than
the area covered by absorpƟon on the facade. Second, the absorpƟon coeﬃcient of the roof is slightly
higher at most frequencies compared to the one of the facade, due to the required construcƟon of each
absorbing material. The absorbing materials for the wall and facade both consisted of insulaƟon, but
the facade was covered with perforated wooden panels to protect the surface from damage, as it is in
contact with the occupants. These two facts result in a very diﬀerent absorpƟon area, A, for the diﬀer-
ent scenarios, which is most likely the main reason for the higher eﬀecƟveness of the scenario where
the roof is used.
Another possible aspect, which could contribute to the eﬀecƟveness of the scenario with the roof, is
the ƟlƟng of the glass panes of the semi-outdoor space. The ƟlƟng of the glass panes could have a
posiƟve eﬀect on the noise control in the semi-outdoor space if it ensures that the sound is redirected
towards the absorbing area. The majority of the sound propagaƟng upwards in the semi-outdoor space
is directed towards the roof and thus the ƟlƟng of the glass panes could have an impact on the high
reducƟon in reverberaƟon Ɵme for this scenario. AddiƟonal studies are required to determine if the
ƟlƟng of the panes actually have an eﬀect on the reverberaƟon Ɵme and if so, to what extent it could
be used.
The scenario where the roof of the internal building is covered with absorpƟon is desirable due to a
number of reasons, besides the fact that it resulted in the largest reducƟon of the reverberaƟon Ɵme.
The absorbing material on the roof can be constructed without a protecƟve covering, as it does not
come into contact with the occupants, which ensures a higher absorpƟon coeﬃcient and lower cost.
Furthermore, the roof can be uƟlized without interference of the occupied space, as the occupants are
not in physical or visual contact with the roof, whereas the uƟlizaƟon of the facade as an area for ab-
sorpƟon renders the surface useless for other usage such as decoraƟons or storage. Because of all these
aƩributes, the roof of the internal building is deemed to be the most eﬀecƟve in terms of reducing the
reverberaƟon Ɵme, while having the least impact of the visual appearance of the semi-outdoor space.
The scenario where the facade of the internal building is covered with absorpƟon was ineﬃcient in terms
74
==PAGE:89==
of reducing the reverberaƟon Ɵme enough in both the insƟtuƟonal and commercial categories. Only in
the residenƟal category did the scenario reduce the reverberaƟon Ɵme enough, but this was also the
case for the scenario with the larger area covered with grass, which is a more desirable soluƟon. Addi-
Ɵonally, uƟlizing the facade as a highly absorbing surface could create an unpleasant environment for
the occupants, as they are likely to be in very close proximity of the surface. When standing close to
a highly absorbing surface in such a large space, the acousƟcal condiƟons could be perceived as very
disconcerƟng and oﬀ-balance compared to the expectaƟons of the occupants. This is because the visual
appearance and feel of the room do not correspond with the actual condiƟons experienced through
hearing.
The uƟlizaƟon of the grass is by far the least expensive soluƟon and is recommended for all the cate-
gories. For the residenƟal category the uƟlizaƟon of a larger area with grass is enough, while addiƟonal
acƟon must be taken for the other two categories. For the insƟtuƟonal category a larger area with grass
along with a completely covered roof proved to be the soluƟon required to obtain the desired values
in terms of noise exposure and reverberaƟon Ɵme. For the commercial category a soluƟon where only
the roof was covered by 50 % absorpƟon proved to be enough to obtain the desired reverberaƟon Ɵme.
The uƟlizaƟon of the grass had too liƩle eﬀect in the commercial category to be used as a standalone
soluƟon.
The simulaƟons illuminated the eﬀect of the diﬀerent individual acƟons and were not meant to deliver
a speciﬁc soluƟon, but merely point out the best ones. As a result, the following guidelines can be set.
As far as possible, the ﬂoor area of the semi-outdoor space should be covered with vegetaƟon to im-
prove the acousƟcal condiƟons. If the usage of vegetaƟon is not enough, the roof of the internal building
should be used as an area of absorpƟon and lastly the facade of the internal building should be uƟlized.
So, this study has concluded that the usage of horizontal surfaces for absorpƟon is indeed preferable in
general. This conclusion contradicts the exisƟng recommendaƟons set in SBi Anvisning 218 regarding
the acousƟcs in schools and daycare buildings, which states that to achieve the desired condiƟons in
the insƟtuƟons at least 10 % to 15 % of the total absorbing area should be placed on verƟcal surfaces
(Hoﬀmeyer, 2008).
The guidelines set for the lighƟng condiƟons can be found previously in this report and will not be re-
peated here. The guidelines should be treated as such and only serve as inspiraƟon and general advice
when designing the lighƟng of a semi-outdoor space. Some venues might have a completely diﬀerent
take on the actual use of the semi-outdoor space than those assumed in this study. In such cases, where
the space is not used at all during the darker hours, or where the children are supposed to be able to
perform indoor acƟviƟes which require higher illuminances, the recommendaƟons set here are not all
completely applicable.
The ever-changing lighƟng environment of a semi-outdoor space will make for an interesƟng contrast
to the trivial arƟﬁcial lighƟng experienced indoors in all categories invesƟgated. The characterisƟcs of
an overcast sky is a uniform and almost shadowless light, as known from many indoor environments,
whereas the more dramaƟc and ever-changing interplay of both shade and light found in the sunlight
will make for a very sƟmulaƟng environment, especially important for children (Johnsen et al., 2011).
The children have a natural tendency to seek outdoors but the weather can in some instances prevent
this. In such cases, the semi-outdoor space can be used as a buﬀer zone where they are sƟll able to
experience the sƟmulaƟng condiƟons of the room without the total impact of the weather. The adults
are even more suscepƟble and impeded by the weather since they have a much lower metabolic rate.
75
==PAGE:90==
This means that their thermal state is only found acceptable at a much more narrow and higher tem-
perature interval, which could result in the adults having the opportunity of experiencing the outdoors
within the semi-outdoor space during their working hours where they would not normally venture out-
side. In such instances they would be sƟmulated visually in greater measures than when spending the
enƟrety of the day inside and thus perhaps even their working eﬀort and moƟvaƟon could be enhanced.
It is known that the creaƟvity of a person is enhanced when being closer to nature and thus it is con-
ceivable that their producƟvity is aﬀected in the same way, but probably to a lesser extent (Plambech
& Van Den Bosch, 2015).
The arƟﬁcial lighƟng design of a semi-outdoor space serves the fundamental need of illuminaƟng dif-
ferent areas, but it also largely plays a part in the architectural expression and indeed becomes a design
approach. The guidelines set in this study oﬀers for the opportunity of achieving a balance between the
lighƟng approaches which are solely for the purpose of the visual appearance while sƟll ensuring that
the minimum requirements are maintained, so that it is a saƟsfying environment and not just aesthet-
ically beauƟful. The arƟﬁcial lighƟng both within the semi-outdoor space and in the surrounding area
just outside the space can be used to blur out the boundary created by the glass. It can help bring the
scenery from outdoors into the semi-outdoor space, during the darker hours as well, and create an even
closer connecƟon to nature, by almost wiping out the visibility of the glass.
If indeed a case requires uƟlizaƟon of the facade of the internal building for absorpƟon, the recom-
mended perforated panels open up for the opportunity of creaƟng interesƟng and diﬀerent visual pat-
terns. Such surfaces could be enhanced and brought to focus by the accent lighƟng recommended for
the lighƟng purposes. Together these two aspects could be used for the architectural and aestheƟcal
appearance of the space, while both serving the main purpose of ensuring an opƟmum indoor environ-
ment.
The standards can be used for the areas which are to be used for working environments, seeing as such
places are already well deﬁned and the same condiƟons should always be present in order to achieve op-
Ɵmum producƟvity and well-being of the occupants. However, where the general stay is concerned the
adaptaƟon of the occupants and their actual percepƟon cannot be predetermined for a semi-outdoor
space yet. When being outdoors, humans have a great ability to adapt by both types of adaptaƟon;
behavioral and psychological, but within limits (Liu et al., 2012) (Nikolopoulou & Steemers, 2003). They
can put on sunglasses, more clothing and headphones, which is behavioural adaptaƟon, while their
psychological adaptaƟon, including expectaƟons, Ɵme of exposure and adapƟve opportuniƟes, calls for
even further invesƟgaƟons to determine the actual condiƟons which should be upheld within the three
diﬀerent categories. And even sƟll, these condiƟons will most likely be listed as intervals, as done in this
study, as the condiƟons of a semi-outdoor space and its occupants can diﬀer to great extent. Occupants
have a very diﬀerent predisposiƟon towards what consƟtutes comfort and well-being, when not being
in a working situaƟon, and this may especially be expected in such a diverse environment as a semi-
outdoor space.
Naturally, the shape and design of the semi-outdoor space is not limited to the ones illustrated and used
in this study. These were only meant to serve as a reference and simpliﬁcaƟon of the many types pos-
sible. The simple construcƟon of the semi-outdoor space oﬀers vast opportuniƟes in terms of design
and shape, and therefore it can be created with speciﬁc visual appearance and not only serve as a func-
Ɵonal space. In such cases some of the guidelines presented in this study could be used to beneﬁt and
enhance the appearance while others might be counteracƟve. Therefore, the guidelines should serve
76
==PAGE:91==
as inspiraƟon and general advice and not as actual rules to follow, as they might not be compaƟble to
all types of semi-outdoor spaces.
The diﬀerencebetweenthe lighƟng and acousƟcsisthattheacousƟcaltreatmenthas tofuncƟon through-
out the enƟre usage period, even though it is aﬀected by the occupants and therefore might not be
necessary at all Ɵmes. The arƟﬁcial lighƟng condiƟons however are mainly an issue during the darker
hours of occupancy which is a relaƟvely short Ɵme compared to the enƟrety of the usage Ɵme. The
semi-outdoor space is expected to be used during said hours, but it is also expected that in insƟtuƟonal
use the children will probably venture inside at some point and the same can be said for the commercial
use. The occupants in both those categories, but also to a large extent in the residenƟal category, are
expected to primarily use the semi-outdoor space during the iniƟal hours of the transiƟon from day to
evening; the dusk. At this Ɵme the semi-outdoor space will sƟll hold much of the desired thermal con-
diƟons acquired during the day and the natural inclinaƟon to seek indoors when the chill arrives with
the dusk, will be postponed. The occupants are expected to linger in the semi-outdoor space during
this prolonged stage where the cosiness of the dimmed light and sƟll relaƟvely warm climate creates a
desirable atmosphere. Even sƟll, this is not expected to be a deﬁnite and constant occurrence and thus
the primary use of the semi-outdoor space is expected to be during the day Ɵme for all three categories,
while the residenƟal may have a larger inclinaƟon towards having a more prolonged usage schedule.
The lighƟng guidelines in the semi-outdoor space in general adds to the environment in a posiƟve way
by making it more pleasant and inviƟng to be there. Only the requirements for the localized condi-
Ɵons, such as work places, and the lighƟng for traﬃc ways are a necessity. The laƩer is only relevant for
working environments and thus only strictly for the commercial and insƟtuƟonal category. In terms of
lighƟng condiƟons, the semi-outdoor space mimics the outdoors, but removes many of the downsides,
such as wind, rain and harmful ultraviolet radiaƟon. Therefore, the room represent lighƟng condiƟons
which we are used to adapt to and the arƟﬁcial lighƟng is primarily used to improve said condiƟons.
As for the acousƟcal guidelines and requirements they are more of a necessity within the enƟre semi-
outdoor space and not just at the localized condiƟons. In terms of acousƟcal condiƟons, the semi-
outdoor space does not mimic the outdoors as the occupants are conﬁned in a glass construcƟon which
has a much higher reverberaƟon Ɵme than outdoors, where minimal surfaces are present to reﬂect the
sound and thus it propagates freely away from the sources. Therefore, the room presents condiƟons
which must be controlled in order to achieve a comfortable (semi) indoor climate for the occupants.
Both aspects are important, but in terms of the overall condiƟons in the semi-outdoor space, not includ-
ing the localized condiƟons, the acousƟcs are to be seen as actual requirements, whereas the lighƟng
can be seen as more of an improvement to the condiƟons.
8.3
Sources of error
When using the simulaƟon tool ODEON some sources of error must be expected to have been present,
which should be taken into account when evaluaƟng the results. Some sources of error could be at-
tributed the fact that simpliﬁcaƟons have been made to the diﬀerent models and the inputs. The sim-
pliﬁcaƟon of surfaces and geometries could cause slightly diﬀerent results, as opposed to using accurate
geometries. However, as the spaces invesƟgated are so large in size, the small simpliﬁcaƟons are insignif-
icant and so the results found are deemed reliable. Furthermore, human errors made while seƫng up
the models or processing the results, could also be a contribuƟng factor.
ODEON is a tool best suited for large scale rooms and thus the results achieved for the semi-outdoor
77
==PAGE:92==
spaces are assumed to be reliable. AddiƟonally, ODEON is not that well suited for simulaƟng low fre-
quencies, and thus the results found here must be treated accordingly. If for instance the results are
close to the target intervals at the low frequencies without deﬁnitely being either outside or within,
the results should not be trusted completely. Seeing as the main problems with the reverberaƟon Ɵmes
were at the mid-frequencies, the limitaƟon of ODEON should not be taken into account when evaluaƟng
the credibility of the results and recommendaƟons. The limitaƟon of ODEON was however taken into
account when assessing the ﬁnal soluƟon for the commercial category, where the absorpƟon area of
the roof was decreased unƟl the results lay within the target interval. When determining the soluƟon it
was ensured that the reverberaƟon Ɵme in the low frequencies were below and not equal to the upper
limit of the target interval of 1,6 s. This resulted in 50 % coverage of the roof yielding a maximum rever-
beraƟon Ɵme, in the low frequencies, of 1,5 s at 250 Hz.
If other venues, with diﬀerent noise exposures within the internal building, were to be invesƟgated,
the requirements in this study would be non-applicable. In such cases the noise exposure limit could
not remain at 88 dB(A), which would call for further invesƟgaƟons in terms of ﬁnding the appropriate
reverberaƟon Ɵme.
The 80 % of occupants speaking in the simulaƟons may be a bit high, seeing as so many occupants would
most likely not be speaking at the same Ɵme. However, in the case of the insƟtuƟonal category many
of the children could be singing which would mean that they are in fact contribuƟng with their speech
spectrum at the same Ɵme. In the commercial category it is possible that visitors are present, beyond
the employees, seeing as the criƟcal condiƟons would be when some sort of arrangement is taking place.
Nevertheless, the results give an overall idea of the acƟons needed to lower the noise level and proved
that the pre-set target reverberaƟon Ɵme intervals were just.
In addiƟon, the simulaƟons carried out using ODEON are for a staƟc situaƟon, whereas the requirements
for the noise exposure is based on Ɵme of exposure. Therefore, simpliﬁcaƟons were done in terms of
assigning vocal eﬀort to the occupants. Ideally a dynamic simulaƟon would show beƩer results as the
peaks of the sound level and their duraƟon should be evaluated according to the requirements. Instead
the model was set up so as to best represent an average of a worst-case scenario, where peaks and
their duraƟon was incorporated as best as possible. Because of this simpliﬁcaƟon the results cannot be
used directly, and further studies will be required in order to beƩer evaluate the actual condiƟons in a
semi-outdoor space. However, the results can be used as iniƟal guidelines for designing a semi-outdoor
space and pave the way for future studies on the subject, as was the scope of this study.
During the usage of ODEON, it was found that the placement of the sources and receivers for the noise
control invesƟgaƟon indeed had a substanƟal eﬀect on the results. Ideally a receiver could be placed
alongside each of the sources, to get a more accurate picture of the overall noise condiƟons. But as this
would result in the simulaƟons being vastly more Ɵme consuming, the constellaƟon used was opted for
instead. By reducing the Ɵme of each simulaƟon, more invesƟgaƟons could be carried out to get an
overall idea of the condiƟons and ﬁnd the most eﬀecƟve acƟons to set up general guidelines. This study
only serves as an iniƟal invesƟgaƟon of the acousƟcal and lighƟng condiƟons of a semi-outdoor space
and hereby paves the way for future and more detailed studies.
78
==PAGE:93==
9
Further studies
This study holds iniƟal invesƟgaƟons and suggested guidelines regarding the acousƟcal and lighƟng con-
diƟons in semi-outdoor spaces. Further studies are necessary to illuminate challenges found in all in-
stances and subcategories imaginable for the semi-outdoor space and in doing so set up ﬁnal require-
ments and guidelines.
UnƟl dynamic simulaƟons can be carried out, actual measurements could be performed in present semi-
outdoor spaces, where the sound is produced by actual occupants or sound sources with varying levels,
according to the categories in quesƟon.
Other simulaƟons could be carried out using auralizaƟon to determine at which reverberaƟon Ɵme the
occupants, test subjects, ﬁnd the acousƟcal condiƟons acceptable in a semi-outdoor space.
The physiological adaptaƟon towards light and acousƟcs could be invesƟgated in general to evaluate and
incorporate its eﬀect into requirements and recommendaƟons for future standards of a semi-outdoor
space.
The next step in the invesƟgaƟon of the acousƟcal condiƟons could be to make simulaƟons with varying
volumes and shapes in order to ﬁnd the correlaƟon between absorpƟon area and volume or rever-
beraƟon Ɵme and volume. This would ensure a more precise target value for the absorpƟon area or
reverberaƟon Ɵme, compared to the current ones in the standards, which only take the ﬂoor area or
height into account. Or compared to this study, where only requirements were set for the reverberaƟon
Ɵme.
A previous study has shown that thermal comfort is aﬀected by the colour temperature of lighƟng (Kühl,
2017), and a future study could invesƟgate the potenƟal of such an inﬂuence in a semi-outdoor space,
where the span of the temperature is vastly greater than indoors. Perhaps such a study could unveil a
possibility of even longer periods of usage in a semi-outdoor space, than those assumed in this study,
by using arƟﬁcial lighƟng.
79
==PAGE:94==
80
==PAGE:95==
10
Conclusion
Based on the guidelines presented in this study, it has been found that the desired acousƟcal and lighƟng
condiƟons can be achieved in large scale semi-outdoor spaces, where the internal building is covered
completely by the second skin of glass. The use of such semi-outdoor spaces was thereby found to be
spanning over the residenƟal, commercial and even insƟtuƟonal categories, despite the quite substan-
Ɵal noise exposure oŌen found in the laƩer.
For both the acousƟcal and lighƟng aspect, the shape of the semi-outdoor space can be used to help
create opƟmum condiƟons. TilƟng the glass panes of the semi-outdoor space can help prevent acous-
Ɵcal phenomena such as echo, ﬂuƩer echo and focusing. Furthermore, the same ƟlƟng could miƟgate
lighƟng issues such as unwanted reﬂecƟons and glare from luminaires. The shape and placement of the
internal building could serve as a soluƟon to the prevenƟon of echo, which could occur in most large
scaled semi-outdoor spaces.
Further acƟons such as using absorpƟon on mainly the horizontal surfaces and choosing the correct
placement and type of luminaires, both within and outside the semi-outdoor space, must be taken in
order to fully achieve the desired condiƟons, which can be done without compromising the visual ap-
pearance and purpose of a semi-outdoor space; creaƟng a transparent second skin.
The guidelines presented can be used for achieving opƟmum acousƟc and lighƟng condiƟons in the
semi-outdoor space, and even serve as an aestheƟc design approach to highlight and enhance certain
aspects of the construcƟon or the space within.
81
==PAGE:96==
82
==PAGE:97==
References
ÅF - Hansen & Henneberg. (2009). Håndbog for kommunernes vej- og byrumsbelysning. Vejdirektoratet
& KTC (SAMKOM).
American LighƟng AssociaƟon. (2017). Basic types of lighƟng. Retrieved 2018-05-01, fromhttps://www
.americanlightingassoc.com/Lighting-Fundamentals/3-Types-of-Lighting.aspx
Andersen, K. T. (2012). OpdriŌvenƟlaƟon: TeoreƟsk grundlag. bind 2. Statens ByggeforskningsinsƟtut.
Bouyer, J., Vinet, J., Delpech, P., & Carre, S. (2007). Thermal comfort assessment in semi-outdoor
environments: applicaƟon to comfort study in stadia. Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial
Aerodynamics, 95(9-11), 963–976.
BR18. (2018). Bygningsreglementet 2018. Byggestyrelsen, T. O..
Bradley, J. S. (2002). AcousƟcal design of rooms for speech. InsƟtute for Research in ConstrucƟon,
NaƟonal Research Council of Canada.
DS490. (2007). Sound classiﬁcaƟon of dwellings. Danish Standard AssociaƟon.
DS/EN12464-1. (2011). Light and lighƟng - lighƟng of work places - part 1: Indoor work places. Danish
Standard AssociaƟon.
DS/EN12464-2. (2014). Light and lighƟng - lighƟng of work places - part 2: Outdoor work places. Danish
Standard AssociaƟon.
DS/EN3382-2. (2008). 3382-2: AcousƟcs - measurement of room acousƟc parameters - part 2: Rever-
beraƟon Ɵme in ordinary rooms. Danish Standards.
EN15251. (2007). Indoor environmental input parameters for design and assessment of energy per-
formance of buildings addressing indoor air quality, thermal environment, lighƟng and acousƟcs.
Thermal Environment, LighƟng and AcousƟcs; European CommiƩee for StandardizaƟon: Brussels,
Belgium.
Gade, A. C. (2003). Room acousƟc engineering. Department of Electrical Engineering, Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark.
Ganslandt, R., & Hoﬀmann, H. (1992). Handbook of lighƟng design. Citeseer.
Guyer, J. P. (2009). Fundamentals of acousƟcs. ConƟnuing EducaƟon and Development, Inc Course(M02-
022), 31.
HFB. (2012). Håndbog for bygningsindustrien. Molio - Byggeriets Videnscenter, 376.
Hoﬀmeyer, D. (2008). Lydforhold i undervisnings-og daginsƟtuƟonsbygninger. SBi Anvisning, 218.
Holm, S., & Tvedt, T. S. (1998). De grønne områder og sundheden. Skov & Landskab, Københavns
83
==PAGE:98==
Universitet.
Hwang, R.-L., & Lin, T.-P. (2007). Thermal comfort requirements for occupants of semi-outdoor and
outdoor environments in hot-humid regions. Architectural Science Review, 50(4), 357–364.
IEA. (2011). Energy policies of iea countries-denmark-a review. InternaƟonal Energy Agency.
IEA. (2017). Energy eﬃciency 2017. InternaƟonal Energy Agency.
IST45. (2016). AcousƟc condiƟons in buildings - sound classiﬁcaƟon of various types of building. Stan-
dards Iceland.
Jacobsen, F., Poulsen, T., Rindel, J. H., Gade, A. C., & Ohlrich, M. (2011). Fundamentals of acousƟcs and
noise control. Department of Electrical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark.
Johnsen, K., & Christoﬀersen, J. (2007). Dagslys i rum og bygninger. SBi Anvisning, 219.
Johnsen, K., Kirkeby, I. M., Espenhain, A., & Larsen, K. B. (2011). Lys i daginsƟtuƟoner. SBi Anvisning,
238.
Kühl, M. (2017). Colour temperature of lighƟng and thermal comfort, lysets farvetemperatur og termisk
komfort .
Lin, Y., & Zmeureanu, R. (2006). Thermal performance of a dome-covered house. Design and Nature III:
Comparing Design in Nature with Science and Engineering, 87, 81.
Liu, J., Yao, R., & McCloy, R. (2012). A method to weight three categories of adapƟve thermal comfort.
Energy and Buildings, 47, 312–320.
Maekawa, Z., Lord, P., & Rindel, J. H. (2011). Environmental and architectural acousƟcs. Spon Press
London.
Møller, K. L. (2018). MulƟ-criteria decision support for refurbishment of danish primary schools –
integraƟon of indoor environment quality in analysis and design processes. Department of Civil
Engineering, Technical University of Denmark.
Møller, S. (2014). Energy and indoor environment simulaƟons of a house in a greenhouse. Department
of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark.
Nikolopoulou, M., Baker, N., & Steemers, K. (2001). Thermal comfort in outdoor urban spaces: under-
standing the human parameter. Solar energy, 70(3), 227–235.
Nikolopoulou, M., & Steemers, K. (2003). Thermal comfort and psychological adaptaƟon as a guide for
designing urban spaces. Energy and buildings, 35(1), 95–101.
NS8175. (2012). AcousƟc condiƟons in buildings - sound classiﬁcaƟon of various types of building.
Standards Norway.
84
==PAGE:99==
Olesen, B. W., & Seelen, J. (1993). Criteria for a comfortable indoor environment in buildings. Journal
of Thermal Biology, 18(5-6), 545–549.
Olsen, W. O. (1998). Average speech levels and spectra in various speaking/listening condiƟons: A
summary of the pearson, benneƩ, & ﬁdell (1977) report. American Journal of Audiology, 7(2),
21–25.
Papachristou, C., Foteinaki, K., Kazanci, O. B., & Olesen, B. W. (2016). Structures that include a semi-
outdoor space: Part 2: Thermal environment. In 12th rehva world congressrehva world congress.
Plambech, T., & Van Den Bosch, C. C. K. (2015). The impact of nature on creaƟvity–a study among danish
creaƟve professionals. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 14(2), 255–263.
Polomová, B., Vargová, A., Chmelík, V., & Urban, D. (2014). MulƟ-purpose uƟlisaƟon of historic building
glass atrium. case study of the slovak philharmonic. Advanced Materials Research(899).
Rasmussen, B., & Hoﬀmeyer, D. (2016). Vejledning om lydbestemmelser i bygningsreglement 2015
(akusƟsk indeklima). Traﬁk-og Byggestyrelsen.
Rindel, J. H. (2010). Verbal communicaƟon and noise in eaƟng establishments. Applied AcousƟcs, 71(12),
1156–1161.
Rychtarikova, M., Urban, D., Kassakova, M., Maywald, C., & Glorieux, C. (2017). PercepƟon of acous-
Ɵc comfort in large halls covered by transparent structural skins. In Proceedings of meeƟngs on
acousƟcs 173eaa (Vol. 30, p. 015005).
Sauerberg, A., & Andersen, M. D. A. (2016). Design af lavenergibygning - implementering af et tredje
rum i en integreret insƟtuƟon. Department of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark.
Trankjær, L. S. (2018). ValidaƟon of simulaƟon models and design of semi-outdoor spaces. Department
of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark.
Vorländer, M. (2007). AuralizaƟon: fundamentals of acousƟcs, modelling, simulaƟon, algorithms and
acousƟc virtual reality. Springer Science & Business Media.
WEA. (2017). At-vejledning d.6.1-5: Støj. The Danish Working Environment Authority.
85
==PAGE:100==
86
==PAGE:101==
List of Figures
1
IllustraƟon of semi-outdoor spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Broadening and narrowing the scope schemaƟc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
IllustraƟon of the type of semi-outdoor space invesƟgated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
IllustraƟon of the general stay within the insƟtuƟonal, commercial and residenƟal cate-
gories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5
IllustraƟon of the Ɵme available for usage of the semi-outdoor space during the year . .
9
6
Time available for usage of the semi-outdoor space during a day for the insƟtuƟonal and
commercial categories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
7
Time available for usage of the semi-outdoor space during a day for the insƟtuƟonal and
commercial categories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
8
Overall properƟes for Model A used for the insƟtuƟonal and commercial categories . . .
13
9
Overall properƟes for Model B used for the residenƟal category
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
10
The three basic components of acousƟcal treatment and the focus area of semi-outdoor
spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
11
IllustraƟons of focusing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
12
IllustraƟon of echo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
13
IllustraƟons of ﬂuƩer echo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
14
IllustraƟon of interior for localized acousƟcal condiƟons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
15
Placement of occupants for evaluaƟng the criƟcal distance in terms of experiencing echo
26
16
Plan and secƟons for the iniƟal Model A with dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
17
Plan and secƟons for the iniƟal Model B with dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
18
IllustraƟon of the criƟcal distance in terms of echo for all categories . . . . . . . . . . .
29
19
IllustraƟon of the criƟcal distance in terms of echo for all categories for alternaƟve shapes 30
20
Placement and shape of the internal building in all categories in order to avoid echo
. .
30
21
The model for the insƟtuƟonal category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
22
The model for the commercial category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
23
The model for the residenƟal category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
24
Reference heights of children and adults, both standing and seated
. . . . . . . . . . .
38
25
Placement of sources and receivers for the noise exposure in the insƟtuƟonal model . .
39
26
Placement of sources and receivers for the noise exposure in the commercial model
. .
39
27
Placement of sources and receivers for the reverberaƟon Ɵme in the insƟtuƟonal model
41
28
Placement of sources and receivers for the reverberaƟon Ɵme in the commercial model
41
29
Placement of sources and receivers for the reverberaƟon Ɵme in the residenƟal model .
42
30
IllustraƟon of the individual scenarios for the insƟtuƟonal category . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
31
The reverberaƟon Ɵme for the individual scenarios of the insƟtuƟonal category . . . . .
45
32
The reverberaƟon Ɵme for the combined scenarios of the insƟtuƟonal category . . . . .
46
33
IllustraƟon of the individual scenarios for the commercial category . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
34
The reverberaƟon Ɵme for the individual scenarios of the commercial category . . . . .
48
35
The reverberaƟon Ɵme for the ﬁnal soluƟon of the commercial category . . . . . . . . .
49
36
IllustraƟon of the individual scenarios for the residenƟal category
. . . . . . . . . . . .
50
37
The reverberaƟon Ɵme for the individual scenarios of the residenƟal category . . . . . .
51
38
IllustraƟon of relevant aspects of the lighƟng condiƟons in a semi-outdoor space . . . .
53
39
Minimum requirements of immediate surrounding and background area in relaƟon to
task area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
87
==PAGE:102==
40
Minimum requirements and placement of background area in relaƟon to task area in a
semi-outdoor space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
41
IllustraƟon of smaller booths or covered areas for localized lighƟng condiƟons . . . . . .
58
42
IllustraƟon of ambient lighƟng . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
43
IllustraƟon of task lighƟng
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
44
IllustraƟon of accent lighƟng . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
45
IllustraƟon of angled glass panes in order to minimize reﬂecƟons . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
46
IllustraƟon of angled glass panes according to the path of the sun
. . . . . . . . . . . .
66
47
IllustraƟon of spherical luminaires for ambient lighƟng
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
48
IllustraƟon of asymmetrical luminaires for accent lighƟng . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
49
IllustraƟon of diﬀerent luminaires and their placements inside and outside the semi-
outdoor space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
88
==PAGE:103==
List of Tables
1
Noise limits and exposure during a working day (WEA, 2017) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2
IniƟal target reverberaƟon Ɵmes for all categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Surface properƟes for the default models used for noise control . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Surface properƟes for the individual scenarios used for noise control . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Speech spectra as sound power level in dB(A) according to octave bands depending on
ﬁve vocal eﬀorts by three groups of talkers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
ProperƟes for sources and receivers in the noise exposure simulaƟons in ODEON . . . .
40
7
ReverberaƟon Ɵme and noise exposure for the default scenario of the insƟtuƟonal category 43
8
ReverberaƟon Ɵme and noise exposure for the individual scenarios of the insƟtuƟonal
category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
9
ReverberaƟon Ɵme and noise exposure for the combined scenarios of the insƟtuƟonal
category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
10
ReverberaƟon Ɵme and noise exposure for the default scenario of the commercial category 46
11
ReverberaƟon Ɵme and noise exposure for the individual scenarios of the commercial
category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
12
ReverberaƟon Ɵme and noise exposure for the ﬁnal soluƟon of the commercial category
48
13
ReverberaƟon Ɵme for the default scenario of the residenƟal category . . . . . . . . . .
49
14
ReverberaƟon Ɵme for the individual scenarios of the residenƟal category . . . . . . . .
50
89
==PAGE:104==
Guidelines for the indoor environment of a semi-outdoor space
regarding acousƟcs and arƟﬁcial lighƟng
Master’s thesis by
Maria Djekic Arent Andersen
Spring 2018
