==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Echo: guided self awareness
Using personal data to support client self aware-
ness through therapy.
Lys
Egholm
Andersen
(s155956),
Alina Gabriela Ciobanu (s155505)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a MSc degree in Digital Media Engineering/Computer Science
and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, August 3, 2018
Lys Egholm Andersen (s155956), Alina Gabriela Ciobanu (s155505)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary
One in four people are during their lifetime affected by poor mental health and mental
health disorders. This imperative societal concern has been developing over the last
years, becoming one of the leading cause of illness worldwide. Development in ubiqui-
tous sensor technologies made it possible to easily collect an unprecedented amount
of health data on individuals. There has been an increasing research interest in mo-
bile health (mHealth) applications, addressing physical health, wellness and mental
health. Prior work in mental health has mainly addressed specific disorders. Since
this is not the only way of characterizing poor mental health, a solutions addressing
mental health independently of a disorder is needed. This is what this thesis strives
to accomplish.
Echo, a solution for clients to use personal informatics in psychotherapy is proposed.
This thesis documents the design of Echo, an iPhone mental health mHealth applica-
tion prototype. The application offers a great variety of automatic and self-assessment
tracking options, that can be adapted to the specific therapy and client-therapist re-
lationship. Echo offers a different level of insight into the individual’s life and what
affects mental health. Insights and reflection are supported by therapists, providing
guided self-awareness for clients. The solution was designed through an iterative, user
centred, lean design process. Clients and therapists were closely involved in shaping
Echo’s concept and interface, ensuring their needs were met. User-involvement relied
on a thorough, qualitative approach, exploring every facet of the concept. Echo’s con-
cept and its interactive prototype were highly appreciated by therapists and clients
alike.
A functional solution was requested by participants throughout the design
process, proving there is a high need for a solution like Echo in practice.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
i
Summary
iii
Contents
iv
Acronyms
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Prior work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research question/ problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Research goals and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Result and contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.6
Thesis overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Background and Literature Review
7
2.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Design methodologies within mental health
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Personal informatics in mental health
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Design for Personal Informatics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Methodology
25
3.1
Methods in iterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
User involvement and data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Iteration 1: Initial validation and research
35
4.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Results of iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Iteration 2: Echo concept development
43
5.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
6
Iteration 3: Design definition
57
6.1
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7
Iteration 4: Design evaluation
69
7.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
8
Echo: final prototype
81
8.1
Echo. Guided self-awareness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
8.2
App design and UI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
8.3
Micro-interactions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
8.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
9
Discussion
95
9.1
Echo - did it answer the research questions? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
9.2
Self tracking in mental health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
9.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
10 Conclusion
101
10.1 Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
A Distribution of Contributions
103
B Data sources
105
B.1
Iteration 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
B.2
Iteration 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
B.3
Iteration 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
B.4
Iteration 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
B.5
Designs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
C Surveys
107
C.1 Client survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
C.2 Therapist survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
D Focus group moderator guide
115
D.1 Session 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
D.2 Session 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
D.3 Scenarios rating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
D.4 Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
E Interview guide
121
F Echo v1 - Initial prototype
123
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
G Design workshop Moderator Guide
127
G.1 Session 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
G.2 Session 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
G.3 User tasks cards used in first session . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
H Role-play Moderator Guide
131
H.1 Session 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
H.2 Session 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
I
Think Aloud Moderator Guide
137
I.1
Tasks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
J
Personas Data
141
K Data handling and ethics
143
Bibliography
145
==PAGE:9==
Contents
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Acronyms
CBT Cognitive Behavioural Therapy. 8, 9
HCD Human Centred Design. 25, 28, 30, 37, 45, 69
HCI Human Computer Interaction. 9–13
MVP Minimal Viable Product. 26
PD Participatory Design. 2, 10
PI Personal Informatics. 2, 3, 7, 16, 17, 20, 25, 31, 32, 99
QDA Qualitative Data Analysis. 46, 48, 49
QS Quantified Self. 2, 40, 95, 96
UCD User Centred Design. 2, 3, 6, 10, 25–28, 30, 32, 34, 35, 42, 57, 59, 99
UI User Interface. 6, 26, 30, 34, 59, 60, 65–67
UML Unified Modelling Language. 34
USM User Story Map. 26, 28–31, 38, 42, 43, 45, 54, 56, 59, 60, 62, 63, 65, 67, 83,
84
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
”To know thyself is the beginning of wisdom” - Socrates
Poor mental health is an important societal concern that has been constantly increas-
ing over the last years. According to Sundhedstyrelsen (The Danish Health Author-
ity), 13.2% of the population in Denmark reported poor mental health in 2017, an
increase of 3.2% since 2013 [28]. Poor mental health and associated mental disorders
are some of the largest and most rapidly increasing categories of diseases[23] world-
wide, affecting health systems and becoming a bigger societal burden than cancer or
cardiovascular disease[23].
1.1
Context and motivation
Mental health is defined by not only the lack of mental illness but by the psychological
resources and abilities required to develop oneself mentally and handle challenges and
stress in family and work life [28]:
Mental health is defined as a state of well-being in which every individual
realizes his or her own potential, can cope with the normal stresses of life,
can work productively and fruitfully, and is able to make a contribution to
her or his community. [62]
Recent studies in mental health have also pushed for a shift of paradigm in interven-
tion, from a symptom repressing focus to fostering the individual’s well being [55].
Building on Ryff’s cognitive model for psychological well being [56], well being ther-
apy has a focus on the individual’s self awareness through self-observation, structured
diary and the interaction between patient (client) and therapist. The active role of
the patient (client) in achieving recovery is emphasized [55], especially in the context
of preventing relapses.
Self awareness in particular was previously discussed as a
measure of therapy effectiveness [50].
Advances in ubiquitous sensor technologies, the rise of pervasive computing and big
data have created new opportunities for mental health [58],[45] in this regard. The
large volume of data continuously and seamlessly generated, the so called personal dig-
ital trace, can provide a deeper understanding to a person’s behaviour and emotions.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
There is a huge interest in Personal Informatics (PI) from the mental health research
area and a large number of studies have investigated different applications[45]. The
Quantified Self (QS) movement is pioneering the field of PI, pursuing ”self knowledge
through numbers” 1. There is a large spectrum of mobile health (mHealth) applica-
tions commonly falling in to three main categories: wellness, management of physical
illness and mental health and illness [5].
However, the overlapping area between
wellness and mental illness that psychotherapy is concerned with, was not previously
investigated. In the scope of this thesis psychotherapy is defined as therapy conducted
by psychologists or psychotherapists, independent of a disorder or diagnose, within
mental health. Clients are defined as individuals actively attending psychotherapy2,
regardless of their quandary.
The motivation of the thesis is rooted in the lack of a personal informatics tool to be
used in psychotherapy independent of a clinical diagnose.
The thesis describes the design development of Echo, a PI solution for clients, to
be used in therapy. The thesis has a holistic view on the design, by getting a well
founded understanding of the domain through an extensive User Centred Design
(UCD) process, and a detailed conceptual and interface design. While focusing on the
design and not the implementation, it strives to evaluate all the facets of the concept
and interface design. Echo is utilizing elements within PI: physical, behavioural and
social parameters to help understand the psychological states of the client, further
referred to as personal data in the thesis.
1.2
Prior work
Being at the convergence between PI and mental health mHealth, Echo’s design was
inspired by previous design research in these two areas. The thesis reviews related
literature on design methods for mental health solutions and PI applications in mental
health. Moreover, it discusses existing solutions used to inspire Echo’s design. The
complete review can be found in Chapter 2 Background and Literature Review.
User involvement in mental health application development is rapidly increasing due
to the emphasis on keeping clients engaged between therapy sessions [43]. The design
methodologies used within mental health are mainly User Centred Design including
Participatory Design (PD) and focuses on how to involve client and therapist despite it
being a very sensitive area[15][43]. The main methods are role-play[43] and including
the therapists throughout the design process[15]. Another important point is what
design aspects to consider before and during the design [3].
There is an extensive research on mental health applications of PI, mostly focused over
a specific diagnose. A recent review of mental health studies involving self tracking
reveals previous use of 71 different information sources for mobile sensing ranging over
1http://quantifiedself.com/
2This will be referred to as therapy from here on out
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Research question/ problem statement
3
a wide spectrum of categories: social, psychical, location, device, subject, environment
and bio. An example closely related to Echo is Monarca, a personal mental health
mHealth application for bipolar disorder. Monarca combines system driven tracking
and self-assessment to provide a better insight into the disease for both patient and
clinician, supporting the patient’s self-awareness and optimizing the treatment.
1.3
Research question/ problem statement
The overall problem area of the thesis is How to use personal data in psychotherapy?
Since the thesis focuses on the design and concept phase it addresses the following
research question:
How should personal data be presented and used in psychotherapy sessions?
This includes the following underlying questions to research:
• What personal data is relevant for clients in psychotherapy?
• What features are relevant for an mental health mHealth application used in
psychotherapy?
• How should the mHealth application be presented and used in psychotherapy,
and how often?
The thesis consists of four iterations, each addressing facets of the main problem
by utilizing existing User Centred Design (UCD) methods for defining, creating and
evaluating the concept and design of Echo.
1.4
Research goals and methods
The research question was answered by conducting surveys, a focus group, a design
workshop, a role-play workshop and think aloud sessions. These methods were all
supported by desktop research, conducted within the mental health domain, UCD
and design methodologies.
1.4.1
Background and Literature review
The thesis presents the background within psychotherapy and summarizes existing
literature on the following area:
• Design methodology within mental health
• Personal Informatics (PI) within mental health
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
1.4.2
Empirical considerations
Since the scope of the thesis was the concept and application design, it includes
participant inputs, therefore most of the empirical data was qualitative. The data
was analyzed using thematic analysis.
1.4.3
Participants
To reach the desired outcome of Echo, two types of participants were recruited: clients
and therapists.
Clients consisted of people who had been or were currently in psychotherapy.
Therapists were either psychologists or psychotherapists who had prior experience
with clients.
The participants were recruited through several psychologist forums and volunteer
organizations, through the authors’ network and through the psychologist expert
used throughout.
1.4.4
Collaboration
Throughout the thesis a psychologist was used as an expert for domain knowledge,
sparing and validation.
1.5
Result and contribution
The main contribution of the thesis is the concept and design of Echo, a system that
helps clients and their therapists during and between therapy by utilizing the clients
personal data.
Echo is an mental health mHealth iPhone application that the therapist will intro-
duce to the client in the beginning of the therapy process. It gives the possibility to
track both automatically, using phone based sensors and wearables, and manually.
The automatic tracking options, possible to turn on and off are: sleep, physical
activity, social activity, app usage and pulse.
The manual tracking is divided into two categories, self rating and custom.
Self
rating is anything that the client rates from 1-5, custom is any task the client is asked
to do, i.e call their brother or reflect on a given issue.
==PAGE:17==
1.5 Result and contribution
5
All the tracking in Echo is homework from the therapist, and the clients can add
notes to all the elements they are tracking.
Echo also offers the possibility to see visualizations and key metrics on the auto-
matic and self rating tracking. Furthermore the clients can easily get an overview of
all notes made
The use of Echo is adaptable for the given therapist, client and the concrete problem
the client is seeing a therapist for.
Echo offers the client the possibility to track their own behaviour and patterns and
discuss it with their therapist. It is not a stand alone application, but can also be
used after a therapy process has finished, to give the client a tool to aid further work
on their problem.
Echo is an application that lies between the clinical treatment applications and the
self help wellness applications already out there. It supports guided self-awareness.
Echo is designed for clients as the primary user, which means that the therapists
will only have access to the data with the clients consent and thereby privacy is en-
sured.
The design consists of a hi-fi prototype of Echo, developed using Marvel 3 and Adobe
Illustrator CC 4. The final prototype can be found here:
https://marvelapp.com/32g615f
The design has been developed through iterations including both therapists and
clients, which entails discoveries of how to work with the clients in terms of design
involvement. The area is quite sensitive and a lot of previous research has been done
in the domain. Echo differs from the articles in Chapter 2 Background and Literature
Review review by having the clients participate throughout the process.
3https://marvelapp.com
4https://goo.gl/5EWDUa
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
1.6
Thesis overview
The remaining of the thesis is structured as follows:
Chapter 2 Background and Literature Review first introduces the background
for using Echo and discusses aspects of psychotherapy. It then reviews relevant prior
work in design methodologies for mental health and personal informatics in mental
health.
Chapter 3 Methodology presents the overall methodologPiy followed in this thesis
- a User Centred Design design process, discussing the choice of UCD methods used.
Methods used in the empirical work are also described here.
Chapter 4 to Chapter 7 present the actual design process throughout the four it-
erations. Each iteration describes the design goals, the methods, participants and
apparatus used. The results of the user inputs analysis are presented and discussed.
Chapter 8 Echo: final prototype describes the outcome of the design process,
Echo’s final prototype. Both the concept and the User Interface (UI) are presented
in detail, and a complete micro interaction diagram of Echo’s prototype is given.
The research question and the results of the thesis are discussed in
Chapter 9
Discussion. The chapter also discusses some relevant reflection points for the re-
sults, on the impact self tracking can have in on psychotherapy and clients.
Chapter 10 Conclusion, rounds up with a summary of the whole thesis and its
result and discusses future work for introducing Echo in the psychotherapy practice.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Background and
Literature Review
This chapter introduces the knowledge foundation of Echo’s design. It first discusses
the overall context for Echo, which includes important aspects of the psychotherapy
domain. Two particular approaches that Echo is intended supporting: cognitive be-
havioural therapy and psycho-dynamic therapy are touched upon. Related literature
and prior work is reviewed after. The literature was selected in relation the mental
health and personal data domain of the thesis. It consists of design methodologies and
Personal Informatics in mental health and related systems. Key papers are discussed
more in detail, emphasizing how Echo differs or is inspired by prior work.
2.1
Background
Practical psychology spans over a wide range of application areas: clinical psychology,
counseling psychology, neuropsychology, etc. Psychotherapy is however not defined
based on the branch of psychology, the educational background of the psychologist,
nor the presence of a diagnose of the client. It is defined based on the practice of
the psychologist. One important factor in practicing psychotherapy is authorization.
The psychologist needs to obtain an authorization which implies practical work with
clients, under the supervision of another authorized psychologist. Furthermore, autho-
rized psychologists can further specialize on adult, child or organizational psychology.
Besides psychologists, another group of therapy providers are psychotherapists. These
are very similar to psychologists, as they help clients through therapy for improving
mental health, but differentiate, according to the Danish Psychotherapist association
1 in the problems they tackle, as psychotherapist do not deal with diagnoses or severe
mental problems - but provide counseling instead. Echo is targeted at psychother-
apy, with either psychologists or psychotherapists, further commonly referred to by
'therapists'.
In terms of methods, a common approach is to use a combination of theories and
tools, to accommodate to the clients needs, understand their problems and finding
1https://psykoterapeutforeningen.dk/
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Background and Literature Review
solutions 2
3. This was consistent to how the therapists surveyed and interviewed
described their approach (further described in Iteration 1: Initial validation and re-
search and Iteration 2: Echo concept development). There are several categorization
of psychotherapy approaches.
Psykologbogen 4, a danish psychologist knowledge
platform and organization, identifies three main approaches: Psychoanalysis/psycho-
dynamic therapies, Cognitive Behavioural therapies and Humanistic therapies. The
Danish psychology lexicon (Psykologileksikon)[7] additionally includes Body therapy
and Systemic therapy. The American Psychological Association (APA) 5 includes In-
tegrative or holistic therapy, which is reflecting the blending of the above approaches,
in line with the clients needs. The approaches Echo is designed in mind with are
further described.
2.1.1
Cognitive behavioral therapy
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT) is most commonly the targeted approach when
designing applications for psychotherapy and mental health. Bakker et al. [2] have,
based on an extensive review of mental health applications, formulated a set of rec-
ommendations for design; their first recommendation, ”Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
Based” refers, as the name says, to the use of CBT principles. Bakker et al. build
on prior work attempting to incorporate technological solutions and CBT, that were
proved both cost-effective but also therapy efficient and valid.
CBT works generally with symptoms and symptom reduction, better functioning, and
preventing the remission of the specific problem the therapy deals with [24]. It can be
viewed as a collection of interventions that combine a variety of cognitive, behavioral,
and emotion-focused techniques [24]. Focus is put on identifying so called ”triggers”
and learning how they influence cognitive processes and behaviours. Triggers can be
anything from emotional, physical, the presence of others, physical setting, social pres-
sure, activities or thoughts. CBT is different from other psychotherapy approaches,
because it focuses on a current problems rather than issues from the past. It is a
more practical approach such as changing habits or behavioural patterns and ensure
awareness of these, which self tracking, quantified self or personal informatics can
support well. CBT is an extensively used approach in psychotherapy for a wide range
of problems [2], [24]. CBT based mental health applications have also proven efficient
in different interventions : depression , anxiety, social anxiety. chronic pain, smoking
cessation, etc [2]. An important aspect of CBT is that it is not only applicable in a
diagnose or condition, but it is ”fundamentally a prevention technique” [2, p. 4], used
in both prevention and treatment, to avoid worsening.
2http://www.apa.org/topics/therapy/psychotherapy-approaches.aspx
3https://www.health.harvard.edu/mind-and-mood/types-of-psychotherapy
4http://www.psykologbogen.dk/
5http://www.apa.org/
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Design methodologies within mental health
9
2.1.2
Psycho-dynamic therapy
Psycho-dynamic therapy is routed in the psychoanalytic therapy, funded by Sigmund
Freud and has a focus on the unconscious. It argues that it is the unconscious that
is driving the behaviours and decisions, and by exploring it one can find the roots of
the experienced problems. Unconscious behaviours are behaviors dictated by inner
problems that one has not acknowledged. The therapist role is to support the client in
uncovering the unconscious patterns, by observing their behavior, their reactions, by
always asking what they mean in the conversation. Psycho-dynamic therapy works
a lot with symbols, dreams, images and tries to decipher the unconscious motivation
for handling things the way clients do.
have the potential to support the collection
of these different aspects for psycho-dynamic therapy.
The use of personal informatics has been proven to have benefits both in clinical
mental health [5] and well being solutions. The idea to incorporate personal infor-
matics within psychotherapy was also strongly supported by the expert’s inputs. It
is to be used within psychotherapy by clients working with therapists (psychologists
and psychotherapists), regardless of the client’s problem or therapist background.
Therapy-wise, Echo is intended at both psycho-dynamic and CBT based therapy.
CBT is naturally easy to integrate, as it is looking into symptoms and client param-
eters. Even if pyscho-dynamic based therapy is not obviously fitted to integrate this
type of sensor data, expert input suggested that all this data can be a reflection of a
inner cause or problem that is not easily discoverable. This idea was also expressed
in the interviews by therapists having a psychodynamic approach.
As mentioned
above, PI have the opportunity to facilitate the collection of parameters that psycho-
dynamic works with, to uncover inner problems. Bringing these parameters in the
therapy could shed light on the client’s needs and help the therapist better target his
efforts.
2.2
Design methodologies within mental health
This section focuses on previous research on methodologies and frameworks used
within personal data and mental health application development.
Prior work argues that when working with mental health technologies or interven-
tions it is paramount to acknowledge the possible constraints due to the sensitivity
of the area [49] [43] [15]. Additionally there are ethical concerns.
Using IT in mental health care is more relevant than ever due to the accessibility
of the technology, with almost everyone having a smart phone [49] and the impor-
tance of activating clients between sessions [43]
As in Human Computer Interaction (HCI), there has been a shift in how much clients
or patients should be involved in their treatment or engaged in their therapy. This
is due to achieving better results when collaborating with users [20] and that clients
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Background and Literature Review
engagement in their therapy is crucial for achieving positive results[43]. Additionally,
it is crucial to involve the clients and patients in the design and ensure user empow-
erment [20] [49].
This is best achieved with Participatory Design (PD) according to Orlowski et al.
and can be done by either using PD to design the system which will then ensure more
user involvement in the daily processes or by designing the process and the system
simultaneously using PD[20]. For Echo the latter is hard to do since it does not aim
at changing the practices within therapy but merely to support it.
2.2.1
Design and evaluation guidelines for mental health
technologies
In their article, Doherty et al.[15] focuses on what parameters to keep in mind when
designing a system for mental health.
HCI methodologies such as User Centred
Design (UCD) and PD are harder to apply in the field of mental health, considering
the limited access to clients and sometimes also mental health personnel. UCD and
PD are still valid approaches, the most important aspect is how to use some elements
from these frameworks in a manner that respects the sensitivity of the area.
In the design process, the need to clarify the outcome the application is designed for
is accentuated. Besides usability and the user experience, a mental health application
is designed for some impact on the therapy. Therefore it is relevant to consider the
following parameters:
• Is it a stand alone tool or is designed to be used in combination with face-to-face
therapy?
• What type of clients or patients it is developed for?
• Is it developed for a specific disorder and it’s intervention methods? or is it
aiming at improving the client-therapist relationship and communication? or is
the goal client self-awareness? etc.
Doherty et al. highlights designing in collaboration with mental health care profes-
sionals. A determinant aspect is adapting the UCD process to the given setting and
gathering background information on the area and the target group.Here included
are suggestion to use experts, future workshops and role-play. The role-play aspect
is stressed, since therapists, according to Doherty et al. have encountered it during
their training/education and that it is a good alternative to observation or other
more intrusive methods, to understand the practice of therapy. It is also suggested
to include the design of a protocol for usage.
In terms of collaboration with therapists the article stresses the potential difficulties
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Design methodologies within mental health
11
as a result of the interdisciplinary collaboration. It also emphasizes on the knowledge
sharing between HCI professionals and therapist to ensure a cooperation. It states
that when possible, removing the technical aspect of e.g. a prototype, ensures less
focus on unknown territory for the therapists.
The design recommendations covers three areas, designing for clients, designing for
therapists and general design recommendations.
The clients aspect includes engagement, social and cultural backgrounds, using famil-
iar technologies etc. In terms of engagement the article is looking at how to motivate
and keep the clients motivated to use the application, including building upon the
interest and motivation of the clients. They also emphasize that in mental health it
is important that the engagement should be with the treatment rather than the tech-
nology. Of course it is optimal that the engagement with the system would enhance
engagement with the therapy. [15]
In relation to the client and their social and cultural backgrounds, they argue that
the ontology of the client including all aspects from profile (e.g.
age, gender, so-
cio/cultural, etc.) to life history (e.g. early life, significant event, etc.) should be
incorporated in decisions and considerations
[15]. This is not as relevant for the
design of Echo, since the previous history and potential diagnosis of the user is irrel-
evant for the app usages. A user of Echo can be anything from a stressed student to
a person suffering from anxiety.
When designing with the therapist in mind, existing skills, experience and values
of the therapist as well as the constraints a possible application can put on their time
and their therapy methods are the most relevant aspects to consider. It is important
that it supports the existing methods and routines [15].
This is quite relevant for Echo and for answering the research question. Therefore,
therapists were used throughout the iterations. Moreover, a psychology expert was
used to ensure the value was present for therapist, since they would introduce Echo
to clients.
Another significant aspect is the client-therapist relationship, this can vary depending
on the therapy approaches used, but it is key to be aware of the importance of the
relationship:
”Although modern research suggests that an empowering relationship
is not in and of itself sufficient for achieving positive change, the central
importance of effective client–therapist relationships is now recognized in
most intervention theories.” [15, p. 247]
Additionally, elements such as adaptability, usability, sustainability, tangibility, pri-
vacy, personalization and customization are also briefly mentioned by Doherty et al.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Background and Literature Review
.
The paper discusses the different evaluation stages from lo-fi prototyping in design
to clinical studies. The main contribution is to evaluate in all stages, keep ethics
in check and how to evaluate in the sensitive area of mental health. This includes
keeping in mind who the system is designed for and using peer users or the therapist
as a proxy if there is no access to clients.
Fortunately the access to clients was not a problem when designing Echo, since it
was of great importance for the design to have the engagement and acceptance of the
client.
Doherty et al. has very valid considerations for designing within mental health, and
a lot of the elements highlighted was in-cooperated in the thesis, here including the
methodologies to use. Despite Doherty et al. stating that therapist are more acces-
sible, recruiting therapists for the design process was initially challenging, probably
due to them having to participate voluntarily.
2.2.2
Taking part: role-play in the design of therapeutic systems
Matthew et al. discusses role-play in HCI and in mental health. [42] It is argued
that role-play is quite useful in mental health because of the normal difficulties to
understand the area, limited access to end users, and the stigma associated with men-
tal health issues. Furthermore the therapy setting should be a very safe space and
therefore outside intrusion is not allowed. By using role-play, the designers can still
get the user’s perspective.
Matthew et al. claim that role-play can be used to understand therapy, get feed-
back on design before clinical use and train therapist in using tech, making them less
reluctant towards it. Role-play is especially fitted for the domain, since therapists
have used it through their training and use it in their therapy. Role-play is used
for evaluating prototypes in HCI, an example is ’mock therapy’ where the system or
design is tested in a close-to-real therapy session.
The article uses the role-play aspects from psychotherapy to enhance the role-play in
HCI and give a relation to why it is useful. In therapy role-play is used to gain insight
about a clients thoughts, behaviour and feelings. Three case studies are used to il-
lustrate how the role-play can be used in mental health care system development: (i)
developing a system for clients to track symptoms by recording thoughts, behaviour
and feelings, (ii) prototyping and evaluating a design and (iii) create the protocol for
introducing a system to the therapists and get their input.
In the first case the goal was to understand how it is to be a client and understand
how a therapy session work. This was done by role-play in-situ of the therapist office,
with the researcher acting as a real client within the session and doing homework as
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Design methodologies within mental health
13
well.
The next case had the goal of getting criticism and do design debugging. This was
done by having six therapist pair up and play a scenario where the therapist explains
and introduces the system to a client. Here the therapist acting as clients were given
a role card. This helped the feedback because as Matthew et al. states:
One of the uses of role-play is to provide frank and non-subjective
criticism of a person or a behaviour in a safe environment[42, p. 649]
It is also a safe way to test a system and get pre-clinical evaluation, because it is close
to the real clinical setting.
In the third use case seven therapist were used. While some were role-playing, the
rest was asked to observe and comment. This was effective especially since therapists
rarely use technology in their sessions. It introduced how to use the technology and
more important understand how it could be used in their sessions.
These three case studies shows how role-play in HCI can help gain an understanding of
the setting in therapy and the process. It also helps improve design and get therapists
to see the value of the system. Role-play can help give insight where it is otherwise
limited.
Matthews et al. concludes with some guidelines and considerations when using role-
play in design.
• Use improvised role-play for exploration, use scripted role-play for debugging,
validating, making protocol, and getting therapists open to it.
• The longer the role-play, the closer to reality and the more engaged the partic-
ipants become.
• Let the therapist play themselves. They can also play the client - they are not
unaccustomed with it.
• Add unfamiliar elements (the technology) to familiar settings (therapist office)
to see how it works.
The idea of using role-play to evaluate a system, get a concrete idea of the setting
and introduce a new application is quite relevant for the development of Echo. Two
imperative elements gained from this article are that asking therapist to do role-play
is not an obstacle, due to them being accustomed to it and that it is hard to get
therapists to accept new technology into their practices.
Both Doherty et al. and Matthews et al. are concentrating on the therapist as the
primary involved user. This is not the approach that this thesis have decided to take,
because of the access to clients and limited access to therapists. Furthermore the end
users, the clients, should be in focus.
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Background and Literature Review
2.2.3
The Personal Health Technology Design Space
While the two previous papers concentrate on the overall methodology the article by
Bardram and Frost [3] has a more practical and concrete approach to designing a
system within personal health.
Bardram and Frost, 2016 [3] are defining and categorizing the aspects and elements to
keep in mind when designing within the personal health area. They use two different
applications Monarca (intervention for people with bipolar) and BeWell (a wellness
app for personal use) to explain the different elements to consider, since these two are
almost direct opposites in their choices of the design space described in the article.
They are defining a Personal Health Technology design space which is divided into
four areas, as shown in Figure 2.1
Figure 2.1: The personal health technology (PHT) design space from Bardram and
Frost [3, p. 72]
The intervention model aims at defining the following questions: Is it designed for
a specific illness or for general mental wellness? Is it part of clinical setup or is it
a personal tool?
If the application is aimed at having an impact on a disease or
is designed for clinical setup it is important to base it on evidence of effect on the
method that the application supports.
Data processing includes data sampling, pattern recognition and data analysis. The
first consideration is what type of data is collected and by whom. This should be
defined based on what type of data the application uses.
System-driven data collection makes sense if it is possible to collect it without user
involvement, but downsides or considerations are how precise it is and in what qual-
ity. In terms of user-driven data collection, the question is if it is valid enough due
to human interpretation and lack of objectivity.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Design methodologies within mental health
15
What type of data analysis of the collected data is equally necessary. Is the appli-
cation displaying correlation or forecasting to the users? Forecasting and prediction
is quite sensitive, especially within mental health, due to the possible affect on users
and the risk of inaccuracy [3]. This is also one of the reasons Echo did not have these
elements.
In the feedback model Bardram and Frost encourage the developers of a personal
health application to consider the following aspects: visualization, behaviour inter-
vention and gamification. The visualization aspect is simply the decision of either
showing the concrete data to the user or using a metaphor, i.e. the age of a fish in
Fish’n Step to illustrate the amount of steps taken.
For behaviour intervention there is the choice of a passive or active intervention
type. The passive feedback is letting the user seek out the information whereas the
active is pushing the information to the user, i.e. notifications and reminders. The
gamification element is also divided in two, either a rewarding or a competitive ap-
proach. This means that the user can either be motivated by rewards when doing
good or by comparing and competing against others or themselves.
The last design feature category is regulatory issues. This is regarding privacy model
and device regulations. It will not be discussed further since it is outside the scope
of the thesis.
The design space is meant as guidelines to be used when developing, but it does not
require the design to contain all of the four categories. Furthermore Bardram and
Frost emphasizes that it does not have to be an either-or choice in regards to the
design space, for instance the system could have both user-driven and system-driven
data sampling. They round up giving examples of a clinical treatment technologies.
”..Such systems are typically used for the collection of self-reported
data but might include automatically sensed data as well. More advanced
data processing and analysis are rarely applied, because data is interpreted
and used by clinicians.
In these systems, the feedback model is often
based on showing the data combined with active behavior intervention
from clinicians or simple rules.”
They also give an example of personal wellness technologies.
”Personal wellness systems are not prescribed as part of a medical
treatment and should thus include intrinsic motivation for people to use
them. Therefore, they typically have a more aesthetically appealing look
and feel, including the use of graphical metaphors, dynamic and interactive
feedback, and gamification elements. ”
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Background and Literature Review
The article describes the different aspects to keep in mind and questions to ask when
designing a system within mental health. For Echo the data is both user-driven and
system-driven and there are no correlations, forecast or prediction due to the risk
of clients being prompted with negative predictive data that will only worsen their
problem.
The definition of a clinical and a wellness technologies and what they typically contain
does not quite fit the design of Echo. This is to some extend due to the nature of the
system being somewhat in between these two definitions, this thesis tries to question
and push the existing, somewhat rigid divided applications, often defined by diagnosis.
Even though Bardram et al. are stating that it is a very flexible design space and
that both or none of the models can be integrated, there is still some categorization
about what should go in what type of mHealth application that does not fit Echo.
Echo is for instance not sending or sharing data with the therapist and at the same
time it is not using gamification or metaphors for motivational purposes.
2.3
Personal informatics in mental health
The section draws a landscape of prior work in Personal Informatics, focusing over
results in mental health applications. Prior results in the area were used in the design
as a theoretical foundation of what is possible. Echo’s design process did not have a
focus on the system architecture, data collection and analysis, but used the results
discussed in this section as fundamental assumptions for the concept and interface
design.
Personal Informatics (PI) (also referred to as quantified self, self tracking, personal
analytics [36] or personal sensing [45], [27]) take a holistic, quantitative approach to
health and mental health, utilizing the digital trace produced by ubiquitous sensing
[45]. PI systems incorporate different parameters, from body measurements like heart
rate to behavioural and social aspects like location and activities [27].
Previous work in PI have studied the correlation of various measured parameters and
mental health, by means of wearable devices or smartphone based sensors. A recent
comprehensive review of 34 studies [54] shows that several parameters have been
found to have a consistent correlation with mental state and mood assessments. The
review identifies 7 categories of behavioral features used in previous studies: social,
psychical, location, device, subject, environment and bio.
These consists of no less then 71 different information points that can be extracted
from mobile devices. The social category consists of Call Duration, Call Frequency,
Calls missed, Maximum call duration, etc.
They are based overall on 16 unique
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Personal informatics in mental health
17
sources in the smartphone or wearable device (for example SMS log, Call log, Ac-
celerometer, GPS, Screen, Microphone, LED sensor) [54].
In general previous systems focus on a specific diagnose e.g depression, anxiety, bipo-
lar disorder, etc. There are also many systems with a focus on the therapist and
improving the therapy, based on different parameters measured. This is how Echo
differentiates, being a client-focused application, that can be used in therapy regard-
less of a specific diagnose.
Several studies have focused on investigating the relation between pi captured pa-
rameters and depression. One example is the StudentLife study, at the University
of Dartmouth [9]. The application used in studying the 48 college students mental
health and behavioral trends made use of sensor based tracking and self assessment
through the PHQ-9 [31] form. The study found conversation frequency and duration
and co-location with other students to be significantly related to depression.
Kelley et al. [29] describes the use of PI in stress detection and management through
typing analysis, mouse pressure or wearable sensors measuring physiological signals
like breathing and heart rate.
Another study [35] focused over Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), discusses
the use of a minimalist PI setup in psychotherapy. Larsen et. al, 2017 [35] describe a
quite novel and unique approach for self tracking, yet incredibly simple: a one-button
wearable device. Tracking took place between psychotherapy sessions and targeted
occurrences of subjective experiences, identified and defined by the user together with
his therapist as precursor to the hyperarousal state the therapy was concerned with.
The motivation for self tracking as part of psychotherapy was routed in the bias
introduced by memory recall, which according to Larsen et al.:
influences the accuracy of answers to [the therapist’s] questions, the ability
to make accurate assessments, or even the ability to recall particular events
at all [35, p. 1].
This is also part of Echo’s value proposition, as of now, the accuracy of the data
used in therapy relies on the client’s recollection and reporting ability. Echo offers
support to recall of events and aspects through the automatic and manual tracking,
which can be annotated with context by the client. Larsen et al. also argues that
active self tracking should be used in combination with passive sensing for a more
holistic understanding of the mental state. This is supported through self-rating and
custom tracking in Echo, as presented in Chapter 8. Not only the ability of reporting
is supported; Echo creates a mean for the client to become more self-aware Quite
remarkable for this study is the user adoption of the system and self tracking routine.
This might indicate that the effort a user must take as part of tracking and also the
simplicity of the system are crucial for the user experience and the value perceived
by the user.
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Background and Literature Review
Three particularly related solutions in the literature are reviewed next. The purpose
of the review was to derive learning points applicable for the content, interaction and
interface design of Echo, based on the practical experience of these case studies.
2.3.1
Monarca
The Monarca system[4], a pioneer in smartphone-based behavior monitoring tech-
nologies for mental health [45] is targeted at clinical use, for patients suffering from
bipolar disorder. It consists of a mobile application for clients and a web portal for
clinicians, designed, as Echo through a ucd process. The mobile application is used to
collect objective (sensor based) and self-reported patient health data, which is then
available for clinicians to review on the web portal. Automatics sampled data covers
physical activity, mobility, social activity, phone usage and voice features. Self as-
sessment includes mandatory items like mood, sleep, medicine intake and subjective
activity and optional ones like warning signs, alcohol, stress. The data is presented
through concrete graphs visualizations, as in Echo. Echo interface was also inspired
by Monarca’s in self-assessment module.
The application differs from Echo in the clinical aspect, for instance the medicine
intake module. While also supporting patient self-awareness, the scope of the Monarca
application also differs from Echo in its self-care, self-treatment focus, in reducing
the need for clinical supervision and treatment. Another differential aspect is mood
predictions made based on collected data. The mobile application is shown Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: The Monarca system, mobile application preview of main page and self-
assessment.
2.3.2
Emotion sense
Emotion sense is an application developed by the Computer laboratory at the Uni-
versity of Cambrigde, in colaboration with social psychologists [58]. Very similar to
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Personal informatics in mental health
19
the scope of this thesis, Emotion sense is a smart phone application tracking passive
data through a wide range of sensors and user’s own reported moods. This is ana-
lyzed to identify ”what might be triggering peaks in their mood”. Mood assessment
is done through a interface different then previous surveying techniques, on a two
dimensional matrix called the “emotion grid”, see Figure 2.3. The point assessment
is further clarified through a short traditional survey.
Emotion sense was used in a very large scale study of the relation between automatic
tracking data (smartphone sensor based) and the ”user’s demographics, personality,
well-being perception, and other psychological factors” [58, p. 2]. The study also inves-
tigated whether sensor based data can be used to assess user’s mood and happiness.
Compared to Monarca and Echo, Emotion sense has a very broad scope. The study
was conducted with general public, that installed and used the application after ad-
vertised through a media campaign. This was done independent of a mental health
diagnose or therapy involvement. The study reports a strong correlation between
sensor based tracking and well-being perception, as well as the possibility to predict
mood based on automatic tracking with an accuracy of 70%. This results could be
used to provide guidelines for data interpretation for therapists in Echo’s case.
Figure 2.3: Emotion sense application
2.3.3
MyRoR
MyRor, decribed by Pavell et al.
[51] is an application designed to support self-
awareness and self-understanding. While not having defined a specific application, it
is very relevant for Echo, due to its focus on self-awareness. Pavell et al. [51] discusses
mental health as a potential application for MyRor. The emphasis is put on interface
design to support self-awarness. They describe a story based design paradigm for
visualizing personal data, stressing the challenge of capturing, coding and visualizing
complex information about one’s life. To address this challenge they define models for
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Background and Literature Review
context based data collection and visualization that is accessible for the inexperienced
user.
Figure 2.4: MyRor, an example of a story
Stories are sequences of meaningful daily events, displaying the available processed
data via images and narratives. Stories are designed based on the Story Model [51],
defining five story dimensions : the setting, theme, characters, storyline and point
of view. Information is categorized and processed around eight types of contexts:
activity, availability, emotional, environmental, mental, social, spacial and temporal,
analogous to tracking options in Echo. An aspect emphasized is context. Not sur-
prisingly, usefulness of the information cannot be detached from the context it was
recorded in. Without its context, information about one’s parameters loses value.
Deriving the different contexts to create stories using automatic tracking is not triv-
ial though. In MyRor this is done by means of user annotations to automatically
recorded information and stories. This has inspired the annotating feature of graphs
and homework, as described in Chapter 8 Echo: final prototype. The user evaluation
concluded that the story-based interface was very effective in providing self-awareness
- users reported perceiving the system as a snapshot of oneself. This is also what Echo
is intended at, by providing a multitude of different tracking options and the possi-
bility to add custom ones. While image capturing seems to be a good provider for
context, it was not considered for Echo, but discussed as possible future work.
2.4
Design for Personal Informatics
Having reviewed design processes and frameworks for mental health and pi and related
systems, it is important to also review design challenges and recommendations in
terms of interface and design for PI, to round up the knowledge basis needed for
Echo’s design.
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Design for Personal Informatics
21
When it comes to design of personal informatics, a lot of previous work has personal
informatics design, a framework was needed to further refine the user needs and goals
from the USM in relation to the data tracked and deriving meaning from it. Li et. al’s
stage based model [36] is the referenced model in the Personal Informatics research
area. The model describes five stages : the preparation, collection, integration, re-
flection and action Figure 2.5. The stages can be either user or system driven, or a
combination of both. Furthermore PI systems can have either several data tracking
sources (multifaceted) or one (uni-faceted).
Figure 2.5: The stage based model framework for personal informatics, [36]
The stages are defined as sequential and overall iterative. In preparation tracking
parameters and tools are decided, collection is represented by the actual tracking,
integration means preparing, combining, transforming the data in order to reflect
upon in the reflection stage.
Finally action is where decisions are taken to take
action, or change goals and reiterate through the model.
The model was adapted to Echo (see Figure 2.5 in Chapter 8 Echo: final prototype),
as, compared to other Personal Informatics system, Echo has two different user roles
(clients and therapists). The model helped shaping the concept and investigate in a
more detailed level the roles of the clients and therapists in the different aspects of
tracking.
One critic to the stage based model is that it is too focused on the action as an
outcome, while reflection is limited to a single stage.
In many cases there might
not be a specific action goal, but reflection should be a integrate part of all stages.
This is also true for Echo, since the application is intended at improving therapy
outcome and overall, mental health.
The desired outcome is tough a supporting
better understanding of the client for the therapist and increasing self-awareness for
the client. This can be facilitated through continuous reflection.
This shift of paradigm in personal informatics from a research dominated area to a
personal one [26] brings more challenges to design, to support the reflection stage.
Fan, 2013 [16] weighs data visualization as ”one of the main ways by which users of
==PAGE:34==
22
2 Background and Literature Review
personal informatics tools make sense of their data” [16, p. 1]. This reflection stage
is fundamental to PI systems to leverage both the understanding of the different
patterns personal data may describe but also to make this knowledge actionable for
behavioral change [13]. Reflection in
is characterized by Li et al, 2013. through
six dimensions or question asked from the user’s perspective: Status (or what is my
situation now?), history (or what was my situation in the past?), goals (or what
is the desired future status), discrepancies (or what is the distance between my
status and my goals?), context (what affects my status?), factors (or how are the
different parameters related?) [37]. However these considerations of PI systems need
to be carefully adapted when applied to mental health. One aspect is users might
have limited experience, knowledge and time for interpretation and data analysis. At
the same time mental health is a very sensitive area. Goals as defined in the above
questions are for instance not straightforward applicable within mental health. This
is also the motivation for not including goals in Echo, suggested by the clients in one
of the user involvement activities. This is further discussed in Chapter 9.
Different techniques have been used priorly, including traditional statistical charts,
avatars or story based visualizations. Existing systems typically employ several data
streams, across multiple domains. Fan [16] argues that simply visualizing the different
data streams separately, does not suffice for the user to derive meaning. Echo offers
means of comparison in personal patters by combining data streams. Specific data
mining must as well be implemented to support insights. There is a fine line between
visualizing the raw data, providing insights and providing the ability to zoom into the
details, in a way that engages users [16]. Qualitative and quantitative information
must be carefully integrated. In Echo qualitative data is collected though custom
trackers and notes. There was an attempt to integrate these with automatic tracked
data, to provide means for understanding, for instance how mood is influenced by
different objective parameters.
Regular charts have been traditionally used for visualization purposes.
They can
also have shortcomings, as similar visual models can describe very different data
sets [34], [41]. One also needs to have the ability to comprehend specific statistical
visualizations. Therefore inexperienced user needs a simple way of interacting with
his / her data. In Echo, this is was done by having simple line charts to represent
trends over time and summarizing statistics for the different key metrics.
Cuttone et al. [13] also focuses over the challenge of turning observations and insights
from PI into actions. The authors suggest that state-of-the art systems fail to offer
the flexibility and personalization needed for the key element in PI: self-reflection. To
address this challenge, Cuttone et al. builds on top of PI models and state of the
art systems design to define four heuristics to make the design ”facilitate effective
exploration of personal data and make such data actionable for behavior change” [13,
p. 4]:
• Make data interpretable at a glance Data visualizations must be optimized
for interpretation at a glance, for users to obtain feedback and answers with
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Design for Personal Informatics
23
minimal effort and time. As [16], the authors argue against dividing insights
into different visualizations, with every one conveying a specific property or
parameter of the data. In Echo this is covered by having a single module for
visualizing graphs - the Charts. Here different automatic and self rating trackers
can be combined to provide an easy overview of patterns.
• Enable exploration of patterns in time series data
When analyzing patterns one is concerned with two different perspectives: global
trends and periodic patters.
Global trends measure how a variable changes
over time (increase, decrease) and periodic patterns measure how the variable
changes with a repeating pattern (week, month). Echo provides different filter-
ing options for daily, weekly and monthly overview of results, both graphical
and key metrics.
• Enable discovery of trends in multiple data streams
By tracking different parameters, users are generally interested in seeing the
relations between different parameters, for example how sleep is influencing
productivity. Data visualizations need to provide means for investigating this
relations, either by means of comparing or correlating. In Echo’s case, com-
parison is the mean to enable discovery of trends. Correlations visualizations
were disregarded due to realistic limitations in accuracy and the application
area, where is dangerous to make explicit inferences.
Another aspect is the
dichotomy of causality and correlation, discussed by Jensen: are we drinking
coffee because we are tired, or are we lacking sleep because of the caffeine in the
coffee we are drinking [27, p. 15].
• Turn Key Metrics into Affordances for Action
Cuttone et al. [13] make an analogy to the work flow of an analysts, to illus-
trate the importance of interaction in generating insights about personal data.
An analyst typically generates a data view, explores the result then adjust the
parameters or generates a new data view to get insights. Likewise, am this itera-
tive process in PI systems can help identify key metrics and use them to derive
possible actions for behavior change. Visualization should allow interactions
like slicing, filtering, scrolling, zooming in various ways, by time or category, by
thresholds or geographical area, etc. The interaction pattern recommended is
“Overview first, zoom and filter, then details-on-demand” [13, p. 10]. Echo has
considered some of the interaction elements discussed, like filtering and scrolling.
However there were limited possibilities for implementing interactions through
prior to implementation, therefore this is a main consideration of future work.
2.4.1
Overall considerations
To sum up, personal informatics can provide key information and insight into mental
health.
A lot of previous studies have focused over determining the relation be-
tween self-tracking data and mental health parameters and showed evidence of the
==PAGE:36==
24
2 Background and Literature Review
power of personal informatics in understanding and supporting mental health. Prior
work has also shown the importance of the interface and visualization design in self-
awareness focused solutions, like Echo is. While not focused over a specific diagnose
within mental health, Echo borrows from existing systems in terms of automatic
and self-assessment tracking, context annotation and visualization design to support
exploration of personal patterns and support self-awareness.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
This chapter describes the overall methodology of Echo’s design process. The research
objectives are discussed at first, followed by a description of the methods used in
different iterations. The chapter is rounded off with a critical discussion of the possible
implications of the chosen approach.
The motivation for the overall methodology is routed in the research objectives of
this thesis and backed by the reviewed literature on personal informatics and design
for mental health methods in Chapter 2 Background and Literature Review. Echo
is a mental health mHealth solution for integrating PI in psychotherapy.
The approach most commonly used in design research area are Human and User Cen-
tred Design methods [1], [40], [59], (see Chapter 2). HCD and UCD advocate for
continuous user involvement along the design process. While HCD has a broad per-
spective, putting the general human psychology and the human needs and limitations
at the center of the designed solution, UCD is more focused on the target audience
for the specific solution. Both make use of the same methods and are are widely
used interchangeable in literature [40]. In the remaining of the thesis the term UCD
and HCD will be used interchangeable. Typically a UCD process involves iterations,
where user feedback is used to update requirements specifications and prototypes.
Principal methods used in User Centred Design include: background interviews and
questionnaires, focus groups, ethnography, cultural and technology probes, personas,
user scenarios and various forms of prototyping and user testing.
An User Centred Design approach was followed in designing Echo, due to its benefits
documented by considerable design research [40]. However, traditional UCD processes
were previously critiqued as lengthy and heavy, focusing over creating specification
documents rather then focusing on meeting user needs [59]. The need for a more
rapid and flexible process in the design of Echo in the thesis, given the limited time
frame, has brought the attention to a related approach, Lean UX.
Recently, the demand for faster processes in designing new products have lead to an
industry born approach to UCD, the Lean UX. [38]. The Lean UX paradigm is shifting
focus from design deliverables, i.e design specifications, to satisfying user needs in the
design process. It does so through an iterative feedback loop build-measure-learn
[19], [6] 3.1 which, seeks to imagine or derive user needs, design prototypes and
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Methodology
validate needs with prototypes. This was the process each iteration followed. An
example of the loop as applied in Echo’s design is shown in Figure 3.1.
BUILD
LEARN
MEASURE
User involvement
Survey
Focus group
Interviews
Design workshop
Role-play
Think aloud
Design
User story maps
Paper prototype
Interac!ve proto-
type
Analysis
Transcripts
Qualita!ve Data Analysis
Priori!sa!on
Figure 3.1: The build - measure - learn Lean UX feedback loop in Echo’s design
process. Compiled by the authors (adapted from Gothelf [19])
A core concept is the Minimal Viable Product (MVP).The MVP is developed though
prototyping. Different options exist, depending on the scope of the prototype build,
from pen and paper to fully coded. Prototyping in lean is focused on implementing
only the must-have, crucial user tasks. Less prioritized task are pushed to further
implementation (design) sprints or disregarded. This is achieved though a simple
approach, followed in each of the iterations in Echo’s design. First, functionality is
described through user stories, prioritized into a hierarchical model of goals, activities
and tasks, the User Story Map (USM) [52]. The cards prioritized for current release
are refined into a prototype of the . This helps speed the design process, as it changes
focus from extensive requirements specification to designing only needed functionality.
In designing Echo, User Story Maps were extremely valuable for structuring and
prioritizing user feedback data into a clear concept. It also served as a rapid and
flexible ”design contract” to ensure agreement and common understanding between
the authors. Prototypes of the MVP defined through User Story Maps were build in
incremental detail levels, as the project progressed.
The overall methodology can therefore be described as a lean, User Centred Design
approach. Echo was designed in an iterative way from concept to UI, with the involve-
ment of clients, the primary users, and therapists, secondary users. The design was
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Methods in iterations
27
iterative in that the prototype of each iteration was improved upon in the following
one. Using an iterative method meant more time was used on the overall application
design rather then perfecting specific elements through design specifications. It also
meant user feedback was collected based on three versions of Echo prototypes rather
then design specifications. However, iterations with users brought challenges in terms
of planning and managing users for the different methods of involvement along the
iterations.
As discussed in Chapter 2 Background and Literature Review, UCD methods must
be however carefully selected and adapted when designing for mental health. The
specific methods used are discussed in the next section.
3.1
Methods in iterations
An overview of the four iterations is given in figure 3.2
ITERATION 1
INITIAL VALIDATION 
AND RESEARCH
CLIENT & THERAPIST 
SURVEY 
EXPERT INPUTS
REVIEW  
Client & therapist 
survey data
CONCEPT & DESIGN 
Sensor data to be used 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
PRIOR WORK
INTERVIEWS - THERAPISTS 
EXPERT INPUTS
FOCUS GROUP - CLIENTS
ITERATION 2
ECHO CONCEPT 
DEVELOPMENT
ITERATION 3
DESIGN 
DEFINITION
ITERATION 4
DESIGN 
EVALUATION
REVIEW  
Focus group &
Interviews data
CONCEPT & DESIGN
User Story Map
Initial prototype
REVIEW  
Design workshop
data
CONCEPT & DESIGN
2nd User story Map
Interactive prototype
REVIEW  
Roleplay & Think Aloud
data
CONCEPT & DESIGN
Final design - Echo
DESKTOP RESEARCH
THINK ALOUD - CLIENTS
ROLE PLAY - THERAPISTS
 
EXPERT INPUTS
DESIGN  WORKSHOP - 
CLIENTS
DESKTOP RESEARCH
Figure 3.2: Design process overview, compiled by the authors
Prior to the design process a great deal of the related literature and prior work was
reviewed in order to lay the needed academic basis and domain understanding. This
was however recurrent throughout the process of the design
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Methodology
Echo was designed in four iterations where users (clients and therapists) were in-
volved, with different goals. Each iteration used different aspects of User Centred
Design (UCD) methods. The methods selected were predominantly qualitative meth-
ods, to gain a good understanding of both user types, clients and therapists and their
needs for the solution.
The methods used in the iterations follow the Human Centred Design (HCD) process
as described in Maguire[40]: Planning, Context of use, Requirements, Design and
Evaluation
The reason for following this structure is due to the high focus on usability, which
according to Maguire [40] enables a lot of benefits, including: increased productivity,
reduced errors and improved acceptance. Phase 1, Planning is not included, as this
was completed prior to the iterations.
Phase 2 Context of Use: identifying stakeholders, identifying the context, ask ex-
isting users, observe the field and tasks analysis. Maguire [40] emphasizes it is
important to ensure a broad knowledge of the domain and the context the ap-
plication will be used within. Task analysis was done through USM throughout
the four iterations.
Phase 3 Requirements: thorough stakeholder analysis, user requirements, interviews,
focus groups, scenarios, personas and existing solution analysis among other
things.
Phase 4 Design: parallel design, design guidelines, card sorting, prototype etc.
Phase 5 Evaluation: Involving different methods such as user testing, participatory
evaluation and Assessing cognitive workload.
Table Table 3.1 gives an overview of the iterations coverage of the research goals of
Echo.
Research question
Addressed in
What personal data is relevant for clients in
psychotherapy?
Iteration 1,2
What features are relevant for an mHealth
application used in psychotherapy?
Iteration 3,4
How should the application be presented and
used in psychotherapy, and how often?
Iteration 1,2,3,4
Table 3.1: Research goals as they were covered by the thesis design process
The choice of methods in each iteration is discussed next.
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Methods in iterations
29
3.1.1
Iteration 1
As mentioned by Maguire [40] it is important to ensure a broad knowledge of the
domain and the context the application will be used within. Therefore a lot of desktop
research has been conducted to get a broad idea of the context. Furthermore the
psychologist expert has been consulted through interviews and discussions on phone
and Skype. In this iteration this has been mostly to get an introduction to her practice
as well as to understand to what extend how the application could be used. Some
of the parameters discussed were: what types of problem does the client come with,
what type of data could be used, when should that data be used in therapy and in
what context. Furthermore inputs were given on the different types of therapy and
the concept of homework in therapy. The expert has been used for each iteration
to give feedback on the method and formulations. Due to the sensitivity of the area
there has been no field studies or observations. Task analysis was done using the User
Story Map technique, which offered a definition of functionality within Echo.
The survey was created using the recommendations from Mackenzie[39, ch. 5] and
Nielsen for online surveys [47]. They are pinpointing the following elements: quick
and painless, ask few questions, ask different questions of different visitors, ensure
that the questions are easy to understand.
Furthermore the survey used mostly
closed-ended questions for a statistical result, but a few open-ended were used to
collect participants’ own opinions.
3.1.2
Iteration 2
Iteration 2 consisted of a focusgroup, interviews and the initial design as a result of
these.
Personas were not used in the first iterations due to a close collaboration with
actual users. The focus was mainly on requirements, gathered from interviews and
focus group using scenario of use. The focus group method was chosen due to the ben-
efits mentioned by Tynan, 1988[11] and Kitzinger, 1994[30] (i)time-saving compared
to individual interviews, (ii) give the possibility to discover new unexpected outputs
and (iii) they offer interaction between participants:
Crucially, focus groups are distinguished from the broader category of
group interviews by ’the explicit use of the group interaction’ [30, p. 1].
The focus group was created based on the principles from Tynan[11] and Kitzinger[30].
This includes creating an open space for the participants and using participatory tools
such as card sorting and rating exercises. The number of participants was kept low,
due to the sensitiveness of the topic, as argued by Tynan et al.[61]. According to
Kitzinger it is also important that there is a common ground between the paticipants
i.e. they all had or were seeing a therapist.
Therapists interviews were conducted as semi-structured qualitative interviews[33]
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Methodology
The initial prototype design was created by the authors of the thesis based on the
review of prior work and user inputs from the the first iteration and interview and
focus group.
This was done in line with Cooper’s recommendations, that states
users may lack the necessary knowledge and skills to be involved in the actual design
[12].
The initial design made use of three methods discussed by Maguire in [40]:
brainstorming, parallel design and design guidelines. Brainstorming was used used
for idea generation, having the starting point in the user inputs organized in a User
Story Map. The result of the brainstorming were a set of ideas on the application’s
components that were then further refined through parallel design. Here the authors
worked separately on the generated ideas to design different UI. This helped achieve
more diversity in the User Interface, ”before settling on a single solution (possibly
drawing from several solutions)” [40, p. 608].
The outputs of the parallel design
session were discussed thoroughly and combined into a single prototype. Apple design
guidelines for IOS were used in order to ”embody good practice in interface design,
[...] increase the consistency between screens and reduce the development time” [40,
p. 608].
3.1.3
Iteration 3
Iteration 3 was focused on the forth phase of Human Centred Design described by
Maguire [40], design. In the thesis this phase consisted of two parts: a the design
workshop held with client participants and a redesign of the prototype.
Having the initial application UI designed, next step was to challenge it by involving
users. Given that through the first two iterations Echo was narrowed down to have
a focus on the client, only client participants were involved. This was done through
a design workshop that consisted of three design methods of HCD: card sorting,
scenarios of use using a low-fidelity paper prototype. First the concept design was
on focus. Card sorting was chosen as a method in order to validate the structure
of the application and the user journey defined in the initial design session. Besides
validating application structure through the use of different user groups for the sorting
activity, this method can help uncovering difficulties in understanding and design
inconsistencies. For the interface design, scenarios were chosen to be played out using
a paper prototype. This is motivated by the need to investigate examples of how the
application would be used by the users in therapy to satisfy their needs [40]. Maguire
argues that at a low fidelity prototype should at least be used in order to ensure the
functional needs of the users are met.
The prototype was redesigned using the inputs from the design workshop as described
above, using brainstorming, parallel design and the Apple IOS design guidelines.
3.1.4
Iteration 4
This iteration focused on the Evaluation of the Echo design and concept and a final
redesign of Echo. Two types of user involvement were chosen. They consist of the
==PAGE:43==
3.2 User involvement and data analysis
31
elements mention by Maguire [40]: user testing, participatory evaluation and assess-
ing cognitive workload. Think aloud was used for client participants, as it covers all
of the three elements. It is an easy and effective way to test an application in terms
of usability. This is measured by the possibility of the users to navigate through the
application. Learnability [21] could also to some extend be seen by how the tasks
got incrementally easier for the users.
The method offers access to what the users were thinking while using the application.
It is however hard to do for the user, since you think faster than you speak, as stated
by Nielsen et al. [48] . This constraint of the cognitive load can be used to determine
how difficult a given task is for the user by noting how much the user is verbalizing[48]
”demanding tasks creating a “high cognitive load” interfere with verbal-
ization, because other processes crowd verbal information out of working
memory.”[10, p. 72].
According to Nielsen[48] (stated in Nielsen et al.) five users are enough to find the
main usability issues, therefore five participants were used for Think aloud user tests
in Iteration 4: Design evaluation. Nielsen argues the tasks the users are asked to do
should also be kept simple, to minimize the cognitive load and the prototype tested
should be functional enough for the users to understand [48].
The role-play method was selected based on the amount of literature explaining the
benefits of this method within mental health. Both Doherty et al.[15] and Matthews
et al.[42] argues for the benefit when the area is so sensitive and access to the clients
might be limited as well as the therapists being familiar with the role-play method
from their field.
The prototype was redesigned using the inputs from the design workshop as described
above, using brainstorming, parallel design and the Apple IOS design guidelines, The
result is shown in Chapter 8 Echo: final prototype.
3.2
User involvement and data analysis
Having a UCD focus, a great deal of user input was collected and analyzed throughout
the thesis. This section describes the research approach to the UCD process: the data
collection and analysis done in the four iterations, ethical considerations, expert and
participant selection and recruitment and the roles of the authors in the different user
involvement activities.
3.2.1
Participants
The thesis involved two types of users, clients and therapists. In all four iterations of
the design, both client and therapist participants were continuously recruited through
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Methodology
the authors’ networks, through meetings and emails with therapists and psychologists
organizations, word of mouth, the expert’s network and social media. Each of the
workshops involved a number of 4 - 5 client participants, in accordance to recommen-
dations by Nielsen [48]. Three therapists participated in the role-play workshop.
Client users are defined as individuals who have prior been or are currently involved
in psychotherapy. This was a requirement for recruitment for all iterations. Their
therapy experience ensured they were able to contribute in terms idea generation and
identifying functional elements for the application. Another aspect was to be able to
be critical through their own experiences in therapy.
After the first client focus group, where only female participants attended, male
participants were recruited in order to balance the dynamic of the discussions and
make the input representative of a higher user base.
Therapist users were involved based on the guidelines defined by Doherty et al. on
design for mental health [15]. Even if the application was defined to be focused on the
client, the therapist plays a crucial role as the facilitator in the tracking preparation
and also the reflection process (see Echo’s stage based model Figure 2.5 ).
3.2.2
Expert
The expert’s role was to give a basic ideas of a therapist view of the concept and
application, and ensure a continuous feedback on iterations and concept ideas. The
expert is a MA in psychology and has a body therapy education.
She has a her
own clinic. Her approach is holistic, including conversational therapy with psycho
dynamic aspects as well as cognitive behaviour therapy.
3.2.3
Moderators role
All user involvement were moderated by the authors of the thesis. In sessions with
two parallel user groups both authors were moderating. In sessions with one main
activity, the roles were equally distributed and alternated between moderating and
taking notes.
3.2.4
Data collection and ethics
Given the sensitive domain area of the thesis - mental health - and the extensive data
collection, measures were taken to ensure participants understand and are assured
on how their inputs are used in the thesis. The participants were asked to sign a
consent form prior to starting the test. For the therapist interviews a verbal consent
was received from the participants. A complete description of ethics considerations,
along with a copy of the consent form are available in Appendix K Data handling
and ethics. Additionally all pictures and transcripts were anonymized in regards to
clients participants.
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Discussion
33
3.2.5
Qualitative data analysis
All the user involvement were transcribed or summarized and analyzed using thematic
analysis. Transcriptions were made for all the sessions. For activities were users were
engaged in a task with paper cards or a prototype, transcripts were combined with
summaries of selected parts, compiled using the recordings and notes.
Thematic analysis is a qualitative data analysis inspired by grounded theory principles,
and the ”most widely used framework for analyzing qualitative data” [60, p.567]. One
particular principle used was coding. Coding involves reiterating through transcripts
or summaries and annotating text with labels that are important for the specific
research goal.
The codes used was based on what was relevant in relation to each iteration and the
overall development of Echo, here included, validation, design elements and concept.
In addition, codes related to the method (participant dialog, moderator input, work-
shop activity and reflections about the workshop) were used to evaluate the workshop.
3.3
Discussion
All research methods come with trade offs and limitations. The thesis follows a lean
UCD process. While the design process itself is indeed very focused on the user needs,
rapid prototyping and gathering continuous user feedback, the overall project has
been heavy documented, given the requirements for a master thesis. Seeing it from
this perspective, Echo’s design process resembles more a traditional User Centred De-
sign than a lean one. All user interactions were in detailed transcribed, analyzed and
discussed in the different iteration chapters - much like design deliverables or require-
ment specifications. However, having an traditional approach would have resulted in
a extensive design documentation and UML based specification and less iterations of
the prototype.
Another option for methodology given the novelty of Echo’s application area, would
be a Design Thinking approach. However, Orlowski et al. recommend using partici-
patory design within mental health rather than design thinking, due to including the
user throughout the design process [49].
Another important aspect of the approach, as explained above, is that the UCD
process involved mostly qualitative methods. Having a more quantitative approach
would have limited the depth of the design insights. The motivation for doing so, is
rooted, again, in the focus of the thesis - design. The evaluation process has generated
a lot of usable feedback that was implemented. Validating using standard schemas
like SUS [8] or the perceived usability [14] are considered for future work.
==PAGE:46==
34
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4
Iteration 1: Initial
validation and
research
The first iteration focused, as illustrated in Figure 3.2, on a initial validation of the
concept of Echo and getting clients and therapists initial thoughts. The domain of
Echo was investigated to clearly understand the context, which concluded in narrow-
ing down the scope of Echo. Here included defining whom Echo is defined for, for
what use and what aim [15]. This consist of four sub goals as shown in table Table 4.1
Goal
(i)Defining the
target group
(ii)Selecting
initial trackers
for Echo
(iii)Clarifying
if clients would
show data to
the therapists
(iv)Clarifying
how therapist
would use Echo
in therapy.
Methods
Desktop
Research
Expert and
Client &
Therapist survey
Client survey
Therapist survey
Participants
None
Clients &
Therapists
Clients
Therapists
Table 4.1: Iteration 1 Overview
4.1
Method
The methods used in the first iteration have to some extend followed the structure of
understanding and specifying the context of use in Human Centred Design explained
by Maguire [40] (see Chapter 3 Methodology). The methods used consist of a survey,
desktop research and expert inputs.
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Iteration 1: Initial validation and research
4.1.1
Participants
Two surveys were collected, one for clients and one for therapists.
Clients
The nine participants were all female and were selected by the criteria discussed in
Methodology They were recruited through the authors’ network and the expert used.
The age span was between 25-43. None of the participants had used any apps in
therapy before and they had different therapists.
Therapists
Twenty therapists or psychology students participated in the therapist survey and
were recruited through postings on Dansk Psykolog Forening (DPF)1, Psychologists
Facebook groups, Headspace2, Psykologisk Kortids Rådgivning3, Psykologisk Sam-
talecenter4, Studenterrådgivningen5 and Sind6 as well as from a psychodrama group
of the psychologist expert. Most of the places mentioned are based on volunteers,
students as well as therapists. The distribution of students and non students were
around 50%.
4.1.2
Apparatus
Google forms 7 was used to create the two surveys. It was shared with all the above
mentioned organizations and the clients via email and Facebook. The surveys can be
found in Appendix C
The User Story Map was created using post-its on the wall and the storieOnBoard
tool8, a simple tool for collaboratively designing USM.
4.1.3
Procedure and design
The procedures and design of the different methods will be described in this section,
for a theoretical background of the methods see Chapter 3 Methodology.
4.1.3.1
Identifying Target group
Echo’s users were defined in this iteration based on desktop research, consisting of
statistics review within the domain of the concept and goal of Echo. Furthermore a
definition of primary and secondary users were concluded based on the User Story
1http://www.dp.dk/
2https://www.headspace.dk/kobenhavn
3http://pkrnorrebro.dk/kontakt/
4https://psykologisksamtalecenter.dk/
5http://www.srg.dk/
6http://sind-kbh.dk/
7https://www.google.com/forms/about/
8www.app.storiesonboard.com
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Method
37
We’re two Computer Science students at DTU  
designing a solution to utilize personal data in 
therapy as our master thesis. This is aimed at 
people seeking to improve their mental health  
and wellbeing through therapy (using cognitive 
behaviour therapy and psychodynamic psycho-
therapy.)
If you are a psychologist or a 
psychology student, 
you can help by :
- Filling in a 3 min survey 
- Participate in a focus group
- Participate in evaluating our design 
No personal data of participants will be collected.
Your contribution would only consist of giving 
inputs and feedback on the design.
Interested? 
Fill in your email adress here: goo.gl/3N7ktn and we will contact you.
You can contact us at :  s155956@student.dtu.dk / s155505@student.dtu.dk
Fill in your email adress:
goo.gl/3N7ktn
Contact us:
 s155956@student.dtu.dk 
 s155505@student.dtu.dk
Fill in your email adress:
goo.gl/3N7ktn
Contact us:
 s155956@student.dtu.dk 
 s155505@student.dtu.dk
Fill in your email adress:
goo.gl/3N7ktn
Contact us:
 s155956@student.dtu.dk 
 s155505@student.dtu.dk
Fill in your email adress:
goo.gl/3N7ktn
Contact us:
 s155956@student.dtu.dk 
 s155505@student.dtu.dk
Fill in your email adress:
goo.gl/3N7ktn
Contact us:
 s155956@student.dtu.dk 
 s155505@student.dtu.dk
Fill in your email adress:
goo.gl/3N7ktn
Contact us:
 s155956@student.dtu.dk 
 s155505@student.dtu.dk
Do you want to have an impact on 
how personal data can 
help psychotherapy?
Figure 4.1:
Flyer made for recruiting
therapist participants in the first itera-
tion. Compiled by the authors
We’re two students designing a solution to 
utilize personal data in therapy as our 
master thesis, aimed at people seeking to 
improve their mental health  and wellbeing 
through therapy 
Help us by ﬁlling in a 2 min (anonymous) 
survey and give your opinion about what 
personal data you would track and how 
you would like using it (in therapy). 
Contact us at :  
s155956@student.dtu.dk 
s155505@student.dtu.dk
https://goo.gl/ca4eLQ
Do you want to have an impact on 
how personal data can
help mental health?
Figure 4.2: Flyer made for recruiting
client participants in the first itera-
tion. Compiled by the authors
Map, see section 4.1.3.3. Further definition of the users has been done in Iteration 2:
Echo concept development.
4.1.3.2
Survey
The surveys was conducted to get an initial validation of the concept and get a
baseline of understanding the domain.
The questions in the survey were created
based on the iterations overall goals (see Table 4.1), as well as using different survey
theories and recommendation discussed in Chapter 3 Methodology. The trackers and
sensors selected for the questions in both surveys were chosen based on literature
review and brainstorm.
4.1.3.3
User Story Map
The initial User Story Map was created by brainstorming on the therapy process and
adding respectively goals, activities and tasks on the wall. Afterwards it was digitized
to make it easy to reiterate over the same map.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Iteration 1: Initial validation and research
4.2
Results of iteration
The results of this iteration defined the target group Nd validated the initial concept
of Echo.
4.2.1
Target group
Echo can be used by all clients who sees a therapist. To ensure that the design fits the
user, the target group was narrow down, mainly on age. This is somewhat conflicting
with Doherty et al. [15] that states that the client ontology is relevant, however Echo
is designed independently of some of these parameters.
According to KORA (the Danish Institute for Local and Regional Government Re-
search) [44] people referred to a psychologist in 2013 were most often between 15-54
years old. Likewise, Sundhedsstyrelsen states that Danes between 16-54 are most
affected by poor mental health[28]. Secondly, in 2013 the people with most health
apps on their phone were in the age span of 18-49 [17].
Finally a study regarding usage of QS [53] shows that most QS users and most
interested non-users are between 25-44. Based on these statistics the target group
has been defined as the following:
• Age 18+, but to narrow the scope: 18-64.
• Gender: all
• Socio/social background: any, but the user should be seeing a therapist.
• Technical skill: all levels
• Demographic: DK
• Platform: iPhone users, since most Danes are using IOS rather then Android 9
4.2.2
Survey
The results from the client survey shows that the preferred trackers are smart-phone
screen time, pulse and location. It is the same both for self tracking and for what
they would show and talk with a therapist about, See Table H.1.
9http://danskemedier.dk/wp-content/uploads/pressemeddelelse-mobile-life-final.pdf
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Results of iteration
39
Choice of trackers in percentage
Trackers
Self tracking
Track and show therapist
Smart-phone screen time
67%
67%
Pulse
56%
67%
Location
33%
44%
Table 4.2: Percentage of answers of top three trackers.
The key findings of the client survey are:
• 30% of the clients did already use some kind of self tracking tool (for respectively
steps, sleep, weight, activity and calories. They were doing it to be aware of
their patterns and to loose weight. )
• 20 % were seeing a therapist at the moment for one to three months, at the
time of the survey.
• 80% have seen a therapist in the past.
• 11% did not want to show or talk about any of their personal sensor based
(tracked) data with their therapist
The most important of these result is the last item, meaning that when asked What
smartphone sensor based personal data would you show or talk about with
your psychologist, if it would improve your therapy? (select one or more),
89% of the respondents would show and talk about their data with their therapist.
This accommodates goal (iii): clarifying if clients would show data to the therapists
and validates part of the concept for clients.
4.2.2.1
Therapists
The result of the therapist survey show that the most important tracked data seen
from the the therapist perspective are location, pulse, phone calls and smartphone
screen time.
To answer the goal(iv) of the iteration the following question was asked
In what scenarios could you see yourself using sensor data in a therapy
sessions?
The top three answers were: As a tool for tracking improvements(30%), as a home-
work tool(20%) and as a supplement to diary keeping or questionnaires(20%).
An interesting result was that 60% would use these types of data in their therapy
The rest argued that the chosen data was either not relevant in therapy in their
opinion or too simple to make use of in therapy as seen in the two quotes from
respondents.
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Iteration 1: Initial validation and research
Choice of trackers by therapist
Trackers
Pct. of respondents
Location
50
Pulse
30
Phone calls
25
Smartphone screen time
25
None
25
Text messages
20
Activity
15
Sleep
10
Food
10
Table 4.3: Percentage of answers for each tracker data in therapist survey Appendix C
As people come to therapy with very different problems and complaints, I
find it hard to believe, that any such single factor will be a significant help
in dealing with the clients.
The data would be “too simple” to use in a meaningful manner. I prefer
to rely on the clients account, that I find more meaningful.
Overall the survey meets the second(ii) goal of the iteration having smart-phone
screen time, pulse, location and phone calls,food, sleep, activities and blood pressure.
4.2.3
User Story Map
The User Story Map were used to get a clear and concording initial idea of Echo and
to ensure a discussion of the domain and help decide on primary user of the system
and where the system fits in the context. It also helped define what to investigate
further. It is therefore more of a brainstorming result than an actual USM to be
iterated over.
The User Story Map have been divided into two separate sections. One for clients
and one for therapists. This also helped decide on the primary user, based on the
extensiveness of the client version compared to the therapist.
The expert approved the goals, activities and tasks of initial User Story Map after
being introduced to the concept.
4.2.4
Discussion of results
The way of doing the User Centred Design in this iteration have proven to be very
valid and gave a lot of inputs, that would possibly not have been taken into considera-
tion have the users and expert not been involved. The use of User Story Map proved
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Results of iteration
41
Figure 4.3: User Story Map Clients. Compiled by the authors
Figure 4.4: User Story Map Therapists. Compiled by the authors
to be a valuable way of collecting requirements and a good tool for both discussion
and united understanding of the concept. The survey helped answer some questions
in relation to both goal (iii) and goal (iv) and helped define the goals for the next
iteration, even if the sample size might be too small in the traditional sense of quan-
titative data. Furthermore it defined some of the tracking options, though they are
be further investigated qualitatively in Iteration 2: Echo concept development.
The results of the therapist survey did not show a staggering rate of therapists eager
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Iteration 1: Initial validation and research
to use these data, this might be caused by how technical the question was phrased.
As discussed in several articles[15][43] in the section 2.2, one of the most challenging
aspects of when designing for the mental health domain, is that therapists have a
reluctance to use technology in a field with so many years of traditional human focus.
This aspect was also mentioned when talking with Dansk psykolog Forening. The
GDPR 10 issues also makes therapist very aware of data and how to use it correctly.
10https://www.eugdpr.org/
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Iteration 2: Echo
concept
development
The overall goal of this iteration was to get input from users to generate requirements
using the User Story Map for the initial concept and design of Echo. This includes
a more thorough analysis of some of the elements discussed in Iteration 1: Initial
validation and research and answering the sub question. The sub goals of this iteration
can be found in Table 5.1
Goals
(i)Defining
trackers to be
included in
Echo
(ii)Define
when and by
whom Echo
should be used
in therapy
(iii)Define how
Echo should be
introduced and
used in
therapy.
(iiii)Define if
Echo should be
used during
and/or
between
sessions
Methods
Focus group &
Interviews &
Desktop research
Interviews &
focus group
Interviews &
focus group
Focus group &
Interviews
Participants
Clients &
therapists
Clients &
therapists
Clients &
therapists
Clients &
therapists
Table 5.1: Iteration 2 Overview
5.1
Method
According to Maguire[40], the next step in Human Centred Design is requirements.
The methods used in to support this step consist of interviews, focus group and desk-
==PAGE:56==
44
5 Iteration 2: Echo concept development
top research to further define what tracking option to include in Echo, see Methodol-
ogy for further discussion of the methods.
5.1.1
Participants
The participants were recruited from the authors’ network, the expert and through
the survey from Iteration 1: Initial validation and research
5.1.1.1
Focus group
The focus group participants were all clients and consisted of four females within the
age span of 29-36. All the participants had participated in the survey in Iteration 1:
Initial validation and research.
5.1.1.2
Interviews
The two main requirements for the interview participants were: (i) being a therapist or
psychology student and (ii) have previous experience working with clients. Participant
A. was 65 years old and an authorized clinical psychologist using mainly psycho-
dynamic therapy, Participant B. was 24 years old and a master student of organization
psychology in the last year.
5.1.2
Apparatus
The interviews were conducted via Skype, since the participants were located in Århus
and Sweden. It was conducted with audio only.
The focus group used scenario cards in the first session, consisting of small cards
created by the moderators, see Figure 5.1. The tracking options were chosen based
on answers from the survey in Iteration 1: Initial validation and research. Each par-
ticipant was given a rating sheet. The rating was done on a 5-point Likert scale from
very relevant (1) to very irrelevant (5), see Appendix D. Furthermore a whiteboard
and small sticky notes were used for the last part of session 1, for the clients to
add on a time-line on the whiteboard. Both focus group and interviews were audio
recorded using a recorder on Android phones and the interviews were recorded on
the mac computer they were held on. Google voice typing was used for transcription
and QDA miner Lite 1 was used for Qualitative Data Analysis for more detail see
section 3.2.
5.1.3
Procedure and design
The procedures and design of the different methods are described here.
1https://provalisresearch.com/products/qualitative-data-analysis-software/freeware/
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Method
45
Imagine an app that records your self reported 
mood. An overview of your mood pattern and 
history can identify the triggers, causes and 
effects of different moods you experience: 
depressive, angry, happy, calm, energetic, 
lethargic, sad, lonely, etc. This can also be 
used in comparison with other tracked parame-
ters.  Is your mood affected by your social 
activity and how? Is your mood affected by 
sleep patterns? Is your mood affected by 
weather? 
An example: Arne never understood his mood 
swings during the day. After tracking his mood 
he could identify different parts of the day were 
similar over a large period of time and caused 
by the setting he was in : at work, with his 
family, in traffic. 
MOOD
Figure 5.1: Mood scenario card used in focus groups. It contains a description of the
tracking option (here mood) and a small case where the tracking option would be
relevant. Compiled by the authors
5.1.3.1
Focus group
The focus group, consisting of four participants, a moderator and a notetaker. It
was held at Aalborg Univeristy in Sydhavn on the 24th of April from 17-18.30 in a
classroom. The focus group consisted of two sessions.
In the first session the participants were asked to read, rate and discuss 10 different
scenarios cards, corresponding to the 10 possible trackers based on surveys from it-
eration 1 and desktop research. The trackers with scenarios were: Physical activity,
sleep, mood, SMS, calls, app usage, pulse, location, blood pressure and food con-
sumption. The rating was done individually on a rating sheet and then the rating
was discussed by all participants.
The participants were then asked to agree on top three of the scenarios and add them
to a time-line on a whiteboard, indicating when they thought an app with the data
would be useful, i.e between or during therapy sessions.
Finally they were asked
where in a therapy time frame they saw the use of Echo, i.e. initially, first session,
after some sessions, etc.
In the second session the participants were asked to discuss how they saw the app
being used in therapy.
The focus group was constructed and carried out with focus on creating an open space
for the participants[11] and using participatory tools such as card sorting and rating
exercises [30]. The moderator guide can be found in Appendix D.
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Iteration 2: Echo concept development
5.1.3.2
Interviews
The interview was conducted, due to the lack of therapists participating in the focus
group, to include inputs from therapist and not only clients. The interviews were
conducted as semi-structured qualitative interviews[33]. The Interview guide is avail-
able in Appendix E. The main goal of the interview was defined and then divided
into sub goals, which were rephrased as questions.
Both interviews and focus group were roughly transcribed and analyzed using a qual-
itative data analysis tool, see section 3.2 User involvement and data analysis for
details.
5.1.3.3
Trackers
Based on the results from the first iteration, the focus group, the interviews and desk-
top research, a comparison of trackers was performed. The tracker chosen for Echo
was then based on the most often mentioned tracker within the scope and relevance
of Echo. The desktop research consisted of articles reviewing or summarizing other
studies within the same domain.
5.1.3.4
User analysis
A thorough investigation of previous solutions and literature review were carried out
as well as a brainstorming session to clearly define the roles of both the primary
users(clients) and secondary users(therapists).
This also affected decisions on the
interface and whether or not both user types should have their own interface.
5.2
Results
The results of this iteration defined what trackers Echo should contain, the primary
user of Echo, how Echo should be introduced and used and when.
5.2.1
Focus group
The scenarios from session 1 with the highest scores are activity, sleep, mood and
pulse.
The rating was also intended to make the participants talk and discuss. Using the
QDA, made it clear to see that mood was the most discussed and relatable, see
Figure 5.3 below.
There was some skepticism towards if the trackers could actually calculate and show
what the scenarios examples showed. One participant complained about wrong pre-
dictions when using Clue2. The participants discussed the benefits and drawbacks of
2 An application to track female health www.clue.com
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Results
47
Rating
Scenarios
Partic. 1
Partic. 2
Partic. 3
Partic. 4
Median
Mode
Pulse
4
4
4
2
4
4
Calls
1
1
3
1
1
1
Location
2
4
1
1
1.5
1
SMS
2
1
1
1
1
1
Blood pressure
4
4
1
2
3
4
Mood
5
5
5
5
5
5
Food
4
1
1
2
1.5
1
Phone usage
3
3
5
3
3
3
Sleep
4
4
5
4
4
4
Activity
4
4
4
4
4
4
Table 5.2: The results of the 5-level Likert scale rating from each participant of each
tracking options scenario and the mode and median for each tracker, see section 5.1.3.1
Figure 5.2: Cardsorting and rating in focusgroup, session 1
tracking, it can help you become self-aware, but it can also turn out to be a stress
factor, both in terms of having to do manual tracking and seeing the data. However
they all agreed that if you have found out what stresses you or makes you sad, you are
in general more aware of it. The main design elements retrieved from the Qualitative
Data Analysis of the focus group are:
• Add correlation of different trackers
• Maybe remove goals that the client could feel bad about not achieving.
• Physiological measurements are more interesting because they are hard to ob-
tain otherwise.
• Be able to make notes, annotate why the data looks at it does, so when you go
back and look at it, you can see why and don’t need to remember.
• Make the data representation and visualization simple if client uses it alone.
==PAGE:60==
48
5 Iteration 2: Echo concept development
Figure 5.3: Scenarios coded frequency. Compiled by the authors
• The clients has to believe that it can actually correctly indicate what it is
suppose too
• It should offer the possibility to select and display only the relevant data not
all.
• It should be personalized and customizable
• Echo should be able to fit all types of clients and their type of problem
Figure 5.4: When should Echo be used, focus group, session 2.
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Results
49
In regards to when and how Echo should be used, there was a clear consent that it
should be introduced by the therapist and it should be in the beginning of a ther-
apy time frame, maybe session 1-3. Hereafter it would depend on the client and the
problem, how often it should be discussed in therapy. They would like to use the ap-
plication both between sessions by themselves and during sessions with the therapist.
There were some discussions as to whether or not Echo should allow clients to send
the data to the therapist prior to a meeting. When discussing how often Echo should
be used one participant summed up the consensus of the group ”dynamically in the
session and regularly on my own.”
An important aspect of the focus group is that the participants are talking and dis-
cussing the trackers from their point of view, meaning that since they all have been
going to a therapist their self-awareness might be higher than others. Therefore some
of the trackers might not seem relevant to them, but might be to other potentiel users
of Echo.
This also indicates that the users should be able to select the trackers, since it might
be someone new in therapy or someone who has been going to therapy before. Based
on the analysis the clients did not see the point of SMS, calls and food because they
only focused on how these elements could affect their mood and problem and not how
for instance the amount of calls can be used to indicate a depressed mindset. They
did however still see the idea and concept of Echo having value:
...an initial thing when you start out like a helpful tool when you don’t
really have a clue you can really see the coherence between your patterns
and moods and it’s very good to use this. you can see what’s going on and
in what time frames and talk with your psychologist about it. Appendix B,
Focus group recording, 40:49
The complete transcribed focus group can be found in Appendix B
5.2.2
Interview
Both the participants were very aware of the appearance of their clients, facial ex-
pression, the way they talk (words, pace). It is important to see the client, look for
the unconscious expressions, the words that are not said, bodily expression or even
silences.
The data that they found quite valuable would be data that can tell them how their
client are doing in different social situations, i.e. work, meeting friends. Another
important element for both was sleep.
They also saw a benefit in having a small note or diary function, to help the client
remember what happened or what affected them.
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Iteration 2: Echo concept development
One saw Echo being used as a tool for preparation before the client arrives and
they both saw the value of using it in therapy. Mostly to help keep focus on the most
relevant elements and to start a discussion.
In terms of clients looking at the data themselves one of the therapist concluded:
They [The clients] report back to me in the conversation, they are coders
of the information themselves or they can report it back and I can read
it before that. But sometimes I think it’s better if the patients themselves
actually looks at the pattern, or look at the answers, together with me and
we can talk about it Appendix B, Interview therapist 1 recording, 20.49
They would not use it every session though, but use it in different sessions depending
on the client and their problem. They both stressed that the therapist should intro-
duce Echo and explain it thoroughly both in terms of why it makes sense in therapy
and how the given client should use it.
I would introduce it because it would be important for the patient to
know that I think this is a helpful tool.Appendix B, Interview therapist 1
recording, 28:54
It is very important that it is not a one fits all solution. It is not only for the client
that it should be customizable and personalized but also for different therapists.
Both therapist saw Echo as a valid product that could actually aid them in therapy
sessions.
I think your task [project] is really really good to help people report back
about sleep, about feeling better or feeling worse, about different things.
Even I as a psychodynamic [therapist] I could use that information but I
couldn’t use it as the only means of therapy, I would still have to meet my
patients Appendix B, Interview therapist 1 recording, 10:37
I think this is a good area, but you need to, as always, be very sensitive of
how to use it and when to use it and so on. But it could be very helpful
to have it designed.
Appendix B, Interview therapist 1 recording, 35:30
The complete transcriptions of the interviews can be found in Appendix B
5.2.3
Target group analysis
The therapists still have to be considered as secondary users, since they would use
the application in cooperation with the clients. They would be introducing the ap-
plication and initialize the talk in relation to Echo in a therapy session. However
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Results
51
they would not have their own user interface, even though it was suggested in the
focus group and the interview, because the therapist does not need access to the data.
The arguments for creating a web portal for therapists were that it would give the
therapist a possibility to look at the data prior to having a therapy session with a
client. This would reduce the time in the therapy session used for analyzing and
reviewing data. It could be an opt in, opt out option.
However both privacy concerns and some clients in the focus group felt like they
were perceived as a set of data instead of a person, because they were not given the
possibility to argue for the data made it clear that it should only be there if highly
useful.
In other solutions that contain a web portal such as Moodbuster[46] and Monarca[3],
it makes sense due to a more clinical approach such as adjusting medicine intake and
a possibility to monitor patients, but that is not the scenario with Echo.
It is quite important to distinguish between sharing and showing.
Clients would
not mind showing their data, but some would be more reluctant to share data with
their therapist than with their doctors, due to the precedence within the medical field.
Furthermore it opposes the concept of the therapist being a facilitator as both clients
and therapists emphasize in both interviews and the focus group. A web portal is
not seamlessly adaptable in the existing approach of psychotherapy.
5.2.4
Trackers
As mention in the method section, the different trackers used in Echo was determined
by comparison of other reviews and the empirical data. The table below shows the
distribution of trackers.
Trackers
Source
Activity
Pulse
Sleep
Location
Light
SMS
calls
App use
Mood
Survey C.
x
x
x
x
x
Survey T.
x
x
x
x
Focus group
x
x
x
x
Interview
x
x
x
x
Rohani et al.[54]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Mohr et al.[45]
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Harari et al.[22]
x
x
x
Table 5.3: Echo trackers selection
==PAGE:64==
52
5 Iteration 2: Echo concept development
There are many more sensors and useful tracking options than mentioned in the above
table, this is however the key elements. Some of the papers used for comparison in
the table do also include battery life time and Bluetooth, this is however not included
in Echo. Microphone and camera has also been discussed, but was considered to be
too intrusive.
Based on the above, the trackers selected for Echo are: Pulse, app usage, Location,
Activity and Light. Furthermore it will include manual trackers that can be created
and added as wanted, this could be used for mood. SMS (text messages) and phone
calls are included under communication in app usage. It is however not possible to see
exactly how many calls and texts, how long the call was or to whom. This restriction
was based on a concern of it being too intrusive which might cause some clients to
obtain from using Echo.
5.2.5
User stories
To update the User Story Map, user stories had to be made based on the results
from this and the previous iteration. They were created using the template from
Economy and Patton ”As a [type of user] I want to [do something] So that I can [get
some benefit]” [52, ch. 7]. To keep the structure from the previous USM, the user
stories was divided into client and therapist. Some of the user stories are shown below
1. As a client I want to ...
• ...track myself, so that i can learn about myself
• ...revise my data, so that I can move forward in my therapy
• ...show my data with my therapist, so that I can get a more informed
advice /therapy
• ...see changes in my patterns over time, so that I can understand the root
cause of my problem
• ...discuss with my therapist what I can be aware of, so that I can change
my behavior/work through my problem.
2. As a therapist I want to...
• ... understand the parameters that affects my client, so that I can under-
stand and help my client better
• ...help my clients be more self aware, so that my clients can change their
behaviour
• ...give my clients homework so that I can understand my clients better
• ...discuss my clients objective data, so that I understand their problem
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Results
53
• ...support my client in between sessions / keep him/her engaged so he/she
can work on solving the problem
Figure 5.5: User Story Map - version 2, Clients. Compiled by the authors
==PAGE:66==
54
5 Iteration 2: Echo concept development
Figure 5.6: User Story Map - version 2, Therapists. Compiled by the authors
5.2.5.1
Initial design
Based on the USM the following initial design of Echo was created using Marvel
prototyping tool3 Below are some of the screens created, the full initial design can be
found at Appendix F.
Each tracker has its own graphs that can be viewed in the Appendix F. The graphs
in the initial design are however just mock graphs as examples of how they could be
designed, since the purpose of the initial design was to have a base for a design and
a discussion in the design workshop.
The idea for the therapy module was based on the concept that the clients should be
able to easily show the data to their therapist, without the therapist having to have
a portal of their own.
3www.marvelapp.com
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Results
55
Figure 5.7: Initial design, therapy, dashboard, graphs and track. Compiled by the
authors
5.2.6
Discussion of results
The four main goals of the iteration: getting requirements, defining what trackers
Echo should use, how and when the application should be used and defining the con-
cept has all been fulfilled through the different UCD methods used.
Initially the focus group was planned as the only user involvement, but due to the
challenge of getting therapist involved, it had to be divided into two separate meth-
ods. One thing worth considering is that even though the users have very relevant
inputs, not all feedback makes sense for Echo.
The fact that they had already worked with themselves and had become more self-
aware through prior therapy makes them indifferent to some of the trackers that other
client or new client could still benefit from. Another element is that all participants
had to imagine how it would work without any design or IT background[12, ch. 9],
which might make them doubt how it could be done.
==PAGE:68==
56
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6
Iteration 3: Design
definition
The third iteration in Echo’s development was focused on the application’s User
Interface (UI) design. The overall goal was to evaluate the content (through the
USM defined in the previous iteration) and the initial UI design of Echo.
More specific, user feedback was sought to evaluate four different goals, as presented
in Table 6.1
Goals
(i) Evaluate if
USM tasks
support user
needs
(ii) Evaluate
flow and screen
interaction
(iii) Prioritize
screen content
(iv) Identify
missing
elements
Methods
Card sorting of
user tasks
Card sorting of
user tasks
Card sorting of
user tasks &
Scenario
role-play
Scenario
role-play
Participants
Clients
Clients
Clients
Clients
Table 6.1: Iteration 3 Overview
6.1
Methods
According to Maguire[40], the next step in Human Centred Design is producing and
evaluating design solutions. The methods used in this step consist of a Design work-
shop [40] that consisted of a serie of other UCD methods: paper prototyping, card
sorting, user stories and scenarios.
Please see section 3.1.3 in Methodology for a
detailed discussion of the methods.
==PAGE:70==
58
6 Iteration 3: Design definition
6.1.1
Participants
All participants used in the workshop are or were previously clients, three females
between 28 to 36, who also participated in the first focus group and a 28 years old
male participant. One participants was an iPhone user and the rest were Android
users.
6.1.2
Apparatus
User stories (USM tasks) paper cards were used for the first session of the design
workshop. In the second session, paper cut-outs of the application’s screens were
used for a card game and scenario role-play. The workshop was audio recorded with
Android phones, transcribed with Google Voice Typing 1 and analysed with QDA
Miner Lite2.
Storiesonboard.com3 was used to implemented the user feedback in
USM and the UI prototype was developed in Marvel4.
6.1.3
Procedure and design
A design workshop [15] was held in a closed classroom at Aalborg University, in
Sydhavn, on the 24th of May, between 17.30 - 19.30. This provided a high internal
validity but a lower external validity, due to not being done in the actual context [39,
ch. 5]. It consisted of two sessions: one focused on the requirements and the user
journey and one focused on the UI design. The Moderator guide for both sessions
can be found in Appendix G.
In the first session, after being introduced to the topic of the thesis and the general
rules of the workshop, the participants were divided into two groups and each group
was seated at a different table together with a moderator. The participants were
given paper cards with user tasks created based on the previous iterations User Story
Map (see Figure 5.5). They were asked to discuss the cards together, sort them into
categories and label the defined categories. The participants were also allowed to add
their own tasks, if they considered so. This was to verify that the application met the
needs of the users, and supports all the different tasks a user would perform through
the app. Figure 6.1 and Figure 6.2 show the USM created by the two participants
groups.
After the categorization the participants were asked to create a user journey for using
the application in therapy. When both tasks were completed, each group presented
their user journey to the other group (see Figure 6.3).
In the second session, targeted at evaluating the UI, participants interacted with the
initial design through a paper prototype of screen cut-outs. Paper prototyping was
1https://support.google.com/docs/answer/4492226?hl=en
2https://provalisresearch.com/products/qualitative-data-analysis-software/freeware/
3http://storiesonboard.com/
4https://marvelapp.com/
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Methods
59
Figure 6.1: User story map created by
the first group
Figure 6.2: User story map created by
the second group
Figure 6.3: Participants presenting and discussing around one of the user story maps
chosen as it is ” well suited to understanding very high level interface requirements”
[63, p. 20]. The initial UI was not in detailed defined, but contained the high level
functionality (Track, Therapy, Graphs, Profile and About modules, and the graphs
used were simply examples, as described in section 5.2.5.1). This session consisted of
two activities: a card game and a role-play of different therapy scenarios using the
paper prototype.
In the card game each participant received a mixed pile of 25 paper cards correspond-
ing to screens of the app. 25 paper cards with titles of the screens were displayed on
the floor in the room where the workshop was held. The participants had to start at
one of the title cards on the floor and look in her/his card deck for that specific screen.
If he/she had it, they could move forward to the next title card. If they lacked the
==PAGE:72==
60
6 Iteration 3: Design definition
specific screen, they would need to ask the other participants about it. They would
continue until they would form a whole 25 deck with all the screens.
The game
was planned to actively involve the participants in getting familiar with the different
screens of the application for the role-play session - see Figure 6.4. However, towards
the end of the game the participants started to do a trading game and instead of
walking around the floor cards, they would look at each others decks and exchange
different screens - see Figure 6.5.
Figure 6.4:
Participants playing the
screen card game
Figure 6.5: Participants trading in the
card game
After playing the card game the participants were divided into two groups, each with
one moderator for role-playing of five scenarios. The topic of the scenarios was chosen
based on the client’s user journey in Echo as defined in the initial design: (i) being
introduced to the app, (ii) showing the data in therapy, (iii) following up on homework,
(iv) self-preparation for the therapy, and (v) being self aware of own patterns. The
scenarios can be found in Appendix G. The participants were asked to take turns
reading a scenario and playing out using the 25 paper screens that were displayed
on the table - see Figure 6.6. After each scenario, the participants discussed whether
they agree or have a different view on the scenario than the one playing it. In one of
the groups, the participants had quite different opinions, generating a lot of relevant
discussions for Echo’s design.
6.2
Results
The user inputs from the workshop are summarized in the following sections, in
regards to the goals of the iteration, defined above in Table 6.1
6.2.1
Goal (i): evaluate if USM tasks support user needs
This goal was addressed in the card sorting session. Overall, both participant groups
discussed the iterative nature of the USM tasks. More specific, goals were introduced,
to define the objective of tracking and to structure the tasks in regards to it; The
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Results
61
Figure 6.6: Participants role-playing and discussing different scenarios using the paper
prototype
participants suggested an iterative process in relation to goals: setting a goal, self
tracking, doing homework, measuring progress, setting new goals, ”then you start
collecting data again and it’s a iterative process” (see Appendix B Data sources, Iter-
ation 3, 02.45 in Design workshop part 3.m4a). Another important aspect discussed
was the therapist and client’s roles. Consensus was that the therapist initiates the
process, by introducing the app, explaining the expected benefits and demonstrating
the tasks the client would be recommended by him/her to do in the app i.e manual
tracking, notes, homework.
In order to update the User Story Map, the feedback was categorized more specific
to the user goals defined in the map, in Table 6.2.
==PAGE:74==
62
6 Iteration 3: Design definition
Even if the application is dealing with a great deal of personal and sensitive
data, the clients did not show concerns regarding the ”read the privacy
policy” task. However, defining personal data like gender, age etc. was not
seen adding value for the client
The participants had different opinions on the tasks related to this goal. One
participant was particularly disagreeing with the graphs being accessible to
the client, as clients don’t have the necessary background to interpret the
data in relation to the goal of the therapy. All participants agreed that it is
important to be aware of what the graphs indicate to the client, i.e negative
progress. Another idea discussed was the selection of tracking parameters;
consensus was that it should be defined together with the therapist.
Automatic tracking was preferred over manual; it is still important to be able
to track custom parameters, but it should require little effort from the client.
Visualization elements from applications like Moves5 and Clue6 were
referenced as positive to the tracking experience. Furthermore, some terms
difficult to grasp were discussed : key metrics, visualization, annotate,
personal data, mix [graphs]. In terms of UI, all participants agreed the
application should be kept simple, visual, icon-based.
One of the tasks introduced by the participants was the definition of therapy
goals but also session to session goals for tracking progress. It was suggested
that the introduction to the application contain a video demonstration of the
application and clear to understand examples of the most common client
tasks i.e how to add tracking entries, how to annotate. The participants also
described annotating as very important for the tracking process, in order to
give context to data but also for the client’s self-reflection and preparation
for therapy (annotations were not implemented in the paper prototype). In
terms of visualizations (graphs), participants discussed again the role of the
client and therapist in deriving meaning from data. One participant
suggested that it should be the therapist’s task to identify potential
correlations. Another participant thought that the reflecting over the
personal data during the therapy session would be to timely, and suggested
this as a task for the client to perform in preparation for the session.
Opinions were also divided in terms of adding homework - if it should be
during the therapy session or after. Interventive notifications were re-defined
as reminders in relation to tracking and homework rather then the client’s
(mental) state.
While a large focus was put over the previous therapy goal, the participants
saw the benefit of the application for the client’s individual work to improve
mental state. The possibility to add context to tracked data was reviewed as
very important. The participants discussed annotating as adding comments
both in text and voice. Another aspect touched upon was the possibility to
see one’s history of graphs, data, homework and notes. This was discussed in
the idea of clients re-practicing exercises or homework after the therapy
process, on their own. Notes were also touched upon as a tool for tracking
ideas or for questions for the therapist.
Table 6.2: Design inputs in relation to the User Story Map goals
==PAGE:75==
6.2 Results
63
6.2.2
Goal (ii) evaluate flow and screen interaction
The two user story maps and the user journey presented by the two participant groups
in the card sorting session (see Figure 6.1 and Figure 6.2 shared a common organiza-
tion of tasks, similar to the USM defined in the previous iteration (see Figure 5.5 in
Iteration 2: Echo concept development). According to Maguire, clear organizations
of cards from several users means the application has a well defined scope [40]. The
distinction between ”in-therapy” usage and ”on-my-own” usage of the app was very
clear in both groups and consistent with the distinction between the goals : optimize
my therapy and learn about my self / work through my problem. Overall, the
described flow was similar. The difference consisted in the selection and definition
of tracking parameters - individual or with the therapist (the preparation stage de-
scribed in Li’s stage based model [36]).
The user journey was validated by the card sorting technique. However, flow and
screen interaction was difficult to measure. This is due to the participants limited
interaction with the paper prototype, when playing scenarios in the second session.
This might be due to using all the application screens from the first prototype, which
made it difficult for the participants to have an overview of the application and distin-
guish between different functionality. The interaction was therefore re-evaluated with
an interactive version of the prototype, in the subsequent iteration (see Chapter 7).
6.2.3
Goal (iii) prioritize screen content
This goal was concerned with the design of the main screen of the application, the
dashboard. The participants came with different opinions on what is the preferred
way of selecting content to be display for easy access in the dashboard (third screen
shown in Figure 6.9). They have discussed whether the approach to the dashboard
should be personalization. Some participants argued that Echo should be aware of the
active tracking, the current status of the client and display meaningful information
relevant for the status. On the other hands another participant talked about the
surprise effect - even if some particular information might not be characterized as
important, it could reveal surprising facts, and support self-awareness.
6.2.4
Goal (iv) identify missing elements
Both sessions have contributed with relevant suggestions in terms of new or missing
tasks. Most notable, as previously touched upon, were the annotation and browsing
of history data tasks. UI elements like check-marks for homework, icons for differ-
ent screens were also brought in the discussion by the participants. Another new
aspect discussed by participants during the card sorting activity was goals defined
by the client together with the therapist, through the application. This was however
disregarded from the design, as the psychotherapy application area is quite different
compared to other areas where self tracking is used. While it is obvious that the psy-
==PAGE:76==
64
6 Iteration 3: Design definition
chotherapy goal is to help the client in regards to his/her mental health and mental
well being, it is very difficult to define very specific goals for the psychotherapy. This
decision was also supported by discussions with the therapist expert and it is further
touched upon in Chapter 9 Discussion.
6.2.5
Inputs for concept and UI design
Based on these inputs the Client User Story Map was slightly adjusted. The therapist
USM was not further used, as Echo was defined to be focused on the client. The home-
work task was turned into a activity, to support the different needed tasks in relation
to homework: add new type of homework, define new homework in therapy (with
therapist), define experiment with therapist, mark homework as done in notification
screen / pop-up, mark homework as done in homework screen (in app), write notes
on homework, audio record notes on homework. Other new tasks introduced were:
see quick image tutorial (tour of app), view historical data in calendar, personalize
stats shown on dashboard (system task).Another result of the was concerned with
the language used in both describing the requirements, but also in the application,
for different labels. Using the users language in the UI makes it intuitive for them
to recognize and find the functionality they look for. Therefore both the User Story
Map and UI labels were updated with user suggested terms. The updated USM is
displayed in Figure 6.7.
After defining the User Story Map, the application prototype was updated. Paper
prototyping was used for creating new screens for the missing elements identified
and as well adapt the existing ones, in accordance with the previous discussed points.
Screens were added for annotating, recording voice notes, homework tasks and viewing
history of homework as well.
All the screens of Echo version 2 can be found in
Appendix B, Designs, Echov2.
In general a whole redesign of all the different graphs was made.
Ambience was
removed from the trackers and sleep was added based on discussions by the clients in
the workshop and expert inputs.
The design was also enriched with more visualizations and icon based UI elements,
as shown in Figure 6.9.
A color scheme was chosen to add detail to the different elements and to be used
in the graphical design of the different graphs and achieve a higher fidelity in the
prototype version. The color scheme is showed in Figure 6.10. The primary color is
pastel green. This was chosen as it is a positive color, symbolizing hope and health
[25], concepts that are at the core of Echo.
Micro-interactions were used to re-define the interaction flow through triggers, rules,
feedback and loops. Figure 6.11 shows the paper version of the micro-interactions
definition.
==PAGE:77==
6.2 Results
65
Figure 6.7: User Story Map - Second design, Clients. Blue cards represent user goals,
yellow cards - activities, white cards - user tasks and purple cards - system tasks.
Compiled by the authors
Based on the micro-interactions definition, an interactive prototype was implemented
using Marvel7 and is available here: https://marvelapp.com/92c8g1e
7https://marvelapp.com
==PAGE:78==
66
6 Iteration 3: Design definition
Figure 6.8: Echo prototype version 2, examples of redesigned Graphs: Sleep, Social
Interaction, Activities and Pulse, daily views. Compiled by the authors
Figure 6.9: Echo prototype version 2, main modules: Track, Therapy, Graphs, Profile,
About. Compiled by the authors
Figure 6.10: Color scheme used in Echo. Compiled by the authors
==PAGE:79==
6.2 Results
67
Figure 6.11: Second version of Echo’s prototype design, paper prototype with anno-
tated micro-interactions
==PAGE:80==
68
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 7
Iteration 4: Design
evaluation
This iteration sought out to get insight from both clients and therapist in regards to
design improvements. This was done through different types of evaluation, depending
on the user type. This was the final iteration with users. The three sub goals of this
iteration is shown in Table 7.1
Goals
(i)Final user
evaluation of the
concept of Echo
(ii)Final user
evaluation of the
UI & UX design
(iii)Final design
inputs
Methods
Think Aloud &
role-play
Think Aloud &
role-play
Think Aloud &
role-play
Participants
Clients & Therapists
Clients & Therapists
Clients & Therapists
Table 7.1: Iteration 4 Overview
7.1
Method
This iteration follows the last part of HCD called Evaluation[40] as presented in
Chapter 3 Methodology. The approach consisted of two methods: role-play [42] with
therapists and Think Aloud [10] with clients. These methods were chosen due to
their relevance within the mental health domain and their ability to test usability
including learnability and systems functionalities.
7.1.1
Participants
The participants were recruited from the authors’ network and through the expert
and previous user involvements regarding Echo.
==PAGE:82==
70
7 Iteration 4: Design evaluation
7.1.1.1
Role-play
The role-play participants consisted of three therapists, all female and all above 50.
One participant was a psychologist, one a psychotherapist and the last one a family
therapist. Two were iPhone users and one an Android user. They all had different
level of experience with role-playing.
7.1.1.2
Think Aloud
The think aloud consisted of three female and two male participants. The age of
the participants were between 25 and 36. Some of the participants had participated
prior in the Echo user involvement and some participated for the first time. Three of
the participants were Android users, one was an iPhone user and the last was both
Android and iPhone user.
7.1.2
Apparatus
The role-play was video and audio recorded on an iPad and the Echo prototype was
used on an iPhone 8 and a Samsung Galaxy A3 phone. The Echo version 2 prototype
as described in Iteration 3: Design definition was used Appendix B, designs, Echov2.
A role card description was created for the role of the client which was used in all
mock therapy sessions. Furthermore a comment sheet for all the module was used,
see Appendix H
The think aloud was carried out using the Echo prototype Figure 6.9 on an iPhone
8, and an introductory think aloud video1 was shown on a Lenovo laptop in the
introduction.
7.1.3
Procedure and design
This section describes the procedures for the role-play and the think aloud, the meth-
ods and the reason for using them was described in Chapter 3 Methodology.
7.1.3.1
Role-play
The role-play workshop consisted of 2 sessions. It was carried out in-situ at one of
the participants clinic, which increased the external validity. It was scripted role-play
due to the aim of evaluating Echo [42]. The total role-play workshop lasted approx-
imately 2 hours. The first session consisted of 4 mock therapy sessions of around
15 min. each, where each of the participants got a role to play and a short intro
of setting the stage and the participant playing the client got the client role card.
The participants playing the therapist were instructed to play themselves. Through
1
https://s3.amazonaws.com/media.nngroup.com/media/editor/2014/08/18/thinking-aloud-
demo.mp4
==PAGE:83==
7.1 Method
71
all four mock therapy sessions the role card of the client was the same. After each
mock session a wrap up discussion was done to get the inputs from all the participants.
The first mock session imitated the first time at a therapist. Before the next mock ses-
sion the participant playing the therapist and the observer was given a walk through
of Echo. The second mock session imitated the third therapy session with a client,
including introducing Echo to the client. The third mock session imitated a fourth
therapy session, where the client had been using Echo for a week. In this mock session
the participants was told not to use Echo directly, the phone was not allowed in the
session, but they could talk about the app if it made sense. The last mock session
had the same setup as the third except that they were allowed to use the app directly
if they saw it fit.
In the second session each participant were given a phone with Echo on it and was
asked to look around in Echo and add comments on each module on the comment
sheet. Afterwards, a small wrap up discussion about when and where to use Echo
was held. The moderator guide for the role-play can be fund in Appendix H.
Figure 7.1: Role-play, session 2 participants are evaluating the module of Echo
7.1.3.2
Think Aloud
The think aloud was a within-subjects [39], user involvement conducted at both DTU
and AAU adapting to where the participants could attend. Four was held at DTU and
one at AAU. It was held in a closed room, to ensure no disturbance and unnecessary
random variables. This provided a high internal validity but a lower external validity
in regards to not being used in the actual context [39, ch. 5].
It consisted of an
==PAGE:84==
72
7 Iteration 4: Design evaluation
introduction, including an intro video2, eight tasks and a wrap up interview. Only
the participant, the moderator and the note taker was present. The participants was
informed of the screen and audio recordings. The concept of the application was
described to the participants who did not know it already, for the others this was
skipped.
The key features that were tested through the tasks were: the tracking setup, present
mode, homework and notes in the therapy tab, combined graphs and the specific
graphs for app usage and sleep in the graph, the dashboard and the calendar. The
moderator guided the process and gave the task, but refrained from talking, except
for encouraging the participant to keep talking aloud. The note taker focused on
elements that were not retrievable in the audio and screen recordings such as facial
expressions and body language. The goal of the Think Aloud was to evaluate Echo
and test usability, here included learnability[21]. The moderator guide, including the
tasks can be found in Appendix I
7.2
Results
The results below consists of the analyzed discussion and feedback from the clients in
the think aloud, and discussions, observations and participant notes from the role-play
workshop.
7.2.1
Role-play
The role-play workshop was conducted to get an evaluation of the concept and design
of Echo from therapists, goals (i) and (ii).
Session 1
To easily discuss the four mock therapy session, the participant playing the client in
the given scenario will be addressed at client, and the participant playing the thera-
pist, will be addressed as therapist. When quoting, the therapist is T and the client
is C. The English was somewhat of an obstacle for the participants, translation was
sometimes needed and some of the participants felt uneasy doing it in English.
Since the first mock session imitated the first time at a therapist it consisted mainly
of clarifying why the client was there. The client followed the role card very closely
and was troubled when having to answer questions not in the role-card. The main
comment on the first mock session was that it was very short and a bit unnatural.
However they still managed to play out most of a normal session, as the observer
mentioned:
2https://s3.amazonaws.com/media.nngroup.com/media/editor/2014/08/18/thinking-aloud-
demo.mp4
==PAGE:85==
7.2 Results
73
it was very quickly, but E.[the therapist role] still managed to get a picture
of the client and give homework, but the whole middle part was missing.
(Appendix B, Session 1 part 2, Time:9.51)
Before the second mock session, the therapist was given a walk-through of Echo by
the moderators.
The therapist was then instructed to present Echo to the client.
Since the therapist was an Android user it was a bit hard for her to move around in
the prototype, made for iPhone, and she needed help to find things and use the phone.
The therapists introduction was very focused on manual trackers and not really men-
tioning any of the automatic ones. This could be due to the participant having a
better understanding of them and maybe also preferring these.
The client was a bit troubled about the having to show what she had been track-
ing and worried that it might feel like extra homework. she asked the therapist if she
thought it would actually help her. The therapist assured that the client only had to
show what she wanted and emphasized that it was not a control of the client, solely
a tool to help her. It could even help the client do things she wanted to and not what
she had to.
In the wrap up discussion, the observer and client noted that the therapist included
the introduction to Echo very smoothly and naturally. It was clear that the therapist
should know the application better. The observer was appreciative of the way the
therapist managed to naturally move from the client’s problem in the role-play to
introducing the app ”I think it was very elegant”.
She also stressed that the therapist needs to know the app well, otherwise the client
won’t understand the benefits nor be willing to put the effort to use it. The thera-
pist needs to be able to answer the clients questions regarding Echo and transistion
smoothly between the discussion about the app and the rest of the therapy.
The therapist said that she felt the app introduction like an interruption in the con-
tact with the client in therapy, because she was trying to find a specific functionality.
Being used to and knowing the app very well could remove that problem.
In the third scenario it was assumed the client had been tracking her self for a week,
the main instruction here was to not explicitly use the app and the phone in the
session.
They however talked a lot about the Echo in this session, the client initializing it.The
client emphasized on the pulse tracking and talked about it giving her a clear idea of
how stressed she was at work. After the moderator tells the participants to wrap up
they conclude:
T: so as a conclusion about the app, we can say, maybe it is a little bit
helpful?
==PAGE:86==
74
7 Iteration 4: Design evaluation
C: Yeah, yeah.. Appendix B, Iteration 4, session 1, part 4: 7:29
In the wrap up discussion they were talking about how the participants playing the
client adapted to the role as it transforms and how the client and therapist adapts to
the app.
The fourth session setup was the same as the previous except that they were al-
lowed to use the app if they saw it fit. The participant talked quite a lot about the
app in this scenario but did not use the phone. The client gave a lot of good feedback
on the app.
T: and have you used the app?
C: yes
T: and what..
C: and then i recognize that I was actually not smoking so much as I
thought I was and that makes me feel good because then my old mum
doesn’t have to say to me don’t smoke, don’t smoke all the time and my
children don’t have to say don’t smoke because I recognize that was not..
T: ..an issue
C: no, and I recognize that I was moving quite a lot
T:yes, moving physically or..
C: moving physical yes and then that makes me feel good because I know
that’s important for me, not because the doctors says or something, but
because I know it’s something that will make me feel good in the time
before with the stuff with Jens and the work and that... so the app helped
me to recognize it
T: yes, and what about sleeping?
C: I.. if I understand it right... I’m not so familiar with it.. but if I read
it the right way then I can see that I actually sleep. The last time I was
here I told you that I didn’t know if I slept but because I can see that I
actually sleep then I.. I’m not so tired anymore not all the time.
T: No
C: Not all the time
T: ..and maybe you go to bed in another way because you know you can
sleep
C: Yes that’s for sure I don’t have to lie down and think [puuhhh] maybe I
can sleep maybe I can’t. What am I going to do if I can’t sleep am I going
to read or am I going to get out of bed and make some light house work
or something stupid Appendix B, Iteration 4, session 1 part 4, 17:38
All the participants were quite intrigued by Echo and saw a lot of potential using
it. When asked specifically into the homework tab and the present status of the app,
they all replied that it was useful and saw no problem asking the client about it, they
compared it to asking about homework.
==PAGE:87==
7.2 Results
75
E: yes I could , I could imagine
H: yes I would do it with the family or something I always give them
homework. writing it down and sending them a picture on the phone so
that would be obvious
M:What type of homework?
H: that depends of what is in the App, that I don’t know.
E: it also depends on the issue , Because I think that if I had a client with,
who’s very upset and so, I would use that app, With a pulse that function
in the app more but if it is a client who is going around and around and
around I would use the function with the notes more and I would like to
see, ..[towards H.] you talked about it, that you didn’t know that you was
sleeping but when you looked at the app you could see, oh I was sleeping,
I think that’s a very good function in the app and also with activity how
often I call like I do not use my phone because I’m so depressed and then
there is 10 calls, its useful, because all human beings are lying in that way
Appendix B, Iteration 4, session 1 part 4, 25:13
The 4 scenarios really helped for evaluating the application. Seeing the therapist
introduce Echo in the second mock session, made it clear that it is crucial that the
therapist knows Echo well before introducing it to a client.
Furthermore using Echo affects the relation between client and therapist in a positive
way, they have more of a common ground, which is quite important in therapy [15].
The fact that they talked quite a lot about the app might be an indicator of how
much time it would take up, however looking at the dialogues in each scenario it is
very easily intertwined with the rest of the therapy.
Finally seeing that the participants did not always follow the directions given, but
adapted the use of Echo to the therapy, shows that Echo is very adjustable for each
therapist and client and what issue that is at hand.
Session 2
The participants were asked to write comments on the three main modules of the app
(see Appendix H), the key comments were:
• I would like to have more functions that reveal my behavior sleeping, eating,
why nothing about sex
• it’s so smart! that you can add whatever you want to keep attention on ex.
alcohol, cigarettes I tried calling you
• when i have people in therapy I typical write /draw on a whiteboard, their
homework would typically be there as well, therefore it would be practical if
you could take a picture and import to homework so it was in the app and not
in photos
==PAGE:88==
76
7 Iteration 4: Design evaluation
• its smart to combine and pay attention to my changes and to help my memory
• optional for the client to add what is relevant, i.e. what did I do today
• generally it is important that it is as simple as possible and that all is repeated
no matter where you are entering the app and what it adds - i cant really tell
from the prototype
A round up discussion was held were the two main questions were: “Would you
look at a clients data prior to a therapy session if you had the option?”
One participant would, to prepare for the therapy sessions. It was discussed that it
depends on the given client.
When asked how they would get the clients data, they all imagined that the client
would send the data on email or through the app. None of them wanted access to the
clients Echo or their own portal, but potentially a small interface in the app where
they could see messages from the clients.
This led to a discussion regarding who should take the initiative to talk about data
from Echo in a therapy session. They all had an idea of the therapist most likely
initiating it, however they also saw the idea of the client initiating it, that way the
client would take responsibility for their own process.
The second question was ”Is there any data that you would not like the client
to look at by themselves?”.
All participants agreed that there would not be anything they did not want their
clients to see, they here emphasized that Echo should not by itself conclude on the
data and then tell the client the conclusion. For instance if the client has a high pulse
which could be due to a panic attack, Echo should not say ” you are having a panic
attack”. That would not be helpful for the client to see. This was already discussed
in the design process and Echo does not notify the user of these things.
In conclusion it is very important that the application is adjustable to different client,
therapists and problems.
7.2.2
Think aloud user tests
The main conclusion of the think Aloud was to simplify Echo. The participants had a
lot of valid input throughout the eight tasks. This has here been sorted by the different
modules. To follow the specific comments the prototype from Iteration 3: Design
definition is shown in small here, for more details see Iteration 3: Design definition.
Furthermore the interactive prototype can be found at https://goo.gl/FPgDBC.
7.2.2.1
Graphs
==PAGE:89==
7.2 Results
77
Figure 7.2: Com-
bined
graphs-
accessible
from
therapy
and
graphs
Most participants liked all the individual graphs(see section 6.2.5),
but the combined graph was a little to complex for them to grasp,
especially the mood part of it.
This was due to the confusion
based on mood being tracked as words, they were expecting a
rating. Furthermore since the mood did not have a legend, the
color coding was more confusing than helpful. Especially since
some of the same colors from app usage and activity was used.
Some of the participants noted that they would imagine negative
words to be red and positive words to be green. Suggestions were
:
• Rate mood with numbers instead of text
• call graphs results
• more detailed weekly and combined graphs
• add a feature to enable clicking in a combined graph and go
directly to the specific graph for the clicked element
• make it easier to jump between differnt graphs in either
weekly and daily view.
only one graph screen where you
can see single or combined graphs
• clear and easy to identify what data is from today in both
calendar and graphs.
• Less color/categories in App usage Add axis on the graphs.
• Change order of categories in sleep, i.e. not awake and deep
sleep next to each other
• add information about sleep phases in sleep
• sleep quality in percentages as there is in many other sleep
tracking apps.
• info icon for how to do stuff, i.e. read the combined graph.
Most participants found the combined graph through the present mode. It is some-
what confusing for them that it is accessible under both graph and therapy. Some of
the participants preferred to see each graph separately rather than using the combined
one when doing tasks. This is partly because of the lack of detail in the combined
graphs.
Mood
The mood graph itself had some of the same comments as mood in the combined
graphs. If it was rating instead of words a visual representation would be possible,
which most users would prefer. The word cloud in the mood graph was not easily
understood by all participants.
Activity
The participants were somewhat confused about whether activity was location, aka
social activity or physical activities. One participant also mentioned that ’workout’
in the daily graph was measured in calories despite the header in the table saying
distance. There were also some confusion as to if it would be tracked manually or
automatic.
==PAGE:90==
78
7 Iteration 4: Design evaluation
App usage
The app usage graph was easy to understand for most, but some struggled to find how
much time they spent playing games, which was part of task 6. This was mostly due
to the legend being in the bottom of the screen and a lack of implemented possibility
to enter the different categories in the prototype.
Task 6 was only completed by
participants who had stumbled upon games in a prior task or seeing games in the
combined graphs, either through graphs or present mode.
Sleep
This screen was easily understood, some commented on the graph not being easy to
use and they all looked at the key metrics to answer task 7, How did you sleep
last night? Furthermore they would like more information on the different sleep
phases and maybe get an indication of their sleep quality as there is in many other
sleep tracking apps.
7.2.2.2
Therapy
Figure 7.3: Ther-
apy main screen,
present
tab
se-
lected
The therapy module consist of present mode, homework and notes.
The present mode was not easily understood by all participants,
some wanted to go to graphs by clicking on the icon instead of
having to select them and then press ”start presenting”. One par-
ticipant misunderstood it as current status.
The label stating
next therapy session was seen as some as a deadline for homework.
In summation it did not give the easy overview as intended, due
to complexity and not all participants understanding all the ele-
ments. However there was also positive feedback: ”This is amaz-
ing, it looks really good. It’s a very nice overview of everything.”
Appendix B, Iteration 4, Think aloud T, 10:53
The homework part was easy to comprehend for most par-
ticipants,
and
they
saw
the
benefit
of
the
feature,
how-
ever
the
experiment
homework
was
more
confusing
than
helpful.
’Type’
in
the
pop-up
was
discussed,
and
they
all had different ideas of what it would include.
Home-
work
was
used
in
alternative
ways
than
designed
for
by
some participants, i.e.
as a way to check their status or
progress.
The note part of therapy was quite easy understood by all, but
with different objectives as how to use it. They all liked the noti-
fication set-up options.
7.2.2.3
Track
==PAGE:91==
7.2 Results
79
Figure
7.4:
Track screen
This was quite easy for all participant, they used words as in-
tuitive, easy and simple.
Due to the phrasing of task number
oneAppendix I, most participants understood that they had to
register mood and not just set up the tracker.
The only com-
ments were that they would have a informative text next to the +
button and that maybe renaming it to set-up instead of track.
7.2.2.4
Profile
Very few comments, they all understood it and it made sense to
all. The only confusing part was that the placeholder name ”Tove”
was confusing to all non Danes. They all liked the fact that the
wearables was listed and easily added to the app.
In general there were suggestions to add info icons to guide the
user throughout the app, maybe some renaming of labels and mod-
ules. The note possibilities in graphs was not easy to find for the
users. The menu should be more clear and in general more icons
in the app. Some would like an intro to the app before signing
in. The color code should be more clear throughout the app and
more coherent. Echo is somewhat simple but has a steep learning
curve. Even if there were a lot of optimization comments only one
participant would not use Echo and they all saw a lot of potential.
Below are some of the comments from the participants:
My overall thoughts is that there is a lot of information in the app, it
seems not complicated. I think it’s very easy to use when you’re first learn
to use it. Appendix B, Iteration 4, Think aloud D, 34:25
I think that the idea is great. Specially the automatic tracking. I think
that actually shows a lot with the pulse and the sleep patterns and phone
use. Those three are really interesting and the way that they are there
shown is actually ok. Appendix B, Iteration 4, Think aloud B, 27:56
7.2.3
Discussion of results
The main objective of this iteration, evaluating Echo and thereby getting feedback
for improvements and validation were all met.
7.2.3.1
Role-play
There were a potential bias since one of the participants were already quite familiar
with the concept of Echo, due to her being involved as the expert throughout the
thesis. However since they all had similar comments in regards to Echo, this bias was
==PAGE:92==
80
7 Iteration 4: Design evaluation
not considered relevant. The role-play workshop did not provide a lot of new design
inputs, but that was not the goal. The aim was to get hands on ideas of how Echo
could be used in real life and get therapist concrete thoughts on the app and concept.
This is also why role-play was selected, since it offers a better understanding of the
context, is a safe way to get some in-context validation [42] and offers access to an
otherwise closed space [15]. The role-play also offers a safe space for criticism [43],
however one of the participants were not as accustomed to role-play and was therefore
initially not so comfortable. Furthermore it was an obstacle that the participants were
not comfortable speaking English.
7.2.3.2
Think Aloud
The participants all saw the value of Echo even if there were a lot of optimization
suggestions, this gives an opportunity to fine tune the app. Almost all participants
could see themselves using it in a therapy setting. The biggest challenge was to select
what suggestions and features should be added to the design of Echo and which
ones should be discarded.
Even if 85% of usability issues are found using only 5
participants3, there are most likely more thing to improve after redesigning the app.
It was quite interesting to see that the learning curve of Echo might be a bit steep.
This clearly proved that a tutorial from the therapist would aid the use of Echo a lot.
This iteration was a reminder of simplicity over complexity.
3https://www.nngroup.com/articles/why-you-only-need-to-test-with-5-users/
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 8
Echo: final prototype
This chapter presents the output of the thesis, Echo’s final design.
This chapter
consists of a detailed description of the interface and interaction design. The design
has changed substantially since Iteration 3: Design definition, due to the amount of
feedback. This led to changing the structure and modules of Echo.
8.1
Echo. Guided self-awareness
To clearly define the concept of Echo, the problem, solution and value proposition
from lean [38] was defined as shown in Figure 8.1. Having a clear concept makes the
design process much more focused since elements, modules and screens have already
been defined.
PROBLEM
SOLUTION
VALUE 
PROPOSITION
Lack of 
self-awareness,
limited memory 
capacity,
impossible to 
observe own 
behavior (e.g. sleep), 
biased recollec!on
Guided 
self-awarenes.
Co-develop 
strategies to sup-
port therapy and
client’s 
self-awareness
Echo
an mHealth 
iPhone applica!on 
for collec!ng and 
visualizing 
personal data, 
to be used 
in  therapy
Figure 8.1: Echo’s concept, from a Lean UX perspective. Compiled by the authors
In Echo the client is the primary user, the therapist is only using Echo with the client
on the clients phone. Echo is supporting the therapy, but it is not a self-contained
application, it should only be used in relation to a therapy process. This also means
that even if it is inspired by other Personal Informatics systems, it does not contain
==PAGE:94==
82
8 Echo: final prototype
the same amount of data detail, interventive notifications and goals, because these
elements does not make sense in a therapy setting.
To clearly define Echo and what it entails, a persona (see Figure 8.2 ) was created
with her own motivation, data and problem, this is used to illustrate how Echo could
be used in a therapy process. The client role card from Iteration 4: Design evaluation
was used to give the persona details. Moreover a small data set of Tina’s data from
14th of may to 12th of june was generated for developing the hi-fi prototype of Echo.
An excerpt of the personas data can be seen in Table 8.1. It is worth mentioning
that the data is not completely representative of a common Echo user, since Tina has
tracked manually every day, in reality there would be some gaps in the data. Having
a persona also means that not all the elements will be displayed in the prototype,
since it does not make sense for a given user to use all the functionalities and trackers
in Echo.
Therapy
Story
Name
Age
Sex
Posion
Lives in
Family
Plaorm
Been in therapy for 5 weeks, once a week. 
Been using Echo for 3 weeks. 
Married to Jens for 10 years, been together 
for more than 20. Jens cheated with a cow-
orker, they have been seperated for 3 month 
and they live seperately. Tina is not sure if 
she should leave Jens or get back together 
with him.  Tina got demoted from chief 
accoantant due to lack of engagment and 
producvity. She seeked advice from a thera-
pist
Tina Dalmgaard
43
female
Accountant
Svendborg 
Married, 2 children
iPhone
Figure 8.2: Persona card. Compiled by the authors
Activity(h:min)
Social(h:min)
Rating
Date
Biking
Walking
Sleep
Work
Friends
Home
Out
Mood
Smoke
Alcohol
2018/05/22
00:43
00:12
40
07:54
01:00
13:00
0
2
1
1
2018/05/23
00:23
00:41
81
07:00
02:00
14:00
0
1
3
2
2018/05/24
00:54
00:22
64
07:54
0
11:00
03:00
2
2
1
Table 8.1: Excerpt of the persona’s (Tina Dalmgaard) dataset. The full data set can
be found at Appendix J
A stage based model [36] diagram was created for Echo, to elucidate the different
==PAGE:95==
8.1 Echo. Guided self-awareness
83
PREPARATION
Client
Therapist
User driven
System & 
user driven
System driven
Client &
therapist
COLLECTION
INTEGRATION
REFLECTION 
ACTION
Figure 8.3: Echo’s self tracking model, Compiled by the authors, based on Li’s stage
based model [36]
stages and what elements were user or system driven. For Echo the distribution of
client and therapist involvement was also added. Echos stage based model is shown
in Figure 8.3. In Echo the preparation state is deciding what elements to track, what
homework to do. This is decided through a discussion between the therapist and
client, with the therapist as the main actor. The Collection state is where the client
tracks. In the reflection state, the client and therapist are reflecting and discussing
the results from Echo and determine how to use the knowledge to move forward in
therapy and with the initial problem of the client. Finally the action stage is where the
client can take actions, do something, based on the reflection done with the therapist.
All the stages are iterative and multifaceted since therapy covers several aspects of a
clients life. As mentioned by Li[36] most often the multifaceted systems do not offer
combined visualizations of the different facets, however Echo offers to show different
aspects in one combined graph.
8.1.1
User Story Map
Based on the user feedback described in Iteration 4: Design evaluation from both
clients and therapists the User Story Map was adjusted to the new changes in the
concept of Echo. This was the base for the final design. The USM is also aligned
with the stage based model described above.
8.1.2
Modules
The concept of Echo consists of four modules that are the key functionalities of Echo:
charts, homework, notes and setup. Echo also contains a calendar to visualize when
data has been added. Before defining what each module consist of, the concept of
trackers in Echo will be explained.
8.1.2.1
Trackers
There is three types of trackers in Echo, the automatic which is everything system
based, a self rating tracker where the user can rate a given element from 1-5 and a
==PAGE:96==
84
8 Echo: final prototype
Figure 8.4: Echo User Story Map. Compiled by the authors
custom where a task or a reflection can be added.
A custom tracker is often something that needs to be done, i.e. call your brother,
reflect over your relationship. The self rating can be anything from mood to alcohol
consumption or sex.
Echo comes with 5 possible automatic trackers: pulse, app usage, sleep, exercise
and social. The pulse is measured through a wearable or possibly through the phones
lens if no device available, which would then make it a custom tracking.
The app usage is tracked from the phone usage and contains four categories: mu-
sic, social media, communication(SMS, messenger, calls etc.) and games.
Sleep measures quality and the 3 main stages of sleep: REM, deep, light and time
awake.1. If no wearable is connected this is tracked as a self rating tracker.
Exercise is all types of physical activities such as walking, running, biking, workout,
etc.
1https://www.tuck.com/stages/
==PAGE:97==
8.1 Echo. Guided self-awareness
85
The last category within automatic trackers is social, this is all the social activi-
ties based on GPS and wifi, possibly using the Foursquare Places API2 to determine
cafes etc. The social category has 4 sub categories: home, work, friends and family
and cafe and restaurants.
8.1.2.2
Charts
This is where the user can see their data from automatic tracking and from self rating
tracking, either represented as key metrics or visualized graphically. They can see
the daily, weekly and monthly data and have the possibility to have up to three
trackers shown simultaneously in one graph. This is where the client can see their
tracked history within Echo. This is a combination of the previous therapy and graph
modules.
8.1.2.3
Homework
This is anything the therapists asks the client to do by themselves between ther-
apy sessions. It could be reflecting on something or a task to accomplish, tracking
automatically, tracking self rating or custom. All of these can contain notes. The
homework is given in the therapy session by the therapist.
8.1.2.4
Notes
There are three main types of notes: therapy, homework and charts. A therapy note
is a note the client makes in Echo, related to something they want to discuss with
the therapist next time, this could be questions, considerations or thoughts.
The homework notes are notes added to self rating or custom homework. These notes
are optional to add.
The last category is chart notes, which are notes made in the chart module, to either
clarify or remember what triggered a certain peak or outlier in the data or simply for
adding context.
8.1.2.5
Setup
This module consist of the profile, account settings such as device and notification
setup and an about module including help, data policy and a tutorial.
The profile includes name, email, password a pin for securing privacy, and the pos-
sibility to delete the profile. The notifications settings gives the user the possibility
to opt in or out of reminders. There are two types of notifications, homework- which
2https://developer.foursquare.com/places-api
==PAGE:98==
86
8 Echo: final prototype
reminds the user to do their homework and a confirmation reminder which gives the
user the possibility to optimize Echo by aiding the system, e.g. ”Echo have detected
this location as your friends home, is that correct? ”.
8.1.2.6
Calendar
Echo has a calendar to easily get an overview of trackers and notes. The calendar is
accessible from all modules main screen and all charts. A specific day can be chosen
in the calendar and it will show the user what type of data Echo has registered in the
given day.
8.2
App design and UI
This section will go into details about the visual identity of Echo as well as the design
elements in the main screens of Echo.
The final design of Echo is a product of all the four previous iterations and their
feedback from users as well as inspiration from existing applications both within (see
Chapter 2) and outside the domain of mental health applications.
To get an idea of the structure of Echo a flowchart has been created, see Figure 8.5
8.2.1
Visual identity
Echo is using the same color scheme as in the previous design Figure 6.10, more
colors has been added to better assist the differentiation for the user as oppose to
using shades and tints. The colors have been more coherently and carefully used to
support the definitions from section 8.1. Echo’s main color for logo, general icons etc.
is green. This was chosen, as mentioned in Iteration 3: Design definition because it
symbolizes hope and health [25]. Echo’s logo can be seen in Figure 8.6.
The icons used in Echo are inspired by IOS icons from the Apples guidelines3 and are
adjusted to fit the context of Echo. Each tracker, both automatic and manual have
a color assigned to them and each sub elements of that category is assigned the same
color, e.g. exercise and walking.
The menu of Echo is a tab bar in the bottom of the screen to allow the user to easily
navigate between the four modules, see Figure 8.7. It is present in all main modules
that are represented on the menu.
8.2.2
Screens
This section will go briefly through the main elements in the main screens of Echo.
For a thorough understanding see the micro interactions of Echo in section 8.3
3https://developer.apple.com/design/human-interface-guidelines/ios
==PAGE:99==
8.2 App design and UI
87
Charts
Homework
Notes
Setup
PIN login
App start
Fingerprint login
Email log in
Sign up
2
3
4
1
Main screen
(Charts daily)
Add new self 
ra!ng tracker
Add new 
custom tracker
Calendar
Toggle on/oﬀ 
no!ﬁca!ons
Toggle note 
types 
Proﬁle setup
Device setup
About & 
Support
Log out
Toggle on/oﬀ 
tracking charts
Toggle daily/ 
weekly/ 
monthly view
Do homework
Toggle tracking 
on/oﬀ
Calendar
Add new 
therapy note
Calendar
Tour
Help & FAQ
Privacy
 policy
Figure 8.5: Flowchart of Echo. Screens are represented by grey rectangles, the given
screen functionality is added in text. Compiled by the authors
Figure 8.6: Echo’s logo. Compiled
by the authors
Figure 8.7:
Bottom menu with
Echo’s
four
modules:
charts,
homework, notes and setup (home-
work menu item active).
Com-
piled by the authors
Micro-interactions.
The interactive prototype is also available at marvel: https:
//marvelapp.com/32g615f. Please note that not all the possible interactions are
in-cooperated in the Marvel prototype, but there is proof of concept of all possible
interactions types.
8.2.2.1
Charts
Charts is somewhat similar to the previous graph module in Chapter 6 except that
it has been simplified, so there is only one view for all graphs and the user can then
select the given tracker they want to visualize, either a single one or up to three.
==PAGE:100==
88
8 Echo: final prototype
The user can only choose to view a category e.g. social and exercise and not a sub
category, e.g. work and biking. This possibility could be implemented in the next
version. All the graphs and key metrics in Echo was generated and calculated through
Excel based on the personas data set and then added to the screens. For the full data
set see Appendix J
2
3
1
Figure 8.8: Dashboard of
charts, the main page of
Echo
The main page of the charts is a dashboard where a
quick overview of either totals for daily or average
for weekly and monthly is shown. This also works
as a access point to each of the separate graphs.
The dashboard is only displaying active trackers,
so it does not necessarily display all existing track-
ers.
1. This is the Segmented Controlsathat allows the
user to select a daily, weekly or monthly view of
the graph and key metrics.
2.The buttons display the total or average for each
tracker/homework and when clicked the user is sent
to the visualizations of the clicked tracker, i.e. ex-
ercise
3. This is the calendar icon which will send the user
to the calendar page when clicked.
ahttps://developer.apple.com/design/human-interface-
guidelines/ios/controls/segmented-controls/
1
3
2
Figure 8.9: Chart for ex-
ercise,
sleep and social
part 1
This is the graphical interface of a users data. In
Figure 8.9 exercise, sleep and social is selected and
a visualization for these three parameters is shown.
The view can be scrolled to see more data, see next
section.
1. This is the back button which will send the user
to the previous page. It is always present except
for on the main page of a module
2. When clicking on one of the buttons, the given
tracker is selected. A max of 3 can be selected at
the same time to avoid clustered graphs on a small
screen.
3.
This is the chart area and a previous day,
week or month can be seen by swiping here
(implemented in Exercise weekly).
==PAGE:101==
8.2 App design and UI
89
4
5
6
Figure 8.10: Chart exer-
cise, sleep and social part
2
This displays the key metrics of the selected track-
ers.
4. Overview of the social key metrics: home, work,
friends & family and cafe & restautant
5. Overview of the sleep key metrics: REM, deep,
light and awake
6. Overview of the key metrics for exercise, since
Tina only walks and bikes and sometimes runs to
catch the bus, these are the only ones displayed.
8.2.2.2
Homework
The homework screen consist of creating homework, doing homework and seeing his-
tory of homework. The homework is easily created either by turning on the automatic
tracker, using a preexisting self rating or custom tracker or creating a new custom
or self rating tracker. When a user wants to do their homework, i.e. rate a given
parameter or do a task, they can easily access that in the homework screen and rate
or accomplish it. When selecting what type of homework the user wants to see the
history for, they will automatically be sent to the calendar screen where they can
select for what time span they want to see the history. See calendar in Figure 8.15.
==PAGE:102==
90
8 Echo: final prototype
2
1
Figure 8.11:
Homework
screen part 1
This is the setup section of homework, i.e. trackers.
1.The user can turn on and off automatic trackers.
It hereby gives the user an overview of what auto-
matic trackers are on.
2. The user can see which self rating trackers are
active, edit them by clicking the list item and they
can also add a new self rating tracker.
The self rating has three default types:
alcohol,
mood and sex. The user can add anything he likes
and the Echo logo will be displayed as the icon.
3
4
5
Figure 8.12:
Homework
screen part 2
3. The setup of homework has one more option, the
custom trackers. This can also be edited and any
possible custom tracker can be added.
4. Here the user will rate their self tracking and
do their custom tracking. Notes can be added to
both. The manual tracking is done by expanding
the items in the list.
5. This is the history of the homework, when the
user clicks one of these list items they will be di-
rected to the calendar default view and can see the
history of homework, i.e. trackers and notes.
==PAGE:103==
8.2 App design and UI
91
8.2.2.3
Notes
2
1
Figure 8.13: Notes,
therapy filter on
This is where the user can get a quick overview of
the notes added to Echo.
1. Clicking the buttons will select or deselect the
type of notes that will be displayed, all three can
be selected at the same time. In Figure 8.13only
therapy notes are displayed.
If several types are
displayed, it will be sorted by category and then by
ascending dates
2. This is the list of the notes shown based on the
selected type. It shows when the note was created,
a description of what it contains and a tag. When
clicking the list item, the user will be sent to the
note and can read it, edit it or delete it.
8.2.2.4
Setup
1
3
4
2
5
Figure 8.14: Setup screen
in Echo
1. This is the profile, here the user can see their
main info and their picture, they also have the pos-
sibility to edit or delete it by clicking the profile
item.
2. This is where the users devices are shown includ-
ing their status. The user can also set up a new
device here by clicking the ”add new device”
3. When the user clicks the ”about and support”
item they get three option, take the tour, get help
and read privacy policies.
4. Here the user can log out of their profile
5. This is the notification setting, the user can se-
lect to have either homework or confirm notification
on or off.
8.2.2.5
Calendar
The calendar view is accessed from all the main screens of each module and from all
screens in charts. It is a quick overview of the users history.
==PAGE:104==
92
8 Echo: final prototype
1
3
2
Figure
8.15:
Calendar
view
The calendar uses the same types of buttons as the
other screens, here the automatic, self rating and
custom tracking can be selected as well as all three
types of notes.
1. This is where the user is informed of what month
they are viewing and they will be able to change
that by clicking either arrow next to the text. left
for previous month and right for next month
2. This is the calendar view. It displays the days
of the month chosen and indicates which days are
from previous month with the gradient of text color.
Furthermore today’s date is indicated by a border
around it.
3. The colored circle on a given day indicated what
information has been added to Echo on that day.
The color matches the color of the button selected.
8.3
Micro-interactions
The micro-interactions for the final prototype of Echo can be found in Figure 8.16. In
consideration to the size of the micro-interactions diagram, only selected screens have
been annotated. For modules with interactive elements within the screen i.e filtering
in notes and charts, the date tabs, sliding toggles on and off or expanding items, not
all the different screen setups are display, but representative ones have been chosen
to illustrate the concept. The complete set of 110 screens can be seen in Appendix B,
Designs, Echov3.
Triggers, feedback, rules and loops were described in accordance to Saffer’s book,
Microinteractions: Designing with Details [57]. Triggers are interactions that initiate
a change of state i.e the press of a button, or a timer for notifications. They can be
either user or system initiated. Rules define what the change is i.e what happens when
a save button is clicked and the feedback is the ( most commonly visual) representation
of the rule, that informs the user the rule has been activated. Loops determine when
rules are executed, based on some time or history of actions i.e. access is denied after
the PIN is mistaken three times.
All the different interactions were annotated with triggers and feedback. Repetitive
elements like back buttons or menu items are only annotated once for readability
purposes. As well, not all interactions have rules and loops.
==PAGE:105==
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Add new self 
rating tracker
Open  Add new self 
rating tracker page
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Add new 
Therapy note
Open  Add new 
therapy note
Trigger
Feedback
Click on 
note
Open  note
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Add new 
custom tracker
Open  Add new 
custom tracker page
Trigger
Feedback
Rules
Click on tracker list 
item
Open page for 
conﬁguring 
selected tracker
Show “Active” tag 
on currently used 
trackers
Loop
All created trackers 
are displayed
Trigger
Feedback
Rules
Click on tracker item in 
Do Homework list 
Expand list item, 
Display form
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Save
Unexpand list, 
save inputs
Display form and note 
option.  If custom 
tracker, display yes / no 
option, if self rating, 
display Likert scale 
Rules
If completed, save to 
database and add to 
charts / calendar. If note 
added, add to notes
Trigger
Feedback
Click on About 
& Support
Open  About & 
Support page
Trigger
Feedback
Rules
Click on 
notiﬁcation
Toggle on / oﬀ
Turn oﬀ if on, 
turn on if oﬀ
Trigger
Feedback
Click on 
name / image 
Open  Proﬁle 
page 
Trigger
Feedback
Rules
Click on Log out
Open Log in page, show 
conﬁmartion message
Trigger
Feedback
Rules
Loop
Click on Add new 
device/ paired device
Open  device setup
Multiple devices can 
be added, only one at 
a time syncing data
(“Connected”)
Display list of all paired 
devices, “Connected” 
used for syncing  
Trigger
Feedback
Rules
Loop
Wrong PIN entered
Prompt PIN again
After 3 wrong entered 
times, give 1 min to 
re-try
Display Wrong pin, 
enter PIN again
Trigger
Feedback
Rules
Form ﬁlled in and 
validated, click on 
Create your account
Display welcome message, 
prompt for email veriﬁcation
When email veriﬁed, open app, 
Intro video overlay 
Don’t allow app access 
until email is conﬁrmed
Rules
If saved, display 
under therapy
Trigger
Feedback
Form ﬁlled and 
credentials match 
database entry, click on 
Open Charts screen, 
Daily view
Trigger
Feedback
Clicl on Forgot 
Password
Open Forgot 
Password screen
3
Trigger
Feedback
Click on tracker
button 
Open Charts
graphic view (plot) 
Trigger
Feedback
Click on 
Homework menu 
Open  Homework 
page
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Notes 
menu item
Open  Notes page
all ﬁlter buttons on
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Homework 
history list item
Open Calendar 
page
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Setup 
menu item
Open  Setup page
Trigger
Feedback
Click on tab 
button
Display a small 
coloured dot for 
active button, hide 
for inactive
Rules
Display buttons for all 
active automatic and 
self - rating trackers 
and daily results
Trigger
Feedback
Click on app icon 
on homescreen
Open PIN entry 
screen
Rules
User is logged in 
pin lock activated
Trigger
Feedback
Correct PIN entered
Open Charts,  Daily 
view
Trigger
Feedback
Click on app icon 
on homescreen
Open Sign up 
screen
Rules
Open Sign up when app 
is freshly installed (user 
never logged in app)
Trigger
Feedback
Click on app icon 
on homescreen
Open Sign in 
screen
Rules
Open Sign when user
logged out
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Sign in
Open Sign in 
screen
Each button will open 
it’s respective tracker 
graph, daily view
Rules
Display dot in 
same color as 
button, only 
when data is 
recorded for 
that day
Trigger
Feedback
Click on day
square
Open Calendar day 
view, display all 
tracked data and 
notes for the day
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Daily / 
Weekly / Monthly tab
Change displayed 
metrics to reﬂect the 
choice of timespan
Rules
Daily - display 
total data
Weekly / Monthly - 
display average
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Daily / 
Weekly / Monthly tab
Change plot and 
displayed metrics to 
reﬂect the choice of 
Rules
Daily - display exact 
data, no plot.  Weekly / 
Monthly - display 
average metrics and 
Trigger
Feedback
Click on tracker 
button tab
Display plots for active 
tracker button 
Rules
Display all trackers 
recorded for timespan 
deﬁned by above tabs, 
plots and key metrics. 
Only display automatic 
and self-rating trackers
Max three active 
trackers at a time 
Trigger
Feedback
Click on calendar icon
Open Calendar page
Rules
Display current month
All toggle buttons (tags) 
active in calendar 
3
Rules
Loop
Turn oﬀ if on, 
turn on if oﬀ
Trigger
Feedback
Click on  tracker list item 
or toggle button
Toggle on / oﬀ the
 automatic tracker
Sleep and pulse is 
tracked automaticlay 
only with  connected 
Fitbit wearable
Rules
Turn oﬀ if on, turn on if oﬀ
and send notiﬁcation at 
set date and time
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Reminder toggle
If oﬀ, turn on and expand 
with reminder options; If on, 
turn oﬀ and colapse
Rules
Make innactive if active
make active if innactive
Trigger
Feedback
Click on active toggle
Set tracker as active, show  
as “Active” in tracker list and 
history
Rules
Prompt authentication 
with active lock when 
oppening the app. 0-2 
locks on at once
Trigger
Feedback
Click on PIN / pass toggle
Set lock on if oﬀ, oﬀ if on
Rules
Don’t save changes
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Cancel
Go back to homework 
screen
Rules
Save changes, display 
tracker in list
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Save
Go back to homework 
screen
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Create 
account
Open Sign up 
screen
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Back 
button
Open Charts
Daily 
(Dashboard)
Rules
Save changes
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Save
Go back to setup screen
Trigger
Feedback
Click detail item / edit
Edit mode
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Help & FAQ
Open Help & FAQ page
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Privacy policy
Open Privacy policy page
Trigger
Feedback
Click on Take the 
tour
Open Take the tour 
page
Trigger
Feedback
Click on note 
category button
Display notes in 
respective 
Display ordered 
notes by category 
and then by date, 
descendantly
Rules
Trigger
Rules
Feedback
Click on Back
Go back to Notes
screen
Discard note
Trigger
Feedback
Click Save
Saved note message, 
go back to Notes screen
Rules
Prompt user to conﬁrm, 
detele note if conﬁrmed
Trigger
Feedback
Click bin icon
Delete note conﬁrmation
Trigger
Feedback
Click Cancel
Do not save changes, 
go back to notes
Trigger
Feedback
Click Save
Save changes, 
go back to notes
Trigger
Feedback
Click Edit icon
Enter edit mode
Trigger
Feedback
Click Delete icon
Delete note, go 
back to Notes
==PAGE:106==
94
8 Echo: final prototype
Figure 8.16: Echo Microinteractions diagram
8.4
Discussion
Even though the final prototype has been designed meticulously and keeping the
relevant user input in mind, there is still possible improvements for the next version.
The possibilities was discovered and discussed throughout the final prototype design.
Some of them might need further research to ensure they are relevant for users.
• Compatibility with other wearables than Fitbit
• Offer users to choose their own icons to represent their self rating or custom
tracking.
• Offer the possibility to view the visualizations in full screen mode when double
tapping on the graph.
• Offer the possibility to view visualizations for sub categories, e.g.
biking in
Exercise or social media in App usage
• Offer to sort across categories in notes.
• Create a messaging module, to send and receive messages and notes between
the client and the therapist
Before any of these extra features would be in cooperated, the design should be
validated, implemented and tested in a pilot study to ensure Echo meets its goal:
Offering guided self-awareness in psychotherapy.
==PAGE:107==
CHAPTER 9
Discussion
In this chapter the research question, its sub questions and aspects of self tracking
in mental health are discussed. This include a look at the results from the thesis
and how that corresponds to the literature within the domain of mHealth application
within mental health.
9.1
Echo - did it answer the research questions?
What personal data is relevant for clients in psychotherapy?
As mentioned in the introduction, personal data was, in the thesis, defined as
physical, behavioural and social data. Moreover this was further defined in Echo as
automatic trackers containing all three types of data, [27] [3], self rating and custom
trackers, consisting of the behavioural data.
Defining exactly what type of personal data was relevant for clients in psy-
chotherapy requires an understanding of what data a client in psychotherapy would
benefit from. The client might have an indication of what their problem is or what
causes it, but not necessarily know what parameters of their life is affecting or
causing the problem or would help it. The therapist on the other hand, have a more
professional understanding of what social, physical or behavioural data would be
important for the given client.
This is an important aspect discussed throughout the thesis, the importance
of ensuring flexibility and the possibility to select relevant trackers. Echo supports
this by offering the possibility to easily turn on or off any of the trackers and create
new ones.
Having all the trackers in Echo on would however affect the battery
lifetime, which the users should be warn about if choosing to do so.
What features are relevant for an mHealth application used in
psychotherapy?
The features selected for Echo had to make sense for the clients and more specifically
had to emphasize the benefit of using it within psychotherapy with their therapist.
Furthermore, the development of Echo should keep the experiences, skills, tools and
processes of the therapist in mind to get their accept of the application [15].
==PAGE:108==
96
9 Discussion
Based on these considerations, homework and notes were selected as key mod-
ules. Homework is a very common practice in psychotherapy and clients see a benefit
of the system if they can annotate the tracked data, to remember the context.
The chart feature needed to support the need for clients to understand their
data both while talking to a therapist and by themselves. A crucial element here
was that the clients should not be exposed to harmful system driven conclusions, i.e.
you are having a panic attack
The participant had other suggestions to features for Echo, that did not neces-
sarily fit the overall concept and goal of the app. And even if the process of designing
Echo relied heavily on users’ inputs, they do not necessarily have the knowledge or
understanding required to know what they want.[32] [12, ch. 9].
An important example is clients wanting to have goals in Echo (see Iteration
3: Design definition). This did not fit within the scope of Echo, and could potentially
have a very negative affect within the framework of psychotherapy. Besides it is very
hard to have a measurable goal within psychotherapy.
It is not the users job to design the solution, but the designers needs to be
able to decipher and interpret what the users actually want.
How should the application be presented and used in psychotherapy,
and how often?
This question was mainly answered through user input and was more concept
oriented. Therefore having the domain knowledge and the inputs from both therapist
and clients was paramount due to the specificity of the domain.
Even if the therapist might be the most obvious resource for answering this
question, it was still relevant to include the clients inputs since they needed to be
engaged within the concept to actually use it[15] The answer to the question is in
fact very simple. It should be decided by the given therapist and client using the
application, therefore the most important role of Echo is to give enough possibilities
for the users to customize it.
How should personal data be presented and used in psychotherapy
sessions?
With all the sub questions answered, all the building bricks to answer the main
research question was defined. The result of the thesis is Echo, which answers the
research question. Echo offers to accommodate self-awareness by presenting tracked
data to the user, which he/she then can share with the therapist. Echo offers the
personalization needed to embrace all clients and therapists, the ’how’ in the research
questions will therefore be defined by the Echos users.
==PAGE:109==
9.2 Self tracking in mental health
97
9.2
Self tracking in mental health
This section discusses an important trait of the research contribution of the thesis:
self tracking in mental health and the possible impact of self tracking.
How much self-awareness is too much self-awareness
One of the important discussion points in the design workshop (see Iteration 3: Design
definition) focused over the roles of the client and therapist in deriving meaning from
the data. While some participants saw the value of becoming more self-aware of own
patterns, one participant believed that the sense making process belongs completely
to the therapist’s role:
I’m not sure if it’s relevant for me to see all these graphs alone, on my
device, because I don’t know how to interpret it. That’s why I’m going to
a therapist in the first place, to interpret my behaviour. If I see this [it
means] I can diagnose myself.
This challenge of designing visualizations that provide meaningful and actionable
feedback but does not however negatively impact the users was previously discussed
in related literature and in the QS community.
Frost et al. present a similar argument, in regards to the Monarca application for
bipolar patients, however here it is focused on mood prediction. Both the designers
and clinicians involved with the design of the Monarca solution saw the benefit of
informing patients about their forecast mood state.
It would provide insights for
both patients and clinicians and allow them to prevent unwanted mood changes. [18].
However the idea of presenting mood swings for the patient was rejected due to
ethical concerns, as predicting mood could end up as ”a self-fulfilling prophecy” [18,
p. 5]. Kelley et al. [29] report similar findings: ”displaying someone’s stress data does
make them more aware of their stress levels, but can also exacerbate their stress” [29,
p. 630].
Echo was designed with this in mind. While not making any negative predictions,
as it only shows historical data it will also not make inferences about the data - for
instance in the case of a panic attack, the user would see a high pulse from the pulse
chart, but it would not be labeled it as a panic attack. In the role-play session held
in iteration 4 (see Iteration 4: Design evaluation) the therapists have all agreed on
this matter.
Tracking drawbacks and possible impact on psychotherapy
Another important aspect to discuss is the risk of shifting focus in psychotherapy
from the problem of the client to tracking. Drawbacks of self tracking have been
previously discussed in literature and the Quantified Self community. Fan mentions
that tracking too many things can overwhelm the person tracking, and this might
==PAGE:110==
98
9 Discussion
lead to loss of motivation and inconsistent tracking data [16].In Echo’s case, tracking
parameters will be agreed upon by the client and the therapist and can easily be
adjusted if such tracking fatigue might arise. Many QS - ers report self tracking as
becoming an obsessive goal in itself
1
2.
Client participants also expressed concerns in regards to self tracking.
When dis-
cussing tracking scenarios in Iteration 2, the client participants mentioned the ben-
efits and drawbacks of tracking: it can help you become self-aware, but it can also
turn out to be a stress factor, both in terms of having to do the manual tracking and
dealing with the data. However they agreed that if you have found out what stresses
you or makes you sad you are in general more aware of it and you are able to use
it for your benefit. Echo’s design has strived to followed Doherty et al.’s guidelines :
designing with focus over the therapy rather then the technology [15].
The misleading idea of self-awareness
Self-awareness and self knowledge are not one-time exercises. Acknowledged since
ancient times as ”the beginning of wisdom”, self-awareness through self reflection and
self tracking is not a new concept. Self tracking has for centuries been done though
diaries and alike methods [27]. However, this exercise takes a lot of discipline and
sustained effort. Some clients might not see the benefit of using Echo, if they already
feel like they are very self-aware. That would not be a common case. There is always
something to learn about one’s self. Even so, it takes a lot of discipline and sustained
effort to self track and reflect on personal informatics, and Echo provides a support
framework to do so.
9.3
Limitations
This sections briefly touches upon the limitations of the research work and how this
could have an impact on the results obtained.
One limitation was access to participants. Unlike in funded research, participants
in this thesis were involved on a voluntarily basis. Few clients were recruited from
the social groups of the authors, on the basis discussed in Methodology. Recruiting
therapists was a challenge, especially for the first two iterations.
As mentioned in the Methodology chapter, an expert psychologist was used to guide
the psychotherapy domain related decisions. A limitation was that the expert used
is closely related to one of the authors. As well role-play therapist participants were
collaborators of the expert used. This could have impacted the feedback received.
Another limitation was the fact that the prototype developed and evaluated through
the four iterations was a hi-fi, nonfunctional prototype.
Screen interactions were
mimicked to a high degree of detail using Marvel3, however it is not possible to exten-
1https://www.theodysseyonline.com/be-patient
2https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/to-your-health/wp/2015/05/11/a-fitbit-fanatics-cry-
for-help/
3https://marvelapp.com/
==PAGE:111==
9.3 Limitations
99
sively cover all possibilities with such a solution. Especially in terms of interaction
with charts, future work should implement more meaningful interactive possibilities.
==PAGE:112==
100
==PAGE:113==
CHAPTER 10
Conclusion
The Thesis has explored many aspects to be able to properly answer the main
question: How should personal data be presented and used in psychotherapy sessions?
This includes a thorough selection of what methods were relevant for each sub
question, discussions, analysis and interpretation of the empirical data and a
meticulous design process. The thesis also investigated the areas of mental health
mHealth applications, Personal Informatics and User Centred Design. This included
the possibility to investigate, the rather under explored, area between wellness and
clinical mental health mhealth applications.
In addition, the thesis offered the opportunity to work closely with therapists
and clients, and thereby understanding what parameters are crucial for supporting a
therapy process. New knowledge was gained in terms of how to empower the clients
and still ensure the importance of the therapist.
A clear goal of the thesis was to have the possibility to dive deep into the sub
elements of what such an application should contain and how it should be used.
The idea, concept and design of Echo were welcomed with positive feedback from
both therapists and clients. All the therapists asked into when it would be available
for them to use in practice. This is a clear indication that even if this thesis does
not conclude with an implemented prototype it has thoroughly investigated all the
aspects prior to implementation and managed to solve a relevant problem, for aiding
clients and therapists in psychotherapy.
10.1
Future work
The main future work for Echo would be to evaluate the final prototype, preferable
with new users, then develop and implement the application. To ensure that Echo
actually aids the psychotherapy, an in-context pilot study would be conducted with
the implemented prototype.
Another important next step would be to clearly define the protocol for usage[15]
and define how Echo should be introduced to therapists.
This could be done in
==PAGE:114==
102
10 Conclusion
several ways, but further research would be needed to decide on the optimal way.
Based on the research done so far, the therapist needs to have a thorough un-
derstanding of Echo and would benefit from using the application before introducing
it to a client. This requires an introduction of the possibilities in Echo as well as the
benefits it offers to psychotherapy.
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX A
Distribution of
Contributions
The distribution of contribution of the writing was as follows
Alina : Chapter Summary, Chapter 3 Methodology, Chapter 6 Iteration 3: Design
definition, section 8.3 and microinteractions diagram
Lys:
Chapter 4 Iteration 1:
Initial validation and research, Chapter 5 Itera-
tion 2:
Echo concept development, Chapter 7 Iteration 4:
Design evaluation,
Chapter 8 Echo:
final prototype, Chapter 10 Conclusion and section 3.1.1, sec-
tion 3.1.2 and section 3.1.4
Both:
Chapter 1 Introduction, Chapter 2 Background and Literature Review
and Chapter 9 Discussion
For further details see Table A.1.
An X indicates who is key responsible for
the chapter or section, a X is used for chapters.
The empirical work for each iteration consists of performing the UCD methods, tran-
scribing, doing Qualitative Data Analysis and discussing what elements are relevant
for the next design.
Each of the design versions included paper mockups and marvel and illustrator
screens.
==PAGE:116==
104
A Distribution of Contributions
Table A.1: Distribution of work, X: indicates the writer and key responsible
Chapter
Alina
Lys
Report writing
Summary
X
Ch. 1 Introduction
X
X
Ch. 2 Background & Literature Review
X
X
Sec. 2.1 & 2.3 -2.4
x
Sec. 2.2
x
Ch. 3 Methodology
X
sec. 3.1.1, 3.1.2, 3.1.4
X
Ch. 4 Iteration 1
X
Ch. 5 Iteration 2
X
Ch. 6 Iteration 3
X
Ch. 7 Iteration 4
X
Ch. 8 Echo: final Prototype
X
Sec 8.1 - 8.2
x
Sec. 8.3
x
All Graphics and Diagrams
x
Micro interactions Diagram
x
Ch. 9 Discussion
X
X
Sec. 9.1
x
Sec. 9.2 - 9.3
x
Ch. 10 Conclusion
X
Appendices
X
X
Empirical elements
Iteration 1
X
X
Iteration 2
X
X
Iteration 3
X
X
Iteration 4
X
X
Design version 1
X
X
Design version 2
X
X
Design version 3
X
X
Defining Micro interactions all iterations
X
X
User Story Map all iterations
X
X
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX B
Data sources
The complete set of audio recordings, video recordings and transcripts from all the
user involvement activities and the the full designs for Echo version 2 and Echo version
3 are available for download from Google Drive 1 at https://goo.gl/EMwffs
The Google Drive folder is structured in five sub-folders, corresponding to the four
iterations and designs:
B.1
Iteration 1
• Client survey (Google form)
• Therapist survey (Google form)
• Client survey results
• Therapist survey results
B.2
Iteration 2
Focus group
• Focus group recording.m4a
• Focus group transcript
Interviews
• Interview therapist 1 transcript
• Interview therapist 1 recording
• Interview therapist 2 transcript
• Interview therapist 2 recording
B.3
Iteration 3
• Design workshop summary
• Audio recording
1https://drive.google.com/
==PAGE:118==
106
B Data sources
B.4
Iteration 4
• Think aloud screen and audio recordings
• Role-play video recording
• Think aloud transcripts
• Materials used in the roleplay
• Roleplay transcript
B.5
Designs
• Echov2
• Echov3
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX C
Surveys
C.1
Client survey
==PAGE:120==
==PAGE:121==
==PAGE:122==
==PAGE:123==
C.2 Therapist survey
111
C.2
Therapist survey
==PAGE:124==
==PAGE:125==
==PAGE:126==
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX D
Focus group
moderator guide
Date: 30th April, 17.00 - 18.30
Participants: K, A, T and H
Location, Frederikskaj 12, room 3.66
Goal:
• when and how to use the system in therapy
• what scenarios are relevant and useful?
The scenarios do not contain technical / application specific information (about
types of sensor data or UI/UX representation of it). For the purpose of the
focus group it should be assumed that the data can be recorded and displayed
optimally and that is what the decisions should be based on.
• when should the system be used for the defined scenarios?
• how should it be used in therapy?
Plan
Introduction (5 min)
Thank you for joining today. We are doing our master thesis, that looks into how
personal smartphone, sensor data can be used to support psychotherapy; What do
we mean by support: help clients and their psychologist understand their patterns
to be able to achieve their goals. Today we’ll have two sessions and a small break in
between. We’ll start in a minute explaining about the first one.
But before we begin there are some small guidelines:
No right or wrong answers, only different points of view
We’re audio recording - one person speaking at a time preferably
Please turn off your phones. If you cannot and if you must respond to a call, please
do so as quietly as possible and rejoin us as quickly as you can.
Our role as moderators will be to guide the discussion, but not as such participate
==PAGE:128==
116
D Focus group moderator guide
D.1
Session 1
Introduction
So the first session here will take around 40 min and then we will have a break. First
of all we will divide you into two groups: Lets say A and T, K and H. In each group
you will together read ten scenarios and then individually rate them on your own
paper, which we will distribute. After you have rated it you have to discuss it with
your group member. You will have 2 min to do both the rating and the discussion
for each scenario. We will let you know when you have to move to the next scenario.
Rating
What scenarios makes sense to have in therapy? Read scenarios and decide on a
individual rating for each scenario from 1-5 (very relevant(1), somewhat relevant (2),
neutral(3) , somewhat irrelevant(4), very irrelevant(5))
Discuss your rating
Next decide on a top 3 of scenarios in each group, you will get 2 min. for that. You
will briefly present it to the other group afterwards. (groupwise)
When done with the 10 scenarios, pick top 3 = 2 min i total Now let’s move together.
Each group will now have 2 min to present it to the other group, who wants to start?
(all together)
Meet up and present each groups decisions of top 3 scenarios. = 2 min in total Now
as the last thing before the break, we want you to put the scenarios up on the board
here. So the first part is determining when you would see it being useful, i.e. between
or during, the next part is when in terms of when in the therapy time frame to use
it. You will get 10 min from now on. (all together) Pile Sorting/the card game to
start discussions: help each other decide when the top scenarios should be used - give
them a time slot indicator. = 10 min
Break 5 min - snacks and drinks
D.2
Session 2
Introduction to the task
We will continue with session 2, it will take approximately 15 min. In this session
we will just ask you to discuss this question. (The question and sub questions are
written on board). To start you off, let’s have a round the table of what each of you
think on who should take the initiative to talk about the data in the app in a therapy
session?
An overall discussion based on the question: how should the app be used in therapy,
to make it comfortable and meaningful for the clients?
==PAGE:129==
D.3 Scenarios rating
117
If the discussion doesn’t flow, the moderator will have 3 sub questions to get the
discussion going:
- Should it be initiated by the client
- Should it be initiated by the psychologists
- Should it be a regular thing or only when it seems meaningful in terms of the therapy
progress/issue
Round up & thank you for today
D.3
Scenarios rating
Figure D.1: Rating table using a 5 point Likert Scale, used by participants in the
focus group to rate every scenario
D.4
Scenarios
==PAGE:130==
PULSE
Imagine an  app that accurately tracks and 
shows your heart rate throughout the day and 
over different periods of time. This can be used 
to identify your stress patterns, i.e.  what is it 
that makes you stressed? It can pinpoint what 
affects you and what helps: having a lot of 
meetings in a day, self study at home, handing 
in assignments or exams, spending time with 
friends, being up until late, waking up early, 
taking a lot of phone calls (or a specific one), 
etc. It could also help you see your behaviour 
when you are stressed, i.e. do you tend to 
sleep, eat, change moods due to being stress?
An example: Louise is writing her master thesis 
and often complains about stress affecting her 
efficiency with writing. By tracking her stress 
pattern she realizes her pulse is increasing with 
the number of calls and notifications per day. 
Imagine an application that can accurately tell 
you how much and how long you are talking on 
the phone, either when calling or receiving 
calls. The data will be displayed in an easy 
understandable way so you easily can get an 
overview of how often you talk on the phone 
and for how long and what types of call you are  
making. This data can be used to indicate your 
depression level, understanding your social 
habits and possibly your stress indicators, as 
well as being able to see your own habits.
An example: Hanne is feeling like her friends 
don't really like her anymore, she never hears 
from them and they rarely call. She feels 
neglected and sad, when she looks at her app 
she sees that it is not actually true, her friends 
calls her the same amount of times as she calls 
them. 
An app that shows an overview of your mes-
saging patterns, i.e.  sms and other messaging 
applications. The data is shown in an easy and 
quickly understandable way. It could  for 
instance tell you  how often and how long 
(timewise) you spend texting, when you texted, 
etc. This can give information about your social 
interaction or time spent chatting
For example, Anne always complains about 
Peter not being present when spending time 
with the kids, while he thinks he is very much 
present.  His messaging patterns thought him 
he was always texting a lot with his friends in 
the afternoon, when he was actually watching 
the kids. 
Imagine an application that can accurately tell you 
how much time you have spent at home, at work 
and at other places, i.e. cafes, fitness center, 
friends places etc. The data will be displayed in an 
easy understandable way so you easily can get an 
overview of how often you stay at home or went out 
in for instance weekends and evenings.The data 
can be used if you want to reduce your stress (too 
many places in one day), increase or decrease 
your amount of social interaction (how many times 
were you at home or at a friends place), or keep 
focus and productivity (how many hours have you 
been in school, at work, studying at home or at the 
library etc.)  
A small example: John is feeling a little sad and 
moody and has problems getting things done. He is 
normally a very outgoing person and extrovert to 
some extend. The app helps John see that he the 
last months has been at home on almost every day 
both weekends and weekdays. He checks his 
calendar and sees that he didn't have any visitors 
either, he is simply lacking social interaction.
LOCATION
MESSAGING
CALLING
==PAGE:131==
Imagine an application that can accurately tell 
you how much time you spent on your phone in 
total and on each type of applications, i.e. 
social media, e-mail, games etc. in an easy and 
understandable way. The data could be used if 
you wanted to improve your productivity, addic-
tion to your phone, low self esteem, social 
anxiety, social phobia and other possible issues 
or improvement areas. 
A small example: Marie is having problems 
getting her tasks done, and is getting stressed 
and ends up not doing any of the tasks. She 
feels like she does nothing but work all day, but 
when looking at phone usage in the app she 
realizing that she uses facebook for 4 hours a 
day. 
An app that shows your detailed sleep pattern for 
every night and gives you the possibility to see your 
sleep for periods of time. This can also be used in 
relation to other parameter tracked (like pulse, activi-
ty level, etc). This data can help you with  stress 
level, anxiety, tiredness, irascibility / anger / high 
temperament, procrastination, perfectionism etc
An example: Sean has in the recent months experi-
enced his family complaining about him always 
being angry. He could not understand why they 
thought so, and blamed it on the stress caused by 
switching jobs. When this persisted for a long time 
he started with his psychologist to trace the causes 
of his anger. Sean tracked different aspects of his 
daily life and his wife rated his angriness daily. There 
was a huge relation between the amount of sleep he 
got and the anger reported: it was not the fact of 
getting a new job in itself, but having to commute 
way further and waking up 2 hours earlier in some of 
the days. 
Imagine an application that can accurately tell 
you how much food and what food you have 
consumed, based on your inputs.  The data will 
be displayed in an easy understandable way so 
you easily can get an overview of how often 
and what you eat. The data can be used if you 
want to reduce your food intake or get an 
overview of your eating habits, i.e are you 
eating more or less when you are sad or happy. 
An example: Torben is constantly hungry even 
if he just ate, it makes him irritable and 
annoyed, when looking at the application he 
can see that it is especially on wednesdays he 
eats a lot, that is when he is having his mum 
over for tea, he does not have a good relation 
with his mum.
An app that records your self reported mood. 
An overview of your mood pattern and history 
can identify the triggers, causes and effects of 
different moods you experience: depressive, 
angry, happy, calm, energetic, lethargic, sad, 
lonely, etc. This can also be used in compari-
son with other tracked parameters.  Is your 
mood affected by your social activity and how? 
Is your mood affected by sleep patterns? Is 
your mood affected by weather? 
Arne never understood his mood swings during 
the day. After tracking his mood he could identi-
fy different parts of the day were similar over a 
large period of time and caused by the setting 
he was in : at work, with his family, in traffic. 
PHONE USAGE
SLEEP
MOOD
FOOD 
==PAGE:132==
Imagine an application that can accurately tell 
you how high your blood pressure is displayed 
in and easy understandable way so you quickly 
and easily can get an overview of how your 
blood pressure is and when it is higher or 
lower. This data can be used to for instance 
help you give an indication of  your mental 
stress level, how often you are getting angry or 
being hot-tempered. 
An example: Lena is having problems under-
standing why she is always forgetting things, 
being tired and annoyed, but by looking at her 
app she sees that her blood pressure has been 
very high for the last month and she needs to 
do something different. 
An app that shows you an overview of your activi-
ty: whether you bike, run, walk, exercise, do 
sport, clean around the house, etc . It will display 
it in an easy understandable way, for instance by 
day, over a period of time or by  comparison 
between selected periods.  This data can help 
understand your stress level, your mood, etc. 
Besides it can be used in relation with for exam-
ple reported mood - to see how physical activity 
influences mood, stress, relationship dynamics.
Take an example: Morten started seeing a psy-
chologist for copying with stress.  His app showed 
him that he was stressed on all working days, this 
did not make sense to him, because  he really 
loved his work. However some days stress was 
low and when identifying how those days were 
different, he discovered something interesting. He 
was not stressed in the days when he was train-
ing the day before. 
ACTIVITY
BLOOD 
PRESURE
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIX E
Interview guide
Participants:
Lil Mollen: authorized psychologists, Sweden
Kristoffer Geer: psychologist student, Århus
Briefing
Set the stage: purpose and context
As you know, we are doing our thesis at DTU that is designing a system that uses
personal smartphone based sensor data in therapy. More specifically it is a system
where the clients can track themselves in different regards, for instance how social
they are, mood, pulse for stress and anxiety etc. The idea is that this can be used
by the client to become more self aware and by the psychologist and the client in
therapy sessions to pinpoint possible daily / physical elements that can affect the
psychological aspects. It could be used in different ways by the client and by the
psychologists. This is what we want to get your thoughts on as a psychologist, today.
We are recording the interview, for the purpose of the thesis, we hope that is ok..
Any questions before we begin?
To understand your points of view we will start by getting an idea of your approach
in therapy
• What (data) scenarios are relevant and useful?
For Kristoffer: First of all, do you have clients today or have you had? If not,
phrase questions as “imagine that” - future perspective.
• Can you describe to us what kind of information from the client you use today
in your therapy sessions, besides the conversation? (i.e. What the clients say,
facial expressions, breathing, calls, social life etc)
• Can you give us an example of that?
• Do you use any digital tools today in your sessions? App, web, questionnaires?
Why? Or why not?
• Is there some data that you would like to use that you don’t have access to
today? (For instance location, pulse and calls)
• When should the system be used for the defined scenarios?
• How do you see such data being used in therapy?
• If you imagine your clients having this app we are designing, how would you see
it being used? (Lill: in the survey you answered that you would use this app as
==PAGE:134==
122
E Interview guide
homework and as an assessment tool, can you elaborate on that? Kristoffer: in
the survey you answered that you would use this app as a tool for homework,
as a supplement/alternative to diary/questionnaires etc., as a tool just for the
clients, as a tool for tracking the improvement of the clients, can you elborate
on that?)
• How often would you use it?
• How should it be used in the specific therapy sessions?
• Can you explain how you would introduce this application to a client?
• Let’s assume that you are in a therapy session with a client who is using the
app. How would you use the app in the specific session? (should it be initiated
by you or the client - if it’s you: would you look at the data with the client /
ask the client to talk about their experience/awareness)
Debriefing
Do you have anything else you would like to add?
Thank you a lot for participating and for your input (would you like helping us again?)
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX F
Echo v1 - Initial
prototype
==PAGE:136==
0
 
==PAGE:137==
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:138==
126
==PAGE:139==
APPENDIX G
Design workshop
Moderator Guide
Iteration 3
Date: 24th May, 17.30 - 19.30
Participants: K, A, T, H, S
Location, Frederikskaj 12, room 3.66
Goal
• Get feedback on initial design
• Get suggestions for missing elements
• Evaluate the initial user tasks (USM)
Questions
• does the user story map : content, user journey (workflow) covers the user needs,
is the flow as expected? what is missing?
• prioritizing : what to have on dashboard? What are the most important or
useful features to get at first?
Plan
Introduction (5 min)
Thank you for joining today. We are doing our master thesis, that looks into how
personal smartphone, sensor data can be used to support psychotherapy; What do
we mean by support: help clients and their psychologist understand their patterns,
to be able to achieve their goals. Today we’ll have two sessions and a small break
with food in between. We’ll start in a minute explaining about the first one.
But before we begin there are some small guidelines:
• No right or wrong answers, only different points of view
• We’re audio recording - one person speaking at a time preferably
• Please turn off your phones. If you cannot and if you must respond to a call,
please do so as quietly as possible and rejoin us as quickly as you can
• Our role as moderators will be to guide the discussion, but not as such partici-
pate
==PAGE:140==
128
G Design workshop Moderator Guide
G.1
Session 1
17.40 Evaluation of user tasks (USM)
Introduction to Session 1
So in this first session we will ask you to have a look at some tasks that we have
created to make sure the app has the right content. We would like you to sort them
and make a user journey, we will explain more about that in a bit. First we will
divide you into two groups and then when you are done with the two tasks you will
present it to the other group.
[divide into two groups]
The tasks have been made as cards and we would like you to in each group you sort
the cards based on a category that you will give them. Afterwards we will ask you to
make a user story - imagine that you are the user of the app and what steps you will
have to go through when using the app in therapy. Therefore the categories have to
be made in a way that you can create a story with them. We have around 10 tasks,
if there are some task missing, add them yourself, there are pens over here and blank
cards here. Do you have any questions? You will get 15 min for this first sorting task.
[participants work on the task]
Now the second task is to create the user journey, imagine that you are a client that
goes to a therapist and then you are introduced to this app. The story starts here
and ends with you being done with the therapy and on your own. Any questions?
(15 min)
Now we will gather and briefly present the journey to each other, you have 2 min.
each for the presentation.
Short recap of the two groups presentation
18.15 Break - food
G.2
Session 2
18.30 Evaluation of UI design
Introduction to screens game (10-15 min): So to get started, we will start by
introducing you to the screens of the app so far. To do it in a more fun way and get
you up on your feet after food, we will make a small game. As you can see there are
small papers on the floor. First you select one to stand at. Then you each get 25
cards, and you have to make a complete set of the app. The way it is done is kind
of like the game fish, where you ask for the card you are missing based on the paper
you are standing at. When you have the one where you are standing, you move to
another label and ask for that. Any questions? (Showing how it works)
==PAGE:141==
G.3 User tasks cards used in first session
129
[participants play the game]
Introduction to scenarios (45 min):
Now, that you hopefully have an idea of the screens we will do a small role play game
in two groups. To shake it up a bit, we have divided you differently than before. So
in each group you will have 5 scenarios that you will act out using the screens. One
will read the scenario and the other will try and show what they would do in that
scenario in the app using the screens. We have 30 min to do this, and you will switch
roles after each scenario. Any questions?
[divide into two groups.]
Here are the scenarios and feel free to stand or sit or whatever makes the most sense
for you when you are using the app. Think of what you would do in real life.
Scenarios
1. You are at the 3rd therapy session for exam anxiety and your psychologist
introduces the app to you
2. You are at therapy, it’s the 5th therapy session and you have been using the
app for a while. You are in therapy due to too many sad days. You want to
share the data with your psychologist
3. You are in between therapy sessions, you go there every monday and you have
homework to do before next monday. Today is wednesday
4. Its sunday, tomorrow you are seeing your therapist, and you want to prepare
for the session.
5. You have been going to a psychologist for the last 5 months and you have both
agreed that you are ready to keep working on your own and don’t need more
sessions for the time being. But then you have a bad day and you go to the
app to get help feeling better.
19.30 Thank you for today
G.3
User tasks cards used in first session
==PAGE:142==
 
login to app 
turn all or individual 
tracking on/off 
 
read the data policy 
 
 
turn on automatic 
tracking 
Get informative 
notifications 
 
Get interventive 
notifications 
 
define personal 
experiment 
 
annotate tracked data 
with context 
reflect on my patterns 
 
get homework 
present personal data 
customize visualizations 
 
 
adjust profile 
 
adjust settings 
manually record 
See key metrics 
 
select/filter my 
parameters 
therapist customization 
of app 
See visualizations 
 
 
 
==PAGE:143==
APPENDIX H
Role-play Moderator
Guide
Iteration 4
Date: 12th of june, 18.30 - 20.30
Participants: E, H, C
Location: Paradisets Psykologiske Rådgivning, Bjernemark Byvej 2, Svendborg, Fyn.
Goal
• What effect does using Echo in therapy have?
• Get feedback on the concept that only client have access
• Is it problematic for the client to use the app by themselves
• How should it be used in therapy?
Notes Make very clear scenario, with roles and clear motivation for characters.
Plan
Introduction (5 min)
Hi and thank you for joining today. As you all know we are doing our master thesis,
where we are designing an app, that looks into how personal smartphone, sensor data
can be used to support psychotherapy; What do we mean by support: help clients
and their psychologist understand their patterns to be able to achieve their goals.
Today we’ll have two sessions, one with role-play which takes around an hour and
one small session for around 30 min. where we will discuss and ask you to give your
thoughts on the app. We will have a small break in between the two sessions and
afterwards we will have dinner.
But before we begin there are some small guidelines:
• We are testing our concept and the app, and not you.
• No right or wrong answers, only different points of view
• We’re video recording - one person speaking at a time preferably
• Please turn off your phones. If you cannot and if you must respond to a call,
please do so as quietly as possible and rejoin us as quickly as you can
• Our role as moderators will be to guide the role-play and discussions, but not
as such participate
==PAGE:144==
132
H Role-play Moderator Guide
H.1
Session 1
Distribution of roles
Scenario
Therapist
Client
Observer
Scenario 1
E
C
H
Scenario 2
C
H
E
Scenario 3
E
C
H
Scenario 4
E
H
C
Table H.1: Distribution of roles for the four mock session
18.40 Scenario 1
Introduction to Session 1
In the first session we will have a few, short role-play sessions. You will be switching
roles : one of you will play the therapist, one the client, and one will observe the
role-play - we already defined who plays who in the different scenarios. After each
role-play session a small discussion will be done, where the observer can contribute.
[The participants places them self according to their role]
To warm up we will ask you to do a simple role-play so we can get an idea of how a
therapy session works. For this we’ll have E as the therapist and C as a client. H -
you going to be the observer - you are welcome to comment at the end of the roleplay.
The scenario is that it’s the first therapy session of the client and therapist. C here is
what you need the scenario of your character - please take 2 min to read it and then
we can start. We’ll have 10 min to play in this first session, I’ll let you know when
you have to wrap up Ok, let’s start! .
Scenario 1
A typical scenario of a therapy session - field study when not possible, more an overall
idea for us in general - control data for the scenario 3 and 4 Method: 15 min Give
the client their scenario - 2 min Set the scene - 2 min And ask them to play it out
for 10 min. Any comments - 2 min
[participants do the role-play]
[The moderator facilitates a round up discussion of scenario 1]
Scenario 2
Ok, let’s move to the second roleplay. The roles now are: C, you are the therapist,
H , you are the client - so you will be playing the same client, Tine. and E, you
will observe the two. In this session we will assume that is the 3rd time for Tine in
therapy and her therapist - that would be you C, wants to introduce Echo to her -
an app that the therapist thinks can help their progress. To begin with , we’ll take a
few minutes to introduce the app to C (Lys) and E (Alina). H - you will read about
your character. We will begin after.
==PAGE:145==
H.2 Session 2
133
[participants do the role-play]
[The moderator facilitates a round up discussion of scenario 2]
Scenario 3
So know you have done a small role-play for a classic therapy session and now we
would like you to do two more mock therapy sessions. You all have an idea of the app
now and the client. It’s the 4th therapy session. In this scenario the client has been
using the app since last therapy session. You are however not allowed to use/play
with/look at the app in the therapy session. You get around 5 min to play the scene,
i will let you know when you have to wrap up. E you are the therapist, C you are
the client and H you are the observer. C you are welcome to take the scenario for the
client with you. Please take your places. Action.
[participants do the role-play]
[The moderator facilitates a round up discussion of scenario 3]
Scenario 4
Explanation: So this is the final roleplay. It is very similar to the previous: . It’s the
4th therapy session, the client has been using the app since last therapy session. The
difference is that we in this scenario would ask you to use/play with/look at the app
in the therapy session. You get around 5 min to play the scene, I will let you know
when you have to wrap up.
E you are the therapist, H you are the client and C you are the observer. H you are
welcome to take the scenario for the client with you. Please take your places. Action.
[participants do the role-play]
[The moderator facilitates a round up discussion of scenario 4]
19.50 Break
H.2
Session 2
20.30 Evaluation of UI design
Introduction to evaluation (10-15 min):
In this session, we will look more at the app itself Each of you will get a phone with
the app so you can try and play with it for a few minutes, and this [handing out the
comment sheets] piece of paper where you can write a few notes about the app’s three
main modules: trackers (parameters, data you can track), Graphs - representations
of the data - also the calendar and the Therapy module, where the client can present,
add and do homework and add notes in relation to data tracked, the homework or
just notes for the next therapy session.
[They each get a phone and a piece of paper with four fields, one for each module in
the app. They get 2 min for each module.]
==PAGE:146==
134
H Role-play Moderator Guide
[participants evaluate the app]
Round up discussion (10 min):
So this is the last part before dinner. We would like you to discuss two questions.
You will get around 5 min for each question:
• Would you look at a clients data prior to a therapy session if you had the option?
• Is there any data that you would not like the client to look at by themselves?
If the discussing doesn’t start, the moderator has some sub questions to ask:
- What tracked data should the client see by themselves
- Thoughts on client and therapist division of the app
- Thoughts on how the data should be presented?
20.40 Thank you for today
==PAGE:147==
H.2 Session 2
135
Figure H.1: Comment Sheet for participants - role-play session 2
==PAGE:148==
136
==PAGE:149==
APPENDIX I
Think Aloud Moderator
Guide
Iteration 4
Date: 30th April, 17.00 - 18.30
Participants: K, A, T, D and B
Location, Frederikskaj 12, room 3.01 and Elektrovej 324, room 261
Goal:
• Evaluate the app (UI and UX) - focus on visualizations - evaluate learnability
• Evaluate which visualizations facilitate the understanding of own tracked data
and patterns (self awareness)
• Focus on Therapy and Graphs modules - ignore profile and about
Plan
Introduction (5 min)
Thank you for joining us for this think aloud test, it will take about 30-40 minutes.
Think aloud means that we will give you the app, ask you to do some tasks and try
to say aloud all the thoughts you have. To get you an idea of what think aloud is
and what we expect from you, we have a small think aloud demo [showing the video 1]
We will give you a list of tasks you have to do using the application.
The most
important thing is to verbalize all your thoughts while you do the tasks . Please take
your time, so that you do not jump into another task to fast. We will guide you
through the entire test, but you will do all the talking. No right or wrong answers,
we are interested in all thought you might have. We will give you one task at a time.
I’m the moderator and xx will take notes on me and the app. So before we begin, are
you an android or iphone user?
[if android: The design is for an iphone, so to give you a quick idea of how it works
i’ll show you. So it doesn’t have the buttons in the bottom like android, going back
and so forth is in the top of the app. ]
It is a prototype, so all things are not yet done and clickable, if you see something
1https://s3.amazonaws.com/media.nngroup.com/media/editor/2014/08/18/thinking-aloud-
demo.mp4
==PAGE:150==
138
I Think Aloud Moderator Guide
you cant click just tell us what you would do and what you expect to happen if you
click.
But before we begin there are some small guidelines:
No right or wrong answers, only different points of view
We’re audio recording - one person speaking at a time preferably
Please turn off your phones. If you cannot and if you must respond to a call, please
do so as quietly as possible and rejoin us as quickly as you can.
Our role as moderators will be to guide the discussion, but not as such participate
Any questions before we begin?
I.1
Tasks
1. Trackers: You are using the app for the first time and you have agreed with
your therapist that you for the next week record your sleep and mood. You
want to track that using the app.
2. Therapy/Homework: You are at a therapy session and your therapist gives you
a homework to do. You add it in the app.
• The homework is to call your brother, because you don’t talk
• The homework is to follow how your mood is for the next week
• The homework is to see if training affects your mood
3. Therapy/Present Mode: You are going to your therapist in 2 days and you want
to prepare what visualizations to show him/her in your next session. You select
mood and activity and app usage.
4. Therapy/Notes/manual tracker: You have been introduced to the app by your
therapist in your last session and discussed using it to follow your dreams before
next session. You just woke up and remember a few bits and pieces of your
dream, so you grab the phone and want to add it to Echo.
5. Graphs/Combined graphs: You have been tracking yourself for a week and you
want to see if you mood changes depending on your activity and/or your app
usage.
- can you see any dependencies?
6. Graphs/App usage: You’re seeing your therapist and you’re asked if you made
progress with playing less games on your phone for the last week. You look for
it in the app.
- Have you made progress?
7. Graphs/Sleep: Its the 9th of june, your therapist asks you how you slept last
night, you look for it in your app.
- How did you sleep?
8. Dashboard/calendar: This is three tasks in one. You are in the train to see
your therapist, you open the app to see how you have been doing for the last
week and for today and see when you added notes in the last month. (should
==PAGE:151==
I.1 Tasks
139
be simplified)
- How many notes did you add?
[The participant goes through all 8 tasks]
Exit interview
• What are your overall thoughts on the app?
• Can you see yourself using it in therapy?
- What if the therapist suggests it?
• Are there some things you are missing or a feature you would like to have in
the app?
Round up & thank you for today
==PAGE:152==
140
==PAGE:153==
APPENDIX J
Personas Data
The data created as a representation of a possible Echo user, Tina Dalmgaard, is
shown here. The data was used to generate the graphs and calculate the key metrics
seen in the final prototype of Echo.
==PAGE:154==
Activity
Sleep(%)
Social activity( from 24-24)
Rating(1-5)
biking(min)Average daily
walking(min)Average daily
Work (h)
Friends (h)
Home (h)
Out in the city
Mood
Comments to mood
Cigarets (how good she was)
Alkohol(1-5)
Comments to chart
22/05/2018
00:43
00:12
40
07:54
01:00
13:00
0
2 Jeg føler mig lidt forvirret og alt kører rundt
1
1
23/05/2018
00:23
00:41
81
07:00
02:00
14:00
0
1
3
2
24/05/2018
00:54
00:22
64
07:54
0
11:00:00
03:00
2
2
1
25/05/2018
00:22
00:21
74
08:00
0
16:00:00
00:00
5
4
3
26/05/2018
00:12
00:25
52
0
0
23:00:00
00:00
3
5
2
27/05/2018
00:14
00:34
42
0
0
21:00:00
02:00
2 Jeg er sur og vred og forstår ikke hvorfor alt skal v
5
5
28/05/2018
00:22
00:25
67
0
0
17:00:00
05:00
3
4
2
29/05/2018
01:00:00
00:28
15
0
03:00
16:00:00
03:00
4
5
3
30/05/2018
00:22
00:39
54
09:00
01:00
13:00:00
02:00
3
4
4
31/05/2018
00:13
00:24
66
09:06
0
12:00:00
03:00
5 Måske er det godt at alt sker som det gør, måske e
2
1
01/06/2018
00:13
00:42
75
07:00
02:00
14:00:00
02:00
2
3
1
02/06/2018
01:04
01:08
79
0
0
20:00:00
01:00
3
2
1
03/06/2018
00:33
00:22
76
0
0
19:00:00
03:00
4
2
1
04/06/2018
00:24
00:33
74
07:06
03:00
10:00:00
02:00
5
3
1
05/06/2018
00:21
00:21
79
07:36
03:00
12:00:00
00:00
2
1
2
06/06/2018
00:34
00:21
87
08:22
01:00
12:00:00
02:00
3 jens sagde han ville prøve igen
1
3
07/06/2018
00:22
00:23
85
08:02
04:00
12:00:00
00:00
1
1
1 Ja, Yes, I was seeing my friends, tried to get out of my head..  but it was actually very bad. I got an impression that my friedns were some sort of piting it me and avoided very obvious talking to me about it, I got so annoyed
08/06/2018
00:14
00:34
84
06:47
01:00
14:00:00
00:30
4
2
5
09/06/2018
00:12
00:23
83
0
0
21:00:00
02:00
3
3
2
10/06/2018
00:22
00:35
75
0
0
22:00:00
01:00
5
3
4
11/06/2018
00:43
00:32
67
10:18
0
12:00:00
00:00
2
3
1
12/06/2018
00:55
00:10
92
08:54
0
12:00:00
00:00
1
2
1
2.772727273
2.136363636
3
1
2.166666667
1.916666667
3
1
0
0
0
0
0
==PAGE:155==
APPENDIX K
Data handling and
ethics
Given the sensitiveness of the thesis area, there was a need for investigating ethics and
good practice for data collection and processing, in accordance with current legislation.
The legal department at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) was consulted in
this regard. While there are several rules and an ethics application is required for this
area of research, DTU’s policy for students project is more open,closely following the
danish legislation. According to the Danish Data Protection Agency 1 or Datatilsynet
in Danish, student’s collecting of (sensitive) personal data as part of students projects
and as such, master thesis projects, are exempted from notifying and ethics approval
from the Agency, under two conditions :
• that the students are active students enrolled in a higher education
• that participants and owners of the collected data give their express consent
Even if the collection of personal sensor data and respective study falls out of the scope
of the master thesis, having a user centred, participatory design approach implied
having clients give inputs based on their experience in psychotherapy.
Given the
possibility of participants sharing sensitive data through the focus groups and design
workshops that were recorded for analysis and documentation, consents were signed
prior to the specific activities by all participants K.1. For Skype and call interviews,
participants were informed of the recording and gave their (verbal) consent.
1https://www.datatilsynet.dk/english/the-danish-data-protection-agency/introduction-to-the-
danish-data-protection-agency/
==PAGE:156==
144
K Data handling and ethics
Figure K.1: Participant consent form
==PAGE:157==
Bibliography
[1]
Chadia Abras et al. “User-Centered Design”. In: Encyclopedia of Human-
Computer Interaction (2004).
[2]
David Bakker et al. “Mental Health Smartphone Apps: Review and Evidence-
Based Recommendations for Future Developments”. In: JMIR Mental Health 3
(2016).
[3]
Jakob E. Bardram and Mads Frost. “The Personal Health Technology Design
Space”. In: IEEE Pervasive Computing 15.2 (2016), pages 70–78.
[4]
Jakob E. Bardram et al. “Designing Mobile Health Technology for Bipolar Dis-
order: A Field Trial of the Monarca System”. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’13. ACM, 2013.
[5]
Jakob E. Bardram et al. “The MONARCA self-assessment system”. In: Proceed-
ings of the 2nd ACM SIGHIT symposium on International health informatics -
IHI ’12 (2012).
[6]
Tatiana Batova. “Extended abstract: Lean UX and innovation in teaching”. In:
IEEE International Professional Communication Conference (2016), pages 2–4.
[7]
Jens Bjerg. Gads Psykologileksikon. Gads Forlag, 2011.
[8]
John Brooke. “SUS - A quick and dirty usability scale”. In: Usability evaluation
in industry (1996).
[9]
Andrew Campbell et al. “StudentLife: assessing mental health, academic perfor-
mance and behavioral trends of college students using smartphones”. In: (2014).
[10]
Elizabeth Charters. “The use of think-aloud methods in qualitative research:
An Introduction to think-aloud methods”. In: Brock Education 12.2 (2003),
pages 68–82.
[11]
Conducting Focus Groups. Oxfam GB.
[12]
Alan Cooper. The Inmates Are Running the Asylum. Sams publishing, 2004.
[13]
Andrea Cuttone, Michael Kai Petersen, and Jakob Eg Larsen. “Four Data Vi-
sualization Heuristics to Facilitate Reflection in Personal Informatics”. In: Uni-
versal Access in Human-Computer Interaction. Design for All and Accessibility
Practice. Springer International Publishing, 2014, pages 541–552.
==PAGE:158==
146
Bibliography
[14]
Fred D. Davis. “Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and User Accep-
tance of Information Technology.” In: MIS Quarterly 13 (1989).
[15]
Gavin Doherty, David Coyle, and Mark Matthews. “Design and evaluation
guidelines for mental health technologies”. In: Interacting with Computers 22.4
(2010), pages 243–252.
[16]
Chloe Fan. “The Future of Data Visualization in Personal Informatics Tools”.
In: Personal Informatics in the Wild: Hacking Habits for Health & Happiness
— CHI 2013 Workshop (2013).
[17]
Susannah Fox and Maeve Duggan. Tracking for Health. Pew Research Center’s
Internet American Life Project, Caliornia HealthCare foundation, 2013.
[18]
Mads Frost et al. “Supporting disease insight through data analysis”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 2013 ACM international joint conference on Pervasive and
ubiquitous computing - UbiComp ’13 (2013), page 133.
[19]
Jeff Gothelf and Josh Seiden. Lean UX: Apply Lean Principles to Improve User
Experience. O’Reilley Media inc., 2013.
[20]
Erik Grönvall et al. “Concordance: A Critical Participatory Alternative in
Healthcare IT”. In: AA ’15 Proceedings of The Fifth Decennial Aarhus Con-
ference on Critical Alternatives (2015), pages 21–24.
[21]
Tovi Grossman, George Fitzmaurice, and Ramtin Attar. “A survey of software
learnability: Metrics, Methodologies and Guidelines”. In: Proceedings of the 27th
international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI 09
(2009), pages 649–658.
[22]
Gabriella M. Harari et al. “Using Smartphones to Collect Behavioral Data
in Psychological Science: Opportunities, Practical Considerations, and Chal-
lenges”. In: Perspectives on Psychological Science 11.6 (2016), pages 838–854.
[23]
Emily Hewlett and Valerie Moran. Making Mental Health Count: The Social
and Economic Costs of Neglecting Mental Health Care. OECD Health Policy
Studies, OECD Publishing, Paris, 2014.
[24]
Stefan G. Hofmann et al. “The efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy: A review
of meta-analyses”. In: Cognitive Therapy and Research 36.5 (2012), pages 427–
440.
[25]
William Horton. The Icon Book: Visual Symbols for Computer Systems and
Documentation. John Wiley Sons Inc, 1994.
[26]
Dandan Huang et al. “Personal visualization and personal visual analytics”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 21.3 (2015),
pages 420–433.
[27]
Camilla Birgitte Falk Jensen, Jakob Eg Larsen, and Michael Kai Petersen. “De-
sign of Cognitive Interfaces for Personal Informatics Feedback”. In: (2016).
[28]
Heidi A. R. Jensen et al. “Danskernes sundhed Den Nationale sundhedsprofil,
2017”. In: (2018).
==PAGE:159==
Bibliography
147
[29]
Christina Kelley, Bongshin Lee, and Lauren Wilcox. “Self-tracking for Mental
Wellness”. In: Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems - CHI ’17 (2017).
[30]
Jenny Kitzinger. “The methodology of Focus Groups: the importance of inter-
action between research participants”. In: Sociology of Health & Illness 16.1
(1994), pages 103–121.
[31]
Williams J B Kroenke K Spitzer R L. “The PHQ-9: validity of a brief depression
severity measure”. In: Journal of General Internal Medicine (2001).
[32]
Sari Kujala. “User involvement: A review of the benefits and challenges”. In: 22
(January 2003), pages 1–16.
[33]
Steinar Kvale. “Doing Interviews”. In: (2007), pages 51–66.
[34]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Andrea Cuttone, and Sune Lehmann. “QS Spiral : Visualizing
Periodic Quantified Self Data”. In: Personal Informatics in the Wild: Hacking
Habits for Health & Happiness — CHI 2013 Workshop (2013), pages 5–8.
[35]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Kasper Eskelund, and Thomas Blomseth Christiansen. Active
Self-Tracking of Subjective Experience with a One-Button Wearable: A Case
Study in Military PTSD. 2017.
[36]
Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. “A stage-based model of personal infor-
matics systems”. In: Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human
factors in computing systems - CHI ’10 (2010), page 557.
[37]
Ian Li et al. “Personal informatics in the wild”. In: CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts
on Human Factors in Computing Systems on - CHI EA ’13 (2013), page 3179.
[38]
Lassi A. Liikkanen et al. “Lean UX: the next generation of user-centered agile
development?” In: the 8th Nordic Conference (2014), pages 1095–1100.
[39]
Scott MacKenzie. Human Computer Interaction. Elsevier Inc., 2013.
[40]
Martin Maguire. “Methods to support human-centred design”. In: International
Journal of Human Computer Studies 55.4 (2001), pages 587–634.
[41]
Justin Matejka and George Fitzmaurice. “Same Stats , Different Graphs : Gen-
erating Datasets with Varied Appearance and Identical Statistics through Sim-
ulated Annealing”. In: ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems (2017), pages 1290–1294.
[42]
Mark Matthews, Geri Gay, and Gavin Doherty. “Taking part: role-play in the
design of therapeutic systems”. In: Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM con-
ference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’14 (2014), pages 643–
652.
[43]
Mark Matthews et al. “Designing mobile applications to support mental health
interventions”. In: Handbook of Research on User Interface Design and Evalua-
tion for Mobile Technology (January 2008).
==PAGE:160==
148
Bibliography
[44]
Michael Daugbjerg et al. Kortlægning og analyse af tilskudsordningen for
psykologbehandling i praksissektoren. Implement and KORA, 2015.
[45]
David Mohr, Mi Zhang, and Stephen M. Schueller. “Personal Sensing: Under-
standing Mental Health Using Ubiquitous Sensors and Machine Learning”. In:
Annual Review of Clinical Psychology (2017).
[46]
Moodbuster. 2015.
[47]
Jakob Nielsen. “Keep Online Surveys Short”. In: How to measure client outcomes
(2004).
[48]
Janni Nielsen, Torkil Clemmensen, and Carsten Yssing. “Getting access to what
goes on in people’s heads?” In: Proceedings of the second Nordic conference on
Human-computer interaction - NordiCHI ’02 (2002), page 101.
[49]
Simone Orlowski et al. “Mental Health Technologies: Designing With Con-
sumers”. In: JMIR Human Factors 3.1 (2016).
[50]
Morris B. Parloff, Herbert C. Kelman, and Jerome D. Frank. “Comfort, Effec-
tiveness, and Self-awareness as Criteria of Improvement in Psychotherapy”. In:
American Journal of Psychiatry 111.5 (1954), pages 343–352.
[51]
Dana Pavell, Dirk Trossen, and Matthias Holweg. “Lifestyle Stories : Correlat-
ing User Information through a Story-Inspired Paradigm”. In: 2013 7th Inter-
national Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare and
Workshops 3 (2013), pages 412–415.
[52]
Peter Economy and Jeff Patton. User story Mapping. O’Reilley Media inc., 2014.
[53]
“Quantified self” Digital tools - a CPG Marketing opportunity. Rocket Fuel,
2014.
[54]
Darius Adam Rohani et al. “Correlations between objective behavioral features
collected from mobile and wearable devices, and mood symptoms in affective
disorders: A systematic review”. In: Journal of Medical Internet Research (2018).
[55]
Chiara Ruini. “The use of well-being therapy in clinical settings”. In: The Jour-
nal of Happiness & Well-Being 2.1 (2014), pages 198–206.
[56]
Carol D. Ryff. “Happiness Is Everything, or Is It? Explorations on the Meaning
of Psychological Well-Being”. In: (1989).
[57]
Dan Saffer. Microinteractions: Designing with Details. O’Reilly Media, Inc.,
2013.
[58]
Sandra Servia-Rodríguez et al. “Mobile Sensing at the Service of Mental Well-
being”. In: Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide
Web - WWW 17. 2017.
[59]
Tiago Silva et al. “User-Centered Design and Agile Methods: A Systematic
Review”. In: Agile Conference (AGILE), 2011 (2011), pages 77–86.
[60]
David R Tobergte and Shirley Curtis. “Social research methods”. In: Journal of
Chemical Information and Modeling 53 (2013).
==PAGE:161==
Bibliography
149
[61]
Caroline A. Tynan. “Conducting Focus Groups — a Guide for First‐Time Users”.
In: Marketing Intelligence & Planning 6.1 (1988), pages 5–9.
[62]
WHO. Promoting mental health: concepts, emerging evidence, practice (Sum-
mary Report). 2004.
[63]
Alex Woolley and Steve Gill. Contextual Testing of Interactive Prototypes at
the Early Stages within the discipline of Design. December 2008. University of
Wales, 2008.
==PAGE:162==
