==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
Feasibility and Risk Assessment of New 
Concept of Drone Delivery in Takeaway 
Service 
 
Key words: Entrepreneurship, Innovation, Drone, Takeaway, Risk  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specialization: Industrial Engineering and Management 
 
Department: Management Engineering 
 
 
Author: Yin Jia (s161444) 
 
Supervisor: Jieyu Zhou 
 
 
 
Date: 16 July, 2018 
 
==PAGE:2==
Preface 
Firstly I would appreciate the invaluable insights from my thesis supervisor Professor Jieyu
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zhou, I would like to thank for her time and support that I can not describe with words. I
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
have personally learned a lot throughout the thesis period. I would like to thank my friends,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
classmates and all Management Engineering staff at Technical University of Denmark for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their help and knowledge. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract 
Along with the rapid development of drone technology and the popularity of food takeaway
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
service all over the world, due to the wide range of applications of drone technology, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
business proposal about drone-based takeaway platform was born. The proposal is intended
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
to be introduced in China since there is no precedents of this kind of business. This thesis
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
encompasses the feasibility and risk assessments of the drone-based takeaway platform, to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
make a comprehensive and multidimensional analysis by adopting a series of quantitative and
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
qualitative models and methods. The outcomes of the analysis and assessment should be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regarded as a reference that whether it is a practicable proposal to apply in takeaway service. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
==PAGE:4==
Table of Content 
1 Introduction
5 
1.1 Initial Motivation
5 
1.2 Purpose and Goal of The Analysis
8 
1.3 Scope of The Analysis
8 
1.4 Research Questions
8 
2 Literature Review
10 
3 Methodology
13 
4 Analysis of Necessity of Drone-based Takeaway Platform
15 
4.1 Current Situation of Takeaway Service in China
15 
4.2 Questionnaire Survey of User Groups
16 
4.2.1 Questionnaire of Consumer
16 
4.2.2 Questionnaire of Restaurant Owner
21 
4.3 The Other Relevant Stakeholders
24 
4.4 PESTEL Analysis
26 
4.5 SWOT Analysis
32 
4.6 Porter’s Five Forces
34 
5 Business Model Canvas
37 
5.1 Value Propositions
37 
5.2 Customer Segments
38 
5.3 Channels
38 
5.4 Customer(User Groups) Relationships
39 
5.5 Key Activities
39 
5.6 Key Partners
39 
5.7 Key Resources
39 
5.8 Cost Structure
40 
5.9 Revenue Streams
40 
6 Platform Detail and Implementation
42 
6.1 Delivery System Composition
42 
6.2 Working Principle of the Platform
44 
6.3 Workstation of The Platform
44 
6.4 Technology Exploration
46 
6.5 A Simple Flight Experiment
49 
7 Risk Assessment
50 
7.1 Event Tree Analysis
50 
8 Technology Suggestion
53 
3 
==PAGE:5==
9 Cash Flow
54 
10 Conclusion
57 
11 Reference
59 
12 Appendix
62 
Appendix 1
62 
Appendix 2
65 
Appendix 3
67 
Appendix 4
68 
Appendix 5
71 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
==PAGE:6==
1 Introduction 
When mention take away business, the first thing can be associated is eating take away. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
history of takeaway business can be dated back to 1000 years ago in China, some chefs cook
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
at home and package the meal in a small vehicle, then sell them on some busy commercial
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
streets, so the flexibility of their action can be embodied maximum. 
 
In recent years, the online food delivery industry is gradually emerging. Online food delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
is a newly emerging O2O(Online to Offline) business. Since 2015, the online food delivery
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
industry has been recognized by the capital market. Several third-party takeaway platforms
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suchlike Meituan.com and Ele.me have obtained multiple rounds of financing and formed a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
new round of market blowout for the online catering business. In the first half of 2014-2015,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the size of China's online takeaway market orders showed an upward trend with fluctuated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
form, especially in the fourth quarter of 2014 and the second quarter of 2015, with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase reaching at 140.9% and 99.5% respectively. The order size have reached 190 million
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and 350 million respectively. Last year, the scale of online delivery orders has reached the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peak in recent years. In addition, there were 256 million customers using App online in 2016
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
and 346 million in 2017, the services have already covered 1300 cities and the market was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
estimated to be worth over 240 billion Chinese yuan around the year. (Li Tao, 2017) 
 
1.1 Initial Motivation 
Nowadays, E-commerce has developed as a popular mode of commerce around the world, it
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
is capable of delivering goods fast and efficiently due to the current strong logistics
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
capabilities. Although the traditional delivery service such as trucks, motorcycle have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
occupied a dominant position, the modernized delivery method such as drone is being paid
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
more and more attention by the public.  
 
Amazon has been one of the earliest and most aggressive innovators in the drone delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
space since Jeff Bezos unveiled the idea of Amazon Prime Air in 2013. This is not surprising
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
given how important delivery costs are to Amazon’s whole online retailer model, they have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
began testing the autonomous drone delivery in cambridgeshire and completed the first
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery to a customer in late 2016. (Jon Walker, 2017) In the same year, DHL has also
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
claimed a major progress in drone delivery which can be conducted in snow weather and soft
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
wind environment. (​Figure 1​) According to DHL, their parcel-drone can fly at least 8.1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
kilometers, at an altitude of over 480 meters, carrying 2.2kg of cargo at a speed of over
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
70km/h. It can fly in 8 minutes a trip that takes cars half an hour. That was not a one-off test
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
and DHL has flew 130 deliveries to different destinations in various of environments. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
additional, Google is also testing its own drone for the Australian postal service. (Kelsey D.
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Atherton, 2016) 
5 
==PAGE:7==
 
Figure 1. DHL drone delivery. (DHL official website) 
 
In the apparel industry, fashion company Dolce&Gabbana even use drone to exhibit their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bags on the fashion show. (​Figure 2​) Furthermore, as early as 2014, a Dutch engineer has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
created a flying defibrillator for emergency situations and the drone is called Ambulance
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone which would be stationed at various points in the city. In an emergency, people on the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scene can call it in and it arrives a few seconds later, the built-in defibrillator unit can be used
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by anyone and it allows doctors to monitor the situation after the shocks are administered.
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The drone includes a webcam and loudspeaker and allows remote doctors to walk people on
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the scene through the process of attaching the electrodes and preparing the defibrillator. (John
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biggs, 2014) 
 
 
Figure 2. Dolce&Gabbana’s drone exhibition. (D&G official Instagram) 
 
As the drone delivery is becoming prevalent in many fields and has come out with some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
achievements in recent years, and Amazon, DHL as the vanguards of drone delivery, they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have demonstrated a high level of operability.  
 
With the huge demand of online takeaway service as mentioned previously, and based on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some giants dominate majority of the food delivery market share, food is an eternal topic for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
consumers. Meanwhile, some thorny problems gradually appeared in this wave. For example,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
6 
==PAGE:8==
college students are the main force of the takeaway customers, but there always be a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
congestion when the meal time is coming, so the customer always encounter the delay of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery, the reason also could be the bad weather, traffic problem, courier is not familiar
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
with the delivery route etc. In addition, the electric bicycles which used by delivery men may
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cause traffic accidents. 
 
In the other hand, restaurants also have to pay for the delivery and distribution of employees
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each month, and these fees become the takeaway delivery fees that consumers need to pay
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
extra. Another example is that delivery man always drop the meal downstairs due to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
high-rise building, so the consumer have to use rope to lift up the meal. (​Figure 3​)  
 
 
Figure 3. The consumer lift up the meal by rope. 
 
Therefore, in order to solve the above problems, a timely, safe, and inexpensive distribution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
of food delivery has become a problem that restaurants need to seriously focus on. According
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
to a news from EveningStandard, a food company called Lucky foodies in Reykjavik, Iceland
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
are the first case in the world that be able to order burgers, sushi and even beer online to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivered by drone, at the moment, their drone service has cut the journey time down from 25
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
minutes to 4 minutes, but it is only available on one route yet and just in a trial period.
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(Harriet Pavey, 2017) Nevertheless, due to there is no recorded and reported precedents in
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
China before this thesis started, and with the rapid development of drone technology,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consequently it’s possible to introduce drone technology into takeaway business as well,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
especially in China such a big marketplace, where people have regarded takeaway as an
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indispensable part in their daily life. 
 
7 
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Purpose and Goal of The Analysis 
However, there must be some unforeseen factors when start up a new business and delivering
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
food by drone is no exception. So it’s necessary to conduct a series of assessments to argue,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
evaluate, test and verify whether it’s a reliable idea to fit into the current social, technical and
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the other environments. The goal of this thesis is aimed at analyzing the feasibility and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reliability by using drone to conduct a takeaway service in China, and provide a total solution
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
of drone-based takeaway platform, which include the key working functions of the platform.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To assess the impact on all dimensions of society, politics, technology and economy etc. and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sum up the advantages and disadvantages. Lastly to evaluate the key functions, risk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assessment within the whole delivery system, such as safety consideration and possible
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
incidents, as well as the technical suggestion changes, then to expound and prove whether it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
can bring profits to the relevant stakeholders. 
 
1.3 Scope of The Analysis 
The feasibility and risk assessment of this project are involving catering business which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
takeaway service will be the main objective, the scope will contain both the whole platform
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the drone itself, which the whole platform refers to the business proposal and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone-based takeaway system. The assessment of the whole platform should be started with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the overall situation of online takeaway catering industry in China, no matter political,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
economic, technological, social issues or the influence of relevant stakeholders and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
environment, all of these issues need to be considered. So such as the Political, Economic,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social, Technological, Environmental, Legal Analysis (PESTEL analysis), Strengths,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats Analysis (SWOT Analysis), Business Model Canvas etc
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be applied. In the end, a deep feasibility analysis will be applied due to this quite new
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
idea. With regard to drone itself, the key functions and operation assessments will be the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
main task. The aim of using rotary-wing drones is to deliver meals until the customer’s house
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
fast and cost-effectively. However, some failures and accidents could be happen during its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
route thus cause the relevant losses suchlike financial and human life losses. It could be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
foreseen if a risk analysis is made in order to find out the causes and the consequences
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regarding for the component failure either a system failure. So the Event Tree Analysis will
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
help assess these kinds of risks and to figure out the failures and come up with some useful
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
measures to reduce the risks, for instance, add safe case around the propellers. 
 
1.4 Research Questions 
As a result, the following research questions will be answered throughout the study: 
●
Is it a feasible idea to conduct a takeaway serive by using drone in China? 
●
With what methods and models to analyze the feasibility and risk?  
8 
==PAGE:10==
●
How to establish an independent platform which is mainly using drone to conduct
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
such a new business? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
==PAGE:11==
2 Literature Review 
As mentioned in previous parts, the research theme of this thesis is to carry out a series of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
assessments of the drone-based takeaway service, it is related to two main aspects of the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research.  
 
●
One is the drone aspect. 
●
Another one is the degree of market acceptable on drone-based food delivery. 
 
These two aspects ought to be discussed separately. Therefore, it is crucial to encompass the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
research questions and tell people that what knowledge and ideas have been established and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agreed in these two aspects. In additional, the gaps and disadvantages of these two aspects
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also need to be related. Correspondingly, the following reviews are focus on deliberating in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Drone, Express Delivery by Drone, and Takeaway Catering. 
 
Firstly, what is a drone? To understand drones, it is necessary to understand the accurate
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
definition of a drone. As Penguin Engine describe in the article “Drone Literature: What are
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Drones?”: The term “drone” is meant for any unmanned robot either preprogrammed or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
remotely controlled which can be used in the water, land, or air. The most common drone is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
an aerial unit which is an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) and flies without an onboard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pilot. Modern UAVs are equipped with high definition cameras for recording and GPS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system for tracking. Drones are providing people with new ways to do their day-to-day
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activity in all facets of life, be it work or play. From drone racing to engineering and research
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
to spying and security, people have come up with brilliant applications of such devices for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different kinds of situations. Looking at the recent boom in usage of commercial drones it is
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
safe to say that the drone age seems to be just around the corner. Drones are not new, as there
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have been radio-controlled airplanes or copters known as RC toys used since the 1940s &
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50s. But the uses and applications of the modern day drones are much broader than those RC
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
crafts. (Penguin Engine, 2017) 
 
To promote the understanding of utilization of drones, it is necessary to understand their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
military use and history. As Thomas Rootwelt portrayed in his research paper “Ambulance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Drone in Norway”, the drone was historically utilized as military use, he said: Historically,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UAVs have been used when a job has been too "dangerous, dirty, or dull" to be done by
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people. As early as 1849, unmanned balloons carrying bombs where used to attack Venice,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and a kite was used for aerial photography during the Spanish-American War in 1898. In
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
World War 1 drones were used for target practice and remote controlled bombs. World War 2
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
saw more advanced guided aircraft, including tv-guided, gliding bombs. In the Vietnam War
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drones were used for reconnaissance, and the modern day drone fills many roles, most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
notably the hunter-killer, able to detect and take out targets, while operating nearly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
autonomously for several hours and from half the world away. Military drone systems
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
==PAGE:12==
(​Figure 4​) have mostly been involved in surveillance/reconnaissance and direct engagement,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but has more recently been used to deliver supplies in combat zones. 
 
Figure 4. Military Drone. (Thomas Rootwelt and wikipedia commons) 
 
An example of this is the Kaman K-Max helicopter, delivering towed loads to friendly and
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hard to reach outposts. This unmanned helicopter has also been used in firefighting, where it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
automatically identifies hotspots and dumps water on them. It does this by cooperating with a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
quad-rotor drone, Lockheed’s Indago, that acts as a sensor platform, providing information
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
about the fire to fire-fighters on the ground. The system can also operate at night and in heavy
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
smoke, some- thing manned systems cannot do. This results in 2-3 times as many sorties as a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
manned system. The helicopter has also been tested for autonomous casualty evacuation. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was done in tandem with a UGV (unmanned ground vehicle), that navigated to and found the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
wounded person (in the test case it was a mannequin). Some of the first uses of drones for
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
non-military uses has been for surveillance, such as monitoring of disaster areas and Search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Rescue (SAR). This task has often been accomplished by military drone systems, such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Global Hawk. 
 
In short, from these paragraphs described by the two authors above, the established and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agreed theories on the aspect of Drone is that the drone is a relatively novel thing. In recent
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
years, the scope of drone utilization has gradually expanded, this is a good device for a air
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
photography and transportation. However, when close to search the information of delivering
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
food by drone, there is no relevant literatures regarding to this. However there are several
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reports and articles towards the risks of drone delivery in express industry, e.g Amazon. As
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anthony Mark Lawson recounted in his paper “Consumer Behaviors of Drone Delivery”:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With the adoption of a new technology comes uncertainty and risks; drones (for delivery) are
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
no exception to this rule. Consumers have voiced their concerns about the possibility of drone
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery: the landing spot of the package, privacy regarding drones flying over their 4 houses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
or themselves, hijacking, crashes and cyber-attacks releasing personal information (A. M.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lawson, 2017). Stanislaw Bobela also related in his article “Developing a drone delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
11 
==PAGE:13==
system for blood in Bangalore, India” that the drone delivery has several uncertainties factors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about the successful delivery and must consider the local regulation for UAVs. (Stanislaw
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bobela, 2016) 
 
So, a common consensus of the drone delivery is that this device is realizable to transport
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
goods by its nimble route that manual work can not obtain. However, according to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
literatures there still be some restrictions and unreliable factors that people may doubt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regarding to the express industry. So a feasibility assessment seems like an inevitable process
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when employ drones to catering industry. Before this thesis started, there are merely some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relevant YouTube videos on pizza delivery and a news in Iceland. According to the YouTube
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
video “Domino's First Company To Deliver Pizza By Drone” from CNBC, the pizza
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
company Domino’s Pizza was testing and conducting a pizza delivery, in the video you can
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
see they have cooperated with Amazon. In addition, an Icelander food company which was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mentioned in Section 1.1, has also conducted a food delivery by drone. However, these
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
activities are just on trial period, and there is no precedents nor literature analysis towards it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
in China before this thesis started. Consequently, in order to introduce this novel idea into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
China, a systematic analysis towards drone-based food delivery looks like an important and a
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
necessary process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
==PAGE:14==
3 Methodology 
With the objectives of answering the previous mentioned research questions, an overall
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysis on the feasibility will be made by using different models in Section 4. The models
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
allow to define the coherence of overall assessment of the new proposal.  
 
Firstly, in order to have a deep understanding of the current situation of takeaway business in
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
China, a questionnaire survey towards customers suchlike consumers and restaurant owners
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be conducted in Section 4.2, since questionnaire has lots of advantages over the other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
types of surveys because it is cheap, does not require as much effort from the questioner as
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
verbal or telephone surveys, and often has standardized answers that makes it simple to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
compile data. It can smoothly lead the interviewees to the research goals and core ideas.
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When come up with a new idea, an essential part need to be considered is the relevant
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders, so a Stakeholder Analysis will be applied in Section 4.3, through this method, a
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
systematic understanding of the stakeholders’ need will be formed. In addition, in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consider the issues that can influence the relevant stakeholders, an overall situation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
catering and express businesses, include political, economic, technological, social issues etc.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a Political, Economic, Social, Technological, Environmental, Legal Analysis (PESTEL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Analysis) need to be applied in Section 4.4, since PESTEL Analysis is a powerful and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
comprehensive method to assess the multidimensional factors and issues towards an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organization or business proposal and it can nicely conduct an external analysis for the new
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept’s business position, potential and direction of operations. To follow up the outcomes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of PESTEL Analysis, a Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats Analysis (SWOT
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Analysis) has been applied in Section 4.5, by using this strategic planning method, it is easily
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
to identify the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats, thus can help determine the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
goals and obstacles of this business proposal and have a deep analysis of the proposal’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
competitive advantages. In order to assess the different forces from each aspect, and evaluate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the competitiveness of this new business proposal, the Porter’s Five Forces Model will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applied in Section 4.6. To understand how a new concept or business creates, delivers, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
capture values in economic and social cultural context, it’s necessary to conduct a Business
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Model Canvas Analysis (BMC) in Section 5. 
 
Secondly, in the other hand, for the drone itself and drone delivery system, it’s more related
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the risk assessment for the key functions and the whole platform, so a simple experiment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
towards drone operation will be made in Section 6.5, the experiment is operated by my
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
brother Huang Haoyuan, commanded by me on video chat in Zhengzhou, China. This is a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
very simple experiment that just operate it from one place to another place, however it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
manifested a helpful influence towards this thesis. For the drone delivery platform, in order to
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
evaluate the probability of the possible occurring events, an Event Tree Analysis will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applied in Section 7.1, of which it’s widely used in electronic system, aerospace and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
==PAGE:15==
automotive domain. By using this method, a systematic description of the possible risks can
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be formed.  
 
For this project, it is also associated with business plan that may related to the financial
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
budget, so behind the main body of this thesis, a simple Cash Flow towards this new platform
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has been made in Section 9, a Cash Flow Analysis can help estimate the incomes and
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
outcomes for a project or company, it helps foresee the potential financial issues and give an
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
entire outlook of profits circumstances on this new proposal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
==PAGE:16==
4 Analysis of Necessity of Drone-based Takeaway Platform 
This chapter is aimed at applying a series of different methods and models to carry out a
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
comprehensive analysis of all dimensions of
this new proposal that can affect the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process-making, every methods and models will result in different outcomes which are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
essential to integrate them, therefore make assessments and decisions. The analysis is started
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
with the current situation of takeaway service and followed up with the user questionnaires,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
then to give a multidimensional analysis of factors which may influence this new platform. 
 
4.1 Current Situation of Takeaway Service in China 
There are three main takeaway platforms in China from now on, they are: meituan.com,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ele.me and baidu. (​Figure 5​) 
 
 
Figure 5. Three main takeaway App in China. 
 
These three largest food delivery apps have dominated over 90% of the food-delivery market
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in China. ​Figure 6 shows the market share of the three giants, there you can see they
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
basically occupy a similar share in the marketplace which is around 30% for each.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meanwhile, there are other smaller food-delivery service providers who are seeking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opportunities and joining this fierce battlefield by providing an unique business model. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
three giants are all online-to-offline(O2O) food delivery platforms that provide customers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with online ordering, food delivery and some other related services in China. Their services
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are well developed in all of China’s first and second-tier cities such as Beijing, Shanghai,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hangzhou, Zhengzhou and 300 other cities. They started by helping restaurant owners install
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
computers in order to connect them to the meal ordering platform, they hire their own food
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery employees and coordinates them based on food-delivery locations, this way it can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
control the entire process from online meal ordering to food delivery. Once online orders are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assigned, the platforms set a delivery deadline based on the distance between restaurants and
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users’ home. Users can receive compensation if the deliveries are delayed. Data analysis
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
shows the average time is 40 minutes and the companies are trying to reduce the time further
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
by improving on their management efficiency. (Kaikai Shi, 2018) 
 
 
15 
==PAGE:17==
 
Figure 6. Market share of China’s takeaway providers. 
 
4.2 Questionnaire Survey of User Groups 
The above is the analysis of current food-delivery platform, however, deliver food by using
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone technology is a quite new idea, most people in China even never hear about this
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept. As the founder of Marshall Field & Company, Marshall Field had offered the slogan
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“The customer is always right” in the late 19th century. As a result, in order to verify the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
acception of drone-based takeaway service in the society, it’s crucial to collect plenty of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information and data from the the user groups in current catering industry. For example, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consumer’s and restaurant’s satisfaction of the current delivery method, what kind of delay
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have they encountered: bad weather, traffic jam, or something else. So a complete
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigation towards consumers and restaurants need to be considered. 
 
4.2.1 Questionnaire of Consumer 
Here is a takeaway questionnaire has been finished which aims at investigating the consumer
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
experiences regarding to takeaway service in catering business, here are the parts of crucial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions and outcomes which are shown in following figures. The detailed data is shown in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Appendix 1. There are 150 people have been interviewed and they varied from 20 to 36 years
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
old, mainly from the the second-tier cities in China, such as Wuhan, Xi’an and Zhengzhou. 
 
In the following graphs, the outcomes of Q1~3 illustrate the huge demand of takeaway
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
service in current society of China, ​Figure 7 has shown the consumer’s attitude towards
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
take-away service and the question is “How do you like to use take-away service?” Below the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
chart, (1, 2, 3, 4, 5) represent the degree of the consumer’s attitude, where “1” is dislike and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
“5” is strongly like. The figure has pointed that 44.7% of the people are at “4” degree which
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
indicates they are willing to use but not very strongly, and 24% of the people are at “5” which
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
indicates that they strongly like it, only 1.3% of the people are unwilling to use take-away
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
==PAGE:18==
service. Overall, over 80% of the interviewees are taking a relatively positive attitude towards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
take-away business. 
 
 
Figure 7. Consumer’s attitude towards takeaway service. 
 
Figure 8 has shown the people’s point of view regarding whether takeaway is a good service.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Also,
(1, 2, 3, 4, 5) represent the degree of the consumer’s point of view that whether
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
take-away service is a good channel in catering business, where “1” is strongly disagree and
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
“5” is strongly agree. Here you can see the outcomes are basically consistent with Figure 5
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
that almost 100% of the interviewees are holding a positive point of view, over 90% of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people are at the degree of (3, 4, 5) and they think it is a good approach in catering business. 
 
 
Figure 8. people’s point of view regarding whether takeaway is a good service. 
 
The sector chart in ​Figure 9 illustrates the frequency of usage of takeaway service towards
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the interviewees, there you can see people who use takeaway service twice or more times a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
week has occupied the most percentage. People who use takeaway service once in three days
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
has occupied 22.7%, and 15.3% of the interviewees use takeaway service once a week. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
short, over 60% of the interviewees have a high frequency of using takeaway service in their
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
daily life which is at least once in one week. 
 
17 
==PAGE:19==
 
Figure 9. Frequency of usage of takeaway service towards the interviewees. 
 
In the below graphs, the outcomes of Q5~7 illustrate that consumers are not pleased with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
traditional delivery method since they always run into various delivery delays and a long
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
waiting time. The sector chart in ​Figure 10 has displayed the issue of deliver delay, here you
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can see people who have encountered a delivery delay has dominated in this issue, so
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery delay can be regarded as a common problem and really need to improved. 
 
 
Figure 10. Delivery delay encounter. 
 
Figure 11 shows the main reasons of a delivery delay that people have ever experienced if
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
they answered “yes” in Question 5, the bar chart shows the most common reason of delivery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delay is traffic problem, people always complain the terrible traffic condition. The following
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dominant factor is delivery man’s mistake, the mistakes can be unfamiliar with the route to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
customer’s home, mis-operating the order etc. Other than this, bad weather and system error
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also occupy a relatively important position in the factors. 
 
18 
==PAGE:20==
 
Figure 11. Main reasons of a delivery delay. 
 
Figure 12 shows the general waiting time people often experience, this is a multiple choice
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
question, there are 81.3% of the interviewees usually wait one hour for their meals, and only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42% of the people wait for their meal within 30 minutes. Waiting time two hours and over
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
two hours are merely occurred. 
 
 
Figure 12. General waiting time. 
 
From the outcomes of Q8~10 in below graphs, you can see that consumers are showing a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
curiosity about new delivery method. In ​Figure 13​, the various of delivery method are shown,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the most common vehicle is motorcycle which is occupied as 88.7%, and the second common
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vehicle is bicycle which is 36%, car is only occupied with 26.7%. In this question, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery method, drone is specially added that can incite people’s curiosity of novel delivery
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
method, thus it is conducive to develop the following study. 
 
19 
==PAGE:21==
 
Figure 13. Delivery method. 
 
Figure 14 shows people’s viewpoint of using an automatic system to conduct a takeaway
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
service in catering business, apparently the automatic system refer to drone delivery and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
existing in a platform. There are 60.7% of the interviewees think automatic system could be a
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
smart approach to operate in takeaway service. This shows people’s positive attitude towards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
new things, people believe that there will be a better platform to improve the takeaway
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
industry in the future. This will be of great help to the subsequent research. 
 
 
Figure 14. People’s viewpoint of using drone to conduct a takeaway service. 
 
Overall, among these interviewed people, they have a huge demand for takeaway service.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
The takeaway service is currently in a trend with spurted development in China especially in
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
big cities. From the questions in the survey, it indicates that people have a high level of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
interest towards takeaway service, some people even call takeaway every day. However there
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are still some shortcomings especially delivery delay, and various reasons have been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analyzed in the above figures. In addition, people hope to shorten the meal delivery time as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
much as possible and customers hope to have a simple and fast automatic platform to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
improve the takeaway industry. Though this investigation, subsequent research on drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery will make sense. 
 
20 
==PAGE:22==
4.2.2 Questionnaire of Restaurant Owner 
The above is mainly an analysis and survey for consumers, furthermore, it is vital to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigate towards another user that restaurant owners, since their viewpoints of new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
business proposal are the key to develop and research the following activities as well. A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questionnaire towards restaurant owners has been completed and this survey has asked 23
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
restaurant bosses with 5 questions, the outcomes are shown below. 
 
Figure 15 shows the restaurant owners’ satisfaction of current delivery platform, (1, 2, 3, 4,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5) represent the degree of satisfaction, where “1” is unsatisfied and “5’ is satisfied, according
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
to the charts, almost half of the interviewees are holding a degree of “2”, which is a little bit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
unsatisfied with the current delivery platform. Only 17.4% of the interviewees are relatively
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
satisfied with the current delivery platform which at the degree of “4” and “5”, and 30.4% of
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the interviewees are holding a neutral attitude. 
 
 
Figure 15. Restaurant owners’ satisfaction of current delivery platform. 
 
Figure 16 shows the restaurant owners’ viewpoint about main gaps of the current takeaway
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
service, this is a multiple choice and the complaints of delivery delay and high cost of salary
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for delivery man are at the same percentage which are over 60%, meanwhile, only 13% of the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviewees think the current platform is perfect and there is no need to improve anything.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
This chart largely reflects the dissatisfaction of the restaurant owners with the current state of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
takeaway service. 
 
21 
==PAGE:23==
 
Figure 16. Restaurant owners’ viewpoint about main gaps of the current takeaway service. 
 
The following sector chart in ​Figure 17 shows the bosses’ opinion on whether there could be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a better option to replace the manual delivery in takeaway service, in the graph there are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60.9% of the interviewees agree that there could be a better option, 34.8% of the interviewees
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
are having a indecisive attitude but maybe there is a feasible alternative solution to conduct a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
takeaway service.  
 
 
Figure 17. The bosses’ opinion on whether there could be a better option to replace the 
manual delivery in takeaway service. 
 
Figure 18 has shown the attitude of bold attempt towards novel approaches, (1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represent the degree of attitude towards drone delivery, where “1” is no meaning, “5” is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
interesting and “3” is neutral, there you can see over 78% of the interviewees are holding a
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
positive attitude at the degree of “4” and “5”, which indicates that they think it is a interesting
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
idea to delivery food by using drone.  
 
22 
==PAGE:24==
 
Figure 18. Bosses’ attitude of bold attempt towards novel approaches. 
 
Figure 19 has shown a simple question that whether the restaurant owners want to have a try
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
and join the drone-based food delivery platform.In the chart you can see all of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviewees have an affirmative answer where 78.3% of the people really want to join the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
platform and the rest want to have a try. 
 
 
Figure 19. Question about whether the restaurant owners want to have a try and join the 
drone-based food delivery platform. 
 
Through the above analysis and investigation of the two main users of the new business
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposal, it can be seen that, on the whole, the interviewees especially consumers have a very
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
positive attitude towards the development of new takeaway platform, which stems from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dissatisfaction with the current stage of takeaway service. And the restaurant owners have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also shown an interest about the new platform. As a result, these questionnaires and surveys
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
helpfully contribute to the further study. Next, this project will conduct a more in-depth
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
analysis of other relevant stakeholders, and eventually to develop a complete adaptation plan
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
and solution. 
23 
==PAGE:25==
4.3 The Other Relevant Stakeholders 
To start up a new business plan, a good product or new concept is one with positive effects in
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
terms of sales success, high market share, well adapted to the functions of the company, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
formulating
an
efficient
innovative
paradigm.
Obviously
that
has
presented
a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
multidimensional problems, so the entrepreneurs and designers are facing multiple actors and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
must balance multiple wishes for properties and functions. Furthermore, all these are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
underpinned by the product’s lifecycle and the subsequent actor interactions, so the key
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders can be identified as users, manufacturers, society and lifecycle actors. (Mogens
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& Claus & Philip, 2015), ​Figure 20 shows a model of the key stakeholder groups related to a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
product, its realization and lifecycle. 
 
 
Figure 20. Key stakeholder groups related to a product, its realization and lifecycle. (Mogens 
& Claus & Philip, 2015) 
 
 
For this drone-based food delivery platform, the key stakeholders and their potential
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discourse, need statement are shown in ​Table 1​. The potential discourse relates the original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intentions of the stakeholders and what are the own jobs of of the stakeholders, which can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interpreted as what they want to do for a simple desire. The need statement relates the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders’ demand on this platform and what benefits the stakeholders can get from this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
new platform(product or company). As a result, among these statements there are different
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
needs, goals or requirements regard to this new platform, which can be the drivers to trade off
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
and perfect this new platform. Furthermore, there you can see almost all of the statements are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presenting a positive effect on the platform, that is why this platform can display its
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
necessity. 
 
 
 
 
24 
==PAGE:26==
Stakeholder 
Potential Discourse 
Need Statement 
 
 
 
User 
Groups 
Consumer: 
student, white 
collar, etc 
 
Want to eat at home and 
workpalce 
A most effective and 
efficiency platform to 
order meal from local 
restaurant 
 
 
Restaurant owner 
 
Want to send the meal to 
customer’s home or workplace 
A professional third-party 
platform to conduct food 
delivery efficiently and 
reduce the expenditure of 
delivery 
 
 
Drone Manufacturer 
Want to design and 
manufacture a multifunctional 
drone with a lower cost which 
can fit the delivery job for the 
platform 
A platform that can reveal 
their powerful and 
multifunctional drones 
and get profit from the 
platform 
 
Software(App) Developer 
Want to design a good App for 
the platform and elevate its 
own design level 
An attractive proposal 
that worth to design for 
and get a lump-sum profit 
from the platform 
 
Government 
Can give legally support in 
accordance with the local law 
and want to make a positive 
image to the city 
A good 
company(platform) that 
can help drive and raise 
the local GDP 
 
Advertiser(Third-party) 
Want to spread this new 
product to the society and raise 
its own reputation 
An attractive 
product(platform) that 
easy to spread and get a 
lump-sum profit from it 
 
 
Investor 
 
 
Want to invest a novel idea 
An attractive and 
appealing business 
proposal(platform) that 
worth to invest and gain a 
fat profit 
 
 
Competitor 
 
Want to impose market 
pressure on this platform 
A strong competitive 
company that can 
stimulate it to make an 
effort on beneficial 
competition 
Table 1. Relevant stakeholders of the drone-based takeaway platform. 
 
In addition, need to interpret in Table 1 that the users can be sorted as two groups, one is the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
consumer who will order meal online via the platform(App), another one is the restaurant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
25 
==PAGE:27==
owner who will through this platform to send meal by using drone, the detailed description of
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
user groups is shown in Section 5.2.  
 
The drone manufacturer should be the professional drone company and “DJI” can be a good
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
choice which is a drone producer based in Shenzhen, southern China. DJI will supply high
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality and low-cost drones since it has dominated the drone market all over the world,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
according to Skylogic Research 2016 version of the report, DJI has a whopping 72% market
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
share in drone industry, the distribution of each drone brand is shown in ​Figure 21​, this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shows its strong competitiveness. The detailed technical analysis of DJI drone will be in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 6.4. 
 
 
Figure 21. Market share of drone brand. (Skylogic Research, 2017) 
 
Advertisers can also be divided into two categories, one is the professional third party
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
advertisers, another one is the platform(App) itself. The third-party advertisers are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
responsible for spreading this platform into society. In the other hand, this drone-based
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
takeaway platform can also be an advertise platform which can carry the cooperated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
companies’ information, for instance, stick up advertising slogan on the drone when it fly into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
pedestrians’ view. 
4.4 PESTEL Analysis 
Originally it is out of curiosity to come up with this new idea, however, when a new idea was
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
born, there are so many encircled factors to consider. In order to identify the macro(external)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
forces facing this idea, and have a wide view of the whole environment, thus to determine the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
idea’s feasibility and future development path, a PESTEL analysis has been made in Table 2.
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
The letters stand for Political, Economic, Social, Technological, Environmental and Legal,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where the outcomes of the analysis can be used to identify weaknesses and threats which is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
used in a SWOT analysis. 
26 
==PAGE:28==
 
Political 
In recent years, the international environment facing China is in rapid change. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
international system is transforming from the core of Europe and America to the core of Asia
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
especially China. With the continuous development of China in all aspects, frequently appear
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
on international political arena, China is entering the stage which is called rejuvenation of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Chinese nation according to the history of China's development process. So it can be said that
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
China's political environment is enlightened, the government encourages people to start new
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
business, encourages some people to get rich first, and then help others get rich too. For
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instance, the CEO of Hangzhou Alibaba, Jack Ma, the development of his company has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
greatly supported and promoted by the Chinese government and the government is committed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
to creating a world-wide enterprise and brand for Alibaba. China's politics is a socialist
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
system with Chinese characteristics, which is different from the Chinese politics before the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reform and Opening-up in 1978, and now China's political policy pays more attention to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
development of economic and technological innovation and the improvement of people's
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
living standard. Therefore, in the current environment of China's political, this project will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
give full play to its advantages. 
 
Economic 
At present, China has become an economic power in the economy, is the world's second
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
largest economic entity. Namely the Asia's largest economic powerhouse, China has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accounted for a significant portion of the market share. ​Figure 22 shows the parts of China’s
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
economic data, which basically indicates that China's economy circumstance is growing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
steadily from 2013 to 2017. And the more detailed data is shown in Appendix 2.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Focus-economics.com, 2017) But economic hardship still exists in some areas of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
country, for example, the bubble economy of the real property market is more serious.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Although China has entered a well-off society, but this is only an average, the income gap
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
between the residents is still quite large, resulting in an increase in the gap between rich and
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
poor.  
27 
==PAGE:29==
 
Figure 22. Parts of China Economy Data. (Focuse-conomics.com, 2017) 
 
So for this project, the target cities and regions will be the middle-class groups such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hangzhou, Zhengzhou, Xi’an, these cities are also like the Beijing and Shanghai where have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a large population condition, people have a huge demand of takeaway service as well.
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, the central government is committed to promoting these kinds of cities to all
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
around the world. These cities is dominating the substantial majority of middle-class families
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and are perfectly suit for this kind of new business. Middle-classes are after all the principal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
force of consumption in such a new business environment and people in current stage of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
economy environment are more likely to consume their money on some novel things, this is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
positive to look forward to get a good harvest in the high-growth economic environment. 
 
Social 
The social factor is also known as socio-cultural factor, which is the areas that influence the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
shared belief and attitudes of the population. When considering social issues, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
circumstances of population growth, age distribution, health consciousness, career attitude
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
etc. need to be analysed since they have a direct effect on how this platform understand
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consumers and what drives them. As everyone knows, China has the largest population base
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the world, so this is a huge market that cannot be ignored. If any business or project is
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
deeply rooted in China, the benefits and profits will be huge. According to the 2017 census,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
China currently has a population of 1.4 billion. These populations are mainly distributed in
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
eastern and central China. Among them, Henan Province, where Zhengzhou is located, has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
become the most populous province in the country. Hangzhou is located in the southeast
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coastal area and is the most densely populated area. In the central and western regions where
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Xi'an is located, the population is also growing steadily. According to the Worldometers’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
==PAGE:30==
information,
here
lists
of
some
key
characteristics of China’s current population.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Worldometers.info, 2018) 
 
●
The current population of China is 1,415,201,432 as of Thursday, July 12, 2018,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
based on the latest United Nations estimates. 
●
China population is equivalent to 18.54% of the total world population. 
●
China ranks number 1 in the list of countries (and dependencies) by population. 
●
The population density in China is 151 per Km2 (390 people per mi2). 
●
The total land area is 9,388,211 Km2 (3,624,807 sq. miles) 
●
59.3 % of the population is urban (838,818,387 people in 2018) 
●
The median age in China is 37.3 years. 
 
In addition, ​Figure 23 shows the distribution of China’s population, where also marks the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
density of each province. (Cac-ib-geography, 2017) In the second-tier big cities suchlike
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zhengzhou (​Figure 23​), Hangzhou, residents are mainly live in downtown area, the high-rise
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
buildings (more than 10 floors) occupied a considerable proportion. 
 
 
Figure 23. Population density and distribution of China. 
 
For the gender and age distribution, according to the above data analysis, although China is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
gradually developing into an aging society, young people who are between 20~40 years old
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
still occupy a large proportion of the population, and they will still be the main consumers of
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this platform. 
29 
==PAGE:31==
 
With regard to career attitude, China is currently vigorously developing economic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
construction. People, especially young people, are highly showing enthusiasm for their jobs.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In big cities, young people will work day and night for their work. It is precisely due to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
large population environment, people have developed a habit of competition, no matter what
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
they do, people will solve and complete problems in the quickest and most effective way.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This also creates some workaholics who have no leisure time to dine in restaurants and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
canteens on university campus often cause congestion. The emergence of takeaway service
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will solve this problem very well, moreover, for those who live in high-rise building do not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
want to waste time going downstairs to take meals, this drone-based takeaway platform will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solve this problem exactly. 
 
Technological 
In terms of science and technology, China's achievements are remarkable. This is not only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
reflected in military and aerospace science, and the bits and pieces of daily life are more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
evident in the take-off of technology. For example, the popularity of mobile software
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
payments has greatly increased the convenience of people's lives. Using mobile software to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
order online has become an indispensable part of people's lives. In software R&D, China's
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
major technology companies invest huge sums of money to develop the latest and most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
advanced products, such as Alipay in Hangzhou Alibaba and WeChat pay in Shenzhen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tencent have already occupied the largest market for online payment in China. In addition,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for this project, drone technology is one of the main components of this platform, however, in
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
China there is just a powerful company that develops drones, called DJI which was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mentioned in the previous part. ​Figure 24 shows the popular product from DJI. The drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
products developed by DJI have occupied the majority of the world market, which also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indicates that China is now taking the lead in the world in terms of high-tech and innovative
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology. Although the average level is not as good as those in Europe and the United
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
States, its development trend is optimistic, which will provide a good technological
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development environment for this project. 
 
 
Figure 24. The drone product from DJ named “Mavic Pro”. (DJI offical, 2018) 
30 
==PAGE:32==
 
Environmental 
This factor actually has only come to the forefront in the last ten years, it becomes important
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
because the increasing scarcity of raw materials, pollution issues etc. Nowadays, consumers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are seeking to buy the products which are sourced ethically, and if possible from a sustainable
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
source. For this project, the part which can related to environmental issues is the drone itself,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
consumers in China are more and more attaching importance to environmental protection, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
drone manufacturer suchlike DJI just devote s its energy to developing sustainable products,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
regardless of consumers or this platform, it will always a good thing. 
 
Legal 
This drone-based takeaway platform a quite new idea and it will present in different
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provinces all around China, especially the second-tier cities and the capital of province.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, the legal policy of a specific province or city may influence the implementation of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this platform. For example, beginning in 2017, the Beijing Municipal Government has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stipulated that drone flight is banned within Beijing's Fifth Ring Road. Thereby, it is probably
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
not to conduct this kind of business in central zone of Beijing. So this project need to avoid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Beijing area to seek a market where can meet the local rules, currently, the second-tier cities
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such as Zhengzhou, Hangzhou, Xi’an will be a good choice since these cities have a liberal
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
local legal policy and also have a great population condition, it conducive to popularize and
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
promote this new platform. 
 
To sump up the above factors, the PESTEL model is shown below in ​Table 2​. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
==PAGE:33==
Political 
Economic 
Social 
-The entire political of 
China is open and 
enlightened 
 
-It is beneficial to conduct 
this new business 
 
-Will receive helps from 
government 
 
-Will give full play to the 
advantages in China’s 
political environment 
-China is the world’s second 
largest economic entity 
 
-Economy circumstance is 
growing steadily in recent 
years 
 
-Average level of 
consumption has increased 
these years 
 
-Middle-class fimilies are 
the main force of 
consumption 
-Have huge population base 
 
-A huge market 
 
-Young people are the 
principal force of 
consumption 
 
-High degree of enthusiasm 
for work 
 
-Eastern and southern region 
will be the main target 
Technological 
Environmental 
Legal 
-Highly developing 
 
-Relatively mature in 
high-tech and innovative 
technology 
 
-Development of mobile 
software(App) is mature and 
popularized 
 
-Drone manufacturers are 
powerful 
-Abundant in natural 
resources 
 
-Products can be made of 
sustainable materials 
 
-People are attaching 
imporatnce to environmental 
protection 
-Different in each province 
and city 
 
-Beijing is a special case 
where is not allowed drone 
flight in downtown 
 
-Liberal rules and relevant 
laws in second-tier cities 
such as Hangzhou, 
Zhengzhou, Xi’an etc. 
Table 2. PESTEL analysis for the drone-based takeaway platform. 
 
In the table, the background colour of each heading(factor) represents whether it can fit to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
drone-based takeaway platform, where the colour “green” is fit and beneficial to this project,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
the colour “yellow” is not very fit or depends on other issues, the colour “red” is not fit to this
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
project. There you can see except legal factor is in a colour “yellow”, all the rest of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
factors are shown in “green”, and there is no colour “red” among the factors. Consequently,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this project can demonstrate a high degree of adaptability among these factors. 
 
4.5 SWOT Analysis 
To follow up the PESTEL analysis and strengthen identify this platform’s competitive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
position, to assess what this platform can and cannot do, a SWOT analysis has been made in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
Table 3​. This model helps determine what helps this platform achieve its goals, and obstacles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
==PAGE:34==
it must overcome or minimize to achieve the desired results. By identifying the strengths,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
weaknesses, opportunities and threats, it is helpful to evaluate the feasibility of this platform
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and formulate a correct direction.  
 
For this project, the strengths by using this platform could be that the restaurant becomes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more responsive since a newer technological service is provided for consumers, it can be
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
defined as innovative spirit, for example an accurate positioning delivery can be came true by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
using drone delivery. Specifically, this service ensures a timely and fast delivery in the urban
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
area since the speed of a DJI drone can up to 70 km/h, the drone can avoid traffic jams and
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obstacles with a maximum degree of straight-line movement. Furthermore, it is very
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
convenient both for consumer and restaurant that can establish a subtle connection between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
them that consumers can enjoy the meal at home and workplace from their favorite restaurant
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
no matter the distance from the restaurant. For the consumers who live in high-rise building,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
they can get the meal from window since the drone can suspend in mid-air with a vertical and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
stationary flight. Moreover, all the courses of this service are conducted with an automatic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process. As a platform, restaurant can review the consumer feedback through this platform. In
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
addition, this open platform can provide a wide advertising space for cooperated ventures. In
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the other hand, for the drone itself, now there are variety of all-weather drone in current
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
market, especially “Mavic Pro” which is from DJI. So adapt into all kinds weather condition
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can also be a strength for this platform, for instance, the drone can fly in a snow weather
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
while it may easily cause traffic accidents for a car since the ground is so slippery. However,
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
meanwhile, this can also be the weakness since in some special cases the extreme adverse
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
weather suchlike tornado, rainstorm can restrict the flight. 
 
As for the weaknesses, except for the extreme weather condition which is expounded above.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
The mechanical breakdown of the drone could be a biggest weakness, for example, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
propellers may get stuck by foreign matters. Furthermore, once a power failure from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
battery, the drone will fall down and maybe crack the pedestrians. Another weakness is the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
carrying capacity, in most instances, the payload of a drone suchlike Mavic Pro is 0.5 kg~1.2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
kg, which is unable to carry a multiple orders in one time. 
 
Besides the internal factors of the platform, the external factors opportunities and threats also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have been analyzed that the opportunities could be using a lower price to delivery meal to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
outermost consumers in urban area, where the traditional delivery method is slow and costly.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
For the consumers, there will be a new delivery option can be selected when drone-based
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery was born, especially in such a rapid-developing environment in China. Once this
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
new idea(platform) is filtering into consumers’ minds, the market share of this platform will
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase conspicuously.  
 
With regard to threats, the legislation has not been finalized yet, and the law is amended
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
every year. For example, according to the local law in Beijing, it is not allowed drone flight
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
inside the 5th-ring road. It is therefore uncertain whether drone delivery services will be
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
==PAGE:35==
sustainable in the long run, as changes in legislation may prohibit or severely limit the service
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the future, thus resulting in investment failures and financial losses. There are also some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
security risks, for instance, hackers can access and steal consumers’ personal information or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drones themselves for spying and attacking the pedestrians. In addition, this is a quite new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
service that may not be widely accepted, causing people to worry about its privacy and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reliability, for instance deliberately sabotage and attack the flying drones. In addition, these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
threats will create a bad reputation for this platform and increase the cost of insurance,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thereby further increasing the total cost of the investment. 
 
 
Helpful 
Harmful 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internal 
Strengths 
 
-Responsive 
-Innovative 
-Reduce delivery time 
-Timely and fast 
-On time 
-Convenience 
-Performance 
-All-weather (except for extreme 
condition) 
-Limited competition 
-Advertising without extra cost and 
earn profit from it 
Weaknesses 
 
-Can not fly in extreme adverse 
weather condition 
-Limited payload 
-Mechanical breakdown 
 
 
 
 
External 
Opportunities 
 
-Delivery to outermost area 
-Automatic process 
-New delivery option for consumer to 
choose 
-Lower delivery price instead of 
traditional delivery method 
-Expand market share 
Threats 
 
-Amended legislation may restrict the 
drone delivery 
-High insurance cost 
-Security of drone and meal (thefts 
and vandalism) 
-May only acceptable by few people in 
the early period 
Table 3, SWOT analysis for drone-based takeaway platform. 
 
4.6 Porter’s Five Forces 
In order to understand the forces that shape competition on this new proposal, it is necessary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
to carry out a Porter’s Five Forces Analysis. By using this method, it can comprehensively
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
assess and evaluate the competitive strength and position of this drone-based takeaway
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
platform. The five forces refer to supplier power, buyer power, competitive rivalry, threat of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
substitution and threat of new entry. 
 
34 
==PAGE:36==
Supplier Power 
This platform is intended cooperating with DJI and DJI is the most powerful drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
manufacturer in China now, it has already monopolised the drone market in China, so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regarding to the ability of technological development, the supplier of this platform will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
present a high level since DJI is competent to supply the best drone ever.  
 
Buyer(user groups) Power 
The buyers of this platform are divided into consumers and restaurant owners, the number of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the buyers are considerable since the huge population base in China and along with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
high-speed development of economy, people in China are willing to try new things and spend
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
money on that. 
 
Threat of New Entry 
From now on and before this thesis started, there is no reported and recorded example of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone-based food delivery in China, but can not forswear the future entries since there are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some examples in Iceland and they may introduce it through the other paths. So overall, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the initial period maybe three or five years, the threat of the new entries is relatively low. 
 
Threat of Substitution 
The threat substitution of this platform may present a medium or high level since the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
traditional food delivery platform dominate in catering industry and people may be already
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accustomed to using the traditional delivery methods. 
 
Competitive Rivalry 
As mentioned in previous sections, the competitors of this platform are mainly three
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
traditional online food delivery companies. However, the three companies only provide the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
traditional delivery method suchlike car and electronic motorcycle. And there is no
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
precedents of drone-based food delivery in China ever. So for this platform, there could be a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
huge space to develop and could increase the market attractiveness significantly. 
 
 
So to sum up the above five forces, a Porter’s five forces model is made in ​Figure 25​ below. 
 
35 
==PAGE:37==
 
Figure 25. Porter’s five forces for the drone-base takeaway platform. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 
==PAGE:38==
5 Business Model Canvas 
In general, when come up with a new idea or business, and follow up the user survey and
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relevant stakeholders analysis, it’s crucial to conduct a new business model, it’s a strategic
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
management and lean startup template for developing new business (​Barquet, Ana Paula B,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2011​), ​It is a visual chart with elements describing a firm's or product's ​value proposition​,
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure, customers, and finances. (​A. Osterwalder, ​Yves Pigneur​, Alan Smith, 2010​),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it’s a company’s plan for how it will generate revenues and make a profit. It explains what
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
products or services the business plans to produce and market, and how it plans to do so. By
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
using this method, it can lay out a step-by-step plan of action for profitably operating the
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
business in a specific marketplace. However, for instance, the business model for a restaurant
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
is significantly different from the business model for an online business. (Investopedia, 2018)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this project, it is a union of traditional restaurant service and online service, the objective
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of this project is to bring new technologies and services to market and create an entirely new
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
market. So the degree of the motivation of this project is proactive by exploring and testing a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
new business model that might replace existing ones. 
 
5.1 Value Propositions 
To obtain a good business model, the value proposition need to be clear for the business, it’s
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a simple statement of a company’s product or service in the form of a value to a potential
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
customer or client, ideally separating the company from its competitors. It should convince
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
users that the product or service is better than others in the market, and can lead to a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
competitive advantage when customers pick that particular product or service over other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
competitors since they receive greater value.  
 
So in this platform offers value proposition for both consumers and restaurants, compared
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the traditional online food takeaway suppliers suchlike Meituan.com and Ele.me, this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
new platform can create new values beyond the foundation of traditional delivery method.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(car, motorcycle, etc.) 
 
●
For the ​consumers​: Firstly its core value will be convenience which can be explained
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as save more time than traditional delivery method, save costs and liberate the manual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workforce. When people complete their orders, the most urgent thing is that food can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
appear in front of them immediately. No matter at any time, time is money, when the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
deliver men ride the motorcycle with a speed of 40 km/h in downtown, the drone goes
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
directly to the customer’s home at a speed of 70 km/h in the sky (Mavic Pro, DJI
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Official), which will greatly reduce the delivery time and enable the customers to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enjoy the meals in time. Meanwhile, the use of drone have excused the salary for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery men. So in this position, there will not be manual operation anymore,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore can maximize the liberation of the workforce and then achieve an intelligent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 
==PAGE:39==
automatic platform. Secondly its core value will be strong performance that this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
platform attaches importance to technology innovation, and resulting in a more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
scalable, robust and more attractive platform that does not slow down in times of peak
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
demand and ordering since the drone can be adequate to this kind of task. 
●
For the ​restaurants​: Firstly its value will be accessibility that by informing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consumers of whether the restaurant have takeaway option. So it allows restaurants to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
obtain consumers who might not come across the venue but have an online search.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secondly this platform can also create convenience for the restaurants that the drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will significantly reduce the delivery time and expenditures. It can also guarantee to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
deliver on time even in a snowing weather while the traditional delivery method may
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cause a accident on the slippery road. In the other hand, it only takes a few minutes
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
for restaurants to join up with the platform and can be able to accept online payment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for orders as well. 
 
5.2 Customer Segments 
This is the targeted user groups and these groups have certain commonalities that allow
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
companies to create value. The process of defining consumer groups is also referred to as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
market segmentation. This project is aiming at two sorts of users, one is the consumers who
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
want to be able to order meal from local restaurant, they love eating at home or workplace
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
and they do not have enough time to cook themselves, they are always the student who are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stressing about their studies, the white-collars who are struggling for their careers.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Particularly, the people who are living in high-rise housing or office building can enjoy the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
convenience of the drone’s vertical take-off and landing.  
 
Furthermore, the restaurant owners are also the key users of this platform, by entering this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
platform, they will offer takeaway service and devote to expand their customer volume
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
beyond traditional channels. 
 
5.3 Channels 
There are different channels to deliver the value proposition to the customers, in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distribute the value proposition in ways that are fast, efficient and cost-effective, an effective
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
channel need to be developed. In this project, to reach the client, it will be through its own
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
channel and its partner channel. For its own channel, the platform itself, including the App,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
website, drone itself, and advertisement will be used, this platform will promote itself via
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
social media, television. The partner channel could be the drone manufacturer such as DJI,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
third-party advertisers and publicized by restaurants. 
 
38 
==PAGE:40==
5.4 Customer(User Groups) Relationships 
In order to ensure the survival and success of any businesses, the platform must identify the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
type of relationship it wants to create with its customer segments. In general, there are several
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
forms of customer relationships: 
●
Personal assistance 
●
Dedicated personal assistance 
●
Self service 
●
Automated service 
●
Communities 
●
Co-creation 
For this platform, the customer relationship with consumers can be regarded as a self service,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
people utilize the drone-based takeaway service through the main platform while having
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
limited interaction with employees. In addition, there will be a personal assistance component
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
in the form of phone and online chat support.  
 
The relationship with restaurants can be regarded as a dedicated personal assistance, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
restaurant is assigned to a specific local team member who can access the site if necessary. In
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
addition, the restaurant support team can answer questions by phone or online chat at any
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time. 
 
5.5 Key Activities 
The platform will include the online order App(website) and drone delivery system. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
business model involves in maintaining a powerful platform by providing drone delivery
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
between consumers and restaurants, it can supply plentiful information of various restaurant
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and conduct a series of advertising activities. 
 
5.6 Key Partners 
The platform will cooperate with the similar food delivery venture suchlike the previously
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analyzed Meituan.com, Ele.me etc, thus to expand its market and reach. Also, the drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
manufacturer will be an inseparable partner all the time, such as DJI, who can provide drone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technical support. In addition, software developer should also be a key partner since they can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
design a good App for this platform therefore satisfy user groups. 
 
5.7 Key Resources 
This drone-based takeaway service’s resource should be the proprietary App platform, it need
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
to massively attract user groups, include consumers and restaurant owners, it should also rely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
39 
==PAGE:41==
on the human resources, technical staff to enhance the platform, rely on sales staff to obtain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
new customers, and provide support to service personnel. Lastly, as a new business model,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the platform need to attract funding support from external investors. 
 
5.8 Cost Structure 
The cost structure of this platform should be a value-driven structure, aims at providing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
drone-based food delivery through important personal services and frequent product
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enhancements. The biggest cost drivers may be marketing costs, fixed costs. Other key
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drivers may include customer support/operations, and both of sales and fixed costs. 
 
5.9 Revenue Streams 
There should be three main revenue streams of the platform, namely joining fees, transaction
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fees and advertising fees. 
 
●
Joining Fees: Revenues will be generated from the lump-sum payment of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
restaurants who have
joined this platform, price of the admission depends on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
degree of maturity of the particular market. 
●
Transaction Fees: Revenues will be generated by the platform's commission for each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
order (rates may vary by province) and fees charged to the restaurant for processing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consumer’s card payments. 
●
Advertising Fees: This kind of revenues can be generated from the fees charged to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
restaurants who want a higher ranking in search result. As a public platform, for
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
instance, revenues can also be the earnings from helping other ventures carry slogan
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on drone. 
 
Through the comprehensive analysis of each factor of the business model, the nine building
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
blocks of this drone-based takeaway platform are portrayed in ​Table 4​, where the block of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Value Proposition is filled with a green background, which means the new created values and
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
advantages that the traditional food takeaway suppliers do not have. 
 
40 
==PAGE:42==
Key Partners 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Meituan.com 
-Ele.me 
-DJI 
-Software 
developer 
Key Activities 
 
 
-Maintain the 
platform 
-Provide inform 
of restaurant 
-Advertising 
Value 
Propositions 
 
 
 
 
 
For consumer: 
-Save more time 
than traditional 
delivery method 
-Higher 
performance 
-More scalable, 
robust and more 
attractive 
 
For 
restaurant: 
-Accessibility 
-Significantly 
reduces delivery 
time 
-Save 
expenditures 
-Guarantee 
on-time 
delivery in 
snowing 
weather 
Customer 
Relationships 
 
For consumer: 
-​Self service 
-Personal 
assistance 
 
For 
restaurant: 
-Personal 
assistance 
Customer 
Segments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Consumer 
-Restaurant 
owner 
Key Resources 
 
-Proprietary of 
App platform 
-Human 
resources 
-Technical staff 
-Sales staff 
-Investors 
Channels 
 
-Platform itself 
-App 
-Website 
-Drone 
-Social media 
-Television 
-DJI 
-Advertisers 
-Restaurants 
Cost Structure 
 
-Value-driven structure 
Revenue Streams 
 
-Joining fees 
-Transaction fees 
-Advertising fees 
Table 4. Business model canvas for drone-based takeaway platform. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 
==PAGE:43==
6 Platform Detail and Implementation 
Upon completion of analysis of the concept as a whole with a variety of factors, it is more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
necessary to establish a detailed system of the platform that can be implemented to fulfill the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
business idea. This system is separately conceived based on the above analysis results. The
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following part is a detailed explanation and analysis of the system of the platform. 
 
6.1 Delivery System Composition 
The idea has released a drone-based delivery system and the detailed method, the system
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consists of drone and delivery box which the delivery box is hanging under the drone and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
carrying meals in it. The operation process is operated with a new mobile Application which
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
is called “Jiayin Takeaway” and its abbreviation is “JYTA”, the icon is shown in ​Figure 26​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
in the following sections, JYTA will represent this drone-based takeaway platform. There are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
several modules inside the drone, which are: controller module, wireless module, sensor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
module, motor module, user verification module and battery module. 
 
 
Figure 26. The icon of “Jiayin Takeaway”. 
 
 
Among these modules: 
 
●
The wireless module is connected with phone APP for information interacting,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positioning, sending position instruction and online ordering. 
●
The sensor module and motor module are under the control of controller module. 
●
The sensor module consists of sensors, gimbal and gyroscope, accelerometer,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
electronic compass, barometric altimeter, GPS and camera, which are used for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring the position and velocity of the drone. 
●
The motor module is inclusive of 4 brushless DC motors and 4 electronic velocity
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
governor, each motor is connected with one velocity governor, which are used for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adjusting the movement and path of the drone. 
42 
==PAGE:44==
●
The drone is adopted with 4 rotary-wing propellers that rotated by 4 brushless DC
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
motors and this is currently the only reliable option since the jet-propelled is not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mature enough. 
●
The user verification module is used for verifying the valid identity information of
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consumers. 
●
The battery module is used for supplying electricity to the drone. 
●
The delivery box is setted with a password lock where the user verification module is
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
embedded in it. Only when the consumer inputs correct code, the delivery box can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opened, thus they can enjoy the meals. 
●
The detailed composition is shown in ​Figure 27. 
 
 
Figure 27. System layout and composition. 
 
43 
==PAGE:45==
6.2 Working Principle of the Platform 
In general, there are three main steps to implement this process, ​Figure 28 has illustrated the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery process: 
 
●
Firstly, the consumer places an order through JYTA application, there is a list of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
different sort of restaurants in local city, consumer can easily make a choice, then the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
order contents will be sent to the selected restaurant and consumer’s address will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sent to the drone. 
●
Secondly, restaurant receives the order through JYTA application and cooks for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consumer, then put the meal into delivery box with a sealing package. Meanwhile the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
JYTA is sending password to consumer, once the drone take off, restaurant will notify
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the consumer, and the approximate delivery time will be displayed on JYTA
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application, which is estimated according to drone’s speed and flight distance. 
●
The last step is that the drone determines the consumer’s position and fly to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consumer, consumer inputs code and open the delivery box, meanwhile the drone will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
notify restaurant that the order is completed. 
 
 
Figure 28. Delivery process. 
 
6.3 Workstation of The Platform 
A workstation for JYTA also plays an important role in this platform. It consists of drone,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
video receiver, remote controller, display and the power supply. ​Figure 29 shows how does a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
workstation work, where the electricity power supplies electricity to display, video receiver
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 
==PAGE:46==
and the remote controller. When the drone is flying by controlling the remote controller, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
computer will display the first-person-view of the flight from the video receiver, thus the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
operator can conveniently and easily control the flight status. The workstation will be set up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the central area of a city, where can smoothly interconnect with the done. 
 
 
Figure 29. The workstation of the platform. 
 
By enabling rapidly delivery of customer’s meal, no time is wasted delivering foods. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
delivery representation greatly optimize the process of delivering foods and maximum avoid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
traffic jam.  
 
As in any case, time is money and the drone will often help save delivery time maximum,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thus it’s possible to conduct multi-journey delivery in the same time compared with manual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delivery, when the last meal is delivered the drone will return automatically. Furthermore, as
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the consumer may encounter with a delivery delay, the reason can be the bad weather, traffic
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
jam, courier is not familiar with the route etc. In this case consumers always complain to the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
restaurant. So this system relieves this pain both for the consumers and restaurants by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
utilizing the speed advantage of drone which can be up to 70 km/h, but this numerical value
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is not allowed by using car or motorcycle on the street in city center. And this system can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
maximum save labor costs. In addition, by using ​this App, it also allows restaurant to see
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
consumer comments, obtain insight into its reputation. 
 
45 
==PAGE:47==
6.4 Technology Exploration 
Regarding to the drone which is applied in this platform, as the previous sections have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mentioned, the drones manufactured by DJI will be adopted. DJI, the full name is Dajiang
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Innovation Technology Co., Ltd, is a company headquartered in Shenzhen who is mainly
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
engaged in the production and development of drone system. With its innovative ability and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality, it has became the largest drone manufacturer around the world and occupied a market
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
share of 72%. (Skylogic Research, 2017)  
 
The product named “Mavic Pro” is a smart and portable drone which is produced by DJI. It is
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
widely used to many fields, the drone has a series of powerful functions that can master a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
takeaway task. According to DJI official, there are 7 main advantages: 
 
Compact 
 
 
Figure 30. Folded size of the drone. 
 
Figure 30 shows the size of the drone which indicates that it is only occupied with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H83mm×W83mm×L198mm and 743g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
==PAGE:48==
Flight Autonomy 
 
 
Figure 31. Internal composition of the drone. 
 
In ​Figure 31​, it shows that the drone includes 5 cameras, GPS & GLONASS, 2 ultrasonic
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
range finders, redundant sensors, and 24 powerful computing cores, which give the drone the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intelligence to avoid obstacles, hover precisely in mid-air and reduce accidents. This function
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
is really beneficial to the meal delivery that can ensure the meal is safe when arrive to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consumer’s address. 
 
Fly Further and longer 
 
 
 
Figure 32. Fly further and longer. 
 
Figure 32 shows the time the drone can fly to, the drone can be controlled by either the smart
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
remote controller or a smartphone. It is capable of reaching an absolute maximum flight time
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of 27 minutes, a maximum distance of 13 km and a maximum speed of 70 km/h due to its
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47 
==PAGE:49==
powerful and high-efficiency motors. So it can arrive at most cities’ outermost area by the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
control of the workstation. For the consumers who live far from downtown, it is possible to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
deliver meal for them with this powerful drone. 
 
Level headed 
 
 
Figure 33. Keep the same height. 
 
The drone can stay at the same level height above the ground automatically, there is no need
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
to worry about flying too low and the drone will keep the operator at just the right height over
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
uneven terrain. 
 
Easy to control 
 
 
Figure 34. Controlled by a smartphone. 
 
48 
==PAGE:50==
Figure 34 shows that the drone can be controlled by a smartphone, it is very easy and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
convenient to control the drone by an operator or someone does not have lots of experience. 
 
6.5 A Simple Flight Experiment 
With regard to the meal delivery, a flight experiment has been conducted in Zhengzhou. The
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
experiment is operated by my brother Huang Haoyuan and commanded by me via video chat.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The experiment is very simple but also crucial to this project, which is sorted into two kinds,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
one is the horizontal flight, another one is the vertical flight. The horizontal flight is the drone
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
flew with a 1kg object(a box with two hamburgers) from point A to point B on the ground
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
with 50 round-trips, where the distance between A and B is 5 km, this action is aimed at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
testing the accuracy of the flight and the success rate was 100%. Another experiment is the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
drone flew from ground to the 6th floor with 50 round-trips, this action is mainly to test the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
lasting of the drone and it had performed perfectly with a success rate of 100%. During this
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
experiment the hamburgers were safe and did not drop out all the time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 
==PAGE:51==
7 Risk Assessment 
Risks can be occured in anywhere and anytime, regardless of a product, a service or any other
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
domains, a risk assessment always plays an essential role. It can be defined as a quantitative
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
or qualitative estimate of the risk related to a well-defined situation and recognized threat.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
The risk assessment in this project consists of two aspects which are individual risk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assessment and system risk assessment. Individual risk refers to the possible risk on the body
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
of drone itself and the failure probability of each component, e.g one of the motors does not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
work. The system risk refers to the probable risk of the whole platform and the failure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
probability of each event occurs in the whole platform, e.g a workstation does not work or the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone operator’s mistake. As a result, all kinds of the risks will consequently cause a series of
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
relevant losses, for example the financial and human life losses.  
 
7.1 Event Tree Analysis 
This thesis is not about a professional electrical or mechanical engineering, hence it will not
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
be related to an accurate calculation towards each components of the drone nor an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
electromechanical principle in the system. However, it will encompass the management
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perspective to evaluate the possible occurred events and bring an estimate outcome. So in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
order to describe the series of events systematically and have a suitable risk reduce solution,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
the Event Tree Analysis has been applied to drone itself (​Figure 35​) and the whole platform.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(​Figure 36​) 
 
 
Figure 35. Event tree analysis for drone itself. 
 
50 
==PAGE:52==
In ​Figure 35​, the initial event is an occurred thing thus the probability is 1 (100%), the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
following events are marked with different values below the branch which represent the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
probability of happening. The each value in this project is in accordance with the previous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
experiments and literature “Proposal for requirements for low complexity safety related
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
systems” (RM Consultants Ltd), and is a trade-off between the relevant factors. A point need
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
to be interpreted is that when one of the motors is failure to work in the air, it is also likely to
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
  
land and arrive safety with a minor probability which can be estimated as 20%, so the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
probability of the corresponding outcome (need to maintain) is calculated as below, where the
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
final probability is the multiplying of the values below each branch: 
 
0.99×0.01×0.2=1.98E-03 (0.198%) 
 
However, due to the high quality of current drone manufacturer, the series of events failure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can rarely occur, so the probability of the unsuccessful delivery is only: 1.0E-02 (1%) 
 
 
Figure 36. Event tree analysis for the whole platform. 
 
Figure 36 shows the event tree analysis for the whole platform, where has been applied with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the same method from above. With regarding to a same event, one important point need to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
considered is that a probability of the same event following up to the previous occurred event
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
may vary, e.g if the drone operator makes mistakes when a workstation failure occurred,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
components failure will more likely to occur than when the operator did not do mistakes,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which the probabilities are 0.1 and 0.05 respectively. As a result, the different outcomes will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
51 
==PAGE:53==
occur due to the different events have or not occurred previously. There you can see the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
probability of successful delivery is quite high which is: (RM Consultants Ltd) 
 
0.99×0.96×0.99=9.4090E-01 (94.09%) 
 
On the contrary, according to the values of each outcome, the risk probability of this whole
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
platform is very low. Furthermore, the series of corresponding financial and human life losses
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will scarcely occur.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 
==PAGE:54==
8 Technology Suggestion 
When the risk assessment has been completed, the corresponding adjustments and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improvements need to be made. Here is a technical suggestion regarding to this drone-based
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
takeaway platform that may cause a motor failure which was mentioned previously. ​Figure
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 shows the illustration of the propeller upgrade, where the protective ring is added to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
propeller, therefore can protect the propeller from external foreign matters. As a result, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
smoother delivery task can be performed. 
 
 
Figure 37. Propeller upgrade. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53 
==PAGE:55==
9 Cash Flow 
In order to evaluate the entire budget and financial circumstances of this business proposal, to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
assess the potential profits or losses, a cash flow analysis has been made in Form 1. First of
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
all, this platform intends starting in my hometown Zhengzhou, central China. As mentioned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in Section 5.9, the revenues are mainly generated from joining fees, transaction fees and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
advertising fees. Due to the currency rate between Chinese Yuan and Danish Krone is almost
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
the same, namely 1 Yuan=1 Krone, so the following currency unit will be adopted as Chinese
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Yuan. The calculations are involved in 3 years and each year will be divided into 4 quarters,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
so each quarter contains 3 months. 
 
Cash in 
Assume that in the initial stages, 10 restaurants in Zhengzhou are willing to join this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
platform, the registration fee for joining this platform will be a lump-sum payment which is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
1500 Yuan, and in the following quarters, each quarter will gain 5 restaurants that willing to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
join, so with the quarter number added, the joining fee will be increased. For the first quarter,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the joining fee will be: 
 
Joining Fee: 1500×10=15000 Yuan 
 
The transaction fees is this platform’s commission for each order from the restaurants, the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rate will be determined as 3%. In general, a small or medium restaurant in Zhengzhou can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gain 60000 Yuan per month. So for the first quarter: 
 
Transaction Fee: 60000×3%×10×3=54000 Yuan 
 
Advertising fee for the restaurants who want to rank top in the search list will be charged for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1000 Yuan per month per unit. So for the first quarter: 
 
Advertising Fee: 1000×10×3=30000 Yuan 
 
So the total sales from the first quarter will be: 
 
Sales: 15000+54000+30000=99000 Yuan 
 
To assume that investors A and B would invest 50000 and 20000 Yuan respectively in the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
first quarter. And the founding support and loan are 500000+300000=800000 Yuan to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
establish this platform. So for the first quarter, the total cash in will be: 
 
Cash In: 99000+70000+800000=969000 Yuan 
 
54 
==PAGE:56==
Cash Out 
The cash out includes salary, office rent, productions etc. For example, in Zhengzhou area,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the average salary level is 6000 Yuan per month. (Numbeo, 2018) In the initial period, the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
company team is composed of 5 people, so in the first quarter the salary need to pay is 90000
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
Yuan. For the expenditure of rent, according to the local environment, in general, the monthly
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
rent include furnitures is 5000 Yuan. Drones are the main body of this platform, so the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
company (platform) need to purchase the drones to conduct the delivery task, according to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DJI, the lowest price for the drone “Mavic Pro” which is mentioned previously is 6000 Yuan,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
however it is possible to negotiate with DJI and agree on a lower price in the future, so the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
platform intends purchasing 10 drones in the first year. The second year afterwards, along
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the market increasing, the amount of drones will correspondingly increase. Software
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developer will provide the App design (include software updates) for a lump-sum fee with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
2000 Yuan. So the total detailed cash out is shown in ​Form 1​ below. 
 
 
Form 1. Cash flow for the drone-based takeaway platform. 
 
55 
==PAGE:57==
 
Figure 38. Cash in hand of the drone-based takeaway proposal. 
 
Figure 38 shows the cash in hand with investment and without investment, which indicates
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that in the first three quarters, cash in hand without investment shows a negative value,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
however from the 4th quarter, this platform will gain profit. Overall, throughout all the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quarters, it shows that the profits present a sustained and stable growth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56 
==PAGE:58==
10 Conclusion 
After a series of specific and comprehensive analysis for this drone-based takeaway proposal,
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it’s important to have a concise assessment of the proposal’s feasibility. Here is a list of the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
evaluation criteria (Belliveau et al. 2002) regarding different factors in ​Table 5​. The specific
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issues are determined by the whole theis The degree of strength and attractiveness is divided
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
into 5 degrees (-2, -1, 0, 1, 2), which “2” represent the most attractive or strength, “0”
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represent medium or neutral and “-2” represent the most unattractive or weakest. 
 
 
Factors 
 
Specific issues 
Degree of strength or attractiveness 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
2 
Market 
Market size 
 
 
 
× 
 
Market growth 
 
 
 
 
× 
Market drivers 
 
 
 
 
× 
Market access 
 
 
 
× 
 
Potential market share 
 
 
   
× 
 
Competency Business infrastructure 
 
 
 
× 
 
Customer familiarity 
 
 
× 
 
 
Core competency 
 
 
 
 
× 
Competitive 
issues 
Proprietary position 
 
 
 
× 
 
Leadership position 
 
 
 
 
× 
Cost position 
 
 
× 
 
 
Key competitive 
advantage 
 
 
 
 
× 
Sustainability of 
position 
 
 
 
× 
 
Time factors 
Time to sales 
 
 
× 
 
 
Full 
commercialization 
 
 
× 
 
 
57 
==PAGE:59==
Competitive time 
advantage 
 
 
 
× 
 
Operating at 
break-even 
 
 
 
× 
 
Technology 
Technology 
availability 
 
 
 
 
× 
Technology readiness 
 
 
 
 
× 
Technology skill base 
(people and time) 
 
 
 
 
× 
Financial 
After-tax operating 
income 
 
 
 
 
× 
Maximum cash hole 
 
× 
 
 
 
Revenue stream 
 
 
 
 
× 
Business potential 
 
 
 
× 
 
Table 5. Evaluation criteria for the drone-based takeaway platform. 
 
According to the above table, it clearly expounds the adaptability and feasibility of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone-based takeaway platform, there most of the specific issues and factors have shown a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
very positive influence. The research questions in front of this project can be answered now.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Through using a variety of models and methods, the feasibility and risk assessments were
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
successfully carried out. A total solution regard to the drone delivery system was well
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designed. However there also some awkward shortcoming when apply the models, for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
example, in the event tree analysis, it is somewhat difficult to make a accurate value of every
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
event, thus using the trade-off value according to the professional consultant and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experiment which seems inevitable from time to time. Overall, it looks like that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drone-based takeaway platform is an attractive and practicable business that can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implemented smoothly in the multidimensional circumstances. Of course there could also be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some unforeseen circumstances and sceneries to confront and challenge in the future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 
==PAGE:60==
11 Reference 
/1/ Li Tao, “Dinner at your door: inside China’s US$37 billion online food delivery services 
market”, 16 Sep, 2017, available at: 
http://www.scmp.com/business/companies/article/2111163/dinner-your-door-inside-chinas-u
s37-billion-online-food-delivery 
 
/2/ Jon Walker, “Drone Delivery Timeline for America’s Top Retailers”, Aug 10, 2017, 
available at: ​https://www.techemergence.com/drone-delivery-timeline-retail/ 
 
/3/ Kelsey D. Atherton, “DHL Delivery Drone Is Three Times As Fast As A Car”, May 9, 
2016, available at: ​https://www.popsci.com/dhl-delivery-drone-is-three-times-as-fast-as-car 
 
/4/ DHL drone delivery, available at:  
http://www.dhl.com/en/press/releases/releases_2016/all/parcel_ecommerce/successful_trial_i
ntegration_dhl_parcelcopter_logistics_chain.html 
 
/5/ Harriet Pavey, “You can now get takeaway delivered by drone in Iceland”, 
EveningStanstard, Aug 29, 2017, available at: 
https://www.standard.co.uk/lifestyle/foodanddrink/you-can-now-get-takeaway-delivered-by-
drone-in-iceland-a3621831.html 
 
/6/ John Biggs, “This Ambulance Drone Can Fly Into Trouble With First Aid”, Oct 31, 2014, 
available at: 
https://techcrunch.com/2014/10/31/this-ambulance-drone-can-fly-into-trouble-with-first-aid/?
guccounter=1 
 
/7/ Dolce & Gabbana official Instagram, available at:  
https://www.instagram.com/p/Biw27Ykjo9-/?taken-by=dolcegabbana 
 
/8/ Penguin Engine, “Drone Literature: “What are Drones”, Dec 6, 2017, available at:  
http://penguinengine.com/drone-literature/ 
 
/9/ Thomas Rootwelt, “Ambulance Drone in Norway”, Jun, 2016, available at:  
https://brage.bibsys.no/xmlui/bitstream/handle/11250/2405591/15738_FULLTEXT.pdf 
 
/10/ Anthony Mark Lawson, “Consumer Behaviors of Drone Delivery”, May, 2017, available 
at:  
https://libres.uncg.edu/ir/asu/f/Lawson,%20Anthony%20August%202017%20Thesis.pdf 
 
59 
==PAGE:61==
/11/ Stanislaw Bobela, “Developing a drone delivery system for blood in Bangalore, India”, 
2016, available at:  
https://projekter.aau.dk/projekter/files/230978627/Master_s_thesis_final_Stanislaw_Bobela_
GSD.pdf 
 
/12/ CNBC, “Domino's First Company To Deliver Pizza By Drone”, YouTube, available at:  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JoP1lvgGLys 
 
/13/ KaiKai Shi, “The 5 most popular food delivery apps in China”, Feb 16, 2018, available 
at: ​https://alltechasia.com/5-popular-food-delivery-apps-china/ 
 
/14/ Mogens Myrup Andreasen, Claus Thorp Hansen, Philip Cash, “Conceptual Design”,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 372, 2015 
 
/15/ Skylogic Research, “2017 Drone market sector report”, available at: 
http://droneanalyst.com/2017/09/18/new-report-unveils-drone-industry-market-share-figures 
 
/16/ Mavic Pro, DJI Official website, available at: 
https://store.dji.com/product/mavic-pro?gclid=CjwKCAjwspHaBRBFEiwA0eM3kVQ4qOH
giOIS7ZXPM2Jo5WytvxZxZ935NPR6P1iVoG-TOFalEh8aihoCIJYQAvD_BwE 
 
/17/ Focuseconomics.com, “China Economic Outlook”, 2017, available at: 
https://www.focus-economics.com/countries/china 
 
/18/ Worldometers.info, “China Population”, 2018, available at: 
http://www.worldometers.info/world-population/china-population/ 
 
/19/ Cac-ib-geography, “Population Density and Distribution of China”, 2017, available at: 
https://cac-ib-geography.wikispaces.com/Population+Density+and+Distribution+of+China 
 
/20/ ​Barquet, Ana Paula B., et al. "Business model elements for product-service system." 
Functional Thinking for Value Creation. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011 
 
/21/ A. Osterwalder, ​Yves Pigneur​, Alan Smith, and 470 practitioners from 45 countries, self 
published, 2010, “Business Model Generation” 
 
/22/ Investopedia, Business Model, available at: 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/businessmodel.asp 
 
/23/ RM Consultants Limited, “Proposal for requirements for low complexity safety related 
systems”, Health and Safety Executive, 2002 
60 
==PAGE:62==
 
/24/ Numbeo, “Cost of Living in Zhengzhou”, May, 2018, available at:  
https://www.numbeo.com/cost-of-living/in/Zhengzhou-China 
 
/25/ Belliveau P, Grif n A, Somermeyer S (eds) (2002) The PDMA toolbook for new product 
devel-opment. Wiley, New York 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61 
==PAGE:63==
12 Appendix 
Appendix 1 
Questionnaires survey towards consumers. 
 
 
 
62 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
 
63 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
 
64 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
Appendix 2 
Questionnaires survey towards restaurant owners. 
 
 
 
65 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
 
 
 
 
66 
==PAGE:68==
Appendix 3 
China Economy Outlook. 
 
67 
==PAGE:69==
Appendix 4 
 
 
68 
==PAGE:70==
 
 
69 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70 
==PAGE:72==
Appendix 5 
Cash flow of the drone-based takeaway platform. 
 
71 
