==PAGE:1==
BIM and Change Orders in
Construction
Kamma Christensen, s133592
29th of June 2018
Supervisiors: Sten Bonke and Christian Thuesen
==PAGE:2==
"BIM and change order in construction"
A master’s thesis - Master of architectural engineering
Period: from January the 29th 2018 to June the 29th 2018
ECTS: 30 points
Supervisors
Sten Bonke
Associate Professor Emeritus
DTU Management Engineering
Christian Thuesen
Associate Professor
DTU Management Engineering
Author
Kamma Christensen
Signature:
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgement
I would like to thank Viet Pham and Adham Al-Nachar from MT Højgaard, Lars Jo-
hansson from NNE, Kasper Rix from Exigo and Jacob Güldner from Sweco for taking the
time to participate in the interviews and sharing their knowledge and experience on the
subject with me, so I had some data from the industry to base my analysis on.
Furthermore I would like to thank my supervisor Sten Bonke for helping and guiding me
throughout the writing process of this thesis, both with feedback on the written material
sent to him and for the talk and establishment of contact to some of the interviewed.
==PAGE:4==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Contents
1
Resume - Dansk
3
2
Abstract - English
4
3
Introduction
5
4
Methods
7
5
Theoretical perspectives
8
5.a
Deﬁnition of change order
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5.a.1
Cost changes in relation to change orders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.b
Regulations concerning change orders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5.b.1
AB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5.b.2
IKT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.c
State of art about BIM and virtual reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.c.1
BIM and VDC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.c.2
Classiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.c.3
Virtual reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.d
The change in form of procurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.d.1
Types of procurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.d.2
Dialog in procurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.d.3
How to establish dialog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.e
Partnering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.e.1
Types of partnering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.f
Activity theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.f.1
Main concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.f.2
Contradictions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Data and analysis
32
6.a
Object . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.b
Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.b.1
The norm within the construction business . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.b.2
IKT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.b.3
Contradiction within the rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.c
Main tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.c.1
BIM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
1
==PAGE:5==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
6.c.2
VR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.c.3
Other tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.c.4
Tools in relation to the object . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Conclusion
42
References
44
A Interview spørgsmål - dansk
47
B Interview questions - English
48
C Interview - MT Højgaard
49
D Interview - NNE
54
E Interview - Exigo
58
F Interview - Sweco
62
2
==PAGE:6==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
1
Resume - Dansk
Projektændringer og deres omkostninger er et stort problem i byggebranchen. Dog kan
omkostningerne som disse forårsager minimeres, jo tidligere man fanger dem og får dem
ændret. Dette skyldes blandt andet, at det er billiger at rette i en BIM model i design-
fasen, end det er at ændre på byggeriet, efter det er påbegyndt.
Denne afhandling undersøger om BIM og VR kan være med til at ﬁnde og fange pro-
jektændringerne tidligere i processen. Dette er gjort ved at afholde interviews med ﬁre
forskellige ﬁrmaer i byggebranchen, nemlig MT Højgaard, NNE, Sweco og Exigo, samt un-
dersøge teorien bag disse enmner. Derunder hvad projektændringer kan skyldes, hvilken
betydning det har, hvornår det opfanges, samt hvilke regler gør sig gældende for dem.
Derudover er der et teoriafsnit tildelt BIM og VR, samt IKT. Disse fortæller generelt
om disse emner, blandt andet hvordan byggebranchen er gået fra 2D tegninger til i dag
at arbejde op til seks dimensioner, hvor tidsplan, økonomi og drift også er koblet på
modellen. Derudover berøres partnering som samarbejdsform, der kan skabe mere dialog,
samt hvordan dialog i tilbudsfasen kan have betydning for projektet.
Det kunne ses, at BIM og VR ikke er udbredt til hele byggebranchen endnu. Dette skyldes
blandt andet normen i byggebranchen, som er konservativ, og det kan derfor være svært
at indføre nye arbejdsgange. Dog kunne de der deltog i interview, som bruger BIM til
mange af deres projekter, se mange fordele ved det som kommunikationsværktøj. Blandt
andet til visualiseringer, samt til at forklare løsninger til bygherrerne, således alle har det
samme udgangspunkt, når byggeriet påbegyndes. Derudover kan BIM være medvirkende
til at give et bedre overblik over, hvad konsekvenserne af en ændring er, i hvert fald hvis
man har koblet de nye dimensioner på modellen. Heraf virker det til at BIM kan være
medvirkende til at reducere omkostningerne ved projektændring og være medvirkende til
bedre bygherre afklaring tidligere i projekterne. Dog skal det noteres, at det er svært
at måle på disse ting, da to projekter aldrig er ens. Derudover kan det ikke entydigt
konkluderes, at det er BIM der har gjort forskellen i branchen, eller om det skyldes andre
faktorer, som ikke er medtaget i denne afhandling.
3
==PAGE:7==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
2
Abstract - English
Change orders, and the cost related to these, are a big problem within the construction
business. However, it is possible to lower the cost if the change orders are found and han-
dled as early as possible in the process. This is among other things because it is cheaper to
make changes to a BIM model compared to making changes when construction has begun.
This thesis studies whether BIM and VR can help ﬁnd and catch the change orders earlier
in the process. This is done by interviewing four diﬀerent companies within the construc-
tion business, namely MT Højgaard, NNE, Sweco, and Exigo, as well as study the theory
behind these subjects. As part of this it was studied what causes change orders, what
inﬂuence it has when the change orders are retained, and the rules concerning them.
Furthermore, there is a theory section concerning BIM and VR as well as IKT. These
generally tell about these subjects, among other things how the construction industry has
gone from 2D drawings to working with up to 6D, where time schedule, economic, and
maintenance, are also included in the model. Moreover partnering is mentioned as a way
of collaboration, which can create more dialog, and how dialog within procurement can
have an inﬂuence on the project.
It could be seen that BIM and VR are not widespread to everyone within the construction
business yet. This is partly due to the norm within the construction business, which is
quite conservative, and therefore it can be diﬃcult to change the work procedures. Though
those taking part in the interviews, who use BIM to a great extent, could see many
advantages with BIM as a tool for communication. One of those being visualizations, and
in order to explain diﬀerent solutions to the client, so everyone has the same expectations
when the construction begins. Moreover, BIM can contribute to giving a better overview
of what the consequences of a change is, at least if the cost and time are connected to the
model. Hereof it seems like BIM can contribute to a better clariﬁcation, in terms of the
client, earlier on in the process. It should be noted that it can be diﬃcult to measure these
things, as two projects are never the same. Further, it can not be a clear-cut conclusion
that it is BIM that has made the diﬀerence within the business, or if it is caused by other
factors which are not included in this thesis.
4
==PAGE:8==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
3
Introduction
Change orders are a common problem within the construction industry, which often re-
sults in delays in the given time schedule and overruns on the budget.
A change order is a change in the original scope of the project and this can occur as a
result of diﬀerent things. One of these are changes made by the client, for instants in
the design of the building, if it does not look like they expected it to or if the function
of the building changes. Another reason for change orders is if the project has not been
estimated correctly from the beginning so, when bidding, the bids are too low compared
to the real cost of the project. This can lead to diﬀerent kinds of changes as the overall
cost of the project might be too big for the client, so changes in the design might be made.
The consequences of the change can be minimized the earlier they are made, as it is easier
to make changes in for instant in the design of the building during the design phase than
during the construction phase of the project. This is due to the fact that when making
changes in the design phase the cost and schedule might still be aﬀected but much less
than if the construction has begun.
Through the years there has been a development in how information is communicated
in projects. In the beginning, all drawings and thereby most of the communication was
made in 2D, using pen and paper, which then later developed into 2D drawings in CAD-
programs, which have digitized the process and thereby increased the knowledge sharing
throughout the project. Next step in the development was using 3D drawings and intro-
ducing the term modeling, which then has resulted in BIM. BIM or Building Information
Modeling/Management is a tool or method which digitize the building process and thereby
make knowledge sharing between the diﬀerent participants in the project easier. Further-
more using 3D models makes it easier to give a realistic picture or rendering of how the
ﬁnished building will look, as the programs today give the opportunity to insert furniture
and the correct materials into the models. The newest add-on to the models is using
virtual reality which can give the client an even more realistic showing of the building,
where they are able to walk through the building as if they were in it.
Furthermore, there have been regulations on the area. By introducing "IKT-bekendtgørelsen"
in 2007, which is used in public building projects, it has been a requirement that the owner
5
==PAGE:9==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
has to demand that digital communication is part of the project and that the relevant
documentation is saved within the models.
The new technology might be able to help reduce the number of change orders, as they
cannot be eliminated completely, and ﬁnd them earlier in the project. Therefore this
thesis will examine how BIM and virtual reality can potentially help reduce the amount
of change orders, as these tools can help the client see the building before it is being built.
Therefore the main problem statement is:
Can BIM and virtual reality help reduce the number of change orders in the
construction business?
Furthermore, some working questions have been made in order to assure that the problem
statement gets answered:
• What are change orders and why are they a problem?
• How has the technology evolved and how is this incorporated into the construction
business?
6
==PAGE:10==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
4
Methods
In this thesis qualitative method, namely interviews, have been used to gather the infor-
mation used in the analysis. In order to do this, diﬀerent companies, mainly consulting
engineering companies, within the construction business where interviewed. It was also
chosen to have a consulting company which has specialized in the use of BIM included,
who was able to give a more general view of the usage of BIM in the construction business.
This method is chosen in order to get insight in the construction business from people
who work with the given problem statement given in this thesis. The people which have
been interviewed all works with BIM on a daily basis, which gives a guarantee that they
have usable knowledge in order to answer the questions presented in the interview.
There are both advantages and disadvantages to this method as every other method. The
advantages are that it is quite focused and it is possible to ask direct questions about a
given topic. Furthermore, it is a way to assure state of art information about the topic,
one is interested in investigating.
Some of the disadvantages are that the answers one gets from an interview are based on
the knowledge, linguistic and memory of the one being interviewed. Furthermore, the
answers can be based on what the interviewed person thinks, the interviewer wants. [15]
In order to assure these disadvantages are minimized the questions were sent beforehand
to the interviewed, so they knew the exact questions and therefore had time to think
about their answers. Moreover, the question was not composed before the theory was
read and known in order to make sure that the questions were relevant for the hypothesis.
7
==PAGE:11==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
5
Theoretical perspectives
5.a
Deﬁnition of change order
Change order: A change in the original scope of the project that might inﬂuence the
time schedule and cost of the project.
Change orders are a common problem within the construction industry as changes always
occur doing a construction project. These changes can be caused by several things. One of
these is the client, who can request changes in the design, either because it did not look the
way they expected, the function of the building has changed or their economic situation
has changed. Some of these changes in the design are caused by a lack of communication
or understanding between the designers and client, as mentioned by Winch [21] as the
brieﬁng problem, which can be illustrated by using the Johari Window. This can be seen
at ﬁgure 1.
Figure 1: Johari Window. From [21]
The Johari Window includes four squares called shared, blind, private and unknown.
Shared information is the most optimal, as both the designer and the client knows this
information and understand it. Private information is only known or understood by the
client. This can contain information about the needs of the project, which the client does
not communicate, either because they do not think that it is necessary information, they
do not trust the design team or they do not put enough time and eﬀort into being the
client [21]. The blind information is information not shared by the design team to the
8
==PAGE:12==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
client while the unknown information is information that neither the design team or the
client knows, due to the uncertainties a construction project includes.
A problem and a main factor for client changes are them not being clear about what
they want and need from the construction being built. This can simply be because they
do not know what options they have when starting the construction project in terms of
design solutions. Therefore it is important that the design team do not keep blind in-
formation to themselves because they think that it is obvious, because it might not be
for the client. In general, it is important that both the design team and the client share
more information, so it will not end up as blind or private. This would assure a generally
better understanding within the project of what the end product will look like, and what
values are important for the client, and everyone would be able to give feedback on the
design earlier on in the process. In terms of what gives the project value, this is based
on subjective judgment and will change for everyone. Thyssen [19] states that it changes
based on time and context and therefore it is important that diﬀerent design solutions
are presented in order to ﬁnd the one which gives the client the most value.
In some cases, the client is clear about what they want and need, but their needs change
throughout the project. This could for instants be when making a factory, where the
capacity needed is one at ﬁrst, and then change to either become bigger or smaller.
Another factor which can cause change orders is a non-fulﬁlling tender from the client.
Again this can be because the client actually does not know exactly what they want and
need, but this might cause problems when receiving oﬀers in terms of price on the project
as this will not be correct and the price of the project, therefore will be more expensive,
when everything is included.
Though client changes are a problem and result in change orders, change orders can also
occur from other situations. Some of these can be seen in table 1, which is built with the
phase in construction at the top and the responsible for the change order down the left side.
9
==PAGE:13==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Table 1: Diﬀerent causes for change orders.
Design
Construction
Operation
Client
- Changes in economic
- Changes in economic
- Do not fulﬁll the
- Do not fulﬁll
functions needed
the functions needed
- Missing clarity
- Missing clarity
- Non-fulﬁlling
- Changes in the
tender
facility needed
- Changes in the
facility needed
Consulting
- Collisions between
- Collisions between
models
objects (physical)
- Project engineering
is not ﬁnished
- Errors in speciﬁcations
for objects in models
- Not buildable
Contractor
- Not realistic time
- Missing information
schedule
in models about
- Bad weather
physical features
Supplier
- Incorrect materials
delivered
- Broken materials
Miscellaneous
- Bad weather
- Fire
- Bad soil condition
Change orders can occur if there are errors in the drawing. This can result in both collision
or incorrect order of materials because the speciﬁcations on parts within the drawings are
diﬀerent from drawing to drawing. This is a more common problem when several consul-
tants are doing the diﬀerent drawings without a general guideline for drawings is made.
Therefore it is important to agree on a classiﬁcation system which should be used through
the project from the beginning. Further information about classiﬁcation systems can be
found in section 5.c.2 Classiﬁcation. Furthermore, if all or at least part of the design
made is not buildable the contractor will have to make a decision at the construction site
about how it should be built, which sometimes will not be documented in the models.
10
==PAGE:14==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Therefore the model does not match with what has actually been built. This can result
in problems later on when maintaining or renovating the building.
Unforeseen conditions can also happen when doing a construction project. An example
of one of these is the weather. Bad weather conditions can result in changes in the time
schedule as it can stop the construction until the weather is better. Though bad weather
will be an unforeseen problem the contractor can take precautions against this, like cover
the site, so rain will not be a problem. This is why it is seen both under miscellaneous
and contractor. Another unforeseen condition is bad soil condition, as this might result
in a diﬀerent type of foundation, which might be more expensive and it takes more time
to make the new calculation for the new foundation. Though this should be found doing
soil testing, testing is expensive, and therefore sometimes is not done properly.
5.a.1
Cost changes in relation to change orders
As mentioned earlier it is not possible to eliminate change orders completely, but it is in
the interest of the client to reduce the amount as much as possible, as they can cause
delays in the time schedule and overruns on the budget. According to O’Leary [13] the
work related to the change order will often cost 10-15% more than if the work had been
included in the original plan, because of the lack of competition, the paperwork which is
needed when making changes and the changes in the schedule. The paperwork is impor-
tant as it can be a problem if the change order is not communicated in the proper way,
to all parties involved. This can cause confusion about diﬀerent things within the project
when all parties are not at the same stage and do not have the same information. It could
result in wrong price estimations or collisions in the design if everyone is not kept up to
date on the changes made in diﬀerent areas of the projects. Therefore it is important
to include in the contract how change orders are handled and communicated when they
occur. In Denmark, the guide AB92 gives guidelines concerning how to handle change
orders. More on this can be read in section 5.b.1 AB.
Though O’Leary states that it will cost around 10-15% to make a change, the change
in cost depend on how early the change is found. In general the earlier the cheaper.
According to the interview with MT Højgaard, see appendix C, a rule of thumb is that
a change order becomes a factor 1000 more expensive when the change occurs in the
construction phase compared to in the design phase. This is due to several things, one of
11
==PAGE:15==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
those is that it is always more expensive to change the built construction compared to the
drawn construction. Furthermore, the time schedule, and thereby when each tradesman is
going to do their part, is planned before the construction begin. When making changes to
the construction this time schedule most likely will not keep up, resulting in the tradesmen
have to do their work at a diﬀerent time, which might conﬂict with their other work, which
then leads to even further delays.
12
==PAGE:16==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
5.b
Regulations concerning change orders
5.b.1
AB
In Denmark schedule and budget overruns from change orders are handled and regulated
by AB 92 article 14. This states that the contractor has the right to make the changes
that the client proposes as long as these are a natural extension to the original agreement.
Furthermore, it states that a proposal for change and the information about changes in
prize, schedule, and safety, should be available in written form. It is stated that if the
changes only include units which have already been given a ﬁxed price, this is used, but can
be regulated with up to 15 % of the contract sum and up to 100 % for the actual unit price.
These are the current rules in Denmark but at the moment the hearing for a new AB
18 is in the works. This presents some new and more speciﬁc rules about how to handle
change order in terms of budget and time schedule overruns but is still using some of the
paragraphs from AB 92. For instants, the ﬁrst and second paragraph in article 23 in AB
18 is the same as the ﬁrst in article 14 AB 92, which is about when the client can demand
a change in work and when the contractor has a right to make the change order work
demanded by the client. Article 23 paragraph 3, which is the same as article 14 paragraph
2, states that the client’s demand should present the change and what is included in the
change either as a written document or at a construction meeting.
In terms of budget overruns AB 18 article 24 states that the unit price only can be
regulated with +/- 100 %, which was the same in AB 92, but for the total cost of the
project the variation in price can now be up to 20 % when the change results in more work
while it can be -10% if the change orders result in a reduction of work for the contractor.
Furthermore, it states that if a work which has been given a certain unit price and this
is changed for another work, only the diﬀerence between the two prices will be part of
the calculation for the new total price. This is also valid if it is the other way around.
Though the above is stated in article 24 paragraph 1, in article 24 paragraph 2 it states
that if the cost based on the unit prices overruns the limits for the total cost, the total
cost will be regulated of the unit prices and not the limits stated in paragraph 1, unless
the client or contractor proves that the unit prices are not valid. Furthermore, article 24
paragraph 3 says that if the regulations in price are not based on unit prices the work will
be done as a service, based on a time and material basis. This price will as presented in
article 25 paragraph 4 be agreed upon between the contractor and client.
13
==PAGE:17==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Article 25 is about price, time and safety when doing change order work, which is the work
done in relation to the change order. It states that change order work and how it aﬀects
the original work shall be presented as soon as possible either as a written document or
at a construction meeting. Furthermore, article 25 paragraph 2 state that the request
presented must be accepted as fast as possible, and when accepted a written agreement
should be made. This is valid both for change order work with results in changes in either
cost, time or safety. Article 25 paragraph 5 requires that the client register all the request
for changes, and if this is not done correctly the contractor must contact the client and
make sure it is done correctly.
Besides the new addition for change order work, a new section about digital building
models is added to AB 18 which is not present in AB 92. These are presented in article
16 and state that if digital building models are used in the project it must be determined
in the tender documents how and when they shall be used.
Furthermore, the tender
documents need to state if an "as build" drawing for maintenance should be included
when the handover is done. Article 16 paragraph 4 state that the data which is delivered
should be in an open format so everyone has the ability to see the given data. Furthermore,
article 16 gives regulations about who is responsible for the models, and state that the one
who is making the model available is the one responsible for it and the one who should
state in what context the model can be used. They are not responsible for other inputs
and errors in the standard software.
5.b.2
IKT
It should be noted that AB 18 does not state that digital modeling is required to be
used but that it gives regulations if it is used, while Act about application of informa-
tion and communication technology in public construction (Bekendtgørelse om anven-
delse af informations- og kommunikationsteknologi i oﬀentligt byggeri), here after IKT-
bekendtgørelsen, states that it should be used in projects, both in new construction,
renovation or maintenance, which fall into one or more of the following categories.
"1) Construction with the state as client and an estimated contract sum of 5 million DKK
ex VAT or more.
2) Construction with an estimated contract sum of 5 million DKK ex VAT or more, which
is completely or partly ﬁnanced by loans or subvention from the state at least 50 pct.
14
==PAGE:18==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
3) Construction with an estimated contract sum of 5 million DKK ex VAT or more, which
is going to be used as institutions which operation is paid by the state, when the subvention
make up at least 50 pct. of the operation.
4) Construction with region and municipality as client with an estimated contract sum of
20 million DKK ex VAT or more.
5) Construction with an estimated contract sum of 20 million DKK ex VAT or more, that
completely or partly is ﬁnanced by loan or subvention from region or municipalities on at
least 50 pct.
6) Construction with an estimated contract sum on 20 million DKK ex VAT or more
which is going to be used as institutions which operation is paid by the region and munic-
ipalities when the subvention makes up at least 50 pct. of the operation." 1 [22]
It should be noted that during renovation and maintenance projects the client can choose
not to live up to parts of the IKT but not the rules about a digital tendering process
through a digital program.
In general, the IKT’s main focus is the client’s role in the digitized construction process,
and how he should handle this. First and foremost the client should make sure that there
is coordination of IT and communication between all parties of the project. Moreover,
the client shall make requirements concerning the objects in the models, as these all need
a classiﬁcation and a level of detailing, which is used by all involved parties throughout
the project.
The client shall require that a system for digital communication is used
throughout the project, and the relevant information is shared and saved in that sys-
tem. Furthermore, digital information should be handed over at end of the project, which
should include the relevant information about the construction both as documentation of
the construction project and for the further operation and maintenance of the construc-
tion.
The IKT determines that all public construction projects shall have a digital tendering
process. The tender material should be made in a way that it can be used as part of the
proposal given. Furthermore, when the proposal should include amounts, the count of
these should be based on a digital model, which should be available for the client. For
project contest the client shall make requirements concerning the proposals, these shall
1Own translation
15
==PAGE:19==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
include "digital, object-based building models and visualization based on these"2 ([22] arti-
cle 8 line 2). In contest program, a speciﬁcation of the information included in the model
and the number of visualizations should be based on the competitions size and complexity.
This version of the IKT became eﬀective 1st of April 2013, and it is, therefore, this version
which is valid for all construction done after this date. It should be noted that the ﬁrst
IKT was made valid in 2007 but some of the requirements have changed since then.
2Own translation
16
==PAGE:20==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
5.c
State of art about BIM and virtual reality
5.c.1
BIM and VDC
Building Information Modeling (BIM) and Virtual Design and Construction
(VDC): A digital representation of the construction which can store diﬀerent information
about the construction.
BIM and VDC are becoming a bigger part of the construction business. This is due to
the several beneﬁts that using BIM models in a project presentation. First and foremost
it has taken the industry from working with 2D drawings to adding up til 6 dimensions
on the models. These can be seen in ﬁgure 2.
Figure 2: An illustration showing the dimension from 3D to 6D [16]
The ﬁrst new dimension, the fourth, is a new way to make a time schedule. It divides
the model into sequences so it is easy to see where the construction should be at a given
time. The next dimension adds pricing on each component within the model. In order
to do this classiﬁcation of each component is needed. The diﬀerent classiﬁcation systems
can be seen in section 5.c.2 Classiﬁcation. Furthermore linking the pricing to the time
schedule gives a more precise pricing and makes it easy to make changes to the budget, if
there are changes in the time schedule. The last dimension is 6D and in this dimension all
the information from the models is combined into information needed when doing main-
tenance and later on renovation on the construction. It should be noted that in order
to obtain the full potential of all of these dimensions it is important that the models are
always updated with the newest information and that there consistency within them.
17
==PAGE:21==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Using VDC and BIM presents several advantages one of these are collision check, which
assure that none of the ﬁeld-speciﬁc models collide with one another. This reduces the
number of changes needed to be made at the construction site as it has already been
checked that for instants none of the ventilation canals and pipes interfere with eachother.
Another advantage is the ability to see the project in 3D, as this makes it easier to visu-
alize how the ﬁnal project will look compared to seeing the construction in 2D. Moreover,
the ability to draw out amounts of each building component from the models make the
costing more precise as the contractor can base it on the components needed instead of
basing it on an estimate. It should be noted in order to obtain some of these advantages
the planning of the project needs to be ﬁnished before construction starts. If the models
are not ﬁnished before the collision check and the amounts being drawn out the outcome
will be incomplete and therefore might be useless.
In order to expand the usages of digital models, IKT-bekendtgørelsen states that some
projects are imposed to use digital models, which projects are included in this can be seen
in section 5.b.1 Regulations concerning change order.
Though the usage of BIM is becoming a bigger part of the industry there are several
factors which should be taken into account and kept in mind when using BIM. First of all
it can be a great tool with a lot of possibilities within it, so it should be determined from
the beginning which of these should be used in the given projects. Furthermore the level
of detailing or LOD, which should be obtained at diﬀerent time points in the project,
should be agreed upon so the diﬀerent models has a given minimum of detailing each. An
example of the diﬀerent levels can be seen in ﬁgure 3.
18
==PAGE:22==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Figure 3: Level of detailing. From [25]
As seen on the ﬁgure the higher the level the more detailed the model. It often makes
sense to choose to work with a lower level of detail at the beginning of the project as this
is a quick sketch of the construction and then as the project process the more detail is
added. This is done in order to save time, as the more detailing the more time is often used.
It should be noted that the greatest outcome from using BIM is seen when using it from
the beginning and throughout the project and in order to assure that this obtained, an
IKT-agreement should be made. The purpose of this agreement is to make some rules
about the usages and coordination of the work with BIM. This includes who makes the
collision control and if any collisions is found when checking, who is responsible to ﬁgure
these out.
5.c.2
Classiﬁcation
BIPS/Molio suggest using the CCS system for classifying the objects in a model. The
CCS main objective is to "assure that digital data can be shared precisely between the
value chain, phases, and software system in the construction, and thereby contribute to
increasing the productivity of the project."3 ([26] line 2-5). This is done by classifying
every object, which can be building parts, rooms, materials and so on, with a speciﬁc size
or placement, in the models with a code, which will follow the given object throughout
the whole life cycle of the construction. This makes ﬁnding the amounts of each object
easier and more precise if all the objects are identiﬁed. Using CCS also includes adding
3Own translation
19
==PAGE:23==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
properties and thereby values, which could be needed when doing the project.
Though CCS is the one classiﬁcation system that BIPS is suggesting more projects are us-
ing another classiﬁcation system called SfB. Actually, an analyze by MT Højgaard from
July 2015 showed that 48% of the projects in Denmark, which was using BIM-models
where using the SfB system, as the classiﬁcation system [14]. SfB is a system which has
been developed in Sweden and is based on three factors - the building part, which is
presented by a number, the construction, which is represented by a capital letter and the
reduction, which is represented by a non-capital letter and a number [28].
Another greatly used system is BIM7AA, which is produced by seven Danish ﬁrms and is
somewhat a modernization of SfB. In [3] it states the system is based on "the engineers’
requirements in terms of project planning, Danish style of building and best practice from
both complex and manageable BIM-projects."4 Moreover it is not necessarily meant to
be a classiﬁcation system but type coding.
The coding is based on three parts - the
type code, which represent the building part, the type number, which represent the given
building component within the building part, and the type text, which describes the
building component.
5.c.3
Virtual reality
Virtual reality (VR): "A computer-simulated environment that allows you to interact
in a realistic and/or physical way within the environment." (from [30])
A new addition to the BIM method is virtual reality, which makes it an even more realistic
view of the construction before it is being built and makes the experience of the building
more interactive. Through the digital models which have been made it is possible, by
using another software, to make it into VR where the client can actually walk through
the building and see if it is as imagined and fulﬁll the given requirements in term of func-
tion, before the construction on site start. Furthermore, it can be used in order to see a
diﬀerent option in terms of design before starting construction.
An example where it would make sense to use it is for the construction of new hospitals.
This could help the workers at the hospital assure that the placement of the diﬀerent tools
4Own translation
20
==PAGE:24==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
is correct and makes sense in terms of how they are working [30]. This was for instant
done when building the care center Martin Luther King Multi-Service Ambulatory, where
input from doctors and nurses was used in order to optimize the construction before the
actual construction on site had begun [29]. Another case where virtual reality is helpful
is by checking height of the room. This might not be as it should be for instants in an au-
ditorium, where the back row are not able to stand up due to lack of ﬂoor to ceiling height.
In Denmark, VR is used when constructing "Nyt Hospital Nordsjælland" which is one
of the hospitals within the portfolio of new super hospitals in Denmark. In this project,
they have bought a VR studio so the workers and users of the hospital can experience it
before it is being built. Like the Martin Luther King Service Ambulatory, it will include
the workers more in the development of the design, and show the client diﬀerent oppor-
tunities in terms of design and layout of the hospital [18].
21
==PAGE:25==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
5.d
The change in form of procurement
When making a procurement there is four main principles one should follow. The only
exception is if the total cost is going to be under the threshold value and if other countries
within EU is not going to participate in the procurement. These are as follow:
Equal treatment: The orderer is not allowed to give some suppliers any advantages.
Each and everyone should be judged by the same set of requirements, which should be
stated in the tender. This is valid unless there is a reasoned argument behind the unequal
treatment.
Non-discriminate: A bidder must not be judged by their nationality. It does matter if
it is to their advantages or not, it must not be a requirement which they are judged upon.
Proportionality: The orderer is not allowed to make requirements which do not relate
to what is needed in the given procurement.
Transparency: All the information needed in order to make a bid should be available
to everyone who wants to take part in the procurement. This includes what the bid is
judged upon and so on. Furthermore, the bidders are required to be informed as soon as
possible after the decision about who has won is made. This is done in order to assure
that the principle about equal treatment is fulﬁlled. [10]
These general principles are made in order to assure that the orderer have some guidelines
to follow if their given situation is not regulated by the law of procurement (Udbudsloven),
and they, therefore, have to make their own assessment of the situation.
5.d.1
Types of procurement
There exist several types of procurement which should be used in diﬀerent scenarios. One
of these is public procurement which means that everyone is able to take part in the pro-
curement and therefore bid on the given project. This gives an opportunity to get a wide
range of oﬀers and thereby ideas on the given project, but it can cost a lot of resources
both for the client and the one bidding.
Another type is limited procurement, which is done by splitting the procurement into two
phases. One which is the qualifying round, where the bidders are able to advance to the
next step, where they are able to come up with an actual oﬀer on the given project. This
type assures that the client has to look through fewer oﬀers, but will most likely prolong
22
==PAGE:26==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
the procurement as the bidders have to go through a qualifying round to actually come
with an oﬀer.
The third type of project competition is mostly seen when doing an architect competi-
tion. This type can be done both open and with and qualifying round. Furthermore,
there is a certain condition which is made in this type, such as there must be a selection
committee and the client can negotiate with the bidders, and they are not obligated to
choose someone.
The last type of procurement is procurement with negotiation. This is not the most used
type as it can only be used in some cases, which is caused by the diﬃcult task it can be
to assure that the principle about equal treatment and transparency is obtained. Though
a big advantage about this is that the client can have a dialog with the bidders. [32]
5.d.2
Dialog in procurement
Now a day it is becoming more and more common to introduce dialog in the procurement
both before, during and after. But even though this is becoming more common it is
important to keep in mind the four main principles of procurement, which can be seen
above. As mentioned in the diﬀerent types of procurement it can be hard to assure that
this is the case, and therefore one should be even more aware that it is obtained. This is
particularly important during and after the procurement has begun as "Udbudsloven" is
valid there.
One of the main advantages, when using dialog before the actual bidding starts, is that
the client is able to get feedback on the material for bidding so they are able to optimize
it to assure better and more precise bidding. Furthermore introducing dialog throughout
the procurement assure a matching of expectations between all parts within the project.
Though it can create undesirable costs if the dialog is adjusted to the actual assignment
in terms of size and complexity. [9]
5.d.3
How to establish dialog
There are several ways to establish dialog before the actual procurement starts, which one
the client should choose is based on what the desired outcome is. One of these is open
23
==PAGE:27==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
meetings where one or more clients are able to present their up coming projects for several
ﬁrms which could be interested in doing these project with the clients. In addition, to
spread information about new projects, the clients are able to present their values and
what is important for them when doing construction projects, which is valuable when the
ﬁrms are making a bid.
Another form is an individual meetings. This gives the client a chance to talk to a com-
pany one on one, and get feedback on a given proposal and thereby improve it before
it goes out. A way to assure that the main principle for procurement is to have these
meetings with several ﬁrms, so no one has an unfair advantage in comparison to others.
The two ﬁrst option has the client turn to the bidder, but it is also an option for the
bidder to turn to the client, with ideas to how their next procurement should be or talk
about the client’s current projects.
24
==PAGE:28==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
5.e
Partnering
Partnering: "A form of cooperation based on dialog, trust and openness and with early
involvement of all parts.5([31] page 6)
Partnering is a type of collaboration form which was instituted by the Danish Depart-
ment of housing and urban development with the project New ways of collaboration. The
project ran from 1998 to 2001, with the purpose of monitoring partnering as a form of
collaboration and to ﬁnd ways to minimize the problems with communication within con-
struction projects, and to minimize the potential utilization of uncertainties in the tender.
The focus was on "the collaboration between the client and the construction companies,
the collaboration between the construction companies, the collaboration on the construction
site and the integration and collaboration of design and construction"6 ([2] page 178). The
result of the project, which was based on seven projects, according to [2] was as follow:
• Economic savings of up to 13 % compared to traditional collaborations
• The quality of construction has lived up to the client’s expectations to the consid-
erable extent
• , In general, a better collaboration throughout the whole project was obtained. Only
one out of the seven projects had problems in the beginning but these were resolved
throughout.
The focus in partnering is an active client, early involvement of the ﬁrms which is go-
ing to take part in the project, trust between the involved parties, shared responsibility,
and open communication between parties. In order to obtain this for each construction
project using partnering, a workshop should be held where matching of expectations is
made in terms of what the main goal is, subsidiary goal and how success for the project
is deﬁned. This assures that everyone works towards the same standard, and everyone
knows what to expect from each other. Furthermore, benchmarks can help visualize if
the given subsidiary goals are obtained, therefore it can be a good tool to use.
In order to assure that everyone is taking responsibility for what has been agreed upon
at the workshop a letter of intent is made, which everyone who is involved in the project
sign. An example of one of these can be seen in ﬁgure 4.
5Own translation"
6Own translation
25
==PAGE:29==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Figure 4: An example of a letter of intent from [5]
5.e.1
Types of partnering
When talking about partnering two main forms are in focus, project partnering, and
strategic partnering, as seen in ﬁgure 5.
Figure 5: Types of partnering [5]
The diﬀerence between the two is as follow. Project partnering is between parties involved
in a given project, and the partnering starts and stops when the project does. This results
in the best team for a given project is put together, as a new team is put together each
time. Though it is the best team for the given project, a disadvantage with this type of
partnering is that the parties do not necessarily know each other, therefore it might take
a longer time to trust each other, and more time has to be put towards workshops.
26
==PAGE:30==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Strategic partnering, on the other hand, is between certain companies and runs through-
out several projects. This results in an even better relationship between the involved parts
as they have worked together before. The main disadvantages with this type are that it
can result in a less competitive construction business, which might result in higher prices,
which is not wanted for the client.
27
==PAGE:31==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
5.f
Activity theory
In order to analyze the interviews, the activity theory is found useful and this section will,
therefore, describe this and the main concepts, which will be used in the analysis of the
interviews, in order to assure a common understanding of the used concepts.
The activity theory works in several generations but the focus in this thesis will be on the
second generation, which Engström has formulated, as this uses the concepts from the
ﬁrst generation, which is mainly based on the individual action, and add concepts so its
main focus is on collective actions. This is chosen as the problem presented and studied
in this thesis works with activities which have several people and parties involved, as this
is the case for a construction project.
5.f.1
Main concepts
The second generation of the activity theory uses the following main concepts, which is
described below:
Subject: Is the actors within the given activity, who has been chosen to have the main
role in the activity. In this case, it would be the consulting engineers, as these are the
ones that have been interviewed in relation to the thesis.
Object: Is the overall goal which is desired in relation to the given activity, and this
relates to the actual outcome. In this given case the object is to reduce the cost of the
change orders within a project.
Tools: Refers to the tools which help the subject reach the object. In this case, the tools
are the tools which are available within the BIM-universe.
Community: In order to create a community the actors within it has to work towards
the same object.
Rules: The main purpose of the rules is to regulate the actions of the subject in relation
to other within the given project. This can be regulated by standards, norms, values,
and legislation. In the analysis, this is used in order to understand what conditions the
diﬀerent actors are working under.
Division of labour: This refers to how the work is divided between each individual
within the system.
28
==PAGE:32==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Figure 6 shows the relation between the main concepts within the theory.
Figure 6: Relation between main concepts. From [33]
It can be seen that most of the concepts relate to one another, and therefore a change
within one of these will result in a change in the activity system and the outcome of
this. This can sometimes result in contradictions. Diﬀerent types of contradictions can
be seen in the following section Contradictions 5.f.2. A more descriptive explanation of
the relation of the concepts which is mainly used in the analyzing can be seen in table 2.
29
==PAGE:33==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Table 2: Relation between concept. Inspiration from [4]
Tools
Rules
Subject
Subject
The main focus of this
The main focus of this
relation is the accessibility
is how the subject behave
of the tools to the subject
in relation to the given
rules
Object
Object
The main focus of this
The main focus of this
relation is the accessibility
is how the rules is created
and relevance of the tools
in order to obtain the
in terms of obtaining the
object
object
As it can be seen the main concepts which will be used in the analyze is the tools, rules,
subject, and object as these are seen as the most relevant, as the hypothesis of this thesis
is about how a tool can have an inﬂuence on the object within the system.
5.f.2
Contradictions
The activity theory also works with contradiction. These can both create distributions but
also help with renewal of the activities within the actives system, and it should, therefore,
be noted that contradiction not necessary is the same as a conﬂict. Sometimes it helps
the system evolve, this could be when introducing a new thing into the system, which
then might conﬂict with another part, and therefore the system either have to evolve or
remove the new thing.
The diﬀerent types, and the level of them, can be seen below.
Primary contradictions: Are contractions which are located within one of the central
points, the ones presented above as the main concepts, of the given activity system. So
it could for instants be placed within the tool.
30
==PAGE:34==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Secondary contradictions: Are contradiction located between the central points of the
given activity system. So it could be between the tools and the rules.
Tertiary contradictions: These happen between a central point, for the given activity
system and a more culturally advanced version of the system.
Quaternary contradiction: are contradictions which happens between the central ac-
tivity within the system and a neighbor activity system.
31
==PAGE:35==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
6
Data and analysis
As mentioned in section 5.f Activity theory the theory used in this analysis is the activity
theory, and the main concepts which are in focus on within this analysis are the tool, the
subject, the object and the rules. The reasoning behind this is that these are the ones
who are of the most important to the given activity system and to the problem statement
given in this thesis. Moreover, all the interviews can be found in the appendix, where a
resume and the used quotes can be found.
The four companies interviewed in relation to this thesis is MT Højgaard (from now
on called MTH), NNE, Sweco, and Exigo.
The ﬁrst three are consulting engineering
companies while Exigo is a company who has specialized in advising both client and
entrepreneur in complicated projects, with a focus on integrated 3D-models within the
project.
Furthermore, even though NNE is a consulting engineering ﬁrm their main
focus is within the pharmaceutical industry and their clients, therefore, have diﬀerent
requirements, and thereby change orders, for the building compared to some of the client
requirement MTH and Sweco meet in some of their projects. As mentioned in section 5.f
Activity theory the subjects in this analysis is the consulting engineers and their role in
the activity system as these are the ones, which have been interviewed in relation to this.
6.a
Object
For the given activity system analyzed the object is to assure that the client ends up with
a valuable construction, which lives up to the requirements given within their ﬁnancial
frame. A problem with this object is that the client does not necessarily know what
creates a valuable construction in the end, which can result in change orders throughout
the project. As Viet Pham from MTH said:
"So it is the early question which is often a problem in the end, because they make some
decision which they are not really on top of, and then they realize they want to change it.
And then there is extra work."7 (Appendix C, quote 15:57).
This is a big problem because the later in the project the client ﬁgure out they want to
change something, the more expensive it becomes. As stated in section 5.a.1 Cost changes
7Own translation
32
==PAGE:36==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
in relation to change orders and from appendix C it cost around a factor 1000 more when
making changes in the construction phase compared to in the design phase. Therefore a
part of the object is to reduce the cost from change orders, as much as it is possible, as
change orders most likely always will be part of a project, which is done by ﬁnding them
earlier on in the project. Though one should keep in mind throughout the analyze that
not all change orders, which are made and result in an additional cost, result in a lesser
valuable construction in the end, but though this is valid it is still desirable to assure that
value is determined in the beginning or planning phase of the project.
6.b
Rules
There are two main rules which are valid in this system, and valid in terms of how the
subject uses the tools, which are available. First of all the norm within the construction
business in terms of new technology and secondly the IKT, which have presented the
business with a law valid for public construction, and then AB18, which is currently in
hearing.
6.b.1
The norm within the construction business
In general, the construction business is one of the more conservative businesses. This is
stated by all the interviewed, and all of them meant that the technology needed is there
at the given moment, but the biggest problem is to get everyone to use it, and not only
relying on 2D-drawings and manual work. One of the reasons for this is that people do
not trust the program and do not realize what potential these have. As stated by Kasper
Rix from Exigo:
"One of the greatest challenges is ﬁrst of all how much people know about it. It has some-
thing to do with if people understand the potential. Understand why they should do these
things, and what do I get from doing this"8 (Appendix E quote 16:16)
This is important as people are not likely to spend time and money on things they do not
realize give them some advantages or they do not see the potential of. The problem is
that they cannot see why they should upgrade from 2D drawings and manual work when
this works quite nicely and have done for a long time.
8Own translation
33
==PAGE:37==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Though the programs have great potential and a lot of usable features it should be kept
in mind that, like a calculator, the programs are only as smart as the persons behind
the screens, because they use the input given to come up with an output. Furthermore,
it should be noted that a lot of the features which the BIM universe presents give more
precise results when the project actually is no longer in the planning phase and before
construction have begun. A feature like collision control, which might be able to reduce
change orders on the construction site works the best when everything which might collide
is ﬁnished within the models.
While the lack of knowledge in terms of the potential is a general problem within the
construction business, the pharmaceutical business is just as conservative. This is ex-
pressed by many of the clients within that business only requiring 2D drawings and not
3D models. Even though the client might not request it, NNE uses 3D models anyway
and has for a while, as it has created value for them, and by now it is becoming more and
more common that the client request 3D models. This might be because they have seen
the potential when 3D models have been used without their request.
6.b.2
IKT
As mentioned in section 5.b.2 IKT the newest IKT for public construction have been
valid since 2013, though this is the current one, there have been one since 2007. These
have assured that there have been made some requirements from the state when talking
about public construction and the use of digital models. If these are the ones which have
made a diﬀerence in the use of BIM in the business the interviewed do not agree upon,
which can be seen in the following statements:
"If it is the IKT-agreement that have made a diﬀerence or if it is the technology there
have made the diﬀerence is one big question mark. Because the IKT-agreement does set
some requirements for the agreement you make, but I think you would not have chosen
the technology if you did not think it was a good idea or if you were not forced to do it."
9 - Adham Al-Nachar from MTH (Appendix C quote 28:44)
9Own translation
34
==PAGE:38==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
"I think maybe it has been a natural development, that maybe we have adopted what has
been happening within the public and said that makes a lot of sense also in our world,
even though our client maybe do not require it at the moment, or it is limited that they
do, but it makes a lot of sense to us"10 - Lars Johansson from NNE (Appendix D quote
38:14)
"Again if it really is the acts which have been the reason or that some professional client
or professional client organizations there have gotten something out of it, I can not say"11.
- Kasper Rix from Exigo (Appendix E quote 34:19)
"That you should not underestimate. It has also had an impact on the deﬁnition of how
the diﬀerent study lines in the diﬀerent education, about what they shall learn and work
with."12 - Jacob Güldner from Sweco (Appendix F quote 35:58)
From these statements it is hard to conclude upon which have had the bigger impact of
the technology itself or the IKT. But even though this is the case the IKT might have
helped some realize the potential of the technology, as they have been forced to use it,
if they have been part of a public construction project, which lives up to one or more of
the requirements presented in section 5.b.2 IKT. Furthermore it might have been a big
factor that the new so-called super hospitals in Denmark all were subjected to the IKT
and therefore the companies which wanted to take part in building these, and thereby
getting a part of the 40 billion, which the state was willing to invest in these [appendix
E], had to use digital models.
Though some of the companies might not think that the public IKT have made that big
of a diﬀerence for the construction business, but that it is most likely other factors which
have made the diﬀerence, as the technology itself, all of them still make an IKT-agreement
for each project using BIM. This also represents a rule within the system, as these works
as a match of expectation and set the rules for the given project. So even though a general
set of rules is made in the IKT, as these only are valid for a certain project, each company
works out one which is valid for the given project.
10Own translation
11Own translation
12Own translation
35
==PAGE:39==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
6.b.3
Contradiction within the rules
As it can be seen from the two sections above the rules and norms within the construction
business represent a primary contradiction, as these two contradict one another and both
represent the rules within the activity system. As discussed in the section above relating
to IKT, this has maybe been made, in order for the norm in the business to change so
more and more see the potential and the advantages which can be achieved when using
BIM. But Viet Pham from MTH states that:
"There have to happen a change in culture before you will be able to see a really big dif-
ference within the business. It will come though" (Appendix C quote 21:50)
So though the IKT have helped pushing the business in a new and improved direction
and have created a distribution in the original activity system, where BIM and VR was a
much less used tool, by creating a contradiction with the old rule, there is still room for
more improvement before the community changes.
6.c
Main tools
In this thesis, the tool is deﬁned as the functions and programs that the BIM universe
can provide. Furthermore, VR is also considered a tool, which will be analyzed as part of
the system, but as its own tool. The main focus of this analysis is to examine if the cost,
which change orders result in, is reduced by using these tools. Moreover, this section looks
at how the subject uses the tools in order to obtain the main object within the activity
system.
6.c.1
BIM
In table 3 it is shown how much each consulting engineering company uses BIM. The
numbers show how many of their projects in which they are currently using BIM. All of
the numbers can be found in their respected appendix C, D, and F.
36
==PAGE:40==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Table 3: In percent the amount of projects the consulting engineering companies
uses BIM
Company
Usages of BIM [%]
MTH
90
NNE
80-85
Sweco
100
As it can be seen in table 3 all of the companies uses BIM in most or all of their projects,
and for MTH and NNE their goal is to use BIM in all of their projects in the future.
But even though the consulting companies who have been interviewed for this says they
use BIM to a great extent, Kasper Rix from Exigo have a diﬀerent experience of the
construction business. He states the following:
"One gets surprised when one goes out to the real world and see how little 3D there actu-
ally is compared to how much people talk about 3D.13" (From appendix E, quote 6.04).
Viet Pham from MTH supports this view. He states that though they use BIM to a great
extent, it should be noted that not all do this. This could indicate that though the com-
panies interviewed in relation to this thesis uses it quite a lot, this might be because they
are some of the bigger consulting engineering companies within the business, and others,
maybe smaller companies, are not using 3D-modelling to the same extent. From this, it
also should be noted that though it is common technology within the companies which
have been interviewed, it is still not that widely used in all of the construction business.
This is also supported by the rule concerning the norm within the business, which can be
seen above.
The 3D models do not only do the job of visualization, but it also contains information
which is relevant when building and for the users of the models. This is done by classify-
ing the objects within the model. Which system is used is depended on the client and/or
the consulting engineering company, but common for all is that they use it when doing
a project with 3D-models. The problem with several classiﬁcation systems is that each
time a new is introduced, there should be set time aside for education within the system.
Further, it is possible that working with several systems increase the risk of errors in the
13Own translation
37
==PAGE:41==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
classiﬁcations, which then can result in wrong orders of materials.
How important the classiﬁcation is perceived, is depending on who one is talking to.
Kasper Rix from Exigo states the following:
"Classiﬁcation of objects, building parts, is the absolute precise, almost, most important
that is within this business, in relation to 3D-models" (Appendix E quote 8:33)
While Jacob Güldner from Sweco points out the classiﬁcation should only be done when
it gives value to the projects, as some of it seems to be a bit overly complicated compared
to what it should be used for.
6.c.2
VR
Where BIM and 3D-models are widely used in MTH, NNE, and Sweco, this is not the case
with VR, at least not to the same extent. MTH uses it in around 20 % of their projects,
while NNE and Sweco did not have an exact number but uses it in some projects, but
not that many. All of them and Kasper Rix from Exigo mention it as a great tool for
visualizations, so the client gets a better experience of the construction. This way of using
VR is mainly used by the architect, but the engineers also use VR, as it, according to
Viet Pham from MTH, is a great way to assure user involvement within the project. He
has experienced that people start asking questions as soon as they wear the glasses, which
assures that some question, which one not necessarily have thought about, is taken care of
earlier on in the project. Further it can be used for visualization of the installations, like
ventilation ducts, to assure that there is room enough for the diﬀerent ones to be there,
and that service can be made. Moreover, it is according to Jacob Güldner form Sweco
a great tool to communicate solutions, so the client has the possibility to experience the
room instead of having to visualize it themselves.
6.c.3
Other tools
Within the activity system which presents the construction of a building, there are several
tools, which is not the main focus of the analysis but is mentioned throughout the thesis.
One of these is partnering which is mentioned in section 5.e Partnering, which focus on a
new way of collaboration within the projects, where every participant within the project
is connected to the project as early as possible. This will assure a better collaboration
38
==PAGE:42==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
within the project, and as mentioned by Kasper Rix from Exgio:
"The more collaboration we can get the better" (Appendix E quote 47:44)
But a problem with this is that everyone earns money of everyone which is why change
orders are can create a big extra cost within the project, so this has to change before
partnering can be a big part, as trust is the main component within partnering.
6.c.4
Tools in relation to the object
Though BIM and VR are used within the system it can be hard to pinpoint that with the
use of these the cost has been lowered. One of the reasons for this is that the technology
is still new, and therefore no one has really measured how the use of the given tools help
in terms of reduction of change orders. Furthermore, it can be hard to measure these
things as no projects are similar, so it will most likely be word for word, as it can be due
to several factors, that the cost from change order is low. But even though this is the
case the interviewed all see great potential in the usage of BIM, as a communication tool
which can present the material better and easier than a 2D drawing are able to, as stated
by Lars Johansson from NNE:
"That visually communication, just by using the 3D models actively, that have deﬁnitely
been a advantages for us"14 (Appendix D quote 17:53)
Further, it is also a great tool for simulations as it is possible to generate simulation based
on the models, and this is a valuable feature for the projects, this could be in terms of time
scheduling, and how far the project should be on a given time but also energy simulation.
In the table below the blue colored causes of change orders are the ones which BIM and
VR can help reduce the cost of. The original table is resented in section 5.a Deﬁnition of
change order at page nine, where a better explanation of all the cause for change orders
is explained.
14Own translation
39
==PAGE:43==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Table 4: Diﬀerent causes for change orders.
Design
Construction
Operation
Client
- Changes in economic
- Changes in economic
- Do not fulﬁll the
- Do not fulﬁll the
functions needed
functions needed
- Missing clarity
- Missing clarity
- Non-fulﬁlling
- Changes in the
tender
facility needed
- Changes in the
facility needed
Consulting
- Collisions between
- Collisions between
models
objects (physical)
- Project engineering
is not ﬁnished
- Errors in speciﬁcations
for objects in models
- Not buildable
Contractor
- Not realistic time
- Missing information
schedule
in models about
- Bad weather
physical features
Supplier
- Incorrect materials
delivered
- Broken materials
Miscellaneous
- Bad weather
- Fire
- Bad soil condition
As it can be seen the use of the tool can help reduce several of the causes and thereby
help obtain the main object of the system because if the causes are reduced so are the
cost of the change orders, as these will not occur.
But as not all of the causes of change orders presented in table 4 is reduced or removed
change order will still occur, but BIM can still be a valuable tool to obtain the object, as
the connection between models, economics, and time schedule result in a quick estimation
of the change in cost. As stated by Kasper Rix from Exigo:
40
==PAGE:44==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
"It does that the usages of BIM are helping, at least theoretical, reducing how much it
means that change orders occur"15 (Appendix E quote 21:51)
Though he states that it might help in theory at least, the general observation is that it
will also help in reality. This is due to the fact that a quick estimation at least will present
the client with an overview of the consequences of a given change order, and thereby can
make an informed decision about if they would like to go through with it.
In general, it should be noted that the tool works the best in relation to the object when
introduced and used to its full potential as early as possible. Moreover, it is important to
note that as stated by Jacob Güldner from Sweco, it is mainly about catching the changes
in the early phase:
"The question is how fast you are catching them (red: the change order) and handle them
so it does not topple anything, and still keep the time schedule. And there the digitization
also gives some advantages, so one quickly are able to come in and see what it means"16
(Appendix F quote 23:11)
Overall better communication seems to be the main problem and BIM and VR are tools,
which can be used in order to optimize the communication between the diﬀerent parties
within a project. Because it is an easier way to communicate solutions and thereby start
talking about alternatives. Furthermore it can assure that everyone has the same point
of origin when talking about the projects, and the solution which has been chosen in the
given project.
15Own translation
16Own translation
41
==PAGE:45==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
7
Conclusion
In general it is seen that change orders are a common problem within the construction
business, and sometimes relates to the client not knowing what they need or want from
the construction being built. Finding these changes and handle them as early as possible,
and desirable before construction start, is important as the later these are found and
handled the more expensive it becomes.
It was seen that the rules within the system contradict one another as the norm in the
business is conservative, and therefore as people are used to use 2D drawing, they do not
necessarily see the point in changing to 3D models, as it will take both time and money
to do so. The IKT on the other hand pulls the business in the other direction, trying to
make the business use 3D modelling. But whether it is the IKT itself or the technology
and general use of this that have been the main factor for the beginning change within
the business, is not known, and depends on who of the interviewed one talks to.
BIM as a tool is used to a great extend within the companies interviewed, but this is still
not the case within the construction business as a whole. Furthermore VR is used even
less and mainly used by the architects, as it creates the most value for them. One of the
main advantages with both tools are that they are great for communication, as it is easier
to imagine the solution when either seeing it in 3D or experience it. This assures that the
client and the other parties within the project is at the same page and most likely have
the same experience of the construction. Furthermore it is possible for the client to see
more proposals, which gives them a better base for making a decision.
Furthermore connecting price and time schedule to the 3D model, makes it easier to see
what impact a change order will have if implemented in the project. This assures that
the client are able to make a more informed decision about the implementations of change
orders.
Using BIM as a tool to create better understanding and communication within the project
seems to help decrease the cost of the change orders, as the client are able to experience
the project better before it is being built, and therefore change orders relating to the client
needing help ﬁgure out what creates a valuable construction for them is decreased or at
least handled in the early phases of the project. If they need to make a change anyway it
42
==PAGE:46==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
can be done in an informed manner, where they know what this means in terms of time
and cost. Though it seems like this is the case it is hard to make an actual conclusion
saying that it is valid, as BIM is still new technology and therefore no one has made an
actual measure if this is the case. Furthermore it could be several other factors which
interfere with the outcome, so it can be hard to make a precise conclusion whether if BIM
is the one reducing the additional cost or not.
43
==PAGE:47==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
References
[1] Abdul-Rahman,
H.,
Chen,
W.
and
Hui,
J.
Y.
B.
(2015),
"Im-
pacts
Of
Design
Changes
on
Construction
Project
Performance:
In-
sights
From
A
Literature
Review",
MiCRA
2015.
Avalible
at:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/283714629_Impacts_Of_Design_Changes
_on_Construction_Project_Performance_Insights_From_A_Literature_Review
[2] Anlægsforeningen i Danmark (2011) "Anlægsteknik 2. Styring af byggeprocessen", 3rd
edition, Polyteknisk forlag
[3] Arkitektskolen
Aarhus,
et
al.
(2017)
"BIM7AA
typekodning"
Avalible
at:
http://bim7aa.dk/BIM7AA_Typekodning.html
[4] Behrens, O. E. R. (2018) "Digitale projekteringsværktøher i et strategisk partner-
skab. Projekteringsproces og IKT hos arkitekter, ingeniører og software leverandør",
Aalborg Universitet København.
[5] Bonke, S. (2016) "Alliancing, Collaborative Project Governance, Trust and Partnering
in Management of Construction", Presentation, DTU
[6] Friis, T. and more (2016) "Reducing chance orders in construction", DTU Lyngby
[7] Karanastios, S., Riisla, K. and Simeonoca, B. (2017) "Exploring the use of contradic-
tions in activity theory studies: An interdisciplinary review". Presented at the 33rd
EGOS Colloquium: The Good Organization, Copenhagen, July 6-8th.
[8] Kensek, K. M, and Noble, D. (2015), "Building information modeling: BIM in Current
and Future Practice", John Wiley and Son
[9] Konkurrence-
og
forbrugerstyrelsen
(2018)
"Dialog
før
og
under
udbudspro-
cessen".
Available
at:
https://www.kfst.dk/media/49852/dialog-foer-og-under-
udbudsprocessen_februar.pdf
[10] Konkurrence- og forbrugerstyrelsen (2016) "Udbudsloven. Vejledning om udbudsre-
glerne". Available at: https://www.kfst.dk/media/47065/udbudsloven-vejledning-om-
udbudsreglerne.pdf
[11] Lee, C. (2008). BIM: changing the construction industry. Paper presented at PMI R⃝
Global Congress 2008—North America, Denver, CO. Newtown Square, PA: Project
Management Institute. Available at: https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/building-
information-modeling-changing-construction-industry-6983
44
==PAGE:48==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
[12] Lee, M. J., Choi, M. S. and Kim, Y. S. (2010) "Attitudes of Engineers Related
to Prevention of Change Order Claims", Journal if Asian Architecture and Building
Engineering
[13] O’Leary, A. (2015) "Coping With Change Orders Keeping Confusion under Control
And Limiting Disputes". Available at: https://www.dcd.com/articles/coping-with-
change-orders-keeping-confusion-under-control-and-limiting-disputes
[14] Olsen, P. B. and el al (2015), "En praktisk guide til BIM i bygge- og anlægsprojekter",
MT Højgaard
[15] Olsen, P. B. and Pedersen, K (2015), "Problemorienteret projektarbejde. En værk-
tøjsbog", 4. edition, Samfundslitteratur
[16] Pham, V. and Kragh A. (2016), "MTH - VDC Best In Class", MT Højgaard
[17] Rodriguez, J (2017) "Situations That Might Trigger a Change Order Request". Avail-
able at: https://www.thebalance.com/change-order-request-triggers-844405
[18] Thygesen, E. (23th Febuary 2017) "VR handler om at få fremtidens hospital ind
under huden". Avalible at:
https://www.regionh.dk/nythospitalnordsjaelland/til-
pressen/pressemeddelelser/Sider/Nyt-Hospital-Nordsj%C3%A6lland-%C3%A5bner-
VR-studie-for-at-bringe-alle-t%C3%A6ttere-p%C3%A5-fremtidens-hospital-.aspx
[19] Thyssen, M. H. (2016): "Value and design management", København
[20] Værdibyg.dk (2018) "Dialog i udbudsprocessen"
[21] Winch, G. M. (2010), "Managing Construction Projects. An Information Processing
Approach", Second edition, Wiley-Blackwell
[22] (2013)
"Bekendtgørelse
om
anvendelse
af
informations-
og
kom-
munikationsteknologi
(IKT)
i
oﬀentligt
byggeri".
Avalible
at:
https://www.retsinformation.dk/Forms/R0710.aspx?id=145421
[23] http://www.bim.byg.dtu.dk/bimlab/hvad-er-bim
[24] http://bimequity.dk/info/hvad-er-bim/
[25] https://bimobject.com/en/blog/post/the-data-conundrum-in-bim
[26] https://bips.dk/v%C3%A6rkt%C3%B8jsomr%C3%A5de/ccs0
[27] http://ccs.molio.dk/News/About_CCS
[28] https://www.hfb.dk/ﬁleadmin/templates/hfb/dokumenter/oversigt/Sfb_systemet.pdf
[29] http://sheriﬀbuilders.co.uk/virtual-reality-the-game-changer-for-construction/
45
==PAGE:49==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
[30] https://geniebelt.com/blog/vr-in-construction-management
[31] http://www.frinet.dk/media/247093/partnering_i_praksis_2005.pdf
[32] http://tilbud.udbudsportalen.dk/artikler/kend-reglerne-for-udbud/ (besøgt d. 06/06
2018)
[33] https://www.researchgate.net/ﬁgure/Activity-Theory-framework-adapted-from-
Engestroem-4_ﬁg1_241688439
46
==PAGE:50==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
A
Interview spørgsmål - dansk
BIM og VR
• Hvordan oplever du/I at teknologien har udviklet sig i byggebranchen?
• Hvor meget bliver BIM og VR brugt hos jer? Evt. et tal i ca procent?
• I hvor stor grad oplever I at BIM er en del af byggebranchen?
• Kan I se en forskel i kommunikationen mellem jer og de andre involverede i projek-
terne, når disse værktøjer bliver brugt?
• Klassiﬁcering af bygningsdele - gør det en forskel for kommunikationen i projektet?
Og bruger I den samme system hver gang?
• Oplever I nogle problemer ved brug af BIM?
Projektændringer
• Hvor stort et problem oplever I at projektændringer er?
• Eksempler på projektændringer - gerne med projekter.
• Mindskes omkostningerne forårsaget af projektændringer ved brug af BIM og VR?
Enten i forhold til den egentlig prisændring eller ved mindre overskridelser af tid-
splan. Hvordan det håndteres i kontrakten?
• Hvis, ja hvad tror du/I begrundelsen for dette er?
Reglementer
• Har det gjort en forskel at IKT-bekendtgørelsen er trådt i kraft?
47
==PAGE:51==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
B
Interview questions - English
BIM and VR
• How do you experienced that the technology within the construction business have
developed?
• How much do you use BIM and VR? Possibly a number in percent?
• In your experience how big a role does BIM and VR play in the construction busi-
ness?
• Do you see a diﬀerence in communication between you and the involved in the
project, when these tools are being used?
• Classiﬁcation of building object - does it makes a diﬀerence in terms of communi-
cation within the project? And do you use the same system every time?
• Do you experience any problems when using BIM?
Change order
• In your experience how big a problem is change order?
• Examples of change order
• Does the charge from change order reduce when using BIM and VR? Either in terms
of the change in price or in terms of smaller changes in the time schedule.
• If yes, why do you think this is the case?
Regulations
• Do you think it has made a diﬀerence that the IKT-bekendtgørelse has become
eﬀective?
48
==PAGE:52==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
C
Interview - MT Højgaard
Interviewer: Kamma Christensen
Interviewpersoner: Adham Al-Nachar (VDC-konsulent med fokus på tilbud i MTH) og
Viet Pham (Projektleder i MTH)
Dato for interview: 1. maj 2018
Resume:
Først præsenteres projektet og dermed hvad fokus i interviewet kommer til at være.
Herefter spørges ind til, hvor stort et problem de oplever projektændringer er.
Det
afhænger af hvilken entrepriseform der benyttes, da dette har indﬂydelse på hvor hårdt
det rammer økonomisk. Generelt bliver det dyrere jo senere i procesen, man laver æn-
dringen, og som tommelﬁnger regel siges det, at det bliver ca. en faktor 1000 dyrere at
lave ændringen, når man er i byggefasen fremfor designfasen. Det varierer fra projekt til
projekt om det er et realt problem, når bygherre kræver en projektændring. Dog er der
stadig en del projekter hvor ændringer ses. Der gives et eksempel hvor det kunne ses at der
blev lavet ændringer i BIM-modellerne løbende efter man havde haft opstart på projektet.
I teorien laver man en kontrakt, og så bliver det man har haft aftalt der, det der bliver
bygget, men det er bare sjældent det er sådan det forløber i virkelighed. Der ser man
ﬂere ting der resulterer i ændringer af det oprindeligt aftalte. En af disse ting er, at
modellen simpelthen ikke er bygbar, en anden ting kan være at bygherre kommer med
ændringer. Derfor laves der ofte en "as built model", når projektet er afsluttet således,
man har en korrekt model for byggeriet, der indeholder de ting, som det egentlige byggeri
gør. Grunden til man laver denne model er at det gør drift og renovering lettere. I dag er
det muligt ved hjælp af teknologi at skabe en model af det man allerede har bygget ved
hjælp af skanning af bygningerne, hvor man laver en punktsky, som derefter kan bruges til
at lave modellen. En anden måde at gøre det på er at man ændre i modellen undervejs,
hvilket i følge Viet Pham er den mest normale måde at gøre det på i de ﬂeste projekter.
VR bliver brugt men er ikke specielt udbredt. MTH har givet det gratis til nogle af deres
projekter for at hjælpe med udbredelsen af dette, da man har tænkt at hvis folk først ser
hvad produktet kan, er de mere tilgængelige til at ville betale for at bruge det i det næste
projekt. Der ses generelt en større efterspørgsel på det nu, og bygherre beder nogle gange
selv om det, da det er det tætteste på virkeligheden og det færdige resultat de kommer.
I MTH bruger de det pt på ca. 20 % af deres projekter. VR giver kun mening at bruge
49
==PAGE:53==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
på de projekter hvor man stadig er i designfasen, da det kan give afklaring på nogle af de
spørgsmål der stilles på dette tidspunkt. Der snakkes om viden vs tid grafen, der fortæller
at der i starten af et projekt er størst usikkerhed, men jo længere man kommer i processen
jo færre spørgsmål mangler svar. Her kan VR hjælpe med at besvare nogle af de spørgsmål
de først ser resultatet af senere, og vise dem hvad resultater vil være, således de har en
viden inden det endelig valg bliver taget. Det er et godt redskab til brugerinddragelse, da
brugerne kan svare på nogle spørgsmål og har noget viden som rådgiver/entreprenør ikke
har.
VR hjælper med at starte nogle samtaler som måske ikke var startet hvis dette red-
skab ikke var blevet brugt. Derudover ser man nogle gang ting, som måske ellers ikke
var blevet opdaget før bygningen var blevet bygget, hvilket havde resulteret i, at det var
dyrere at lave ændringen sammenlignet med hvis man fandt den før bygningen var bygget.
Ifølge Viet Pham passer VR allerbedst hos arkitekterne, som dog ikke har taget det helt
til sig endnu. De store rådgivende ingeniørﬁrmaer bruger det, dog skyldes dette ikke at
det er dyr teknoklogi, da VR er ved at være hverdagsteknologi og derfor ikke er specielt
dyrt.
Teknologien udvikler sig hurtigere end branchen, derfor er der en masse uudnyttet po-
tentiale i teknologien, som byggebranchen ikke tager del i. Dette skyldes at kulturen i
byggebranchen dikterer at man ikke rykker sig. Et af problemerne er at folk ikke har tillid
til programmerne, og har svært ved at forholde sig til, at det er ligesom en lommeregner,
den giver dig output baseret på det input du giver. Derfor hvis du giver den korrekt input,
vil output også være korrekte.
Når man kobler alt sammen i modellen i forhold til økonomi og tildeler iPads på pladsen,
gør det det nemmere at fakturere arbejdet, da der så pludselig er en mere konkret ind-
deling, da folk dermed har mulighed for at tracke deres arbejde, end hvis en projektleder
laver inddelingen baseret på hans/hendes viden.
Klassiﬁcering er ikke begrænset til et system, men de prøver at holde sig til at bruge
BIM7AA i tilbud. Man ser klassiﬁcering bliver brugt mere og mere end bare for 2-3 år
siden. MTH stiller krav til at dette bruges i deres modeller, og de bruger det blandt andet
til mængdeudtræk og tilbud.
50
==PAGE:54==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Om IKT’en har gjort en forskel er ikke helt til at sige. Det er i følge Adham Al-Nachar
en mulighed at folk bare har set hvad teknologien kan og derfor tilvælger det uafhængigt
af IKT. I følge Viet Pham har de ﬂeste i byggebranchen fokus på det kortsigtede, derfor
kan folk have svært med vælge ting der er gode på den lange bane.
Det kan være svært at tracke ændringerne og deres betydning for projektets forløb, hvilket
kan gøre det sværere at vise fordele frem. Det kan derudover også være svært at vise æn-
dringen ved at bruge BIM, da det hurtigt bliver ord mod ord, i og med det kan være svært
at måle på betydningen. Det bliver muligvis muligt om nogle år, når man har indsamlet
mere data, men det vil stadig være en vurderingssag om man havde fanget det selvom
man ikke brugt BIM. Nogle ser tingene lidt som en gemick især ved tilbud, dog kan man
se at renderingerne sælger, hvilket får folk til at bruge BIM og VR. Det er straks sværere
at få det ud på byggepladsen, da de bygger på samme måde som for 50 år siden. På
pladsen bruges modellerne hovedsageligt til at trække plantegninger ud af, hvilket er det
der bygges efter.
De har haft et projekt hvor de har haft samlet de forskellige faggrupper fra starten, således
man kunne snakke sammen igennem hele projektet og få afklaret tingene hurtigst muligt.
I denne situation har BIM-modellerne hjulpet med at man hurtigt har kunne give et es-
timat på hvad det har kostet i fx. materialer og dermed hvad prisen vil være. Samtidigt
kan man se kollisioner osv.. På denne måde kan man give bygherre den mest optimale
løsning, i samarbejde med de forskellige faggrupper.
Citater
1:29; "Vi kunne se der skete en del ændringer i BIM-modellerne og i designet løbende
efter man sådan set var småstartet med projektet ik’?. Og det betyder rigtig meget i
forhold til hele planlægningen i forhold til hele tidsplanen osv. så er der rigtig meget man
lige skal følge op på." - Adham Al-Nachar
4:12; "Principielt hvorfor skulle man lave en model over noget og så ændre det senere til
det man har bygget. Modellen er jo det du skal bygge fra. Du laver jo ikke en model af
en bil, en BMW eller en Mercedes eller andet og så bygger du bilen og så ﬁnder du ud
af det ikke lige var det du havde modelleret, lad os ændre modellen til det, men det gør
byggebranchen desværre. Det at man har "As built model", som er en model man laver
51
==PAGE:55==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
efter man har bygget og så siger man det er sådan det i virkeligheden ser ud." - Adham
Al-Nachar
11:46; "Nu er vi i MT Højgaard, jeg tror, vi bruger 90% af vores byggerier, det har vi en
3D-model på, det er ikke alle der er sådan der. Det er meget vigtigt at sige. Der er mange
der stadig arbejder med 2D-modeller, og der er mange der arbejder med 3D-modeller,
IFC-modeller, som der ikke kan ændres noget ved." - Viet Pham
14:15; "Det er som når man køber tøj online... Så hvis du går ind på en eller anden
hjemmeside så ﬁnder du en eller anden skjorte eller et par bukser eller et eller andet par
sko som du synes er mega nice. Så bestiller du skoene, så vælger du størrelse, så bestiller
du efter du har kigget på de her tegninger eller billeder af dem, så bestiller du dem hjem.
Så går der måske en til to uger alt efter om du har bestilt hos Post Nord eller DHL
eller hvem det er og så får du den her pakke. Så tror jeg alle har prøvet at man åbner
pakken, tager skoene på og så ﬁnder man ud af de passer mig overhovedet ikke det her.
Og så sender man dem tilbage igen. Så det man kan gøre hvis man skal have noget der
passer, så går man ned i butikken og prøver du det. (14.55??) Så for det meste af tiden
i lang tid så har byggebranchen været den her online shop der, hvor man kigger på nogle
tegninger og så skal man bestemme det er den her man gerne vil have. Så arkitekterne
laver nogle ﬂotte renderinger, de får nogle 2D-tegninger og så prøver vi at bygge det der
er. Så bygherren har jo i princippet aldrig set det. Det man kan med VR er at det er det
tætteste du kommer til virkeligheden som det overhovedet er muligt." - Viet Pham
15:57; "Så det er de tidlige spørgsmål, som typisk er et problem i slutningen, fordi de
tager nogle valg de ikke rigtig har styr på, og så ﬁnder de ud af de gerne vil lave det om.
Og så er der ekstra arbejde." - Viet Pham
17:14; "Brugerinddragelse er et rigtig godt ord at sætte sammen med virtual reality. Det
er et rigtig godt kommunikationsværktøj til netop de ting her (Red: Ting som drift folk
har mere information om end rådgiver/entreprenør)" - Viet Pham
18:57; "Det er ca. sådan en faktor 1000 plejer man at sige prismæssigt at ændre noget i
design fasen i forhold til at ændre noget ude på pladsen" - Viet Pham
21:50; "Der bliver nødt til at ske et kulturskift før du vil kunne se en virkelig virkelig stor
52
==PAGE:56==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
ændring i branchen. Det skal nok komme." - Viet Pham
28.44; "Vi har sådan set altid IKT-aftaler med når der er en model. Hvor meget forskel
det gør... Om det er IKT-aftalen der har gjort en forskel eller teknologien der har gjort
en forskel, det er et stort sprøgsmålstegn. Fordi IKT-aftalen sætter jo nogle krav for den
aftale man har, men jeg tænekr altså man ville jo ikke slet ikke have tilvalgt teknologien,
hvis man ikke synes det var en god ide eller hvis man ikke var tvunget til det." - Adham
Al-Nachar
36:20; "Det (Red. bygherreafklaring) tror jeg VR kan hjælpe meget på, men der skal man
fange det i designet" - Adham Al-Nachar
53
==PAGE:57==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
D
Interview - NNE
Interviewer: Kamma Christensen
Interviewpersoner: Lars Johansson (Global BIM Manager)
Dato for interview: 7. maj 2018
Resume
Det startede med en introduktion af ﬁrmaet. NNE, er et datterselskab fra Novo Nordisk,
og det de beskæftigere sig med er projektering inden for pharma og deres fokus er ikke så
meget på skallen af bygningen, men derimod processerne inden i bygningen. En ting der
er specielt for dem er at de har alle displiner in-house.
Pharma branchen er mere konservativ i forhold til at stille krav, da de ﬂeste bygherre
kun stiller krav til 2D tegninger, dette skyldes at man i pharma har valideret tegninger
som er de gældende, dog er bygherrene begyndt at stille krav til 3D modellering. Selvom
bygherrerne først nu er begyndt at stille krav har NNE i længere tid brugt 3D modeller
i deres projektering af byggeprojekter. Deres målsætning går på at alle deres projekter
med tiden skal bruge BIM, som både er bygnings- og proessmodelering, mens i dag er det
gældende for 80-85 % af alle deres projekter.
De bruger BIM og VR til at lave nogle processer, som de ikke har haft mulighed for
før. Blandt andet bliver sådan noget som omklædning simuleret, således de ansatte har
mulighed for at opleve det inden de kommer ind i bygningen. Det bruges også til at få
brugergruppernes feedback, da det giver et bedre billede af hvordan det vil ende med at
se ud. Derudover bruges det til at lave pænt og godt præsentationsmateriale, så de kan
lave en god præsentation, som indeholder gode visualiseringer.
Klassiﬁcation er baseret på et internt system, der er baseret på BIM7AA i hvert fald på
danske projekter, da deres kunder ikke stiller krav til dette. Dette skyldes sandsynligvis
at de ikke kender fordelene ved klassiﬁcering, derudover er der ikke umiddelbart et system
der indeholder alt det NNE har brug for.
De oplever store problemer med projektændringer, da en lile ændring kan få stor betyd-
ninger for hvornår fabriken kommer til at være driftklar og dermed har mulighed for at
tjene penge. En typisk projektændring kan være at kunden kommer med nye krav til
54
==PAGE:58==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
hvor stor en kapacitet fabrikken skal kunne håndtere, hvilket derefter stiller nye krav til
rørføring osv., da større kapacitet ikke nødvendigvis betyder større bygning. De oplever
sjældent ændringer på skallen af bygningen, da kunderne ikke nødvendigvis har det store
fokus på dette.
BIM virker til at have hjulpet på den interne kommunikation, da det hjælper de forskel-
lige displiner med at få et ensartet billede af projektet, og giver et bedre indblik i hvad
de forskellige displiner har burg for at rummet kan indeholde. Derudover giver det også
kunderne en bedre forståelse for hvorfor nogle ting måske ikke kan lade sig gøre, da det
er nemmere at visualisere et rum i 3D end en 2D tegning.
I skitsefasen, som er den indledende fase, er der mange ting der skal lægges på plads, da
ændringer senere i projektet er både tidskrævende og koster mere. Dette skyldes, der er
ﬂere ting, der muligvis skal ændres på jo senere man kommer. De store ting, og dermed
dem der kan have de største konskvenser, bliver ofte håndteret tidligere ved at bruge digi-
tale værktøjer. Dog vil projketændringer stadig ses, blandt andet hvis kundens ønsker og
behov skifter undervejs i projektet. Nogle ændringer kan også skyldes nye regualivitiver,
da disse kan medføre at man skal nytænke designet.
Nogle gange kan det være en god ting at udfordre kunden i forhold til hvilke ændringer
der bliver lavet, således alt de forslår ikke nødvendigvis bliver til en realitet. Derudover
er det ikke altid muligt at lave de ændringer som kunden ønsker, på grund af stabilitet osv.
På store projekter har de "Planners", hvis job er at planlægge projektforløbet. Denne
tidsplan bliver derefter holdt op på modellerne, således man sikre sig, at man ikke får
bygget for langt, så man ikke kan få store maskiner ind i bygningen, eller laver en plan
for hvor kranerne skal stå.
De prøver at sørge for at få lavet en model der favner så bredt som muligt, ved at samle
alle displinernes modeller, således man har en model der kan bruges til VR, simulering af
tidsplaner osv. Dog kan det være svært at få lavet dette.
NNE arbejder med deres egen IKT-aftale, som de præsentere for kunden i de tidlige faser,
således man få en diskution omkring kravene til digitale modeller. Derudover har de en
"BIM execution plan", der sikre at aftalerne mellem kunden og NNE bliver overholdt
55
==PAGE:59==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
internt.
Mange har deres udlandske kunder og kollegaer har været virkelig positivt over at vi i
Danmark har en organisation, Molio, som laver guidelines og publikationer omkring BIM
som man kan bruge.
Citater
5:16; "Men det har da simpelthen revolunitioneret vores verden også, og hele 3D-delen så
det har virkelig, virkelig betydet meget"
17:53; "Den der visuelle kommunikation, netop ved at bruge 3D modellerne aktivt, at det
er da helt klart en fordel for os."
24:12; "Så det bruger vi også vores BIM modeller til, at lave den simulering (red: Der
viser hvor langt byggeriet skal være på givne tidspunkter) derhen igennem, på nogle af de
elsisterende tidsplaner."
25:43; "Netop fordi mange kunder har jo ønsker om, at inden vi skriver under på en kon-
trakt, hvordan kommer det her til at se ud, det skal måske passe ind med eksisterende
bygninger og det skal måske passe ind i et eller andet landskab eller noget derhen igennem."
28:20; "At man netop har det samme udgangspunkt eller den samme forståelse for hvad
er det egentlig vi snakker om ik’?. Man kan mange gange se at hvis man tager den tra-
ditionelle kommunikation, hvor det er en plantegning eller et snit eller en opstaltstegning
eller noget, der har vi måske et billede om det bliver nødt set at se sådan ud fordi sådan
og sådan, og der er der måske mange kunder som siger hvorfor kan jeg ikke få mine tre
store skriveborde her, hvorfor kan jeg ikke få mit store køleskab til laboratoriforsøg eller
et eller andet derhen af."
31:50; "Der kommer selvfølgelig stadig ændringer, men de store ting og dem som måske
kan få nogle store konsekvenser, dem får vi ligesom luset ud, kan man sige, tidligere i
processen blandt andet ved at bruge digitale værktøjer."
38.14: "Jeg tror måske lidt det har været en naturlig udvikling, at vi måske har addopteret
56
==PAGE:60==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
hvad der skete inden for det oﬀentlige og sagt det giver rigtig god mening også i vores
verden selvom vi ikke har kunder der måske pt stiller kravet, eller det er begrænset de
stiller kravene om det, men så giver det rigtig god mening for os."
57
==PAGE:61==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
E
Interview - Exigo
Interviewer: Kamma Christensen
Interviewpersoner: Kasper Rix (Projektleder)
Dato for interview: 16. maj 2018
Resume
Interviewet indledes med en præsentation af Kasper Rix og Exigo som ﬁrma, som hov-
edsageligt arbejder med projekt og risikostyring af større byggerier. De hjælper hoved-
sageligt bygherre og entreprenør, hvilket medfører at deres rolle er mere som konsulent
end rådgiver. Firmaet blev startet med henblik på at udnytte de digitale værktøjer bedre.
Byggebranchen udvikler sig nærmest ikke, da den stort set er den mindst innovative
branche. Der blev lavet et studie i 2007 omkring brugen af teknologi i byggebranchen, og
det ses at der stort set ikke er sket en udvikling i brugen siden. Teknologien eksisterer
allerede, branchen tager det bare ikke til sig. Nogle ting udvikler sig, så som brugen af
VR, som er begyndt at blive udbredt, det er dog ikke nået til den brede del af branchen.
Derudover er 3D heller ikke så brugt, som man umiddelbart tror.
I Exigo arbejder de med BIM, ud fra den deﬁnition som er givet i citat 6:52, men arbejder
overhovedet ikke med VR, da VR hovedsageligt bruges som visualiseringer i forbindelse
med design, som arkitekter bruger. Derudover kan det bruges til at lave visualiseringer
af et lokale, således man kan undgå at skulle lave en fysisk model af lokalet.
Klassiﬁcering bliver mere og mere udbredt, og der ses en klar forbedring gennem de sidste
4-5 år. I følge Kasper Rix, er det det absolut vigtigste når man bruger BIM, da det er
dette der gør at man kan skabe en sammenhæng og bruge modellerne samlet og ikke bare
som en visualisering. Det ses, at det er meget skiftende hvilket systemer der bruges, det
er BIM7AA samt CSS der er de mest brugte. Hvilket system man bruger afhænger af
rådgiver, der ofte vil bruge BIM7AA, mens hvis bygherre dikterer bruges oftest CSS. CSS
kan være et svært system at bruge, da det er et system, der er lavet til at støtte alle
aspekter. Derfor blev BIM7AA lavet, da dette er simplere og mere overskueligt. Man kan
sagtens bruge ﬂere klassiﬁceringssystemer i samme projekt.
Et sted hvor klassiﬁcering af bygningsdele er nødvendig er ved udbud med mængdeudtræk.
58
==PAGE:62==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Dette skyldes at IKT-bekendtgørelsen siger at man skal kunne trække de mængder ud af
modellen, og dette besværliggøres betydeligt, hvis man ikke har klassiﬁceret sine bygn-
ingsobjekter, da det så kan være svært at ﬁnde de objekter der er tale om.
Der er utroligt mange udfordringer med BIM. En af de allerstørste er hvor meget folk
kender til det, og om de forstår potentialet af dette. Både i forbindelse med klassiﬁcering
samt hvorfor der skal laves en IKT-aftale. En anden udfordring er forskelligheder i viden-
sniveau, det kan dog skyldes man ikke har set potentialet endnu.
Projektændringer er ikke nødvendigvis noget de oplever så meget, da det ikke umiddel-
bart er det de laver, men derfor vil Kasper Rix gerne udtale sig om det alligevel, da han
ved noget fra branchen alligevel.
Det er et problem i branchen at der stort set aldrig bliver færdigprojekteret, da dette be-
tyder at tingene bliver lavet mere on the go i stedet. I forhold til BIM, kan man benytte
programmer der knytter tidsplan og økonomi sammen med 3D-modellem, hvilket betyder
man nemt og hurtigt kan se hvad en ændring i 3D-modellen har af konsekvenser. Dette
gør man hurtigt kan se og teste en masse forskellige scenarier af og dermed vurdere hvilken
man skal arbejde videre med baseret på disse informationer.
Et andet problem er den måde man tjener penge på i branchen, da et overskud på 4-5
% er stort for et entreprenørﬁrma, og projektændringer er et sted hvor man kan tjene,
da det ikke er underlagt samme konkurrence på priserne, som det der indgår i kontrak-
ten er. Derfor sender entreprenøren en ekstra regning til rådgiver for ændringer. Dette
gælder også rådgiverne som sender ekstra regning til bygherre for ændringer. Derfor vil
projektændringer blive ved med at være et problem indtil man begynder at samarbejde
i branchen. Derfor vil mere samarbejde, såsom partnering, kunne gøre en forskel. Folk i
branchen er bare ikke nødvendigvis klar på partnering, da de ikke er sikre på det fungerer.
BIM har ikke haft den indﬂydelse pga. der er for stor en opdeling i værdikæden, selvom
det er en vigtig del af BIM.
Der er nogle tydelige forbedringer i kommunikationen ved brug af BIM, dette skyldes at
man har bedre visuelt materiale til bygherre, da man hurtigere kan lave simuleringer som
viser hvordan det kommer til at se ud, når man laver en ændring.
59
==PAGE:63==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Derefter tales der om omkostninger og reduktion i disse ved brugen af BIM. Først og
fremmest er det deﬁnitionsspørgsmål, da nogle ændringer godt kan give et mere værdi-
fuldt byggeri, samtidigt med at det får projektet til at koste mere. Derudover kan BIM
ikke nødvendigvis være med til at reducere omkostningerne. Det der vil kunne gøre den
største forskel er hvis byggeriet blev færdigprojekteret, da det der koster mest er det der
skal laves på pladsen, som ikke er inkluderet i den oprindelige aftale. Dog hvis man har
tiden til at færdigprojektere vil man kunne optimere brugen af BIM, da man så bedre
kan bruge værktøjer, som kollisionskontrol osv. til at sikre byggeriet.
IKT-bekendtgørelsen har gjort en forskel, da man har opstillet regler for hvordan of-
fentlige bygherre skulle opstille regler. Dog menes det at den egentlige forskel kom med
kvalitetsreformen for sygehusene, da den medførte at entreprenører og rådgivere kunne få
del i de 40 milliarder kroner, der var blevet tildelt projekterne, hvis de overholdt kravene
i IKT-bekendtgørelsen. Det gjorde især en forskel i starten, mens nu, blandt andet fordi
man har slækket på kravene i IKT’en, gør det en mindre forskel.
Selvom det i starten kun var et krav for de oﬀentlige kan man se at det har haft en positiv
indﬂydelse på de private bygherre. Dog er det ikke sikkert om det er bekendtgørelserne
eller bygherre der har set fordelene i det, der har gjort forskellen.
Citater
6.04; "Man bliver overrasket når man kommer ud i den virkelige verden og ser hvor lidt
3D, der rent faktisk er i forhold til hvor meget folk snakker om 3D".
6:52; "BIM er jo realt bare en hvordan og hvorledes processer omkring brugen af digitale
modeller og mulighederne ved det."
8:33; "Klassiﬁcering af objekter, bygningsdele er det absolut entydigt, næsten, vigtigste
der ﬁndes i den her branche, når det kommer til 3D-modeller."
16:16; "Der er utroligt mange udfordringer i forhold til BIM... En af de allerstørste ud-
fordringer det er for det første hvor meget folk kender til det. Det er noget med om folk
forstår potentialet. Forstår hvorfor skal man gøre de her ting, hvad får jeg ud af at gøre
det her."
60
==PAGE:64==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
21:51; "Dette (red: at man kobler økonomi samt tidsplan til 3D-modellen) gør at, brugen
af BIM er med til, i hvert fald teoretisk om ikke andet, at mindske hvor meget det betyder
at der kommer projektændringer."
22:53; "BIM ændrer ikke på om man har brug for at lave projektændringer, så meget
tænker jeg, men lige så meget at man kan se hvad det betyder. Dog kan man så sige
at ved at man har BIM og ved at man projektere, altså man projektere meget mere på
forhånd, så kan man også hurtigere lave forskellige forslag, lave forskellige versioner."
26:04; "Du kan godt lave nogle ændringer der er fordi at lave nogle ændringer så det
koster mere at lave byggeriet, men du får så et byggeri der er det mere værd."
27:39; "Når man har tid til at projektere færdigt, så er det jo bare lige pludselig at man
har, så er det lige pludselig der det hele bliver interessant, fordi så har vi bare nogle mu-
ligheder. Fordi så er det vi kan lave kollisionskontrol, så er det vi kan lave bygningsanalyse
og alle de her ting, så vi overhovedet kan sikre os at tingene kan bygges."
34.19; "Igen om det vitterligt lige nøjagtigt bekendtgørelserne der har været skyld i det
eller at det er nogle professionelle bygherre eller nogle professionelle bygherre organisa-
tioner der har fået noget ud af det her det skal jeg ikke kunne sige."
47:44; ”Jo mere samarbejde vi kan få ind, jo bedre.”
61
==PAGE:65==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
F
Interview - Sweco
Interviewer: Kamma Christensen
Interviewpersoner: Jacob Güldner (IKT-chef for Vest, som pt tæller Jylland)
Dato for interview: 18. maj 2018
Resume
Interviewet starter med at Jacob Güldner fortæller om sig selv og hvad hans rolle hos
Sweco er. Han er IKT-chef, og er med i tilbudsfasen, og sørger for at de rigtige mennesker
bliver tilknyttet projektet, derudover er han en gang imellem med senere, hvis der opstår
noget uventet.
Selve produkterne er der fuld fart på, da teknologien ikke rigtigt er blevet bremset. Dette
skyldes blandt andet, at man kigger til andre brancher for at ﬁnde inspiration til, hvordan
denne type teknolgi kan bruges inden for eget felt. Der hvor den bliver bremset er i og
med, at byggebranchen er rimelig konservativ, og derfor ikke nødvendigvis er så hurtig til
at tage teknologien til sig. Derudover bliver ﬁrmaerne stadig målt på deres tegninger og
ikke deres modeller, hvilket heller ikke hjælper på at BIM og 3D-modeller bliver taget ind.
Alle deres projekter bliver kørt op i 3D, og de bruger disse modeller til at samle så meget
information, dog kan det være at der er nogle små projekter, som er startet i 2D og derfor
fortsætter i det. Dog har de ikke længere folk til at lave tingene i 2D, og derfor har de
ikke rigtig nogle projekter der bruger det.
VR er noget de har haft brugt i nogle år nu, dog er det stadig ikke meget brugt. Der hvor
Sweco bruger det er i forbindelse med installationerne til at tjekke om, der er plads nok
rundt omkring disse, så der er mulighed for at lave opsyn på det, men at de stadig tager
så lidt plads som muligt, således at der er ﬂere kvadratmeter til beboelse. Derudover giver
det værdi at vise det til deres kunder, således at de kan opleve deres byggeri tidligere i
projektet.
VR er et rigtig godt værktøj til kommunikation, da det er betydeligt lettere at kommu-
nikere løsninger, idet kunden oplever løsningerne fremfor at rådgiverne skal prøve at stå
og forklare hvordan det kommer til at se ud.
62
==PAGE:66==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
Da det stadig er nye værktøjer kan det være rigtig svært at måle på, om det gør en forskel
i og med, at det ikke alle der har taget det til sig endnu. Det er dog noget Sweco er ved
at afprøve på nuværende tidspunkt.
Formålet med klassiﬁcering er at binde projektmaterialet sammen, hvilket giver rigtig god
mening på et overordnet plan. Dog er problemet med klassiﬁcering, at det kan være svært
at bruge på byggepladsen, da det sjældent giver god mening. Derfor kan det muligvis give
mening, at indføre ﬂere klassiﬁkationssystemer undervejs i projektet således, der kommer
en sammenhæng i materialet, således det givne klassiﬁkationssystem kan bruges af dem
det er tiltænkt.
De bruger klassiﬁkation til mængdeudtræk, dog er det et spørgsmål om balance hvornår
der skal klassiﬁceres i forhold til hvornår fagbetegnelser bruges. Sweco gør det således
at alle dele får tildelt en fagbetegnelse, som folk på byggepladsen kan forstå, og derefter
laver en "omregningstabel" fra disse til klassiﬁkationerne.
Et af problemerne ved klassiﬁcering er, at der ﬁndes så mange forskellige systemer, hvilket
resultere i meget opsætning og uddannelse for ﬁrmaerne, hver gang de skal starte et pro-
jekt. Sweco anbefaler at bruge CCS, da den overordnede kode bare informerer om at
det fx er en væg. Det har ingen betydning om det er en inder- eller ydervæg, da det
er information man først tillægger væggen bagefter. Hvilket betyder man nemmere kan
inddele denne i forhold til fx. BIM7AA og SfB.
Et af problemerne ved BIM er den manglende forståelse for programmerne og disses kun-
nen. En vigtig ting at huske er, at programmerne kun er så kloge, som de personer der
benytter dem. Programmerne kan fx godt lave kollisions check, men derfor er der stadig
noget faglighed der skal ind hvis man oplever at der er kollisioner. Programmerne kan
hjælpe er ved at gøre tingene hurtigere end hvad vi selv kan gøre, men de kan ikke træﬀe
beslutningerne, den kan give muligheder og sandsynligheder.
Projektændringer er typisk et større problem når der er brugergrupper med, da de ofte
har nogle ændringer de synes skal laves, nogle gange kommer de bare sent i processen.
Dog forekommer de altid i større eller mindre grad. Digitaliseringerne er en hjælp i disse
tilfælde da man hurtigt kan se hvilke omkostninger der vil komme ved at lave en ændring.
63
==PAGE:67==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
I byggeriet, fordi der er mange forskellige faggrupper, kræver det at alle får alt med, da
hvis en misser en ting eller laver en fejl, kan der give bølger igennem resten af projektet. I
dette tilfælde kan man ikke gøre det store. Derfor er det vigtigste at man kommer godt fra
start. Jacob Güldner tror på at omkostningerne fra projektændringer er blevet mindre,
dog har han svært ved at sætte en ﬁnger på hvorfor. Han tror det muligvis skyldes man er
blevet mere opmærksomme på kommunikationen igennem hele projektet, og få alle med
så tidligt som muligt.
I starten kører man på et mere overordnet plan, da det er en begrænset viden man har på
det tidspunkt. Dog kan nogle af de store linjer, som størrelse på byggeriet og lignede, godt
opfanges tidligere hvilket har resulteret i at bygherre har et bedre billede af sit byggeri.
En af de store udfordringer er som nævnt tidligere at styre brugergrupperne på de store
projekter, da de typisk har mange forskellige krav til byggeriet, hvilket kan være svært
at stoppet rettidigt. Dette er der dog mere fokus på inden for selve projektledelsen af
projekterne og faciliteringen af dette.
Det er typisk artikterne der giver ﬂere udkast til hvordan bygningen kan komme til at se
ud, således bygherre kan lave et mere begrundet valg, inden selve byggeriet starter. Sweco
laver typisk energisimuleringer baseret på bygherres ønsker, således bygherre kan se hvad
der sker ved fx at tilvælge solafskærmning på bygningen.
Hver gang de laver et projekt bliver der lavet en IKT-aftale, da det er vigtigt at alle in-
volverende i projektet er enige, og arbejder efter samme standard. Nogle gange ses højere
og knap så værdi skabene krav fra bygherre, hvor Sweco så går i dialog omkring hvad der
realt skabet værdi i dette projekt.
Jacob Güldner mener helt bestemt at IKT’en har hjulpet på at teknologien er blevet mere
udbredt. Dette skyldes blandt andet at den har været med til at deﬁnere studieretninger,
og dermed sørge for at de nyuddannet kommer ud i branchen med en viden om forståelse
for BIM-værktøjerne. Derudover har den hjulpet med at deﬁnere en fælles standard for
alle. Han ser yderligere gerne at der kommer endnu ﬂere retningslinjer med i IKT’en,
deriblandt hvilket klassiﬁkationssystem man skal bruge, da dette har været med tidligere
men blev fjernet, da det system der var deﬁneret slet ikke var klar.
Citater
64
==PAGE:68==
Master thesis
Kamma Christensen
5:32; "Det handler i bund og grund nok om at få ophævet denne tegning til en model og
placeret den i hjertet af projektet, så det er den der kommer i centrum."
11:16; "Det er forholdsvis nyt så vi har rigtig ikke kunne måle noget på så at sige om det
er blevet bedre eller ej osv."
19:44; "Det er vigtig at forstå at de programmer vi bruger ikke er et hak klogere end os
selv i forhold til det input vi giver."
23:11; "Spørgsmålet er så hvor hurtig man er til at gribe dem (Red: projektændringerne)
og håndtere dem, så det ikke vælter noget. Og man stadigvæk kan holde tidsplanen og
der giver digitaliseringen også nogle fordele, så man hurtigt kan komme ind og se hvad
betyder det her."
26:43; "For kunden er det et fantastisk værktøj at de har mulighed for at tage stilling til
de store emner inden selve byggeriet."
35:58; "Det skal man endelig ikke undervurdere det har jo også været med til at deﬁnere
studieretningen på de forskellige uddannelser, for hvad det er de skal lære og arbejde med.
Og når de dumper ud i virksomhederne så tager de jo den viden med sig"
65
