==PAGE:1==
FUNCTIONALITY OF
SUNDHEDSPLATFORMEN ASSESSED
AMONG DOCTORS IN AN AMBULATORY
Student:
Mia Reﬀs s112828
DTU Supervisor:
Peter Jacobsen
External Supervisor:
Lene Kim Strandbygaard
Master’s Thesis
June 29, 2018
DTU Management
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The objectives for Sundhedsplatformen are deﬁned on a strate-
gic level, which makes it hard to compare the progress on an op-
erational level, since hospital-, centre- and department managers
have been responsible for applying the tool as intended.
The doctors’ work in Sundhedsplatformen were observed with a
LEAN standardization approach, to learn how the new applica-
tions systematically are applied in practice, and which gains are
perceived so far. Additionally the LEAN tools "process map" and
"value stream map" are used to investigate interaction among
clinicians, work ﬂow and value-/waste-causing activities. Finally
the "work system method" is applied to gain a comprehensive
view on factors aﬀecting the work system, during introduction
of a new IT-system. It is thereby evaluated how working proce-
dures in the operational level of a surgical department have been
aﬀected and beneﬁted from the objectives deﬁned for Sundhed-
splatformen.
It was found that the work practices followed a standardized
pattern to some extent, though challenged by factors as commu-
nication, confusion and interruptions.
The mean documentation and overall time spend in Sundhed-
splatformen were respectively 21.2% and 52.7% of the total con-
sultation time. These numbers did not deviate remarkably from
similar studies.
Overall the objectives for Sundhedsplatformen is partial met,
though there is still a lack of integrated functionality in SP, a need
operational adaptation to new work routines and EHR functions.
i
==PAGE:3==
Resumé
Målsætninger for Sundhedsplatformen er deﬁneret på strate-
gisk niveau, hvilket gør det svært at måle fremgangen på det op-
erationelle niveau, hvor ledelsen på hospitaler, centre og afdelinger
selv er ansvarlige for at anvende det nye værktøj efter hensigten.
Lægernes arbejde med Sundhedsplatformen blev observeret i en
LEAN standardiserings-kontekst, for at opnå viden om hvor-
dan de nye funktioner systematisk anvendes i praksis, og hvilken
gevinst der er opnået indtil nu. Derudover blev LEAN-værktøjerne
"process map" og "value stream map" anvendt til at under-
søge samspillet mellem klinikere, arbejdsgangene og værdi-/spild-
skabende aktiviteter.
Til sidst blev "work system method" anvendt, for at få et om-
fattende overblik, over de faktorer, der påvirker hele systemet i
løbet af indførelsen af et nyt IT-system. Det kan hjælpe til at
afklare hvordan de kliniske arbejdsgange på en kirurgisk afdeling
er påvirket og eventuelt har draget fordel af de målsætninger der
er sat for Sundhedsplatformen.
Et standardiseret mønster viste sig for de observerede arbe-
jdsgange, dog med udfordringer ved kommunikation, tilfælde af
forvirring og forstyrrelser.
Den gennemsnitlige tid brugt på dokumentation er 21.2% og den
samlede tid i Sundhedsplatformen 52.7% af den totale konsul-
tationstid. Disse tal er ikke markant højere end resultater fra
lignende studier har vist.
Overordnet er målene for Sundhedsplatformen delvist nået, men
nogle funktionaliteter er stadig ikke integreret. På operationelt
niveau er arbejdsgangene og de nye funktioner i Sundhedsplat-
formen ikke helt indarbejdet endnu.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Peter Jakobsen. He has given me the
freedom to steer direction of this thesis within boundaries of trust, respect
and ever available guidance, for this I am very grateful.
A huge thank you to both Peter, the censor & Lene; for reading head over
heels through this thesis prior to the day of defence.
Furthermore, a big reward goes to Lene Kim Strandbygaard, my external
supervisorhuman from CIMT, for allowing me to do my thesis in this highly
coveted ﬁeld, and for being the person who always know someone who knows
the answer for my questions.
It has been a pleasure to work with your
professional approach regarding the clinicians and Sundhedsplatformen, not
to mention your "everything-is-possible-attitude".
The surgical case department of Rigshospitalet is also granted a thankful
thought for showing me the conﬁdence to observe consultations and working
procedures in Sundhedsplatformen, forming the foundation for the analysis
of this thesis.
Finally a thank you to my small family, Benedikte and Christian, for all
the welcome and unwelcome interruptions allowing me to empty my brain
during the work, and for endless cheering and pep-talks.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
I
Introduction
1
1
Introducing IT in Healthcare and Sundhedsplatformen
1
1.1
Introducing the course of content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Research questions
4
3
What is an electronic health record?
5
4
The politics of Danish Healthcare
6
5
Objectives of Sundhedsplatformen
9
5.1
Investing in Sundhedsplatformen
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
Sundhedsplatformen - the machinery . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2.1
Work ﬂow during a consultation in the ambulatory . .
17
5.2.2
Applications of relevance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6
A complex public organization
19
6.1
Complex communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.2
Surgical department case description . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
II
Methods
24
7
Methodology
24
7.1
Literature approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7.2
Observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7.3
Qualitative data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
III
Analysis & Literature
29
8
Standardizing Work with Healthcare IT
29
8.1
What and why standardize? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8.2
Is standardization for robots? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8.3
Anticipation among clinicians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
9
Process map
36
iv
==PAGE:6==
10 Value Stream Mapping
46
10.1 Deﬁnition of Waste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
10.2 What does patients actually value? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
10.3 Categorizing activities in Sundhedsplatformen . . . . . . . . .
50
10.4 Value Stream Maps of Case Consultancies . . . . . . . . . . .
51
11 Work System Method
58
11.1 Level two, First step - Applying WSM . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
11.1.1 Problems and Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
11.1.2 Factors inﬂuencing the proposed challenges and oppor-
tunities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
11.1.3 The Work System Snapshot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
11.2 Second step, Level two - Applying WSM . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
11.2.1 Customers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
11.2.2 Service and Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
11.2.3 Work Practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
11.2.4 Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
11.2.5 Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
11.2.6 Technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
11.2.7 Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
11.2.8 Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
11.2.9 Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
11.2.10The work system as a part of the great picture
. . . .
71
IV
Results
72
12 Summary of Findings
72
12.1 Objectives and beneﬁts of SP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
12.2 Standardization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
12.3 Process Map
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
12.4 Value Stream Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
12.5 A ﬁnal look on value (and waste) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
12.6 Work System Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
V
Discussion & Conclusion
80
13 Discussion
80
13.1 Standardization with Sundhedsplatformen . . . . . . . . . . .
80
v
==PAGE:7==
13.2 Process Map
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
13.3 Value Stream Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
13.4 Work System Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
13.5 Final remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
14 Conclusion
85
References
94
Appendix
95
A Appendix
95
B Appendix
97
C Appendix
98
D Appendix
100
E Appendix
101
F Appendix
102
G Appendix
103
H Appendix
104
I
Appendix
105
J
Appendix
107
K Appendix
121
L
Appendix
122
vi
==PAGE:8==
Part I
Introduction
1
Introducing IT in Healthcare and Sundhedsplat-
formen
Looking into how electronic health records can improve quality of care and
patient safety has been investigated extensively[1, p. 1].
Implementing a
new healthcare information system, intends to improve work ﬂows, improve
management of healthcare data and patient safety also causing reduced
expenses[2, p. 260].
Another purpose when implementing an electronic
health record(EHR) is that patients should not have to tell the doctor their
entire course of illness for every consultation.
An EHR will provide the
needed information, allowing the doctor to go through the disease course
prior to the consultation[3, p. 3].
Contrary to the above mentioned beneﬁts, Pascale Carayon states that im-
plementation of an EHR will cause changed work practices for the clinicians
and increased documentation time[4, p. 10]. Another study showed that the
time doctors spend with the patient is decreased 38.9% of the doctors’ total
work time[5, p. 378]. The study by P. Carayon et.al found that implementa-
tion of an EHR increased the documentation time with 40-55%. The same
study stated that the mean time spend on reviewing the patient record was
14% of the total time[4, p. 9]. The increased time needed for documenta-
tion after implementing an EHR was also conﬁrmed by Andy Podgurski,
who found the time of documentation to increase up till 28%, which did not
reduce, even though the doctors got familiar with the EHR application[6,
p. 22].
These studies give the incentive to ask how Sundhedsplatformen, the elec-
tronic health record(EHR) implemented in public hospitals at Zealand, has
aﬀected the doctors’ work.
In the Capital Region and Region Zealand Sundhedsplatformen is imple-
mented as an overall EHR, replacing up to 30 outworn systems[7]. Sundhed-
splatformen is purchased, created and implemented according to the national
strategy within healthcare, aiming to digitize the patient record in one single
system, both to improve eﬃciency of work, safety and continuity of treat-
ment, but also to empower the patient[8, p. 35],[9, p. 4],[10, p. 10],[11, p. 6].
1
==PAGE:9==
A set of indicators has been deﬁned to measure whether the objectives for
Sundhedsplatformen, and thereby also for the national strategy has been
achieved. The indicators are to be used by hospital management who are
responsible for the implementation of Sundhedsplatformen in practice[12,
p. 3-5].
It is therefore interesting to investigate if the aims of these indicators has
been met. To do so, the ambulatory of a surgical department has been used
as case, where 11 consultations are observed. The observed work carried out
by doctors, is compared to the set of indicators, and the overall objectives
for Sundhedsplatformen.
The investigation is motivated by a massive resistance and media coverage,
where many doctors complain about Sundhedsplatformen. The system is
accused for increased documentation time, and not having improved treat-
ment of the patient[13, p. 3]. According to Flemming Pless(deputy chairman
in the Health Counsil(Sundhedsudvalget), there is a tendency to resist the
increased requirement for documentation, which is caused by incomplete
communication and education[14]. Oppositely Andy Podgurski emphasizes
that clinicians must learn to be proﬁcient with the EHR, and that imple-
mentation of an EHR might change work practices extensively[6, p. 22].
Along with Sundhedsplatformen came a major change in working proce-
dures, due to a need for standardization across all public hospitals in Re-
gion Zealand and the Capital Region[8, p. 6]. The standardization across
hospitals is intended to improve eﬃciency in work procedures and patient
safety[15],[16, p. 60].
These contradictions motivates to investigate how Sundhedsplatformen has
aﬀected the doctors and their work procedures to follow a more standardized
work pattern.
1.1
Introducing the course of content
The thesis will elucidate the above described topics with an introductory lit-
erature study within the general ﬁeld of EHRs and the application. Thereby
it will be investigated how the national goals within healthcare have shaped
the objectives for Sundhedsplatformen. A thorough description of the ob-
jectives will follow, and thereby a look into the organizational scope of this
thesis.
According to Manos et.al. LEAN can be applied in a healthcare setting to
evaluate and optimize processes. If the LEAN standardization approach is
2
==PAGE:10==
applied, eﬃciency will be improved, since the employees will be trained in the
way of work[17, p. 26]. It will therefore be investigated how standardization
of work practices is applied in Sundhedsplatformen. The work practices in
the surgical case department will be assessed, to learn if Sundhedsplatformen
caused the work to follow a standardized framework.
Thereby a study on the LEAN tools, "process map" and "value stream map-
ping", applied in healthcare settings will be carried out, to set the scene for
the subsequent analysis. An analysis of the work practice and interaction
among clinicians will be carried out for three selected consultations. Subse-
quently an assessment of time distribution and value-/waste-causing activi-
ties will be conducted.
When a comprehensive overview is carried out, the "work system method"
is applied to evaluate how people, IT and processes interact during the work
with Sundhedsplatformen.
This method helps to assess other sources of
challenges and opportunities in the progress toward the objectives for Sund-
hedsplatformen.
Results from the above mentioned analyses are gathered, and comprise the
foundation for discussion of similar studies and the ﬁndings of this thesis.
Finally, a conclusion emphasize if the objectives for Sundhedsplatformen
among doctors in the ambulatory for the surgical case department are met,
which is also the main research question presented in the next section.
3
==PAGE:11==
2
Research questions
An overall research question is deﬁned and four supplementary questions
are asked to delimit the problem and bring speciﬁc answers for the topic of
research.
• What are the planned beneﬁts and objectives of Sundhedsplatformen,
and can an eﬀect on the doctors’ work in an ambulatory setting be
found?
1. What does the term standardization mean in a LEAN context, and how
has Sundhedsplatformen contributed to standardization of the doctor’s
work in the ambulatory?
2. How is the work process in Sundhedsplatformen during consultations
in a surgical department, and how do clinicians collaborate to carry
out the necessary tasks?
3. What deﬁnes value in a healthcare setting and how does a value stream
map look for consultations in the case?
4. How can the work system method be applied to provide an overview of
challenges and opportunities related to the use of Sundhedsplatformen
in an ambulatory setting of the surgical department case?
4
==PAGE:12==
3
What is an electronic health record?
To assess the eﬀects of an electronic health record, it is relevant to know what
deﬁnes such a system. After evaluating a number of scientiﬁc articles cover-
ing the subject, it has become clear that diﬀerent expressions for electronic
health records are used interchangeable. A couple to mention are electronic
medical record(EMR), computer-based patient record(CPR), computerized
patient record (also abbreviated CPR), electronic patient record(EPR), vir-
tual patient record(VPR) and electronic health record(EHR). It is found that
the deﬁnition covers more or less the same deﬁnition, namely a computer-
ized patient record that aims to reduce cost[18]. During this thesis the term
electronic health record will be used when referring to Sundhedsplatformen,
though "patient record" or "health record" will also be used as short-cuts.
A general and more comprehensive deﬁnition used to describe an electronic
health record is a platform providing access to real-time data about pa-
tients and with the ability to support clinicians in decision-making based
on best practices. The EHR-deﬁnition is according to Giuseppe Aceto et.al.
restricted to application in healthcare delivery organizations and for the pur-
pose of documenting, monitoring and managing healthcare[19, p. 132]. An-
other deﬁnition by Kamila Smolij and Kim Dun emphasizes that an EHR is a
system ensuring conﬁdentiality of the patients data which might include med-
ical history, vital indicators, allergies, laboratory data and progress notes[20,
p. 132].
Morten Hertzum and Jesper Simonsen states in a conference paper that the
general term "EHR" is a plastic open-ended system that must be continu-
ally conﬁgured to meet the needs of each department. It is therefore hard to
make an exact deﬁnition of an EHR, since it depends on the customization
preferably carried out by every single department[21].
A number of attributes can be listed so summarize the functionality of an
EHR-system applying to Sundhedsplatformen:
• EHR’s are exclusively applied in healthcare settings
• Provide access to real time data
• Assist clinicians in decision making based on best practices
• Ensure conﬁdentiality about patient data
• Patient data includes, but are not limited to: medical history, vital
indicators, allergies, laboratory data and progess notes
5
==PAGE:13==
• Can be adapted and improved on a simultaneous basis
4
The politics of Danish Healthcare
Numerous of political reports and action plans have been created to steer the
course of how the healthcare sector is about to develop[8, p. 35],[9, p. 4],[10,
p. 10],[11, p. 6]. This piece of text aims to illustrate that only minor changes
to the healthcare objectives on a national level have occurred during time. It
will be seen that the foundation for Sundhedsplatformn was formed several
years ago.
Back in 1993 the Danish Health Authority suggested that a clinical qual-
ity database-system was established for all medical specialities with the
objective of making data-based decisions to improve quality in healthcare.
This was the seed for the data-driven management, which today constitutes
the bottom of Sundhedsplatformen. Until 2000, 57 diﬀerent clinical quality
databases were established, and the plan was still to increase the number[11,
p. 16].
Several editions of "The National Strategy for IT in the healthcare sector",
composed by Danish Health Authority, has been reviewed, to gain an im-
pression of the strategy development during the years. The strategy-plans
provide coherent descriptions of goals and projects in healthcare, and in ta-
ble 1 a gathered overview of the strategic goals can be found. Starting from
2000 to the current strategy lasting till 2022. The goals are categorized after
subjects, which are deﬁned broadly and covers: "quality", "user satisfac-
tion", "continuity", "digitalization" and "eﬃcient use of resources".
Additional subjects are included, and can be divided in the following topics
after weight(the number stated in parenthesis indicates how many reports
the topic are mentioned in):
• "Prevention and minimal risk for patient"(3)
• "Better information and communication"(2)
• "Priority"(1)
• "Good management"(1)
• "Action"(1)
6
==PAGE:14==
It will be seen that the goals are in line with the objectives of Sundhedsplat-
formen, which will be evaluated in section 5.
It should be noted that the table contains both "IT-strategies within health-
care" for several periods, but also strategies from "The national quality
program"[23] and "National Strategy for quality development in healthcare"[11],
to give a full overview of the strategic development in the ﬁeld of healthcare.
When "high quality", "continuity" and "digitalization" are mentioned in
the diﬀerent strategy plans, the word standardization is unavoidable[8, p. 6].
Standardization was particularly emphasized in 1999, when the Danish Health
Authority entailed the following point in the IT-strategy:
"An important prerequisite for an EHR to contribute to obtain the general
objectives is some level of standardization. Standardization is important be-
cause a uniform structure of data-content is a prerequisite for sharing and
exchanging data between various IT-systems, integration of systems and for
data to be applied in all relevant purposes, including clinical research and
development of quality"[8, p. 6]
It is also stated that standardization will provide improved quality in the
daily work for clinicians and to increased eﬃciency and patient safety[15],[16,
p. 60]. A list of safety procedures was in 2002 implemented at many medical
departments, but the action plan required further development of a standard-
ized way of working, to ensure a thorough high level of safety[11, p. 20-21].
Standardizing working procedures will lead clinicians to produce structured
data in the patient record; an application to be integrated in Sundhedsplat-
formen. The objective of collecting structured data is included in the "The
National Strategy for Quality Development in Healthcare 2002-2006".
It
was described how an EHR should replace the numerous individual quality
databases. The objective was to collect large amounts of data, turn it into
information and thereby make qualiﬁed decisions to increase quality of treat-
ment. The strategy plan predicted that the collection and validation of data
would require a change in working procedures among clinicians, and that a
great management challenge lay ahead of implementing a new information
technology. Apart from managers, the implementation of a new EHR would
require a great amount of resources, but it would beneﬁt in the end, in form
of better patient safety and more continuity for each patient’s healthcare
plan. It was also foreseen that a new EHR would open up for new collabo-
rative opportunities among clinicians, patients and relatives[11, p. 16].
7
==PAGE:15==
Table 1: A gathered overview of IT-strategies in the health-sector from 2000-2022. All subjects of the strategies
have been sorted and the ﬁve upper rows indicate similarity across the strategies, which are roughly divided in
"quality", "user satisfaction", "continuity", "digitalization" and "eﬃciency".
The last two rows contain other
strategic areas that has been proclaimed. The message of this table is that the strategic foundation for an EHR
system was founded long time ago.
2000-2007
[8, p. 35],
[9, p. 4]
2002-2006
[11, p. 6]
2008-2012
[10, p. 10]
2013-2017
[22, p. 4]
2015-2018
[23, p. 4]
2018-2022
[24, p. 18]
Quality High medical and
treatment quality
High professional
standard
Quality, research
and learning
Improved visibility regarding
results and quality, carried by
systematic data-utility
User
satis-
faction
High user satisfaction High patient
satisfaction
Empowering
the patient
Health to the
citizen in
new ways
Continuity in
treatment
courses with
an empowered
patient
The citizen as
an active player
Contin-
uity
Continuity in
the patient
course
Continuity
supported by safe
communication
Continuity in
patient courses
Progress and common
building blocks
Digitali-
zation
Digital working
procedures and
processes
Faith in safety
and data
Eﬃ-
ciency
Eﬃcient utilization
of resources
Eﬀective utili-
zation of
resources
Eﬃcient
utilization of
resources
Improved utilization
of data
Reduce cost per
treated patient by
investing in future
Other
Minimal risk
for the patient
Prevention and
treatment
Priority, action
and visibility
Good management in
all levels of the
healthcare setting
Knowledge on
time
Other
Better information
about service
and quality
Prevention
8
==PAGE:16==
A shift from aiming to obtain clinical quality data to obtaining what is called
patient reported information(DK: patient rapporterede oplysninger) - PRO-
data has happened in the most recent IT-strategy report. A quote from the
plan "National strategy for digitalization of healthcare sector 2018-2022"
emphasize that data and patient empowerment shall be combined:
"PRO-data provides a new and strong data foundation for research, quality
improvement and the work with new managing models in healthcare. Applied
correctly, PRO-data will be as relevant for quality of treatment as clinical
data. The value of PRO-data should therefore be considered coherently with
clinical data"[24, p. 22]
Including the patient in data-collection is a way to empower the patient in
the medical process, and a way to increase both patient safety and satisfac-
tion, since the patient will be able to examine all his/her personal health
information[25, p. 7].
After reviewing the content of the strategy plans, it can be seen that the
strategies are partially streamlined upon the same topics, though an increas-
ing focus on data and digitalization can be found. Additionally the focus on
the patient has went from "User satisfaction" till "Patient empowerment".
Repeatedly the action plans get back to the importance of data-collection,
and the opportunity of data-driven management. It is anticipated that cor-
rectly deﬁned indicators will allow the managers to see if the desired progress
is achieved, and if not, where to turn attention for further optimization[23,
p. 4].
The national goals form the foundation for the objectives deﬁned for Sund-
hedsplatformen, which will be assessed during next section.
5
Objectives of Sundhedsplatformen
From the beginning of planning for a new EHRs it has been clear that the
change not only included a new IT-system, but it would bring new ways
of performing work, aiming for better treatment and more room for patient
needs and desires[26, p. 22],[7, p. 1].
Structural changes and change of working procedures while also having to
handle a new IT-system is a major challenge for the users, in this case
9
==PAGE:17==
clinicians[27, p. 246]. Steven Alter said the following about implementing
IT-systems to organizations:
"The software is part of a system, just as lungs are a part of a human being.
We all need lungs and feel better if our lungs are operating well, but that
doesn’t mean that every discussion of human endeavours need to focus on
lungs"[28, p. 4]
This quote tallies with the objectives of Sundhedsplatformen, since it is not
only about changing the software in hospitals. SP could easily have been de-
signed to do nothing else than replace the old numerous systems in one new
and gathered system. But that was not the purpose. The purpose was to
oblige the strategic goals set for healthcare within IT as discussed in section4.
Figure 1 indicate the three major goals, derived from the national
strategy of healthcare in Denmark, and which beneﬁts a success-
ful implementation will bring. The stated objectives and gains are
deﬁned on a strategic level, and the focus during this thesis will
be to evaluate if the goals are fulﬁlled in the operational level. A
surgical case department has been used as representative for the
"operational level" during the research. A single department is not
representative across the two regions, but it can pose an indicator
for the achievements until now.
The objectives of implementing a new EHR in the two regions will now be
reviewed in order to reach a foundation for comparing the actual in-situ work
in a hospital department.
The following information is obtained via an internal powerpoint presenta-
tion where relevant slides can be found in appendix A, interview with Lene
Kim Strandbygaard and sources:[7],[29].
Empower patient and ensure continuity in treatment courses
The MinSundhedsplatform-application allows the patient to involve in his/her
treatment course, by following all information and also having the opportu-
nity to book consultations, ask questions for the doctor and ﬁll out surveys
with health information. Access to personal data will urge the patient to get
a better understanding of his/her illness and treatment and thereby enforce
patient empowerment[30, p. 110].
10
==PAGE:18==
Figure 1: Illustrates the objectives for Sundhedsplatformen, derived from
the National Strategic Goals within Healthcare, and the gains to be expected
by the hospitals after implementing a new EHR. The ﬁgure indicates that
the objectives are stated in a strategic level, and that a research of a case
department on operational level is conducted at Rigshospitalet to evaluate
if the gains are realised.
11
==PAGE:19==
Another example supporting the continuity in treatment courses is that the
documentation in the patient record is written in a standardized way. Tem-
plates for the notes have been created, to minimize the amount of free
text.
During hospitalization the doctor is asked to ﬁll a survey-like re-
port about the patient, which intends to reduce risk of errors in the patient
record[31],[32, p. 317].
Improve eﬃciency of clinical processes and working procedures
The doctors will be oﬀered easier prescription, by using predeﬁned "pack-
ages" of examinations or medicine-sets suited for a row of speciﬁc diagnoses[33],[12].
Another feature of the EHR is the decision support, for example advising a
recommended treatment for selected diagnoses, providing a warning in case
of allergies noted in the record or a wrong dose of medicine prescribed.
Eﬃciency will also be improved in long term patient courses, since the doc-
tor has a historical and coherent overview of the patient information, and
thereby the best foundation for decision making.
The collection of all patient information in one system provides also the op-
portunity to draw reports, and thereby replace a number of diﬀerent quality
databases. The collection and utilization of data can provide knowledge to
assist managers in decision making and optimization of work[25, p. 7].
Increased patient- and employee satisfaction
SP has replaced up till 30 outworn systems, and made it easier for employees
to navigate in functions as medication, documentation, booking of surgery,
blood samples and other tests. At the same time the operational stability is
improved, reducing break downs and thereby increasing satisfaction for the
users.
Increased patient satisfaction is expected due to the increased coherence
in treatment courses, and the involvement of patients in their own disease
course supported by MinSundhedsplatform.
The slogan for Sundhedsplatformen: "One patient, one record", indicates
focus on the individual patient, while optimizing the use of resources. Gitte
Fangel, Program director for Sundhedsplatformen, emphasizes that the three
major changes in her perspective will be the empowerment of the patient, the
real-time structured documentation done in collaboration with the patient
and the utilization of real time data to improve management[25, p. 7].
12
==PAGE:20==
To reach the goal of the objectives standardization across hospitals is highly
important, but due to the dimension of this project, it is only possible to
evaluate a minor part of the organization, which reduces to an ambulatory
of a surgical department at Rigshospitalet. The stated objectives will be
compared to the current state of work, to give an impression of the progress.
A number of indicators has been deﬁned to measure the beneﬁts of im-
plementing Sundhedsplatformen. Indicators related to the ambulatory care
setting has been out-pinned and accentuated and can be found in page 14.
The content in the table is translated from Danish to English, but contains
only information from Sundhedsplatformens "Driftsmålskatalog for gevin-
strealisering i forbindelse med Sundhedsplatformen"[12].
13
==PAGE:21==
Indicators applied in the ambulatory
Operational gains of implementing SP
1.2
Improved quality in patient treatment 
because the doctor sees the sample results 
on time for ambulant patients
Calculation:
(number of results for ambulatory patients seen in 
1 weekday) / (number of results for ambulatory 
patients recieved in 1 week day) * 100
No data available, though trouble 
with InBasket might confuse this 
indicator.
obj:
Increased patient safmty
Effective clinical process
Reduction in paraclinical examinations
1.10
Application of best./ord. sets in general
Calculation:
(number of ordinations via a best./ord.-set) / 
(number of ordinations in total) * 100
Not	  implemented	  yet
obj:
Standardized	  treatment	  a1er	  
clinical	  guidelines
Improved medication process
Fewer in-bed-days per course
Fewer ambulant consultations per course
Efﬁcient clinical planning
2.1
Creation of booking packages
Calculation:
Number of booking packages
Not	  implemented	  yet
obj:
Fewer ambulant consultations per course
Eﬃcient	  u8liza8on	  of	  resources
Improved patient experience
2.2
Application of booking packages
Calculation:
Number of booked consultations via booking 
packages compared to number of consultations in 
total.
Not	  implemented	  yet
obj:
Fewer ambulant consultations per course
Eﬃcient	  u8liza8on	  of	  resources
Improved patient experience
2.3
Fewer “no-shows” in the ambulatory
Calculation:
(number	  of	  “no-­‐shows”)	  /	  (total	  number	  
of	  consulta8on)	  *	  100
No	  data	  available
obj:
Eﬃcient	  u8liza8on	  of	  resources
2.7
The doctors makes orders electronically by 
him/herself
Calculation:
(number	  of	  orders	  conducted	  by	  the	  
doctor)	  /	  (total	  number	  of	  orders	  in	  a	  
department)	  *	  100
The	  doctor	  made	  orders	  by	  
him/herself	  during	  the	  
observed	  consulta8ons
obj:
Effective clinical process
Efﬁcient work in the record
Fewer in-bed-days per course
3.1
Patients make bookings themselves via 
MinSundhedsplatform
Calculation:
(Number	  of	  ambulant	  consulta8ons	  
booked	  by	  pa8ents)	  /	  (total	  number	  of	  
ambulant	  consulta8ons)	  *	  100
Not	  implemented	  yet
obj:
Improved patient experience
Eﬃcient	  u8liza8on	  of	  resources
3.2
Hand out of “tickets” to allow patients book 
their own consultation
Calculation:
(number	  of	  “8ckets	  handed	  out)	  /	  (total	  
number	  of	  pa8ents	  in	  the	  ambulatory)	  *	  
100
Not	  implemented	  yet
obj:
Improved patient experience
Eﬃcient	  u8liza8on	  of	  resources
3.3
Response time on inquiries in 
MinSundhedsplatform
Calculation:
(Number	  of	  answered	  inquiries	  within	  
three	  week	  days)	  /	  number	  of	  total	  
inquiries)	  *	  100
Not	  implemented	  yet
obj:
Improved patient experience
Eﬃcient	  u8liza8on	  of	  resources
Fewer ambulant consultations per course
Effective clinical process
14
==PAGE:22==
From the table of indicators(table in page 14) it is found that only two indica-
tors are relevant for this thesis, since the remaining functionalities/indicators
have not been implemented yet. The relevant indicators are 1.2 and 2.7.
1.2 says "Improved quality in patient treatment because the doctor sees the
sample results on time for ambulant patients". This indicator is measured by
a report from "InBasket". InBasket corresponds to a mailbox where doctors
receive sample- and experimental results. The intention is that the doctor
signs all the results, and to meet the aim of indicator 1.2 it should be done
within one weekday. When the doctor signs samples in Inbasket the samples
are automatically registered as seen in the relevant patient record. The chal-
lenge is that the doctors are not using InBasket yet, but waits to sign the
samples until the consultation. When the sample is signed via the patient
record, it will not automatically be signed in InBasket, which causes invalid
data for the indicatorG.
2.7 says "The doctors make orders electronically by him/herself ". This is
the only indicator that seem to work properly, and can be measured at the
time of this thesis. Unfortunately it was not possible to obtain data on the
indicator, therefore it was noticed during the observations to what extend
the doctors manually did the orders.
After reviewing the table in page 14, it is found that the indicators cannot
be applied in the case of this thesis, due to applications that have not been
implemented yet or due to lack of data. Therefore this thesis will aim to
compare the observed case consultations via a thorough analysis.
5.1
Investing in Sundhedsplatformen
Back in 2012 the new EHR-system was put out to tender for Region Zealand
and the Capital Region.
In total 17 hospitals, 44.000 employees and 2.5
million citizens would be aﬀected by the new EHR[34].
The procurement phase lasted for two years where eight potential suppliers
of the new EHR was reduced to three. The three, IBM, Epic and Cerner
Ireland went through an evaluation where 500 clinicians voted about sug-
gested functionality, working procedures and user experience, see ﬁgure 2.
The American IT-company Epic was chosen to deliver the new EHR and
meet the 1600 requirements deﬁned for the new system.
Epic is special-
ized within EHR’s, and have designed solutions to more than 1100 hospitals
worldwide[35].
15
==PAGE:23==
During the design of Sundhedsplatformen, 264 clinicians were stationed to
create applications in SP, and thereby design the required functionality. 420
clinical specialists were allocated on a half time basis to validate the created
content and functionality. Apart from the clinicians allocated to build and
design, numerous of clinicians was educated as superusers, meaning they
became specialists in applying Sundhedsplatformen, with intention to guide
and assist clinical colleagues in the practical use of Sundhedsplatformen dur-
ing the implementation.
In Denmark Sundhedsplatformen was implemented at the ﬁrst hospital in
May 2016, and the last during November 2017[36]. The 1st of January 2018
the implementation phase was considered to be at an end, and Sundhed-
splatformen went into an operational stage managed by CIMT[34].
Figure 2: The picture is borrowed from Gitte Fangels presentation "Imple-
mentering af Sundhedsplatformen"[33, p. 8], where a group of clinicians is
gathered to vote about the design of working procedures for the draft of
Sundhedsplatformen.
5.2
Sundhedsplatformen - the machinery
A complex machinery, a cockpit, a mess, high-tech is just a few descriptions
of Sundhedsplatformen. This section aims to give a more speciﬁc view of the
system.
The structure of Sundhedsplatformen can visually be described as two sys-
tems of three pillars each. One system is action driven and contains a pillar
for respectively doctors, nurses and secretaries. The second system is more
structural and divided in the ambulant care setting, hospitalization care set-
ting and the "best./ord."-part(which enables all samples, tests, cases and
medicine prescriptions). An overview of the pillars can be seen in ﬁgure 3.
16
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3: A simplistic view of the pillar structure in Sundhedsplatformen.
The doctors, nurses and secretaries can perform tasks in the three structural
pillars(ambulatory, hospitalization and best./ord.), but only limited interac-
tion is possible across the columns, i.e. nurse and secretary or hospitalization
and ambulatory. Best./ord. deviates since it can be seen as a layer which
can be utilized in the ambulatory and in the hospitalization setting.
A major challenge for the clinicians is the missing link to the colleagues’ in-
terface in SP, which looks diﬀerent for each of the three types of clinician[31].
Likewise diﬀerent ways of working in SP depends whether it is an ambulatory
or hospitalization setting, but this particular challenge will not be assessed
during this thesis. The focus is therefore on doctors in an ambulatory set-
ting, the work ﬂow and related functionalities that will be assessed during
this thesis. Relevant functionalities will be reviewed below in section .
5.2.1
Work ﬂow during a consultation in the ambulatory
For a common ambulatory consultation more pillars of ﬁgure 3 are involved;
the secretary creates the patient contact from the redirection received from
the family doctor. Next the secretary books a consultation and sends it to
both the patient and registers it in the schedule of the doctor and nurse. Prior
to the consultation, the secretary registers the patient arrival in SP. By that
time the doctor and nurse might have reviewed the patient record and the
patient is invited to the consultation room. The consultation is initiated in
Sundhedsplatformen where the doctor updates the patient history according
to medicine, diagnosis and general health. Subsequently, the examination is
17
==PAGE:25==
carried out, which is documented in SP either simultaneous or subsequently.
When the medical examination is over, the conclusion can be documented in
the record. Thereby relevant orders and transcriptions of new a consultation,
surgery, medicine or something else is ordered via the best./ord.-module.
The ﬁnal resume(epikrise) is send to the family doctor, in order to share the
progress in the treatment course. That makes the end of the consultation,
and the patient can return to the secretary to book a new consultation time,
if that is the case.
Either simultaneously or afterwards the nurse assists with documenting the
examination, updates patient diagnosis and reports the SKS-codes in order
to make an invoice for the consultation.
5.2.2
Applications of relevance
Prefrences, packages and Best./ord.-sets: When examinations, surg-
eries or consultations are ordered, the doctor can choose from a list of avail-
able resources, and to avoid mistakes and confusion, a list of preferences can
be created to keep the doctor from examining a long list for every order.
Another function is the design of sets of medicine. For some diagnoses sev-
eral medications are prescribed as a standard, and to improve the working
procedure of the doctor, these medications are gathered in a set. In this
way the doctor only has to make one prescription, instead of the number of
medications that is included in the set. The use of sets is also stated as an
indicator at page 14.
Documentation: Before SP the doctor made oral dictations for the docu-
mentation, which is now made as written notes. Mostly, a template can be
pasted in the patient record, to ease the working procedure so the doctor
has to write as little free text as possible.
The template generate struc-
tured data when the doctor is allowed to choose from a couple of pre-deﬁned
formulations from drop-down-menus during the template.
Sample- and Examination results: InBasket has the interface of a mail-
system where sample results and messages are received. The intention is
that the doctor signs for the sample results in InBasket, which will also be
visible in the patient’s health record. An indicator is designed to evaluate if
the sample results are signed within one weekday. Though InBasket is not
used as intended and the doctor signs for the sample via the patient record
instead, which thereby makes the indicator unreliable, since the approval is
not automatically transferred to InBasket.
18
==PAGE:26==
MinSundhedsplatform: This application is a patient interface where the
patient currently is allowed to review his/her health record.
It was also
meant to provide opportunity of writing to the doctor, book a consultation
and answer surveys about the current health condition(PRO-data). These
functionalities are not integrated yet, but it is expected that they will be
part of the new update SP2018 released the 3rd of November[37].
This was a review of a selection of functionalities and challenges which will
be assessed during this thesis.
6
A complex public organization
It is challenging to implement a one-size-ﬁts-all solution with a new IT-
system aﬀecting more than 44.000 clinicians, covering two regions and a
number of individual hospitals, centres and departments. In this section the
most important parties of the thesis will be described, but ﬁrst a brief intro-
duction to the scoped organization.
For simpliﬁcation, the organizational scope has been delimited to cover the
areas that will be discussed during this thesis. An organizational network is
depicted in ﬁgure 4. Each group in the ﬁgure is described further below.
• EPIC: Epic is the supplier of Sundhedsplatformen, responsible for sup-
port, training of superusers and implementation(among many other
tasks).
• Regional board (Regionsråddet): each of the ﬁve regions in Denmark
has a council, constituting elected people making decisions for each
region. For this case the Regional Boards of Capital Region and Region
Zealand collaborates to decide on the objectives for regional hospitals,
so they are in line with the national strategy within healthcare.
• CIMT(centre for IT, medico and telephony, Capital Region): a broad
and extensive department responsible for IT within healthcare in the
Captial Region. Several sub-departments is covered within CIMT, fx
Sundhedsplatformen.
• Sundhedsplatformen: As a sub-department of CIMT everything men-
tioned here will also be a part of CIMT. Included are the Clinicians’
Helpdesk, clinical builders, Sundhedsplatformen Training Course and
19
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4: The diagram contains a relational illustration of the parties men-
tioned during this thesis. A comprehensive description of each unit is stated
in the text. Due to the scope of this project the clinicians, especially the doc-
tors are in focus, and as illustrated in the ﬁgure they are in touch with many
diﬀerent units. Patients are marked with a thin relation to Sundhedsplatfor-
men, due to the functionality targeted patient use via MinSundhedsplatform.
20
==PAGE:28==
the clinical IT consultants(KIK) who assists clinicians with challenges
occurring in SP.
• Hospitals: in this case Rigshospitalet will be in focus, despite numer-
ous of other hospitals are covered by Sundhedsplatformen. Rigshos-
pitalet has an agreement with a number of students, known as black
scouts(sorte spejdere) who assist clinicians with technical problems in
SP.
• Clinics: Rigshospitalet covers a number of clinics which in practice
could resemble individual hospitals within diﬀerent ﬁelds of medicine.
• Departments: In each clinic a number of departments are included
covering the medical specialities within the particular medicine ﬁeld.
• Department managers: each department has a head doctor, head nurse
and head secretary responsible for the daily operations of the depart-
ment.
• Clinicians: includes doctors, nurses, secretaries in this thesis, but in
practice others might also be entailed in this category; laboratory tech-
nicians, researchers etc.
• SP-project manager: a resource person among the clinicians who takes
care of problems experienced in Sundhedsplatformen by communicat-
ing it to the right people from Sundhedsplatformen.
• SP-key-people(SP-nøglepersoner): these people are clinicians special-
ized in the use of SP, dedicated to assist colleagues in the use of SP.
During the implementation phase they were named SuperUsers, but
after turning into the operational phase, they are known under this
title.
• Patients: are relevant in this context since they can access information
in MinSundhedsplatform, and in future also add information.
• Clinical builders: can edit applications in SP on departmental level.
These are often doctors who work 50% of the time in the hospital and
50% of the time as builders.
• Health Professional Council(sundhedsfaglige råd): clinical management,
e.g. head nurses and head doctors from the same medical speciality
across hospitals. They gather to discuss actions, measures and new
initiatives across their ﬁeld.
21
==PAGE:29==
After this inexhaustible list of participants, the organizational scope of this
thesis is set.
6.1
Complex communication
In prolongation of the organizational overview, it makes sense to talk about
communication channels, since targeting the right people with the right
(amount of) information at the right time is of major importance[38, p. 44].
Prior to the implementation, clinicians were oﬀered to participate in infor-
mation meetings, to prepare for and demystify the pending change. Apart
from that, local communication about Sundhedsplatformen happens in the
department, via SP project managers and Superusers. Managers who are
part of the Health Professional Council did information meetings to discus
priorities of action.
Individual hospitals arranged go-home meetings to inform about SP and
those who did not participate, could follow via the intranet and newsletters
send out via email. And last but not least all clinicians have to join the
SP training course, where they are taught to use SP in the correct way. E-
learning prior to the training course was available, and could also be used
after accomplishing the training course.
22
==PAGE:30==
6.2
Surgical department case description
The case is narrowed to the ambulatory for a single surgical department
in the Abdominal Centre, where only the doctors’ working procedures are
included. The limitation of the scope allows to assess a decent level of details.
The department is located in Rigshospitalet, and have consented to purvey
information with proviso of conﬁdentiality in this thesis.
The case surgical department of this thesis is relevant because the working
procedures have aﬃnity with other surgical departments.
The chosen department impinges over all pillars in ﬁgure 3, and comprises
during a normal day six specialized nurses in the ambulatory, two specialized
doctors, a reserve doctor, a project nurse and a secretary.
Consultations in the ambulatory covers pre-examination of 45 minutes du-
ration, continual consultations and post-controls of 30 minutes duration.
During an ambulatory consultation several medical examinations might be
carried out, such as measures of blood pressure, examination with stetho-
scope, ultrasonic scans and assessment of the general health situation.
During the visit in the ambulatory, it was learned that great attention has
been put to the implementation of Sundhedsplatformen. Margit Roed He-
man, leading head nurse, who has had a strong position during the imple-
mentation of SP states that:
"I have emphasized the importance of following the intended working proce-
dures strictly, since we really want it to work, and it might beneﬁt a more
smooth implementation and help us gain the data we need.” - (appendix I)
The case observations are therefore focused to see if the intended aims of
implementing SP have beneﬁted in the actual work. To address this ques-
tion, the standardized working procedures are evaluated, and the value of
performing each action is assessed. The ambulatory setting of doctors work-
ing procedures are considered in a work system analysis to dig deeper into
other factors that might aﬀect the use of Sundhedsplatformen.
23
==PAGE:31==
Part II
Methods
7
Methodology
This section will evaluate the methods applied during the thesis which is also
illustrated in ﬁgure 5. The literature studies provides a foundation for the
analysis of the observed work. The results from each box will be gathered
an subsequently discussed in relation to similar studies, in order to conclude
on the ﬁndings of this thesis.
Figure 5: Process illustration of applied methods
7.1
Literature approach
To gain an academic foundation for assessing the research questions intro-
duced in section 2, a literature search was carried out. For the information
search the following databases are used: DTU FindIt, Scopus and Web of
Science.
Literature on Sundhedsplatformen At DTU FindIt a search for "Sund-
hedsplatformen" gave 16 hits, and a good impression on what have been
written so far. To gain a broader international overview a block search(da:
bloksøgning) was carried out, to investigate existing studies about how elec-
tronic health records have aﬀected doctors work.
A block search consists of a number of relevant search words, and relevant
synonyms if a word is covered by several terms. It can also be used to in-
crease the number of search results if the number of hits is limited. Figure 6
24
==PAGE:32==
illustrates the initial block search, which gave 40 hits, when the time frame
is restricted to 2010-2018.
Figure 6: Illustration of block search yielding 40 results via ﬁndit.dtu.dk.
Another applied approach is chain search, where references from the original
article are investigated. In this way supplementary research within a topic
can be obtained.
Literature on LEAN tools
A search for books about LEAN in healthcare was conducted, and com-
posed the foundation for knowledge about LEAN tools.
Subsequently a
block search was carried out for the fundamental knowledge about electronic
health records, and for each of the LEAN tools; standardization, value stream
mapping and process maps, all in relation to healthcare. When one or more
relevant articles was found, a chain search(da: kædesøgning) was used to
identify more relevant articles. Furthermore the Web of Science database of-
fers the possibility of searching in related records, which can be used to ﬁnd
newer articles that cite the originally found "mother article". This strategy
ensures articles with a great number of citations, which to some extend is a
validation of the content.
Literature on the work system method
This ﬁeld was investigated in the speciﬁc context of Sundhedsplatformen,
and limited information was found. The references of relevant articles was
therefore assessed, and the book named "the work system method" has pro-
vided the framework for the analysis[28].
25
==PAGE:33==
7.2
Observations
The aim of making observations, is to understand the practical context of
doctors’ working procedures, identify value, and assess which EHR-challenges
are aﬀecting the clinicians and the patients. Observations are carried out
during doctors’ training with SP and during ambulatory consultations.
Sundhedsplatformen Training Courses
To ensure a smooth implementation a training course in the application of
Sundhedsplatformen is provided to all 44.000 clinicians. Around the training
center illustrations are decorating the walls and communicating the change
strategy and progress to the course participants. The set-up can be seen in
ﬁgure 7.
Figure 7: Illustration of Sundhedsplatformen Education Center and sur-
roundings located in Gentofte.
The SP training course was joined as a part of the observations for this
thesis, ﬁrstly to get a brief introduction to Sundhedsplatformen, but also to
examine the prerequisites doctors are equipped with prior to the usage of
the new EHR.
The course was parted as the pillars of Sundhedsplatformen in ﬁgure 3. The
doctors’ course for respectively the ambulatory and the hospitalization, cov-
ering a day each, was followed.
The classes entailed a short introduction to each topic, followed by practical
exercises carried out with the help of a very detailed step-by-step manual.
The manual was based on the new standardized working procedures, and
26
==PAGE:34==
aimed to familiarize the doctor with the use of SP during various work ex-
amples.
Observations
The case observations in the surgical department at Righospitalet aim to
gain insight in working procedures in a delimited part of the application of
Sundhedsplatformen.
To assess the working procedure for doctors in the
ambulatory, observations were carried out during two days. Consultations
with three diﬀerent doctors were observed to gain insight in the variance
of work. The observation was conducted with a watch and notation pro-
gram at hand, to register the time for each activity, which is needed for
the value stream map. Two diﬀerent types of ambulant consultations were
observed, the initialising visit where the patient is redirected from another
healthcare institution(duration 45 min), and a follow-up examination, either
post-operational or as a monitoring of the patient’s development(duration
30 min).
7.3
Qualitative data
To understand the challenges of SP the persuasion of doctors are highly
relevant to assess, therefore a short questionnaire was made. Additionally
several clinicians uttered their opinion during the observations or interviews.
Questionnaire
During the SP training course a minor questionnaire about standardization
was handed out to the participating doctors, covering anticipations about
working routines with Sundhedsplatformen. Nine doctors answered the ques-
tionnaire and provided a hint of the general feeling about standardization(the
questionnaire with results can be seen in appendix C).
Interview
When appropriate during consultations and after consultations, contextual
interviews was conducted. The contextual interview allows the observer to
act as a trainee, and to ask questions in the context of work. A contextual
interview provides the ability to identify which processes are expedient and
which are impractical. The ability to see the system with the eyes of a doc-
tor makes the analysis closer to reality, since functions meant for a certain
27
==PAGE:35==
solution might seem to work diﬀerent in practical use.
Apart from the contextual interview in the ambulatory, a semi-structured in-
terview was carried out with the leading head nurse, who has worked closely
with implementation of Sundhedsplatformen in the surgical department. The
interview concerned how information ﬂows in the organization, and which
initiatives had been done to improve implementation both concerning Sund-
hedsplatformens applications and management.
Supervisory assistance for the thesis
To remain on track with the analysis of the chosen working procedures, Lene
Kim Strandbygaard guided and assisted in collecting relevant internal infor-
mation, such as manuals, plan of actions and an overview of the proposed
beneﬁts realisation(Da: gevinstrealisering)[39]. Notes from meetings with
Lene can be found in appendix G.
28
==PAGE:36==
Part III
Analysis & Literature
8
Standardizing Work with Healthcare IT
Implementing a new EHR is challenging to the clinicians, and getting into
the routine of new working routines can be stressful and time consuming for
the clinicians[40, p. 1132]. The importance of ﬁnding and establishing good
working procedures early in the process is therefore highly important[41,
p. 502-503].
Deciding how work practices are most eﬃcient can be diﬃcult, since it de-
pends on the setting. Adler-Milstein found that larger healthcare settings
were more potential to beneﬁt from an EHR-system with set work practices,
since less coordination among the clinicians would be needed[42, p. 350].
A general demand for implementing and beneﬁting from EHR-systems was
the motivation for setting up a $2 billion price in USA, to be shared among
healthcare providers who implemented a new EHR and demonstrated "mean-
ingful use" of the new EHR[1],[43, p. 382]. The term "meaningful use" refers
to a list of objectives and indicators the hospitals must comply with, to re-
ceive the "money-reward" for accomplishing "meaningful use". The list of
objectives and indicators is set, and from that point it was up to the hospital
managers to adapt the EHR to reach the objectives[44, p. 502-503].
Before implementing Sundhedsplatformen in Region Zealand and the Cap-
ital Region, various work practices across hospitals existed, and according
to Gitte Fangel, the program director, there was a need for streamlining
the treatment practices. A streamlined work practice would be beneﬁcial
for both patients’ safety and the new EHR. Therefore standardized working
procedures were incorporated into Sundhedsplatformen[45].
The "Surgery Package"(DK: Kirurgi-pakken), is a Danish example of a check
list to improve working procedures and thereby patient safety implemented
back in 2014. Practices to reduce surgery-caused infections, mortality and
re-hospitalizations was relying on evidence-based research[46]. The ability
to gather data and improve work practices on evidence based research is
another argument of standardizing work procedures with Sundhedsplatfor-
men. The structured data can then be utilized to assist doctors in decision
making[45].
29
==PAGE:37==
Progeny of standardized healthcare - the political perspective
Considering the political aims listed in section 4, standardizing working pro-
cedures of the clinicians, especially the doctors, will add to the patient safety
and bring a more eﬃcient utilization of resources.
Gitte Fangel, Program Director at Sundhedsplatformen, has outlined the
beneﬁts and disadvantages of standardization[33]. In ﬁgure 2 the academic,
political, economic and technical circumstances are listed in relation to stan-
dardization.
Table 2:
The table is translated and thereby borrowed from Gitte
Fangel’s presentation about "Implementing Sundhedsplatformen" page 9,
which describes the opportunities and limitations of standardizing working
procedures[33].
Advantage
Disadvantage
Political
Equal treatment across
communities
Limited respect for patient
and doctors autonomy
Economic
Cheapest, most eﬃcient
treatment
Diﬀerent preferences among
(almost) equal treatment
opportunities
Technical
Opportunity of automatic data
processing and support on
decision making
Variation in available
competences and resources
Academic
Evidence, quality surveillance,
aspects of patient safety
Missing evidence,
variation across communities
By allowing patients to follow their own data via the application "Min-
Sundhedsplatform", it is intended to provide all with equal knowledge and
ownership of their disease course. Though the entire functionality of "Min-
Sundhedsplatform" has not been implemented yet, according to Margit Roed
Heman(appendix I). It is a time demanding process to change the mentality
of patients, and to make them aware that they have the right to take their
own decisions, guided by the doctor’s knowledge[47, p. 227].
After looking into the political opportunities of standardization, a closer look
at the meaning of "standardization" is necessary, and will be assessed in the
next part.
30
==PAGE:38==
8.1
What and why standardize?
Mark Graban stated the deﬁnition of standardization as: "The current one
best way to safely complete an activity with the proper outcome and the high-
est quality, using the fewest possible resources"[48, p. 67]. The deﬁnition
implies by saying "proper outcome and the highest quality" that a proper
question to ask regarding working procedures is: "Would standardizing this
process improve quality for patients, doctors, the hospital and/or other em-
ployees?". When planning for a standardization, it should therefore be con-
sidered how much time the process will demand, to keep the desired level of
quality without overburdening the employees. The quote also indicates that
standardization requires actions to be completed, it is thereby not enough to
have a written manual about the intended working procedure.
8.2
Is standardization for robots?
The deﬁnition of standardization seem to entail one correct way to per-
form work. Mark Graban states that standardization can entail actions of
"critical importance", which might be performed in a speciﬁc way to work
properly[48, p. 69]. For the case of Sundhedsplatformen ordering examina-
tions and specimens or ordination of medicine(DK: best./ord.) is of critical
importance to ensure the correct course of treatment[31]. Likewise, other
activities can be diﬀerentiated in "important" and "less important" actions,
which allows the employees to have a certain degree of freedom in the exe-
cution of actions, without aﬀecting the quality or ﬁnal outcome.
In ﬁgure 8, an overview of the standardized working procedure is illustrated.
Each box and related tasks are elaborated in the following bull-its, with
information obtained from sources: [49],[31].
• Yellow: The three upper boxes relate to the review of the patient
records. Only the third box "review journal" is used during the anal-
ysis, since it is assumed that the doctor is already logged on SP, and
that the patient is found as a part of the "review". These boxes are im-
portant for the doctor to gain prerequisites for welcoming the patient
with enough knowledge to ask relevant questions about the disease.
• Light blue: "Update patient history" entails update of diagnose(and
medical prescriptions) in the patient history.
31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 8: The ﬁgure is inspired by "Tip Sheet - Ambulant besøg", which is
the click-guide providing information about each step during an ambulant
consultation[49].
The order of boxes is an illustration of the standardized working procedure as
it is intended to be. The ﬂow-illustration is meant to guide doctors through
Sundhedsplatformen during an ambulant consultation. The ﬁgure will be a
reference for the further analysis of observations, where color codes will be
repeated as the same actions.
32
==PAGE:40==
• Orange: "Document examination" a task where the nurse often assist
the doctor, since she performed a part of the examination and ensured
pictures to be saved in the patient record as documentation. The tab
called "vurderingsskema" is essential in this block and ﬁlled by the
doctor. Here goes measures as blood pressure, blood samples etc..
• Azure: this box shares similarity with the orange, but says: "Write
note in journal". In order to gain structured data for quality improve-
ment, templates are used as an attempt to standardize the patient
record/journal documentation, though there is still room for the doc-
tors to write free text.
• Red: This box illustrates an action of critical importance: "Orders and
redirections(best./ord.)". If orders are not carried out correctly, the or-
dination can go to another hospital, be a wrong examination, a wrong
dose or the like with potential hazardous consequences. Therefore stan-
dardization of tasks entailed in this box, is of particular importance for
the clinicians to understand, especially because the "Best./ord." sys-
tem is a massive collection of all available orders and cases, which can
make it hard to select the exact one.
• Green: This is the documentation send to the family doctor and poten-
tially other secondary clinicians. It is called "Letter and other external
information", which includes the so called "epikrise", the response to
the patient’s family doctor.
• Purple: "End consultation" is quite essential to the entire process,
since the patient record cannot be edited by others until the doctor
has ended and signed the consultation.
After elaborating on the tasks, it should be emphasized that the best./ord.
is of major importance for the prescriptions to get right. It can seem over-
whelming for the clinicians since all available orders across all hospitals can
be found in the system. Furthermore it is found that getting the doctors to
do structured data in the journal(azure box) is challenging for the doctors.
A further assessment of the work practices will be carried out during section 9
33
==PAGE:41==
8.3
Anticipation among clinicians
When asking clinicians about standardization in a healthcare setting, most
of them turn pale and tired or heating red and angry. During a questionnaire
nine doctors were asked: "Do you think your colleagues prefer to follow a
standardized ﬂow in SP?", of which eight replied "No" and one did not
answer. The next question was "Which of the following opportunities would
you prefer, if you experience a challenge with SP?", and the doctors had to
chose among three predeﬁned answers:
(3) Search for an answer for my self
(5) Ask a colleague
(1) Ask someone else, who? (IT-department)
Each number in front of the answers indicate the number of replies. The full
questionnaire and replies can be found in appendix C.
The replies in overall indicate that the meaning of "standardization" may be
obscure to the surveyed clinicians. Standardization means to gather the best
or most eﬃcient actions, and make them the habit in a working procedure.
The aim is to help the employees make decisions in situations where ques-
tions arise as: "what should I do next?" or "how do I solve this problem".
When employees do not have to make numerous of those decisions every
day, but work from a standard instructing them what to do in predeﬁned
common cases, they will tend to be less stressed and mentally exhausted.
And by saving mental energy the employees will be better prepared to take
decisions when uncommon situations occur[48, p. 70].
Standardization is therefore not a mean of repeating identical actions in and
out everyday, but a guideline for how to make everyday decisions in the most
optimal way. As discussed previously standardization can be distinguished
in diﬀerent levels of detail, and since some variation will almost always be
left to the employee. Clinicians will never be displaced with a robot unable
to make decisions during uncommon situations[48, p. 71]. Furthermore the
established work routines are decided on by a group of clinicians who ﬁgured
the best practice for speciﬁc tasks, and should therefore be suitable in the
hospital-setting[45].
When most of the surveyed doctors answer they would prefer to ask a col-
league about a challenge in SP, but they will not work after a standardized
set of activities, it seems remarkably that the colleagues’ answer should be
34
==PAGE:42==
more trustworthy than a veriﬁed solution to the same question.
Understanding the objective and beneﬁts of change in work is crucial, if a
group of employees should be convinced to obtain a standardized set of ac-
tivities. People in general tend to fall back into old routines, if they do not
have a fair reason to change[48, p. 76].
The surveyed doctors have not yet been exposed to the standardized working
routines, since they were about to enter the SP training course. They are
therefore unbiased considering the actual application of standardized work-
ing routines, though they might have been interpreted by news and word of
mouth opinions.
Despite the missing espousal of standardization, the surveyed doctors in-
dicated in the replies that some cases would beneﬁt from standardization,
for example: surgeries, acute patient care, resuscitation, ordination of com-
monly used blood samples, medicine and "pain packages". A doctor also
commented: "In case of patient safety is standardization good, and also in
case of research and data collection, but for the individual patient, standard-
ization is bad"(Appendix C). These ﬁndings lead back to the deﬁnition of
"standardization", and the fact that it is a relative term with potential of
leaving variation for the individual.
35
==PAGE:43==
9
Process map
Assessing healthcare settings with LEAN tools can provide the opportunity
to increase quality of care, improve patient safety and lower cost, due to a
superior lucidity of every action by knowing its duration and objective in the
setting[50, p. 4].
A process map is commonly used to illustrate the course of a product through
a row of actions. The traced "product" for this case is the "patient’s informa-
tion", ﬂoating through the system, as the doctor carries out a row of actions
in SP. Since the focus lies on the doctor’s interaction with Sundhedsplatfor-
men, the commonly known process-map-tool is adapted to ﬁt the case where
the patient normally would have been the "product".
The map will be designed continually, though duration of each activity is
not represented. The map is divided by a stippled line, indicating when the
patient is present(front-oﬃce) and when the doctor works alone in SP(back-
oﬃce). Emphasis is thereby put to the physical presence of the patient and
the doctor’s interaction with the EHR during the consultation. The simulta-
neous health record documentation is a new way of working and might aﬀect
the patient-doctor-relationship[51, p. 129].
Looking for the truth of a process
In section 8, a description of the idealized standard working procedure of an
ambulatory consultation can be found, leading to an interpretation of how
the working procedure is carried out in practice. The author of "Lean Hos-
pitals: Improving Quality, Patient Safety, and Employee Satisfaction" Mark
Graban[48, p. 49] emphasizes the importance of assessing the process to ob-
tain a realistic view on the process. He divides the awareness of processes
in:
• "How the process should be"
• "How we think the process is"
• "How it actually is"
Obtaining an honest impression of a working procedure can only be achieved
by getting out in the ﬁeld and doing systematic observations.
To follow the mindset of Mark Graban, the intended order of activities is vi-
sualized in ﬁgure 8, and accounts for the part: "how the process should be".
36
==PAGE:44==
Figure 9: Illustration of the process map for the working procedures as they
are intended to be. Nurse and secretary tasks are grey since they are not
the primary focus.
37
==PAGE:45==
The ﬁgure is in line with the standardization of ambulant consultations, im-
plemented in thread with objectives of Sundhedsplatformen.
Based on ﬁgure 8, a process map is created "as it should be" if we assume
the routines are implemented to perfection in practice, see ﬁgure 9.
To gain an impression about "how we think it is" a group of physicians has
been asked about the standardized working procedures in SP. The survey
was conducted among the doctors participating in the SP training course.
The nine participants were asked:
"Do you believe that consultations can be standardized?" Out of nine, seven
answered "No", and two answered"Yes". Most doctors elaborated that stan-
dardization in a treatment context is not possible, due to the high variation
of individualism. The quotes from the doctors were:
• "No doctor or patient is the same"
• "Patients are diﬀerent, and individualisation should be possi-
ble"
• "Too many individualists"
• "Not every patient can follow a ﬂow chart"
• "Only in some cases"
• "Patients are diﬀerent and standardization can lead to loss of
important knowledge"
Few people believe that every consultation is actually that standardized, and
during the implementation of SP, several clinicians have reported that SP
working procedures were arduous and time consuming[52]. These remarks
have formed the incentive to sift through the working procedures.
To assess "how the process actually is", observations were carried out during
11 consultations in the ambulatory of the surgical case department. From the
observations carried out in the surgical department setting it became obvious
that the consultations in practice are more complicated. A high deviation
among the 11 consultations were observed, and to give an illustration of the
deviation, ﬁgure 10 depict the order of activities of all 11 consultations.
Three consultations are selected for the analysis, since it would be too com-
prehensive to go through all 11 consultations. The three chosen consulta-
tions entail a very long consultation, an average length consultation and a
38
==PAGE:46==
Figure 10:
Order
of
activities
car-
ried out in SP dur-
ing the observed 11
consultations. De-
viation and order
of activities should
be noted.
39
==PAGE:47==
shorter consultation, which can be found in the ﬁgures: 11, 12, 13 and 14.
Common for all four ﬁgures is a separation in "family doctor", "ambulatory
doctor", "the nurse" and "secretary". Arrows illustrate when information is
exchanged among each participant, and an arrow with a vertical line crossing
means that "oﬀ-line"-activities has interrupted the work ﬂow in Sundhed-
splatformen.
Common for the ﬁgures is also a color coded bar in the bottom of the ﬁgure,
indicating the standardized working procedure "as the process should be", to
compare "how it actually is".
When something is remarkable it has been highlighted with a blue back-
ground box, and explained additionally in the corresponding subsection. It
is qualiﬁed that there might be a lack of detail in the nurse-actions, since
focus during the consultations was at the doctor’s application of Sundhed-
splatformen.
Consultation 2
In ﬁgure 11 it can be seen that the doctor initiates the visit by creating the
note(azure box). From the journal review(yellow box) she decided which ex-
amination was needed, and pasted therefore an automatic scheme to the
note for results.
The scheme is directly related to the examination re-
sults(Vurderingsskema), and the doctor can therefore type the results in
vurderingsskema, and it will appear in the note, thereby avoiding double
documentation.
Additionally it is relevant to note the number of interruptions while the doc-
tor is writing the note in the health record, as the doctor changes among
talking to the patient and writing the note(azure box). A lot of re-reading of
what she had already written occurs after each interruption. In the second
azure box three interruptions in the documentation appears, which is very
ineﬀective for the general overview. In the last azure box still in ﬁgure 11,
the doctor decides to clean up the document, by sorting the free text in the
sections integrated in the used template.
During the consultation the nurse and doctor discuss the examination re-
sults, which ensures a common understanding of the diagnose and course of
treatment.
If the progress of the consultation is compared to the standardized proce-
dure(see color codes in the bottom of the ﬁgure), it can be seen that the
medical writing(azure box) is initiated prior to the examination. In this case
it lead to wasted work, since a great part of the record note must be deleted
since results show that a surgery is needed.
A surgery has its own type of note, so it has to be adapted to that kind of
40
==PAGE:48==
note, which is marked with the highlighted blue boxes in the background of
ﬁgure 12. In the end, the doctor signs to end the consultation three times
due to lacking actions. Initially the nurse tells the doctor that she did not
update the diagnose, and the doctor reopens the journal to register it. Af-
ter ending the consultation again the doctor reminds that the family doctor
note(epikrise) should be send, and reopens the patient journal again and
subsequently ends it third and last time.
Consultation 7
The consultation is chosen since it represents an average consultation in
relation to order of activities, interaction with the nurse and the duration.
As in consultation 2, the medical record(azure box) is begun before the
examination results are discovered. According to the standardization, the
order of writing the epikrise(note to the family doctor - green box), and the
order of a new consultation time(red box) is changed. The consultation is
another example of interruptions in the medical record notation.
Consultation 8
Represents a more atypical consultation with a doctor who has found a
middle ground between the new standardization and the old setting. The
duration is short, which according to the doctor is more of a coincidence
than a rule. He has chosen to keep the computer out of the consultation,
and prefers to do the documentation after each consultation, which is also in-
dicated by the dotted line in ﬁgure 14. The space between the lines indicates
the oﬀ-line time/front-oﬃce where the patient is present in the consultation
room. Outside the dotted line, in the back-oﬃce areas the doctor is going
through the documentation solely in his own oﬃce.
The order of the consultation is ﬂawless only exempted by the epikrise(green
box) and order of surgery(red box). Since no examination was required dur-
ing the consultation, no orange box is added to the map. A remarkable issue
about this consultation is the reduced communication between the doctor
and the nurse, which is also indicated in the ﬁgure with a blue box with
question marks.
The fact that the doctor and nurse only communicates
brieﬂy is a source of risk, since misapprehension will be more likely to occur.
After the doctor leaves the consultancy room, the nurse remained present
with the patient, and probably made a brieﬁng about the surgery, and sub-
sequently did the SKS-coding. But all this is only assumptions, which is a
source of risk because there is no obvious agreement about who does what.
Additionally it is likely that the nurse and the doctor registers information
in SP simultaneously which will also cause errors. The importance of com-
munication among clinicians is therefore underpinned with this example.
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure
11:
The
ﬁrst part of consul-
tation 2, which is a
rather long consul-
tation
caused
by
challenges
during
examination
of
the patient.
The
documentation
happened
very
sporadic
during
the
consultation
which
splits
the
doctors
attention
between
the
pa-
tient
and
SP.
It
is
observed
that
the notation(azure
box)
is
initiated
before the exami-
nation results are
present.
42
==PAGE:50==
Figure 12: The
second part of
consultation 2
proceeds to be
rather shuﬄed,
in
compar-
ison
to
the
standardized
working proce-
dure.
Though
it
might
be
caused
by
waiting
time
while
the
patient is ex-
amined by the
nurse,
where
the
doctor
aims to do as
much work as
possible to uti-
lize the time.
Unfortunately
the
result
is
that
a
great
amount of the
note is useless
when the con-
clusion of the
examination is
assessed.
43
==PAGE:51==
Figure
13:
The
consultation
is
a
very
average
consultation
re-
garding
duration,
interaction
with
the
nurse
and
order of activities.
It should be noted
that the notation
in
the
medical
record(azure
box)
again is initiated
prior to the orange
box
embodying
documentation
of
the
medical
examination,
which according to
the
standardized
working procedure
should be carried
out after examin-
ing
the
patient.
Another change of
places is the letter
for
the
family
doctor(green box)
and the order of a
new
consultation
time(red box).
44
==PAGE:52==
Figure 14:
A
rather atypical
consultation
in the setting
of
Sundhed-
splatformen.
The
order
of
activities
is
conventional,
but it should
be noted that
the
consul-
tation
takes
place
front-
oﬃce,
and
the
doctor
is
oﬀ-line
while
seeing
the
patient.
The
documenta-
tion is carried
out
after
the
consultation.
45
==PAGE:53==
10
Value Stream Mapping
To improve value the healthcare setting must be assessed from a patient
point of view, but also the working procedures of clinicians must be car-
ried out eﬃciently for the entire system to survive and thrive[53, p. 1]. The
value stream mapping in this thesis will therefore focus on processes provid-
ing value for the patient, but also for the clinician who might take over the
patient course. Value can also be provided indirectly to patients, when clin-
icians are granted a coherent overview of the patient record, which improves
the continuity leading to increased patient satisfaction.
Cindy Jimmerson describes in "Value Stream Mapping for Healthcare made
easy" how measuring the duration of each and every activity during a con-
sultation, will provide a clear overview of how work is really performed.
Evaluating the duration of each task will help to understand factors aﬀect-
ing the performance of clinicians[54, p. 244]. Collecting data and dividing
all actions in waste or value, will help to gain a picture of the eﬃciency, and
provide a foundation for assessing opportunities of improvement. The order
of actions, repetitions, ﬂow interruptions and the like will be elucidated, and
reveal how the working procedures’ current state actually is[55, p. 29]. The
illustration will make it possible to compare the progress of the current state,
and elucidate the gap between the current state and the objectives deﬁned
for Sundhedsplatformen.
The value ﬂow is an important illustration, but before an illustration can
be conducted, the deﬁnition of what exactly brings value to a process must
be covered. Mark Graban states that the deﬁnition of value should be seen
in the light of the ultimate customer, which for healthcare always will be
the patient. An activity can bring value in relation to the customer(s), or it
can be deﬁned as waste. "Customers" is stated in plural since both primary
and secondary customers can appear in a system. The primary customer is
the patient, but family/friends, other physicians and clinicians constitutes
the secondary customers in this case, since they will also be aﬀected by the
work carried out by the ambulatory doctor in SP. It is therefore important to
look at the activity’s value or waste in relation to both type of customers[56,
p. 775].
46
==PAGE:54==
10.1
Deﬁnition of Waste
The waste-term is divided in groups to distinguish diﬀerent types, and to
make it easier to identify inappropriate activities. The common LEAN waste
types are: overproduction, over-processing, motion, waiting, transportation,
inventory or defect/rework[48]. Since the healthcare sector deviates from a
common production where LEAN might be used, Cindy Jimmerson redeﬁned
the types of waste in her book, to ﬁt into a healthcare setting[55, p. 4]. The
modiﬁed set of waste types entail:
• Confusion: is described as a very time consuming waste type lead-
ing to frustration, errors and loss of worker capacity. Confusion is the
doubt rising from the countless decisions to make in a care setting,
leading to questions as: "What does this mean", "Where do I ﬁnd the
results of..?", "Which case should I choose from the list?" and "What
is the diﬀerence on this and that?". The questions are simpliﬁed exam-
ples from the observations carried out in the surgical case department
with doctor X, Y and Z, see appendix D, E and F . A study by Tucker
and Spear found that questions like these arise in average 8.4 times per
shift[57, p. 650]. The questions demand a great working capacity, es-
pecially if the clinician needs to ask a colleague to proceed, or in cases
where hasted decisions might increase the risk of errors and damage
patient safety.
• Motion/conveyance: covers under normal circumstances all physical
movements inappropriate for the actual purpose. But for the sake of
Sundhedsplatformen movement is not measured, due to diﬃculty of
measuring excess movement across the screen.
• Waiting: is a cumbersome form of waste, leading to frustration, espe-
cially in a stressed hospital environment. The external system FMK(fælles
medicinkort) used to cause a lot of waiting time in Sundhedsplatfor-
men, but has been ﬁxed and does not sink the clinicians further[33,
p. 15]. It is important to note the context of waiting time, since the
patient is exposed to waiting time while the doctor documents and
updates the health record, but it is hard to identify the waiting time
as waste, since it might provide value to the patient in the end.
• Over-processing: insinuates that more actions than required are car-
ried out. This could for example be the situation where the doctor
needs to calculate the increase or decrease in percent, of a blood pres-
47
==PAGE:55==
sure measure. This case was observed in consultations 5 and 10, where
the doctor needed to write the measured blood pressure on a piece
of paper, make the manual calculation on his/her private phone, and
thereby type the result into the SP assessment scheme(DK: vurder-
ingsskema).
• Inventory: An excessive inventory can cause confusion and lacking
overview, which makes it hard to pick the needed item. The counter-
part in Sundhedsplatformen is the massive number of available orders,
medicines and cases that can be chosen in the "Best./ord."-part of
Sundhedsplatformen.
• Defects: should be avoided and at least corrected as fast as possible
when they occur. Errors and defects can appear in a production, as
well as they can appear in a system like Sundhedsplatformen.
• Overproduction: means make a product faster than it is required.
This type of waste is most common in settings where batches of sam-
ples, tests or the like is carried out[17, p. 24]. For Sundhedsplatformen
overproduction can be seen as the case where the doctor starts writing
the health record note(azure boxes) prior to the end of examination.
In cases where the note(azure box) is initiated prior to a diagnose
conclusion, the doctor would have to start over and make a new note
corresponding to the correct diagnose and course of treatment. The
previous work in the record would go as overproduction. This situa-
tion was observed during consultation 2 where the note was initiated
after 4 minutes, and 46 minutes into the consultation, it became clear
that the created note was useless according to the found diagnose, see
ﬁgure for consultation 2 in section 10.4. The ﬁnal result turned out to
demand a surgery, and a change of diagnose, which forced the doctor
to rewrite a great part of the note.
After doing observations during the consultations and identifying waste and
value-creating activities, an indirect form of waste was further observed as
the numerous recurring interruptions. It has been found in a study carried
out by J. Brixey et.al., that interruptions are a major source of risk regarding
errors in healthcare[58, page E27]. An interruption is according to the article
from J. Brixey deﬁned as:
• Communication with a present person, not initiated by the interrupted
clinician
• An event turning the doctor’s attention away from the task at hand
48
==PAGE:56==
• Any action making the doctor loose attention brieﬂy on the subject at
hand, without switching to the new task
From these statements several interruptions can be recognized during the 11
observed consultations. They will be pointed out in section 10.4 about the
value stream maps.
When assessing value in a value stream map, the measure is often cost, but
for healthcare the value measure comes out to other additional factors. The
deﬁnition of value in relation to patients is of particular importance. There-
fore the deﬁnition of patient value must be stated explicitly if quality in a
healthcare setting is to be improved[59, p. 871]. The aim of Sundhedsplat-
formen is by all means to improve eﬃciency in order to reduce cost, but also
to increase value for the patient[7].
10.2
What does patients actually value?
When a value stream is assessed in a hospital with a LEAN perspective,
value is often deﬁned as patient satisfaction and safety[50, p. 3]. Patient sat-
isfaction is also a part of the objectives stated for SP, and therefore relevant
to assess further.
Healthcare staﬀare dedicated with numerous years of education to deliver
the best treatment for patients. In today’s healthcare setting, knowledge
cannot by itself deﬁne quality treatment. Several other factors aﬀect the
patient experience, for example technological possibilities, economic bud-
gets, patient expectations and preferences. And not to mention an increased
number of chronic diseases and co-morbid conditions that make treatment an
interacting puzzle, often with more than one diagnose to handle. Knowledge
about patients’ preferences and values for a treatment is highly relevant for
policy-makers and medical communities, since those factors will aﬀect the
outcome and duration of treatment, but also the patients appreciation of the
received care[59, p. 872].
The American Institute of Medicine has stated six characteristics aﬀecting
patient value, while another institution, the Picker Institute has stated eight
characteristics. Both sets of "value generators" are listed in table 3. Another
qualitative study conducted by Bastemeijer et.al. suggest patient value to be
separated in three overall categories; patient, interaction and professional.
The result of this study, based on more than 12.000 American patient an-
49
==PAGE:57==
swers led to a taxonomy describing patient value as:
"Recognition by professionals of the patient’s uniqueness and autonomy, leads
to the professional behaving compassionate, professional, and responsive, and
creates interaction based on partnership and empowerment"[59, p. 878],[60,
page 7-4].
This deﬁnition and the characteristics in table 3 will be considered when the
patient value is assessed. Optimally each patient of the observed consultation
should have been asked about their experience, but since it was not possible
the value will provided in relation to the doctors’ work.
Table 3: Distinctive characteristics of patient value.
Institute of Medicine
Picker Institute
Bastemeijer
1.
Eﬀective
Respecting patient’s preferences
Autonomy
2.
Patient centered
Coordinated integration of care
Uniqeness
3.
Safe
Information and education
Partnership
4.
Timely
Physical comfort
Empowerment
5.
Eﬃcient
Emotional support
Compassion
6.
Equitable
Involvement of family and
friends
Professionalism
7.
–
Continuity and transition
Responsiveness
8.
–
Access to care
–
The characteristics of patient value can be taken into account, when the it
is assessed if the observations correspond to the SP objectives.
10.3
Categorizing activities in Sundhedsplatformen
After reviewing value and waste generators, a value stream map can be de-
signed, pointing to illustrate the SP working procedure during an ambulatory
consultation.
As it is suggested in "The LEAN Practitioners Handbook", the map can be
made vertically if more people are involved, and diﬀerent stages are part of
the process. The presence of the nurse and patient was illustrated in the
process map, and since suﬃcient data on their respectively activities during
the consultation is not obtained, their presence is omitted from this part.
Though the vertical form is kept to leave space for details about the doctors
50
==PAGE:58==
activities. Each row illustrates one minute, and the description is marked
either green or red, depending whether the activity brings value or waste in
the value stream map starting at page 54.
The working practice in SP has been
discussed in sections 8 and 9, and
the same color codes will be applied
to the value stream map(VSM) for
the sake of transparency.
To catch
up on the meaning of each color,
it is summarized in ﬁgure 15.
The
VSM contains an aspect of time,
to identify how much capacity each
activity covers. In section 10.4 three
value stream map illustrations for
consultation 2, 7 and 8 are created,
to proceed with the consultations also
assessed in section 9.
Figure 15: colors codes used
for each activity in SP.
10.4
Value Stream Maps of Case Consultancies
Measurement of time for the value stream map(VSM) initiates when the
doctor brings his/her attention to the consultation, indicated by 00:01 in
the VSM tables.
Consultation 2
The ﬁrst value stream map(VSM) is spread across two pages due to the long
duration of time; as much as 1 hour and 11 minutes is spend to consult this
patient, estimated to last 45 minutes. During the previous consultation the
doctor starts to review the patient medical record(yellow boxes), illustrated
with the yellow boxes above the grey start line in table 17 at page 53 -
54. Prior to the patient’s arrival the doctor continues to assess the medical
record, and decides to create a notation(azure box) right after ﬁnishing the
record review.
The patient arrives after 5 minutes, and starts to elaborate on the disease,
allowing the doctor to proceed the notation with a new row of information
(azure boxes). It should be emphasized that a row of interruptions pause
51
==PAGE:59==
the writing of notes. A great amount of free text was written, but as the
examination proceeded it became obvious that the patient needed a surgery.
When planning for a surgery, another kind of note is required, and much
of the written text became irrelevant and was therefore deleted, causing a
great amount of waste(overproduction), indicated by a light red background
in the ﬁgure.
Prior to the surgery the doctor needs a new set of blood samples, so the
doctor reviews the journal once again to look for the last set of blood sam-
ples. A win win activity that brings value to the patient since the doctor
aims to reduce the inconvenience of the patient having to deliver new blood
specimens, and aims to reduce the cost for the hospital when making new
analyses of specimens. Though this case required new samples and was or-
dered via the "best./ord." module in SP(01:06). The doctor evinced a bit
of confusion when ordering the surgery, but made a decision about which
one to chose, and relied on the description she made in the note, that the
surgical doctor would understand the need of action. This uncertainty can
be categorized as "confusion-waste" if the surgery doctor do not understand
the type of suggested surgery.
In the end of the consultation(01:08) the doctor seems stressed since she
ends the consultation without updating the diagnosis and without sending
an epikrise(green box) for the family doctor. The result is that she ends the
consultation three times which is a big cause of over-processing waste.
Overall the consultation time spend in SP can be parted in 38% value-
providing activities and 16% wasteful activities(remaining is 46% oﬀ-line
time with the patient). The duration of the consultation depended on the
examination which caused problems and was responsible for the extended
duration.
Consultation 7
Table 18 illustrates the course of consultation 7, where the three ﬁrst min-
utes are spend on reviewing the patient record. When the patient enters
and the consultation is started, the doctors attention is primarily turned to
the patient. Once after a couple of minutes the doctor turns attention to
Sundhedsplatformen, to check the patient’s physical progress comparing to
previous consultations. After asking a set of questions the doctor creates a
note to start documenting the examination, but interrupts quickly to partic-
ipate in examination of the patient. After examination free text is written,
with a couple of interruptions to talk to the nurse. After 16 minutes the
doctor starts to document the examination(orange box), but experiences an
error after a couple of minutes. It becomes obvious that the error is caused
52
==PAGE:60==
Figure 16: Part one of two - description is found in part two.
53
==PAGE:61==
Figure 17: Review of the patient record is initiated during the previous
consultation illustrated by the boxes above the grey bar in ﬁgure 16. Subse-
quently the doctor continues to review the journal and creates a documen-
tation note as the ﬁrst part of the consultation. Value for the patient and
the next doctor is created when the note is written(azure coloured). Unfor-
tunately the examination results conclude that a surgery is needed, and the
notation is suddenly stated in a wrong template. Therefore a lot of text is
deleted resulting in over production-waste.
It is value creating when the doctor easily can check the date of the most
recent blood specimens in the patient record(00:55 min). Eventually some
over-processing waste is caused by the three iterations of ending the consul-
tation, see explanation in text.
54
==PAGE:62==
by the doctor and nurse registering examination results simultaneously. The
error leads to overproduction, since the doctor has to register the results over
again.
Rest of the consultation runs smooth and brings only value-creating activi-
ties. Overall 7 % of the time accounts for waste, 52% for value and remaining
41% for oﬀ-line consultation time.
Consultation 8
This consultation deviates since the doctor makes the documentation in SP
back-oﬃce. It can be noted that no interruptions occurred during the docu-
mentation, but still 57% of the total consultation time was spend on docu-
mentation. During the work in SP no waste was registered. Though a slight
confusion sneaked in, during the best./ord.(red box) where the doctor had to
choose the needed kind of surgery and location. He was in doubt for a short
while, and then made a decision and kept on with rest of the documentation.
It was hard to follow the documentation of this consultation, since there was
no interaction with the nurse either during the front-oﬃce or back-oﬃce time.
The nurse probably did the SKS-coding and maybe some extra examinations
of the patient. But the doctor consulted the patient, made a decision and
went to document the consultation.
After evaluating the time and value distribution, the last part of the analysis
entails an assessment of surrounding factors aﬀecting the work.
55
==PAGE:63==
Figure 18: The consultation is mostly value providing. The only associated
waste occurs when the doctor and nurse enters information in SP simulta-
neously. Since they performed the documentation front-oﬃce, they became
aware of the mistake and had it corrected, which is an advantage of docu-
menting front-oﬃce. In total 52% of the time is value generating, and 7%
of the time waste generating. Rest of the time is noted as oﬀ-line time, or
patient-doctor-time.
56
==PAGE:64==
Figure 19: A short consultation where documentation is carried out back-
oﬃce.
No waste is registered, but a slight confusion appeared when the
doctor made the best./ord. and needed to ﬁnd the right surgery. Apart
from that the routine in SP worked very well, though it accounted for 57%
of the total consultation time.
57
==PAGE:65==
11
Work System Method
When implementing an electronic record major challenges are likely to be
caused by human, technical and organizational factors[2, p. 261]. It is there-
fore important to evaluate people’s interaction with the technical system,
rather than just focusing on the system itself[61, p. 12]. Steven Alter states
the following about implementing new IT-systems:
"Getting people to use a new system correctly is much harder than getting it
up and running"[28, p. 1].
He describes a tendency to see technology as a Swiss knife for all problems,
assuming that implementation of a new IT-system, is responsible for either
success or failure of a system. It is therefore accentuated that a human and
organizational view on the system must be prioritized.
It can be challenging to implement a coherent system of IT, processes and
people, which must be managed well to make a system function. The Work
System Method is described by Steven Alter, and provides a systematic
approach to assess a system. The method can be applied in various ways
with diﬀerent purposes, and since the scope of this thesis it to evaluate the
doctor’s working procedures in relation to the objectives deﬁned for SP. Level
one only provides a very cursory view of the "System and Problems"(SP).
Next a brief look into "Analysis and Possibilities"(AP) and last a short
assessment of "Recommendations and Justiﬁcations"(RJ). The second level
asks a set of predeﬁned questions within each of the three steps to help assess
all factors of the work system[28, p. 23]. A ﬁgure from the book can be seen
in ﬁgure 20, where the framework for this analysis is depicted. As stated
by Steven Alter, the method can be applied in various ways, and not all
questions have to be applied in all cases[28, p. 30]. Therefore third step in
level two is not applied for this case, where the aim only is to evaluate how
the objectives of SP have aﬀected the doctors’ work.
58
==PAGE:66==
Figure 20: The framework for the work system method, divided in two
levels, containing three steps each. The abbreviations in the ﬁgure covers
the expressions: SP - System and Problem, AP - Analysis and Possibilities,
RJ - Recommendations and Justiﬁcations. The ﬁgure illustrates which part
of the method will be applied in this analysis. The ﬁgure is copied from the
book "The Work System Method"[28, p. 23].
Johnson et.al. applied the work system method for assessing the information
ﬂow, when a patient is transferred from one care setting to another, and
found the method suitable for analysing healthcare settings in general[62,
p. 87]. The objectives of Sundhedsplatformen relates to both IT, people and
processes, which makes the method suitable for assessing surrounding factors
of the system. The framework will therefore be applied systematically, to
get an overview of the actual situation, and make a brief overview of which
opportunities exist. Results from the previous chapters will be included in
this analysis, to get a comprehensive perspective of the entire system.
11.1
Level two, First step - Applying WSM
Initially the "SP-part" helps to scope the system with related problems and
opportunities. Though the scope is already deﬁned as the ambulatory of the
surgical case department, assessing working procedures in Sundhedsplatfor-
men for doctors. This leads to the ﬁrst step of level two, which is to reﬂect
upon problems and opportunities.
59
==PAGE:67==
11.1.1
Problems and Opportunities
Based on interviews, the survey, observations and illustrations of process
maps and value stream maps, a list of challenges and opportunities is stated
in table 4 at page 61.
Both problems and opportunities were found from a brainstorm centred
around the objectives deﬁned for Sundhedsplatformen in section 5.
The
list is not inexhaustible, but focuses on selected subjects assessed during the
thesis until now.
11.1.2
Factors inﬂuencing the proposed challenges and opportu-
nities
"Preferences" is a functionality allowing the doctor to see only relevant ap-
plications for his/her ﬁeld of work. The same applies to the best./ord.-sets,
which might be diﬃcult to implement, since the required sets of relevance
are diﬀerent for each department(The best./ord.-sets are a part of the indi-
cators(appendix 5).
It is hard to cater for all departments and solve these challenges, since a
change in one part of SP will also change other parts, that might be well
implemented and useful in another medical speciality. This issue underpins
the importance of standardization, since it will help to streamline the func-
tionalities in SP.
Sundhedsplatformen has to work across various medical ﬁelds, hospital set-
tings and clinicians. The SP-training course is therefore struggling to target
all clinicians with the right amount of details about work practices. Though
it would be relevant for all clinicians to be educated in the strategic purpose
and objectives of the major changes that comes with Sundhedsplatformen.
According to Lene Kim Strandbygaard the limited resource of people who
can build applications in SP, comprise a bottleneck for solving problems in
Sundhedsplatformen.
Last but not least, communication and collaboration has shown to be an
important factor for the outcome and eﬃciency of the consultations.
60
==PAGE:68==
Table 4: A table of opportunities and problems in the ambulatory surgical case department for doctors’ working
procedures in SP.
Opportunities
Problems
1 List of preferences can be made
and shared across the department
The preferences-functionality is not applied among many
doctors and it is easy to mess up the list of references so it
contains irrelevant items
2 Voice recognition could be implemented to the free-text
part of documentation
Doctors spend 50% of the consultation time in SP, and 20%
of the time with documentation
3 SP should guide the doctor through the documentation
with messages and intuitive order.
Doctors perform tasks in opposite orders causing several
interruptions and some times errors
4 During SP training course, the doctors should be educated
in the purpose of structured data and standardized work.
The strategic purpose of collecting data to improve does not
meet understanding among clinicians at the operational level.
5 Surveys answered by the patient prior to a consultation
could ease the documentation work for the doctor
MinSundhedsplatform is accessible, but the functionality to
"empower the patient" is not implemented
6 Nurse can assist doctors in several tasks, to reduce
stress.
It can be hard to distinguish "who does what" during a
consultation(the nurse can handle some of the doctors tasks)
61
==PAGE:69==
11.1.3
The Work System Snapshot
To gain an overall understanding of the system, nine topics are evaluated
according to the work system method: customers, products and services,
work practices, participants, information, technologies, environment, infras-
tructure and strategies. When these topics are considered, a thoroughly and
meaningful discussion of the system can be carried out[28, p. 14].
A "snapshot" is the framework Steven Alter uses to give a rapid overview of
the relevant work system. Participants are the ones carrying out work prac-
tices to produce products, or in this case services to beneﬁt the customers.
For this transfer of work to occur, some information and technology are re-
quired. To illustrate the work in a lucid format the doctors work system will
be demonstrated in ﬁgure 21, depicting the main focus of this thesis.
62
==PAGE:70==
Figure 21: The overall work system for a consultation in the ambulatory
requires a nurse and a doctor, and in some cases where errors occur, there
might be a need for support which are stated in parenthesis. The primary
customer is the patient, but the services are also likely to aﬀect relatives. Also
the clinicians who take over the course of treatment are aﬀected by the work
practices. The customer can be exposed to a variety of products, depending
on the patient-needs. A list of technology tools and information is required
for the doctor to accomplish the work, for example Sundhedsplatformen as a
piece of software provides the information in the patient journal, and about
allergies(CAVE). Additionally the intranet is a platform where all manuals
and tip sheets are collected. Structured data is included since it provides
basis for improvements, so management - also stated in parenthesis, can be
able to optimize according to the obtained data.
63
==PAGE:71==
11.2
Second step, Level two - Applying WSM
The diﬀerent ﬁelds of the work system snapshot will be evaluated in this
part, as it is noted in ﬁgure 20, level 2 - step 2
11.2.1
Customers
The customers stated in the work system snapshot(ﬁgure 21) include the
primary care receiver, the patient, but relatives are also to be treated as
customers, since they can play a supportive role for the patient, especially
regarding information sharing. Doctors are also included as customers since
they are exposed to the work the ﬁrst doctor performs in the health record[56,
p. 775].
The WSM invites to assess which concerns might appear among customers.
A rich picture presentation is used to illustrate the customer’s conceivable
concerns in ﬁgure 22[63]. The patient’s thoughts are conceived, according to
the objectives of Sundhedsplatformen, though Podgurski states that patients
worry about the doctor spending too much time in front of the computer,
instead of focusing on the consultation[6, p. 21]. Below are the objectives
for SP-listed, with prospective patient concerns about empowerment, data-
and/or patient security.
1. "Empower patient and ensure continuity in treatment courses" →"Do
I have inﬂuence on my treatment course?" and "What can I use Min-
Sundhedsplatform for?"
2. "Improve eﬃciency of clinical processes and working procedures"
3. "Increased patient and employee satisfaction" →"Does Sundhedsplat-
formen aﬀect the safety of my treatment?"
The quotes from clinicians in ﬁgure 22 are obtained during the observations,
and can be found in appendix D - I.
The concern for doctors is found to be if they have the prerequisites to
proceed an optimal treatment course with the information provided by for-
mer doctors that consulted the patient in the course. An overview of the
customers’ concern is an important starting point, since the objectives of
Sundhedsplatformen primarily are targeting the customers.
64
==PAGE:72==
Figure 22: The ﬁgure illustrates a selection of the concerns each customer
might have regarding the work system and the scope of Sundhedsplatformen.
Patient thoughts are assumed, and the other statements are from interviews
and the case observations.
11.2.2
Service and Products
Service is the outcome of the work that brings value to the customer, which
should always be of high quality.
In healthcare settings service includes,
among others, the consultation, the documentation and medical advice.[64,
p. 197].
The following quotes regarding the current level of service are obtained dur-
ing contextual interviews:
"Yes I feel absolutely more pressure than before! We produce the
same now, but the waiting time for patients is much longer."
65
==PAGE:73==
and
"Prior to Sundhedsplatformen the secretary would have recognized
this as an error since she/he is educated to know what is available
in which setting. After we as doctors has to do both orders and
documentation there is no cross checking of what we have done,
and that is a drawback for patient safety."
and
"I could record all this in 30 seconds, and the secretary could spend
two minutes, but now I spend 20 minutes instead.(...) My notes has
become 1/3 compared to pre-SP. Maybe something was excess back
then, but now I do not even have time to check content or spelling
mistakes. I often experience notes where I lack information and I
assume it is due to lack of time"F.
The quality of service is not the main focus of this thesis, but it is for sure a
result of the working procedures which are in focus. Therefore the services
will also be touched upon during this analysis.
11.2.3
Work Practices
The practices correspond to all tasks necessary to produce the service, and
should entail all participants mentioned.
Here all information channels,
technologies, participants and customers will often be combined[28, p. 40].
Therefore both doctor and nurse are included. In parenthesis is a couple of
helping sources mentioned, in case the doctor might need assistance during
the work in SP.
This part will refer to the standardization, process map and value stream
map conducted so far, to evaluate how the practices ﬁt with the objectives
of SP.
Initially a couple of quotes regarding the working procedures are stated be-
low. First from the leading head nurse(also depicted in ﬁgure 22 at page 65)
about the implementation and thereby the clinicians:
66
==PAGE:74==
“I have emphasized the importance of following the intended working
procedures strictly, since we really want it to work, and it might
beneﬁt a more smooth implementation and help us gain the data
we need”(Appendix I).
and
"We are not using best./ord.-sets yet"(Appendix H).
and
"I can view records from the Zealand Region, and I have everything
gathered which is a good thing. It was partially possible in Opus,
but it is much easier in SP, and I can quickly determine which kind
of patient I am dealing with"(Appendix E).
The quotes imply variation in the perceived use of SP, but from the stan-
dardization analysis in section 8 it was seen that the consultations followed
the intended working procedure to a great extent though with some degree
of deviation. This will improve patient safety, since the clinicians do not
have to remember every single step when it is part of a routine[48, p. 24].
Furthermore it is in line with the SP-objective number two("Improve eﬃ-
ciency and clinical processes and working procedure") illustrated in ﬁgure 1
at page 11.
The value stream map revealed a great number of interruptions when docu-
menting in SP, while also providing numbers on the time distribution during
consultations. 50% of the time was spend in SP, which is a great part com-
pared to the forecasted beneﬁts, where it was assumed that maximum 30%
of the total consultation time would comprise the EHR[26, p. 24]. When
talking to the clinicians the documentation is the Achilles’ heel(quote nr. 3
below products and services).
11.2.4
Participants
In a work system where services are healthcare-related activities, the partic-
ipants will naturally entail clinicians[65, p. 53]. In this thesis the doctors are
outlined as primary participants, and secondary participants are nurses and
supportive actors who can provide guidance and assistance in case of errors
in SP.
67
==PAGE:75==
Sundhedsplatformen is intended to comprise a supportive tool for doctors
regarding decision making, warnings about allergies(CAVE) and conﬂicting
medications. During the observations only one alert was provided by Sund-
hedsplatformen regarding a prescription of medicine. Even though doctors
have the knowledge to make decisions about treatment courses and diagnoses,
errors can happen which imposes the need for a decision making tool[66,
p. 382].
The extra support are in line with objective number two about
improving eﬃciency(ﬁgure 1 at page 11).
From the process map the standardized working routines revealed a challenge
with "who does what?" since the nurse can assist the doctor in selected
tasks, but there is no guidelines for what the doctor should do and what the
nurse should do. An example was seen when they carried out the same task
simultaneously, causing a temporary error and wasted work. This learning
refers to the same objective as above, but might also relate to objective
number 3 ("Increased patient and employee satisfaction") since it leads to
confusion and frustration when work is wasted.
11.2.5
Information
Assessing the level and suitability of information in the work system in re-
lation to the SP objectives centres around the patient record. The patient
record is the major source of information constituting the foundation of the
value-creating services, and therefore of major importance according to all
three objectives for SP(see either page 64 or ﬁgure 1 at page 11).
Additional sources of information cover for example the booking calender, the
allergy-application(CAVE) providing alerts about allergies and the best./ord.
lists but also guides and tip-sheets to assist clinicians in how to use Sund-
hedsplatformen.
In this case the right information is a very important resource for the qual-
ity of the value-creating service.
The ability to measure the quality and
eﬃciency of information-transfer is therefore relevant, in order to ensure the
best possible service and opportunity of improving it[19, p. 133].
11.2.6
Technology
Sundhedsplatformen touches upon information, infrastructure, the work en-
vironment and work practices, because the technology is designed to do so.
68
==PAGE:76==
Sundhedsplatformen is therefore the most important technology in the work
system, assisted by internet, computers, examination equipment and the like.
To improve the work system, other technologies might be relevant to evalu-
ate in future, for example a voice-recognition technology. This might reduce
documentation time and improve both employee satisfaction and eﬃciency
of working procedures[67] according to SP-objective 2 and 3.
11.2.7
Environment
Regarding the organizational environment Sundhedsplatformen is challenged
by the great diversity it has to suit. All public hospitals across Zealand,
covering all sorts of medical departments.
Optimization is a major chal-
lenge since the smallest changes might aﬀect unforeseen ﬁelds and ruin
a functionality that suited the particular department.
Therefore the SP-
environment must be individualized for each department regarding user-
interface, best./ord.-sets and preferences[68, p. 436].
11.2.8
Infrastructure
Can relate to either information technologies(IT) or non-IT infrastructure[28,
p. 46]. For the focus of this thesis Sundhedsplatformen is viewed as an IT-
technology infrastructure, since it provides information for customers based
on a technology solution.
Sundhedsplatformen allows the doctor to update the patient diagnosis or to
order medicine and surgery cases, and does thereby provide the infrastruc-
ture of the value-generating service. Sundhedsplatformen was also intended
to cover an infrastructure allowing the patient to book consultations, ask
questions or ﬁll out surveys(PRO-data). This information technology of the
infrastructure is not supported yet, but will maybe be entailed in the new
version of Sundhedsplatformen, SP2018, according to appendix L.
The work system entails also the helpdesk, black scouts, CIMT and manage-
ment in the participants, and the reason is that they assist with information
as part of the infrastructure. The organizational diagram illustrated in ﬁg-
ure 4 at page 20, shows how the organizational infrastructure is connected.
Each part of the organization has a relation to Sundhedsplatformen and
collaborates to reach the aims stated in the SP-objectives. Their approach
and competencies varies, and constitutes thereby the organizational infras-
tructure. A challenge underpinned by Lene Kim Strandbygaard during a
69
==PAGE:77==
meeting, is that it is hard for the clinicians to know where to get which
kind of assistance.
For example the helpdesk and KIK are two channels
of assistance available via CIMT, and the black scouts are a group of en-
gineering students hired by Rigshospitalet to help clinicians solve practical
issues(Appendix G).
Other sources of information contributing to the organizational infrastruc-
ture is these channels mentioned by the head nurse in the surgical case de-
partment:
"When changes and new applications happen in Sundhedsplatfor-
men I am signed up for a newsletter-email. News are targeted doc-
tors, nurses and secretary so they can login and stay informed on
any updates"
and
"To solve issues in SP we are provided with tip-sheets and manuals
to illustrate the working procedures, but they are not applied very
much any more.
There are more than 200, but it is possible to
search in the list. We have several additional guides in the personel
room, created by our own nurses"
and
"Every 14th day we have a meeting in this department where we
discuss improvements needed in SP."
A brief look on the infrastructure reveals a great network, where it is hard
to measure which information goes where.
It is found from the overall analysis that when consultations ﬁt into the stan-
dardized procedures the information infrastructure seems to work ﬂawless,
but when challenges in SP occurs and a doctor needs assistance, it is com-
plicated to ﬁnd the right channel of help due to the complex infrastructure.
A meeting with Lene Kim Strandbygaard made a connection between that
challenge and the fact that sharing information is a major hurtle. She said:
"Sometimes we experience that a doctor has found a proper solution which
we(editted: CIMT) and other doctors are struggling to solve, but no one
knows about it because information is not shared"(Appendix G).
This quote underpins the challenge of information infrastructure.
70
==PAGE:78==
11.2.9
Strategy
The work system method ask how well the work system suits the overall
strategy, and in the case of Sundhedsplatformen the national goals during
many years has steered the course to digitize the healthcare sector. There-
fore Sundhedsplatformen is created to follow the national objectives. The
regional goals within healthcare correspond to the objectives for SP, which
is the foundation for how hospitals and departments plan to meet the ob-
jectives. This refers to the challenge stated in the beginning of this thesis,
saying that only a catalogue of regional indicators are provided, which is
not necessarily useful for working procedures on operational level in each
department. In order to measure the progress toward the aim, performance
measurement is important to keep track of. It is also indicated in the gains
of Sundhedsplatformen, (in ﬁgure 1 at page 11), where it is stated that a
beneﬁt of SP is: "Reuse of data for research and continuous optimization of
quality and utilization of treatment resources"(number 5).
11.2.10
The work system as a part of the great picture
Evaluating factors for each topic of the work system snapshot in depth, al-
lows to see the work system not only in light of the work practices. A lot
of factors are articulated, and it might seem overwhelming, therefore only
selected factors will be evaluated during the discussion.
The work system method provides a list of questions to assess "Recommen-
dations and Justiﬁcations" for the work system, but since it is not a part of
the scope for this thesis, the ﬁndings until now will be stated in section 12.6.
71
==PAGE:79==
Part IV
Results
12
Summary of Findings
The ﬁndings regarding the objectives of SP and each of the analysis sections
will be described in this chapter, to provide a foundation for the discussion
and conclusion.
12.1
Objectives and beneﬁts of SP
Initially the national goals and objectives for Sundhedsplatformen were ac-
counted for, to provide a basis for comparing observation results with per-
ceived beneﬁts. A list of performance indicators for the ambulatory were
provided(in table 5 at page 14), though it was found that most of the in-
dicators were not applicable yet. The functionality supporting indicators
including MinSundhedsplatform was not accessible yet, and for the surgical
department functionalities as best./ord.-sets and booking packages are not
implemented yet. When omitting indicators including the aforementioned
functionalities, indicator 1.2 and 2.7 remains. They can be applied in the
current setting, though it was not possible to obtain data from either of
them. The reason for 1.2 is that InBasket, is presumably not applied among
the clinicians and can therefore not produce valid data, and for 2.7 it was
not possible to obtain the relevant data-report.
With that knowledge the working procedures in SP for doctors were assessed
to evaluate changes in relation to the objectives deﬁned for SP. The ﬁndings
of each partial analysis can be found below.
12.2
Standardization
During section 8 it was found that the functionality of prescribing medica-
tions, examinations and blood samples in the best./ord. module is of major
importance for the treatment course. It has to be carried out correct, to
ensure safe treatment and continuity in the treatment course.
72
==PAGE:80==
Standardization is also very relevant to the documentation-part, depicted as
azure coloured boxes during the thesis, since a standardized way of docu-
menting will ensure production of structured data, enforcing objective 2("Im-
prove eﬃciency of clinical processes and working procedures").
Among the surveyed clinicians the general attitude toward standardization
is that it only provides limited applicability in healthcare.
It was found
that the surveyed doctors would prefer to ask a colleague about help rather
than turning to a work guide.
Furthermore it was found that a general
comprehension of the standardized work practices and the purpose were not
obtained, leading to resistance against the intended work practices.
12.3
Process Map
During the observations and process map analysis, suﬃcient communication
between the doctor and nurse was found in 9 out 11 consultations, though
it seemed challenging that they had to agree for each consultation who does
the "registration of diagnose", "the SKS-coding", "the order of a new con-
sultation" and the like. In consultation eight and nine no communication
between the doctor and nurse occurred during the observations, it was seen
that the doctor did everything but the SKS-coding.
When the 11 observed consultations were illustrated in a gathered overview(see
ﬁgure 10 at page 39), it was found that 6 out of 11 consultations started the
medical record notation(azure boxes) prior to the conclusion of the exami-
nation. Of the 11 consultations 4 did not entail an examination and thereby
no documentation of the evaluation(orange box) and only 1 did it initially
as it should be.
In 5 consultations both an epikrise was sent, and a best./ord. was required.
In 4 out of 5 cases the best./ord. was conducted prior to the epikrise, which
is exactly how the work is intended to be carried out. The update of patient
history(light blue box) is 4 times out of 11 carried out prior to documenta-
tion of the examination(orange box) as it is intended.
The results described in the value stream map overlaps partially with the
results of this analysis, and is therefore only described one place. It will
be mentioned in the next subsection which results are conﬁrmed in both
analyses.
73
==PAGE:81==
12.4
Value Stream Map
From the value stream map the standardization pattern found in the previ-
ous analysis sections were conﬁrmed. Though deviations appeared in form
of changed order of activities, for example several times it was seen that
the doctor initiated the documentation note even though the examination
was not concluded yet. This resulted in waste in cases where the diagnosis
deviated from the doctor’s anticipation of a diagnosis, meaning that he/she
had to delete the note and start over.
Overall a tendency for the doctors to try to safe time was seen. The no-
tation was initiated early in the consultation, implying the risk of writing
something becoming obsolete as the consultation progresses. The purpose of
the notation template is partially to produce structured data, which is done
from drop-down menus, that have to be ﬁlled in the template. But for all
consultations an amount of free text occurred, yielding unstructured data.
Documentation is thereby a time-consuming activity, where the doctors also
spend time to correct and sort the written text, which provides a minimal
level of value regarding data capturing, but might value the next doctor who
has to go through the patient record.
When the doctor creates a documentation note prior to documenting the
examination results(via vurderingsskema), a common thing the doctors of-
ten start by, is pasting a table into the documentation note which refers to
the examination results(vurderingsskema)- orange boxes. When they enter
examination results into the scheme(vurderingsskema) the results will au-
tomatically appear in the documentation note(azure boxes). It reduces the
need for double or triple documentation, since the scheme will also be en-
tailed in the note for the family doctor - epikrise(green box). This part of
the template provides great value in the clinical process.
In ﬁgure 23 an overview of the time distribution during the 11 consultations
is gathered. It is found that the consultations in average require 52.7% of the
consultation time spend in Sundhedsplatformen, see ﬁgure 23. Furthermore
it can be seen from the table, that more than 20% of the total consultation
time in average is used for documentation(azure box). The consultations 2,
7 and 8, used in the analysis, are accentuated in ﬁgure 23, to compare the
distribution of time across the cases.
74
==PAGE:82==
Figure 23: The ﬁgure illustrates the distribution of time during consultations
in the ambulatory surgical department. The code of each color can be found
in ﬁgure 15 at page 51, and the distribution of the diﬀerent activities in
SP can thereby be reviewed. The framed columns(consultation 2, 7 and 8)
represent the consultations used as explanatory cases during this thesis.
It should be noted from the ﬁgure that more than 50% of the consultation
time is spend in SP, and in average more than 20% of the overall time goes
with patient record documentation(Azure box).
12.5
A ﬁnal look on value (and waste)
From the value stream map it can be found that doctors gain value from
the patient record, where all information is gathered, and provide a great
overview.
In average the doctor spend 12% of the consultation time on
reviewing the record, as seen in ﬁgure 23. Previously the doctor would have
used this time to discuss the disease course with the patient and looking
through diﬀerent systems to assess the health record.
Now it is possible
to get the relevant medical information right away by looking through the
record[3, p. 3]. It might have caused a turn in the patient-doctor-time versus
75
==PAGE:83==
doctor-computer ratio, but doctors are generally happy for the improved
overview. These quotes are from the observations:
“I can view records from The Zealand Region, and I have everything
gathered which is a good thing. It was partically possible in Opus,
but it is much easier in SP, and I can quickly determine which kind
of patient I am dealing with.” - doctor Y (appendix E)
“I actually like SP in many ways, especially regarding continuous
consultations and research." - doctor Z(appendix F)
"It is nice to have everything gathered " - nurse in the case depart-
ment
Both the process map and value stream map revealed a lot of interruptions
causing waste since the doctor had to get back into the activity that was
disturbed. The number of interruptions during the 11 consultations were
counted and divided by the total consultation time. Figure 24 shows the
calculation, which yields 2.57 interruptions per hour.
Figure 24: The table illustrate the number of interruptions per hour observed
during the consultations. Each row account for one consultation, where the
average is found below "sum".
It would be interesting to note if the repetitive number of interruptions dur-
ing the documentation(azure boxes) has an eﬀect on the quality of notes or
the total time spend.
Another source of waste is the confusion arising when decisions has to be
made. A collection of quotes from all 11 consultations have been gathered
in the box bellow:
76
==PAGE:84==
“I made this best./ord. and there seems to be two of the same now?”
(The doctor did not have time to investigate the two similar ordered
blood samples and went on with next task) - doctor X(appendix
D)
“I haven’t tried this before, so I am unsure which one to chose, but
I think this one seems correct so let’s try that”- doctor Y(appendix
E)
Doctor runs through a medical record and ﬁnds an ordination of an
acute CT-scanning for the next patient, and says: “Acute scannings
like this one, is only available for hospitalized patients, so I wonder
if the patient actually has been booked for the scanning yet”. - doctor
Z(appendix F)
Pictures of the diseased area could not be found in SP and led the
doctor to ask: “Where do I see the pictures from last consultation?”
hoping the nurse had the ability to ﬁnd the missing documentation.
- doctor Z(appendix F)
Confusions like the above did not appear often during the observations, but
they are a source of risk in the long run. Especially if the doctor is stressed
and do not have time to reﬂect enough about the situation to ﬁnd a suitable
solution[55, p. 4].
What the value stream map cannot illustrate, is the conversation with the
doctor, where the patient is advised about her rights to decide whether or
not to take the prescribed medicine, but that the doctor would recommend
it from a scientiﬁc point of view. It is not directly associated to the use
of Sundhedsplatformen, but it strengthens the objective of empowering the
patient. During the observations MinSundhedsplatform was not mentioned
a single time, and Margit Roed Heman, leading head nurse, explained it due
to readiness:
"Regarding MinSundhedsplatform, which is intended to be a plat-
form for the patients, it is not implemented yet. We have decided
not to inform our patients about it, because the functionality is not
77
==PAGE:85==
yet providing value for the patient.”
“The opportunity for patients to book an appointment or ask ques-
tions for the doctor is not working yet.
We ﬁgure that we have
to learn to apply Sundhedsplatformen inhouse, before we invite the
patients inside." - Margit Roed Heman(Appendix I)
12.6
Work System Method
Below a ﬁgure with results obtained from the analysis will be illustrated,
followed by elaborations on environment, infrastructure and strategy.
Figure 25: The work system snapshot template is used to summarize the
ﬁndings of the work system analysis. Results will be discussed further in
section 13
Environment:The organizational environment is challenging, since SP has
to work across a complex organization. This is a major source of challenges
78
==PAGE:86==
when optimization across departments is attempted.
Infrastructure: especially the information infrastructure across the orga-
nization is challenging when clinicians experience errors in Sundhedsplatfor-
men. A number of channels for support is available, and it is confusing to
know who to ask about what. Additionally, it is diﬃcult to share experiences
about work practices that work well among clinicians and Sundhedsplatfor-
men as an organization. The result is that some clinicians work ﬂawless in
SP, while others are struggling to solve the exact same issue, without know-
ing that a colleague might have a solution.
Strategy: The strategy planned through several years forces the work prac-
tices to change, in order to meet the objectives.
Deciding to implement
new working procedures simultaneously with a new EHR record is a great
change-management challenge.
It is highly relevant that the strategic purpose of introducing new work prac-
tices is understood by the participants, before a successful implementation
of Sundhedsplatformen can occur[69, p. 88].
79
==PAGE:87==
Part V
Discussion & Conclusion
13
Discussion
13.1
Standardization with Sundhedsplatformen
In general a pattern of standardization is observed through the consultations,
though with smaller deviations. Aligning the work in Sundhedsplatformen
across hospitals will contribute with several advantages according to Gitte
Fangel, e.g. equal treatment across hospitals and generation of structured
data[33]. During the documentation(azure boxes) observed in the consul-
tations, templates were used to a great extend, providing the demanded
structured data. Though it has not been possible to withdraw and learn
from the data yet, since the quality is not validated yet(appendix G).
It was also stated by Lene that knowledge sharing about eﬃcient work prac-
tices in Sundhedsplatformen were not shared among clinicians. Not because
they did not want to, but because no-one knew that a better work practice
had been found(appendix G).
Resistance among doctors appear when they are asked about standardization
and alignment of work practices. According to the ﬁndings in this thesis, it
seemed like the term "standardization" was misinterpreted among doctors.
Mark Graban stated that standardization is a way to handle critical tasks
that must be carried out in one speciﬁc and most eﬃcient way[48, p. 67].
Standardization does therefore not mean; "Turning doctors into robots", but
is instead a way of emphasizing work of special importance. For Sundhed-
splatformen critical tasks was found to be documentation where structured
data was generated. Another critical tasks is when prescriptions and orders
were made in the best./ord-module. This study can therefore emphasize the
importance of setting up best./ord.-sets and customized preferences in the
SP-user interface for each department. It will make it easier for the doc-
tors to pick the right case/medicine/examination every time, and thereby
support objective 2 for Sundhedsplatformen("Improve eﬃciency of clinical
processes and working procedures").
80
==PAGE:88==
13.2
Process Map
According to Mark Graban the process map is important to reveal how a
process is actually carried out[48, p. 49]. After creating the process map it
was revealed that a deviation between the standardized framework in ﬁgure
8 at 32 were found, conﬁrming the statement by M. Graber.
From the process map, the collaboration between the doctor and the nurse
was emphasized, which revealed a major importance of communication dur-
ing the consultation and carrying it out front-oﬃce.
The importance of
communication was conﬁrmed by a study investigating the communication
among clinicians in relation to EHR use[70, p. 194].
This ﬁnding might
go along with both objective 2 and 3 for Sundhedsplatformen(2:"Improve
eﬃciency of clinical processes and working procedures" and 3: "Increased
employee satisfaction").
13.3
Value Stream Map
Patient value was deﬁned in section 10, and will therefore not be discussed
further in this section, since the scope of this thesis was not to assess the
aﬀection of patient value.
Cindy Jimmerson encouraged to apply the value stream map tool, to get a
better understanding of which factors aﬀects the performance of clinicians[55,
p. 29],[54, p. 244]. For example the value stream map helped to elucidate
how doctors during the observed consultation avoided double and triple work
by pasting a table into the patient record(azure box) from the examination
module(vuderingskema - orange box). In that way the entered data could
appear in both the documentation note and epikrise.
A set of waste-types was also deﬁned in section 10 according to C. Jimmerson[55,
p. 29]. During this discussion emphasis will be put on the "confusion"-waste,
which appeared only four times during the consultations. In a study car-
ried out by Anita Tucker, confusion was found 8.4 times per work shift[57,
p. 650]. Compared to this study where four cases of "confusion" appeared
during two shifts, eﬃciency among the clinicians using Sundhedsplatformen
can be found to be better. Further research could be carried out in this ﬁeld
to investigate if empirical evidence can be found for the decreased occurrence
of confusion-waste. Additionally the factors leading to less confusion waste
should be investigated.
81
==PAGE:89==
The value stream map assessed the work practices in relation to time, and
the time distribution of this analysis found the mean documentation time to
be 21.2% of the total consultation time, which corresponds to results found
by E.Joukes et.al.(2018). This group found the documentation time to be
33%[71, p. 52].
This is almost the same mean found in this analysis, if
examination documentation, patient record documentation and epikrise are
summarized: 5.3% + 21.2% + 3.3% = 29.8%(see results in ﬁgure 23 at 75).
These numbers could have been compared regarding signiﬁcance level, but
the low amount of available data would not provide any statistical evidence
anyway.
The patient-doctor time in this thesis can be found by subtracting the time
spend in SP(52.7%) by the total duration, which leaves 47.3% for the patient.
Sinka et.al. found this number to be 52.9%[72, p. 4]. With these studies it
can be summarized that Sundhedsplatformen did not cause exceptional in-
creases in documentation time, compared to similar studies. Either were the
observed patient-doctor time notably decreased compared to other studies.
An article by Ash, et.al. has found that introducing an electronic health
record increases documentation time, and causes a set of arduous tasks for
the doctors, e.g. to conﬁrm several boxes popping up[73, p. 4]. The study
agrees with the ﬁndings of this thesis, where the time distribution corre-
sponds to several other studies[71, p. 52],[72, p. 4],[4, p. 9]. A doctor in this
study recognized the aﬀore-mentioned occurrence of arduous tasks, when a
he stated the following:
"I have to click yes, OK, sign, accept, solve and it eats up my time" - doctor
Z(appendix F)
The quote cannot be used for generalization, but cooperates with the study
where doctors found application of the EHR inconvenient[73, p. 4].
During the consultations repetitive shifts of the doctors attention should be
noted. Focus changes rapidly from patient to SP, back to the patient and
back to SP again. The numerous interruptions might pose a risk of errors
to happen, according to Parker and Coiera who states that the memory will
be aﬀected by interruptions, and clinicians will be likely to miss information
when getting back to the original task[74, p. 6].
A study investigated the occurrence of interruptions for clinicians in an in-
tensive care unit, and found that doctors in average were interrupted 3.8
times per hour, and compared it results from another study where doctors
in average had 2.9 interruptions per hour[75, p. 8].
82
==PAGE:90==
An interruption in this study is deﬁned by two boxes of the same color sepa-
rated by oﬀ-line time in more than 30 seconds. Interruptions were found 16
times during the 11 observations. The average interruptions for this study
was found to be 2.57 times per hour, and indicate more continuity during
the consultation than similar studies have shown(see ﬁgure 24)[75, p. 8],[4,
p. 8].
13.4
Work System Method
The tendency to expect a Swiss-knife solution from an EHR-system, was not
distinct during this study, where it might seem like Sundhedsplatformen has
caused more issues than it has solved. Though it should be emphasized that
it was not possible to compare to the prior EHR-systems, and therefore no
comparison can be conducted. From the ﬁndings it seems like Sundhedsplat-
formen has caused challenges in similar ﬁelds as other EHR has caused. The
perspective to obtain the perceived beneﬁts can be quite long, according to
a study by Yeona Jang emphasizing that the beneﬁts of an EHR might only
be gained if policy makers and managers support the objectives on a contin-
uous basis[76]. The study emphasized the importance of ensuring a stream
lined work practice across the healthcare organization, as it was also found
in this thesis. Both knowledge sharing and optimization of work practices is
therefore relevant to obtain the objectives stated for SP.
13.5
Final remarks
It should be emphasized that the ﬁndings of this thesis is representing a very
small group of clinicians, and only 11 consultations, which makes the results
very unsure. Further investigation should therefore be carried out in order
to have the results conﬁrmed.
Another drawback of this study, is that it was hard to compare the objectives
for Sundhedsplatformen to the observed work, since no indicators were com-
parable to the scope. The study should have been able to compare two sets
of results, either how work was carried out prior to Sundhedsplatformen, or
how work was carried out in the beginning of the implementation compared
to a set amount of time later.
Basically, comparing strategic goals with operational work is not possible if
83
==PAGE:91==
trustworthy data is required, unless speciﬁc performance indicators are de-
ﬁned and can be transferred from one management level to the other. An
additional drawback of this study is the wide coverage. The scope should
have been narrowed further, since it was diﬃcult to delimit "factors aﬀecting
doctors work". Therefore the ﬁndings of this study have also undertaken a
very general form. Though the ﬁndings have depicted that the aﬀections of
Sundhedsplatformen on doctors’ work is rather normal, compared to other
similar cases. At least regarding documentation time, interruptions and con-
fusion, of which the results for Sundhedsplatformen actually was better than
for the compared studies. With that said, it does not mean that there is no
challenges for Sundhedsplatformen. The lacking functionality should still be
implemented to utilize the beneﬁts oﬀered by Sundhedsplatformen. Espe-
cially it should be emphasized that creating preferences, best./ord.-sets and
packages should be conducted, to ease the work of clinicians.
Due to the above discussed topics, a short evaluation of the EHR term will
be carried out. Morten Hertzum and Jesper Simonsen argued that an EHR
is a plastic open-ended system[21]. Due to the ﬁndings and the need for
further development of applications, Sundhedsplatformen clearly agrees with
the deﬁnition stated by Hertzum and Simonsen.
84
==PAGE:92==
14
Conclusion
This thesis has pointed a list of factors inﬂuencing the work practices of the
doctors in the ambulatory of a surgical department.
The aim was to identify the objectives of Sundhedsplatformen, and evaluate
how the objectives aﬀected doctors’ work in the operational level of a speciﬁc
case. It was found that doctors in the surgical case department succeed to
apply SP almost as intended, and provide the needed service for patients.
A list of inconveniences for the work to happen eﬃciently is summarized in
context of the objectives set for SP:
1. Empower patient and ensure continuity in treatment courses
2. Improve eﬃciency of clinical processes and working procedures
3. Increased patient- and employee satisfaction
Objective 1:
Even though MinSundhedsplatform does not provide the full functionality
yet, the patients can still access health information. This opportunity allows
him/her to engage in his own treatment course, and has lain the foundation
for empowerment.
Regarding continuity in treatment courses it was found that clinicians uti-
lized the overview of the patient record very well. The coherent overview
of patient history and the ease of sending information back to the family
doctors was appreciated by doctors.
Additionally the number of interruptions between tasks during the consul-
tations were found to be fewer than similar studies have shown.
Objective 2:
It can be concluded that the best./ord.-sets and customization of the user-
interface with preferences should be implemented as quick as possible, to
ease the work of doctors.
From the analysis challenges of using InBasket to sign sample and examina-
tion results were found. It was not possible to obtain data for indicator 1.2
assessing when the doctor has seen the sample results, and it can thereby
not be used to evaluate either patient safety or eﬀective clinical processes as
it was meant to.
Generally the work practice in Sundhedsplatformen follows a standardized
pattern during the documentation. If attention is put to the fact that initi-
ating documentation early does not give an edge, the work practice follows
85
==PAGE:93==
the objectives fairly good. Though it should be investigated how the overall
documentation time can be decreased to gain the perceived beneﬁts of Sund-
hedsplatformen. Furthermore the importance of the communication between
doctor and nurse should be emphasized. A clear comprehension of "who does
what" should be articulated both to improve eﬃciency and to avoid errors.
Objective 3:
Evaluating patient satisfaction is not a part of the scope for this thesis, and
can therefore not be concluded here.
Employee satisfaction is also not measured during this thesis.
Therefore
anticipations about their work is evaluated from the analysis. Considering
the doctor’s concern about standardized work, it seemed to be more of a
worry for the doctors who had not worked with Sundhedsplatformen yet,
than it was for the doctors who already applied it. The term and purpose of
standardization should therefore be demystiﬁed as a part of the SP-training
course.
From the work system method it was found that challenges can partially
be ascribed to the dimension of the organization. The variation of needs
across hospitals makes it diﬃcult to align work practices, and aﬀects the
work of clinicians at the operational level. Meanwhile a change in strategy
has occurred simultaneously with the implementation of Sundhedsplatfor-
men making it even harder to grasp. Managing two major changes simulta-
neously might therefore be harder than expected when implementation of a
new EHR was planned.
Sharing information about how work can be carried out in an eﬀective and
eﬃcient way, should be investigated further to avoid that each department
has to invent the soup plate. Finally, improving the functionality of Sund-
hedsplatformen will make it easier for the clinicians to meet the objectives,
though it is a time and change-management consuming process.
86
==PAGE:94==
References
[1] Institute of Medicine. Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record
System: Letter Report.
The National Academies Press, Washington,
DC, 2003.
[2] Madison N Ngafeeson. Healthcare information systems opportunities
and challenges. In Encyclopedia of Information Science and Technology,
Third Edition, pages 3387–3395. IGI Global, 2015.
[3] www.athenahealth.com. Making the Switch: Replacing Your EHR for
More Money and More Control Making the Switch: Replacing Your
EHR for More Money and More Control Executive Summary. 2010.
Accessed: 2018-19-06.
[4] Pascale Carayon, Tosha B Wetterneck, Bashar Alyousef, Roger L
Brown, Randi S Cartmill, Kerry McGuire, Peter LT Hoonakker, Jason
Slagle, Kara S Van Roy, James M Walker, et al. Impact of electronic
health record technology on the work and workﬂow of physicians in
the intensive care unit. International journal of medical informatics,
84(8):578–594, 2015.
[5] Amy S. Oxentenko, Colin P. West, Carol Popkave, Steven E. Wein-
berger, and Joseph C. Kolars. Time spent on clinical documentation a
survey of internal medicine residents and program directors. Archives
of Internal Medicine, 170(4):377–380, 2010.
[6] Sharona Hoﬀman and Andy Podgurski. Finding a cure: The case for
regulation and oversight of electric health record systems. Harv. JL &
Tech., 22:103, 2008.
[7] Sundhedsplatformen.
"sundhedsplatformen
løfter
behandlingen".
https://www.regionh.dk/sundhedsplatform/presse/Documents/
KernefortÃęlling%20Sundhedsplatformen.pdf,
2018.
Accessed:
2018-12-06.
[8] Danish
Health
Authority.
"national
strategi
for
it
i
syge-
husvæsenet 2000-2002". http://docplayer.dk/storage/24/2724028/
1528666322/h_ouxR-EiAA3tNYQnPcpOA/2724028.pdf, 2018. Accessed:
2018-10-06.
87
==PAGE:95==
[9] Danish Health Authority.
"den nationale it-strategi for sund-
hedsvæsenet
2003-2007".
http://www.epj-observatoriet.dk/
konference2002/konferenceslides/ArneKverneland.pdf,
2018.
Accessed: 2018-10-06.
[10] Danske Regioner Digital Health.
"national strategi for digitaliser-
ing af sundhedsvæsenet 2008 – 2012".
https://www.sundhed.dk/
content/cms/6/3406_national-strategi-2008-2012.pdf, 2018. Ac-
cessed: 2018-10-06.
[11] Jens Kristian Gøtrik Lars Løkke Rasmussen.
"national strategi for
kvalitetsudvikling i sundhedsvæsenet, fælles mål og handleplan 2002-
2006".
https://www.ikas.dk/FTP/PDF/D15-16151.pdf, 2018.
Ac-
cessed: 2018-21-05.
[12] Region
Hovedstaden.
Driftsmålskatalog
for
gevinstrealisering
i
forbindelse med sundhedsplatformen.
Internal document, 2018.
Ac-
cessed: february.
[13] Nadia Landex. Det episke sundhedsvæsen. Ugeskrift for Laeger, 179(50),
2017.
[14] Kirstine Dons Christensen. Tilstandsrapport på en møgsag: Hvordan
står det egentlig til med sundhedsplatformen? https://www.zetland.
dk/historie/soV73bAQ-a8DEYJ9z-77b05, 2018. Accessed: 2018-19-06.
[15] Danske Regioner. "sundhedsplatformen går ind i næste fase". https://
www.regionh.dk/presse-og-nyt/pressemeddelelser-og-nyheder/
Sider/Sundhedsplatformen-gaar-ind-i-naeste-fase.aspx,
2018.
Accessed: 2018-12-06.
[16] Andrew DF Price and Jun Lu. Impact of hospital space standardiza-
tion on patient health and safety. Architectural Engineering and Design
Management, 9(1):49–61, 2013.
[17] Anthony Manos, Mark Sattler, and George Alukal. Make healthcare
lean. Quality progress, 39(7):24, 2006.
[18] Healthcare Informatics.
"will the real cpr/emr/ehr please stand
up".
https://www.healthcare-informatics.com/article/
will-real-cpremrehr-please-stand,
2018.
Accessed:
2018-15-
05.
88
==PAGE:96==
[19] Giuseppe Aceto, Valerio Persico, and Antonio Pescapé. The role of in-
formation and communication technologies in healthcare: taxonomies,
perspectives, and challenges. Journal of Network and Computer Appli-
cations, 107:125 – 154, 2018.
[20] Kamila Smolij and Kim Dun. Patient health information management:
searching for the right model. Perspectives in Health Information Man-
agement/AHIMA, American Health Information Management Associa-
tion, 3, 2006.
[21] Morten Hertzum and Jesper Simonsen. Electronic health records: What
an ehr is not, generating it is. In Next Generation of Electronic Health
Records, 2018.
[22] Danske Regioner.
"national strategi for digitalisering af sund-
hedsvÆsenet 2013-2017". https://www.sundhed.dk/content/cms/6/
3406_national-strategi-for-digitalisering-2015.pdf, 2018. Ac-
cessed: 2018-11-06.
[23] Ministry
for
Health
and
Prevention.
"nationalt
kvalitet-
sprogram
for
sundhedsområdet
2015-2018".
https://www.
sum.dk/~/media/Filer%20-%20Publikationer_i_pdf/2015/
Nationalt-kvalitetsprogram-for-sundhedsomraadet/Nationalt%
20kvalitetsprogram%20for%20sundhedsomrÃědet%20-%20april%
202015.pdf, 2018. Accessed: 2018-10-06.
[24] Danske
Regioner.
"national
strategi
for
digitaliser-
ing
af
sundhedsvÆsenet
2018-2022".
https://www.sum.
dk/~/media/Filer%20-%20Publikationer_i_pdf/2018/
Strategi-for-digital-sundhed-januar-2018/Strategi%20for%
20digital%20sundhed_Pages.pdf, 2018. Accessed: 2018-11-06.
[25] Gitte Fangel. "sundhedsplatformen som grundlag for at skabe værdi
af kliniske data".
http://www.dachi.aau.dk/digitalAssets/144/
144821_gittefangel.pdf, 2018. Accessed: 2018-15-06.
[26] Yvonne Herløv Sundhedsministeriet, Andersen.
Elektroniske Patien-
tjournaler - hvorfor og hvordan. Sundhedsministeriet, 1995.
[27] Zahra Niazkhani, Habibollah Pirnejad, Marc Berg, and Jos Aarts. The
impact of computerized provider order entry systems on inpatient clin-
ical workﬂow: a literature review.
Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 16(4):539–549, 2009.
89
==PAGE:97==
[28] Steven Alter. The work system method: connecting people, processes,
and IT for business results. Work System Method, 2006.
[29] Danske Regioner. "strategisk indsats bedre behandling med sundhed-
splatformen".
https://www.regionh.dk/om-region-hovedstaden/
fakta/Mission-vision-og-maalsaetninger/PublishingImages/
Sider/strategiske-indsatsomraader/Strategisk%20beskrivelse%
20af%20Bedre%20behandling%20med%20sundhedsplatformen.pdf,
2018. Accessed: 2018-11-06.
[30] A. R. Wenner. Point of care made possible with patient data entry.
Toward an Electronic Patient Record’99. Conference and Exposition.
Tepr’99, pages 110–12 vol.1, 1999.
[31] Sundhedsplatformen. Øvehæfte for sp læge del 1 ambulatoriet. Internal
document, 2018. Accessed: 2018-02-02.
[32] Ronald P. Loui and Ashley Hollinshead. Eﬃcient population of struc-
tured data forms for medical records using syntactic constraints and
intermediate text.
2016 Ieee International Conference on Healthcare
Informatics (ichi), pages 317–317, 2016.
[33] Gitte
Fangel.
"implementering
af
sundhedsplatformen".
http://diku.dk/begivenhedsmappe/begivenheder-2017/
konference-gode-offentlige-it-projekter/slides/
gitte-fangel.pdf, 2018. Accessed: 2018-21-05.
[34] Claus
Balslev
CIMT.
"udbudsbekendtgørelse".
https://www.
udbud.dk/Pages/Tenders/ShowTender?tenderid=4585,
2018.
Ac-
cessed: 2018-30-04.
[35] Region
Hovedstaden.
"spørgsmål
og
svar
om
sundhedsplatformen".
https://www.regionh.dk/
sundhedsplatform/om-sundhedsplatformen/Sider/
spÃÿrgsmÃěl-om-sundhedsplatformen.aspx, 2018.
[36] Region
Hovedstaden.
"tidsplan".
https://www.regionh.dk/
sundhedsplatform/om-sundhedsplatformen/Sider/tidsplan.aspx,
2018. Accessed: 2018-02-05.
[37] Region
Hovedstaden.
5.
opgradering
af
sundhedsplatformen
og
implementering
af
landspatientregistret
version
3
(lpr3).
http://www.regionsjaelland.dk/dagsordener/Dagsordener2018/
90
==PAGE:98==
Sider/Politisk%20styregruppe%20for%20Sundhedsplatformen/
4145-MÃÿde%20d.%2014-5-2018/3557143.aspx,
2018.
Accessed:
2018-16-06.
[38] David C. Kaelber and David W. Bates. Health information exchange
and patient safety. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 40(6, Supple-
ment):S40 – S45, 2007.
[39] Region Hovedstaden. Implementering i bund koncept for gevinstrealiser-
ing i sundhedsplatformen. Technical report, Region Hovedstaden, Juni
2015.
[40] Robert H Miller, Christopher West, Tiﬀany Martin Brown, Ida Sim,
and Chris Ganchoﬀ. The value of electronic health records in solo or
small group practices. Health Aﬀairs, 24(5):1127–1137, 2005.
[41] Lise Poissant, Jennifer Pereira, Robyn Tamblyn, and Yuko Kawasumi.
The impact of electronic health records on time eﬃciency of physicians
and nurses: a systematic review. Journal of the American Medical In-
formatics Association, 12(5):505–516, 2005.
[42] Julia Adler-Milstein and Robert S Huckman. The impact of electronic
health record use on physician productivity. The American journal of
managed care, 19(10 Spec No):SP345–52, 2013.
[43] David Blumenthal.
Launching hitech.
New England Journal of
Medicine, 362(5):382–385, 2010.
[44] David Blumenthal and Marilyn Tavenner. The “meaningful use” regu-
lation for electronic health records. New England Journal of Medicine,
363(6):501–504, 2010.
[45] Version
2.
Region
h-direktør
bag
sundhedsplatformen:
»folk
må tro,
vi er bindegale«.
https://www.version2.dk/artikel/
direktoer-sundhedsplatformen-vi-oeger-kvalitet-lighed-sundhedsvaesnet-1079558,
2018. Accessed: 2018-06-22.
[46] Charlotte Mouritsen Anna Marie Fink.
"kirurgi pakken projek-
tbeskrivelse".
http://www.vest.rm.dk/siteassets/afdelinger/
administrationen/kvalitet-og-udvikling/emner-div/
patientsikkerhed/pakkerne/projektbeskrivelse-kirurgi-hev.
pdf, 2018. Accessed: 2018-28-05.
91
==PAGE:99==
[47] K Asimakopoulou, P Newton, AJ Sinclair, and S Scambler. Health care
professionals’ understanding and day-to-day practice of patient empow-
erment in diabetes; time to pause for thought? Diabetes research and
clinical practice, 95(2):224–229, 2012.
[48] Mark Graban. Lean hospitals: improving quality, patient safety, and
employee satisfaction. CRC Press, 2011.
[49] Sundhedsplatformen. Tip sheet ambulant besøg. Internal document,
2018. Accessed: 2018-05-09.
[50] Brenda Rinehart.
Applying lean principles in healthcare.
Radiology
management, 2013.
[51] M. Frankel, Richard. Ehr and physician–patient communication. Safety
of Health It, pages 129–141, 2016.
[52] Kristina
Hohlmann
Martin
Poul
Gangelhoﬀ
Hansen.
Overlæge
om
udskældt
system:
-
det
føles
som
om,
vi
løber
i
vand.
http://nyheder.tv2.dk/samfund/
2017-11-16-overlaege-om-udskaeldt-system-det-foeles-som-om-vi-loeber-i-vand,
2018. Accessed: 2018-20-06.
[53] Ronald G. Bercaw, Kurt A. Knoth, and Susan T. Snedaker. The lean
electronic health record: A journey toward optimized care. Lean Elec-
tronic Health Record: a Journey Toward Optimized Care, pages 1–275,
2017.
[54] Matthew B. Weinger, Oliver W. Herndon, Mark H. Zornow, Martin P.
Paulus, David M. Gaba, and Larry T. Dallen. An objective methodol-
ogy for task analysis and workload assessment in anesthesia providers.
Anesthesiology, 80(1):77–92, 1994.
[55] Cindy Jimmerson. Value stream mapping for healthcare made easy. CRC
Press, 2009.
[56] Andrew Georgiou, Anne Marks, Jeﬀrey Braithwaite, and Johanna Irene
Westbrook. Gaps, disconnections, and discontinuities—the role of infor-
mation exchange in the delivery of quality long-term care. The Geron-
tologist, 53(5):770–779, 2013.
[57] Anita L. Tucker and Steven J. Spear. Operational failures and inter-
ruptions in hospital nursing. Health Services Research, 41(3):643–662,
2006.
92
==PAGE:100==
[58] Copyright Wolters, Kluwer Health, Juliana J. Brixey, Craig W. John-
son, Phd Todd, R. Johnson, James P. Turley, Rn Jiajie Zhang, Drs
Brixey, C. W. Johnson, and T. R. Johnson. A concept analysis of the
phenomenon interruption, 2007.
[59] Carla M Bastemeijer, Lennard Voogt, Johannes P van Ewijk, and Jan A
Hazelzet. What do patient values and preferences mean? a taxonomy
based on a systematic review of qualitative papers. Patient education
and counseling, 100(5):871–881, 2017.
[60] J Michael McGinnis, Leigh Stuckhardt, Robert Saunders, Mark Smith,
et al. Best care at lower cost: the path to continuously learning health
care in America. National Academies Press, 2013.
[61] John R Wilson. Fundamentals of systems ergonomics/human factors.
Applied ergonomics, 45(1):5–13, 2014.
[62] Hege Mari Johnsen, Ann L Fruhling, and Mariann Fossum. An analysis
of the work system framework for examining information exchange in a
healthcare setting. CAIS, 39:5, 2016.
[63] Peter Checkland. Systems thinking. Rethinking management informa-
tion systems, pages 45–56, 1999.
[64] Steven Alter.
Viewing systems as services: a fresh approach in the
is ﬁeld.
Communications of the association for information systems,
26(1):11, 2010.
[65] P. Carayon, A. Schoofs Hundt, B-T Karsh, A. P. Gurses, C. J. Alvarado,
M. Smith, and P. Flatley Brennan.
Work system design for patient
safety: the seips model. Quality and Safety in Health Care, 15(1):I50–
I58, 2006.
[66] Robert M Hamm. Clinical intuition and clinical analysis: expertise and
the cognitive continuum. Professional judgment: A reader in clinical
decision making, pages 78–105, 1988.
[67] Christoph Thuemmler and Chunxue Bai. Health 4.0: How virtualization
and big data are revolutionizing healthcare. Springer, 2017.
[68] Sara Nasiri, Mohammad Mehdi Sepehri, and Marjan Khobreh. Utilizing
acquired healthcare knowledge, based on using electronic health records.
In Symposium of the Austrian HCI and Usability Engineering Group,
pages 429–439. Springer, 2011.
93
==PAGE:101==
[69] Tim Brown. Design thinking. Harvard Business Review, 86(6):84–+,
2008.
[70] SA Collins, S Bakken, DK Vawdrey, E Coiera, and L Currie. Clinician
preferences for verbal communication compared to ehr documentation
in the icu. Applied clinical informatics, 2(2):190, 2011.
[71] Erik Joukes, Ameen Abu-Hanna, Ronald Cornet, and Nicolette F
de Keizer. Time spent on dedicated patient care and documentation
tasks before and after the introduction of a structured and standard-
ized electronic health record. Applied clinical informatics, 9(01):046–
053, 2018.
[72] Christine Sinsky, Lacey Colligan, Ling Li, Mirela Prgomet, Sam
Reynolds, Lindsey Goeders, Johanna Westbrook, Michael Tutty, and
George Blike. Allocation of physician time in ambulatory practice: a
time and motion study in 4 specialties. Annals of internal medicine,
165(11):753–760, 2016.
[73] Joan S Ash, Dean F Sittig, Richard Dykstra, Emily Campbell, and Ken-
neth Guappone. The unintended consequences of computerized provider
order entry: ﬁndings from a mixed methods exploration. International
journal of medical informatics, 78:S69–S76, 2009.
[74] Julie Parker and Enrico Coiera. Improving clinical communication: A
view from psychology. J Am Med Informatics Assoc, 7:453–461, 2000.
[75] Mark A Ballermann, Nicola T Shaw, Damon C Mayes, RT Noel Gibney,
and Johanna I Westbrook. Validation of the work observation method
by activity timing (wombat) method of conducting time-motion obser-
vations in critical care settings: an observational study. BMC medical
informatics and decision making, 11(1):32, 2011.
[76] Yeona Jang, Michel A. Lortie, and Steven Sanche. Return on investment
in electronic health records in primary care practices: A mixed-methods
study. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 16(9):e25, 2014.
94
==PAGE:102==
1.  Understøttelse af papirløse arbejdsgange og struktureret, klinisk 
dokumentation, processer og kvalitetskontrol 
2.  Øget produktivitet på grund af bedre mulighed for planlægning og 
anvendelse af ressourcer samt reducering af dobbeltindtastning 
3.  Øget kvalitet i behandlingen som følge af forbedret klinisk oversigt og 
beslutningsstøtte 
4.  Nem og brugervenlig adgang til patientjournaler og data for al 
sundhedspersonale 
5.  Genbrug af data til forskning og til kontinuerlig optimering af kvalitet og 
anvendelse af ​behandlingsressourcer 
6.  Bedre understøttelse af kompliceret og langvarig behandling 
9 
Det får vi med Sundhedsplatformen 
A
Appendix
95
==PAGE:103==
10 
1. 
Forbedringer i patientsikkerhed og behandlingsforløb 
2. 
Effektivisering af kliniske processer og arbejdsgange  
3. 
Øget patient- og medarbejdertilfredshed 
Effekter og gevinster 
96
==PAGE:104==
21/05/18 11:55
Målsætninger for Region Hovedstaden
Page 1 of 2
https://www.regionh.dk/om-region-hovedstaden/fakta/Mission-vision-og-maalsaetninger/Sider/Målsætninger-for-regionen.aspx
Til fagfolk
Til borgere
Til borgere
For sundhed og vækst i
hovedstaden
Målsætninger for Region Hovedstaden
​Se de politiske målsætninger, regionen arbejder efter.
Redaktør Christian Hult
Patientens situation styrer forløbet ​
Sundhedsvæsnet skal altid tage udgangspunkt i det enkelte menneske, når patientens forløb
tilrettelægges. 
Patienterne har forskellige forudsætninger for at indgå i behandlingsforløb og opnå det bedste
resultat af deres behandling. Derfor skal planlægning og gennemførelse af behandling tage
udgangspunkt i patientens situation, forudsætninger, ressourcer og motivation. 
Høj faglig kvalitet ​
Behandlingen i sundhedsvæsenet skal baseres på retningslinjer, der afspejler den højeste
faglige standard på et givent område. Behandlingen skal være sikker, og der arbejdes
systematisk med at reducere risici for skader og utilsigtede hændelser. 
Ekspansive vidensmiljøer ​
Region Hovedstaden står internationalt stærkt i forhold til markante vidensmiljøer, hvor
generering af ny viden og innovation er i fokus. 
Samtidig rummer Region Hovedstaden et af verdens bedste sundhedsvæsener med kort vej fra
banebrydende kliniske forskningsresultater til ny og bedre behandling af patienterne, nye
patenter og nye kommercialiseringsmuligheder. 
Ved at satse på udvikling af det samlede vidensmiljø i hovedstadsregionen, får vi styrket den
fælles indsats for den langsigtede udvikling 
af vækst og livskvalitet. 
Grøn og innovativ metropol ​
Det, at være en attraktiv metropol, der kan tiltrække arbejdskraft og viden, er afgørende for, at
regionen kan fastholde sine styrkepositioner. 
Region Hovedstaden er internationalt anerkendt for et attraktivt bymiljø, hvor man trygt kan
færdes, og hvor der er adgang til både vand og grønne områder. Internationalt står regionen
stærkt inden for det blå/grønne erhvervsliv, særligt med gode samarbejder med forskere og
oﬀentlige institutioner, der skaber innovative løsninger på globale samfundsudfordringer inden
for klima og miljø. 
Region Hovedstaden skal i højere grad være god til at udnytte det gode afsæt og indgå
strategiske samarbejder om den blå/grønne og innovative metropol, der gør regionen attraktiv
for borgere, turister, arbejdskraft og investeringer, og samtidig skaber potentiale for vækst på
den internationale scene.​
REGION HOVEDSTADEN - KONGENS VÆNGE 2 - 3400 HILLERØD -
TELEFON: 38 66 50 00 - FAX: 38 66 69 94 - E-MAIL: REGIONH@REGIONH.DK
B
Appendix
97
==PAGE:105==
Doctors'(questionnaire
Number(of(answers:
9
1.
Specialization
2.(
Age
3.(
Were1you1prior1to1the1implementation,1aware1of1the1change1in1
working1procedures1caused1by1SP?
Yes
5
No
4
4.
Ideally,1would1you1then1prefer1to1do1the1documentation1during1a1
consultation1or1after?
During1consultation
3
After1consultation
6
5.
Do1you1think1the1doctors1tasks1have1become1more1standardized1
with1SP?
Yes
7
No
2
5.a
Why?
Yes
3 Standardized1journals
Forced1to1go1through1systems
No
2 Limits1the1creativity
Limitations1in1some1specialties
6.
Do1you1think1your1colleagues1prefer1to1follow1a1standardized1flow1
in1SP?
I1belive1my11colleagues1prefer1a1stanard
0
I1believe1my1colleagues1prefer1their1own1way1of1documenting
8
Either1and,1smartphrases11implies1a1risk1for1writing1something1that1has1not1
been1checked.1In1opporsite,1SP1provides1som1security1checks1to1reduce1errors.
If1yes,1is1it1a1
good1thing?
01
21
41
61
Yes1
No1
QuesRon131
01
21
41
61
81
During1consultaRon1
ASer1consultaRon1
QuesRon141
01
11
21
31
41
51
61
71
81
91
I1belive1my11colleagues1prefer1a1
stanard1
I1believe1my1colleagues1prefer1
their1own1way1of1documenRng1
QuesRon161
C
Appendix
98
==PAGE:106==
7.
Which1of1the1following1opportunities1would1you1prefer,1if1you1
experience1a1challenge1with1SP?
Search1for1an1answer1for1my1self
3
Ask1a1colleague
5
Ask1someone1else,1who?
1
8.
Diagram
Irrelevant
9.(
According1to1you,1is1it1realistic1to1standardize1the1work1of1a1
doctor?
Why?
Yes
2 To1a1certain1extend1…1(rest1is1unreadable)
No
7 No1doctor1or1patient1is1the1same
Patients1are1different,1and1individualisation1should1be1possible
Only1in1some1cases
Not1every1patient1can1follow1a1flow1chart
Too1many1individualists
Medicine1is1an1art,1not1a1science
Patients1are1different1and1standardization1can1lead1to1loss1of1important1knowledge
10.
Can1you1give1an1example1where1standardization1for1doctors1
works1well?
a
Documentation1will1be1easier1when1everybody1does1it1the1same1way
b
In1case1of1surgeries
c
Acute1patient11care
d
resusitation
e
Hjertestop
f
Traumekald
g
When1ordinating1blood1samples,1medicine1and1pain1packages(smertepakker)1etc.
h
In1case1of1patient1safety1is1standardization1good,1and1also1in1case1of1research1and1data1collection,1but1for1the1individual1patient,1standardization1is1bad
IT1depart^
ment
01
11
21
31
41
51
61
Search1for1an1answer1for1
Ask1a1colleague1
Ask1someone1else,1who?1
QuesRon171
01
21
41
61
81
Yes1
No1
QuesRon191
99
==PAGE:107==
Friday 4 May 2018
Observations in surgical case department: doctor X
Rigshospitalet, Ambulatory of a surgical department 
- “I made this best./ord. and there seems to be two of the same now?” (The doctor did 
not have time to investigate the two similar ordered blood samples and went on with 
next task)
- “Among doctors it is a common routine to always measure right limbs ﬁrst, and 
thereby left. Despite that, Sundhedsplatformen wants me to ﬁll out the result for left 
side ﬁrts which is just troublesome.”
- “I really do not fancy the message I get when I log into FMK(red: Fælles medicinkort), 
“You are successfully logged in”, what should I used it for?!”
- “It is a challenge that the nurse and I cannot register information in the system 
simultaneously, and we are not always aware of who is doing what when, and that is a 
risk of error” - Quoted in consultation 7 where the nurse and doctor typed information 
in the same table and caused an error.
Accounting for consultation 1-7
!1
D
Appendix
100
==PAGE:108==
Friday 4 May 2018
Observations in surgical case department: doctor Y
Rigshospitalet, Ambulatory of a surgical department 
- “The politicians want me to talk to the patient over the computer screen, but I prefer to 
write the medical record in my ofﬁce and rather pay attention to my patient during the 
consultation”
- The doctor explains that he can ﬁnd an enourmus amount of data in SP which does 
not provide any value to him or the patient. In his opinion it is data for the sake of 
collecting data. The doctor will therefore only do notations with relevance for the 
particular patient. He thinks the amount of data in SP is to detailed for him to apply in 
practice. The last is quoted while he showed me numbers and graphs of numerous 
samples registered in SP.
- Question: Do you know more about the patient after SP is implemented: “I can view 
records from The Zealand Region, and I have everything gathered which is a good 
thing. It was partically possible in Opus, but it is much easier in SP, and I can quickly 
determine which kind of patient I am dealing with.”
- Question: Do you think the patient safety is improved: “Compared to the times where 
notes were written unreadably by hand it is improved. But I still experience incidents 
that could have caused major errors where I think -Holy shit! Good we ﬁgured this out 
prior to … . Well, patient safety in SP is challenged by other issues, but there was also 
challenges in the old system.”
- “A challenge I have experienced is for citizens who has more than one CPR-number. I 
they arrive in the trauma center and are looked up under one CPR-number, but the 
other one contains an allergy warning(CAVE) it is totally fucked. I mean, there is a 
great risk that the patient will be exposed to allergies. Back in the time some sheets 
from a medical record could slip into a wrong journal, and cause errors, but this is 
something totally different.”
- Quote from contultation 8 where the doctor had to choose a speciﬁc case for ordering 
a surgery: “I haven’t tried this before, so I am unsure which one to chose, but I think 
this one seems correct so let’s try that”
-
Accounting for consultation 8, 9
E
Appendix
101
==PAGE:109==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
Observations in surgical case department: doctor Z
Rigshospitalet, Ambulatory of a surgical department 
- Doctor runs through a medical record and ﬁnds an ordination of an acute CT-scanning 
for the next patient, and says: “Acute scannings like this one, is only available for 
hospitalized patients, so I wonder if the patient actually has been booked for the 
scanning yet”. 
- He adds to the previous question of concern: “Prior to Sundhedsplatformen the 
secretary would have recognized this as an error since she/he is educated to know 
what is available in which setting. After we as doctors has to do both orders and 
documentation there is no cross checking of what we have done, and that is a 
drawback for patient safety.”
- “During the implementation we extended the open hours in the ambulatory to avoid 
increase in waiting time while we got to know SP, but the waiting time has increased 
anyways and we do not have the ressources to catch up on it. It is very stressfull.”
- During consultation 11, pictures of the diseased area could not be found in SP and led 
the doctor to ask: “Where do I see the pictures from last consultation?”, hoping that 
the nurse has the ability to ﬁnd the missing documentation.
- Question: “What do you think about SP?” Answer: “I actually like SP in many ways, 
especially regarding continuous consultations and research, but I think the everyday-
use is annoying when I have to press sign, approve, accept, solve and so forth.” He 
continues to explain: “I can never be as good as the nurse, when it comes to case-
orderings and documentation.” He points to the screen and says: “I could record all 
this in 30 seconds, and the secretary could spend two minutes, but now I spend 20 
minutes instead.” He elaborates further: “My notes has become 1/3 compared to pre-
SP. Maybe something was excess back then, but now I do not even have time to 
check content or spelling mistakes. I often experience notes where I lack information, 
and I assume it is due to lack of time.”
- Question: “Do you think it is possible to standardize the care for patients in this 
ambulatory setting?” replied by: “People are not boxes, but in some ways it is 
possible, though in SP I am prompted to press “yes”, “ok”, “solve”, “sign”, “accept”,  
and “conﬁrm” . It eats up my time”
- Question: “Do you feel more stressed now?” replied by: “Yes I feel absolutely more 
pressure that before! We produce the same now, but the waiting time for patients is 
much longer.”
Accounting for consultation 10-12
F
Appendix
102
==PAGE:110==
Thursday 8 February 2018
Lene Kim Strandbygaard
CIMT - Blegdamsvej, 2100 Østerbro 
- “Sometimes we ﬁnd that a doctor has found a proper solution which we and other 
doctors are struggling to solve, but no one knows about it because information is not 
shared”
- “Team of students called, black scouts, hired by Rigshospitalet, to assist the clinicians 
in practical issues. It became a succes with more than 165 student helpers, of which 
40 was at Rigshospitalet”
- “Helpdesk is contacted by the clinicians when they discover a problem in 
Sundhedsplatformen”
- “KIK’er clinical IT consultants assist with challenges that cannot be solved by 
helpdesk. This group of 20 people can log into a sub environment to analyze where 
and how the root of the cause is.”
- “Knowledge sharing is our major challenge. We simple cannot ﬁgure out how to solve 
it”
- “We do not have a platform where knowledge can be shared”.
- “We send newsletters, but no-one reads it, and it is a great challenge, it is very hard to 
make doctors know what is new and needed”.
- “Some of my colleagues say, “It would be so much easier if the doctor just did it the 
right way”, but the right way is not speciﬁed in detail for each department anywhere, 
and that is a challenge”.
- “There are trouble with getting data out of SP, and a great part of the data is invalid”
- “InBasket is like the doctors’ mail program where they receive sample results. We are 
having a lot of problems with InBasket since it is not used correct. The doctors are 
meant to sign sample results via InBasket, but does it in the patient record instead. 
Unfortunately people doesn’t know that this functionality only works one way, InBasket 
transfers the conﬁrmed results to the patient record, but conﬁrming the results in the 
patient record does not transfer the results to InBasket, which then becomes a mess.
- “Data cannot be drawn from Sundhedsplatformen yet, I know a lot of people is working 
to solve it, but it is something about the data which apprently is not valid.”
G
Appendix
103
==PAGE:111==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
Ledende Oversygeplejerske
Rigshospitalet, Ambulatory of a surgical department 
- “We have a clinical developer(Bygger) in this department, just returned after the 
implementation period ended. She is our go-to when we have challenges in SP, since 
she can still build a little bit.”
- The surgical department is part of a center with other departments in the same ﬁeld, 
and the nurse explains they have a contact person who manages all information 
between CIMT and the departments entailed in the overall center.
- She elaborates on information sharing: “When changes and new applications happen 
in Sundhedsplatformen I am signed up for a newsletter-email. News are targeted 
doctors, nurses and secretary so they can login and stay informed on any updates.”
- “To solve issues in SP we are provided with tip-sheets and manuals to illustrate the 
working procedures, but they are not applied very much any more. There are more 
than 200, but it is possible to search in the list. We have several additional guides in 
the personel room created by our own nurses.”
- “Every 14th days we have a meeting in this department where we discuss 
improvements needed in SP. For example are we not using best./ord.-sets yet, since it 
requires some organizational changes.”
H
Appendix
104
==PAGE:112==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
Organisation and implementation: Margit Roed Heman
Rigshospitalet, Ambulatory of a surgical department 
- Margit is the leading head nurse(red: ledende oversygeplejerske) at the surgical 
department used as a case in this thesis, and involved in several groups working with 
implementation of Sundhedsplatformen both across regions and locally at 
Rigshospitalet. 
- Initially Margit gave an introduction to the complexity of the organization, and 
continued to explain the structure of the network they share information about 
Sundhedsplatformen via. One channel used for knowledge sharing is a group 
consisting of SP - project managers(nøglepersoner) meeting every ﬁfth week to share 
information across departments. The Health professional counsil(sundhedsfaglige råd) 
consists of primarily head doctors within the same speciality, but across hospitals, 
meeting on a regular basis to discuss challenges, actions and initiatives across their 
common ﬁeld. She also told that information about Sundhedsplatformen is shared in 
management meetings, in local team leader meetings, among nurses at each 
department. In her opinion knowledgesharing needs to happen in existing channels 
instead of a new row of meetings. Though every second week a one hour meeting 
only entailing SP, is helt for team leaders and superusers to discuss challenges and 
changes in SP.
- The local surgery department has established meetings for all nurses to discuss 
issues regarding the department including how to use SP. This has resulted in a 
common agreement on how to do notations and coding in SP.
- It has been challenging to draw data from SP, for example regarding number of 
hospitalizations, number of surgeries and the like. Margit explains: “I have 
emphasized the importance of following the intended working procedures strictly, 
since we really want it to work, and it might beneﬁt a more smooth implementation 
and help us gain the data we need.”  
- “The leading secretary(ledende lægesekretær) has managed to gain some data now, 
but there is still far more work to get done in that ﬁeld.”      They have noted the 
number of hospitalizations manually and compared with the numbers reported to the 
department’s own incident register.
- Education of new employees is challenging since the surgical department 
encountered only limited beneﬁts of the genuine Sundhedsplatformen training that is 
offered to all clinicians. When new employees had went through the training, they still 
needed a wast amount of one-to-one training in the speciﬁc working procedures for 
this department. The learning from the training course was simply too general, which 
I
Appendix
105
==PAGE:113==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
is why they experimented with substituting the organized SP-traning course with one-
to-one training, and that is what they are using now, combined with a fraction of e-
learning provided by Sundhedsplatformen. It takes extra staff to do the traning, but 
since the procedures are speciﬁc, they are gaining the most of the training in this way. 
This is also due to the fact that they have to pay salaries for the days the employees 
are participating in the SP training course, and they encounter more value for money 
by saving the course, and doing the training locally on the department.
- In general it is hard to implement, Margit states that: “First, it has to be learned, then it 
has to be used, then it has to be the center of meetings for improving”. She therefore 
states that training should be carried out in the space where it is actually applied. 
Regarding patient empowerment Margit explains:
“Regarding MinSundhedsplatform, which is intended to be a platform for the patients it is 
not implemented yet. We have decided not to inform our patients about is, because the 
functionality is not yet providing value for the patient.” 
“The opportunity for patients to book an appointment or ask questions for the doctor is 
not working yet. We ﬁgure that we have to learn to apply Sundhedsplatformen inhouse, 
before we invite the patients inside. “
For example the function allowing the patient to book a consultation is not applied 
because a consultation-booking depends on 4-5 factors, which the patient does not have 
prerequisites to decide on. The functionality is not yet supported by CIMT. She also 
mentions how the patient is intended to participate in writing the medical record, which in 
the long run will improve patient safety.
106
==PAGE:114==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
Observation notes - collected
Rigshospitalet Surgical Department 
BESØG 1 
SCHEDULED DURATION 8:30-9:00
8:38 start: Åbning af SP, ”Vis journal" er åben - kontinuationsnotater
Snak om patienten
8:42
Trykmåling i fod
Afmontering af fodtøj
8:43 "Nyt notat" skrives i fritekst.  Notatskrivningen stoppes da patienten har taget 
fodtøj af.
8:43 Patient på briks
8:44 Varmepude monteres på fødder
8:45 læge giver besked til patient + rådgivning
8:46 notatskrivning fortsættes. Under kontrol mener lægen ikke at smart-texts er 
nødvendig.
Alle smarttexts hedder noget med karkir, og er derfor lette at ﬁnde
8:47
SP spørger ind til medicin mod blodtryk
8:48 Fritekst færdig
8:48 Skema til trykmålingsnoter indsættes som smarttext
8:48 Patienten spørges om medicin der blev udskrevet ved sidste konsultation
8:49 Notatskrivning fortsættes
8:49 SP tjekker op på temperatur
8:50 Notat er færdigt
8:50 Udd.læge briefes og fremtid for patient
Ventetid på at tæer bliver varme
8:52 Signer
8:52 Plan best./ord. Fremvises for udd.læge.
8:53 Varmepude afmonteres og sættes på ny
8:54 "afrund besøg", --> Opfølgning ambulant besøg (er præudfyldt med ambulatoriest 
noter) sæt tidspunkt. Denne opfølgning med bestilling af ny tid sendes til sekretæren
8:55 Læge siger sygeplejerske koder, epikrise sendes ikke pga intet nyt. 
8:55 Læge viser kodning for besøget
8:56 SP taler om tryk ift følgesygdomme og konsultation igen efter et halvt år.
8:56 SKS-kodning der er lavet favoritter, og de er tjekket af. 
8:57
Skema til trykinput åbnes under ?? Hvor input går direkte til tabellen der blev 
indsat som smarttext
8:59
Læge forklarer at ankeltryk kan give falsk positiv og derfor vælges tåtryk. 
Patienten er set med forkert ankelttryk og derfor går de efter tåtryk. Patient har modtaget 
binyrebark der virker stivende på årerne.
9:00
Næste patient åbnes og scannes mens der ventes på opvarmning af fødder. (max 
to journaler kan være åbne)
9:01 SP forbereder apparat til måling
9:03  Læge indtaster tryk i åbent skema (højre måles først, og derefter venstre, men i 
SP står de omvendt!!!!)
J
Appendix
107
==PAGE:115==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
9:04
læge indtaster tryk
9:04 udd.læge måler blodtryk - læge taster, 1 minuts ventetid på måling
9:05 SP måler tryk
9:06 trykket aﬂæses, SP siger talet og læge indtaster i tabellen
9:06 lægen signerer
9:07 rediger notat - lægen skriver konklusion på målingerne og signerer igen
9:08 patienten briefes om resultaterne. Ny tid til om et år. (vindueskigger syndrom) - 
panodiler kan tages for at presse den ekstra
9:09 lægen spørger om patient har spørgsmål
9:09 anviser patient til at få ny tid hos sekretæren
9:11 
læge viser mig at hun har lavet best./ord på ny tid. Undrer sig over at der ligger to, 
men går ikke videre
9:11 
læge viser at det signerede notat giver en gul besked om at medicin ikke er 
gennemgået.
BESØG 2
SCHEDULED DURATION 9:00-9:45
9:11 
udd.læge briefes om næste patient. "vis journal"  notater
9:13
SP kan ikke åbne resultat de taler om..?
9:13 læge spritter hænder
9:13 forskellige notater i journalen skimmes og det fastslåes at patienten skal have 
målt tåtryk
9:14 nyt notat åbnes og smart text med tabel til tåtryk er indsat
9:14 SP henter patient og spørger ind til CPR-nummer(skete ikke til første 
konsultation)
9:14 læge forklarer udd.læge at der skal spørges om CPR og noteres
9:15 "plan" er åben
9:15 patienten er budt velkommen og sætter sig
9:22 læge spørger om patienten fejler andet
9:22 patient uddyber på andre sygdomme og rygestatus, samliv og alkohol
9:23 patient anvises i at lægge sig på briks og afklædning læge beslutter at måle på 
åreforkalkning, og tåtryk(BLIVER DISSE TASTET IND?)
9:24 notat med smarttext udfyldes mens patient afklæder sig
9:25 læge ser til patient på briksen
9:25 SP begynder anrettese af scanning
9:25 læge laver tryktest på patientens fødder og tilser sår.
9:25 Udd.læge anlæger varmepude
9:26 notatskrivning fortsættes (gule ord: bilateral, læg og fod) -ubrugelige i som 
struktureret data pga den store mængde fritekst), andet stykke gult tekst erstattes med 
fritekst. (ville friteksten før være dikteret?  Ja. 
9:30 notatskrivning færdig
9:30 tabel åbnes hvor data skal skrives ind
9:31 lægen forklarer at hun skriver i journalen hvad lægens tobak, alkohol og 
livsstilssituation er. Nogle gange går SP ind i Splat og tjekker historik af med ﬂueben for 
alkohol, tobak m.m.
9:32 SP fortæller hvad scanningen viser
108
==PAGE:116==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
9:33 læge skriver hvad sygeplejersken siger om scanningsresultater
9:33 FMK åbnes, lægen logger ind og får en besked om at det er gennemført(?!)
9:34 lægen skriver videre på notat 
9:34 læge venter
9:34 der skrives videre i notat
9:35 læge venter
9:35 SP tager billede af resultat og lægen skriver videre på notat.
9:36 billede printes?? Læge venter
9:38 læge skriver videre på notat efter at have betragtet skærm
9:38 læge venter
9:39 læge skriver videre på notat. Gule ord: fastholdelse af rygeophør, venstresiden, 
hælﬁsurer 5 uger
9:41 læge klipper sin tekst fra øverst i notatskriveren til feltet: aktuelle
9:41 en linje slettes, og småfejl rettes, der skrives lidt til.
9:42 læge skriver og sorterer tekst så det står under overskrifter i skabelonen, så som 
tobak/alkohol, objektivt, medicinstatus, ekspositioner, anamnese. (Giver det værdi at 
tingene er opdelt) De er først skrevet et sted, og bliver derefter sorteret.
9:44 læge gennemgår notat med udd.læge
9:45 læge venter
9:45 SP monterer hæltryk-apparat
9:46 SP fjerner betræk fra varmepude og spritter den af. Og lægger den på rullebord 
med tåmålingsgrej
9:47 mens tåmåler arbejder spritter SP Ultralydsscanneren af.
9:47 læge venter stadig, nu stående ved patienten.
9:48 måling startes forfra (kunne denne måling være foretaget under scanning?
9:50 måling er stadig i gang, læge venter (kunne fx se næste patients journal
9:50 læge forlader rummet
9:50 måling startes forfra igen
9:51 læge og udd.læge går for at tale med en anden læge om situationen
9:52 patient briefes kort af SP og forklarer hvorfor det kan være svært at måle trykket i 
tåen.
9:52 SP starter ny måling igen
9:53 mens der måles spritter SP udstyr af med engangservietter der står på rullebordet
9:55 resultat er lykkes
9:55 tåmåler afsprittes
9:56 blodtryk måles
9:56 læge vender tilbage og modtager info om tåtrykresultat
9:57 lægen sletter alt under aktuelle og meget andet tekst, fordi der i stedet skal laves 
et notat til operation?
9:58 læge skriver ny info i journalen
A-graﬁk-journal? Kunne være brugt?
9:59 resultater fra prøve skrives ind i tabel der overføres til notat.
10:00 der skrives i notatet hvad UL-resultat var
10:00 "Plan" er en underoverskrift i skabelonen, og her skrives en note om a-graﬁ
10:01 trykker tilbage til "vis journal", men notatet er åbent
10:01 i tabellen ændres et tal
109
==PAGE:117==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
10:02 patient tager tøj på mens lægen fortæller hvad der skal ske
10:03 patient tilbydes videre behandling
10:05 læge har talt indtil nu, og er gået ind i "Vis journal" under "Laboratoriesvar" og 
tjekker hvornår de nyeste blodprøver er fra
10:06 læge forklarer om operation og risici
10:06 læge spørger om patienten må gives blod og siger at indkaldelsen vil komme i 
eboks. 
10:07 SP laver notat om at en dato er uønsket
10:08 læge forklarer at patienten skal have medicin på livstid, og at bivirkningerne kan 
diskuteres med egen læge.
10:09 læge siger at blodprøver skal tages hos egen læge for at sikre mod bivirkninger
10:10 reumatolog kan se resultatet i SP, og havde efterspurgt resultaterne. Læge 
fortæller at epikrise skal sende stil egen læge. Patient går direkte til reumatolog, som 
kan se notatet fra lægen så snart han kommer.
10:11 læge lytter på patient
10:12 læge laver operationsoplæg og får en skabelon frem. Har underoverskrifter som 
indikation, planlagt operation, historik, information og samtykke.
10:13 læge skriver
10:10 SP spørger ind til medicinbehov, hjælpemidler
10:14 gul tekst tilpasses og indeholder or som percutan indgreb, blodning, konvertering 
til åben kirugi, nerveskade og nedsat følesants, patienten, samtykke til blod(ja)
10:15 der skrives videre under indikation
10:15 SP giver lægen skriftlig information om medicin og operationen
10:16 "Plan" best.ord. Medicin vælges og ﬁndes og den rette dose vælges, udløb 
fjernes
10:17 best.ord. Case bestilles som er selve operationen lægen klikker hurtigt igennem
10:18 lægen signerer og siger farvel til patienten. Lægen fortæller patienten at han skal 
holde øje med eboks, og kan ombooke hos sekretæren om nødvendigt.
10:19 diagnoseliste åbnes og en tillempet diagnose vælges fordi den rigtige ikke var så 
let at ﬁnde
10:19 SP fortæller at hun har kodet med at der mangler diagnose
10:20 afslut besøg
10:21 notat til egen læge sættes ind og der signeres
Besøg 3
SCHEDULED DURATION 9:45-10:30
10:21 ny patient åbnes og journal scannes
10:21 læge spritter hænder
10:22 lægen scanner videre i journalen mens SP henter patienten
10:22 læge og udd.læge diskuterer hvad det mest sandsynlige udfald er. 
Ultralydsscanning skal laves
10:25 læge forlader lokalet for at hente patient og SP. Det viser sig at de bare er 
langsomt gående
10:27 patienten kommer ind og sætter sig
10:27 læge spørger ind til patienten
110
==PAGE:118==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
10:30 lægen forklarer for at forventningsafstemme og fortæller at bukser, sko, strømper 
skal ud
10:31 der spørges til tobak, og gives en ﬂink røffel
10:33 der spørges til arbejdssituation mens læge venter på at patienten afklædes
10:33 SP spørger til CPR-nummer
10:33 læge åbner "vurderingsskema" notat (AOP) og der fremkommer en ny skabelon. 
Og der kan skrives under objektivt, ul-undersøgelse, PLAN. Lægen skriver (Kommentar: 
"Vurderingsskema" ligger under "Status" og over "Diagnoseliste")
10:34 SP begynder UL-scanning.
10:35 SP tjekker at det var højre ben
10:35 lægen læser igennem og retter lidt til: gule ord: højresidig, fod, 
10:36 læge laver tjek på fødder + spritter hænder
10:36 læge åbner henvisninger skriver ned på papir de testresultater der skal tastes ind 
i tabellen (fordi man ikke kan have begge åbne samtidig og de kan ikke overføres fra 
dne ene til den anden SPILD
10:38 læge taster tal fra henvisningen ind manuelt
10:38 læge spørger ind til puls, åbner notat og skriver ind
10:39 læge skriver notat omrygning
10:39 læge skriver notat fra UL-scanningen
10:39 læge spørger yderligere ind til rygning og uddyber i notatet
10:40 SP fortæller om resultater og læge skriver ned.
10:40 læge venter
10:41 læge retter gul tekst(begge ben ses stærke uden ødemer, varicer eller sår) og 
venter efterfølgende
10:43 læge skriver videre
10:44 læge venter
10:45 læge skriver videre
10:45 læge venter
10:45 læge viser udd.læge hvordan man ændrer dato inde i tabellen som er 
vurderingsskemaet
10:46 læge forlader rummet for at hente en anden sygeplejerske der skal se på UL
10:47 læge vender tilbage uden anden SP
10:48 anden SP kommer ind for at tjekke UL-resultat
10:49 læge begunder at skrive videre på notat og venter videre
10:49 læge taler med udd.læge om hvad der kan gøres og forlader rummet for at 
spørge en anden læge
10:53 patient er færdig og begynder påklædning
10:54 patient skal op på briksen igen
10:54 SP skal lave UL-scanning i modsat side
10:54 læge kommer tilbage
10:54 læge fortsætter med at skrive under "Plan"
10:55 læge beder patient om at klæde sig på
10:56 læge skriver videre under "UL-undersøgelse" og derefter "plan".
10:56 læge spørger ind til medicin og åbner plan --> medicinering best./ord. 
10:57 læge åbner notat igen og skriver notat om medicin
10:58 læge skriver stadig
111
==PAGE:119==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
10:58 læge overdrager resultater
11:00 læge vil se patient igen efter tre mdr. og anviser i at reducere tobak
11:02 læge foreslår at tale med egen læge om rygestop
11:03 lægen fortæller at der bliver ordineret blodfortyndende og at tiden til om tre 
måneder skal aftales med sekretæren.
11:04 læge siger at SP er inde i sundhedsplanen
11:04 SP har kodet og lavet noget der skal sendes til egen læge. Der mangler at blive 
signeret.
11:04 lægen vil lave en ordinering i FMK og Signerer
11:05 afrund besøg der kopieres ind fra notatet til epikrisen, som lukkes og  der 
signeres.
Besøg 4
10:30-11:00 ER UDEBLEVET
Besøg 5
SHEDULED DURATION 11:00-11:45
11:06 SP fortæller at en patient er udeblevet og der kan springes videre til kl 11-
konsultationen.
11:06 læge skimmer journal og diskuterer det med udd.læge.
11:07 lægen har svært ved at tyde epikrise som er en fuld kopi at et notat, og dermed 
svær at forstå. 
11:08 lægen læser og læser og beslutter at der skal laves en ny trykmåling
11:08 lægen spritter hænder
11:08 lægen går for at hente pt
11:09 læge spørger ind til CPR-nr og derefter til patienten
11:13 læge beslutter scanning og anviser patient i afklædning og briks
11:14 lægen anlægger måling af blodtryksapparat om anklen
11:14 lægen spørger ind til sukkersyge
11:15 pt oplyser om en blodprop i hasen mens lægen sidder og scanner ankeltryk
11:15 læge scanner ankeltryk mens SP lav UL-scanning
11:16 læge måler blodtryk og mærker efter puls i foden
11:17 læge venter på UL-resultat
11:18 læge spørger ind til patientens symptomer + spritter blodtryksapparat af
11:19 læge opretter nyt AOP notat og får dermed en skabelon frem læge begynder at 
skrive testresultater ned mens UL-scanning fortsættes af SP. (Gule ord: højresidig + 
gluteal region og lår)
11:21 SP og læge taler om UL-scanning. Læge fortæller patient hvad der sker
11:23 lægen skriver videre efter at have talt med SP om målingen(UL)
11:24 læge skriver og skriver. Gul tekst: (begge ben ses uden ødemer, varicer og sår)
11:24 læge åbner "vurderingsskema" og indtaster tal som lige er aﬂæst af Udd.læge og 
hende selv
11:25 læge skifter tilbage til "vurderingsskema" og indtaster blodtryksmåling fra 
udd.læge
11:26 læge tager telefon frem for at beregne blodtryk.
112
==PAGE:120==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
11:26 i notatet overføres først data fra vurderingsskemaet når man har trykket opdater
11:26 lægen skriver resultater under UL-undersøgelse
11:27 læge skriver videre på "Plan"
11:28 SP fortæller resultat af UL-scanning og læge skriver det ind i notatet. Lægen 
bliver klar over at der står "Nær-okklusion " journalen og retter efterfølgende i eget notat 
fordi hun troede det var noget andet.
11:29 SP giver yderligere oplysninger fra UL der skrives ind i notatet
11:30 læge taler med patienten om resultaterne, og forklarer at det er en forsnævring 
hvor læge troede det var en lukning. Læge foreslår ikke yderligere behandling, men at 
problemet må være noget andet.
11:32 patient klæder sig på igen og der fortælles om åreforkalkning, og siger at pt bør 
undersøges for en anden diagnose - slidgigt. Dvs lægen henviser tilbage til egen læge i 
epikrisen. 
11:35 patienten siges farvel
11:36 læge skriver færdig under plan i notatet
11:37 SP fortæller at hun er afsluttet, at der er lavet kode og at der ikke er sat en 
diagnose
11:37 læge skriver fortsat på plan, gul tesk: anbefales fortsat, afsluttes, 
11:37 afrund besøg, der indsættes tekst til egen læge i epikrisen, og der signeres to 
gange.
————
11:38 Lægen undrer sig over den udeblevne patient, og læser på historik i journalen, 
eftersom det var et kontrolbesøg. 
11:39 lægen skimmer andre notater i journalen
11:40 læge skriver telefonnummer ned på papir og forlader rummet.
11:41 den gik på telefonsvarer så SP bestiller ny tid til om tre måneder 
11:42 læge læser videre på journal fra udeblevne patient.
11:44 læge er inde på et dokument der viser resultater fra tidligere trykmålinger.
————
Besøg 6
SCHEDULED DURATION 12:30-13:15
12:34 journal er åben og skimmet inden patient kom ind
12:37 Lægen hentede patient som fortæller om symptomer
12:39 læge spørger ind til tobak 
12:40 læge spørger til alkohol
12:40 læge spørger til arbejde
12:42 Læge fortæller om risikofaktorer og siger at tryk er målt så hun vil gerne lave en 
UL-scanning for at se hvordan det ser ud.
12:43 pt fortæller at han er blevet UL-scannet på Frederiksberg men der står ikke nogle 
notater om det, så nu foretages behandlingen igen.
12:45 læge mærker på lyske og fødder og puls ved ankler 
12:45 SP spørger efter CPR nummer
12:46 læge spritter hænder
113
==PAGE:121==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
12:46 læge laver notat: AOP, og indsætter skabelon som ved de andre konsultationer. 
Gul tekst: venstresidig + læg og fod
12:47 læge skriver notat
12:49 SP fortæller læge om scanning og hun skriver ned
12:49 læge stopper med at skrive og spørger patient, og skriver derefter videre
12:50 lægen læser sit notat og siger til lægen at formegentlig har været en blodprop.
12:51 lægen rejser sig og forsøger sig med UL-scanneren
12:52 SP styrer billedet på skærmen og lægen holder UL-scan
12:55 lægen scanner stadig
12:56 lægen er færdig med at scanne og vasker hænder
12:57 læge spørger udd.læge om hvad han ville gøre
12:58 der laves UL-scanning for aorta anneurisme, den er blevet målt og 
12:58:25 
læge skriver videre på notat
12:58:46 
a-journal-graﬁ, først notat, og så operationsoplæg. (konﬂikt: når AOP er 
påbegyndt og man under undersøgelsen får viden der kræver OP, så burde det have 
været en a-journal-graﬁ, men så laves operationsoplæg i stedet udenom.
13:00 
SP giver melding på resultater og læge skriver videre på notat
13:01 
læge skriver stadig,nu på resultaterne af UL-scanningen
13:01:21 
"Plan" skrives i notatet 
13:01:50 
intet aorta aneurisme siger SP
13:02:20 
gul tekst indsættes
13:03:00 
læge skriver stadig
13:03:15 
læge skriver på papir prøveresultater fra lægens henvisning , så de kan 
skrives ind i vurderingsskemaet.
13:04 
patient er færdig og begynder påklædning
13:04:37 
lægen er færdig med at skrive på papir og taster nu ind
13:05:10 
lægen er færdig med at indtaste fra papir og indtaster fra UL-scanningen
13:05:30 
lægen skriver videre på journalen
13:06:30 
Læge stopper med at skrive, og begynder at fortælle hvad der er sket.
13:07:14 
læge mener at pt ﬁk blodprop tilbage i tiden
13:08:10 
ballonbehandling tilbydes hvor de går ind i lysken. Dette foregår med 
lokalbedøvelse så patienten kan sige til hvis noget gør ondt.
13:09:50 
lægen anviser om risici for nyre ift kontrastprøve
13:10:08  
læge kan se blodprøver fra tidligere, men vælger alligevel at få taget et nyt 
sæt(?) prøver
13:11:43 
læge fortæller at sekretæren sender indkaldelse via e-boks.
13:12:18 
læge fortæller om ricisi for blødning, og spørger om der må gives blod, og 
det må der. 
13:13:20 
patient giver lægen skriftligt samtykke til udveksling af helbredsoplysninger.
13:14:50 
lægen laver et operationsoplæg, og udfylder ift. "indikation", "planlagt 
operation", "historik", "information og samtykke".
13:16 
Sp gennemgår tjekliste ift medicin-allergi, transportmulighed frem og 
tilbage, mulighed for at klare sig selv,
13:17:33 
lægen foreslår kolesterolsænkende medicin og hjertemagnyl fordi det har 
en god forebyggende virkning, men pt er ikke interesseret.
13:18:44
lægen siger hun vil lave en recept på hjertemagnylen
114
==PAGE:122==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
13:19:30 
læge skriver videre på notatet, planlagt operation
13:20:27 
der skrives videre på indikation, SP giver pt skriftlig information
13:20:44 
planlagt operation der skrives typen af operation og derunder er der blå 
skrift der og derefter gul skrift.
13:21:20 
lægen vælger den gule tekst med: "blødning, akutte smerter, konvertering 
til åben kirurgi og nerveskade, percutan indgreb"
13:22:08 
læge lytter på pt
13:23
læge er færdig med undersøgelse
13:23:10 
læge skriver videre
13:23:46 
lægen signerer notatet
13:24:10 
afrund besøg --> Plan
13:24:40 
Plan: lægen laver best.ord.
13:25:40 
operationen signeres som bestilling
13:25:50 
læge forklarer udd.læge om operationens navn
13:26:40 
Der sættes tekst ind til egen læge i epikrisen, som redigeres
13:27:25 
besøget signeres
13:27:38 
der laves rettelser i notatet
13:27:50 
notatet signeres
13:28 
SP har bestilt de relevante blodprøver
13:28:20 
pt forlader stedet
13:28:39 
SP siger hun har kodet og lægen siger hun har lavet diagnose.
13:29:00 
Lægen forklarer udd.læge om de symptomer pt har ift diagnosen
13:30:24 
lægen fortæller belæget for de prøver der er blevet bestilt, blodprøverne 
må være max tre måneder gamle, så det ser ud til at alle får taget blodprøver uanset 
hvad. Diabetikere og folk over 70 skal have prøver der max er en uge gamle på 
operationsdagen. Undtagelser som dialyse m.m.
Besøg 7
SCHEDULED DURATION 13:15-13:45
13:31:29 
Journal for næste patient skimmes
13:32:30 
Sp og læge taler om journalen og hvad der formegentlig skal gøres.
13:33:35 
lægen skimmer fortsat journalen
13:34:50 
lægen modtager skriftlig samtykke fra patienten (lægen vender 
erklæringen fra forrige patient på hovedet og skjuler de følsomme data)
13:35:00 
læge spørger patienten om status
13:36 
patient spørger ind til gang og hjælpemidler, lægen forklarer at hun ikke 
ved hvordan man ordinerer hjælpemidler.
13:37:11 
lægen prøver at sammenholde gangdistance med forrige konsultation
13:37:41 
Læge spørger ind til tobak 
13:38:11 
læge spørger ind til medicin
13:39:40 
læge siger at det er op til pt om hun vil tage sin kolesterolmedicin eller ej.
13:40:11 
patient bliver sat til at gøre sig klar til UL-skanning.
13:40:30 
læge spørger ind til motion.
13:41:09 
udd.læge mærker på patienten
13:41:25 
SP tager skriftlig information til patienten
115
==PAGE:123==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
13:41:30 
læge opretter et kontinuationsnotat og begynder at skrive.
13:42:14 
læge mærker på patienten efter udd.læge
13:43:20 
udd.læge tager blodtryk ved anklen
13:44:10 
læge vasker hænder
13:44:20 
læge skriver videre på notat, som der ikke har en skabelon
13:44:42 
udd.læge måler blodtryk ved fod.
13:45:30 
læge spørger til patientens vægt
13:45:43 
lægen notere i fritekst patientens højde og vægt.
13:46:07 
der indsættes en tabel der taler sammen med vurderingsskemaet
13:46:41 
læge skriver stadig
13:47:00 
SP måler blodtryk og siger det højt.
13:47:13 
lægen registerer blodtrykket
13:48:00 
udd læge fortæller ankeltryk på venstre fod først(og måler det derefter på 
højre, altså i omvendt rækkefølge) og lægen registrere
13:49:00 
udd. Læge fortæller ankelttryk på højre fod som SP registrere
13:49:42 
læge og SP har tastet tal i vurderingsskemaet samtidig, og der skete derfor 
en lille fejl med noget tekst der stod forkert. Lægen opdagede det, og rettede det med 
det samme.
13:50:40 
SP spørger om CPR-nummer
13:51:00 
lægen forklarer udfald af undersøgelsen. De aftaler at pt skal have et 
hjælpemiddel fra egen læge, fordi lægen på denne afdeling ikke ved hvordan det 
foregår.
13:52:30 
pt er tilfreds med at notatet sendes til egen læge, hvor hun kan få 
hjælpemiddel.
13:53:00 
næste tid aftales til om et år.
13:53:10 
kontinuitionsnotatet skrives videre af lægen
13:53:40 
lægen anviser til at aftale ny tid med sekretæren, hvis hun ikke gør noget 
kommer der automatisk en ny tid.
13:54:10 
lægen skriver videre på notatet under "Plan"
13:54:50 
SP spritter blodtryksmålere af og rydder op.
13:55:08 
lægen signerer notatet og går tilbage til journalen. 
13.55:27 
lægen skynder sig at oprettte billet til en ny tid, så den ligger klar til 
sekretæren.
13:56:43 
læge tjekker diagnoseliste, 
13:57:07 
luk computerne helt beder SP om. Den tændes om morgenen af SP igen.
Besøg 8
SCHEDULED DURATION 08:30-8:50
8:35:25 
start (computer slukket) læge spørger til patients tilstand (læge har 
formegentlig læst journal forud for dette.
8:36:40 
læge har taget beslutning
8:38:29 
SP udleverer skritﬂig dokumentation til pt
8:39:00 
læge fortæller at operation bestilles til de kommende uger, indlæggelse 
sker ikke pga fridage, og pt's tilstand er stabil
8:43:00 
stop på gangen, forlader lokalet for at dokumentere på kontoret
116
==PAGE:124==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
8:43:00 
sp fortsætter med patienten på lejet 5
8:44:47 
kontor - journal åben under indled besøg
8:44:58 
forkert diagnose rettes
8:45:22 
Notat skriver åbnes som operationsoplæg og læge begynder at skrive 
under indikation. Skabelon hentes frem
8:46:22 
gul tekst ændres til åben operation og blødning, patienten, 
8:47:23 
nyt notat åbnes og der skrives under kontinuationsoplæg (Kunne tekst 
have været kopieret herind?
8:48:10 
signer
8:48:17 
plan åbnes og der vælges noget med set? Ved søgning på karkir kommer 
der en liste over  muligheder. Forvirring omkring case og best./ord. Der oprettes en 
case-bestilling under plan og der indsættes en kode, og højre trykkes af som lokalitet. 
Under særlige behov skrives der noget om hvornår patienten skal operees.
8:50:25 
der er signeret
8:50:50 
Afrund besøg, gul tekst sættes ind i epikrise, og operationsoplægget 
vedhæftes
8:51:00 
lægen nævner navnet på den nye patient og virker til at vide hvad det 
handler om
8:51:15 
lægen forklarer at politikerne har udtænkt at man som læge skal samtale 
med patienten over computeren, men han foretrækker at skrive på sit eget kontor. 
Omfanget af teksten lå mellem 1,5 og 4 linjer. Læge mener at der går noget af besøget 
ved at tale med computeren i stedet for at tale med patienten.
8:52 
læge er færdig og hilser på ny patient der 
8:55:04 
læge og SP kommer ind på lejet og taler om den kommende patient
Besøg 9
SCHEDULED DURATION 9-9:30
8:55:51 
læge og SP taler om patientens journal hen over SP's computer.
8:57:18
pt og pårørende kommer ind -sp spørger efter CPR-nummer
8:57:30 
læge spørger ind til SP
8:58:00 
læge og SP er rettet mod patienten
8:59:15 
læge mærker puls på patient
9:00:15 
pt lader til at være færdige - lægen siger at det er normalt og spørger ind til 
medicin
9:01:00 
pt forlader lokalet
9:02:35 
læge går fra indled besøg til diagnoseliste
9:02:59 
der slttes en diagnose på patienten og trykkes marker som gennemgået, 
Der trykkedes på læs
9:03:31 
notat oprettes - kontinuationsnotat, pt afsluttes med notat om at alt var 
godt. Der skrives 2. linjer. Ingen skabelon. Kun fritekst
9:05:07 
notat er færdigt. Afrund besæg, gul tekst indsættes og det samme gøres 
notat fra før. Episkrise er sendt og besæget signeret.
117
==PAGE:125==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
Besøg 10
SCHEDULED DURATION 9:30-10:00
9:25:?? 
Læge sidder og skriver på notat fra foregående pt.
09:32:00 
læge siger næste patient, 
09:32:20 
læge åbner "vis journal" og skimmer - kigger under henvisninger. SP læser 
om patient, den anden henter pt. 
09:32:50 
læge spørger efter distal trykmåling
09:33:44 
SP spørger efter CPR
9:34:00 
læge spørger ind til patient
9:36:02 
læge spørger til Tobak og hjerte som står i journal
9:36:21 
læge beder pt om at lægge sit på briks.
9:37:11 
læge tilser pt på briks
9:37:27 
SP assisterer læge
9:38:01 
læge laver trykmåling på benet (h. side)
9:38:20 
SP forbereder ultralyd og trækker gardiner for
9:39:11 
læge skriver note på briksklde om trykket med kuglepind
9:39:44 
derefter måles på v. side
9:40:30 
læge skriver tryk på blåt briksklæde
9:40:50 
læge mærker efter puls
9:41:40 
læge er færdig med at måle tryk og puls på fødder
9:42:20 
læge spørger SP om at tage armtryk
9:43:50 
SP noterer armtryk på blåt brikspapir
9:47:33 
læge åbner notater og vælger kontinuationsnotat og begynder at skrive 
( her er det som om lægen ved at patienten ikke skal opereres)
9:50:16 
læge stopper med at skrive (2,2 linje total)
9:51:06 
læge skriver videre på notatet 
9:51:40 
læge spørger efter belastningstest
9:52:12 
læge stopper med at skrive (3 linjer total)
9:54:50 
sp noterer tryk
9:55:01 
læge stopper med at skrive (6 linjer total) 
9:55:15 
læge laver udregning på egen telefon
9:56:30 
sp noterer på briksklæde det nye belastningstryk
9:56:50 
SP beder pt om at klæde sig på
9:57:20 
læge stopper med at skrive samlet 7 linjer.
9:57:42 
læge laver beregning(% af funktion) på telefon og skriver videre på 
konklusion
9:58:00 
læge taler med pt om undersøgelserne og fortæller at det ser normalt ud
9:59:12 
læge beder pt om at stoppe med at ryge
9:59:50 
læge mener det kan være bivirkninger fra medicin, fordi han kan se der er 
meget medicin.
10:01:05 
læge siger han vil sende konklusionen tilbage til egen læge
10:01:50 
læge fortsætter med at skrive på konklusionen
10:02:12 
SP taler om næste pt
10:04:22 
læge skriver stadig konklusion på 2-3 linjer
118
==PAGE:126==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
10:04: 
indled besøg patientforløb
10:05:10 
læge bliver bevidst om pt'er han skulle have taltmed.
10:05:30 
besøg signeres 
Besøg 11
SCHEDULED DURATION 11:00-11:30
10:59:00 
Læge og SP taler om patienten 
10:59:15 
de taler om hvorvidt 1-årskontrol er bestilt, læge leder under aftaler, men vil 
spørge sekretær hvis det ikke er nemt at se umiddelbart.
10:59:50 
SP går ud efter pt.
11:00:43 
læge indleder og siger hej, pt kommer direkte på briksen, 
11:01:07 
læge skal mærke på lyske efter puls, SP kigger på tå
11:01:42 
læge sammenligner tå med et billede der ligger i SP under journalnotater.
11:02:04 
læge mener ikke operation er nødvendig og siger at der skal henvises til 
ortopædkirurgi
11:02:50 
læge giver udsigt til pt's kone som oversætter
11:03:23 
læge taler med patient om sukkersyge
11:03:20 
SP kommer tilbage med udstyr til at behandle tåen(som åbenbart ikke var 
på lejet)
11:04:30 
læge siger til pt at han skal stoppe med at ryge
11:05:36 
SP er færdig med at pakke tå ind
11:05:50 
læge og SP spritter hænder
11:06:09 
Sp beder pt om at sige CPR-nummer
11:06:28 
læge spørger til antibiotika som han kigger på under journalen
11:06:50 
pt pårørerende spørger til medicin- og læge beder dem om at diskutere det 
med egen læge.
11:07:48 
vi ses om cirka 9 måneder siger lægen, og læge spørger om SP vil lave en 
henvisning til ambulant kontrol
11.08:44 
læge laver kontinuationsnotat og begynder at skrive 
11:09:40 
læge signerer notat
11:09:07 
SP har lavet henvisning til opfølgningstid
11:10:40 
læge går ind i planlægning og kigger på sin oversigt over patienter.
11:11:09 
læge kigger på næste patient.
11:13:50 
lægen ser at der er lavet en bestilling på en akut CT, men det er ikke sket, 
fordi det kun kan lade sig gøre når patienten er indlagt. Akut kan ikke vælges når man 
efterfølgende sender patienten hjem. Ved akut i ambulatoriet, så skal man ringe tiil dem 
og lave en aftale.
11:14:44 
hvis der sker en fejl nu, så er der ikke noget dobbelttjek af sekretæren som 
før. Dvs hvis der er lavet en bestilling kommer det til sekretæren som tjekker det, men 
lægens notater kan indeholde fejl.
11:16:12 
læge vil tale med tidligere patient om aneurisme
11:16:31 
SP går
11:16:40 
læge ringer til tidligere patient
119
==PAGE:127==
Wednesday 9 May 2018
Besøg 12
SCHEDULED DURATION 11:30-12:00
11:25:53 
der er bestilt en CT der ikke er lavet fortæller SP.
11:26:11 
har noget der ikke heler SP diskuterer hvad det handler om
11:26:33 
læge og SP aftaler at måle tåtryk
11:26:48 
læge laver lige noget andet i epic "opret personale det er en besked til en 
anden læge.
11:27:12 
SP kommer ind med rullebord til tåtryk
11:27:32 
læge skimmer journal under "Vis Journal"
11:27:32 
læge spørger ind til helling
11:28:00 
SP kører rullebord til tåtryk ud igen - læge har ombestemt sig
11:29:00 
læge byder velkommen og taler med pt. Beder pt om at tage bukser og sko 
af og lægge sig på briksen.
11:29:35 
læge siger, hvis det går fremad, så tror lægen mest på at vente
11:30:42 
SP spørger pt om CPR
11:31:00 
læge tager handsker på for at undersøge pt
11:31:48 
læge spørger til billeder af såret
11:32:02 
læge vurderer at sår ser ok ud og synes ikke at der skal gøres noget, med 
kniv og gaffel tænker jeg.
11:32:44 
læge tager et billede der kan blive lagt i journalen
11:33:20 
læge mener ikke at pt kan gå for meget. Såret skal dog aﬂastes.
11:33:55 
læge spørger til anitbiotika behov. Pt fortæller at det lægges direkte i såret. 
11:35:05 
læge taler med pt om hævelse og kompressionsbind
11:36:00 
Balance mellem hævelse, sårhelling og risiko. Kompression anbefales, 
men så går sårhellingen langsommere
11:36:27 
læge lover at skrive til herlev at kompression skal udskydes til såret er 
hellet.
11:37:20 
læge vil give ny tid om ﬁre uger, men hvis det forværres kan han få tiden 
rykket frem.
11:38:05 
den mystiske CT-scanning er patienten alligevel blevet indkaldt til.
11:42:14 
SP har fundet gamle billeder som vises til lægen på SP's computer
11:44:40 
læge går ind i notater og begynder at skrive
11:45:35 
læge påbegynder notat - kontinuationsnotat
11:47:12 
SP skriver til hjemmesygeplejen og anviser forbinding. Hun vælger at 
kopiere lægens notat ind.
11:47:27 
læge fortsætter med notat
11:48:30 
læge skriver stadig
120
==PAGE:128==
 
Center for Sundhed, Enhed for Kvalitet og Patientsikkerhed 
1. november 2017  
Det nationale kvalitetsprogram - Mål 
Baggrund 
Det nye nationale kvalitetsprogram for Sundhedsområdet 2015-2018 er baseret på regeringens kvalitetsprogram fra 
20151, rammesat i Danske Regioner mv. i 2016, og skal implementeres i 2017-2018. Implementering af det nationale 
kvalitetsprogram i Region Hovedstaden vurderes primært på, at der er opnået forbedringer på de indikatorer i det 
nationale kvalitetsprogram, der vedrører hospitalerne. 
Det nationale kvalitetsprogram skal øge forbedrings- og innovationshastigheden, og samtidig fremme en kultur, hvor 
ledelse og medarbejdere er motiveret til at skabe forbedringer, som en del af det daglige kliniske arbejde. Dette skal 
realiseres gennem en række metoder og indsatser, som eksempelvis uddannelse, e-læring, lærings- og 
kvalitetsteams (LKT), styrket patientinddragelse via Patientrapporterede Oplysninger (PRO), monitorering af 
indikatorer og værdibaseret styring.  
Dette notat fokuserer alene på de nationale mål og regionens driftsmål.  
 
Hospitalernes arbejde med nationale mål 
Dette notat beskriver forventninger til hospitalernes arbejde med de nationale mål og indikatorer samt snitfladen til 
de regionale driftsmål. Målgruppen for notatet er Kvalitets- og forbedringsorganisationen på hospitalerne.  
Principper for arbejdet med nationale mål 
De otte nationale mål angiver den ønskede retning for sundhedsvæsenet på landsplan. De nationale mål er 
konkretiseret i en række indikatorer. Indikatorerne skal gøre det lettere at sætte initiativer i værk, der skaber den 
ønskede udvikling se Nationale mål og indikatorer her http://www.regioner.dk/media/2864/nationale-maal-for-
sundhedsvaesenet-2016.pdf  
For, at de nationale mål og indikatorer kan indpasses i forbedringsarbejdet på hospitalet, er det centralt, at de bliver 
oversat og videreudviklet i det lokale forbedringsarbejde målrettet den lokale kliniske afdeling. En stor del af de 
nationale indikatorer indgår allerede som driftsmål i Region Hovedstaden se bilag 1. Målhierakiet er: 
                              
 
 
                                                          
1 Nationalt Kvalitetsprogram for Sundhedsområdet 2015-2018, Ministeriet for Sundhed og Forebyggelse. April 2015.  
K
Appendix
121
==PAGE:129==
Opgradering af Sundhedsplatformen 
En ny version af Sundhedsplatformen er på vej. Opgraderingen til 
den nye version SP 2018 sker den 3. november 2018, så vi er klar til 
at indberette til det nye Landspatientregister, LPR3. Læs mere om 
arbejdet her.  
Opgraderingen af Sundhedsplatformen til den nye version er en del af det samarbejde, 
som Region Hovedstaden og Region Sjælland har indgået med leverandøren, Epic. SP 
2018 er en modernisering af systemet, som også gør det muligt at indberette i den nye 
version af Landspatientregistret (LPR3).  
Den nuværende version af SP er fra 2015 og kan ikke håndtere de krav, der er til det 
nye Landspatientregister, LPR3, som regionerne er forpligtet til at bruge fra den 3. 
november 2018.  
 
Opdateringen til SP2018 giver et nyt look samt mulighed for at udvide 
Sundhedsplatformen med ny funktionalitet. Det vil sige, det man kan i systemet. Den 
19. februar i år frigav Epic deres nye version, som i Danmark omtales som SP 2018.  
De faglige eksperter er sammen med Sundhedsplatformens SP-enhed ved at 
gennemgå indholdet (scope) i den nye version. Først når den analyse er klar, kan der 
meldes ud om, hvad der kommer med i SP 2018, og hvad systemet kan. 
Se her et grafisk overblik over forløbet for SP 2018 og LPR3 
Opgraderingen kræver byg af nyt indhold og uddannelse 
Der arbejdes på at gøre opgraderingen så smidig som muligt. På de områder, Epic har 
ændret indholdet i systemet, skal det bygges om, så det passer til den nye version, SP 
2018. Det giver samtidigt mulighed for at optimere de arbejdsgange, som opleves 
uhensigtsmæssige. 
Nogle ting i SP 2018 bliver nye og kræver uddannelse og oplæring, hvis de tages i 
brug. Der ses nu på, hvad der skal til af kompetencer for at bruge systemet. Først når 
indholdet (scope) for SP 2018 ligger fast i april, er det muligt at planlægge 
uddannelsesforløb i samarbejde med hospitalerne.  
Brugervenlighed vægtes højt 
Når der træffes beslutning om indholdet i SP 2018, sker det ud fra en vurdering af, 
hvad der skal til for at implementere LPR3 i systemet. Der ses også på, hvordan 
systemet kan forbedre lægernes arbejdsgange, medicinområdet og andre områder, der 
er særlige vigtige for klinikernes brug af systemet. Derudover er der en række nye 
muligheder i systemet, som vurderes af de faglige ekspertgrupper og KAI, der 
vurderer det klinisk administrative indhold. 
Disse fire områder vægtes højt i opgraderingen:  
• 
Brugervenlighed og produktivitet for sundhedspersonalet 
• 
Patientinvolvering 
• 
Kvalitet og patientsikkerhed 
• 
Bedre adgang til data 
L
Appendix
122
