==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
1
Abstract
In the following the relationship between the auroral oval and the magnetic
ﬁeld explored, and a set of proxy variables are created to determine the loca-
tion of the oval depending on geomanetic activity, with the activity calculated
using a solar-coupling function.
1.1
Acknowledgement
Special thanks to Lukas Christensen for help with optimizing the code of
the sorting processes. Thanks to Lasse Lehmann, Arne ’S Jegers and Ida
Videcrantz (s123469)for proof-reading and feedback of the written report -
along with support and understanding under the duration of this project.
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Abstract
1
1.1
Acknowledgement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Introduction
4
3
Background
5
3.1
The solar-terrestrial environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1.1
The Sun’s inﬂuence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1.2
The magnetosphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.3
The ionosphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.4
The Aurorae . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
A solar wind-magnetosphere coupling function . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Satellite missions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3.1
The Defence Meteorological Satellite program . . . . .
11
3.3.2
The Challenging Minisatellite Payload mission . . . . .
12
4
Data
13
4.0.1
Magnetic coordinate system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1
DMSP data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
CHAMP data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
Solar-wind data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Method
19
5.1
Matching Orbits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1.1
Matching Orbits, ﬁrst sorting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1.2
Matching Orbits, second sorting . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.1.3
Results of Matching Orbits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Calculating the oval using CHAMP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.1
The beg-end function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.2
PEJ-location
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Correlation between DMSP and CHAMP . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3.1
Beginning of auroral oval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.2
End of the auroral oval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3.3
Polar electro jet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.4
Method summary and discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Results
43
7
Conclusion
45
2
==PAGE:4==
8
References
46
A Additional ﬁgures
49
A.1 DMSP, all data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.2 Matching Orbits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
B Format ﬁles
55
B.1 DMSP night format ﬁle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
B.2 CHAMP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
C MATLAB Code
61
C.1 Matching Orbits - ﬁrst sorting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
C.2 Matching Orbits - second sorting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
C.3 Polar Electrojet location, and help function
. . . . . . . . . .
76
C.4 Comparing DMSP boundary points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
3
==PAGE:5==
2
Introduction
Aurorae, or polar lights, is one of nature’s most spectacular phenomena. As
such many are interested in knowing the time and location to best experience
this naturally occurring light-show, or to conﬁrm a past observation. The
aurorae is also a visual indication of precipitating particles and movements
in the magnetosphere. As such it is of interest to both scientist and ordinary
people alike.
The objective of this study is to examine if a connection between the location
of aurorae and the magnetic ﬁeld can be determined, and if the boundaries
of the auroral oval could be calculated based on magnetic ﬁeld satellite ob-
servations alone.
To this eﬀect, the known auroral boundaries from the Defence Meteorological
Satellite Program (DMSP) was compared to the magnetic ﬁeld observations
from the Challenging Minisatellite Payload mission. The two dataset was
searched to locate information on when the satellite orbits where at roughly
the same location at the same time.
These corresponding, or matched orbits, was used to examine potential pat-
terns in the magnetic ﬁeld data in relation to the auroral boundaries. Two
proxy variables was made in order to recreate the limits of the auroral oval
from the magnetic data alone. Their correlation with the known boundaries
was examined to ﬁnd the precision and any statistical errors.
The proxy variables was then be used to create a statistic model for the
auroral oval depending on magnetic activity, calculated from a solarwind-
magnetosphere coupling function.
4
==PAGE:6==
3
Background
This study is not an extensive examination of physical parameters or coupling
functions but rather a statistical approach of determining the aurorae using
only magnetic data. As such a detailed theory section is not included but
rather a brief, simpliﬁed, presentation of the most important physical aspects
that are examined in this project. Also a paragraph on the satellite missions
that have supplied the data for this work is included.
3.1
The solar-terrestrial environment
The term solar-terrestrial environment encompasses all the regions where the
interactions between the Sun, galactic cosmic rays, and the Earth’s magnetic
ﬁeld takes place. Speciﬁcally this refers to the magnetosphere, the ionosphere
and the upper atmosphere of the Earth.
The Sun’s inﬂuence is dictated by the physical conditions of the Sun’s core,
atmosphere and the solar wind. The interactions between the solar wind
and the magnetosphere governs the coupling processes taking place in the
ionosphere, and the parameters of the resulting aurorae.
3.1.1
The Sun’s inﬂuence
The Sun emits a contentious stream of energy and charged particles into the
surrounding area, called the solar wind, which originates from the outer part
of the Sun’s atmosphere, the corona. The Sun’s corona is so hot that the
Sun’s gravity cannot prevent matter from evaporating into the interplanetary
medium. This stream of charged particles, primarily electrons, protons and
alpha particles, is the dominant force out to the border of the heliosphere.
Embedded in the escaping plasma is the solar magnetic ﬁeld, which becomes
the interplanetary magnetic ﬁeld (IMF) as it is carried out into space. At a
distance of about 2 solar radii the solar magnetic ﬁeld is reduced to a radially
direct structure frozen into the solar wind plasma.
The sun has a rotation period of 27 days, and this spin causes the solar wind
magnetic ﬁeld to take the shape of an Archimedean spiral, named the Parker
spiral, and often is depicted as or likened to a ballerina skirt. Variations in
solar activity are transmitted trough the solar wind, both the small recur-
ring variation from the 27 days rotation period to the sporadic disturbances
caused by events such as ﬂares, coronal mass ejections and shock waves. The
frequency of these events can be linked to the solar activity cycle, a periodic
cycle of approximately 11 year. [2]
5
==PAGE:7==
3.1.2
The magnetosphere
The Earth is shielded from the solar wind and other cosmic rays by the
magnetosphere. It is powered by the planet’s magnetic ﬁeld and acts as a
protective bubble, deﬂecting the stream of charged particles emitted from
the Sun. If Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld is assumed to be a dipole, and no outside
forces were present, then the magnetosphere would resemble a sphere around
the planet.
As the solar wind impinges on the magnetosphere, the day-side becomes com-
pressed due to the pressure, and the night-side elongated into a tear-shaped
tail. Most of the solar wind is deﬂected but some of the charged particles
penetrate the protection via a process called magnetic reconnection. Upon
reaching the magnetosphere the supersonic solar wind is abruptly decelerated
creating a Bow Shock region. An illustration of the magnetosphere and the
magnetic ﬁeld lines can be seen in Figure 4.
Figure 1: Illustration of the Earth’s magnetosphere, [1]
The IMF lines connect with the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld lines on the day-side
allowing a small part of the charged particles to travel along the magnetic
6
==PAGE:8==
ﬁeld lines into the magnetosphere. The now open ﬁeld lines are then dragged
by the solar wind in the direction away from the Sun, into the tail region,
which can stretch beyond 200 Earth radii. Magnetic reconnection occurs
in the tail occurs when open ﬁeld lines from the North and South Pole are
pressed together, resulting in a reconnection line, sometimes called an X-line
due to the shape it takes. The ﬁeld lines reconnect opposite of their previous
constellation, splitting the X-formation into two closed lines. The earthward
closed ﬁeld lines move back towards the day-side being anchored in the iono-
sphere, while the ﬁeld lines away from the Earth is anchored in the solar
wind and ﬂows away. The day and night side magnetic reconnection creates
a global convection system. When ﬁeld lines reconnect, the particles travel-
ling along them are accelerated and stream from the Magnetosphere down
to the ionosphere. [3, Ch. 7 & 11]
3.1.3
The ionosphere
The ionosphere is the in-between or transition layer between the magne-
tosphere’s fully ionized plasma and the more neutral plasma of the lower
atmosphere, as such the ionosphere itself consists of partially ionised plasma.
Along with the charged particles from the magnetosphere, the ionosphere is
also where solar radiation, in the ultraviolet and extreme ultraviolet wave-
lengths cause photoionization.
The dynamics of the ionosphere, and the magnetosphere, is dominated by
various current systems. The Birkeland currents, also called ﬁeld aligned
currents (FAC), is a set of currents that follow the magnetic ﬁeld lines. In a
quiet periode the currents occurs as two pairs of current sheets, each with a
upward and a downward ﬂowing current - an upward current sheet contains
downward ﬂowing electrons. An illustration can be seen Figure 2.
The current sheets pairs stretches from noon towards midnight, one through
the dawn sector and one through the dusk sector - see section 4.0.1 for an
illustration of the magnetic coordinates. Of the pairs, the current sheet clos-
est to the pole is referred to as Region 1 current sheet and the second at a
lower latitude as the Region 2 current sheet. At the boundary between the
two regions, for both pairs, ﬂows the Polar Electrojet (PEJ) in the direction
perpendicular to the local magnetic ﬁeld.
In the case of high geomagnetic activity, such as under storm conditions, the
magnetic ﬁeld becomes more erratic. As such several current sheets might
be present, with less clearly deﬁned placements, though they always appear
in pairs and with an accompanying electrojet between them. [3, Ch. 8] [4]
7
==PAGE:9==
Figure 2: Illustration of the Birkeland currents, or Field Aligned Currents.
Note: The Pederson current is misspelled and should be Pedersen Currents.
[4]
3.1.4
The Aurorae
The aurorae are a naturally occurring phenomena, primarily observable in
the polar regions - referred to as Aurora Borealis and Aurora Australis in the
Northern and Southern hemisphere, respectively. The aurorae are visible to
the naked eye, but easiest to observe at night-time.
Aurorae occur when charged particles, accelerated by the processes in the
magnetosphere, travel down the ﬁeld aligned currents and precipitate into
the planet’s upper atmosphere. There they excite the neutral atoms and
molecules, causing them to emit electromagnetic line radiation, in the range
from ultraviolet to infrared. The colour produced depends on the atomic
number of the element that is exited, the most commonly seen green aurorae
is caused by energetic electrons interacting with atomic oxygen.
The auroral oval refer to the region where aurorae is most likely to be ob-
8
==PAGE:10==
served. Often found at high latitudes, the oval is centred around the pole
and elongated towards the night side. In quiet periods the oval will resem-
ble an elongated circle of somewhat uniform thickness, close to the magnetic
pole. With increasing geomagnetic activity the oval will expand in size and
the edges propagate towards lower latitudes, making it possible to observe
aurorae in regions well below the poles. The shape will change to an increas-
ingly elongated oval stretched towards the night-side, with an thickness at
magnetic midnight, a schematic is shown in ﬁgure 3.
Figure 3: ”The Feldstein auroral oval in magnetic local time and corrected
geomagnetic coordinates and its variation with magnetospheric disturbance
level in the northern hemisphere (after Feldstein and Starkov, 1967)”, [3,
page 336]
The auroral structure, often seen as bright long lines billowing across the sky,
are called auroral arcs. These band-like structures are aligned in the east-
west direction and can be split into two groups; the bright discrete aurorae
and the dim diﬀuse aurorae.
The discrete aurorae are the most distinctive auroral arcs with their curtain-
like structure. The curtain analogy is enforced by the apparent billowing
motion of lines as the the auroral arcs shifts and fractures due to small-scale
changes in the magnetic ﬁeld. An arc will consist of multiple vertical rays that
follow the local geomagnetic ﬁeld before ending at a semi-uniform threshold,
created by a drop in density of elements to interact with. The green 557.7
nm line for instance stops at about 100 km altitude due to decrease of atomic
oxygen.
The diﬀuse aurorae, on the other hand, are less visible and almost featureless
in comparison to the discrete arcs. It often appears as patches, though still
strong enough to provide suﬃcient conductivity, to support the electric cur-
rents, that discrete aurorae rarely occur when the diﬀuse aurorae is present.
[3, ch 13]
9
==PAGE:11==
3.2
A solar wind-magnetosphere coupling function
Geomagnetic activity is coupled to the behaviour of the solar wind, and
ultimately the activity of the Sun, and as such a solar wind coupling function
was chosen as the indicator of activity. The function, referred to as Newell
from now, represents the rate magnetic ﬂux opening at the magnetopause,
and is given as:
dΦMP
dt
 v4{3  pBTq2{3  sin
θc
2

8{3
(1)
Where v is the rate the IMF approach the magnetopause, the velocity of
the solar wind. BT is the interplanetary ﬁeld magnitude, and θc is the IMF
clockangle, respectively deﬁned as:
BT 
b
B2
z   B2
y
,
θc  arctan
By
Bz

(2)
Information about the solar wind’s velocity and magnetic ﬁeld is required
to utilize this function. As observations of these parameters are done in La-
grange point 1, and neither the transit to the Earth nor the magnetic ﬁeld
response is instantaneous, the calculations are time shifted with one hour.
To clarify, the Newell parameter is calculated using observations taken one
hour previous from situation considered.
The Newell parameter is reported to have correlation factor of 0.760 with
the more commonly known geomagnetic index, Kp, which measures the gen-
eral geomagnetic disturbance. In order to gain an understanding of the scale
of the Newell parameter, it is plotted against Kp for the years 2001 to 2005,
which can be seen in Figure 4.
When Kp is less than 3, the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld is quiet and when it ex-
ceeds 5 a geomagnetic storms is occurring, in between the magnetic ﬁeld is
considered unsettled and active. These thresholds of Kp, equal 3 and 5, are
shown as horizontal lines in the Figure and corresponds to Newell values of
about 0.6  104 and 1.3  104. [5] [6]
10
==PAGE:12==
Figure 4: The calculated Newell parameter plotted against the observed Kp
for the years 2001 to 2005. The red line shows the correlation between the
two, and the black vertical lines shows the Kp state thresholds chosen.
3.3
Satellite missions
The data used in this project was obtained from satellite observations, and
their missions are brieﬂy introduced below, the speciﬁc details about the data
itself and how it was used can be found below in section 4.
3.3.1
The Defence Meteorological Satellite program
The Defence Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) is developed by the
United States Department of Defence and tasked with long-term monitoring
of meteorological, oceanographic, and solar-terrestrial processes. Speciﬁcally
designed to collect and disseminate worldwide cloud cover data on a daily
basis to aid the US military in planning operations at sea, on land and in
the air, the program was started in the 1960s and saw the ﬁrst launch of the
F-1 satellite, in 1971.
The program depends on several satellites for information at any given time,
with the satellites in LEO polar orbit with an altitude of about 830 km and
an orbital time of 101 minute, giving global coverage twice a day.
From 1974, with the launch of F-6, the six satellite constellation was achieved,
always with two designated as primary, and the satellites readily replaced
when exceeding their 3-5 year life time. This coverage scheme was maintained
until 2016, with the failure of the F-19 and the destruction of the yet-launched
F-20 due to storagecosts. As such the next DMSP satellite isn’t scheduled
until 2023, which exceeds the expected lifetime of the current satellites. No
data is available for download after the beginning of 2016. [7], [8], [9]
11
==PAGE:13==
3.3.2
The Challenging Minisatellite Payload mission
The Challenging Minisatellite Payload (CHAMP) satellite mission was launched
in July 15, 2000, in a near circular polar orbit with an initial altitude of 454
km, under the mission category: Earth Observing System. The satellite’s sci-
entiﬁc objectives were, among other, to investigate the Earth’s gravitational
and magnetic ﬁeld, and was ﬁtted with both vector and absolute instrumen-
tation.
Speciﬁcally the satellite carried instruments to facilitate highly precise grav-
ity and magnetic ﬁeld measurements in order to observe spatial and temporal
variations in both ﬁelds. These observations were beneﬁcial to a wide range
of scientiﬁc ﬁelds, such as geophysics, geodesy, oceanography, remote sens-
ing, cartography, and solar-terrestrial physics. The mission ended with the
re-entry of the satellite on September 19th 2010. [10], [11]
12
==PAGE:14==
4
Data
In the following, the datasets used in this project are introduced. For each the
origin, format, time-frame and a quick overview of the information extracted
is included. First is a quick introduction to the coordinate system given.
4.0.1
Magnetic coordinate system
This project is done almost exclusively in magnetic coordinates; Magnetic
latitude and Magnetic Local Time, henceforth denoted Mlat and MLT, re-
spectively. The Mlat is comparable to geographical latitude, while the MLT
is the longitude coordinate but given in hours, where 1 hour corresponds to
15 degrees.
The MLT provides a distinct advantage when considering the aurorae or the
current system, as it is given in respect to the Sun’s location. In ﬁgure 5 a
polarplot is shown in magnetic coordinates, where Mlat is given as for the
North Pole. The top of the circle is always noon, giving the direction of Sun,
Figure 5: Illustration of magnetic coordinates, with Mlat written as for the
North Pole - Noon or 12 is always up and indicate the position of the Sun i
relation to what is examined.
4.1
DMSP data
The DMSP data used in this project is the night-side boundary identiﬁcation
data, downloaded from the The Johns Hopkins University Aurora Particles
and Imagery site, in the form of a txt-ﬁle per year. Data is avaible from the
13
==PAGE:15==
end of 1983 - in this project only the period after 2001 is of interest. [15]
The night-side boundary data is given in sections, each one detailing one
satellite’s pass over one pole. For each pass, 11 boundary points with time
in UT and coordinates in both geographical and magnetic systems are de-
termined, if possible. Also included are a set of four ﬂux regions deﬁned by
the determined boundaries, with four estimated parameters.
In this project only eight of the boundaries are considered, speciﬁcally the
beginning and end of auroral oval, the maximum ﬂux boundaries, and the
structured/unstrictured boundary along with electron boundaries, given in
the magnetic coordinate system, further detailed in the list below: [15], [16]
• b0: The point where the observed precipitation is above noise level,
used here as an indication of the equatorwards limit of the auroral oval.
• b1e: The ”zero-energy” electron convection boundary, where the elec-
trons have no curvature or gradient drifts. It is often the case that b1e
coincides with b0.
• b2e: The boundary where the average electron energy doesn’t change
with decreasing latitude.
• b3a: The most equatorward electron acceleration event identiﬁed
• b3b: The most poleward electron acceleration event identiﬁed. In the
event of polar cap auroral arcs, this may be located outside the auroral
zone, i.e. polewards of b6.
• b4s: The structured/unstructured boundary, based on the running
average of correlation coeﬃcients between individual electron spectra
and their neighbours.
• b5e: The poleward boundary of the auroral oval, as determined by an
abrupt drop in the electron energy ﬂux typically by about an order of
magnitude over a small distance (about 0.2 deg).
• b6: The poleward boundary of the sub-visual drizzle, poleward of the
auroral oval.
The downloaded data was processes by a loading script, divided by year and
processing each satellite-pass individually. For each section, 130 parameters
was extracted, the ﬁrst denoting the satellite identiﬁcation, which was saved
separately. The remaining 129 parameters was saved as a vector, per passage
- a format ﬁle has been included in Appendix B. Some manual editing was
14
==PAGE:16==
done, as some of the passage sections was incomplete.
As a result each year ﬁle results in a string-vector containing the satellite
identiﬁcation, and a data matrix containing number of passes  129 param-
eters.
Inspecting the data revealed a few things that impacts the following work
done in this project, and as such will be brieﬂy summarized.
First, it was found that if a boundary point’s UT timestamp was zero, the
corresponding coordinates was found to be very far - near equator or on the
opposite pole - from the accompanying points and as such deemed unlikely
and removed.
Secondly, the distribution of pole coverage was seen to heavily favour the
South Pole independent of year for the time period of interest, see Figure
6. This bias can potentially inﬂuence the distribution of the results when
searching for comparable CHAMP-orbits.
Figure 6: Histograms of distribution of the DMSP pole coverage in the
CHAMP years, for all DMSP data.
Another distribution which may inﬂuence the results are that of the MLT -
though the data is of the night-side boundaries it is not conﬁned strictly to
the night-side. Looking at Figure 7, a polar histogram of the MLT distribu-
tion for 2001 can be seen, using the b1e boundary coordinate as it a good
representative. The same plot is made for the remaining four years, which
show similar shape and can be seen in Appendix A, Figures 33 to 36.
Aside from the diﬀerence in the amount of data per year, the spread are also
quite varying between the two poles - the exact values can be seen in Table
15
==PAGE:17==
1 in the next section. Generally, the distribution on the North Pole is more
narrow, which might also aﬀect the process of matching the passages to the
CHAMP orbits. The reason for this might be found in the placement/move-
ment of the magnetic poles in respect to the geographical pole.
Figure 7: A Polar histogram of distribution of the DMSP MLT for the b1e
boundary, 2001 - with number of counts showing in the radial direction.
The increase in number of datapoints with year is most likely related to
number of satellites operated at the time, a set of histograms showing which
satellite is being operational at which year and how many passes it recorded
are shown in Appendix A, Figure 37. From that, it can be seen that satellite
F12 ended in 2001, and as such 2002 was only serviced by three satellites un-
til F16 was available in 2003. Another reason is the variance in observations
per day, which is perhaps also linked to the number of satellites - in 2001,
there is a great gab of about a month were no data is given, histograms of
this can be seen in the Appendix A, Figures 38 & 39.
4.2
CHAMP data
The data used in this project are the vector-ﬁles spanning from 1st of January,
00:00, 2001 to 29th of December, 23:50, 2005, along with the corresponding
absolute-ﬁles. Each ﬁle contains information from one orbit, which is approx-
imately one and a half hour long, with 1.13 seconds between observations.
In Figure 8, three orbits have been plotted continuously in geographical coor-
dinates, illustrating the path and direction. The ﬁles always starts at equator
moving towards the North Pole, continue to the South Pole and ends at equa-
16
==PAGE:18==
tor after a full turn - the order of regional coverage has been utilized when
building the various functions used to analyse the data.
Figure 8: Placeholder ﬁgure, I have the data pulled out to make a better
version, but it has been pushed to the bottom of the list - and with bigger
text
Figure 8 also shows slow west-ward drift with each passing orbit, ensuring
the satellite provides full coverage. In Figure 9 the MLT of the ﬁrst datum
in each orbit is plotted against the corresponding time using the entire time-
frame of the project.
17
==PAGE:19==
Figure 9: The MLT of each CHAMP orbit at equator, using the ﬁrst datum
in each ﬁle, plotted over time given in Julian days 2000
A script to load in the orbit information has been made for both the
vector- and absolute-ﬁles, for the vector read-in function additional informa-
tion was calculated and added; this includes a nan-padding in case of missing
data-points, calculating the external magnetic ﬁeld from the observed ﬁeld
and the CHAOS model, and producing the gradient of the resulting vectors
along with the gradient of the magnetic latitude. A format ﬁle is included in
Appendix B.
4.3
Solar-wind data
The Sun’s inﬂuence on Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld was previously explained in
section 3.1.1, the Kp information along with the data used to calculate the
Newell parameter has been taking from the omnih-ﬁles, providing the hourly
mean, extracted from NASA/GSFC’s OMNI data set through OMNIWeb.
[17]
18
==PAGE:20==
5
Method
In order to characterize the magnetic ﬁeld given in the CHAMP data with
the boundaries speciﬁed by the DMSP data, comparable orbits ﬁrst needs
to identiﬁed.
The following section describes the processing, sorting and
plotting involved in matching the two datasets, and analysing the result.
Based on the matched dataset, a set of proxy variables are made to recreate
the auroral boundaries using only the magnetic ﬁeld information. Also an
estimate of the location and intensity of the polar electro jet is made - all
three are then compared with the DMSP boundaries and their correlation
detailed at the end of this section.
5.1
Matching Orbits
The objective of the matchingOrbit-function is to ﬁnd orbits where the
CHAMP and a DMSP satellite run parallel or cross each other over a pole
area at approximately the same time, in order to compare the data from the
two dataset. The process is divided into two parts, ﬁrst a rough sorting to
ﬁnd potential matches followed by a more comprehensive comparison of the
two dataset. The MATLAB code for both sorting processes can be found in
Appendix C.1 and C.2.
5.1.1
Matching Orbits, ﬁrst sorting
The ﬁrst sorting is divided into years, because the DMSP matrices are gener-
ated that way, but also because the amount of data to be processed is quite
large, as such it was easier to monitor if the code was working correctly by
dividing it into smaller runs.
The script cross-references each CHAMP orbit with each DMSP passage,
with the ﬁrst threshold being the time; a comparison between the ﬁrst times-
tamp in the CHAMP orbit with the time given for the DMSP end-point. If
the diﬀerence is greater than 100 minutes then the algorithm proceeds to the
next iteration, as a CHAMP orbit takes about 1.5 hours. This is primarily
used to weed out all the DMSP passages that isn’t on the same day as the
CHAMP orbit.
If a DMSP passage is in time window that is the CHAMP orbit, then the
program will examine if any of the 10 DMSP electron and ion boundaries
have a corresponding CHAMP observation, that fulﬁls the following three
requirements:
19
==PAGE:21==
• Diﬀerence Mlat is less than 3 degrees.
• Diﬀerence in MLT is less than 1 hour.
• Diﬀerence in UT is less than 30 minutes.
If any DMSP boundary fulﬁls these thresholds, the orbit information is stored
along with the pole distribution and the diﬀerence in Mlat, MLT and UT
between the DMSP boundary point and the CHAMP orbit.
In total 17572 potential matches was found using the ﬁrst sorting.
The
results can be seen in Table 1, showing both the number of matches found
per year along with the percentage of the matches on each pole. There is
a great bias towards to South Pole, which in part is born from the DMSP
pole distribution, but also likely from the narrow MLT spread of the DMSP
passages over the North Pole, causing only a limited number of CHAMP
orbits to be potential matches.
All DMSP passages
Matches
year
# Counts
Distribution N/S
# Counts
Distribution N/S
2001
24840
34.96 %
65.04 %
2873
14.69 %
85.31 %
2002
27339
35.52 %
64.48 %
3012
16.97 %
83.03 %
2003
29922
36.62 %
63.38 %
3787
13.60 %
86.40 %
2004
31875
36.90 %
63.10 %
3749
11.23 %
88.77 %
2005
33060
36.68 %
63.32 %
4151
13.37 %
86.63 %
Table 1: Table showing the number and pole distribution per year of all
DMSP passages and the resulting matches after the ﬁrst sorting.
5.1.2
Matching Orbits, second sorting
The second sorting has stricter requirements but the principal diﬀerence is
that this sorting process considers each DMSP separately and makes a ﬁnal
decision depending on the number of boundary points that passes the thresh-
olds.
The script gathers the results from the ﬁrst sorting, comparing each of
the boundary points, speciﬁed in Section 4.1, individually to the matched
CHAMP orbit and only saves the result if four or more boundary points ful-
ﬁl the requirements. This is to minimize the number of matches where the
two orbits are perpendicular, and instead favouring those that are somewhat
20
==PAGE:22==
parallel.
First the Mlat of the DMSP boundary points determine on which pole the
crossing takes place, and extracts the CHAMP observations from that polar
region - limited at  45 deg, respectively, as the equatorial region holds little
interest in this project.
For each DMSP boundary point, the script extracts all CHAMP observations
that are within 1 hour in MLT from the boundary, rejects those that are more
then 3 degrees apart in latitude and then chooses the CHAMP observation
closest in Mlat - the result is that the DMSP is projected on the CHAMP
orbit along the latitude. If a point is found, the time diﬀerence must then
be less than 10 minutes in UT before it is considered a match. The process
is illustrated step-by-step in Figure 10.
If four or more points fulﬁl the requirements then the match is saved. The
resulting number of matches after the 2nd sorting is 2218, and the number
of individual boundary points can be seen in Table 2.
Boundary
b0
b1e
b2e
b3a
b3b
b4s
b5e
b6
# Counts
1420
1667
1842
1739
1259
2012
1579
1305
Table 2: Table showing the distribution of each DSMP boundary points
fulﬁlling the requirements of the 2218 matches found after the 2nd sorting
A second, smaller, set of matches was made using the second sorting pro-
cess, where 6 of the 8 boundary points had to fulﬁl the requirements. This
set of matches was initially used to visually inspect the matches and gain
understanding of the behaviour of the two datasets.
21
==PAGE:23==
Figure 10: Step-by-step illustration of how a DMSP boundary is projected
the CHAMP orbit along the magnetic latitude.
Figure (A) shows a DMSP boundary as a red dot with the blue line being
the CHAMP observations.
(B) shows the CHAMP observations that are
within 1 hour in MLT of the DMSP boundary point highlighted in yellow,
and in (C) the observations within 1 hour MLT that also are within 3 degrees
Mlat hare shown with the purple line. In (D) the green dot represent the
CHAMP observation that is closest in Mlat of the observations that fulﬁls
the thresholds, and as such is the projection along latitude of the DMSP
boundary on the CHAMP orbit.
22
==PAGE:24==
5.1.3
Results of Matching Orbits
The results of the sorting processes forms the base for ﬁnding similarities
between the known auroral boundaries, given with the DMSP data, and the
magnetic ﬁeld. First the distributions of the matches are elaborated upon,
before comparisons between the two datasets are made.
In Figure 11 the year and pole distribution of the found matches are shown.
From the histogram on the left, it can be seen that the found matches are
almost evenly distributed over the time period, and the pole distribution on
the right, resembles greatly the that found after the ﬁrst sorting, with only
14.43 % of the matches being located on the North Pole.
Figure 11: Histograms of the distribution of the found matches. On the left
is the distribution of matches found per year - on the right is the distribution
of the pole coverage of the matches.
The MLT distribution for the resulting matched orbits over the two poles can
be seen in Figure 12. Compared to Figure 6, the matches doesn’t have the
same coverage of the pole areas - on the North Pole no matches are found on
the dawn side, and on the South Pole the time before midnight are heavily
favoured.
The diﬀerence between between the DMSP boundary point and the projected
point on the CHAMP orbit was saved for each match for the three sorting
parameters: Mlat, MLT and UT, and can be seen in Appendix A.2, Figures
40, 41 and 42. Each was examined and it was found that the distribution of
the diﬀerence in Mlat is centred around zero with the spread restrained by
the limit of  3 degrees, which is to be expected.
23
==PAGE:25==
Figure 12: Polarhistogram showing distribution of the b1e DMSP boundary
for the matches found after the sorting process, with the number of counts
represented in the radial direction and the bin-size of half an hour MLT.
The diﬀerence in MLT is evenly spread with no centring, instead it shows
peaks at the outer limits. The UT distribution shows no clear peaks or cen-
tring, but an approximately even spread.
The conclusion was that the matches found was an adequate representation
for the time period considered with no clear bias, other than the pole distri-
bution.
Two ﬁgures proved particular useful in order to get a sense of the behaviour
of the magnetic ﬁeld in comparison to the order of the DMSP boundary
points. The ﬁrst of the ﬁgures, Figure 13, shows a polar overview, a quick
visual representation of orbit paths, and an indication of the location of the
projected points. The color scheme is a 5-second running mean applied to
the gradient of the external Bφ-ﬁeld, as an indication of magnetic activity
given in nT. The black dot marks the observation closest to the pole, and is
later used as a regional divider.
The second ﬁgure, shown in Figure 14, shows the absolute value of the gra-
dient of the external Bφ-ﬁeld plotted over time in Julian days 2000, along
with a 10 and 30 seconds running mean taken over the same. Superimposed
on this are the projected DMSP points, and the polar electrojet location.
As is often the case b0 and b1e are coinciding, along with b5e similar or equal
to b6, and their placement limits the peak magnetic ﬂuctuations - in the case
where the boundary points doesn’t coincide, b1e and b5e is frequently located
before major ﬂuctuations while b0 and b6 acts as outer limits. Another thing
24
==PAGE:26==
to note is that b4s, the structure/unstructured boundary, is rarely found be-
fore b2e and never after b5e, most often it is located very closely to b3a
and equator-wards of the polar electrojet. The other electron acceleration
boundary, b3b, on the other hand is more varying in its placement, it is
always after b3a but a lot of the time it is also located after b6.
Figure 13: CHAMP orbit number 4876 over the South Pole, with the color
indicator being a 5-second running mean of the gradient of the external Bφ-
ﬁeld in nT. The DMSP points are plotted with their actual coordinates, the
legend for the markers can be found in the accompanying ﬁgure, Figure 14.
25
==PAGE:27==
Figure 14: The absolute value of the gradient of the external Bφ-ﬁeld plotted
over time, showing the polar crossing depicted in Figure 13. Superimposed
on the magnetic ﬁeld are plotted the projected boundary points along with
the most poleward observation and the polar electro jet location.
It must be stressed though, that the example shown here are one of the
rarer constellations by far. In most cases the series of boundary points only
cover half of the magnetic ﬂuctuation peak, often with the beginning or end
coincide with the location of the electro jet - an example is shown in the
Appendix A, Figure 43 and 44, where it is evident that it is not caused by
poor alignment of the orbits.
There was found no clear pattern regarding which part of the magnetic ﬂuc-
tuation peak was covered - or the sign of the observation when considering
the vector-observations.
A possible explanation lies within the algorithm
that determines the DMSP boundary points from the satellite data, but that
is beyond the scope of this project.
Nevertheless the b0 and b1e boundaries, marking the beginning of the au-
roral oval, was found when the absolute magnetic ﬂuctuations was close to
zero - and the same holds true for the b5e and b6, which will form the base
for estimating the limits of the aurorae.
26
==PAGE:28==
5.2
Calculating the oval using CHAMP
Using the patterns garnered by comparing the DMSP and CHAMP matched
data, two proxy variables are created to estimate the beginning and end of
the auroral oval using the magnetic data. An estimate of the polar electrojet
location and intensity is also included.
5.2.1
The beg-end function
The beg-end function, however strangely named, does as the title suggests
and determines the beginning and end of the magnetic ﬂuctuations. The
desire was to create a simple but robust estimate, independent of intensity.
The end result being a function who’s input is an orbit vector ﬁle and re-
turns four sets of start and end limits - henceforth referred to as beg and
end, respectively.
The CHAMP orbit is ﬁrst separated into four regions, deﬁned from 45 de-
grees Mlat to the most poleward observation, and from that observation to 45
degrees Mlat - and similarly for the South Pole. Due to the way the orbit ﬁles
are constructed, the sequence of regions is always: from equator approaching
the North Pole, from the North Pole towards equator, from equator towards
the South Pole and from the South Pole approaching equator again. During
the work the polar regions have been denoted PN1, PN2, PS1 and PS2, for
easy identiﬁcation.
A set of running means were created and compared with the gradient of the
observations of the external Bφ ﬁeld, seen in Figure 15, with the horizontal
line being the mean calculated in each scenario. It was found that the 30
second running mean was the best candidate, with its mean as a suitable
threshold to determine the limit of the magnetic ﬂuctuations.
Using the
mean should help to ensure that the proxy variable takes the ﬁeld intensity
into account.
27
==PAGE:29==
Figure 15: Region of the South Pole showing the gradient of the external
Bφ-ﬁeld, and four running means taken of the absolute value of the same
ﬁeld, with the horizontal line being the mean of the vector in each scenario.
The function that determines the limits works in a similar manner as a run-
ning mean, each point and the ﬁve adjacent observations on each side is
considered to ﬁnd the locations where the mean-threshold is crossed. In or-
der to be a candidate, four or more points before the point considered have
to be above/below of the threshold and two or less above/below after the
point. The distinction between a beginning and end point is determined by
the direction the threshold is being crossed and the knowledge of which re-
gion is being considered.
In most cases this results in multiple candidates for both the beg and end
limits, as can be seen in Figure 16.
Because of the construction with a
window-search, a threshold crossing often returns two adjacent candidates
for the same passing, where one is removed. The way this is done is that
the script checks if two candidates are with one or two indices of each other
and removes the second one if that is the case. This introduces a small er-
ror, as it is not necessarily the one furthest from the threshold that is being
removed, but the Mlat diﬀerence between two observations is approximately
0.06 degrees and as such it was considered a negligible error.
In order to make an estimate of the limits of the auroral oval, the script
selects the beginning candidate that is furthest towards equator and the end
candidate most polewards. This selection bypasses the problem seen in Fig-
ure 16 where a beg-candidate has been found near -85 Mlat because of a
small rise in the magnetic ﬂuctuations, but it does not solve the problem
28
==PAGE:30==
Figure 16: The example from Figure 15, now shown only with the magnetic
vector ﬁeld and the absolute ﬁeld with a 30 second running mean. The circles
indicate the beg and end candidates that are found using the window-search.
that arises if an end-candidate has been found there. Several combinations
of smoothing-functions was tried but none adequately removed the small rise
in the poleward end of the region, which is born from the way the regions
are divided. As such a limit is introduced that any end-candidates cannot
be above/below  83 degrees Mlat.
5.2.2
PEJ-location
The script that calculates the location and intensity of the polar electrojet,
and its associated help-functions, was created and supplied by the supervisor
of this project. The script was adapted to the needs of this study, primarily
with the changing of the format of the input parameter and altering the out-
put intensity parameter from a colour indication to a speciﬁc value, but all
credits must be attributed to its creator. The adapted version can be found
in Appendix C.3
The function uses the absolute ﬁle of a CHAMP orbit and returns the time,
location and intensity of the polar electrojet. Figure 17 shows the location
and intensity of the PEJ calculated for the matched dataset. The intensity
scale is deﬁned with values below 5 are low, between 5 and 5.4 are medium
and above 5.4 is high. As expected there is a tendency of the higher intensity
events being at lower latitude. When looking at the placement of the PEJ on
29
==PAGE:31==
the ﬁgure, the distribution loosely resembles a double ring-structure, particu-
larly visible on the noon side of the North Pole. In the simple constellation of
a low activity situation, there are only one electrojet located between Region
1 and Region 2 current sheets, but in the cases of high magnetic intensity
the number of current regions can increase. The program only returns the
location of the PEJ with the highest intensity, regardless of whether there
multiple currents present.
Figure 17: Polar plot of PEJ location calculated for the matched orbits, with
colour indication the scale intensity returned by the function; with below 5
being low, between 5 and 5.4 being medium and above 5.4 is high intensity.
5.3
Correlation between DMSP and CHAMP
In order to ascertain how well the DMSP determined boundary of auroral oval
corresponds to the calculated boundary of the magnetic ﬂuctuations, each
calculated boundary was compared with the corresponding DMSP point(s)
of that orbit. The correlation for the proxy variables, is to be used along the
values themselves to make the statistical model of the auroral oval location.
Since some of the DMSP boundaries are quite similar in location, the cal-
culated proxy variables was compared to multiple DMSP boundaries. The
calculated equator-wards boundary has been compared to both b0 and b1e,
as even though b0 is deﬁned as the beginning of the auroral oval, it was
seen when inspecting the data that the magnetic ﬂuctuations often coincided
both with b0 and b1e. The same was found to be true for the pole-wards
boundary of the magnetic ﬂuctuations and b5e and b6, as such both of these
were compared with the calculated end.
30
==PAGE:32==
When visually inspecting the DMSP points projected on CHAMP, it was
also found that the PEJ was often located between DMSP boundaries b3a
and b3b, therefore the PEJ location was compared to them, with the expec-
tation that there will be a discrepancy in correlations. A script was created
to compare each of the mentioned DMSP boundaries with the corresponding
calculated beg, end and PEJ locations, which can be found in Appendix C.4.
5.3.1
Beginning of auroral oval
To ﬁnd the correlation between the beginning of the aurorae determined by
DMSP and the beg parameter, the coordinates of each was compared. The
diﬀerence in Mlat and MLT between each DMSP point and the corresponding
proxy for both b0 and b1e was calculated. In Figure 18 is a visual overview of
the location of the two dataset, divided into pole and boundary plots. Since
the number of b0 and b1e datums are diﬀerent, refer Table 2, the number
and location of the calculated beg also vary, which is the reason for the small
diﬀerence in location of the red dots between the b0 and b1e plots.
Looking at the plots, it can be seen that even though b0 and b1e are very
similar, there is a visual diﬀerence in regards to the placement of the calcu-
lated beg. Especially for the South Pole, the b0 boundaries are spread more
equatorwards, with the calculated beg almost coinciding with the uppermost
poleward locations. Whereas for b1e, the calculated beg seems more centred
on the distribution of DMSP boundaries.
On the North Pole it is harder to ascertain the relation between the two
boundaries, which most likely is caused by the smaller number of data. In
both cases it seems that the calculated beg is somewhat centred on the DMSP
boundaries, though in the case of b1e the proxy variables appears more equa-
torwards.
The DMSP boundaries are also plotted with a colour indication of the Newell
intensity, and it can be seen that some of the higher intensity events are lo-
cated at lower latitudes. It must be noted that the calculated Newell values
have been constrained for the matches plotted, speciﬁcally all values greater
2.5  104 have been set to 2.5  104. This is done to better see the activity
distribution, when considering ﬁgure 4 it can be seen that these values all
correspond to storm activity. No information is then lost by setting them to
the max of range considered.
31
==PAGE:33==
Figure 18: Comparison of b0 and b1e DMSP boundaries, the ﬁlled circles,
with the colour indicating the Newell intensity, and the red dots being the
calculated beg
In Figure 19 the diﬀerence in Mlat and MLT between the DMSP boundaries
b0, b1e and the calculated beg are collected in histograms, superimposed on
each other for better comparison. A positive diﬀerence in latitude is caused
by the DMSP boundary being close to the pole than the calculated proxy,
with the opposite being true for a negative value.
32
==PAGE:34==
Figure 19: Histograms showing the diﬀerences in Mlat and MLT between
b0, b1e and the calculated beg, with the DMSP boundaries superimposed on
each other. A positive diﬀerence in Mlat is caused by the DMSP boundary
point being closer to the pole than the calculated proxy.
Even though the matches have an in-built MLT limitation of 1 hour from
the sorting process, as is evident from the lower row in the ﬁgure, the diﬀer-
ence here can exceed that. This is due to the fact that the calculated proxy
doesn’t have the same MLT coordinate as the projected DMSP point, which
is caused by the fact that the CHAMP orbit doesn’t cross the magnetic poles
in a straight line, but rather has a curved orbit path, as seen in the example
in Figure 13, but more evident in Figure 43 seen in the Appendix A.2. In
order for the points to still be comparable, a 1.5 hours MLT limit was placed
on the diﬀerence calculation.
The inﬂuence of large MLT diﬀerences on the diﬀerence in Mlat was exam-
ined by changed the MLT limitation from 1.5 to both 1 and 0.5 hours. The
result was a very slight decrease in the spread of the Mlat diﬀerence distri-
bution with a MLT limit of 0.5, and a great reduction in data points.
Another variable to consider is the geomagnetic activity. The proxy vari-
ables have been designed with criteria that they should respond equally well
33
==PAGE:35==
no matter the activity level, as such it should not aﬀect the distribution. In
Figure 20 the diﬀerence in Mlat and MLT between the proxy beg and the
DMSP boundary b0 are shown divided by the two Newell thresholds. In the
ﬁgure the shape of the distributions for the low and medium activity levels
resembles those seen for the collected activity, in the case of high activity
the number of observations is to small to make any conclusions. As such
the comparison to determine the eﬀectiveness of the proxy variables will be
made over the entire geomagnetic activity range.
Figure 20: Diﬀerence i Mlat and MLT between the equatorwards proxy, beg,
and the DMSP boundary b0, divided by magnetic activity.
Though the histograms in Figure 19 conﬁrms what is seen in the polar
overviews in ﬁgure 18 about the distribution and the spread of the two
dataset, it is diﬃcult to determine which of the two boundaries correlate
the best with calculated proxy due to the diﬀerence in number of datum.
As such the histograms of the diﬀerence in Mlat are normalised in Figure
21 and displayed with normal probability density functions (pdf’s) superim-
posed calculated for each DMSP boundary.
34
==PAGE:36==
Figure 21: Normalised histograms of diﬀerence in Mlat, shown with normal
probability density functions for the proxy variable, beg, and the DMSP
boundaries b0 and b1e.
Looking at the normalised histograms it is seen that they both center around
zero, indicating that there is a strong correlation between the beginning of
the magnetic ﬂuctuations and the start of the Auroral oval. The mean and
standard deviation (std) for the pdf’s in 21 are listed in table 3.
Looking at both the means and the std, though the b0 boundary seems to
correlate the best for the North Pole, the b1e seems to ﬁt the best for the
South Pole. Overall the b1e seems a better correlation, the mean on the
South Pole is approximately zero, and not much is lost in precision for the
North Pole compared to the b0 boundary.
pdf b0, North
pdf b1e, North
pdf b0, South
pdf b1e, South
Mean µ
-0.4829
0.6921
-1.1310
-0.0564
std (σ)
4.6729
4.8653
3.4878
3.2224
Table 3: Table of the mean (µ) and the standard deviation (σ) of the prob-
ability density functions seen in Figure 21 .
35
==PAGE:37==
5.3.2
End of the auroral oval
The comparison of the end parameter and the DMSP boundaries b5e and
b6, are done in the same manner as described for the beg parameter. In
Figure 22 is seen the visual distribution of the two dataset, again plotted
with Newell intensity represented by the colour.
Figure 22: Comparison of b5e and b6 DMSP boundaries, the ﬁlled circles,
with the colour indicating the Newell intensity, and the red dots being the
calculated proxy, end.
From the ﬁgure, it can be seen that the end parameter doesn’t correlate par-
ticularly well with either DMSP boundary points, being consistently closer
to the pole in all cases even with the cut-oﬀat 83 degrees Mlat from the
proxy variable calculation.
The discrepancy is also evident in Figure 23, as a negative diﬀerence is caused
by the calculated proxy being closer to the pole than the DMSP boundary.
Like in the case for b0 and b1e, the histograms for b5e and b6 are nearly
36
==PAGE:38==
identical on the South Pole, though unlike the case the b0 and b1e, the MLT
distribution looks quite uneven, for both poles.
Figure 23: Histograms showing the diﬀerences in Mlat and MLT between
b5e, b6 and the calculated end, with the DMSP boundaries superimposed on
each other. A positive diﬀerence in Mlat is caused by the DMSP boundary
point being closer to the pole than the calculated proxy.
Considering the normalised histograms of the diﬀerence in Mlat, seen in Fig-
ure 24, the systematic error is quite apparent. Which is supported by the
mean and the standard deviation, found in Table 4, where the error is seen
to be about 3.5 degrees oﬀfor both poles in the case of b6. The std’s are
very similar to the standard deviations found for the correlation between beg
and b1e.
As a systematic error is unavoidable, and for consistency since b1e was cho-
sen as the comparison for beg, b5e is chosen as the comparison for the end
parameters. Also, there is little diﬀerence in the standard deviations for the
two DMSP boundaries, as such the level of uncertainty will not be aﬀected
by this choice.
37
==PAGE:39==
Figure 24: Normalised histograms of diﬀerence in Mlat, shown with normal
probability density functions for the proxy variable, end, and the DMSP
boundaries b5e and b6.
pdf b5e, North
pdf b6, North
pdf b5e, South
pdf b6, South
mean (µ)
-4.5108
-3.2447
-4.5992
-3.8228
std (σ)
4.1344
4.1439
3.9932
3.9234
Table 4: Table of the mean (µ) and the standard deviation (σ) of the prob-
ability density functions seen in Figure 24 .
38
==PAGE:40==
5.3.3
Polar electro jet
In Figure 25 the visual overview of the PEJ location plotted against the
DMSP maximum ﬂux event locations are shown. As was expected, the PEJ
data are overall more polewards located than the b3a boundary while the
opposite seems to be true for the b3a boundary. As it was also mentioned
in the case of b0 and b1e, the number of DMSP boundary points diﬀers for
b3a and b3b - see Table 2 - which changes the number and placement of the
DMSP and PEJ locations in the ﬁgure.
Figure 25: Comparison of b3a and b3b DMSP boundaries, the ﬁlled circles,
with the colour indicating the Newell intensity, and the red dots being the
calculated location of the polar electrojet.
The histograms showing b3a and b3b against the PEJ location can be seen
in Figure 26.
The diﬀerence in number of DMSP point, along with the
bias in the pole distribution can make it diﬃcult to conclude much about
the placement of the PEJ in relation to the DMSP boundaries. The data
doesn’t exclude the possibility that the electrojet is located between the two
boundaries, but it doesn’t fully support it either.
39
==PAGE:41==
In Figure 27 the normalized version of the histograms are seen, making the
boundaries easier to compare. From Table 5 it can be seen that the center
point between the two DMSP boundaries isn’t around zero, but rather about
-1 deg for the North Pole, with a almost uniform spread in std. On the
South Pole it appears to be about -1.5 deg, and again with a similar std.
From a statistically point of view the placement of the electrojet is between
the boundaries, close to the b3a on the North pole and the b3b on South pole,
with a somewhat large spread of the distribution decreasing the certainty of
this correlation.
Figure 26: Histograms showing the diﬀerences in Mlat and MLT between
b3a, b3b and the PEJ location, with the DMSP boundaries superimposed on
each other. A positive diﬀerence in Mlat is caused by the DMSP boundary
point being closer to the pole than the calculated proxy.
pdf b3a, North
pdf b3b, North
pdf b3a, South
pdf b3b, South
mean (µ)
-0.7963
1.7026
-2.2885
0.3083
std (σ)
5.4135
5.6789
4.5571
4.4673
Table 5: Table of the mean (µ) and the standard deviation (σ) of the prob-
ability density functions seen in Figure 27 .
40
==PAGE:42==
Figure 27: Normalised histograms of diﬀerence in Mlat, shown with normal
probability density functions for the calculated PEJ and the DMSP bound-
aries b3a and b3b.
5.4
Method summary and discussion
The sorting processes ﬁnd orbits where the CHAMP and DMSP satellites
are overlapping in time and location, in order to ﬁnd comparable data. De-
spite requirements for the number of DMSP boundary points that have to
match, some cases where the two orbits are anti-parallel still occurs, when
the DMSP boundaries are located closely together. The second sorting pro-
cess’s thresholds were determined with this in mind, in order to minimise the
number of matches of that constellation.
It should be noted that the ﬁrst sorting process includes the DMSP ion
boundaries in its search, and excludes the b0, and the second sorting process
could easily be expanded to include the ion data, if it was desirable.
Two proxy variables to characterize the limits of the auroral oval was made
and found to correlate with the DMSP boundaries b1e and b5e. The proxies
are determined by the same method utilizing a 30 second running mean of
the magnetic ﬁeld and uses the mean of the same to calculate the limits. The
equatorwards boundary was found to recreate the DMSP boundary pretty
well, with a statistical error of 0.69 and -0.05 degrees, for the North and
South Pole respectively. The polewards boundary performed worse, despite
attempts to optimize the function, and it shows a statistical error of -3.24
and -3.83 for the North and South Pole respectively.
41
==PAGE:43==
Then the calculated electrojet was compared the to most poleward and most
equatorward electron acceleration event, to see if there was a correlation be-
tween the electron acceleration region deﬁned by the b3a and b3b, and the
electrojet location. A correlation was found, pointing to the PEJ location
being located between the two boundaries, though it was close to b3a on the
North Pole and closer to the b3b on the South Pole.
For all comparisons made, it must be stressed that there are signiﬁcantly less
observations on the North Pole compared to the South Pole, which makes
the correlations less certain.
42
==PAGE:44==
6
Results
Using the procedure detailed in the method section, two proxy variables have
been created and a correction factor applied depending on the region. The
entire CHAMP dataset are now again considered, and for each orbit the
proxy variables are calculated along with the Newell value. Scatterplots of
the distribution of the calculated beginning and end of the auroral oval can
be seen n Figure 28 and Figure 29.
Figure 28: Scatterplots of the calculated equatorwards limit of the auroral
oval shown with Newell as indicator of geomagnetic activity.
Figure 29: Scatterplots of the calculated polewards limit of the auroral oval
shown with Newell as indicator of geomagnetic activity.
Looking at the ﬁgures, the cut-oﬀat  83 degrees placed into the proxy-
calculation for the end variables becomes vary apparent. But more surprising
43
==PAGE:45==
is that the beg-variable returns values at the center of the plot, considering
that it is the equatorwards boundary. Because of that it might be considered
to place a similar limiter to that of the end-variable.
The latitude distribution depending on geomagnetic activity given by the
Newell parameter is as expected. Higher geomagnetic activity pushed the
oval further equatorwards.
In Figures 30, 30 and 30 are seen statistical
models of the beg and end proxy variables depending on geomagnetic activity.
Figure 30: The mean (black line), 95 % conﬁdence interval (black dotted line
and std (red line) for the beg and end variables.
44
==PAGE:46==
Figure 31: The mean (black line), 95 % conﬁdence interval (black dotted line
and std (red line) for the beg and end variables.
7
Conclusion
The relationship between magnetic satellite observations and the location
of the auroral oval depending on geomagnetic activity has been explored
in this study. The result was two proxy variables to estimate the equator
and polewards boundary of the auroral oval depending on a solar-coupling
function.
45
==PAGE:47==
Figure 32: The mean (black line), 95 % conﬁdence interval (black dotted line
and std (red line) for the beg and end variables.
8
References
theory
[1] Illustration of Earth’s magnetosphere, taken from NASA’s homepage;
https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/sunearth/multimedia/
magnetosphere.html
[2] Emilie G. Falmer, Synthesis project; Prediction of geomagnetic storms
associated with CMEs, 2018.
[3] Yohsuke Kamide,
Abraham C.-L. Chian,
Handbook of the Solar-
Terrestrial Environment, 2007.
Speciﬁcally the chapters; 1, 7, 8, 11 and 13 were considered during this
study.
[4] Wikepedia - Good overview of the Region 1 and 2 current sheet constel-
lation
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birkeland_current
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Schematic-of-combined-FACs-and-ionospheric
png
46
==PAGE:48==
[5] Newell, P.T., A nearly universal solar wind-magnetosphere coupling
function inferred from 10 magnetospheric state variables, 2007
J. Geophys. Res., 112, A01206.
https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/
2006JA012015
[6] An short explanation of Kp-index.
https://www.spaceweatherlive.com/en/help/the-kp-index
[7] Earth Observation Portal, satellite mission overview: DMSP.
https://directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/-/dmsp
[8] National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, DMSP (speciﬁcally
the fact sheet). http://www.ospo.noaa.gov/Operations/DMSP/index.
html
[9] Article ”Malfunctioning Weather Satellite Can’t Be Recovered, Air Force
Finds” published in DefenceNews on July 25, 2016.
https://www.defensenews.com/air/2016/07/25/
malfunctioning-weather-satellite-can-t-be-recovered-air-force-finds/
[10] Earth Observation Portal, satellite mission overview: CHAMP.
https://directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/
satellite-missions/c-missions/champ
[11] NASA’s Earth Observing System - Project Science Oﬃce. https://
eospso.nasa.gov/missions/challenging-mini-satellite-payload
[12] The European Space Agency website: Swarm.
https://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Observing_the_Earth/
Swarm/Facts_and_figures
[13] Earth Observation Portal, satellite mission overview: Swarm.
https://directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/
satellite-missions/s/swarm
[14] Vennerstrom, S., T. Morette (2013), Monitoring auroral electrojets with
satellite data.
47
==PAGE:49==
data
[15] The Johns Hopkins University Aurora Particles and Imagery webpage;
http://sd-www.jhuapl.edu/Aurora/dataset_list.html
http://sd-www.jhuapl.edu/Aurora/nightb/nightb.html
[16] Morphology of nightside precipitation, by P.T.Newell,
Journal of Geophysical Research, Vol. 101, No. A5, Pages 10,737-10,748
https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/
95JA03516
[17] NASA/GSFC’s Space Physics Data Facility’s OMNIWeb
https://omniweb.gsfc.nasa.gov/ow.html
48
==PAGE:50==
A
Additional ﬁgures
A.1
DMSP, all data
Figure 33: Polar histogram of distribution of the DMSP MLT for b1e, 2002
Figure 34: Polar histogram of distribution of the DMSP MLT for b1e, 2003
49
==PAGE:51==
Figure 35: Polar histogram of distribution of the DMSP MLT for b1e, 2004
Figure 36: Polar histogram of distribution of the DMSP MLT for b1e, 2005
50
==PAGE:52==
Figure 37: Histrograms of the DMSP satellite distribution in the years of
CHAMP ﬁles, with the satellite number shown on the x-axis
Figure 38: Histogram of Day Of Year (DOY) of DMSP 2001 to 2003
51
==PAGE:53==
Figure 39: Histogram of Day Of Year (DOY) of DMSP 2004 to 2005
A.2
Matching Orbits
Figure 40:
Matched orbits:
diﬀerence in magnetic latitude between the
DMSP boundary point and the projected point onto the CHAMP orbit
52
==PAGE:54==
Figure 41: Matched orbits: diﬀerence in MLT between the DMSP boundary
point and the projected point onto the CHAMP orbit
Figure 42: Matched orbits: diﬀerence in UT (seconds) between the DMSP
boundary point and the projected point onto the CHAMP orbit
53
==PAGE:55==
Figure 43: CHAMP orbit over the South Pole, with the color indicator being
a 5-second running mean of the gradient of the external Bφ-ﬁeld in nT.
Figure 44: The absolute value of the gradient of the external Bφ-ﬁeld plotted
over time, superimposed are plotted the projected boundary points along
with the most poleward observation and the polar electro jet location.
54
==PAGE:56==
B
Format ﬁles
B.1
DMSP night format ﬁle
1)
year
2)
day of
year
3)
beg geo
l a t
4)
beg geo long
5)
beg mag l a t
6)
beg mag MLT
7)
b1e geo
l a t
8)
b1e geo long
9)
b1e mag l a t
10)
b1e mag MLT
11)
b1i geo
l a t
12)
b1i geo long
13)
b1i mag l a t
14)
b1i mag MLT
15)
b2e geo
l a t
16)
b2e geo long
17)
b2e mag l a t
18)
b2e mag MLT
19)
b2i geo
l a t
20)
b2i geo long
21)
b2i mag l a t
22)
b2i mag MLT
23)
b3a geo
l a t
24)
b3a geo long
25)
b3a mag l a t
26)
b3a mag MLT
27)
b3b geo
l a t
28)
b3b geo long
29)
b3b mag l a t
30)
b3b mag MLT
31)
b4s geo
l a t
32)
b4s geo long
33)
b4s mag l a t
55
==PAGE:57==
34)
b4s mag MLT
35)
b6 geo
l a t
36)
b6 geo long
37)
b6 mag l a t
38)
b6 mag MLT
39)
b5e geo
l a t
40)
b5e geo long
41)
b5e mag l a t
42)
b5e mag MLT
43)
b5i geo
l a t
44)
b5i geo long
45)
b5i mag l a t
46)
b5i mag MLT
47)
s
[ hhmmss ] UT
48)
0
49)
1e
50)
1 i
51)
2e
52)
2 i
53)
3a
54)
3b
55)
4s
56)
5e
57)
5 i
58)
6
59)
e
% region
between
60)
electron
p r e c i p i t a t i o n
energy
flux
( in
ergs /cm∗∗2 s )
61)
ion
p r e c i p i t a t i o n
energy
flux
62)
electron
average
energy
63)
ion
average
energy
64) peak
electron
energy
flux
65) peak ion
energy
flux
66)
electron
average
energy at the
electron
peak
67)
ion
average
energy at the
ion peak
68) the ut (hhmmss)
of
observing
the
electron
peak
69) the ut (hhmmss)
of
observing
the
ion peak
56
==PAGE:58==
% region
between 01
70)
electron
p r e c i p i t a t i o n
energy
flux
( in
ergs /cm∗∗2 s )  for 01
71)
ion
p r e c i p i t a t i o n
energy
flux
72)
electron
average
energy
73)
ion
average
energy
74) peak
electron
energy
flux
75) peak ion
energy
flux
76)
electron
average
energy at the
electron
peak
77)
ion
average
energy at the
ion peak
78) the ut (hhmmss)
of
observing
the
electron
peak
79) the ut (hhmmss)
of
observing
the
ion peak
% region
between 12
80)
electron
p r e c i p i t a t i o n
energy
flux
( in
ergs /cm∗∗2 s )  for 12
81)
ion
p r e c i p i t a t i o n
energy
flux
82)
electron
average
energy
83)
ion
average
energy
84) peak
electron
energy
flux
85) peak ion
energy
flux
86)
electron
average
energy at the
electron
peak
87)
ion
average
energy at the
ion peak
88) the ut (hhmmss)
of
observing
the
electron
peak
89) the ut (hhmmss)
of
observing
the
ion peak
% region
between 24
90)
electron
p r e c i p i t a t i o n
energy
flux
( in
ergs /cm∗∗2 s )  for 24
91)
ion
p r e c i p i t a t i o n
energy
flux
92)
electron
average
energy
93)
ion
average
energy
94) peak
electron
energy
flux
95) peak ion
energy
flux
96)
electron
average
energy at the
electron
peak
97)
ion
average
energy at the
ion peak
98) the ut (hhmmss)
of
observing
the
electron
peak
99) the ut (hhmmss)
of
observing
the
ion peak
% region
between 45
100)
electron
p r e c i p i t a t i o n
energy
flux
( in
ergs /cm∗∗2 s )
101)
ion
p r e c i p i t a t i o n
energy
flux
102)
electron
average
energy
57
==PAGE:59==
103)
ion
average
energy
104) peak
electron
energy
flux
105) peak ion
energy
flux
106)
electron
average
energy at the
electron
peak
107)
ion
average
energy at the
ion peak
108) the ut (hhmmss)
of
observing
the
electron
peak
109) the ut (hhmmss)
of
observing
the
ion peak
% region
between 56
110)
electron
p r e c i p i t a t i o n
energy
flux
( in
ergs /cm∗∗2 s )
111)
ion
p r e c i p i t a t i o n
energy
flux
112)
electron
average
energy
113)
ion
average
energy
114) peak
electron
energy
flux
115) peak ion
energy
flux
116)
electron
average
energy at the
electron
peak
117)
ion
average
energy at the
ion peak
118) the ut (hhmmss)
of
observing
the
electron
peak
119) the ut (hhmmss)
of
observing
the
ion peak
% region
between 6e
120)
electron
p r e c i p i t a t i o n
energy
flux
( in
ergs /cm∗∗2 s )
121)
ion
p r e c i p i t a t i o n
energy
flux
122)
electron
average
energy
123)
ion
average
energy
124) peak
electron
energy
flux
125) peak ion
energy
flux
126)
electron
average
energy at the
electron
peak
127)
ion
average
energy at the
ion peak
128) the ut (hhmmss)
of
observing
the
electron
peak
129) the ut (hhmmss)
of
observing
the
ion peak
Example of a passage
block
F18
16
1
( g0 )/(m0)=70.6
70.4/ 75.7
1.0 % < b0 values
b1e , b1i=70.6
70.4/ 75.7
1.0//
81.1 350.2/ 69.7
21.0
b2e , b2i=79.3 327.7/ 67.0
21.5//
73.3 304.2/ 61.1
20.8
b3a , b3b=77.2 316.1/ 64.7
21.2//
76.9 315.0/ 64.5
21.2
b4s , b6= 73.3 304.2/ 61.1
20.8//
66.5 293.8/ 55.1
20.4
b5e , b5i=67.3 294.6/ 55.7
20.4//
68.9 296.7/ 57.2
20.5
s =005400 0=005400 1e=005400 1 i =005934 2e=010045 2 i =010301
3a=010138 3b=010144 4s =010301 5e=010455 5 i =010425 6=010509 e=011250
58
==PAGE:60==
s0
0.00
0.00
0.
0.
0.00
0.00
0.
0.
000000 000000
01
0.02
0.00
476.
2784.
0.12
0.02
2410.
14487. 005508 005648
12
1.08
0.03
1012.
11691.
19.78
0.79
3383.
20674. 010300 010301
24
0.00
0.00
0.
0.
0.00
0.00
0.
0.
000000 000000
45
6.86
0.30
1442.
14883.
42.78
0.88
1006.
11533. 010313 010338
56
0.44
0.01
2406.
1736.
1.23
0.05
3962.
2041. 010500 010459
6e
0.02
0.00
1610.
2940.
0.61
0.08
2917.
4313. 010515 011221
B.2
CHAMP
The data
f i l e s
in
t h i s
directory
are numbered by Oersted
o r b i t s .
In
addition
to Oersted magnetic
f i e l d
measurements they
include Model
f i e l d
values , and Apex magnetic
corrdinates .
 Scalar
data 
The
f i l e s
with names ending
. abs are
for the Oersted measurements of
the
absolute
value
of
the magnetic
f i e l d .
These
f i l e s
have a row entry
for each measurement point
(1 sec data ) with 15 columns .
The contents
of
the columns are
as
follows :
1) time
[ Modified
Julian Day 2000; 0 = Jan 1 , 2000 , 00 UT]
2)
position
radius
[km]
3)
position
geographic
colatitude
[ deg . ]
4)
position
geographic
longitude
[ deg . ]
5)
position
quasidipole
l a t i t u d e
[ deg . ]
6)
position
quasidipole
longitude (= Apex longitude )
[ deg . ]
7)
position
magnetic
l a t i t u d e
(Apex)
[ deg . ]
8)
position
magnetic
l o c a l
time (Apex)
[ hours ]
9) Measured
s c a l a r
f i e l d
value
[nT]
10) Model
f i e l d
Oersted (10b/01) ,
r a d i a l
component
[nT]
11) Model
f i e l d
Oersted (10b/01) ,
theta component
[nT]
12) Model
f i e l d
Oersted (10b/01) ,
phi component
[nT]
13) Dst correction ,
r a d i a l
component
[nT]
14) Dst correction ,
theta component
[nT]
15) Dst correction ,
phi component
[nT]
 Vector data 
The
f i l e s
with names ending
. vec are
for the Oersted measurements of
the magnetic
f i e l d .
These
f i l e s
have a row entry for each measurement
59
==PAGE:61==
point
(1.13 sec data ) with 20 columns .
The contents
of
the columns are
as
follows :
1) time
[ Modified
Julian Day 2000; 0 = Jan 1 , 2000 , 00 UT]
2)
position
radius
[km]
3)
position
geographic
colatitude
[ deg . ]
4)
position
geographic
longitude
[ deg . ]
5)
position
quasidipole
l a t i t u d e
[ deg . ]
6)
position
quasidipole
longitude (= Apex longitude )
[ deg . ]
7)
position
magnetic
l a t i t u d e
(Apex)
[ deg . ]
8)
position
magnetic
l o c a l
time (Apex)
[ hours ]
9) Measured B r
[nT]
10) Measured B theta
[nT]
11) Measured B phi
[nT]
12) Model
f i e l d
Oersted (10b/01) ,
r a d i a l
component
[nT]
13) Model
f i e l d
Oersted (10b/01) ,
theta component
[nT]
14) Model
f i e l d
Oersted (10b/01) ,
phi component
[nT]
15) Dst correction ,
r a d i a l
component
[nT]
16) Dst correction ,
theta component
[nT]
17) Dst correction ,
phi component
[nT]
18)
r a d i a l
component of
unit
vector
of SIM boresight
d i r e c t i o n
19)
theta
component of
unit
vector
of SIM boresight
d i r e c t i o n
20) phi
component of
unit
vector
of SIM boresight
d i r e c t i o n
Additionally
calculated
during study
21)
External B r
[nT]
22)
External
B theta
[nT]
23)
External B phi
[nT]
24)
delta
external
B r
[nT]
25)
delta
external
B theta
[nT]
26)
delta
external
B phi
[nT]
27)
delta Mlat
[ deg . ]
60
==PAGE:62==
C
MATLAB Code
C.1
Matching Orbits - ﬁrst sorting
%% Loading information
% loading
in CHAMP
clear
varia bles
set (0 , ’ DefaultFigureWindowStyle ’ , ’ docked ’ )
load ( ’DMSP2005night . mat ’ ) ;
numberoforbits =5735;
lowerLim =25288;
%30044;
upperLim = lowerLim + numberoforbits ;
tic
counter = 0;
year = 2005;
matchingOrbits = [ ] ;
for
orbitIdx = lowerLim : upperLim
% loopprogress
indicator
(( orbitIdx lowerLim+1)/ numberoforbits )∗100
counter
% loading CHAMP o r b i t
orbitnumber = num2str( orbitIdx , ’%05i ’ ) ;
filename = [ orbitnumber ,
’ . vec ’ ] ;
filename zip = [ filename ,
’ . gz ’ ] ;
i f
exist ( filename zip ,
’ f i l e ’ ) ==0 % i f
f i l e
doesn ’ t
e x i s t
continue
end
gunzip ( filename zip ,
’C:\ Users\ Mille \Documents\MATLAB’ ) ;
orbit = load ( filename ) ;
delete ( filename ) ;
% comparing CHAMP and DMSP dates
CHAMP = datestr ( orbit (1 ,1)+730486);
CHAMPvec = datevec (CHAMP) ;
for daynumber = 1:365 % days in a year
j j = find (DMSP2005 ( : , 2 ) == daynumber ) ;
61
==PAGE:63==
i f isempty( j j ) ==1
continue
end
for
i = 1: length ( j j )
day = DMSP2005( jj , : ) ;
h = floor ( day ( i ,59)/10000);
m = floor (( day ( i ,59)  h∗10000)/100);
s = day ( i ,59) m∗100h∗10000;
DMSPvec = [ DayOfYearVector ( year , daynumber ) , h , m,
s ] ;
d i f f e r e n c e = etime(CHAMPvec,DMSPvec ) ;
% d i f f e r e n c e
between
o r b i t
s t a r t
and DMSP boundary
point
i f
d i f f e r e n c e < 0 && d i f f e r e n c e > 6000
x e =[day ( i , 9 ) , day ( i ,17) , day ( i ,25) , day ( i ,33) , day ( i , 4 1 ) ] ;
y e =[day ( i ,10) , day ( i ,18) , day ( i ,26) , day ( i ,34) , day ( i , 4 2 ) ] ;
x i =[day ( i ,13) , day ( i ,21) , day ( i ,29) , day ( i ,37) , day ( i , 4 5 ) ] ;
y i =[day ( i ,14) , day ( i ,22) , day ( i ,30) , day ( i ,38) , day ( i , 4 6 ) ] ;
idx1 = ( day ( i , 4 9 : 5 8 ) ˜= 0 ) ;
idx1 e = [ idx1 (1)
idx1 (3)
idx1 (5)
idx1 (7)
idx1 ( 8 ) ] ;
i d x 1 i = [ idx1 (2)
idx1 (4)
idx1 (6)
idx1 (10)
idx1 ( 9 ) ] ;
vDMSP = find ( idx1 ) ;
nDMSP = length (vDMSP) ;
% Check
l a t i t u d e
l e s s
than 5 deg
latDiffMat = zeros ( size ( orbit , 1 ) ,nDMSP) ;
latDMSP = [ x e ( idx1 e )
x i ( i d x 1 i ) ] ;
for
i i = 1:nDMSP
latDiffMat ( : , i i ) = abs(latDMSP( i i )  ( orbit ( : , 7 ) ) ) ;
end
l a t D i f f = min( latDiffMat , [ ] , 2 ) ;
idx = find ( l a t D i f f < 5 ) ;
viable = orbit ( idx , : ) ;
% Check MLT l e s s
than 1 hour
mltDiff = min(abs( wrapToPi ( [ y e ( idx1 e )
y i ( i d x 1 i ) ] . . .
∗pi/12 viable ( : , 8 ) ∗pi / 1 2 ) ) , [ ] , 2 ) ;
viable = viable ( mltDiff < (1 ∗pi / 1 2 ) , : ) ;
62
==PAGE:64==
% Check time (UT)
CHAMPTime = datestr ( viable (: ,1)+730486);
CHAMPTimeVec = datevec (CHAMPTime) ;
times = day ( i , 4 9 : 5 8 ) ’ ;
h = floor ( times ( idx1 )/10000);
m = floor (( times ( idx1 )  h∗10000)/100);
s = times ( idx1)m∗100h∗10000;
DMSPTimeVec = [ repmat (DMSPvec( 1 : 3 ) ,nDMSP, 1 ) h m s ] ;
minTime = 10000;
for
i i = 1:nDMSP
val = min(abs(etime(DMSPTimeVec( i i , : ) , CHAMPTimeVec) ) ) ;
i f
( val < minTime)
minTime = val ;
end
end
% Save
o r b i t
i f
v i a b l e
i f
(minTime < 1800) % UT < 30 min
matchingOrbits = [ matchingOrbits ;
. . .
[ year ,
. . .
daynumber ,
. . .
i ,
. . .
orbitIdx ,
. . .
sum( x e )>0,
. . .
min( l a t D i f f ) ,
. . .
min( mltDiff )∗12/ pi , . . .
minTime ] ] ;
counter = counter +1;
end
end
end
end
end
toc
save ( ’CMO2005. mat ’ , ’ matchingOrbits ’ )
63
==PAGE:65==
C.2
Matching Orbits - second sorting
%% Making CHAMP selected , 2nd sorting
% Taking the
c o l l e c t e d
output
of
matchingOrbit and searcing
through
% matches to DMSP points  4/8 has to match to be
selected ,
for
% the
best
f i t
6/8.
% Loading in ,
s e t t i n g
up and clearing
used
v a r i a b l e s
clear
varia bles
load ( ’CMO2001. mat ’ ) ; MO1 = matchingOrbits ;
load ( ’CMO2002. mat ’ ) ; MO2 = matchingOrbits ;
load ( ’CMO2003. mat ’ ) ; MO3 = matchingOrbits ;
load ( ’CMO2004. mat ’ ) ; MO4 = matchingOrbits ;
load ( ’CMO2005. mat ’ ) ; MO5 = matchingOrbits ;
clear matchingOrbits
MO = [MO1; MO2; MO3; MO4; MO5] ;
clear MO1;
clear MO2;
clear MO3;
clear MO4;
clear MO5;
load ( ’DMSP2001night . mat ’ ) ;
load ( ’DMSP2002night . mat ’ ) ;
load ( ’DMSP2003night . mat ’ ) ;
load ( ’DMSP2004night . mat ’ ) ;
load ( ’DMSP2005night . mat ’ ) ;
DMSP = [DMSP2001; DMSP2002; DMSP2003; DMSP2004; DMSP2005 ] ;
clear DMSP2001;
clear DMSP2002;
clear DMSP2003;
clear DMSP2004;
clear DMSP2005;
clear
s a t e l l i t e 2 0 0 1 ;
clear
s a t e l l i t e 2 0 0 2 ;
clear
s a t e l l i t e 2 0 0 3 ;
clear
s a t e l l i t e 2 0 0 4 ;
clear
s a t e l l i t e 2 0 0 5 ;
load ( ’CMO prop . mat ’ )
% Sorting
thresholds
latLim = 5;
MLTLim = 1;
timeLim = 600;
counter = 0;
% p r e a l l o c a t i n g
space
MO properties fit = nan( length (MO) ,
60);
tic
% Looping through each match
for
i d x o r b i t =1:length (MO)
( i d x o r b i t /length (MO))∗100 % showing
place
in
loop
%  read in CHAMP and DMSP information 
[ o r b i t c ] = read vec CHAMP(MO( idx orbit , 4 ) ) ;
64
==PAGE:66==
i f sum( isnan ( o r b i t c ( : , 2 6 ) ) ) > length ( o r b i t c )/4
continue
end
DMSP idx = find (DMSP( : , 1 ) == MO( idx orbit ,1) 2000
. . .
& DMSP( : , 2 ) == MO( idx orbit , 2 ) ) ;
index = DMSP idx(MO( idx orbit , 3 ) ,
: ) ;
D = DMSP( index , : ) ;
%
b0 ,
b1e ,
b2e , b3a ,
b3b ,
b4s ,
b5e ,
b6
x b = D( [
5 ,
9 ,
17 ,
25 ,
29 ,
33 ,
41 ,
3 7 ] ) ;
y b = D( [
6 ,
10 ,
18 ,
26 ,
30 ,
34 ,
42 ,
3 8 ] ) ;
t b = D([48 ,
49 ,
51 ,
53 ,
54 ,
55 ,
56 ,
5 8 ] ) ;
% sorthing
out
missing DMSP points
using
the
time
idmissing = t b == 0;
for a = 1:8
i f
idmissing ( a ) ==1
y b ( a ) = nan ;
x b ( a ) = nan ;
t b ( a ) = nan ;
end
end
% 
% . . . . . . . . . . . . .
t e s t i n g
each DMSP point
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
% 
% pole
divide
i f sum( x b ,
’ omitnan ’)< 0 % South
pole
po le id = find ( o r b i t c ( : , 7 ) < 45);
p o l e o r b i t = o r b i t c ( pole id , : ) ;
p o l e o r b i t a b s = abs( p o l e o r b i t ) ;
[ p o l e f i l t e r s ] = RunningMean( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 2 6 ) , 0 ) ;
[ p o l e f i l t e r s a b s ] = RunningMean( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 2 6 ) , 1 ) ;
else % North pole
po le id = find ( o r b i t c ( : , 7 ) > 45);
p o l e o r b i t = o r b i t c ( pole id , : ) ;
p o l e o r b i t a b s = abs( p o l e o r b i t ) ;
65
==PAGE:67==
[ p o l e f i l t e r s ] = RunningMean( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 2 6 ) , 0 ) ;
[ p o l e f i l t e r s a b s ] = RunningMean( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 2 6 ) , 1 ) ;
end
%  b0 
% s h i f t s
o r b i t
i f
close
to
midnight
i f
y b (1) > 22.5
[ orbit temp ,
cc ] = find ( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) < 4 ) ;
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
pole orbit changed ( orbit temp ) = p o l e o r b i t ( orbit temp ,8)+24;
e l s e i f
y b (1) < 1.5
[ orbit temp ,
cc ] = find ( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) > 20);
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
pole orbit changed ( orbit temp ) = p o l e o r b i t ( orbit temp ,8) 24;
else
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
end
% finding
projected
point on CHAMP o r b i t
[yiMLT,
yclat ] = find (abs( y b(1) pole orbit changed ) < MLTLim) ;
[ xilat ,
xclat ] = find (abs( x b(1) p o l e o r b i t (yiMLT, 7 ) ) < latLim ) ;
[ yc yi ] = min(abs( x b(1) p o l e o r b i t (yiMLT( x i l a t ) , 7 ) ) ) ;
yC 1 = yiMLT( x i l a t ( yi ) ) ;
% Calculating
time and time
d i f f e r e n c e
CHAMP = datestr ( p o l e o r b i t (yC 1 ,1)+730486);
CHAMPvec = datevec (CHAMP) ;
h = floor ( t b (1)/10000);
m = floor (( t b (1)h∗10000)/100);
s = t b (1)m∗100h∗10000;
DMSPvec = [ DayOfYearVector (D(1)+2000 ,D(2)) , h , m,
s ] ;
t i m e d i f f 1 = etime(CHAMPvec,DMSPvec ) ;
i f abs( t i m e d i f f 1 ) > timeLim
yC 1 = [ ] ;
end
i f isempty( yC 1 ) ==0
MLTdiff1 = y b(1) pole orbit changed ( yC 1 ) ;
Latdiff1 = x b(1) p o l e o r b i t (yC 1 , 7 ) ;
end
%  b1e 
% s h i f t s
o r b i t
i f
close
to
midnight
66
==PAGE:68==
i f
y b (2) > 22.5
[ orbit temp ,
cc ] = find ( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) < 4 ) ;
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
pole orbit changed ( orbit temp ) = p o l e o r b i t ( orbit temp ,8)+24;
e l s e i f
y b (2) < 1.5
[ orbit temp ,
cc ] = find ( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) > 20);
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
pole orbit changed ( orbit temp ) = p o l e o r b i t ( orbit temp ,8) 24;
else
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
end
% finding
projected
point on CHAMP o r b i t
[yiMLT,
yclat ] = find (abs( y b(2) pole orbit changed ) < MLTLim) ;
[ xilat ,
xclat ] = find (abs( x b(2) p o l e o r b i t (yiMLT, 7 ) ) < latLim ) ;
[ yc yi ] = min(abs( x b(2) p o l e o r b i t (yiMLT( x i l a t ) , 7 ) ) ) ;
yC 2 = yiMLT( x i l a t ( yi ) ) ;
% Calculating
time and time
d i f f e r e n c e
CHAMP = datestr ( p o l e o r b i t (yC 2 ,1)+730486);
CHAMPvec = datevec (CHAMP) ;
h = floor ( t b (2)/10000);
m = floor (( t b (2)  h∗10000)/100);
s = t b (2)m∗100h∗10000;
DMSPvec = [ DayOfYearVector (D(1)+2000 ,D(2)) , h , m,
s ] ;
t i m e d i f f 2 = etime(CHAMPvec,DMSPvec ) ;
i f abs( t i m e d i f f 2 ) > timeLim
yC 2 = [ ] ;
end
i f isempty( yC 2 ) ==0
MLTdiff2 = y b(2) pole orbit changed ( yC 2 ) ;
Latdiff2 = x b(2) p o l e o r b i t (yC 2 , 7 ) ;
end
%  b2e 
% s h i f t s
o r b i t
i f
close
to
midnight
i f
y b (3) > 22.5
[ orbit temp ,
cc ] = find ( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) < 4 ) ;
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
pole orbit changed ( orbit temp ) = p o l e o r b i t ( orbit temp ,8)+24;
e l s e i f
y b (3) < 1.5
[ orbit temp ,
cc ] = find ( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) > 20);
67
==PAGE:69==
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
pole orbit changed ( orbit temp ) = p o l e o r b i t ( orbit temp ,8) 24;
else
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
end
% finding
projected
point on CHAMP o r b i t
[yiMLT,
yclat ] = find (abs( y b(3) pole orbit changed ) < MLTLim) ;
[ xilat ,
xclat ] = find (abs( x b(3) p o l e o r b i t (yiMLT, 7 ) ) < latLim ) ;
[ yc yi ] = min(abs( x b(3) p o l e o r b i t (yiMLT( x i l a t ) , 7 ) ) ) ;
yC 3 = yiMLT( x i l a t ( yi ) ) ;
% Calculating
time and time
d i f f e r e n c e
CHAMP = datestr ( p o l e o r b i t (yC 3 ,1)+730486);
CHAMPvec = datevec (CHAMP) ;
h = floor ( t b (3)/10000);
m = floor (( t b (3)  h∗10000)/100);
s = t b (3)m∗100h∗10000;
DMSPvec = [ DayOfYearVector (D(1)+2000 ,D(2)) , h , m,
s ] ;
t i m e d i f f 3 = etime(CHAMPvec,DMSPvec ) ;
i f abs( t i m e d i f f 3 ) > timeLim
yC 3 = [ ] ;
end
i f isempty( yC 3 ) ==0
MLTdiff3 = y b(3) pole orbit changed ( yC 3 ) ;
Latdiff3 = x b(3) p o l e o r b i t (yC 3 , 7 ) ;
end
%  b3a 
% s h i f t s
o r b i t
i f
close
to
midnight
i f
y b (4) > 22.5
[ orbit temp ,
cc ] = find ( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) < 4 ) ;
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
pole orbit changed ( orbit temp ) = p o l e o r b i t ( orbit temp ,8)+24;
e l s e i f
y b (4) < 1.5
[ orbit temp ,
cc ] = find ( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) > 20);
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
pole orbit changed ( orbit temp ) = p o l e o r b i t ( orbit temp ,8) 24;
else
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
end
% finding
projected
point on CHAMP o r b i t
68
==PAGE:70==
[yiMLT,
yclat ] = find (abs( y b(4) pole orbit changed ) < MLTLim) ;
[ xilat ,
xclat ] = find (abs( x b(4) p o l e o r b i t (yiMLT, 7 ) ) < latLim ) ;
[ yc yi ] = min(abs( x b(4) p o l e o r b i t (yiMLT( x i l a t ) , 7 ) ) ) ;
yC 4 = yiMLT( x i l a t ( yi ) ) ;
% Calculating
time and time
d i f f e r e n c e
CHAMP = datestr ( p o l e o r b i t (yC 4 ,1)+730486);
CHAMPvec = datevec (CHAMP) ;
h = floor ( t b (4)/10000);
m = floor (( t b (4)  h∗10000)/100);
s = t b (4)m∗100h∗10000;
DMSPvec = [ DayOfYearVector (D(1)+2000 ,D(2)) , h , m,
s ] ;
t i m e d i f f 4 = etime(CHAMPvec,DMSPvec ) ;
i f abs( t i m e d i f f 4 ) > timeLim
yC 4 = [ ] ;
end
i f isempty( yC 4 ) ==0
MLTdiff4 = y b(4) pole orbit changed ( yC 4 ) ;
Latdiff4 = x b(4) p o l e o r b i t (yC 4 , 7 ) ;
end
%  b3b 
% s h i f t s
o r b i t
i f
close
to
midnight
i f
y b (5) > 22.5
[ orbit temp ,
cc ] = find ( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) < 4 ) ;
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
pole orbit changed ( orbit temp ) = p o l e o r b i t ( orbit temp ,8)+24;
e l s e i f
y b (5) < 1.5
[ orbit temp ,
cc ] = find ( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) > 20);
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
pole orbit changed ( orbit temp ) = p o l e o r b i t ( orbit temp ,8) 24;
else
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
end
% finding
projected
point on CHAMP o r b i t
[yiMLT,
yclat ] = find (abs( y b(5) pole orbit changed ) < MLTLim) ;
[ xilat ,
xclat ] = find (abs( x b(5) p o l e o r b i t (yiMLT, 7 ) ) < latLim ) ;
[ yc yi ] = min(abs( x b(5) p o l e o r b i t (yiMLT( x i l a t ) , 7 ) ) ) ;
yC 5 = yiMLT( x i l a t ( yi ) ) ;
% Calculating
time and time
d i f f e r e n c e
69
==PAGE:71==
CHAMP = datestr ( p o l e o r b i t (yC 5 ,1)+730486);
CHAMPvec = datevec (CHAMP) ;
h = floor ( t b (5)/10000);
m = floor (( t b (5)  h∗10000)/100);
s = t b (5)m∗100h∗10000;
DMSPvec = [ DayOfYearVector (D(1)+2000 ,D(2)) , h , m,
s ] ;
t i m e d i f f 5 = etime(CHAMPvec,DMSPvec ) ;
i f abs( t i m e d i f f 5 ) > timeLim
yC 5 = [ ] ;
end
i f isempty( yC 5 ) ==0
MLTdiff5 = y b(5) pole orbit changed ( yC 5 ) ;
Latdiff5 = x b(5) p o l e o r b i t (yC 5 , 7 ) ;
end
%  b4s 
% s h i f t s
o r b i t
i f
close
to
midnight
i f
y b (6) > 22.5
[ orbit temp ,
cc ] = find ( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) < 4 ) ;
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
pole orbit changed ( orbit temp ) = p o l e o r b i t ( orbit temp ,8)+24;
e l s e i f
y b (6) < 1.5
[ orbit temp ,
cc ] = find ( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) > 20);
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
pole orbit changed ( orbit temp ) = p o l e o r b i t ( orbit temp ,8) 24;
else
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
end
% finding
projected
point on CHAMP o r b i t
[yiMLT,
yclat ] = find (abs( y b(6) pole orbit changed ) < MLTLim) ;
[ xilat ,
xclat ] = find (abs( x b(6) p o l e o r b i t (yiMLT, 7 ) ) < latLim ) ;
[ yc yi ] = min(abs( x b(6) p o l e o r b i t (yiMLT( x i l a t ) , 7 ) ) ) ;
yC 6 = yiMLT( x i l a t ( yi ) ) ;
% Calculating
time and time
d i f f e r e n c e
CHAMP = datestr ( p o l e o r b i t (yC 6 ,1)+730486);
CHAMPvec = datevec (CHAMP) ;
h = floor ( t b (6)/10000);
m = floor (( t b (6)  h∗10000)/100);
s = t b (6)m∗100h∗10000;
DMSPvec = [ DayOfYearVector (D(1)+2000 ,D(2)) , h , m,
s ] ;
70
==PAGE:72==
t i m e d i f f 6 = etime(CHAMPvec,DMSPvec ) ;
i f abs( t i m e d i f f 6 ) > timeLim
yC 6 = [ ] ;
end
i f isempty( yC 6 ) ==0
MLTdiff6 = y b(6) pole orbit changed ( yC 6 ) ;
Latdiff6 = x b(6) p o l e o r b i t (yC 6 , 7 ) ;
end
%  b5e 
% s h i f t s
o r b i t
i f
close
to
midnight
i f
y b (7) > 22.5
[ orbit temp ,
cc ] = find ( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) < 4 ) ;
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
pole orbit changed ( orbit temp ) = p o l e o r b i t ( orbit temp ,8)+24;
e l s e i f
y b (7) < 1.5
[ orbit temp ,
cc ] = find ( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) > 20);
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
pole orbit changed ( orbit temp ) = p o l e o r b i t ( orbit temp ,8) 24;
else
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
end
% finding
projected
point on CHAMP o r b i t
[yiMLT,
yclat ] = find (abs( y b(7) pole orbit changed ) < MLTLim) ;
[ xilat ,
xclat ] = find (abs( x b(7) p o l e o r b i t (yiMLT, 7 ) ) < latLim ) ;
[ yc yi ] = min(abs( x b(7) p o l e o r b i t (yiMLT( x i l a t ) , 7 ) ) ) ;
yC 7 = yiMLT( x i l a t ( yi ) ) ;
% Calculating
time and time
d i f f e r e n c e
CHAMP = datestr ( p o l e o r b i t (yC 7 ,1)+730486);
CHAMPvec = datevec (CHAMP) ;
h = floor ( t b (7)/10000);
m = floor (( t b (7)  h∗10000)/100);
s = t b (7)m∗100h∗10000;
DMSPvec = [ DayOfYearVector (D(1)+2000 ,D(2)) , h , m,
s ] ;
t i m e d i f f 7 = etime(CHAMPvec,DMSPvec ) ;
i f abs( t i m e d i f f 7 ) > timeLim
yC 7 = [ ] ;
end
i f isempty( yC 7 ) ==0
MLTdiff7 = y b(7) pole orbit changed ( yC 7 ) ;
71
==PAGE:73==
Latdiff7 = x b(7) p o l e o r b i t (yC 7 , 7 ) ;
end
%  b6 
% s h i f t s
o r b i t
i f
close
to
midnight
i f
y b (8) > 22.5
[ orbit temp ,
cc ] = find ( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) < 4 ) ;
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
pole orbit changed ( orbit temp ) = p o l e o r b i t ( orbit temp ,8)+24;
e l s e i f
y b (8) < 1.5
[ orbit temp ,
cc ] = find ( p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) > 20);
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
pole orbit changed ( orbit temp ) = p o l e o r b i t ( orbit temp ,8) 24;
else
pole orbit changed = p o l e o r b i t ( : , 8 ) ;
end
% finding
projected
point on CHAMP o r b i t
[yiMLT,
yclat ] = find (abs( y b(8) pole orbit changed ) < MLTLim) ;
[ xilat ,
xclat ] = find (abs( x b(8) p o l e o r b i t (yiMLT, 7 ) ) < latLim ) ;
[ yc yi ] = min(abs( x b(8) p o l e o r b i t (yiMLT( x i l a t ) , 7 ) ) ) ;
yC 8 = yiMLT( x i l a t ( yi ) ) ;
% Calculating
time and time
d i f f e r e n c e
CHAMP = datestr ( p o l e o r b i t (yC 8 ,1)+730486);
CHAMPvec = datevec (CHAMP) ;
h = floor ( t b (8)/10000);
m = floor (( t b (8)  h∗10000)/100);
s = t b (8)m∗100h∗10000;
DMSPvec = [ DayOfYearVector (D(1)+2000 ,D(2)) , h , m,
s ] ;
t i m e d i f f 8 = etime(CHAMPvec,DMSPvec ) ;
i f abs( t i m e d i f f 8 ) > timeLim
yC 8 = [ ] ;
end
i f isempty( yC 8 ) ==0
MLTdiff8 = y b(8) pole orbit changed ( yC 8 ) ;
Latdiff8 = x b(8) p o l e o r b i t (yC 8 , 7 ) ;
end
% 
% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Saving
values
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
% 
72
==PAGE:74==
% checking
i f
points
f u l f i l l e d
the
thresholds
yC(1) = isempty( yC 1 ) ;
yC(2) = isempty( yC 2 ) ;
yC(3) = isempty( yC 3 ) ;
yC(4) = isempty( yC 4 ) ;
yC(5) = isempty( yC 5 ) ;
yC(6) = isempty( yC 6 ) ;
yC(7) = isempty( yC 7 ) ;
yC(8) = isempty( yC 8 ) ;
i f sum(yC) <=4
% Saving
counter = counter +1;
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
1:4) = MO( idx orbit ,
1 : 4 ) ;
i f yC(1) == 0 % b0
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
5) = p o l e o r b i t (yC 1 , 7 ) ; % CHAMP l a t
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
6) = p o l e o r b i t (yC 1 , 8 ) ; % CHAMP MLT
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
7) = x b ( 1 ) ; % DMSP l a t
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
8) = y b ( 1 ) ; % DMSP MLT
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
9) = Latdiff1 ; % l a t
d i f f
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
10) = MLTdiff1 ; % MLT d i f f
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
11) = t i m e d i f f 1 ; % UT d i f f
end
i f yC(2) == 0 % b1e
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
12) = p o l e o r b i t (yC 2 , 7 ) ; % CHAMP l a t
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
13) = p o l e o r b i t (yC 2 , 8 ) ; % CHAMP MLT
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
14) = x b ( 2 ) ; % DMSP l a t
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
15) = y b ( 2 ) ; % DMSP MLT
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
16) = Latdiff2 ; % l a t
d i f f
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
17) = MLTdiff2 ; % MLT d i f f
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
18) = t i m e d i f f 2 ; % UT d i f f
end
i f yC(3) == 0 % b2e
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
19) = p o l e o r b i t (yC 3 , 7 ) ; % CHAMP l a t
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
20) = p o l e o r b i t (yC 3 , 8 ) ; % CHAMP MLT
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
21) = x b ( 3 ) ; % DMSP l a t
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
22) = y b ( 3 ) ; % DMSP MLT
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
23) = Latdiff3 ; % l a t
d i f f
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
24) = MLTdiff3 ; % MLT d i f f
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
25) = t i m e d i f f 3 ; % UT d i f f
73
==PAGE:75==
end
i f yC(4) == 0 % b3a
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
26) = p o l e o r b i t (yC 4 , 7 ) ; % CHAMP l a t
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
27) = p o l e o r b i t (yC 4 , 8 ) ; % CHAMP MLT
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
28) = x b ( 4 ) ; % DMSP l a t
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
29) = y b ( 4 ) ; % DMSP MLT
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
30) = Latdiff4 ; % l a t
d i f f
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
31) = MLTdiff4 ; % MLT d i f f
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
32) = t i m e d i f f 4 ; % UT d i f f
end
i f yC(5) == 0 % b3b
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
33) = p o l e o r b i t (yC 5 , 7 ) ; % CHAMP l a t
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
34) = p o l e o r b i t (yC 5 , 8 ) ; % CHAMP MLT
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
35) = x b ( 5 ) ; % DMSP l a t
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
36) = y b ( 5 ) ; % DMSP MLT
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
37) = Latdiff5 ; % l a t
d i f f
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
38) = MLTdiff5 ; % MLT d i f f
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
39) = t i m e d i f f 5 ; % UT d i f f
end
i f yC(6) == 0 % b4s
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
40) = p o l e o r b i t (yC 6 , 7 ) ; % CHAMP l a t
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
41) = p o l e o r b i t (yC 6 , 8 ) ; % CHAMP MLT
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
42) = x b ( 6 ) ; % DMSP l a t
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
43) = y b ( 6 ) ; % DMSP MLT
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
44) = Latdiff6 ; % l a t
d i f f
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
45) = MLTdiff6 ; % MLT d i f f
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
46) = t i m e d i f f 6 ; % UT d i f f
end
i f yC(7) == 0 % b5e
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
47) = p o l e o r b i t (yC 7 , 7 ) ; % CHAMP l a t
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
48) = p o l e o r b i t (yC 7 , 8 ) ; % CHAMP MLT
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
49) = x b ( 7 ) ; % DMSP l a t
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
50) = y b ( 7 ) ; % DMSP MLT
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
51) = Latdiff7 ; % l a t
d i f f
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
52) = MLTdiff7 ; % MLT d i f f
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
53) = t i m e d i f f 7 ; % UT d i f f
end
i f yC(8) == 0 % b6
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
54) = p o l e o r b i t (yC 8 , 7 ) ; % CHAMP l a t
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
55) = p o l e o r b i t (yC 8 , 8 ) ; % CHAMP MLT
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
56) = x b ( 8 ) ; % DMSP l a t
74
==PAGE:76==
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
57) = y b ( 8 ) ; % DMSP MLT
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
58) = Latdiff8 ; % l a t
d i f f
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
59) = MLTdiff8 ; % MLT d i f f
MO properties fit ( idx orbit ,
60) = t i m e d i f f 8 ; % UT d i f f
end
end
end
toc
counter
temp = ˜isnan ( MO properties fit ( : , 1 ) ) ;
MO properties fit = MO properties fit (temp , : ) ;
save ( ’CMO prop . mat ’ , ’ MO properties ’ ,
’ MO properties fit ’ )
75
==PAGE:77==
C.3
Polar Electrojet location, and help function
function
[ t pas , geolat pas , geolon pas , alat pas , mlt pas , col ]= PEJ locat
%Determines
the
location
of
the maximum auroral
e l e c t r o j e t
current
% for
each %of
the 4 passes
of
the
auroral
oval
for 1 Swarm o r b i t
%
%based on Babs measurements .
%Version
1.0
%
% Input :
%
A =o r b i t number
%
sat=s a t e l l i t e
indicator , 1=CHAMP, 2=S A , 3 = S B and for 4 = S C
%
% Output :
%
t pas (4)= jd2000 time
of
passage
of CORRECTED max current
%
position
along
o r b i t
%
a l a t p a s (4)= corrected
magnetic
l a t i t u d e
of
s a t t e l i t e
at
%
time
t pas
in deg
%
mlt pas (4)=MLT of
s a t t e l i t e
at time
t pas
in hours
%
geolat pas (4)= geographic
l a t i t u d e
in deg
of
s a t e l l i t e
at
%
time
t pas
%
geolon pas (4)= geographic
longitude
in deg [180 180]
of
%
s a t e l l i t e
at time
t pas
%
col (4)= indicator
of
current
i n t e n s i t y
l e v e l
%
( ’ g ’
greeen , ’ y ’
yellow
or
’ r ’
red ) ,
%I n i t i a l i z e
t t o t=repmat (NaN, 1 , 4 ) ;
t pas=repmat (NaN, 1 , 4 ) ;
l a t t o t=repmat (NaN, 1 , 4 ) ;
mlt tot=repmat (NaN, 1 , 4 ) ;
%l a t t o t c o r=repmat (NaN, 1 , 4 ) ;
alat pas=repmat (NaN, 1 , 4 ) ;
mlt pas=repmat (NaN, 1 , 4 ) ;
geolat pas=repmat (NaN, 1 , 4 ) ;
geolon pas=repmat (NaN, 1 , 4 ) ;
maxlat=repmat (NaN, 1 , 4 ) ;
maxdBabs=repmat (NaN, 1 , 4 ) ;
col = repmat (NaN, 1 , 4 ) ;
%col =’
’;
76
==PAGE:78==
% Set parameters used in
c a l c u l a t i o n
%
threshold =0.1;
MaxMeanBabs=1000;
MaxSingValBabs=10000;
MaxSingValdBabs=10;
% Setting up
f i l e
path
readorbit = num2str(A, ’%05i ’ ) ;
orbitnumber = [ readorbit ,
’ . abs ’ ] ;
filename = [ orbitnumber ,
’ . gz ’ ] ;
i f
sat == 1
f i l e = [ ’ c :\ Users\ Mille \Documents\Matlab\CHAMP\ ’ ,
filename ] ;
datex=’y ’ ;
e l s e i f
sat == 2
f i l e = [ ’ c :\ Users\ Mille \Documents\Matlab\SWARM\A vec\ ’ ,
filename ] ;
datex=’y ’ ;
e l s e i f
sat == 3
f i l e = [ ’ c :\ Users\ Mille \Documents\Matlab\SWARM\B vec\ ’ ,
filename ] ;
datex=’y ’ ;
e l s e i f
sat == 4
f i l e = [ ’ c :\ Users\ Mille \Documents\Matlab\SWARM\C vec\ ’ ,
filename ] ;
datex=’y ’ ;
else
fprintf ( ’ in vali d
second input ’ )
datex=’n ’ ;
end
i f
exist ( f i l e ,
’ f i l e ’ ) ==0 %f i l e
does not
e x i s t
datex=’n ’ ;
return
end
gunzip ( f i l e ,
’C:\ Users\ Mille \Documents\MATLAB’ ) ;
x = load ( orbitnumber ) ;
delete ( orbitnumber ) ;
i f
datex==’y ’
[ n ,m]= size (x ) ;
77
==PAGE:79==
%x(:,3)=90x ( : , 3 ) ;
i f n==0
datex=’n ’ ;
e l s e i f n>0
d e l l a t=repmat (NaN, n , 1 ) ;
d e l l a t ( 1 : n1)=x ( 2 : n,7)x ( 1 : n1 ,7);
%Calculate
r e s i d u a l
f i e l d
Babs=x(: ,9)  sqrt (( x (: ,10)+ x (: ,13)).ˆ2+
. . .
(x (: ,11)+ x (: ,14)).ˆ2+( x (: ,12)+ x ( : , 1 5 ) ) . ˆ 2 ) ;
% Babs = Br ( observed )  s q r t ( ( bt ( obs ) + bt ( chaos ))ˆ2 + . . .
%
(( bp ( obs ) + bp ( chaos ))ˆ2 + ( br ( chaos)+br ( magnetorsphere ))ˆ2)?
rorb=x ( : , 2 ) ;
teta=x ( : , 3 ) ;
phi=x ( : , 4 ) ;
end
end
i f
datex==’y ’
% Start
computation
%
i f
length ( Babs)>700
i f abs(mean( Babs )) < MaxMeanBabs %remove
o f f s e t
o r b i t s .
i i=find (x ( 2 : end,1)x ( 1 : end1,1)==0);%error
in time ,
i d e n t i c a l
timestam
i f
length ( i i )>0
%error ( ’ Error in time ’ )
return
end
%remove
spikes
i i=find (abs( Babs)>MaxSingValBabs ) ;
i f
length ( i i )>0
j j=find (abs( Babs)<MaxSingValBabs ) ;
x=x( jj , 1 : 1 5 ) ;
Babs=Babs ( j j ) ;
end
%F i l l
data gaps
tjd=x (1 ,1):(1/(24∗60∗60)): x(end , 1 ) ;
Babs1=interp1 (x ( : , 1 ) , Babs , tjd , ’ s p l i n e ’ ) ;
i l a t 1=interp1 (x ( : , 1 ) , x ( : , 7 ) , tjd , ’ s p l i n e ’ ) ;
78
==PAGE:80==
mlt1=interp1 (x ( : , 1 ) , x ( : , 8 ) , tjd , ’ s p l i n e ’ ) ;
r1=interp1 (x ( : , 1 ) , x ( : , 2 ) , tjd , ’ s p l i n e ’ ) ;
theta1=interp1 (x ( : , 1 ) , x ( : , 3 ) , tjd , ’ s p l i n e ’ ) ;
phi1=interp1 (x ( : , 1 ) , x ( : , 4 ) , tjd , ’ s p l i n e ’ ) ;
%highpass
f i l t e r
nlow=1500;
Babslow=l o w f f i l t ( Babs1 , length ( Babs1 ) ,1 , nlow ) ;
Babs1=Babs1Babslow ;
dBabs=Babs1 ( 2 : end)Babs1 ( 1 : end1);
%remove
spikes
in dBabs
i i s p=find (abs(dBabs)>MaxSingValdBabs ) ;
dBabs( i i s p )=NaN;
for
ihe =1:2
clear
j1
j1a
j2
j2a
i f
ihe==1
int=find ( ilat1 >40 & tjd<tjd (1)+45/60/24);
else
int=find ( ilat1 <40 & tjd>tjd (1)+45/60/24);
end
i f
length ( int )>100 & max( int)<length ( Babs1)1;
d i l a t =( i l a t 1 ( 2 : end) i l a t 1 ( 1 : end1));
intp=find ( d i l a t ( int ) >0);
intn=find ( d i l a t ( int ) <0);
i f
length ( intp )>500 & length ( intn )>500
dBabsdilat=dBabs . / ( d i l a t ) ;
dBabsfilt=l o w f f i l t (dBabs , length (dBabs ) ,1 ,150);
d B a b s d i l a t f i l t=dBabsfilt ./ d i l a t ;
%Find maxlat
for
o r b i t
i d i=find (abs( d i l a t ) <0.03
| abs( d i l a t ) >10);
d B a b s d i l a t f i l t ( i d i )=NaN;
dBabsfilt ( i d i )=0;
idihe=find (abs( d i l a t ( int )) <0.03);
i f
length ( idihe )>0
maxlat(1+( ihe 1)∗2)= i l a t 1 ( int ( idihe ( 1 ) ) ) ;
79
==PAGE:81==
maxlat(2+( ihe 1)∗2)= i l a t 1 ( int ( idihe (end ) ) ) ;
else
i f
ihe==1
imaxlat=find ( d i l a t ( int ) >0);
else
imaxlat=find ( d i l a t ( int ) <0);
end
maxlat(1+( ihe 1)∗2)= i l a t 1 ( int ( imaxlat (end ) ) ) ;
maxlat(2+( ihe 1)∗2)= i l a t 1 ( int ( imaxlat (end ) ) ) ;
end
minilat=find (abs( i l a t 1 ( int )) >40);
for
i d i r =1:2
i f
i d i r==1
d i r s =1;
else
d i r s =1;
end
intp=find ( d i l a t ( int ) >0);
[yma, i i a ]=localmax( d i r s ∗(32∗ihe )∗( dBabsfilt ( int ( intp ) ) ) , 1 0 0 ) ;
maxdBabs(1+( ihe 1)∗2)= p r c t i l e ( dBabsfilt ( int ( intp ) ) , 9 8 ) ;
intn=find ( d i l a t ( int ) <0);
[ymd, i i d ]=localmax ( d i r s ∗(32∗ihe )∗( dBabsfilt ( int ( intn ) ) ) , 1 0 0 ) ;
maxdBabs(2+( ihe 1)∗2)= p r c t i l e ( dBabsfilt ( int ( intn ) ) , 9 8 ) ;
i f
ihe==1
ym=[yma ymd ] ;
nym1=length (yma ) ;
i i =[ i i a
i i d+length ( intp ) ] ;
e l s e i f
ihe==2
ym=[ymd yma ] ;
nym1=length (ymd) ;
i i =[ i i d
i i a+intn (end ) ] ;
end
i i 1=find (ym>threshold ) ;
i f
length ( i i 1 )>0
80
==PAGE:82==
iym=find ( i i >minilat ( 1 ) ) ;
i i 1 1=find (ym(iym ( 1 ) : nym1)>threshold ) ;
i f
length ( i i 1 1 )>0
j1=find (max(abs(ym(iym ( 1 ) : nym1)))==
. . .
abs(ym(iym ( 1 ) : nym1)))+iym(1) 1;%simply
take max
ym( j1 )=0;
j1a=find (max(abs(ym(iym ( 1 ) : nym1)))==
. . .
abs(ym(iym ( 1 ) : nym1)))+iym(1) 1;%simply
take max nr . 2
i f abs( d B a b s d i l a t f i l t ( int ( i i ( j1a ) ) ) ) > . . .
abs( d B a b s d i l a t f i l t ( int ( i i ( j1 ) ) ) )
. . .
|
isnan ( d B a b s d i l a t f i l t ( int ( i i ( j1 )))) >0 %i n c l
d i l a t
in
rank
jdum=j1 ;
j1=j1a ;
j1a=jdum ;
end %swop j1 and j1a
imin=1;
else
j1 =0;
j1a =0;
end
iym=find ( i i <minilat (end ) ) ;
i i 1 2=find (ym(nym1+1:iym(end))> threshold ) ;
i f
length ( i i 1 2 )>0
j2=find (max(abs(ym(nym1+1:iym(end))))==
. . .
abs(ym(nym1+1:iym(end))))+nym1 ;%simply
take max
ym( j2 )=0;
j2a=find (max(ym(nym1+1:iym(end)))==
. . .
ym(nym1+1:iym(end)))+nym1 ;%simply
take max nr . 2
i f
(abs( d B a b s d i l a t f i l t ( int ( i i ( j2a ) ) ) ) > . . .
abs( d B a b s d i l a t f i l t ( int ( i i ( j2 ) ) ) ) )
|
. . .
isnan ( d B a b s d i l a t f i l t ( int ( i i ( j2 )))) >0; %i n c l
d i l a t
in
rankin
jdum=j2 ;
j2=j2a ;
j2a=jdum ;
end %swop j2 and j2a
else
j2 =0;
j2a =0;
end
81
==PAGE:83==
i f
length ( j1)==0 |
j1==0
j1 =0;
noval ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
timejd ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=0;
mltoval ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
dintenjet ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
r ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
theta ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
phi ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
else
j1=j1 ( 1 ) ;
noval ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)= i l a t 1 ( int ( i i ( j1 ) ) ) ;
timejd ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)= tjd ( int ( i i ( j1 ) ) ) ;
mltoval ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=mlt1 ( int ( i i ( j1 ) ) ) ;
dintenjet ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)= d B a b s d i l a t f i l t ( int ( i i ( j1 ) ) ) ;
r ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=r1 ( int ( i i ( j1 ) ) ) ;
theta ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)= theta1 ( int ( i i ( j1 ) ) ) ;
phi ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=phi1 ( int ( i i ( j1 ) ) ) ;
end
i f
length ( j1a)==0 |
j1a==0
j1a =0;
novala ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
timejda ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=0;
mltovala ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
dintenjeta ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
ra ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
thetaa ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
phia ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
else
j1a=j1a ( 1 ) ;
novala ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)= i l a t 1 ( int ( i i ( j1a ) ) ) ;
timejda ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)= tjd ( int ( i i ( j1a ) ) ) ;
mltovala ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=mlt1 ( int ( i i ( j1a ) ) ) ;
dintenjeta ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)= d B a b s d i l a t f i l t ( int ( i i ( j1a ) ) ) ;
ra ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=r1 ( int ( i i ( j1a ) ) ) ;
thetaa ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)= theta1 ( int ( i i ( j1a ) ) ) ;
phia ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=phi1 ( int ( i i ( j1a ) ) ) ;
end
i f
j1==j1a
novala ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
timejda ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=0;
82
==PAGE:84==
mltovala ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
dintenjeta ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
ra ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
thetaa ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
phia ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
end
i f
length ( j2)==0 |
j2==0
j2 =0;
noval ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
timejd ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=0;
mltoval ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
dintenjet ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
r ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
theta ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
phi ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
else
j2=j2 ( 1 ) ;
noval ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)= i l a t 1 ( int ( i i ( j2 ) ) ) ;
timejd ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)= tjd ( int ( i i ( j2 ) ) ) ;
mltoval ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=mlt1 ( int ( i i ( j2 ) ) ) ;
dintenjet ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)= d B a b s d i l a t f i l t ( int ( i i ( j2 ) ) ) ;
r ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=r1 ( int ( i i ( j2 ) ) ) ;
theta ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)= theta1 ( int ( i i ( j2 ) ) ) ;
phi ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=phi1 ( int ( i i ( j2 ) ) ) ;
end
i f
length ( j2a)==0 |
j2a==0
j2a =0;
novala ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
timejda ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=0;
mltovala ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
dintenjeta ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
ra ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
thetaa ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
phia ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
else
j2a=j2a ( 1 ) ;
novala ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)= i l a t 1 ( int ( i i ( j2a ) ) ) ;
timejda ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)= tjd ( int ( i i ( j2a ) ) ) ;
83
==PAGE:85==
mltovala ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=mlt1 ( int ( i i ( j2a ) ) ) ;
dintenjeta ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)= d B a b s d i l a t f i l t ( int ( i i ( j2a ) ) ) ;
ra ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=r1 ( int ( i i ( j2a ) ) ) ;
thetaa ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)= theta1 ( int ( i i ( j2a ) ) ) ;
phia ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=phi1 ( int ( i i ( j2a ) ) ) ;
end
i f
j2==j2a
novala ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
timejda ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=0;
mltovala ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
dintenjeta ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
ra ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
thetaa ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
phia ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
end
else
j1 =0;
j2 =0;
noval ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
timejd ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=0;
mltoval ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
dintenjet ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
r ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
theta ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
phi ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
novala ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
timejda ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=0;
mltovala ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
dintenjeta ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
ra ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
thetaa ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
phia ( idir ,1+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
noval ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
timejd ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=0;
mltoval ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
dintenjet ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
r ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
theta ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
84
==PAGE:86==
phi ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
timejda ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=0;
novala ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
mltovala ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
dintenjeta ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
ra ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
thetaa ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
phia ( idir ,2+( ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
end
end %end of
i d i r
%Determine the
strongest
current
for
ip =1:2
d i n t t ot ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=abs( dintenjet (1 , ip+(ihe 1)∗2));
mlt tot ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)= mltoval (1 , ip+(ihe 1)∗2);
l a t t o t ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=noval (1 , ip+(ihe 1)∗2);
t t o t ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)= timejd (1 , ip+(ihe 1)∗2);
r t o t ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=r (1 , ip+(ihe 1)∗2);
i f
(abs( dintenjet (2 , ip+(ihe 1)∗2))>abs( dintenjet (1 , ip+(ihe 1)∗2))
. . .
|
isnan ( dintenjet (1 , ip+(ihe 1)∗2))==1);
d in t t ot ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=abs( dintenjet (2 , ip+(ihe 1)∗2));
mlt tot ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)= mltoval (2 , ip+(ihe 1)∗2);
l a t t o t ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=noval (2 , ip+(ihe 1)∗2);
t t o t ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)= timejd (2 , ip+(ihe 1)∗2);
r t o t ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=r (2 , ip+(ihe 1)∗2);
end
i f abs( l a t t o t ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)maxlat ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)) <0.05
l a t t o t ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
d in t t ot ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=NaN; %not
real max
end
%Correction
of
i l a t
of PEJ due to non
v e r t i c a l
f i e l d
mlat=l a t t o t ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2);
rsat=r t o t ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2);
dint=di n t t ot ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2);
85
==PAGE:87==
i f
isnan ( mlat)==0
[ col1 , d e l t a i l a t ]=PEJcor ( rsat , mlat , dint ) ;
else
col1=NaN;
d e l t a i l a t=NaN;
end
i f
ihe==2
d e l t a i l a t=d e l t a i l a t ;
end
col ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)= col1 ;
%corrected apexl a t i t u d e
alat pas ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=mlat+d e l t a i l a t ;
iinew=find (abs( ilat1 alat pas ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2))<1 & . . .
abs( mlt1mlt tot ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)) <6);%
%new max l e s s
than 1 min and 1 deg away
iinew=find (abs( ilat1 alat pas ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)) <0.5 & . . .
abs( tjdt t o t ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2))<1/24/60 & abs( ilat1 mlat ) <1);
[dum, i i c ]=min(abs( i l a t 1 ( iinew) alat pas ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)));
%keyboard
i f
isnan ( col1)==1 |
isnan ( mlat+d e l t a i l a t )==1 |
. . .
dum>0.05
|
isnan (dum)==1
%i f
col1==’ ’
|
isnan ( mlat+d e l t a i l a t )==1 | dum>0.05
|
isnan (dum)==1
t pas ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
%d i n t t o t ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
alat pas ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
mlt pas ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
geolat pas ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
geolon pas ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=NaN;
else
i i c o r=iinew ( i i c ) ;
t pas ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)= tjd ( i i c o r ( 1 ) ) ;
alat pas ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)= i l a t 1 ( i i c o r ( 1 ) ) ;
mlt pas ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=mlt1 ( i i c o r ( 1 ) ) ;
geolat pas ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=90theta1 ( i i c o r ( 1 ) ) ;
86
==PAGE:88==
geolon pas ( ip+(ihe 1)∗2)=phi1 ( i i c o r ( 1 ) ) ;
end
end %end for
ip
end %end
i f
length
intn >500 & length ( intp )>500
end %end
i f
length
int
end %end for
ihe =1:2
end %i f
abs (mean( Babs))<MaxMeanBabs;% exclude
o f f s e t
o r b i t s
end %end of
i f
f i l e
e x i s t
( length Babs >...)
end %end
i f
f i l e
e x i s t
datex=’y ’
%end
return
function
[ col , d i l a t ]=PEJcor ( r , i l a t , dint )
%Determines
l a t i t u d e
correction due to
f i e l d
i n c l i n a t i o n
%
%input r ,
magnetic
l a t i t u d e
and
i n t e n s i t y
%output
l a t i t u d e
correction and colour
( green ( g ) ,
yellow (y) or red ( r ))
I0=1e6 ;
y=(r 6371115)∗1e3 ;
x=1000e3 :1 e3 :1000 e3 ;
t=atan2(y , x)∗180/ pi ;
Bc=I0 ∗4∗pi∗1e 7/(2∗pi∗y)∗1 e9 ;
Bt=Bc∗y ./ sqrt (x.ˆ2+y . ˆ 2 ) ;
Bx=Bt . ∗( sin ( t /180∗pi ) ) ;
By=Bt.∗(cos ( t /180∗pi ) ) ;
B=[Bx; By ] ;
l a t=abs( i l a t ) ;
tet=(90 l a t )∗pi /180;
I=atan(2∗cos ( tet )/ sin ( tet ))∗180/ pi ;
I=I ∗pi /180;
Bmain=[cos ( I ) sin ( I ) ] ;
Bp=Bmain∗B;
87
==PAGE:89==
dBp=Bp( 2 : end)Bp( 1 : end1);
dBy=By( 2 : end)By( 1 : end1);
i i=find (abs(dBp)==max(abs(dBp ) ) ) ;
dintfac=dBp( i i )/1 e3 ∗(6370 e3∗pi /180);
delx=x( i i ( 1 ) ) ;
d i l a t=delx /6370 e3 ∗180/ pi ;
I=dint ∗I0 / dintfac ;
i f
log10 ( I ) <4.5 & lat <60;
I=NaN;
end
% returner
log10
i s t e d e t
i f
log10 ( I ) <= 7
col = log10 ( I ) ;
e l s e i f
log10 ( I ) > 7
disp ( ’ greater
than 7 ’ )
col = NaN;
else
col = NaN;
end
% i f
log10 ( I ) <4.5;
%
col =’g ’ ;
% e l s e i f
log10 ( I)>=4.5 & log10 ( I )<5.0 ;
%
col =’g ’ ;
% e l s e i f
log10 ( I)>=5.0 & log10 ( I )<5.4 ;
%
col =’y ’ ;
% e l s e i f
log10 ( I)>=5.4 & log10 ( I )<7;
%
col =’r ’ ;
% e l s e ;
%
col =’
’;
% end
return
88
==PAGE:90==
C.4
Comparing DMSP boundary points
%% Correlation
between
predicted
beg/end and DMSP boundaries
clear
varia bles
clc
load ( ’CMO prop ’ )
load ( ’ CHAMP selected ’ )
MOp = MO properties ;
MOs = CHAMP sel ;
CDC = nan( length (MOp) ,
50);
for
i = 1: length (MOp)
i
x b = [MOp( i , 7 ) MOp( i ,14) MOp( i ,21) MOp( i ,28) MOp( i ,35)
. . .
MOp( i ,42) MOp( i ,49) MOp( i , 5 6 ) ] ;
y b = [MOp( i , 8 ) MOp( i ,15) MOp( i ,22) MOp( i ,29) MOp( i ,36)
. . .
MOp( i ,43) MOp( i ,50) MOp( i , 5 7 ) ] ;
% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
% 
beg

% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
%  b0 
i f
isnan ( x b (1)) == 1 % does
the DMSP s a t i s f y
the
requirements
x b (1) = nan ;
y b (1) = nan ;
b e g 0 l a t d i f f = nan ;
beg 0 MLTdiff = nan ;
beg coor 0 = nan ( 2 , 1 ) ;
else
% finding
d i f f e r e n c e
between
predicted
beg and DMSP b0
% f i r s t
determing which beg
to compare with
i f
x b (1) > 0 % North pole
beg coor 0 = [MOs( i , 2 5 : 2 6 ) ; MOs( i , 2 9 : 3 0 ) ] ;
else % South
pole
beg coor 0 = [MOs( i , 2 7 : 2 8 ) ; MOs( i , 3 1 : 3 2 ) ] ;
end
y = y b ( 1 ) ;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(ybeg coor 0 ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
i f mc > 6
i f y > 19
y = y24;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(ybeg coor 0 ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
89
==PAGE:91==
e l s e i f y < 5
y = y+24;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(ybeg coor 0 ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
end
end
i f mc > 1.5
x b (1) = nan ;
y b (1) = nan ;
b e g 0 l a t d i f f = nan ;
beg 0 MLTdiff = nan ;
beg coor 0 = nan ( 2 , 1 ) ;
else
beg coor 0 = beg coor 0 ( : , mi ) ;
beg 0 MLTdiff = y  beg coor 0 ( 2 ) ;
i f
x b (1) > 0 % North pole
b e g 0 l a t d i f f = x b (1)  beg coor 0 ( 1 ) ;
else % South
pole
b e g 0 l a t d i f f =  x b (1) + beg coor 0 ( 1 ) ;
end
end
end
%  b1e 
i f
isnan ( x b (2)) == 1
x b (2) = nan ;
y b (2) = nan ;
b e g 1 l a t d i f f = nan ;
beg 1 MLTdiff = nan ;
beg coor 1 = nan ( 2 , 1 ) ;
else
% f i r s t
determing which beg
to compare with
i f
x b (2) > 0 % North pole
beg coor 1 = [MOs( i , 2 5 : 2 6 ) ; MOs( i , 2 9 : 3 0 ) ] ;
else % South
pole
beg coor 1 = [MOs( i , 2 7 : 2 8 ) ; MOs( i , 3 1 : 3 2 ) ] ;
end
y = y b ( 2 ) ;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(ybeg coor 1 ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
i f mc > 6
i f y > 19
y = y24;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(ybeg coor 1 ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
e l s e i f y < 5
y = y+24;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(ybeg coor 1 ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
end
end
90
==PAGE:92==
i f mc > 1.5
x b (2) = nan ;
y b (2) = nan ;
b e g 1 l a t d i f f = nan ;
beg 1 MLTdiff = nan ;
beg coor 1 = nan ( 2 , 1 ) ;
else
beg coor 1 = beg coor 1 ( : , mi ) ;
beg 1 MLTdiff = y  beg coor 1 ( 2 ) ;
i f
x b (1) > 0 % North pole
b e g 1 l a t d i f f = x b (2)  beg coor 1 ( 1 ) ;
else % South
pole
b e g 1 l a t d i f f =  x b (2) + beg coor 1 ( 1 ) ;
end
end
end
% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
%  PEJ 
% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
%  B3a 
i f
isnan ( x b (4)) == 1
x b (4) = nan ;
y b (4) = nan ;
PEJ 3a latdiff = nan ;
PEJ 3a MLTdiff = nan ;
PEJ coor 3a = nan ( 2 , 1 ) ;
else
i f
x b (4) > 0 % North pole
PEJ coor 3a = [MOs( i , 1 3 : 1 4 ) ; MOs( i , 1 7 : 1 8 ) ] ;
else % South
pole
PEJ coor 3a = [MOs( i , 1 5 : 1 6 ) ; MOs( i , 1 9 : 2 0 ) ] ;
end
y = y b ( 4 ) ;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(yPEJ coor 3a ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
i f mc > 6
i f y > 19
y = y24;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(yPEJ coor 3a ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
e l s e i f y < 5
y = y+24;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(yPEJ coor 3a ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
end
end
i f mc > 1.5
x b (4) = nan ;
y b (4) = nan ;
PEJ 3a latdiff = nan ;
91
==PAGE:93==
PEJ 3a MLTdiff = nan ;
PEJ coor 3a = nan ( 2 , 1 ) ;
else
PEJ coor 3a = PEJ coor 3a ( : , mi ) ;
PEJ 3a MLTdiff = y  PEJ coor 3a ( 2 ) ;
i f
x b (4) > 0 % North pole
PEJ 3a latdiff = x b (4)  PEJ coor 3a ( 1 ) ;
else % South
pole
PEJ 3a latdiff =  x b (4) + PEJ coor 3a ( 1 ) ;
end
end
end
%
%  B3b 
i f
isnan ( x b (5)) == 1
x b (5) = nan ;
y b (5) = nan ;
PEJ 3b latdiff = nan ;
PEJ 3b MLTdiff = nan ;
PEJ coor 3b = nan ( 2 , 1 ) ;
else
i f
x b (5) > 0 % North pole
PEJ coor 3b = [MOs( i , 1 3 : 1 4 ) ; MOs( i , 1 7 : 1 8 ) ] ;
else % South
pole
PEJ coor 3b = [MOs( i , 1 5 : 1 6 ) ; MOs( i , 1 9 : 2 0 ) ] ;
end
y = y b ( 5 ) ;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(yPEJ coor 3b ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
i f mc > 6
i f y > 19
y = y24;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(yPEJ coor 3b ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
%disp ( ’ above 22 ’)
e l s e i f y < 5
y = y+24;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(yPEJ coor 3b ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
%disp ( ’ below
2 ’)
end
end
i f mc > 1.5
x b (5) = nan ;
y b (5) = nan ;
PEJ 3b latdiff = nan ;
PEJ 3b MLTdiff = nan ;
PEJ coor 3b = nan ( 2 , 1 ) ;
92
==PAGE:94==
else
PEJ coor 3b = PEJ coor 3b ( : , mi ) ;
PEJ 3b MLTdiff = y  PEJ coor 3b ( 2 ) ;
i f
x b (5) > 0 % North pole
PEJ 3b latdiff = x b (5)  PEJ coor 3b ( 1 ) ;
else % South
pole
PEJ 3b latdiff =  x b (5) + PEJ coor 3b ( 1 ) ;
end
end
end
%  B4s 
i f
isnan ( x b (6)) == 1
x b (6) = nan ;
y b (6) = nan ;
PEJ 4s latd iff = nan ;
PEJ 4s MLTdiff = nan ;
PEJ coor 4s = nan ( 2 , 1 ) ;
else
i f
x b (6) > 0 % North pole
PEJ coor 4s = [MOs( i , 1 3 : 1 4 ) ; MOs( i , 1 7 : 1 8 ) ] ;
else % South
pole
PEJ coor 4s = [MOs( i , 1 5 : 1 6 ) ; MOs( i , 1 9 : 2 0 ) ] ;
end
y = y b ( 6 ) ;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(yPEJ coor 4s ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
i f mc > 6
i f y > 19
y = y24;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(yPEJ coor 4s ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
e l s e i f y < 5
y = y+24;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(yPEJ coor 4s ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
end
end
i f mc > 1.5
x b (6) = nan ;
y b (6) = nan ;
P EJ 4s latdi ff = nan ;
PEJ 4s MLTdiff = nan ;
PEJ coor 4s = nan ( 2 , 1 ) ;
else
PEJ coor 4s = PEJ coor 4s ( : , mi ) ;
PEJ 4s MLTdiff = y  PEJ coor 4s ( 2 ) ;
93
==PAGE:95==
i f
x b (6) > 0 % North pole
PEJ 4s latd iff = x b (6)  PEJ coor 4s ( 1 ) ;
else % South
pole
PEJ 4s latd iff =  x b (6) + PEJ coor 4s ( 1 ) ;
end
end
end
% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
% 
end

% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
%  B5 
i f
isnan ( x b (7)) == 1
x b (7) = nan ;
y b (7) = nan ;
e n d 5 l a t d i f f = nan ;
end 5 MLTdiff = nan ;
end coor 5 = nan ( 2 , 1 ) ;
else
i f
x b (7) > 0 % North pole
end coor 5 = [MOs( i , 3 3 : 3 4 ) ; MOs( i , 3 7 : 3 8 ) ] ;
else % South
pole
end coor 5 = [MOs( i , 3 5 : 3 6 ) ; MOs( i , 3 9 : 4 0 ) ] ;
end
y = y b ( 7 ) ;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(yend coor 5 ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
i f mc > 6
i f y > 19
y = y24;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(yend coor 5 ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
e l s e i f y < 5
y = y+24;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(yend coor 5 ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
end
end
i f mc > 1.5
x b (7) = nan ;
y b (7) = nan ;
e n d 5 l a t d i f f = nan ;
end 5 MLTdiff = nan ;
end coor 5 = nan ( 2 , 1 ) ;
else
end coor 5 = end coor 5 ( : , mi ) ;
end 5 MLTdiff = y  end coor 5 ( 2 ) ;
94
==PAGE:96==
i f
x b (7) > 0 % North pole
e n d 5 l a t d i f f = x b (7)  end coor 5 ( 1 ) ;
else % South
pole
e n d 5 l a t d i f f =  x b (7) + end coor 5 ( 1 ) ;
end
end
end
%  B6 
i f
isnan ( x b (8)) == 1
x b (8) = nan ;
y b (8) = nan ;
e n d 6 l a t d i f f = nan ;
end 6 MLTdiff = nan ;
end coor 6 = nan ( 2 , 1 ) ;
else
i f
x b (8) > 0 % North pole
end coor 6 = [MOs( i , 3 3 : 3 4 ) ; MOs( i , 3 7 : 3 8 ) ] ;
else % South
pole
end coor 6 = [MOs( i , 3 5 : 3 6 ) ; MOs( i , 3 9 : 4 0 ) ] ;
end
y = y b ( 8 ) ;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(yend coor 6 ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
i f mc > 6
i f y > 19
y = y24;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(yend coor 6 ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
e l s e i f y < 5
y = y+24;
[mc mi ] = min(abs(yend coor 6 ( 2 , : ) ) ) ;
end
end
i f mc > 1.5
x b (8) = nan ;
y b (8) = nan ;
e n d 6 l a t d i f f = nan ;
end 6 MLTdiff = nan ;
end coor 6 = nan ( 2 , 1 ) ;
else
end coor 6 = end coor 6 ( : , mi ) ;
end 6 MLTdiff = y  end coor 6 ( 2 ) ;
95
==PAGE:97==
i f
x b (8) > 0 % North pole
e n d 6 l a t d i f f = x b (8)  end coor 6 ( 1 ) ;
else % South
pole
e n d 6 l a t d i f f =  x b (8) + end coor 6 ( 1 ) ;
end
end
end
% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
% 
Saving

% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
CDC( i ,
1:4) = MOs( i , 1 : 4 ) ; % o r b i t
i d e n t i f i e r
CDC( i ,
5:12) = x b ; % boundary
l a t
CDC( i ,
13:20) = y b ; % boundary MLT
CDC( i ,
21:22) = MOs( i ,
7 : 8 ) ; % Newell
CDC( i ,
23) = beg coor 0 ( 1 ) ; % beg
l a t
CDC( i ,
24) = beg coor 0 ( 2 ) ; % beg MLT
CDC( i ,
25) = b e g 0 l a t d i f f ; % beg0
l a t
d i f f
CDC( i ,
26) = beg 0 MLTdiff ; % beg0 MLt d i f f
CDC( i ,
27) = beg coor 1 ( 1 ) ;
CDC( i ,
28) = beg coor 1 ( 2 ) ;
CDC( i ,
29) = b e g 1 l a t d i f f ; % beg1
l a t
d i f f
CDC( i ,
30) = beg 1 MLTdiff ; % beg1 MLt d i f f
CDC( i ,
31) = PEJ coor 3a ( 1 ) ;
CDC( i ,
32) = PEJ coor 3a ( 2 ) ;
CDC( i ,
33) = PEJ 3a latdiff ; % PEJ 3a
l a t
d i f f
CDC( i ,
34) = PEJ 3a MLTdiff ; % PEJ 3a MLT d i f f
CDC( i ,
35) = PEJ coor 3b ( 1 ) ;
CDC( i ,
36) = PEJ coor 3b ( 2 ) ;
CDC( i ,
37) = PEJ 3b latdiff ; % PEJ 3b
l a t
d i f f
CDC( i ,
38) = PEJ 3b MLTdiff ; % PEJ 3b MLT d i f f
CDC( i ,
39) = PEJ coor 4s ( 1 ) ;
CDC( i ,
40) = PEJ coor 4s ( 2 ) ;
CDC( i ,
41) = PEJ 4s latdi ff ; % PEJ 4s
l a t
d i f f
CDC( i ,
42) = PEJ 4s MLTdiff ; % PEJ 4s MLT d i f f
CDC( i ,
43) = end coor 5 ( 1 ) ;
CDC( i ,
44) = end coor 5 ( 2 ) ;
CDC( i ,
45) = e n d 5 l a t d i f f ; % end b5
l a t
d i f f
CDC( i ,
46) = end 5 MLTdiff ; % end b5 MLT d i f f
CDC( i ,
47) = end coor 6 ( 1 ) ;
CDC( i ,
48) = end coor 6 ( 2 ) ;
96
==PAGE:98==
CDC( i ,
49) = e n d 6 l a t d i f f ; % end b6
l a t
d i f f
CDC( i ,
50) = end 6 MLTdiff ; % end b6 MLT d i f f
CDC( i ,
51) = MOs( i , 5 ) ; % N Kp
CDC( i ,
52) = MOs( i , 6 ) ; % S Kp
CDC( i ,
53) = MOs( i , 7 ) ; % N Newell
CDC( i ,
54) = MOs( i , 8 ) ; % S Newell
end
temp = find (CDC( : , 5 3 ) > 2.5 e4 ) ;
CDC(temp ,53
) = 2.5 e4 ;
temp = find (CDC( : , 5 4 ) > 2.5 e4 ) ;
CDC(temp ,
54) = 2.5 e4 ;
save ( ’ DMSP selected ’ ,
’CDC’ )
97
==PAGE:99==
98
