==PAGE:1==
Abstract
III-V nanowires (NWs) are attractive for solar cells. Through the composition
of the NWs, their bandgap and hence their electronic properties can be tuned, for
example, to optimise absorption so that most of the Sun’s radiation is used.
In this study, compositional analysis of Ga-As-Sb, Al-Ga-N, In-Ga-N systems has
been done using Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and Energy
Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) with the aid of the Python-based Hyperspy
library for a more transparent and possibly better compositional analysis. This
includes setting up an analysis routine based on the quantiﬁcation method called
zeta method intruduced by Watanabe & Williams, but not available yet in com-
mercial software packages.
The required ζ-factor has been estimated experimentally for the elements Ga, As,
Sb, Al, N, In, C, O, Si on the used JEOL JEM2100F with an 80 mm2 silicon
drift detector and the ζ-method compared to the classical Cliﬀ-Lorimer method.
Diﬀerent reference samples with known thickness and composition were used for
this step.
Tilt eﬀects on the zeta-factor quantiﬁcation were studied with GaAs NWs and
the Ga catalyst droplet of GaAsSb NWs. When the holder was tilted to negative
X-tilts, the ζ-factor increased. In the range between 0o and 35o tilt, the ζ-factors
were constant indicating no detector shadowing.
For ζ calibration and mapping, a positive tilt was used to avoid shadowing eﬀects.
Quantitative compositional maps have been calculated of areas within GaAsSb,
AlGaN and InGaN NWs that contain a heterostructure. These heterostructures
could have a varying thickness or composition in the direction of the electron beam
Using the EDS spectra images, thickness maps could be constructed for areas where
the composition was known.
Further reﬁnements to the zeta method have to be made, especially ﬁnding good
calibration specimens with exactly known thicknesses.
==PAGE:2==
Preface
Work for this thesis was performed at the TEM Gemini Centre.
It is a
master thesis following up a specialisation project within the Master ’Sus-
tainable Energy Engineering, Solar Cell Systems and Materials’ within the
Department of Physics (IFY) at the Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU) carried out from January to June 2018.
The NWs analysed here, were grown in the MBE lab at the Department
of Electronics and Telecommunication (IET) by Dr Dingding Ren. Refer-
ence samples were grown by Mazid Munshi and Andreas Liudi Mulyo, a FIB
sample was prepared by Per Erik Vullum. Supervision of the project was
done by Professor Antonius T. J. Van Helvoort at NTNU, Trondheim, and
co-supervisors Christian Danvad Damsgaard and Jakob Birkedal Wagner at
DTU, Kopenhagen.
Thanks to my extraordinary supervisor Antonius T. J. Van Helvoort for guid-
ance, help and constructive feedback, thanks to Postdoc Dingding Ren for
sample preparation, Ragnhild Sæterli and Bjørn Gunnar Soleim for teaching
me how to operate the TEM, and the TEM group with their weekly Friday
lunch seminar. Thanks to NTNU Nanolab who granted me access to use the
SEM APREO.
Also thanks to my fellow students Annika, Carolyn, Kevin and Ruby, and
my family for all their support.
Trondheim, 25th June 2018
Johanna Neumann
==PAGE:3==
Nomenclature
BF
Bright-Field imaging in TEM
CCD
Charge-Coupled Device
DP
Diﬀraction Pattern in TEM
EDS
Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy
ETD
Everhart-Thornley detector
FFT
Fast Fourier Transformation
GaAsSb
Gallium Arsenide Antimonide
HAADF
High-Angle-Annular-Dark-Field imaging in TEM
HRTEM
High resolution TEM
MBE
Molecular Beam Epitaxy
NMF
Non-negative matrix factorisation
NW
Nanowire
PCA
Principle component analysis
SAED
Selected area energy diﬀraction
SEM
Scanning electron microscopy
SQ
Shockley-Queisser
STEM
Scanning transmission electron microscopy
3
==PAGE:4==
TEM
Transmission electron microscopy
VLS
Vapour-Liquid-Solid
ZB
Zinc-Blende
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Crystallographic diﬀraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Electron Microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Electron-Matter Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.2
Contrast in SEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.3
TEM hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.4
Contrast in TEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.5
Diﬀraction in TEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.6
STEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Methods for quantitative EDS analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Principal component analysis (PCA) . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
Cliﬀ-Lorimer-Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.3
ζ-Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
III-V NWs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.1
NW Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.2
NW Geometry and Morphology . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.3
Lattice Defects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4.4
NW Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Experimental Methods
19
3.1
Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Ga-As-Sb
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.2
Al-Ga-N . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.3
In-Ga-N . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Electron Microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.1
SEM sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:6==
3.2.2
TEM sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Results
26
4.1
Electron dose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Shadowing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Reference Samples GaAs, AlGaN, InAs . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
Zeta constant of elements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5
Samples Ga-As-Sb, Al-Ga-N, In-Ga-N . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.6
Elemental composition of the three systems
. . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6.1
Ga-As-Sb
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6.2
Al-Ga-N . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.6.3
In-Ga-N . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Discussion
41
6
Conclusion
43
7
Further Work
44
A Energy bandgap
47
B K and L X-ray line transition energies
49
C Diﬀraction patterns
51
D Hyperspy code
52
D.1 Conversion and scaling of raw EDS map data written by Adrian
Lervik . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
D.2 Functions written by A. Garmannslund . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
D.3 Zeta calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
D.4 Mapping with the CL- and ζ-method . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
With an increasing number of people and energy need, renewable energy re-
sources are necessary in addition to fossil fuels. The sun is the most abundant
of the renewable energies. Therefore, solar cells, which produce electricity by
converting the sun’s radiation, can be promising as future sustainable energy
source. There are diﬀerent generations and types of solar cells on the mar-
ket. The ﬁrst generation includes silicon solar cells, which are dominating
the market and are most often used on house roofs. The second generation
are thin ﬁlm solar cells and the third are newer solar cells based on other
systems such as organic solar cells, quantum dot solar cells or nanowire solar
cells. The latter is a novel and promising solar cell consisting of NWs as the
active material with the pn-junction. While eﬃciencies for NW solar cells are
reaching half the Shockley-Queisser limit (SQ-limit) [Otnes and Borgstr¨om
(2017)], there are theoretical studies that predict that for NWs the Shockley-
Queisser limit (SQ-limit) can be surpassed [Krogstrup et al. (2013)]. This
limit is the maximum eﬃciency of a single pn-junction and depends on the
bandgap of the pn-junction. Further optimisation of NW material and device
structure are required to reach towards the maximum possible.
There are several advantages using NWs as active component in a solar
cell. With NWs, the distance between them can be adjusted to the order of
the wavelength of light to optimise absorption. This light trapping increases
the eﬃciency [Otnes and Borgstr¨om (2017)]. Due to the space between small
diameter NWs, the matching criteria of the lattice spacing of the NWs and
of the substrate is relaxed. The diameter of the NW is very small, the free
surface area can reduce the stress due to lattice mismatching. This allows
1
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
alternative (i.e. cheaper) substrates to be used and limits the formation of
misﬁt dislocations that limit the eﬃciency of thin ﬁlm based solar cells. An-
other advantage of NW solar cells is a short distance between the pn-junction
and the outer contact. This reduces unwanted e−h+ recombinations, and in-
creases thereby the eﬃciency.
In order to use most of the solar radiation from the solar spectrum, the
bandgap of the NWs can be tuned. Tuning the bandgap of a material is pos-
sible by tailoring its composition [Papadopoulos (2014)]. To be able to grow
NWs with a particular composition, it is necessary to measure the compo-
sition. One option of analysing composition in thin material (<10-200 nm)
is by energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) in a transmission electron
microscope (TEM). There are two main methods in calculating the composi-
tion from measured x-ray intensities. One is the Cliﬀ-Lorimer method, (CL
method), [Cliﬀand Lorimer (1975)]. This is a long-used method for thin
ﬁlms, which relates the intensity to the composition by a ratio of two ele-
ments. The newer one is the ζ method [Watanabe and Williams (2006)]. This
method takes additionally the specimen mass-thickness and the electron dose
into account. Although the zeta method is generally seen as potentially the
more accurate method, it is seldom used as it requires probe measurements
in addition to EDS, the constants have to be calibrated for each system by
the user and the method is not yet available in commercial and easy to use
packages.
In this thesis, quantitative EDS is used to analyse the composition at the
top and bottom parts of several NWs with diﬀerent compositions. These ends
will be a crucial part of the ﬁnal devices and their electronic characteristics,
partly dependent on their composition, which might dominate the device
performance. The aim is to ﬁnd the composition of parts of the NW with a
high accuracy using both the CL method and the ζ method. As the latter is
not yet implemented in most commercial EDS software packages, the method
had to be implemented and calibrations taken for the used TEM-EDS system.
In this project, ﬁrst the theory necessary to understand imaging using SEM
and TEM is introduced, followed by an elementary introduction to NWs,
the CL method and the ζ method, Chapter 2. In Chapter 3, there is an
experimental overview of how the samples were prepared and what hardware
and software were used. After that, results are presented and discussed. A
conclusion summarises the ﬁndings and further work is suggested.
2
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Theory
The theory chapter is devided into four parts, ﬁrst it describes how electrons
are diﬀracted in crystals, then an introduction in electron microscopy, fol-
lowed by EDS in TEM describing the principal component analyser as data
treatment and the two methods: CL and ζ, and lastly about III-V NW.
2.1
Crystallographic diﬀraction
The interplanar distance for a cubic system for a crystal plane (hkl) can be
calculated, [Williams and Carter (2009)]:
dhkl =
1
q
h2
a2
1 + k2
a2
2 + l2
a2
3
(2.1)
with the primitive lattice vectors a1, a2 and a3.
When an incident plane wave is in phase with the scattered plane wave,
the Bragg condition is fulﬁlled:
2dsin(θ) = nλ
(2.2)
with the distance between two crystal planes d, and the scattering angle
θ. The crystal plane distance d and the scattering angle θ have a reciprocal
relationship. In a more general visual description, with the incoming electron
vector k and diﬀracted k’, the Ewald sphere, Fig. 2.1, shows the diﬀerence
in phase with the scattering vector ∆k=k’-k.
3
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.1: Schematics of the Ewald sphere in the reciprocal lattice.
The structure factor (for a perfect crystal) measures the amplitude scat-
tered by a unit cell:
F =
X
j
fjexp(−iGrj) =
X
j
fjexp(−2πi(hxj + kyj + lzj))
(2.3)
with atomic form factors fj and reciprocal lattice vector G. The intensity
I and scattering amplitude A have the following relationship for kinematic
diﬀraction with the structure factor with N unit cells in the crystal:
I ∝A2 = N 2F 2
(2.4)
|F2(θ)| is proportional to the scattered intensity I. σ describes the scatter-
ing cross section, f(θ) is the atomic scattering cross section. It is the strength
of the scattering and depends inversely on the scattering angle θ (where an
atom is the scattering center).
2.2
Electron Microscopy
Basics for electron microscopy, interaction volume, contrast and diﬀraction
are described in this section. There are diﬀerent types of electron microscopy
and electron beam techniques. SEM and TEM are the ones used here.
2.2.1
Electron-Matter Interaction
When electrons hit a sample with an energy E, they interact with the sample
in diﬀerent ways. Fig. 2.2 shows electrons and photons that can be measured
4
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
after a high kV-beam is directed onto a material. In the SEM, the sample
has a thickness in the µm range. Electrons do not have enough energy to
pass through it, therefore, electrons can only escape the sample through the
surface where the beam penetrates. In the TEM, on the other hand, the
sample is around 100 nm thin, so the electrons penetrate the sample and
scatter once or not at all. Dynamic scattering, more than one scattering
event, is likely as the electron-matter interaction is strong. It becomes more
important when the sample is thicker.
Figure 2.2: Interaction between beam electrons and matter.
When detecting electrons and X-rays, it is important to know that elec-
trons are charged and, therefore, scatter much more strongly than X-rays.
2.2.2
Contrast in SEM
For surface topography analysis, a scanning electron microscope (SEM) can
be used. It is a point scanning technique which means that every point of a
sample area has to be scanned to create an image of this area. The typical
magniﬁcation ranges from 10 to 10,000 x, the electron energy ranges between
1 and 30 keV. The SEM consists of an electron source, a long beam column
with apertures and lenses, the sample and detectors. Since electrons travel-
ling through the column will interact with atoms, the whole apparatus needs
to be in vacuum, thus a vacuum pump is necessary.
5
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
As an electron source a ﬁeld emission gun (FEG) is used. After leaving
the source, electrons travel through a condensor aperture followed by a con-
densor lens, which focuses the beam (reduces beam diameter). Further down
there is an objective aperture and an objective lens to focus the beam onto
a speciﬁc spot on the sample.
When the beam hits the specimen, the primary electrons (beam electrons)
interact with the specimen. The beam electrons can hit electrons out of the
specimen while entering the sample. These are secondary electrons of type
one (SE1). When the primary backscattered electrons hit electrons out of
the sample while exiting the sample, these secondary electrons are of type
two (SE2). The electrons from the beam that have enough energy left to exit
the sample are called backscattered electrons (BSE), see Fig. 2.3a.
In addition to electrons, electromagnetic waves can escape the sample. When
an electron gets hit out of an atom it leaves a hole behind. The atom is ex-
cited and emits either characteristic X-rays when an electron from an outer
shell falls into the hole. Instead of X-ray radiation, the atom can also emit
an Auger electron from a third shell.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.3: (a) Path of an electron through thick material. λ is the free mean
path of secondary electrons. After [Goldstein et al. (2003)] (b) Interaction
volume when an electron beam hits a material surface.
All secondary and backscattered electrons with enough energy to leave
the sample can be detected, for example, with an Everhart-Thornley detec-
tor (ET-detector). It has a grid in front of it that can be biased positive or
6
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
negative. If it is biased negative, it prevents SE from entering the detector,
and only BSE can enter since they have a much higher energy. If the grid
is biased positively, it attracts SE, who have energies below 50 eV. In this
project, the ET detector was used with positive bias.
There are also scattered electrons of type 3 (SE3) that can be detected by
the ET-detector. Those electrons originate from the polepiece or the cham-
ber walls of the microscope when they get hit by BSE.
Looking at the interaction volume, see Fig. 2.3b, it can be seen that scat-
tered electrons of diﬀerent types originate from diﬀerent depth due to their
varying energies. Auger electrons only come from close to the surface, SEs
come from a bit deeper regions than Auger electrons, and BSEs come from
even deeper regions in the sample. Only X-rays originate from the entire
interaction volume.
When interpreting SEM images, two eﬀects need to be considered; If the
primary electron beam hits a ﬂat surface, a smaller part of the interaction
volume is close to the surface than when the beam hits an uneven surface. In
case of the uneven surface, more SE can escape the sample and this part of
the surface is seen as a brighter area. This is called the edge-eﬀect. Another
eﬀect is the shadow-eﬀect. This happens because the ET-detector is situated
not directly above the sample but further to one side of the sample. The
electrons that escape from the uneven surface facing the detector are more
likely to reach the detector than those escaping an uneven surface facing
away from the detector. This is in analogy with the sun shining onto an
uneven surface creating shadows. Having these two eﬀects in mind, images
can be analysed.
The signal per probe position is displayed, forming the image.
2.2.3
TEM hardware
In the TEM, the electron energy ranges between 100-300 keV. The TEM has
an electron gun, in this study a warm ﬁeld-emission (Schottkey) gun crystal,
several lenses, deﬂectors and apertures to guide the electron beam to the
sample and detectors. The lenses are electromagnetic. Because the beam are
moving electrons in a magnetic ﬁeld and therefore experience a Lorentz force,
7
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.4: Schematic layout of the TEM column, apertures are not included.
8
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
they spiral through the TEM column. The sample is very thin (typically <
100 nm), so most electrons are transmitted through the sample. Fig. 2.4
shows the schematic of the TEM without apertures.
2.2.4
Contrast in TEM
When the electron beam hits the specimen, electron waves are scattered by
the specimen, which leads to TEM image contrast. Both the amplitude and
the phase of the electron wave can be altered when it traverses the specimen.
This change in wave amplitude and phase can result in image contrast.
Amplitude contrast is devided in mass-thickness contrast, which origi-
nates from incoherent elastic (Rutherford) scattering of the electrons, and in
diﬀraction contrast, which is Bragg diﬀraction, which is elastic scattering of
coherent beams at small angles. Both contrasts lead to thickness fringes and
bending contours.
Bright ﬁeld (BF) and Dark ﬁeld (DF) imaging are the two most basic modes
in the TEM. In BF imaging the objective lens aperture is centered around
the central beam. This way only electrons from the direct beam contribute
to the image formation. The image on the screen appears as dark and the
background as bright. At the objective lens, all scattered electrons from one
point in the sample are focused to one point on the screen, see solid lines in
Fig. 2.5. The objective aperture is inserted, the SAD aperture is removed. In
DF imaging the objective lens aperture selects part of the scattered electrons
and excludes the direct beam. The sample appears bright, the background
dark.
Phase contrast is due to interference of beams after the sample and can
be seen when more than one beam contributes to the image. This contrast
leads to lattice fringes. One speciﬁc case of phase contrast are Moir´e pat-
terns. They are formed by interference by two lattice planes with similar
periodicities or planes that are slightly rotated against each other.
High resolution images are formed without the objective lens and thus in-
cludes the direct and diﬀracted beams. Therefore phase contrast can be seen
in HRTEM images. HRTEM images are used to image lattice spacing and
symmetry to identify the crystal phase, growth and facet directions and pos-
sible lattice defects.
9
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.5: Electron paths for BFTEM and SAED. The solid lines represent
the BF TEM. The dashed lines show the SAED, if the objective aperture is
removed and the SAD aperture inserted. The blue arrows show the images
at diﬀerent positions in the TEM in BF mode, and the black spots the DP
in SAED mode, adapted from (Williams and Carter, 2009).
10
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
One other aspect that can inﬂuence the resolution in TEM images are im-
perfections in the electromagnetic lenses. That can be astigmatism, spherical
aberration and chromatic aberration. The astigmatism can easily be cor-
rected by an octapole. Spherical aberration limits the performance and can
be partly counterbalanced by defocus or the use of correctors. Chromatic
aberration has an eﬀect due to the energy spread in the beam or after in-
teraction with the specimen, and are for conventional TEM not the limiting
factor for ultimate resolution.
2.2.5
Diﬀraction in TEM
In diﬀraction mode, the objective aperture is removed and the SAD aperture
is inserted making diﬀraction spots visible on the screen. In the backfocal
plane of the objective lens, all electrons scattered through the sample with
the same angle are focused in one point, see Fig. 2.5.
The diﬀraction spots can be linked to lattice planes in the crystal, because
the real space and reciprocal space are related. The following equation is
valid [Williams and Carter (2009)]:
Rdhkl = λL
(2.5)
with the camera length L (microscope parameter), the interplanar distance
dhkl, the wavelength of the beam electrons λ, and the distance between a
diﬀraction spot and the central spot (000) R. The product λL is constant
in a diﬀraction image. From this and Equation 2.1, the relation between
two distances Ri and the angle between two diﬀraction spots and the (000)
spot can be calculated and the respective crystal structure be found. Apart
from crystal structure, a diﬀraction pattern can also give information about
possible crystal defects such as twinning, see Section 2.4.3.
2.2.6
STEM
The conventional TEM uses a parallel beam onto the sample. In scanning
transmission electron microscopy (STEM), the beam is converged to a spot
onto the specimen. This spot is then scanned across the surface of the spec-
imen. The scattered signal can be collected at diﬀerent angles, for example,
high angle annular dark ﬁeld (HAADF) STEM. It is advantageous to record
EDS spectroscopy per point using STEM mode to construct spectral images
11
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
or line scans.
HAADF STEM images have a strong Z-contrast and coherent diﬀraction ef-
fects are excluded if the starting angle is large enough (for 200 kV medium
Z element > 50 mrad). If the annular HAADF detector is large enough,
an incoherent image is formed. The scatter angle is selected by controlling
the camera length using the intermediate lenses. BF STEM is also possible
and has a contrast similar to BF TEM. As with SEM (Section 2.2.2), the
collected signal is recorded per beam position.
2.3
Methods for quantitative EDS analysis
For thin and light samples, the counts in the EDS detector can be small and
the S/N ratio needs to be improved. For this, the principle component anal-
yser is brieﬂy described. As a following step, for quantitative EDS mapping,
two methods for thin ﬁlm specimen can be used and are presented thereafter.
These are the CL- and ζ-methods.
2.3.1
Principal component analysis (PCA)
One way of improving the signal to noise (S/N) ratio is by in increasing the
signal. This is possible with a bigger probe size in the TEM, because increas-
ing the electrons that hit the sample also increases the number of interaction
with the sample and the number of x-rays detected. There is a maximum
amount of electrons that a sample can tolerate without getting damaged (i.e.
critical dose). This limit is low for small particles such as small NWs or NWs
with light elements such as nitrogen. If the signal cannot be increased further
and the data is still poorly, the noise can be reduced. One option to reduce
the noise is to bin the data. This leads to high loss in spatial resolution. For
an evenly thick sample with homogeneous composition, this can be a good
solution. For a sample with changing thickness and composition, a high res-
olution is desired. This leaves another option of noise reduction by using
the principal component analysis, PCA. This is machine learning, where the
algorithm ﬁnds a number of the most frequent spectra (called scree plot) and
throws away the rest assuming that these spectra contain noise only. PCA
was successfully used to denoise EDS spectra images amongst others in [Jany
et al. (2017)].
12
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.6: One raw spectrum of GaAsSb top crystal (left) and using PCA
(right). The zero peak gets cut out for further data processing.
2.3.2
Cliﬀ-Lorimer-Method
First introduced by [Cliﬀand Lorimer (1975)], the Cliﬀ-Lorimer method
(CL-method) is a simple method but it does not assume any absorption.
For light elements this can be problematic. For evenly thick samples with
homogeneous composition, this classical method works very well. It relates
the intensities and compositions of two elements with a proportionality factor
k:
CA
CB
= kAB
IA
IB
(2.6)
with Ci the composition of element i in weight percent, Ii the x-ray intensity
of element i above background and kij the Cliﬀ-Lorimer factor, which can
be determined experimentally (diﬃcult as good standards are needed and
exactly the same illumination conditions) or theoretically (most used to date)
[Goldstein et al. (2003), Williams and Carter (2009)].
2.3.3
ζ-Method
A newer and more precise method for EDS quantiﬁcation was introduced
by [Watanabe and Williams (2006)] as the ζ-method. This method takes
the mass-thickness and electron dose into account, and has the possibility of
including absorption correction.
The X-ray intensity IA of element A in an analysed volume is proportional
13
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
to the mass-thickness (ρt), composition CA and electron dose De:
ρt = ξAIA/(CADe)
(2.7)
where the electron dose De is:
De = IpτNe
(2.8)
with the probe current Ip, the acquisition time τ and the number of electrons
Ne[#/e]. For a relative composition of two elements (CA/CB), the mass-
thickness ρt eliminates and makes absorption correction easier.
With two elements, A and B, CA + CB = 1 and Eq. 2.7, three equations
can be formed for calculating the mass-thickness or the composition:
ρt = ζAIA + ζBIB
De
, CA =
ζAIA
ζAIA + ζBIB
, CB =
ζBIB
ζAIA + ζBIB
(2.9)
These can be expanded to more than two elements. The zeta constant
needs to be calibrated for each TEM-EDS system, however, pure samples
with known composition and thickness are necessary. For the zeta method,
the probe current has to be measured during the experiment. The two big
advantages are that 1) the eﬀect of thickness or density variation is corrected
in the composition analysis and 2) an absorption correction A, based on tab-
ulated absorption coeﬃcients and less complicated than for the CL-method,
can be applied.
If also absorption correction A is taken into account, Eqs. 2.9 result in
ρt =
N
X
j
ζjIjAj
De
, CA =
ζAIAAA
PN
j ζjIjAj
, CN =
ζNINAN
PN
j ζjIjAj
(2.10)
14
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.4
III-V NWs
III-V NWs consist of elements from the third to the ﬁfth group of the periodic
table. The following sections introduce them.
2.4.1
NW Synthesis
NW growth with the Molecular-Beam-Epitaxy (MBE) machine uses UHV to
achieve ultra high purity. Shutters can be opened to let speciﬁc elements ﬂow
towards a sample, which can be heated and rotated. Growth rates can be
accurately controlled and in-situ characterisation can be done using reﬂection
high-energy electron diﬀraction (RHEED). Fig. 2.7 shows the MBE growth
as a schematic.
Figure 2.7: Schematic of MBE growth set-up.
In the vapour-liquid-solid (VLS) method there is a vapour phase, a liquid
phase and a solid phase. Where these three phases meet, the growth hap-
pens. [Wagner and Ellis (1964)] explains the process using Au as catalyst.
Here the growths are self-catalyzed.
In the MBE machine, the vapour phase is supplied by the machine. The liq-
uid phase is in the beginning a droplet on the sample. Then the droplet moves
up while the NW is growing underneath it. The solid phase is ﬁrst the seed
particle and then the NW. Fig. 2.8 is a schematic of the VLS growth method.
15
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.8: VLS growth of a NW. The time of the VLS growth steps is not
speciﬁc, the time slots in this image are the ones used in growing the GaAsSb
sample B analysed in this thesis. V stands for vapour, L for liquid and S for
solid.
2.4.2
NW Geometry and Morphology
Ga-As-Sb. Both GaAs and GaSb have fcc crystal structure. For GaAs1−ySby,
there are two fcc crystals together, an fcc crystal with two diﬀerent base
atoms. This is called the zinc-blende (ZB) structure. If the Ga atom sits in
the (0,0,0) position, the As or the Sb is in the [1
4, 1
4, 1
4] position.
The structure factor, which is used in the indexing of diﬀraction patterns, is:
Fhkl =fGa

1 + e−2πi( 1
2 h+ 1
2 k) + e−2πi( 1
2 k+ 1
2 l) + e−2πi( 1
2 h+ 1
2 l)
+
(2.11)
fAs

e−2πi( 1
4 h+ 1
4 k+ 1
4 l) + e−2πi( 3
4 h+ 3
4 k+ 3
4 l) + e−2πi( 1
4 h+ 3
4 k+ 3
4 l) + e−2πi( 3
4 h+ 1
4 k+ 3
4 l)
As a consequence, there are strong reﬂections, f.ex., for (400): I=F2=
4(fGa+fAs) and weaker ones, f.ex., for (002): F = fGa-fAs.
16
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Al-Ga-N. GaN and AlN have wurtzite (WZ) structure, which is a hexag-
onal structure, with hcp stacking order but four atoms in the basis instead of
two (which hcp has). It is similar to two hcp lattices with a displacement of
[1
3, 1
3, 1
8] relative to each other. The structure factor for GaN and AlN using
the position of Ga (Al) and N atoms is:
Fhkl =

fGa + fNe−3
4 iπl
·

e−2πi( 1
3 h+ 2
3 k) + e−2πi( 2
3 h+ 1
3 k+ 1
2 l)
(2.12)
The second term is only kinematically allowed when it is not zero.
This
formula shows that in WZ structure there are also stronger and weaker re-
ﬂections, see [Nylund (2018)].
In-Ga-N. The ternary system InGaN has a direct bandgap range from
infrared (0.7 eV) to ultraviolet (3.4 eV) [Hsu and Walukiewicz (2008)]. It is
therefore an ideal material for solar cells. InN has the same crystal structure
as GaN, WZ (hexagonal).
2.4.3
Lattice Defects
In crystals there can be diﬀerent forms of defects. If there is a change of
structure, for example, there is an area of ZB and then there is an area of
WZ, in between of those two structures there will be a defect.
Stacking faults is one example of a defect.
It characterises a disorder of
crystal planes, e.g. ABCABCAB to ABCBACBA.
Twinning is a defect where two crystals share some of the crystal points, see
Fig. 2.9b.
For WZ the stacking is ABABAB. If there is a mis-stacking like ABACAB
or ABACBCBCB this is called a stacking fault (the ABC close packing is for
monoatomic).
17
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.9: (a) Zinc blende structure, made in the software Vesta.
(b)
HRTEM image of a twin in a GaAs1−ySby NW. The arrows point at (111)-
twin planes.
2.4.4
NW Applications
NWs could be used in diﬀerent areas with diﬀerent implementations. Semi-
conductor NWs are promising building blocks for optoelectronic devices. The
advantage is that diﬀerent materials can be combined within a single NW and
that due to the small diameter, strain can relax on the free surface and NW
growth can be on lattice mismatching substrates. Overall less gain material
is needed, what is relevant as elements within them are relatively scarce (i.e.
expensive) and/or toxic. Beside the examples mentioned in the introduction
chapter speciﬁcally for III-V NW, other examples relevant for solar cells exist
in II-VI systems as for example [Joel and Sehoon (2013)]. However, the ﬁeld
of NW-based devices is compared to thin ﬁlm technology still young, and
research is required both at the synthesis, device design, optimisation and
fabrication to realize large scale implementation and to utilise the unique
characteristics of such systems fully.
18
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Experimental Methods
This section describes the sample preparation, the microscopes and software
used to collect and analyse the data.
3.1
Material
Several samples with diﬀerent substrates and elements were used in this
study. Tab. 3.1 shows an overview over all the samples used for calibration
and mapping. The samples with known thickness and composition were used
for calibration of the corresponding ζ-values. These ζ-values were used for
mapping to ﬁnd the samples with unknown thickness and composition. The
three systems that were analysed, are Ga-As-Sb, Al-Ga-N and In-Ga-N.
Table 3.1: Samples used for calibration and EDS analysis.
Sample
ID
System
Details
Comments
A
GaAs
SC-48
Ga-As-Sb
calibration
ζGa, ζAs,
Shadowing
B
GaAsSb etched
GN-45
Ga-As-Sb
calibration
ζGa, ζSb
C
GaAsSb
GN-45
Ga-As-Sb
ζGa, Shadowing,
Mapping
D
GaN/AlGaN
DgFS011
Al-Ga-N
calibration
ζAl, ζGa, ζN,
Mapping
E
GaN/AlGaN
SGN-6
Al-Ga-N
Mapping
F
InAs
NWG-40
In-Ga-N
calibration
ζIn, ζAs
G
InGaN
SGN-8
In-Ga-N
Mapping
19
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
3.1.1
Ga-As-Sb
Sample A: GaAs. This sample was previously analysed in [Garmannslund
(2016)] by EDS and also in [Kauko et al. (2014)] by HAADF STEM. The
NWs were grown with VLS method in a Varian Gen II Modular MBE system
by Mazid Munshi. The NWs consist of pure gallium arsenide (GaAs) with
ZB structure and growth direction [111] in the bottom part, an axial GaAsSb
insert and pure GaAs with WZ structure and [0001] growth direction in the
top part. The substrate is Si(111).
In this thesis the sample is used as reference for ζGa and ζAs, and for analysing
the shadowing of the sample holder. Growth speciﬁcations are listed in Tab.
3.2.
Table 3.2: GaAs reference sample grown at Tc = 620 oC.
element
ﬂux [Ml/s]
duration
monolayer per second
1.
Ga
0.7 Ml/s
20 min
As
4.2E-6 Torr
2.
Ga
0.7 Ml/s = 3.3E-7 Torr
1 min
As
4.2E-6 Torr
Sb
1.1E-6 Torr
3.
Ga
0.7 Ml/s
5 min
As
4.2E-6 Torr
Sample B: GaAsSb. For sample B, the NWs were grown on graphene
glass by Dingding Ren at the Department of Electronic Systems at NTNU,
Trondheim, by using VLS epitaxy. A graphene layer on top of SiOX, de-
scribed in [Sun et al. (2015)], was used as substrate. Here a 10 x 10 mm
piece was cut out and inserted into an MBE machine. In UHV, the sample
was heated to 625oC. Then, Al in vapour phase was directed onto the sample
and deposited for one second with a ﬂux of 0.1 monolayers per second. On
the substrate the Al forms liquid islands. After that, the Al beam was closed
and the As2 and Sb2 beam opened for 1 min to allow As and Sb to dissolve
into the Al islands to form AlGax−1Asx as seed particles to start the growth.
Then, the As and Sb beam is closed and the Ga beam opened for 5 s. During
that time Ga droplets form. The last step is to have the Ga, As and Sb beam
directed onto the sample. This deposition phase lasts for 10 min. In that
time, the NW grows. The crystal is growing at the point where the liquid
20
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Ga droplet meets the NW crystal (or seed particle in the beginning) and the
vapour phase around it. The Ga droplet stays on top of the NW and the
NW is growing underneath the droplet as long as Ga is fed into the droplet
and Sb and As ﬂuxes directed onto the sample. Table 3.3 lists the growth
parameters.
Table 3.3: Speciﬁcations during MBE growth, the whole process happened
at Tc = 625oC.
element
ﬂux [Ml/s]
duration
monolayer per second
1.
Al
0.1
1 s
2.
As2
2.5E-6
1 min
Sb2
6E-7
3.
Ga
0.7
5 s
4.
Ga
0.7
10 min
Sb
2.5E-6
As
2E-7
Sample C: GaAsSb etched. A part of sample B was taken and etched
to get sample C. This etching process, one minute immersion in hydrochloric
acid fuming 37 %, should remove the Ga droplets from the NWs and para-
sitic crystals. This etched sample was examined with the SEM and TEM for
the ﬁrst time in this thesis.
3.1.2
Al-Ga-N
Sample D: GaN/AlGaN. This sample was MBE grown at Tokyo Univer-
sity by Andreas Liudi Mulyo. It is an AlN/GaN/n-AlGaN/AlN/p-AlGaN/GaN
grown on graphene on fused silica.
The fused silica, AlN, GaN bottom and top and the protection layer electron
deposited C was used to ﬁnd ζ-values and the n-AlGaN/AlN/p-AlGaN as
heterostructure to map.
Sample E: GaN/AlGaN. This sample was grown with MBE by Dingding
Ren and the substrate was graphene glass. First, AlN nucleation particles
were grown, then GaN NWs grew on top of the seed particles. Growth pa-
21
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
rameters are given in Tab. 3.4. Previous characterisation work on this sample
can be found in Nylund (2018).
Table 3.4: Speciﬁcations during MBE growth of sample E.
element
Temperature
ﬂux [Ml/s]
duration
Tc [oC]
monolayer per second
1.
Al
600
0.1
400 s
N2
2.7/480 sscm/W
2.
Ga
960
0.3
4 hrs
N2
2.7/480 sscm/W
3.1.3
In-Ga-N
Sample F: InAs. The InAs sample, which was used here as reference, was
grown in the MBE on kish-graphite substrate by Mazid Munshi. GaAs was
grown at 450 oC for 45 min. Tab. 3.5 shows growth parameters.
Table 3.5: Speciﬁcations during MBE growth of sample F.
element
Temperature
ﬂux [Ml/s]
duration
Tc [oC]
monolayer per second
1.
Ga
450
0.1 (=0.2 ˚A/s)
45 min
As4
3·10−6 Torr
Sample G: InGaN. This sample was grown by Dingding Ren in the
MBE. The substrate is graphene glass fabricated at Peking University. The
NWs consist of n-type AlN with Si dopant 1100, n-type GaN with Si dopant
1100 and intrinsic InGaN.
22
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Table 3.6: Speciﬁcations during MBE growth of sample G.
element
Temperature
ﬂux [Ml/s]
duration
Tc [oC]
monolayer per second
1.
Al
600
0.1
400 s
N2
2.7/480 sscm/W
2.
Ga
960
0.3
3 hrs
N2
2.7/480 sscm/W
3.
In
620
0.2
1 hrs
Ga
0.1
N2
2.7/480 sscm/W
3.2
Electron Microscopy
For this thesis the SEM FEI-Apreo located in the cleanroom Nanolab, and
the TEM JEOL JEM-2100 were used. Voltages in the SEM ranged between
two up to 20 kV. The TEM was used with an acceleration voltage of 200
kV. The TEM sample holder was a double tilt beryllium holder. The light
Beryllium minimises the background signal, which is especially important in
the EDS analysis. The condensor lens aperture in the TEM had a diameter
of 40 µm if not stated otherwise. For HAADF STEM images in the TEM,
the ADF detector was used at a camera length of 12 cm, corresponding to
an inner ADF detector angle of approximately 50 mrad. For acquiring EDS
data, an Oxford X-Max 80 SDD detector was used. The detector has an
energy resolution of approximately 130 eV. All EDS was measured in STEM
mode while the detector was operated by AZtecEnergy software.
To be able to study a sample with TEM or SEM, it has to be prepared prior
to inserting it into the microscope.
3.2.1
SEM sample preparation
For the SEM the samples could be used directly after the NWs were grown
onto the substrates in the MBE machine.
3.2.2
TEM sample preparation
For the TEM, the sample had to be prepared further. The following steps
were taken for the GaAsSb sample (Sample B and C); The sample for the
23
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
SEM was scratched with a diamond scratcher. Fig. 3.1 shows an SEM image
of the scratches, which can be seen as dark lines. As a TEM grid, a holey
C-ﬁlm on 300 mesh Cu grid was taken and swiped over the sample to deposit
some of the scratched oﬀparts of the sample onto the grid.
The FIB sample was made by Per Erik Vullum at an FEI Helios. A FIB
sample was used to have a constant thickness and that the electron beam
should go through one crystal with a constant composition (sliced by FIB).
The thickness was estimated by t/λ in EELS. This thickness interface area
is about 140 nm.
Figure 3.1: SEM overview of the GaAsSb sample, ETD 2 kV.
For the samples InAs and InGaN, samples F and G, the preparation had
one additional step. (The same had been done for GaN/AlGaN, sample E.)
A drop of isopropanol was deposited onto the scratched substrate with a
pipette. The 300 mesh Cu grid was then swiped over the isopropanol droplet
with NW in it. The isopropanol evaporated leaving scratched oﬀparticles
including NWs on the grid.
Fig. 3.2 shows an area of the GaAsSb sample B (left) and of the GaN/Al-
GaN sample E (right) in the TEM. Apart from diﬀerent NWs, many of the
parasitic crystals can be seen in the GaAsSb sample. The parasitic crystals
are too thick for electrons to pass through and cannot be analysed further
with a TEM.
24
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Figure 3.2: Lower magniﬁcation of part of the GaAsSb TEM sample.
3.3
Data Analysis
Image processing was done using the softwares Digital Micrograph and Im-
ageJ. Python was used for further data processing including spectrum images
using the Hyperspy library. The code is given in Appendix D.
The .oip maps from AZtek were converted to .hdf5 ﬁles using the Hyper-
Spy Script from Adrian Lervik. This script uses for each conversion a .msa
spectrum for energy calibration, a .raw and .rpl ﬁle for map data and a .txt
ﬁle for spatial calibration data. If not speciﬁed otherwise, for ζ-calibration
the data was binned and ﬁtted to a model. For mapping, PCA was used
to maintain a high spatial resolution and then ﬁtted to a model. Functions
written by Andreas Garmannslund were used to create compositional and
thickness maps. The k-factors for the CL-method were used from the AZtek
software.
25
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 4
Results
In this section, the results of the three systems Ga-As-Sb, Al-Ga-N and In-
Ga-N are presented.
4.1
Electron dose
For the zeta calibration, the electron dose was measured using the CCD
camera. With the constant 4.855 by [Nylund (2018)], the counts on the CCD
can be related to the number of electrons on the sample. For diﬀerent spot
sizes and CL apertures, the beam current changes. There are four diﬀerent
CL apertures in the microscope, 10, 40, 100 and 200 µm. From the spotsizes,
0.7, 1 and 1.5 nm were chosen. With a bigger CL, more electrons hit the
sample. Using a bigger spotsize, also more electrons hit the sample, see Fig.
4.1.
For EDS measurements, spot sizes of 0.7 nm and 1 nm were chosen. For
all measurements, the 40 µm CL aperture was used. This leads to currents
of 0.2 nA to 0.4 nA, see Tab. 4.1.
Table 4.1: Electron dose averaged.
Spotsize diameter [nm]
0.7
1
1.5
2
Probe current [nA]
0.2
0.4
1
1.75
26
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.1: Probe current vs. condensor aperture size for three diﬀerent spot
sizes: 0.7 nm, 1 nm and 1.5 nm.
4.2
Shadowing
The holder can be tilted towards or away from the EDS detector. If the
holder is tilted away from the detector, the holder is shadowing the detector
and a lower signal gets to the detector. This increases the zeta value. Fig.
4.2 shows a tilt series of a Ga droplet of sample C, GaAsSb, in black. There is
also a tilt series from the Ga droplet of sample A, the GaAs reference sample,
and from the Ga and As from the NW of that GaAs reference sample. The
analysed NW including the map areas are shown in Figure Fig. 4.2 on the
left.
It can be seen that the zeta values for Ga and As are quite constant
between 0o and 35o tilt. Below 0o the ζ-values increase. The zeta values of
Ga in the droplets is in the same range of both samples (black: 1823 ±3% and
green: 1756 ±7%). It can be noted that ζGa from the droplets is consistently
higher than ζGa from the NW.
27
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.2: Tilt series of the Ga droplet of sample C, a GaAsSb NW (top left)
and sample A, a GaAs NW (bottom left). The black measurement points
are from sample C, the blue, red and green from sample A. The black and
the green are from NW droplet, the red and blue from a NW.
4.3
Reference Samples GaAs, AlGaN, InAs
For the zeta calibration, reference samples of known composition and thick-
ness were used.
GaAs NWs, sample A, were available for calibration of ζGa and ζAs. Fig.
4.3 shows a BF image of a typical NW (a), HR images of the top part (b)
and the middle (c), and HAADF STEM images of the NW (d), the top (e)
and the middle (f). Calibration maps were taken in the middle of the NW.
A reference sample to determine ζSb is sample B, GaAsSb etched. This
is the GaAsSb sample (sample C), but the Ga etched away. Removing the
droplet is also a way to proof that the top crystal is GaSb. Fig. 4.4 shows
an SEM image of the top view of the sample (a), a BFTEM images (b) with
SAED patterns of the top (c) and middle (d) part of the NW. A HRTEM
image (e) shows the top crystal and a HAADF STEM image shows the whole
NW (g) and the top part of the NW (f). In the SEM image the hexagonal
cross-section of the NWs can be seen as the Ga droplets are not covering them
28
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.3: GaAs reference sample, sample A. BFTEM (a), HRTEM (b and
c) and HAADF STEM images (d, e and f) are shown.
anymore. Also the polycrystaline crystals have no more droplets on them.
The HRTEM images shows carbonious contamination around the top crystal.
The GaN reference sample, sample D, was a FIB lamella. It was mounted
onto a half grid. Fig. 4.5 shows the lamella (a) where the grid can be seen
on the sides as dark area, and the NW which were used for EDS analysis (b).
The thickness was analysed using EELS data by Per Erik Vullum.
InAs, sample F, was the reference sample for calibration of ζIn and ζAs.
The NWs were a little asymmetric which makes the thickness estimation
diﬃcult. EDS maps were taken in the middle of the NW where the NW was
assumed to be symmetric. Fig. 4.6 shows a HRTEM image (a), a SAED
29
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.4: GaAsSb etched reference sample, sample B. The Ga droplets were
removed. A SEM image (a), a BFTEM (b), SAED of top (c) and middle (d)
are shown. A HRTEM image (e) shows carbonious contamination around
the top crystal. HAADF STEM images of the NW (g) and the top of the
NW (f) show the same NW.
30
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.5: GaN/AlGaN reference sample, sample D. An overview shows the
FIB lamella (A) and a HAADF STEM images (b) shows the analysed area.
image (b) and a HAADF STEM image (c) of a NW used for EDS. There are
several stacking defaults, which can be seen in the HRTEM image. In the
SAED image, the defects are visible as they smear out the diﬀraction spots to
lines. The HAADF STEM image (c) shows the whole NW. The asymmetry
can be seen in the top part. At the bottom right part of the NW there is an
overlapping particle.
Figure 4.6: InAs reference sample, sample F. A HRTEM image (a), SAED
image (b) and HAADF STEM image (c) are shown.
31
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.4
Zeta constant of elements
The zeta values of the K-lines and L-lines of the elements is plotted against
the transition energies of the elements, see Fig. 4.7. The error is the error is
not indicated in this plot, but from the measurements depicted in Fig. 4.2 it
is rather large.
Figure 4.7: Zeta values of K-lines and L-lines for JEOL JEM2100F of the
elements analysed.
4.5
Samples Ga-As-Sb, Al-Ga-N, In-Ga-N
GaAsSb, sample C, has straight NWs and NWs grown at an angle. There
is an Sb-rich crystal at the top. The NWs are almost defect free apart from
some twinning defects at the bottom. In addition to the NW growth, there
was a high number of polycrystalline 2D growth crystals.
Fig. 4.8 shows SEM images of the same area of the GaAsSb sample,
sample C, in 45 otilted (a) and top view (b). The orange rectangle in both
SEM images shows the same NW. In the tilted view, the NW and the droplet
can be seen, in the top view only the round droplet is visible. Fig. 4.8 also
shows a BFTEM image of one NW (c), a SAED image (d) from the middle
of the NW and the HRTEM image of the same NW (e). This NW probably
grew at an angle since it has a bend at the bottom edge. The SAED image
32
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
shows the ZB structure and the HRTEM image presents the GaSb top crystal.
Figure 4.8: GaAsSb sample, sample C. SEM images (a and b) of the same
area, a BFTEM (c), SAED (d) and HRTEM image (e) are shown.
The
orange rectangle points to the same NW.
33
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
AlGaN/GaN, sample E, was used for elemental mapping. The bottom
part of one NW was used for EDS analysis. Fig. 4.9 shows the BF image
(a) of two NWs. The right one of the two NWs is used for analysis and EDS
mapping. The bottom part is shown in the HRTEM image (b). A SAED
image (c) and a HAADF STEM image (d) are shown. The SAED image
shows the WZ crystal structure. Diﬀraction spots of diﬀerent intensities can
be seen as mentioned in the theory chapter. The HAADF STEM image was
taken after tilting the NW on zone, before the EDS data were taken. By
focusing the electron beam onto the NW, it damaged the NW. This damage
can be seen as a dark spot in the HAADF STEM image (d), the red arrow
is pointing at it. That means that the AlGaN/GaN NWs have a lower max-
imum electron dose than the NW from samples A - C as these samples had
no visible damage.
Figure 4.9: AlGaN/GaN sample, sample E. A BFTEM image (a), HRTEM
(b), SAED image (c) and a HAADF STEM image (d) are shown. The dark
spot in (d) is damage by the electron beam.
34
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
InGaN is a new sample, sample G, which is analysed here for the ﬁrst
time. Fig. 4.10 shows SEM images in top view (a) and 45o tilt (b). The
hexagonal shape of the top part of the NWs can be seen. The NWs vary a
lot in size. The NW density is very high, that is why the NWs were usually
seen in clusters on the TEM grid. One NW was chosen for EDS analysis. A
BFTEM (c), HRTEM (d), SAED (e) and HAADF STEM image (f) is shown.
In the BFTEM and HAADF STEM image there is an overlying particle at
the bottom of the NW.
Figure 4.10: InGaN sample, sample G. SEM images of top view at 20 kV
(a) and 45o tilt at 10 kV (b). A BFTEM (c), HRTEM (d), SAED (e) and
HAADF STEM image (f) are shown.
35
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.6
Elemental composition of the three sys-
tems
In this section, the composition of the three systems is analysed using el-
emental maps and thickness maps while comparing the CL-method to the
ζ-method. Non-negative matrix factorisation (NMF), was used before calcu-
lating the CL- and ζ-quantiﬁcation maps.
4.6.1
Ga-As-Sb
System 1 is GaAsSb, sample C. The composition and thickness of the top
crystal is analysed in Fig. 4.11. The left image shows the map area, the right
image shows the thickness of that area in arbitrary units.
Figure 4.11: Map area of the top part of a NW of sample C, GaAsSb, (left)
and a thickness map with arbitrary units (right).
Fig. 4.12 shows maps of atomic percentages of Ga, As and Sb for Zeta
quantiﬁcation (left column) and CL (right column). Note: the scales of the
two methods is diﬀerent for each element.
36
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.12: Comparison of the Zeta method to the CL method of a NW of
sample C. PCA with additional constraint of non-negative matrix factorisa-
tion (NMF) is used and no binning.
4.6.2
Al-Ga-N
System 2 is AlGaN/GaN, sample E. The composition at the bottom end of
the NW and the composition and thickness of the seed particle is analysed
here. Fig. 4.13 shows the map area (left) and a thickness map with arbitrary
unit (right). In the left image, damage can be seen in the bottom of the NW
at the seed particle. This damage originated from previous EDS analysis
that measuring day.
Fig. 4.14 shows the maps of atomic percentages of Al, Ga and N for Zeta
quantiﬁcation (left column) and CL (right column). Note: the scales of the
two methods is diﬀerent for each element.
37
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.13: Map area of the bottom part of a NW of sample E, AlGaN/GaN,
(left) and a thickness map with arbitrary units (right).
Figure 4.14: Comparison of the Zeta method to the CL method of a NW of
sample E. PCA with additional constraint of non-negative matrix factorisa-
tion (NMF) is used and no binning.
38
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.6.3
In-Ga-N
System 3 is InGaN, sample G. The composition and thickness of the top
part of the NW is analysed here. Fig. 4.15 shows the map area (left) and a
thickness map with arbitrary unit (right).
Figure 4.15: Map area of a NW of sample G, InGaN, (left) and a thickness
map with arbitrary units (right).
4.16 shows the maps of atomic percentages of In, Ga and N for Zeta
quantiﬁcation (left column) and CL (right column). The CL method does
not show many data points here.
39
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.16: Comparison of the Zeta method to the CL method of a NW of
sample G. PCA with additional constraint of non-negative matrix factorisa-
tion (NMF) is used and no binning.
40
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5
Discussion
The CL aperture and spotsize were chosen depending on the sample anal-
ysed.
This was done to have adjust the number of electrons hitting the
sample. The more electrons hit the sample, the more counts can be detected
with the EDS detector and thus give a better signal. But if there are too
many electrons on the sample, the sample gets damaged. The ideal case is
to have the maximum possible number of electrons without damaging the
sample. This number changes from sample to sample because thinner lighter
samples are damaged more easily. Here it is the sample with the light ele-
ments N and Al in sample D and E.
Zeta Ga values are consistently higher in the droplet than in the NW.
This might be due to thickness over- or underestimation. The droplet could
be not perfectly spherical but due to gravity slightly elliptical.
The NW
could also be asymmetrical. There could be other elements, contaminations,
on the droplet which are not assumed to be there.
The ζ-values are calculated. Several factors inﬂuence the error of the
ζ-values. The raw signal has noise. This is always there but can be reduced
with binning or methods such as PCA. The electron dose is an estimation,
which has an error. Measuring the electron dose can reduce this error. The
error of the ζ-values are also dependend on an error in sample thickness and
on the error in the reference sample composition.
The estimated ζ-values have a very large error. It is therefore diﬃcult to
ﬁnd a relation between the values of the K- and L-lines and the x-ray transi-
tion energies, which was f.ex. done in [Garmannslund (2016)] with the TEM
41
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
JEOL ARM200F.
All three sample classes analysed here have their diﬃculties. The ﬁrst
system, GaAs1−ySby, has a crystal embedded in the Ga droplet with an un-
known shape. The second system has NK (0.39 eV absorbed), and a seed
crystal AlN embedded in the GaN NW. The third system has extreme thick-
ness variations aﬀecting quantiﬁcation.
In system two, AlGaN/GaN, damage is a problem. Fig. 5.1 shows a
HRTEM image before (top image) and after (bottom image) an EDS scan.
The electron beam damaged the bottom of the NW and a hole formed. If the
beam current is smaller, the EDS signal is weaker. For good maps, though,
the count rate should always be bigger than 1000 counts per s.
Figure 5.1: Limitation to beam damage. The top image was taken before
EDS scan, the bottom image after the scan.
42
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
In this project the ζ-method was for the ﬁrst time set-up on the TEM-EDS
system used in this study. This included 1) to convert data from other soft-
ware format, recalibrate and save appropriately in .hdf5. 2) get ζ-factors
calibrated for diﬀerent relevant elements testing diﬀerent specimen geome-
tries, structures, condensor and holder tilt settings and 3) do all data pro-
cessing within HyperSpy notebook which is transparent and transferable to
co-workers and can include more advanced data processing routines such as
PCA-based denoising and NMF blind source separation. The developed ap-
proach was applied to some example heterostructures of interest to NW-based
optoelectrical devices.
43
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 7
Further Work
As next step, the ζ calibration can be improved. More reference samples are
needed to get better statistics. Also, the dose measurements can be more
precise. The current can be directly measured in the TEM with an ammeter
to improve the previously determined constant between the current on the
sample and the current on the CCD camera.
The estimated ζ-values have an error range. This error range can be calcu-
lated more precisely.
The absorption correction can be included in the ζ method. This would im-
prove the accuracy of the light elements such as nitrogen.
The InGaN/GaN FIB sample, sample D had one interface layer. The com-
position of this interface can be analysed.
The GaSb top crystal in sample B can be analysed in more detail. Up to
now this sample was used for ζ-calibration, but the geometry of the crystal
can be analysed further.
44
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
Bearden, J. A. (1967). X-Ray Wavelengths. Reviews of Modern Physics,
39:78–124.
Cliﬀ, G. and Lorimer, G. W. (1975). The quantitative analysis of thin spec-
imens. Journal of Microscopy, 103(2):203–207.
Edington, J. W. (1976). Typical Electron Microscope Investigations, pages
1–112. Macmillan Education UK, London.
Garmannslund, A. (2016). Reﬁnement of the ζ-factor method for quantita-
tive energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy in scanning transmission electron
microscopy. .
Goldstein, J., Goldstein, J., Goldshtain, Y., Newbury, D., Joy, D., Echlin,
P., Lyman, C., Lifshin, E., Sawyer, L., Joy, O., et al. (2003). Scanning
Electron Microscopy and X-ray Microanalysis: Third Edition. Scanning
Electron Microscopy and X-ray Microanalysis. Springer US.
Hsu, L. and Walukiewicz, W. (2008). Modeling of ingan/si tandem solar
cells. Journal of Applied Physics, 104(2):024507.
Jany, B. R., Janas, A., and Krok, F. (2017). Retrieving the quantitative
chemical information at nanoscale from scanning electron microscope en-
ergy dispersive x-ray measurements by machine learning. Nano Letters,
17(11):6520–6525. PMID: 29032683.
Joel, J. and Sehoon, C. (2013). Zno nanowire arrays for enhanced photocur-
rent in pbs quantum dot solar cells. Advanced Materials, 25(20):2790–2796.
Kauko, H., Fimland, B. O., Grieb, T., Munshi, A. M., M¨uller, K., Rosenauer,
A., and van Helvoort, A. T. J. (2014). Near-surface depletion of antimony
45
==PAGE:52==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
during the growth of gaassb and gaas/gaassb nanowires. Journal of Applied
Physics, 116(14):144303.
Krogstrup, P., Ingerslev Jørgensen, H., Heiss, M., Demichel, O., Holm, J.,
Aagesen, M., Nygard, J., and Fontcuberta i Morral, A. (2013).
Single
nanowire solar cells beyond the shockley-queisser limit. ., 7.
Nylund, I.-E. (2018).
Electron microscopy characterization of iii-nitride
nanowires grown on graphene. Master Thesis.
Otnes, G. and Borgstr¨om, M. T. (2017). Towards high eﬃciency nanowire
solar cells. Nano Today, 12(Supplement C):31 – 45.
Papadopoulos, C. (2014). Solid-State Electronic Devices: An Introduction.
Undergraduate Lecture Notes in Physics. Springer New York, New York,
NY.
Sun, J., Chen, Y., Priydarshi, M. K., Chen, Z., Bachmatiuk, A., Zou, Z.,
Chen, Z., Song, X., Gao, Y., R¨ummeli, M. H., Zhang, Y., and Liu, Z.
(2015).
Direct chemical vapor deposition-derived graphene glasses tar-
geting wide ranged applications. Nano Letters, 15(9):5846–5854. PMID:
26305883.
Wagner, R. S. and Ellis, W. C. (1964).
Vapor-liquid-solid mechanism of
single crystal growth. Applied Physics Letters, 4(5):89–90.
Watanabe, M. and Williams, D. B. (2006). The quantitative analysis of thin
specimens: a review of progress from the cliﬀ-lorimer to the new ζ-factor
methods. Journal of Microscopy, 221(2):89–109.
Williams, D. and Carter, C. (2009). Transmission Electron Microscopy: A
Textbook for Materials Science. Number v. 2 in Cambridge library collec-
tion. Springer.
46
==PAGE:53==
Appendix A
Energy bandgap
In Fig. A.1 the energy bandgap is plotted against the lattice constant. The
lattice constant for GaAs is just above 5.6 ˚A, whereas pure GaSb has a lattice
constant of 6.1 ˚A. That is why changes in composition of GaAs1−ySby can
be seen as a change in the lattice constant. Comparing GaAs and AlAs, the
diﬀerence in lattice constant is too small to see in a TEM image using FFT.
Thus, if there is a crystal in the bottom part of a NW, which consists of more
Al than Ga, it could not be seen in BF-TEM or HRTEM.
Figure A.1: Lattice constant vs. energy bandgap [Papadopoulos (2014)].
47
==PAGE:54==
APPENDIX A. ENERGY BANDGAP
Figure A.2: The energy bandgap changes depending on the composition of
InGaN [Hsu and Walukiewicz (2008)].
For InGaN, the bandgap ranges from 0.7 to 3.4 [Hsu and Walukiewicz
(2008)], see Fig. A.2.
48
==PAGE:55==
Appendix B
K and L X-ray line transition
energies
Detected energies of X-ray emission lines in the EDX analysis are listed in
Tab. B.1. Elements of group III are Al, Ga and In, elements of group V are
N, As and Sb. C, O and Si are part of the substrates.
Figure B.1: Elements of interest, silicon, carbon and oxide are found in the
sample substrates.
49
==PAGE:56==
APPENDIX B. K AND L X-RAY LINE TRANSITION ENERGIES
Table B.1: Main transition energies in eV for C, O, Si, Cu, Ga, As and Sb [Bearden (1967)].
Element
Kα1
Kα2
Kβ1
Lα1
Lα2
Lβ1
Lβ2
Lℓ
6 C
277
7 N
392.4
8 O
524.9
13 Al
1,486.7
1,486.3
1,557.4
14 Si
1,739.98
1,739.38
1,835.9
29 Cu
8,047.78
8,027.8
8,905.3
929.7
949.8
811.1
31 Ga
9,251.74
9,224.8
10,264.2
1,097.92
1,097.92
1,124.8
957.2
33 As
10,543.72
10,508.0
11,726.2
1,282.0
1,282.0
1,317.0
1,120
49 In
24,209.7
24,002.0
27,275.9
3,286.9
3,279.3
3,487.2
3,713.8
2,904.4
51 Sb
26,359.1
26,110.8
29,725.6
3,604.72
3,595.3
3,843.57
4,100.78
3,188.6
50
==PAGE:57==
Appendix C
Diﬀraction patterns
Diﬀerent orientations of a crystal can give diﬀerent diﬀration patterns [Ed-
ington (1976)]. Fig. C.1 shows three diﬀraction patterns that were seen with
the sample B, GaAsSb.
Figure C.1: Various DPs from the sample GaAsSb. Where the beam blocker
covered some spots, they were drawn in with a red marker.
51
==PAGE:58==
Appendix D
Hyperspy code
D.1
Conversion and scaling of raw EDS map
data written by Adrian Lervik
get ipython () . magic ( ’ matplotlib
tk ’ )
import hyperspy . api
as hs
from pandas import read csv
import re
# Load :
. rpl ,
. msa and . txt
# . rpl = d a t a f i l e
from exported MAPDATA,
. msa = energy
c a l i b r a t i o n
of
s i n g l e
# spectra and . txt = s p a t i a l
c a l i b r a t i o n
from an EDS−
map metadata ( d e t a i l s )
s = ( hs . load ( ’EDS Data 10deg . rpl ’ ,
signal type=”EDS TEM
” ) ) . as signal1D (0)
s p a t i a l c a l i b r a t i o n r a w d a t a =
read csv ( ’ text . txt ’ , sep=’\t ’ , header=None)
s i n g l e s p e c t r a = hs . load ( ’Map Sum Spectrum . msa ’ ,
signal type=”EDS TEM” )
# Energy
c a l i b r a t i o n
s . g e t c a l i b r a t i o n f r o m ( s i n g l e s p e c t r a )
s . axes manager [ 2 ] . name=’ Energy ’
52
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX D. HYPERSPY CODE
# Scale
should now be
d i f f e r e n t
from ”1.0”
[ u n i t l e s s ] ,
as
i t
was
i n i t i a l l y .
# Should be ”somevalue” [ keV ]
s . axes manager [ 2 ] . s c a l e
# Spatial
r e s o l u t i o n
c a l i b r a t i o n
column = [ ’ 2 ’ , ’ 3 ’ , ’ 4 ’ , ’ 5 ’ ]
s p a t i a l c a l i b r a t i o n = [ ]
for
i
in column :
a = [ int ( s ) for s in re . f i n d a l l ( r ’\d+’ ,
s t r i n g =(
s p a t i a l c a l i b r a t i o n r a w d a t a . get value ( int ( i ) ,1 ,
takeable=False ) ) ) ]
s p a t i a l c a l i b r a t i o n . append ( a [ 0 ] )
# Variable :
’ s p a t i a l c a l i b r a t i o n ’ now include :
# 0 = Resolution width ,
# 1 = Resolution height ,
# 2 = Image width ,
# 3 = Image height
names = [ ’x ’ ,
’y ’ ]
units = ’$nm$ ’
s c a l e s = [ s p a t i a l c a l i b r a t i o n [ 2 ] / s p a t i a l c a l i b r a t i o n
[ 0 ] ,
s p a t i a l c a l i b r a t i o n [ 3 ] / s p a t i a l c a l i b r a t i o n [ 1 ] ]
for
i
in range (2) :
ax = s . axes manager [ i ]
ax . name = names [ i ]
ax . units = units
ax . s c a l e = s c a l e s [ i ]
s . plot ()
s . data .sum()
# Remember to save
i t !
s . save ( ’edsmap ’ ,
extension=’ hdf5 ’ )
53
==PAGE:60==
APPENDIX D. HYPERSPY CODE
D.2
Functions written by A. Garmannslund
def
determine zeta factor ( s ,
i n t e n s i t i e s ,
composition ,
thickness ,
density ) :
”””
Determine the zeta−f a c t o r s
from a sample with known
mass−thickness and composition .
Parameters
−−−−−−−−−−
s :
s i g n a l
Temporary ,
replace
l a t e r by
s e l f
when moved to
eds tem . py
i n t e n s i t i e s :
l i s t
of
s i g n a l
The i n t e n s i t y
for
each X−ray
l i n e
composition :
l i s t
of
f l o a t
Composition
of
the elements
in
the same order
as
i n t e n s i t i e s .
elements :
Elements in same order
as composition .
mass thickness :
f l o a t
or
s i g n a l
Mass−thickness
for
the sample .
I f
signal , must
be same shape as
i n t e n s i t i e s .
Returns
−−−−−−−
A s i g n a l
in
the same shape as
i n t e n s i t i e s ,
giving
the zeta−f a c t o r s
for
each X−ray
l i n e .
”””
z f a c t o r s = u t i l s . stack ( i n t e n s i t i e s )
z f a c t o r s . data =
determine zeta factor ( z f a c t o r s .
data ,
composition ,
s . get dose ( ” zeta ” ) ,
thickness ∗1e−9∗density )
z f a c t o r s = z f a c t o r s . s p l i t ()
x r a y l i n e s = [ xray . metadata . Sample . x r a y l i n e s [ 0 ]
for xray in
i n t e n s i t i e s ]
54
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX D. HYPERSPY CODE
for i ,
l i n e
in enumerate( x r a y l i n e s ) :
z f a c t o r s [ i ] . metadata . General . t i t l e = ”Zeta−
factor
for ” + l i n e
return
z f a c t o r s
def
determine zeta factor ( i n t e n s i t i e s ,
composition ,
dose ,
mass thickness ) :
”””
Determine zeta−f a c t o r s
Parameters
−−−−−−−−−−
i n t e n s i t i e s : numpy . array
The i n t e n s i t i e s
for
each X−ray
l i n e . The
f i r s t
axis
should be the element
axis .
composition :
l i s t
of
f l o a t
Composition
of
the elements
given
in weight−
percent
in
the same order
as
i n t e n s i t i e s .
dose :
f l o a t
Total
electron
dose given by i ∗t∗N,
where
i
i s
the beam current ,
t
i s
the
a c q u i s i t i o n
time ,
and N the number of
e l e c t r o n s
per
unit
e l e c t r i c
charge (1/ e ) .
Returns
−−−−−−−
A numpy . array
containing
the
z e t a f a c t o r s
with the
same shape as
i n t e n s i t i e s
”””
z f a c t o r s = np . z e r o s l i k e ( i n t e n s i t i e s ,
dtype=float )
for i ,
( intensity , comp) in enumerate( zip (
i n t e n s i t i e s ,
composition ) ) :
z f a c t o r s [ i ] = ( dose ∗mass thickness ∗comp) /
i n t e n s i t y
return
z f a c t o r s
55
==PAGE:62==
APPENDIX D. HYPERSPY CODE
D.3
Zeta calibration
%matplotlib
tk
import hyperspy . api
as hs
import numpy as np
import scipy
import matplotlib . pyplot as
plt
from pandas import read csv
from hyperspy import u t i l s
### Example GaAs ###
s raw = hs . load ( ’edsmap . hdf5 ’ ) # Load the
f i l e .
s raw . change dtype ( ’ f l o a t ’ )
s=s raw . rebin ( s c a l e =[41 ,2 ,1]) # choose
rebinning
rebin var = 41∗2 # change according
to
rebinning
l i n e s = [ ”Ga Ka” , ”As Ka” ] # Add the x−ray
l i n e s
to
evaluate .
elements = [ ”Ga” , ”Cu” , ”As” , ”C” ] # Add a l l
elements
in
the
spectra .
(To f i t
and deconvolute
overlapp )
s . add elements ( [ ’As ’ ,
’Ga ’ ,
’Cu ’ ,
’C ’
] ) # Cu and C are
elements from the TEM grid
s . add lines ()
s . crop ( axis =2, s t a r t =30) # crop
zero peak
# Constants
probe currents = 0.416 # Average ( i f
measured before
and a f t e r )
in nA,
depends on each measuring
s e s s i o n
ac quisition time = 0.207∗rebin var # Dwell time in
s
thickness = 88∗np . cos (np . deg2rad (30) )+0 # nm,
change
depending on
t i l t
density = 5317 # kg/mˆ3
GaAs
comp = hs . material . atomic to weight ( [ 0 . 5 ,
0 . 5 ] ,
( ”Ga” ,
”As” ) ) /100 # Mass fraction ,
order
of
elements the
same as
in
’ l i n e s ’
56
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX D. HYPERSPY CODE
# Append i t
to the metadata
s . metadata . Acquisition instrument .TEM. beam current =
probe currents
s . metadata . Acquisition instrument .TEM. Detector .EDS.
real time = acquisition time
# This
function
does
a l l
the work .
It
creates a model
including a background and
a l l
the elements
in
the
sample
# f i t s
the model and returns
the
i n t e n s i t i e s
of
the
l i n e s
of
i n t e r e s t .
It
returns
the model and the
z e t a f a c t o r s
# for
the
desired
l i n e .
def
run analysis ( s ,
acquisition time ,
probe current ,
thickness ,
density ,
lines , composition ) :
s . add lines ( l i n e s )
s . add elements ( elements )
m = s . create model ()
m. fit background ()
m. m u l t i f i t ()
s i n t s = m. g e t l i n e s i n t e n s i t y ( x r a y l i n e s=l i n e s )
z e t a f a c t o r s = determine zeta factor ( s ,
s in ts ,
composition ,
thickness ,
density )
return m,
z e t a f a c t o r s
# Typicall
usage
m,
z e t a f a c t o r s = run analysis ( s ,
acquisition time ,
probe currents ,
thickness ,
density ,
lines ,
composition=comp)
# Print
the mean values
np . mean( z e t a f a c t o r s [ 0 ] . data . f l a t t e n () )
for
i
in range( len ( z e t a f a c t o r s ) ) :
print ( ”Mean %s : %.2 f ” % ( z e t a f a c t o r s [ i ] . metadata .
General . t i t l e , np . mean( z e t a f a c t o r s [ i ] . data .
f l a t t e n () ) ) )
57
==PAGE:64==
APPENDIX D. HYPERSPY CODE
D.4
Mapping with the CL- and ζ-method
### Example for GaAsSb ###
s raw = hs . load ( ’edsmap . hdf5 ’ ) # Load the
f i l e .
s raw . change dtype ( ’ f l o a t ’ )
s raw . crop ( axis =2, s t a r t =30) # crop
zero peak
s raw . decomposition ( algorithm=’nmf ’ ,
output dimension
=4) # PCA with
additional
constraint
of non−negative
matrix
f a c t o r i s a t i o n
s=s raw . get decomposition model ()
l i n e s = [ ”As Ka” , ”Ga Ka” , ”Sb La” ] # Add the x−ray
l i n e s
to
evaluate .
elements = [ ”As” , ”Cu” , ”Ga” , ”C” , ”Sb” ] # Add a l l
elements
in
the
spectra .
(To f i t
and devoncolute
overlapp )
# Constants
probe currents = 0.44 # changes at each measuring
s e s s i o n
s . metadata . Acquisition instrument .TEM. beam current =
probe currents
# CL method
s . add lines ( l i n e s )
s . add elements ( elements )
s . g e t l i n e s i n t e n s i t y ()
AsKa = s . g e t l i n e s i n t e n s i t y () [ 0 ] # depending on
elements ,
check the index
GaKa = s . g e t l i n e s i n t e n s i t y () [ 1 ] # depending on
elements ,
check the index
Sb La = s . g e t l i n e s i n t e n s i t y () [ 2 ] # depending on
58
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX D. HYPERSPY CODE
elements ,
check the index
i n t e n s i t i e s = [ AsKa , GaKa,
Sb La ]
i n t e n s i t i e s
kfactors = [ 1 . 6 3 6 , 1 . 4 4 4 , 1 . 9 3 5 ] # As K , Ga K , Sb L # order
a l p h a b e t i c a l l y
# k =[3.475 ,1.045 ,1.444 ,1.693 ,1.636 ,1.674 ,1.876 ,1.935] #
choose the k−factor
given by AZtekEnergy : N K, Al K ,
Ga K , Ga L , As K , As L , In L , Sb L
compCL = s . q u a n t i f i c a t i o n ( i n t e n s i t i e s , ’CL ’ , kfactors ,
p l o t r e s u l t=True , composition units=’ atomic ’ )
# Zeta method
z e t a f a c t o r s = [1900 ,1800 ,5300] # As K , Ga K , Sb L ,
choose
for
each sample
comp s ,
pt s = s . q u a n t i f i c a t i o n ( i n t e n s i t i e s , ’ zeta ’ ,
zetafactors ,
p l o t r e s u l t=True , composition units=’
atomic ’ )
ts = get thickness map ( comp s ,
pt s )
ts . plot () # plotting
the
thickness map
59
