==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Stochastic Optimisation of Quay
Crane Assignment in Container
Terminals
Rikke Kristiansen
s134606
Christine Schnipper
s134566
Supervisor:
Dario Pacino
June 11, 2018
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction to the maritime industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Introduction to stochastic modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Literature Review
7
3
Problem Description
9
4
Mathematical Formulation
9
5
Heuristic
11
5.1
Crane allocation functions (solveCrane) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5.2
Neighbourhood functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.3
Acceptance function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6
Data
18
6.1
Data ﬁle for general information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6.2
Data ﬁle for handling time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6.3
Data ﬁle for arrival time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.4
Scenario generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.5
Parameter selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
7
Computational Results
21
7.1
Comparison of solution methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
7.2
Testing of neighbourhoods in the heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7.3
MIP results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7.4
Value of stochastic solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7.5
Testing of buﬀer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
7.6
Testing of price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7.7
Testing of variance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
8
Conclusion and Suggestions for Future Work
30
Appendices
33
A Neighbourhood
33
==PAGE:3==
Stochastic Optimisation of Quay Crane Assignment in Container
Terminals
Rikke Kristiansena, Christine Schnippera
aTechnical University of Denmark
Abstract
This thesis focus on the stochastic Quay Crane Assignment Problem, which is modeled as a
two-stage problem with recourse where the arrival and handling times are considered as the
stochastic elements. A mathematical formulation and Simulated Annealing based heuristics
are presented. Computational results reveal that including stochasticity in the planning cre-
ates value for the port and that the MIP model outperforms the heuristic solution methods.
Keywords:
Container Terminal Operations, Stochastic, Scenarios, Quay Crane
Assignment, Heuristic, Simulated Annealing, Mixed Integer Programming
1. Introduction
80% of all world trade is carried on board of vessels, and 60% of all seaborne trade are
containers being shipped. This is equivalent to 701 million TEUs being transported each year
on the 5147 container vessels, which make up the world ﬂeet [UNCTAD (2017), Statista.com
(2018, 2017)]. The size of container ships has grown exponential the last years, with the
largest vessels in 2000 having a capacity around 6000 TEUs, where the largest vessels today
have a capacity of more than 18000 TEUs [Rodrigue et al. (2017)]. This evolution causes the
port to focus more on the planning of their operations, and the utilization of their resources.
With the increased number of vessels and containers, the planning is highly complicated
and is made even harder because of the huge uncertainties in maritime transportation, e.g.
48% of container vessels arrive with more than 12 hours delay [McKinsey&Company (2017)].
These factors all make the problem complex and therefore optimization tools are needed.
1.1. Introduction to the maritime industry
In maritime logistic, there are various types of vessels, each working in diﬀerent business
areas. The biggest vessel class is the bulk carriers, which represent 36% of the world ﬂeet.
These transport dry cargoes, such as grain, coal and iron ore, in bulk form, meaning that it
is unpacked. 35% of the world ﬂeet consists of oil tankers, which as the name suggests trans-
port oil. These vessels are by far the largest at seas, and cannot transport any other kind of
cargo. The third largest class is the container ships, which makes up 13% of the world ﬂeet
[UNCTAD (2016)]. The container ships can only transport cargo packed in containers of
standard sizes. The size of container vessels is not measured in tonnage as other vessels but
1
==PAGE:4==
in twenty-foot equivalent units (TEU), meaning the number of twenty-foot containers the
vessel can carry. The size of the containers is standardized to either a twenty-foot container
or a forty-foot container. The characteristic of the standards size makes the containers eﬃ-
cient to stowage and intermodal, meaning that they can be handled by diﬀerent transport
modes. The vessel types explained is known as ”The big three” in the maritime industry, but
there exist other vessel types including General Cargo Ships, Liqueﬁed Gas Carriers, Oﬀ-
shore Supply Vessels, Chemical Tankers, and Ferry and Passenger Ships. [maritimeinfo.org
(2013a,b)]
There are two types of markets in the maritime industry: The tramp and the liner. The
tramp market is also known as a charter market since the owner of the cargo rents the
vessel to transport only their goods from any origin to any destination. Here the vessel is
either completely full or empty, and the cargo from two customers cannot be transported
at the same time. The cargo is either dry or liquid bulk cargo, and the value of the cargo is
relatively low. Examples of vessels in this market are the oil tankers and bulk carriers. The
liner market transports unitized cargo, such as containers, from A to B, using some set of
scheduled services. Similar to a bus or train network, where the cargo might change services
in transit. So instead of going directly from A to B, it might change vessel in a diﬀerent
port. In the liner market the vessel transport cargo for several customers at the same time,
and the vessels are often not entirely full. The cargo has a relatively high value and can
consist of other types than containers, such as Roll-on/Roll-oﬀcargo - cars and trucks.
Within the strategic, tactical and operational level, there are several planning and opti-
mization problems for the liners. The design of the network and the ﬂeet size and mix are
problems which have a long time horizon and therefore are a part of the strategic level. The
decisions for planning the network is the design of the routes, and which ports to include
in the network. For the ﬂeet size and mix, the problem is to decide the number of vessels
and the associated size of the vessels the ﬂeet should consist of. Planning problems for the
tactical level are frequency determination, schedule construction, and speed optimization,
where the planning is executed for the upcoming months. Frequency determination is to
decide the number of times a route has to be serviced. At the tactical level the schedule
for each vessel is constructed, here the details of arrival and departure time in each port is
decided. The last problem at the tactical level is speed optimization which is a huge problem
for the liners since fuel is a large expense. There are restrictions for speed in some areas and
emission restriction in other areas which complicates the problem.
At the operational level the container booking and routing, rescheduling and disruption
management, and stowage planning are made with a daily planning horizon. The speciﬁc
routes and vessels each container is shipped by are decided within the container booking
and routing planning. Here the handling of the empty containers is an important problem
because the ﬂow from Asia to the western countries are larger than vise versa. The handling
of the empty containers is an expense for the liners. They should not take up space for
containers which make a proﬁt, but they still need to be moved to areas where they are
2
==PAGE:5==
needed. Within rescheduling and disruption management unexpected events for the vessels
and containers are handled, this could be due to bad weather or problems at the port. The
problem is then how to adjust the plan after the disruption, either speed up to keep up
with the schedule or skip ports. Containers then need to ﬁnd a new route if a connection is
missed, either due to the vessels being late or a port is skipped.
For the container terminals planning and optimization is important to utilize the berth,
cranes, yard, and yard equipment. A container terminal is overall divided into three diﬀer-
ent areas. The landside, where containers are loaded/unloaded from trucks and trains; The
yard, where the containers are stored when in transit; and the quayside, where the contain-
ers are loaded/unloaded to the vessels. To transport containers between the diﬀerent areas
of the port two diﬀerent types of vehicles can be used. Either trucks with one or multiple
trailers or automated guided vehicles (AGV), where the main diﬀerence is whether or not
the vehicle needs a driver. This type of vehicles is called passive since they are only able
to transport the containers but not lift them. For all the vehicles in the port the objective
when planning them is always to minimize the number of empty travels, e.i. when they
drive without a container.
On the landside, the containers are transferred to the road or rail network. The planning
problem for the port is to coordinate that the right containers are loaded to the associated
trucks and trains. Here the goal is to get a higher service level by minimizing the waiting
time and delay for the trucks and trains. The planning job of placing containers is much sim-
pler for trains than for container vessels since the containers cannot be stacked on the train.
Because of the simplicity of the planning problem, and the fact that delays for trucks and
trains are not nearly as expensive as for container vessels, it is not the main focus for the port.
The yard is where containers are stored before being loaded on and after being unloaded
oﬀthe vessels.
There are special areas at the yard for empty containers and for reefer
containers, which need power to keep cooling. The problems within yard management are
reservation of yard capacity, storage locations, and repositioning of the containers. The ﬁrst
problem is to utilize the yard area, where liner services reserve a block of the yard to store
the containers for and from the vessel. The reserved yard block does not need to be available
at all time, just for the time the vessel is berthed. The utilization of the yard then depends
on the liner service, if the vessel has more containers than informed there is not enough
capacity and if there are fewer containers the yard is not fully utilized. For the reserved
area, the containers are stored in stacks, the problem is then how to store the individual
containers, where the objective is to minimize the number of reshuﬄes. The last problem
at the yard is to manage the containers which need to be repositioned, e.g. containers not
stored in the reserved area or the order of the stack need to be reshuﬄed.
Four types of equipment are used for the yard management, one crane, and three ve-
hicles. The crane is a gantry crane and is assigned for a block in the yard and cannot be
moved around the yard. The crane is used to stack the containers from a height of 4 to
3
==PAGE:6==
10 containers. The three vehicles are the straddle carrier, reachstacker, and forklift and
are called active as they can lift containers. The straddle carrier can stack the containers
in a height of 3 to 4 containers. It is more ﬂexible than the gantry crane, as it has ac-
cess to containers regarding their position in the yard. The straddle carrier can transport
two 20-foot containers at the same time or one 40-foot container. The diﬀerence between
the three vehicles is the reachstacker and forklift mainly lift and moves the light containers
short distances, where the straddle carrier can transport heavier containers longer distances.
At the quayside planning is done on several levels, the top level is the berth allocation.
Given the length, draft and handling time for each vessel the problem is to position the
vessel at the berth, but vessels cannot be berthed at the same place at the same time. Dif-
ferent objectives can be considered, often it is minimizing the handling time or minimize
the distance from a wanted berth position.
The main equipment at the quayside for servicing the vessels is the quay cranes (QC).
The quay cranes can either load or unload 1, 2 or 4 containers at a time and in the most
eﬃcient ports they make up to 40 moves per hour. However a quay crane can only work on
one vessel at a time, and therefore it is important to plan how the cranes are assigned to the
vessels. For the quay crane assignment diﬀerent objective can be considered: minimizing
the handling time of the vessel or minimizing the number of gangs hired. Where a gang is
a crew which operates the quay cranes. These gangs are hired for an entire work shift, and
the number of gangs hired in a shift is the maximum number of cranes used in that shift.
The quay crane assignment can either be done with the number of cranes assigned to each
vessel or with speciﬁc individual cranes assigned to a vessel. When making a speciﬁc quay
crane assignment it is important to consider that the quay cranes move along the quay on
a single track, and hence they cannot cross each other.
Similar to the quay crane assignment is the detailed quay crane scheduling. Here the
planning is done for one individual vessel, and cranes are scheduled for each section of the
vessel, with the objective of minimizing the movement of the cranes. The last level of plan-
ning is storage planning of the containers on the vessel. It is planned where each container
should be placed, taking into account that it should be eﬃcient to unload in the next ports
and ensure a correct balance of the vessel. It is highly important to balance the vessel cor-
rectly, an unbalanced vessel can cause vessels to sink or lose the containers in the middle of
the sea. [Meisel (2009), Steenken et al. (2004)]
1.2. Introduction to stochastic modelling
What makes a stochastic problem diﬀerent from a deterministic problem, is that for the
stochastic problem some decision is made without knowing the future. An example is a
production company, where the products need to be produced before it is sold. In a de-
terministic problem, the company will know exactly what the demand will be and hence
produce that exact amount. In the stochastic problem, the demand is not known when
4
==PAGE:7==
the production takes place, and the company might produce too little or too much of the
product.
If they produce too little they lose potential proﬁt, if they produce too much
they will have leftovers which cannot be sold, and consequently loses money. Therefore in a
stochastic problem, the objective is not to maximize the actual proﬁt since it is not known,
but instead, the expected proﬁt is maximized. The expected proﬁt is the average proﬁt of
all the scenarios which can happen, given that the same initial decision is made for all the
scenarios. The initial decision might not be the optimal solution for the individual scenarios,
but it is on average the best choice.
This kind of problem is called a two-stage problem. In the ﬁrst stage, a common decision
is made without knowing which scenario will come true. In the second stage, it is known
which scenario applies, and the result of the common decision can be calculated. In the
second stage the decision made in the ﬁrst stage cannot be changed, no matter if it is a good
or bad decision for the scenario. There also exist multi-stage problems, where information
is revealed and decisions are made at several stages in time, but again cannot be changed
in later stages.
In general, the ﬁrst stage decisions cannot be changed, but in some cases, it might be
possible in the second stage to take actions to ”save” the solution. In the case of production
it would be to sell excess products at a much lower price, or in the case of shortage a rush
production could be made, but this will be more expensive. Actions like these are called
recourse, and the cost (proﬁt) of taking these actions is called the recourse cost (proﬁt), and
the problem is a two-stage problem with recourse.
For the general stochastic two-stage problem the mathematical formulation is seen in
Figure 1. Here lowercase letter symbolizes a vector and uppercase letter a matrix. The x
is the ﬁrst stage decision variables and the Y is the second stage decision variables, with
the rest being parameters. The objective (1) is combined by the ﬁrst stage cost, c, and the
seconds stage cost, q, which is multiplied with the probability of each scenario, π. The ﬁrst
set of constraints (2) only applies to the ﬁrst stage, where the second set of constraints (3)
applies to the second stage. Here Ys is the second stage variables for the scenario s, and S
is the set of scenarios. It is seen that the second set of constraints applies to each individual
scenario, and have the ﬁrst stage solution, x, combining them.
min cTx + πY q
(1)
s.t.
Ax = b
(2)
Dx + FYs = gs
∀s ∈S
(3)
Figure 1: Mathematical formulation of general stochastic two-stage problem
5
==PAGE:8==
It is preferable that the set of scenarios S contains all possible outcomes. From the
production example above it could be that demand will either be 4, 5 or 6, and no other
options exist, but this is not always possible. In the case of having a large or inﬁnite set of
scenarios, it is also possible to only let S contain a subset of the scenarios. The size of this
subset can be determined by performing an inner/outer sample analysis. The inner sample
results come from solving the two-stage problem with one subset of scenarios. The outer
sample results come from using the inner sample ﬁrst stage solution, but solving it on a
diﬀerent subset of scenarios. By comparing the diﬀerence in the inner and outer results for
multiple sizes of scenario subsets, it is seen when a suﬃcient subset size is reached which
represent the entire set of scenarios.
To analyze the stochastic solution stochastic programming also uses two other solutions.
One is the Wait-And-See solution which assumes perfect predictions. Here the optimal so-
lution is found for each scenario, and then one wait and see which scenario comes true, and
chooses the solution which matches the scenario. The cost (proﬁt) of the Wait-And-See
solution is then calculated as the average of the optimal solution for each scenario. This
approach, however, does not work in real life, since it is not possible to wait and see, but
it can be used to give an idea of the expected value of perfect information (EVPI). The
EVPI is calculated by subtracting the value of the stochastic solution from the value of the
wait-and-see solution. This is used to give an estimate of how much one maximum should
pay for more accurate information.
The second solution is the expected value solution.
Here the expected value of the
stochastic elements is used to make the problem deterministic.
Then this deterministic
solution is applied in all the scenarios and the average cost (proﬁt) is calculated. This is used
to ﬁnd the value of a stochastic solution (VSS), which is used to examine if it is proﬁtable
to use extra resources to solve the more complicated stochastic problem, compared to the
easier deterministic problem. The VSS is calculated by subtracting the value of the expected
value solution from the value of the stochastic solution.
1.3. Outline
The aim of this thesis is to formulate the stochastic quay crane assignment problem as
a mathematical model seen in section 4 and to create a heuristic solution method to solve
the problem in section 5. The stochastic elements of the problem are the arrival time and
handling time of the vessels, which is included through scenarios generated in section 6.
The diﬀerent solution methods will be compared and evaluated. The best method will be
used to test the importance of the stochastic approach compared to the deterministic, this
comparison is conducted in section 7. Lastly the conclusion is seen in section 8.
6
==PAGE:9==
2. Literature Review
In the literature, the Crane Allocation Problem (CAP) is often considered as a part of
the Berth Allocation Problem (BAP). An example of this is found in Iris et al. (2015) where
a MIP model is formulated to solve the BACAP. This model however only considers the
crane allocation as a small part of the objective, where they minimize the number of cranes
used in total. They consider both the time-invariant and the time-variant problem, where
the number of cranes assigned to a vessel, respectively cannot and can change for each time
period. The authors show that the time-invariant problem has an additional cost. It is
also included that depending on the actual berth position the required crane hours for the
vessel changes. This is not considered in this thesis since we know the berth positions, and
hence also know the required crane hours. The paper Iris et al. (2017), which is a follow-up,
solves the problem using an Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search (ALNS). The new so-
lution method, however, works for solving the entire BACAP, which is not relevant for this
thesis. The ﬁrst paper Iris et al. (2015) improve benchmark solutions of state-of-art optimal
approaches, where Iris et al. (2017) outperform state-of-art heuristics.
The problem of minimizing the number of gangs used to operate the cranes is considered
in Meisel and Bierwirth (2006), which is the ﬁrst to look at this objective function. The
authors solve the BACAP heuristically by a priority-rule based method, and tests show good
results. In the work by Meisel and Bierwirth (2009), a more detailed BACAP is formulated,
where they include productivity of cranes and an increase in the handling time when the ves-
sel is not berthed at the desired berth position. However here the gang consideration is not
included and the solution method is based on a Squeaky Wheel Optimization (SWO) and
Tabu Search (TS). Considering the complexity of the BACAP, the combination of stochas-
ticity and BACAP together will be too complex, therefore we have chosen not to consider
the berth allocation.
Another paper where gangs are considered is Zampelli et al. (2013). Again, the entire
BACAP is considered but they also plan which individual cranes should be working on a
vessel and not just how many cranes. The problem is time-variant, they consider breaks
for the gangs and the time it takes to move cranes between vessels. The solution method
was Constrained Programming. In an earlier special project, we have considered the idea
of planning with individual cranes. We saw that the gangs needed did not change whether
or not the planning was done for individual cranes. Therefore the individual cranes are not
included in this thesis since it would only add extra complexity to the problem.
As in the deterministic papers mentioned above, fei Zhou and gui Kang (2008) works
with the entire BACAP, but now with a stochastic element. They consider arrival time and
handling time as stochastic, where the variance of the parameters is set at random. The
objective is to minimize the waiting time of vessels, which is not part of this thesis since we
cannot control the waiting time. Another diﬀerence is that the paper does not deal with
gangs as part of the problem.
7
==PAGE:10==
Other papers on the stochastic BACAP is Han et al. (2010) and Zhang et al. (2014).
Here Han et al. (2010) works with a time-variant model and Zhang et al. (2014) with a
time-invariant model, but gangs are not considered in the papers. Neither have much infor-
mation on which stochastic data they use. Han et al. (2010) mentions that the exponential
and Erlang distributions are used for the arrival and handling time, respectively, but do not
mention any scientiﬁc reason for this. In Zhang et al. (2014) they solve the deterministic
problem, where they handle uncertainty by maximizing buﬀer time between vessels.
Guldogan et al. (2012) only consider the Berth Allocation Problem, and hence do not
include crane allocations, which is the focus of this thesis, but there are stochastic elements.
Again, the handling time and arrival time are the stochastic elements. Without any refer-
ence to data analysis, the paper assumes an exponential distribution, where we use a normal
distribution. In this and in the previous stochastic papers, the solution method is heuristics
based on Genetic Algorithms (GA), wherein Guldogan et al. (2012) an Artiﬁcial Bee-Colony
(ABC) Algorithm is also used.
The paper Zhen et al. (2011) focus on the BAP, but the problem is, similar to ours,
formulated as a two-state recourse problem, where scenarios are used to handle the stochas-
ticity. However, the number of scenarios is not signiﬁcantly high. The solution method is
Simulated Annealing (SA), and therefore it is similar to our solution method. The paper
mentions that to their knowledge there is not much research on stochastic BAP. This can
also be concluded from the survey by Bierwirth and Meisel (2015), where there are not
found many stochastic papers in either berth allocation or crane operations. For crane op-
erations, they conclude the following: ”In the area of crane operations planning, it strikes
that stochastic approaches are still missing.”(Bierwirth and Meisel, 2015, Page 666)
The small amount of papers in the ﬁeld means that there is no benchmark data for
comparison of results, and hence it is hard to say which solution approaches have worked
best so far.
From the literature review, it is seen that there is a lack of papers on the impact of
stochasticity in the crane allocation, where the lack of papers including gangs is even higher.
Therefore the contribution of this thesis is to solve the time-variant crane allocation problem
where gangs are minimized, given that the arrival and handling times are uncertain. Scenar-
ios are generated as sampling from normal distributions, where the problem is formulated as
a two-stage recourse model. The problem is then solved using Mixed Integer Programming
and a Simulated Annealing based heuristic.
8
==PAGE:11==
3. Problem Description
In this thesis, it is assumed that the berth allocation has been done beforehand, and
hence the arrival time, departure time, and berth location is known. The problem is then to
assign the number of cranes to work on each vessel in the hours that the vessel is berthed.
This thesis considers a time-variant CAP, meaning that the number of cranes allocated to a
vessel can change from time period to time period. The thesis’ main objective is to minimize
the number of gangs which need to be hired to operate the cranes. Each gang operates one
crane, and hence the number of gangs needed in a time period corresponds to the number
of cranes used. However, the gangs are hired for an entire work shift, which in this thesis is
12 hours. The number of hired gangs is then set by the maximum number of cranes used in
that shift.
To handle the stochastic elements in the thesis several diﬀerent scenarios is generated,
where the arrival time, departure time and handling time for a vessel is diﬀerent in each
scenario. The handling time of a vessel is deﬁned as the number of quay crane hours needed
to load and unload the containers. The goal of this thesis is then to decide how many gangs
should be hired to accommodate all the scenarios. If the number of gangs hired should be
able to handle all scenarios, it would often lead to the maximum number of cranes available
being assigned to all shifts. This would be expensive and on average leave a lot of idle time
for the gangs. Therefore it is formulated as a two-stage problem with recourse, where the
ﬁrst stage decision is the number of gangs hired. The recourse in the second stage is that
extra gangs can be hired later to accommodate the speciﬁc scenario. However, these extra
gangs will be hired at a higher cost.
The ﬁrst stage gangs need to be hired 48 hours before the shift begins. The focus of this
thesis is mainly the number of gangs hired in the ﬁrst stage since it is possible to conduct
a more precise crane allocation closer to the starting time of operations, where there is less
uncertainty. This means that the crane allocation in this thesis only contains the few essen-
tial constraints. First, the total number of quay cranes assigned to a vessel has to be at least
the number of quay crane hours needed. Secondly, there is a maximum number of cranes
which can be assigned to a vessel at the same time. This is because quay cranes need safety
space, and since each vessel have a speciﬁc length, only a certain number of cranes can work
in the limited space. Lastly, the total number of cranes working at any time cannot exceed
the total number of available cranes.
4. Mathematical Formulation
In following section the two-stage stochastic crane allocation problem with recourse and
the deterministic crane allocation problem is formulated as mixed integer programs (MIP).
The needed notation for the mathematical formulations is seen in Table 1 and the formula-
tions is seen in Figure 2 and 3.
9
==PAGE:12==
Sets:
V
Set of all vessels, V ∈{1, 2, . . . , N}, where N is the number of vessels to be serviced
T
Set of 1 hour periods, T ∈{1, 2, . . . , H}, where H is the planning horizon
W
Set of all work shifts, W ∈{1, 2, . . . , P}, where P is the number of planning periods
S
Set of all scenarios, S ∈{1, 2, . . . , J}, where J is the total number of scenarios
Parameters:
n
Price for hiring gangs
e
Price for hiring extra gangs
htw
1: if the time t ∈T is within the work shift w ∈W, 0 otherwise
qvs
Number of needed quay crane hours for each vessel v ∈V in each scenario s ∈S
bvts
1: if vessel v ∈V is berthed at time t ∈T in scenario s ∈S, 0 otherwise
mv
Maximum number of cranes assigned for each vessel v ∈V
c
Total number of quay cranes available
ps
Probability for scenario s ∈S
Decision variables:
rvts ∈Z+
Number of quay cranes assigned to each vessel v ∈V in each time period t ∈T for each scenario s ∈S
gw ∈Z+
Number of gangs required for each work shift w ∈W
yws ∈Z+
Number of extra gangs, recourse cost, for each work shift w ∈W in each scenario s ∈S
Table 1: Notation for mathematical formulations
min
X
w∈W
n · gw +
X
s∈S
X
w∈W
e · ps · yws
(4)
s.t.
gw + yws ≥
X
v∈V
rvts · htw
∀t ∈T, w ∈W, s ∈S
(5)
X
t∈T
rvts ≥qvs
∀v ∈V, s ∈S
(6)
rvts ≤bvts · mv
∀v ∈V, t ∈T, s ∈S
(7)
X
v∈V
rvts ≤c
∀t ∈T, s ∈S
(8)
Figure 2: Mathematical formulation for the stochastic problem
The stochastic formulation is seen in Figure 2, where the objective (4) is overall to min-
imize the cost of hiring gangs. It includes the cost of the two stages, ﬁrst the cost of hiring
gangs at normal price and second the cost of hiring extra gangs to accommodate the scenario.
The probability for each scenario is included in the objective to obtain a weighted average.
In constraint (5) the total number of gangs hired is set by the maximum number of cranes
needed to handle the vessels in the time periods within the work shift. In constraint (6) the
total number of cranes handling a vessel is set to be at least the number of needed quay
crane hours for each vessel. There is a maximum number of cranes for each vessel which can
work at the vessel when it is berthed, this is established in constraint (7). Constraint (8)
ensures that the total number of cranes used in each time period does not exceed the total
10
==PAGE:13==
number of available cranes at the quay. All the constraints are assured for each scenario,
and the scenarios are connected through the gw variable in constraint (5).
The mathematical formulation for the stochastic problem is changed to achieve the for-
mulation for the deterministic problem, which is seen in Figure 3. This model is used to solve
the deterministic problem, where the mean arrival and handling time is used and therefore
do not include recourse and scenarios. The syntax of the parameter is the same as in Table
1.
min
X
w∈W
gw
(9)
s.t.
gw ≥
X
v∈V
rvt · htw
∀t ∈T, w ∈W
(10)
X
t∈T
rvt ≥qv
∀v ∈V
(11)
rvt ≤bvt · mv
∀v ∈V, t ∈T
(12)
X
v∈V
rvt ≤c
∀t ∈T
(13)
Figure 3: Mathematical formulation for the deterministic problem
5. Heuristic
In this section, the heuristic solution method is presented and described, where the main
heuristic is seen in Algorithm 1. The heuristic is based on a simulated annealing approach,
only with slight changes to accommodate the scenarios. The general simulated annealing
is built in the following way: First is the initialization and creation of the initial solution
(lines 1-12). Then the while loop makes the heuristic run until a stopping criterion is met
(line 13). Within the while loop a random neighbour solution is found and then evaluated
(lines 14-18). The acceptance criterion is checked, and in the case, the new solution is the
so-far-best solution the optimal solution is updated (lines 19-26). In the end the temperature
is updated (lines 27-31).
The addition to a regular simulated annealing compared to this heuristic is found in lines
4-6 and 15-17. Here the recourse cost for each scenario is found, using the predetermined
ﬁrst stage solution. The heuristic will be described in the following sections.
The symbols used in the algorithm code is generally the same as in the MIP model in
Figure 2. The input for the heuristic is the deterministic and stochastic instances. Here
11
==PAGE:14==
an instance includes the same as the parameters in the MIP model, with price for gangs,
associated time periods for the shifts , the arrival/departure time of vessel, the handling
time of vessels, maximum number of cranes which can be assigned to a vessel, and the total
number of cranes available at the quay. The diﬀerence of the deterministic instance and the
stochastic instance is for the arrival/departure/handling time of the vessels. In the deter-
ministic instance, there is only one value (the average) for each vessel, wherein the stochastic
instance there is a value for each scenario.
On line 1 the iterCount is initialized and is used to count the number of iterations the
heuristic goes through. Similar the iterNotUpdated is initialized, which counts the number
of iterations since a solution was last accepted, and is used in the reheating later on. The
initial solution is found in line 3, and is the crane allocation for the deterministic problem
solved using the MIP formulation in Figure 3. The recourse is found in line 5, where a crane
allocation is solved for each scenario. This crane allocation is done by the function solve-
Crane, where three diﬀerent functions have been tested. These are described in section 5.1.
On line 7 the objective value is calculated as in the MIP formulation in Figure 2, using the
number of gangs found in the ﬁrst and second stage and the cost of the two types of gangs.
The initialization of diﬀerent elements is made in line 8-11, and here a regular character x
is the element currently being used by the algorithm. A x′ is the newly found element, and
x∗is the element for the overall best solution. Line 12 initializes the temperature T and the
reheat temperature T ′ to the given start temperature.
Line 13 starts the while loop, which runs until the time limit is met. The ﬁrst step is
ﬁnding a new ﬁrst stage solution. This is done by the neighbourhood function, where this
paper test three diﬀerent neighbourhoods, which are described in section 5.2. The recourse
and objective are found again by using the newly found ﬁrst stage solution (Lines 15-18).
The acceptSolution function, which is described in section 5.3, compares the previous so-
lution with the new by using a standard simulated annealing acceptance criterion in line
19. If the new solution is accepted then the ﬁrst stage solution and the objective is saved.
Simultaneously the parameter iterNotUpdated is reset to zero since there has now been an
update, where if the new solution is not accepted the parameter is incremented in line 25.
On line 21 it is checked whether or not the newly accepted solution is better than the current
best. If this is the case the variables are updated and the current temperature is saved.
If the iterNotUpdated exceeds the limit a reheat is done in line 28 by setting the current
temperature to the one saved when ﬁnding the current best solution. If this is not the case
the temperature is decreased in classic simulated annealing way in line 30, by multiplying
the temperature by a factor α ∈[0, 1]. The reheat is done to avoid the heuristic spending
a lot of time ﬁnding neighbours to the same solution without accepting any of them. The
reheat then makes the heuristic accept more solutions and thereby move on to diﬀerent
neighbourhoods. This can also help the heuristic to escape local minimums.
12
==PAGE:15==
Input
: detInst: Deterministic data instance, scenInst: Scenario data instance
Output: g∗: Number of gangs hired in each shift
1 iterCount ←0
2 iterNotUpdated ←0
3 g, ¯r ←initialSolution(detInst)
4 for All scenarios s do
5
ys, rs ←solveCrane(g, ¯r, scenInst)
6 end
7 z ←objCalc(g,y,n,c)
8 g∗←g
9 y′ ←y, y∗←y
10 r′ ←r, r∗←r
11 z∗←z
12 T ←T0, T ′ ←T0
13 while Time remains do
14
g′ ←N(g, y, detInst)
15
for All scenarios s do
16
y′
s, r′
s ←solveCrane(g′, ¯r, scenInst)
17
end
18
z′ ←objCalc(g′,y′,n,c)
19
if acceptSolution(z′,z,T) then
20
g ←g′, z ←z′, iterNotUpdated ←0
21
if z′ < z∗then
22
g∗←g′, y∗←y′, r∗←r′, z∗←z′,T ′ ←T
23
end
24
else
25
iterNotUpdated += 1
26
end
27
if iterNotUpdated > iterFactor/nScen then
28
T ←T ′, iterNotUpdated ←0
29
else
30
T ←T · α
31
end
32 end
Algorithm 1: Main heuristic
5.1. Crane allocation functions (solveCrane)
To ﬁnd the y-variable and hence the recourse for each scenario three diﬀerent solveCrane
functions is tested. The ﬁrst method uses the MIP model in Figure 4. The second method
solves the LP-relaxation of the MIP model in Figure 4. The third method is a heuristic,
which can be seen in algorithm 2.
13
==PAGE:16==
The MIP model used in the solveCrane functions is based on the crane allocation models
in Figure 2 and 3. Given the ﬁrst stage solution, gw, as a parameter the following model
solve the problem for one scenario. In the main heuristic the model is solved for each sce-
nario, hence the scenario based parameters changes for each scenario.
min
X
w∈W
yw
(14)
s.t.
gw + yw ≥
X
v∈V
rvt · htw
∀t ∈T, w ∈W
(15)
X
t∈T
rvt ≥qv
∀v ∈V
(16)
rvt ≤bvt · mv
∀v ∈V, t ∈T
(17)
X
v∈V
rvt ≤c
∀t ∈T
(18)
Figure 4: Mathematical formulation used in the solveCrane function
The heuristic solveCrane function starts by using the crane allocation found when solv-
ing the deterministic problem. This crane allocation is then shifted so it matches the arrival
time of the speciﬁc scenario. This means that the assigned cranes are shifted in time peri-
ods from the deterministic berthing period to the scenario’s berthing period. To handle the
diﬀerence in handling time extra cranes is added to the plan or excess cranes is removed.
The plan so far can have time periods, where the number of cranes planned exceeds the
total number of available cranes on the quay. This is handled by making a crane switch,
which can be seen in ﬁgure 5. After this more crane switches is made using a local search
to try and get a lower number of cranes. A line by line walkthrough of the pseudocode can
be found in the following paragraphs.
On line 1 the deterministic solution is moved to ﬁt the arrival time of the scenario. The
parameter vesselNotChanged is initialized in line 2 and tells whether or not it is possible
to add all the necessary crane hours to a vessel. Line 4-9 adds the extra cranes for each
vessel to the plan, which is done at the time where the craneGangDiﬀfrom equation (19)
is smallest. If it is not possible to add all the extra gangs the parameter vesselNotChanged
is set to true for the vessel. The excess cranes is removed in line 10-12. The removal is done
at the time where the number of total cranes used for all vessels is highest.
14
==PAGE:17==
craneGangDifft =
X
v∈V
rvt −gt
(19)
When cranes have been added or removed from all vessel, for the ones where it was not
ﬁrst possible to add all the cranes is retried, line 14-21. The second try can be successful
because of the removal of cranes earlier. If it is not successful the cranes are just added,
the constraint about not exceeding the total number of available cranes is then disregarded.
The total crane violation will be handled later.
It is then checked for all time periods if there is a total crane violation, line 23. If this is
the case a crane switch is made on line 24. When the number of total gangs is exceeded in
a time period, all vessels which use a crane at the overloaded time period is checked until
one is found, where it is possible to move one crane to a diﬀerent time period. An example
of a crane switch is illustrated in Figure 5a, where the overloaded time period is time 3
with a total of 4 cranes. A switch is then made for the upper vessel, from time period 3 to
5. If it is not possible to make the switch a double crane switch is considered. Here it is
checked if a diﬀerent vessel can move a crane from one time period, t′ ∈T, to another, and
thereby make it possible for one of the vessels using a crane at the overloaded time period
to move it to the time period t′. This is done on line 26 and a double switch from over-
loaded time period 3 is illustrated in Figure 5b. The lower vessel makes the ﬁrst switch from
period 5 to 6, for the upper vessel to switch from period 3 to 5 and make the solution feasible.
After this, a local search is carried out. Here crane switches are made, but it is ensured
that the number of gangs will never increase. Fist on line 31 a random shift is chosen, then
the time period in that shift with the highest number of cranes pr hour is found on line 32.
This is the time period which sets the required gangs for the shift. Then a crane switch is
made from this time period. Here a switch is only allowed if the time period, which the crane
is switched to, has a lower cranes pr hour than the number of gangs. Hence the number of
gangs needed for the shift will always stay the same or decrease. If a crane switch at the
gang-setting time period is not possible a switch is made at a random time period in the
shift, line 34-37. This switch can inﬂuence the possibility of making a better switch later in
the local search.
5.2. Neighbourhood functions
For this thesis, three diﬀerent neighbourhoods are tested. The ﬁrst neighbourhood has
the already used ﬁrst stage solution as input, a random shift is then chosen, where the
number of gangs is either increased or decreased by 1. Whether it is increased or decreased
depends ﬁrst on what is possible, at least zero or at most the total number of available
cranes, and secondly on a random variable.
15
==PAGE:18==
Input
: g: Number of gangs pr. shift, ¯r: Deterministic crane allocation, scenInst:
Scenario data instance
Output: y: The number of extra gangs in each shift, r: The crane allocation
1 r ←move(¯r)
2 vesselNotChangedv ←false
3 for All vessels v do
4
if craneHoursUsedv < craneHoursNeededv then
5
Add extra cranes to vessel without exceeding maxCranesv and totalCranes
6
if Enough cranes cannot be add then
7
vesselNotChangedv ←true
8
end
9
end
10
if craneHoursUsedv > craneHoursNeededv then
11
Remove excess cranes from vessel
12
end
13 end
14 for All vessels v where vesselNotChangedv is true do
15
if craneHoursUsedv < craneHoursNeededv then
16
Add extra cranes to vessel without exceeding maxCranesv and totalCranes
17
if Enough cranes cannot be add then
18
Add extra cranes to vessel without exceeding maxCranesv
19
end
20
end
21 end
22 for All times t do
23
while cranesPrHourt > totalCranes do
24
makeCraneSwitch(t)
25
if Crane switch not possible then
26
makeDoubleCraneSwitch(t)
27
end
28
end
29 end
30 for maxIter iterations do
31
shift ←rand(all shifts)
32
tmax ←argmax{cranesPrHourt|t ∈shift}
33
makeCraneSwitch(tmax)
34
if Crane switch not possible then
35
trand ←rand(t in shift)
36
makeCraneSwitch(trand)
37
end
38 end
Algorithm 2: solveCrane Heuristic
16
==PAGE:19==
(a) Crane switch
(b) Double crane switch
Figure 5: Illustration of a crane switch and a double crane switch. Each square is a vessel, the numbers
represent the number of cranes. Where green is the changes. The number of total cranes on the
quay is 3.
The second neighbourhood has the same input. Here it is chosen at random for each
shift whether it should increase by 1, decrease by 1 or stay the same. If the chosen option is
not possible due to it exceeding the number of total available cranes or result in a negative
number of gangs, the shift just stays the same.
The third neighbourhood has the already used second stage solution as input, from this
a weight for each shift is calculated in the following way:
weightw =
1
1 + P
s∈S yws
Then the deterministic problem is solved again using the MIP model in Figure 3, but with
the calculated weights multiplied in the objective function.
5.3. Acceptance function
In this thesis, the standard simulated annealing acceptances function is used. Here the
new solution is always accepted if the new objective (z′) is lower the previous objective (z).
If this is not the case then the new solution is accepted with the probability given by:
P = e
z−z′
T
17
==PAGE:20==
6. Data
In this thesis, three diﬀerent data ﬁles were used. One holds general data for the planning,
where the other two holds information on changes in handling time and arrival time. The
last two data ﬁles are only used to get statistical information used to generate the scenarios.
Here normal distributions are assumed for the handling and arrival time. All the ﬁles contain
data from an actual port.
6.1. Data ﬁle for general information
This data ﬁle is the one used in the MIP models and heuristic. The ﬁle holds information
on 90 vessels where the total number of available cranes on the quay is 40. The planning
period is 156 hours which is 13 shifts of 12 hours each. The data ﬁle gives the following
information for each vessel:
• The handling time, as the number of quay crane hours needed
• The arrival time, which is the ﬁrst time period in which the vessel can be handled
• The departure time, which is the last time period in which the vessel can be handled
• The length of the vessel in meters
From the length of the vessel the maximum number of cranes, which can be assigned to
the vessel, is calculated. This is done in the following way from the rule that there can be
one crane per 50m:
maxCranesv =
lengthv
50

6.2. Data ﬁle for handling time
The data ﬁle containing information of the handling time holds data for 126 vessels, in
total 364 data points, wherein average there are three data points for each vessel. A data
point contains the information of the number of container moves recorded when the vessel
was handled at the port. The average move count is then calculated from the given data
points for each vessel. For each vessel, the average absolute deviation from the average
move count is calculated.
From the industry, it is known that some vessels give more
accurate move count information than other vessels. Therefore when ﬁnding the average
standard deviation for the vessels, the data is split into two groups, reliable and unreliable.
The average absolute deviation which divides the data points into equal halves is 4%. This
means that there are 182 data points classiﬁed as reliable and 182 as unreliable. The number
of vessels being reliable are 65 and 61 are unreliable. The average standard deviation is the
percentage deviation from the average handling time, which is seen in Table 2.
18
==PAGE:21==
Average Standard
Deviation
Reliable
1.6%
Unreliable
15.9%
Table 2: Standard deviation for handling time for vessels classiﬁed as reliable and unreliable
6.3. Data ﬁle for arrival time
The last data ﬁle contains information for 613 vessels. For each vessel there is more than
one data point, each point containing the following information:
• Length of the vessel in meters
• The time and date the data point is created
• The expected arrival time at the created time of the data point
• The actual arrival time
When considering vessels arrival time it is seen that the further away from arrival the
vessels are, the more uncertain the expected arrival time is. Since the planning horizon is
slightly less than one week, it is decided to split the vessels into four groups: The vessels
arriving within 0-2 days, 2-4 days, 4-6 days and 6 or more days. Therefore it is calculated
from the data what time of arrival the port expects for the vessels when it is 2, 4, 6, and 8
days before their actual arrival time. From this, a standard deviation for the diﬀerence in
expected time of arrival and the actual time of arrival is calculated for the vessels 2, 4, 6
and 8 days before they arrive.
From the data, it is seen that there is a diﬀerence in the uncertainty for the arrival time
depending on the length of the vessel. Here it is seen that vessels shorter than 250 meters,
called feeders, have a higher uncertainty than vessels longer or equal to 250 meters, called
deep-sea vessels. The analyze is split into the two length groups, and the analysis conﬁrms
that vessels with a length under 250 meters have a higher deviation than vessels with a
length of 250 meters or more. The standard deviation for each vessel size and the four days
is seen in Table 3.
0-2 days
2-4 days
4-6 days
6 or more
days
Feeder
0.35
0.54
0.69
0.83
Deep-Sea
0.30
0.44
0.59
0.68
Table 3: Standard deviation of arrival time for feeder and deep-sea vessels
19
==PAGE:22==
6.4. Scenario generation
When generating scenarios the standard deviation, which is found in the handling time
and arrival time data ﬁles, is used. For both the arrival time and the handling time the
deterministic data, which is the data in the general data ﬁle, is used as the mean value.
When generating a scenario each vessel is given a new arrival time and handling by at
random pulling values from the normal distribution with the vessels mean and standard
deviation. For the arrival time, each vessel’s standard deviation is determined from the
length of the vessel and the expected arrival time. For the handling time, it is chosen by
random if the vessel has high uncertainty or low uncertainty, and the standard deviation is
set accordingly. Since the standard deviation in the handling time is set as a relative value
to the mean handling time, this percentage is multiplied by the mean value. It is determined
that the time in the berth for the vessels is the same across the scenarios, and therefore when
the arrival time is determined, so is the departure time. When a scenario is created it might
not have a feasible crane allocation. If this is the case then some vessels will be delayed or
a new scenario is generated.
6.5. Parameter selection
Values for the diﬀerent parameters were chosen through experiments with the heuristic
where sets of diﬀerent values were tested. The parameters were chosen not only with respect
to the objective value but also with respect to the best convergence rate. The test was done
on ﬁve diﬀerent set of scenarios, and the parameters are chosen considering the overall best.
For the classic simulated annealing, parameters start temperature (T0) and alpha (α) the
values 3, 5, 7, 10 and 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 99 were tested respectively. The parameter tests
was done for all three diﬀerent solveCrane functions. The start temperature is set to 5
for all solveCrane functions, where alpha is set to 90 for the solveCrane functions with the
heuristic and the LP-relaxation of the MIP model, and to 80 for the solveCrane function
with the MIP model.
The parameter for when to reheat, called iterFactor (can be found in Algorithm 1 line
27) is tested for the values 500, 1000, 2000 and 5000. Here it was seen that the size of the
parameter did not have much eﬀect on the result. So the parameter could be set to any value
without changing the results in a noticeable manner, the parameter is then set to 1000. It
was also tested not to included the reheat, but it showed no diﬀerence. Since reheating did
not have any negative inﬂuence, it was kept in the heuristic.
For the heuristic solveCrane there is a parameter which determines how many iterations
the local search will go through. Here the values 500, 1000, 3000 and 5000 were tested. Here
it was seen that 3000 and 5000 made the convergence much slower. Between 500 and 1000
the convergence was much the same, but the objective for 1000 was lower and hence this
was the value chosen.
The number of scenarios needed is determined by testing the diﬀerence between inner
and outer samples. The relative diﬀerence between the cost of the inner and outer samples
20
==PAGE:23==
can be seen in Table 4. Here it is seen that there is not any diﬀerence between using 75 and
100 scenarios. Therefore 75 scenarios are chosen because it is a representative size but also
a size which is possible to handle by the heuristic and MIP model.
Scenarios
Relative diﬀerence
10
2.71%
20
1.50%
50
0.70%
75
0.32%
100
0.32%
Table 4: Relative diﬀerence of the cost between inner and outer sample for diﬀerent number of scenarios
In the following sections, the cost of hiring gangs in the second stage will be twice the
cost of hiring in the ﬁrst stage. In the sections the second neighbourhood function is used,
within this function, every shift is changed. Both of these settings will be tested later on.
7. Computational Results
The following results are found by using 5 diﬀerent set of scenarios then used at the
parameter tuning. Unless other is written the cost is average of the 5 set of scenarios. The
tests are conducted on an HP ProLiant SL2x170z G6 with 2x Intel Xeon Processor X5550
(quad-core, 2.66 GHz, 8MB L3 Cache), and the MIP models in solved using CPLEX version
12.7.1.
7.1. Comparison of solution methods
The heuristic is run with the three diﬀerent solveCrane functions on ﬁve diﬀerent set of
scenarios called seeds. The change of the objective through time is seen in Figure 6, where
the heuristic is run for 3600 seconds with the three diﬀerent solveCrane functions. Here
it is seen that the heuristic solveCrane function makes the main heuristic converge much
faster than using the LP-relaxation or MIP functions. It is also seen that the LP-relaxation
solveCrane function makes the main heuristic converge a bit faster than using the MIP
solveCrane function.
The MIP solveCrane function ﬁnds the integer optimal crane allocation and is used after
the main heuristic is completed and have found the best number of gangs (g∗). The integer
optimal crane allocation is then used when calculating the ﬁnal cost. This ﬁnal cost is seen in
Figure 7a and 7b for running the heuristic in 30, 60, 600, and 3600 seconds. The two ﬁgures
are the same, but with diﬀerent scales on the y-axis to show the cost diﬀerence in detail.
Due to the fast convergence of the heuristic when the heuristic solveCrane function is used,
it is seen in Figure 7b that this is the best method when running for 30 seconds. However, as
the heuristic is running for a longer time it becomes the LP-relaxation solveCrane function
which makes the main heuristic perform best. Furthermore, it is also seen that the main
21
==PAGE:24==
MIP model perform the worst when running for 30 seconds, but for one minute or more the
MIP model becomes the best solution method. The solution is however not optimal, but
from the ﬁgure, it is seen to be close to optimal when running for more than 30 seconds.
It can be concluded that with a very short time limit the heuristic with the heuristic
solveCrane function performs best, but for more than one minute the main MIP model per-
forms best. However it is seen from Figure 7c, that no matter the time limit, when the right
solution method is chosen, there is a saving compared to using the deterministic solution.
The results from the main heuristic solution method will always be at least as good as the
one obtained from the deterministic solution since this solution is the starting point for the
heuristic. It is also be seen from Figure 7c, that this is not always the case with the main
MIP model.
(a) Heuristic
(b) MIP
(c) LP-relaxation
Figure 6: Convergence of the heuristic using diﬀerent solveCrane functions
22
==PAGE:25==
(a) Cost (Full y-axis)
(b) Cost (Partly y-axis)
(c) Relative diﬀerence in cost to the deterministic solution
Figure 7: Cost comparison between the diﬀerent solution methods.
HH: Heuristic with heuristic solveCrane. HM: Heuristic with MIP solveCrane. HML: Heuristic
with LP-relaxation solveCrane. MIP: Main MIP model. LB: Lower bound from main MIP model.
Det: Deterministic
Figure 8 shows the ﬁrst stage solution when using the main MIP model and the heuristic
with the three diﬀerent solveCrane functions. From the ﬁgure, it is be seen how the solution
changes over time. After 30 seconds the three heuristic solutions are very similar and the
MIP solution is higher and closer to the maximum number of gangs, 40, the entire time.
For the time limits of 60 seconds and more the MIP solution only slightly change, where
the heuristic solutions make changes from time limit to time limit. The heuristic solution
with the MIP model and LP-relaxation solveCrane functions both converge towards the
same solution as the main MIP model. Where the heuristic with the heuristic solveCrane
function converges fast, it is seen in Figure 8d that it is towards a diﬀerent solution than
the rest of the solution methods. This is also why this solution method performs worst in
the long run.
When the MIP model was ﬁrst developed the constraints was modeled in a more complex
matter. Preliminary tests showed this model to be extremely hard to solve, and the time to
achieve the ﬁrst integer solution was more than 25 minutes. Based on this, the decision to
create a heuristic solution method was made. In the processes of developing the heuristic
changes to the model was carried out, which resulted in the less complex model in Figure 2.
23
==PAGE:26==
(a) 30 seconds
(b) 60 seconds
(c) 600 seconds
(d) 3600 seconds
Figure 8: Comparison between number of gangs used in each shift with diﬀerent solution methods.
HH: Heuristic with heuristic solveCrane. HM: Heuristic with MIP solveCrane. HML: Heuristic
with LP-relaxation solveCrane. MIP: Main MIP model
7.2. Testing of neighbourhoods in the heuristic
In the main heuristic, Algorithm 1 three neighborhood functions are tested, the neigh-
bourhoods are tested for all three solveCrane functions. Figure 9 shows the convergence
of the main heuristic using the heuristic solveCrane function, where the time limit is 3600
seconds. Using the neighbourhood with the MIP model, it is seen in Figure 9c that the
solution does not make signiﬁcant improvements from the initial solution. This is caused by
the heuristic iterating between the same solutions and therefore does not improve.
Comparing the usage of the other two neighbourhoods in Figure 9a and 9b, it is seen
that the function which can change every shift converges faster and get lower costs. This is
caused by the diﬀerence in the size of the neighbourhoods, where the function which changes
one shift, is the smaller neighbourhood. The results of the convergence and behavior of the
heuristic using the three neighbourhoods are the same for the three diﬀerent solveCrane
functions. The ﬁgures for the MIP model and LP-relaxation solveCrane functions is seen in
Appendix A.
24
==PAGE:27==
(a) Neighbourhood 1, changes one random
shift
(b) Neighbourhood 2, changes every shift ran-
domly
(c) Neighbourhood 3, uses MIP model
Figure 9: Convergence of the neighbourhoods where the heuristic uses the heuristic solveCrane function
7.3. MIP results
The results from running the main MIP model is seen in Table 5, where it is seen that for
a 30 seconds time limit it is a poor solution, which has a gap of 100%, since no improvements
on the lower bound is reached. On the contrary, the solution for the other time limits shows
remarkable results with gaps below 0.5%
Cost
LB
Gap
30 sec
530.92
0
100%
60 sec
435.27
433.35
0.44%
600 sec
434.68
433.45
0.28%
3600 sec
434.51
433.51
0.23%
Table 5: Result of the main MIP model
25
==PAGE:28==
Figure 10: Comparison of ﬁrst stage gangs between
time limits
Figure 11: Comparison of utility
In Figure 10 the average number of gangs in each work shift is shown for solving the
main MIP model with a time limit of 30, 60, 600, and 3600 seconds. It is seen that on
average there are a higher number of gangs with a time limit of 30 seconds. For time limit
60, 600, and 3600 seconds the average number of gangs in each shift is similar to each other.
Comparing the solution for 60 seconds with the solution for 600 and 3600 seconds, it is seen
that the average number of gangs diﬀerentiate more for 60 seconds. The similarity in the
solutions from 600 seconds and 3600 seconds means that the increase in time does not have
an inﬂuence, which also is seen in the close gaps from Table 5. Given the changes for 60
seconds, and that there are no changes from 600 to 3600 seconds, the time limit chosen for
further tests is 600 seconds.
For ports, a tool for measuring the quality of a plan is to consider the utility of the gangs.
Since a gang is hired for an entire shift, there can be times where the gangs are idle, e.i.
not assigned to a vessel. The utility is then the proportion of time where the gangs are idle.
The utility of the MIP model solution is seen in Figure 11, where the average, minimum,
and maximum utility for the scenarios is shown. The ﬁgure also displays the utility if MIP
model solution is used on the deterministic data. It is seen that the average utility is around
97% but decreases to 81% and 76% in the endpoints. Even though the maximum utility
often is 100%, the minimum utility comes as low as 30%. For the deterministic case, the
utility is always high with 86% as the minimum.
7.4. Value of stochastic solution
The average expected value of perfect information (EVPI) is seen in Table 6. It is seen
that the EVPI is high for the solution after 30 seconds. This is because the solution found
after 30 seconds is far from optimal. After 60 seconds the average EVPI is 6.8% and only
falls to 6.7% for longer running time. This means that if it was possible for a port to have
perfect information on handling times and arrival times it would be possible to save 6.7%
of the ports cost on hiring gangs. However it is not possible in real life to gain perfect
information, but it might be possible to obtain better information. The EVPI can be used
26
==PAGE:29==
for the port to decide if they should spend money on better stochastic data. They should
not use more than what is equivalent to 6.7% of their cost of hiring gangs since this is the
theoretical highest saving they can obtain.
Table 6 also shows the average value of the stochastic solution (VSS). Here it is seen
that the solution found by MIP after 30 seconds has a negative value. This means that it
would be better to use the deterministic solution, or as seen the heuristic. When running
for 60 seconds or more it is seen that the average VSS goes from 7.6% to 7.8%. This means
that by not using the stochastic solution method the port would spend 7.8% more on hiring
gangs.
EVPI
VSS
30 sec
23.7%
-11.9%
60 sec
6.8%
7.6%
600 sec
6.7%
7.7%
3600 sec
6.7%
7.8%
Table 6: Average expected value of perfect information and average value of stochastic solution
7.5. Testing of buﬀer
When the number of hired gangs in the ﬁrst stage is determined the number of extra
hired gangs, and hence the number of total hired gangs is set for each scenario. How the
total number of gangs changes between the scenarios for both the stochastic solution and
the deterministic solution is illustrated in Figure 12. Here it is seen that for the stochastic
solution the number of minimum used gangs, the number of gangs hired in the ﬁrst stage,
and the average number of total gangs hired follow each other closely. The average number
of extra gangs hired is small, but there is often at least one scenario needing the maximum
number of gangs hired in every shift. For the deterministic solution it is seen that instead
of the number of the ﬁrst stage hired gangs is in the middle of the minimum number of
used gangs and the average number of total gangs, it switches between being directly at the
minimum used gangs and the average total gangs.
In the following, it is tested if it is possible to obtain the stochastic solution by adding
a buﬀer to the deterministic solution. This is preferable since the deterministic model is
faster to solve. When adding a buﬀer a percentage of gangs is added to the solution. The
values for the buﬀer tested is 1%, 2%, 3%, 3.7%, 4%, 5%, 5.5%, 6%, 6.5%, and 7% and is
seen in Figure 13a. The reason for testing the value 3.7%, that it is the average relation
between the gangs in the stochastic and deterministic solution in each shift. The points
around 3.7%; 1%, 2%, 3%, and 4% were then tested, and as Figure 13b shows, better results
were obtained for 4%. This led to the test of 5%, 6%, and 7% where a buﬀer of 5% turned
out to be the best. When comparing the results of 4% and 6%, a buﬀer of 6% gives the best
results. Therefore 5.5% was tested and is seen to be the best buﬀer to add together with 5%.
27
==PAGE:30==
(a) Stochastic
(b) Deterministic
Figure 12: Diﬀerence in number of gangs for the scenarios
It is then seen that adding a buﬀer will enhance the deterministic solution. From Figure 13a
it is seen that the stochastic solution is by far the best solution, therefore this test shows
it is not possible to obtain the stochastic solution by adding a buﬀer to the deterministic
solution.
(a) The cost of the stochastic solution and
the cost of the deterministic solution with
added buﬀer
(b) Average cost of deterministic solution with
added buﬀer
Figure 13: Impact of adding a buﬀer
7.6. Testing of price
The price of the gangs hired in the second stage is tested to see if and which inﬂuence
it has on the solution. Therefore the price is tested to be two, three, four, and ﬁve times
higher than the cost of hiring gangs in the ﬁrst stage. In Figure 14a the average extra hired
gangs compared to the average gangs hired in the ﬁrst stage is shown. As expected it is
seen that the higher the price is the less extra gangs will be hired. Instead, the number of
gangs hired in the ﬁrst stage will increase as seen in Figure 14b, which is the average gangs
hired for a set of scenarios in the ﬁrst stage. Figure 14c shows the utility of the gangs hired
28
==PAGE:31==
in the ﬁrst stage. It is seen that the utility decreases as the cost of extra gangs increase.
This means that if a lower amount of extra gangs is wanted, then the utilization will also
be lower. How to balance these two is for the individual port to decide with respect to their
opportunities and strategy.
(a) Average extra gangs hired in relation to
gangs in ﬁrst stage for each set of scenarios
(b) Average gangs hired in ﬁrst stage for each
set of scenarios
(c) Average utility of gangs in ﬁrst stage for each set of scenarios
Figure 14: Impact of higher cost for gangs hired in second stage for ﬁve set of scenarios
7.7. Testing of variance
Through all previous tests, the handling time and arrival time have both been uncertain,
and it has been seen to have an impact on the solution compared to the deterministic solu-
tion. This section tests in which part of the uncertainty the biggest impact is found. Table
7 shows data from running the MIP model on cases where speciﬁc elements are uncertain.
The ﬁrst row shows the results for the having both arrival and handling time is uncertain.
The second row has only the arrival time to be uncertain, and therefore the handling time
is the mean in all scenarios. The third row has handling time as uncertain, but for vessels
longer than 250 meters the arrival time is uncertain. Similar is row four, here it is only
vessels with a length under 250 meters which is uncertain. For the last row, it is only the
handling time which is uncertain.
29
==PAGE:32==
If only the handling time is uncertain the impact is small when using the stochastic
solution method. This is seen by the VSS being 0.6%, and the solution having an average of
two extra gangs. Since the results of having all elements uncertain are similar to the results
of having only arrival time uncertain, it can be concluded that most of the stochasticity
comes from arrival time. Comparing the results for having uncertainty for the arrival time
of vessels over 250 meters and vessels under 250 meters it is seen that the longer vessels
conduct most of the impact on the solution. This is seen even though they have a smaller
standards deviation than the smaller vessels, and only makes up one-third of the vessels.
This is caused by the larger vessels need for more quay crane hours, and therefore moving
a vessel in time also moves a lot of crane demand.
G
Y
EVPI
EVPI %
VSS
VSS %
All uncertain
407.8
13.44
29.10
6.7%
33.65
7.7%
Arrival
414.6
12.49
28.49
6.5%
36.77
8.4%
Arrival o. 250m
400.8
9.40
19.90
4.7%
18.52
4.4%
Arrival u. 250m
400.0
5.10
11.38
2.8%
16.49
4.0%
Handling
399.0
2.03
4.29
1.1%
2.37
0.6%
Table 7: Data for diﬀerent changes in the stochastic elements
8. Conclusion and Suggestions for Future Work
In this thesis, the stochastic quay crane assignment problem have been presented and
the current solution methodologies have been reviewed and discussed. The Mixed Integer
Program was formulated as a two-stage problem with recourse where the objective was to
minimize the number of gangs hired. A simulated annealing solution approach was also
developed. Here three diﬀerent functions were used to calculate the recourse in the sec-
ond stage. Through statistical analysis, the standard deviation of the handling time and
arrival time is found, which are used to generate scenarios. The computational results are
conducted on a large data set containing 90 vessels, and through inner and outer sample
analysis it was seen that 75 scenarios were enough to represent the deviation.
The results showed that for the main heuristic using an LP-relaxed MIP model to cal-
culate the recourse performed slightly better than a MIP model to calculate the recourse.
When running for a longer time both of these performed better than using a heuristic to
calculate the recourse. However, for a time limit of 30 seconds, the heuristic recourse func-
tion performed best, due to the fast convergence. The best solution method when running
for more than 30 seconds proved to be the MIP model. Even though all solution method did
not perform equally, they all had a lower cost than using the deterministic solution. Several
diﬀerent neighbourhood functions tested for the heuristic showed not to be able to compete
against the MIP model.
30
==PAGE:33==
It was seen that even after 60 seconds the MIP model only had a relative gap less than
0.5%. A gap below 0.3% was seen after 600 seconds, and because of this slight improve-
ment, a time limit of 600 seconds was chosen for further testing. Examination of the solution
showed that the gangs’ utilization was on average 97%, but the minimum and maximum
for the individual scenarios was 30% and 100% respectively. The examination also showed
that the expected value of perfect information was 6.7% of the total cost of hiring gangs.
It was concluded that the deterministic solution would be 7.8% more expensive than using
the stochastic solution, i.e. the value of the stochastic solution is 7.8%.
From the computational results, it was concluded that it was not possible to simply add
a buﬀer to the number of gangs found in the deterministic solution and thereby obtain-
ing similar results as the stochastic solution. However, it was seen that adding the buﬀer
did improve the deterministic solution, and the best buﬀer to add was 5% or 5.5%. From
the results, it was seen that the average number of extra gangs needed is rather low, but
obtaining an even lower number of extra gangs is a compromise with the utility of the gangs.
Through the result of testing the variances, it was seen that the uncertainty in arrival
time contributed with most of the stochasticity, compared to the handling time having al-
most no inﬂuence on the solution. It was also concluded that larger vessels have a higher
inﬂuence than the smaller vessels, even though they only represent one-third of the vessels.
From this thesis, it is concluded that including the stochasticity in the planning process
provides value for the port. Therefore a natural topic for future research can be to include
stochasticity in the berth allocation problem. The berth allocation problem can also be
included as an extension to the crane allocation problem by including it when generating
the scenarios, to ensure they are feasible. The extension can also be to include the berth
allocation problem in the MIP model when calculating the recourse.
An interesting topic for future work can also be to gather more data on the stochastic
elements and thereby make a more thorough and precise statistical analysis. In future re-
search, the problem could be extended to include more restrictions on the gangs, such as
breaks and individual eﬃciency levels.
31
==PAGE:34==
References
Bierwirth, C., Meisel, F., 2015. A follow-up survey of berth allocation and quay crane scheduling problems
in container terminals. European Journal of Operational Research 244 (3), 675 – 689.
fei Zhou, P., gui Kang, H., 2008. Study on berth and quay-crane allocation under stochastic environments
in container terminal. Systems Engineering - Theory & Practice 28 (1), 161 – 169.
Guldogan, E. U., Bulut, O., Tasgetiren, M. F., 2012. A dynamic berth allocation problem with priority con-
siderations under stochastic nature. In: Huang, D.-S., Gan, Y., Gupta, P., Gromiha, M. M. (Eds.), Ad-
vanced Intelligent Computing Theories and Applications. With Aspects of Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 74–82.
Han, X., Lu, Z., Xi, L., 2010. A proactive approach for simultaneous berth and quay crane scheduling
problem with stochastic arrival and handling time. European Journal of Operational Research 207 (3),
1327–1340.
Iris, C¸., Pacino, D., Røpke, S., 2017. Improved formulations and an adaptive large neighborhood search
heuristic for the integrated berth allocation and quay crane assignment problem. Transportation Research
Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 105, 123 – 147.
Iris, C¸., Pacino, D., Røpke, S., Larsen, A., 2015. Integrated berth allocation and quay crane assignment
problem: Set partitioning models and computational results. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics
and Transportation Review 81, 75 – 97.
maritimeinfo.org, 2013a. Cargo types. The Maritime Industry Knowledge Centre. (Visited: 09-05-2018).
URL https://www.maritimeinfo.org/en/Maritime-Directory/cargo-types
maritimeinfo.org, 2013b. Ship types. The Maritime Industry Knowledge Centre. (Visited: 09-05-2018).
URL https://www.maritimeinfo.org/en/Maritime-Directory/ship-types
McKinsey&Company, 2017. Container shipping: The next 50 years.
Meisel, F., 2009. Operational Planning Problems. Physica-Verlag HD, Heidelberg, pp. 17–30.
Meisel, F., Bierwirth, C., 2006. Integration of berth allocation and crane assignment to improve the re-
source utilization at a seaport container terminal. In: Haasis, H.-D., Kopfer, H., Sch¨onberger, J. (Eds.),
Operations Research Proceedings 2005. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 105–110.
Meisel, F., Bierwirth, C., 2009. Heuristics for the integration of crane productivity in the berth allocation
problem. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 45 (1), 196 – 209.
Rodrigue, J.-P., Comtois, C., Slack, B., 2017. The Geography of Transport Systems, 4th Edition. Routledge.
Statista.com, 2017. Container shipping - statistics & facts. (Visited: 31-01-2018).
URL https://www.statista.com/topics/1367/container-shipping/
Statista.com, 2018. Number of ships in the world merchant ﬂeet between january 1, 2008 and january 1,
2017, by type. (Visited: 10-06-2018).
URL https://www.statista.com/statistics/264024/number-of-merchant-ships-worldwide-by-type/
Steenken, D., Voß, S., Stahlbock, R., Jan 2004. Container terminal operation and operations research - a
classiﬁcation and literature review. OR Spectrum 26 (1), 3–49.
UNCTAD, 2016. Review of maritime transport 2016.
UNCTAD, 2017. Review of maritime transport 2017.
Zampelli, S., Vergados, Y., Van Schaeren, R., Dullaert, W., Raa, B., 2013. The berth allocation and quay
crane assignment problem using a cp approach. In: Schulte, C. (Ed.), Principles and Practice of Constraint
Programming. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 880–896.
Zhang, X., Sun, B., Sun, J., Gou, Z., July 2014. The berth and quay cranes integrated scheduling based on
redundancy policy. In: Proceedings of the 33rd Chinese Control Conference. pp. 7595–7600.
Zhen, L., Lee, L. H., Chew, E. P., 2011. A decision model for berth allocation under uncertainty. European
Journal of Operational Research 212 (1), 54 – 68.
32
==PAGE:35==
Appendices
A. Neighbourhood
(a) Neighbourhood 1, changes one random shift (b) Neighbourhood 2, changes every shift ran-
domly
(c) Neighbourhood 3, uses MIP model
Figure 15: Convergence of the neighbourhoods where the heuristic uses the MIP model solveCrane function
with a time limit on 3600 seconds
33
==PAGE:36==
(a) Neighbourhood 1, changes one random shift (b) Neighbourhood 2, changes every shift ran-
domly
(c) Neighbourhood 3, uses MIP model
Figure 16: Convergence of the neighbourhoods where the heuristic uses the relation of the MIP model
solveCrane function with a time limit on 3600 seconds
34
