==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Design and Fabrication of Low-loss
Silicon Carbide Waveguides
Written by:
Xiaodong Shi (s161438)
Supervisor:
Haiyan Ou and Yi Zheng
Thesis for the degree of Master of Science
Department of Photonics Engineering
Date of submission: July 28, 2018
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Silicon carbide on insulator is a new kind of complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor
compatible integrated platform. Excellent material properties of silicon carbide, such as
large bandgap, high thermal conductivity, and high second- and third-order nonlineari-
ties, make it a competitive platform for a wide range of applications and a great potential
to explore. One of the most important requirements for the integrated platform is the
low-loss waveguide. Light, transmitting through the waveguide, usually suﬀers from two
types of loss, which are the propagation loss and the coupling loss. Surface roughness
of the wafer plays a key role in the propagation loss, as high roughness induces strong
scattering. Thermal oxidation is applied to improve the surface condition in this work.
The oxidation mechanism and properties of silicon carbide are explored and analyzed
in the measurement. In order to reduce the coupling loss between the waveguide and
the ﬁber optical system, an optimized fully etched photonic crystal apodized grating
coupler in silicon carbide on insulator platform is designed. The detailed simulation
method is introduced, and the performance, taking the fabrication and characterization
ﬂuctuation into account, is predicted. Finally, the fabrication process is tested, and the
grating couplers are fabricated and characterized.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my main supervisor, Haiyan Ou, for everything she
has done for me. She oﬀered me with all of the conditions that I needed in the project.
Since I started with limited experience in this ﬁeld, I encountered many challenges and
diﬃculties, and she always provided guidance, and encouraged me to overcome. Her
invaluable support and help are far beyond what a supervisor should have. I would like
to thank my co-supervisor Yi Zheng. When I met problems in the simulation or the
fabrication, he always gave suggestions, and spent a lot of time doing the fabrication
with me. Meanwhile, I am also very grateful to Yong Liu and Xiaowei Guan, as they
shared a lot of experience of the grating coupler simulation.
I would like to thank the people, who helped me during my master program. Kai Guo
lead me to the ﬁeld of integrated photonics, and taught me a lot of experimental skills.
Lars Ren´e Lindvold, Karsten Rottwitt, Yunhong Ding, and Jesper Bjerge Christensen
gave me so much help and had many useful discussions with me. I would always remain
grateful to them.
I would like to thank all the groupmates, roommates, and friends, for all the time spent
together.
Finally, a particular thank to my family, especially my parents, for their love and sup-
port.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Integrated Photonics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Silicon Carbide Waveguide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Silicon Carbide Material Property
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.2
Silicon Carbide Waveguide Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.3
Silicon Carbide on Insulator Fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Overview of the Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Silicon Carbide Oxidation
8
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Oxidation Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Deal-Grove Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Interfacial Silicon and Carbon Emission Model . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Silicon Carbide Oxidation Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
Hardness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.2
Chemical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.2.1
Energy-dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.2.2
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.3
Oxidation Thickness and Rate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3.4
Surface Roughness Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3
Grating Coupler Simulation
32
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2
Edge Coupling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3
Vertical Grating Coupler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4
Fully Etched Photonic Crystal Apodized Grating Coupler Simulation . . .
38
3.4.1
Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.4.2
Simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4.2.1
Step 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4.2.2
Step 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.4.2.3
Step 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
iii
==PAGE:5==
iv
3.4.2.4
Step 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4.2.5
Step 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.4.3
Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.4.4
Fluctuation Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.4.4.1
SiC Thickness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.4.4.2
Hole Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.4.4.3
Coupling Angle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4
Grating Coupler Fabrication and Characterization
60
4.1
Fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.1.1
Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.1.2
Dose Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.1.3
Etching Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.1.4
Device Fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.2
Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
4.2.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
4.2.2
Fully Etched Photonic Crystal Apodized Grating Coupler . . . . .
69
4.2.2.1
Measurement of Transmittance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.2.2.2
Fabrication Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.2.2.3
Taper Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.2.2.4
Coupling Angle Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
4.2.2.5
Hole Size Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4.2.3
Straight Waveguide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5
Conclusion and Future Work
77
5.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A Process Flow
79
Bibliography
80
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Integrated Photonics
Integrated photonics provides a variety of compact optical components integrated on
chip, enabling plenty of signal processing functions. Both active and passive optical
components have been demonstrated on chip. Active ones include lasers, ampliﬁers,
and photon detectors.
Passive ones include ﬁlters, couplers, beam splitters, arrayed
waveguide gratings, and so on.
Diﬀerent applications may require diﬀerent material
properties. Therefore, many integrated platforms have been explored during the past
two decades.
Silicon has been demonstrated with low cost, high crystal quality, and compatible fabri-
cation process with the existing integrated circuit manufacture [1]. Silicon on insulator
(SOI) is a commercial platform. High refractive index of silicon allows compact inte-
gration of optical components. High third-order nonlinearity makes it eﬃcient for the
applications of soliton formation, Raman ampliﬁcation, and four-wave mixing. How-
ever, the narrow bandgap of silicon limits high-power applications, because two-photon
absorption and free-carrier absorption can degrade the performance of the nonlinear
interaction.
Two complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) compatible silicon compound
based platforms, silica on silicon and silicon nitride on silica, have been explored. Silicon
oxide (SiO2) has high optical transparency and low loss, but its low refractive index
does not guarantee scalable integration as silicon, and the weak third-order nonlinearity
requires much higher power to pump [2]. Silicon nitride (Si3N4) has large bandgap,
enabling light transmission from visible to mid-infrared [3]. Low loss transmission with
acceptable third-order nonlinearity makes it available for eﬃcient phase modulation.
1
==PAGE:7==
2
However, it is formed by the amorphous structure, which results in rather weak second-
order nonlinearity.
Low-loss aluminum nitride (AlN) on insulator platform has also been demonstrated
with CMOS compatible nanofabrication [4]. Good performances of both electro-optic
eﬀect and Kerr eﬀect appear in AlN waveguides. Broadband supercontinuum generation
and frequency comb from visible to mid-infrared range were achieved, thanks to the
advantages of large bandgap, and both second- and third-order nonlinearities existence
[5, 6].
Table 1.1: Properties of diﬀerent kinds of platform materials. n denotes the refractive
index at 1550 nm. 2nd NL denotes the second-order nonlinear susceptibility tensor,
χ(2). 3rd NL denotes the Kerr refractive index, n2. It is deﬁned through the intensity
dependent refractive index in Kerr eﬀect, given by n = n0 + 3χ (3)
8n0 |E|2 = n0 + n2I,
where χ(3) is the third-order nonlinear susceptibility tensor. BG denotes the bandgap.
κ denotes the thermal conductivity. And CMOS denotes CMOS compatibility.
Material
n
2nd NL
3rd NL
BG
κ
CMOS
(pm/V)
(m2/W)
(eV)
(W/(mK))
Si [7, 8]
3.5
0.6
3.5 × 10−18
1.12
149
√
SiO2[9]
1.4
3 × 10−20
9
1.4
√
Si3N4 [10]
2.0
0.3
2 × 10−19
5
83
√
AlN [4, 11]
2.0
1.5
2 × 10−19
6
319
√
Diamond [12]
2.4
8.2 × 10−20
5.5
2200
√
LiNbO3[13]
2.2
27
4
38
×
GaAs [14]
3.4
1.5
1.4
52
×
AlGaAs [15]
3.3
2.6 × 10−17
1.4-2
57-91
×
SiC [16]
2.6
20
8 × 10−19
2.4-3.3
360-490
√
Diamond platforms usually require sophisticated fabrication process, and lack second-
order nonlinearity. Nevertheless, it has superior mechanical and thermal properties, also
with large bandgap. Optically active defects, so called color centers, make it competitive
in quantum regime [17].
Lithium niobate (LiNbO3) exhibits the highest second-order nonlinearity among the
introduced materials. Meanwhile, thanks to the large bandgap, it can be applied to
a number of up- or down-conversion applications, from visible to mid-infrared range.
Rare-earth element doped lasers have been realized in lithium niobate waveguides, mak-
ing it possible as an all-optical integrated platform [18]. However, it has low thermal
conductivity and lacks third-order nonlinearity.
==PAGE:8==
3
III-V compound platforms provide eﬃcient on-chip laser sources, which is not avail-
able for the CMOS compatible nanofabrication.
Besides active components, gallium
arsenide (GaAs) owns second-order nonlinearity, which can be applied for fast optical
switches. [19]. Aluminium gallium arsenide (AlGaAs) on insulator platform has been
demonstrated recently, with the highest third-order nonlinearity among the introduced
platforms, enabling high conversion eﬃciency frequency comb [15, 20].
Properties of diﬀerent platform materials are listed in Tab. 1.1.
1.2
Silicon Carbide Waveguide
1.2.1
Silicon Carbide Material Property
Silicon carbide (SiC) is a IV-IV compound semiconductor, existing in more than two
hundred polytypes. 3C-, 4H-, and 6H-SiC are the three most common polytypes, of
which the properties, including crystal structure, bandgap, and thermal conductivity,
are shown in Tab. 1.2.
3C-SiC is available for microelectromechanical systems, because it can grow on conven-
tional silicon substrates directly [21]. Sensors, such as pressure sensors and accelerom-
eters, have been demonstrated using 3C-SiC [22, 23]. 4H- and 6H-SiC are widely used
for photonic and electronic device, such as light-emitting diodes, static induction tran-
sistors, ultraviolet photodiodes, and metal-oxide-semiconductor ﬁeld-eﬀect transistors
(MOSFET) [24–27].
Table 1.2: Properties of diﬀerent SiC polytypes [28].
Polytype
3C-SiC
4H-SiC
6H-SiC
Crystal structure
Cubic
Hexagonal
Hexagonal
Bandgap (eV)
2.36
3.23
3.05
Thermal conductivity (W/(mK))
360
370
490
Excellent material properties of SiC make it a promising candidate in electronics and
photonics technology. The original idea of studying SiC was to replace the traditional
material, that is silicon [29]. The performance of silicon based electronic components
becomes diﬃcult to further develop and improve, due to the limitation induced by
the material properties. Large bandgap and high electrical breakdown voltage of SiC
allow high operation temperature, and enable electronic device with high power, high
frequency, and high current density. Additionally, The thermal conductivity of SiC is
==PAGE:9==
4
more than three times larger than that of silicon, GaAs, or GaN, making possible fast
heat dissipation and high temperature stability. Therefore, the MOSFET made of SiC
exhibits better performance than those conventional materials.
For example, silicon
device has to be operated under 200◦C, but SiC device has been demonstrated to work
at 500◦C for a long lifetime [30]. Meanwhile, SiC has high chemical inertness, which
means that it prevents from corrosion, and its biocompatibility has already been tested
in vitro [31].
1.2.2
Silicon Carbide Waveguide Platform
The advantageous material properties of SiC also provide a signiﬁcant potential for the
SiC waveguide platform. Perfect optical properties of SiC, such as both high second- and
third-order nonlinearities, beneﬁt eﬃcient nonlinear applications, from visible to mid-
infrared range. Silicon carbide waveguide platforms have been developed since 2013.
Two types of platforms are reported. One is SiC on silicon platform, and the other is
SiC on insulator (SiCOI) platform.
For the SiC on silicon platform, the easiest way to fabricate is to deposit amorphous
SiC directly on silicon substrate. A variety of chemical vapor deposition methods are
able to form high-quality amorphous SiC [29]. X. Lu et al. have observed Kerr eﬀect
in the amorphous SiC on silicon platform [32]. They fabricated a microdisk with an
intrinsic quality factor of 1.3 × 105, shown in Fig. 1.1(a), and characterized the non-
linearity through cross-phase modulation. The Kerr refractive index was measured to
be n2 = 5.9 × 10−19 m2/W.
Besides, growing single crystalline SiC on silicon sub-
strate by heteroepitaxy is the second way to make SiC on silicon platform. The surface
roughness can reach 0.5 −1 nm. However, only 3C-SiC is currently available to grow
through this method. Microdisks, fabricated in the 3C-SiC on silicon platform, could
achieve high optical quality factor of 3.9 × 104 and 5.12 × 104 for the microdisk radius
of 2.5 µm and 6.25 µm, respectively [33, 34]. J. Cardenas et al. also demonstrated a
microring resonator in this platform [35], shown in Fig. 1.1(b). The quality factor of
1.41 × 104 has been achieved for the microring with a radius of 20 µm. Recently, a
four-wave mixing experiment has been conducted in 3C-SiC microring resonator with
an intrinsic quality factor of 7.4 × 103 [36]. A conversion eﬃciency of −72 dB has been
achieved under the pump power of 2.9 mW. The Kerr refractive index was derived to
be n2 = 5.3 × 10−19 m2/W. SiC on silicon platform usually suﬀers from a big challenge,
which is the huge loss of 37 dB/cm [36]. It is because the poor lattice mismatch of
SiC and silicon leads to stacking defects, which are formed at the interface between SiC
and silicon. Additionally, waveguides in this platform require sophisticated fabrication
process, which is not CMOS compatible.
==PAGE:10==
5
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.1: Micrographs of the fabricated device, including (a) microdisk resonator
[34] and (b) microring resonator [35], in the SiC on silicon platform.
For the SiCOI platform, it enables CMOS compatible waveguide fabrication, and can
eﬀectively solve the problem of huge loss. The fabrication process of the platform is
introduced in the next section. J. Cardenas et al. measured the third-order nonlinearity
in the 4H-SiCOI platform [16]. He fabricated straight waveguides with a dimension of
600 nm×2700 nm. The linear propagation loss is as low as 7 dB/cm. The Kerr refractive
index was measured to be n2 = 8 × 10−19 m2/W, at the wavelength of 2360 nm, by self-
phase modulation. Then, he conducted a four-wave mixing experiment in a 4.5 mm
long waveguide, with a linear propagation loss of 12.5 dB/cm, and achieved a conversion
eﬃciency as high as −19.5 dB over a range of 180 nm, centered at 1559 nm, under the
pump power of 0.84 W [37].
As can be seen, these results are mainly based on the simple waveguide structure charac-
terization. Only several basic nonlinear experiments, like self-phase modulation, cross-
phase modulation, and four-wave mixing, were reported. It is because, although the
propagation loss is reduced to 7 dB/cm in SiCOI platform, it is still much larger than
SOI, Si3N4, or AlN waveguides, which can reach less than 1 dB/cm [4, 38, 39]. Therefore,
it is necessary to further reduce the loss of the waveguides by improving the fabrication
process.
As long as the loss can be suppressed to down to 1 dB/cm, more nonlin-
ear communication experiments or quantum applications can be applied to the SiCOI
platform.
1.2.3
Silicon Carbide on Insulator Fabrication
Silicon carbide on insulator (SiCOI) is usually fabricated with 4H-SiC and 6H-SiC.
Smart-Cut process, including hydrogen implantation and wafer bonding, is applied,
because of its high feasibility and practicability, with low cost eﬃciency, which is similar
==PAGE:11==
6
to the SOI fabrication. The fabrication can be divided into three main steps, hydrogen
implantation, wafer bonding, and wafer splitting.
Figure 1.2: Schematic of the SiCOI wafer fabrication process ﬂow
At ﬁrst, as shown in Fig. 1.2 (a), deposit silicon oxide on the SiC wafer, using plasma-
enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), and thermally oxidize the silicon wafer.
The silicon oxide becomes the buried oxide layer in SiCOI structure. Then, implant
hydrogen ions into the SiC wafer to produce microcavity defects at the required thickness
for the thin SiC layer on the insulator. Next, hydrophilically bond the silicon oxide
surfaces of the two wafers together at the room temperature, as shown in Fig. 1.2 (b).
The silicon oxide surface deposited by PECVD is usually much rougher than that by
thermal oxidation, so it requires to be polished before bonding.
Finally, anneal the
wafer to exfoliate the SiC wafer into a SiC layer adhering to the insulator and a thick
SiC substrate, as shown in Fig.
1.2 (c).
The temperature ramp should keep slow,
because excessive stress may be generated to split the interface of the two silicon oxide
layers. Additionally, it is recommended to post anneal the SiCOI wafer to strengthen
the chemical bonds at above 1100 ◦C.
After splitting, a surface treatment of SiCOI wafer is necessary. Otherwise, the thin
damaged layer formed during hydrogen ion implantation and the rough surface generated
by the splitting can induce a huge loss for the optical components. In Chapter 2, one of
the simplest methods, dry oxidation, is applied to strip the damaged layer and improve
the surface roughness.
1.3
Overview of the Work
This project is to work on the low-loss SiC waveguides in SiCOI platform. The propa-
gation loss is decreased by dry oxidation to improve the surface roughness, which can
weaken the light scattering. The coupling loss is optimized by designing fully etched
photonic crystal apodized grating couplers.
==PAGE:12==
7
In Chapter 2, dry oxidation is applied to tailor the SiC thickness and reduce the surface
roughness. The mechanism and the properties of dry oxidation are explored.
In Chapter 3, an optimized fully etched photonic crystal apodized grating coupler in
SiCOI platform is designed. The simulation is introduced step by step, and the properties
are analyzed.
In Chapter 4, the fabrication process of the grating couplers in SiCOI platform is tested
and evaluated. The device is fabricated and characterized.
In Chapter 5, the results, presented in this work, are summarized, and the future im-
provement is proposed.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Silicon Carbide Oxidation
In this chapter, the dry oxidation is explored to engineer the silicon carbide thickness,
remove the defect layer, and improve the surface condition. The SiC oxidation theory
is introduced. And the SiC oxidation mechanism and properties are characterized and
analyzed.
2.1
Introduction
Oxidation is one of the most important fabrication processes in the semiconductor tech-
nology. A basic usage is to generate an oxide layer to protect the device from corrosion
or being scratched. For the application in MOSFET, gate oxide is used as an insu-
lator layer to keep the gate terminal apart from the drain source, the drain terminal,
and the channel. The quality and the thickness of the oxide layer are quite crucial for
MOSFET [40]. Oxidation is also used to form an adaption layer in LOCOS process,
standing for Local Oxidation of Silicon, in order to separate the transistors from cross
talk [41]. Moreover, when doing ion implantation, amorphous materials, such as silicon
oxide produced by thermal oxidation, are commonly employed as an ion scattering layer
to weaken the channel eﬀect [42]. In the diﬀusion process, oxidation can be used to
make a diﬀusion mask [43]. Besides, it can also be used to make alignment marks for
the lithography process.
In this work, three processes need to be done for the as-received SiCOI wafer before
fabricating the optical components, including removing the defect layer in SiC, engi-
neering the thickness of SiC, and improving the surface roughness of the SiC. Surface
condition is a key for low-loss waveguides. The as-received SiCOI sample, fabricated by
Smart-Cut process, has defects, existing within a depth of about 200 nm from the top.
8
==PAGE:14==
9
The defects are caused by the hydrogen ion implantation. Meanwhile, the as-received
sample has a large surface roughness, which induces strong light scattering and huge
propagation loss in the waveguides. Thus, it is required to remove the defect layer, and
decrease the surface roughness.
Several surface treatments on SiC have been reported. High-temperature etching of the
SiC surface with hydrogen or hydrogen chloride is able to remove the large defects and
scratches eﬀectively [44, 45]. Etching by the gas combination of boron trichloride, chlo-
rine, and argon is also valid to improve the SiC surface [46]. And the root-mean-square
surface roughness of 2.39 nm has been achieved. Chemical mechanical polishing (CMP)
performs the best in smoothening the SiC surface among these methods. SiC is a mate-
rial with high hardness. The Mohs hardness of SiC is 9.3, while the diamond is 10. As
a result, it is diﬃcult to mechanically lap or polish SiC. The SiC is usually oxidized to
soft silicon oxide by chemicals, and then is polished. Strong oxidants, such as potassium
permanganate and hydrogen peroxide, can be used for eﬃcient SiC oxidation. Potas-
sium permanganate, with the abrasive of colloidal silicon oxide or manganese dioxide,
can smoothen the SiC surface down to a low arithmetic average roughness of 0.5 nm,
approximately [47, 48]. The arithmetic average roughness can be decreased down to
around 0.1 nm, using the slurry of hydrogen peroxide mixed by hydrogen chloride acid,
with the polishing pad impregnated by iron and aluminum oxide particles [49]. The
lowest arithmetic average surface roughness that has been reported is 0.05 nm, with
the mixed slurry of hydrogen peroxide, potassium hydroxide, and colloidal silicon ox-
ide [50–53]. Additionally, thermal oxidation, anodic oxidation, and water vapor plasma
oxidation are also commonly used for the chemical process in CMP [54–56]. Thermal
oxidation along with cerium oxide polishing is able to achieve a low root-mean-square
roughness of 0.1 nm [54]. Actually, the thermal oxidation enables direct improvement
of surface roughness. The oxidation of silicon waveguides, as well as AlGaAs waveg-
uides, has been reported for roughness reduction [57, 58]. The propagation loss of the
waveguides is signiﬁcantly decreased, due to the roughness improvement. The lowest
roughness of silicon could reach 2 nm, by wet oxidation at 1000◦C [57].
Considering the available equipment and condition, dry oxidation is explored for remov-
ing the defect layer, controlling the SiC thickness, and improving the surface roughness
in this work.
==PAGE:15==
10
2.2
Oxidation Theory
2.2.1
Deal-Grove Model
Deal-Grove model was originally proposed for silicon thermal oxidation [59]. It considers
the diﬀusion and the reaction at two interfaces, between the gas and the oxide and
between the oxide and the material to be oxidized, respectively. It is not only available
for silicon, but the model itself or its extension has also been applied for the oxidation
of other materials, for example, Si3N4, AlAs, as well as SiC [60–63].
The schematic of the Deal-Grove oxidation model is shown in Fig. 2.1. The model is
operated under the assumption that the oxidation reaction is induced by the inward
diﬀusion of the gas oxidant, instead of the outward movement of the material to be
oxidized. There are three regions, including gas oxidant, covered oxide, and the material
to be oxidized. The oxidant ﬁrstly moves to the interface between the gas and the oxide,
then diﬀuses into the covered oxide, ﬁnally reacts with the material at the interface
between the oxide and the material, and new oxide is generated.
According to the
steady state condition, the ﬂux, deﬁned as the number of the molecules crossing a unit
surface area in a unit time, is always equivalent in the oxidant transmission process.
Figure 2.1: Schematic of the Deal-Grove oxidation model.
The ﬂux of the oxidant from the gas region to the interface between the gas and the
oxide is given by
F1 = h(C∗−C0),
(2.1)
==PAGE:16==
11
where h is the gas-phase transport coeﬃcient, C∗is the oxidant equilibrium concentra-
tion in the gas, dependent on the partial pressure, and C0 is the oxidant concentration
at the interface, which is regarded as a time-invariant parameter.
The ﬂux of the oxidant, transmitting through the covered oxide, is a function of depth,
given by
F2 = −Deff
dC
dx = Deff
C0 −Ci
x0
,
(2.2)
where Deff is the eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient, and dC
dx represents the oxidant concen-
tration gradient of the diﬀusion depth in the covered oxide. In terms of the steady state
condition, F2 should be a constant in the oxide, so one gets dF
dx = 0. As a result, the gra-
dient dC
dx can be then given by a linear expression, where Ci is the oxidant concentration
at the interface between the covered oxide and the material to be oxidized.
The ﬂux of the oxidant, consumed at the interface between the oxide and the material,
is given by
F3 = kCi,
(2.3)
where k is the constant reaction coeﬃcient, which is invariant with the oxide thickness.
Because of the steady state condition, F1 = F2 and F2 = F3 can be found. Thus, by
solving the equations, one gets
Ci = C∗
1
1 + k
h +
kx0
Deff
,
(2.4)
C0 = C∗
1 +
kx0
Deff
1 + k
h +
kx0
Deff
.
(2.5)
Then, the ﬂux is described as
F = F1 = F2 = F3 =
kC∗
1 + k
h +
kx0
Deff
.
(2.6)
The oxide growth rate can be expressed as
dx0
dt = F
N =
kC∗
N
1 + k
h +
kx0
Deff
,
(2.7)
==PAGE:17==
12
where x0 is the thickness of the oxide layer, and N is the number of the oxidant molecules
in a unit volume of the covered oxide. The oxide thickness, x0, also takes the native
oxide thickness, xn, into account. Therefore, one solution of the diﬀerential equation is
obtained that x0 = xn for t = 0. Substitute Eq. 2.7 into the integration of Eq. 2.6, one
gets
x2
0 + Ax0 = Bt + x2
n + Axn.
(2.8)
It is usually simpliﬁed into another expression, x2
0+Ax0 = B(t+τ), where A = 2Deff( 1
k+
1
h), B = 2DeffC∗
N
, and τ = x2
n+Axn
B
. The parameter, τ, can be regarded as a constant,
which is a modiﬁcation of the oxidation time due to the native oxide thickness. Finally,
the oxide thickness is derived as a function of time,
x0 = A
2 [(1 + t + τ
A2
4B
)
1
2 −1].
(2.9)
Considering a long oxidation time case, that t >>
A2
4B and t >> τ, one can get an
approximation,
x0 ≈
√
Bt.
(2.10)
As can be seen, the thickness tends to increase parabolically for large t. The physical
meaning of B is regarded as the diﬀusion rate. Therefore, the oxidation is diﬀusion
limited.
On the other hand, considering a short oxidation time case, that t << A2
4B, one can get
another approximation,
x0 ≈B
A(t + τ).
(2.11)
The trend follows a linear growth for small t. The physical meaning of B
A =
kh
k+h
C∗
N
is regarded as the oxidation reaction rate at the interface. Therefore, the oxidation is
reaction rate limited.
The Deal-Grove oxidation model has been veriﬁed experimentally for both dry oxidation
and wet oxidation. However, the predicted oxidation rate, for the oxide thickness less
than 50 nm by dry oxidation, does not work very well [64]. Thus, it is modiﬁed by adding
an exponential term, Ce−x0
L , into Eq. 2.7, where C is a constant, dependent on the
temperature, and L is the characteristic length [65]. This empirical modiﬁcation makes
a reasonable ﬁt for the experiment results, but cannot get a theoretical explanation.
==PAGE:18==
13
2.2.2
Interfacial Silicon and Carbon Emission Model
The interfacial silicon and carbon emission model of SiC oxidation was proposed by Y.
Hijikata, based on the interfacial silicon emission model of the silicon oxidation [66, 67].
The postulated condition of the Deal-Grove model is that the oxidant diﬀuses into the
oxide layer, reacts at the material interface, and produces new oxide at the material
interface. While the interfacial atom emission model assumes that the atoms of the
material to be oxidized can diﬀuse into the oxide layer, react at the oxidant interface or
in the oxide layer, and produce new oxide there.
To be more speciﬁc for the SiC oxidation, there are two postulated conditions. Firstly,
the reaction rate depends on where the oxidation takes place. In the oxidation, plenty
of silicon and carbon atoms from SiC are emitted into the oxide layer. At the start
of the oxidation, these atoms can easily reach the oxidant interface and be oxidized,
because the oxide layer is very thin. As the thickness of the oxide layer grows, only a
few atoms can reach the interface, and most of them are oxidized in the oxide layer.
The reaction rate of the former case is faster than that of the latter case, because the
accumulated stress is weaker at the oxidant interface than inside the oxide. Secondly,
the reaction rate also depends on the silicon and carbon emission rate. The silicon and
carbon emission rate is governed by the corresponding concentration at or close to the
SiC interface. These atoms at the SiC interface tend to eliminate the emission of new
atoms. A thick oxide layer makes a number of silicon and carbon atoms accumulate
close to the SiC interface, which leads to a slow reaction rate.
Figure 2.2: Schematic of the interfacial silicon and carbon emission model.
Figure 2.2 shows the schematic of the interfacial silicon and carbon emission model.
The concentration of silicon atoms drops rapidly, from the SiC interface to the oxidant
==PAGE:19==
14
interface. The concentration of carbon atoms is assumed as a constant in the oxide
layer. And the concentration of the oxygen atoms decreases gradually, from the oxidant
interface to the SiC interface. The chemical reaction equation of the model is expressed
as
SiC+(2−vSi−vC−α
2 )O2 −→(1−vSi)SiO2+vSiSi+vCC+αCO+(1−vC−α)CO2, (2.12)
where v denotes the atom emitting rate, and α denotes the production rate of CO.
According to the equation, a part of SiC is decomposed to silicon and carbon atoms,
and the remained is formed to the oxide. The oxidation product of silicon is silicon
dioxide, and the oxidation products of carbon are carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide.
As a result, Eq. 2.3 is modiﬁed by changing the constant reaction coeﬃcient at the oxi-
dant interface into a concentration of silicon and carbon interstitials dependent variable.
It has been demonstrated that the model ﬁts well with the experiment of dry oxidation
of SiC C-face at 1090◦. Compared the non-emission model, the ﬁtting curve performs
better for the oxide thickness less than 100 nm.
2.3
Silicon Carbide Oxidation Characterization
This section gives the measurement results and the analysis of SiC dry oxidation, in-
cluding hardness, chemical analysis, oxidation thickness, oxidation rate, and surface
roughness. Dry oxidation was operated, using Anneal Bond Furnace (C3) in Danchip.
The oxidation pressure is the same as the air pressure. Before the temperature is stabi-
lized, the furnace is ﬁlled up with nitrogen to prevent pre-oxidation of the sample.
2.3.1
Hardness
Hardness is one of the mechanical properties of a material. It is related to the microstruc-
ture or the atomic structure and the arrangement of atoms in the material. There are
several methods to test the hardness, such as Vicker hardness (HV) test, Knoop hardness
test, and Brinell hardness test. Therein, HV hardness test is common to use, because
its simple hardness calculation is only based on the size of the diamond indenter and the
applied force [68]. Any solid material with a hardness less than the indenter is able to
be tested. The shape of indenter is square-based pyramid, of which the angle between
==PAGE:20==
15
the side faces and the horizontal plane is 22◦. The HV hardness is expressed as
HV = 2 × F × sin(90◦−22◦)
(d1+d2
2
)2
≈7.417 × F
(d1 + d2)2 ,
(2.13)
where F is the applied force with a unit of kgf, and d1 and d2 are the two diagonals of
the indentation on the sample surface with a unit of mm. The value of HV hardness is
from 0 to 10000. The diamond, as the hardest material that can be tested, has a HV
hardness of 10000. It is known that 1kgf = 9.807N. To convert the unit to GPa, the
result, calculated from Eq. 2.13, should be multiplied by a constant of 9.807 × 10−3.
Figure 2.3: Indentation on the SiC surface, with applied force of 1 kgf.
Figure 2.3 shows the indentation on the SiC surface, with an applied force of 1 kgf. Five
measurements were taken for each sample. The HV hardness of as-received SiC and
oxidized SiC is calculated as HVSiC = 3373 ± 249 and HVSiC = 950 ± 44, respectively.
Thus, the hardness (H) of as-received SiC and oxidized SiC is HasSiC = 33±2 GPa and
HoxSiC = 9.3 ± 0.4 GPa, respectively, shown in Fig. 2.4. As can be seen, the hardness
is signiﬁcantly reduced by the oxidation.
2.3.2
Chemical Analysis
During the dry oxidation of SiC, it has been reported that two new oxide layers are
generated, consisting of the top organic layer and the silicon oxide layer in the mid-
dle of the organic layer and the initial SiC layer [54]. Therefore, chemical analysis is
required to inspect the detailed structure and to demonstrate the composition of the el-
ements, which helps to better understand the oxidation mechanism and properties, and
to develop further fabrication process. As diﬀerent elements or chemicals have diﬀerent
atomic structures, their spectral emission peaks are unique, allowing element analy-
sis and chemical characterization, which is the basic principle of spectroscopy. In the
==PAGE:21==
16
Figure 2.4: Hardness of as-received SiC and oxidized SiC
project, two methods are applied to determine the present elements, including energy-
dispersive x-ray spectroscopy and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy.
2.3.2.1
Energy-dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy
Energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) is an elemental-analysis technique, operated
cooperating with the scanning electron microscope (SEM). A high-energy electron beam
is produced by SEM, and bombards to the sample surface. Electrons can be dislodged
from the atoms on the sample surface, where is exposed, and holes are generated, due
to the electron vacancy. As a result, electrons from a higher energy state of the atoms
ﬁll up with the holes, and emit an x-ray at the same time, in order to fulﬁll the energy
conservation.
Finally, the x-rays are detected by the x-ray detector.
The energy of
x-rays emitted by diﬀerent elements is unique, so the detector measures them in terms
of the energy, plotting the spectrum with the counts versus energy. Therefore, not only
can the elementary composition of the sample be identiﬁed, but the detailed proportion
of the involved elements can also be determined by the integration of each peak.
The SiCOI sample after 2 hour dry oxidation is measured by EDX. Figure 2.5, shows
the cross section of the sample. Three points, in buried oxide layer, SiC layer, and new
oxide layer, are set for EDX detection. It can be seen that the oxide layer is not as clear
as other layers, which is because the EDX optimized working distance of 8.5 mm is too
long for good-quality imaging by SEM.
Figure 2.6 shows the elementary composition of the buried oxide layer, the SiC layer,
and the new oxide layer. As can be seen, the buried oxide layer contains silicon, oxygen,
and carbon. The SiC layer mainly contains silicon, carbon, with a little oxygen. The
new oxide layer mainly contains silicon and oxygen. It is noticed that the signals of the
==PAGE:22==
17
Figure 2.5: SEM image of the cross section of the SiCOI structure, after 2 hour dry
oxidation. The top, middle, and bottom points are the EDX detection points, located
at box layer, SiC layer, and new oxide layer, respectively.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.6: EDX measurement of (a) buried oxide layer, (b) SiC layer, and (c) new
oxide layer.
involved elements are too weak, especially compared to the low-energy noise photons. It
is because the voltage of the electron gun is set at 5 kV for imaging of small structures,
which is so low that the amount of the generated x-ray photons is not enough for
detection.
==PAGE:23==
18
Moreover, every spectrum shows the aluminum existence, which comes from the alu-
minum sample holder. Figure 2.7(a) shows the elementary distribution and the struc-
ture proﬁle of the sample holder, in the upper part and the lower part, respectively.
Figure 2.7(b) shows a large amount of aluminum, contained in the sample holder. As
the sample holder has a large size and is conductive, the voltage of the electron gun can
be set as high as 10 kV, enabling a strong signal.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.7: EDX measurement of the sample holder. (a) Elementary distribution and
structure proﬁle. (b) Elementary composition.
Figure 2.8 and 2.9 show the elementary distribution of the oxidized sample cross section.
Red, green, and blue spots represent silicon, carbon, and oxygen, respectively, and a clear
oxide layer can be identiﬁed.
Figure 2.8: Elementary distribution of the cross section of SiCOI structure, after
2 hour dry oxidation.
Red, green, and blue represent silicon, carbon, and oxygen,
respectively.
EDX is able to do the element analysis on the cross section, and to directly identify the
elements, contained in each layer. However, there are two limitations in the measure-
ment. Firstly, EDX is operated with SEM together, but the optimized settings are not
compatible. When using the SEM in Danchip to inspect nanostructures, the optimized
working distance is usually less than 3 mm. While, when using the EDX in Danchip, its
==PAGE:24==
19
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.9: Elementary distribution of (a) silicon, (b) carbon, and (c) oxygen, sepa-
rately.
optimized working distance is 8.5 mm, resulting in low resolution of the image. Secondly,
there is a trade oﬀbetween the signal intensity and the detection accuracy. High-energy
electrons enable strong signal intensity, since the number of x-ray photons, emitted from
the sample surface, increases. On the contrary, the spreading of the electrons and the
probing depth into the sample scale with the electron energy, which means that electrons
with high energy penetrate wide and deep under the sample surface at micrometer scale.
Therefore, the boundary of two layers may not be detected accurately, and thin-layer
detection is disabled.
2.3.2.2
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is a surface elementary composition and chem-
istry analysis technique.
When the sample is illuminated by x-rays, the atoms or
molecules on the surface absorb the x-ray photons, meanwhile, the electrons are ejected
with a kinetic energy (Ek). An electron energy detector is used to measure Ek of the
ejected electrons, and to count the electron number. The electron binding energy (Eb)
is unique for diﬀerent elements or chemicals, because it depends on the element where
the electron comes, the shell where the electron locates initially, and the compounds
where the electron is involved.
In the measurement, Eb can be calculated with the
applied x-ray photon energy (Ep) and Ek, following the energy conservation equation,
Eb = Ep −Ek. The analyzing spectrum is given by the counts per unit time versus
Eb. From the peaks and the corresponding Eb, one can determine the elements and
the chemical information of the sample. The penetration depth is usually from 1 nm to
5 nm from the surface [69]. Thus, it is more suitable for thin-ﬁlm analysis, compared
to EDX. An important function of XPS is to combine the ion etching and the surface
measurement.
The surface is etched by sputtering, then, the ion gun stops and the
spectrum of the new surface is measured. After several cycles, the depth proﬁle of the
==PAGE:25==
20
sample can be acquired, which beneﬁts multi-layer analysis. However, it is diﬃcult to
directly get the thickness variation during etching, as there is no end-point detection.
The binding energy of the element states, which will be involved in the measurement, is
given in Tab. 2.1, so that the element existence can be determined. The binding energy
of diﬀerent compound types, which may present in the sample, is given in Tab. 2.2,
so that the chemical state can be obtained after the analysis. The as-received SiCOI
sample, as well as the sample after every process, is measured from the top surface by
XPS.
Table 2.1: Binding energy of the involved elements.
Element state
C 1s
O 1s
Si 2s
Si 2p
Cu 3p
Binding energy (eV)
284
533
154
103
76
Table 2.2: Binding energy of the involved compound types, based on C 1s and Si 2p.
Compound type
C-C
C-O-C
O-C=O
SiCO
SiO2
SiC
Binding energy (eV)
284-285
286-287
289-292
101-103
103-104
99-101
Figure 2.10(a) shows the overall scanning spectrum of the as-received the SiCOI sample,
which contains a large peak of oxygen, and small peaks of carbon and silicon. In order
to identify the silicon compounds, a high-resolution scanning of silicon 2p spectrum is
done, shown in Fig. 2.10(b). Two peaks exist in this spectral range. The higher one,
corresponding to silicon-oxygen bonds, indicates that silicon oxide is dominant in the top
surface. While, the lower one, corresponding to silicon-carbon bonds, indicates there are
also a few silicon-carbon bonds. For the SiCOI structure, SiC should be the top layer,
but as it is exposed to the air for a long time, a thin native oxide layer is formed, with
a thickness of 1 nm approximately [70]. The existence of a small portion of SiC may
come from the SiC diﬀusion to the native oxide layer, or the deep penetration of x-ray
photons into the SiC layer.
Figure 2.11(a) shows the overall scanning spectrum of the sample, after 3 hour dry oxi-
dation at 1100◦C, which contains two distinct peaks of oxygen and carbon. Additionally,
a small peak of copper also appears, which is considered to be induced by the copper
sample holder. Figure 2.11(b) shows the highly resolved scanning spectrum of carbon
1s, so that the top organic layer can be identiﬁed. Three Gaussian curves are employed
to ﬁt the measured spectral proﬁle. From Tab. 2.2, the three peaks represent C-C, O-
C=O, and C-O-C, which indicates the existence of ether and ester organic compounds.
Apart from carbon-carbon bonds, the amount of the ether is almost equivalent to ester.
It has been predicted that the organic layer is composed of epoxy [55]. However, epoxy,
==PAGE:26==
21
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.10: XPS measurement of the as-received SiCOI sample, scanning in (a)
whole spectrum and (b) Si 2p spectrum.
a special C-O-C ring belonging to the ether category, can not be determined directly
through this analysis.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.11: XPS measurement of the top surface of the oxidized SiCOI structure,
scanning in (a) whole spectrum and (b) C 1s spectrum.
To investigate the layer beneath the organic layer, the organic layer should be stripped.
Several wet chemical methods were tried to remove it, including hydroﬂuoric acid, con-
centrated hydrogen chloride acid, and diluted hydrogen chloride acid, but they did not
work at all. Finally, oxygen plasma ashing was used and demonstrated to be valid to
remove the top organic layer. The parameters are: pressure 1.25 mbar, gas ﬂow rate
400 ml/min for O2 and 70 ml/min for N2, and power 1000 W. Figure 2.12(a) shows the
overall scanning spectrum of the sample, after oxygen plasma ashing for 45 minutes. It
==PAGE:27==
22
shows that the interface between the organic layer and the silicon oxide layer contains
all the involved elements, including carbon, oxygen, and silicon. Speciﬁcally, it is formed
by both SiCO and silicon oxide, analyzed through 2.12(b). After sputtering by the XPS
etching mode, the interface is removed and the silicon oxide layer comes out. Figure 2.13
show the overall and the silicon 2p scanning spectra of the silicon oxide layer, after sput-
tering the interface. In this oxide layer, silicon oxide is the dominant compounds, but
there is still a little carbon existing, which demonstrates the carbon emission from SiC
to the oxide layer. However, it is diﬃcult to observe the silicon emission phenomenon,
as the binding energy of silicon atoms and silicon oxide is so close to each other.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.12: XPS measurement of the interface between the organic layer and the
silicon oxide layer, scanning in (a) whole spectrum and (b) O 1s spectrum.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.13: XPS measurement of the generated silicon oxide layer of the oxidized
SiCOI structure, scanning in (a) whole spectrum and (b) Si 2p spectrum.
==PAGE:28==
23
The silicon oxide layer is then removed by dipping in HF solution. Figure 2.14 show
the overall and the silicon 2p scanning spectra of the interface between the silicon oxide
and the SiC layer, which is composed of carbon, oxygen, and silicon. The interface is
composed of mainly SiCO and a little silicon oxide. Additionally, when using CMP to
polish SiC through the dry oxidation, the slurry aims to polish this interface.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.14: XPS measurement of the oxidized SiCOI structure, after HF etching,
scanning in (a) whole spectrum and (b) Si 2p spectrum.
It is noticed there is a high background noise level under the peaks, especially for the
peaks with high Eb, in the spectrum. The reason is that as the electrons are ejected
from the sample, they suﬀer from inelastic scattering, which means that the energy of
the electrons is not conserved. The kinetic energy of the electron decreases, inducing
large background noise and low peak intensity.
From the above chemical analysis, the elementary composition of every oxidized layer
and interface is well studied. The composition of each layer after SiC dry oxidation is
shown in Fig. 2.15. This work makes the oxidation mechanism of SiC much more clear.
Meanwhile, it demonstrates the carbon-emission SiC oxidation model. It also provides
a lapping method of SiC through dry oxidation, followed by oxygen plasma ashing and
HF etching.
2.3.3
Oxidation Thickness and Rate
To study the oxidation properties and further engineer the thickness of thin SiC layers,
some important data, related to the oxide thickness and rate, is required. In this part,
the SiCOI sample is oxidized in the furnace, then is cleaved, and the cross section is
inspected by SEM to get the thickness information. Ellipsometer is not suitable for
==PAGE:29==
24
Figure 2.15: The composition of each layer after SiC dry oxidation.
this thickness measurement, because the property of the organic layer on the top of the
oxide is unknown. Figure 2.16 shows the SEM image of the cross section of the sample,
oxidized by 3 hour dry oxidation at 1100◦C. The thickness of the oxide layer and the
SiC can be directly extracted from the image. It is noticed that the top organic layer
cannot be seen, the reason might be that the contrast between the organic layer and the
silicon oxide layer is very weak, and its thickness is too thin to inspect. Therefore, in
the measurement the top layer is regarded as the total oxide layer, including both the
organic layer and the silicon oxide layer.
Figure 2.16: SEM image of the cross section of SiCOI sample, dry oxidized at 1100◦C
for 3 hours.
Firstly, the oxide thickness as a function of time for SiC, dry oxidized at 1100◦C and
1000◦C, is measured, as shown in Fig. 2.17. As most of the thickness is more than 50 nm,
so the ﬁtting curves can be plotted based on the Deal-Grove model. Regardless of the
thickness of the native oxide, it can be seen that the model ﬁts well with the measured
data. Because of the resolution limit of SEM inspection and the charging eﬀect, induced
by the non-conductive SiCOI structure, it is diﬃcult to precisely measure the structure
==PAGE:30==
25
with a dimension less than 50 nm. Thus, the curve is dominantly ﬁtted by the large
oxide thickness values. The total oxide thickness increases with the increasing oxidation
duration. However, the slope decreases gradually, which is reckoned that the oxidation
reaction becomes slow, due to the diﬀusion limitation, since the thick oxide layer could
restrain the oxygen transmission and atom emission. The oxide growth rate is plotted
as a function of thickness in Fig.
2.18, for both 1100◦C and 1000◦C dry oxidation.
The trend, that the rate decreases with the increasing oxide thickness, demonstrates the
above conjecture. From Fig. 2.17 and Fig. 2.18, dry oxidation at 1100◦C is much faster
than that at 1000◦C, which indicates that it strongly depends on the temperature. It
is well known that the SiC oxidation is also dependent on the crystal orientation [64].
Compared the measurement results with the results reported in [64], it can be inferred
that the top surface of our SiC sample is C-face.
Figure 2.17: Simulated (solid lines) and experimental (symbols) oxide thickness as a
function of time for SiCOI, dry oxidized at 1100◦C (blue) and 1000◦C (red).
Figure 2.18: Oxide thickness dependent on oxide growth rate, by dry oxidation for
SiCOI at 1100◦C (blue) and 1000◦C (red).
Besides the oxide thickness, the oxidized SiC thickness, as one of the most important
variables, is also concerned, because it is required to be well controlled. Figure 2.19
==PAGE:31==
26
Figure 2.19: Oxidized SiC thickness as a function of time, by dry oxidation at 1100◦C
(blue) and 1000◦C (red).
depicts the oxidized SiC thickness as a function of time, dry oxidized at 1100◦C and
1000◦C. The curves are also well ﬁtted, based on the same formula form as the Deal-
Grove model, but with diﬀerent parameters. As it is expected, dry oxidation with higher
temperature consumes SiC faster.
Figure 2.20: SiC to oxide volume converting ratio, by dry oxidation at 1100◦C (blue)
and 1000◦C (red).
Using the oxide thickness and the oxidized SiC thickness, one can acquire the SiC to
oxide volume converting ratio. It is the ﬁrst time to get this value, and no paper has
reported it, because only oxidation on thin-ﬁlm SiC enables precise measurement of SiC
thickness, whereas bulk SiC does not. Figure 2.20 shows a series of ratio, calculated
from the previous samples.
It is seen there is a large ﬂuctuation for short-time dry
oxidation. It is concerned to be caused by two reasons. One is that the thin-ﬁlm thickness
measurement by SEM, less than 50 nm, is not accurate enough. The other is that the
top organic layer, with low density, is mainly produced at the beginning of the oxidation,
inducing faster oxide layer generation. The ratio for long-time dry oxidation keeps stable,
==PAGE:32==
27
at around 2.55. Compared to the silicon oxidation, with a volume converting ratio of
2.27, SiC oxidation generates a little thicker oxide, for the same thickness of the oxidized
material. To further investigate the details, for example, the thickness or the growth
rate of the organic layer, cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy (XTEM) can
be employed for accurate inspection and measurement.
In this measurement, through calibrating the SiC oxidation thickness as a function of
time, oxidation rate as a function of thickness, and the converting ratio calculation, with
two diﬀerent temperature, one can easily and ﬂexibly design the oxidation conditions
and parameters, when either speciﬁc oxide thickness on SiC or precise SiC reduction
thickness is required. Additionally, by acquiring the volume converting ratio through
the thin-ﬁlm SiC oxidation, one can calculate the SiC reduction directly from the oxide
thickness, for bulk SiC oxidation.
2.3.4
Surface Roughness Analysis
The light propagation loss in the waveguide is generally caused by the material absorp-
tion and the scattering loss, induced by the waveguide material itself and the surface
roughness, respectively. The latter one consists of sidewall roughness, which requires
the optimization of the etching process, and the top surface roughness, which can be
improved by oxidation and further CMP. To analyze the surface roughness, atomic force
microscopy (AFM) is applied to measure the three-dimensional proﬁle, which is so called
topography. It is a kind of scanning probe microscopy, with an ultra high resolution at
nanometer scale. The technique enables force measurement to depict force spectroscopy
and explore the mechanical properties of a sample. Meanwhile, it enables imaging, which
is also related to the microscopic force between the probe and the sample surface. In
our measurement, tapping mode is employed for surface reconstruction, belonging to
non-contact measurement, which can prevent the sample from the surface destruction.
The mechanism is that a cantilever is controlled to oscillate at the resonant frequency
with a constant amplitude. A sharp tip, used as the probe, is connected at the end
of the cantilever. When the cantilever goes much close to the sample surface within
10 nm, van der Waals force exists and applies a nonnegligible impact on the cantilever
oscillation, including the frequency, the amplitude, and the phase. In the system, a
feedback loop is used to compensate the oscillation variation and keep the consistent
motion characteristic, by adjusting the vertical distance between the cantilever and the
sample surface. Therefore, the surface texture can be reconstructed to a topographic
image, using the height information.
==PAGE:33==
28
Figure 2.21 depict the surface proﬁles of the as-received SiCOI samples, measured by
AFM, with scanning size of 200 nm × 200 nm, 500 nm × 500 nm, and 2 µm × 2 µm. As
can be seen from the color bar, small scanning size has small height range. Generally,
the measured roughness of small scanning size is always less than that of the large
scanning size. It is because, for large scanning size, the resolution decreases, and the
uniformity of the surface becomes an important factor for the roughness measurement.
Thus, the surface roughness, obtained from AFM, is dependent on the scanning size and
the scanning position, since the surface does not perform a uniform ﬂatness.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.21:
Surface proﬁles of the as-received sample, measured by AFM, with
scanning size of (a) 200 nm × 200 nm, (b) 500 nm × 500 nm, and (c) 2 µm × 2 µm.
To explore how dry oxidation aﬀects the surface condition, the root mean square (RMS)
of the surface roughness as a function of oxidation time for SiCOI samples, dry oxidized
at 1100◦C, is plotted in Fig. 2.22. Three diﬀerent scanning sizes, measured by AFM,
are recorded, including 200nm × 200 nm, 500 nm × 500 nm, and 2 µm × 2 µm. Each
data is obtained by taking the average of three measurements at diﬀerent positions of
the same sample. It is seen that the surface roughness decreases with the increasing
oxidation time, for the ﬁrst 6 hours.
Then, it slightly increases after 6 hours.
The
roughness improvement for the scanning size of 200 nm × 200 nm, 500 nm × 500 nm,
and 2 µm×2 µm is from 2.12 nm to 1.16 nm, from 3.59 nm to 1.98 nm, and from 4.01 nm
to 2.46 nm, respectively, at the optimized oxidation time of 6 hours. Additionally, the
error bar for the scanning size of 200 nm×200 nm, 500 nm×500 nm, and 2 µm×2 µm,
is about ±1 nm, ±0.5 nm, and ±0.2 nm, respectively. Due to the poor surface ﬂatness,
the measurement with small scanning size has a distinctly large error bar.
Meanwhile, the smoothness of the surface, embodied in the largest diﬀerence in height, is
also improved. Figure 2.23 shows the largest height diﬀerence as a function of oxidation
time for as-received SiCOI samples. The decreasing trend is much more apparent for
large scanning size of 500 nm × 500 nm and 2 µm × 2 µm. And they also have the same
optimized oxidation time of 6 hours.
==PAGE:34==
29
Figure 2.22: Surface roughness (RMS) as a function of oxidation time for as-received
SiCOI samples, dry oxidized at 1100◦C, measured by AFM, with scanning size of
200 nm × 200 nm (blue), 500 nm × 500 nm (green), and 2 µm × 2 µm (red).
Figure 2.23: Largest height diﬀerence as a function of oxidation time for as-received
SiCOI samples, dry oxidized at 1100◦C, measured by AFM, with scanning size of
200 nm × 200 nm (blue), 500 nm × 500 nm (green), and 2 µm × 2 µm (red).
Next, to explore whether the roughness can be improved by further oxidation, the SiCOI
samples, after being dry oxidized at 1100◦C for 6 hours, ashed by oxygen plasma, and
etched by HF, are used for the second time oxidation under the same condition. Fig-
ure 2.24 shows the surface roughness as a function of time for the second-time oxidized
SiCOI samples, dry oxidized at 1100◦C. It can be found that the roughness is contin-
uously reduced moderately, with the increasing oxidation time. The improvement for
the scanning size of 200 nm × 200 nm, 500 nm × 500 nm, and 2 µm × 2 µm is from
1.16 nm to 0.88 nm, from 1.98 nm to 1.55 nm, and from 2.46 nm to 1.87 nm, respec-
tively. It demonstrates that the second oxidation, after stripping the oxide layer in the
ﬁrst oxidation, is valid to further decrease the roughness.
The surface proﬁle of the second dry oxidation at 1100◦C for 6 hours, with scanning size
of 200 nm × 200 nm, 500 nm × 500 nm, and 2 µm × 2 µm, is shown in Fig. 2.25. The
==PAGE:35==
30
Figure 2.24: Surface roughness (RMS) as a function of oxidation time for the second
oxidation SiCOI samples, which have already been dry oxidized at 1100◦C for 6 hours,
ashed by oxygen plasma, and etched by HF, measured by AFM, with scanning size of
200 nm × 200 nm (blue), 500 nm × 500 nm (green), and 2 µm × 2 µm (red).
roughness is much improved, compared to the as-received samples, and it can be also
obviously seen through the height range of the color bar.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.25: Surface proﬁles of the sample dry oxidized at 1100◦C for 6 hours of 2
times, measured by AFM, with scanning size of (a) 200 nm × 200 nm, (b) 500 nm ×
500 nm, and (c) 2 µm × 2 µm.
Through the surface roughness analysis, it is demonstrated that dry oxidation is able
to improve the SiC surface condition, and the optimized duration of dry oxidation at
1100◦C is 6 hours. And, instead of oxidizing for a long duration, two-time oxidation
process works more eﬃciently. The lowest surface roughness, that is achieved for each
scanning size, is less than half of its origin value. However, it seems to be diﬃcult to
make the surface roughness of the samples as low as 0.5 nm by dry oxidation, since
the roughness only decrease a little bit for the second-time oxidation.
According to
the solution mentioned above, CMP is suggested to be employed to polish the interface
between the oxide and the SiC, after oxygen plasma ashing and HF etching to strip the
oxide layer of the oxidized SiC sample.
==PAGE:36==
31
In Chapter 2, the SiC oxidation theory is introduced, and the properties and analysis of
the dry oxidation are discussed from the experiment results. Firstly, the mechanism of
SiC dry oxidation is demonstrated and explored by the chemical analysis, that the oxide
layer is composed of a top organic layer and a silicon oxide layer. Secondly, the oxidation
thickness and rate are calibrated with diﬀerent duration and thickness, respectively,
which beneﬁts the defect layer removal and SiC thickness tailoring. Signiﬁcantly, the SiC
to oxide volume converting ratio is obtained, which is the ﬁrst time to report. Thirdly,
the roughness improvement, dependent on the oxidation duration, is investigated. It
demonstrates that dry oxidation can decrease the surface roughness. Especially, the
second-time oxidation works better than the single-time long-duration oxidation.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3
Grating Coupler Simulation
In this chapter, the light coupling between the ﬁber and the waveguide is ﬁrstly intro-
duced. The development and the state of art of the two main coupling schemes, including
edge coupling, also called butt coupling, and vertical grating coupling, are reviewed, and
the pros and cons are compared. Then, the fully etched photonic crystal apodized grat-
ing coupler in SiCOI platform is simulated, and the detailed steps are given. Finally,
the optimization and the properties are discussed.
3.1
Introduction
For the integrated platforms, as the refractive index contrast is usually very large, it
enables the dimension of the waveguides at submicrometer level. Such small cross section
beneﬁts compact optical component integration, but also remains a big challenge to
couple the light between the optical ﬁber system and the waveguide. The core area of
the standard optical ﬁber is about 108 µm2, which is two orders of magnitude larger
than that of the waveguide. The huge size mismatch, as well as eﬀective refractive index
mismatch, tends to generate the radiation modes and the reﬂection from the interface,
resulting in huge power loss, which could be more than 20 dB, if they are connected
directly. Actually, there are many processes and applications, that desire high power
in the waveguide, such as four-wave mixing, and low loss for the output coupling, such
as quantum key distribution. Therefore, it is signiﬁcant to explore eﬃcient coupling
methods to solve this problem.
Two schemes have been proposed to improve the coupling eﬃciency, including the edge
coupling and the vertical grating coupling. The former one is to couple the light from
the edges of the chip, while the latter one is to couple the light from the top surface of
the chip.
32
==PAGE:38==
33
3.2
Edge Coupling
Development of the edge coupling scheme in SOI platform has demonstrated low coupling
loss and broad bandwidth. Nanotaper is one of the choices for mode conversion, where
the waveguide is invertedly tapered to a tip with a dimension of nanometer scale, as
shown in Fig. 3.1(a). As the surrounding material has a much lower refractive index,
compared to the Si waveguide, the mode proﬁle is well conﬁned in the waveguide core,
but leaks gradually into the low refractive index region along the taper. The mode size
can expands to micrometer scale at the tip, enhancing the mode overlapping with the
ﬁber. Additionally, the reﬂection at the interface is eliminated, due to the low refractive
index contrast between the ﬁber core and the cladding.
T. Shoji et al. reported an adiabatic inverted taper, with 200 nm in length and 60 nm
wide of the tip [71]. The taper is located inside a polymer, which is 3 µm × 3 µm square
shaped, to enlarge the mode proﬁle. When coupling to the ﬁber, a high-index ﬁber with
a mode size of 4.3 µm is used to connect at ﬁrst, then a thermal-diﬀusion expanded
core ﬁber is applied to further enlarge the mode size to connect with the standard single
mode ﬁber. The total insertion loss they achieved is 3.5 dB. Nanotapers, as short as
40 µm, are proposed for compact mode conversion [72]. The strategy is to taper the
waveguide to the nanotip in a parabolic variation, rather than linear, so that the width
is quickly reduced with a low mode conversion loss. It achieves the insertion loss of
3.3 dB and 6.0 dB for TM and TE mode, respectively. For further improvement, G.
Roelkens et al. made a taper end with a 175 nm wide tip, which is embedded in polymer
and benzocyclobutene upcladding, then they used lensed ﬁbers to couple the light [73].
The lensed ﬁber can transform and focus the light in a small spot size to improve the
mode matching. They achieved the insertion loss of 1.9 dB for TE mode. To weaken
the sensitivity of the polarization, a narrow tip with a width less than 20 nm is desired.
By post thermal oxidation and polymer spin coating to embed the taper in cladding,
the insertion loss reaches 0.36 dB and 0.66 dB for TM and TE mode, respectively [74].
More recently, R. Takei et al. demonstrated a knife-edge inverted taper, that the height
and width gradually reduce towards the edge. The insertion loss is 0.21 dB and 0.35 dB
for TM and TE mode, respectively [75].
As the inverted nanotapers mentioned above can only be engineered horizontally, a
tapered graded index structure has been demonstrated for two dimensional engineering
[76]. The stepwise parabolic index proﬁle was applied to conﬁne the light in vertical
direction, as shown in Fig. 3.1(b). Combined with the normal taper, the structure is
able to modulate the mode to a circular shape, better matching the ﬁber mode. By
depositing seven layers with refractive index from 1.7 to 1.52, they achieved the lowest
==PAGE:39==
34
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1: The schematic of (a) inverted nanotaper [74] and (b) tapered graded
index structure [76].
insertion loss of 1.9 dB. The 1 dB bandwidth of edge coupling is usually more than
100 nm.
As can be seen, although the edge coupling has been demonstrated to have weak polar-
ization dependence, rather low loss, and wide bandwidth, it usually requires complicated
or extra processes, for example, narrow width at ten-nanometer scale, angled sidewall
etching, polymer covering, and multi-layer deposition, which make the fabrication so-
phisticated and increase the expense [75–77]. Besides, the end facet of the chip is ultra
smooth for low-loss coupling. It means that the cleaving of the chip should be accurate
and the edge needs to be polished. As the coupling is only from the edge of the chip,
it is unable to make wafer-scale test of the optical components. Moreover, the diﬃcult
alignment of the end facet with a lensed ﬁber usually takes much time, and requires a
powerful microscope with high magniﬁcation.
3.3
Vertical Grating Coupler
Coupling light on top of the chip surface by a grating is also widely used in the inte-
grated platforms. The apparent advantage, compared to the edge coupling, is that it
does not need cleaving and polishing of the chip, or other post processes. Vertical grat-
ing couplers can be placed at any position or direction on the chip, enabling device test
on a wafer scale, which beneﬁts large volume fabrication. For the alignment, it has a
relatively relaxed tolerance. However, the grating couplers are usually strongly polariza-
tion dependent, so the optimized structures for transverse electric (TE) and transverse
magnetic (TM) modes have large diﬀerence.
Recent progress of grating couplers in the SOI platform has developed very fast. The
original grating couplers are based on the two-dimensional binary gratings, that the
==PAGE:40==
35
gratings are made by periodic slots with vertical sidewalls. For an optimized grating
structure, the slots are usually shallowly etched, which means that it requires a sepa-
rate fabrication process with other fully etched optical components. Shallowly etched
uniform grating couplers have invariant pitch, etch length, and etch depth, shown in
Fig. 3.2(a). According to Bragg condition, the uniform grating couplers enable the light
with a speciﬁc wavelength diﬀracting at a speciﬁc angle, so that the light can be coupled
between the ﬁber and the waveguide. D. Taillaert et al. made a pair of shallow etched
uniform grating couplers in a SOI platform, with the insertion loss of 5.1 dB and 1 dB
bandwidth of 40 nm [78].
As such grating structure has a weak diﬀraction ability, more pitches are desired to
diﬀract more light. Such strategy will lead to the diﬀraction region larger than the ﬁber
mode. To compact the grating in a small footprint, curved gratings are employed, shown
in Fig. 3.2(b). Eight-fold length reduction of the coupling section has been fabricated,
with the coupling eﬃciency of −7 dB and 1 dB bandwidth of 41 nm [79]. Y. Zhang et
al. later got an improved coupling eﬃciency of −4.4 dB, with a 1.5 dB bandwidth of
45 nm [80].
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.2: (a) Shallowly etched slot grating coupler [78], (b) curved grating coupler
[81], and (c) ploysilicon overlayed grating coupler [82].
==PAGE:41==
36
In order to increase the eﬃciency of the binary gratings, several methods are imple-
mented in SOI platform, including the metal grating, top cladding, apodized grating,
reﬂection mirror, slanted grating, and polysilicon overlayed grating. Metal grating cou-
plers, made of silver, gold, aluminum and copper, were proposed, from which the silver
ones perform best, with the coupling eﬃciency of −2.2 dB and 3 dB bandwidth of 80 nm
[83]. Depositing a top cladding on the grating is the simplest way to improve the cou-
pling eﬃciency. D. Taillaert et al. adjusted the air cladding grating to silicon oxide
cladding grating [78]. As a result, the eﬃciency was increased by 0.8 dB. Apodized
shallowly etched grating couplers were used to vary the coupling strength, by tailoring
the duty cycle. The coupling eﬃciency increased to −1.2 dB [84]. It has been found
that diﬀerent slot width has diﬀerent etching rate, so called lag eﬀect. Wide slots are
etched faster than the narrow ones. By utilizing this eﬀect, Y. Tang got the coupling ef-
ﬁciency of −1.9 dB and 1 dB bandwidth of 43 nm [85]. Layer stack with SiO2/Si bottom
reﬂection mirror has been demonstrated to avoid light leakage into the substrate, and
achieve the coupling eﬃciency of −1 dB [78]. Combined the apodized shallow etched
grating with the distributed Bragg reﬂecting mirror, A. Mekis fabricated a grating cou-
pler, with a coupling eﬃciency of −0.75 dB [86]. Slanted parallelogram shaped grating,
embedded in silicon oxide, was also designed, which has a coupling eﬃciency of −1.2 dB
[87]. D. Vermeulen et al. proposed a method to add an amorphous silicon overlay on
shallow etched gratings to enhance the upward diﬀraction, shown in Fig. 3.2(c), and
achieved the coupling eﬃciency of −1.6 dB and 3 dB bandwidth of 80 nm [82]. Com-
bined the polysilicon overlay with silicon oxide upcladding, G. Roelkens et al. increased
the coupling eﬃciency to −1.1 dB, with a 3 dB bandwidth of 85 nm [88].
Although low loss of the shallowly etched grating couplers has been validated, there are
still some disadvantages. First of all, the grating couplers and the waveguide components
need to be fabricated separately, as the etching depth of them are diﬀerent. The lithog-
raphy and etching steps are required for twice. Therefore, it is quite desired that the
grating couplers can be made in the same process with other photonic components by
applying the fully etched gratings, as the etching depth of them are identical. However,
the fully etched slot gratings, embedded in air or silicon oxide, introduce large refractive
index contrast and sharp refractive index variations, resulting in strong back reﬂec-
tion. Such reﬂection between the grating couplers may form resonance cavities, such as
Fabry-Perot resonators, and generate ripples in the transmittance, which degrades the
performance of the device.
The eﬃcient fully etched grating couplers have been proposed and demonstrated, includ-
ing anti-reﬂection interface, subwavelength pattern arrays, and photonic crystal arrays.
To reduce the reﬂection of the slot gratings, anti-reﬂection interfaces are added on both
==PAGE:42==
37
sides of the grating for interference. The coupling eﬃciency and 3 dB bandwidth are the-
oretically calculated as −3 dB and 35 nm, respectively [89]. Subwavelength structures,
behaving as homogeneous media with an equivalent eﬀective refractive index, are widely
used recently [90]. Hole arrays, instead of slots, are applied to form the gratings. By
adjusting the hole size and the interval, two dimensional tailoring is enabled. X. Chen
et al. has demonstrated such structure with the coupling eﬃciency of −4.7 dB and 3 dB
bandwidth of 40 nm [91]. Triangular-lattice air holes based photonic crystals can also
be used to replace the slot. The grating was formed by photonic crystal arrays, with
an interval of a photonic crystal array, which can be regarded as a transformation of
uniform slot gratings with a duty cycle of 0.5. Little back reﬂection has been achieved,
and the coupling eﬃciency and 1 dB bandwidth is −3.8 dB and 37 nm, respectively [92].
This uniform grating was then improved by apodized photonic crystal grating couplers,
shown in Fig. 3.3(a). By engineering the hole size of every photonic crystal arrays,
the diﬀraction mode proﬁle can well match the ﬁber mode, enabling a much stronger
coupling strength. Y. Ding et al. have achieved the coupling eﬃciency of −1.74 dB and
3 dB bandwidth of 60 nm [93]. Further, by adding an aluminum mirror to the sub-
strate of the structure, they increased the coupling eﬃciency to −0.58 dB, with a 3 dB
bandwidth of 71 nm [94]. Apart from circular holes, rectangular shaped patterns are
also used, shown in Fig. 3.3(b). Uniform rectangular shaped subwavelength gratings
has been demonstrated with the coupling eﬃciency and 3 dB bandwidth of −2.3 dB
and 60 nm, respectively [95]. By applying apodized engineering and bottom mirror, its
coupling eﬃciency as high as −0.42 dB has been predicted [96].
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3: (a) Apodized photonic crystal grating coupler [93], and (b) rectangular
shaped subwavelength grating coupler [96].
Grating couplers are also widely used in other integrated platforms. C. Xiong et al. made
curved gratings in the AlN-on-silicon platform [4]. The coupling eﬃciency is −10 dB per
grating. M. Nisar developed grating couplers in the LiNbO3 platform with buried silicon
oxide layer [97]. The normal shallow etched grating had a coupling eﬃciency of −4.55 dB
per grating, while it was improved to −3.45 dB with a reﬂection mirror. Shallowly etched
grating couplers in SiNOI platform have been demonstrated with a coupling eﬃciency
==PAGE:43==
38
of −4.55 dB per grating [98]. The same grating couplers in InGaAsPOI platform have
also been demonstrated with a coupling eﬃciency of −4.2 dB per grating [99]. Only
one grating coupling case in the SiC platform has been reported [100]. It is a type of
apodized shallowly etched trapezoid shaped grating, suspending in air. The coupling
eﬃciency for a pair of grating couplers is −6 dB, with a 3 dB bandwidth of 38 nm, but
the peak wavelength is at 1500 nm.
Actually, it is not fair to directly compare these diﬀerent methods by the coupling
eﬃciency or the bandwidth, as they strongly depend on the material, refractive index
contrast, layer thickness, as well as the polarization.
3.4
Fully Etched Photonic Crystal Apodized Grating Cou-
pler Simulation
It is known when the lattice constant is small enough, the photonic crystal structures
act as a homogeneous medium, with an eﬀective refractive index, which can be changed
by the size of the holes. Using arrays of photonic crystal holes instead of slots in the
grating has demonstrated the advantage of reducing the back reﬂection. Additionally,
uniform gratings cannot engineer the mode proﬁle of the diﬀraction, but the apodized
ones can. The coupling eﬃciency between the ﬁber and the grating coupler depends
on two important factors. One is the directionality, deﬁned as the fraction of power
diﬀracted upwards, and the other is the mode proﬁle overlap between the diﬀracted
light and the ﬁber. Apodized grating couplers is able to produce the diﬀracted light
with a Gaussian-shaped mode proﬁle, well matching the single mode ﬁber, to improve
the coupling eﬃciency. All in all, with the above advantageous aspects, the fully etched
photonic crystal apodized grating couplers (PCGC) are of signiﬁcant interest. The target
of the simulation is to design PCGC in SiCOI platform, with an insertion loss less than
10 dB, and the 3 dB bandwidth covering the whole C band transmission window, from
1530 nm to 1565 nm.
3.4.1
Theory
The strategy to design the PCGC is to use two-dimensional (2D) fully etched slot grating
model to ﬁnd the optimal refractive index of every artiﬁcial material slot in the gratings,
and then replace the slots by the three-dimensional (3D) photonic crystal holes, which
matches the desired eﬀective refractive index. The schematic is shown in Fig. 3.4.
Speciﬁcally, there are ﬁve main steps to model the PCGC.
==PAGE:44==
39
Figure 3.4: Schematic of the strategy to design the PCGC, including the 2D slot
grating (left) and the photonic crystal grating (right). lp, le, θd, θ and a denote pitch
length, etch length, diﬀraction angle, coupling angle, and lattice constant of the pho-
tonic crystals, respectively.
Firstly, select an etch length (le), so called slot width, and ﬁnd the coupling angle (θ),
between the diﬀraction direction and the vertical direction, for a desired wavelength (λ),
which should also be the central wavelength of the diﬀraction spectrum. Moreover, to
have a high coupling eﬃciency at a certain coupling angle, high-order diﬀraction should
be avoided. The diﬀraction angle (θd), between the grating and the diﬀraction direction,
follows the Bragg condition, given by
λ = lp(neff −ncsinθd),
(3.1)
where lp is the pitch length, neff is the eﬀective refractive index of the Bloch mode
propagating inside the grating, and nc is the refractive index of the upcladding of the
grating. It is noticed that the sum of the coupling angle and the diﬀraction angle is 90◦.
Normally, the diﬀraction angle cannot be designed exactly at 90◦, because the unwanted
second-order diﬀraction will be generated, with a direction back to the waveguide. Thus,
an angle detuning is required.
Secondly, get the artiﬁcial refractive index (na), which is related to neff, and the power
leakage factor (2α) for the corresponding pitch length, that enable the desired diﬀraction
angle. The power leakage factor can be acquired through
P = P0e−2αx,
(3.2)
where P is the exponentially decay power along the propagation direction in the grating,
x, and P0 is the input power. It describes the ability of power conﬁnement of the grating.
Thirdly, engineer the output beam to match the mode proﬁle of the single mode ﬁber,
by synthesizing the power leakage factor distribution to a Gaussian-shaped mode proﬁle,
==PAGE:45==
40
2α(x) =
P 2
l (x)
P 2
i −
R x
0 P 2
l (x)dx,
(3.3)
where P 2
l (x) is the power leakage density, and P 2
i is the input power. When normalizing
the input power to 1, the power leakage density is also normalized to Gaussian proﬁle,
expressed as
2α(x) =
G2(x)
1 −
R x
0 G2(x)dx,
(3.4)
where G2(x) = −dP(x)/dx is the normalized Gaussian proﬁle. For the single mode
ﬁber, the normalized Gaussian proﬁle is given by
G2(x) =
1
√
2πaw0
e
−(x−xc)2
2(aw0)2 ,
(3.5)
where a is the scaling factor of the Gaussian proﬁle, w0 is the beam radius, and the xc is
the center position of the ﬁber, which is also the center of the grating in our case. After
this step, the pitch length and the artiﬁcial refractive index of each period are obtained,
so the 2D grating model can be built up.
Fourthly, ﬁnd the optimal box layer thickness for the highest coupling eﬃciency, based on
the above parameters and structures. The buried silicon oxide layer has a low refractive
index, compared to the top SiC layer and the silicon substrate, so light can generate
interference, which aﬀects the coupling eﬃciency.
Finally, replace the slots by 3D fully etched photonic crystals with equivalent eﬀective
refractive index. The holes are distributed as triangular lattice. The eﬀective refractive
index of the photonic crystals, ne, is estimated through
n2
e
n2m
= n2
h(1 + f) + n2
m(1 −f)
n2
h(1 −f) + n2m(1 + f),
(3.6)
where nm and nh denotes the refractive index of the material (SiC) and the hole inclusion,
respectively. The volume ﬁlling factor, f, of the circular holes, is given by
f = 3
√
3πD2
16a2
,
(3.7)
where D is the hole diameter, and a is the lattice constant of the photonic crystals. The
lattice constant is regarded the same as the etch length of each pitch [93]. Therefore, all
the parameters for the 3D PCGC are obtained, and the 3D model can be set up. Figure
3.5 shows a simpliﬁed ﬂow chart of the PCGC design steps.
==PAGE:46==
41
Figure 3.5: Flow chart of the PCGC design steps.
3.4.2
Simulation
In this part, the detailed simulation steps of PCGC in SiCOI platform are introduced.
The software, Lumerical FDTD Solution, is used for the modelling. Before the simu-
lation, some parameters are required to acquire and set. The refractive index of SiC
dependent on the wavelength is measured by the ellipsometer. The length of the grat-
ing is designed for 20 µm, and the ﬁber is put in the middle of the grating. The SiC
layer thickness of the SiCOI is set at 500 nm. When selecting etch length, it is noticed
that wide etch length may induce large size of photonic crystal holes, which results in
strong scattering loss. On the other hand, narrow etch length may induce small size of
photonic crystal holes, leading to high requirement for the fabrication. The etch length
is set at 350 nm in the simulation. The grating is designed for TE mode coupling. And
the desired center wavelength is in the middle of C band. The ﬁrst four steps are done
with 2D model, while the last step is done with 3D model. We calculate the coupling
eﬃciency and 3 dB bandwidth from the waveguide to the ﬁber. It is feasible to treat
the coupling eﬃciency and the 3 dB bandwidth of the light transmitting from the ﬁber
to the waveguide the same as that from the waveguide to the ﬁber, because the mode
coupling of the standard single mode ﬁber and the waveguide is used to simulate in the
model [78].
3.4.2.1
Step 1
For gratings in SiCOI platform, the diﬀraction angle of a speciﬁc wavelength can be
determined through Eq. 3.1, once the pitch length, the eﬀective refractive index, and
the cladding refractive index are set. Although it is easy to make one wavelength diﬀract
at a desired angle, the diﬀraction spectrum may not center at the same wavelength. For
example, one can make the coupling angle at 15◦through adjusting the parameters of
the grating, but the diﬀraction spectrum has a center at about 1460 nm, which means
there is a little fraction of light diﬀracted in C band. Therefore, Step 1 is to select a
==PAGE:47==
42
diﬀraction angle or a coupling angle, which makes the desired wavelength as the center
wavelength in the diﬀraction spectrum.
Figure 3.6: Schematic of Lumerical FDTD Solutions to simulate the coupling angle
versus artiﬁcial refractive index and pitch length, and to calculate the power leakage
factor.
Although the target is apodized gratings, where the pitch length and the artiﬁcial refrac-
tive index of every unit are diﬀerent, the property of every unit with its own parameters
is explored by the uniform format. Figure 3.6 shows the model of 2D SiCOI with a
uniform grating structure in Lumerical FDTD Solutions, which is applied in both Step
1 and Step 2. The top monitor is set to measure the far-ﬁeld distribution, where the
coupling angle can be acquired. Besides, the mode expansion of the top monitor is used
to get the diﬀraction mode spectrum and the center wavelength.
Figure 3.7: The coupling angle versus the artiﬁcial refractive index and the pitch
length. The color bar depicts the coupling angle.
By sweeping the pitch length, from 700 nm to 1100 nm with an interval of 50 nm, and
the artiﬁcial refractive index, from 1.2 to 2.7 with an interval of 0.1, one can plot the
coupling angle versus the artiﬁcial refractive index and the pitch length, shown in Fig.
3.7. Either increasing artiﬁcial refractive index or pitch length can induce an increasing
coupling angle.
It is noticed there are some large negative coupling angles at large
pitch length, which is due to the existence of the high-order diﬀraction, rather than
single-order diﬀraction, shown in Fig 3.8. As the pitch length increases, more high-order
diﬀraction exists. However, only the single-order diﬀraction is desired, because high-
order diﬀraction leads to more light diﬀracting to other unexpected angles. Additionally,
==PAGE:48==
43
the width of the peaks reﬂects the size of the diﬀraction light spot, resulting in the
diverging diﬀraction.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8: (a) Single-order diﬀraction. (b) High-order diﬀraction.
Figure 3.9:
Coupling angle as a function of center wavelength.
The blue circles
denote the data extracted from the simulation, the red solid line denotes the polynomial
ﬁt of these data, and the yellow point denotes the desired coupling angle and the
corresponding center wavelength.
Next, using the above sweeping data, one can get the coupling angle as a function of
center wavelength of the diﬀraction, shown in Fig. 3.9. As can be seen, the available
center wavelength to choose is from 1400 nm to 1700 nm, governed by the refractive
index range and the pitch length range. The angle depends on the center wavelength
sensitively, with a slope of 0.12◦/nm at around 1550 nm. The coupling angle of 22.5◦
can be extracted, which enables the center wavelength at 1545 nm.
3.4.2.2
Step 2
After selecting the proper coupling angle, one needs to ﬁnd the artiﬁcial refractive index
and the power leakage factor versus the pitch length, which can diﬀract the light of
==PAGE:49==
44
desired wavelength at the selected angle.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.10: (a)Coupling angle as a function of pitch length. (b) Coupling angle of
the calculated points.
For the artiﬁcial refractive index, the data, that is got from Step 1, is used. The coupling
angles versus the pitch length, from 700 nm to 1100 nm, and the artiﬁcial refractive
index, from 1.2 to 2.7, are acquired, but they are discontinuous, because the sweeping
parameters are set to be discontinuous, due to the time-consuming simulation. Thus,
Lagrange′s mean value calculation is applied to calculate the artiﬁcial refractive index,
from 1.2 to 2.6, with an interval of 0.1, versus the pitch length, for the speciﬁc coupling
angle of 22.5◦, shown in Fig. 3.10(a). The curve is ﬁt by the ﬁfth-order polynomial.
Then, the coupling angle of every calculated data is modelled to verify the accuracy.
Figure 3.10(b) shows that the maximal deviation is ±0.06◦, which is satisfactory.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.11: An example of getting the power leakage factor of a uniform grating
with a speciﬁc artiﬁcial refractive index. (a) Linear scale, and (b) logarithmic scale of
the normalized power distribution, along the propagation direction.
For the power leakage factor, the basic model is the same as the one in Step 1, shown
in Fig. 3.6. The monitor inside the grating is set to measure the power distribution, so
that the power leakage factor can be extracted. Figure 3.11(a) shows the exponential
==PAGE:50==
45
decay of the power along the grating. It can be seen there are many periodic ﬂuctuations
on the curve, of which the peaks are generated in the SiC section of every grating unit.
The reason is that two adjacent interfaces between the SiC and the air form a local
Fabry-Perot resonator. Equation 3.2 can also be expressed as −ln(P/P0) = 2αx, so
that the logarithm part is linear with the propagation distance, shown in Fig. 3.11(b).
Thus, the slope of the linear ﬁt curve represents the power leakage factor. The power
leakage factors versus the pitch length of the 15 calculated points are calculated and
plotted in Fig. 3.12. The curve is ﬁtted by the eleventh-order polynomial.
Figure 3.12: Leakage factor as a function of pitch length.
Therefore, the refractive index of the artiﬁcial material and the corresponding power
leakage factor as a function of the pitch length are obtained, shown in Fig. 3.13. The
resolution of the pitch is 1 nm. The power leakage factor increases monotonously with
the increasing pitch length, but with the decreasing artiﬁcial refractive index. As these
three parameters are related to each other, if one of them is selected, the other two are
also ﬁxed.
Figure 3.13: The refractive index of the artiﬁcial material and the corresponding
power leakage factor as a function of the pitch length.
==PAGE:51==
46
3.4.2.3
Step 3
For high coupling eﬃciency of the apodized grating, the arrangement of diﬀerent pitches
becomes important. As the light propagates in the circular single mode ﬁber with a
Gaussian-shaped proﬁle, the maximal coupling eﬃciency occurs, when the diﬀraction
light has the same mode proﬁle as the ﬁber. According to Eq. 3.5, the scaling factor,
determining the amplitude of the normalized Gaussian proﬁle, is limited by the range
of the power leakage factor, in terms of Eq. 3.4. Generally, small power leakage factor
range limits the normalized Gaussian proﬁle with a small amplitude, which induces a
large scaling factor. The amplitude of the normalized Gaussian proﬁle is expected to be
as large as possible, because its integral along the grating is related to the diﬀraction
fraction of the input power. However, one should pay attention, that as large power
leakage factor requires long pitch length, high-order diﬀraction may exist.
Figure 3.14: Ideally normalized Gaussian output proﬁle (blue) and the corresponding
power leakage factor (red) along the propagation direction of the grating.
In the simulation, since the power leakage factor has a maximum of 0.245, so the scaling
factor is set at 1.06, to make the amplitude is as high as possible. The beam radius is
set at 5.2 µm for the standard single mode ﬁber, and the center of the ﬁber is set at
10 µm. Figure 3.14 shows the normalized output Gaussian proﬁle of the desired grating
and the corresponding power leakage factor along the grating.
Once the power leakage is determined, the corresponding pitch length is also determined.
Starting from the beginning of the grating, the ﬁrst pitch length lp1 can be acquired,
based on the power leakage factor at x = 0. Then, the power leakage factor of the second
pitch can be acquired at x = lp1, so the second pitch length is known. The pitch length
of the rest units can be got in the same manner. As it is shown in Fig. 3.15, the 20 µm
long grating is composed of 22 pitches. And the synthesized power leakage factor ﬁts
very well with the desired distribution.
==PAGE:52==
47
Figure 3.15: Synthesized power leakage factor along the propagation direction of the
grating.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.16: Parameters of every pitch, including (a) pitch length, (b) artiﬁcial re-
fractive index and the power leakage factor.
The artiﬁcial refractive index is also known, because the pitch length is set for each
pitch. Till now, all the parameters required for the 2D apodized grating are obtained,
shown in Fig. 3.16.
3.4.2.4
Step 4
Therefore, the 2D apodized grating can be modelled, using the above parameters. Figure
3.17 shows the schematic of the 2D apodized grating. The box layer thickness is designed
to be 2 µm in the SiCOI fabrication, so the simulation is operated by sweeping the
thickness in a range of 500 nm around 2 µm.
Figure 3.18 shows the normalized coupling eﬃciency versus the box layer thickness.
As can be seen, the box layer thickness is a quite important parameter, if it is not
selected properly, the eﬃciency may decrease by 3 dB. For this grating structure, the
==PAGE:53==
48
Figure 3.17: Schematic of Lumerical FDTD Solutions to simulate the 2D apodized
grating coupler.
optimized thickness is at 1980 nm. The 0.5 dB bandwidth is from 1900 nm to 2100 nm
approximately, which means that the box layer thickness of around 2000 nm in the
original fabrication process is satisfactory.
Figure 3.18: The normalized coupling eﬃciency dependent on the box layer thickness.
Until now, the optimized 2D apodized grating coupler model in SiCOI platform can
be built up. Besides the top monitor and its mode expansion, another three monitors,
shown in Fig. 3.17, are set to measure the reﬂection, the transmission, and the downward
diﬀraction to the substrate, in order to analyze the property.
Figure 3.19: Electric ﬁeld distribution.
==PAGE:54==
49
Figure 3.19 shows the electric ﬁeld distribution of the grating. The bright part indicates
that the grating can well conﬁne, propagate, and diﬀract the light.
Figure 3.20: The optimized 2D apodized grating coupling eﬃciency.
The coupling eﬃciency is simulated by the mode expansion of the top monitor. The
diﬀerence between the monitor and the mode expansion is that the monitor measures
all the light transmitting through the monitor, while the mode expansion measures the
mode propagating stably in the ﬁber, which could be the TE, TM, fundamental mode,
or other desired modes in the coupling ﬁber. The former one indicates how much light
is diﬀracted, while the latter one indicates how much TE, TM, or fundamental mode is
coupled into the ﬁber. In this model, only TE mode is concerned.
Figure 3.20 shows the upward diﬀraction and the coupling eﬃciency as a function of the
wavelength. The latter one represents the transmittance of the optimized 2D apodized
grating. The maximal coupling eﬃciency is −3.05 dB, exactly at the designed center
wavelength of 1545 nm. The 1 dB bandwidth is 43 nm, from 1523 nm to 1566 nm. For
a pair of grating couplers, the coupling eﬃciency is −6.1 dB, and the 3 dB bandwidth
is 52 nm, from 1517 nm to 1569 nm, covering the whole C band. At the peak, about
80% of the light, which is upward diﬀracted, is able to propagate stably along the ﬁber.
It is noticed that the transmittance is not symmetric, and the coupling eﬃciency drops
faster in long wavelength range.
The reason can be seen from the spectrum of the
upward diﬀraction, where its eﬃciency becomes decreasing for the wavelength longer
than 1560 nm.
The spectra, that are measured by the top, bottom, reﬂection, and transmission moni-
tors, are plotted in Fig. 3.21. All the four spectra are not ﬂat, showing that they strongly
depend on the wavelength. More than half of the incident light is upward diﬀracted, but
the downward diﬀraction also occupies a large fraction about 40%, which demonstrates
the grating enables a strong diﬀraction. Only a little fraction of the incident light is
reﬂected or transmitted.
==PAGE:55==
50
Figure 3.21: The eﬃciency of the 2D apodized grating in upward diﬀraction, down-
ward diﬀraction, reﬂection, and transmission.
Figure 3.22: Upward diﬀraction eﬃciency versus the wavelength and the coupling
angle.
Figure 3.22 shows the upward diﬀraction eﬃciency dependence on the wavelength and
the coupling angle. Light with long wavelength has small coupling angle and narrow
linewidth. The width of the bright line illustrates the size of the diﬀraction beam. And
the slope of the line reﬂects the bandwidth of the diﬀraction spectrum, that a large
absolute value of the slope indicates a wide bandwidth. According to this ﬁgure, one
can change the center wavelength of the coupling spectrum by changing the coupling
angle of the ﬁber.
After Step 4, all the optimized parameters of the 2D grating coupler are obtained, and
the model has been built up. Meanwhile, the properties of the model have been studied.
The performance of this 2D grating coupler model can be regarded as the best and ideal
performance for its corresponding 3D grating coupler design.
==PAGE:56==
51
3.4.2.5
Step 5
The key of this step is to replace the 2D slots with speciﬁc artiﬁcial refractive index
by the 3D photonic crystal structures with equivalent eﬀective refractive index. If the
refractive index matches very well, one can expect the highest coupling eﬃciency the
same as the corresponding 2D model. Otherwise, not only does the coupling eﬃciency
decrease, but also the center wavelength shifts undesirably.
The 3D PCGC model is shown in Fig. 3.23. Compare to the 2D model, the 3D one
has an extra dimension, which is the width of the grating. The width is set at 12 µm,
a little bit wider than the standard single mode ﬁber core with a diameter of 10.4 µm.
The cross-sectional dimension of the grating is 12 µm × 0.5 µm, supporting multi-mode
distribution.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.23: 3D Model of PCGC using Lumerical FDTD Solutions, (a) top view, and
(b) side view.
As the PCGC is designed for TE mode only, so a gradually width varied taper is required
to connect the grating with other waveguide components for real applications. In the
simulation, the TE mode of the source at the input of the grating can be set directly,
and the mode proﬁle is shown in Fig. 3.24.
According to Eq. 3.6 and Eq. 3.7, the hole size for each pitch is calculated, of which the
diameter is from 141 nm to 324 nm. Figure 3.25 shows the upward diﬀraction and the
coupling eﬃciency. As can be seen, the upward diﬀraction is very high, but the coupling
eﬃciency is rather low. Meanwhile, the center wavelength of the grating transmittance is
at 1440 nm, which is far away from the designed wavelength. It means that the eﬀective
refractive index of the photonic crystals calculated by the equations fails to match the
corresponding artiﬁcial refractive index.
==PAGE:57==
52
Figure 3.24: The mode proﬁle of the source at the input of the grating.
Figure 3.25: The eﬃciency of the 3D apodized grating.
To solve this problem, the 3D uniform PCGC model is used to ﬁnd the correct hole
size for each pitch, by checking the diﬀraction angle, which depends on the eﬀective
refractive index of the photonic crystals. Speciﬁcally, set all the pitches of the grating
with the same pitch length, etch length and the hole size of the photonic crystals, then
sweep the hole size, until the grating diﬀracts the light of 1545 nm at 22.5◦. Through
this method, the hole size for each pitch is acquired, of which the diameter is from 49 nm
to 238 nm, much smaller than the values calculated by Eq. 3.6 and Eq. 3.7.
Figure 3.26 shows the upward diﬀraction and coupling eﬃciency of the improved grating
structure.
The maximal coupling eﬃciency is −6.48 dB, at the peak wavelength of
1535 nm, and the 1 dB bandwidth is 46 nm, from 1510 nm to 1556 nm. For a pair
of grating couplers, the coupling eﬃciency is about −13 dB, with a 3 dB bandwidth of
61 nm, from 1504 nm to 1565 nm. Compared to the 2D model, although the transmission
bandwidth is approximately the same, the eﬃciency of one grating reduces by half, and
the center wavelength shifts 10 nm to short wavelength.
Meanwhile, there are less
==PAGE:58==
53
Figure 3.26: The coupling eﬃciency of the 3D apodized grating with a = le.
fraction of light in the upward diﬀraction, that can stably propagate in the ﬁber. It is
because the eﬀective refractive index of the photonic crystals still does not well match
the artiﬁcial refractive index. As a result, the output proﬁle of the diﬀraction does not
exhibit a good Gaussian shape. The reason is considered to be that the holes of one
pitch aﬀects the previous pitch, especially for the holes with large size, when the lattice
constant of the photonic crystal is equal to the etch length of the 2D grating.
Figure 3.27:
The eﬃciency of the 3D apodized grating with a = le, in upward
diﬀraction, downward diﬀraction, reﬂection, and transmission.
Additionally, as shown in Fig. 3.27, the reﬂection keeps at a rather low level over the
whole spectrum, but the total diﬀraction is less than that of the 2D model, while more
light transmits through the grating, which means the diﬀraction ability of this PCGC
structure is much weaker than the 2D binary grating.
In brief, the basic 3D PCGC design procedure is introduced. However, the coupling
eﬃciency is under the expectation. In order to increase the eﬃciency, the improvement
==PAGE:59==
54
of changing the relations between the lattice constant of photonic crystals and the etch
length is put forward in the next part.
3.4.3
Optimization
As mentioned above, the large coupling loss is mainly induced by the eﬀective refractive
index mismatch between the 2D model and the 3D model. Since the lattice constant
of the photonic crystals is equal to the etch length, the holes does not only aﬀect their
own pitch, but they may also aﬀect the previous pitch.
To solve this problem, the
lattice constant of the photonic crystals should decrease, and is adjusted to be equal to
a = le −D and a = le −D
2 , as shown in Fig. 3.28, where le and D denote the etch length
and the diameter of the holes, respectively. Through modelling, the hole diameter is
calculated from 50 nm to 180 nm, and from 54 nm to 198 nm, for the two adjusted
structures.
Figure 3.28: Adjustment of the lattice constant.
Following Step 5, the coupling eﬃciency and the eﬃciency in upward diﬀraction, down-
ward diﬀraction, reﬂection, and transmission of the 3D apodized grating, are plotted
in Fig. 3.29 and Fig. 3.30, respectively. As can be seen, there are a large fraction of
light in the upward diﬀraction, which can stably propagate in the ﬁber, compared to
the previous structure. The maximal coupling eﬃciency and the 1 dB bandwidth of
these two adjustments reach −3.80 dB and 55 nm, which is decreased by 2.68 dB and
increased by 9 nm, respectively. The coupling eﬃciency is increased by more than 5 dB,
and the 3 dB bandwidth is increased by 7 nm, for a pair of grating couplers. The center
wavelength of the two designs is almost the same, at 1535 nm.
The 10 nm shift of
the center wavelength reﬂects the eﬀective refractive index replacement is still not very
==PAGE:60==
55
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.29: The coupling eﬃciency of the 3D apodized grating with (a) a = le −D
and (b) a = le −D
2 .
accurate, although the gratings perform a good Gaussian-distributed diﬀraction. The
fraction of upward diﬀraction is more than 60%, while the transmission is suppressed to
10% approximately, showing that the optimized grating has a strong diﬀraction ability.
Compared to the 2D model, the optimized 3D model achieve a wider bandwidth, and
the peak eﬃciency is only 0.75 dB less per grating.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.30: The eﬃciency of the 3D apodized grating with (a) a = le −D and (b)
a = le −D
2 , in upward diﬀraction, downward diﬀraction, reﬂection, and transmission.
When doing fabrication, the wall thickness between the holes needs to be taken into
consideration, as thin walls require higher fabrication accuracy. Figure 3.31(a) depicts
the wall thickness for every pitch of the two optimized structures. For the grating with
a = le −D, the minimal wall thickness is negative, that is, the holes are overlapped with
each other. As shown in Fig. 3.31(b), the walls of some arrays disappear, so they are not
photonic crystal structures anymore, and some walls are so thin, less than 10 nm, that
is diﬃcult to fabricate. For the grating with a = le −D/2, the thinnest wall thickness is
53 nm, which is acceptable for the fabrication. The parameters of this optimized PCGC
==PAGE:61==
56
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.31: (a) The wall thickness between the holes for every pitch of the 3D
apodized grating with a = le −D (blue) and a = le −D
2 (red), (b) Schematic of the
overlapped holes
structure, including the pitch length and hole diameter for every pitch, are given in Tab.
3.1.
Table 3.1: The parameters of the optimized PCGC structure with a = le −D/2.
Pitch No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
lp (nm)
812
820
828
837
846
856
866
877
888
900
912
D (nm)
54
80
91
101
110
119
127
135
143
151
158
Pitch No.
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
lp (nm)
924
937
949
960
970
979
988
994
998
995
986
D (nm)
165
171
177
182
187
191
195
197
198
197
194
3.4.4
Fluctuation Analysis
The grating simulation is operated with the ﬁxed or optimized parameters and ideal
conditions. However, when doing the fabrication or characterization, many ﬂuctuations
may occur, which more or less aﬀects the performance of the gratings. It is desired
that the grating couplers have a large ﬂuctuation tolerance. In this part, ﬂuctuations
including the SiC thickness, the hole size, and the coupling angle, are explored by
changing the design parameters.
3.4.4.1
SiC Thickness
In the simulation, the thickness of SiC layer is designed at 500 nm. In the fabrication,
when lapping SiC by dry oxidation, introduced in Chapter 2, although the oxidation
rate is calibrated, it is diﬃcult to accurately control the oxidation time to consume exact
thickness of SiC, especially for the thickness reduction less than 100 nm. Moreover, the
==PAGE:62==
57
thickness measurement may also not very precise, due to the sophisticated SiC oxidation
mechanism and the low resolution of SEM.
Figure 3.32: The eﬀect of the SiC thickness on the coupling spectrum of the 3D
apodized grating.
Figure 3.32 shows the coupling spectrum, with SiC thickness ﬂuctuation of ±20 nm.
The inﬂuences on the maximal coupling eﬃciency and the bandwidth are negligible, but
the center wavelength shifts obviously. As the thickness increases, the spectrum has a
red shift, while as it decreases, the spectrum has a blue shift. The rate of the center
wavelength shift due to the SiC thickness ﬂuctuation is 0.45 nm/nm. Therefore, the
tolerance on the SiC thickness is relatively large.
3.4.4.2
Hole Size
The hole size is an important parameter for grating couplers. The variation of hole
sizes aﬀects the eﬀective refractive index, which induces diﬀerent diﬀraction intensity or
diﬀerent diﬀraction angle. In fabrication, many factors can aﬀect the hole size, such as
the property of the resist, the dose of electron-beam lithography, the development time,
and the etching conditions.
The simulation is made under the assumption, that all holes are cylinder-shaped, and
the variation of the size are the same. Figure 3.33 shows the coupling spectrum, with
hole diameter ﬂuctuation from −4 nm to +8 nm. It is apparent that both the coupling
eﬃciency and the center wavelength depend on the size of the holes strongly. Smaller
hole size can cause a reduction on coupling eﬃciency and a red shift on the spectrum,
while larger hole size can cause an increase on coupling eﬃciency and a blue shift on the
spectrum. The rate of the center wavelength shift due to the hole diameter ﬂuctuation
is −3.17 nm/nm. Therefore, the grating couplers have a rather low tolerance on the hole
size of photonic crystals.
==PAGE:63==
58
Figure 3.33: The eﬀect of the hole size on the coupling spectrum of the 3D apodized
grating.
3.4.4.3
Coupling Angle
When coupling the light between the ﬁbers and the grating couplings, a pair of ﬁber
holders with a speciﬁc angle are applied. The ﬁber is put in the slot of the ﬁber holder
and is ﬁxed by tapes. The angle of the ﬁber depends on the angle of the ﬁber holder.
However, if the angle of the slot is not precisely equal to the designed angle, or the ﬁber
is not tightly adhered to the holder, the coupling angle may change.
Figure 3.34: The eﬀect of the coupling angle on the coupling spectrum of the 3D
apodized grating.
Figure 3.34 shows the coupling spectra, with coupling angle from 20◦to 24◦. It can be
seen the center wavelength is very sensitive to the coupling angle. As the coupling angle
increases, the spectrum has a blue shift, while as it decreases, the spectrum has a red
shift. The rate of the center wavelength shift due to the coupling angle variance is about
−18.3 nm/◦. Although the coupling angle performs a bad tolerance, one could select
==PAGE:64==
59
the desired center wavelength, by changing the coupling angle, as the coupling eﬃciency
is not severely aﬀected.
In Chapter 3, light coupling between the ﬁber and the waveguide is discussed. Diﬀerent
types of the coupling scheme are reviewed and compared. Then, fully etched photonic
crystal apodized grating coupler in SiCOI platform is modelled. The principle is given,
and the detailed design steps are introduced. The maximal coupling eﬃciency of a pair
of designed grating couplers is −7.6 dB, with a 3 dB bandwidth of 68 nm, covering
the whole C band. Finally, the fabrication and characterization induced ﬂuctuation is
analyzed.
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 4
Grating Coupler Fabrication and
Characterization
In this chapter, the fabrication process of the photonic crystal apodized grating couplers
is introduced and tested. The device is made and measured. The performance of the
grating couplers, as well as the optimized designing parameters, is discussed.
4.1
Fabrication
4.1.1
Process
As the grating coupler designed in the work is fully etched, it can be fabricated in
the same process with the waveguide components, and no further steps are required.
The SiCOI sample has a silicon oxide buried layer with a thickness of 2.03 µm. Before
fabrication, the top SiC layer is oxidized to reduce the thickness down to 500 nm.
In the fabrication, ﬁrstly, a negative electron-beam (E-beam) resist, hydrogen silsesquiox-
ane (HSQ), is spinned to cover the sample surface, which is later used as a mask layer for
etching. The resolution of HSQ by E-beam exposure has been demonstrated to be less
than 10 nm [101]. Secondly, a thin aluminum (Al) ﬁlm is deposited on the sample by
thermal evaporator. The reason to deposit a conductive metal is that the SiCOI struc-
ture contains an insulator layer, which may induce charging eﬀect during the E-beam
lithography.
Thirdly, it is E-beam exposure.
The pattern of the waveguide compo-
nents is transferred to the E-beam resist. Fourthly, use AZ400K, a potassium hydroxide
based developer, to remove the Al thin ﬁlm and the unexposed E-beam resist. Fifthly,
deep reactive-ion etching (DRIE) is applied for etching the patterns. DRIE is a dry
60
==PAGE:66==
61
Figure 4.1: Fabrication process of SiC waveguides. (a) Initial SiCOI sample. (b) Spin
coating of HSQ. (c) Thermal evaporation of Al. (d) E-beam exposure. (e) Development.
(f) Dry etching. (g) Resist strip.
etching method, desired for anisotropic etching. It employs inductively coupled plasma
to increase the plasma density, compared to normal reactive-ion etching (RIE). Sulfur
hexaﬂuoride (SF6) is selected to etch SiC. It reacts with SiC chemically, and the main
products are tetraﬂuoromethane (CF4) and silicon tetraﬂuoride (SiF4), both of which
are volatile at 20◦C. The etching rate of SiC is about 110 nm/min. And the selectivity
of the SiC and HSQ is about 1.3. Finally, the residual resist is removed by hydroﬂuoric
acid (HF).
The whole fabrication process of SiC waveguides is depicted in Fig. 4.1. The process
ﬂow, including all the parameters, is given in Appendix A.
4.1.2
Dose Test
As the linewidth error and the resolution are necessary to calibrate before the device
fabrication, a preliminary exposure dose test is required. In the test, the dose range is
set from 3000 µC/cm2 to 13000 µC/cm2. The test patterns contain slots with designed
width from 100 nm to 600 nm, and photonic crystal holes with designed diameter from
40 nm to 296 nm.
==PAGE:67==
62
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: (a) Slot width versus the designed width, and (b) hole diameter versus
the designed diameter, after development.
Figure 4.2(a) shows the slot width versus the designed width after development. The
data was measured from the top view of the sample. As can be seen, the real width
almost increases linear with the designed width, except for applying the large dose to
the narrow slot exposure. With the decreasing dose, the real width increases. The dose
of 9000 µC/cm2 performs a good agreement between the real and designed width in the
development.
Figure 4.2(b) shows the hole diameter versus the designed diameter after development.
The real diameter also increases approximately linear with the designed diameter. Dif-
ferent from the slots, all the real hole size is larger than the designed size. Additionally,
the real hole size is not sensitive for large dose exposure, as there is only a little diﬀerence
between the dose from 7000 µC/cm2 to 13000 µC/cm2. It is noticed that most of the
structures, exposed by the dose of 3000 µC/cm2, are stripped oﬀafter development, so
the measurement is not taken into analysis. The exposed area is supposed to remain,
due to the property of the negative resist. Therefore, it can be inferred that the dose as
low as 3000 µC/cm2 is not enough to transfer the pattern to the HSQ with a thickness
around 550 nm.
Take 11000 µC/cm2 as an example of the large dose exposure to analyze. Figure 4.3
show the cross section of the slots. The slots, wider than 200 nm, are well developed,
while others cannot be developed completely. It is because the large dose induces severe
proximity eﬀect, and the strong backscattering of the electron beam can broaden the
exposed area. As a result, it limits the minimal slot width, as well as the minimal hole
size.
Figure 4.4 show the top view of the sample after development, which is exposed by a dose
of 11000 µC/cm2. It is seen that the holes with large size are developed, but the hole
==PAGE:68==
63
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: Cross section of the sample after development, which is exposed by a
dose of 11000 µC/cm2. (a) Overview of the slots with designed width from 100 nm to
600 nm. (b) Zoom-in view of the 200 nm wide slot.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4: Top view of the sample after development, which is exposed by a dose
of 11000 µC/cm2. (a) Overview of the holes with designed diameter from 40 nm to
296 nm. (b) Zoom-in view of the holes in small-diameter region.
with diameter less than 120 nm are missing, and only some shadows appear. Meanwhile,
as it is shown in Fig. 4.5, although the patterns of large hole size can be observed, they
cannot be developed completely, even for the holes with the largest diameter of 296 nm.
And the development is not uniform for the holes with the same size. Therefore, the dose
as large as 11000 µC/cm2 is not suitable for the fabrication of the designed photonic
crystal grating couplers.
Figure 4.6 show the top view of the sample after development, which is exposed by a
dose of 5000 µC/cm2. All the patterns appear, even for the holes with the smallest
designed diameter of 40 nm, although the diameter of all the holes after development is
approximately 50 nm larger than the design.
From Fig. 4.7(a), the SiC layer can be apparently observed through the holes, which
means that the development is completely well done. Additionally, the thickness of the
sidewall between the holes is able to reach the minimum of 35 nm. Figure 4.7(b) shows
==PAGE:69==
64
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: (a) Top view and (b) cross section of the holes with designed diameter of
296 nm after development, which are exposed by a dose of 11000 µC/cm2.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: Top views of the sample after development, which is exposed by a dose of
5000 µC/cm2. (a) Overview of the holes with designed diameter from 40 nm to 296 nm.
(b) Zoom-in view of the holes with designed diameter from 40 nm to 136 nm.
the development of the slots. All the slots, designed from 100 nm to 600 nm, are also
well developed.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7: Top views of (a) holes in large-diameter region and (b) slots with designed
width from 100 nm to 600 nm, which are exposed by a dose of 5000 µC/cm2.
To sum up, large dose exposure above 9000 µC/cm2 performs terrible, when making
the small pattern features less than 200 nm. However, small dose exposure between
==PAGE:70==
65
5000 µC/cm2 and 7000 µC/cm2 demonstrates the feasibility to create small structures
at around 100 nm scale.
4.1.3
Etching Test
Etching is the last step to create patterns, so it determines the ﬁnal dimension of the
structures. The diﬀerence between the ﬁnal size and the designed size can be calibrated
after etching.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8: Top views of (a) slots with designed width from 100 nm to 600 nm and (b)
holes with designed diameter from 40 nm to 296 nm, after etching, which are exposed
by a dose of 11000 µC/cm2.
Figure 4.8 show the etching results of the slots and the holes, exposed by a dose of
11000 µC/cm2. Wide slots and large holes look ﬁne. However, slots with width less than
300 nm are not etched completely, and they have a huge linewidth error. Small holes
with diameter less than 200 nm are seriously distorted. It is caused by the incomplete
and ununiform development, since the dimension and depth of these small structures in
the resist are diﬀerent. When transferring the pattern from the resist to SiC by etching,
the remained resist of the structures needs to be removed ﬁrst, then the SiC etching can
take place. It results in bad uniformity of the patterns, and structures of diﬀerent size
may require diﬀerent time for etching the same thickness.
Samples, exposed by doses of 5000 µC/cm2 and 7000 µC/cm2, are also etched. Figure
4.9 show the slots, exposed by a dose of 5000 µC/cm2, after etching. As can be seen, the
slot with a designed width of 100 nm also cannot be etched completely. The linewidth
error is less than the sample, exposed by a dose of 11000 µC/cm2. It is reasonable to
infer that the holes with diameter less than 100 nm cannot be etched completely, neither.
Moreover, the cross section of the waveguide is trapezoid shaped. It is because the resist
at the edge of the pattern is consumed, and the patterns gradually becomes larger during
etching. The sidewall angle of the waveguide is measured as 74◦, approximately.
==PAGE:71==
66
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: (a) Top view and (b) cross section of the slots with designed width from
100 nm to 600 nm, after etching, which are exposed by a dose of 5000 µC/cm2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.10: Top views of (a) holes with designed diameter from 40 nm to 296 nm,
(b) holes in small-diameter region, and (c) holes in large-diameter region, after etching,
which are exposed by a dose of 5000 µC/cm2.
Figure 4.10 show the holes, exposed by a dose of 5000 µC/cm2, after etching. These
holes have better circular shape and uniformity than those, exposed by a dose of
11000 µC/cm2. However, the edge of small holes is very rough, which is induced by
the incomplete development. Meanwhile, the sidewalls between large holes appear shal-
low scratches, which are periodic along with the photonic crystals. It is because the
sidewalls of the resist after development are so thin that they are destroyed easier and
faster in the etching process.
Figure 4.11 show the cross section of these holes. It is noticed that the cross section does
not exactly show the diameter of every holes. As can be seen, large holes are completely
etched, but it is hard to see whether small holes are also completely etched. The shape
of the holes are not cylindrical as desired, but conic. The angle of the cone is about 23◦.
Figure 4.12(a) shows the slot width after etching versus the designed width. The real
dimension is larger than the design. The linewidth error can be obtained as 80 nm
and 60 nm for large patterns, exposed by 5000 µC/cm2 and 7000 µC/cm2, respectively.
Figure 4.12(b) shows the hole diameter after etching versus the designed diameter. From
==PAGE:72==
67
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11: Cross section of the sample after etching, which is exposed by a dose of
5000 µC/cm2. (a) Overview of the holes with designed diameter from 40 nm to 296 nm.
(b) Zoom-in view of the holes in large-diameter region.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.12: (a) Slot width after etching versus the designed width. (b) Hole diameter
after etching versus the designed diameter.
the calibration, the designed diameter of diﬀerent holes in the grating couplers can be
obtained.
4.1.4
Device Fabrication
The device is fabricated following the optimized parameters from the simulation and the
fabrication tests. Both dose 5000 µC/cm2 and 7000 µC/cm2 are employed to make two
series of device. The SiC layer thickness of the SiCOI sample is engineered to be 502 nm
by the thermal oxidation. As mentioned above, the photonic crystal holes designed for
the grating couplers are cylinder shaped. If the cylinder-shaped holes are replaced by
cone-shaped ones with the same top surface size, the eﬀective refractive index will be
increased, which changes the properties of the grating couplers. In order to suppress the
eﬀect, an over etching of half a minute is applied. As a result, the SiC at the bottom of
the coning can be etched for a longer time, which will make the sidewalls more vertical.
==PAGE:73==
68
However, there is also a risk, that the buried layer under the holes may also be etched
a little bit.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.13: Top view of (a) the grating and (b) the straight waveguide after fabri-
cation, exposed by a dose of 5000 µC/cm2.
Figure 4.13 show the top view of the grating and the straight waveguide after fabrication,
exposed by a dose of 5000 µC/cm2. The waveguide is trapezoid shaped, with a short
base of 676 nm, a long base of 904 nm, and a height of 502 nm. The sidewall angle
of the waveguide is calculated to be 77◦, which shows that the over etch can make the
sidewall 3◦more vertical, compared to the test result.
4.2
Characterization
4.2.1
Setup
Figure 4.14 shows the schematic of experimental setup for characterizing the grating
couplers. A continuous-wave laser (CW laser) launches the single-wavelength light into
a polarization controller (PC), which is used to adjust the polarization for a high cou-
pling eﬃciency.
Then, the light is coupling in and out of the gratings by a pair of
ﬁber holders. At last, an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) is connected to obtain the
transmittance. The CW laser, controlled by the OSA for the synchronized sweep, has a
tunable wavelength range from 1520 nm to 1620 nm.
Figure 4.15 shows the coupling scheme. The ﬁbers are mounted along the ﬁber holders
with a coupling angle of 67.5◦.
When doing the alignment, the ﬁber tip should be
exactly on the top surface of the grating couplers, without any gap and also without any
applied force to the surface. There are some hints to determine the height position of
the ﬁber tip. Firstly, when turning down the ﬁber to the grating coupler, two spots can
==PAGE:74==
69
Figure 4.14:
Schematic of experimental setup for the measurement.
CW laser:
continuous-wave laser, PC: polarization controller, OSA: optical spectrum analyzer.
Figure 4.15: Image of the coupling scheme.
be observed from the microscope. One is the ﬁber end facet, and the other is its reﬂected
shadow from the chip surface. As the two spots are just overlapped with each other, the
ﬁber tip is at the proper height. Secondly, it is also available to stare at the ﬁber tip.
When turning down the ﬁber, the tip becomes clearer, because it is close to the focus
plane, which is the chip surface. As the tip touches the surface, it will move forward,
instead of becoming clear. Then, lift it a little bit up to the initial clearest position.
Thirdly, one can turn down the ﬁber, and change one of the horizontal positions, at the
same time. When the ﬁber tip does touch the chip surface, it will not move smoothly
as usual.
4.2.2
Fully Etched Photonic Crystal Apodized Grating Coupler
4.2.2.1
Measurement of Transmittance
The transmittance, discussed in this chapter, is the ﬁber-to-ﬁber eﬃciency, which con-
tains a pair of grating couplers.
Figure 4.16 plots the transmittance of the grating
couplers, exposed by dose of 5000 µC/cm2 and 7000 µC/cm2. It is noticed that these
==PAGE:75==
70
two transmittance shows the best coupling eﬃciency among all the grating couplers in
each chip.
Figure 4.16: Transmittance of the grating couplers, exposed by dose of 5000 µC/cm2
(blue) and 7000 µC/cm2 (red).
For the grating couplers with an exposure dose of 5000 µC/cm2, the ﬁber-to-ﬁber ef-
ﬁciency is −13.89 dB, the 3 dB bandwidth is 59 nm, and the center wavelength is at
1586 nm. For the grating couplers with an exposure dose of 7000 µC/cm2, the ﬁber-
to-ﬁber eﬃciency is −11.17 dB, the 3 dB bandwidth is about 40 nm, and the center
wavelength is at 1605 nm. The grating couplers exposed by a dose of 7000 µC/cm2
have a higher coupling eﬃciency than those exposed by a dose of 5000 µC/cm2, but the
transmittance has a red shift with a decreasing 3 dB bandwidth.
Compared to the simulation results, the coupling eﬃciency is decreased by 6.3 dB and
3.6 dB, and the 3 dB bandwidth is decreased by 9 nm and 28 nm, respectively. The center
wavelength has severe red shift of 50 nm and 70 nm into L band, respectively. The huge
red shift of the center wavelength is induced by the conic shape of the photonic crystal
holes. According to Fig. 3.33, the smaller hole size could cause a red shift. Therefore,
it can be inferred when the eﬀective refractive index of the photonic crystals is higher
than the artiﬁcial refractive index, it results in a weaker diﬀraction ability, and induces
a red shift of the transmittance. Large dose exposure leads to incomplete etching and
stronger conic eﬀect, so the transmittance of the 7000 µC/cm2 case shows a larger red
shift. The high coupling loss is considered to be caused by several reasons. Firstly, the
real hole shape is not cylindrical as designed, so the output proﬁle, strongly dependent
on the photonic crystals, is not ﬁtted well with the simulated Gaussian shape, which
is also the reason of the narrow bandwidth. Secondly, the SiCOI chip has a box layer
with a thickness of 2.03 µm, which induces 0.5 dB loss for a pair of grating couplers,
according to Fig. 3.18. Thirdly, two 100 µm long tapers connecting the grating couplers
can induce mode conversion loss and extra propagation loss. Fourthly, the scratches
==PAGE:76==
71
between the large holes can induce scattering loss on the surface. Fifthly, when doing
the alignment, the ﬁber and the grating are not strictly placed parallel in the same plane,
which could induce mode mismatch.
A high power test was conducted. The fully etched photonic crystal apodized grating
coulpers in SiCOI can suﬀer at least 35 dBm (3.2 W), which is the maximal output
power of erbium-doped ﬁber ampliﬁer (EDFA) in our laboratory.
It shows a much
higher stability compared to that in SOI platform, which only works with the input
power less than 28 dBm (0.63 W). This property signiﬁcantly beneﬁts the nonlinear
experiments, where a high pump power is desired.
4.2.2.2
Fabrication Stability
In order to test the fabrication stability, the same grating couplers are designed at
diﬀerent positions in the chip. Ten grating couplers, exposed by a dose of 5000 µC/cm2,
are measured. Their ﬁber-to-ﬁber eﬃciency, 3 dB bandwidth and center wavelength are
shown in Fig. 4.17.
The average ﬁber-to-ﬁber eﬃciency is −14.47 dB, with a standard deviation of 0.28 dB.
The average 3 dB bandwidth is 59.8 nm, with a standard deviation of 3.3 nm. The
average center wavelength is at 1582.3 nm, with a standard deviation of 2.9 nm. Al-
though the performance of them is not exactly identical, such little ﬂuctuations indicate
satisfactory fabrication stability.
4.2.2.3
Taper Analysis
In order to explore the eﬀect of the taper length, besides the 100 µm long taper, other
taper lengths of 75 µm and 50 µm are also designed and fabricated, as shown in Fig.
4.18. In order to save the space, two tapers are connected directly.
Figure 4.19 shows the normalized transmittance of the grating couplers with diﬀerent
taper lengths. Neglecting the small variations of bandwidth and center wavelength, the
transmittance of taper lengths of 100 µm and 75 µm almost has the same ﬁber-to-ﬁber
eﬃciency, while the 50 µm long taper shows the worst performance, that the eﬃciency
is decreased by 2 dB. Although a long taper induces a little larger propagation loss,
the mode can be converted safely with much less mode conversion loss. As the taper
lengths of 100 µm and 75 µm have little diﬀerence, the shorter one, with small footprint,
is preferred for compact device integration.
==PAGE:77==
72
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.17: (a) Coupling eﬃciency, (b) 3 dB bandwidth, and (c) center wavelength
of the grating couplers with the same designed size at diﬀerent positions in the chip.
It is noticed there are many ripples at the side band of the transmittance. These ripples
comes from the Fabry-Perot eﬀect, because some fraction of the light in the grating is
reﬂected. The free spectral range (FSR) of a resonator cavity is expressed as
FSR = λ2
2nL,
(4.1)
where λ is the center wavelength of the resonance, n is the refractive index of the
material, and L is the length of the cavity. Thanks to the short length of the tapers with
no straight waveguide connection, the Fabry-Perot eﬀect can be observed obviously, as
the FSR is inversely proportional to the length of the cavity. Concerning the wavelength
range from 1580 nm to 1620 nm, the free spectral range (FSR) of the tapers, with length
of 100 µm, 75 µm, and 50 µm is measured as 2.15 nm, 2.75 nm, and 3.80 nm, respectively,
showing a good linear relation. In terms of Eq. 4.1, assuming the refractive index is 2.65
and the center wavelength is 1600 nm, the cavity lengths are calculated to be 224.66 µm,
175.64 µm, and 127.11 µm, respectively. The reﬂection of the grating couplers, R, can
==PAGE:78==
73
Figure 4.18: Image of the grating couplers with the taper length of 100 µm, 75 µm,
and 50 µm.
Figure 4.19: Normalized transmittance of the grating couplers with the taper length
of 100 µm (blue), 75 µm (red), and 50 µm (yellow).
then be derived through
ER =
1
1 + 4Rsin2(δ/2)
(1−R)2
,
(4.2)
where ER is the extinction ratio that can be measured through the transmittance, and
δ is the round-trip phase shift. Therefore, the reﬂection of the these grating couplers
at 1600 nm is calculated at around 20%. As can be seen, the reﬂection is much higher
than the simulation in Fig. 3.30(b), which also indicates the upward diﬀraction might
be weaker than the design.
4.2.2.4
Coupling Angle Analysis
The center wavelength is desired in the middle of C band. However, it is shifted to
longer wavelength, due to the unsatisfactory etching in the fabrication process. In order
==PAGE:79==
74
to change the center wavelength, one can change the angle of the ﬁber holders, which
has been analyzed according to Fig. 3.34.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.20: Normalized transmittance of the grating couplers, which are exposed
by dose of (a) 5000 µC/cm2 and (b) 7000 µC/cm2, coupled by the ﬁber holders with
diﬀerent angle.
Figure 4.20 show the normalized transmittance of the grating couplers, coupled by the
ﬁber holders with angle of 67.5◦and 62.5◦. Through decreasing the angle of the ﬁber
holders by 5◦, the center wavelength is shifted from 1580 nm to 1540 nm and from
1605 nm to 1545 nm, for the grating couplers exposed by dose of 5000 µC/cm2 and
7000 µC/cm2, respectively. Both of the two enable the 3 dB bandwidth covering the
whole C band. However, the coupling eﬃciency decreases dramatically. There is a trade
oﬀbetween shifting the center wavelength and getting a high coupling eﬃciency.
4.2.2.5
Hole Size Analysis
The holes, fabricated with conic shape, can induce a high eﬀective refractive index, if
they are designed based on the cylindrical shape. Therefore, one can enlarge the designed
hole diameter in order to match the artiﬁcial refractive index. Two diﬀerent diameter
changes are made. One is to enlarge all the holes diameter by a constant value of 8 nm.
The other is to enlarge all the hole diameter by a factor of 5
4.
Figure 4.21 shows the normalized transmittance of the grating couplers, exposed by a
dose of 5000 µC/cm2, with diﬀerent changes of the designed hole diameter. The center
wavelength of the cases of D0 + 8 nm and D0 + 1
4D0 is shifted to 1548 nm and 1535 nm,
respectively. Meanwhile, the ﬁber-to-ﬁber eﬃciency is only decreased by 0.5 dB and
1 dB, respectively. The former one enables the center wavelength in the middle of C
band, and the 3 dB bandwidth covers the whole C band. The latter one also enables a
blue shift of the transmittance, but is a little over shifted.
==PAGE:80==
75
Figure 4.21: Normalized transmittance of the grating couplers with the hole diameter
of D0 (blue), D0+8 nm (red), and D0+ 1
4D0 (yellow), where D0 is the designed diameter
acquired from the calibration in Fig. 4.12(b)
Compared to the method of reducing the angle of the ﬁber holders, increasing the
designed hole diameter works better to shift the transmittance, as the ﬁber-to-ﬁber
eﬃciency is only decreased by 0.5 dB.
4.2.3
Straight Waveguide
Cutback method is usually applied to determine the transmission characteristics. To
measure the propagation loss of straight waveguides in SiCOI platform, the transmit-
tance of the waveguides with four diﬀerent length is measured, including 0.1 mm, 1 mm,
3 mm, and 5 mm, as shown in Fig. 4.22(a). The ﬁber-to-ﬁber eﬃciency decreases with
the increasing length of the waveguides.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.22: (a) Transmittance of straight waveguides with diﬀerent length of 0.1 mm,
1 mm, 3 mm, and 5 mm. (b) Cutback method to measure the waveguide loss. The red
line is ﬁtted by y = 4.957x −14.66.
==PAGE:81==
76
By extracting the maximal ﬁber-to-ﬁber eﬃciency of every transmittance, one can plot
the eﬃciency as a function of waveguide length, as shown in Fig. 4.22(b). The slope
of the linear ﬁtted line reﬂects the propagation loss of the straight waveguides, which
is about 5 dB/mm. The huge loss is considered to be induced by the top surface and
sidewall roughness.
In Chapter 4, the fabrication process of the waveguides in SiCOI platform is introduced.
The dose test and etching test are made to explore the optimized fabrication parameters
for the grating couplers. The fully etched photonic crystal apodized grating couplers
are then fabricated and characterized. The ﬁber-to-ﬁber eﬃciency of −13.89 dB and
−11.17 dB is achieved, by exposure dose of 5000 µC/cm2 and 7000 µC/cm2, respectively.
The fabrication stability, taper length, coupling angle, and hole size of the photonic
crystals are analyzed with the measurement results. The propagation loss of the straight
waveguides in SiCOI platform is obtained as 5 dB/mm through the cutback method.
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 5
Conclusion and Future Work
5.1
Conclusion
In this project, low-loss waveguides in SiCOI platform are investigated.
First of all, dry oxidation is applied to remove the defect layer in SiC, tailor the SiC layer
thickness, and decrease the surface roughness. The mechanism of SiC dry oxidation is
explored. The oxide contains two distinct layers. One is the top organic layer, including
ether and ester. The other is the silicon oxide layer, with a little carbon inside due to
the carbon emission from SiC. The oxide thickness versus the oxidation duration and
the oxide growth rate versus the oxide thickness are calibrated under the temperature of
1000◦C and 1100◦C. By measuring the reduction of the SiC, the SiC to oxide volume-
converting ratio is ﬁrstly calculated to be 2.55. Dry oxidation is then demonstrated
to be valid to improve the SiC surface roughness. Through the optimized second-time
oxidation by 1100◦C, with 6 hours for each time, the surface roughness is decreased from
3.59 nm to 1.55 nm, for the AFM scanning size of 500 nm × 500 nm.
Next, a fully etched photonic crystal apodized grating coupler in SiCOI platform is
simulated. The initial coupling eﬃciency for a pair of grating couplers is −13 dB, with
a 3 dB bandwidth of 61 nm. By adjusting the lattice constant of the photonic crystals,
an optimized structure is found. The maximal coupling eﬃciency is −7.6 dB, with a
3 dB bandwidth of 68 nm, covering the whole C band.
Finally, the fabrication process of the grating couplers is optimized, by dose test and
etching test. The fully etched photonic crystal apodized grating couplers, exposed by
dose of 5000 µC/cm2 and 7000 µC/cm2, are fabricated and characterized. They perform
maximal ﬁber-to-ﬁber eﬃciency of −13.89 dB and −11.17 dB, with 3 dB bandwidth
of 59 nm and 40 nm, respectively.
The fabrication exhibits a satisfactory stability.
77
==PAGE:83==
78
However, both of them have a severe red shift of the transmittance, compared to the
simulation result. To solve this problem, either reducing the angle of the ﬁber holders
or enlarging the designed hole size is demonstrated to be able to shift the spectrum to
short wavelength. And it has been found that the latter method works more eﬃciently.
By increasing all the hole diameter by 8 nm, the center wavelength is blue shifted to
1551 nm. A ﬁber-to-ﬁber eﬃciency of −14.47 dB, with a 3 dB bandwidth of 46 nm
covering the whole C band, is achieved. The propagation loss of the straight waveguides
is characterized to be 5 dB/mm by the cutback method.
5.2
Future Work
The propagation loss of 5 dB/mm and the coupling loss of −14.47 dB are still very
high for optical applications. There are several improvements to further decrease the
propagation loss and the coupling loss.
Firstly, although dry oxidation can decrease the surface roughness, it is still as high as
1.55 nm, for the AFM scanning size of 500 nm × 500 nm. To decrease it below 0.5 nm,
CMP can be applied after dry oxidation. As mentioned in Chapter 2, it remains an
interface, containing SiCO and SiO2, after HF etching. By polishing this interface, the
surface condition can be further improved.
Secondly, as dry oxidation has been demonstrated to be valid to improve the top surface
condition, it also has the potential to improve the sidewall roughness.
A post dry
oxidation can be employed for the sidewall treatment, after the waveguide fabrication.
Thirdly, to reduce the coupling loss, depositing a thin silicon oxide layer on the top of
the grating is the easiest way, as the refractive index contrast between the ﬁber and the
grating surface is minimized, leading to weak reﬂection from the ﬁber tip.
Fourthly, the center wavelength shift is induced by the mismatch of the eﬀective refrac-
tive index, due to the conic shape of the holes. One can calculate the eﬀective refractive
index of the cones, then the cylindrical holes can be replaced by the cones with equiva-
lent eﬀective refractive index, which could be more eﬀective than blindly enlarging the
designed hole size.
In a ﬁnal word, low-loss waveguides in silicon carbide on insulator platform have a
signiﬁcant potential to explore. We are on the way.
==PAGE:84==
Appendix A
Process Flow
Table A.1: Process ﬂow of SiC waveguide fabrication.
No.
Step
Equipment
Procedure
1
Spin coating
Spin coater
Resist HSQ
Thickness 550 nm
Speed 2000 round/min
Acceleration 250 round/s2
Time 60 s
First softbake 120◦C 2 min
Second softbake 220◦C 2 min
2
Thermal evaporation
Wordentec
Material Al
Thickness 20 nm
Rate 1.5 ˚A/s
3
E-beam exposure
E-Beam Writer 9500
Current 6 nA
Dose 5000 −7000 µC/cm2
4
Development
Fumehood
Chemical AZ400K
Ratio H2O : AZ400K = 3 : 1
Time 4 min 30 s
5
Dry etching
DRIE-Pegasus
Recipe SiC high O2
Gas SF6
Flow rate 150 sccm
Power 13.56 MHz Coil 800 W
13.56 MHz Platen 80 W
Pressure 6 mTorr
Temperature 20◦C
Time 5 min
6
Residual resist strip
Fumehood
Chemical 5% HF
Time 2 min
Ultrasound 10 min
79
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[1] Bahram Jalali and Sasan Fathpour. Silicon photonics. Journal of lightwave tech-
nology, 24(12):4600–4615, 2006.
[2] AJ Ikushima, T Fujiwara, and K Saito. Silica glass: A material for photonics.
Journal of Applied Physics, 88(3):1201–1213, 2000.
[3] Zengkai Shao, Yujie Chen, Hui Chen, Yanfeng Zhang, Fangxing Zhang, Jian Jian,
Zeming Fan, Lin Liu, Chunchuan Yang, Lidan Zhou, et al. Ultra-low temperature
silicon nitride photonic integration platform.
Optics Express, 24(3):1865–1872,
2016.
[4] Chi Xiong, Wolfram HP Pernice, Xiankai Sun, Carsten Schuck, King Y Fong, and
Hong X Tang. Aluminum nitride as a new material for chip-scale optomechanics
and nonlinear optics. New Journal of Physics, 14(9):095014, 2012.
[5] Daniel D Hickstein, Hojoong Jung, David R Carlson, Alex Lind, Ian Codding-
ton, Kartik Srinivasan, Gabriel G Ycas, Daniel C Cole, Abijith Kowligy, Connor
Fredrick, et al. Ultrabroadband supercontinuum generation and frequency-comb
stabilization using on-chip waveguides with both cubic and quadratic nonlineari-
ties. Physical Review Applied, 8(1):014025, 2017.
[6] Hojoong Jung, Rebecca Stoll, Xiang Guo, Debra Fischer, and Hong X Tang.
Green, red, and ir frequency comb line generation from single ir pump in aln
microring resonator. Optica, 1(6):396–399, 2014.
[7] Clemens Schriever, Federica Bianco, Massimo Cazzanelli, Mher Ghulinyan, Chris-
tian Eisenschmidt, Johannes de Boor, Alexander Schmid, Johannes Heitmann,
Lorenzo Pavesi, and J¨org Schilling. Second-order optical nonlinearity in silicon
waveguides: Inhomogeneous stress and interfaces. Advanced Optical Materials, 3
(1):129–136, 2015.
[8] Richard L Espinola, Jerry I Dadap, Richard M Osgood, Sharee J McNab, and
Yurii A Vlasov. C-band wavelength conversion in silicon photonic wire waveguides.
Optics express, 13(11):4341–4349, 2005.
80
==PAGE:86==
Bibliography
81
[9] M Ferrera, L Razzari, D Duchesne, R Morandotti, Z Yang, M Liscidini, JE Sipe,
S Chu, BE Little, and DJ Moss. Low-power continuous-wave nonlinear optics in
doped silica glass integrated waveguide structures. Nature photonics, 2(12):737,
2008.
[10] Adrien Billat, Davide Grassani, Martin HP Pfeiﬀer, Svyatoslav Kharitonov, To-
bias J Kippenberg, and Camille-Sophie Br`es. Large second harmonic generation
enhancement in si 3 n 4 waveguides by all-optically induced quasi-phase-matching.
Nature communications, 8(1):1016, 2017.
[11] Hojoong Jung, Chi Xiong, King Y Fong, Xufeng Zhang, and Hong X Tang. Optical
frequency comb generation from aluminum nitride microring resonator. Optics
letters, 38(15):2810–2813, 2013.
[12] BJM Hausmann, I Bulu, V Venkataraman, P Deotare, and Marko Lonˇcar. Dia-
mond nonlinear photonics. Nature Photonics, 8(5):369, 2014.
[13] Cheng Wang, Xiao Xiong, Nicolas Andrade, Vivek Venkataraman, Xi-Feng Ren,
Guang-Can Guo, and Marko Lonˇcar.
Second harmonic generation in nano-
structured thin-ﬁlm lithium niobate waveguides. Optics express, 25(6):6963–6973,
2017.
[14] C-A Berseth, C Wuethrich, and FK Reinhart. The electro-optic coeﬃcients of
gaas: Measurements at 1.32 and 1.52 µm and study of their dispersion between
0.9 and 10 µm. Journal of applied physics, 71(6):2821–2825, 1992.
[15] Minhao Pu, Luisa Ottaviano, Elizaveta Semenova, and Kresten Yvind. Eﬃcient
frequency comb generation in algaas-on-insulator. Optica, 3(8):823–826, 2016.
[16] Jaime Cardenas, Mengjie Yu, Yoshitomo Okawachi, Carl Poitras, Ryan K Lau,
Alexander L Gaeta, and Michal Lipson. Optical nonlinearities in high conﬁnement
sic waveguides. In CLEO: Science and Innovations, pages SW3I–4. Optical Society
of America, 2014.
[17] Igor Aharonovich, Andrew D Greentree, and Steven Prawer. Diamond photonics.
Nature Photonics, 5(7):397, 2011.
[18] Wolfgang Sohler, Bijoy K Das, Dibyendu Dey, Selim Reza, Hubertus Suche, and
Raimund Ricken. Erbium-doped lithium niobate waveguide lasers. IEICE trans-
actions on electronics, 88(5):990–997, 2005.
[19] JC Campbell, FA Blum, DW Shaw, and KL Lawley. Gaas electro-optic directional-
coupler switch. Applied Physics Letters, 27(4):202–205, 1975.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
82
[20] Hao Hu, Francesco Da Ros, Minhao Pu, Feihong Ye, Kasper Ingerslev, Edson Porto
da Silva, Md Nooruzzaman, Yoshimichi Amma, Yusuke Sasaki, Takayuki Mizuno,
et al.
Single-source chip-based frequency comb enabling extreme parallel data
transmission. Nature Photonics, page 1, 2018.
[21] Liudi Jiang and Rebecca Cheung.
A review of silicon carbide development in
mems applications.
International Journal of Computational Materials Science
and Surface Engineering, 2(3-4):227–242, 2009.
[22] Darrin J Young, Jiangang Du, Christian A Zorman, and Wen H Ko.
High-
temperature single-crystal 3c-sic capacitive pressure sensor. IEEE Sensors Jour-
nal, 4(4):464–470, 2004.
[23] Toan Dinh, Hoang-Phuong Phan, Takahiro Kozeki, Afzaal Qamar, Takahiro Na-
mazu, Nam-Trung Nguyen, and Dzung Viet Dao. Thermoresistive properties of
p-type 3c–sic nanoscale thin ﬁlms for high-temperature mems thermal-based sen-
sors. RSC Advances, 5(128):106083–106086, 2015.
[24] M Ikeda, T Hayakawa, S Yamagiwa, H Matsunami, and T Tanaka. Fabrication of
6h-sic light-emitting diodes by a rotation dipping technique: Electroluminescence
mechanisms. Journal of Applied Physics, 50(12):8215–8225, 1979.
[25] RC Clarke, RR Siergiej, AK Agarwal, CD Brandt, AA Burk, A Morse, and PA Or-
phanos. 30 w vhf 6h-sic power static induction transistor. In High Speed Semi-
conductor Devices and Circuits, 1995. Proceedings., IEEE/Cornell Conference on
Advanced Concepts in, pages 47–55. IEEE, 1995.
[26] S Zhao, G Lioliou, and AM Barnett. Temperature dependence of commercial 4h-
sic uv schottky photodiodes for x-ray detection and spectroscopy. Nuclear Instru-
ments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers,
Detectors and Associated Equipment, 859:76–82, 2017.
[27] Muhammad Nawaz and Nan Chen. Evaluating 4h-sic based commercial mosfets
power modules. In Power Electronics and Drive Systems (PEDS), 2015 IEEE 11th
International Conference on, pages 462–466. IEEE, 2015.
[28] Gary Lynn Harris. Properties of silicon carbide. Number 13. Iet, 1995.
[29] Roya Maboudian, Carlo Carraro, Debbie G Senesky, and Christopher S Roper.
Advances in silicon carbide science and technology at the micro-and nanoscales.
Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A: Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films, 31(5):
050805, 2013.
==PAGE:88==
Bibliography
83
[30] Philip G Neudeck, Steven L Garverick, David J Spry, Liang-Yu Chen, Glenn M
Beheim, Michael J Krasowski, and Mehran Mehregany. Extreme temperature 6h-
sic jfet integrated circuit technology. physica status solidi (a), 206(10):2329–2345,
2009.
[31] Stephen E Saddow, Christopher L Frewin, Camilla Coletti, N Schettini, E Weeber,
A Oliveros, and M Jarosezski. Single-crystal silicon carbide: A biocompatible and
hemocompatible semiconductor for advanced biomedical applications. In Materials
Science Forum, volume 679, pages 824–830. Trans Tech Publ, 2011.
[32] Xiyuan Lu, Jonathan Y Lee, Steven Rogers, and Qiang Lin. Optical kerr nonlinear-
ity in a high-q silicon carbide microresonator. Optics Express, 22(25):30826–30832,
2014.
[33] Xiyuan Lu, Jonathan Y Lee, and Qiang Lin. High-frequency and high-quality
silicon carbide optomechanical microresonators. Scientiﬁc reports, 5:17005, 2015.
[34] Xiyuan Lu, Jonathan Y Lee, Philip X-L Feng, and Qiang Lin.
High q silicon
carbide microdisk resonator. Applied Physics Letters, 104(18):181103, 2014.
[35] Jaime Cardenas, Mian Zhang, Christopher T Phare, Shreyas Y Shah, Carl B
Poitras, Biswajeet Guha, and Michal Lipson. High q sic microresonators. Optics
express, 21(14):16882–16887, 2013.
[36] Francesco Martini and Alberto Politi. Four wave mixing in 3c sic ring resonators.
Applied Physics Letters, 112(25):251110, 2018.
[37] Jaime Cardenas, Steven Miller, Yoshitomo Okawachi, Sven Ramelow, Austin G
Griﬃth, Alessandro Farsi, Alexander L Gaeta, and Michal Lipson. Parametric
frequency conversion in silicon carbide waveguides. In CLEO: Science and Inno-
vations, pages SF1D–7. Optical Society of America, 2015.
[38] M Gnan, S Thoms, DS Macintyre, RM De La Rue, and M Sorel. Fabrication
of low-loss photonic wires in silicon-on-insulator using hydrogen silsesquioxane
electron-beam resist. Electronics Letters, 44(2):115–116, 2008.
[39] Jacob S Levy, Alexander Gondarenko, Mark A Foster, Amy C Turner-Foster,
Alexander L Gaeta, and Michal Lipson.
Cmos-compatible multiple-wavelength
oscillator for on-chip optical interconnects. Nature photonics, 4(1):37, 2010.
[40] N Mohd Radzi and R Sanudin. Eﬀect of oxide thickness variation in sub-micron
nmos transistor. In IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering,
volume 226, page 012145. IOP Publishing, 2017.
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
84
[41] Terukazu Ohno, Y Kado, M Harada, and T Tsuchiya. Experimental 0.25-/spl
mu/m-gate fully depleted cmos/simox process using a new two-step locos isolation
technique. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, 42(8):1481–1486, 1995.
[42] AE Michel, RH Kastl, SR Mader, BJ Masters, and JA Gardner. Channeling in
low energy boron ion implantation. Applied Physics Letters, 44(4):404–406, 1984.
[43] KV Anand, HD McKell, and DC Northrop. The properties of silicon dioxide ﬁlms
on silicon as diﬀusion masks for boron. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, 4
(11):1722, 1971.
[44] Shu Nie, CD Lee, Randall M Feenstra, Y Ke, RP Devaty, WJ Choyke, CK Inoki,
TS Kuan, and Gong Gu. Step formation on hydrogen-etched 6h-sic {0 0 0 1}
surfaces. Surface Science, 602(17):2936–2942, 2008.
[45] Shun-ichi Nakamura, Tsunenobu Kimoto, Hiroyuki Matsunami, Satoru Tanaka,
Nobuaki Teraguchi, and Akira Suzuki. Formation of periodic steps with a unit-
cell height on 6h–sic (0001) surface by hcl etching. Applied Physics Letters, 76
(23):3412–3414, 2000.
[46] Munho Kim, Jung-Hun Seo, Deyin Zhao, Shih-Chia Liu, Kwangeun Kim, Kang-
mook Lim, Weidong Zhou, Edo Waks, and Zhenqiang Ma. Transferrable single
crystalline 4h-sic nanomembranes. Journal of Materials Chemistry C, 5(2):264–
268, 2017.
[47] Uma Rames Krishna Lagudu and SV Babu. Eﬀect of transition metal compounds
on amorphous sic removal rates. ECS Journal of Solid State Science and Technol-
ogy, 3(6):P219–P225, 2014.
[48] Syuhei Kurokawa, Toshiro Doi, Osamu Ohnishi, Tsutomu Yamazaki, Zhe Tan,
and Tao Yin. Characteristics in sic-cmp using mno 2 slurry with strong oxidant
under diﬀerent atmospheric conditions. MRS Online Proceedings Library Archive,
1560, 2013.
[49] Jihng-Kuo Ho, Chih-Yung Huang, Ming-Yi Tsai, and Che-Cheng Tsai. Investiga-
tion of polishing pads impregnated with fe and al2o3 particles for single-crystal
silicon carbide wafers. Applied Sciences, 6(3):89, 2016.
[50] Yan Zhou, Guoshun Pan, Xiaolei Shi, Suman Zhang, Hua Gong, and Guihai Luo.
Eﬀects of ultra-smooth surface atomic step morphology on chemical mechanical
polishing (cmp) performances of sapphire and sic wafers. Tribology international,
87:145–150, 2015.
==PAGE:90==
Bibliography
85
[51] Yan Zhou, Guoshun Pan, Xiaolei Shi, Hua Gong, Guihai Luo, and Zhonghua Gu.
Chemical mechanical planarization (cmp) of on-axis si-face sic wafer using catalyst
nanoparticles in slurry. Surface and Coatings Technology, 251:48–55, 2014.
[52] Yan Zhou, Guoshun Pan, Chunli Zou, and Lei Wang. Chemical mechanical pol-
ishing (cmp) of sic wafer using photo-catalyst incorporated pad. ECS Journal of
Solid State Science and Technology, 6(9):P603–P608, 2017.
[53] Yan Zhou, Guoshun Pan, Xiaolei Shi, Li Xu, Chunli Zou, Hua Gong, and Guihai
Luo.
Xps, uv–vis spectroscopy and afm studies on removal mechanisms of si-
face sic wafer chemical mechanical polishing (cmp). Applied Surface Science, 316:
643–648, 2014.
[54] Hui Deng, Katsuyoshi Endo, and Kazuya Yamamura.
Atomic-scale planariza-
tion of 4h-sic (0001) by combination of thermal oxidation and abrasive polishing.
Applied Physics Letters, 103(11):111603, 2013.
[55] Hui Deng, Katsuyoshi Endo, and Kazuya Yamamura.
Comparison of thermal
oxidation and plasma oxidation of 4h-sic (0001) for surface ﬂattening. Applied
Physics Letters, 104(10):101608, 2014.
[56] Canhua Li, Ishwara B Bhat, Rongjun Wang, and Joseph Seiler. Electro-chemical
mechanical polishing of silicon carbide.
Journal of electronic materials, 33(5):
481–486, 2004.
[57] Kevin K Lee, Desmond R Lim, Lionel C Kimerling, Jangho Shin, and Franco
Cerrina. Fabrication of ultralow-loss si/sio 2 waveguides by roughness reduction.
Optics letters, 26(23):1888–1890, 2001.
[58] Di Liang, Douglas C Hall, and Gregory M Peake. Oxidation smoothing of sidewall
roughness in algaas heterostructure waveguides. In Lasers and Electro-Optics So-
ciety, 2005. LEOS 2005. The 18th Annual Meeting of the IEEE, pages 382–383.
IEEE, 2005.
[59] Bruce E Deal and AS Grove. General relationship for the thermal oxidation of
silicon. Journal of Applied Physics, 36(12):3770–3778, 1965.
[60] I Franz and W Langheinrich.
Conversion of silicon nitride into silicon dioxide
through the inﬂuence of oxygen. Solid-State Electronics, 14(6):499–505, 1971.
[61] Marek Osinski, Tengiz Svimonishvili, Gennady A Smolyakov, Vladimir A Smagley,
Pawel Mackowiak, and Wlodzimierz Nakwaski. Temperature and thickness depen-
dence of steam oxidation of alas in cylindrical mesa structures. IEEE Photonics
Technology Letters, 13(7):687–689, 2001.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
86
[62] B Koley, M Dagenais, R Jin, G Simonis, J Pham, G McLane, F Johnson, and
R Whaley Jr. Dependence of lateral oxidation rate on thickness of alas layer of
interest as a current aperture in vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser structures.
Journal of Applied Physics, 84(1):600–605, 1998.
[63] Takeshi Yamamoto, Yasuto Hijikata, Hiroyuki Yaguchi, and Sadafumi Yoshida.
Growth rate enhancement of (0001)-face silicon–carbide oxidation in thin oxide
regime. Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 46(8L):L770, 2007.
[64] V ˇSimonka, A H¨ossinger, J Weinbub, and S Selberherr. Growth rates of dry ther-
mal oxidation of 4h-silicon carbide. Journal of Applied Physics, 120(13):135705,
2016.
[65] Hisham Z Massoud, James D Plummer, and Eugene A Irene. Thermal oxidation
of silicon in dry oxygen: Growth-rate enhancement in the thin regime ii. physical
mechanisms. Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 132(11):2693–2700, 1985.
[66] Masashi Uematsu, Hiroyuki Kageshima, and Kenji Shiraishi. Uniﬁed simulation of
silicon oxidation based on the interfacial silicon emission model. Japanese Journal
of Applied Physics, 39(7B):L699, 2000.
[67] Yasuto Hijikata, Hiroyuki Yaguchi, and Sadafumi Yoshida. A kinetic model of
silicon carbide oxidation based on the interfacial silicon and carbon emission phe-
nomenon. Applied Physics Express, 2(2):021203, 2009.
[68] Robert L Smith and GE Sandly. An accurate method of determining the hard-
ness of metals, with particular reference to those of a high degree of hardness.
Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, 102(1):623–641, 1922.
[69] Chuyang Y Tang, Young-Nam Kwon, and James O Leckie. Eﬀect of membrane
chemistry and coating layer on physiochemical properties of thin ﬁlm composite
polyamide ro and nf membranes: I. ftir and xps characterization of polyamide and
coating layer chemistry. Desalination, 242(1-3):149–167, 2009.
[70] Z Zolnaia, NQ Kh´anha, E Szil´agyib, ZE Horv´atha, and T Lohnera. Native oxide
and ion implantation damaged layers on silicon carbide studied by ion beam anal-
ysis and ellipsometry. In Proc.” XV International Conference for Physics Students
ICPS, pages 4–11, 2000.
[71] T Shoji, T Tsuchizawa, T Watanabe, K Yamada, and H Morita. Low loss mode size
converter from 0.3 µm square si wire waveguides to singlemode ﬁbres. Electronics
Letters, 38(25):1669–1670, 2002.
==PAGE:92==
Bibliography
87
[72] Vilson R Almeida, Roberto R Panepucci, and Michal Lipson. Nanotaper for com-
pact mode conversion. Optics letters, 28(15):1302–1304, 2003.
[73] Gunther Roelkens, Pieter Dumon, Wim Bogaerts, Dries Van Thourhout, and Roel
Baets. Eﬃcient silicon-on-insulator ﬁber coupler fabricated using 248-nm-deep uv
lithography. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, 17(12):2613–2615, 2005.
[74] Minhao Pu, Liu Liu, Haiyan Ou, Kresten Yvind, and Jørn M Hvam.
Ultra-
low-loss inverted taper coupler for silicon-on-insulator ridge waveguide.
Optics
Communications, 283(19):3678–3682, 2010.
[75] R Takei, M Suzuki, E Omoda, S Manako, T Kamei, M Mori, and Y Sakakibara.
Silicon knife-edge taper waveguide for ultralow-loss spot-size converter fabricated
by photolithography. Applied Physics Letters, 102(10):101108, 2013.
[76] Victor Nguyen, Trisha Montalbo, Christina Manolatou, Anu Agarwal, Ching-yin
Hong, John Yasaitis, LC Kimerling, and Jurgen Michel.
Silicon-based highly-
eﬃcient ﬁber-to-waveguide coupler for high index contrast systems. Applied physics
letters, 88(8):081112, 2006.
[77] Tai Tsuchizawa, Koji Yamada, Hiroshi Fukuda, Toshifumi Watanabe, Jun-
ichi Takahashi, Mitsutoshi Takahashi, Tetsufumi Shoji, Emi Tamechika, Sei-ichi
Itabashi, and Hirofumi Morita. Microphotonics devices based on silicon microfab-
rication technology. IEEE Journal of selected topics in quantum electronics, 11
(1):232–240, 2005.
[78] Dirk Taillaert,
Frederik Van Laere,
Melanie Ayre,
Wim Bogaerts,
Dries
Van Thourhout, Peter Bienstman, and Roel Baets.
Grating couplers for cou-
pling between optical ﬁbers and nanophotonic waveguides. Japanese Journal of
Applied Physics, 45(8R):6071, 2006.
[79] Frederik Van Laere, G¨unther Roelkens, Melanie Ayre, Jonathan Schrauwen, Dirk
Taillaert, Dries Van Thourhout, Thomas F Krauss, and Roel Baets. Compact and
highly eﬃcient grating couplers between optical ﬁber and nanophotonic waveg-
uides. Journal of lightwave technology, 25(1):151–156, 2007.
[80] Yi Zhang, Tom Baehr-Jones, Ran Ding, Thierry Pinguet, Zhe Xuan, and Michael
Hochberg. Silicon multi-project wafer platforms for optoelectronic system integra-
tion. In Group IV Photonics (GFP), 2012 IEEE 9th International Conference on,
pages 63–65. IEEE, 2012.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
88
[81] Attila Mekis, Steﬀen Gloeckner, Gianlorenzo Masini, Adithyaram Narasimha,
Thierry Pinguet, Subal Sahni, and Peter De Dobbelaere.
A grating-coupler-
enabled cmos photonics platform. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum
Electronics, 17(3):597–608, 2011.
[82] Diedrik Vermeulen, S Selvaraja, Pl Verheyen, G Lepage, W Bogaerts, P Absil,
D Van Thourhout, and G Roelkens. High-eﬃciency ﬁber-to-chip grating couplers
realized using an advanced cmos-compatible silicon-on-insulator platform. Optics
express, 18(17):18278–18283, 2010.
[83] Stijn Scheerlinck, Jonathan Schrauwen, Frederik Van Laere, Dirk Taillaert, Dries
Van Thourhout, and Roel Baets. Eﬃcient, broadband and compact metal grating
couplers for silicon-on-insulator waveguides.
Optics express, 15(15):9625–9630,
2007.
[84] Xia Chen, Chao Li, Christy KY Fung, Stanley MG Lo, and Hon K Tsang.
Apodized waveguide grating couplers for eﬃcient coupling to optical ﬁbers. IEEE
Photonics Technology Letters, 22(15):1156–1158, 2010.
[85] Yongbo Tang, Zhechao Wang, Lech Wosinski, Urban Westergren, and Sailing He.
Highly eﬃcient nonuniform grating coupler for silicon-on-insulator nanophotonic
circuits. Optics letters, 35(8):1290–1292, 2010.
[86] Attila Mekis, Sherif Abdalla, Peter M De Dobbelaere, Dennis Foltz, Steﬀen Gloeck-
ner, Steven Hovey, Steven Jackson, Yi Liang, Michael Mack, Gianlorenzo Masini,
et al. Scaling cmos photonics transceivers beyond 100 gb/s. In Optoelectronic In-
tegrated Circuits XIV, volume 8265, page 82650A. International Society for Optics
and Photonics, 2012.
[87] Bin Wang, Jianhua Jiang, and Gregory P Nordin. Embedded slanted grating for
vertical coupling between ﬁbers and silicon-on-insulator planar waveguides. IEEE
Photonics Technology Letters, 17(9):1884–1886, 2005.
[88] G¨unther Roelkens, Dries Van Thourhout, and Roel Baets. High eﬃciency silicon-
on-insulator grating coupler based on a poly-silicon overlay. Optics Express, 14
(24):11622–11630, 2006.
[89] Bernd Schmid, Alexander Petrov, and Manfred Eich. Optimized grating coupler
with fully etched slots. Optics express, 17(13):11066–11076, 2009.
[90] Robert Halir, Alejandro Ortega-Monux, Jens H Schmid, Carlos Alonso-Ramos,
Jean Lapointe,
Dan-Xia Xu,
J Gonzalo Wanguemert-Perez,
Inigo Molina-
Fernandez, and Siegfried Janz. Recent advances in silicon waveguide devices using
==PAGE:94==
Bibliography
89
sub-wavelength gratings. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electron-
ics, 20(4):279–291, 2014.
[91] Xia Chen and Hon Ki Tsang. Nanoholes grating couplers for coupling between
silicon-on-insulator waveguides and optical ﬁbers. IEEE Photonics Journal, 1(3):
184–190, 2009.
[92] Liu Liu, Minhao Pu, Kresten Yvind, and Jørn M Hvam. High-eﬃciency, large-
bandwidth silicon-on-insulator grating coupler based on a fully-etched photonic
crystal structure. Applied physics letters, 96(5):051126, 2010.
[93] Yunhong Ding, Haiyan Ou, and Christophe Peucheret.
Ultrahigh-eﬃciency
apodized grating coupler using fully etched photonic crystals. Optics letters, 38
(15):2732–2734, 2013.
[94] Yunhong Ding, Christophe Peucheret, Haiyan Ou, and Kresten Yvind.
Fully
etched apodized grating coupler on the soi platform with- 0.58 db coupling ef-
ﬁciency. Optics letters, 39(18):5348–5350, 2014.
[95] Xiaochuan Xu, Harish Subbaraman, John Covey, David Kwong, Amir Hosseini,
and Ray T Chen. Cmos compatible subwavelength grating couplers for silicon
integrated photonics. In Photonics Conference (IPC), 2012 IEEE, pages 350–351.
IEEE, 2012.
[96] Daniel Benedikovic, Pavel Cheben, Jens H Schmid, Dan-Xia Xu, Jean Lapointe,
Shurui Wang, Robert Halir, Alejandro Ortega-Mo˜nux, Siegfried Janz, and Mi-
lan Dado. High-eﬃciency single etch step apodized surface grating coupler using
subwavelength structure. Laser & Photonics Reviews, 8(6):L93–L97, 2014.
[97] Muhammad Shemyal Nisar, Xiangjie Zhao, An Pan, Shui Yuan, and JinSong Xia.
Grating coupler for an on-chip lithium niobate ridge waveguide. IEEE Photonics
Journal, 9(1):1–8, 2017.
[98] Houssein El Dirani,
Christelle Monat,
St´ephane Brision,
Nicolas Olivier,
Christophe Jany, Xavier Letartre, Minhao Pu, Peter D Girouard, Lars Hagedorn
Frandsen, Elizaveta Semenova, et al. Sinoi and algaas-on-soi nonlinear circuits
for continuum generation in si photonics. In Integrated Optics: Devices, Materi-
als, and Technologies XXII, volume 10535, page 1053508. International Society for
Optics and Photonics, 2018.
[99] Mitsuru Takenaka, Masafumi Yokoyama, Masakazu Sugiyama, Yoshiaki Nakano,
and Shinichi Takagi. Ingaasp grating couplers fabricated using complementary-
metal–oxide–semiconductor-compatible iii–v-on-insulator on si. Applied Physics
Express, 6(4):042501, 2013.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
90
[100] Francesco Martini and Alberto Politi. Linear integrated optics in 3c silicon carbide.
Optics express, 25(10):10735–10742, 2017.
[101] AE Grigorescu, MC Van der Krogt, CW Hagen, and P Kruit. 10 nm lines and
spaces written in hsq, using electron beam lithography. Microelectronic Engineer-
ing, 84(5-8):822–824, 2007.
