==PAGE:1==
Predicting eucalypt plant species
and oil production by applying
deep learning on images.
Arnór Ingi Sigurðsson
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Bio and Health Informatics
Kemitorvet, building 208
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 2477
info@bioinformatics.dtu.dk
http://www.bioinformatics.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Eucalypt plants are known worldwide for the oil they produce, as it has been
found to exhibit useful properties for medicinal, insect repellence and ﬂavoring
purposes, to name a few. The detailed leaf venation and oil gland pattern
found in their leaves can, in many cases, be speciﬁc enough to allow for species
identiﬁcation. As there are many hundreds of eucalypt species, identifying a
species from the leaf pattern alone would require expert knowledge or matching
the pattern with documented species patterns manually. The goal of this project
was to see if it is possible to automate eucalypt identiﬁcation from leaf venation
and oil gland patterns using modern deep learning architectures. A secondary
goal of this project is to investigate whether leaf patterns can be connected to
the amount of leaf oil produced by eucalypts.
Source images of eucalypt leaves were split into tiles and color detection used to
isolate tiles containing leaves from tiles unrelated to the task, such as background.
For the oil yield prediction, tiles were integrated with oil yield data from other
sources to build a dataset for modeling. Modern pre-trained deep learning
algorithms were ﬁne tuned for the tasks in this project. The eﬀect of images size,
color and model architecture for species prediction were evaluated. In the task
of predicting oil yield, models were trained on color images as well as binarized
images where non-circular shapes were removed in order to isolate oil glands.
The species prediction experiment showed good results on all image transforma-
tion, including binary images. The result indicates that the leaf venation and oil
gland arrangement alone, without color, is enough to identify numerous eucalypt
species. In the oil yield experiment, the deep learning models were not able to
ﬁnd a signal in a set of species that could be transferable to accurate predictions
==PAGE:4==
ii
on another set of species. This was the case both when using color images and
binary images focused on circular oil glands.
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Eukalyptus planter er kendt over hele verden for den olie de producerer, da olien
har vist sig at have nyttige egenskaber der kan bruges i fx lægemidler, insekt
afvisende midler og smagsstoﬀer, for blot at nævne nogle få. Undersøgelser af
de detaljerede vener og olie kirtler, der ﬁndes i bladene, kan i mange tilfælde
være speciﬁkke nok til at muliggøre identiﬁkation af arten. Da der eksisterer
mange hundrede forskellige eukalyptus arter, vil det kræve ekspertviden at
identiﬁcere arter ud fra mønstrene i et blad alene, eller at matche mønstret
med dokumenterede arter manuelt. Målet med dette projekt var at se om det
er muligt at automatisere identiﬁkationen af eukalyptus arter ud fra vene- og
oliekirtel strukturen i bladene ved brug af maskine læring, herunder de dybe
læringsarkitekturer. Et sekundlært mål med projektet var at undersøge om
mønstrene i bladene kan forbindes med mængden af olie der bliver produceret af
eukalyptus planter.
Billeder af eukalyptusblade blev opdelt i mindre udsnit og ved brug af farve
detektion blev udsnit der indeholdte blade isoleret fra udsnit der ikke var re-
laterede til opgaven, fx baggrund. Til forudsigelsen af olieudbyttet blev udsnit
koblet sammen med olieudbyttedata fra andre kilder for at opbygge et datasæt
til modellering. Moderne præ-trænede dybe lærings arkitekturer blev ﬁnjusterede
til opgaverne i dette projekt. Eﬀekten af billedstørrelse, farve og modelarkitektur
for artsforudsigelsen blev evalueret. I opgaven med at forudsige olieudbytte blev
modeller trænet på farvebilleder samt binariserede billeder, hvor ikke-cirkulære
former blev fjernet for at isolere oliekirtlerne.
Artsforudsigelseseksperimentet viste gode resultater på alle billedtransformatio-
ner, inkl. de binære billeder. Resultatet indikerer, at bladets opbygning af vener
==PAGE:6==
iv
og oliekirtler alene, uden farve, er nok til at identiﬁcere et stort antal eukalyptus
arter. I olieudbytte eksperimentet kunne de dybe læringsmodeller ikke ﬁnde et
signal i et sæt arter, der efterfølgende kunne overføres til nøjagtige forudsigelser
på et andet sæt arter. Dette var tilfældet både ved brug af farvebilleder og binære
billeder fokuseret på cirkulære oliekirtler.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in fulﬁllment
of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. in Engineering. The thesis work was
performed at the Department of Bio and Health Informatics, DTU Bioinformatics,
between February 12th 2018 and July 12th 2018. The thesis project corresponds
to 30 ECTS.
The primary objective of this thesis was to develop deep learning models in
order to recognize eucalypt species and investigating whether learned information
about a set of species could be used to infer about chemical properties of another
set of species.
Lyngby, 12-July-2018
Arnór Ingi Sigurðsson
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my mother, father and brother for the unconditional
support, motivation and kindness they have provided me throughout all my
studies.
I would also like to greatly thank my supervisor Bent Petersen, for all the good
advice, support and encouragement he gave me during this thesis project.
Many thanks to Thomas Sicheritz-Ponten for his good advice and help during
the thesis project.
I want to thank the members of the Metagenomics group, namely Simon Ras-
mussen, Jakob Nybo Nissen and Franziska Klincke for their useful feedback on
the thesis project.
I would like to give my thanks to Elizabeth Heather Jakobsen Neilson for giving
me essential advice on eucalypts in the beginning of the project.
Special thanks to Dean Nicolle for providing me with the great leaf images I
used in this thesis, without them the project would not have been possible.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Eucalyptus Plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Eucalypt Metabolites
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.1
Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.2
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
1.2.3
Performance Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
1.2.4
Modern Deep Learning for Image Recognition . . . . . . .
38
2
Method
47
2.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
2.1.1
Metabolite and oil yield data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
2.1.2
Image data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
2.2
Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
2.2.1
Species Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
2.2.2
Oil Yield Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3
Results and Discussion
65
3.1
Species Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
3.1.1
Comparison of Image Transformations and Sizes
. . . . .
65
3.1.2
Comparison of Architectures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.1.3
Final Model Performance for Species Classiﬁcation . . . .
68
3.1.4
Interpreting AUC for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation Tasks . .
69
3.2
Oil Yield Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
4
Conclusion and Future Perspectives
77
4.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A Training and Performance Plots
79
A.1 Species Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.1.1
Image Transformations and Sizes . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.1.2
Model Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.2 Oil Yield Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
A.2.1
Training Plots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
A.2.2
ROC curves and AUC for Individual Folds
. . . . . . . .
84
B Other Experiments
87
B.1
Compound Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
Bibliography
89
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter starts by introducing the genus Eucalyptus and similar genera, with
focus on their leaf patterns and compounds found in the leaf oil they produce.
Next, a large portion of the chapter is devoted to deep learning. The foundations
that make up a neural network are discussed, with focus on providing intuition
as well as basic mathematical formulation. The type of neural networks mainly
used for computer vision, convolutional neural networks, are described as well as
how deep learning models can be evaluated. The chapter concludes with some
examples of recent deep learning techniques applied in this project.
1.1
Eucalyptus Plants
The genus Eucalyptus consists of over 800 diverse species of ﬂowering trees
and shrubs, with most of the species being native to Australia. Robustness to
a variety of climate conditions and their fast growing nature are among the
reasons they have been planted and grown in many other countries than Australia
[Cop03].
Including traditional uses, such as timber ﬁrewood, Eucalyptus plants are known
for producing compounds that can be used for medicinal, ﬂavour, fragrance,
insect repellence and antimicrobial purposes [AAWS+15]. These are some of
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
(a) E. regnans.
(b) E. angustissima.
Figure 1.1: An example of the diversity within the genus Eucalyptus, E. reg-
nans and E. angustissima. E. regnans is often referred to as the
giant mountain ash and can reach up to 70 m in height while E.
angustissima more closely resembles a shrub [Cop03]. Images taken
from [WP2].
the things that set them apart from other fast growing plants, but there is a
lot of research to be done into the compounds themselves and their viability for
commercial use. It is common to group Eucalyptus and other similar genera,
such as Corymbia and Angophora under the name “eucalypts” [LUN03].
The plants themselves exhibit a highly diverse structure. Eucalyptus range from
small trees resembling shrubs to giant trees taller than 75 meters [BBC+06]. The
trees do not only diﬀer in their structure, but also their habitat. While some
trees grow in the dry Australian desert, there are some that grow in swamps and
have even been used for swamp drainage [OMK+09]. Figure 1.1 shows examples
of two plants belonging to the genus Eucalyptus.
For this project however, the most interesting part of the eucalypts are the leaves.
The term “leaf venation” refers to the pattern of veins found in a plant leaf,
which the plant uses to transport nutrients and water to diﬀerent parts of the
leaf. There does not seem to be one concrete leaf venation pattern which can be
described as being common among eucalypts [BN13]. However, some eucalypts
do exhibit a characteristic leaf venation which do allow for identiﬁcation. Namely,
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Eucalyptus Plants
3
(a) C. calophylla.
(b) E. approximans.
Figure 1.2: Eucalypt leaf venation patterns. Subﬁgure 1.2a shows the leaf
venation pattern of C. calophylla, where clear secondary veins
extend at an angle from a primary vein. The leaf venation pattern
of E. approximans is shown in subﬁgure 1.2b, but the primary vein
is much thinner and secondary veins seem to be parallel to the
primary vein. Numerous oil glands can be seen in both ﬁgures.
Note that the zoom of subﬁgure 1.2b has double the zoom of
subﬁgure 1.2a. Images taken from [BN13].
a primary vein extends along the leaf from which secondary veins arise from.
From the secondary veins, further vein reticulation can occur in the form of
tertiary and quaternary veins [Cop03]. Despite some similar characteristics, leaf
venation patters can be distinguishing enough to allow species identiﬁcation
within eucalypts in some cases [BN13]. A comparison of leaf venation can be
seen in ﬁgure 1.2.
Another part of eucalyptus leaf that can provide useful information for identiﬁ-
cation are the oil glands, which store the eucalyptus leaf oils. The arrangement
and sizes of the glands themselves can form distinguishing patterns in much the
same way the leaf veins do. For example, oil glands can be categorized based on
their location in relation to the veins. Oil glands that are unconnected to a vein
network are said to be “island” oil glands while those connected to a vein network
are called “intersectional” oil glands. The oil gland shape can also provide useful
information, with some species having round glands while others exhibit more
irregular shapes [BN13]. One can imagine that the combination of leaf venation
and oil gland patterns can provide useful information in the identiﬁcation of
eucalyptus species, especially since the patterns tend to be quite regular within
species [BN13]. A comparison of oil glands can be seen in ﬁgure 1.3.
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
(a) E. fasciculosa.
(b) E. microcorys.
Figure 1.3: A comparison of oil glands found in eucalypt leaves. The leaf of
E. fasciculosa in subﬁgure 1.3a lacks visible oil glands. Subﬁgure
1.3b shows the leaf of E. microcorys which shows clear oil glands
dispersed between a sparse leaf venation pattern. Images taken
from [BN13].
1.1.1
Eucalypt Metabolites
Eucalyptus oil is composed of a very large and diverse set of compounds. Of those
the most important compound is the monoterpene ether 1,8-cineole, also known
as Eucalyptol. Its uses include ﬂavoring, fragrance, medicine and insect repellence
[Cop03, SZA09]. Additionally, the antifungal and antimicrobial activity of the
compound has been studied [BTEAI84, MMT12, HWCL09]. Eucalyptus oil is
composed of up to 90% 1,8-cineole in some species and the estimated production
of the compound in 1991 was between 2500 and 3000 tonnes [Cop03, CH+92].
Although many eucalypt species do produce 1,8-cineole, only a few of them
produce enough for them to be beneﬁcial commercially, such as E. globulus and
E. smithii.
Another important compound found in eucalyptus oil is citronellal, which gives
a characteristic lemon scent. Therefore, it has mainly been used for fragrance
purposes in products such as soaps, detergents and disinfectants. It has also
shown to exhibit strong antimicrobial activity against Staphylococcus aureus
[GWML99]. The estimated production of citronellal was estimated at 320 tonnes
for 1984 [Law85]. As with 1,8-cineole, only a few species produce enough of the
compound to be commercially viable, the main species being E. citridora.
Piperitone is another compound extracted from eucalypts used for commercial
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Eucalyptus Plants
5
(a) 1,8-cineole
(b) (+)-citronellol
(c) (-)-piperitone
Figure 1.4: Molecular structures of 1,8-cineole,
(+)-citronellol and (-)-
piperitone.
purposes. Previously it was used to produce menthol but more recently its
main use cases are producing disinfectants, industrial soaps and solvents, in-
secticides and ﬂavoring agents [Cop03]. Additionally, it has shown insecticidal
activity [KKGH06]. The molecular structure of 1,8-cineole, (+)-citronellal and
(-)-piperitone can be seen in ﬁgure 1.4.
Although some of the compounds themselves found in eucalypts exhibit beneﬁcial
properties, the oils themselves can be utilized directly for various purposes.
Having a mix of compounds can provide a diﬀerent or enhanced activity than
single compounds [LRG74, MSRW11]. Due to diﬀerent eucalypts producing
diﬀerent compounds in varying quantities, researching eucalyptus oils from lesser
known species for bioactive properties might be of interest.
A higher metabolite yield can be expected from those species that produce a lot
of oil, given that the metabolite ratios are similar between the species. If it was
possible to know the oil yield of a plant from the leaf pattern alone, it might
allow for identiﬁcation of high oil yielding plants among candidates without the
need of physical measurements. This might also mean that low producing plants
would not be harvested for a low return. Knowing the oil yield however is not
enough if the goal is to isolate certain compounds eﬀectively. There can be a
lot of variance in the measured metabolite ratios between diﬀerent species, as
mentioned before with 1,8-cineole for example. Therefore, one must take into
account the metabolite ratios in the oil produced by a species if the goal is
to collect a certain compound. Nonetheless, being able to predict the amount
of oil produced by diﬀerent species is of interest as it indicates that there is a
shared pattern in the leaf venation and oil gland arrangement between species.
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
A successful predictive ability would also be a proof of concept that might be
transferable to other plants.
1.2
Deep Learning
Machine learning is a ﬁeld within computer science that has been drawing a great
deal of attention in the past few years. It can be viewed as a subﬁeld of artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI), and revolves around computer systems using given data and
statistical techniques to become better at a given task (i.e. “learning”). The
main objective is that the computer system is able to generalize from experience,
meaning that the system can perform accurately on previously unseen data
having “learned” using the given data. A formal description attributed to Tom
M. Mitchell is often used to describe the ﬁeld:
A computer program is said to learn from experience E with respect
to some class of tasks T and performance measure P if its performance
at tasks in T, as measured by P, improves with experience E [Mit97].
The term “machine learning” therefore covers a wide range of techniques that
apply the methodology described above. One such technique is representation
learning. The classical approach to applying machine learning is to extract
features from raw data that contain a certain pattern which can be connected
with an output of interest. The classical model learns how these features correlate
with the output and can therefore make predictions given a new set of data
containing the features it was trained on. The performance of the model is
therefore dependent on how well the features are crafted. If the features do not
contain any pattern that can be correlated with the response of interest, accurate
performance cannot be achieved.
An oversimpliﬁed example is that of training a classical model to identify whether
a picture contains a human or a dog. A descriptive feature could be “number of
legs”, where the model would correlate a higher value with a higher probability
of the picture being of a dog. A rather useless feature would be “number of ears”,
as it does not provide variability that can be used to separate the two classes. It
is indeed straightforward to come up with good features for such a simple task.
However, the provided example requires a person to quantify the feature before
it can be fed to the machine learning model. Additionally, machine learning
practitioners often attempt to solve complex abstract problems where which
features should be used is less than obvious.
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Deep Learning
7
As mentioned, a useful approach to solve this problem is a set of techniques within
machine learning called representation learning (also known as feature learning).
With representation learning, machine learning algorithms are leveraged not only
to discover a mapping from predeﬁned features to a certain output but also to
discover the features themselves. This circumvents the manual process of ﬁnding
a good set of features from the raw data and having to assign the feature values
to observations before modeling.
Neural networks are a family of machine learning algorithms that are capable
of solving the problem of representation learning. An input associated with an
output is fed to the neural network model, which propagates the input through
a set of layers while performing certain mathematical operations during the
forward propagation. Each layer is composed of units (also called nodes) that
process the input in diﬀerent ways. It has been shown that neural networks with
a high enough number of nodes in one layer can be universal approximators.
The fact that neural networks can be universal approximators means that they
have the capabilities of approximating arbitrary continuous functions [Hor91].
Neural networks therefore learn representations from the data and subsequently
use the representations for the tasks they are trained for. Neural networks are
discussed in more detail in section 1.2.1.
For many cases however, the mapping from an input to the identity associated
with that input can be very complicated. In the case of an image, raw pixel
values must be considered in relation to those pixel values around them which
can make up abstract representations. Extracting such high level representations
from the raw values is a problem in itself. Deep learning tries to address this
problem by creating complex representations through the combination of more
simple ones. Deep learning, with focus on image recognition, is discussed in
more detail in section 1.2.2. Figure 1.5 shows a Venn diagram depicting how
deep learning is related to other ﬁelds within AI.
1.2.1
Neural Networks
The average human brain is composed of around 100 billion neurons. A neuron
is a cell that processes and transmits information in the form of electro-chemical
signals. For neurons in the brain to communicate with each other, there must be
some way to transfer information between them. This is done through a part of
the neuron called axon, which connects one neuron to another. By exhibiting a
electro-chemical impulse through its axon, a neuron can therefore send a signal
to another neuron it is connected to [Rob16].
Despite this project not being about the human brain, its inner working are
==PAGE:20==
8
Introduction
AI
Machine learning
Representation learning
Deep learning
Example:
Knowledge
bases
Example:
Logistic
regression
Example:
Shallow
autoencoders
Example:
MLPs
Figure 1.5: A Venn diagram showing where deep learning cat be categorized
within the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence. Examples of technologies
are provided for each ﬁeld listed. Image taken from [GBC16].
==PAGE:21==
1.2 Deep Learning
9
somewhat analogous to the model applied in this work: artiﬁcial neural networks.
The model can be traced back to 1943, when Warren McCulloch and Walter
Pitts were researching how neurons might work [MP43]. Since then there have
been many improvements to neural network models, such as when Rumelhart,
Hinton and Williams showed the usefulness of back-propagation for various tasks
through computer experiments [RHW86].
Neural networks belong to a group of mathematical models called supervised
machine learning models. What they have in common is that they try to “learn”
from labeled data. Given enough descriptive examples, the models seek to
optimize parameters that allow them to discern the class of a previously unseen
example (e.g. if a model is given pictures of cats as positive examples and pictures
of not cats as negative examples, a successful model will be able to identify if a
new picture contains a cat or not).
1.2.1.1
Neural Network Structure
An artiﬁcial neural network is composed of units (often called nodes) arranged
in a series of layers. The convention is to call the ﬁrst layer the input layer. The
input layer is designed to receive information that the neural network attempts
to learn about and make predictions based on. The last layer is called the output
layer, which is how the network responds to the information it received in the
input layer. Between the input and output layer are one or more hidden layers,
where the information processing can be said to take place. Between nodes in
one layer and the next, there are connections called weights. The weights can
be either positive or negative, and their size represents how much a given node
aﬀects another node it is connected to [Bis06, Sch15]. A visual representation of
a simple artiﬁcial neural network can be seen in ﬁgure 1.6.
Therefore, given a certain input and a set of weights, the value of any hidden
node hn can be calculated as:
hn =
X
j
wj,nxj
(1.1)
where xj represents input node j and wj,n represents the weight between from
input node j to hidden node n. Equation 1.1 is therefore just a weighted sum
between the input nodes and their weights leading to the hidden node. This can
also be expressed as the dot product between the input nodes and the weights,
x · w∗,n, where x and w∗,n and the vector representations of the inputs and
weights leading to hidden node hn respectively.
==PAGE:22==
10
Introduction
w1,1 
x1
h1
o
w2,2
x2 
h2 
w1,2 
w2,1
v1
v2
Figure 1.6: A diagram depicting a simple artiﬁcial neural network. The network
has an input layer with two input nodes, one hidden layer with two
nodes and an output layer consisting of one node. The network is
fully connected with weights between the input layer and hidden
layer written as wj,n where i is the input node the weight is
mapping from and j is the hidden node the weight is mapping to.
The weights between the hidden layer and output layer are written
as vi where i is the hidden node being mapped from.
1.2.1.2
Activation Functions
By taking the weighted sum between the weights and nodes as described, we can
see that ultimately the output is a linear combination of the input nodes. However,
more often than not the data that is being modeled is non–linear, meaning that
the output cannot be reproduced by a linear combination of the inputs. To
solve this problem, non–linear transformations can be performed through the
use of activation functions. Activation functions take the total weighted sum
of a node and transform it to non–linearity. The default recommendation for
modern neural networks is the rectiﬁed linear unit, or ReLU, which is deﬁned by
the function g(z) = max{0, z} [NH10, RZL17]. The ReLU activation function
is therefore performing a relatively simple operation by changing all negative
values to zero, while positive values remain unchanged.
Another activation function is the Sigmoid activation function, which has the
mathematical form σ(x) = 1/(1 + e−x). Historically, it was used in the hidden
layers of neural networks but has recently fallen out of favor due to ReLU. The
Sigmoid activation function takes a real valued number and “squeezes” it in a
range between 0 and 1. Due to this fact, it is still commonly used for problems
where the task is to predict the output as a probability. A generalization of the
==PAGE:23==
1.2 Deep Learning
11
Sigmoid activation function is the Softmax function, which is often used when
predicting what class an input belongs to among multiple classes (multi-class
classiﬁcation). Plots of the ReLU and Sigmoid can be seen in ﬁgure 1.7.
1.2.1.3
Bias
It is almost always the case that so called “bias nodes” are included in neural
network architectures. Just like the input, the bias nodes are connected to the
hidden nodes with their respective weights, as seen in ﬁgure 1.8. While the input
changes depending on which observation is being passed through the network,
bias nodes maintain a constant node value, such as 1. This provides the network
with trainable weights that allow it to shift/translate the activation function.
This is comparable to the α constant in the simple linear function y = α + βxi.
Deﬁning bn as the bias weight leading to hidden node hn, we can calculate a
given hidden node’s value before activation as:
hn =
X
j
wj,nxj + bn
(1.2)
Being able to shift the activation function therefore allows the network to tune at
what value its activation function is centered at. This eﬀect cannot be achieved
by tuning the input weights, as they only aﬀect the steepness of the activation
function. The additional ﬂexibility this provides can lead to more successful
learning as the node activations are not constrained to be centered around a
certain value. This eﬀect is illustrated in ﬁgure 1.9.
1.2.1.4
Cost functions
So far we have seen how a neural network receives certain inputs and performs
certain operations to propagate them through the network and produce a single
output. This process of propagating the inputs through the network is called
forward-propagation or a forward pass. In order to improve its performance
however, a neural network must be able to learn based on how well it is performing
on given inputs. How wrong a network is in its prediction is called a cost (also
known as loss). This cost is used to tune the network’s weights to improve
its predictive performance, often through a process called back-propagation.
Although the concept was introduced earlier, the algorithm’s rise to popularity is
commonly attributed to the paper “Learning representations by back-propagating
errors” by Rumelhart et al. [RHW86].
==PAGE:24==
12
Introduction
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.7: Plots of the ReLU and Sigmoid activation functions which are com-
monly used in neural networks. ReLU is the most commonly used
activation function for modern neural networks, but its function
is to convert negative values to 0 while keeping positive values
unchanged. The Sigmoid function was commonly used as the main
activation function in neural networks before being mostly replaced
by ReLU. It is commonly used for probability predictions due to
its property of outputting values in the [0, 1] range.
==PAGE:25==
1.2 Deep Learning
13
l = 1
l = 2
l = 3
b21 b22
+1 
b31
+1 
Figure 1.8: A simple neural network including bias nodes. Each bias node has
a ﬁxed value, usually 1 and is connected to each of the nodes with
diﬀerent weights in its respective layer. The bias weights in the
ﬁgure are written as bl
n, meaning the bias weight leading to node
n in layer l. Having a bias allows the network to shift/translate
the activation functions.
==PAGE:26==
14
Introduction
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.9: The eﬀect of introducing a bias to a node activated with the ReLU
activation function. Subﬁgure 1.9a shows the eﬀect of changing the
weight of a single input leading to a hidden node that subsequently
gets activated with the ReLU function.
Changing the weight
changes the steepness of the activation function while leaving its
center unchanged. Subﬁgure 1.9b shows the eﬀect of connecting a
bias node to a hidden node and altering the bias weight. As can
be seen, the changing the bias weights translates the activation
function to the left or right.
==PAGE:27==
1.2 Deep Learning
15
As mentioned, we use cost to measure how correct or incorrect a network is
about a prediction. This cost can be deﬁned with a cost function (also known as
loss functions), C, which provides a quantitative measurement of the networks
correctness for a given observation. A commonly used constraint for cost functions
is that the cost of many observations can be written as an average over the costs
of the single observations. An example of a cost function is the cross entropy
cost function, which takes the form:
C = −1
N
N
X
i=1
yi · log2(ˆyi)
(1.3)
where N is the number of observations, yi is the vector encoding the true label
of the observations and ˆyi is the vector encoding the neural network predictions.
The yi vector can be thought of as one-hot encoding, where it “selects” the
prediction values for the ground truth positive classes while discarding the
predictions for the negative classes. As the negative classes get discarded during
the cost calculation, the cross entropy loss is calculated only based on the positive
label probabilities for a given observation. It should be noted however that the
predictions for the negative classes do play a part in tuning the network during
back-propagation. Cross entropy can be used as a loss function for diﬀerent
classiﬁcation tasks, namely binary, multi-class and multi-label classiﬁcation
problems. There do exist multiple other loss functions that are often used for
various tasks within machine learning, such as L1, L2 and hinge loss [JC17].
With a high cost meaning that the network is performing relatively poorly on
training observations, the goal is to tune the network in such a way to minimize
the cost function. This is most commonly done with a technique called gradient
descent. Gradient descent is an algorithm that attempts to ﬁnd the set of weights
and biases that minimize the cost function. In order for the algorithm to tune the
weights and biases in a way that decreases the cost, how changes in their values
aﬀects the cost must be known. The mathematical term for how a weight/bias
aﬀects a cost function is a partial derivative, i.e. how much does the cost function
change with respect to a given weight/bias.
1.2.1.5
Gradient Descent
A simple example is that of optimizing an arbitrary cost function of one variable,
C(w). We can imagine that the cost function has a convex form and therefore a
global minimum in the middle. In order to ﬁnd the value of w that minimizes
C(w), gradient descent iteratively tries diﬀerent values of w until it reaches the
==PAGE:28==
16
Introduction
minimum. How the C is calculated in relation to training observation depends
on which variant of gradient descent is used, but let us imagine that all training
examples are used to calculate the cost before each iteration. Note that it is
common to call each full iteration of training examples an epoch. Which values
of w it chooses are not random however, but rather it changes the value of w
in a “direction” that decreases C(w). Which direction to take is determined by
the derivative of C(w) with respect to w at a given point, ∂C(w)
∂w . For example,
if the derivative is positive it means that the cost increases as w is increased,
which means that w must be decreased in order to lower the cost. How much
w should be changed is determined by a small positive parameter, η, called the
learning rate.
The process of taking a step in the opposite direction of the derivative with a
certain learning rate is commonly called an update rule. The update rule can be
written in a functional form as follows:
w′ = w −η ∂C(w)
∂w
(1.4)
where w′ is the updated value of w. Gradient descent simply refers to the
iterative application of the update rule to search for the weights and biases
that minimize the cost function. A visual representation of the gradient descent
process to ﬁnd the optimal value of one variable can be seen in ﬁgure 1.10.
The process of tuning a variable value in the opposite direction of the derivative
to minimize a cost function can be extended to multiple variables. If we now
deﬁne the vector w = [w1, w2], the cost becomes a function of two variables,
C(w1, w2). We can also deﬁne the vector ∇C to be a vector holding the partial
derivatives of C(w1, w2), also known as a gradient vector. A generalization of
the gradient vector is called the Jacobian matrix. For the case of w = [w1, w2],
∇C takes the form
∇C =
 ∂C
∂w1
, ∂C
∂w2

(1.5)
which is telling us how C(w1, w2) changes with respect to w1 and w2. Just like
in the case with one variable, gradient descent can be used to ﬁnd the values
of w1 and w2 to minimize C. A sketch of how gradient descent might ﬁnd the
global minimum of a cost function that takes two variables can be seen in ﬁgure
1.11.
==PAGE:29==
1.2 Deep Learning
17
Figure 1.10: A graph showing how gradient descent can be used to ﬁnd the
value of w that minimizes the cost C(w). The optimal value for
w is 0.5 and the initial chosen value for w is 0. The reduction
in cost associated with each step is a function of the gradient at
a given point. The steps are therefore “larger” in the beginning
where the gradient is steep but level oﬀas the chosen value for
w approaches the global minimum, where the gradient starts to
ﬂatten out.
==PAGE:30==
18
Introduction
Figure 1.11: A graph showing how gradient descent might converge to ﬁnd the
optimal values of the parameters w1 and w2 that minimize the
cost C(w1, w2).
In the case of tuning one or two variables, it is relatively straightforward to
eyeball which parameter values result in a minimum of the cost function when
plotted, as can be seen in ﬁgures 1.10 and 1.11. In some cases it is also possible
to ﬁnd the solution analytically by computing the derivatives and ﬁnding the
extrema. However, ﬁnding the minimum visually is limited to relatively simple
graphs that can be plotted and computing the derivatives for a complex function
is often not feasible. In the case of neural networks, the weights can be in the
millions which makes an iterative approach such as gradient descent the only
practical approach [SZ14].
We brieﬂy mentioned that there are diﬀerent variants of Gradient descent de-
pending on how many training examples are used to calculate the cost C. These
variations diﬀer in the sense of how many training observations are used to
calculate the loss before gradient descent uses it to tune the network’s weights.
It was mentioned before that one assumption of the loss function is that it
must be able to average the loss over many training examples. It is exactly
like this how “vanilla” gradient descent works, but all training examples are
passed through the network and an average cost calculated. Another variant is
stochastic gradient descent, where a single training observation’s cost is used
to tune the network. A compromise between vanilla and stochastic gradient
descent is mini-batch gradient descent, where an update is done for each batch
==PAGE:31==
1.2 Deep Learning
19
of n training observations. Furthermore, there exist many extensions of gradient
descent that seek to lower training time and increase training accuracy, such as
Adam, gradient descent with momentum and RMSprop [Rud16, KB14].
1.2.1.6
Back-propagation
So far we have seen how the correctness of a neural network can be measured
using the cost and how gradient descent attempts to minimize the cost by
changing the network’s weights and biases. We showed how gradient descent
uses the partial derivatives of the cost with respect to the weights/biases, but
how these partial derivatives are calculated has been treated as a black box so
far. This is where back-propagation comes in, as it provides a way to calculate
these partial derivatives eﬃciently.
Before discussing back-propagation, we are going to make our notation when
it comes to neural network components a bit more thorough. So far we have
been focusing on neural networks composed of one hidden layer. In practice, it
is common to have multiple hidden layers in a neural network. To refer to a
certain layer, we will use l. For example in a neural network with one hidden
layer, l = 0 refers to the input layer and l = 1 refers to the hidden layer.
Let us now consider a simple neural network composed of only one neuron in
each layer. Furthermore, we are only going to focus on the last two neurons and
the weight between them. As there is only one neuron present in each layer, we
do not need to distinguish between individual neurons in the same layer. We are
going to use zl to refer to a neurons net input and al to refer to its net output
after activation. The same notation can be used for weights, where wl refers to
the weight leading to layer l. A ﬁgure showing the relevant parts of this neural
network example and how its output relates to the cost can be seen in ﬁgure
1.12.
The cost associated with a given observation is a function of al, which itself is
a function of zl. Furthermore, the value zl is a function of al−1 and wl, with
these two variables being independent of each other in the forward propagation.
For this example, we want to examine how the cost changes with respect to the
weight wl, the partial derivative ∂C
∂wl . Having described how the variables depend
on each other, we can leverage the chain rule and get the following expression
for
∂C
∂wl :
∂C
∂wl = ∂C
∂al
∂al
∂zl
∂zl
∂wl
(1.6)
==PAGE:32==
20
Introduction
zl
al
C
y
wl
Figure 1.12: The output neuron of a simple neural network with only one neu-
ron per layer. A part of the image is greyed out for simpliﬁcation.
The output of the ﬁnal layer, al, and the expected output, y, are
used to calculate the ﬁnal cost, C. Narrow lines indicate that the
previous value is used to calculate the value they point to while
thicker lines are indicating where a certain element is located in
the network.
Intuitively, we can imagine changing the value of wl slightly. This change will
have a certain eﬀect on zl, which in turn will have an eﬀect on al, which directly
aﬀects the cost. Looking at equation from right to left, we can see how it is
multiplying the eﬀect that each component has on the next one in a cascading
eﬀect through the network. Another way to look at it is that the cost associated
with observation i can be calculated as:
Cost = C(A(Z(al−1, wl)))
(1.7)
with C being the cost function, A being the activation function and Z being
weighted sum. Using the chain rule on this form to derive C with respect to wl,
we get:
C′(wl) = C′(A) × A′(Z) × Z′(wl)
(1.8)
which is equivalent to what we saw in equation 1.6. Now, let us imagine that
we wanted to go even further back in the network and calculate the change in
C with respect to wl−1. In that case, we follow the same logic as before where
we derive each component of the network with respect to the component that
==PAGE:33==
1.2 Deep Learning
21
inﬂuences it:
∂C
∂wl−1 = ∂C
∂al
∂al
∂zl
∂zl
∂al−1
∂al−1
∂zl−1
∂zl−1
∂wl−1
(1.9)
Notice how we have already calculated the ﬁrst two partial derivative of this
equation previously in equation 1.6. The heart of back-propagation is calculating
the partial derivatives that gradient descent needs to improve the network, and
it does that eﬀectively by reusing previously computed partial derivatives as it
propagates backward through the network.
1.2.1.7
Gradient calculation for any weight
Up to this point we have discussed neural networks composed of one hidden layer
or having one neuron per layer. However, most neural network architectures are
composed of multiple hidden layers with multiple neurons each. We therefore
introduce the notation wl
j,n, which refers to the weight leading from neuron j
in layer (l −1) to neuron n in layer l. Therefore, to ﬁnd how the cost changes
with changes in wl
j,n, one must calculate
∂C
∂wl
j,n . Just like we use wl
j,n for a given
weight in the network, we will now use zl
n and al
n to refer to net input and the
output after activation of node n in layer l. How this notation is used to refer to
parts of a neural network can be seen in ﬁgure 1.13.
Before looking at how we can calculate how the costs changes with respect to
any weight wl
j,n, we are going to deﬁne an intermediate value, δl
n, that we call
the error of neuron n in layer l. This error value takes the form:
δl
n = ∂C
∂zln
(1.10)
We can see how δl
n is measuring the change in cost with respect to the net input
to node n in layer l. Intuitively, we can think of this value being high negative or
positive value meaning that changing zl
n in the opposite direction of the gradient
∂C
∂zln can reduce the cost by a large margin. However, if
∂C
∂zln is a low value, we
can imagine as the value of zl
n being close to the bottom of ﬁgure 1.10, which
means that the neuron is close to its optimal value.
Let us now refer to the output layer as l = L. Using the chain rule, we can
express
∂C
∂zL
n as a partial derivative of the cost with respect to the activation of
==PAGE:34==
22
Introduction
w32,1
l = 1
l = 2
l = 3
z31 a31
Figure 1.13: A neural network showing the notation and indexing used to
indicate individual weights, net input of a neuron and a neuron
output after activation. Narrow lines indicate that the previous
value is used to calculate the value they point to while thicker
lines are indicating where a certain element is located in the
network.
==PAGE:35==
1.2 Deep Learning
23
the nth neuron in the output layer we are interested in:
δL
n = ∂C
∂aLn
∂aL
n
∂zL
n
.
(1.11)
Now if the task was to calculate the error in a layer other that the output layer,
it is important to note that a given neuron in hidden layer l will aﬀect all the
neurons in layer l + 1 through each of the weights leading from it. Therefore if
we want to look at the eﬀect of neuron zl
j on C, we have to take into account all
the weights leading from zl
j to neurons in the next layer that eventually aﬀect
the cost. By applying the chain rule to and through some algebraic operations,
we can arrive at the following expression for the error in the jth neuron in any
non-output layer:
δl
j = ∂al
j
∂zl
j
X
n
wl+1
j,n δl+1
n
.
(1.12)
We can see how equation 1.12 is summing together the product of the weights
leading from it and the respective errors in the next layer. If we were to write
δl+1
n
in terms of partial derivatives, we would eventually arrive at an expression
of how the cost C changes with respect to the output nodes that are used to
calculate it directly. δl+1
n
can therefore be thought of as an “intermediate” value
that keeps track of the partial derivatives leading from its node to the eventual
cost. The
∂al
j
∂zl
j derivative is similar to the rightmost term in equations 1.6 and
1.9, where we are looking at how the ﬁrst variable in the cascade aﬀects the one
it is connected to. This is the same approach as we saw in equation 1.11, where
we are looking at how C changes with respect to the jth neuron. As mentioned,
the main diﬀerence here as compared to the output neurons is that we have to
look at the cascading eﬀect a node has through all its weights and sum them up
to ﬁnd how close this neuron is to being optimal.
Lastly, if we want to calculate an expression for how C changes with respect to
any weight in the network, we can yet again apply the chain rule to get:
∂C
∂wl
j,n
=
∂zl
n
∂wl
j,n
∂C
∂zln
(1.13)
We know that the right part of the expression is equal to δl
n. In the left part
we are looking at how zl
n changes with respect to one weight leading to it, wl
j,n.
==PAGE:36==
24
Introduction
We know that zl
n = P
k wl
k,nal−1
k
, but deriving this expression with respect to
wl
j,n means that all elements of the summation become zero unless j = k, which
ﬁnally gives us al−1
j
as the result from the derivative. Therefore, we get the
following expression which allows us to calculate the partial derivative of any
weight in a neural network:
∂C
∂wl
j,n
= al−1
j
δl
n
(1.14)
which is taking the product of the activation neuron the weight comes from and
the error in the neuron it is leading to. If this is a high value, it might mean that
the previous activation is high and/or the error in the next neuron is high. This
indicates that the weight value is party responsible for a high cost. This will
then result in a high gradient value for this weight, which means that gradient
descent will attempt to take a relatively large step to change it in order to lower
the cost.
1.2.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are a class of deep learning algorithms
that are known for their success in computer vision, namely image classiﬁcation.
Similarly to neural networks, CNNs were inspired by biology in the sense how
the visual perception mechanisms is organized in animals [LB+95, GWK+15].
They largely use the same concepts as introduced for neural networks in section
1.2.1, such as neurons and trainable weights and biases. The main diﬀerence
from neural networks, however, is how input gets passed into the model. While a
neural network normally treats the input as a single input vector and processes
it in one go, CNNs can be thought of as looking at one part of the input at a
time and combining that into an overall view. This has been shown to work
exceptionally well for image data and has also been applied in natural language
processing (NLP) [CPC16, Kim14]. As the purpose of this project is leveraging
CNNs for image recognition, the discussion will assume that the input is images
without touching on other applications of CNNs.
The reason why CNNs are useful for high dimensional data such as images is that
the number of parameters is quick to explode if one applies a traditional feed
forward for the task. As an example, if one has an image of 224 by 244 pixels
with 3 color channels, the input size itself is going to be 224 × 224 × 3 = 150.528.
This is the number of weights needed to connect the input vector to one neuron.
If the hidden layer is composed of multiple neurons, the number of parameters
==PAGE:37==
1.2 Deep Learning
25
quickly grows to an impractical amount for partial derivatives to be calculated
and applied during gradient descent. Note that it is common to refer to the
number of channels an image has as “depth”.
1.2.2.1
Convolutional layers
CNNs derive their name from the convolutional operation they perform, which
are done in so called convolutional layers in the CNN. The convolutional layers are
the main building blocks of CNNs and their task can be described as extracting
important features from the images that allow the network to classify them. For
example, through multiple convolutional layers the shape of a car’s tire might
be extracted from an image’s raw pixel values, which the CNN uses to classify
the image as a car. The earlier convolutional layers are normally activated by
simple shapes such as lines and edges, while later layers show high activations
when exposed to more complex shapes [LGRN09, ZF13]. This can be seen in
ﬁgure 1.14.
The convolutional layers do not look at the whole image at a time however, but
rather slide over the image looking at a small tile at a time. The CNNs look at
these small patches through so called ﬁlters/kernels, which are just small square
matrices containing number values that can be used to extract features from
images. An example showing how an image looks before and after applying an
edge detection ﬁlter can be seen in ﬁgure 1.15.
The convolution operation these ﬁlters actually perform is taking the dot product
of the ﬁlter and the part of the image the ﬁlter is focusing on at a given step.
This operation can be seen in ﬁgure 1.16. Note that this process is almost the
same as with the neural networks described earlier, a dot product followed by an
activation such a ReLU is performed, but in this case the activation is calculated
for a part of the input image. It is common to use multiple ﬁlters, each with their
own values in CNNs, where each ﬁlter can be thought of as being specialized in
extracting a certain feature from the image. These values can be thought of as
weights, and are exactly the main parameters that CNNs try to optimize during
training. Optimized ﬁlters allow the CNNs to extract meaningful features from
images, that are eventually used in a fully connected layer at the end of the
network to classify the images. The number of ﬁlters in a given convolutional
layer is a hyperparameter that controls the output depth of that layer. For
example, if we have a grayscale image and apply ten ﬁlters to it, the output
depth will also be ten.
One can see that for any ﬁlter bigger than 1x1, then number of steps taken
over a certain image dimension is going to be less than the number of pixels in
==PAGE:38==
26
Introduction
Figure 1.14: Visualization of CNN activations. High ﬁlter activations in the
convolutional layers are deconvoluted to visualize what pattern
caused the ﬁlters to become activated. The corresponding image
patches of the input images are also shown. The image shows how
earlier layers in the CNN are activated by simple shapes while
later layers combined these simple shapes and get activated by
more complex ones. Image taken from [ZF13].
==PAGE:39==
1.2 Deep Learning
27
Original 
Edge detection
Result
Figure 1.15: An image showing how a convolution operation where a ﬁlter is
slid over an image can be used to extract features, such as edges,
from an image. In this case the ﬁlter is a matrix of size 3x3 and
its values are specialized for edge detection. Image adapted from
[WP1].
1
4
2
2
3
1
0
5
2
1
0
-1
0
0
0
-1
0
1
1
Input image
Filter
Output
Figure 1.16: How a convolution operation is performed on an one channel
image shown as pixel values. Note that this is the same process
as performed in neural networks, where a dot product is taken
between an input (image) and weights (ﬁlter). After taking the
dot product, the weighted input is put through an activation
function such as ReLU.
==PAGE:40==
28
Introduction
the image itself. The output dimension is therefore going to be smaller than
the image input dimension. For example, given a 7x7 input image and a 3x3
ﬁlter, the output dimension is going to be 5x5. Performing many convolutional
operations can therefore shrink the input volume to a size that is diﬃcult to
make sense of for classiﬁcation. One trick that is used to preserve the spatial
dimension of an image is zero-padding. Zero-padding refers to padding the image
with zeros around the border. This means that we can control the size of the
output volume, and one application is the preservation of spatial size through
convolutional operations.
Another way to control the output dimension of a convolutional layer is the
use of stride. Stride refers to the step size a ﬁlter takes as it slides over the
input volume. With a stride of one, the ﬁlter will slide over the image one
pixel at a time. With a stride of two, it will jump two pixels forward after each
convolutional operation before performing the next one. Having a larger stride
means producing smaller output dimensions. The following equation can be used
to calculate the output size of an image’s dimension after the convolutions:
D = W −F + 2P
S
+ 1
(1.15)
where D is the size of the output dimension, W is the input dimension, F is
the ﬁlter size along the dimension in question, P is the size of the zero-padding
and S is the stride. If the image and ﬁlter dimensions are squares, the output
dimensions will be the same for the width and height given that the zero-padding
and stride are the same for both dimensions. For an input image of 32x32 with
a ﬁlter size of 5x5, no zero-padding and stride of 1 the output dimension after
one convolutional operation is therefore (32 −5 + 2 × 0)/1 + 1 = 28. Note that
some combinations of image dimensions, ﬁlter dimensions and stride might cause
the ﬁlter to slide outside of the image itself. The fact that the ﬁlter does not
ﬁt evenly over the input is reﬂected in a non-integer value in equation 1.15.
Zero-padding can also be applied in that case to make sure the ﬁlter ﬁts over
the input.
We discussed that CNNs are better suited for high dimensional input because the
number of parameters is quick to reach impractical values with fully connected
neural networks. One method would be to use specialized ﬁlters for each location
in the image, but that does not solve the problem of having an extreme amount
of parameters to optimize. CNNs take advantage of the fact that if a ﬁlter is
good at extracting a shape from a certain position in an image, it is also good
at extracting a feature from another location. This is why we say that ﬁlters
slide over images, a given ﬁlter eventually looks at the whole image, but only
gets “activated” when it encounters the shape it has been optimized to extract.
==PAGE:41==
1.2 Deep Learning
29
Additionally, note that the ﬁlters themselves can have a depth greater than one.
As an example, let us assume we have an input image of size 224x224x3 and a
convolutional layer with 5x5x3 sized ﬁlters and an output depth of 48, i.e. we
apply 48 ﬁlters on the input. With each ﬁlter having a bias, the total number of
weights in this convolutional layer is (5 × 5 × 3) × 48 + 48 = 3648. Note that this
is much less than the 150.528 weights needed for one hidden neuron in a fully
connected network. A real world example is the CNN architecture by Krizhevsky
et al., which won the ImageNet competition in 2012, but the ﬁrst convolutional
layer had around 35.000 weights [KSH12a].
1.2.2.2
Pooling layers
So far we have discussed the convolutional operation that CNNs perform. There
is another important operation that CNNs perform however, which is pooling.
Pooling is an operation that is commonly applied to reduce the number of
parameters and therefore computation in the CNN. A common pooling operation
is max-pooling, where only the maximum value of a given spatial region is used.
The pooling operation is performed independently on each channel of the inputs
the pooling layer receives. It is often done using a 2x2 ﬁlter and a stride of two,
which reduces the height and width dimensions by half. For example, applying
the described max-pooling to an 224x224x3 image outputs a 112x112x3 volume.
CNN architectures commonly have a pooling layer periodically inserted between
the convolutional layers. An example of the max-pooling operation can be seen
in ﬁgure 1.17.
1.2.2.3
Fully connected layers in CNNs
At the end of the CNN there is a fully connected layer which is used for
classiﬁcation. The convolutional and pooling layers can be thought of as feature
extractors and the features they extract are used to classify the input image in
the fully connected layer. Every neuron in the last convolutional/pooling layer is
therefore connected to each neuron in the fully connected layer. Intuitively, one
can imagine the channels that recognize shapes such as circles and rectangles to
be highly activated if the input image is a car. Together, they will contribute
to a high class score for the “car neuron” in the output layer. The output layer
normally uses Softmax, as described in section 1.2.1, to calculate probabilities
from the class scores in the output layer.
In summary, a CNN takes in an input image and propagates it through convolu-
tional and pooling layers until a fully connected layer assigns class scores to the
==PAGE:42==
30
Introduction
1
4
2
2
3
1
0
5
2
1
4
2
1
0
1
3
Input image
4
4
5
3
Output
2x2 max-pooling 
with stride 2 
Figure 1.17: The result of applying max-pooling with a 2x2 ﬁlter and a stride
of two on a 4x4 input image. Max-pooling operates on a certain
spatial region of the input (color-coded) and outputs the maximum
value of that spatial region.
image. The loss is calculated with a loss function such as cross entropy. The loss
is used to calculate the weight gradients using back-propagation, both for the
ﬁlter weights and the fully connected layer weights. Optimizing the ﬁlter weights
makes the network better at extracting meaningful shapes from the images, while
optimizing the fully connected weights makes it more eﬀective at connecting
those shapes to the correct classes. An overview of a CNN architecture used to
classify an image can be seen in ﬁgure 1.18.
1.2.3
Performance Evaluation
Performance evaluation refers to investigating how well a model is performing
on the task it is being trained for. It can refer to how well the model is ﬁtting
to training data, how tuning certain hyperparameters leads to an increase in
performance and how well the model is expected to perform on previously unseen
data.
There are multiple methods to measure the performance of a model. During
training, one can monitor the loss directly to see how the model is ﬁtting to the
data. However, it is common to use more interpretable performance metrics such
==PAGE:43==
1.2 Deep Learning
31
Figure 1.18: An overview of a CNN being used to classify an input image. The
image shows a convolutional operation being performed as a ﬁlter
slides over the image, producing multiple output volume. The
output volume dimension can be reduced with a pooling operation
and ﬁnally the image is classiﬁed using a fully connected layer.
Image take from [RW17].
as accuracy, confusion matrices and F1 score when actually reporting on model
performance. This project uses accuracy, the Matthews correlation coeﬃcient
(MCC) and the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC
AUC), which are discussed in the following sections, for performance evaluation.
1.2.3.1
Overﬁtting
Neural networks tend to be extremely good at optimizing their parameters to
the data they are trained on. This can lead to a problem called overﬁtting (also
called high variance), where a model ﬁts extremely well to the training data but
does not generalize well on previously unseen data [JWHT13]. One way to think
of it is that the network has “memorized” the training data, including variation
that is irrelevant to the task at hand. There are multiple established ways to
avoid overﬁtting in neural networks, such as weight decay / L2 regularization
[PN13], early stopping [LSZ08], dropout [SHK+14] and batch normalization has
some regularization eﬀects [IS15]. The opposite of overﬁtting is underﬁtting
(also called high bias), where the model is not able to ﬁt to the training data well
enough. An example of overﬁtting and underﬁtting can be seen in ﬁgure 1.19.
==PAGE:44==
32
Introduction
Figure 1.19: An example of underﬁtting, overﬁtting and ﬁtting well to one
dimensional data. A linear model with varying transformations
of the input x is ﬁt to the supplied data. When underﬁtting, the
model is not complex enough to the data because it has only one
parameter to optimize, resulting in straight line. With the right
complexity, the model is able to ﬁt to the data while accurately
modeling the ground truth. With too much complexity, the model
starts overﬁtting and ﬁts to the random noise in the data, meaning
it is not capturing the general trend in the ground truth.
1.2.3.2
Model assessment
In the performance evaluation process it is almost always the case that the data
is split into diﬀerent sets. Firstly, the training set which contains the data the
model is trained on. In order to monitor the training and tune the model, a
separate validation set is used. Only looking at how well the model performs
on the training set might cause one to choose a model that is overﬁtting to
the data. After ﬁtting the model on the training data and using the validation
model to settle on a good model, the model makes predictions on a previously
unseen test set. The test set is to measure how well the model generalized to
new data, i.e. in a real life scenario where future data is unknown. The test set
is necessary because by choosing the model that performs best on the validation
set introduces a certain bias.
It should be noted that the terms for validation and test sets are often reversed,
depending on who is asked. In this project the validation set is used to monitor
training while the test set is used to estimate generalization error, as is often the
case in the literature [RN16, Rip07, HTF13].
The process of doing one split of the data as described above is often called a
validation split or the holdout method [JWHT13]. The main drawback of the
==PAGE:45==
1.2 Deep Learning
33
Test 
Training
Validation
Figure 1.20: A ﬁgure showing how holdout validation split the original data
into training, validation and test sets. The training set is used
for model ﬁtting while the validation set is used to evaluate the
model performance and choosing hyperparameters. After settling
on the best performing model, the test set is used to provide an
unbiased measure of the generalization performance.
holdout method is that results can exhibit a high variance when the method
is repeated on the same dataset.
This is due to the randomness involved
when splitting the observations into training, validation and test datasets. For
example, similar observations could end up in the training dataset by chance.
This causes the model to be trained on these observations only, which might
mean it generalizes poorly to the test set. The opposite can also happen, where
performance of the model is overestimated due to observations that are easy
to classify ending up in the test set. This is more likely to be a problem in
data scarce situations, where the training and test set compositions are more
sensitive to randomness. In data rich situations however, the holdout method is
often the most practical approach [HTF13]. This is because it is more likely that
the validation and test sets represent the training data accurately and doing
more extensive performance evaluations, such as cross-validation, might be too
computationally expensive. It is diﬃcult to give a general rule for how much
data is enough for the holdout method, as it depends on the signal-to-noise ratio
in the data and model complexity among other things. A ﬁgure showing how a
dataset might be split using the holdout method can be seen in ﬁgure 1.20.
If the dataset is small enough, the most common approach for evaluation is a
concept called cross-validation. The approach revolves around doing multiple
splits of the dataset into training, validation and test sets. This means that
each observation rotates between being part of the training, validation or test
sets. Eﬀectively, this means that the model will be trained and tested on all
observations, which gives a more accurate performance measure than the holdout
method. However, this comes at a higher computational cost, as multiple ﬁtting
and predicting iterations are performed. Something between 3 and 10 splits of
the data is common, but this version is called K-fold cross-validation. Diﬀerent
approaches to cross validation exist, such as Leave-One-Out and Monte Carlo
cross validation [DGB07, Bis06]. One approach of K-fold cross validation is to
take out a test set, repeatedly split the rest of the observations into training and
validation sets for hyperparameter tuning and ﬁnally test the chosen model on
the test set. It is possible to repeat this procedure, where the original data is
split multiple times into training/validation sets (inner loop) and test sets (outer
loop), but this is commonly called nested or two-fold cross validation [CT10]. A
==PAGE:46==
34
Introduction
Test 1
Inner 1
Train 1
Validation 1
Train 2
Validation 2
Train 5
Inner 2
Validation 5
Test 2
Inner 5
Test 5
Figure 1.21: A ﬁgure showing how nested cross-validation splits the original
data multiple times into outer and inner loops. The inner loop
is used for training and model selection while the outer loop is
used to estimate generalization error. In this case, a 5-fold split
is used for both the inner and outer folds.
ﬁgure showing how a dataset might be split using nested cross-validation can be
seen in ﬁgure 1.21.
1.2.3.3
Matthews correlation coeﬃcient
As mentioned, there are many metrics that can be used for model assessment.
One of which is the Matthews correlation coeﬃcient (MCC). One problem with
using metrics such as accuracy and F1-score is that they are sensitive to class
imbalance. For example, if one has a dataset containing 95 observations of the
positive class and 5 observations of the negative, an accuracy of 95% and a F1
score of 0.9744 will be reported if the classiﬁer simply assigns all observations to
the positive class. Looking at the those metrics only, one might believe that the
classiﬁer has high predictive power when in fact it is just naively assigning all
observations to the dominant class. The MCC however does take into account the
size of the classes, therefore giving a high score only if the classiﬁer is performing
well on both the positive and negative classes in the test data [BBC+00, Chi17].
For a binary classiﬁcation case, the MCC can be calculated with the following
formula:
MCC =
TP × TN −FP × FN
p
(TP + FP)(TP + FN)(TN + FP)(TN + FN)
(1.16)
==PAGE:47==
1.2 Deep Learning
35
where TP, TN, FP and FN are the number of true positives, true negatives,
false positives and false negatives respectively. One can see how the nominator
value depends on all four measures, as opposed to accuracy where the nominator
is the sum of TP and TN only.
The denominator can be thought of as a
normalization term, which thresholds the MCC value between -1 and 1. If a
binary classiﬁer performs perfectly, an MCC of 1 is achieved. A value of 0
means that the classiﬁer performs no better than random guessing and a value
of -1 indicates perfect misclassiﬁcation. Note that if any of the terms in the
denominator is zero, the MCC can be arbitrarily set to zero as the nominator
would also be zero. It is possible to extend the MCC to multi-class classiﬁcation
scenarios, which involves aggregating the prediction results for each class in the
dataset [Gor04].
1.2.3.4
Receiver operating characteristic curve and area under the
curve
Another good approach to evaluate a model is the Receiver operating character-
istic (ROC) curve and calculating the area under the curve (AUC) [JWHT13].
The metric uses the fact that some classiﬁers output a probability of an ob-
servation belonging to each of the classes in question, instead of doing a hard
assignment immediately. For example, we discussed applying Softmax in the
ﬁnal output layer of neural networks in section 1.2.1, which does exactly that.
With these probabilities in mind, it is possible to choose thresholds for what is
a high enough probability to assign an observation to a class. In most binary
cases, it is common to set the threshold at 50%. Meaning for example, that if
an observation is predicted to have a 60% chance of being in the positive class,
it will be assigned to that class. Now, let us imagine we ran a classiﬁer on a
binary classiﬁcation task and assigned probabilities to a test set. We can imagine
plotting the distribution of these observations, with the probabilities assigned to
them by our classiﬁer on the x-axis. In this case, the y-axis simply encodes the
density of observations with regard to which probability was assigned to them. If
our classiﬁer assigns diﬀerent probabilities to positive and negative observations,
we can expect them to be well separated in the plot. This can be visualized in
ﬁgure 1.22.
The ROC plot revolves around considering all possible thresholds in the [0, 1]
range and plotting the false positive rate (FPR) on the x-axis and the true
positive rate (TPR) on the y-axis. Intuitively, one can imagine starting with
the threshold at 1.0 and sliding it backwards, assigning all observations on the
right side to the positive class and those on the left to the negative class. At a
given point, the FPR and TPR is calculated and plotted. If the classes are well
separated, the TPR will rise very quickly before the FPR. This is reﬂected in
==PAGE:48==
36
Introduction
Figure 1.22: A density plot of an example dataset containing positive and
negative observations after a classiﬁer assigns probabilities to
observations. Observations belonging to a positive class (orange)
are generally assigned higher probability values than observations
belonging to a negative class (light blue).
A threshold (red)
can be chosen to decide the cutoﬀfor when to actually assign
observations to the positive/negative class. In this case a good
threshold value is around 0.5.
==PAGE:49==
1.2 Deep Learning
37
Figure 1.23: An example of a ROC curve where the FPR is plotted on the
x-axis and the TPR is plotted on the y-axis. In this example case
the classiﬁer is performing quite well, achieving an AUC of 0.82.
The area under the gray line gives an AUC of 0.5, indicating
that if the ROC curve is performing better than random if it is
generally over the line.
a sharp vertical jump on the ROC plot, followed by a horizontal tendency to
the right. Therefore, a sharp rising TPR followed by a steady increase in FPR
is indicative of a good classiﬁer. A single metric to evaluate a ROC curve is
the AUC. The AUC calculates the area under the ROC curve. If the classiﬁer
is performing well, one can see how the sharp increase on the y-axis leads to
a higher AUC. The fact that there are rates in the [0, 1] range on both axes
ensures that the AUC is in the same range. If the classiﬁer is performing no
better than random, an AUC value of 0.5 is expected. An example ROC curve
and the AUC can be seen in ﬁgure 1.23.
It is possible to extend the ROC curve and subsequently the AUC to multi-class
settings. This involves a one-vs-all approach, where multiple ROC curves are
plotted where a given class is deﬁned as a positive and all other classes as nega-
tives. Therefore a binary classiﬁcation setting is used for a given class during
the evaluation. By repeating the procedure for all classes and taking an average,
an AUC can be calculated for multi-class settings [ASS00, LD08]. There are two
==PAGE:50==
38
Introduction
common ways in calculating an average from a multi-class classiﬁcation task,
micro- and macro averaging. Micro averaging refers to concatenating the predic-
tions from all classes and looking at the separability of positive observations from
negative ones in one go, while macro averaging refers to calculating performance
for each class independently and then taking the average of those results. Micro
averaging is therefore less sensitive to class imbalance, while macro averaging
gives an equal weight to each class during the evaluation.
1.2.4
Modern Deep Learning for Image Recognition
The previous two sections provide a short description of the foundations of neural
networks and convolutional neural networks. Using the concepts described so
far, a lot of success has been achieved within the domains of machine learning
and deep learning. For example, using a relatively shallow CNN, an error rate of
around 1% was achieved on a test set in handwritten digit recognition [LBBH98].
In the past few years however, there has been a plethora of new techniques
and approaches developed to improve image recognition. Covering all of them
is outside of the scope of this thesis, but this section will describe the main
techniques used in this project.
1.2.4.1
Transfer Learning
Training a deep convolutional neural network from scratch on a large dataset
can take a long time even when high computational power is accessible. It does
seem that performance increases with the number of parameters a CNN has up
to a certain point, meaning that if one wants state of the art performance, a
relatively deep CNN is most likely needed [CPC16]. However, instead of training
deep established architectures from scratch, it is possible to take advantage
of a process called transfer learning. Transfer learning refers to transferring
learned knowledge used to solve a certain task in order to solve a diﬀerent task
[TS10]. In the case of CNNs, it means that one can leverage a CNN trained to
classify a certain set of images (such as objects) to classify another set of images
(such as plant species). In that case, one is taking advantage of the feature
extractors optimized during earlier training to extract features from a new set of
images. The main training that has to take place is the optimization of the fully
connected layer that uses extracted features for classiﬁcation. Additionally, some
ﬁne tuning of the convolutional layers might be needed, especially when it comes
to the later convolutional layers that combine simple shapes into more complex
ones. It is common to refer to the previously trained CNNs as pre-trained
networks. These pre-trained networks have often been trained on large datasets
==PAGE:51==
1.2 Deep Learning
39
such as the ImageNet database [RDS+15] on systems with a lot of computational
power. Pre-trained convolutional neural networks have been shown to boost
performance signiﬁcantly when applied to new tasks [YCBL14, RASC14].
1.2.4.2
Modern CNN architectures
In addition to hosting a database, ImageNet runs the annual ImageNet Large
Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) contest. Contest participants
submit software to classify and detect objects in images. In the past few years,
various CNN architectures have been submitted and performing extremely well
in the contest. Examples include AlexNet [KSH12b] (2012), VGGNet (2014)
[SZ14], Inception (2014) [SLJ+14], ResNet (2015) [HZRS15] and ResNeXt (2016)
[XGD+16]. In this work pre-trained ResNet and ResNeXt architectures were
ﬁne-tuned and used for classiﬁcation.
One problem with increasing neural network depth is the so-called vanishing
gradient [BSF94, GB10]. Vanishing gradient refers to the fact that repeated
gradient multiplication when back-propagating causes neurons in the earlier
layers to be optimized slower than those in later layers, due to the gradient
decreasing with each multiplication. If the earlier layers are not optimized, there
is little information that gets passed to the later layers which causes the whole
network to learn slowly. It has been shown that a traditional 56 layer CNN has
bigger training and test error than a traditional 20 layer CNN [HZRS15]. The
opposite problem is that of exploding gradients, where repeated multiplication
of gradients with value larger than one lead to unstable learning.
Kaiming He et al. argue that deeper models should be able to perform at least as
well as the shallower counterpart. This is because there should exist a solution
in the deeper model where the added layers are identity mappings, i.e. copies,
of layers in the shallower network. The deeper network is therefore essentially
the same as the shallower one, just containing some redundant layers. The core
idea of ResNets is to introduce so-called “shortcut” or “skip” connections. Skip
connections copy the activation from a previous layer and add it to the weighted
sum of a layer further down in the network before applying non-linearity, in this
case ReLU. Normally a skip connection that skips one weight layer and gets
added to the weighted sum of the next one is called a residual block. A diagram
showing a residual block is shown in ﬁgure 1.24.
The reason why such skip connections help is that in practice, very deep networks
might not be able to perfectly learn the identity mappings to make the equivalent
to shallow ones. Therefore, the added complexity can lead to an overall lower
performance. The beneﬁt of the skip connections is that instead of learning
==PAGE:52==
40
Introduction
Figure 1.24: A residual block which is found in the ResNet architecture. There
is an input x to a weight layer which is propagated through a
neural network in a normal fashion. The weighted sum of the
ﬁrst layer and applying ReLU is written as F(x). This input is
usually the activated outputs of an earlier layer in the network,
not the actual network input. Additionally, x is added to the
weighted sum of a layer further down in the network. The result
is subsequently put through an activation function. Image taken
from [HZRS15].
exact weights and biases to create an identity layer, it is easier for the network
to push the weights and biases to 0 in the layer just downstream of the skip
connection. Since the outputs of the residual block are put through the ReLU
activation function, it will be exactly the same as the input if the weights and
biases in the intermediate layer are 0, eﬀectively creating an identity layer.
The skip connections also help with the vanishing gradient problem, as going
through the skip connections gives a shorter path to earlier layers in the network
[GRUG17]. The ResNet architecture guarantees that a deeper network is not
worse than a shallower one, by allowing identity mappings and more eﬀective back
propagation through skip connections. When a deeper network is advantageous
however, training will most utilize all the layers that are available. Additionally,
recent research indicates that ResNets work like ensembles, where diﬀerent paths
through the network can be thought of as shallower networks that work together
to make a prediction [VWB16].
A newer variant of ResNet is the ResNeXt architecture [XGD+16]. In addition
to using skip connections, the ResNeXt architecture was inspired by the split-
transform-merge approach introduced in the Inception architecture [SZ14]. The
approach revolves around using 1x1 convolutions to reduce the dimensionality of
the inputs, meaning that it outputs fewer channels than it received. Applying
bigger ﬁlters, such as 5x5, to the output of the 1x1 convolutional ﬁlter greatly
reduces computation. The motivation is that many of the channels in a given
==PAGE:53==
1.2 Deep Learning
41
Figure 1.25: Comparison of a ResNet residual block and a ResNeXt block with
a cardinality of 32. The ResNeXt block uses 1x1 convolutions
to reduce the input to lower dimensions. Each 1x1 ﬁlter is the
beginning of a “path”. A 3x3 convolution is applied to the lower
dimensional representation which then uses another 1x1 convolu-
tion to expand the dimension. Finally, the outputs of each path
are summed together. Notice how both architectures include a
skip connection, where the outputs of the previous layer are added
to the weighted sum before the current layer’s activation. Image
taken from [XGD+16].
convolutional layer do not necessarily contain useful information at a given spatial
point. The Inception architecture originally used this approach to apply diﬀerent
sized ﬁlters in the same layer and concatenating the results, therefore getting
the beneﬁt of multiple ﬁlter dimensions. ResNeXt uses the same approach of 1x1
convolutions and multiple paths, but the ﬁlters applied to the 1x1 convolution
output all share the same topology. The number of paths therefore becomes
a hyperparameter that the authors call cardinality. Additionally, instead of
concatenating the outputs from the paths as in the Inception architecture, there
is a summation. The idea is that by transforming the input along multiple
paths and applying the convolutional ﬁlters to the transformed values, stronger
representations of the input image are achieved. A comparison of a ResNet
residual block and a ResNeXt block with a cardinality of 32 can be seen in ﬁgure
1.25.
==PAGE:54==
42
Introduction
Figure 1.26: Example of image augmentation used for deep neural network
training. The original image (top left corner) is randomly aug-
mented by various rotations, ﬂips, shifts, shears and zooms.
1.2.4.3
Image Augmentation
As mentioned in section 1.2.3.1, weight decay / L2 regularization, early stopping
and dropout have often been used to make neural networks more robust against
overﬁtting. Another way to avoid overﬁtting is data augmentation [SVLD92].
Data augmentation refers to changing the input data slightly before being passed
into the network. This causes the network to receive diﬀerent versions of the
same observations during each epoch. Data augmentation makes the neural
network more robust against learning patterns that are irrelevant. For example,
imagine one is classifying similar motorcycle types in a small dataset. Pictures
of motorcycle type A are all facing left in the image and pictures of motorcycle
B are facing to the right. Training a neural network on this dataset might mean
that it learns the orientation of the motorcycles in the picture, rather than other
more subtle features useful for classiﬁcation. If a previously unseen image of a
type A motorcycle facing right is fed to the model, it might classify it as type B.
Image augmentation in the form of random horizontal ﬂipping might prevent
this, as the model is trained with each type facing both directions. An example
of augmenting a single image can be seen in ﬁgure 1.26.
==PAGE:55==
1.2 Deep Learning
43
An interesting use of augmentation is a technique called test time augmentation
[RDG+17]. Test time augmentation refers to not only augmenting images during
training, but also doing multiple augmentations when predicting on the test set.
Taking a majority vote of the predictions made on the augmented ﬁgures can
lead to an increased performance. This is similar to model ensembles, where the
predictions of multiple models are combined in some way to get a ﬁnal prediction
for a given observation.
1.2.4.4
Choosing learning rates
In section 1.2.1.5 we talked about learning rate, which is used to determine how
much to change the weights at each update during gradient descent. However,
choosing the optimal learning rate can be challenging. If the learning rate is
too high, it might cause the update step to move the over the global optimum,
meaning that it overshoots and leads to a higher cost value. The next step will
cause it to step even further in the opposite direction (due to the higher gradient
since the cost is higher) meaning that it increases cost even further. Having the
learning rate too low means that the steps taken are in the right direction, but
they are so small that many iterations are needed to reach convergence. An
example of gradient descent attempting to optimize a variable with too high and
too low learning rates can be seen in ﬁgure 1.27.
A commonly applied approach is learning rate annealing, where the learning rate
is pre-deﬁned to a certain range and allowed to adjust during training. There are
various ways to deﬁne how the learning rate should change, such as step decay
where learning rate is decreased by a factor every time interval and exponential
decay where the learning rate is an exponential function of time/epochs. One
drawback of learning rate annealing however is that it must be deﬁned in advance
and cannot adapt to the data being modeled in a given experiment [Rud16].
The optimization algorithms mentioned in section 1.2.1.5, such as Adam, apply
what is called adaptive learning rates which means that the learning rate is calcu-
lated and applied dynamically during training. A drawback of adaptive learning
rates however is that calculating the local learning rates can be computationally
expensive and therefore cause training to be slow [Smi15].
A recently proposed method is that of cyclical learning rates [Smi15]. Cyclical
learning rates revolve around deﬁning a maximum and minimum bound and
allowing the learning rate to vary between them. This is motivated by the idea
that minimizing loss in neural network is mostly challenging not because of local
minima but because of saddle points. Local minima refers to regions with a
positive gradient all around them while saddle points refer to regions with low
==PAGE:56==
44
Introduction
(a) Learning rate too high.
(b) Learning rate too low.
Figure 1.27: Comparison of high and low learning rates during gradient descent
in the optimization of one variable. When the learning rate is
too high, the updated values of the variable w bounce around
the global minimum with an increasing trend in the cost C(w).
With the learning rate too low, the optimization of w is heading
in the right direction but reaching a global minimum will take
many update iterations.
==PAGE:57==
1.2 Deep Learning
45
gradient values, i.e. ﬂat regions. It can be diﬃcult for the optimization to escape
these ﬂat regions due to the low gradient leading to very small steps being taken
[DdVCB15]. A higher learning rate makes it easier to escape such saddle points,
so varying the learning rate between high and low values can lead to a faster
convergence. Additionally, it has been suggested that local minima with a sharp
increase in cost around them generalize worse than those with a more ﬂat cost
surface around them. Increasing the learning rate from time to time might help
the algorithm escape from such sharp local minima [KMN+16]. One way of
varying the learning rate is using a triangular learning rate annealing, where the
learning rate is linearly increased and decreased in alternation.
Another method which is very similar to cyclical learning rate is stochastic
gradient descent with warm restarts [LH16].
Instead of using a triangular
alternation of the learning rate, the learning rate is ﬁrst decreased from a
maximum value using a cosine function. When the learning rate reaches the
lower threshold, it is immediately restarted to the upper value. Additionally it
is suggested to increase the cycle length, i.e. number of epochs per cycle, with
some constant factor so the time between restarts becomes longer as the training
progresses. A visual representation of triangular learning rate annealing and
learning rate annealing with warm restarts can be seen in ﬁgure 1.28.
Cyclical learning rates themselves however do not solve the problem of ﬁnding
a good starting learning from which to do the annealing. One method to solve
this problem is to start with a low learning rate and increasing it linearly while
training for a few epochs while keeping track of the model performance. Using the
learning rate values for when the performance starts to increase and subsequently
decrease are suggested as good starting points for the minimum and maximum
learning rates respectively [Smi15].
==PAGE:58==
46
Introduction
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.28: Plots showing how learning rate can be tuned with either triangu-
lar learning rate annealing or cosine learning rate annealing with
warm restarts.
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 2
Method
This chapter is organized into two main sections. Firstly, the data used in this
project is described, with focus on how it was retrieved and processed into
a suitable format for deep learning. Secondly, the deep learning experiments
performed in this project are discussed. This section discusses not only the ex-
periments themselves but also the particular data setup used for the experiments,
such as subsampling. It is important to note that this chapter combines factual
descriptions of the work performed and intermediate results that aﬀected the
decision making when it came to the experiments. Hence, some parts of this
chapter would also have been relevant for chapter 3. However, this format is
used in order to depict how in some cases results from one experiment dictated
what kind of experiment was performed next.
2.1
Data
The data used in this report is combined from multiple sources. Firstly eucalypt
metabolite and oil yield data and secondly leaf image data.
==PAGE:60==
48
Method
2.1.1
Metabolite and oil yield data
Metabolite data comes from two sources, an online database of essential oils
and their compounds called EssOilDB [KPP+14] and from table 5.2 of the book
“Eucalyptus: The Genus Eucalyptus” [Cop03]. The data from the table is also
available as an article accessible online titled “Eucalyptus leaf oils: Use, chemistry,
distillation and marketing” [Sou92].
Oil yield was also acquired from “Eucalyptus leaf oils: Use, chemistry, distillation
and marketing” [Sou92]. It should be noted that when calculating oil yields as
a percentage of leaf weight, it is important to distinguish whether the leaf was
fresh or dry. If possible, it is better to calculate the oil yield on a dry leaf basis,
as measurements are less sensitive to variations in leaf moisture content and
can therefore be compared on a more equal basis [Cop03]. In some cases, the
oil yield was given as a range between two values. In that case the midpoint
between the two values was chosen as the actual oil yield for that measurement.
Data from EssOilDB was scraped from the database website and parsed to a
suitable format. The source data contains the percentages of various compounds
measured in the leaf oils, among other information. The table data from the
article based on the book was ﬁrst converted from a PDF to a CSV format. The
CSV ﬁle was then parsed so that each row in the data contains a plant name,
compound, oil yield, compound percentage in the leaf oil and other information.
The oil yield was deﬁned as the oil weight divided by leaf weight, converted to
a percentage. In the experiments using oil yield, only the dry leaf weight was
used. After parsing the metabolite sources individually, they were combined in
one source table. A part of the parsed metabolite table can be seen in table 2.1.
It is important to note that some eucalypt species are classiﬁed into various
subspecies and variants. In some cases, there were speciﬁc oil yield and metabolite
measurements for these subspecies and variants. As the tasks performed were
on a species level, it was assumed that subspecies and variants could be grouped
under the same species in the oil yield and metabolite data. This is also due to
the image labels being on species level. The approach is indeed a compromise, but
it was assumed that if a subspecies has a certain oil yield that other subspecies’
oil yield will not vary by a large margin. Variance might also be explained by the
fact that measurements were done in diﬀerent experiments. Hence, the approach
taken was to average the oil yield over subspecies and variants. If the assumption
fails and there is a high variation in the oil yield between subspecies, it might be
that the assigned oil yield to a particular image is incorrect. For example, in
the edge case that all other subspecies than one found in an image have high oil
yields it would cause that image to be incorrectly labeled.
==PAGE:61==
2.1 Data
49
Table 2.1: A part of the metabolite data. The compound amount column refers
to the amount of a compound in the leaf oil, while oil yield is how
much of the total leaf weight was oil. In some cases more than one
experiment measured the same compound in the same plant with
diﬀerent percentages, as is the case with piperitone in the table.
This was handled by taking the mean of all measurements. In some
cases the percentage was not measured, for example with terpinyl
acetate. The oil yield was sometimes given as a range which was
handled by taking the range midpoint as the actual value. Multiple
oil yields for the same compound in the same plant were handled
by using the measurement average.
Plant name
Compound
Compound amount (%)
Oil yield (%)
E. Amygdalina
p-cymene
8
2.5-6.3 dry
E. Amygdalina
piperitone
13
2.5-6.3 dry
E. Amygdalina
piperitone
63
0.2
E. Amygdalina
terpinen-4-ol
4
0.2
E. Amygdalina
terpinyl acetate
n/a
1
2.1.2
Image data
Raw image data was kindly provided by Dr. Dean Nicolle, one of the authors
of the book “Atlas of Leaf Venation & Oil Gland Patterns in the Eucalypts”
[BN13]. The images were originally taken and used for the book, but Dr. Dean
Nicolle provided the raw images upon contact. The total number of images in
the supplied dataset was 1563 with total size of around 7 gigabytes. The images
were manually examined and images not suitable for the deep learning task, such
as those not showing the leaf venation patterns, were removed. After manual
examination the total number of images was 1553. Examples of a kept image
and a removed one can be seen in ﬁgure 2.1.
The raw images have very high pixel dimensions, meaning that the resolution
remains high despite zooming in at a certain part of the images. The average
width and height dimensions are around 3600 and 2700 pixels respectively. When
applying deep learning for image recognition, it is common to scale the height
and width dimensions down to a small square image. For example, the CIFAR-10
and CIFAR-100 datasets often used for image recognition benchmarking are
32x32 pixels [KH09]. Another example is the ResNet architecture, which used
an image size of 224x224 pixels to get state of the art results on a benchmark
dataset [HZRS15]. This is to save compute time and because of GPU memory
limitations. In this work however, resizing the images to such a scale would mean
a lot of detail in the leaf venation and oil gland arrangement would be lost.
==PAGE:62==
50
Method
(a) Removed
(b) Kept
Figure 2.1: Examples of an images that were removed from the source data
before machine learning training and an image that was a part of
the training data. Images taken from [BN13].
Therefore, the approach taken was to split the images into smaller tiles of roughly
224x224 pixels, where 224 pixels correspond to a length of roughly 0.5-1.6 mm,
depending on the image’s zoom level. An important detail about the dataset
is that in many cases there is more than one image of the same leaf with the
images almost being the same, e.g. a slight shift is the only diﬀerence between
them. Splitting the source images directly into tiles and then splitting these tiles
randomly into training, validation and test sets would most likely lead to an
overoptimistic performance result, as diﬀerent tiles might contain the same leaf
region. This is known as data leakage, as test/validation data “leaks” into the
training data. The model’s performance on the test data might therefore be due
to it remembering training data rather than having a high generalization ability.
To avoid this the source data was manually inspected and partial duplicates
pruned. Of the 1553 pictures, 676 were used for the tiling procedure.
Each 3600x2700 image ﬁts roughly 16 tiles on the width dimension and 12 tiles
on the height dimension, resulting in 192 tiles per image. Each tile is given the
same label as the original image it came from. It is assumed that the whole
leaf is not needed for classiﬁcation, but rather the leaf venation and oil gland
arrangement contains enough information for the tasks examined in this project.
This is due to diﬀerent species exhibiting characteristic patterns, as mentioned in
section 1.1. Splitting images into square tiles ensures that all of the source data
is utilized during the classiﬁcation task. It should be noted that not all images
were exactly 3600x2700 pixels, but the number of splits was done dynamically
as a function of image dimension to produce 224x224 tiles.
Another approach would be to load the big images into memory and crop a
random part out of the image to be fed into the neural network. The beneﬁt
==PAGE:63==
2.1 Data
51
of this approach is that diﬀerent crops of the source image would mean that
the network would likely never see exactly the same tiles, hence preventing
the network form overﬁtting. The source image could also be augmented with
transformations such as rotations before cropping out a part of it. This approach
however does not guarantee that the network will be exposed to the full source
image, as which part is cropped out is random. Additionally, image augmentation
can be applied to the tiles themselves to reduce overﬁtting.
As can be seen in ﬁgure 2.1b, some source images contain background in addition
to the leaves themselves. The bottom part of the image contains a scaling tool to
indicate the zoom level of the image and a white background. The arrangement
of the leaves in the images varies, some of the images do not contain background
while some of them do. Some of the tiles therefore contain edges of the leaf with
the background, the scaling tool or simply just white background. These images
do not provide any variance related to the machine learning tasks applied, and
feeding them to the neural network models with labels from the source images
might result in a decreased performance. As with any machine learning task, it is
a good idea to try to reduce the noise in the dataset to increase the signal-to-noise
ratio for a better performance. It was therefore decided to attempt identifying
the tiles that did not contain useful information, such as white background.
The ﬁrst relevant observation is that the background is always found on the
bottom of the images. Secondly, the actual leaves contain a shade of green, while
the background contains a mix of white and black colors. Therefore, the bottom
two rows of tiles were assumed to be candidates for a background. The other
tiles were immediately assigned to be part of the leaf. For the tiles found in the
bottom, the dominant color was found by looking at its RGB pixel values. If
the color was a shade of green, it was assumed that it was a tile coming from
the leaf itself. If not, the tile was assumed to originate from the background
of the source picture. Only the tiles coming from the leaf itself were used for
the classiﬁcation task and the total number of green shaded tiles was 116.318,
from the original 127.970 tiles. Another approach would be to apply the color
detection on all tiles, but to save compute time it was only performed on the
bottom tiles. In order to check whether the splitting the tiles according to the
dominant color was successful, the colors of the two groups were visualized in
ﬁgure 2.2. Examples of tiles from both groups can be seen in ﬁgure 2.3.
As can be seen in ﬁgure 2.2, the color splitting seems to have been largely
successful due to ﬁgure 2.2a containing much more color variation than 2.2b.
The splitting does not seem to have been perfect however as some green can be
seen in ﬁgure 2.2a, which can be considered a trade-oﬀfor getting a less noisy
dataset for modeling. Hence, the 116.318 green-shaded tiles conclude the image
pre-processing and were used for deep learning modeling.
==PAGE:64==
52
Method
(a) Tiles assigned as background
(b) Tiles assigned as leaf
Figure 2.2: Plots of the color variation found in the images determined to be
background/noise and those determined to be leaf images. The
group of tiles assigned as background have a much higher presence
of non-green colors while those assigned as leaf are mostly green.
It is clear that the process did not separate the tiles perfectly as
there are green colors found in the background assigned tiles and
most likely some background tiles in the leaf assigned tiles as well.
Therefore, there is some noise present in the training data and
some leaf data missing as well.
==PAGE:65==
2.1 Data
53
(a) Tiles determined to be leaf
(b) Tiles determined to be background
Figure 2.3: Examples of tiles determined to be from the leaf part of an image
and tiles determined to be from the background by using color
detection. Images were randomly sampled from their respective
folders.
==PAGE:66==
54
Method
2.2
Deep Learning
The deep learning experiments can be divided into two sections. Firstly the
prediction of eucalypt species and secondly the prediction of eucalypt oil yield.
2.2.1
Species Classiﬁcation
2.2.1.1
Experimental setup
As mentioned in section 2.1.2, 116.318 tiles were used for training after splitting
the original tiles based on color. For the experiments where the goal was to predict
species from single tiles, a 25% split was separated for testing in the beginning
of the experiment, a total of 29.080 tiles. The large number of observations
in the other 75% (87.238 tiles) causes training to take a long time, even when
using a GPU. Therefore, it was decided to sample observations from the training
data to speed up development and model assessment. A sample of 45.000 tiles
was randomly drawn from the training dataset. This sample was used in the
experiments described in sections 2.2.1.2-2.2.1.6, while the full dataset along
with the testing set was used in the experiment described in section 2.2.1.7. In
order to determine whether the sample provided an accurate representation of
the full sample, vectors where each element represents the number of tiles for
a given species were calculated. The vectors were then normalized with the
total number of tiles in the full dataset and the sample respectively. One way to
calculate the similarity of two vectors is to use cosine similarity, which can be
calculated with:
cos(θ) =
nP
i=1
AiBi
s
nP
i=1
A2
i
s
nP
i=1
B2
i
where cos(θ) is the cosine similarity and Ai represents element i of vector A.
The cosine similarity between the full and sample datasets was 0.9990, which
indicates a high degree of similarity in the species distribution of the datasets.
A more thorough test of whether the sample is a realistic representation of the
full training data might be to calculate the means and standard deviations of
the color channels for the full dataset and the sample. A statistical test could
determine whether the values in the sample are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the
==PAGE:67==
2.2 Deep Learning
55
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.4: Class distribution of full dataset and in randomly drawn sample
consisting of 45.000 observations. The distributions are largely
similar indicating that the sample might be a good representation
of the full dataset.
full dataset. Since the sample is only being used for development purposes and
the ﬁnal performances are reported on the full dataset this was not done however.
The distributions can be visualized in ﬁgure 2.4.
The ResNet and ResNeXt models trained on the dataset were optimized with
mini-batch gradient descent with a batch size of 64 and momentum of 0.9. The
model used has some slight modiﬁcations from the original model, e.g. dropout
is applied in the fully connected layer. Binary cross entropy was used as the cost
function. The maximum bound for the learning rate was determined as described
in section 1.2.4.4, where the learning rate was increased until performance
dropped sharply. The models using color images were ﬁrst trained with a ﬁxed
learning rate for a few epochs, allowing the models to take large optimization
steps. Then the models were trained with a cyclical learning rate, where cosine
annealing was used to decrease the learning rate after reach restart.
Each
restart cycle was progressively made longer with a multiple of two, meaning
that later in the ﬁtting procedure the models were trained for a longer time
at lower learning rates, as suggested in [LH16]. The models were trained until
validation error started leveling oﬀ, indicating that the model had converged.
For the sample data, models were trained between 17-20 epochs, depending on
the transformations performed on the images before feeding them to the models.
More training could have been performed on some of models trained on the
==PAGE:68==
56
Method
Figure 2.5: Species distribution in the 676 images used for the species classiﬁ-
cation experiment. Note how more than half of the species have
only one source image of their leaf.
sample data, but it was decided to leave the extensive model tuning for the ﬁnal
model trained on the whole data. During training, image augmentation was
performed by a combination of randomly changing the lighting of the images,
randomly rotating images slightly, ﬂipping along the horizontal axis and rotating
the images 90 degrees to the left or right. When predicting on the ﬁnal test set,
test time augmentation was used, where a majority vote on four augmentations
determined the ﬁnal prediction.
2.2.1.2
Color Image Classiﬁcation
The ﬁrst experiment performed was to see whether a model could be trained
to classify species based on the leaf venation and oil gland arrangement using
color images. The total number of unique species in the dataset was 351. The
machine learning task is therefore a multi-class classiﬁcation with 351 classes. An
important observation for this task is that most species have only 1 image taken
of their leaf after discarding duplicates, as seen in ﬁgure 2.5. Tiles from separate
leaves therefore cannot be used for training and testing. Hence, there might be a
certain data leakage due to tiles coming from the same source picture being used
for training and testing. However, random lighting is added to the images during
training to try to prevent the model from memorizing the lighting conditions in
the source picture. Additionally, leaf venation and oil gland arrangement tends
to be very similar in the same species [BN13]. This means that tiles from one
leaf can in some sense be considered a good representation of the species. The
ﬁrst model tested was the ResNet34 model on color images sized 224x224 pixels.
The experiment gave good results, which can be seen in section 3.1.1.
==PAGE:69==
2.2 Deep Learning
57
During the ﬁtting procedure the last classiﬁcation layer was ﬁrst optimized while
the earlier convolutional layers were not. This was to see how well the model
performed with the pre-trained ﬁlter weights. It has been suggested that this
helps with the ﬁtting procedure as the fully connected weights are randomly
initialized and will therefore need to be optimized the most [YCBL14]. When
the validation loss started to level oﬀ, the earlier layers in the model were tuned
as well to allow the model to optimize the ﬁlters to learn shapes speciﬁc to the
leaves themselves.
2.2.1.3
Grayscale Image Classiﬁcation
One important thing to consider when splitting a single source picture into
tiles and treating them as independent observations is that there might be a
correlation between the tiles due to them all coming from the same leaf. One
example of such correlation could be the color of the source leaf. If a leaf picture
from another plant was taken, the colors might vary while the venation and oil
gland pattern remains the same. This could also be aﬀected by the conditions
when the picture was taken.
The model might therefore overﬁt to these unrelated conditions rather than the
venation/oil gland arrangement, especially if there is only one source picture as
was with the majority of the species. Performing image augmenting in the form
of random lighting might help to reduce partial data leakage of this kind, but it
cannot be expected to avoid the problem completely, i.e. scaling the intensity of
all color channels does not alter the ratio between them. If the color channels are
causing leakage, an approach to avoid that is to convert the images to one channel
grayscale images. Additionally, this could give a clue as to how important the
leaf shapes by themselves are in species classiﬁcation. An example of an image
converted to grayscale can be seen in ﬁgure 2.6.
Despite converting from color images to grayscale, there might still be some
leakage in the color intensity itself. For example, darker conditions in an color
image would transfer over to a darker grayscale picture. In order to prevent
leakage, completely independent observations would be needed in the training,
validation and test sets.
In this experiment, the input to the pre-trained models is a 1 channel image
instead of a 3 channel one. Therefore, the model’s input dimension and the input
layer’s weight matrix dimension must be changed accordingly. Additionally, the
whole model was optimized from the beginning of the training. This is because
the ﬁrst input channel weight matrix from the pre-trained model was arbitrarily
chosen as the initialization matrix for these two tasks. It was expected that
==PAGE:70==
58
Method
Figure 2.6: Same tile with the original color scheme and after being transformed
to a grayscale image.
the learned ﬁlters on a single color channel might not transfer well over to one
channel images. A sanity check was performed by comparing the results of ﬁtting
the ResNet34 model on 128x128 images with and without training only the fully
connected layer ﬁrst. Training the fully connected layer ﬁrst yielded slightly
worse results, indicating that it might not need to be tuned speciﬁcally before
tuning the earlier layers.
2.2.1.4
Binary Image Classiﬁcation
Due to the possibility of leakage in the form of intensities, it was also decided
to test performance on binary images. Binary images diﬀer from grayscale
in the sense that pixels are binary, i.e. represented by either 0 or 1. Before
binarizing an image, it is normally converted to a one channel grayscale image
ﬁrst. After conversion to grayscale there are various methods to binarize the
image, such as using a global threshold. In this work a technique called adaptive
local thresholding was used, where a threshold for the binarization is calculated
for small local regions at a time. This experiment used a 9x9 area at a time for
the threshold determination and subsequent binarization. As the oil glands and
leaf veins are lighter in color than the leaf itself, the background should mostly
get ﬁltered out when choosing ﬁlters over the mean value. This procedure is
expected to make the modeling less sensitive to overﬁtting due to color intensities
in the source picture, since diﬀerent local means are calculated for diﬀerent tiles.
That is, the shapes in a dark and a light image are expected to be similarly
represented in a binarized image. An example of an image converted to binary
format can be seen in ﬁgure 2.7. The binary images were trained in the same
==PAGE:71==
2.2 Deep Learning
59
Figure 2.7: Same tile with the original color scheme and after being transformed
to a binary image.
way as the grayscale images as described in section 2.2.1.3.
2.2.1.5
Optimal Image Size
After seeing that a model could be trained to classify images with good results, it
was decided to investigate how well the model performed on smaller images, i.e.
with less resolution that the larger ones. If a model could perform similarly well
on small images as large ones, it might be worth sacriﬁcing small performance
gains for a faster training. The same image at diﬀerent resolutions can be seen
in ﬁgure 2.8. It is clear that some detail is lost when the images are scaled
down, but the overall shape still remains the same. This might also give an
indication of how important the colors are when doing predictions. For example,
if a model trained on small color images performs well while one trained on
grayscale performs poorly, one can infer that the colors are being used rather
than shape in predicting the species. When scaling down the binary images, the
block sizes used for the adaptive local thresholding were scaled down accordingly
in order for the same spatial area being used for threshold calculation at all sizes.
The result from the experiment can be seen in section 3.1.1.
2.2.1.6
Model Comparison
After deciding on an optimal image size and whether to use color, grayscale or
binary images, diﬀerent CNN architectures were compared. In addition to the
==PAGE:72==
60
Method
Figure 2.8: Same tiles shown at diﬀerent resolutions, represented with the
number above each tile. There is little visible diﬀerence between
tiles with a 224x224 and those with 128x128 resolution. At 64
pixels the lack in detail starts to be visible to the human eye.
ResNet34 model, the ResNet18, ResNet50 and ResNeXt50 models were trained
on 224x224 binary images. This was done see how complex of a model was
needed in order to classify the images. A shallower model might be able to
perform almost as well as a deeper one, due to its complexity being adequate
in ﬁtting to the data. A shallower model is more computationally eﬃcient at
training and predicting on new observations, which means more experiments can
be run in a fraction of the time it would take with a deeper model.
It is important to note that during these and the other experiments the models
were not trained until the validation error completely stopped improving. It
is likely that the deeper models could perform better if trained longer, but at
the cost of more compute. As is often the case with deep learning, this is a
tradeoﬀbetween time and performance. In this case it was decided to not train
the deeper models further, as the shallower ones were performing well on the
validation set after 17 epochs. If the case was that the shallow models were
performing poorly on the training and validation sets, indicating that they were
not complex enough to ﬁt to the data (i.e. underﬁtting) it might be worth the
compute time to train the deeper models further.
2.2.1.7
Final Model Training for Species Prediction
Results from the previous experiments, which were all performed on the sample
dataset were used to decide on which model, image size and transformations to
use for the ﬁnal ﬁtting procedure on the full dataset, consisting of 116.318 tiles.
Based on the results presented in sections 3.1.1 and 3.1.2, the architecture chosen
==PAGE:73==
2.2 Deep Learning
61
for the ﬁnal ﬁtting procedure was ResNet18 trained on 224x224 binary images.
The shallow architecture was chosen as it was judged to provide a good trade-oﬀ
between performance and compute. The binary images were believed to minimize
data leakage from conditions in the source pictures, while still containing enough
variance to allow a good model ﬁt. As mentioned before, 25% of the full dataset
was split oﬀfor testing and not used in any of the previous experiments. The
training dataset in this experiment was further split into 80% for training and
20% for validation. The model was trained until performance on the validation
set leveled oﬀ, where the model was then used to make predictions on the test
data. The model was trained until validation error leveled oﬀand then evaluated
on the external test set.
2.2.2
Oil Yield Classiﬁcation
2.2.2.1
Experimental setup
After seeing that species could be predicted with good results, it was decided to
investigate whether oil yield could be predicted from the tiles. As mentioned in
section 2.1.1, the most accurate measurement of leaf oil yield are those done on
a dry basis. Therefore, only records where leaves were weighted on a dry basis
were used for the oil yield predictions. Species were labelled according to which
percentile their oil yield was in according to three even percentile thresholds.
The values were 0.7%, 1.9% and 6.5%, e.g. if a plant had an oil yield of less than
0.7% it was assigned the label “0”.
The interesting part about this experiment is that we are no longer conﬁned
by the fact we have only one source picture for the majority of the species,
as we only have three labels. That is, splitting on species level means that
there is a much lesser chance of data leakage since tiles in each set are now
coming from separate source images. Hence the training, validation and test
sets will all contain tiles from separate species. The intersection of species that
had a measured oil yield on a dry weight basis and were photographed was a
total of 127. This is less than the 351 species used for the species classiﬁcation
task, which is why all the available data for these 127 species was used in this
experiment instead of a sample. The 127 species used amounted to 39.959 tiles.
Since species are considered independent observations, performance evaluation is
much more likely to be aﬀected by the random splitting into training, validation
and test sets. Therefore, a 3-fold cross validation split on species level was used
as the generalization performance measure.
First, the species were split into stratiﬁed splits based on their label, meaning
==PAGE:74==
62
Method
that it was tried to ensure an even label distribution in each of the splits into
training and test sets. The training set was then split again with the same
approach into training and validation sets, in order for the validation to give an
accurate representation of how the model could be expected to perform on the
test data. For the validation set, a stratiﬁed random sample of 20% of the species
in the training set were used. Therefore, there is a cross validation performed
when splitting the data into training and tests sets while a holdout split was
done to create the training and validation sets. Normally a cross validation split
is performed on the inner loop as well, but in order to save compute time and
there was no hyperparameter tuning performed, this was not done. Models were
trained in the same way as described in section 2.2.1.1.
2.2.2.2
Oil Yield Classiﬁcation on Color Images
As splitting on species level highly reduces the chance of data leakage, the full
color images were leveraged for training in the ﬁrst oil yield experiment. As
before, models were trained until the validation performance stopped improving.
The modeling was done on color images of size 224x224 with the ResNet34
architecture. The architecture was chosen as it had given good results for species
prediction on color images, indicating that it was able to ﬁt to supplied training
data.
2.2.2.3
Oil Yield Classiﬁcation on Shape Filtered Binary Images
As can be seen in the results in section 3.2, the models were not able to learn a
signal in the color images to allow them to accurately predict oil yield in images
of previously unseen species. It was theorized that the models were ﬁtting to
features speciﬁc for the training set, i.e. memorizing the shapes and colors in the
training set rather than learning features expected to be correlated with oil yield
such as oil gland size. Indication of this overﬁtting can be seen in the training
plots in ﬁgure A.3, as training error goes down the validation error goes up. In
order to reduce the eﬀect of such noisy features, it was decided to preprocess the
images with focus on the oil glands.
The goal of the procedure was to ﬁlter out small details in the images and draw
out the oil gland shape, size and number in each tile. Firstly, small details in the
image were reduced by applying a 5x5 gaussian kernel. That is, a given pixel
value becomes the weighted average of itself and other pixels in the region which
blurs small details out of the image, with higher weight being given to closer
pixels. Next, an adaptive threshold was applied with a block size of 65x65 and a
==PAGE:75==
2.2 Deep Learning
63
Figure 2.9: A ﬁgure showing an original color tile, the image in binary form,
the contours found in the binary image and the image after ﬁltering
out non-circular shapes.
constant of 6 added to the threshold value for each local region. Having a larger
block size means that smaller details get ﬁltered out. That is, the thresholding
will be more consistent to the overall color scheme in the picture rather than
looking at small local regions which can have varying pixel value distributions.
Adding a certain value to the threshold decreases the likelihood of parts other
than oil glands and veins to be included, as they are in most cases brighter than
the average pixel value. It should be noted that these values were chosen by
a rather hand-wavy trial-and-error procedure. A more robust examination of
which values to choose for the block size and the constant to ﬁlter out shapes
other than oil glands would likely improve the modeling.
It was theorized that the oil glands themselves rather than the leaf venation
pattern was important in predicting the oil yield. In order to focus on the
variance found in oil gland size, the leaf veins were ﬁltered out of the binary
images. This was also done to further avoid the model ﬁtting to the leaf venation
arrangement in the training data, which might not transfer well over to predicting
oil yield in previously unseen species. First the contours, i.e. boundaries, of
the binary image were found. Next, the circularity of all found contours was
calculated. Circularity can be calculated with fc = 4πA/P 2 where A is the
area and P is the perimeter of a contour. The contours that had a circularity
value between 0.5 and 1.2 were kept and ﬁlled. A ﬁgure showing how an original
picture can be processed to ﬁlter out non-circular shapes can be seen in ﬁgure
2.9.
As the ResNet18 model had shown good success in classifying species with binary
transformed images, it was used for this experiment as well. As before, exclusive
training of the fully connected layer was not done since modeling was done with
binary images. The total number of epochs is therefore lower when compared
with using color images, as can be seen in table 3.3.
==PAGE:76==
64
Method
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 3
Results and Discussion
This chapter discusses the results from the experiments described in section 2.2.
The ﬁrst section discusses the species classiﬁcation, where results from related
experiments such as image transformations and sizes, are combined. Additionally,
interpretation of model performance is discussed. The second section gives an
analysis on the oil yield classiﬁcation results.
3.1
Species Classiﬁcation
3.1.1
Comparison of Image Transformations and Sizes
This section covers experiment results from sections 2.2.1.2-2.2.1.5, where models
were trained on color, grayscale and binary images of various sizes. For each of
the color schemes, the ResNet34 model was trained on square images of 64, 128
and 224 pixels, using the sampled image data. As discussed in previous sections,
data leakage might partially explain the good results when modeling on color
and grayscale images. The results from these experiments can be seen in table
3.1.
As described in sections 2.2.1.3 and 2.2.1.4, grayscale and binary image were not
==PAGE:78==
66
Results and Discussion
Table 3.1: Training results from ResNet34 ﬁne tuned on a sample of 45.000
tiles with diﬀerent image colour schemes and sizes. The term “Val.”
is shorthand for validation.
Image type
Size
Val. Loss
Val. MCC
Val. ACC
Epochs
Time (m)
Color
224x224
0.08735
0.9790
0.9791
20
60.77
Color
128x128
0.1038
0.9770
0.9771
20
39.05
Color
64x64
0.1771
0.9540
0.9540
20
22.64
Grayscale
224x224
0.1594
0.9553
0.9555
17
55.71
Grayscale
128x128
0.2548
0.9262
0.9265
17
28.73
Grayscale
64x64
0.8558
0.7599
0.7610
17
23.27
Binary
224x224
0.3260
0.9074
0.9078
17
58.62
Binary
128x128
0.6216
0.8194
0.8202
17
34.46
Binary
64x64
1.952
0.4582
0.4607
17
34.55
subjected to an initial training of the fully connected layer, resulting in fewer
training epochs. The fact that it takes a similar amount of time to train the one
channel images as compared to the 3 channel color images is most likely due to
the fact that transformations were done on-the-ﬂy before images were fed into
the model, which results in a longer training time. In the binary case there does
not even seem to be a diﬀerence in training time between the 128x128 and 64x64
images, indicating that calculating the local thresholds might be bottleneck
instead of parameter tuning at those sizes. Another observation is that there is
a sharp decline in performance on the binary and grayscale images from 128x128
to 64x64 pixel images. This might be due to ﬁne details in the image being lost
and the fact that such a decline is not seen when modeling with color images
might mean that the models trained on color images are memorizing the image
color proﬁles. In fact, models were trained on 32x32 and 16x16 color images
which gave MCCs of 0.8191 and 0.5616 on the validation set respectively. This
supports the hypothesis that the models are memorizing color proﬁles, as little
detail is found in such small images.
Interestingly, the model is able to perform well on binarized images despite there
being a loss in the form of color and intensity detail, achieving an MCC of 0.9074
on the sample validation set with 224x224 images. This indicates that the shape
itself gives enough detail to classify species from the tiles themselves. Color and
intensities of the leaf are almost sure to play a part in identifying the species as
well, but due to the data leakage described before the extent to which the color
and intensity are contributing to the classiﬁcation as opposed to the leakage is
unknown. One way to investigate that would be to take only those species that
have more than one leaf photographed in the source pictures and split them into
training, validation and test sets on a species level. Although this might reduce
==PAGE:79==
3.1 Species Classiﬁcation
67
Table 3.2: Results from diﬀerent architectures trained on a sample of 45.000
images. All experiments were run on 224x224 binary images. Note
that the ResNet34 values are from the same experiment as in table
3.1.
Architecture
Val. Loss
Val. MCC
Val. ACC
Epochs
Time (m)
ResNet18
0.3449
0.9009
0.9013
17
38.76
ResNet34
0.3260
0.9074
0.9078
17
58.62
ResNet50
0.3029
0.9141
0.9144
17
93.37
ResNeXt50
0.2787
0.9198
0.9201
17
129.7
the leakage in the form of tiles in the test and validation set coming from the
same source leaf, external eﬀects from when the picture was taken might have
an eﬀect. For example, if there were darker conditions when a certain species
was ﬁlmed as opposed to another species.
Due to the possibility of data leakage in the form of color channel ratios and color
intensities in the grayscale pictures, it was decided to proceed with the 224x224
binary images for the next steps in the analysis. The size of 224x224 was chosen
because the increased training time was considered worth the 0.1 improvement
in the MCC value as compared to results from using 128x128 binary images.
3.1.2
Comparison of Architectures
After deciding on a image size and which color encoding to use, diﬀerent CNN
architectures were compared.
The compared architectures were ResNet18,
ResNet34, ResNet50 and ResNeXt50. The results can be seen in table 3.2.
The main takeaway from the results is that the ResNet18 model can be considered
to perform almost as well on the validation set as the ResNet34 model when
it comes to the validation loss, MCC and accuracy. Therefore, further analysis
can use the shallower architecture and take advantage of the fact that it takes a
shorter time to train than the deeper ones. The deeper ResNet50 and ResNeXt50
do show a small improvement over the shallower models, however at the cost of
double to triple the training time when compared to ResNet18.
==PAGE:80==
68
Results and Discussion
3.1.3
Final Model Performance for Species Classiﬁcation
The ﬁnal model, trained and validated on 75% and tested on 25% of the leaf
image tiles performed very well, achieving a MCC of 0.9473 and an accuracy of
0.9476 on the external test set. This indicates that training a ResNet18 model
on binary 224x224 images of the leaf venation and oil gland shape of eucalypt
plants allows for a good identiﬁcation performance of species among the 351
used in this project. The model was trained for 26 epochs and the training
took 107.58 minutes to complete. A plot showing training loss, validation loss
and accuracy as a function of epochs can be seen in ﬁgure 3.1. The plot shows
how training and validation error decrease while accuracy on the validation set
increases during training, indicating the the model is not only ﬁtting to the
training data but also having high predictive power on previously unseen data.
The validation loss is consistently lower than the training loss during training.
Using traditional machine learning algorithms and limited training data, this
might indicate that the splitting procedure was subject to randomness, meaning
that there are “easier” observations in the validation set than the training set.
In the case of neural networks and using a dropout regularization, the dropout
is applied during the training phase and not during the evaluation phase. Hence,
the model is able to perform as well on the training set as on the validation set
when all the weights are available for utilization.
Another interesting observation is how the loss sometimes shows sharp peaks.
This is in many cases due to the the warm restarts applied during training. When
the learning rate is increased suddenly, it can be expected that the gradients
“jump out” of local minima or saddle points, meaning that they are not as
optimized as in the epoch before.
This however gives the optimization an
opportunity to ﬁnd other better minima instead of getting “stuck” in the local
minima / saddle point in the previous epoch.
==PAGE:81==
3.1 Species Classiﬁcation
69
Figure 3.1: Training plot of the ﬁnal model trained on 75% of the full dataset.
The plot shows training loss, validation loss and accuracy as a
function of epochs.
3.1.4
Interpreting AUC for Multi-Class Classiﬁcation Tasks
A rather interesting result was gotten when the ROC curve and AUC of the test
set for the species prediction was examined. The result was unexpectedly good,
with a calculated AUC of 0.9999. This immediately seemed out of place, as the
accuracy was a somewhat lower 0.9478. The ROC curve was calculated by micro
averaging the results from a one-vs-all setting for all classes. That is, if looking
at the probability matrix on a row-by-row basis, each observation can be thought
as having one positive point assigned to it and 350 negative points assigned to
it. To investigate why this happens it can be good to look at one class at a
time. The class which the model had the highest amount of wrongly predicted
tiles, therefore contributing most to lowering the overall accuracy for all classes
was E. eﬀusa. When binarizing the output and looking at the accuracy in a
one-vs-all setting, the accuracy for the class would be 0.99. This is due to the high
number of negative observations in the one-vs-all setting, i.e. even though classes
are balanced in the original dataset the one-vs-all scheme introduces skewed
positive-negative distributions. Hence, a certain class imbalance is introduced
by the one-vs-all approach in itself. A better approach might be to focus on the
positive observations. The model classiﬁed 107 observations correctly as true
positives out of 131, giving a recall of 0.82 and a precision of 0.88. However,
==PAGE:82==
70
Results and Discussion
Figure 3.2: A ROC curve showing how the ﬁnal model performed in E. eﬀusa
classiﬁcation on the test set.
looking at a column in the probability matrix for one class and calculating its
ROC curve gives the separability of negative observations from positives ones,
but does not take into account that there might be higher probabilities in each
row, i.e. a wrongly classiﬁed observation as a false negative. For example, the
ROC curve that gives an AUC of 0.9993 for E. eﬀusa can be seen in ﬁgure 3.2.
Looking at the distribution of the predicted probabilities for the E. eﬀusa tiles,
one can see that they show a high degree of separation between the positive and
negative class. Of the 29.027 negative observations in the one-vs-all scheme for
E. eﬀusa, 28.398 had a lower predicted probability value of belonging to the
class than the minimum probability value predicted for the actual positive labels.
This degree of separation will amount to a high AUC value, as the TPR will
reach its maximum value the threshold crosses to the majority of the negatives.
A plot showing the densities of predicted probabilities for E. eﬀusa and all other
species can be seen in ﬁgure 3.3.
This analysis on one class would extend to a macro average case when inde-
pendent class performances are averaged. When taking the micro average, the
observations are all considered together by concatenating the rows in the proba-
bility matrix and comparing them to a binarized true label matrix. Hence, if a
given observation is classiﬁed incorrectly but the probability for the true class is
higher than the rest of the negative classes (excluding the one causing it to be
incorrectly classiﬁed), it will contribute to a high AUC value.
Therefore the binarized accuracy will give a high value do to a large amount
of negatives introduced in the one-vs-all approach. The negatives also aﬀect
==PAGE:83==
3.1 Species Classiﬁcation
71
Figure 3.3: A plot showing the probability distribution of predicted proba-
bilities for E. eﬀusa in a one-vs-all scheme. The orange curve
shows the density of predicted probabilities for observations in
the positive class, i.e. E. eﬀusa tiles. The blue curve shows the
density of predicted probabilities for all other classes, i.e. negatives.
The actual probability values for the positives are shown as orange
crosses while the ones for the negatives are shown as blue circles.
Note that the plot has been cut-oﬀat the y-axis.
the AUC in the sense that they limit how much the false positive rate increases
despite there being incorrectly labelled observations, if most of them have low
assigned probabilities. The approach used to calculate the AUC therefore does
not translate the model’s performance at actually classifying the observations,
but rather its ability to separate them in the assigned probabilities. In the binary
case, if the positive class has a higher predicted probability than the negative
one, it will always be labelled correctly. In the multi-class case however, an
observation can be labelled incorrectly despite being separate from most of the
negative observations.
There are methods to calculate the AUC metric for multi-class cases other than
micro- and macro averaging, such as the Hand and Till method [HT01]. Shortly
put, the method revolves around comparing all combinations of the classes using
a binary metric and averaging the results for all combinations. The binary metric
proposed is ˆA(j|i), which is the probability that a randomly drawn member of
class i will have a lower estimated probability of belonging to class j. It seems
however that the method would give similar results as it is also based around
separation of two classes on a probability scale. Although the ROC curve and
AUC are an excellent performance measure for binary classiﬁcation tasks as they
handle class imbalance, one might want to exercise caution when extending it to
one-vs-all multi-class classiﬁcation tasks. A better approach in this case might be
==PAGE:84==
72
Results and Discussion
Table 3.3: Results from the outer folds in the oil yield prediction experiments.
Image Type
Outer fold
Val. loss
Test MCC
Test ACC
Epochs
Time (m)
Color
1
2.482
0.05828
0.3695
20
32.99
Color
2
3.141
-0.02113
0.3186
20
30.49
Color
3
4.223
0.09037
0.4012
20
32.67
Filtered
1
1.285
0.01619
0.3534
17
30.92
Filtered
2
1.001
-0.04748
0.2988
17
24.91
Filtered
3
1.499
0.07467
0.3891
17
29.12
to calculate the AUC for the precision-recall curve, as it ignores true negatives.
The AUC for the precision recall curve for E. eﬀusa gave a value of 0.89, which
seems more in line with how the classiﬁer is actually performing. However, a
further analysis would be needed however to evaluate AUC as a performance
metric in multi-class settings the number of classes is high.
3.2
Oil Yield Classiﬁcation
The results from the oil yield prediction experiments were less than optimal,
as can be seen in table 3.3. A validation set was used as before to monitor
the training, but was omitted from the table. Instead the performance on the
external test set is shown for each outer fold. There are far fewer classes in these
experiments than those with the species classiﬁcation, therefore a lower number
of total introduced negatives in the one-vs-all scheme when drawing ROC curves.
As the ROC curves and AUC values were more in line with other metrics used
for these experiments, they were included in the evaluation. The averaged ROC
curves and AUC values for all classes for both experiments can be seen in ﬁgure
3.4. Showing the same trend as the results in table 3.3, the curves vary around
the diagonal middle line indicating low predictive performance. The results for
individual folds in both experiments can be seen in ﬁgure A.4. Training plots
for each individual fold in both experiments can be seen in ﬁgure A.3.
The takeaway from the poor results is that training on one set of species images
does not give a predictive ability on new species, with the image and oil yield
datasets used in this project.
When using color images, the training error
decreased while validation error increased as the training progressed.
This
indicates that the model is able to ﬁt to the training data, but is unable to
generalize about the oil yield of previously unseen species, i.e. the model overﬁts
to the training data and does not learn transferable features. The experiment
with the ﬁltered binary images showed a diﬀerent trend, with the training error
==PAGE:85==
3.2 Oil Yield Classiﬁcation
73
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4: ROC curves showing mean model performance on outer folds in
the 3-fold oil yield prediction experiment. ROC curves are shown
for all three classes in both oil yield prediction experiments.
remaining almost unchanged during the ﬁtting procedure. This indicates that the
model can not ﬁnd a signal in the training data to classify training observations,
i.e. underﬁtting. In order to see if the ﬁltering procedure removes variance that
could otherwise be used to classify the oil yield, training a model on non-ﬁltered
images was done for one fold. The training showed the same trend as with the
color images, i.e. the model did not learn features transferable to unseen species.
Training plots for the oil yield experiments can be seen in ﬁgure A.3.
The poor performance is most likely not a problem with the model itself, but
rather with the data and the labels associated with the observations. As men-
tioned in section 2.1.1, the oil yield was averaged over subspecies when assigning
a single yield to a certain species which might introduce mislabeled observations.
Additionally, there might be some noise in the source images themselves and
oil yield data. Firstly, images from the same species look quite diﬀerent when
it comes to leaf venation and oil gland arrangement in some cases. Image 3.5
shows two images of E. scyphocalyx where this diﬀerence is clear. The species is
labelled with a high oil yield according do the oil yield data, which ﬁts the image
showing clear and large oil glands. However, the image containing very few oil
glands will have the same label and if the model learns that big oil glands are
associated with a high oil yield, it will most likely classify tiles from this image
wrongly.
Secondly, some species are labelled as having low oil yield according to the
metabolite data despite having high oil glands. An example is the species E.
viridis, the images show the species having large oil glands while the oil yield in
the dry leaf, 0.1%, causes it to be labelled as a low oil yielding species. In this
==PAGE:86==
74
Results and Discussion
(a) Few clear oil glands
(b) Clear oil glands
Figure 3.5: Example of images of E. scyphocalyx where one image shows clear
oil glands while another image does not, despite the species being
labelled as a high oil yielding one from the oil yield data.
Figure 3.6: An example of a species, E. viridis, showing large oil glands despite
a low yield according to oil yield data.
case, either the measurement is incorrect or that there is not a clear connection
between a species’ oil yield and its leaf pattern. An image showing the leaf
pattern in E. viridis can be seen in ﬁgure 3.6.
Therefore, the learning algorithm might not be able to learn features that allow
for oil yield classiﬁcation that is transferable between species because (a) there
might be noise / mislabels in the source image and oil yield data, (b) there is
not enough variance in the supplied image data to allow for eﬀective ﬁtting and
(c) assuming the oil yield data is correct, there might not be a clear connection
between leaf shapes and the oil yield associated with a species.
It would be possible to train a model to predict oil yield but with independent
tiles. However, this is essentially the same task as was done in the species
prediction experiment just with diﬀerent labels. Hence, good results can rather
==PAGE:87==
3.2 Oil Yield Classiﬁcation
75
be attributed to the algorithm learning to predict species, just with labels
according to measured oil yield.
==PAGE:88==
76
Results and Discussion
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 4
Conclusion and Future
Perspectives
In this project, various convolutional neural network architectures were trained
with the purposes of predicting eucalypt species and oil yield.
The results
indicate that a large group of eucalypt species can be identiﬁed with a high
accuracy by training a ResNet18 architecture on binarized images of their leaf
parts. This is in line with suggestions found in other literature, which describe
how the leaf venation and oil gland shapes can be a distinguishing factor on a
species level [BN13]. Predicting the oil yield did not show as good of a result,
but as discussed in section 3.2, one of the reasons for such a poor performance
might be lack of image and oil yield data. Section B.1 describes an additional
experiment that was tested, which revolved around predicting single compounds.
The experiment was was abandoned however in favor of other experiments due
to time limitations.
Although predicting oil yield and compounds on previously unseen species was
not a success, it would be possible to integrate the species predictions and known
metabolite information for those prediction tasks. That is, given a leaf image,
one could predict the species and look up known metabolite information for the
species, hence bypassing the problem of predicting oil yield and compounds from
the image.
==PAGE:90==
78
Conclusion and Future Perspectives
4.1
Future Work
There is a lot of potential work on training machine learning algorithms on
eucalypt leaf images and how they can be linked to other features such as oil
yield. One thing that might be of interest is a diﬀerent label assignment in the
oil yield task. In this project the labels were assigned according to three evenly
split percentiles. One might change the task into a binary classiﬁcation, where
the top 20% of species are assigned a high yield label and the rest a low yield
label. An improvement could also be achieved if the source images themselves
would be classiﬁed according to a majority vote on their tiles. For example, if
60% of tiles coming from a single source image are assigned a label, the source
images would be assigned that label. The evaluation would therefore be based
on predictions on whole images, not single tiles. This could be extended to
the species predictions as well. The cross validation scheme in the oil yield
experiment could also have been improved. Instead of a 3-fold split one could try
increasing the split count, which would mean that more data would be available
for training in each fold. Being exposed to more training data might mean the
models would pick up on broader features that would increase their performance
on the test sets.
If one was building a model that could work in the ﬁeld to identify species,
considering the zoom level is of importance. If a leaf venation picture was taken
under diﬀerent circumstances than the ones used in this work, it cannot be
expected to have the same level of zoom. Although there is a random zoom
introduced as an image augmentation, it serves only to increase the zoom level
found in the original source image by a slight margin. Hence it would most likely
create a more robust model to train it on tiles with more variability in zoom
level, as can be expected if new images are taken in the ﬁeld. This could be
achieved by altering the zoom level as the source images are split into tiles. For
example, the source image could be split into larger tiles that either would be
rescaled or cropped. As before, it would be important to make sure that data
leakage is minimized if the tiles would later be split into training and test sets.
==PAGE:91==
Appendix A
Training and Performance
Plots
A.1
Species Classiﬁcation
A.1.1
Image Transformations and Sizes
Image A.1 shows training loss, validation loss and accuracy as a function of
epochs for the experiments with diﬀerent images transformations and sizes.
==PAGE:92==
80
Training and Performance Plots
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure A.1: Plots of training loss, validation loss and accuracy as a function
of epochs for the results shown in section 3.1.1.
==PAGE:93==
A.1 Species Classiﬁcation
81
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
Figure A.1: Continued ﬁgure.
==PAGE:94==
82
Training and Performance Plots
A.1.2
Model Comparison
Training plots of the ﬁtting procedure of diﬀerent model architectures. Note that
plot is a duplicate from A.1i, but it included in this ﬁgure as well for convenience.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure A.2: Plots of training loss, validation loss and accuracy as a function
of epochs for the results shown in section 3.1.2.
==PAGE:95==
A.2 Oil Yield Classiﬁcation
83
A.2
Oil Yield Classiﬁcation
A.2.1
Training Plots
Training plots for diﬀerent folds in the cross validation scheme used for oil yield
prediction evaluation, as described in section 3.2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure A.3: Plots of training loss, validation loss and accuracy as a function
of epochs for the results shown in section 3.2.
==PAGE:96==
84
Training and Performance Plots
(e)
(f)
Figure A.3: Continued ﬁgure.
A.2.2
ROC curves and AUC for Individual Folds
ROC curves showing individual class performance in each of the outer splits
used for testing, as described in section 3.2.
(a)
(b)
Figure A.4: ROC curves and AUC values for individual outer splits for the
results shown in section 3.2.
==PAGE:97==
A.2 Oil Yield Classiﬁcation
85
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure A.4: Continued ﬁgure.
==PAGE:98==
86
Training and Performance Plots
==PAGE:99==
Appendix B
Other Experiments
B.1
Compound Classiﬁcation
There was another experiment attempted not discussed in the thesis until now,
but that was the prediction of single compounds from the leaf images. It was
theorized that there might be a connection between the leaf patterns and if a
plant was a high producer of a certain compound. When predicting a single
compound the task would be a binary classiﬁcation. The task could possibly be
extended to a multi-label classiﬁcation if many compounds are predicted at once,
i.e. some plants can produce a high amount of more than one compound.
The approach was to ﬁrst identify those compounds that are most evenly split
between being produced in a high amount and a low amount in the plant species.
This was done do minimize class imbalance further down the road when doing
the actual modeling. The chosen threshold for a plant to be labeled as a high
producer of a certain compound was 20%, i.e.
if the mean amount of the
compound in the oil was more than the threshold it was labelled as a positive.
In many cases a compound was found in a plant but its amount not measured. If
a compound has only been detected in a plant but its amount not measured, the
plant can neither be given a positive or negative label. Hence, a negative label
was only assigned to a plant if it was measured and no trace of the compound
was found or that the compound was measured in a low enough amount. The
==PAGE:100==
88
Other Experiments
two compounds that produced the most evenly split classes were 1,8-cineole
and α-pinene. As was with the oil yield experiments, the images could be split
on species level when creating training, validation and test sets. Preliminary
modeling did now show good results however, with validation error increasing
while the training error decreased. Therefore, the experiment was not continued
due to time limitations.
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
[AAWS+15] Babar Ali, Naser Ali Al-Wabel, Saiba Shams, Aftab Ahamad,
Shah Alam Khan, and Firoz Anwar. Essential oils used in aro-
matherapy: A systemic review. Asian Paciﬁc Journal of Tropical
Biomedicine, 5(8):601–611, 2015.
[ASS00]
Erin L Allwein, Robert E Schapire, and Yoram Singer. Reducing
multiclass to binary: A unifying approach for margin classiﬁers.
Journal of machine learning research, 1(Dec):113–141, 2000.
[BBC+00]
Pierre Baldi, Søren Brunak, Yves Chauvin, Claus AF Andersen,
and Henrik Nielsen. Assessing the accuracy of prediction algorithms
for classiﬁcation: an overview. Bioinformatics, 16(5):412–424, 2000.
[BBC+06]
DJ Boland, MIH Brooker, GM Chippendale, N. Hall, BPM Hyland,
RD Johnston, DA Kleinig, MW McDonald, and JD Turner. Forest
Trees of Australia. CSIRO PUBLISHING, 2006.
[Bis06]
C.M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Informa-
tion Science and Statistics. Springer, 2006.
[BN13]
I. Brooker and D. Nicolle. Atlas of Leaf Venation and Oil Gland
Patterns in the Eucalypts. CSIRO PUBLISHING, 2013.
[BSF94]
Yoshua Bengio, Patrice Simard, and Paolo Frasconi.
Learning
long-term dependencies with gradient descent is diﬃcult. IEEE
transactions on neural networks, 5(2):157–166, 1994.
[BTEAI84]
Bachir Benjilali, Abdelrhafour Tantaoui-Elaraki, Aziz Ayadi, and
Mohamed Ihlal. Method to study antimicrobial eﬀects of essential
==PAGE:102==
90
BIBLIOGRAPHY
oils: application to the antifungal activity of six moroccan essences.
Journal of Food Protection, 47(10):748–752, 1984.
[CH+92]
JJW Coppen, GA Hone, et al. Eucalyptus oils: a review of produc-
tion and markets. NRI Bulletin 56, 1992.
[Chi17]
Davide Chicco. Ten quick tips for machine learning in computational
biology. BioData mining, 10(1):35, 2017.
[Cop03]
J.J.W. Coppen. Eucalyptus: The Genus Eucalyptus. Medicinal and
Aromatic Plants - Industrial Proﬁles. CRC Press, 2003.
[CPC16]
Alfredo Canziani, Adam Paszke, and Eugenio Culurciello.
An
analysis of deep neural network models for practical applications.
CoRR, abs/1605.07678, 2016.
[CT10]
Gavin C Cawley and Nicola LC Talbot. On over-ﬁtting in model
selection and subsequent selection bias in performance evaluation.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(Jul):2079–2107, 2010.
[DdVCB15] Yann N. Dauphin, Harm de Vries, Junyoung Chung, and Yoshua
Bengio.
Rmsprop and equilibrated adaptive learning rates for
non-convex optimization. CoRR, abs/1502.04390, 2015.
[DGB07]
Werner Dubitzky, Martin Granzow, and Daniel P Berrar. Fun-
damentals of data mining in genomics and proteomics. Springer
Science & Business Media, 2007.
[GB10]
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the diﬃculty
of training deep feedforward neural networks. In Proceedings of
the thirteenth international conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and
statistics, pages 249–256, 2010.
[GBC16]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learn-
ing. MIT Press, 2016. http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[Gor04]
Jan Gorodkin. Comparing two k-category assignments by a k-
category correlation coeﬃcient. Computational biology and chem-
istry, 28(5-6):367–374, 2004.
[GRUG17]
Aidan N. Gomez, Mengye Ren, Raquel Urtasun, and Roger B.
Grosse. The reversible residual network: Backpropagation without
storing activations. CoRR, abs/1707.04585, 2017.
[GWK+15]
Jiuxiang Gu, Zhenhua Wang, Jason Kuen, Lianyang Ma, Amir
Shahroudy, Bing Shuai, Ting Liu, Xingxing Wang, and Gang
Wang. Recent advances in convolutional neural networks. CoRR,
abs/1512.07108, 2015.
==PAGE:103==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
91
[GWML99] Shane G Griﬃn, S Grant Wyllie, Julie L Markham, and David N
Leach. The role of structure and molecular properties of terpenoids
in determining their antimicrobial activity. Flavour and Fragrance
Journal, 14(5):322–332, 1999.
[Hor91]
Kurt Hornik. Approximation capabilities of multilayer feedforward
networks. Neural networks, 4(2):251–257, 1991.
[HT01]
David J Hand and Robert J Till. A simple generalisation of the
area under the roc curve for multiple class classiﬁcation problems.
Machine learning, 45(2):171–186, 2001.
[HTF13]
T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman. The Elements of Statis-
tical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction. Springer
Series in Statistics. Springer New York, 2013.
[HWCL09]
ER Hendry, T Worthington, Barbara R Conway, and PA Lambert.
Antimicrobial eﬃcacy of eucalyptus oil and 1, 8-cineole alone and in
combination with chlorhexidine digluconate against microorganisms
grown in planktonic and bioﬁlm cultures. Journal of Antimicrobial
Chemotherapy, 64(6):1219–1225, 2009.
[HZRS15]
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep
residual learning for image recognition. CoRR, abs/1512.03385,
2015.
[IS15]
Sergey Ioﬀe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accel-
erating deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift.
CoRR, abs/1502.03167, 2015.
[JC17]
Katarzyna Janocha and Wojciech Marian Czarnecki.
On loss
functions for deep neural networks in classiﬁcation.
CoRR,
abs/1702.05659, 2017.
[JWHT13]
G. James, D. Witten, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani. An Introduction
to Statistical Learning: with Applications in R. Springer Texts in
Statistics. Springer New York, 2013.
[KB14]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. CoRR, abs/1412.6980, 2014.
[KH09]
Alex Krizhevsky and Geoﬀrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of
features from tiny images. Technical Report, 2009.
[Kim14]
Yoon Kim. Convolutional neural networks for sentence classiﬁcation.
CoRR, abs/1408.5882, 2014.
==PAGE:104==
92
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[KKGH06]
Guillaume K Ketoh, Honore K Koumaglo, Isabelle A Glitho, and
Jacques Huignard. Comparative eﬀects of cymbopogon schoenan-
thus essential oil and piperitone on callosobruchus maculatus devel-
opment. Fitoterapia, 77(7-8):506–510, 2006.
[KMN+16]
Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail
Smelyanskiy, and Ping Tak Peter Tang. On large-batch training
for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima. CoRR,
abs/1609.04836, 2016.
[KPP+14]
Sangita Kumari, Sachin Pundhir, Piyush Priya, Ganga Jeena,
Ankita Punetha, Konika Chawla, Zohra Firdos Jafaree, Subhasish
Mondal, and Gitanjali Yadav. Essoildb: a database of essential oils
reﬂecting terpene composition and variability in the plant kingdom.
Database, 2014, 2014.
[KSH12a]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoﬀrey E Hinton. Imagenet
classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. In F. Pereira,
C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou, and K. Q. Weinberger, editors, Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 25, pages 1097–1105.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2012.
[KSH12b]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoﬀrey E Hinton. Imagenet
classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances
in neural information processing systems, pages 1097–1105, 2012.
[Law85]
BM Lawrence. A review of the world production of essential oils
(1984). Perfumer & ﬂavorist, 10(5):1–16, 1985.
[LB+95]
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, et al. Convolutional networks for
images, speech, and time series. The handbook of brain theory and
neural networks, 3361(10):1995, 1995.
[LBBH98]
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haﬀner.
Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. Proceed-
ings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
[LD08]
Thomas CW Landgrebe and Robert PW Duin. Eﬃcient multiclass
roc approximation by decomposition via confusion matrix perturba-
tion analysis. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
intelligence, 30(5):810–822, 2008.
[LGRN09]
Honglak Lee, Roger Grosse, Rajesh Ranganath, and Andrew Y
Ng. Convolutional deep belief networks for scalable unsupervised
learning of hierarchical representations. In Proceedings of the 26th
annual international conference on machine learning, pages 609–616.
ACM, 2009.
==PAGE:105==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
93
[LH16]
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.
SGDR: stochastic gradient
descent with restarts. CoRR, abs/1608.03983, 2016.
[LRG74]
Deborrah Low, BD Rawal, and WJ Griﬃn. Antibacterial action
of the essential oils of some australian myrtaceae with special
references to the activity of chromatographic fractions of oil of
eucalyptus citriodora. Planta medica, 26(06):184–189, 1974.
[LSZ08]
Yinyin Liu, Janusz A Starzyk, and Zhen Zhu. Optimized approx-
imation algorithm in neural networks without overﬁtting. IEEE
transactions on neural networks, 19(6):983–995, 2008.
[LUN03]
Pauline Y Ladiges, Frank Udovicic, and Gareth Nelson. Australian
biogeographical connections and the phylogeny of large genera in
the plant family myrtaceae. Journal of Biogeography, 30(7):989–998,
2003.
[Mit97]
T.M. Mitchell.
Machine Learning.
McGraw-Hill International
Editions. McGraw-Hill, 1997.
[MMT12]
Caterina Morcia, Mauro Malnati, and Valeria Terzi. In vitro an-
tifungal activity of terpinen-4-ol, eugenol, carvone, 1, 8-cineole
(eucalyptol) and thymol against mycotoxigenic plant pathogens.
Food Additives & Contaminants: Part A, 29(3):415–422, 2012.
[MP43]
W S McCulloch and W Pitts.
A Logical Calculus of the Idea
Immanent in Nervous Activity. Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics,
5:115–133, 1943.
[MSRW11]
Sri Mulyaningsih, Frank Sporer, Jürgen Reichling, and Michael
Wink. Antibacterial activity of essential oils from eucalyptus and of
selected components against multidrug-resistant bacterial pathogens.
Pharmaceutical biology, 49(9):893–899, 2011.
[NH10]
Vinod Nair and Geoﬀrey E Hinton. Rectiﬁed linear units improve
restricted boltzmann machines. In Proceedings of the 27th interna-
tional conference on machine learning (ICML-10), pages 807–814,
2010.
[OMK+09]
C Orwa, A Mutua, R Kindt, R Jamnadass, and A Simons. Agrofore-
stree database: a tree species reference and selection guide version
4.0. World Agroforestry Centre ICRAF, Nairobi, KE, 2009.
[PN13]
Adam P Piotrowski and Jarosław J Napiorkowski. A comparison of
methods to avoid overﬁtting in neural networks training in the case
of catchment runoﬀmodelling. Journal of Hydrology, 476:97–111,
2013.
==PAGE:106==
94
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[RASC14]
Ali Sharif Razavian, Hossein Azizpour, Josephine Sullivan, and
Stefan Carlsson. CNN features oﬀ-the-shelf: an astounding baseline
for recognition. CoRR, abs/1403.6382, 2014.
[RDG+17]
Ilija Radosavovic, Piotr Dollár, Ross B. Girshick, Georgia Gkioxari,
and Kaiming He. Data distillation: Towards omni-supervised learn-
ing. CoRR, abs/1712.04440, 2017.
[RDS+15]
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev
Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya
Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei.
ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International
Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 115(3):211–252, 2015.
[RHW86]
David E Rumelhart, Geoﬀrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams.
Learning representations by back-propagating errors.
nature,
323(6088):533, 1986.
[Rip07]
B.D. Ripley. Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks. Cambridge
University Press, 2007.
[RN16]
S. Russell and P. Norvig. Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern Approach.
CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2016.
[Rob16]
A. Roberts.
The Complete Human Body.
Dorling Kindersley
Limited, 2016.
[Rud16]
Sebastian Ruder. An overview of gradient descent optimization
algorithms. CoRR, abs/1609.04747, 2016.
[RW17]
Waseem Rawat and Zenghui Wang. Deep convolutional neural
networks for image classiﬁcation: A comprehensive review. Neural
computation, 29(9):2352–2449, 2017.
[RZL17]
Prajit Ramachandran, Barret Zoph, and Quoc V. Le. Searching
for activation functions. CoRR, abs/1710.05941, 2017.
[Sch15]
Jürgen Schmidhuber.
Deep learning in neural networks:
An
overview. Neural Networks, 61:85–117, 2015.
[SHK+14]
Nitish Srivastava, Geoﬀrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever,
and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Dropout: A simple way to prevent
neural networks from overﬁtting. The Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 15(1):1929–1958, 2014.
[SLJ+14]
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott E.
Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke,
and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. CoRR,
abs/1409.4842, 2014.
==PAGE:107==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
95
[Smi15]
Leslie N. Smith.
No more pesky learning rate guessing games.
CoRR, abs/1506.01186, 2015.
[Sou92]
Ian Southwell. Eucalyptus leaf oils: Use, chemistry, distillation and
marketing. Phytochemistry, 31(6):2193, 1992.
[SVLD92]
Patrice Simard, Bernard Victorri, Yann LeCun, and John Denker.
Tangent prop-a formalism for specifying selected invariances in an
adaptive network. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 895–903, 1992.
[SZ14]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional
networks for large-scale image recognition. CoRR, abs/1409.1556,
2014.
[SZA09]
V Sfara, EN Zerba, and Raúl A Alzogaray. Fumigant insectici-
dal activity and repellent eﬀect of ﬁve essential oils and seven
monoterpenes on ﬁrst-instar nymphs of rhodnius prolixus. Journal
of medical entomology, 46(3):511–515, 2009.
[TS10]
Lisa Torrey and Jude Shavlik. Transfer learning. In Handbook of
research on machine learning applications and trends: algorithms,
methods, and techniques, pages 242–264. IGI Global, 2010.
[VWB16]
Andreas Veit, Michael J Wilber, and Serge Belongie. Residual
networks behave like ensembles of relatively shallow networks. In
D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. V. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett,
editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29,
pages 550–558. Curran Associates, Inc., 2016.
[WP1]
Kernel (image processing) - wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Kernel_(image_processing). Accessed on 05/23/2018.
[WP2]
Eucalyptus - wikipedia.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Eucalyptus. Accessed on 06/12/2018.
[XGD+16]
Saining Xie, Ross B. Girshick, Piotr Dollár, Zhuowen Tu, and
Kaiming He. Aggregated residual transformations for deep neural
networks. CoRR, abs/1611.05431, 2016.
[YCBL14]
Jason Yosinski, JeﬀClune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod Lipson.
How transferable are features in deep neural networks?
CoRR,
abs/1411.1792, 2014.
[ZF13]
Matthew D. Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding
convolutional networks. CoRR, abs/1311.2901, 2013.
