==PAGE:1==
Playware Technology for Children’s
Therapy in Developing Countries
Ana Filipa Exposto (s161868)
Master of Science in Engineering
2018
==PAGE:2==
Playware Technology for Children’s
Therapy in Developing Countries
Report written by:
Ana Filipa Exposto (s161868)
Advisor(s):
Henrik H. Lund, Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
22. January- 13. July
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Ana Filipa Exposto, 2018
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This project exploits modularity as known from LEGO to create playware technology and
activities for children’s therapy. Playware is created in the form of intelligent hardware
and software that act as a play force to inspire and motivate children with different
abilities to enter into a play dynamics. The project investigates how to create playware
activities, which may support and increase skills, which may be cognitive, physical,
and/or social skills, with the help and expertise of professional working in the field of
children’s therapy. The project will put emphasis on using the Playware ABC concept
to develop life-changing solutions for anybody, anywhere, anytime through building
bodies and brains to allow people to construct, combine and create. Thereby, explicitly
performing development for use in developing countries, for which activity analysis, pilot
testing and testing will be performed, based upon the playware research methodology
of iterative fast prototyping testing in the real environment. Final testing is performed
in a developed country and results are analyzed and compared.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This MSc Thesis documenting all the work and results of the project Playware Tech-
nology for Children’s Therapy in Developing Countries, was prepared at the Center for
Playware in the department of Electrical Engineering at the Technical University of
Denmark.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Henrik Lund at the Center of Pylayware in the
departemnt of Electrical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark for his
supervision and guidance during this project. I would also like to thank all the children
and staff at Børneterapien in Gentofte, with a special thanks to David Fusager Johnsen
for helping me understand many concepts of physical and occupational therapy, and
translating for me so that the testing could take place. Finally I would like to thank
Hospital Central de Maputo and Centro Infantil Esperança da Matola, Mozambique, for
allowing me to visit and test at their facilities.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
List of Figures
ix
List of Tables
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Children’s Therapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
What is Playware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
The MOTO Tiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Current Practice
11
2.1
Sub-Saharan Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Northern Europe
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Methodology
23
3.1
The Waterfall Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
The Iterative Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Testing
27
4.1
The Games
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
First Iteration - Mozambique
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Second Iteration - Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Results
35
5.1
Results in Mozambique Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Results in Denmark Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Conclusion
45
6.1
Future Improvements and Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.2
Benefits of Playware in Developing Countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3
The Drawbacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Bibliography
51
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
11
Vygotsky’s zone of proximal development [30]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
12
First version of modular robotic tiles [11] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
13
Second version of modular robotic tiles [17] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
14
The current MOTO tile [18] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
15
Tiles setup apart [18] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
16
Tiles setup connected [17] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
21
Gross Motor Function Classification System [33] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
22
Statistics at Børneterapien (2007) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
31
Diagram of the waterfall model [31] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
32
Diagram of the iterative model [10] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
41
Game Difficulty Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
42
Game 1 - Follow the red . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
43
Game 2 - Find the red . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
44
Test Game - Find the special one . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
45
Test Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
51
Child 2 playing at Centro Esperança . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
52
Graph of Points Achieved During One Minute Training Sessions . . . . . . .
41
53
Child B playing with the re-arranged tiles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
61
Children in Mozambique playing with tires and sticks [27]
. . . . . . . . . .
48
List of Tables
51
Table of Results of Find the Special One Game in Mozambique
. . . . . . .
35
52
Table of Results of Find the Special One Game in Denmark
. . . . . . . . .
39
53
Table showing improvement in each session in regards to their baseline
. . .
42
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Children’s Therapy
Children’s therapy is a multifaceted practice requiring a variety of professionals to tackle
a variety of complications to aid the child in aging and become a productive member of
society. A typical ”team” of pediatric therapy includes a physical therapist, occupational
therapist, speech therapist, and a psychologist.
The physical therapists’ duties consist of the evaluation and treatment of delays in
motor skills. These skills include strength, flexibility, posture, gait, balance, and sensory
skills. Improvement of these skills can only be achieved through repetition of exercises
to correct dysfunctional movements.
The occupational therapists’ duties consist of helping the child gain independence by
providing the tools to succeed in their day-to-day tasks. These include improving their
fine motor skills, sensory and visual motor skills, as well as their social skills. This is
done by first evaluating how the child currently plays and interacts with other children
and compare them to other children their age. A treatment plan is then created to
address the issues they may face in their sensory skills, social skills, fine motors skills,
behavior, or environment.
The pediatric speech and language therapist also going through a diagnosis phase first.
In this phase, the child is assessed for any swallowing, memory, attention, phonation, and
articulation issues. If an issue is detected, the child will initiate language, articulation, or
oral-motor therapy depending on their needs. Language therapy helps the child develop
and correct their vocabulary and grammar, articulation therapy correct the sounds and
syllables in words, oral-motor therapy includes massages of the face, tongue, lip, and
jaws to strengthen the muscles surrounding the mouth to easy swallowing.
Psychologists are required to assess the existing relationship dynamics between chil-
dren and their families as well as their attitudes towards their health. Children with
disabilities commonly feel outcasted from their peers and even family members caus-
ing them to be introverted or even aggressive in their socialization. Having a therapist
present to speak to them about their problems helps the child understand their envi-
ronment and peers better leading to more adequate social interactions and improved
self-esteem.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
1.1.1
Challenges in Therapy
Children’s therapy is filled with challenges that are, in general, disregarded. The ther-
apists must be patient and dedicate a lot of time into the treatment of their patients.
Unlike with adults, it is difficult to explain to a child the importance of the activities and
exercises they need to do. If a child is unwilling to cooperate, it becomes a big hurdle for
the therapist. Pediatric therapists need to think outside the box to get children more
involved in their own treatment [24]. However, if the therapy has positive results, the
child’s life might be changed and they might have a chance at more normal adulthood.
Although there are many challenges, the benefits outweigh them.
Another challenge in children’s therapy is the family, in particular the parents. It
is many times essential that the parents are aware of the treatment plan and perform
exercises and enforece certain behaviours at home. However, parents will often surrender
to their children in order not to upset them, which can have negative consequences. The
parents must also be instructed on the disorder and what impacts it has on the family
daily life. Parents often become anxious when dealing with these new challenges, and it
is up to the therapists to comfort them and encourage them.
1.1.2
Children and Technology
In developed countries, play and technology are becoming more and more synonymous
with each other. Dating back to the Tamagotchi in 1996, children have involved technol-
ogy in their everyday lives. Today, elementary schools are stocked with computers and
children are taught how to use them at the same age at which they learn to read and
write. Before they can even talk, children are now able to unlock their parents’ phones
by mimicking their actions. Technology is surrounding the world more and more, and
children are no exception. Different technologies have different effects on the child and
are used for different purposes. The television is a source of entertainment for many
children, a kaleidoscope is a way of learning, and a remote-controlled car a source of fun.
Technology is a part of everyday life and, therefore, a child should not be deprived of
it, when they will need to understand to succeed in the future. Computer games today
help children with their decision making by putting them through a set of challenges
and allowing them to come up with creative solutions to overcome them. When dealing
with computer games specifically, it is essential to keep in mind that they may lead
to aggressive behavior from a lack of physical interactions [8]. The use of technology
in play and learning is essential, but children still need physical interactions with their
peers to develop healthy social skills.
In developing countries, technology may not be so readily available, especially to chil-
dren. However, by depriving them of newer technologies, they will have more difficulty
in the future to learn about them and how to use them. It is, however, common for most
people in developing countries to have mobile phones. Remote controlled cars and little
robot like toys are available but monetarily unattainable to most. Televisions are fairly
common even if not in every household. The use of technology is growing in developing
==PAGE:15==
1.2 What is Playware
3
countries, and must, therefore, be introduced to children, who will surely use it in their
daily adult lives.
1.1.3
Motivation
Motivation is defined as ”an intrinsic psychological force that encourages the individual
to attempt to master skills that are at least moderately challenging to them.” [16] Moti-
vation is of critical importance in children’s rehabilitation, as it is the only non-health
related characteristic in the child that affects their improvement. An unmotivated child
is limited in how much they can benefit from their treatment, as well as, their partici-
pation in everyday activities in their regular life. Children with disabilities tend to shy
away from complex and challenging activities in comparison to their peers, which can
stem from the current challenges in their lives and a fear of failure. The degree of the
disability and behavioral problems correlates directly to the lack of motivation shown in
the child.
There are varying methods to increase motivation including the use of rewards, use of
negative consequences, illustrating the value of the activity, and providing the child the
choice [9]. Rewards and choice are perceived as the two most motivating techniques by
children. However, the use of rewards does not always have long-term benefits as once
the rewards are no longer attained, the motivation decreases again, but it might be ideal
when the child does not respond to the other methods. During treatment, children are
motivated by being allowed to select their favorite activities such that they are enjoyable
and yet, still challenging. Group activities have also been seen to enhance motivation.
Motivation is a priority goal in therapy, resulting in improvements in their condition, as
well as, their everyday activities and social interactions.
1.2
What is Playware
1.2.1
Play
Scott Eberle, an author for the Journal of Play, defines plays as ”an ancient, voluntary,
‘emergent’ process driven by pleasure that yet strengthens our muscles, instructs our
social skills, tempers and deepens our positive emotions, and enables a state of balance
that leaves us poised to play some more.” [6] It can be noticed from this definition that
play is not limited to children, and that is voluntary, meaning if one is forced to do
something then they are not playing. However, play is a right of all children and should,
therefore, be ensured that every child is able to exercise this right. Eberle also states
that ”play can be challenging or soothing, rough or gentle, physical or intellectual, mis-
chievous or well mannered, orderly or disorderly, competitive or cooperative, planned or
spontaneous, solitary or social, inventive or rule-bound, simple or complex, or strenuous
or restful.” [6] There is no one way to play. It presents itself in different manners in
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
different cultures. Play can occur in the form of how one interacts with objects, by
making up fantasies, or by the social interactions with others.
1.2.2
Play-Based Learning
Play can be described as a leisure activity, but it could have a far more critical role than
only entertainment. A structured form of play, called a game, can serve as an educational
tool. When children play, they develop skills such as cooperation or confidence. Play is
a universal phenomenon that is spontaneous and rewarding with several added benefits.
For example, in education it helps children learn and build skills that lay the foundation
for reading, writing, and logic; in social skills, it provides opportunities to integrate with
peers of the same age, teaches to understand others and communicate with them; in
cognition, it encourages to learn, imagine, categorize and solve problems.
Play-based or game-based learning has high learning value in critical thinking, group
communication, debate, and decision making [23]. Children tend to lose focus when
listening to a teacher lecture or looking at PowerPoint presentations. By introducing
play into the learning, the child is more involved in the material and can enjoy and
apply themselves more in the tasks they are performing. Playing games can also help
in breaking cultural boundaries and help children socialize with their peers. With the
assistance of teachers or others who are knowledgeable in the particular subject, the
child is able to achieve a higher level than if attempting the task on their own, therefore,
cooperation is advised.
1.2.3
Collateral Effects of Play
When a person plays, their only expected outcome is enjoyment.
They enter what
Lund refers to as play-dynamics, which is the ”dynamic effect of the play-force which
affects the player by placing the person in a state of playing.” [12] However, there can
be other specific effects of play that are beneficial for a participant, called the collateral
effects of play. The collateral effects of play can be educational achievements, motor
skill enhancement or cognitive or physical rehabilitation.
Vygotsky states that ”play creates a zone of proximal development in the child. In
play, the child always behaves beyond his average age, above his daily behavior; in play it
is as though he were a head taller than himself. As in the focus of magnifying glass, play
contains all developmental tendencies on a condensed form and is itself a major source
of development.” [29] A visual representation of the zone of proximal development is
shown in Figure 11. In this diagram, it is possible to see why it is necessary to challenge
each child at a level that is appropriate to them individually. If the challenge is too easy
for the child and is already within the realm of what they are already able to achieve
independently, they will feel bored. However, if the challenge is too demanding, the child
feels anxiety in attempting it. With the assistance of a teacher or a more knowledgeable
peer, the child enters the zone of proximal development through scaffolding and can
==PAGE:17==
1.2 What is Playware
5
complete a more difficult child than working independently. Play also creates a zone of
proximal development in the child, and they are able to tackle a challenge as if they had
some assistance.
Figure 11: Vygotsky’s zone of proximal development [30].
1.2.4
Playware
It is not without reason that electronic products can inspire and create play and playful
experiences among children, juvenile and adults. Computer games may be the example
which is most successful nowadays. The use of intelligent technology to create play is
only briefly explored and developed. This technology could be directed to create a kind
of leisure activity that uses both software and hardware to produce experience among
its users. This has been called playware. Playware is defined as intelligent hardware
and software, which creates play and playful experiences for users of all ages [13]. It
is believed that such playware can mediate other actions including social interactions
and physical movement [12]. The playware is a mediator, which acts like an invisible
force attracting users to play. The participant is dragged into making interaction with
technology and pushed into a play dynamics. Being in such play dynamics may feel
like forgetting about time and place. Sometimes it can create a feeling of being able to
perform more or better, which can be a desired collateral effect.
In modular playware, the key features have been determined as modularity, flexibility,
immediate feedback, end-user activity design and creative exploration [11]. It is also
important to consider the robustness of the equipment and creating a tangible interaction.
To include players of all ages and physical capacity, the playware must be adaptive and
produce immediate feedback to keep the player motivated and engaged.
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
1.2.4.1
The ABCs of Playware
To ensure that a quality of play that suits all groups of people is achieved, whether they
be young or old, non-disabled or disabled, the Playware ABC concept is introduced. The
Playware ABC concept is defined by:
A:
Anybody,
Anywhere,
Anytime
B:
Building
Bodies and
Brains
C:
Construct,
Combine,
Create
Lund, form the center of Playware at DTU, describes the Playware ABC concept
as ”creating technology solutions for anybody, anywhere, anytime by using embodied
artificial intelligence building bodies and brains, which facilitates that users can them-
selves manipulate with the technology solutions to construct, combine and create their
own solutions.” [13] To achieve optimal performance, most systems have a complex in-
frastructure, installation process, and typically serve only one purpose. The Playware
ABC concept, on the other hand, takes away from this complexity and focus instead on
creating a solution that can be used by anybody, anywhere at anytime. This requires a
flexible solution that can be used in a variety of ways in a variety of contexts. A flexible
solution also means a robust solution, such that anyone can understand how to use the
product and it can truly be applied anywhere.
Building bodies and brains refers to the fact that in the past a robot or other systems
had fixed predetermined functionalities, not adapting to its user or surroundings. When
looking at nature, it is clear that it is not possible to separate the evolution of the
body and its environment, from the brain. To demonstrate this relationship to people
of all ages and demographics and allow them to explore it, the LEGO Mindstorms were
created. The robotic systems allowed the user to effortlessly build and program them to
fit their environment and perform tasks correspondingly. Combining the development of
the body and the brain of a robot or system, it is possible to have it adapt at run-time
to each individual user and the environment where used. The user can build bodies
and brains through the use of robotic playware which is flexible, modular, has provides
feedback to stimulate engagement, and allows the user to design and create playful
activities regardless of the cognitive or physical skills [15]. Constructing, combining, and
creating using this technology presents a cognitive challenge in the form of a physical
challenge, similar to how a child is taught to count and perform simple math operations
using their fingers instead of doing it in their heads, tackling a cognitive challenge with
a physical representation of the same [13].
1.3
The MOTO Tiles
Following the Playware ABC concept, the MOTO tiles were designed and developed
for use in training balance, mobility, agility, strength, and endurance in the elderly
==PAGE:19==
1.3 The MOTO Tiles
7
population [12]. The first design of the tiles shown below in Figure 12 was a quadratic
shape measuring 300mm*300m*33m made from polyurethane. Each of the four sides of
the tiles contained two magnets and an infra-red transceiver. The magnets were used to
ensure that the tiles would fit with each other such that the infra-red transceivers were
aligned. One tile contained an XBee radio communication chip through which it could
communicate to the game selector or a computer using a USB XBee dongle. Between
themselves, the tiles would communicate to their adjoining neighbor via the infra-red
transceivers.
Figure 12: First version of modular robotic tiles [11].
The next iteration of the tiles shown below in Figure 13 abandoned the use of the
magnets. Instead, the tiles were made to resemble jigsaw puzzle pieces somewhat, and
were attached in the same manner. Like the previous iteration, the tiles used infra-
red transceivers to communicate with each other, having one tile containing the radio
communication chip. This meant that this one tile always had to be on for all the other
to work as well.
Figure 13: Second version of modular robotic tiles [17].
==PAGE:20==
8
1 Introduction
The current design of the tile is lighter and works individually, not needing to be
connected to any other tiles. As seen in Figure 14, the tiles have a pressure sensitive
zone, containing a force sensitive resistor which is able to detect when a tile is pressed
or released. Around this are eight evenly space RGB LEDs. Each tile is equipped with
ANT+ transmitters and receivers, and the tablet that is used to control them is already
an ANT+ compatible device, and acts as the master, while the tablets are the slaves.
The ANT+ is a communication protocol created by Garmin which allows devices to
communicate amongst eachother. According to their website, ANT+ is ”perfectly suited
for any kind of low data rate sensor network topologies - from peer-to-peer or star, to
practical mesh - in personal area networks (PAN) which are well suited for sports, fitness,
wellness and home health applications” [32].
Figure 14: The current MOTO tile [18].
As a tile is turned on, even without being connected to the tablet, it rotates through
the colors with each press. This allows for a simple game of coloring even without any
connection. With the ANT+ protocol, it is possible to connect any number of tiles to the
tablet and place them in any desired configuration as shown in Figure 15 and Figure 16.
Having the user to choose the physical configuration and the number of tiles used in a
setup allows for a more suited use. For example, if someone with limited movement is
using the tiles, it may be more beneficial to use a small number of tiles and keep them
close together. On the other hand, if the user is using them for endurance training in a
sport, it would be more beneficial to use a larger number of tiles, farther apart.
==PAGE:21==
1.3 The MOTO Tiles
9
Figure 15: Tiles setup apart [18].
Figure 16: Tiles setup connected [17].
1.3.1
Playware for the Elderly
The current MOTO tiles were designed to have many uses, but specifically to improve
the health of the elderly. Therefore, to validate the technology, tests were performed
at two senior centers in Gentofte. Over a 16 week period, a total of 16 residents from
elderly care homes participated in 13 training sessions. The residents were able to sign-
up for these training sessions, and none of them was forced to do so. Most of the games
were designed to challenge the users’ physical and cognitive abilities within the one
game. Before beginning train each individual was put through four standardized test
for mobility. Those test were again repeated at the end of the 16 weeks and showed a
improvements between 21% and 66% showing the collateral effects of play. It was also
obesrved that the eledrly participants were having fun an dand the they performed the
activities for their own enjoyment and pleasure [12]. In May of 2018 Henrik Lund, from
the Center of Playware at DTU, won an oscar of eledely care for Product Innovation
of the year.
The MOTO tiles have been to proven to positevely impact the elderly
community and are now getting international recognition.
==PAGE:22==
10
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Current Practice
2.1
Sub-Saharan Africa
2.1.1
Common Problems
Unfortunately, statistics demonstrating the prevalence of neurological impairments, mus-
culoskeletal disorders, genetic disorders and autism are not readily available for most of
Sub-Saharan Africa. Field research was necessary to get a better understanding of what
disorders are most frequent. Two places were visited to find out what disorders they
encounter and how they go about treating or managing them.
The first place visited was Hospital central de Maputo. The government runs this
hospital and, therefore, it is free of charge for the patients. Here the patients with purely
physical disorders such as cerebral palsy or brachial plexus birth palsy are treated in
the Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation department.
On the other hand, patients
with disorders such as autism or intellectual disability get treatment in the psychology
department of the hospital. Here, they exercise only their intellectual abilities.
The second place visited was Centro Infantil Esperança located in the outskirts of
Maputo [20]. The center currently helps children from five years old all the way to
adults at forty years old, and works like a school where their students arrive in the
morning after 6:30 am and leave before 5:00 pm. They aim to create a space where
the children feel safe and can interact with one another regardless of disability and age.
The children are taught regular schooling material such as math and Portuguese, with
particular attention to needs of each child. The older students are taught life skills such
as gardening and cooking and help out around the center. They are funded by the
parents that are able to help and by donations, so they have difficulty expanding and
accepting more children. The doctors who help diagnose and provide medical expertise
are volunteers working at other hospitals or clinics.
2.1.1.1
Encountered Disorders
Autism: Autism is the most common of the Autism spectrum disorders (ASD). It is a
neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by impairments in social interactions,
communication, both verbal and non-verbal, and unusual behaviors and interests
for their age. Symptoms start emerging in children before three years of age. The
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Current Practice
child has difficulty creating friendships with others of the same age, is unable to
sustain conversations with others, and typically does not adapt well to changes
in routines. Impairments in cognitive, sensory-perceptual and motor functioning
are found in children with autism requiring physical and occupational therapists,
but can also benefit from psychologists, speech therapists, and special education
teachers [28].
Intellectual Disability: According to the American Psychiatric Association, intellec-
tual disabilities are defined using the following three criteria[2]:
• Deficits in intellectual skills; reasoning, problem-solving, planning, abstract
thinking, judgment, learning (academic and from experience.
• Deficits in adaptive functioning; communication, social participation, and
independent living.
• The deficits listed above commence during the developmental period.
The term intellectual disability, previously referred to as mental retardation, en-
compasses any child that meets the criteria mentioned above. Throughout this
project, it is also referred to as learning difficulties. For a more accurate descrip-
tion of the disorder, a severity specifier is used.
The severity levels are mild,
moderate, severe, and profound. Many times children with intellectual disabili-
ties will have neuromuscular, musculoskeletal, and cardiopulmonary impairments.
These impairments result in deficient motor control, coordination, postural control,
force production, flexibility, and balance, requiring continuing physical therapy.
The child may also experience learning impairments demonstrated by deficits in
advanced cognitive processes, performing and mastering tasks, and memory [28].
Due to the difficulty in mastering tasks and adapting to new environments, it
is essential that the treatment of the child be consistent. This requires that the
occupational, physical and speech therapists, as well as the parents and special ed-
ucation teachers, be aware of the child’s treatment program so that it may overlap
in all aspects of the child’s daily life.
Down’s Syndrome: Down’s syndrome, also referred to as trisomy 21, is the most
common cause of intellectual disability, caused by a chromosomal disorder where
the child is born with 47 chromosomes instead of 46. In this specific case, the
child experiences low muscle strength, slow reaction time and motor delays which
increase with age. They may also have musculoskeletal disorders such as scoliosis,
foot deformities, loose ligaments, and joint hypermobility. Children with Down’s
syndrome usually present slightly different physical features, where the back of
the head and certain parts of the face are slightly flattened.
They will suffer
deficits in their hearing, sight, and speech. These deficits increase the difficulty
of therapy, which is similar to that of other intellectual disabilities, except the
therapist may have difficulty communicating with the child when hearing and
speech are impaired. The therapist must also be aware that the child may suffer
from congenital heart defects and may have seizure disorders. Attention deficits
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Sub-Saharan Africa
13
and information processing difficulties have the added challenge of getting the child
to focus on the tasks and treatments. Children with Down’s syndrome benefit from
demonstrations and multimodal sensory approaches.
Cerebral Palsy: “Cerebral palsy describes a group of permanent disorders of the devel-
opment of movement and posture, causing activity limitations that are attributed
to nonprogressive disturbances that occurred in the developing fetal or infant brain.
The motor disorders of CP are often accompanied by disturbances of sensation, per-
ception, cognition, communication, and behavior as well as seizures and secondary
musculoskeletal problems.” [28] Although not always present, there is 75 % pos-
sibility of the child also experiencing learning disabilities. The five-level scale of
Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS), classifies the severity of
the disorder for children between the ages of six and 12 years of age as such:
Level I
Walks without limitations
Level II
Walks with limitations
Level III
Walks using a hand-held mobility device
Level IV
Self-mobility with limitations; may use powered mobility
Level V
Self-mobility is severely limited
transported in a manual wheelchair
Figure 21: Gross Motor Function Classification System [33].
The type of movement exhibited by the child can be categorized into the following:
Spastic: Increased resistance to passive movements, creating difficulty in control-
ling muscle movement.
Dyskinetic: Involuntary slow and squirmy movements of the hands, feet, arm, or
legs.
Ataxic: Increased difficulty in balancing and coordinating muscle movements,
with a noticeable tremor.
Hypotonic: Decreased muscle tone that will commonly transition in to dyskinetic
or ataxic.
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Current Practice
While the parts of the body that are affected may be categorized as hemiplegia,
diplegia, and quadriplegia.
Hemiplegia: One side of the body is affected, both arm and leg.
Diplegia: Both lowers extremities are affected.
Quadriplegia: All four limbs are affected as well as the back and neck.
Due to the many limitations that children with Cerebral Palsy may experience,
their intervention consists of primarily physical therapy due to limited mobility,
but may also benefit from occupational therapy to improve fine motor and self-care
skills, and speech therapy for their communications skills.
New-Born Brachial Plexus Palsy: New-born brachial plexus palsy results from com-
plications at birth, where the shoulder of the new-born gets stuck at the pubic bone
of the mother during delivery, causing an injury to two or more cervical or thoracic
nerve roots [19]. Injuries to the brachial plexus affect the nerves that control the
shoulder, arm, wrist, hand, and fingers, causing limitations to motion in these. The
severity of this injury can go from a mild stretching of the nerve all the way up to
the tearing of nerve roots from the spinal. Incidents of New-born brachial plexus
palsy have been decreasing in developed countries, specifically the United States
of America, however, in Sub-Saharan Africa, it is a prevalent problem due to its
persistent occurrence. Treatment of brachial plexus palsy aims at restoring motor
function, as well as preventing muscle atrophy and stiffness of the affected limbs.
For an effective treatment, it is of great importance that the mothers are taught
the exercises so that they may be carried out more frequently at their homes in
addition to the physical therapy. It is also of importance to continue managing
the condition as its treatment tends to be a long-term process.
ADHD: Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder is defined by the American Psychi-
atric Association as ”a persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-
impulsivity that interferes with functioning or development.”[2] There are three
behaviors characterizing this definition. The first, inattention, is demonstrated by
a lack of focus, being disorganized, and not being persistent in completing tasks.
The second, hyperactivity, can be seen in fidgeting, excessive talking, or running
around in inappropriate moments. Lastly, impulsivity refers to hasty decisions and
actions disregarding consequences. Based on these definitions, it may be difficult
to correctly diagnose a child with ADHD seen as many of these actions, on their
own, maybe normal child behavior. Hence, diagnosis of ADHD tends to happen
during the elementary school year, and several of the symptoms must be present
before 12 years of age. Due to an inability to focus on tasks and instructions, chil-
dren with ADHD will usually show a learning disorder. This may even cause the
individual to be defiant in resisting orders and demands. Children with ADHD will
often have poor school performance and suffer social-rejection, which may affect
their performance at a job and interpersonal interactions as adults. Treatment
of ADHD can consist of special education teachers, occupational therapists, and
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Northern Europe
15
psychologists to help in the completion of tasks, school performance, and social
behaviors.
2.1.2
Current Solutions Available
Availability of treatments in Mozambique is very limited, with even more limited invest-
ment in equipment and facilities. For those who can not afford to pay for treatment,
they are limited to using the central hospital. Due to a lack of resources here, the chil-
dren are only able to go in for treatment about twice a month for 30-minute sessions.
In these sessions, their improvement is assessed, and some activities are performed, the
rest of the treatment is sent as homework, where the children are expected to do sim-
ilar activities in their own homes. The sessions are often run by medical students in
their last years of study. The activities performed by the children vary greatly based on
their age and disorder. Those with intellectual disability, often do school like exercises
such as math, reading and writing, or reading comprehension. Younger children with
autism often play games such as putting together jigsaw puzzles or threading objects
with a string together with the therapists. This helps them develop their fine motor
skills, as well as their social skills. The older children, however, tend to find these tasks
monotonous and end up benefiting less from them due to a lack of motivation.
For those who have the means, they can send their children to go to a special school
where they are looked after and cared for every day of the week. Here, it is easier to
assess the development of the children and enforce treatment plans. The children get
more one-on-one time with their therapists and can feel ”normal” in a school where
everyone is treated the same. Children with certain disorders such as autism or Down’s
syndrome tend to feel like outsiders in the typical school environment since they are not
able to play or act like the other children their age.
2.2
Northern Europe
2.2.1
Common Problems
Although there are recorded studies on the prevalence of certain disorders in northern
Europe, it is still difficult to ascertain their significance due to changing diagnostic cri-
teria.
The last known estimate of autistic disorder in Denmark dates back to 2002,
using values provided by the national register. Only children of age 8 were included,
and there was a prevalence of 7.2 per 10,000 children affected by autism, with 5.0-10.0
being within the 95 % confidence interval. From the same study, pervasive developmen-
tal disorders had a prevalence of 30.0 per 10,000 children with no confidence interval
provided. Pervasive developmental disorder (PDD) is another term for autism spectrum
disorders and encompasses autistic disorder, Asperger’s disorder, childhood disintegra-
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Current Practice
tive disorder, Rett’s disorder, and pervasive disorder not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS)
[7].
The Surveillance of Cerebral Palsy in Europe Network has a database containing
the data for cerebral palsy for most European countries.
Denmark has Det Danske
Cerebral Parese Register which was established in 1950 and has since recorded the cases
of Cerebral Palsy in the whole country. According to their information there are 130
new cases per year, while there are 64,000 births a year. This means that there is a
prevalence for cerebral palsy of 20.3 per 10,000 children [5].
To get a better understanding of how common each disorder is in Denmark, Børneter-
apien was able to provide their internal statistics of 2007. These statistics are shown in
Figure 22 below. The bars colored in red are of greater importance to this project as
they represent disorders that were encountered either in the testing in Mozambique or
the testing in Denmark. These statistics may not be exactly accurate because each child
was entered only into one category even though the may suffer from multiple disorders,
which are sometimes correlated. The most common disorders seen in Mozambique were
cerebral palsy, autism, Down’s syndrome, and intellectual disability. From those four,
cerebral palsy and autism are also common in Denmark. It is difficult to compare in-
tellectual disability since it was not given its category but is present in a few. Down’s
syndrome has a low prevalence in Denmark, although cases still exist as shown in the
graph.
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Northern Europe
17
Figure 22: Statistics at Børneterapien (2007).
2.2.1.1
Encountered Disorders
Sleep Disorders: As the name suggests, sleep disorders are the disturbance of sleep.
In children, these typically happen in the form of sleepwalking, sleep talking, con-
fusion arousals, and sleep terrors. Without treatment or management, these can
lead to irritability and learning difficulties [4]. Sleep disorders in children require
close attention from the parents, ensuring that the child has a consistent bedtime
and wake-up time. The child requires the help of a psychologist if affected by
irritability, and an occupational therapist for learning difficulties.
Albinism: Albinism is a genetic condition affecting reducing the presence of pigment
in the skin, hair, and eyes. As a result, vision problems which are not correctable
by the use of glasses occur, and may even cause legal-blindness. Due to their very
fair skin, people with albinism need to take precautions when in the sun, always
wearing protection. Failure to do so may lead to skin cancer [1]. The appearance
of people with albinism may cause some social out-casting for which psychology
may be a helpful tool.
Dyspraxia: Dyspraxia, also known as developmental coordination disorder, is a condi-
tion affecting the brain causing complication in the planning and coordination of
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Current Practice
muscle movements and can be seen in many everyday activities such as jumping,
speaking, and grasping objects. Deficits in social skills are usually associated with
dyspraxia, making the child appear immature for their age group. There are three
categories of dyspraxia based on the affected movement.
Ideomotor: Difficulty with single-step physical tasks.
Ideational: Difficulty with sequences of physical tasks.
Oromotor: Difficulty with enunciation (speech)
Constructional: Difficulty with spatial relationships such as expressing direc-
tions, understanding relative positions, and the use of building blocks.
Depending on the category the child falls in to, treatment might consist of physical,
occupational, and speech therapy. The child may also benefit from a psychologist
due to social difficulties [22].
Epilepsy: Epilepsy is a condition affecting the brain which may be caused by genetics,
brain injury, or through lack of oxygen to the brain. People who have epilepsy
are susceptible to having seizures or attacks. These seizures may be short and
go unnoticed by the parents or bystanders. During these seizures the child may
appear dazed, perform involuntary movements, lose balance, or suddenly become
angry or scared [25]. Seizures may also occur during the night leading to the same
symptoms as the sleeping disorders previously described.
The child will often
exhibit low self-esteem and isolate themselves from their peers. Psychological help
is crucial in helping the child understand their disorder and making them feel more
at ease in their environment, be it home or school.
Legg-Calve-Perthes Disease: Legg-Calve-Perthes disease (LCPD), also referred to
as only Perthes, is a rare disorder usually presenting itself in boys ages 4 to 10,
although it is also possible to affect girls. Children with Perthes will have limited
mobility, usually limping without any pain.
The limping happens due to the
interrupted blood flow to the femoral head, killing bone cells.
When detected
at an early age, through physical therapy and observation, the body will remove
the dead bone and develop new, healthy bone. In more severe or late detection
cases the child may need surgery to cut the bone and realign the joint. In most
cases of Perthes, the child can recover through physical therapy and is able to
perform physical activities without any major limitations [21].
A therapist at
Børneterapien stated that children suffering from Perthes tend to also have ADHD.
This combination can be problematic since they may have limited mobility at some
points in their childhood but also have considerable energy.
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), also referred
to as progressive muscular dystrophy, is a disorder affecting only males, severely
disabling the child as they age. Symptoms appear between 2 to 5 years of age
including clumsiness, falling, and an abnormal reluctance to walking or running
for their age group.
Although there is a high chance of an intelligence deficit,
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Northern Europe
19
cognitive skills are not usually affected. There is no cure to DMD, but regular
physical treatment may delay the progression of the disorder, in turn, preventing
deformities and prolonging mobility. Death in sufferers of DMD usually occurs
of respiratory or heart issues. Pulmonary function may also be improved through
physical therapy [28].
Hemiparesis: Hemiparesis, also referred to as hemiplegia, is a permanent condition
that affects one side of the body due to brain injury.
Hemiparesis may occur
at birth known as unilateral cerebral palsy [3]. As the name suggests, the child
will experience similar musculoskeletal problems, as well as, deficient perception,
cognition, and communication skills as those affected by cerebral palsy. Given
that only one side of the body is affected, it is likely that the child will experience
a limp and poor balance, although, depending on the severity of the condition,
it may only be noticeable when attempting to perform physical activity.
The
child requires long-term psychical and occupational therapy and may also need
speech therapy if communication skills are impaired. It is important that parents
be integrated into the treatment plan and are instructed on how to aid the child
in their daily activities and perform specific exercises similar to those in therapy.
Feeling the weakness in the one side of the body, the child will naturally tend to
perform tasks or play, with the stronger side. It is necessary to involve the affected
side in all activities so that it may also develop.
2.2.2
Current Solutions Available
Denmark, as well as another 30 countries in Europe, have adopted the inclusive education
system. The European Agency for Special Needs and Inclusive Education strives to
create education systems where ”all learners of any age are provided with meaningful,
high-quality educational opportunities in their local community, alongside the friends
and peers.”[26] This means that it becomes the teachers’ responsibility to ensure that
each student is presented with a challenge to their capabilities, regardless of whether the
student has special needs or not. If some closer support is required, the student may
receive special education only the in subjects where they experience greater difficulties,
and be integrated into regular classes otherwise.
Each child is individually assessed
based on the education and counseling needs, and they are accordingly placed.
There are many extracurricular activities for children with disabilities including judo,
football, horseback riding, and swimming and water sports. Here children can compete
at an adequate level, and are able to improve their physical, as well as, their social skills
by interacting with other children of a similar age with similar disabilities. Activities
take place under the supervision of trained professionals to avoid any injuries, over-
exertion, and to advise proper form for each activity. In addition, these the supervisors
are trained to work with the children with disabilities and are able to assist in the
peer-to-peer socialization getting them started, and make the children feel comfortable
outside of their home environment.
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Current Practice
Other centers as multi-faceted as Børneterapien are not common in or out of Den-
mark. However, throughout the country, there are many centers that are more special-
ized in on or few disorders, as well as center the focus only physical therapy, occupational
therapy, speech therapy, or psychology. Regardless of what part of the country the child
leaves, and what their disorder may be, there is help available. Even if it is a little farther
away, it is never out of the reach of the parents. Schools aid in the process of getting
children the help they need once a disorder is detected, easing the process of finding
suitable help.
2.2.3
MOTO Tiles at Børneterapien
Given that Børneterapien had set of MOTO Tiles already available to them allowed for
a better understanding of how the tiles can be beneficial to children’s therapy, as they
are, and how they can be improved in the future to aim more specifically at the needs
of the children.
At the moment, the tiles are being used for children who weigh over 15kg, due to the
fact that lighter children have a harder time getting their pressed detected by the sensor
in the tiles. However, they are sometimes still used with kids to get them to jump when
they have a difficult time with balance. Børneterapien has its facilities split up between
three different buildings with different purposes, two of which are for physical therapy
and one is used for occupational therapy.
One of the physical therapy buildings is used for the younger children and those with
limited mobility. This building is filled with toys and soft gym mats, examination tables,
some treadmills, and bikes, as well as a trampoline and a pool. The use of toys and
bright decorations aids in the motivation of the young children. The tiles are not used
in this building as frequently since the children treated here are not able to activate the
press sensor.
The other physical therapy building is used for the older children who are more
mobile. There are two rooms in the building, one which is a big open gym with plenty
of space to run and play, has a basketball hoop, a ping-pong table, a rock climbing wall,
and few toys, such as bObles, which are commonly used by the therapists together with
the tiles in order to create obstacles for the children to get over, or around. The other
room in this building consists of some exercise bikes, treadmills, weights and step decks.
The step decks are also used together with the MOTO Tiles, especially with the game
Special One, with the intent of exercising their cognitive skills along with their physical.
2.2.3.1
Treatments
The facilities of Børneterapien in Gentofte proved to be a comprehensive tool in getting
a general idea of how children’s therapy is conducted in Denmark. They treat children
of all ages, from babies up until they reach the age of 18, and provide treatments for
physical therapy as well as occupational therapy.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Northern Europe
21
This proves to be a challenge when attempting to adapt the tiles for children’s therapy.
Each of the patients has different needs, different challenges, and different strengths.
They require a specialized therapy plan, which is determined by the therapist which is
assigned to them.
==PAGE:34==
22
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
3.1
The Waterfall Model
The waterfall model, originally introduced by Winston Royce follows the idea that re-
search happens in consecutive steps as shown in Figure 31. The first assumption in
using this method is that the project is fully defined and all variables are known. This is
true for in lab-experiments but does not always hold true for real-world cases. Following
the waterfall method, once the project scope has been defined, the system and software
requirements are subsequently defined also. As shown in the diagram, there is some
interaction between consecutive step, but if something needs to be changed that it is
not in the step immediately before it, the project must be restarted and redefined.
Figure 31: Diagram of the waterfall model [31].
When working with people, it is not possible to know all variables ahead of time,
and they may even change with the introduction of the technology to the field, in which
case they would have to be reanalyzed. Instead, a cyclic approach should be used where
there is a mix between the participatory and experimental processes [14].
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Methodology
3.2
The Iterative Model
The iterative model of research is better suited when applying the research to messy
real-world environments. A diagram of this model is shown in Figure 32
Figure 32: Diagram of the iterative model [10].
3.2.1
Rapid Prototyping
The iterative model is ideal for playware, where the engineer creates a solution based
on their knowledge of the field, quickly creating a working prototype. That prototype
is then introduced into the field where, with the help of experts, its impact on the
environment is analyzed, and improvements are discussed. This allows all participants
in the research to know the current status and can give input to future prototypes. This
creates the rapid prototyping and field testing that playware follows.
3.2.2
Knowing the Field
Rapid prototyping respects that at the start of a project, not all requirements are known.
When dealing with humans, this is especially true since their behavior and interactions
with objects are unknown until testing is performed. Therefore, with rapid prototyping,
the engineer joins forces with experts in the field where the project will be applied, and
through hands-on testing, knowledge of the field is gathered. The working prototypes
bring together the user, researcher, and professionals, allows them to share a common
language and understanding [14].
For this project, the starting consisted of the MOTO tiles and the MOTO app
which had already been created. These were taken to the first testing environment at
Børneterapien in Gentofte. From talking to the therapists and health-care professionals
==PAGE:37==
3.2 The Iterative Model
25
at the center, it was learned that there was a need to standardize the games to be able
to measure progress. It also noted how the therapists had created their creative ways of
using the tiles that were not considered by the developers. With this knowledge, a test
game was prepared for testing in Mozambique. The testing there did not run its full
course, but it did provide the information that the testing game may be too difficult for
some of the children. Therefore, two easier games were designed to provide training for
the test game and give the researcher an idea of what level suited each child the best.
Through each iteration, new information was learned. Before going out on the field,
the types of disorders and the impairments that were associated with them were unknown.
From the therapists at the various centers and hospitals, and through research, a better
understanding was formed as to why certain children performed the way they did. Most
of the children were not noticeably different from any other non-disabled children, but
understanding their disorders explains their results and provides information as to what
games are more suitable.
==PAGE:38==
26
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Testing
4.1
The Games
For the testing of this project three games, based on the already existing games of the
MOTO app, were developed. The games were chosen to have different levels of difficulty
in order to use the easier games for training and the hardest game for testing. Having
various levels of difficulty also helps to identify if a certain level is more suited for a certain
child, putting the results of the test game into perspective. A visual representation of
the levels of difficulty of the games is shown in Figure 41 below. In the first game, the
child is told what the target is before starting, and only one tile lights up at a time,
hence, it is in the lower left corner. Next, the target remains the same as in the previous
game, except this time all the tiles light up. This creates a distraction by increasing the
number of stimuli and makes the game more difficult than the previous one. In the last
game, the child does not know their target before starting the game and need to identify
it at every game step. Once again, all the tiles are lit up causing more distraction from
the target, therefore, it is in the upper right corner. One more game could have been
added fitting into the bottom right corner, where only one tile would light up changing
its color at every iteration. However, this was deemed unnecessary since more games
steal away from the focus of the child for the final games, and no new skills would be
trained.
==PAGE:40==
28
4 Testing
Figure 41: Game Difficulty Diagram.
4.1.1
Follow the Red
The first game is ”follow the red.” In this game, all tiles appear with the LED’s off, with
the exception of one tile. This tile will be lit up in red. Red was chosen as it is one of
the easiest colors to see on the tiles independently of the lighting in the room. Once the
child has pressed the right tile, this tile will turn its LED’s off while another will light
up. This continues for 60 seconds counting all the amount of correct presses, where the
child is essentially following the red tiles around. It has been made so that the same
tile will never light up twice in a row so that the child is not rewarded for standing still
on that same tile. Before the game begins, an array of 120 random numbers is created
using a seed so that all children will experience the exact same game-play. The numbers
in the array represent the number of the tile to be lit up according to the number it is
assigned by the app. The range of numbers is dependent on the number of tiles chosen
to be used in the game so that all tiles are included. The length of the array was chosen
to be 120 because that would mean that a press must occur every half a second in order
to exhaust all values. This is unfeasible, and therefore, it is assured that the end of the
array is never reached. When time is up all tiles light up to signify the end of the game
and the score is recorded. An example step of the game is shown below in Figure 42.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 The Games
29
Figure 42: Game 1 - Follow the red.
4.1.2
Find the Red
The second game is ”find the red.” In this game, all tiles light up with random colors,
while only one tile will light up in red. In this case, red was chosen as the target color as
a natural continuation from the previous game, where the child was also looking for the
red tile. Once again an array is created at the start-up of the game with 120 numbers.
However, a different seed is used so that the target tiles are not in the same order as the
previous game. The number in that array represents the tile that will be lit up red, and
all other tiles are assigned a different color in the order blue, green, indigo, yellow, and
white repeating itself for any remaining tiles. These colors were chosen so that they are
easy to distinguish from the red, avoiding any confusion. As with the previous game,
the target tile will never be the same twice in a row. When the target tile is pressed, all
tiles will light up to their newly assigned color. This makes it more difficult to spot the
target tile when compared to the first game. The game will run for 60 seconds counting
all correct presses. Again, when the time expires the tiles will blink red, and the score
will be recorded. A step of the game-play is shown in Figure 43.
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Testing
Figure 43: Game 2 - Find the red.
4.1.3
Find the Special One
The last game created, and the testing game is ”find the special one.” In this game,
all tiles light up the same color, with the exception of one tile which is different. The
objective is to find the odd one out and press it. For this game, the color red is no
longer of importance, and instead, the child must first identify which color is different
and then press it. This makes the game more difficult than the previous two since the
target color is not known beforehand and a new target must be established at each step.
As with the previous two games, an array is created and filled with random numbers
using a seed, which is different from the two previous games. However, two new arrays
are added that correspond to the colors of the tiles. The first array contains random
numbers representing the color that the target tile will show. The next array contains
another set of random numbers, excluding the color of the target tile for that step. Both
of these arrays contain a total of 120 random numbers ranging between zero and five to
represent the six colors used in the game in the order red, blue, green, indigo, yellow,
and white. The game will run for 60 seconds, as was done with the previous games, and
the score is recorded at the end. This score will be used as the measure of performance
of each individual child, comparing them only to themselves by their previous results.
Figure 44 below shows an example of a game step.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 The Games
31
Figure 44: Test Game - Find the special one.
4.1.3.1
The Setup
To be able to have a realistic measure of progress, the randomness element must be
eliminated from the testing. For this, the tiles are always set up the same way according
to the number they are assigned by the app. To ensure this, a button was added where
the tiles light up in a specific manner making their position easier to identify. The first
half of the tiles used light up one led in a predetermined color. The first tile lights
up the LED at the top, and subsequent tiles light up an LED in the position directly
counterclockwise to the previous tile. The second half of the tiles light up all LEDs to a
certain color. The user must find the single LED tile that matches and place it directly
above. This process is shown in Figure 45. Once the tiles are set up in the correct
order, it is then possible to run the game so that each child will have the exact same
experience. For the purpose of testing, the tiles were always kept attached together as
shown. This was done so that the spacing between them was always the same, and to
avoid slipping as the tiles will sometimes not grip the ground, and the child might fall
and hurt themselves if running too fast.
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Testing
Figure 45: Test Setup.
4.2
Data Collection
At the end of the games, scores are recorded to note improvement. However, of equal
importance, is noting how the child interacts with the tiles and the games. Therefore,
data collection is broken into two parts.
The score obtained for each game during
each session is recorded for every individual child. This allows for data analysis on the
scores to see whether there was any improvement, whether the training games were
advantageous, and in general to determine the effect of playware in children’s therapy.
On the other hand, the children were observed while they played to note how they reacted
to the sounds and the colors. It was also noted how motivated they were to complete
their given exercises. The difficulty they had understanding the rules and whether they
wanted to set the tiles up themselves and in a different order was all monitored, as it is
an essential part of the use of the tiles.
All testing was done in the presence of a trained therapist to minimize the risk of
injury, and ensure the child was not over-exerting themselves, allowing them to perform
to the most of their ability. No starting position was established, and it was not necessary
for the child to return to a certain position between points. This was chosen to minimize
the number of rules associated with the game, and make it feel less like an exercise and
more like a game.
==PAGE:45==
4.3 First Iteration - Mozambique
33
4.3
First Iteration - Mozambique
The testing of the project was to be based mostly in Mozambique as the goal is to assess
the use of playware technology in developing countries. However, due to unforeseen
circumstances, the testing time in Mozambique was cut short and three days were divided
for testing at two different locations. The first location was the Maputo Central Hospital,
where children came in for 30-minute sessions with their therapists. Sessions sometimes
consisted of more than one child, and it was important that their outline exercises be
completed in that time. This left little time for the use of the tiles, and therefore, only
one to two games could be tried for each child. The second place of testing was the
Centro Infantil Esperança. Here children were in a classroom, attending a normal day
of school. The time they were able to allot for testing allowed for each child to try
one game on the tiles, followed by some feedback from the children, special education
teachers, and other staff.
Due to the time restraints, the games chosen to be tested were done based on the
expected level of performance by that child. In some cases, if the child found the game
easy, it was possible to try another game at a more suitable level. In the case of Centro
Infantil Esperança, the game played was always the same in order to avoid a feeling of
unfairness between the different classmates. The game chosen for the testing here was
the ”find the special one.” This game was chosen since it is the same game that is used
to measure progress and performance at Børneterapien.
4.4
Second Iteration - Denmark
During the three weeks at Børneterapien, a total of eight children had a chance to go
through three sessions of testing. In the first session, the ”find the special one” game
was played first. The result was used as a baseline for measuring progress throughout.
The child then continued on to play ”find the red” and ”follow the red,” these results
were also recorded. These two games are theoretically easier, as they do not require the
same level of cognitive skills. Therefore, the child was able to practice the games with an
increasing level of difficulty. Lastly, the child tried the ”find the special one” again. This
showed how the training of the other two games affected their performance and allowed
for an immediate measure of progress. During the next sessions, the first game was left
out as the baseline for comparison was performed in the first session. This meant that in
all the following sessions, the child had only to play a total of three games allowing for
more focus, and less exhaustion, hence improving their performance. The two training
games were played first, leaving the testing game for last.
==PAGE:46==
34
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5
Results
5.1
Results in Mozambique Testing
The first iteration of testing was performed in Mozambique. A total of three weeks had
been planned and set-aside for testing, however, only three days were possible meaning
that each child was only able to attempt one test game on the tiles. The score they were
able to achieve will be analyzed, but due to the small amount of testing, the qualitative
results will be given greater importance for these particular tests. A table summarizing
the ages, gender, and disorders along with the place of testing and the results obtained
is shown below in Table 51, where the names were omitted for their privacy.
Child
Age
Gender
Disorder
Location
Score
1
6
M
Autism
Centro Esperança
18
2
7
F
Autism
Centro Esperança
15
3
6
M
Intellectual Disability
Centro Esperança
15
4
7
M
Down’s Syndrome
Centro Esperança
13
5
7
M
Cerebral Palsy
Centro Esperança
17
6
8
M
Autism
Centro Esperança
19
7
13
F
ADHD
Hospital Central
27
8
5
M
Severe Autism
Hospital Central
5
9
12
F
Intellectual Disability
Hospital Central
20
Table 51: Table of Results of Find the Special One Game in Mozambique.
From the table above, two outstanding scores are noted. Child 7 was able to achieve
a considerably higher score than her peers while child 8, on the other hand, had lower
performance. Child 7 suffers only of ADHD, meaning she has a lot of energy, has difficulty
focusing, and makes decisions with great prior consideration. These characteristics do
not affect physical or cognitive. Therefore, the child is able to perform at a higher level
than her peers. In her case, a lower score could be obtained if she were not focused,
however, since it was a new technology, she was highly motivated to try it.
At the opposite end of the spectrum, Child 8 had a low score. In fact, this child was
only able to finish the game with the help of the therapists. Due to his severe autism,
he had difficulty following simple commands still, so explaining the rules of the games
was too difficult for him. He was also very attached to his mother, and would only allow
==PAGE:48==
36
5 Results
the exercises to occur in presence. Since there was some time left over in his therapy
session after the testing was finished, he was allowed to play the free piano game. In this
game, each tile shows a different color, and when pressed plays a different note. He was
allowed to crawl freely on the tiles and discover for himself that when they were pressed,
there was a sound. After taking his time to press the first, his interest started growing
when he realized he was controlling the sounds that were being made and wanted to
keep playing for the rest of his session. Even though his score seems low when compared
to other, he was able to train his cognitive, sensory, and physical skills as well, through
the use of a different game. Unfortunately, the testing was too difficult for him, but it
showed that children at different levels could benefit from even the simplest games on
the tiles, and they need to be evaluated on a case-to-case basis.
5.1.1
Observations
The testing at Centro Esperança was done in a small classroom with all six participants
present. Once the rules were explained, and the first child stepped up to play there was
a little hesitation. They had never seen technology similar to MOTO tiles and were
not sure what to expect. After pointing out the solution to first game step, the child
slowly stepped on the correct tile, playing the sound the answer was right, and all the
tiles changed color. From then, there was a shift in the environment in the classroom.
All of a sudden, all of the children present and the teacher/therapists understood how
the game worked, and everyone was yelling out the answer, urging the player to go
faster and cheering them on. The player entered the state of play, but so did everyone
around them. The one-person game became a group activity, and everyone was enjoying
themselves. Even though their scores were being recorded, they were helping each other
achieve higher scores, not worrying about who would able to do the best.
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Results in Mozambique Testing
37
Figure 51: Child 2 playing at Centro Esperança.
One of the last children to go was Child 4, who has Down’s syndrome. This child
was visibly a little more shy than his peers and was not yelling as loud although still
participating. When he stepped onto the tiles, all the other classmates helped, pointing
out the answers and cheering every-time the correct tile was pressed. Even though he got
the lowest score in the group, he might have gotten the biggest applause and cheer when
he was finished. An increase in motivation and a display of fun was expected from intro-
ducing the tiles to children in developing countries. However, the results of introducing
them to a classroom environment surpassed all expectations. The teachers/therapists
were surprised as to how much they were drawn into the fun themselves and thought the
tiles were a great tool for training cognitive, sensory, and physical skills all at once in a
small space. After the children were done playing, they were asked whether the activity
they had just done was only playing or if the thought they were learning and pushing
themselves. With a little hesitation, afraid to give the wrong answer, the unanimous
response was that they felt they were just playing. They had lost themselves in fun of
the game and didn’t consider the thinking they had to do figure out the correct tile to
step on, and the physical exertion of jumping from tile to tile as fast as they could.
The testing the Maputo Central Hospital was performed slightly differently.
As
children came in for the regular session, they were introduced to tiles and performed the
tests with no other children in the room. The therapists had not yet seen how the tiles
worked, so when the first child was tested there was a big look of surprise. Both the
child and the therapists were trying to figure out how the tiles worked, and they were
==PAGE:50==
38
5 Results
controlled by. The first child to try the tiles at the Maputo Central Hospital was Child 7
who has ADHD. She was shy to try the tiles at first but very quickly immersed herself in
the game jumping from tile to tile non-stop, making sure she hit them hard enough that
the press would be recognized. The therapists thought the game was good in training
her sensory, motor, and cognitive skills, but also to burn some energy, making it easier
to focus for the duration of her session.
The next session was with Child 8 with severe autism. His case was described in
assessing the quantitative data. However, an interesting point to his session was that he
felt the need to be part of the setup and clean up of the equipment. He wanted to be
handed the tiles one by one, so he could place them he wanted them. When his session
was over, he put every tile into the backpack that had been used to transport them and
even closed it. He enjoyed being in control of his own activities and liked to help where
he could. When things were not done his way he would cry and be uncooperative. This
was the case when he picked up a toy that was in the room and was asked to put it
back. Once he was able to help with the set-up of the tiles, he forgot about the toy and
focused on the new activity he felt he could control. In his case, motivation came from
him being able to decide or participate in the decision making of the exercises. The last
child was tested in a room where there were no other distractions. By this time, the
therapists knew well how the tiles worked and were able to make sure to assist more
in the explanation of the rules and ensuring that the child did not get injured. The
child understood the rules right away and was able to get right into playing. They were
willing to keep using the MOTO tiles for the remainder of their session, which upon
approval of the therapists, was able to do so.
5.2
Results in Denmark Testing
During the second iteration of testing, occurring in Denmark, a total of eight children
were tested, seven of went through three training sessions and was not able to complete
them.
In Table 52 below, the age and disorders of each of the children are shown
alongside the results they had for each of the tests. Again, the names of the children
were omitted for their privacy. All the children tested in this iteration were male.
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Results in Denmark Testing
39
Child
Age
Baseline
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Disorders
A
9
29
34
38
39
Albinism
Mild Learning Difficulties
B
6
16
19
25
25
Infantile Autism
Sleep Disorder
C
6
20
20
22
22
CP - Hemiparesis
D
6
10
12
16
18
Dyspraxia
Epilepsy
Learning Difficulties
E
10
17
22
24
24
CP - Ataxic Diplegia
Learning Difficulties
F
10
19
24
23
24
CP - Spastic Diplegia
G
8
31
35
33
36
Legg-Calve-Perthes
ADHD
H
5
9
-
-
-
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy
Table 52: Table of Results of Find the Special One Game in Denmark.
5.2.1
Performance
In the Figure 52 below, the performance of each child on their baseline and three subse-
quent tests were plotted, excluding child H which was unable to complete his testing as
will be later explained.
From the graph, three groups seem to emerge. The first group consists of Child A
Child G, the second group consists of Child B, Child C, Child E, and Child F, and the
last group consists only of Child D. All the children tested fall within a similar age group
between six and ten years of age, and all of them were male. Therefore, the similarity
in results for each of the three groups occurs due to the present disorders.
The first group mentioned consists of Child A who is nine-year-old diagnosed with
albinism and mild learning difficulties, and Child G who is an eight-year-old with Legg-
Calve-Perthes, who has been operated and is in physical rehabilitation, and ADHD. Both
children suffer from disorders that do not limit their physical movements to any great
extent. Although Child G had had such difficulties, the operation he was submitted to
was able to restore his physical abilities, and he is now able to run and jump at a level
normal for his age. Neither of the children in the group suffers from great cognitive
challenges either, although learning difficulties are present in Child A, they are mild,
and the challenge of the games are within his capabilities. Due to the absence of strong
limitations, both these children were able to achieve high scores.
The second group consists of four children, three of which have cerebral palsy and one
with autism. Both the ten-year-olds in this group suffer from diplegia, and one also has
learning difficulties. The other two are six-year-olds, one who suffers from hemiparesis
==PAGE:52==
40
5 Results
and the other from infantile autism and sleep disorder. In the case of the three children
with cerebral palsy, it is their physical movements that are mostly limited. The two
suffering from diplegia are able to walk without any obvious difficulties. However, they
are slower to react to any stimulus, which becomes more noticeable when trying to
perform tasks requiring speed. The child suffering from hemiparesis had great difficulty
controlling the right side of his body. When playing the games, he would stand on his
weaker leg, the right leg, and try to reach the necessary tiles with his left leg, keeping
the right one stationary. In doing this, he struggled with balance and could not turn
around, therefore, had a slightly lower score than the children in the first group. The
last child in the group suffers from autism and sleep disorder.
While sleep disorder
can influence reaction times due to insufficient sleep, it is the autism that limits the
ability of performance in these games. Children with autism have impairments in their
cognitive skills which are a critical part of the test. Their limitation in this test was
their cognitive abilities and not their physical. All children in this group suffer from
disorders that limit either their cognitive or physical skills moderately. Therefore, these
children did not have scores as high as the first group but were still able to play the
games without too much difficulty.
The last group consists only of one child. Child D is a six-year-old suffering from dys-
praxia, epilepsy, and learning difficulties. Dyspraxia is a developmental disorder causing
complications on planning and coordination of muscle movements. The combination of
learning difficulties, or impairment of cognitive skills, together with the dyspraxia lim-
its the child in both the cognitive and physical aspects of the tests. They were able
to understand the rules and perform the tests, but it was visible that it was a greater
challenge for them than the children forming the other two groups. Hence their scores
were the lowest in from the children that were tested, which could be expected. On the
other hand, the games used in the training sessions are used to improve both cognitive
and physical skills meaning that Child D is able to gain more from both aspects of the
games than the other children.
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Results in Denmark Testing
41
Figure 52: Graph of Points Achieved During One Minute Training Sessions.
Even though the children have been somewhat grouped together by their perfor-
mances, it is not possible to measure progress by comparing them to their peers. Im-
provement, in this case, has to be analyzed on an individual basis comparing the results
of each testing session to their baseline test. The percentages of improvement are sum-
marized in Table 53 below. It is clear to see, due to the lack of any negative numbers,
that all children performed better after some training. On rare occasions, as occurred
with child G, the child did not improve on their previous training session. This might
not be because of their physical or cognitive condition, but only how motivated they
were feeling that day. When working with children, it is necessary to keep in mind that
they will work harder on the things they want to do and not what they are told to do.
If at a particular day they did not want to the testing, the results suffer.
There is a range of improvement from 10% to 80 %. The testing was done in three
weeks so only the short-term effects can be analyzed. However, it would be expected
that over time the improvements would plateau, becoming lower and steady from session
to session. It is noted that between the two children would mostly physical impairments
the improvements after the third session were 26.32% and 34.48%. On the other hand,
the child with the more severe cognitive and physical impairments, Child D, had an
==PAGE:54==
42
5 Results
improvement of 80%. This is due to the fact that the children limited by their physical
abilities, were able to train them and showed improvement in that area. The child with
limitations in both aspects was able to train them simultaneously leading to improvement
in both. Hence, the improvement of Child D was twice that of the other two children
mentioned.
Child
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
A
17.24%
31.03%
34.48%
B
18.75%
56.25%
56.25%
C
0.00%
10.00%
10.00%
D
20.00%
60.00%
80.00%
E
29.41%
41.18%
41.18%
F
26.32%
21.05%
26.32%
G
12.90%
6.45%
16.13%
Table 53: Table showing improvement in each session in regards to their baseline.
5.2.2
Observations
Not shown in the graphs is Child H. They were unable to finish the first training session
due to not being able to focus. They were able to understand the game and the rules
but needed someone to participate with them in order to continue. Once their physical
therapist started playing with them, they were able to enjoy the game and wanted to
keep going. However, the results of the test would have been skewed if the therapist
were to participate. Therefore, no more testing sessions were done. Forcing the child
to try and go through the three to games for each session without them having the
motivation to do so would lead to inaccurate results, and the time allotted for their
weekly therapy session would be cut short without any significant benefit to the child.
It was clear from their interaction with the tiles that they would be able to benefit
from other games, especially cooperative or competitive games, but lack the intrinsic
motivation to complete the games provided.
Child A was shy and had to get used to the presence of the tester in the room.
There was an added difficulty to this given the tester did not speak Danish making it
more difficult to socialize. The large improvement from the baseline test to the first
two session may be in part due to getting accustomed to the presence of a stranger. By
the last training and testing session, the subject no longer appeared as shy and seemed
comfortable in the completing the tasks he needed to complete.
Child B is a very warm and friendly child.
Within the first minutes of the first
session, he was trying to interact with the tester. He wanted to take part in the setup of
the tiles and even would try to re-arrange them during the games. It was clear that he
liked to be in control of his treatment, and before each test started, he chose his starting
position and gave the order to begin. He was focused for the duration of the tests and
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Results in Denmark Testing
43
always had the energy to keep going and do more exercises if asked. For all his sessions,
he truly immersed himself in the tiles and wanted to keep exploring them.
Figure 53: Child B playing with the re-arranged tiles.
Child C was an unusual case compared to his peers. He showed little motivation and
enthusiasm when first doing the testing. However, his usual therapist was on vacation,
and he was not yet used to the replacement. This may have affected his performance as
he did not feel as comfortable around two strangers, the tester and the therapist. When
the testing was complete, he wanted to continue playing other games on the tiles and
even went on to play games with another little girl receiving treatment at the same time.
The tiles were a motivational tool for him, and when he was playing cooperatively with
the other girl, he tried to help her find the tiles she needed to press, even pressing them
for her if she was having too much trouble. In his case, the tiles helped him with his
social skills. He felt uncomfortable and out of place when playing alone but as soon as
he had someone to play with he became more involved and motivated to perform.
Child D who suffered from dyspraxia had behaviors, as expected from his disorder,
which made him seem more immature.
He also showed much curiosity.
When first
testing, he would stop and ask questions, looking around for approval. The second game
he played, he stopped in the middle of it and was asked by the therapist if he was able
to continue. He responded that he was fine to continue but wanted to see what would
happen if he did not touch anything. For all of his testing, he was involved in the setup,
wanting to help put the tiles together. Though his scores seemed low when compared
to the other children, he interacted well with the tiles and was able to create his own
games within the ones that were made. The tiles are a great tool for such a child because
they really motivated him to take part in the setup, execution, and results of the task
at hand. He was able to understand the rules and how the games worked with ease but
wanted to explore further to find boundaries of the games.
==PAGE:56==
44
5 Results
Child E and G were both extremely energetic children. Using the tiles all connected
together did not seem enough of a challenge for their level. To make the games more
challenging for themselves they would run all the way across the tile setup pressing the
correct one and run a distance of an extra two or three meters away from the tiles each
time running back and forth. They were not asked to perform the tests in this manner,
and yet both approached it this way. Their actions show that more appropriate games
for them would be to use the tiles separated at bigger distances and allow them to run
back and forth. Motivation to play the games in the manner they did came from within,
and they believed they would have fun in that manner. Child G had surgery not too
long before the testing was done and was very limited in his mobility beforehand. His
willingness to run shows that he is recovering well and is making up for the time when
he was not able to run.
Lastly, Child F was the most physically limited of the group. He had very little
control of the right side of his body forcing him to rely more on the left side. Regardless
of his limited mobility, he was a big fan of sports and was always eager to participate
in them. He always tried his hardest during all the testing sometimes losing his balance
and almost falling. He is motivated by physical activities, and since he is limited in
one he can participate in, the ones he can, he tries his hardest forgetting about any
disabilities he might have and try to perform the best he is able.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
6.1
Future Improvements and Considerations
6.1.1
Material
One of the main complaints from the therapists using the tiles is that the plastic edges
hurt the children’s’ feet when they are playing barefoot. Many of the other exercises that
are done in the gym are done barefoot. It would be more convenient for the children and
therapists alike if they could use the MOTO tiles barefoot as well. A possible solution to
this problem would be to round the edges. The height of a tile is of approximately one
centimeter, making it uncomfortable to step on the edge. If the sides were shaped more
like a ramp, slowly getting to the required height, it would not be as painful stepping
on them barefoot. Another possible solution would be to use a different material. An
appropriate material would be one similar to that used in bObles. This material is soft
but resistant and is used all around the Børneterapien gym. This way children would be
able to jump or crawl on the tiles without the concern of hurting themselves, opening
the door to more possible uses of the tiles.
6.1.2
Fine Motor Skills
An issue limiting the number of children that were able to be tested was the required
amount of force needed to activate the tiles. This required the child to be mobile and
of a certain weight. It was also difficult for children of most ages to activate the tiles
using their hands. A solution to this problem could be to use a more sensitive pressure
sensor. This way, more children would be able to use it, including those who are not
mobile, that could play games with their hands.
Another possibility would be to create smaller tiles following a similar design. These
tiles could be placed on a table top, the floor, or on the wall allowing the child to use
their hands for pressing. The tiles would need to be more sensitive to presses as the force
that a child is able to apply using only their hands and arms, is significantly lower than
if they were using their feet, where all the body weight is placed over the tile. Using the
tiles on a tabletop would signify that a child who is not mobile would still be able to
play the games and train their cognitive and fine motor skills. These smaller tiles could
also be used together with the already existing tiles to create a multi-dimensional game
where a combination of the gross motor, fine motor, and cognitive skills are used.
==PAGE:58==
46
6 Conclusion
6.1.3
Child-Friendly App
As it stands, the MOTO app is designed using soft colors with a simplistic look. For
any therapist or other adults, the app is intuitive and easy to use. However, the games
are chosen by their titles only, and all explanations of rules are given only in words.
Children like to take part in choosing the next activity to do. Since there are no pictures,
diagrams, or videos, when given the tablet to choose a game, the child is choosing it
blindly. A possible solution would be to create a mode that is more child-friendly. Here
the placement of the tiles and a common game step would be shown. When a game is
selected, a short video would automatically play as an example of what the tiles would
look like, or a child who is playing the game.
6.1.4
Reward System
Due to the variety of disorders present at children’s therapy centers, it is difficult to
create internal competition. Physical and cognitive abilities differ from child to child
even if suffering from the same disorder. To create a feeling of competition a reward
system may be implemented. In this case, the child is competing only against them-
selves, but the rewards achieved can then be compared to other children. Rewards also
increase motivation in children that have difficulty getting motivated otherwise. The
tiles were only observed and tested in a therapy environment for the purpose of this
project, however, the tiles could also be used at home. In the absence of a therapist to
provide the exercises, rewards might fill the void. The child would be rewarded for com-
pleting their daily, weekly, and monthly exercises, earning higher levels if making more
progress. This can also take the burden off of the therapists at busy centers where with
a few sets of tiles available, the children would be able to perform most of their exercises
on their own, having only someone supervise to avoid injury. In the case of developing
countries where hospitals are overbooked, and children are only able to schedule one to
two sessions per month, granting them the materials and motivation to take action in
their own therapy would benefit them greatly.
6.2
Benefits of Playware in Developing
Countries
Although most of the testing was not done in Mozambique due to unfortunate and un-
foreseen circumstances, it is still possible to draw parallels between the testing done in
Denmark and the application it may have in Mozambique and other developing countries.
In both countries, the testing yield positive results. In Mozambique, it was observed
that the children interacted well with the tiles and welcomed new technology. At Bør-
neterapien in Denmark on the other hand, most of the children selected for the testing
had already used or seen the tiles and are, in general, more accustomed to technology
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Benefits of Playware in Developing Countries
47
being used in their therapy. Within the children chosen to perform the testing were the
most prevalent disorders found in Denmark and in Mozambique. The results, therefore,
show a more global view of the use of playware in children’s therapy.
Improvement in the conditions of the children and the correct use for therapy pur-
poses are the most important parts of analyzing the benefits that playware may have
in developing countries. Results from the testing performed in Denmark on children
with cerebral palsy, autism, and intellectual disabilities, all disorders that are common
in Mozambique, showed short-term improvement. Unfortunately, since the testing was
performed over a period of three weeks, there are no long-term results. However, it can
be expected that the improvement will continue, although it will be a slower rate.
Another aspect of extreme importance when considering the benefits of playware in
developing countries is their current facilities and equipment. From visiting the Maputo
Central Hospital, the facilities in the psychology department, where the children had
treatment, consisted of two rooms.
One room had only a desk where the therapist
would sit on one side and the child on the other. There were no toys, posters, colored
walls, or other distractions in this room. The other room was filled with toys, had soft
mats on the ground where the children could sit and play, and also had a roundtable to
ease socialization. However, the toys in this room were still limited; there was a small
stack of jigsaw puzzles and exercise books on the table. These materials may be of great
benefit to the child, but once they have completed them a few times, the effects are
heavily diminished, and they are able to memorize the results. The puzzles, exercise
books, and toys do not adapt to the needs of all the children and will be seen as boring
to most of them, especially the older ones.
Introducing playware means that children of all levels can be challenged according
to their capabilities. Children are able to benefit more from the treatment which is at
their level, and as they develop and age, the challenge evolves with them. Toys and also
tend to be more gender specific, or designed to attract more one gender than the other.
The playware tiles, with their simplistic designed, are suited for people of all ages and
genders. Due to the limited space available to perform the therapy sessions, having one
piece of equipment that is beneficial to most of the children, at least ones that are mobile,
also saves space. Investment in a public hospital such as Maputo Central Hospital is
very limited, so it would be of greater interest to them to be able to buy one piece of
equipment that benefits a large number of children, than have a variety of equipment
and material with very specific uses.
Technology and digital games are not readily available to children in Mozambique
and developing countries. Most children do not own any gaming consoles or even phones
to play games on. Their toys consist more of physical objects that they are able to find or
purchase. It is common to see groups of children with footballs made of shirts wrapped
in rope, or use a wheel or tire and push it around with sticks as shown in Figure 61.
Children tend to play together since they do not each have their toys individually and
are used to the socialization factor. Introducing new technology to their therapy needs
to be done in a manner where its functionality is easy to understand, and that they are
==PAGE:60==
48
6 Conclusion
able to play with others. The MOTO tiles work in an obvious manner, such that when
the correct one is pressed it moves on to another, making the game straightforward to
learn. A few of the games that already exist, allow for multiple users to play at once, and
the way the games are played, with such excitement and movement, a bystander also
feels like they are participating, yelling out the correct tile and cheering on the player.
Looking specifically at Centro Esperança, they are very limited in space, using a
rented house as a special needs school. This means that the children are grouped to-
gether, and all taught the same material and given the same attention. Introducing
playware to small centers allows for physical activities to take place in the small space
that is available, and more focused treatment and therapy to be made available for each
child. This would also bring play into the classroom, increasing the motivation of the
children to perform in their day-to-day lives. One of the therapists/teacher at the Centro
Esperança stated that they could benefit greatly from having such equipment since they
get no funding and are not able to invest in similar equipment and even wanted to keep
the equipment brought for testing. They were very pleased with the performance that
the children had testing the tiles. Their motivation increased, and they were able to
train their cognitive, sensory, and physical skills. While one of the children was testing,
all the other children were cheering and trying to help them perform even better. There
was a spirit of collaboration and comradery within the classroom that is not usually
seen.
Figure 61: Children in Mozambique playing with tires and sticks [27].
==PAGE:61==
6.3 The Drawbacks
49
6.3
The Drawbacks
Similar technology is not readily available in developing countries and, both the children
and health professionals, are not used to integrating them into their treatment plan. It
was the concern of an occupational therapist at the Maputo Central Hospital that of such
technology become available to them, they would become dependent on them, excluding
other forms of treatments and investment in materials or equipment. He said that it is
part of the culture to use what is readily available in their environment and introducing
new technology like the MOTO tiles would somewhat take away from that. At the same
time, he also believed that not investing in new technologies meant they were not making
strides forward, and the health care system would not improve. A middle ground needs
to be found where new technologies are introduced but not solely relied upon. A mix
of traditional local therapy and newer methods would lead to developments in the local
health care and still feel like they are not losing their culture.
Another factor that could be problematic is that there are no experts to fix the tiles
if they are broken, needing to wait for replacements. It is common in Mozambique to
have power outages, on extreme occasions these last a few days. It is also common
to have voltage spikes, and without voltage regulators, electronics will sometimes get
ruined. However, there is room for new ideas to be developed. In a country where it is
sunny all year round with many hours of sunlight each day, solar panel charging could
be considered. The tiles require low power should be able to charge using solar panel.
Introducing playware for use in children’s therapy in developing countries can be very
beneficial to the children and health professionals alike. However, a few things need to
be considered before-hand. Since there is no similar technology available, the health
professionals, especially the younger ones finishing their studies, need to be educated
on the use the technology and the benefits it may have. They also need to be made
aware that using only technology for treatment may not be the most beneficial for the
child and the need to be assessed on a case by case basis. Other sources of charging the
tiles could also be considered, and the charging base possibly redesigned considering the
amount of dust and sand that is carried around everywhere, making it more difficult
for the current charger to work once it gets dirty. Playware can increase the motivation
to do, what is otherwise a repetitive and tedious treatment of a life-long disorder, and
benefit a greater number of children by adapting to their individual needs.
==PAGE:62==
50
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
National Organization for Albinism and Hypopigmentation. Information Bulletin
– What is albinism? 2018. url: https://www.albinism.org/information-
bulletin-what-is-albinism/ (visited on July 4, 2018).
[2]
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders : DSM-5. Arlington, VA Washington, D.C: American Psychiatric Asso-
ciation, 2013. isbn: 978-0-89042-554-1.
[3]
Liz Barnes. What is hemiplegia? 2014. url: http://www.hemihelp.org.uk/
hemiplegia/what_is_hemiplegia (visited on July 4, 2018).
[4]
Kevin A. Carter. “Common Sleep Disorders in Children”. In: America Family Physi-
cians 89.5 (March 2014), pages 368–377.
[5]
Survaillance of Cerebral Palsy in Europe. The Danish Cerebral Palsy Register. url:
http://www.scpenetwork.eu/en/partners/denmark/ (visited on July 1, 2018).
[6]
Scott G. Eberle. “The Elements of Play”. In: Journal of Play 6.2 (2014), pages 214–
233.
[7]
Mayada Elsbbagh. “Global Prevalence of Autism and Other Pervasive Develop-
mental Disorders”. In: Autism Research 5.3 (2012), pages 160–179.
[8]
Jeffrey Goldstein. “Technology and Play”. In: Scholarpedia 8.2 (), page 30434.
[9]
Suzanne T. Gurland. “Children’s Theories of Motivation”. In: Journal of Experi-
mental Child Psychology 110 (2011), pages 1–19.
[10]
Iteration. url: https://zurb.com/word/iteration (visited on July 10, 2018).
[11]
Henrik H. Lund. “Modular playware as a playful diagnosis tool for autistic chil-
dren”. In: IEEE International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics (209), pages 899–
904.
[12]
Henrik H. Lund. “Play for the Elderly - Effect Studies of Playful Technology”.
In: Human Aspects of It for the Aged Population. Design for Everyday Life 9194
(2015), pages 500–511.
[13]
Henrik H. Lund. “Playware ABC: Engineering Play for Everybody”. In: Journal
of Robotics, Networks and Artificial Life 3.4 (March 2017), pages 283–286.
[14]
Henrik H. Lund. “Playware Research - Methodological Considerations”. In: Journal
of Robotics, Networks and Artificial Life 1.1 (June 2014), pages 23–27.
==PAGE:64==
52
Bibliography
[15]
Henrik Hautop Lund. “Building bodies and brains”. In: Adaptive Behavior 22.6
(2014), pages 392–395. doi: 10.1177/1059712314544177.
[16]
Annette Majnemer. “Importance of Motivation to Children’s Participation: A Mo-
tivation to Change”. In: Physical & Occupational Therapy in Pediatrics 31.1 (2010),
pages 1–3.
[17]
MOTO-Tiles: About us. url: http://moto-tiles.com/about_us.php (visited
on July 10, 2018).
[18]
MOTO-Tiles: Manual. url: http://moto-tiles.com/moto_tiles_manual.pdf
(visited on July 10, 2018).
[19]
Omoyemi O. Ogwumike. “Profile of children with new-born brachial plexus palsy
managed in a tertiary hospital in Ibadan, Nigeria”. In: Nigerian Journal of Physi-
ological Sciences 29.1 (2014), pages 1–5.
[20]
Africa On. Centro Infantil Esperanca, Matola, Mozambique. October 2013. url:
https://www.africaon.it/non- profit- africa- news/mozambique- news/
centro-infantil-esperanca-matola-mozambique.html.
[21]
American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. Perthes Disease. May 2015. url:
https://orthoinfo.aaos.org/en/diseases--conditions/perthes-disease
(visited on July 4, 2018).
[22]
Erica Patino. Understanding Dyspraxia. url: https://www.understood.org/
en/learning-attention-issues/child-learning-disabilities/dyspraxia/
understanding-dyspraxia (visited on July 4, 2018).
[23]
Maja Pivec. “Editorial: Play and lean: portentioals of game-based learning”. In:
British Journal of Education Technology 38.3 (2007), pages 387–393.
[24]
Laura Raines. The triumphs and challenges of pediatric therapy. June 2013. url:
https://www.ajc.com/classifieds/the-triumphs-and-challenges-pediatric-
therapy/JBsQyb3PWqtlI8LjNowvZM/ (visited on June 13, 2018).
[25]
Steven C. Schachter. Living with Epilepsy. August 2013. url: https : / / www .
epilepsy.com/living-epilepsy (visited on July 4, 2018).
[26]
European Agency for Special Needs and Inclusive Education. About Us. 2018. url:
https://www.european-agency.org/about-us (visited on July 3, 2018).
[27]
Lisa Spencer. Toys. url: http://lisajospencer.blogspot.com/2012/06/toys.
html (visited on July 10, 2018).
[28]
Jan S. Tecklin. Pediatric Physical Therapy. 5th edition. Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 2015.
[29]
Lev Vygotsky. Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1978.
[30]
Vygotsky’s Sociocultural Theory Of Development. url: https://sites.google.
com/site/yourchildsdevelopment/vygotsky-s-sociocultural-theory-of-
development (visited on July 10, 2018).
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
53
[31]
Waterfall — iterative methodology of working out. url: http://developers-
club.com/posts/142023/ (visited on July 10, 2018).
[32]
ANT Wireless. ANT+: ANT / ANT+ Defined. 2018. url: https://www.thisisant.
com/developer/ant-plus/ant-antplus-defined/ (visited on July 6, 2018).
[33]
Roelie Wolting. Classification of Cerebral Palsy. url: https://www.physio-
pedia.com/Classification_of_Cerebral_Palsy (visited on July 10, 2018).
==PAGE:66==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
