==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master thesis
Mutual-benefit coordination of P2P market
and distribution grid management
Master thesis
Tommaso Orlandini s162344
INESC TEC Porto 2018
==PAGE:2==
b
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The increasing penetration of decentralized renewable sources, fostered by the European
Union, together with developments in smart grid and house energy management systems,
is creating a new paradigm. The figure of proactive energy consumers, prosumers, that
are willing to actively participate in the electricity market, is growing. An attractive
way to allow that, is the implementation of consumer-centric markets, at the distribution
level, based on the peer-to-peer (P2P) concept. However, the development of this kind of
markets, raise several challenges in operation and management of the distribution system,
because P2P markets trade electricity without considering network characteristics.
This thesis aims to develop several designs for a P2P electricity market that takes into
account network characteristics and solves possible congestion and voltage problems in
the grid, leading to feasible results.
This thesis explores three main methods to achieve its objective. The first consists of
a pure P2P market structure, where network characteristics are not considered. The P2P
clearing market results are validated through an AC-PF that establishes their feasibility.
The objective of this method is to analyze how often network limits are not respected.
Furthermore, the results are used as benchmark and compared with the other developed
methods.
The second method applies to the P2P structure the concept of product differentiation,
that enables to include peers’ preferences for non-monetary characteristics of electricity
in the economic dispatch. In this case these preferences are aiming to include network
characteristics, by encouraging peers to reduce electrical grid usage.
The third method connects a pure P2P market, considered as day ahead market, with
a balancing market that, combined with an AC-OPF validation, aims at modifying day
ahead market results to guarantee that network constraints are respected.
The three methods are simulated in a radial distribution network characterized by
a high penetration of decentralized renewable sources. The obtained results show that
the first method presents congestion problems for all the simulated hours. While, from
peers perspective, it is the one that leads to the highest social welfare. Moreover, the
other two methods reach the objective of the thesis, solving congestion problems and
hence, giving feasible results, at the expenses of a slight decrease of social welfare and
higher costs for loads.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the private non-profit research institution INESC
TEC, Porto in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Sustainable
Energy. The thesis was conducted during the spring semester of 2018 and it corresponds
to 30 ECTS points. It has been carried out under the supervision of Prof. Pierre Pinson
from DTU Elektro, Tiago Soares from INESC TEC and Tiago Sousa from DTU Elektro.
We plan to prepare and submit an article based on the work in this thesis.
I would like to thank my supervisors Professor Pierre Pinson, Tiago Soares and Tiago
Sousa for their help during these 6 months and for allowing me to work on this interesting
topic. I would like to thank Tiago Soares that was always available to meet me here in
Porto when I needed advice or to set me back on track when my reflections where taking
me off track. A special thanks goes to Tiago Sousa for his friendly approach, for his
precious suggestions on the developed topic and for the special and numerous tips given
to fully enjoy my time here in Porto. I would like to thank Pierre Pinson for allowing
me to spend 6 months in Porto, for his enthusiasm and sharp knowledge of the topic
as well as for his frequent feedback on my progresses along the development of my thesis.
I would also like to thank my friends and family for their support throughout my
studies. Finally i would like to thank Elena and Alex for their daily support in both the
good and hard moments of this 6 months period.
Moreover, this thesis has been developed with EIT Climate-KIC to obtain the alumni
certificate.
This project focuses, in fact, on a topic related to climate change and
entrepreneurship.
INESC TEC Porto, July 5, 2018
Tommaso Orlandini s162344
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Contents
iv
Glossary
vii
List of parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context and motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objective and contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
State of art
5
2.1
Peer to peer electricity market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Definition: peer-to-peer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
P2P in power system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Peer-to-peer market designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Power flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Link between P2P market and electrical network
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Methodology
15
3.1
Benchmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
P2P mathematical model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.2
Power flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.3
Revenue and cost calculation benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Iterative process with product differentiation: it. PD . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Product differentiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
Process description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.3
Revenue and cost calculation it. PD
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Iterative process with peer-to-peer flexibility market: it. OPF
. . . . . .
25
3.3.1
Day-ahead market
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.2
Grid management: AC-OPF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.3
Balancing market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.4
Process description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.5
Revenue and cost calculation it. OPF
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
4
Case study
33
4.1
General data description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.1
Network description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.2
Flexibility and cost curves in day ahead market . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.3
Cost curves in balancing market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.4
Power flow setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.5
Optimal Power flow setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Case study Results
45
5.1
Benchmark results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.1.1
Peer-to-peer market clearing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.1.2
Grid operation feasibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.1.3
Inclusion of network losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.1.4
Benchmark observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2
Iterative process with product differentiation results . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2.1
Results t=12:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2.2
Impact of product differentiation on one agent . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2.3
Impact of preference value on internally traded share . . . . . . .
56
5.2.4
Considerations about losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.2.5
Iterative product differentiation process observations . . . . . . .
58
5.3
Iterative process with peer-to-peer flexibility market results . . . . . . . .
59
5.3.1
Results t=12:00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.3.2
Iterative process in detail
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3.3
Importance of price signals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3.4
Considerations about losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.3.5
Iterative OPF process considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.4
Comparison of the models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6
Conclusion and Future works
67
6.1
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A Appendix AC-PF results 12:00 product differentiation method
71
B Network characteristics
73
B.1
Agents’ data for hour 12:00
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
B.2
Branches and capacitor banks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
C Results hour 12:00 for the three methods
79
Bibliography
83
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Glossary
List of parameters
Sets
Γ
All agents in the electrical network
Functions
Cn
Cost function of agent n
Decision variables
Pn
Net power active than agent n produce (>0) or consume (<0)
Qn
Net power reactive than agent n produce (>0) or consume (<0)
DSO
Distribution System Operator
DER
Distributed Energy Resources
GHG
Greenhouse gas
P2P
Peer-to-Peer
QoE
Quality of experience
RES
Renewable energy sources
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Context and motivation
Over the past years, climate change has been an important topic among governments
of the most developed countries. The European Union has settled several targets for
preventing dangerous effects due to climate change. As regards power production, the
main objective it to cut by 2050 green house gas (GHG) emissions by 80−95% compared
to the values of 1990 [1]. To reach this long term target, European Union aims, by 2020,
at reducing 20% in GHG emissions, increasing by 20% renewable generation over the
total energy consumption and also increase 20% in energy efficiency. Furthermore, by
2030, GHG emissions must be reduced, at least, by 40%, there must be 27% increase
in energy efficiency and the total consumption must be covered by at least 27% from
renewable generation [2]. To achieve the European goals, novel electricity market designs
need to be developed to foster renewable penetration and to take full advantage from
their participation.
Current developments in smart grids, smart cities and house energy management
systems paradigms, raise the importance of consumers to actively participate and share
their flexibility in the market.
Furthermore, through the increasing penetration of
decentralized renewable sources, such as solar panels, and storage systems (e.g. electric
vehicle, etc), the figure of proactive energy consumers, also known as prosumers is
growing. Prosumers are customers who consume, as well as produce energy, redistributing
excess electricity to others in a grid [3]. Nowadays, the concept of open and sharing
economy has been gaining a significant track in different sectors of the economy. For
instance, Wikipedia, arXiv, GitHub, Airbnb and Uber are a successful example of this
concept, which satisfy the wishes of many users and empowers them. Thus, the academia
and regulation has been discussing the benefits and implication of applying this concept
to the power system, particularly in the electricity markets. This could help bringing
small energy-users (like prosumers) to the center of such markets. To that end, different
market designs should be developed to allow prosumers to share energy and flexibility
among themselves, always taking into account the open and sharing economy concept.
For such consumer-centric market, one can think on the peer-to-peer (P2P) concept
applied in computer science, which is the backbone of some open and free projects
on this field (like P2P sharing of music, files, etc).
The P2P concept is therefore a
very attractive way of modeling a consumer-centric electricity market that at its core
pretends to share energy and services among prosumers. Since 1995, the idea of enabling
the arrangement of trades between big producers and consumers, was introduced in the
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
so called ”Bilateral model” [4].
Nevertheless, developing such a flexible market can completely challenge the operation
and management of the distribution systems as it can cause bi-directional power flow, as
well as new points of congestion and voltage problems in the distribution grid. In fact, the
peer to peer market trades electricity without considering network characteristics, such
as lines capacities [5]. One can also see potential benefits of this P2P concept in the grid
operation, such as new ways of thinking (and internalizing) grid tariffs to share among
prosumers. In addition, prosumers’ flexibility can play an important role in solving grid
problems, and foster power production from renewable sources. This could incentivize
the distribution system operator (DSO) to further investment in distributed flexible
market designs and localized self-balancing. Thus, proper tools must be developed to
accommodate P2P markets in the operation of future distribution grids.
1.2
Objective and contributions
This dissertation consists of the development of a methodology able to coordinate a P2P
consumer-centric market design, with operations and management of the distribution
system from the DSO, where the P2P market is implemented. In particular, the main
goal is to develop a process that validates market trades and get sufficient flexibility
to turn the market results technically feasible, solving the challenges that P2P market
arises.
Since the validation is applied to a distribution (low-medium voltage) network, an
alternative current power flow (AC-PF) is essential, because distribution network are
very sensitive to reactive power variations. This process may end up with non-optimal
solutions, but beneficial to both agents and system operator.
First of all the challenges of the implementation of a P2P market at the distribution level
need to be identified, together with the possible advantages that this kind of market can
bring. Hence, in a first attempt the two following questions are addressed:
• Which are the advantages of the implementation of a P2P market at the distribution
level?
• Which are the main challenges that this market arise in network operation and
management?
Furthermore, once the challenges and advantages are identified, the feasibility of the
developed methodology, that coordinates P2P market with operation and management of
the distribution system, need to be determined. Considering the developed methodology,
the following questions will be addressed during the dissertation:
• How are the challenges solved, is there more than one possibility to achieve that?
• Which are the effect in terms of social welfare, consumer satisfaction, fairness and
cost or profit of the internalization of grid constraints in the P2P market?
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Thesis structure
3
1.3
Thesis structure
The thesis is structured as follows.
Chapter 2, contains an overview of the main
typologies of P2P electricity markets and power system analysis tools, as treated in
the literature.
Furthermore, different possible methods, applied to link P2P market
with grid management are presented.
Chapter 3 introduces and describes in detail the three developed methods, based on
P2P market structure. In particular, the first method, considered as benchmark, has the
goal to assess the challenges of operating and managing the distribution grid, when a
P2P market architecture is implemented. Furthermore, the other two methods, aims at
solving benchmark challenges by internalizing network constraints in the clearing market
process.
In Chapter 4, the distribution radial network used to simulate the three developed
methods, is described. While, in chapter 5, the results of the simulations are presented
and a final comparison between the different model is done at the end of the chapter.
Finally, chapter 6 gathers the most important conclusions and present possibilities
for further investigations.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
State of art
In this chapter peer-to-peer (P2P) electricity markets and power system analysis are
introduced as treated in the literature.
Section 2.1 introduces the application of P2P network architecture in the electricity
market with the advantages and challenges that this would bring to the consumers and
to the grid. Furthermore, the main types of P2P design are also presented as in [6] and
[3].
Section 2.2 describes the main tools used in the power system to guarantee that the
demand is supplied while respecting grid constraints, such as bus voltage limits and line
thermal limits.
Finally in section 2.3 the main challenges of applying a peer-to-peer market without
network considerations are discussed. Hence, different possible solutions, taken from the
literature, to link peer-to-peer market with the electrical network are also described.
2.1
Peer to peer electricity market
2.1.1
Definition: peer-to-peer
A P2P network architecture is a decentralized model in which the peers, share resources,
such as goods and services. The resources are accessible by other peers directly, without
passing through any intermediary node. The participants of such network are at the same
time resource providers and requesters. The peers are therefore acting as ’Servent’1 and
all the network peers are considered equal [7].
In computer science P2P architectures have been studied since the 1990s, and the three
main principles are identified in [8]:
• Principle of sharing resources directly with other peers.
• Principle of decentralization: part or the whole system is not operated centrally.
This concept is interesting in order to avoid single point of failure. An example of
a fully decentralized system is Gnutella 2.
• Principle of self organization: since the system is decentralized, it does not exist a
single central node that coordinates all the activities, therefore nodes have to self
organize themselves.
1Servent is an artificial word derived from the first syllable of the term server and the second syllable
of the term client. A servent is acting at the same time as a server as well as a client.
2http://rfc-gnutella.sourceforge.net/index.html
==PAGE:16==
6
2 State of art
Starting from computer science, P2P architecture has been implemented in many different
applications. In particular, in the last decade it has been also proposed and applied in
the power system, as a possible future development of electricity markets.
Current electricity market
The existing electricity markets is splitted in the wholesale market and retail market.
The first one is a pool where big consumers (retail providers) and big producers interact
through a central mechanism that collects the bids, amount of energy that can be
produced/consumed and the bidding price (price offered). Once the bids are collected
the market is cleared to match production and demand, and an equilibrium price is
determined. In the retail market, the retailer provider resells the energy purchased in
the wholesale market to the small consumers (e.g. households, little industry). To be
noted that in both markets all the trades go through a central node, therefore, none of
the participants interact directly with each other.
According to [9] current electricity markets do not take full advantage of renewable
resources, leading to market inefficiency. At the same time, through the penetration
of distributed energy sources (DER) such as solar panels and storage systems, together
with the advances in Internet of Things (IoT) and smart devices, such as smart meters,
the figure of proactive energy consumer, also known as prosumer is growing. Prosumers
are willing to play an active role in their electricity management, to pursue their self
sufficiency and share the excess of electricity and flexibility with others [10]. Therefore,
a consumer centric electricity market is necessary, in which each customer chooses who
is going to be his supplier, or who he wants to sell electricity to, avoiding the traditional
operators, such as retailers and market operator.
Hence, a peer-to-peer structure is
required for the consumer to interact with the other agents. In fact a P2P is a consumer
centric market that enables prosumers to have freedom to manage their electricity
production and consumption and to select the type of sources that fit best their needs,
such as taking care of environmental and sustainable issues.
2.1.2
P2P in power system
The first time that P2P concept was proposed for power system was in 2007 [11]. The
authors of [11] state that with the increasing penetration of DER for producing electricity,
the power network stability will be under a high stress. Furthermore, the development
of renewable energy resources (RES) leads to uncertainty in the generation output, so
flexibility from the generation and demand (Demand response, DR) is crucial for covering
the demand, and P2P systems are able to provide a high flexibility. Already in 1995
Wu and Varaiya [4] proposed a bilateral model to replace the existing pool market. The
bilateral model is based on the principle of free market competition, where suppliers
and consumers are able to arrange trades among themselves, being free to choose the
amount of power exchanged and the corresponding price. This kind of trades are known
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Peer to peer electricity market
7
as bilateral trades and lead to short-term economic efficiency. A P2P transaction is also a
bilateral trade but usually it is applied to low or medium voltage networks, while paper
[4] proposes the bilateral model for big players that operate in the wholesale market.
P2P systems require the following characteristics to be implemented:
• IoT to share information between the agents to settle bilateral trades
• Smart devices, as smart meters to measure instantaneously the electricity production
and consumption
• A large amount of DER and flexible consumers at the distribution level
Therefore, a physical and technical structure is necessary to facilitate P2P energy exchange.
Smart grids, and more specifically microgrids, for the low voltage distribution level as
stated in [6] fulfill all the P2P necessities.
Hence, P2P markets fit perfectly into a
microgrid. Numerous papers and projects propose the application of P2P market into
microgrids [12, 13].
2.1.3
Peer-to-peer market designs
Different types of P2P design has been proposed by the literature, based on the degree
of decentralization and the topology. Figures 2.1 and 2.2 represent the three types of
peer-to-peer that can be identified: 1) Pure P2P market 2) community based market
and 3) hybrid P2P market.
Figure 2.1: Representation of pure and community based P2P markets.
Pure peer-to-peer market
In the pure peer-to-peer market, peers can exchange electricity among themselves in a
fully decentralized way, without the control of a central entity. In such systems nodes
are equivalent and are named as servent, which means that all nodes can act at the
same time as producers or consumers. Numerous authors contributed to the pure P2P
market, in particular [14, 15] proposed a pure P2P market design, called multi-bilateral
economic dispatch, in which product differentiation is included. Product differentiation
allows to place a dynamic value on other aspects of electricity than energy content only.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 State of art
For instance, it can be used to express consumers preferences or to include grid tariffs.
The mathematical formulation can be found in [14]. Currently the pure P2P market is
used by Vandebron3, a Dutch start-up that provides an online P2P energy marketplace
platform for renewable energy using. Also in UK the start-up Open Utility4 in 2015
launched Piclo, a pilot program based on P2P renewable energy trading through a
platform.
Community based market
Community based markets are more structured than the pure P2P markets.
The
community members communicate with a non-profit central node, known as community
manager, that supervises the negotiation process within the community. The community
manager is also responsible for negotiating with other community managers and other
external entities in the system.
The community manager works for the interest of
the community guaranteeing the optimum exchange for the peers. A community can
be organized by geographical location, such as groups of neighbours or smaller cases
like the residents of a building.
Furthermore, a community can be also formed by
members that share a common goal and do not necessary live in the same location. [16]
proposes a community based market, named energy collective, defined as a group of
prosumers that operate in a collaborative manner, optimizing the usage of resources.
In particular, this paper analyses how the decision of the prosumers are affected by
market mechanisms. Furthermore, several indicators are used to assess fairness among
the community members.
To be noted that the community based market assume a
passive behaviour from consumers, since their electricity surplus and trades are managed
by the central node. The mathematical formulation is presented in [16]. Community
based markets are the most suitable type for creating an internal electricity market for
microgrids. Currently this type of market is applied in the EMPOWER [17] project,
started in 2015, that aims to develop and verify a local market place and innovative
business models inside a microgrid. A central node, called Smart Energy Service Provider,
manages the energy trading between the members of the community.
Hybid peer-to-peer market
The hybrid market results from a combination of the pure P2P and community based
market. It is a market based on multiple layers with pure P2P or community based
design applied in each layer. As an example [18] designs the hybrid market in three
levels for the distribution grid, figure 2.2:
• At the lower level a community market design is applied for each microgrid (low
voltage network)
• The second level is composed of different CELLs, containing multi-microgrids, and
P2P is applied within each CELL (medium voltage network)
3https://vandebron.nl/
4https://www.openutility.com/
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Power flow
9
• At the third level the different CELLs are considered as peers and exchange
electricity between each other
According to [11] the hybrid approach is the most suitable for power grid because of
its scalability and because different P2P market designs can coexist and be applied to
different layers.
Figure 2.2: Structure of P2P trading as in [18].
To conclude according to [3], the conventional sources of energy, along with the
traditional electricity market will continue to be used in the coming decades. Hence,
consumer centric electricity market will have to coexist with the traditional market,
without fully replace it, at least for the first decades. For this reason, many P2P studies,
such as [15], analyze the interaction between P2P market and wholesale market which
might be profitable for both markets.
2.2
Power flow
In the power system literature three types of problems are usually identified: power flow,
economic dispatch and optimal power flow. The power flow is the basic tool to investigate
the following requirements, necessary to run a successful power system operation [19]:
• The power generation need to supply the demand and cover the losses
• Bus voltage magnitude need to remain close to rated values
• The generators work within specified real and reactive power limits
• Transformers and transmission lines are not overloaded
==PAGE:20==
10
2 State of art
Running a power flow, it is possible to determine the voltage magnitude and angle of
each bus in a power system under balanced three-phase steady state conditions.
It
also computes real and reactive power flows of all lines and transformers. Furthermore,
it does not take into account transmission line limits. Therefore, a power flow finds
a mathematical solution, which is not necessarily physically feasible or optimal. The
general formulation of the power flow problem is defined for AC analysis and it can
be further simplified into the DC power flow, neglecting reactive power and voltage
magnitude. To solve a power flow, different methods exist today, such as Gauss-Seidel
or Newton-Raphson [19]. The economic dispatch optimization problem determines the
power output of generating units to cover a given load minimizing the operating costs.
The economic dispatch does not include in its formulation any network flow or constraint,
therefore it assumes the network as a copperplate.
Traditionally, with conventional
power plants, the transmission system was designed in a manner that there were no
network limit violations. Therefore solving economic dispatch was sufficient. Today,
with the constant increase of the electricity demand, with the changed geographical
location of generators, which are more decentralized, and without a proper expansion
of transmission system lines accordingly with the new needs, the transmission system is
becoming frequently congested. The solution to the problem of optimizing generation
staying within the network constraints is found with the introduction of the optimal
power flow (OPF), which combines the economic dispatch with AC or DC power flow.
The DC-OPF is a simpler version of the AC-OPF, since it assumes voltage magnitudes
fixed and voltage angles close to zero. This simplification is neglectable for the transmission
network, high voltage network, but not for the distribution network, medium and low
voltage network. The OPF optimization problem determines the optimal power output
of generating units to cover a given load, while respecting network constraints, such as
line loading and bus voltage limits. The OPF problem was first invented in 1962 from
Carpentier [20] and it is currently used in CAISO, California and by PJM on the East
Coast of United States. The AC OPF in a non-convex problem, therefore it is complex
and difficult to solve. For further readings about OPF history and evolution, interested
readers are suggested to check [20].
AC OPF notation
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Power flow
11
Sets
Ω
All agents in the electrical network
Ωc
All consumers in the electrical network
Ωp
All producers in the electrical network
NB
Number of nodes in the electrical network
Functions
Cn
Cost function of agent n
Decision variables
Pn
Net power active than agent n produce (>0) or consume (<0)
Qn
Net power reactive than agent n produce (>0) or consume (<0)
θi
voltage angle at node i
V i
voltage magnitude at node i
Parameters
B
imaginary part of the reactance matrix
G
real part of the admittance matrix
S
apparent power flow in branch (kVA)
Pn, Pn
Lower, Upper active power limits of agent n
Qn, Qn
Lower, Upper reactive power limits of agent n
¯U
voltage in polar form (V)
¯y
series admittance of line that connects two buses (S)
¯
ySH
shunt admittance of line that connects two buses (S)
ϕn
pahse angle of agent n
AC OPF mathematical formulation
A general formulation of the AC-OPF mathematical model is hereby present [21].
==PAGE:22==
12
2 State of art
Min.
Z =
∑
n∈Ω
Cn(Pn, Qn)
(2.1)
S.t.
∑
n∈Ωp
P i
n −
∑
l∈Ωc
P i
l = GiiV 2
i + Vi ×
∑
j∈Li
Vj × (Gijcosθij + Bijsinθij)
∀i, j ∈{1, ..., NB},
θij = θi −θj
(2.2)
∑
n∈Ωp
Qi
n −
∑
l∈Ωc
Qi
l = Vi ×
∑
j∈Li
Vj × (Gijinsθij + Bijcosθij) −Bii × V 2
i
∀i, j ∈{1, ..., NB},
θij = θi −θj
(2.3)
V i ≤V i ≤V i
∀i, j ∈{1, ..., NB}
(2.4)
θi ≤θi ≤θi
∀i, j ∈{1, ..., NB}
(2.5)
| ¯Ui × [ ¯yij × ( ¯Ui −¯Uj +
¯
ySH,i × ¯Ui]∗|≤Smax
Branch(i,j)
∀i, j ∈{1, ..., NB} (2.6)
| ¯Uj × [ ¯yij × ( ¯Uj −¯Ui) +
¯
ySH,j × ¯Uj]∗|≤Smax
Branch(i,j)
∀i, j ∈{1, ..., NB}
(2.7)
Pn ≤Pn ≤Pn
∀n ∈Ωp
(2.8)
Qn ≤Qn ≤Qn
∀n ∈Ωp
(2.9)
Qn = tgϕn
∀n ∈Ωp
(2.10)
Pn ≤Pn ≤Pn
∀n ∈Ωc
(2.11)
Qn = tgϕPn
∀n ∈Ωc
(2.12)
The objective function, 2.1, is equal to the sum of the utility functions of the agents
in the network. Utility functions for the AC-OPF are defined in section ??. Equations
2.2 and 2.3, represent the active and reactive power balance equations for each node
composing the network. Furthermore, constraints 2.4 considers the voltage magnitude
limits in each bus, while 2.5 voltage angles. In addition, 2.6 and 2.7 refers to the line
constraints from node i to i and vice-versa. Finally, active and reactive power limits for
generators are included in 2.8, 2.9 and 2.10, and for loads in 2.11 and 2.12. review this
part
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Link between P2P market and electrical network
13
2.3
Link between P2P market and electrical
network
As previously described, when the bilateral model was proposed by [4] in 1999, a major
challenge already arose: the bilateral model is characterized by a lack of coordination
among independent trades, which can lead to a violation of transmission constraints.
Furthermore, the existing electricity system is designed for unidirectional power flows
from conventional big generators to consumers [3], therefore the introduction of solar
PV systems in households’ can cause network issues. In fact, the P2P electricity market
considers the network as a copperplate, therefore network limits are not taken into
account. On the contrary, an AC-OPF, as described earlier gives an optimal solution
for generators’ production to cover the demand considering network limits, but it does
not allow single bilateral-trades between the peers inside the network, or differentiation
of the electricity commodity, such as CO2 emission in the production. Therefore, a
novel framework need to be developed, to enable single bilateral trades while respecting
network constraints. The work on [5] and [22], inspired by [14], introduces two novel
formulations to take grid constraints into account within a peer-to-peer market. This was
accomplished through considering the differentiation of the electricity commodity which
influences participants’ decision making.
The first proposed formulation internalizes
grid constraints into the P2P market model, the state of the network is solved at the
same time than the P2P trades. To be noted that, as AC-OPF is non-convex and very
complex to solve, [5] merged the peer-to-peer with the DC-OPF. The second formulation
does not directly enforce network constraints, but network fees are used to influence
P2P market clearing result. Network fees are implemented through the introduction of
product differentiation in the P2P formulation. In particular three approaches to design
the network fees are applied:
• The fees are shared equally by each member of the community.
• The network costs are allocated according to the electrical distance, which is
defined in [23].
• A uniform zonal cost allocation policy is applied, hence the network is divided in
zones characterized by a different network fee.
In paper [24] a more flexible alternative to the current market design, named ‘coordinated
multilateral trading’ is proposed. This model would perfectly fit to serve the needs of the
distribution system operator. Participants can trade electricity freely among themselves
and propose to the system operator (SO) a balanced trade. The system operator need
to make sure that the network constraints are not violated. If network constraints are
not violated, it accepts the balanced trade. Otherwise, it curtails trades and publish
information about the network state, to give suggestions to participants for future trades
to avoid network constraints. Therefore, the system operator does not intervene in any
economic decision, but it only monitors the trades.
It would be interesting to also add the situation in which to insure power system’s health
==PAGE:24==
14
2 State of art
and keep multi-bilateral trades, an approach would be to run an OPF which fixes the
power outputs of the gen and cosumption. With the given power output run a P2P
optimization. Seems such a good idea, but there is no possibility to give preferences,
and it is an optimal solution for the network but not necessarily for the peers. Try to
explain better and find some references of works done using this approach. Chapter for,
the beginning of Baroche thesis talks about it
In the end of this section, I think you can add a little paragraph saying that there are
other ways to get solutions of the P2P market that respect network characteristics. and
you give example of the iterative precess proposed in this thesis. You can say that an
alternative approach has been built in this project and that will be explained in the
remaining of this thesis. TIAGO WROTE IT ADD
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
In this chapter the three developed models based on the pure P2P market structure are
introduced. The first model is considered as a benchmark and has the goal to assess
the main advantages for customers, but also the challenges of operating and managing
the distribution grid when a P2P market architecture is implemented. The other two
models are developed to overcome those challenges, internalizing network constraints in
the clearing market process. In particular in the second model product differentiation
is used to modify agents’ behaviour to respect network limits. The last model uses an
AC-OPF together with a balancing market design, which goal is to correct, if necessary,
the market clearing results obtained from the pure P2P design.
3.1
Benchmark
The benchmark model is based on a pure P2P market structure, where peers are free
to set multi-bilateral trades among each other. The pure P2P market is designed as
an optimization problem aiming to determine the cheapest solution for covering the
electricity demand, hence it maximizes the social welfare. P2P mathematical model is
presented in section 3.1.1. Furthermore, P2P results are given in input to an AC-PF
that validates them and establishes their feasibility. Figure 3.1 shows the flow chart of
the first model. For a given hour of the day, the input data to the peer-to-peer market
optimization are the peers’ bids, which are loads’ and generators’ electricity demand and
production together with their flexibility, furthermore, a quadratic function is considered
for each customer [25]. As regards generators, the quadratic function is a cost function
and it reflects the costs of producing a certain amount of power. On the other hand, loads’
function is the price that a load is willing to pay for covering its demand. Quadratic
cost function is obtained from its derivative, called marginal curve; further details on
marginal curve formulation are given in section 4.1.2.
As regards renewable generators, such as wind and PV, their power production is
determined by the forecasts.
Once the input data are collected the P2P market optimization is runned in a centralized
way. The multi-bilateral power trades with the respective prices are determined, and
together with the network characteristics, are given in input to the AC-PF which
determines if the P2P clearing results respect the network constraints. In particular,
the feasibility of the P2P results is established considering line loading values in %. If
all the line loading values are below the line loading limit of 100%, the results are feasible.
The benchmark model considers a pure peer-to-peer architecture that does not include
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Methodology
Figure 3.1: Flow chart of the benchmark model.
network constraints. As it will be demonstrated in the results in chapter 5, this lead
to frequent network congestion, and without a proper tool aimed at modifying the P2P
output in order to respect network limits, the only solution is activating load shedding.
3.1.1
P2P mathematical model
Notation
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Benchmark
17
Sets
Ω
All agents in the electrical network
Ωc
All consumers in the electrical network
Ωp
All producers in the electrical network
ωn
Agents in the neighbourhood of agent n
Functions
Cn
Cost function of agent n
Decision variables
Pn
Net active power that agent n produce (>0) or consume (<0)
Pn,m
Net reactive power that agent n produce (>0) or consume (<0)
Parameters
Pn, Pn
Lower, Upper active power limits of agent n
an, bn, dn
Quadratic coefficients of agent n cost function Cn
Mathematical formulation
The mathematical model for the pure P2P, which is defined as a bilateral-trading
economic dispatch optimization model is formulated as follows:
Min.
Z =
∑
n∈Ω
Cn(Pn)
(3.1)
S.t.
Pn,m + Pm,n = 0
∀n ∈Ω,
∀m ∈ωn
(3.2)
Pn ≤Pn ≤Pn
∀n ∈Ω
(3.3)
Pn,m ≥0
∀n ∈Ωp,
∀m ∈ωn
(3.4)
Pn,m ≤0
∀n ∈Ωc,
∀m ∈ωn
(3.5)
Agents’ setup
By minimizing the objective function 3.1, the optimization model determines the lowest
cost, which correspond to maximizing the global social welfare of a community Ωof
peers which are divided in producers and consumers. To be noted that prosumers are
not included in this formulation. Each peer, is characterized by a flexible production or
consumption, which limits are defined in 3.3, and by a cost function, which is assumed
to be quadratic, according to [25]:
Cn(Pn) = 1
2anP 2
n + bnPn + dn
(3.6)
where an, bn, dn are real positive values, and in chapter 4 it will be described how their
values are set. To be noted that the power injected into the system is positive, hence,
for generators Pn > 0, while for loads Pn < 0. The last two constraints, 3.4 and 3.5,
are necessary to force consumers to only buy electricity and producers to only sell it.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Methodology
Those two constraints are necessary to guarantee the correct behaviour of the agents
participating in the market.
Bilateral tradings
Constraint 3.2 ensures bilateral trading agreements, in fact, a P2P market does not only
need a global power balance, as in the Economic Dispatch, but also power reciprocity for
each single trade inside the community. This formulation implies also that each single
trade can be done at different prices, and each trading price is determined by calculating
the dual variable λn,m of constraint 3.2. Important to mention that equation 3.2 when
summed up, implies the global power balance, therefore it is not necessary to include
3.7 in the mathematical formulation:
∑
n∈Ω
Pn = 0
(3.7)
Finally, the total power traded by each peer P DA
n
is equal to the sum of each single
bilateral trade that peer n has arranged with the other m peers, where m ∈ωn and ωn
is a subset of Ω:
P DA
n
=
∑
m∈ωn
Pn,m
∀n ∈Ω
(3.8)
3.1.2
Power flow
The AC-PF [19] is used to validate the P2P clearing market results. Agents’ power
set-points, obtained from the P2P market clearing P DA
n
, are given as input to the AC-PF
model. Therefore, loads and generators are defined with a fixed amount of active power.
The reactive power is only fixed for loads (P-Q), while generators are voltage controlled
(P-V), hence, the active power and voltage magnitudes are fixed. For generators, the
reactive power is not fixed and can vary within given limits that are set according to
the type of generator. Further details about reactive power limits are given in section
4.1.1. Finally a slack bus (V,Θ) need to be implemented, voltage magnitude and angle
are fixed, while active and reactive power are determined by the AC-PF. Usually, the
generator with the highest power capacity is set as the slack bus.
As it will be shown in the results presented in chapter 5, the main indicator to determine
the feasibility of the P2P clearing output in an electric network, is the line loading. In
fact, the PF is not able to determine also if bus voltage limits are respected. Because ...
ask Tiago. On the contrary, using an AC-OPF, also the voltage limits can be evaluated.
The AC-PF for grid operation feasibility is achieved using pandapower [26], which
is a python based tool.
Pandapower uses an element-based model (EBM) to model
the electric grids. Hence, each element is connected to a bus and it is defined with
characteristic parameters. In fact, there are models to define lines, generators, loads,
transformers and other components.
The EBM makes the definition of the electric
grid more user friendly. The commonly used approach to define the electric grid is the
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Benchmark
19
bus-branch model (BBM), which is used in MATPOWER1 and PYPOWER2, this defines
the grid as a collection of buses to which power injection is defined. Therefore, the main
advantage of pandapower is that it is possible to define power output and input values
directly for each generator and load. Hence, the peer-to-peer clearing values from the day
ahead market can be directly applied. Pandapower includes a Newthon-Raphson power
flow solver based on PYPOWER, as presented in figure 3.2. The used EBM model is
automatically converted into the BBM model, to enable PYPOWER to solve the power
flow. Once the results are obtained, they are translated again in the EBM model. This
is useful when an AC-OPF validation is done, as the power output determined by it are
referred to loads and generators directly and not to the buses.
Figure 3.2: Pandapower uses PYPOWER to solve power flow problem [27].
3.1.3
Revenue and cost calculation benchmark
Bilateral contract prices, for each hour, are obtained from the dual variable λn,m of
constraint 3.2. Since, in this method there is no product differentiation implemented,
the marginal prices of the variable λn,m are all the same and equal to the P2P market
clearing price λDA. The total cost (TC) payed by each load, every hour, and the total
revenue (TR) gained by each generator are defined as follow:
TC = −(λDA · P DA
n
)
∀n ∈Ωc
(3.9)
TR = λDA · P DA
n
∀n ∈Ωp
(3.10)
Equation 3.9 is taken with the negative sign, because P DA
n
< 0 for loads. It is important
to mention that grid and transaction fees are not considered in this model.
1http://www.pserc.cornell.edu/matpower/
2https://pypi.org/project/PYPOWER/
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Methodology
3.2
Iterative process with product differentiation:
it. PD
Before explaining in detail the novel model, an introduction about the importance of
product differentiation and its mathematical formulation is necessary.
3.2.1
Product differentiation
Notation
Sets
ωn
Agents in the neighbourhood of agent n
G
Different type of criteria involved in peers’ decisions
Functions
Cn
Cost function of agent n
Variables
Pn
Net power active than agent n produce (>0) or consume (<0)
Pnm
Net power reactive than agent n produce (>0) or consume (<0)
Parameters
Pn, Pn
Lower, Upper active power limits of agent n
an, bn, dn
Quadratic coefficients of agent n’s cost function Cn
cg
n
Trade coefficient, preference coefficient of agent n for criterion g
γg
nm
Trade characteristic, value of criterion g of agent m for perspective of agent n
Product differentiation
The introduction of P2P markets at the distribution level leads to an increasing involvement
and awareness of producers and consumers in managing their electricity production
and consumption.
Furthermore, peers are not only interested in the electricity cost,
but also in some non monetary characteristics of it. As an example peers might be
interested in reducing the CO2 emissions or purchasing electricity by a close producer,
such as a neighbour. [15] proposes the application of peers’ preferences, through the
implementation of product differentiation. In fact, product differentiation can be easily
implemented by including an additional component to the P2P market objective function
3.1. The objective function is now formulated including two components:
• the quadratic cost function of generators and loads, as in 3.1
• the product differentiation part
Cn(Pn) = (1
2anP 2
n + bnPn + dn) +
∑
g∈G
∑
m∈ωn
(cg
nγg
n,mPn,m)
(3.11)
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Iterative process with product differentiation: it. PD
21
The product differentiation part, for each criteria, is equal to the product of the power
exchanged between customer n and m times the matrix γn,m, called trade characteristic,
and the preference value cn, called trade coefficient. The trade coefficient, correspond to
the preference value given by agent n to a given criteria. While, the trade characteristic
measures the valuation of each peer m from the point of view of agent n.
In the specific situation, product differentiation is introduced to reduce grid usage in
order to control network congestion, hence, a distance criterion is the most suitable for
this purpose. The trade coefficient cn [€/(km · kWh)] represents the peer’s willingness
to pay for an electricity trade and it is considered fixed during the whole process. In
particular the trade coefficient is assumed to be equal for all the agents. The trade
characteristic matrix contains the euclidean distances between the buses measured in km.
Applying the distance criteria, grid structure is taken into account, and it represents the
willingness to purchase electricity giving priority to a closer producer, in this way the
network would be less congested. The same result could be reached in a more realistic
way also applying ”electric distance”, but here it is assumed that the the impact on
agents’ behaviour would be similar.
Therefore, distance criterion is a way to give the responsibility to the agents to take into
account the effect of their bilateral trades on the network. To be noted that product
differentiation can be applied to both loads and generators, but in this model it is only
applied to the loads, as the main goal of applying product differentiation is to assess the
effect of consumers’ choices on the power flow.
Particular attention needs to be paid on the sign of the preference value, that changes
depending whether the criterion is meant to be penalizing or rewarding. The distance
criterion is seen as a penalizing one, since the aim is to penalize trades between peers
that are far away from each other.
Therefore, cnγn,mPn,m must be positive, as it is
an additional cost. The trade characteristic matrix γn,m is always positive, because it
represents distances between buses. The power Pn,m is positive for generators, therefore
the preference value cn is set as positive for generators. On the other hand for loads, since
the power Pn,m is negative, the preference value is negative. To conclude, setting the
preference value as negative for loads means that, for equal cost functions, the longer the
distance between two peers, the more expensive the electricity trade is. Once product
differentiation is implemented in the peer-to-peer market design, the multi-bilateral
trades prices, obtained by calculating the dual variable λn,m from constraint 3.2, may be
different. Therefore there is not a global clearing market price, as in the pure peer-to-peer
market without product differentiation.
3.2.2
Process description
The novel developed model introduces product differentiation in P2P market architecture,
as a solution for including network constraints, line loading and voltage limits, in the
market clearing.
In particular, distance criterion, based on the euclidean distance
between buses, is applied. Therefore, peers behaviour on the market is influenced by
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Methodology
Figure 3.3: Flow chart of the interative process with product differentiation.
this additional information given to them.
Figure 3.3 represents the flow chart of the second proposed model. It is possible to notice
that it is an iterative process whose first iteration is the same as the one described in
the benchmark model. In fact, the initial values of the trade coefficient cn and trade
characteristic γn,m are set to zero, so the first peer-to-peer clearing market does not
consider product differentiation. Once the first peer-to-peer market clearing is done,
the results are given in input to the AC-PF which determines if the network limits are
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Iterative process with product differentiation: it. PD
23
respected. If there is no network congestion, the iterative process ends and the market
is cleared with only one iteration. If this is not the case, the trade coefficient value is
updated to the constant value of cn = −5€/(km∗kWh). Note to mention that the value
of cn is negative as previously explained, since it is applied only to the loads. The reason
for choosing this specific value will be discussed in section 5.2.3. The trade characteristic
γn,m is also updated. After the first iteration it is equal to the real distances between the
buses that belong to the network. Once the product differentiation values are updated a
peer-to-peer clearing market is runned again and its results are again validated with the
AC-PF. The iterative process ends when the network constraints are respected. While
the trade coefficient remains constant after the first iteration, the trade characteristic
is always updated. After each AC-PF validation, the congested lines are determined,
with this information it is possible to identify which are the trades that cause network
congestion. Therefore, the trade characteristic is modified in a manner that those ”bad”
trades have a higher grid fee, which means that the specific trade characteristic value is
increased by a given coefficient named up, and so it is most likely that the power flow
through those lines will decrease.
Let us consider a simple example to clarify the update of the trading coefficient:
figure 3.4 shows a simple network composed of three agents, two generators (G1,G2),
one load (L) and two lines connecting the load with the two generators.
Figure 3.4: Example of a simple network with one load and two generators.
G1 is 10km away from the load, while G2 is only 2km away. Applying the introduced
iterative process to clear the market and cover the load demand, assuming the same cost
curve for the two generators, the first iteration is runned without considering product
differentiation, cn = 0. From the load point of view there is no difference between G1
and G2, hence it will probably choose to purchase electricity from both. Assuming that
after the first AC-PF validation, the line between L and G1 is congested, so the line
loading is greater than 100%, the trade coefficient value cn and the trade characteristic
γn,m are updated.
In particular, the trade characteristic correspond to the real line
length between generators and load. Since, the distance between L and G1 is greater
than the one between L and G2, the trade between L and G1 will be penalized:
cLγL,G1PL,G1
≥
cLγL,G2PL,G2
(3.12)
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Methodology
Therefore, the load prefers to purchase electricity from G2, hence the power flow through
line L-G1 would decrease.
Once the peer-to-peer product differentiation results are
obtained, the AC-PF validation is runned again. If the line loading between G1 and L is
still overloaded, the trade characteristic is modified in a manner that the trade between
L and G1 is penalized even more. This is done by increasing the trade characteristic
value between L and G1 by a coefficient (up=1) chosen arbitrarily, as shown in table
3.1.
Table 3.1: Trade characteristic γ variation.
iter 1
iter 2
iter 3
L-G1
0
10
11
L-G2
0
2
2
This iterative process continues until the peer-to-peer clearing results do not arise
network problems. The convergence is helped introducing demand response for loads,
and, if necessary, as last solution, including load shedding.
3.2.3
Revenue and cost calculation it. PD
As in the benchmark model, bilateral contract prices, for each hour, are obtained from
the dual variable λn,m of constraint 3.2. Since, product differentiation is implemented
in this method, the marginal prices of the variable λn,m differs among each other, hence,
there is not a single market clearing price. Marginal prices values are including both
marginal costs and product differentiation costs.
In this model, product differentiation costs are considered as network fees that need to
be payed to the distribution system operator (DSO) for each transaction. Hence, grid
fees are not modelled as flat taxes, but they are proportional to the euclidean distance
between the two peers setting the bilateral contract.
Therefore, consumers’ total costs (TC) and generators’ total revenues (TR) are calculated
as follow:
TC = −(
∑
m∈ωn
λn,m · Pn,m)
(3.13)
TR =
∑
m∈ωn
λn,m · Pn,m −
∑
m∈ωn
cnγn,mPn,m
(3.14)
Equation 3.13 is taken with the negative sign, because Pn,m = n < 0 for loads. Furthermore,
in equation 3.14, ∑
m∈ωn cnγn,mPn,m is equal to the product differentiation cost that is
payed by the consumers to the DSO and not to the generators, hence, it is removed from
generators’ revenues.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Iterative process with peer-to-peer flexibility market: it. OPF
25
3.3
Iterative process with peer-to-peer flexibility
market: it. OPF
This section provides a detailed description of the third proposed model, in which
a novel distributed flexible market design is proposed.
The aim is to create a P2P
consumer-centric market, in which multi-bilateral trades among agents are enabled, and
at the same time, agents’ flexibility is used to solve potential network problems that P2P
market results can create. This model shows the potential benefits that P2P concept
brings in grid operation at the distribution level. The process is divided in three stages:
• A day-ahead market, where a pure P2P is implemented without considering product
differentiation
• A grid management stage, consisting in an AC-OPF analysis based on the day-ahead
market results
• A balancing market, that define which are the agents that provide the necessary
upward and downward regulation, that is determined by the AC-OPF in order to
guarantee that network constraints are respected.
3.3.1
Day-ahead market
In this first stage a pure P2P market architecture is implemented, and it corresponds to
the one applied in the benchmark model. Network constraints are not taken into account
at this level, hence, agents are free to arrange bilateral trades among them, minimizing
their costs. The mathematical model was previously introduced in section 3.1.1.
3.3.2
Grid management: AC-OPF
Once the day-ahead clearing results are obtained, network topology and constraints are
introduced. Differently from the previous method, where an AC-PF is implemented to
validate P2P results, an AC-OPF is used.
As stated in section 2.2, the OPF optimization problem determines the optimal power
output of generating units to cover a given load, while respecting network constraints.
Therefore, the AC-OPF does not only determine if the day-ahead results are feasible,
but it gives suggestions on how to modify agents’ power output or input in order to
respect network limits, using agents’ flexibility. The initial power set points of loads and
generators correspond to the P2P results. Furthermore, flexibility of both generators
and loads is considered and a cost function is attributed to them. In fact, since the
AC-OPF is an optimization problem, it minimizes costs, the AC-OPF will try to modify
as less as possible the power outputs from generators and loads, because it costs money.
In conclusion, the AC-OPF modifies power set point of the agents only when network
constraints are not respected. A more detailed description on how the agents’ cost curves
are modelled in the AC-OPF, is presented in section 4.1.5, of the following chapter.
Figure 3.5 shows how the active power flexibility is modelled for both generators and
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Methodology
loads.
As regards generators, P DA represents the power output determined in the
day-ahead market, while P is the maximum upward flexibility that a generator is willing
to provide. As regards loads, LDA is the load consumption determined in the day-ahead
market, while L and L are, respectively, the maximum and minimum consumption that
the load is willing to consume. It is assumed that all the generators can have a minimum
power output equal to zero. Finally Lsh correspond to the load shedding part, that in
the AC-OPF is not considered.
Figure 3.5: Modelisation of flexibility for generators and loads.
Each generator is defined with a fixed amount of power output equal to the day
ahead market clearing value P DA
n
and it correspond to the white generator in figure 3.5.
Furthermore, generators’ flexibility is modelled as follows:
• an additional fictitious generator, light blue one in figure 3.5, for the upward
flexibility with a variable power output included in the following limits:
0 ≤Pflexup,n ≤Pn −P DA
n
∀n ∈Ωp
(3.15)
• an additional fictitious load, light green one in figure 3.5 for the downward flexibility,
with a variable power input of:
−P DA
n
≤Pflexdw,n ≤0
∀n ∈Ωp
(3.16)
The same approach is applied to the loads, hence, each load is defined with a fixed
amount of power input equal to the day ahead clearing value LDA
n . The loads’ flexibility
is modelled in the following way:
• an additional fictitious generator for downward flexibility, light blue one in figure
3.5, that lowers load consumption, with a variable power output comprehended in
the following limits:
0 ≤Lflexdw,n ≤−LDA
n
+ Ln
∀n ∈Ωc
(3.17)
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Iterative process with peer-to-peer flexibility market: it. OPF
27
• an additional fictitious load for upward flexibility, light green one in figure 3.5,
that increases load consumption with a variable power input of:
Ln −LDA
n
≤Lflexup,n ≤0
∀n ∈Ωc
(3.18)
Considering generators’ and loads’ flexibility, from the AC-OPF results the sum of
the necessary upward and downward regulation is obtained as follows:
∑
n∈Ω
Pup,n =
∑
n∈Ωp
Pflexup,n +
∑
n∈Ωc
Lflexdw,n
(3.19)
∑
n∈Ω
Pdown,n = −(
∑
n∈Ωp
Pflexdw,n +
∑
n∈Ωc
Lflexup,n)
(3.20)
From 3.19, it can be noted that the upward regulation can be obtained in two ways:
• increasing generators’ production
• decreasing loads’ consumption
On the other hand equation 3.20 shows that downward regulation can be achieved in
the two following ways:
• decreasing generators’ production
• increasing loads’ consumption
It is clear that, if the AC-OPF does not need upward and downward regulation, it
means that the day-ahead clearing results respect network constraints and the market
is considered cleared. If it is not the case, a balancing market is necessary to distribute
in the least expensive way the necessary power regulation, according to agents’ bids and
flexibility.
AC-OPF’s objective function can be modelled in different ways. For example, the OPF’s
goal can be to minimize network losses by considering the same cost function for all the
agents’ flexibility. In this way the OPF chooses the best agent to up or down regulate
from the network perspective. By considering different cost functions for the different
agents, the OPF minimizes the balancing cost, by choosing to down or up regulate the
cheapest agents.
Pandapower tool is also used to solve the AC-OPF, this enables to obtain power values of
generators and loads directly [26]. To be noted, that, for sake of clarity, in the description
of generator and load flexibility, the power output from generators is considered positive,
while the power input of loads negative. Pandapower tool, contrarily, apply the load
reference system, hence, power output from generators is negative, while power input
for loads positive.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Methodology
3.3.3
Balancing market
Once the necessary upward and downward regulation is determined by the AC-OPF,
the balancing market has the goal to find the agents that allow a change in the power
output, that was agreed in the day ahead market P DA
n
. A novel P2P regulation market is
designed for that purpose. Its mathematical formulation is equivalent to the day ahead
market one, presented in section 3.1.1. In particular, the balancing market is separated in
two sub-markets. The upward regulation market aims at covering the upward regulation
∑
n∈ΩPup,n. While the downward regulation market covers ∑
n∈ΩPdown,n.
Upward regulation market
Here, a fictitious inflexible load, with a power demand equal to the total upward
regulation, Pup, determined in the AC-OPF, is implemented:
Pup =
∑
n∈Ω
Pup,n
(3.21)
Considering both flexible generators and loads, the upward regulation can be obtained
in the two ways described in the previous section:
• Increasing generators’ production
• Decreasing loads’ consumption
Therefore, loads can be seen as generators: decreasing load consumption is the same as
increasing the production of a fictitious generator implemented in the same bus location.
The balancing market architecture is based on a pure P2P market design with one fixed
load and n ∈Ωflexible generators. Hence, all the generators participating in the day
ahead market that are willing to take part in the upward regulation market are defined
as follows, according to their flexibility:
0 ≤P B
up,n ≤Pn −P DA
n
∀n ∈Ωp
(3.22)
Where P B
up,n is the regulation power output of generator n. Pn −P DA
n
is the maximum
upward flexibility that generator n can offer. It is assumed in this formulation that
each generator is willing to help the market, hence all its flexibility can be used in the
balancing market.
All the loads participating in the day ahead market, that are willing to reduce their
power consumption LDA, and hence to participate in the upward regulation market are
defined as fictitious generators in this market and are defined as follows:
0 ≤LB
up,n ≤−LDA
n
+ Ln
∀n ∈Ωc
(3.23)
LB
up,n is the power output determined in this balancing market for the fictitious generator
n, while −LDA
n
+Ln is the maximum upward flexibility that the same fictitious generator
n can offer. The same assumption considered for generators is also applied to loads: all
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Iterative process with peer-to-peer flexibility market: it. OPF
29
the loads are willing to help the market, hence, they are willing to reduce their power
consumption using all the available flexibility given by demand-response. For the sake
of clarity, a power output of LB
up,n for the fictitious generator n, correspond to reducing
by the same amount, the power input of the load n.
Downward regulation market
Pdown,n, on the other hand, is considered as a fictitious inflexible generator, with a power
output equal to the total downward regulation obtained from the AC-OPF:
Pdown =
∑
n∈Ω
Pdown,n
(3.24)
Also in the downward regulation market, both flexible loads and generators are considered,
therefore the down-regulation can be obtained, as already stated in the previous section,
in the two following ways:
• Decreasing generators’ production
• Increasing loads’ consumption
In this case, generators can be seen as loads. In fact, decreasing generator production
is equal to increase the consumption of a fictitious load placed in the same bus location.
The downward balancing market architecture is based on a pure P2P market design
with one fixed generator and n ∈Ωflexible loads. All the generators participating in
the day ahead market that are willing to take part in the downward regulation market
are defined as fictitious loads and are hereby defined:
−P DA
n
≤P B
dw,n ≤0
∀n ∈Ωp
(3.25)
Where P B
dw,n, is the power input, determined from solving this balancing market, of the
fictitious load n. While −P DA
n
, is equal to the maximum downward flexibility that the
same fictitious load n can offer.
Moreover, the loads participating in the day ahead market that can increase their power
consumption from the set point determined in the day ahead market L(DA)
n
are defined
as follows:
Ln −LDA
n
≤LB
dw,n ≤0
∀n ∈Ωc
(3.26)
LB
dw,n is the regulation power input determined from the balancing market of the load.
In addition, Ln −LDA
n
is the maximum power consumption that load n can offer
Also for this downward regulation market it is assumed that all the agents are willing
to help the balancing market using their total available flexibility.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Methodology
3.3.4
Process description
Figure 3.6 represents the flow chart of the iterative process with AC-OPF applied for
grid management. As explained before, the first stage consist of the day-ahead market.
The agents’ power set-points P DA
n
are here defined and given in input to the AC-OPF
which establishes the necessary upward and downward regulation, to respect network
constraints. Furthermore, the AC-OPF also includes network losses that need to be
covered. The total necessary regulation, as can be seen from the figure, is equal to:
∑
n∈Ω
Pup,n +
∑
n∈Ω
Pdown,n
∀n ∈Ω
(3.27)
If the total obtained regulation is smaller than a predefined threshold value, the day-ahead
market clearing is considered feasible for the network, hence, there is no need to run a
balancing market. While, the balancing market is applied whenever regulation is needed.
To mention that, giving in input to the balancing market only the amount of necessary
up and down regulation, without including any information about the specific areas in
the network where regulation is needed, might not be enough to reach convergence of
the iterative process. Hence, this information, as shown is figure 3.6, is given to the
balancing market as a price signal, which can be seen as a tariff imposed by the DSO
to the network’s agents. The given tariff is included in the balancing market, using
product differentiation. Once the first iteration is done, and the balancing market is
cleared, the modified power set points are added to the initial day-ahead clearing values,
and a second iteration is done. The iterative process ends, when the total necessary up
and down regulation is smaller than a threshold value.
3.3.5
Revenue and cost calculation it. OPF
In this method, market clearing results in the day ahead market are equal to benchmark
results, hence, loads total costs (TC) and generator’s total revenues (TR) are calculated
as in equations 3.9 and 3.10. Furthermore, costs and revenues from the balancing market
also need to be included. As stated in the previous section, the total balancing costs
are payed by the loads proportionally to their power consumption. Hence, the total
balancing cost (TBC) is defined as follows:
TBC = P B
upλB
up−| P B
dw | λB
dw−| LB
dw | λB
dw + LB
upλB
up
(3.28)
When upward regulated, the generators will gain P B
upλB
up, while when downward regulated,
they will have to pay back | P B
dw | λB
dw, to be noted that λB
dw is lower than λDA.
On the other hand, when loads provide upward regulation, which means that their
consumption is lowered, they will gain LB
upλB
up. While, when they provide downward
regulation, which means that their consumption is increased, they will pay | LB
dw | λB
dw.
To conclude, considering the balancing market costs, total revenues for generators and
total costs for loads are calculated as follows:
TR = λDA · P DA
n
+ P B
up · λB
up−| P B
dw | ·λB
dw
∀n ∈Ωp
(3.29)
TC = λDA · P DA
n
+ | LB
dw | ·λB
dw −LB
up · λB
dw + TBC/P DA
n
∀n ∈Ωc
(3.30)
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Iterative process with peer-to-peer flexibility market: it. OPF
31
Figure 3.6: Flow chart of the iterative process with peer-to-peer flexibility market.
==PAGE:42==
32
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Case study
This chapter presents a case study that illustrates the application of the proposed models
and their respective performance. The case study has been chosen to cover a diversity
of situations demonstrating the proposed models behavior. Furthermore, the results of
the proposed models are presented and compared. Finally, some general conclusions are
taken in the last section of this chapter.
4.1
General data description
In this section, the main characteristics of the distribution network chosen for the
case study, are introduced.
Moreover, the importance of cost curves definition and
modelisation of flexibility for both generators and loads is discussed, at the day ahead
market and balancing level. Lastly, AC-PF and AC-OPF setups are also described.
4.1.1
Network description
The three models described in chapter 3, are applied to a 37 bus radial distribution
network. The original network is presented in [28], the update of the network is taken
from [29], including an energy mix in 2050 proposed in [30]. The network is at the
medium voltage (MV) level, with a bus voltage of 11kV. As it can be seen from figure
4.1, it is composed of 27 flexible DER, in particular:
• 3 conventional units: combined heat and power plants (CHP)
• 2 wind farms
• 22 solar photovoltaic systems (PV)
Furthermore, 22 flexible loads are distributed in the network. To be noted that the grid is
at the MV level, hence, for each bus, more consumers are grouped in one single agent. In
total, there are 1908 single consumers divided between 1850 households, 2 industries, 50
commercial stores and 6 service buildings. The loads are assumed to have a flexibility
of 30% of their base load, both in the upward and downward direction; the values
are collected in table B.2, in appendix. With this setup, the network cannot be fully
autonomous and hence, disconnected from the external grid. Being fully autonomous
would require investments in expensive infrastructures, such as batteries or additional
conventional generators, to cover renewable generation fluctuations and to balance the
demand during night hours when PV generators are not producing. Hence, the network
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Case study
Figure 4.1: 37 bus radial distribution network.
has an upstream connection at bus 0. The grid connection is modelled in a manner that
only import from the grid is allowed, thus it is not possible to sell electricity to the main
grid. Finally, as can be seen in figure 4.1, two shunt capacitors are implemented in bus1
to cover reactive power flows inside the network. Branches data, shunts data, as well as
agents characteristics are collected in B.3, B.4 and B.1, in appendix.
4.1.1.1
Renewable producers, wind and PV
For the simulation, renewable generation data are taken from the forecasts, whose values
are presented in table in appendix. In particular wind forecasts are taken from [31] and
[32], while PV ones are from [33].
A proportional strategy able to split the available renewable power production in both
==PAGE:45==
4.1 General data description
35
energy and reserve (flexibility) has been applied [34]. The available power generation
Pexp, given by the forecasts, is splitted between an energy offer Pbid on the day ahead
market and a primary reserve offer P c, which are defined as follow:
Pbid = α · Pexp
(4.1)
P c = (1 −α) · Pexp
(4.2)
Where Pbid is the energy offered in the P2P day ahead market and the coefficient α
is considered equal to 0.8.
This strategy aims at maximizing expected revenues for
renewable generators and enables them to play in the balancing market, providing
upward regulation. For further details of this strategy, interested readers are suggested
to read [34]. To be noted that this strategy will be particularly important when the
iterative OPF process is implemented, as renewable sources can play in the flexibility
market, and offer an additional upward regulation equal to P c.
Since there are no storage batteries and the market is modelled in a manner that it is
not possible to sell electricity to the external grid, to have feasible solutions, both PV
and wind generators are considered flexible:
0 ≤P DA ≤Pbid
(4.3)
To have meaningful results and to allow loads’ flexibility to have an impact on P2P
market clearing, the forecasted power output from PVs and wind generators is increased
by four and three times, respectively. In this way, during day-time, demand can be fully
covered by renewable generation. As stated in chapter 3, the grid operation feasibility
is obtained through an AC-PF or AC-OPF, depending on the different methods. Hence,
reactive power limits need also to be defined for generators and loads.
As regards
renewable generators, they are able to generate reactive power within the following
limits:
0 ≤Qout ≤P DA · tan(ϕ)
(4.4)
Where tan(ϕ) = 0.4 for renewable generators. The reactive power limit values are set
according to [35].
4.1.1.2
Conventional power units
Three CHP plants are present in the network. The upstream connection to the main
grid is represented by a full-dispatchable generator, called throughout the document
as external supplier. CHP plants have an electrical capacity of 0.5MW (P) and it is
assumed that can produce all the time at the same marginal cost, without considering
stops for maintenance. While, the external grid has a capacity of 20 MWA, and can
only sell electricity to the network. As for renewable generators, CHP and the external
supplier have a flexible active power output power output:
0 ≤P DA
CHP ≤P
(4.5)
0 ≤P DA
grid ≤P
(4.6)
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Case study
Furthermore, CHP plants can produce reactive power within the following limits. It is
assumed that all CHP generators can only inject reactive power while producing active
power, to compensate for load reactive power needs:
0 ≤Qout ≤P DA
CHP · tan(ϕ)
(4.7)
Where tan(ϕ) = 0.3 for CHP generators. The maximum reactive power limit value is
set according to [35]. On the other hand, the external supplier can both inject or absorb
reactive power.
4.1.1.3
Consumers
There are 22 flexible loads spread throughout the network. Their electricity demand,
over a 24 hours period is shown in figure 4.2, together with the available upward and
downward flexibility. Thus, for each hour of the day, the total network consumption is
between the minimum and maximum load depending on the generation mix available in
that same hour. The reactive power consumption directly depends on the active power
consumption cleared in the day-ahead market. Thus, equation 4.8 establishes the active
power consumption bounds, while equation 4.9 relates the dependency between reactive
and active power consumption. The following equations show active power flexibility
limits, and reactive power set point:
Pbase −0.3Pbase ≤P DA ≤Pbase + 0.3Pbase
(4.8)
Qload = P DA · tan(ϕ)
(4.9)
Where, for consumers, it is assumed that tan(ϕ) = 0.3, according to [36]. Moreover,
Pbase is the base load of each consumer as presented in table B.2, in appendix. It is
assumed that the load flexibility (demand response) can achieve 30% of the base load,
both for upward and downward flexibility.
Figure 4.2: Total network electricity demand and flexibility.
==PAGE:47==
4.1 General data description
37
4.1.2
Flexibility and cost curves in day ahead market
This section illustrates the cost curve formulation in the day ahead market, and how
the coefficients an, bn, dn of the quadratic function 3.6 are obtained, for both generators
and loads.
4.1.2.1
Generators’ characteristics
Generator’s cost curve for conventional generators is usually determined considering its
derivative, marginal curve. The marginal curve correspond to the marginal cost, which
is defined as the additional cost that a plant has to face for producing one megawatt-hour
of electric energy.
In the presented test case, generators’ cost curve is modelled in a different way. The
external supplier is modelled as follows: the importing price from the grid is assumed
to be constant regardless the quantity of electricity injected in the network. Therefore,
coefficient an of the cost curve 3.6, is set to zero. The network is assumed to purchase
electricity from the grid at the day ahead market level, hence, the import price is
assumed to be equal to the average price of the Iberian electricity market (MIBEL)
[37], 40€/MWh, plus a grid tariff of 18€/MWh, which is about 50% of the chosen
average price. Thus, the external supplier coefficient is bn = 58€/MWh.
To be noted that the considered network is at the distribution level, hence, with current
rules it would not be possible to interact directly with wholesale market.
In the presented test case, to have meaningful results, CHP cost curve is not obtained
considering the marginal cost but it is set slightly lower than the wholesale market price
of 58€/MWh. Coefficient’s values are presented in table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Coefficients an and bn of the external supplier and CHP plants.
Ext. supplier
CHP bus14
CHP bus16
CHP bus24
an [€/MWh^2]
0
10
1.5
5
bn [€/MWh]
58
30
20
10
Being both coefficients an and bn non-zero for CHP plants, the cost curve is equal
to a convex parabola. Note to mention that coefficient dn, that represents the start up
costs, is assumed to be zero.
Finally, renewable generators, such as wind and PV, have a marginal cost equal to zero,
hence, they are modelled with a nearly zero cost curve. In particular, coefficient an = 0,
while coefficient bn = 4€/MWh, which is chosen arbitrarily to avoid hours in which
the price of electricity is equal to zero. More precisely, this would happen in day-light
time (mainly between 11 and 15h), when PV production is at its maximum production
rate. Defining all renewable units with the same cost curve (same an and bn), in the
case in which product differentiation is not applied, means that consumers can chose
to purchase electricity from any of them without any difference, because they all offer
energy at the same price.
To be mentioned that, since renewable generators are the cheapest units, they are the
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Case study
first ones entering the P2P internal market for covering the demand. Consequently, if
the demand is not fully covered by them, CHP plants would start producing, becoming
the price setters. Finally, grid connection to the wholesale market is only used as last
possibility.
Cost curves are defined in this way, because the aim of the hereby presented P2P
electricity market is to give priority to DER while the external supplier is only necessary
to cover peak demand.
4.1.2.2
Loads characteristics
Loads’ cost curve reflect the costs that loads are willing to pay for purchasing power to
cover their electric demand.
In this test case, a quadratic cost function, 3.6, is obtained for each load, from their
marginal utility function, that is calculated considering two points for each load, in
which their flexibility is taken into account:
An(Pn, 58€/MWh)
∀n ∈Ωc
(4.10)
Bn(Pn, 5€/MWh)
∀n ∈Ωc
(4.11)
The straight line passing through those two point, is equal to the marginal utility function
for each load and is shown in figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Marginal cost curve for loads.
To mention that point An correspond to the minimum load Pbase−(Pbase∗0.3), hence,
loads are willing to pay a high price to cover it, equal to the price of the external supplier.
On the other hand, loads are willing to pay a lower price for covering their maximum
load demand.
==PAGE:49==
4.1 General data description
39
4.1.2.3
Flexibility
Load’s and generator’s cost curve can be obtained considering flexible agents. Demand
side flexibility is extremely important for small scale markets such as the presented one,
for two main reasons:
• it helps to balance the system and thus, to reach the market clearing
• without flexibility, loads would not be able to have an impact with their preferences
and would not react to changes in prices depending on the generation mix.
Demand side flexibility needs to be modelled properly in order to efficiently achieve its
advantages to the network. To properly model flexibility, the loads’ marginal curves
need to be designed in a manner that they intersect with producers’ marginal curves. In
case consumers’ marginal curves are lower than producers’ ones, the consumers would
consume always the amount of power equal to P. On the other hand, if consumers’
marginal curves are higher than producers’ ones, they would consume their maximum
demand P at each hour. To show the importance of flexibility also on the generation
mix, in benchmark results I could do the same thing that Etienne did in pag30-31 of his
thesis, maybe do it in appendix
4.1.3
Cost curves in balancing market
In this section, the cost curve formulation applied to the balancing market are presented.
In particular, as stated in section 3.3.3, the balancing market is divided in the upward
and downward regulation market. In both markets, the cost curves are chosen to be
linear, differently from the ones applied to the day ahead market in the previous section
4.1.2, hence, the coefficient an = 0 for all the agents.
4.1.3.1
Upward regulation market
The linear coefficient values bn in the upward regulation market for all generators and
loads are presented in table 4.2. The value of bn varies according to the day ahead market
price, and is set higher than it for all the type of generators that act in this market.
Where the day ahead market price is obtained from the dual variable of equation 3.2, of
the P2P day ahead market formulation.
Table 4.2: Coefficients an and bn of the agents participating in the up-regulation
market.
Ext. supplier
RES
CHP
loads
an [€/MWh^2]
0
0
0
0
bn [€/MWh]
5*λDA
4*λDA
5*λDA
5.5*λDA
The highest cost for upward regulation is given to the loads, which are represented
in this type of market as fictitious generators. Increasing fictitious generator production
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Case study
is equivalent as decreasing load consumption. Hence, decreasing load consumption will
be the last possibility in the upward regulation balancing market. Coefficient bn for
renewable resources is set as the lowest price, because increasing renewable generation
is the best possibility, as it does not increase carbon emissions and allows loads to keep
their power set point unchanged.
4.1.3.2
Downward regulation market
The an and bn coefficients for all energy resources applied to the downward regulation
market are shown in table 4.3. As for the upward regulation market, the coefficients an
are set to 0, in order to obtain a linear cost curve. Furthermore, also for the downward
regulation market bn coefficients vary according to the day ahead clearing price, and cost
curves are set at a lower price than day ahead one to avoid generators and consumers
to take unfair advantages of the market, as discussed in [38].
Table 4.3: Coefficients an and bn of the agents participating in the down-regulation
market.
Ext supplier
RES
CHP
Loads
an [€/MWh^2]
0
0
0
0
bn [€/MWh]
0.25*λDA
0.3*λDA
0.28*λDA
0.2*λDA
Moreover the value of bn changes with the different type of agents. In this case, the
first agents providing downward regulation are the loads, as they would increase their
power consumption. Vice-versa, the most expensive agents are the renewable generators
followed by the CHP, external grid, and loads with demand-response. The curtailment
of renewable energy sources (RES) is assumed to be extremely expensive.
4.1.4
Power flow setup
In this section the implementation of the presented network in the pandapower tool,
necessary for the AC-PF validation is described.
• Loads are implemented as P-Q buses, hence active and reactive power are given as
input. The active power is equal to the day ahead value P DA, while the reactive
power is set according to equation 4.9.
• Generators are defined as P-V nodes. Active power value is equal to P DA, while
voltage magnitude has an unitary value for all generators.
Reactive power is
determined by the AC-PF and it must be included within the limits defined in
equations 4.4 and 4.7 for renewable generators and CHP, respectively.
• The external supplier, as the biggest generator in the system, is modeled as the
slack bus, hence, voltage angle and magnitude are fixed, while active and reactive
==PAGE:51==
4.1 General data description
41
power are set free to be determined within the following limits: the vectorial
summation of active and reactive power must be lower than 20 MVA
0MWA ≤P DA
grid + Qgrid ≤20MWA
(4.12)
Where P DA
grid and Qgrid are vectors.
• two capacitor banks are also implemented and the characteristics are defined in
table in B.4, in appendix
• finally lines characteristics are also included as defined in table in B.3, in appendix
Figure 4.4 shows the representation of the network, seen from pandapower tool. It
is important to mention that, in the night hours, when there is no power production
from the 22 PV generators, they are deleted from the network. Keeping them with zero
power production and hence, without flexibility cause problems in the power flow solver,
and convergence would not be reached.
Figure 4.4: Representation of the 37 bus network seen from pandapower.
The P2P day ahead market does not consider network losses, while the AC-PF
validation take losses into account. In fact, the external supplier located at the upstream
connection (modeled as a slack bus) is the only generator in the network that does not
have a fixed active power output. Therefore, the AC-PF solution cover the network
losses using the external supplier, which is the most expensive generator in the network.
Therefore, it is the most expensive way to cover losses. On the other hand, the iterative
process method with AC-OPF, described in section 3.3, enables the internalization of
losses in the balancing market, and allows to lower expenses for covering the losses by
using cheaper generators, such as PV or wind.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Case study
4.1.5
Optimal Power flow setup
The same network setup described in section 4.1.4 for the AC-PF, is implemented
in pandapower for the AC-OPF validation.
Furthermore, as stated in section 3.3.2,
flexibility is necessary for solving the optimal power flow. Hence, for each generator and
load in the electric grid new fictitious flexible generators and loads are implemented to
consider upward and downward flexibility. Moreover, a cost curve is defined for each
of them regarding active power. The cost curve is defined as a linear function, hence
an = 0. In this case study it was decided that the AC-OPF aims to reach a solution
that minimizes the losses, without considering the different types of generators with
their related costs. Hence, bn = 3 ∗λDA, is set equal for all generators and loads. The
only exception is for the upward regulation of the external supplier, whose coefficient
bn = 15 ∗λDA, because it is preferred to exploit the other DER upward flexibility first,
to be more autonomous as possible from the wholesale market. Figure 4.5 represents an
example of a cost curve applied to a fictitious load, left side of the figure, and a fictitious
generator, right side of the figure. The fictitious load is used to create the downward
power flexibility of the generator, while the fictitious generator is used to represent the
upward flexibility of the generator.
Figure 4.5: Cost curve of fictitious load and generator in AC-OPF.
Line AC is the cost curve applied to the fictitious load implemented in the same bus
of the considered generator with fixed power output P DA. While, line AB is the cost
curve of the fictitious generator also implemented in the same bus. Point A has zero
price and correspond to the point where there is no active power variation in the active
power input from the load P DA, so both, the fictitious load and generator have a zero
power output.
It is important to mention, that it would have been also possible to define directly flexible
loads and generators, without the need to implement fictitious loads and generators to
include the flexibility, defining a piece-wise linear function, as the one shown in figure
4.6. Unfortunately, there were detected some computational problems in pandaspower
by running an AC-OPF using linear cost functions with uneven slopes, forcing the use
==PAGE:53==
4.1 General data description
43
of split fictitious loads and generators 1.
Figure 4.6: Average prices per unit from loads’ perspective.
In addition to the agents’ flexibility, also grid limits are implemented in the formulation:
V ≤V i ≤V
∀i ∈{1, ..., NB}
(4.13)
Ll ≤LL
∀l ∈{1, ..., NL}
(4.14)
Where LL = 98% is the maximum current loading of the lines. As regards voltage limits,
being in a distribution network, V = 0.95 pu and V = 1.05 pu.
Finally, to help the model to reach convergence, the additional power output from
renewable generators P c, called primary reserve, is considered in the AC-OPF.
As regards reactive power, the defined fictitious generators and loads do not provide
any reactive power support, as the ”real” generators that are defined as P-V nodes, are
enough to balance it. Their reactive power limits are set, as in the power flow setup,
according to equations 4.4 and 4.7 for renewable generators and CHP, respectively.
1https://github.com/lthurner/pandapower/issues/99
==PAGE:54==
44
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Case study Results
In this chapter, the previously described network is applied to the three developed
methods and results are presented.
Section 5.1, deals with the first model, which results are used as benchmark, particular
attention is paid to grid operation feasibility, through an AC-PF validation.
Section 5.2, presents the iterative process with product differentiation results. The main
focus is to analyze the effect of product differentiation on consumer decisions and the
consequent influence on grid usage and line loading congestion.
Section 5.3, deals with the results obtained applying the third developed method in
which AC-OPF validation is considered and a balancing market is implemented.
Finally, section 5.4, compares the results obtained from the different models in term of
fairness and social welfare.
5.1
Benchmark results
In this section, the benchmark model described in 3.1, is applied to the 37 bus distribution
network.
The first part considers peer-to-peer clearing results, while the second, assess the grid
operation feasibility, highlighting potential issues that peer-to-peer results may arise in
the network. Furthermore, section 5.1.3 explains how network losses are considered in
the peer-to-peer market, which generator produce additional power for covering them,
and who are the peers that pay for that. Finally, some considerations about the described
results are listed in section 5.1.4.
5.1.1
Peer-to-peer market clearing
Peer-to-peer optimization model, which formulation is presented in section 2.1, is simulated
using Gurobi optimizer [39], applied in Python using the Gurobi Python interface. The
objective function minimizes the total costs and is equal to the sum of the cost curves,
for generators and loads, introduced in section 4.1.2.
Figure 5.1, shows the total electricity demand of the network obtained, solving the
benchmark model for the considered 24 hours. In particular, it is possible to notice that
the total consumption varies within the maximum and minimum load defined by the
given flexibility and it is equal to the base load only in hour 7:00.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Case study Results
Figure 5.1: Peer-to-peer clearing results for loads.
Figure 5.2 represents the generation mix of the system determined from the peer-to-peer
market clearing. During night hours, when there is no PV generation, the network need
to import electricity from the grid, in particular this happens between hours 01:00-04:00
and 18:00-24:00.
Figure 5.2: Peer-to-peer clearing results for generators.
It is possible to notice, from figure 5.1, that in these hours, load consumption is equal
to the lowest possible load, hence:
P DA
n
= Pn
∀n ∈Ωc
(5.1)
This behaviour results from the loads’ cost curve definition: when there is import from
the grid, the electricity price is equal to the wholesale market price, 58€/MWh as shown
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Benchmark results
47
in figure 5.3. Hence, consumers are willing to pay that price only to cover their minimum
load. In those hours, the power set point for loads, is set on point A of the marginal
curve, shown in figure 5.4.
In the central hours of the day, precisely between 9:00 and 16:00, only renewable energy
resources are producing and hence, they are covering the whole network demand by
themselves. In those hours, the total load consumption is equal to the maximum possible
load:
P DA
n
= Pn
∀n ∈Ωc
(5.2)
Renewable generation cost in considered equal to 4€/MWh, which is lower than 5€/MWh,
hence, loads try to consume as much as possible. In those hours, the power set point for
loads, is set on point B of the marginal curve, shown in figure 5.4.
Figure 5.3: Peer-to-peer electricity price per unit.
Finally in the remaining hours in which generation from CHP plants is necessary,
but there is no import from the grid, loads’ power set point varies along the cost curve,
depending on the amount of electricity produced by the CHP plants. The clearing point
on the cost curves is set between point A and B, and it depends on the electricity cost
for that hour, that is determined from the dual variable of the constraint 3.2. Figure 5.3,
shows the peer-to-peer clearing electricity price for the simulated 24 hours. For instance,
in hour 07:00, which is highlighted in figure 5.3, the peer-to-peer clearing market price
is equal to 30.08€/MWh, therefore, the power set point on the marginal cost curve of
a generic consumer is set in point C, as seen in figure 5.4:
C(P ∗, 30.08€/MWh)
(5.3)
From the customers point of view, the proposed peer-to-peer day ahead electricity
market, is the best solution for the agents. In fact, all consumers are free to choose,
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Case study Results
through multi-bilateral contracts, the cheapest generator available. Furthermore, since
product differentiation is not implemented, all loads will pay the same price per unit
of electricity at the lowest possible value. A frequently used fairness indicator, named
quality of experience (QoE), can be applied to analyze the clearing results.
QoE is
defined as follows: it evaluate consumer satisfaction based on perceived prices of energy,
which in this market is equal to the peer-to-peer market clearing price, presented in
figure 5.3:
QoE = 1 −
σ
σmax
(5.4)
Where σ is the standard deviation of the prices, while σmax is equal to the maximum
price deviation. Since all the loads face the same marginal price €/MWh, for this type
of market QoE = 1.
Figure 5.4: Marginal cost curve for loads.
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Benchmark results
49
5.1.2
Grid operation feasibility
Once the peer-to-peer clearing results are obtained, an AC-PF validation, using the
pandapower tool is done for the considered 24 hours, to determine the grid operation
feasibility of the network. In particular, as stated in 3.1.2, the power flow validation
consists in checking line loading values of the lines of the network. Figure 5.5, shows
the line loading value, in percentage, of the most congested line, for each hour, in the
network.
Figure 5.5: Line loading of the most congested line.
The red line represents the line loading limit of 100%, if the maximum line loading is
greater than the threshold value, the peer-to-peer market clearing results are not feasible
for the network, because network constraints are not respected. It is evident that, the
pure peer-to-peer formulation, in which network constraints are not taken into account
in peers’ decisions, is not a good solution for a distributed radial network.
Hour 12:00 is chosen to show more detailed results on the AC-PF validation.
This
specific hour is selected, because it presents a high penetration of renewable sources and
PV generators are all producing. Therefore, since there are many peers playing in the
market, a high competition among them to cover the electricity demand is necessary.
Moreover, in this hour there is also a high flexibility from loads and generators, which
make the comparison between the benchmark results and the other two iterative process
more interesting. In section 5.4, benchmark results are compared with the other two
developed models ones, to see if network issues are solved and at which price.
Figure 5.6 shows the AC-PF results of the peer-to-peer clearing output in hour 12:00,
using a color map that highlights line loading values and bus voltage values.
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Case study Results
Figure 5.6: AC-PF results for the network at t=12:00.
It is evident that line 11 and line 12, table 5.1, are over the line loading limits,
therefore power output from generators located in the buses adjacent to the congested
lines need to be modified.
Table 5.1: Congested lines at time 12:00.
Congested lines
Bus in
Bus out
Loading %
Line 11
1
13
105.2
Line 12
13
14
157.6
In particular, table 5.2 shows the power balance at bus14, that is connected to line12.
It is possible to see that there are three generators and one load in this bus. The two
renewable generators are producing 4162.9MW and only a part of their production is
used to cover the load. The remaining power flows through line 12 to reach the other
loads around the network. This power flow, is too high for the thermal limits of line 12.
Therefore, in order to have a feasible solution for the network, PV and wind generators
in bus14 need to be curtailed and/or load consumption need to be increased. This can
be achieved in two ways: the DSO can force them to modify their power output, or
proper tools, which could be in the form of grid tariffs, using product differentiation,
can be implemented to modify agents’ behaviour.
Table 5.2: Power balance at bus14 at time 12:00.
CHP bus14
Wind bus14
PV bus14
Load bus14
Power balance
Bus 14
0 kW
2825.37 kW
1337.53 kW
1748.92 kW
2413.98 kW
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Iterative process with product differentiation results
51
5.1.3
Inclusion of network losses
As stated in section 4.1.4, the peer-to-peer day ahead market does not take into account
network losses. While, losses are considered in the AC-PF validation and are covered
by the slack bus, which is set as the external grid.
Considering hour 12:00, the overall network losses are equal to 45.64kW which correspond
to the 0.2% of the total power produced in the network. The cost for covering losses
is payed by the loads proportionally to their power demand at the wholesale market
price of 58€/MWh, which is the highest price in the considered market. The cost for
covering losses in added to the total cost of purchasing electricity from the peer-to-peer
day ahead market. The total cost for covering the losses in hour 12:00 is equal to 2.65€.
5.1.4
Benchmark observations
Analyzing the results obtained applying the benchmark model, the following observations
arise:
• Renewable sources are highly exploited in this market: between 9:00 and 16:00,
see figure 5.2, this type of peer-to-peer market design allows the network to cover
the whole demand only from distributed renewable energy resources. Furthermore,
loads react to the renewable power availability, which is cheap and CO2 free, by
using their flexibility and consuming as much as possible.
• On the other hand, when power is produced from conventional and/or more
expensive generators, such as the external grid, loads are consuming their minimum
possible load. In fact, loads’ flexibility, if modelled in the proper way, enables loads
to both save money and reduce CO2 emissions, by maximizing power output from
renewable and cheap resources.
• Grid feasibility challenges: from the obtained results presented in figure 5.5, is
evident that a novel framework that includes network constraints in the peers’
decisions is necessary. In fact, without grid feasibility, the peer-to-peer clearing
results will never be applied.
5.2
Iterative process with product differentiation
results
In this section, the iterative process with product differentiation based on the euclidean
distance criterion, introduced in section 3.2, is applied to the described radial network.
The simulation results are hereby presented and particular attention is paid on the
results obtained considering hour 12:00.
The main goal of this simulation is to assess if the introduction of network fees, which
are proportional to the euclidean distance, in the peer-to-peer market, has a positive
effect on grid operation feasibility, improving grid stability. In particular, this method
guarantees that the agents use less the distribution lines to cover their electricity demand.
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Case study Results
5.2.1
Results t=12:00
Considering hour 12:00, the examined iterative process reaches a feasible solution after
two iterations. Table 5.3, shows the product differentiation setup parameters for the
two iterations. In both of them, the trade characteristic γn,m is equal to the euclidean
distance between the buses, See matrix in appendix.
The first iteration presents a trade coefficient cn = 0, hence, the product differentiation
part of the objective function 3.11 is equal to zero. This means that the peer-to-peer
clearing market results correspond to the benchmark ones, thus they are not feasible for
the grid, as shown in figure 5.6. Therefore, a second iteration is needed, in which a trade
coefficient value of cn = −5€/(km ∗MWh) is applied to the loads. The peer-to-peer
clearing results are hereby presented and validated by running an AC-PF.
It is important to mention that all the agents’ setup characteristics, power limits and
cost curves, are unchanged in the two iterations.
Table 5.3: Simulation product differentiation parameters.
cn [€/(km*MW h)]
γn,m [km]
iter 1
0
Euclidean distance
iter 2
-5
Euclidean distance
Figure 5.7, shows the AC-PF validation results of the second iteration of the peer-to-peer
clearing market.
Figure 5.7: AC-PF results at t=12:00 of the second iteration.
It is evident that the line congestion problems that arise in the first iteration and
benchmark, as shown in figure 5.6, are solved. Therefore, peer-to-peer clearing results
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Iterative process with product differentiation results
53
from the second iteration are feasible and the new obtained loading percentages of line11
and line12, shown in table 5.4, are much lower than the line loading limit of 100%.
Table 5.4: Congested
lines
at
time
12:00
in
iterative
process
with
product
differentiation.
lines
Loading% iter1
Loading% iter2
line11
105.2
31.7
line12
157.6
43.1
Figure 5.8 represents the loading results of all the lines in the network for the two
iterations. It is evident that in the second iteration, almost all the line loadings are
lower, not only for line11 and line12 that were the congested ones.
Figure 5.8: Line loading values for the two iterations.
The most congested lines in the iterative model with product differentiation are lines
3 and 4 with a line loading of 45.32% and 45.37% respectively, that is lower than the
limit of 100%.
The AC-PF line loading results from the iterative process based on
product differentiation, vary greatly compared to the benchmark results and underlines
an evident decrease in distribution lines usage by the peers.
Table 5.5, presents the total power production and consumption of generators, obtained
from the simulation of the considered iterative process. Power production is divided
according to the different types of generators.
To be noted that losses are not included in this table. The inclusion of losses is discussed
in 5.2.4.
In both the iterations, there is no electricity import from the grid, as it is the most
expensive source, it is only used as last possibility. In the first iteration there is also no
necessity of CHP production, while in the second CHP, located in bus24, is producing
a little amount of power.
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Case study Results
Table 5.5: Network power generation for the two iterations.
Grid [kWh]
CHP [kWh]
Wind [kWh]
PV [kWh]
Cons. [kWh]
iter1
0
0
4567.7
17565.9
22133.6
iter2
0
40.1
2210.7
18979.3
21230.1
It can be noted that product differentiation has also a great effect on renewable
generators, in particular wind production is reduced by more than half.
The power
output of wind generator located at bus4 is lowered by 884.3kWh, while the one located
in bus14 has a decrease of 1472.8kWh. On the other hand, the total generation from PVs
increases by 1413.4MWh. Finally the total load consumption decreases by 903.5MWh.
Network division in four areas
Until now, only the effects of product differentiation on grid feasibility and generators’
power set points are analyzed. A deeper analysis on the effect that product differentiation
has on consumers decision is necessary, and it is presented in section 5.2.2. To help the
analysis, as shown in figure 5.9, the 37 bus network is divided in four areas.
Figure 5.9: 37 bus radial distribution network and division into four areas.
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Iterative process with product differentiation results
55
Those areas are chosen according to the position of bus1, that is connected to the
external grid, as the lines connected to it are the most critical ones from the line loading
point of view Maybe show with plots or in appendix put some network colorbar plots.
As it will be demonstrated later, the more the four areas are independent from each
other, the less the network will be congested.
The internally traded share Ia for each area a ∈{1, ..., 4}, is used to determine their
level of independence. In particular, the trade share is defined as the share of trades of
all the agents in a given area that are made with all the other agents in the same area:
Ia =
∑
n∈Ωa
∑
m∈Ωa | Pnm |
∑
n∈Ωa
∑
m∈Ω| Pnm |
(5.5)
Ωa is the set of agents of village a. The internally traded share is comprehended between
0 < Ia < 1 and a given area is completely independent when Ia = 1.
5.2.2
Impact of product differentiation on one agent
In this part, consumer 8 located in bus16 is chosen to analyze the variation of his
behaviour when product differentiation is implemented and the effect this has on the
grid operation feasibility.
Figure 5.10 shows the amount of power purchased by consumer8 at hour 12:00, from
each single generator in the network, to cover its power demand of 1997.7kWh. The
distance between bus16 and the other buses in which the generators are located is also
shown.
Figure 5.10: Consumer8 in bus 16 bilateral trades for the two iterations.
It is possible to notice that in the first iteration, in which there is not the product
differentiation influence, consumer8 set bilateral contracts with almost all the generators,
regardless their distance in the grid.
On the contrary in the second iteration, the
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Case study Results
considered agent purchase 79% of the needed electricity from the PV generator located
in its same bus16. The remaining power is obtained from PV (197, 2kWh) and wind
(220.9kWh) generators located in bus14, which is the closest, and it is located in the
same area B. Therefore, considering the trade share value only for consumer8:
I8 =
∑
m∈Ωa | P8m |
∑
m∈Ω| P8m | = 1
(5.6)
Table 5.6, summarizes what described above. It highlights that with the implementation
of product differentiation, consumer8 prefers purchasing power from closer generators,
as it has to pay a lower or zero grid fee. In particular, its trade share is I8 = 1, which
means that to cover Consumer8 demand, there is no need of the line11 located between
bus1 and bus13.
Table 5.6: Consumer8 bilateral trade setup.
Consumer8
n. generators
max distance [km]
Trade share [%]
iteration 1
24
5.85
27
iteration 2
3
2.2
100
It is important to highlight that the power values Pnm determined from the peer-to-peer
clearing market and shown in figure 5.10 for consumer8, are economical agreements and
do not necessarily correspond to the actual power flow that occurs in the network. As
an example, it is not possible to assess that the power purchased by consumer8 from the
PV generator located in bus7 of 25.1kWh correspond to a real power flow from bus7 to
bus16.
What influences the AC-PF results and actually determines the flow of power along the
grid, are the power balances on each bus.
Table 5.7 shows the power balance on Bus14 for the two iterations:
Table 5.7: Power balance bus14 for the two iterations at time 12:00.
Bus14
CHP bus14
Wind bus14
PV bus14
Load bus14
Power balance
iter1
0 kW
2825.37 kW
1337.53 kW
-1748.92 kW
2413.98 kW
iter2
0 kW
1352.62 kW
814.37 kW
-1748.92 kW
418.07 kW
As can be seen from the table, the power balance of bus14 in the second iteration is
more than 5 times lower than the first iteration. This means that only 418.07kW will
flow from the bus to the network lines. Furthermore, considering bus16 which is the
closest, it has a power balance of −418.07kW, this means that all the power in excess
produced from bus14 flows to bus16, see table ?? in appendix. For that reason, line11
and line12 are no longer congested.
5.2.3
Impact of preference value on internally traded share
In this part, the impact of the preference value, or trade coefficient, cn, on the internally
traded shares for the four areas of figure 5.9, is analyzed.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Iterative process with product differentiation results
57
Figure 5.11, shows an example of the correlation between the internally traded share
values and the trade coefficient one. To be noted that the traded share values of this
figure are calculated considering an average value over the 24 hours simulated, it does
not reflect the traded share values of the considered hour 12:00.
Figure 5.11: Internally traded share for the 24 hours period depending on cn.
Looking at the figure, when cn = 0€/(km · kWh), there is no product differentiation
component and electricity trades are determined considering the agents’ cost functions,
disregarding the position of the different agents on the grid (benchmark solution). On
the other hand, when the preference value is equal to the one in point 1, called saturation
value, the trades are totally driven by the product differentiation, and the traded share
reaches its maximum value. Increasing cn even more, the traded share would not be
affected. The saturation value depends on the value of the coefficients an, bn and dn of
the agents’ cost functions.
The value cn = −5€/(km · kWh), chosen for the simulation is set to be over the
saturation value, to guarantee that the product differentiation part is the one influencing
the peer-to-peer results the most.
Table 5.8 shows the obtained traded shares value from the two iterations considering
hour 12:00.
Table 5.8: Internally traded shares for the two iterations in hour 12:00.
cn [€/(km*kW h)]
IA
IB
IC
ID
iter1
0
0.30
0.32
0.23
0.29
iter2
-5
1
1
1
1
It is evident that, with the introduction of product differentiation with a trade
coefficient of cn = −5€/(km · kWh) for loads, consumers’ behaviour is highly affected.
In the second iteration, since all the traded shares are equal to Ia = 1, all the consumers
are only purchasing electricity from generators located in their same area.
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Case study Results
5.2.4
Considerations about losses
In the iterative process with product differentiation, the losses are included in the market
in the same way as in the benchmark model, as seen in section 5.1.3. As regards hour
12:00, the overall network losses are equal to 7.64kW which correspond to the 0.036% of
the total power produced in the network. Table 5.9 compares the losses obtained here
to the ones in the benchmark model.
Table 5.9: Losses in benchmark and product differentiation models.
losses [kW]
price [€]
benchmark
45.64
2.647
prod diff
7.64
0.443
It is possible to notice that in the iterative process losses are much lower, because of
the lower grid usage. The loads are paying for the losses proportionally to their power
demand at the wholesale market price. The total cost for the losses is equal to 0.443€.
5.2.5
Iterative product differentiation process observations
Analyzing the presented results, the following observations on the effect of product
differentiation based on the distance criterion can be done:
• Table 5.5, shows that wind generation is reduced by more than half, when product
differentiation is implemented. The two wind generators have a big capacity, as
presented in table in appendix, hence, if there are not enough loads located in
the same bus or near ones willing to purchase power from them, their power
production is curtailed. Loads located in further buses need to pay high taxes to
purchase power from wind generators, so they prefer to cover their demand using
closer producers, most likely a PV generator. This observation is also supported
considering the traded share values.
Wind generator located in zone A, being
IA = 1, only sell electricity to the loads located in the same area A.
• Line congestion: this kind of behaviour leads to a lower risk of line congestion,
because a high generation from one single bus as in the case of bus14 table 5.2,
which is not covered by load consumption in the same or close bus, leads to elevated
power flows in the network lines which may cause line loading congestion.
• Slight decrease of load consumption: because the cost of purchasing power with
the introduction of grid fees based on distance criterion increases, so loads have
less generators at low price compared to iteration1.
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Iterative process with peer-to-peer flexibility market results
59
5.3
Iterative process with peer-to-peer flexibility
market results
In this section the third method, in which the peer-to-peer balancing market that
modifies the day ahead market output to guarantee grid operation feasibility, is applied
to the network model introduced in chapter 4.
The simulation results are hereby
presented paying particular attention on hour 12:00.
5.3.1
Results t=12:00
Considering hour 12:00, the iterative process reaches convergence after two iterations
and figure 5.12 shows the AC-OPF validation results of the last iteration (final results).
Figure 5.12: Peer-to-peer clearing results for generators.
From the figure, it is evident that the line congestion problems that arise in the
benchmark model, which correspond to the results of the day ahead clearing market
(iteration zero), are solved. Hence, the balancing market, after two iterations, modifies
the initial peer-to-peer clearing results of the day ahead market in a manner that a
feasible solution is reached and grid constraints are respected. The balancing market
results are presented in figure 5.13, and the power values are reported in table 5.10.
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Case study Results
Figure 5.13: Balancing market power results.
Those power values obtained from the balancing market are added to the day ahead
clearing results, hence, the only power output that are modified from the day ahead
clearing are the ones presented in table 5.10.
Table 5.10: Balancing market power results.
Bus Location
Primary Energy
Power [kW]
bus6
Photovoltaic
187.69
bus9
Photovoltaic
299.26
bus14
Photovoltaic
-882.15
bus34
Photovoltaic
4.056
bus37
Photovoltaic
416.86
Generators and loads power set point results of the three models are presented in
tables C.1 and C.2 in appendix.
Figure 5.14 represents the line loading results of all the lines in the network from the
benchmark model and from the iterative process with the balancing market.
Figure 5.14: Line loading values for OPF model, benchmark and PD model.
==PAGE:71==
5.3 Iterative process with peer-to-peer flexibility market results
61
Furthermore the line loading results of the iterative process with product differentiation
are also included in the figure as comparison. It is evident that the iterative process with
balancing market gives results that are closer to the benchmark model, compared to the
other iterative process, both in the power set-point of the agents and in the line loading
results.
5.3.2
Iterative process in detail
In this section, a detailed description of the two iterations that lead to the final feasible
result is presented.
Table 5.11 shows the total upward and downward regulation, required from the AC-OPF,
to respect grid limits.
Table 5.11: Total regulation needed in each iteration, hour 12:00.
Pup [kW]
Pdw [kW]
Iter 1
903.8
-881.4
Iter 2
4.06
-0.78
Iter 3
0.029
-0.014
The regulation values from iteration 1, are obtained from running the AC-OPF
using the day ahead clearing results, which are the same as the benchmark results. As
underlined in figure 5.15, Line 11 and 12 are the congested lines. Hence, as shown in table
5.12, the PV generator located in bus14 is down-regulated by 881.4kW. Furthermore,
this curtailed power need to be balanced by increasing the power output of other
generators, located in the grid.
Table 5.12: Balancing power output in each iteration hour 12:00.
PV bus6
PV bus9
PV bus37
PV bus34
PV bus14
Iter 1
187.7 kW
299.3 kW
416.9 kW
0
-881.4 kW
Iter 2
0 kW
0kW
0 kW
4.06
-0.78 kW
In the second iteration, it can be noticed that the total regulation needed, determined
from the AC-OPF, is lower compared to the first iteration. For this second iteration
the balancing market, as seen in table 5.12, has chosen to down-regulate PV generator
located in bus14 and up-regulate PV generator in bus34. The agents’ power set point
is updated considering the results from the second iteration. After that the AC-OPF is
runned again and the necessary total upward and downward regulation is determined
again.
Both regulation values are lower than a chosen threshold value that is set
arbitrarily equal to 0.1kW, hence the iterative process finishes, and the obtained solutions
are feasible.
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Case study Results
Figure 5.15: 37 bus radial distribution network.
Say which is the total cost in the balancing market and who is going to pay for that.
Give also cost values.
5.3.3
Importance of price signals
In the previous section, it is shown that to solve the line congestion problem measured
in line11 and line12, PV generator located in bus14 has been down-regulated. It is easy
to understand that, if another generator located in a different bus would have been
down-regulated, instead of the PV in bus14, the effect on the grid would have been
different and probably line loading problems would have not been solved.
To make
sure that the down or up regulated generators are the ones located in the area where
regulation is necessary, as stated in the process description (section 3.3.4), the DSO
imposes a tariff on network agents. In this way the DSO facilitate the iterative process
to reach convergence. Show the example I did in presentation 15 may: challenges to
reach convergence, and show the importance of price signals.
==PAGE:73==
5.4 Comparison of the models
63
5.3.4
Considerations about losses
In the iterative process considered in this section, grid active power losses are considered
in the balancing market. Hence, the upward regulated generators, increase their power
production to cover also the losses.
Considering hour 12:00, the overall network losses are equal to 25.72kW which is equal
to the 0.12% of the total power produced in the network. The cost of covering losses
is payed by the loads proportionally to their power demand at the balancing price of
5 ∗λDA€/MWh. Important to mention that, differently from the other two processes,
renewable generators are covering network losses, hence, there is no need to purchase
electricity from the external grid. The total cost for covering losses is equal to 0.514€
5.3.5
Iterative OPF process considerations
5.4
Comparison of the models
In this section, a comparison between the results obtained from the simulation of
the three developed methods is presented. The benchmark model, considering a pure
peer-to-peer market formulation is the best solution for the agents, as it maximizes
social welfare and allows loads to set bilateral contracts with all the generators in the
network, without any limitation or grid fee. On the other hand, it is also shown that the
benchmark model arise several challenges in the grid operation feasibility. Therefore, the
two new models are developed to internalize network constraints and determine trades
among peers that respect grid constraints. This section focuses on the effect that those
novel models have on social welfare, revenues, costs and fairness among peers.
Considering hour 12:00, figure 5.16 shows the marginal prices €/MWh payed by
the loads to cover their electricity demand. It is evident that in the benchmark model
and iterative OPF model, all the loads are purchasing electricity at the same marginal
price. Contrarily, in the iterative model with product differentiation, marginal prices
are different, as loads pay grid fees proportional to the distance from the generators.
==PAGE:74==
64
5 Case study Results
Figure 5.16: Comparison of marginal prices for loads in the models.
Being electricity the same commodity, from loads’ perspective it is more fair to
purchase it at the same marginal cost. Furthermore, this idea is also supported by the
quality of experience indicator (QoE), defined in section 5.1.1. This indicator is applied
to assess fairness from a load perspective. Table 5.13 shows QoE values considering hour
12:00.
Table 5.13: Quality of experience values, hour 12:00.
Benchmark
Iterative OPF
Iterative PD
QoE
1
1
0.39
Since in both, benchmark and iterative OPF model, the marginal prices are equal
for all loads, the QoE = 1, for the iterative process with product differentiation it is
equal to 0.39.
Table 5.14 shows the results of all simulations, namely the social welfare, total cost,
total remuneration and quality of experience.
The results are calculated simulating
the models in hours between 08:00 and 17:00, which are the hours in which there is
PV generation, hence there are more peers in the system and give the most interesting
results.
Table 5.14: Results of all methods.
Social welfare [€]
Total costs [€]
Total revenues [€]
QoE
BM
11815.19
1155.48
1155.48
1
It. OPF
11121.12
1586.82
1554.97
1
It PD
11602.86
2149.15
1808.29
0.33
For this test case the highest social welfare is reached applying the benchmark model
(BM), while the lowest result is obtained from the iterative OPF process. Moreover, the
==PAGE:75==
5.4 Comparison of the models
65
iterative process with product differentiation has the highest costs for the loads, but
also achieve the highest revenues for generators.
Finally, the quality of experience
has unitary value for benchmark and iterative OPF models. To be noted that in the
benchmark and iterative OPF model, there are no grid fees applied, while they are
considered in the other model. Hence, total costs measured from the iterative process
with product differentiation are higher than the ones measured in the other models also
because they take into account grid fees.
The two proposed novel methods, guarantee grid operation feasibility in the considered
hours, while they decrease the social welfare of the community. Are there other considerations
or results I need to include according to you?
==PAGE:76==
66
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion and Future works
This final chapter presents a conclusion of the thesis, together with possible future works
that might be interesting, to further develop this topic.
6.1
Conclusion
The objective of this thesis is to analyze the challenges on operation and management
of a distribution system, that the implementation a P2P consumer-centric market may
arise. Furthermore, once those challenges are identified, two different possible solution
to overcome them has been developed and tested on a radial distribution network. The
results are presented in chapter 5.
Benchmark model
The benchmark model, as described in section 3.1, consists of a pure P2P market
structure based on multi-bilateral trades, whose clearing results are validated applying
an AC-PF.
The goal of this model is to assess the advantages that this type of consumer-centric
market can bring to small scale loads and generators.
Particular attention is payed
on the penetration of decentralized renewable sources and on the effect that loads
flexibility, demand-response, can have to exploit renewable generation to its maximum.
Furthermore, this kind of market does not take into account network characteristics
hence, the P2P market sees the network as a copperplate. Consequently, P2P clearing
market results are often not feasible, as they do not respect network constraints. Several
observation arise from simulating the benchmark model results in the case study.
First of all, it is observed that P2P markets applied at the distribution level, highly
increase power production from decentralized renewable sources. In fact, from figure
5.2, that shows the generation mix over the simulated 24 hours, it is possible to notice
that in the hours between 9:00 and 16:00, the whole demand is covered by decentralized
renewable sources. Furthermore, loads’ flexibility plays an important role in renewable
power exploitation.
Being renewable sources the cheapest generators, loads, in the
hours with 100% power production from renewable generators, consume their maximum
demand, as shown in figure 5.1. On the other hand, when there is not enough renewable
generation and conventional generators are producing, or the external grid is needed,
loads reduce their consumption, reaching their minimum power demand.
Hence, in
those hours there is a lower need for electricity. It is possible to conclude that this kind
==PAGE:78==
68
6 Conclusion and Future works
of market, gives a great incentive to renewable power penetration, helping the system
to reduce electricity price and CO2 emissions.
The effect of P2P market on operation and management of the distribution system,
has also been assessed, through an AC-PF validation applied to the market clearing
results. Considering the case study, it is shown that line loading limits are not respected
in the all simulated 24 hours, hence P2P market clearing results are never feasible.
Without grid feasibility, the P2P clearing results will never be applied. Therefore, a
novel framework that takes into account network limits is necessary.
Model with product differentiation
In this second model, the concept of product differentiation, introduced in section
3.2.1, is applied to the P2P market clearing as a solution for taking into account
network constraints in an externalized way. Hence, network constraints are not directly
implemented in the P2P mathematical model, but product differentiation, based on
the distance criterion, is applied to modify peers’ behaviour. In particular, this tool
aims at decreasing network usage by suggesting consumers to choose closer generators
in the network to cover their electricity demand. Analyzing the results obtained from
the case study, it is evident that applying the distance criterion, based on the euclidean
distances between the buses, network congestion is solved and P2P clearing results are
therefore feasible. In fact, as measured considering the internally traded share values,
loads choose to set bilateral contracts only with the generators located on the same
bus, or on buses located in the same area of the network, helping to decrease network
usage. Comparing the results of this model with the benchmark ones, a decrease in
social welfare for the peers can be noticed. In particular, simulating the case study
between hours 8:00 and 17:00, the total social welfare decreases by 212€. Furthermore,
an increase in the total costs for the loads is also measured and it is equal to 994€.
Finally, in terms of fairness, which is measured using the QoE indicator, since the peers
do not face the same marginal price for buying electricity, QoEPD = 0.33 is lower than
the one measured in the benchmark model QoEBM = 1.
To conclude, the results obtained from the case study, reflect the expected behaviour
for this model. Hence, the developed method is a valuable possibility for distribution
networks to include P2P market designs, while respective grid constraints.
Model with P2P flexibility market
In this model, a novel balancing market aiming at modifying P2P day ahead market
power outputs to stay within network constraints and hence, make the clearing results
feasible, is developed. An important role, in this method is played by the AC-OPF
validation that takes in input P2P day ahead clearing results and determines if regulation
is needed.
The developed balancing market allows all the peers, both generators and loads, to
modify their power set-point. It is important to mention that this kind of market leads
to interesting results if all the peers are willing to help the system by participating in
==PAGE:79==
6.2 Future work
69
the balancing market. In the case study simulation, it is assumed that all the peers are
willing to modify their power set-point using all their available flexibility.
Considering the results presented in section 5.3, it is possible to notice that the balancing
market modifies the necessary power set-point of the peers and guarantees feasible
solutions.
Also in this model, social welfare is lowered compared to the benchmark
model by 694€. Furthermore an increase in the total costs is measured, equal to 431€,
while, total revenues also increase of 399€. Differently from the iterative process with
product differentiation, in this method, all the loads face the same marginal price, hence
QoE = 1. Therefore, being electricity the same commodity for all loads, from loads’
perspective, this model can be considered more fair compared to the model with product
differentiation.
To conclude, this thesis reached its goal of developing two market framework based
on a pure P2P structure, that guarantees feasible results from the grid limits perspective,
and at the same time enables active participation of the consumers in choosing the best
way to cover their demand, according to their preferences. The feasibility of the results
is obtained at the expense of a lower social welfare and higher costs for loads, compared
to the benchmark results. Furthermore, considering the fairness indicator QoE, from
the load point of view, the model with product differentiation implemented is less fair
than the other two models.
It is also shown that flexibility of both loads and generators help the penetration
of decentralized renewable generation at the distribution level.
The two developed
approaches could be further investigated and some ideas are presented in the following
section.
6.2
Future work
Throughout the development of this thesis, several potential future studies to improve
the presented models have emerged.
Inclusion of storage systems
In the developed methods, as stated in section 4.1.1, renewable generators are modelled
as flexible generators. Hence, they are not forced to produce always their maximum
power output. This is done to avoid hours with overproduction of electricity. Since their
marginal cost is close to zero, curtailing them results in a waste of cheap and CO2 free
electricity. Therefore, in a decentralized network, the implementation of storage systems
can help saving renewable power production from being wasted. Furthermore, storage
system can also help increasing network’s flexibility. The inclusion of storage systems
entails the inclusion of a multiple time step optimization to consider storage constraints.
Scalability
In this thesis a single community with an external grid connection is considered. Through
the implementation of a hybrid P2P market, with multiple layers, several communities
==PAGE:80==
70
6 Conclusion and Future works
can be considered. As an example, at the lower level, a community market design could
be applied to each single community, while a pure P2P structure can be applied among
the different communities, which are considered as a single node.
Distributed optimization
In this thesis the P2P optimization has been centrally solved.
However, numerous
methods allow to solve the P2P as a decentralized optimization. As an example, the
Consensus + Innovation (RCI) approach, introduced in [14], split the global optimization
problem into small local problems. The main advantage of applying this method is to
solve the optimization problem without sharing any information about peers, hence,
guaranteeing their privacy.
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A
Appendix AC-PF results 12:00
product differentiation
method
==PAGE:82==
72
A Appendix AC-PF results 12:00 product differentiation method
Table A.1: 12:00 line results from AC-PF in it. PD method.
Index
p_from_kw
q_from_kvar
p_to_kw
q_to_kvar
loading_percent
0
3.2
367.6
-3.0
-367.6
23.6
1
-438.2
237.5
438.7
-237.4
32.0
2
-247.9
279.5
248.2
-279.4
24.0
3
689.0
-149.4
-688.1
149.8
45.3
4
687.9
153.8
-686.8
-153.4
45.4
5
0.0
-77.6
0.0
77.6
5.0
6
0.2
-225.9
-0.1
225.9
14.5
7
-5.8
-79.6
5.8
79.6
5.1
8
40.6
-64.0
-40.6
64.0
4.9
9
-34.8
-82.4
34.8
82.4
5.8
10
-34.8
-82.4
34.8
82.4
5.8
11
2.1
492.9
-1.6
-492.7
31.7
12
-417.1
525.0
418.1
-524.7
43.1
13
418.7
-32.3
-418.4
32.4
27.0
14
418.4
-32.4
-418.1
32.5
27.0
15
1.9
290.3
-1.7
-290.3
18.7
16
-72.0
-103.2
72.0
103.2
8.1
17
73.7
393.4
-73.4
-393.3
25.7
18
538.4
92.8
-537.8
-92.6
35.1
19
-465.2
233.4
465.7
-233.2
33.5
20
0.2
67.1
-0.2
-67.1
4.3
21
77.5
-67.3
-77.5
67.3
6.6
22
0.0
-71.1
0.0
71.1
4.6
23
-77.3
205.4
77.4
-205.4
14.1
24
-77.4
205.4
77.5
-205.4
14.1
25
0.4
52.7
-0.4
-52.7
3.4
26
0.0
-57.5
0.0
57.5
3.7
27
0.0
-71.9
0.0
71.9
4.6
28
0.4
182.2
-0.3
-182.2
11.7
29
-102.2
199.7
102.2
-199.6
14.4
30
0.0
-85.2
0.0
85.2
5.5
31
102.5
67.7
-102.5
-67.7
7.9
32
102.3
-88.6
-102.2
88.7
8.7
33
0.2
156.4
-0.1
-156.3
10.1
34
109.1
-49.1
-109.1
49.1
7.7
35
-108.9
205.4
109.1
-205.4
15.0
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX B
Network characteristics
B.1
Agents’ data for hour 12:00
Generators characteristics for hour 12:00
Consumer characteristic for hour 12:00
B.2
Branches and capacitor banks
Branches
==PAGE:84==
74
B Network characteristics
Table B.1: enerators characteristics for hour 12:00.
Number
Bus Location
Primary Energy
P max [Kw]
1
1
External supplier
20000
2
14
Co-generation
500
3
16
Co-generation
500
4
24
Co-generation
500
5
4
Wind
2358.35
6
14
Wind
3268.75
7
3
Photovoltaic
362.252
8
4
Photovoltaic
488.723
9
6
Photovoltaic
143.228
10
7
Photovoltaic
337.541
11
9
Photovoltaic
272.07
12
10
Photovoltaic
104.265
13
12
Photovoltaic
218.177
14
14
Photovoltaic
216.382
15
16
Photovoltaic
226.178
16
18
Photovoltaic
182.516
17
20
Photovoltaic
131.545
18
21
Photovoltaic
1087.61
19
23
Photovoltaic
175.141
20
24
Photovoltaic
212.665
21
26
Photovoltaic
353.15
22
28
Photovoltaic
91.4904
23
29
Photovoltaic
194.374
24
31
Photovoltaic
607.147
25
32
Photovoltaic
698.961
26
34
Photovoltaic
595.525
27
36
Photovoltaic
315.827
28
37
Photovoltaic
356.994
==PAGE:85==
B.2 Branches and capacitor banks
75
Table B.2: Consumer characteristics hour 12:00.
Load
Bus
P
Pmax
Pmin
0
3
0.608599
0.791178
0.426019
1
4
0.716337
0.931238
0.501436
2
6
1.02976
1.33869
0.720831
3
7
0.643635
0.836725
0.450544
4
9
0.605022
0.786529
0.423515
5
10
0.674353
0.876659
0.472047
6
12
0.526591
0.684568
0.368614
7
14
1.34532
1.74892
0.941725
8
16
1.68328
2.18826
1.17829
9
18
0.572088
0.743714
0.400462
10
20
1.02976
1.33869
0.720831
11
21
0.608599
0.791178
0.426019
12
23
0.82424
1.07151
0.576968
13
24
0.605022
0.786529
0.423515
14
26
0.526591
0.684568
0.368614
15
28
0.619811
0.805755
0.433868
16
29
0.866171
1.12602
0.60632
17
31
0.511917
0.665492
0.358342
18
32
0.655561
0.85223
0.458893
19
34
1.08904
1.41575
0.762328
20
36
0.757575
0.984847
0.530302
21
37
0.526591
0.684568
0.368614
==PAGE:86==
76
B Network characteristics
Table B.3: Branches characteristics.
line
from bus
to bus
length [km]
r [Ohm/km]
x [Ohm/km]
I max [kA]
1
1
2
0.6
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
2
2
3
0.75
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
3
2
4
0.8
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
4
2
5
0.75
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
5
5
6
0.8
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
6
5
7
0.6
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
7
5
8
0.75
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
8
8
9
0.8
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
9
8
10
0.75
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
10
8
11
0.6
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
11
11
12
0.8
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
12
1
13
0.75
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
13
13
14
0.8
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
14
13
15
0.6
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
15
15
16
0.8
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
16
1
17
0.75
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
17
17
18
0.6
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
18
17
19
0.8
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
19
19
20
0.75
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
20
19
21
0.8
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
21
19
22
0.6
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
22
22
23
0.75
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
23
22
24
0.8
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
24
22
25
0.75
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
25
25
26
0.6
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
26
1
27
0.8
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
27
27
28
0.75
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
28
27
29
0.6
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
29
27
30
0.75
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
30
30
31
0.6
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
31
30
32
0.8
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
32
30
33
0.75
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
33
33
34
0.8
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
34
33
35
0.6
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
35
35
36
0.75
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
36
35
37
0.8
0.32
0.113097
0.081666667
==PAGE:87==
B.2 Branches and capacitor banks
77
Table B.4: Capacitor banks.
Capacitor Banks ID
Number
Bus Location
Levels MVAr
1
1
Level 1
0
Level 2
0.1
Level 3
0.2
Level 4
0.3
Level 5
0.4
2
1
Level 1
0
Level 2
0.1
Level 3
0.2
Level 4
0.3
Level 5
0.4
==PAGE:88==
78
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX C
Results hour 12:00 for the
three methods
==PAGE:90==
80
C Results hour 12:00 for the three methods
Table C.1: Generators active power output for the three methods.
bus
generator
Benchmark [kW]
It OPF [kW]
it prod diff [kW]
bus1
External supplier
0
0
0
bus14
Co-generation
0
0
0
bus16
Co-generation
0
0
0
bus24
Co-generation
0
0
40.13175364
bus4
Wind
1742.366344
1742.366344
858.0484821
bus14
Wind
2825.374541
2825.374541
1352.617515
bus3
Photovoltaic
996.9940634
996.9940634
1229.833814
bus4
Photovoltaic
592.8883809
592.8883809
321.3703775
bus6
Photovoltaic
444.0291812
631.7227047
526.5285286
bus7
Photovoltaic
633.3914882
633.3914882
776.4581992
bus9
Photovoltaic
635.0449319
934.308084
778.5984012
bus10
Photovoltaic
622.0067696
622.0067696
761.6544784
bus12
Photovoltaic
823.5763818
823.5763818
719.3710425
bus14
Photovoltaic
1337.533473
455.3837606
814.3708653
bus16
Photovoltaic
1287.524072
1287.524072
1579.628483
bus18
Photovoltaic
793.5093247
793.5093247
815.7343557
bus20
Photovoltaic
565.3125359
565.3125359
687.2574138
bus21
Photovoltaic
1007.923969
1007.923969
1243.145091
bus23
Photovoltaic
733.9442197
733.9442197
905.3806946
bus24
Photovoltaic
583.1525406
583.1525406
710.7759461
bus26
Photovoltaic
674.8431912
674.8431912
762.0543717
bus28
Photovoltaic
720.9744695
720.9744695
805.7546259
bus29
Photovoltaic
904.6604062
904.6604062
1116.547294
bus31
Photovoltaic
660.1591459
660.1591459
767.7246196
bus32
Photovoltaic
1049.580018
1049.580018
852.2298029
bus34
Photovoltaic
967.1054721
971.1614552
1193.313013
bus36
Photovoltaic
665.3117043
665.3117043
817.905883
bus37
Photovoltaic
866.4002148
1283.259924
793.6191571
==PAGE:91==
C Results hour 12:00 for the three methods
81
Table C.2: Load active power input for the three methods.
bus
Balancing [kW]
it OPF [kW]
it prod diff [kW]
bus3
791.1779426
791.1779426
791.1773491
bus4
931.2374134
931.2374134
931.2375545
bus6
1338.685833
1338.685833
1213.366266
bus7
836.7246193
836.7246193
776.4582399
bus9
786.5282649
786.5282649
772.8297383
bus10
876.6592873
876.6592873
802.2261304
bus12
684.567906
684.567906
684.5680485
bus14
1748.917445
1748.917445
1748.917466
bus16
2188.25893
2188.25893
1997.699396
bus18
743.7139955
743.7139955
743.7142932
bus20
1338.685833
1338.685833
1225.023908
bus21
791.1779399
791.1779399
777.39866
bus23
1071.511523
1071.511523
982.8670116
bus24
786.5282649
786.5282649
750.9076984
bus26
684.567906
684.567906
684.5680563
bus28
805.7544159
805.7544159
805.7546241
bus29
1126.021907
1126.021907
1116.547296
bus31
665.491442
665.491442
665.4914792
bus32
852.2296776
852.2296776
852.2298009
bus34
1415.751414
1415.751414
1295.546162
bus36
984.8469739
984.8469739
926.9569885
bus37
684.567906
684.567906
684.5680453
==PAGE:92==
82
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[1]
European Commission. 2050 Energy strategy. 2015. url: https://ec.europa.
eu/energy/en/topics/energy-strategy/2050-energy-strategy.
[2]
European Commission. EU climate action. 2017. url: https://ec.europa.eu/
clima/citizens/eu_en.
[3]
Benjamin K. Sovacool Yael Parag. “Electricity market design for the prosumer
era”. In: (2016).
[4]
F F Wu and P Varaiya. “Coordinated multilateral trades for electric power networks:
theory and implementation”. In: International Journal of Electrical Power and
Energy Systems 21.2 (1999), pages 75–102. issn: 01420615. url: http://www.
ucei.berkeley.edu/ucei/PDF/pwp031.pdf.
[5]
Thomas Baroche. Grid Cost Allocation in a Peer-to-Peer Market. 2017.
[6]
Tiago Sousa et al. “Peer-to-peer and community-driven markets : a comprehensive
review”. In: (2018).
[7]
R. Schollmeier. “A definition of peer-to-peer networking for the classification of
peer-to-peer architectures and applications”. In: (2001).
[8]
Karl Aberer and Manfred Hauswirth. “An Overview on Peer-to-Peer Information
Systems”. In: Information Systems (2002), pages 1–14.
[9]
Jing Hu et al. “Identifying barriers to large-scale integration of variable renewable
electricity into the electricity market: A literature review of market design”. In:
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 81.March 2017 (2018), pages 2181–2195.
issn: 18790690. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2017.06.028. url: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.rser.2017.06.028.
[10]
Tineke Van Der Schoor and Bert Scholtens. “Power to the people: Local community
initiatives and the transition to sustainable energy”. In: Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews 43 (2015), pages 666–675. issn: 13640321. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.
2014.10.089.
[11]
Hakem Beitollahi. “Peer-to-Peer Networks Applied to Power Grid”. In: International
Journal (2007).
[12]
Yuan Luo et al. “Autonomous cooperative energy trading between prosumers for
microgrid systems”. In: Proceedings - Conference on Local Computer Networks,
LCN 2014-Novem.November (2014), pages 693–696. doi: 10.1109/LCNW.2014.
6927722.
==PAGE:94==
84
Bibliography
[13]
Shenoy Irwin. “Minimizing Electricity Costs by Sharing Energy in Sustainable
Microgrids”. In: ().
[14]
Etienne Sorin, Lucien Bobo, and Pierre Pinson. “Consensus-based Approach to
Peer-to-Peer Electricity Markets with Product Differentiation”. In: X.X (), pages 1–8.
[15]
Etienne Sorin. “Peer-to-peer electricity markets with product differentiation”. In:
(2017).
[16]
Fabio Moret and Pierre Pinson. “Energy Collectives: a Community and Fairness
based Approach to Future Electricity Markets”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems (2018), pages 1–8. issn: 08858950. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2018.2808961.
[17]
Empower Project - Http://94.75.243.141:8080/Empower/. 2009.
[18]
Chao Long et al. “Feasibility of Peer-to-Peer Energy Trading in Low Voltage
Electrical Distribution Networks”. In: Energy Procedia 105 (2017), pages 2227–2232.
issn: 18766102. doi: 10.1016/j.egypro.2017.03.632. url: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.egypro.2017.03.632.
[19]
Sarma Glover Overbye. “Power System Analysis and Design”. In: (2001).
[20]
Mb Cain, Rp O’Neill, and A Castillo. “History of Optimal Power Flow and Formulations”.
In: Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. … December (2012), pages 1–36. url:
http://www.ferc.gov/industries/electric/indus-act/market-planning/
opf-papers/acopf-1-history-formulation-testing.pdf.
[21]
Tiago Soares et al. “Cost allocation model for distribution networks considering
high penetration of distributed energy resources”. In: Electric Power Systems
Research 124 (2015), pages 120–132. issn: 03787796. doi: 10.1016/j.epsr.2015.
03.008. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.epsr.2015.03.008.
[22]
T. Baroche et al. “Exogenous Approach to Grid Cost Allocation in Peer-to-Peer
Electricity Markets”. In: (2018), pages 1–8. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.
02159.
[23]
Cuffe and Keane. “Visualizing the electrical structure of power systems”. In: (2017).
[24]
Junjie Qin, Ram Rajagopal, and Pravin P. Varaiya. “Flexible Market for Smart
Grid: Coordinated Trading of Contingent Contracts”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Control of Network Systems (2017). issn: 23255870. doi: 10.1109/TCNS.2017.
2746347.
[25]
G Hug, S Kar, and C Wu. “Consensus+Innovations Approach for Distributed
Multiagent Coordination in a Microgrid”. In: IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid
6.4 (2015), pages 1893–1903. issn: 1949-3053. doi: 10.1109/TSG.2015.2409053.
[26]
Leon Thurner et al. “pandapower - an Open Source Python Tool for Convenient
Modeling, Analysis and Optimization of Electric Power Systems”. In: (2017), pages 1–12.
issn: 08858950. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2018.2829021. url: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1709.06743.
[27]
Pandapower_PF. url: https://pandapower.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
powerflow/ac.html.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
85
[28]
R.N. Allan et al. “A reliability test system for educational purposes-basic distribution
system data and results”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 6.2 (1991),
pages 813–820. issn: 08858950. doi: 10.1109/59.76730. url: http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/76730/.
[29]
H. Morais et al. “Distributed energy resources management using plug-in hybrid
electric vehicles as a fuel-shifting demand response resource”. In: Energy Conversion
and Management 97 (2015), pages 72–93. issn: 01968904. doi: 10 . 1016 / j .
enconman.2015.03.018. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.
2015.03.018.
[30]
European Commission. “Roadmap 2050”. In: Policy April (2010), page 100. issn:
14710080. doi: 10.2833/10759. url: http://www.roadmap2050.eu/.
[31]
Pierre Pinson. “Wind Energy: Forecasting Challenges for Its Operational Management”.
In: Statistical Science 28.4 (2013), pages 564–585. issn: 0883-4237. doi: 10.1214/
13-STS445. url: http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.ss/1386078879.
[32]
W A Bukhsh, C Zhang, and P Pinson. “Data for stochastic multiperiod opf
problems”. In: (). url: https://sites.google.com/site/datasmopf/.
[33]
Ricardo J. Bessa, Artur Trindade, and Vladimiro Miranda. “Spatial-temporal solar
power forecasting for smart grids”. In: IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics
11.1 (2015), pages 232–241. issn: 15513203. doi: 10.1109/TII.2014.2365703.
[34]
Tiago Soares et al. “Optimal offering strategies for wind power in energy and
primary reserve markets”. In: IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy 7.3 (2016),
pages 1036–1045. issn: 19493029. doi: 10.1109/TSTE.2016.2516767.
[35]
Hossein Haghighat and Scott W. Kennedy. “A model for reactive power pricing
and dispatch of distributed generation”. In: IEEE PES General Meeting, PES 2010
(2010), pages 1–10. issn: 1944-9925. doi: 10.1109/PES.2010.5589576.
[36]
ERSE. “Despacho no 7253/2010”. In: (2010), pages 4–6.
[37]
MIBEL. url: http://www.mibel.com/index.php?lang=pt.
[38]
Juan M. Morales et al. Integrating Renewables in Electricity Markets, Chapter 4:
”Balancing markets”. Volume 205. 2014. isbn: 978-1-4614-9410-2. doi: 10.1007/
978-1-4614-9411-9. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4614-
9411-9.
[39]
Gurobi. url: http://www.gurobi.com/.
==PAGE:96==
