==PAGE:1==
Fabrication of Solar Cells with
Black Silicon as Front-side
Texturing
Adriana Pamela Sánchez Nery
Kongens Lyngby, 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Micro- and Nanotechnology
Ørsteds Plads, building 345C,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 57 00
info@nanotech.dtu.dk
http://www.nanotech.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Optical properties represent one of the main losses in silicon solar cell devices.
A promising concept for reducing this problem is the usage of a nanostructured
surface also called Black Silicon. This nanostructuring signiﬁcantly reduces light
reﬂectance of the device due to its unique surface geometry.
Black silicon is known to have high recombination in the surface due to the
damages made when texturing. Therefore, in this thesis black silicon is obtained
by a novel inductively coupled plasma process. The process avoids the use of
capacitively coupled power (platen power), which reduces surface damage and
therefore reduces recombination.
In this project, solar cells are built with black silicon and the devices are com-
pared by means of front texturing to the most widely used KOH-etched surface
and with non-textured ﬂat substrates. The devices are passivated with a stack
of Al2O3 and SiNx, deposited by atomic layer deposition (ALD) and via plasma
enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) respectively.
A highly doped
polysilicon is used to passivate the back contact, deposited via low pressure
chemical vapor deposition.
Finally, the solar cells contacts were made with
aluminum by e-beam deposition.
The reﬂectance obtained of the solar cell devices with black silicon are below 6 %
in most of the active range for silicon photovoltaics, outperforming KOH-etched
and ﬂat surfaces in this matter. The eﬃciency obtained for the same devices
ranges between 13,48 and 13,66 % and the eﬃciency of the reference devices
were higher, reaching values between 15,09 and 16,05 %.
The challenge of future solar cell technologies is the combination of highly eﬃ-
==PAGE:4==
ii
cient cell and low cost fabrication. Research focused on improving the perfor-
mance of black silicon and reducing the front surface damage continues in order
to achieve a high performance solar cell. Future projects based on this solar cell
architecture should be focused on further reducing recombination in the black
silicon surface and improving the quality of the back contact passivation.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc.
in Engineering in Advanced and Applied Chemistry at the Department of Micro-
and Nanotechnology, DTU Nanotech.
The thesis deals with the fabrication of photovoltaic devices with black silicon as
front texturing as the primary objective. The project was supervised by Postdoc
Beniamino Iandolo and Professor Ole Hansen.
This project corresponds to 30 ECTS, developed in the spring period of 2018,
it includes several references on previous studies reported as Fabrication and
Characterization of Textured Silicon Surfaces for Solar Cells carried out by the
same author and supervisors for the previous development of black silicon.
Lyngby, Denmark. July-2018
Adriana Pamela Sánchez Nery
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Postdoc Beniamino Iandolo and Professor
Ole Hansen for all the guidance, advice and teaching throughout the develop-
ment of this thesis.
I would like to thank Postdoc Rasmus S. Davidsen for his input and advice on
the design of the studied devices.
I would like to thank the staﬀat DTU Danchip for their support in the clean-
room facilities, especially to Thomas Pedersen for his guidance through the
entire fabrication process for this thesis.
I would like to thank Maren Kloster, for sharing her method to optimize back
contact passivation.
And I would specially like to thank my family, Mom, Dad, Javi and Meli for
their unconditional love and support.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction and Aim of the project
1
1.1
Aim of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory and Fabrication Techniques
3
2.1
Solar Cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Semiconductors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Silicon Solar Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Texturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Wet Chemical Etching with KOH
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
Black Silicon
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Recombination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.1
Lifetime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4.2
Passivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.5
Characterization of Solar Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.5.1
Quantum Eﬃciency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.5.2
IV Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Experimental Methods
31
3.1
Process Flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.1.1
Front texture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.1.2
Emitter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.1.3
Rear contact passivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.1.4
Passivation layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3.1.5
Antireﬂecting coating layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.1.6
Front contact design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.1.7
Front and back contact deposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2
Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.1
Lifetime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.2
Reﬂectance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.3
IV Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.4
Quantum eﬃciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Results and Discussion
37
4.1
Preliminary Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.1
Thermal contact in RIE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.2
Passivation and Antireﬂecting Coating . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.1.3
Doping Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2
Solar cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Reﬂectance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4
Quantum eﬃciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4.1
Reﬂectance and QE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.5
Comparing JSC from QE and IV measurements. . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.6
IV Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Conclusion
55
5.1
Future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A Theory behind experimental methods
57
A.1 Sheet Resistance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.2 Inductively coupled plasma (ICP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.3 Photolithography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.4 PECVD and LPCVD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
B Reference graphs
63
Bibliography
65
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction and Aim of the
project
The greenhouse eﬀect is a natural process that warms up the Earth’s surface.
Incoming radiation from the Sun is partially contained in the Earth’s atmosphere
stopping the reﬂected radiation from going back to space. The greenhouse eﬀect
is enhanced by human activities especially by burning fossil fuels and with this,
producing gases such as nitrous oxide, methane and carbon dioxide that stay
in the atmosphere and trap extra heat reﬂected from Earth. Development and
research on ﬁghting global warming and the development of alternative clean
energies has been the target of many nations.
Nowadays, the energy economy of industrialized countries is based on the use
of stored fossil energy such as coal, oil and natural gas. The greenhouse eﬀect is
unavoidable when fossil fuels are used but the continuous damage can be slowed
down by using our primary source of clean energy that gives a ﬂow of 120 000
TW of radiation to the surface of the Earth, the Sun. This amount of energy
exceeds the human needs and, unlike fossil energy, solar energy is inexhaustible
[1].
Solar cells are based on the photovoltaic eﬀect, which converts light to electricity.
The market of solar photovoltaic is dominated mainly by the use of crystalline
silicon, which can be produced in two crystal forms: mono and polycrystalline
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction and Aim of the project
silicon. The production cost of Solar PV electricity has reduced signiﬁcantly in
the last decade and the cost of the equipment does not vary much around the
globe. In general, the cost of a photovoltaic system has become increasingly
aﬀordable at utility and distributed levels [2]. Due to the increasing interest to
lower the impact of the greenhouse eﬀect and the low cost of production, many
countries have started to recognize the potential provision of solar energy to
obtain sustainable clean energy
The main power losses in a solar cell are due to a high reﬂection of incident
light and therefore, to reduce these losses, a combination of antireﬂective coat-
ing (ARC) and surface texturing are used to increase the light trapping and ab-
sorption properties of the device. An ARC, usually made of SiNx, is deposited
on the silicon surface. The industrial and most common way to microstructure
silicon is with potassium hydroxide wet etch, but the reﬂectance obtained can
be further reduced by nanostructuring the substrate in order to obtain black
silicon.
Black silicon (BSi) suppresses almost completely the reﬂection of photons at
the silicon-air interface and since BSi is an almost perfect photon absorber,
it is an attractive candidate to fabricate cells with eﬃciency approaching the
29.1% eﬃciency limit for silicon. While BSi is becoming of industrial relevance,
extensive work is still required to exploit its full potential.
1.1
Aim of the project
Black silicon has presented great potential as a texturing method obtained by
mask-less reactive ion etching in a single step process. The main drawback that
BSi presents is an increased surface recombination, which results in lower power
conversion eﬃciencies compared to other industrialized methods of texturing as
KOH wet etch. Recently, higher carrier lifetime has been obtained when the ca-
pacitively coupled power (platen) is reduced in the RIE process to nanostructure
Si.
This project will focus on the fabrication and characterization of solar cells
containing BSi in the front surface. The black silicon texturing on the sunward
face of the devices is obtained completely suppressing the use of platen power.
Furthermore, the process for obtaining the emitter is optimized to obtain an
eﬀective p-n junction. All the devices are passivated with Al2O3 and diﬀerent
thicknesses of SiNx as ARC are tested to determine an optimal passivation and
antireﬂecting coating to obtain devices with good power conversion eﬃciency.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Theory and Fabrication
Techniques
2.1
Solar Cell
The working principle of solar cells is based on the photovoltaic (PV) eﬀect,
described as the physical process of converting light to electricity. The minimal
requirements of the photoelectric eﬀect are to have a two energy system, where
a relaxed carrier (in a low energy state) can reach an upper and excited state
by the interaction with a photon. The excited carriers must be able to move to
a contact that leads to an external circuit where they can release energy and
thus generate electrical power. The carriers, now in their relaxed state, move
through the second contact back where the process started. A schematic of the
PV eﬀect is shown in Figure 2.1a. The photogenerated carriers are produced
simultaneosly; they are known as electrons and holes. Once the incident photon
ﬂux hits the material, electrons are excited to a higher energy state and a
vacancy in the structure is left (holes). The electron-hole pair (EHP) can move
freely through the structure thus becoming a more conducting material.
The basic structure of a solar cell consists on an absorber, selective contacts
and an external circuit (Figure 2.1b), each part performs speciﬁc processes
[3].
==PAGE:14==
4
Theory and Fabrication Techniques
(a) Schematic of a two energy level system
and movement of the carriers through
a device.
1) Photo-generation and ex-
citation of carriers. 2) Transport of the
carrier to a contact 3) Contact that en-
ables the photo-excited carrier transfer
to the external circuit 4) External circuit
where work is delivered when the carrier
releases energy to its relaxed state 5) Re-
laxed carrier is transported to its initial
lower energy state.
(b) Basic structure of a solar cell con-
sisting of an absorber,
selective
contacts and an external circuit.
Two types of contacts are needed
to transport the excited carrier and
the relaxed carrier selectively.
Figure 2.1: Basic energy system and structure of a solar cell.
In the absorber, carriers are located and, as mentioned before, they can be
excited from its lower energy state to a higher energy level. The photo-excited
carriers are then transported to a contact that allows them to move to the
external circuit where the electrons can deliver work by losing energy. Then,
the relaxed electrons enter the system through the second contact and therefore
the cycle can start again. In order to have a working system, it is necessary to
have selective contacts; one that allows the transport of the excited carrier
and one for the relaxed carrier.
Metal contacts are an essential element of
the solar cell to extract the generated power from the device. The number of
carriers that leave the system should be able to return, otherwise there is an
accumulation of carriers or an exhaustion of these.
The photovoltaic eﬀect can take place in diﬀerent systems like electrochemical
substances, semiconductors, organic materials, dyes, among others. In Figure
2.2 the development throughout the years of solar cells and the achieved eﬃ-
ciencies are presented. In this ﬁgure, the highest eﬃciency achieved is by III-V
Multijunction solar cells followed by GaAs and crystalline silicon.
Even though III-V solar cells can obtain very high power eﬃciency conversion,
the photovoltaic solar cell market is dominated by silicon because is the only
material that can meet the low-cost manufacturing criterion with the clean
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Semiconductors
5
Figure 2.2: Eﬃciency comparison of diﬀerent solar cell technologies. Obtained
from [4].
energy conversion. Silicon is the most abundant element in the Earth’s crust
which also has no environmental impact and no health and safety issues. More
about devices made out of this material is discussed in section 2.2.1.
2.2
Semiconductors
In semiconductors, each atom contributes in an energy level to form two almost
continuous bands called valence band and conduction band, according to the
band theory of solids. A schematic of this is presented in Figure 2.3. In p- and
n-type semiconductors impurities are added at approximately 1 ppm to increase
the number of carriers, which increases the conductivity of the semiconductor.
The EHP diﬀuses to the p-n junction where they are separated by an internal
electric ﬁeld and then collected by the metal contacts, producing an electric
voltage and a current in the external circuit.
Figure 2.3 illustrates the two energy levels in a semiconductor. At 0 K, the
valence band is fully occupied with electrons and the conduction band is empty.
In order to excite electrons into the conduction band, for a semiconductor at
==PAGE:16==
6
Theory and Fabrication Techniques
Figure 2.3: Absorption of a photon with energy ℏω provoking the excitation of
one electron from the valence band εv to the conduction band εc in
a semiconductor material. A phonon with energy εΓ is generated
and lose excitation to reach εc. Reproduced from [5]
atmospheric conditions, it is necessary that the energy of an incoming photon
is equal to the energy gap ℏω = εG or exceeds this value. In some cases the
excess of energy is dissipated as heat and the photons with lower energy are
reﬂected or transmitted [5]. In doped semiconductors, an extra energy level is
added near the conduction and valence band for n- and p-type respectively.
Electrons that are excited into the conduction band lose energy by the generation
phonons i.e. lattice vibrations, until they reach the lower value of εC. Later,
the relaxation of electrons to the valence band is achieved by the energy loss
of a dimension of εG, by the generation of large number of phonons or by the
emission of a photon. Electrons may “stay” in the conduction band for a period
of time in the order of 10−3 s, and this allows their collection by the selective
contacts and further conversion of electron energy into electrical energy [5].
Each semiconductor has a characteristic bandgap, the solar photovoltaic (PV)
market is currently dominated by crystalline silicon technology [2], this is a
widely used material in solar cells due to diﬀerent reasons mentioned in section
2.2.1. The bandgap corresponding to silicon is εG = 1.12 eV. Most of the solar
irradiance lies in the interval of 300-1100 nm.
The area where the p-type and n-type semiconductors have contact is called the
p-n junction. Figure 2.4 presents the band model when the n-type and p-type
region are in equilibrium. In this state, the Fermi energy is stable and the energy
bands are continuous from the p-side to the n-side of the junction, forming an
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Semiconductors
7
energy slope.
Figure 2.4: Band model of the p-n junction. The transition region allows the
movement of electrons between the valence band and the conduc-
tion band. [6]
The Fermi energy level is where the probability of having an electron is around 50
% and it is therefore located between the valence band and the conducting band.
When no current is applied, the two semiconductors regions are in equilibrium
with each other and the Fermi energy is constant. The electrical conductivity
of a semiconductor is regulated by the concentration of electrons and holes and
their ability to ﬂow in a speciﬁc direction under the inﬂuence of an electric ﬁeld
(Figure 2.5).
2.2.1
Silicon Solar Cells
In 1954, D. Chapin, C. Fuller and G. Pearson used silicon to make the ﬁrst
practical solar cell for power generation with an eﬃciency of 1-2 % at the Bell
Laboratories [7]. Since this period, the industry of photovoltaics has been con-
tinuously growing with the development of new technologies on silicon and other
semiconductors.
In the Earth’s crust, silicon oxide (SiO2) is the most abundant mineral; this
makes Silicon the most abundant semiconductor on Earth. This is one of the
many reasons why silicon is an attractive semiconductor that has taken over the
market of photovoltaics.
Other important properties of silicon are the following:
==PAGE:18==
8
Theory and Fabrication Techniques
a)
b)
Figure 2.5: a)When a potential higher than zero is applied, the voltage will
fall across the transition region and the energy barrier is decreased
along with the electric ﬁeld ε. b)When a negative potential is ap-
plied, the potential barrier increases and carrier diﬀusion decreases
[6].
• Si has a characteristic bandgap of 1.1 eV. This is suﬃciently small to allow
photons to excite electrons to the conduction band and therefore produce
a high current and it is also big enough so the material can sustain a high
voltage.
• There is a variety of eﬀective and inexpensive methods for extraction,
puriﬁcation and crystallization of Si from its raw mineral: Silica (SiO2).
• Strong bonds of Si-Si in the crystal structure gives good mechanical prop-
erties that allows easy handling and processing of Si.
• Easy doping of Si and high solid solubility (i.e. for boron doping the solid
solubility is 1.6 × 1019atoms/cm3 at 700 °C) [8].
• In exposure to air, Si is oxidized and a SiO2 layer is formed. This layer
avoids further oxidation of the material.
As many others, silicon can be used in diﬀerent crystal arrangements: single
crystalline, multicrystalline, polycrystalline or amorphous. The crystal structure
is formed by covalent bonds of the elements who share their valence electrons
in their outer electron shell orbits. Silicon has four valence electrons, therefore
it is bound to four neighbouring atoms with the same distance between them.
When a crystal lattice is formed, the energy band of a semiconductor is formed
too and, as mentioned in the previous section, these energy bands indicate the
energy states allowed for the electrons within a speciﬁc material. Crystalline
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Semiconductors
9
silicon has tetrahedral bonds in its unit cell, with a higher crystalline mate-
rial, the grain boundaries and defects are reduced and, as a consequence, the
recombination eﬀects are minimized to obtain higher eﬃciency.
The industrial and most common structure of a solar cell produced today (Fig-
ure 2.6) consists of a p-type semiconductor, a thin layer of highly doped semi-
conductor (emitter) to create the p-n junction, also known as depletion region,
front and rear metal contacts and an anti-reﬂecting coating. The addition of a
small portion of foreign atoms in a regular crystal lattice changes their electrical
properties to produce an n-type or a p-type semiconductor. Electrodonor atoms
such as phosphorous produce n-type semiconductors by their contribution with
extra electrons. Electrodeﬃcient atoms, such as boron, produces a p-type semi-
conductor by forming vacancies in electron positions in the structure, usually
referred as holes. Nowadays nearly all the solar cells have a p-n junction de-
spite the fact that the PV eﬀect can take place without the junction in other
materials. In semiconductors, the PV eﬀect takes place when they have a p-n
junction.
Figure 2.6: A p-type semiconductor, a thin layer highly n-doped semiconduc-
tor, a passivating and antireﬂecting coating, selective front and
rear contacts and an external circuit constitute the main compo-
nents of the most industrialized solar cell. Reproduced from [9].
The emitter and the bulk outside of the depletion region are electrically un-
changed during the cell operation. These two regions absorb the main part of
the incoming light and transport the photogenerated carriers to the p-n junction.
The p-n junction has a strong electric ﬁeld and separates the photogenerated
minority carriers from those in the emitter and the bulk.
Most solar cells have an antireﬂecting coating as a thin layer of a dielectric ma-
terial that reduces the total reﬂection of light for a speciﬁc range of wavelengths.
The use of the antireﬂecting coating for semiconductors is further described in
==PAGE:20==
10
Theory and Fabrication Techniques
section 2.2.1. In commercialized solar cells, more than 90% are based on p-type
doped silicon. This master thesis project is based on an analogous architecture
of Figure 2.6 with and n-type monocrystalline silicon. Solar cells with an n-type
base have been found to have higher carrier lifetime than p-type wafers due to
their higher tolerance to chemical and crystallographic defects [10].
When it comes to the solar cell optics, the principal optical losses in a silicon
solar cell are the reﬂection of the received light at the surface, the parasitic
absorption of sunlight in the rear metal contact and the escape of long wave-
lengths. Close to one third of the light in a polished silicon wafer is reﬂected
[7] and therefore an antireﬂecting coating is needed in the sunward face. The
reﬂection coeﬃcient of light from silicon to air is given by the equation 2.1 [11].
R = (n −1)2 + κ2
(n + 1)2 + κ2
(2.1)
Where n and κ are the refractive index and extinction coeﬃcient of the semi-
conductor and both are funcctions of a wavelength λ in vaccum. For silicon, at
a wavelength of 400 nm n = 5, 64 and κ = 0, 33 [12], the reﬂection coeﬃcient
has a value of 0,48.
The extinction coeﬃcient is related to the absorption coeﬃcient α by :
κ = αλ
4πn
(2.2)
When a single layer of antireﬂection coating with nar is placed in the sunward
face of a solar cell, the reﬂection coeﬃcient becomes:
R = r2
0 + r2
sc + 2r0rsccos2β
1 + r2
0 + 2r0rsccos2β
(2.3)
where r0 is the refractive index of the medium (air), rar for the antireﬂective
coating and rsc for the semiconductor, d is the thickness of the coating and
r0 = nar −n0
nar + n0
; rsc = nsc −nar
nsc + nar
; β = 2π
λ nard
(2.4)
In the ideal case where R vanishes, the refractive index of the antireﬂective
coating is given by the geometric mean of the medium and the semiconductor
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Semiconductors
11
with the next equation:
nar = √n0nsc
(2.5)
For a silicon solar cell in any open space, the geometric mean is nar=2,37. One
of the most common anti-reﬂecting coatings used in industry, for crystalline
silicon solar cells, is silicon nitride (SiNx). This material is used in industry
because it also passivates the silicon to reduce recombination as discussed in
section 2.4 [13]. The refractive index of SiNx at 400 nm is n = 2, 10 [14] and
by applying equations 2.3 and 2.4 we know that the reﬂective coeﬃcient of a
silicon wafer with an antireﬂecting layer of 30 nm is theoretically lowered from
0,49 to 0,21.
The eﬀect of the thickness of the ARC applies to a speciﬁc range of wavelengths
thanks to a destructive interference between two waves and therefore, it avoids
the reﬂection of speciﬁc wavelengths.
This eﬀect follows the rule of quarter
wavelength rule when the thickness d is d=λ/4. Figure 2.7 shows the graphic
representation of this rule that takes place in the front and back surfaces of
the ARC. When a light beam hits the ﬁrst surface of the ARC, it is partially
reﬂected and the fraction of transmitted light is reﬂected in the second surface
after being "delayed" by half wavelength and with the phase shift, a destructive
interference is carried out between both reﬂected waves.
Having good optical properties in the device signiﬁcantly inﬂuences to the per-
formance of the solar cell. It has been shown that having both, a good ARC
and a textured surface, is optimal for a better optical and passivation properties
[15].
==PAGE:22==
12
Theory and Fabrication Techniques
Figure 2.7: The thickness of the ARC determines which small range of wave-
lengths are not reﬂected due to the optical interference between
to waves that are reﬂected at the ﬁrst and second surface of the
ARC. Modiﬁed from [16].
2.3
Texturing
The continuous look to improve solar cells considering the cost-performance
ratio is important for the photovoltaic market growth. One way to decrease
the cost of material is to reduce the thickness of silicon wafers and as wafers
become thinner, the absorption within the wafer is decreased. Texturing the
front surfaces of solar cells is used to increase the light absorption by reducing
the reﬂection from the surface that faces the sun and it also allows the light enter
the bulk material at oblique angles. In this thesis, BSi is obtained using Reactive
Ion Etch (RIE) and it is compared with the most common wet-texturing method
of monocrystalline silicon (KOH-etch) and comparing it equally to a standard
ﬂat polished Si wafer.
2.3.1
Wet Chemical Etching with KOH
The production of nanostructures is achieved by diﬀerent approaches. In the
solar cell industry, KOH etching of monocrystalline silicon is a well known and
optimized process where the ease of use and bulk production make it the pre-
ferred process. The anisotropic etching with KOH produces smooth pyramids
in the surface and avoids physical damage to the bulk material.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Texturing
13
Wet etching is a versatile technique where the modiﬁcation of the etchant con-
centration and temperature give place to diﬀerent structures and by controlling
the process under the same conditions, the texturing is reproducible. Davidsen,
R. (2012) suggests an etching solution containing 2% KOH and 5% IPA at 70°C
to form pyramids with a height of 5 µm after 50 min of etching. SEM images of
the resulting structures from the previously mentioned parameters are showed
in Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: SEM image after texturing silicon with a solution of 2% KOH, 7%
IPA at 70 °C. The texture obtained depends fully on the crystal
structure of the substrate that is the reason why pyramids are
formed after the wet etch. Obtained from [9].
Wet etching on silicon depends strongly on the crystalline structure of the sub-
strate; therefore, the design of the structures formed is limited by the crys-
tallographic orientation. For crystalline silicon, crystal lattice orientation such
as {110} and {100}, have higher etch rate than {111}. This diﬀerence in the
etch rate leaves almost intact the {111} orientation while the substrate is highly
etched on its horizontal {110} and vertical {100} direction producing the pre-
viously shown pyramids.
2.3.2
Black Silicon
The creation of nanostructures in the front surface of solar cells can be used to
increase the light absorption by reducing the reﬂection from the sunward face
of the material. Texturing increases the optical length path that propagates
through the device as shown in Figure 2.10. Electrical performance of solar
==PAGE:24==
14
Theory and Fabrication Techniques
Figure 2.9: Main crystal planes of c-Si. Crystal planes {110} and {100} have a
higher etch rate than {111}, this last group are diﬃcult to etch as
their atoms have stronger bonds and/or a higher number of them
[17].
cells has been shown to reach up to 22.1% [18] of a p-type solar cell with BSi as
front side texturing.
From the materials developed in previous reports [19] the creation of black silicon
reduces the reﬂection in order to have less than 4% when it was etched for 2
and 3 minutes in a range of 300 - 1000 nm, compared to a polished Si wafer.
Figure 2.10: Optical path of sunlight in black silicon.
The nanostructures
allow further absorption of light.
Black silicon nanostructures increase the optical path of the incoming light that
propagates through the device, this phenomenon is referred as optical conﬁne-
ment or light trapping, and in this way longer wavelengths can be absorbed in
the solar cell [20][11]. Black silicon used as front-side texturing is the main study
focus in this thesis, where the nanostructures are produced within 3 minutes us-
ing reactive ion etch with O2 and SF6. After processing a Si wafer appears to be
black instead of the characteristic silver-gray colour as shown in Figure 2.12. A
scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the resulting morphology of the
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Texturing
15
nanostructures is presented in Figure 2.13.
Figure 2.11: Having a textured front surface like BSi and a reﬂecting back
surface allows light trapping within a solar cell.
Figure from
[11].
2.3.2.1
Reactive Ion Etch
Over recent decades, diﬀerent processes of fabrication of BSi have been devel-
oped, such as metal-assisted chemical etching, reactive ion etching and laser
irradiation. In this project reactive ion etch was used to create nanostructures
in the sunward face of Si wafers as an antireﬂecting coating.
There are several characteristics that make RIE attractive. Firstly, it is a very
clean process, the materials are free of chemical contamination and it is not
needed any pretreatment for processing.
Secondly, this method can process
diﬀerent types of Si such as amorphous, crystalline or poly-silicon. Furthermore,
RIE has the possibility to be integrated into a in-line production facility but it
is diﬃcult to scale-up the production [21].
The use of RIE to form nanograss structures in Si surfaces was ﬁrst reported in
1995 by Jansen et al. [22]. Since then, their method has been modiﬁed to create
diﬀerent types of structures. To obtain BSi through RIE SF6 and O2 is needed
in the form of plasma consisting of: F*, SF5
+ and O*. The main reactant to
create silicon nanostructures is the ﬂuorine radical (F*), the product of this
reaction is volatile SiFx compounds.
In Figure 2.14 the etching process of Silicon is presented in 5 diﬀerent stages. In
the ﬁrst stage (a) it is shown the native silicon oxide present in silicon wafers,
this layer works as a passivation layer. The mechanism is suggested to start
==PAGE:26==
16
Theory and Fabrication Techniques
Figure 2.12: Black silicon made by reactive ion etch with an optical reﬂectance
below 1% averaged over a broad range of wavelengths. The sub-
strate appears to be black instead of the characteristic silver color
in planar silicon wafers.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.13: Scanning Electron Microscope images of BSi nanostructures at
a) 0°tilt and b) 40°tilt.The spacing between the structures is of
∼155nm
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Texturing
17
Figure 2.14: Etching process of silicon a) Si substrate with native oxide layer
working as passivation. b) Ion bombardment removes the silicon
oxide layer for further etching. c) F* and O* form a second passi-
vation layer which is etched by SF5
– producing volatile SiOxFy.
d) Fluorine reacts directly with Si to form volatile SiF4. e) Micro
and nanostructures are formed on a silicon substrate
==PAGE:28==
18
Theory and Fabrication Techniques
with the etch of the native oxide to form the ﬁrst pits on the surface as shown
in the second stage (b). A physical mechanism forms the ﬁrst pits with O– and
SF6
– ions colliding with the surface to break oﬀand remove the passivation
layer at certain spots. The etch rate in this stage depends on the roughness of
the surface and on the thickness of the native SiO2 layer.
In the third stage (c) a new passivation layer of SiOxFy is formed when the
radicals F* and O* are bombarded towards the substrate. This layer reduces
the nanostructure formation rate, it is etched faster at the bottom of the pits
making them deeper and it is volatilized after reacting with SF5
+. Finally, in
the last stage (d), the ﬂuorine radical is chemisorpted to the surface, reacting
with Si and producing ﬂuorosilyl products (SiFx), which are desorpted [23] and
volatilized. The roughness of the structure is increased as the pits become more
and more pronounced.
Diﬀerent morphologies can be adopted by silicon by changing the RIE parame-
ters as gas composition, ﬂow rate, temperature and RF power.
When the ﬂow of O2 is increased, the deposition of a SiO2 layer is enhanced.
With a higher ﬂow of SF6, an isotropic etch is performed and therefore Si would
be etched evenly through the entire wafer. By increasing the temperature, the
chemisorption and desorption process would be faster.
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Recombination
19
2.4
Recombination
Recombination is the opposite process of photogeneration of carriers. Recombi-
nation acts to restore the equilibrium of the electron-hole pair moving around
the crystal lattice, to its stable thermal value. There are three types of recom-
bination processes in a bulk semiconductor [7]:
• Radiative - resulting in the emission of a photon.
• Auger - resulting when kinetic energy is delivered to a third carrier.
• Non radiative - resulting in a phonon emission (Shockley-Read-Hall).
From these three types of recombination, radiative and auger depend on a basic
property of the semiconductor and the Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombina-
tion depends on the quality of the material and the density of defects and
impurities in the bulk.
Radiative recombination takes place when electrons in the conduction band re-
combine with holes in the valence resulting in energy dissipation as photons
with bandgap energy εΓ. A schematic of this mechanism is shown in Figure
2.15a. The rate of this type of recombination depends on the ﬂux of photons
from the material and the absorption coeﬃcient of the material as well. The
rate of radiative recombination (Urad(cm−3s−1)) is expressed as :
Urad = Br(np −n2
i )
(2.6)
Where Br(cm−3s−1) is the radiative recombination coeﬃcient, a property of
the material; np is the non-equilibrium electron-hole population produced by a
light source and n2
i is the intrinsic thermal carrier population (n2
i = n0p0).
The radiative recombination coeﬃcient depends on the material’s bandgap with
a range of 10−13−10−15cm3/s for an indirect bandgap such as Si. The radiative
processes are much less probable in indirect bandgap materials than other non-
radiative processes that dominate.
Auger recombination is a non-radiative process that takes place with the in-
teraction of three particles. The process starts with the recombination of the
electron-hole pair by increasing the kinetic energy of a third free electron in the
conduction band or a free hole in the valence band. This last particle releases
==PAGE:30==
20
Theory and Fabrication Techniques
(a) Radiative recombination
(b) Auger recombination
(c) Shockley-Read-Hall recombination
Figure 2.15: The three main recombination mechanisms that take place in
the bulk of a semiconductor are the Radiation, Auger and SRH
recombination. a) Radiation recombination mechanism. [7] An
electron-hole pair recombine resulting in a photon.
b) Auger
recombination mechanism [7]. An electron-hole pair recombine,
the excess of energy is transferred to a third charge carrier to
ﬁnally release the energy in form of phonons. c) SRH recombi-
nation mechanism. Figure modiﬁed from [7]. Electron-hole pairs
move to the valence and conduction band respectively through an
intermediate energy state there the recombine. These phenom-
ena take place mainly in the surface due to the larger amount of
defects.
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Recombination
21
energy in form of phonons to return to a near energy band edge. The Schematic
of this process mechanism is shown in Figure 2.15b.
Since this process involves three carriers, the recombination rate varies as the
square of one of the carrier types. The Auger recombination is expressed as:
UAuger = BAuger,p(n2p −n2
0p0)
(2.7)
when two electrons are involved, BAuger,p(cm6/s) is the hole Auger recombina-
tion coeﬃcient and,
UAuger = BAuger,n(p2n −p2
0n0)
(2.8)
for two holes where BAuger,n(cm6/s) is the electron Auger recombination coef-
ﬁcient.
The net Auger recombination of electrons and holes is determined by the sum
of equations 2.7 and 2.8. In indirect bandgap materials, these processes are
dominant recombination paths because in Auger processes, carriers are able to
conserve momentum.
Shockley-Read-Hall recombination takes place due to impurities and/or the crys-
tallographic imperfections. These impurities and dislocations create new energy
levels in the bandgap forming non-radiative traps. In these traps, higher energy
is needed to move a carrier to the valence or conduction band than the char-
acteristic thermal energy. Non-radiative or SRH recombination occurs at those
sites. The process starts with the transition of an electron or a hole moving
to the intermediate energy level, followed by the recombination of the EHP in
this state. This recombination process is often non-radiative and the captured
energies are further emitted as phonons. A schematic mechanism of this process
is shown in Figure 2.15c.
The net rate of electron capture is given by the equation:
dnt
dt = n(Nt −nt)Bn −nNcBne−(Ec−Et)/kT
(2.9)
The ﬁrst term is the recombination equation as discussed before for n electrons
in the conduction band and (Nt −nt) unﬁlled trap sites. The second term refers
to the thermal emission of carriers back to the conduction band and Bn is the
electron capture coeﬃcient.
==PAGE:32==
22
Theory and Fabrication Techniques
As for hole capture:
d(Nt −nt)
dt
= pntBp −(Nt −nt)NvBpe−(Et−Ev)/kT
(2.10)
Where Bp is the hole capture coeﬃcient, the ﬁrst term determines the cap-
ture of holes into ﬁlled trap states and the second term shows the thermal
emission of holes into the valence band. In crystalline silicon, the main recom-
bination process depends on the carrier injection, for very high carrier injection
10−17cm−3 Auger recombination dominates, and for low and medium carrier
injection 10−13 −10−17cm−3 SRH recombination dominates.
2.4.1
Lifetime
Because of recombination, a photogenerated carrier does not "survive" for long
time in its band. When the photogenerated minority carriers (∆n in cm−3) are
produced and the light source is switched oﬀ, the charge carriers vanish after a
mean lifetime τ [5]. The excess minority carrier lifetime τ is the average time
(in s) that a photogenerated carrier exist before they recombine at a rate R
((cm−3s−1).
τ(∆n) = ∆n(t)
R(t)
(2.11)
The total recombination in a material is expressed as the eﬀective carrier life-
time. This is the average lifetime of the entire structure where the generation
rate G(t) and R(t) is taken into consideration.
∂
∂t∆n(t) = G(t) −R(∆n)
(2.12)
Therefore, equation 2.11 and 2.12 results in the eﬀective lifetime:
τeff(∆n) =
∆n(t)
G(t) −∂
∂t∆n(t)
(2.13)
To measure carrier densities and the generation rate a contact-less probing tech-
nique is used to measure the lifetime. By measuring the photoconductance of a
semiconductor it is possible to calculate the excess minority carrier, this tech-
nique relies in the use of a photon ﬂux from an illumination source and a refer-
ence photodetector [7]. Speciﬁcally in microwave detected photoconductivity, a
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Recombination
23
microwave of 10 GHz is generated and split into a reference and the test sample.
The microwave absorption by excess charge carriers is detected.
Figure 2.16: Signal example of lifetime measurements by photoconductivity
method. Obtained from [24].
In Figure 2.16 an example of photoconductivity measurement during the mea-
surement is presented. Under transient conditions the generation rate changes
within the time frame of lifetime. The lifetime τeff(t) can be extracted by ﬁtting
the equation to the measured data.
2.4.2
Passivation
Defects or impurities in the surface of a semiconductor increases recombination
eﬀects. The surface of the solar cell is basically a severe disruption of the crystal
lattice and the dangling bonds are those that cause a high local recombination
rate. The reduction of surface recombination is known as surface passivation
and can be obtained by two methods: ﬁrst, a chemical passivation is achieved
by reducing the number of interface states and secondly, ﬁeld eﬀect passivation
is obtained by reducing the concentration of one carrier at the surface of the
semiconductor [25].
The ﬁrst method consists on forming a thin layer of a diﬀerent material with a
wide-bandgap to bind the free surface electrons to the atoms within this new
layer and form new bonds. Additional dangling bonds from the new surface can
be passivated with hydrogen atoms by annealing the samples under hydrogen
atmosphere. The thin passivation layer may be a dielectric material such as
Al2O3, SiO2 and SiNx or a diﬀerent type of semiconductor. This is the method
approached in this project for the front face of the devices and is usually re-
ferred as chemical passivation. It has been demonstrated that the eﬃciency of
==PAGE:34==
24
Theory and Fabrication Techniques
solar cells is improved with surface passivation [26] along with an antireﬂective
coating.
For passivation in black silicon, a thin ﬁlm of Al2O3 by atomic layer deposition
(ALD) is the best choice against other materials such as SiNx and SiO2. By
depositing Al2O3 with ALD, the surface is ﬁnely covered following the topology
of the structure. Aluminum oxide is a good passivation due to the strong bond
formed between Si and O from Al2O3. This passivation layer needs to be capped
with an antireﬂective coating such as SiNx, which has a second advantage as it
also works as a passivation coating by attaching hydrogen to the surface during
annealing [27].
For boron-doped emitters, aluminum oxide is also an eﬃcient layer due to its
high ﬁxed negative charge density and its low density of interface defects. More-
over, Al2O3 shows no absorption in the wavelenght range relevant for c-Si unlike
SiNx. Al2O3 brings a lot of beneﬁts for a n-type base solar cell [7].
2.4.2.1
Passivated Contacts
Metal contacts are essential for extracting the generated power from a solar
cell. However, the direct contact of a metal to a semiconductor leads to an
enormous depletion of the minority carriers due to a continuous defect distribu-
tion in the semiconductor band-gap. To reduce the recombination rate in the
metal/semiconductor interface a highly doped region is introduced in order to
reduce the number of minority carriers at the interface and therefore reduce the
recombination rate.
To obtain good passivated contacts with high eﬃciency it is needed ﬁrstly, a good
interface passivation, secondly, an eﬃcient doping on the layers to maintain the
quasi Fermi level separation in c-Si and thirdly, an eﬃcient majority carrier
transport. Good contacts should be able to extract one type of charge carrier
with low resistance and also avoid recombination with the other charge carrier.
This can be accomplished by enhancing the carrier density of one type and
reducing it in the other type.
Carrier-selective contacts enhance the eﬃciency of crystalline silicon solar cells.
A poly-Si/SiOx design reduces the parasitic absorption of carriers and has
been shown to signiﬁcantly reduce the surface recombination at the metal-
semiconductor interface. The thin ﬁlm of silicon oxide works as an insulator
which reduces the interface traps and the poly-Si is highly doped to reduce the
number of minority carriers. Similar designs have demonstrated great potential
where ∼25% eﬃciency has been achieved [28].
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Recombination
25
The use of a thin oxide layer and doped polycrystalline silicon (poly-Si) forms
low recombination junctions and therefore, is a good candidate for creating
passivated contacts for crystalline silicon solar cells. Even though SiO2 is an
insulator, it is not a high obstacle when it is suﬃciently thin to allow electrons
or holes to tunnel through the barrier.
A metal is characterized by the chemical potential of its electrons. The total
value of the chemical potential is known as the work function of the metal.
Metals with a small work function are favorable for the exchange of electrons
for n-type semiconductors, these are called ohmic contacts. Metals with a large
work function make good ohmic contacts to p-type semiconductors. In Table 2.1
the work functions of common semiconductors and metals are shown. Silver,
aluminum and titanium are metals which can work as metal contacts for an
n-type Si wafer.
Table 2.1: Work functions of common semiconductors and metals. Data ob-
tained from [5] [29].
Si
Ag
Al
Ti
Au
Pt
<100>
Work function
4,91
4,26
4,28
4,33
5,10
5,65
(eV)
A stack of Al is used to create full back contact to ensure that most light is
totally reﬂected and not absorbed by the rear metalization.
==PAGE:36==
26
Theory and Fabrication Techniques
2.5
Characterization of Solar Cells
2.5.1
Quantum Eﬃciency
Quantum Eﬃciency (QE) is a technique that expresses the performance of the
solar cell by obtaining the ratio of the number of carriers absorbed by the solar
cell and the wavelength of the incident photon ﬂux as presented in Eq. 2.14. The
obtained information is referred also as External Quantum Eﬃciency (EQE).
QE = Ncharges
Nphotons
=
I/e
Pin/Ephoton
(2.14)
In this equation, I is the generated current, e is the charge of an electron, Pin
is the power of the incoming light and Ephoton is the photon energy at the given
wavelength.
The ideal eﬃciency results when all the photons in a certain wavelength are
absorbed and the minority carriers generated are collected. The ideal QE reaches
100 % and it is only limited by the semiconductor bandgap. For most solar cells,
the QE is reduced due to recombination eﬀects. An example of an ideal QE and
a reduced one are shown in ﬁg 2.17. External quantum eﬃciency of silicon solar
cells takes into account the eﬀect of optical losses like reﬂection and transmission.
Meanwhile, the internal QE deals with photons that are absorbed by the solar
cell, not those transmitted nor reﬂected.
The same mechanisms of recombination aﬀect the quantum eﬃciency.
The
wavelength where the QE is aﬀected is due to recombination processes taking
place in diﬀerent parts of the solar cell. In the front surface, shorter wavelengths
are absorbed (400-700 nm), therefore with high front surface recombination
the quantum eﬃciency will be aﬀected and reduced.
Likewise, in the bulk,
wavelengths from 600-750 nm are absorbed, while in the rear part of the device,
wavelengths at near IR (750 - 1100 nm) are absorbed or recombined.
With
quantum eﬃciency measurements it is possible to estimate which mechanisms
are reducing the eﬃciency of the solar cell.
2.5.2
IV Curves
The IV measurements show the relationship between the output current and
voltage of a device at speciﬁc conditions of illumination and temperature. These
measurements are obtained using a light source to simulate natural sunlight
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Characterization of Solar Cells
27
Figure 2.17: Quantum Eﬃciency plot. The black curve shows the ideal quan-
tum eﬃciency one can obtain from a solar cell, but usually re-
combination process make an impact on QE reducing its value.
The region where the QE is reduced is related to a wavelength
where recombination processes take place. In the front surface
wavelengths from 400 -700 nm are involved, in the bulk from 600
-750 nm and in the rear surface wavelengths from 750- 1100 nm.
The QE is limited until it is reached the bandgap value.
==PAGE:38==
28
Theory and Fabrication Techniques
while maintaining a constant cell temperature and electronic setup to vary the
load and measure current and voltage from the cell. The equation for the IV
curve for the ideal solar cell is as follows:
I = IL −Io exp
 qV
nkT

(2.15)
The characteristic IV curve is shown in ﬁgure 2.18, from which two characteristic
values can be extracted: Open circuit voltage (Voc) and short circuit current
(Isc). The open circuit voltage is the maximum voltage value the cell will supply
with resistance ≃∞Ω, while the short circuit current of the solar cells is the
maximum current value the solar cell will be able to produce with resistance
≃0 Ω. The power of the solar cell is obtained by the product of these two
values, therefore the point where the solar cell would perform best is at its
maximum power point (PMP P ). The maximum power point is usually located
in the "knee" of the IV curve as shown in the previous ﬁgure, and therefore the
IV curves provide information to set a solar system to work close to its optimal
peak power point.
The value linking PMP P , Voc and Isc is called the Fill Factor (FF), which is
used as a parameter of quality for solar cells.
FF = PMP P
Voc · Isc
(2.16)
From the IV curves power conversion eﬃciency is also obtained and it is
the most important value as it describes the general eﬃciency of the device.
The eﬃciency (η) is the ratio of the generated power and the incoming power
as described in the next equation:
η = Pout
Pin
= Voc · Isc · FF
Pin
(2.17)
where, Pin expresses the input power in terms of the area of the cell and the
solar radiation.
When the IV curves are obtained, the illumination might suﬀer from small
ﬂuctuations in the light intensity and thus add a considerable amount of noise
to the system. In dark IV measurements, carriers are injected into the circuit
with electrical means instead of light generated carriers as in the illuminated
measurement.
When a solar cell is measured in the darkness, the device is
==PAGE:39==
2.5 Characterization of Solar Cells
29
Figure 2.18: Representation of a standard IV curve where the maximum power
point is where the max Voc and the max Isc intersect, which is
also the FF which is a parameter of quality for solar cells.
studied as a diode and, in addition to obtaining a performance approximation
of the solar cell, it is also possible to have the series and shunt resistance of the
device.
In a solar cell there are two types of resistance: series resistance (RS) and shunt
resistance (RSH). The ideal solar cell must have a high RSH value and a low
RS and both of these parameters can be extracted from the IV curves. In a
qualitative way, a ﬂat IV curve near the Isc indicates that there is no signiﬁcant
shunting. A method to calculate the series resistance is by obtaining the inverse
of the slope near the Voc value [30].
In presence of both shunt and series resistance, by convention, the IV curve is
the solar cell is given by equation 2.18 and the solar cell circuit with parasitic
resistances is shown in Figure 2.19
I = IL −Io exp
q(V + IRS)
nkT

−V + IRS
RSH
(2.18)
==PAGE:40==
30
Theory and Fabrication Techniques
Figure 2.19: Representation of a solar cell circuit with parasitic resistances
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3
Experimental Methods
In section 2.1, the most common industrial design of solar cell was presented,
however, the continuous search for improvement and acquiring higher eﬃciencies
in solar cells has led to a wide variety of designs.
In this work, optimized solar cell devices have been created with the particular
aim to test a new BSi texturing in contrast with wet etch pyramid texturing and
planar wafers. To obtain BSi, the substrate has been nanostructured within 3
minutes via reactive ion etch avoiding the use of platen power, which reduces
the damage of the sunward face of the substrate.
A high-eﬃciency solar cell must have a transparent front side and an eﬃcient
light-trapping scheme, thus enhancing the optical path length within the ab-
sorber by several orders of magnitude. Therefore, a passivation and antireﬂect-
ing stack of Al2O3/SiNx in the sunward face is deposited. The full rear contact
is passivated with an ultra thin SiOx layer and a heavily doped poly-silicon ﬁlm.
Finally, the front contact has an busbar with 25 ﬁngers made of aluminum.
A cross-section of the designed solar cell studied in this project is presented in
Figure 3.1. In this chapter, the process to obtain the complete structure and
the preliminary tests to create an optimized solar cell are described. The theory
behind some of the experimental steps are presented in Appendix A.
==PAGE:42==
32
Experimental Methods
Figure 3.1: Cross section of the designed solar cell.
3.1
Process Flow
All the solar cells are made using 100 mm double-side polished n-type silicon
wafers with 350 µm thickness and resistivity between 1-20 Ωcm.
3.1.1
Front texture
Figure 3.2: Substrate crosssection
after nanostructuring.
To create BSi, the substrate was dry-
etched by using an inductively coupled
plasma (ICP) metal etcher from SPTS
with a SF6 - O2 plasma. The SF6 and O2
gas ﬂows were 74 sccm and 76 sccm re-
spectively. During processing, the cham-
ber was kept at 0 °C and 24 mTorr. The
coil power was set at 1500 W and no
platen power was used. After texturing,
the wafers were cleaned using a standard
RCA procedure where the ﬁnal HF dip was omitted in order to keep a chemically
grown SiO2 layer.
BSi is compared with planar wafers without any process and also they are com-
pared with the industrial wet etch. KOH etching is performed in a solution of
2% KOH, 5% IPA at 80 °C for 50 minutes with continuous stirring. KOH wet
etch produces very mechanically unstable substrates. Therefore, the wafer is
protected on both sides with 100 nm of SiNx deposited with PECVD and it was
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Process Flow
33
opened a 25 cm2 square in the center of the wafer using UV lithography with
further dry etch to later perform the wet etch previously mentioned.
3.1.2
Emitter
Figure 3.3: Substrate
cross
sec-
tion after BSG deposi-
tion and annealing at
900°C.
A selective p-type emitter was obtained
through thermal diﬀusion from borosili-
cate glass (BSG) in n-type wafers. The
glass was deposited in the substrate with
a Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor De-
position (PECVD) MP0692 tool from
SPTS Multiplex using borine (B2H6),
silane (SiH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) as
precursors. After depositing the glass, the
samples were introduced to a Tempress
furnace at 900 °C for 30 minutes under a
N2 environment to perform the thermal
diﬀusion of boron and form the p-doped emitter.
3.1.3
Rear contact passivation
Figure 3.4: Substrate cross section af-
ter n-Poly Si deposition .
The wafers were cleaned according to
the RCA cleaning procedure.
After
the ﬁnal HF dip, the wafers were im-
mersed into a solution of Nitric acid
at 95 °C for 10 minutes to form 1-2 nm
of SiO2. Later, to deposit 40 nm of n-
poly Si, the wafers are loaded into an
Low pressure chemical vapor deposi-
tion (LPCVD) furnace for 30 min at
620 °C. The process pressure is main-
tained between 200-250 mTorr using
SiH4 and PH3 as precursors with gas
ﬂows of 80 and 7 sccm respectively. The poly silicon is annealed at 850 °C for
20 min and, as it is deposited on both sides of the substrate, the poly silicon is
etched oﬀof the front surface in the next step.
Poly-Si and BSG Removal
==PAGE:44==
34
Experimental Methods
Figure 3.5: Substrate cross section af-
ter n-Poly Si and BSG
etch.
The poly-Si previously deposited on
the front face is dry-etched away using
Deep Reactive Ion Etching (DRIE)
Pegasus with 80 sccm ﬂow of SF6,
the coil power was set at 150 W and
the platen power was set at 5 W.
This etch is performed at 20 °C, it is
done with low power to etch slowly
through the poly-Si and avoid any
damage to the patterns in the struc-
ture. The BSG deposited in step 2 is
wet etched by immersing the samples
in a buﬀered HF solution until the glass was completely removed.
3.1.4
Passivation layer
Figure 3.6: Substrate cross section af-
ter Passivation and antire-
ﬂecting coating.
The samples were passivated in the
sunward face with 35 nm of Al2O3 by
atomic layer deposition (ALD) using
a ALD R200 tool from Picosun. The
oxide was deposited on the samples
with alternating cycles of trimethyla-
luminum (TMA) and water as precur-
sors.
3.1.5
Antireﬂecting
coat-
ing layer
The antireﬂecting coating was de-
posited with PECVD using SiH4,
NH3, and N2 as precursors. It is used a mixed frequency power at 20 W for
7.5 min. The samples were further annealed for 15 min at 400 °C under an N2
environment.
3.1.6
Front contact design
To obtain metal contacting patterns, a 2 µm negative resist was placed on top of
the SiNx antireﬂective coating. The resist was exposed for 8,6 s at 13 mW/cm2.
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Process Flow
35
The design was developed and then the ARC was etched away with an Advanced
Oxide Etcher (AOE) 32843 from Multiplex using He and CF4 with gas ﬂow of
174 and 40 sccm respectively. The coil power was set at 1300 W and the platen
power was set at 350 W to etch through the SiNx. Later, the samples were
immersed in a buﬀered HF solution until the Al2O3 layer was completely etched
away for further deposition of the metal stack on top of the emitter.
Figure 3.7: Implemented UV lithography to etch through ARC and PC for
further deposition of metal contacts.
3.1.7
Front and back contact deposition
A layer of 500 nm Al is deposited using a Wordentec QCL 800 via e-beam
deposition in the front and back surface of the device. The resist previously
placed in the front surface is then removed by lift-oﬀimmersing the samples
a solution of Remover 1165 (solution of 90 % 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone) under
sonication until the mask is fully removed.
Figure 3.8: After the deposition of the metal contacts, the front grid is formed
after performing lift-oﬀto remove the resist.
==PAGE:46==
36
Experimental Methods
3.2
Characterization
3.2.1
Lifetime
In the preliminary studies, lifetime measurements were obtained to determine
diﬀerences in the quality of black silicon etched in diﬀerent conditions described
in section 4.1.1.
The measurements were obtained using a Lifetime scanner
MDPmap made by Freiberg Instruments with a Laser with 200 µW pulse power
at 977 nm with a spot diameter of 2 mm.
3.2.2
Reﬂectance
In order to characterize the optical properties of the solar cell surfaces, the
reﬂectance was measured using an integrating sphere with a QEXL Solar Cell
Quantum Eﬃciency equipment from PV Measurements.
The measurements
were made from 300 - 1100 nm in increasing values of 10 nm.
3.2.3
IV Curves
The power conversion eﬃciency obtained from IV Curves was measured using a
sunlight simulator. The solar cell was contacted from the back contact through a
conducting metal plate and two micromanipulators were contacted on the front
busbar. The IV curves were measured by applying voltages ranging from -0,7
V to 0,7 V in steps of 29 mV and light intensity was adjusted at 950 W/m2.
3.2.4
Quantum eﬃciency
The quantum eﬃciency of the solar cells was obtained using a QEXL Solar
Cell Quantum Eﬃciency equipment from PV Measurements. The equipment is
calibrated by scanning a reference photodiode. The measurements were made
from 300 - 1100 nm in increasing values of 10 nm placing the light beam in an
area that represents the whole solar cell and making contact on the busbar and
the back contact of the solar cell.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Preliminary Studies
A series of preliminary tests were made to optimize the structure of the solar
cells by means of obtaining the lifetime after varying the ARC thickness and
measure the sheet resistance to obtain the resistivity to control the doping level
of the emitter.
4.1.1
Thermal contact in RIE
Black Silicon nanostroctures were dry-etched by using an inductively coupled
plasma (ICP) metal etcher from SPTS with the parameters mentioned in sub-
section 3.1.1 on the previous chapter. This equipment is meant to process 150
mm wafers therefore, for processing 100 mm wafers, two diﬀerent materials
were tested to assure the thermal contact between the carrier and the substrate:
Crystal Bond and Fomblin oil.
The materials used for adhesion must have a good thermal contact to allow
the substrate process at 0 °C. Crystal Bond is a thermoplastic polymer used
==PAGE:48==
38
Results and Discussion
as a temporary adhesive that can be washed away with water after machining.
Fomblin oil is speciﬁed to meet semiconductors to be chemical inert.
Both materials were used to produce nanostructures in a silicon substrate ob-
taining the lifetime presented in the following Figure.
Figure 4.1: Diﬀerent ﬁxing materials were tested to enhance the thermal con-
tact to produce nanostructures through RIE. Fomblin Oil and
Crystal Bond allow the formation of nanostructures with similar
lifetime of 2 ms.
Both materials allowed the production of black Silicon of a lifetime around 2
ms (Figure 4.1). As both materials allow the formation of black silicon and the
lifetime was similar, Crystal Bond is preferred in this project due to its solubility
in water and ease of use.
4.1.2
Passivation and Antireﬂecting Coating
Symmetrical and asymmetrical samples were prepared. A stack of Al2O3 and
an ARC of SiNx were deposited on double-side polished, 350 µm thick n-type Si
wafers. The Al2O3 passivation layer was deposited by atomic layer deposition
by alternating steps of TMA and water at 200 °C. The SiNx layer is later grown
by plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition at 300 °C.
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Preliminary Studies
39
The thickness of the Al2O3 passivation layer is maintained constant at 30 nm
while the SiNx ARC thickness was varied at 40, 60 and 80 nm. The impact
of annealing before and/or after the deposition was studied along the ARC
thickness by means of the lifetime. The result of these measurements are shown
in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: The table shows the obtained lifetime for diﬀerent thickness of c-
Si samples passivated by Al2O3 or Al2O3/SiNx stacks after the
successive processing steps.
Annealing
Annealing
Annealing
Annealing
Thickness
Pre-SiNx
Post-SiNx
Pre + Post SiNx
No Annealing
Sample
of SiNx
τeff
SD
τeff
SD
τeff
SD
τeff
SD
(nm)
(ms)
(ms)
(ms)
(ms)
(ms)
(ms)
(ms)
(ms)
Symmetric
Al2O3
-
-
-
3,42
0,47
-
-
-
-
(A)Al2O3/SiNx
40
2,23
0,32
3,73
0,46
3,38
0,46
-
-
(B)Al2O3/SiNx
60
2,62
0,29
4,50
0,53
4,34
0,49
-
-
Asymmetric
(C)Al2O3/SiNx
80
2,86
0,30
4,40
0,45
4,48
0,49
-
-
(D)Al2O3/SiNx
40
2,61
0,56
4,19
0,45
4,00
0,77
0,49
0,03
(E)Al2O3/SiNx
60
2,68
0,21
4,45
0,87
4,61
0,76
0,58
0,04
Symmetric
(F)Al2O3/SiNx
80
3,82
0,40
4,62
0,61
4,68
0,60
0,71
0,03
(a) Lifetime of Si wafer after symmetric
passivation with Al2O3 and capping
with SiNx
(b) Lifetime of Si wafer after asymmet-
ric passivation with Al2O3 and cap-
ping with SiNx
Figure 4.2: The eﬀect of annealing in diﬀerent stages of SiNx deposition with
diﬀerent thicknesses (40, 60, 80 nm) is presented through the
achieved lifetime.
The lifetime of a reference wafer with only a passivation layer of Al2O3 was
measured to see the eﬀect SiNx has over the devices. From the previous table it
can be seen that the values obtained for only Al2O3 are lower because SiNx works
as an extra passivation layer. The free electrons in the surface of the ARC bond
with hydrogen during the annealing thus the carrier lifetime increases comparing
the results from having only Al2O3.
==PAGE:50==
40
Results and Discussion
Samples D-F have a slightly lower lifetime than those which have an asymmetric
arrangement A-C. In theory, the lifetime is expected to be higher when there is
an ARC on both sides of the Si wafer due to the properties the coating confers
to the device to reduce the recombination.
Furthermore, with increasing thickness of the SiNx layer from 40 to 60 nm
a higher carrier lifetime is achieved as seen in Figure 4.2. However, when the
thickness increased from 60 nm to 80 nm, lifetime shows no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
considering the deviation bars in both cases through samples A-F.
The eﬀect of annealing the samples in the diﬀerent stages of the SiNx deposition
is presented in Table 4.1. In samples D-F a signiﬁcant lower lifetime is presented
where no annealing is performed through the stack deposition. When only pre-
capping annealing was performed, samples A-F show a lifetime increase, but
these are outperformed by samples annealed post capping and both pre+post
capping obtaining similar lifetime values.
The optical properties of a whole solar cell might be compromised when using
a very thick layer to passivate the surface. A layer of 40 and 60 nm annealed
after the ARC deposition were tested to create full solar cells.
4.1.3
Doping Level
Borosilicate glass (BSG) formation was carried out for the n-type Si with the aim
to ﬁnd the appropriate doping level to create a p-doped emitter through sheet
resistance measurements.
BSG was deposited through PECVD with silane,
nitrous oxide and borine as precursors. The doping level control is important
to avoid highly doped emitters, the presence of this would have a signiﬁcant
increase in the Auger recombination and therefore a negative eﬀect in the carrier
lifetime.
The emitter formation was studied over a set of two experiments varying: i)
borine gas ﬂow in PECVD deposition and ii) annealing time and temperature.
For both experiments the gas ﬂow of silane and nitrous oxide was ﬁxed on 1600
and 17 sccm respectively.
For the ﬁrst experiment, the B2H6 ﬂow was changed at 140, 210 and 280 sccm,
the samples were further annealed at 1000 °C for 50 minutes. The results of this
process is presented in Figure 4.3a. In the plot is presented an increase in the
sheet resistance when the ﬂow is modiﬁed from 140 to 210 sccm and followed
by no change as it is increased to 280 sccm. To have eﬃcient solar cells the
aim was to achieve between 60-140 Ω/sq. Therefore, further experiments were
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Preliminary Studies
41
(a) Emitter sheet resistance results when the gas ﬂow of
borine is varied at values of 140, 210 and 280 sccm.
When there is a higher sheet resistance the level of
doping is lower.
(b) The boron diﬀusion into the Si wafer increases with
increasing temperature. When a sample is annealed
at higher temperatures, the level of doping increases
and therefore the sheet resistance decreases
Figure 4.3: Results of two experiments that show the eﬀect of the modiﬁcation
of the gas ﬂow of Borine during the deposition of BSG and the
eﬀects of annealing temperature to the boron diﬀusion into the
sample.
==PAGE:52==
42
Results and Discussion
ﬁxed at 140 sccm of borine, because instability of the PECVD equipment when
processing at higher gas ﬂows.
The variation on annealing time and temperature experiments were made main-
tining 140 sccm of borine and to obtain the target sheet resistance between 50
and 200 Ω/sq the annealing temperature was varied between 900-1000 °C for
30 and 50 minutes. As shown in Figure 4.3b, the diﬀusion of doping into the
wafer to have an optimal doping was achieved at the lowest value of time and
temperature, therefore this parameters were used to build a complete solar cell
(140 sccm of B2H6, 30 min, 900 °C).
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Solar cells
43
4.2
Solar cells
The built solar cells, shown in Figure 4.4, are varied in front texturing with black
silicon (BSi), ﬂat surfaces (F) and wet etched textured with pyramids formed
with wet etch (KOH). With the preliminary tests reported in sections 4.1.3 and
4.1.2, it was determined that a thickness of 40 and 60 nm of SiNx was going to
be tested for the ﬁnal devices while maintaining constant the back design of the
cell. The solar cells have a total area of 6 cm2. The dimensions of the busbar is
0,13 cm x 2,4 cm, the ﬁngers dimensions are 21 µm x 1,2 cm. From this point
the tested devices will be referred to as their front texture with a sub index
indicating the thickness of the ARC used in the solar cell in question.
(a) BSi40
(b) KOH40
(c) F40
(d) BSi60
(e) KOH60
(f) F60
Figure 4.4: Solar cells with front texturing of (a) Black silicon and 40 nm of
SiNx as ARC, b) Wet etched silicon and 40 nm of SiNx as ARC ,
(c) Flat and polished front texture and 40 nm of SiNx as ARC, (d)
Black silicon and 60 nm of SiNx as ARC, (e) Wet etched silicon
and 60 nm of SiNx as ARC, (f) Flat and polished front texture
and 60 nm of SiNx as ARC.
Characterization of the solar cell devices are made to obtain their performance
by means of their reﬂectance, quantum eﬃciency and IV-Characteristics with
their respective power conversion eﬃciency.
==PAGE:54==
44
Results and Discussion
4.3
Reﬂectance
Reﬂection losses is one of the signiﬁcant losses for solar cells and therefore,
micro-texturing of silicon along with an ARC has become a widely used method
to reduce this reﬂection losses. Reﬂectance measurements were obtained from
the full cell, including metal busbars and ﬁngers in the range of 300 - 1100 nm
to study the test devices; the resulting curves are presented in Figure 4.5.
In the ﬁgure, it is possible to see how the solar cell behaves along the study
wavelength range. In wavelengths 300 - 500 nm, textured solar cells present a
very signiﬁcant drop in its reﬂectance with values lower than 25 % for KOH
textured and below 20 % for black silicon. This high reﬂectance values for black
silicon are due to the metal grid present, otherwise the reﬂectance would be, in
most of the range, below 5 %.
Reﬂectance with black silicon presents values below 6 % in the range of 340 - 930
nm with both thicknesses of ARC. In the same range, reﬂectance for KOH40
and KOH60 is below 9 %.
The combination of texturing and antireﬂecting
coating signiﬁcantly lowers the reﬂection.
In ﬂat surface, it is possible to see a a dip in reﬂection at 590 nm, this dip is
shifted to longer wavelengths with increasing thickness of antireﬂecting coat-
ing. The combination of a textured substrate and an appropriate antireﬂecting
coating decreases not only light reﬂection but also enables the transmission of
a wider energy range.
At 1100 nm, KOH textured wafers have the lowest reﬂection with values of 26
% with 60 nm of ARC and 16 % with 40 nm ARC. The reason why black silicon
is not that eﬃcient to reduce the reﬂection of long wavelengths is because the
structures in the substrate are much smaller than those present when textured
with KOH. In this way, BSi has a very high reﬂection of long wavelengths
behaving similar to a ﬂat surface.
The thickness of the antireﬂecting coating marks a diﬀerence in the reﬂection
between solar cells, when an antireﬂecting coating is placed in the interface of
the medium and the substrate, it is usually covered a broader range of the solar
spectrum but if the ARC is too thick, some of the incoming energy might be
absorbed by the same ARC and not by the substrate, thus is important to test
the thickness with other studies diﬀerent from reﬂectance. For the test devices
with three types of texturing, a thickness of 40 nm of SiNx lowers the reﬂection
in most of the wavelengths below those with 60 nm of SiNx.
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Reﬂectance
45
Figure 4.5: Graph showing the reﬂectance as a function of the wavelength for
the diﬀerent test devices. Black silicon shows the lowest reﬂectance
at values lower than 6 % along wavelengths 300-930 nm.
==PAGE:56==
46
Results and Discussion
4.4
Quantum eﬃciency
The quantum eﬃciency of the solar cells were obtained in the range of 300 to
1100 nm, which is the active part of the spectrum for silicon photovoltaics. The
reference measurement was performed on a calibrated silicon photodiode. As
mentioned earlier, the solar cells’ front faces were varied and studied, varying
the front surface texture and the thickness of the antireﬂecting coating. For the
quantum eﬃciency measurements 12 solar cells were studied within the same
front texture and ARC thickness; the QE results in this section represent the
average of these measurements.
Figure 4.6a present´s the external QE of the devices with 40 nm of SiNx. The
curve of the BSi device shows a strong drop of quantum eﬃciency in wave-
lengths from 300 to 680 nm. The low QE of shorter wavelengths represents a
faster recombination in the front surface because shorter wavelengths are mainly
absorbed at the surface. Black silicon is formed with nanostructures with uneven
surfaces within the each heap, this could be the reason why a higher amount of
recombination takes place in this front texture as compared with the ﬂat and the
pyramids in the front surface. The ﬂat surface has an undamaged front face and
the pyramids are formed following the crystal structure of silicon, and therefore
there is no signiﬁcant increase in the recombination in the front surface.
From 680 to 1100, nm black silicon shows a better performance in this wave-
length range, this possibly due to the light trapping properties BSi possess.
Black silicon loses a lot of QE for the short wavelengths but can be seen in
Figure B.1 in appendix B, the irradiance of the sun varies along the active
wavelength range of Si, showing that there is a higher amount of photons at
larger wavelengths.
At long wavelengths, the QE curves show a negative slope, this could be due to
possible ineﬃciency of carrier collection at the back surface.
In Figure 4.6b, the external quantum eﬃciency of the devices with a thicker
antireﬂecting coating (60 nm) and diﬀerent front textures is presented. These
curves have a similar behaviour as those presented in Figure 4.6a, where a solar
cells with black silicon present a lower quantum eﬃciency in short wavelengths.
Again, this is expected due the nanostructures in BSi with possible higher sur-
face recombination. With this thickness, ﬂat substrates show the highest quan-
tum eﬃciency, this phenomena is explained by looking at ﬁgure 4.5 where the
reﬂection of solar cells with ﬂat surface and ARC of 60 nm is almost as low as
KOH-etched solar cells. Flat surfaces have less defects in its surface and there-
fore QE is higher as the recombination is lower. In Figure 4.7 is presented the
curves of quantum eﬃciency of solar cells with black silicon. Two thicknesses
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Quantum eﬃciency
47
(a) Quantum eﬃciency of solar cells with 40 nm ARC
(b) Quantum eﬃciency of solar cells with 60 nm ARC
Figure 4.6: Graphs showing the external quantum eﬃciency in % as a function
of the wavelength in nm for the diﬀerent devices with ARC of (a)
60 nm and (b) 40 nm of SiNx.
The shaded areas correspond
to the standard deviation between measurements of 12 diﬀerent
devices. The measurements show a visible drop on the QE of short
wavelengths for the BSi40 and BSi60, due to the nanostructures
that enable having a higher front surface recombination.
==PAGE:58==
48
Results and Discussion
of ARC are compared but there is no signiﬁcant change in the eﬀect the antire-
ﬂecting coating has. Figure 4.2 presents the lifetime of the diﬀerent thickness of
antireﬂecting coating has a value of ∼1 ms, which does not make a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence in the quantum eﬃciency.
Figure 4.7: Graph showing the external quantum eﬃciency in % as a function
of the wavelength in nm for devices with black silicon as front
texture and ARC of 40 and 60 nm of SiNx. The measurements do
not show a visible diﬀerence with diﬀerent thickness of ARC.
4.4.1
Reﬂectance and QE
Reﬂectance measurements of the devices were obtained to further study the
behaviour of the devices regarding the QE. In Figure 4.8, all the curves of QE
and 100% - Reﬂectance of the solar cells are presented with their dependence
on wavelength.
When the quantum eﬃciency reaches the same height as the reﬂectance curve
it is possible to say that the device does not present any optical losses.
The tested solar cells with ﬂat surface reach this level in wavelengths from 560
- 630 for 40 nm of SiNx and from 620 - 790 nm for 60 nm of SiNx. It was
previously mentioned that the negative slope starting from 600 nm could be
==PAGE:59==
4.5 Comparing JSC from QE and IV measurements.
49
due to a defective back contact. However can be partially ruled out since the
reﬂectance behaviour of the device shows the same tendency.
Although the
two curves have this negative slope, the curves are not totally parallel and they
present a heavy drop at long wavelengths and therefore, it is possible to say that
the back contact is not fully optimized to recover a higher amount of carriers.
In general, the QE has a behavior that follows the optical properties of the
devices. The devices with ﬂat surface, like those textured with KOH, follow
the same trend.
In the graphs it can be seen that those textured with BSi
have a strong diminution in small wavelengths, which is mainly due to the high
recombination in the black silicon surface or some damage in the bulk due to
the reactive ion etch.
4.5
Comparing JSC from QE and IV measure-
ments.
Values of JSC were obtained from the QE measurements through the integration
of the QE curve with the following equation:
Jsc = q
hc
Z 1000
300
λQE(λ)E(λ)dλ
(4.1)
and from the IV curves, presented in the next section, the ratio of ISC and the
device area is obtained. This data is calculated from the total area of the solar
cell and is presented in Table 4.2. Small variations between the obtained values
from the two diﬀerent experiments can be seen in this table. The diﬀerence in
values may be due to a scaling error if the measurement was performed in a
region that does not represent the the overall solar cell and from the diﬀerence
in the light intensity under the tests were performed. Small variations of the
measurements of QE and IV are therefore comparable for the tested solar cells.
==PAGE:60==
50
Results and Discussion
(a) F40
(b) F60
(c) KOH40
(d) KOH60
(e) BSi40
(f) BSi60
Figure 4.8: 100% - Reﬂectance measurements are graphed together with QE
curves to study optical properties with QE. QE curves follow the
same trend as their optical properties but there is a large diminu-
tion on QE on small wavelengths in devices textured with Black
Silicon.
==PAGE:61==
4.6 IV Curves
51
Table 4.2: Short circuit current density from QE and IV measurements for
tested solar cells.
IV
QE
IV
QE
Front
60 nm
40 nm
texture
Jsc (mA/cm2)
BSi
34,04
27,75
33,73
28,05
F
35,21
30,65
36,51
29,75
KOH
38,25
29,99
38,23
29,82
4.6
IV Curves
The power conversion measurements of the solar cells were performed under
the same conditions at 28 °C. In Figure 4.9b, the IV curves of devices with
ARC thickness of 60 nm are presented. From these curves the Voc values are
obtained; the highest Voc is obtained when the solar cell has a front texture
of KOH60 with a value of 0,593 V, followed by F60 with 0,589 V and BSi60
with 0,571 V. A diﬀerent tendency is shown in Figure 4.9a, the IV curve of F40
shows a reduction in the Voc; a reduction that could be due to the lack of an
RCA cleaning of the wafer before the production process starts in case there is
a contamination from the supplier that could aﬀect the Voc. It is important to
note that the obtained Voc of the BSi samples and the other textures does not
show a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between them even though in the QE results there
is very big drop in short wavelengths.
The short circuit current has the same tendency as the Voc, where KOH40,60 has
the highest Isc, and BSi40,60 the lowest. All the obtained values are presented
in Table 4.3.
The ﬁll factor, that the samples present in their IV Curves, is around 0,67 but
in the particular case of F40, the FF is reduced to a value of 0,59 due to this
cell having a lower open circuit voltage, this cell has.
From the IV curves, the eﬀect of shunt and series resistance can be obtained by
obtaining the inverse of the slope of the curve near the Isc and Voc respectively
[30].
Qualitatively, a ﬂat I-V curve near Isc indicates that the device does
not have signiﬁcant shunting as in the case of devices with BSi and KOH.
Whereas for curves of F40 and F60, a shunting of 38,87 Ωcm2 and 15,91 Ωcm2
is obtained. With low shunt resistance, there are power losses that could be
due to manufacturing defects and provoke power losses because it is created an
alternative current path.
==PAGE:62==
52
Results and Discussion
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: IV Curves of solar cells with diﬀerent front textures and ARC of
a) 40 nm and b) 60 nm. It is highlighted the PMP P .
The series resistance needs to be as low as possible in the device, in the test
devices resistance value was around 0,358 Ω. Series resistance can have three
sources: the movement of current through the emitter and the base of the solar
cell, the contact resistance between the metal contact and the silicon or the
resistance of the top and rear metal contacts. The series resistance has a high
impact on the ﬁll factor and very high values may also reduce the short circuit
current. In Table 4.3 all the values obtained from the test devices are presented.
A comparison of the IV curves presented by the solar cells with black silicon is
presented in Figure 4.10. In these IV curves, the Voc and Isc have no signiﬁcant
diﬀerence therefore the front texture has no eﬀect visible in the IV Curves. From
the IV curves measured, the values in Table 4.3 were extracted considering 6
cm2 as the area of the solar cell.
Table 4.3: Data obtained from the IV measurements of all the studied devices.
The measurements were performed at 95 mW/cm2.
Isc
Voc
MPP
FF
Pout
η
Shunt R.
Series R.
(A)
(V)
(W)
(%)
(mW/cm2)
(%)
(Ωcm2)
(Ωcm2)
BSi60
0,202
0,571
0,078
0,67
12,975
13,66
121,951
0,437
F60
0,220
0,589
0,086
0,66
14,337
15,09
38,865
0,284
KOH60
0,230
0,593
0,091
0,67
15,248
16,05
169,779
0,318
BSi40
0,204
0,560
0,077
0,67
12,810
13,48
136,986
0,370
F40
0,216
0,520
0,066
0,59
11,041
11,62
15,911
0,424
KOH40
0,230
0,570
0,088
0,67
14,596
15,36
92,937
0,314
==PAGE:63==
4.6 IV Curves
53
Figure 4.10: IV Curves of solar cells with BSi as front textures. The obtained
PMP P of the two devices is highlighted. The values obtained for
these two devices do not present signiﬁcant diﬀerences that can
be related to the front texturing.
The eﬃciency obtained for the solar cells is presented in Table 4.3. There is a
trend regarding the thickness of the ARC and the eﬃciency of the devices, as in
general, a higher eﬃciency is obtained with a thicker ARC of 60 nm. A thicker
ARC can have an impact on the optical properties of the device, which can
enable a higher absorption in the ARC and therefore reducing the amount of
light directly absorbed by the semiconductor. In regard to the front texturing,
KOH presents the highest eﬃciency followed by the ﬂat surface and black silicon.
With textured front surfaces a higher eﬃciency is obtained due less reﬂectance
and higher absorption of the light. Between KOH and BSi front texture, BSi
has a higher recombination due to its nanostructures. The eﬃciencies obtained
are presented in Figure 4.11.
The low value in eﬃciency of the F40 solar cell could be due to manufacturing
defects, but the low values in shunt resistance may be due to the natural SiO2
layer in the wafers. In textured devices, this layer is removed but in the ﬂat
wafers, this layer is kept through out the process. The removal of this layer
might be beneﬁcial to reduce the shunting in this devices.
==PAGE:64==
54
Results and Discussion
Figure 4.11: Power conversion eﬃciency obtained of the tested solar cells. The
obtained eﬃciency is higher when an ARC of 40 nm is placed and
a KOH front surface.
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
In this master thesis c-Si solar cells were developed to study the eﬀect of diﬀerent
front textures, focusing on black silicon and comparing it to the most industri-
ally used wet-etching method with KOH and with ﬂat polished Si wafers. All
the wafers were fabricated under the same conditions, varying only the ARC
thickness between 40 and 60 nm.
The eﬀect of the front textures was very visible in the obtained reﬂectance where
the textured surfaces signiﬁcantly reduce the percentage of reﬂected light. Black
silicon is the most eﬀective method to reduce the reﬂectance to values lower than
6 % in most of the active part of the spectrum for silicon photovoltaics. With
an antireﬂecting coating of 40 nm the reﬂection is further reduced than with a
60 nm antireﬂecting coating.
External quantum eﬃciency studies show the damage that the creation of black
silicon produces in the front surface due to a strong reduction in small wave-
lengths compared to those with ﬂat and KOH etched front surfaces. Eﬀects of
thickness is not signiﬁcant when the devices are textured with black silicon due
to the very low reﬂectance throughout all the active spectrum of Si. The reduc-
tion of quantum eﬃciency for black silicon at small wavelengths is reﬂected also
in the power conversion eﬃciency values, where the highest value achieved is by
the KOH textured cell and the lowest value for BSi textured solar cells. The
high power conversion of solar cells textured with KOH show the beneﬁts of
==PAGE:66==
56
Conclusion
having a textured front surface and encourages further studies on the reduction
of damages in the BSi surface to reduce recombination eﬀects.
While KOH shows some beneﬁts on the achievable power from the device, black
silicon shows attractive characteristics, that with further optimization of the
devices it could achieve better eﬃciencies in order to be industrially attractive.
The short circuit current at small wavelengths should be improved in BSi by
upgrading passivation of the front surface to have a less damaged substrate to
reduce recombination. In order to improve the obtained Voc from the devices, the
back contact passivation should be the target to increase the device performance
5.1
Future perspectives
The main problem found in the devices was the ineﬃciency of the back contact
passivation to collect carriers eﬀectively. Even though it was not one of the
main objectives for this master thesis, it is proposed to study the eﬀect of
temperature in the grain size of the deposited polySi. The polysilicon used to
passivate the back contact should have small grains to avoid similarities with
crystalline silicon, and with this possibly improve the performance of the cells.
For the texturing of the devices, it is proposed to reduce the time of processing to
obtain black silicon to 2 min [19], this time reduction still produces black silicon
and may show a reduction of the damage in the front surface and increase the
QE at small wavelengths.
To improve the overall eﬃciency of the solar cells, a metal grid could be designed
speciﬁcally for the metal and also for the sheet resistance of the emitter.
==PAGE:67==
Appendix A
Theory behind experimental
methods
A.1
Sheet Resistance
To control the doping level, the resistance obtained after doping is measured by
a simple experiment with the Four-point probe method.
In this method, there is an arrangement of 4 probes separated by the same
distance s. A current is passed between the outer two probes while in the inner
probes, the voltage is being measured. The ratio of the voltage and current will
give the resistance, a property of a particular layer, doping and thickness [31].
Sheet resistance Rs is a property of a thin conducting ﬁlm with units of Ω/sq.
Rs depends on the ﬁlm thickness but not the area, per square denotes any square
unit of ﬁlm regardless of its size. Resistance is obtained with an assumption of a
uniform current distribution across the square. Later, the resistivity is obtained
by the formula [32]:
Rs =
ρ
Xf
(A.1)
==PAGE:68==
58
Theory behind experimental methods
In this formula Xf is the ﬁlm thickness. The sheet resistance stays well-deﬁned
even if the material resistivity varies vertically because the depletition region
acts as an insulator keeping the current ﬂow in the emitter.
Figure A.1: Four-point probe setup. The probes are spaced equally with a
distance s, the inner probes measure voltage while a current is
passed through the outer probes through a substrate with thick-
ness t.
A.2
Inductively coupled plasma (ICP)
In general terms, the ICP equipment induces a magnetic ﬁeld with a coil gen-
erator to obtain plasma. In this set up, there are two decoupled generators:
platen and coil. This generators are shown in ﬁg A.2a. The setup of the ICP
equipment consists of an etching chamber with an insulating plate on the top
to separate it from an induction coil. Connected with the induction coil, it is
placed the source power to generate the plasma.
To obtain a high density plasma ﬁrst it is needed to generate an initial plasma,
then a ﬂow of high frequency current goes through the inductive coil generating
a magnetic ﬁeld. The turning motion of this magnetic ﬁeld creates an electric
ﬁeld and thus a high density plasma is generated. The working plasma density
used has values around 1011cm−3. [33]
==PAGE:69==
A.3 Photolithography
59
(a) Sketch
of
ICP
equipment.
Two
uncoupled generators are present in
this
equipment
shown
as
Bottom
Power(platen) and Source Power(coil)
(b) Principle the plasma generation. The
magnetic ﬁeld movement generates
an electric ﬁeld that creates high den-
sity plasma
Figure A.2: Sketch of an inductively coupled plasma equipment. Figures ob-
tained from [33].
A.3
Photolithography
Photolithography is a process used in microfabrication to transfer patterns of a
mask to a thin ﬁlm of light-sensitive photoresist. In this technique, UV lamps or
UV lasers are used to expose the photosensitive ﬁlm through photomasks usually
with chromium patters to block the light at selected areas in light exposure,
which length is usually in the order of 1 second. With the exposure it is possible
to open areas of the material beneath the mask or outside of the masked region.
The substrate free of photoresist can be further processed and ﬁnally photoresist
is etched away from the substrate [34].
Figure A.3: Positive and negative resist after exposure using the same pho-
tomask.
The microfabrication process starts by heating the wafer at temperatures from
100-200 °C and adding Hexamethyl disilazane (HMDS) vapor to promote the
adhesion of the resist to the wafer. The thickness of the photoresist is controlled
==PAGE:70==
60
Theory behind experimental methods
by spin coating, where acceleration of 5000 rpm spreads the resist over the wafer,
leaving a very uniform layer. After removing the excess of solvent from the resist
and partially drying the resist through a post-exposure bake at ∼90 °C, the
resist is exposed with a mercury lamp to fully dry the resist in the selected
areas with the mask [34]. Finally, the development of the resist takes place,
the soluble parts of the thin ﬁlm are etched away with Tetramethyl ammonium
hydroxide (TMAH) if it is a positive resist or in the case of negative resists, the
exposed parts are cross linked and become stable and the unexposed areas are
removed by a solvent developer [34].
Figure A.4: (a) In the case of a Si wafer, a thin ﬁlm of SiO2 covers the sub-
strate. (b) Photoresist application (negative). (c) UV exposure
through a photomask. (d) Development of the resist. Adapted
from [34].
==PAGE:71==
A.4 PECVD and LPCVD
61
A.4
PECVD and LPCVD
Chemical vapor deposition with low pressure (LPCVD) and with plasma en-
hancement (PECVD) are deposition processes to obtain high-purity ﬁlms of a
wide variety of diﬀerent compositions [35].
Chemical vapor deposition is a process where one or several gaseous compounds
react producing a solid material. The process ﬂow to obtain a solid material
is as follows: i) gas reactants are transported to the surface, ii) the species are
chemisorpted on the aim substrate, iii) heterogeneous reactions occur in the
surface catalyzed by the substrate, iv) desorption of the gas side-products takes
place, and v) the side-products are transported away from the surface [35].
sThe rate of the reaction depends on chemical reaction rates and the ﬂuids dy-
namic transport. The thin ﬁlms can be deposited in open-ﬂow reactors where
the gases are being introduced continuously. In the reactors, gases can be sup-
plied by forced convection in atmospheric pressure (APCVD) or by pumping at
the outlet of a low pressure reactor (LPVCD). In hot-wall reactors small ther-
mal gradients exist but forced convection dominates even if it is used a low gas
velocity.
In some cases, to reduce the deposition temperature below the temperature
where the chemical reaction takes place a diﬀerent type or energy source is
needed. In this case, radio frequency glow discharge is applied in the gas reac-
tants to create a higher quantity of free radicals (PECVD) to have acceptable
deposition rates.
The reactors of LPCVD and PECVD operate at reduced pressure (around 1
mbar) but they have diﬀerent conﬁgurations to maintain uniformity of the de-
position. In a hot-wall tube LPCVD reactor, the reactant gas depletion in the
ﬂow direction is compensated by a downstream temperature increase. While
in a horizontal plate, in a PECVD reactor, the substrate is placed on a heated
electron and the upper electrode is RF driven and therefore this reactor helps
control the ﬁlm thickness homogeneity [35].
==PAGE:72==
62
Theory behind experimental methods
==PAGE:73==
Appendix B
Reference graphs
To characterize a light source, a spectral irradiance measurement as a function
of wavelength is made. Spectral irradiance units are Wm
−2µm−1, where the
ﬁrst term refers to the power density at the wavelength of interest in µm. The
standard solar spectra is presented in ﬁgure B.1.
==PAGE:74==
64
Reference graphs
Figure B.1: Standard Solar Spectra for space and terrestrial use. Figure ob-
tained from [32].
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1] Nathan S Lewis and George Crabtree. Basic research needs for solar energy
utilization: report of the basic energy sciences workshop on solar energy
utilization, april 18-21, 2005, 2005.
[2] World
Energy
Council.
World
energy
resources
solar
2016.
https://www.worldenergy.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/
WEResources_Solar_2016.pdf, 2016. Accessed: December 2017.
[3] Pietro P. Altermatt. Altermatt’s lectures on photovoltaics.
[4] Martin A Green, Keith Emery, Klaus Bücher, David L King, and Sanekazu
Igari. Solar cell eﬃciency tables (version 51). Progress in Photovoltaics:
Research and Applications, 26(1):3–12, 2017.
[5] Wurfel Peter et al. Physics of Solar Cells: From Principles to New Con-
cepts. John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
[6] Adrian Kitai. Principles of Solar Cells, LEDs and Diodes: The role of the
PN junction. John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[7] Angèle Reinders, Pierre Verlinden, and Alexandre Freundlich. Photovoltaic
Solar Energy: From Fundamentals to Applications. John Wiley & Sons,
2017.
[8] GL Vick and KM Whittle.
Solid solubility and diﬀusion coeﬃcients of
boron in silicon. Journal of the electrochemical society, 116(8):1142–1144,
1969.
==PAGE:76==
66
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] Rasmus Schmidt Davidsen. Eﬀect and application of nanostructures on thin
ﬁlm and conventional photovoltaics. Master thesis, Technical University of
Denmark, March 2012.
[10] JE Cotter, JH Guo, PJ Cousins, MD Abbott, FW Chen, and KC Fisher. P-
type versus n-type silicon wafers: prospects for high-eﬃciency commercial
silicon solar cells. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, 53(8):1893–1901,
2006.
[11] Augustin Joseph McEvoy, Luis Castaner, and Tom Markvart. Solar cells:
materials, manufacture and operation. Academic Press, 2012.
[12] G Vuye, S Fisson, V Nguyen Van, Y Wang, J Rivory, and F Abeles. Tem-
perature dependence of the dielectric function of silicon using in situ spec-
troscopic ellipsometry. Thin Solid Films, 233(1-2):166–170, 1993.
[13] Armin G Aberle. Overview on sin surface passivation of crystalline silicon
solar cells. Solar energy materials and solar cells, 65(1-4):239–248, 2001.
[14] Kevin Luke, Yoshitomo Okawachi, Michael RE Lamont, Alexander L
Gaeta, and Michal Lipson. Broadband mid-infrared frequency comb gener-
ation in a si 3 n 4 microresonator. Optics letters, 40(21):4823–4826, 2015.
[15] Josh Engelhardt, Giso Hahn, and Barbara Terheiden. Multifunctional icp-
pecvd silicon nitride layers for high-eﬃciency silicon solar cell applications.
Energy Procedia, 77:786–790, 2015.
[16] Wikipedia. Anti-reﬂecting coating. url=https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anti-
reﬂectivecoating, 2013. Accessed: June 2018.
[17] Miguel A Gosálvez, I Zubel, and Eeva Viinikka. Wet etching of silicon.
In Handbook of Silicon Based MEMS Materials and Technologies (Second
Edition), pages 470–502. Elsevier, 2015.
[18] Hele Savin, Päivikki Repo, Guillaume Von Gastrow, Pablo Ortega, Eric
Calle, Moises Garín, and Ramon Alcubilla. Black silicon solar cells with in-
terdigitated back-contacts achieve 22.1% eﬃciency. Nature nanotechnology,
10(7):624–628, 2015.
[19] Adriana P. Sanchez Nery.
Fabrication and characterization of textured
silicon surfaces for solar cells. Special project, Technical University of Den-
mark, December 2016.
[20] Thomas Allen, James Bullock, Andrés Cuevas, Simeon Baker-Finch, and
Fouad Karouta. Reactive ion etched black silicon texturing: a comparative
study.
In Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC), 2014 IEEE 40th,
pages 0562–0566. IEEE, 2014.
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
67
[21] Martin Steglich, Thomas Käsebier, Matthias Zilk, Thomas Pertsch, Ernst-
Bernhard Kley, and Andreas Tünnermann.
The structural and optical
properties of black silicon by inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etch-
ing. Journal of Applied Physics, 116(17):173503, 2014.
[22] Henri Jansen, Meint de Boer, Rob Legtenberg, and Miko Elwenspoek. The
black silicon method: a universal method for determining the parameter
setting of a ﬂuorine-based reactive ion etcher in deep silicon trench etch-
ing with proﬁle control. Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering,
5(2):115, 1995.
[23] Bishal Kaﬂe, D Trogus, B Dresler, D Köhler, G Mäder, L Clochard, E Duﬀy,
M Hofmann, and J Rentsch. Industrial screen-printed solar cells with novel
atmospheric pressure dry texturing process. In Proceedings of the 28th Eur.
Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conf., Paris, pages 1344–1350. Citeseer, 2013.
[24] Freiberg
Instruments.
Microwave
detected
photoconductivity.
url=http://www.freiberginstruments.com/upcdmdp/technology/microwave-
detected-photoconductivity-mdp.html, 2018. Accessed: April 2018.
[25] Lachlan E Black. New perspectives on surface passivation: Understanding
the Si-Al2O3 interface. Springer, 2016.
[26] Sihua Zhong, Zengguang Huang, Xingxing Lin, Yang Zeng, Yechi Ma, and
Wenzhong Shen. High-eﬃciency nanostructured silicon solar cells on a large
scale realized through the suppression of recombination channels. Advanced
Materials, 27(3):555–561, 2015.
[27] Xiaojie Jia, Chunlan Zhou, and Wenjing Wang. Optimization of the surface
structure on black silicon for surface passivation. Nanoscale research letters,
12(1):193, 2017.
[28] Daisuke Adachi, José Luis Hernández, and Kenji Yamamoto. Impact of car-
rier recombination on ﬁll factor for large area heterojunction crystalline sili-
con solar cell with 25.1% eﬃciency. Applied Physics Letters, 107(23):233506,
2015.
[29] Josef Hölzl, Franz K Schulte, and Heribert Wagner. Solid surface physics,
volume 85. Springer, 2006.
[30] DT Cotfas, PA Cotfas, and S Kaplanis.
Methods to determine the dc
parameters of solar cells: A critical review.
Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 28:588–596, 2013.
[31] Dieter K Schroder. Semiconductor material and device characterization.
John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
==PAGE:78==
68
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[32] Christiana Honsberg and Stuart Bowden. Photovoltaic education network.
url=https://www.pveducation.org/, 2018. Accessed: May 2018.
[33] Kazuo Nojiri. Dry etching technology for semiconductors. Springer, 2015.
[34] Sami Franssila. Introduction to microfabrication. John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
[35] A Stoﬀel, A Kovacs, W Kronast, and B Müller. Lpcvd against pecvd for
micromechanical applications. Journal of Micromechanics and Microengi-
neering, 6(1):1, 1996.
